THE English Moor, OR THE MOCK-MARRIAGE.

A Comaedy as it was often acted with general applause by her Majesties
Servants.

Innocens permit jocos cur ludere nobis
Non liceat? --
LONDON, Printed by J. T. for A. C. and Henry Broom, and are to be sold at the
Gun in Ivie-lane, 1658.

MOst noble, fair and courteous, to ye all
Welcome and thanks we give, that you would call
And visit your poor servants, that have been
So long and pitiless unheard, unseen.
Welcome, you'll say your money that does do,
(Dissembling is a fault) we say so too.
And your long absence was no fault of your,
But our sad fate to be so long obscure.
Jove and the Muses grant, and all good Men,
We feel not that extremity again:
The thought of which yet chills us with a fear
That we have bought our liberty too dear:
For should we fall into a new restraint,
Our hearts must break that did before but faint.
You noble, great and good ones, that vouchsafe
To see a Comedy, and sometimes laugh
Or smile at wit and harmeless mirth, As thus
ye have begun to grace and succour us;
Be further pleased (to hold us still upright,
For our r^lief, and for your own delight)
To move for us to those high powers whom we
submit unto in all humility,
For our proceeding, and we will make it good
To utter nothing may be understood
Offensive to the state, manners or time,
We will as well look to our necks as climb.
You hear our suit, obtain it if you may;
Then find us money and we will find you play.
The Scene London.

DEar Sister, bear with me.

I may not, brother.
What! suffer you to pine, and peak away
In your unnatural melancholy fits;
Which have already turned your purer blood
Into a toad-pool dye. I am ashamed
(Upon my life) almost to call you brother
But nature has her swing in me. I must.
Therefore I crave you (as you are my brother)
To shake this dull and muddy humour off,
By visiting the streets, and quit your chamber,
Which is a sickness to you.

O my sister!

I can say, O my brother too, to show you
How it becomes you. I have the same cause
Equally with your self, to spend my life
In solitary mourning; and would do it,
Could it make good our loss: My honoured Father!
A tear has escaped me there: But that's by th'by,
And more of anger against his enemy,
And his for ever cursed posterity,
That robbed us of a Father, then of sorrow
For what we know is unrecoverable.
But to sit grieving over his Memory
In a resolved silence, as you do;
Killing your own blood while a vein holds any
Proceeding from the flesh, that drew out his,
Is merely idle. Mingle then your grief
With thought of brave revenge: And do it not
In private Meditation in your Chamber;
But bear it out till it proceed to Action.

By pouring blood on blood?

By quenching fire
Of high revenge, with base unmanly blood;
By stopping of our Fathers cureless wounds
(Which still bleed fresh in our vexed memories)
With the proud flesh of him that butchered ours.

We know he lives not that has slain our Father:
Or, if he lives, tis where I cannot reach him:
He ne'er saw English harbour since his sword
Unfortunately had the better of my father.

But his son lives.

Good sister cool thy passion
With reasonable means

O where's the spirit
That my slain father had. Have you no part of't?
Must I now play the Man, whilst you inherit
Only my Mothers puling disposition?

I know thy drift, good sister Dionisia,
Is not unto revenge, or blood; but to stir up
Some motion in me, to prevent the danger
A sad retiredness may bring upon me.

Be it as you think it, so you will abroad;
And make the house no longer dark with sighing.
Now Sir the news with you?

News worth your hearing,
Merely to laugh at: Good for nothing else.

Is the old Ruffian taken, and hanged, that slew
My Father; or his son Brain-battered; or
His Daughter made a prostitute to shame?

How merciless are your wishes!

Lady, no.
But as I was hankring at an ordinary,
In quest of a new Master (for this, here,
Will never last to a new livory
'Less he were merrier) I heard the bravest noise
Of Laughter at a wicked accident
Of Marriage, that was chopped up this Morning.

What marriage? Quickly.

Who do you think
Has married fair Mistress Millicent?

Theophilus (I can name him, though his father
Was fatal unto mine) was sure to her.

Yes, but without a Priest. She has slipped his hold,
And is made fast enough unto another,
For which fine Mr. The. so whines and chafes,
And hangs the head! More then he would do
For's father, were he hanged, as you did wish
For laughing news even now. There's sport for you.

It does me good to hear of any cross
That may torment their family. I wish
Joy to the man that did beguile him of her
What ere he be.

But who has married her?

Thence springs the jest. Old Mr. Quicksands, Sir,
The bottomless devourer of young Gentlemen;
He that has lived, till past three-score, a bachelor,
By three-score in the hundred; he that has
Undone by Mortgages and under-buyings
So many Gentlemen, that they all despaired
Of means to be revenged.

But where's your Jest?

The Jest is, that they now have found that means
(As they suppose) by making of him Cuckold.
They are laying their heads together in every corner,
Contriving of his horns, and drinking healths
To the success. And there were sport for you now,
If you were any body.

I'll abroad however.

That's nobly said. Take courage with you Brother.

And yet me thinks I know not how to look
The wide world in the face, thus on the sudden
I would fain get abroad, yet be unknown.

For that Sir (look you) I have here, by chance,
A false beard which I borrowed, with a purpose
To have worn't and put a jest upon your sadness.

Does it do well with me?

You'll never have
One of your own so good: you look like Hector.

Go fetch my sword and follow me.

Be sure you carry a strict eye over his actions,
And bring me a true account.

I warrant you Mistress.

Do, and I'll love thee everlastingly.
Why, now you are my brother.

Farewell Sister.

I hope he has some stratagem a foot
In our revenge to make his honour good:
It is not grief can quit a fathers blood.

Prithee be and answered, and hang off o'me,
I have no more to say to you in the way
You wot on Phillis.

Nor do I seek to you
In that way which you wot on, wanton Sir,
But to be honest, and to marry me.
You have done too much the the other way already.

I wish you were more thankful, Mrs. Phillis,
To one has taught you a trade to live upon:
You are not th'first by twenty I have taught it
That thrive well in the world.

There are so many
Such teachers in the world; and so few
Reformers, that the world is grown so full
Of female frailties, the poor Harlotries
Can scarce already live by one another,
And yet you would have me thrust in among'em.

I do not urge you. Take what course you please,
But look not after me: I am not marked
For Matrimony, I thank my stars.

Should I run evil courses, you are the cause;
And may in time, curse your own act in it:
You'll find th'undoing of an honest Maid
Your heaviest sin upon your bed of sickness;
T will cost your soul the deepest groan it fetches;
And in that hope I leave you.

Farewell wag-tail.
Marry thee quoth a! That's wise work indeed!
If we should marry every Wench we lie with,
'T were after six a week with some of us.
(Marry love forbid) when two is enough to hang one.

Not, we have sought diligently, for fear
The news that is abroad should fly before us.

What news? What flying fame do you labour with?

News that makes all the Gallants in the Town
Fly out o'their little wits: They are so eager,
Upon the joy. I mean such youthful Gallants
As have, or sold, or mortgaged; or been cheated
By the grave patron of Arch-cosonage,
Whose sad misfortune we are come to sing:
Shall I need to name him to thee?

Who, the old Rascal Quicksands? speak good Vince,
What! has he hanged himself? speak quickly prithe.

Worse, worse by half man. Durst thou hear a news
Whose mirth will hazard cracking of a rib?

I, and't be two. Here's hoops enough besides
To hold my drink in. Pray thee speak; what mischief
Is come upon him.

I pray thee guess again.

Has somebody over-reach'd him in his way
Of damnable extortion; and he cut his throat,
Or swallowed poison?

Ten times worse then that too.

Is he then hoisted into the Star-Chamber
For his notorious practises? or into
The high Commission for his blacker arts?

Worse then all this.

Pax, keep it to your self then,
If you can think it be too good for me.
Why did you set me a longing? you cry worse
And ten times worse; and know as well as I,
The worse it is to him, the better wel-come
Ever to me: And yet you tell me nothing.

He has married a young wife.

Has he Cadzooks?

We bring you no comfort, we.

Ne'er go fine sport, Ha, ha, ha. What is she?
Would he had my wench, was here e^ne now,
What is she he has married? quickly prithe.

One much too good for him.

The beauteous Millicent.
Driven by the tempest of her Uncles will,
Is like a pinnace forced against the Rock.

But he will never split her, that's the b^st on it.
I hope she'll break his heart first. Gentlemen,
I thank you for your news; and know what I
Will presently go do.

Pray stay a little.

And take us with you. What will you go do?

That which we can all at once, Do not hold me.

We came to cast a plot w'ye.

Cast a pudding -- How long ha'they been married?

But this morning.

You'll ha'me come too late.
Ne'er go 'tis a shame he was not Cuckolded
Before Dinner.

That had been a fine first course
At a wedding feast indeed. A little patience.

Pray let me take my course before supper yet.

The business belongs to us as much as you,
He has wronged us all alike. He has cozened us
As much as you.

He has made me so poor
That my poor whore even now claimed marriage of me.

The case is ours. His wrongs are common to us,
So shall his wife be, can we purchase her:
Did we bring you the news for you to run
And prevent us do you think?

Pardon my zeal good Gentlemen; which only
Considered but the fitness of the Act,
And that 'tis more then time 'twere done in faith.

And see here comes a fourth man that has lost
More on her part, then we upon the Bridegrooms.

He's very sour and sad. 'Tis crept upon him
By this untoward accident.

'Twould anger any man to be nosed of such a match;
But I'll remove his sorrow --
Gentle Theophilus, you are well met,
Your sorrow is familiar with us all
In the large loss of your betrothed love;
But, sir, be comforted: you have our pity
And our revenge to ease you. Tis decreed
Her husband shall be instantly a Cuckold.

Most sinfully thou lie; and all that give
Breath to that foul opinion.

What do you mean.

Give me that thought from you; nay, from you all,
Or I will rip you for it.

Zooks what mean you.

Hold, Sir, forbear.

I'll have that thought out first.

I say he does deserve to be a Cuckold;
Let him be what he will, a pox upon him.

So we say all.

What's that to ill in her?
I stand upon that point. Mans evil merit's
No warrant for a woman's dishonesty.
I say had she a man forty degrees
Beneath his undeservings, twere more possible
For him to deceive her with a good Life,
Then she him with a wicked.

I say so too.
But then I say again, The more's the pity.

Do and undo.

Zookes now your bitch has bit me,
I say he will be one, he shall be one;
I'll make him one my self.

And weell both help him.

Why here's trim stuff. Help ho, Murder, Murder.

This is oppression gentlemen; an unmanly one.

What devils this raised? fall off, tis an ill business.

Have you no hurt Sir.

No I'm confident.

By your favour, I will see.

What fortune's this,
I fought against friends to save mine enemy,
But I hope neither know me. I desire
To rest hid to my friends for my offence to them,
And to mine enemy, till I make him dearer.

I told thee there was ^one.

I'm glad it proves so.

But wher's the Gentleman?

Do you not know him sir?

Not I, tis the first time that ere I saw him;
To my remembrance; yet he fought for me.
Beshrew thy idler care that made me lose him,
What should he be that so could fight for me,
Yet care not for my company? beshrew thy heart.
Why should he use me thus? I shall be sick to think on it.
I'm made beholding now to I know not whom;
And I'm the worst to sue or seek to a man --

That scurvy, between proud and bashful quality,
You are famous for, as the other toy that haunts you.

What's that?

Why, to be deadly angry, sir,
On least occasion, and friends as quickly.
Hot and cold in a breath: you are angry now
With him that fought for you I warrant you.

In troth I am, and friends with them I fought with;
He used me peevishly to leave me so,
Ere I could thank him.

So tis that I told you.

But did you mark th'humanity of my Gentlemen,
Cause she's disposed by her self willed uncle
On that unworthy Quick sands (Devil take him)
They thought 'twould sound like music in my ears
To hear her disgrace sung; when her fair honour
Is all I have to love, now she's took from me:
And that they'd go about to rob me of.
Heaven grant me patience. O my slaughtered father!
I am thy son, and know by thy infirmity.

Me thinks, Sir, his example should allay you:
Impatience was his ruin.

Push, we see
Thieves daily hanged for Robberies; yet some
Go on still in the practice! What a fine
Is set upon the head of foul Adultery,
And yet our neighbours Wives can hardly escape us!
There's Laws against extortion, and sad penalties
Set upon Bribes,
Yet great men's hands ha'their fore-fathers itch!
Prisons are filled with Banckrupts; yet we see
How cra^ty Merchants often wrong their credits,
And Lond^ners fly to live at Amsterdam!
Nothing can banish Nature: That's the Moral.

It was indeed your Fathers known infirmity,
And ever incident to the noblest Natures.
But of your Father, is there yet no hope
Of better news?

No, certainly he's slain.

I have not heard a story of more wonder;
That two such men, of such estates and years,
Having lived always friends and neighbours nearly,
Should at the last fall out so mortally
On a poor cast at bowles! Where wast they sought?

It is uncertain. All we heard of'em
Was, they rode sorth ('tis now a whole year past)
Singly to end their quarrel: But to what
Part of the kingdom, or the world they took,
We can by no inquiry find or hear
Of either of them. Sure they crossed the Seas,
And both are slain.

You speak poor comfort Sir.

I speak as my heart finds. She's gone for ever too;
Her hearts desire be with her.

Now he's there again.

Then my poor Sisters sickness; that torments me,
Never in health since our dear Father left us.

And now there.

How shall I do to see these men again?
I shall not be at rest till I be friends with'em.

Why here's the noble nature still. 'Twil show it self.

I'll seek'em out. Nathaniel always loved me.

Here's an unsettled humour. In these fits
Hel'e ne'er be mad, nor ever well in's wits.

Go to I say, go to; as y're my Niece,
And hope t'inherit any thing that's mine:
Shake off this Maiden peevishness. Do you whimper
Upon your wedding day? Or, do you think
You are not married yet? Did you not say
I Millicent take Mandevill? A ha!
Was it not so? Did not I give you too?
I that have bred you from the cradle up
To a fit growth to match with his fair years;
And far more fair estate.

I, there's the Match --

Love him I charge you.

I'll endeavour't Sir.

You will endeavour't! Is't no further yet?
Stand from her, Nephew! I'll so swinge her. Ha!

Let me entreat your patience. She's my wife Sir.

Dandle her in her humour, do; and spoil her.

'Tis but her modesty.

Her sullen doggedness,
I'll baste it out of her. You do not know her
As I do, Nephew.

I shall, Sir, before morning
Better I doubt not. Come we shall agree.

You will endeavour't! Come I'll see it done.
Marry a man first, and then endeavour
To love him will you? Ha! Is it but so?
I'll see you love him presently. So to bed.

What before Supper?

A posset and to bed,
I'll see it done. And cause you are so nice
(To bed I say) there I will see more done
Then I will speak. Tell me of your endeavour!

Be not so rough and stiff with her, good Uncle,
I know my supple tender dealing will
Get more upon her love then all your chidings.

Such tender dealers spoil young Brides; and get
Nothing of stubbornness. Down with her I say
Now in her wedding sheets: She will be nought else.

Construe more charitably, I beseech you,
My Virgin blushes.

'Tis your sullenness;
Would you have brided it so lumpishly
With your spruce younker, that fine silken beggar,
Whose Land lies in your Husbands counting house;
Or the most part.

O my Theophilus.

Indeed the better half; not without hope
To have the rest as he may want my money.

Would you have whin'd and pulled, had you had him,
To bedward think you? yet to speak the truth,
And that wherein she has vexed me a thousand times,
I never saw her laugh, nor heard her sing
In all my life: yet she could both, I have heard,
In company she liked.

It has been' mong Maidens then.
But honoured Sir (I know what I will do)
To let you see and hear, since you desire
To have me show a cheerfulness unto
My reverend Husband: Look you Sir, I'll kiss him,
Clap him, and stroke him: Ha, my Joe, ha, ha, ha, c.

H^y day.

She'll make me blush anon I think.

I'll sing him songs too.

Whoop, how's this?

That I will chick, old songs and over old ones,
Old as thy reverend self, my Chick a bird.

She calls me chick and bird: The common names
With wives that Cuck^ld their old cravend husbands.

She made him a bed of the thistle down soft,
She laid her self under to bear him a loft,
And ever she sung sweet turn thee to me,
We'll make the new bed cry Jiggy Joggy.

What impudence is this.

She's gon as far
Beyond it now as it was to it.

Now may you answer.
Go to bed sweet heart I'll come to thee,
Make thy bed fine and soft I'll lig with thee. Ha, ha, ha.

Is this your bashful Niece.

What can thou mean by this? dos this become thee?

Pray do not beat me o'my wedding might, but tell me
How this and half a dozen chopping Children may
Become an old mans wife some five years hence.

O intollerabl!

Is't possible thou can do thus?

Let women judge. Tis very possible
That a young Iusty wife may have six Children
By one at once in five years, Sir, and by
One Father too. I'll make him young enough
To Father mine.

She'll make a youth of me.

There was a Lady loved a swine.
And wil^ thou be true love mine.

Do you hear gentlewoman; are you in your wits?

Yes, and my own house I hope. I pray be civil.
Shall we to bed, Sir, supperless? you need
No stirring meats, it seems. I'm glad on'^.
Come, biddy, come away, will you see Uncle
How I will love him ^oed? come away.

My edge is taken off. this impudence
Of hers, has outfac'd my concupisence.
Dashed all quite out of Countenance! what a beast
Was I to marry? Rather, what a beast
Am I to be? * How now! O horrible.

What hideous noise is this.

I cannot help it.
While I went forth for the half pint of Sack
To make your prodigal posset; and the maid
(Watching the Milk, for running ore) sorgot
To shut the door, they all rushed in.

What they, what all?

Vizarded people, Sir, and oddly shaped.
You'll see anon. Their tuning o'their pipes,
And swear they'll gi'ye a willy nilly dance
Before you go to bed, tho'you stole your Marriage.

Outrageous Roysters.

Call and raise the street.

That were to let in violence indeed.
These are some merry harmeless friends I warrant.
I knew I could not be so ill beloved
Among the bachelors, but some would find
Way to congratulate our honoured Marriage.

What, with horn music?

A new kind of flourish.

Tis a flat conspiracy.
This is ^our bash^ul modest whimpring Niece.

Then let'em in. If they wrong us to night,
The Law to morrow shall af^ord us right.
Pray let's resolveto s^et. Here comes their Prologue.

At a late Parliment held by the Gods,
Cupid and Hymen ^ell at bitter ods
Upon an argument; wherein each did try
T'advance his own 'bove tothers deity,
Out of this question, which might happier prove
Love without Marriage, or Marriage without love.
By the effects the trial must be made:
So each from others Office drew his aid;
Cupid no more of Hymens matches framed;
Nor Hymen married those that love inflamed.
Now mark, the sad effects this strife begot,
Cupid his fiery darts and arrows shot
As thick as ere he did; and equal hearts
He wounds with equal love. But Hymen parts
Their forward hands (alas!) and joyneth none
But those which his new match-Maker brings on,
(Old greedy Avarice) who by his spells,
In breasts of Parents and of guardians dwells,
That force their tendelings to loathed beds;
Which uncouth Policy to sorrow leads
Thousands a thousand ways, of which the least
Is this with which we celebrate your feast.

A special drove of horn beasts.

These few are thought enough to show how more
Would appear horrible, the town hath store.
The first's a Lawyer, who by strife prevailed
To wed a wife, that was by love entailed
Unto that Courtier, who had the hap
Soon after to adorn him with that cap.
The next a country cormorant, whose great wealth,
By a bad fathers will, obtained by stealth
That valiant Soldiers Mistress: ^or which matter
The Enginier his sconse with Rams did batter.
This an old Goatish Usure, that must
Needs buy a wretches daughter to his lust;
Doted, and married her without a groat,
That Herald gave this crest unto his coat.
And that's the Citizen, so broadly pated,
Which this mad Butcher, cuckold antidated.
Now by this dance let husband that doth wed
Bride from her proper love to loathed bed
Observe his fortune. Music strike aloud
The cuckolds joy, with merry pipe crowd.

How now! all vanished! The devil take the hidmost.

The foremost I say; and lay him a block
For all the rest to break their necks upon.

Who are they? Can you guess.

Truly, not I Sir.
Some of my husbands friends perhaps, that came
To warn him of his fortune.

Well considered.

Lock the doors after 'em, and let us to bed;
And lock our selves up, chick, safe from all danger.

We will to bed chick, since you'll have it so.
This key shall be your guard: And here's another
Shall secure me. My house has store of beds in it.
I bring you not to an unfurnish dwelling.

Be not afraid to lie with me, good man,
I'll so restore thee' gain with Cawdels and Cock-broths,
So cuckle the up to morrow, thou shalt see --

O immodesty.

Thou hast good store of goid, and shalt not want it
In Cullises: in every broth I'll boil
An angel at the least.

I'll hang first.

I am quite out of wits; and yet I'll counsel
Thee, Nephew. Hark thee.

Tis like to be mad counsel.

But will you not lie with me then?

No marry shall he not.
Nephew, You shall not, till she bride it modestly.
Tis now too late, but I'll so rattle her up to morrow.

Tis too late now, yet he'^ do it to morrow! good!

Will you to your lodging?

Where be my bride-maids?

They wait you in your chamber.

The devil o'maid's i'chis but my fellow Madg the Kitchen maid, and Malkin the
Cat, or bachelor but my self, and an old Fox, that my master has kept a
prentiship to palliate his palsy.


Where be the maids, I say; and Bachelors
To disappoint my husband.

Mark you that?

I mean, to take your points. But you have none.
O thrifty age! My Bridegroom is so wise,
In stead of points, to hazard hooks and eyes.

She means the eyes in's head, I'll hang else.
My Master is like to make a blind match here.

Take up the lights, sirrah.

I hope she talks so idly, but for want
Of sleep; and sleep she shall for me to night.

And well said Nephew. Will you to your chamber, Mistress? --

Hey ho, to bed, to bed, to bed.
No Bride so glad -- to keep her Maiden-head.

You're the first Maid that ere I entertained
Upon so small acquaintance. Yet you're welcome,
I like your hand and carriage.

'Tis your favour.
But love, they say sweet Mistress, is received
At the first sight, and why not service then,
Which often brings more absolute returns
Of the dear trust imposed, and firmer faith
By Servants then by lovers?

Stay there Phillis.
I may, by that, conjecture you have been
Deceiv' by some false Lover.

Who, I Mistress?
I hope I look too merrily for such a one,
Somewhat too coursly too, to be beloved;
If I were sad and handsome, then it might
Be thought I were a little love sick. Pray
How long has this disease affected you;
This melancholy, Mistress? Not ever since
You lost your father I hope.

For the most part.
Thou said, me thought, that love might be taken in
At the first fight

There 'tis. I find her.
Love, Mistress? yes, a Maid may take in more
Love at one look, or at a little loop-hole,
Then all the Doddy poles in Town can purge
Out of her while she lives; she smothering it,
And not make known her passion. There's the mischie*

Suppose she love an enemy to her house.

An enemy! Put case the case were yours.

But 'tis no case of mine; put by I pray thee.

I'll put it to you though I miss your case.
Suppose it were your house, and Master Arthur,
Whose father was your fathers enemy,
Were your beloved --

Pray thee no more.

Now I have struck the vein. Suppose I say,
All this were true; would you confound your self
In smothering your love, which, in it self,
Is pure and innocent, until it grow
To a pernicious disease within you;
And hide it in your bosom, till it work
Your kindled heart to ashes?

Thou hast won
My patience to attention: Therefore tell me
If thou can find or think it honourable
In me to take such an affection?

Yes, and religious; most commendable,
Could you but win his love into a marriage,
To beget peace between your families.
How many, and what great examples have we,
From former ages, and of later times,
Of strong dissentions between furious factions,
That to their opposite houses have drawn in
Eithers Allies and F^iends, whole Provinces,
Yea, Kingdoms into deadly opposition;
Till the wide wounds on both sides have sent forth
Rivers of blood, which only have been stopped
By the fost bands of love in marriages
Of equal branches, sprung from the first roots
Of all those Hell-bred hatreds!

My good Maid --

Yes, I have been a good one to my grief.

Thou hast given me strength to tell thee, and I hope
When it is told, I shall have yet more ease.

I warrant you Mistress. Therefore out with it.

I love that worthy Gentleman; and am confident
That in the time of our two fathers friendship
He' affected me no less: But since that time
I have not seen him, nor dare mention him
To wrong my brothers patience, who is so passionate,
That could he but suspect I bred a thought
That favoured him, I were for ever lost.
For this sad cause, as well as for the loss
Of my dear Father, I have sighed away
Twelve Moons in silent sorrow; and have heard
That Arthur too (but for what cause I know not)
Has not been seen abroad; but spends his time
In pensive solitude.

Perhaps he grieves
As much for the supposed loss of you,
As of his Father too.

The best construction,
I make of his retiredness, is the blessed
Prevention (which I daily pray for) of
A fatal meeting 'twixt him an^ my Brother,
Which would be sure the death of one or both.
And now that fear invades me, as it does always,
My Brother being abroad; and such an absence
Has not been usual: I have not seen him
Since yesterday --

Fear nothing, Mistress. Now you have eased your mind,
Let me alone to comfort you. And see your Brother.

How is it with you Sister?

Much better now then when you le^t me Brother,
If no ill accident has happened you
Since your departure; as I fear there has:
Why look you else so sadly? speak, dear Brother.
I hope you did not meet the man you hate.
If you did, speak. If you have fought and slain him,
I charge you tell, that I may know the worst
Of fortune can befall me: I shall gain
Perhaps a death by it.

You speak as if you loved the man I hate,
And that you fear I have killed him.

Not for love
Of him I assure you Sir; but of your self.
Her fear in this case, Sir, is that the Law
May take from her the comfort of her life
In taking you from her, and so she were
But a dead woman. We were speaking
Of such a danger just as you came in;
And truly, Sir, my heart even tremble-tremble-trembles,
To think upon it yet. Pray, Sir, resolve her.

Then 'twas your frivolous fear that wrought in her.
Good Sister be at peace: for, by my love to you,
(An oath I will not violate) I neither saw
Nor sought him, I. But other thoughts perplex me.

What, were you at the wedding, Brother?

Whose wedding, Sister?

Your lost love Millicents. Are you now sad
After your last leave taking?

What do you mean?

There may be other matches, my good Brother --

You wrong me shamefully, to think that I
Can think of other then her memory.
Though she be lost and dead to me, can you
Be so unnatural as to desire
The separation of a thought of mine
From her dear memory; which is all the comfort
My heart is married to, or I can live by.

Surely good Sir, in my opinion,
Sharp, eager stomachs may be better fed
With a'ery smell of meat, then the bare thought
Of the most curious dainties --

What piece of impudence have you received
Into my house?

Pray Brother pardon me.
I took her, as I find her, for my comfort,
She has by council and discourse wrought much
Ease and delight into my troubled thoughts.

Good Maid forgive me; and my gentle Sister,
I pray thee bear with my destractions.

A good natured Gentleman for all his hasty flashes.

And now I'll tell you Sister (do not chide me)
I have a new affliction.

What is it brother?

I am engaged unto a Gentleman,
(A noble valiant Gentleman) for my life,
By hazarding his own, in my behalf.

It was then against Arthur.
What villain was't durst take your cause in hand
Against that man?

You wrong me beyond suffrance,
And my dear fathers blood within your self,
In seeming careful of that mans safety --

His safety Sir? Alas! she means, he is
A villain that would take the honour of
His death out of your hands, if he must fall
By sword of man.

Again, I ask you pardon. But I had
A quarrel yesterday, that drew strong odds
Upon my single person; Three to one:
When, at the instant, that brave Gentleman
With his sword, sides me, puts'em all to flight --

But how can that afflict you?

How quick you are!

Good Brother I ha'done.

My affliction is,
That I not know the man, to whom I am
So much engaged, to give him thanks at least.
O Sir you're welcome, though we parted somewhat
Abruptly yesterday.

I thank you Sir.

Pray thee Not. tell me, for I hope thou know him;
What Gentleman was that came in betwixt us?

If the devil know him no better, he will lose
A part of his due I think. But to the purpose,
I knew your wonted nature would be friends
With me before I could come at you. However, I
Have news for you that might deserve your love,
Were you my deadly enemy.

What is't pray thee?

Sweet Mist^iss Lucy so long unsaluted?

My Brother attends your news Sir.

My Wench become her Chamber-maid! very pretty!
How the Jade mumps for fear I should discover her.

Your news good Not? what is it ready made,
Or are you now but coining it?

No, it was coined last night, of the right stamp,
And passes current for your good. Now know,
That I, and Mun, and Vince, with divers others
Of our Comrades, were last night at the Bride-house.

What mischief did you there?

A Masque, a Masque lad, in which we presented
The miseries of enforced Marriages
So lively -- Zooks, lay by your captious countenance,
And hear me handsomely.

Good brother do, it has a fine beginning.

But mark what follows;
This morning, early up we got again,
And with our Fiddlers made a fresh assault
And battery against the bed-rid bride-grooms window,
With an old song, a very wondrous old one,
Of all the cares, vexations, fears and torments,
That a decrepit, nasty, rotten Husband
Meets in a youthful, beauteous, sprightly wife:
So as the weak wretch will shortly be afraid,
That his own feebler shadow makes him Cuckold.
Our Masque over night begat a separation
Betwixt'em before bed time: for we found
Him at one window, coughing and spitting at us;
She at another, laughing, and throwing money
Down to the Fiddlers, while her Uncle Testy,
From a third Port-hole raves, denouncing Law,
And thundering statutes against their Minstralsie.

Would he refuse his bride-bed the first night?

Hang him.

Our Horn-masque put him off it, (bless my invention)
For which, I think, you'll Judge she'll forsake him
All nights and days hereafter. Here's a blessing
Prepared now for you, if you have grace to follow it.

Out of my house, that I may kill thee; Go:
For here it were inhospitable. Hence,
Thou busy vaillain, that with sugard malice
Hast poisoned all my hopes; ruined my comforts
In that sweet soul for ever. Go, I say,
That I may with the safety of my man-hood,
Right me upon that mischievous head of thine.

Is this your way of thanks for courtesies;
Or is't our luck always to meet good friends,
And never part so? yet before I go,
I will demand your reason (if you have any)
Wherein our friendly care can prejudice you;
Or poison any hopes of yours in Millicent?

Pray brother tell him.

Yes: that he may die
Satisfied, that I did but Justice on him,
In killing him. That villain, old in mischief,
(Hell take him) that has married her, conceives
It was my plot (I know he does) and, for
A sure revenge, will either work her death
By poison, or some other cruelty,
Or keep her locked up in such misery,
That I shall never see her more.

I answer --

Not in a word, let me entreat you, go.

Fair Mistress Lucy --

Neither shall she hear you.

Her Maid shall then: or I'll not out to night.

On what acquaintance Sir.

Be not afraid: I take no notice o'thee,
I like thy course, Wench, and will keep thy council,
And come sometimes, and bring thee a bit and th'wilt.

I'll see you choked first.

Thou art not the first
Cast Wench that has made a good Chamber-maid.

O you are base, and I could claw your eyes out.

Pray tell your Master now: so fare you well Sir.

I thank you, Brother, that you promise me
You will not follow him now, some other time
Will be more fit. What said he to you, Phillis?

Marry he said (help me good apron strings.)

What was it that he said?

I have it now.
It was in answer, Sir, of your objections.
First, that you feared the old man, wickedly,
Would make away his wife: to which he says,
That is not to be feared, while she has so
Much fear of Heaven before her eyes. And next,
That he would lock her up from sight of man:
To which he answers, she is so endued
With wit of woman, that were she locked up,
Or had locks hung upon her, locks upon locks;
Locks of prevention, or security:
Yet being a woman, she would have her will;
And break those locks as easily as her Wedlock.
Lastly, for your access unto her sight;
If you have Land he says to sell or Mortgage,
He will undertake his doors, his wife and all,
Shall fly wide open to you,

He could not lay so.

Troth, but tis like his wild way of expression.

Yes; I knew that: my wit else had been puzzled.

And now I find my self instructed by him;
And friends with him again. Now, Arnold, any tidings.

Not of the gentleman that sought for you. Ent. Earn.
But I have other news that's worth your knowledge.
Your enemy, young Arthur, that has not
Been seen abroad this twel'moneth is got forth
In a disguise I hear, and weapon'd well.
I have it from most sure intelligence.
Look to your self, sir.

My blood chills again.

Pseugh, I'll not think of him. To dinner sister.

Here was a good night, and good morrow to
Given by a crew of Devils.

'Twas her plot,
And let her smart ^or'c.

Smart, Sir, did you say?
I think 'twas smart enough for a young Bride
To be made lye alone, and gnaw the sheets
Upon her wedding.

Rare impudence!

But for your satisfaction, as I hope
To gain your favour as you are my Uncle,
I know not any acter in this business.

Sir, her's a letter thrown into the entry.

It is some villainous libel then I warrant.
Saw thou not who convai'd it in?

Not 1. I only found it, Sr.

Pray read it you. Not my own house free from'em!
The devil owed me a spite; and when he has ploughed
An old mans lust up, he sits grinning at him.
Nay, I that have so many gallant enemies
On fire, to do me mischief, or disgrace;
That I must provide tinder for their sparks!
The very thought bears weight enough to sink me.

May I be worthy, Sir, to know your trouble?

Do you know your self?

Am I your trouble then?

Tis sworn and written in that letter there
Thou shalt be wicked. Hundreds have taken oaths
To make thee false, and me a horned Monster.

And does that trouble you?

Does it not you?

A dream has done much more. Pray, Sir, your patience,
And now I will be serious, and endeavour
To mend your faith in me. Is't in their power
To destroy virtue, think you; or do you
Suppose me false already; tis perhaps
Their plot to drive you into that opinion.
And so to make you cast me out amongst'em:
You may do so upon the words of strangers;
And if they tell you all, your gold is counterfeit,
Throw that out after me.

Now she speaks woman.

But since these men pretend, and you suppose'em
To be my friends, that carry this presumption
Over my will, I'll take charge of my self,
And do fair justice, both on them and you:
My honour is my own; and i'm no more
Yours yet, on whom my Uncle has bestowed me,
Then all the worlds (the ceremony off)
And will remain so, free from them and you;
Who, by the false light of their wild-fire flashes
Have slighted and depraved me and your bride bed;
Till you recant your wilful ignorance,
And they their petulant folly.

This sounds well.

Both they and you trench on my Peace and Honour;
Dearer then beauty, pleasure wealth and fortune;
I would stand under the fall of my estate
Most cheerfully, and sing: For there be ways
To raise up fortunes ruins, were her towers
Shattered in pieces, and the glorious ball
She stands on cleft asunder: But for Peace
Once ruined, there's no reparation;
If Honour fall, which is the soul of life,
Tis like the damned, it ne'er lifts the head
Up to the light again.

Niece, thou hast won me;
And Nephew, she's to good for you. I charge you
Give her her will: I'll have her home again else.

I know not what I can deny her now.

I ask but this, that you will give me leave
To keep a vow I made, which was last night
Because you flighted me.

Stay there a little.
I'll lay the price of twenty Maidenheads
Now, as the market goes, you get not hers
This seav'night.

My vow is for a month; and for so long
I crave your faithful promise not to attempt me.
In the mean time because I will be quit
With my trim, forward Gentlemen, and secure you
From their assaults; let it be given out,
That you have sent me down into the country
Or back unto my Uncles; whither you please.

Or, tarry, tarry -- stay, stay here a while.

So I intend, Sir, I'll not leave your house,
But be locked up in some convenient room
Not to be seen by any, but your self*
Or else to have the liberty of your house
In some disguise, (if it were possible)
Free from the least suspicion of your servants.

What needs all this?
Do we not live in a well governed City?
And have not I authority? I'll take
The care and guard of you and of your house
Against all outrageous attempts; and clap
Those Goatish Roarers up, fast as they come.

I understand her drist, Sir, and applaud
Her quaint devise. Twill put 'em to more trouble,
And more expense in doubtful search of her,
The best way to undo 'em is to foil'em
At their own weapons. Tis not to be thought
The'l seek, by violence to force her from me,
But wit; In which we'll overcome'em.

Agree on it twixt your selves. I see you're friends.
I'll leave you to your selves.
Hark hither Niece -- Now I dare trust you with him:
He is in years, tis true. But hear thou girl
Old Foxes are best blades.

I'm sure they stink most.

Good keeping makes him bright and young again.

But for how long.

A year or two perhaps.
Then, when he dies, his wealth makes thee a Countess.

You speak much comfort, Sir.

That's my good Girl.
And Nephew, Love her, I find she deserves it;
Be as benevolent to her as you can;
Show your good will at least. You do not know
How the good will of an old man may work
In a young wife. I must now take my journey
Down to my country house. At your months end
I'll visit you again. No ceremony
Joy and content be with you.

And a good journey to you.

You are content you say to be locked up
Or put in some disguise, and have it said
You're gone unto your Uncles. I have heard
Of some Bridegrooms, that shortly after Marriage
Have gone to see their Uncles, seldom Brides.
I have thought of another course.

Be it any way.

What if it were given out you're run away
Out of a detestation of your match?

'T would pull a blot upon my reputation.

When they consider my unworthiness
'T will give it credit. They'll commend you for it.

You speak well for your self.

I speak as they'll speak.

Well; let it be so then: I am content.

We'll put this instantly in act. The rest,
As for disguise, or privacy in my house,
You'll leave to me.

All, Sir, to your dispose,
Provided still you urge not to infringe
My vow concerning my virginity.

Tis the least thing I think on,
I will not offer at it till your time.

Why here's a happiness in a husband now

Thou tell me things, that truth never came near.

Tis perfect truth: you may believe it. Lady.

Maintain't but in one fillable more, I'll tear
Thy mischievous tongue out.

Fit reward for Tell-troths.
But that's not the reward you promised me
For watching of your brothers actions;
You said forsooth (if it please you to remember)
That you would love me for it.

Arrogant Rascal.
I bad thee bring account of what he did
Against his enemy; and thou reportst.
He took his enemies danger on himself,
And helped to rescue him whose bloody father
Killed ours. Can truth or common reason claim
A part in this report? My brother do it!
Or draw a sword to help Theophilus.

Tis not for any spite I ow my Master,
But for my itch at her that I do this.
I am strangely taken. Such brave spirited women
Have cherished strong backed servingmen ere now.

Why dost not get thee from my sight, false fellow?

I'll be believed first. Therefore pray have patience
To peruse that.

My brothers character!
Theophilus sisters name -- The brighter Lucy
So often written? nothing but her name --
But change of attributes -- one serves not twice.
Blessed, divine, Illustrious, all perfection;
And (so heaven bless me) powerful in one place.
The worst thing I read yet, heap of all virtues --
Bright shining, and all these ascribed to Lucy.
O I could curse thee now for being so just
Would thou had belied him still.

I ne'er belied him, I.

O mischief of affection! Monstrous! horrid.
It shall not pass so quietly. Nay stay.

She'll cut my throat I fear.

Thou art a faithful servant.

It may do yet:
To you I am sweet Lady, and to my master
In true construction: he is his friend I think
That finds his follies out to have them cured,
Which you have only the true spirit to do.

How I do love thee now!

And your love Mistress,
(Brave sprightly Mistress) is the steeple top
Or rather Weathercock o'top of that
To which aspires my lifes ambition.

How did thou get this paper.

Amongst many
Of his rare twelve-moneths melancholy works,
That lie in's study. Mistress tis apparent
His melancholy all this while has been
More for her Love, then for his fathers death.

Thou hast my love for ever.

Some small token
In earnest of it. Mistress, would be felt,

Take that in earnest then.

It is a sure one.
And the most feeling pledge she could have given:
For she is a virago. And I have read
That your viragoes use to strike all those
They mean to lie with: And from thence tis taken
That your brave active women are called strikers.

Set me that chair.

The warm touch of my flesh
Already works in her. I shall be set
To better work immediately. I am prevented.
A way and be not seen. Be sure I love thee.

A ha! This clinches. Another time I'm, sure on'c.

Sister! where are you? How now! not well or

Sick brother -- sick at heart, oh -- (sleepy.

Passion of heart! where are our servants now
To run for doctors? ho --

Pray stay and hear me.
Her's no work for them. They'll find a master here
Too powerful for the strength of all their knowledge.

What at thy heart?

Yes, brother, at my heart.
Too scornful to be dispossessed by them.

What may that proud grief be? good sister name it.

It grieves me more to name it, then to suffer't.
Since I have endured the worst on it, and proved constant
To sufferance and silence, twere a weakness
Now to betray a sorrow, by a name,
More fit to be severely felt then known.

Indeed I'll know it.

Rather let me die,
Then so afflict your understanding, Sir.

It shall not afflict me.

I know you'll chide me for it.

Indeed you wrong me now. Can I chide you?

If you be true and honest you must do it,
And heartily.

You tax me nearly there.

And that's the physic must help me or nothing:

With grief I go about to cure a grief then.
Now speak it boldly, Sister.

Noble Physician -- It is --

It is! what is it? If you love me, speak.

Tis -- love and I beseech thee spare me not.

Alas dear sister, can thou think that love
Deserves a chiding in a gentle breast?

Do you pity me already. O faint man
That tremble but at opening of a wound!
What hope is there of thee to search and dress it?
But I am in thy hands, and forced to try thee.
I love -- Theophilus --

Ha!

Theophilus, brother;
His son that slew our father. There's a love!
O more then time 'twere looked, for fear it festers.

S^e has put me to it indeed. What must I do?
She has a violent spirit; so has he;
And though I wish most seriously the match,
Whereby to work mine own with his fair Sister,
The danger yet, in the negotiation
May quite destroy my course; spoil all my hopes.
I'll therefore put her off on it if I can.

Can you be tender now?

What! To undo you?
I love you not so slightly. Pardon me.
A rough hand must be used: For here's a wound
Must not be gently touched; you perish then,
Under a Brothers pity. Pray sit quiet;
For you must suffer all.

I'll strive to do it.

To love the Son of him that slew your Father!
To say it shows unlovingness of nature;
Forgetfulness in blood, were all but shallow
To the great depth of danger your fault stands in.
It rather justifies the act it self,
And commends that down to posterity
By your blood-cherishing embraces. Children,
Born of your body, will, instead of tears,
By your example, offer a thankful joy
To the sad memory of their Gransiers slaughter.
Quite contrary! How fearful 'tis to think on it!
What may the world say too? There goes a daughter,
Whose strange desire leaped from her Fathers ruin;
Death gave her to the Bride-groom; and the marriage
Knit fast and cemented with blood. O Sister --

O Brother.

How! Well? And so quickly cured?

Dissembler; foul dissembler.

This is plain.

Th'hast played with fire; and like a cunning fellow
Bit in thy pain o'purpose to deceive
Another tender touch. I know thy heart weeps
For what't has spoke against. Thou that dare love
The daughter of that Fiend that slew thy father,
And plead against thy cause! unfeeling man,
Can not thy own words melt thee? To that end
I wrought and rais'd'em: 'T was to win thy health,
That I was sick; I played thy disease to thee,
That thou might see the loathed complexion on it,
Far truer in another then ones self.
And, if thou can, after all this, tread wickedly,
Thou art a Rebel to all natural love,
And filial duty; dead to all just council:
And every word thou mock'dst with vehemence
Will rise a wounded father in thy conscience,
To scourge thy Judgement. There's thy Saint crossed out,
And all thy memory with her. I'll ne'er trust
Revenge again with thee (so false is manhood)
But take it now into mine own powerfully,
And see what I can do with my life's hazard;
Your purpose shall ne'er thrive. There I'll make sure work.

How wise and cunning is a woman's malice;
I never was so cozened.

Out of my doors pernicious knave and harlot;
Avaunt I say.

Good Master.

Pray you worship.

You have all the wages you are like to have.

Nay, I dare take your word for that: you'll keep
All moneys fast enough whose ere it be,
If you but gripe it once.

I am undone,
And shamed for ever by your negligence,
Or malice rather: for how can it be
She could depart my house without your knowledge.

That cursed Mistress that ever she came here!
If I know of her flight, Sir, may these hands
Never be held up, but to curse you only,
If you cashier me thus: because you have lost
your wife before she was well found, must we
Poor innocents be guilty?

For my part,
Or ought I know she may as well be gone
Out of the the chimney top as out o'door.

The door must be your way; and find her out,
Or never find my door again. Be gone.

Mad. O, you are a cruel Master.

So, so, so.
These cries are laughter to me: Ha, ha, ha.
I will be Master of my invention once,
And now be bold to see how rich I am
In my concealed wealth. Come, precious mark
Of beauty and perfection, at which envy
And lust aim all their ranckling poisonous arrows.
But I'll provide they ne'er shall touch thy blood.

What, are your servants gone?

Turned, turned away
With blame enough for thy supposed escape:
Which they will rumour so to my disgrace
Abroad, that all my envious adversaries
Will, betwixt joy of my conceived misfortune
In thy dear loss, and their vain hopes to find thee,
Run frantic thorough the streets, while we at home
Sit safe, and laugh at their defeated malice.

But now for my disguise.

I, that, that, that.
Be but so good and gentle to thy self,
To hear me and be ruled by me in that,
A Queens felicity falls short of thine.
I'll make thee Mistress of a Mine of treasure,
Give me but peace the way that I desire it --

Some horrible shape sure that he conjures so.

That I may fool iniquity, and Triumph
Over the lustful stallions of our time;
Bed-bounders, and leap-Ladies (as they terme'em)
Mount-Mistresses, diseases shackle'em,
And spittles pick their bones.

Come to the point. What's the disguise, I pray you.

First know, my sweet, it was the quaint devise
Of a Venetian Merchant, which I learnt
In my young factorship.

That of the Moor?
The Backamore you spake of? Would you make
An Negro of me.

You have past your word,
That if I urge not to infringe your vow
(For keeping this month your virginity)
You'll wear what shape I please. Now this shall both
Kill vain attempts in me, and guard you safe
From all that seek subversion of your honour.
I'll fear no powdered spirits to haunt my house,
Rose-footed fiends, or fumigated Goblins
After this tincture's laid upon thy face,
'Twil cool their kidneys and allay their heats.

Bless me! you fright me, Sir. Can jealousy
Creep into such a shape? Would you blot out
Heavens workmanship?

Why think thou, fearful Beauty,
Has heaven no part in Egypt? Pray thee tell me,
Is not an Ethiopes face his workmanship
As well as the fairest Ladies? nay, more too.
Then hers, that daubs and makes adulterate beauty?
Some can be pleased to lye in oils and paste,
At sins appointment, which is thrice more wicked.
This (which is sacred) is for sins prevention.
Illustrious persons, nay, even Queens themselves
Have, for the glory of a nights presentment,
To grace the work, suffered as much as this.

Enough Sir, I am obedient.

Now I thank thee.
Be fearless love; this alters not thy beauty,
Though, for a time obscures it from our eyes.
Thou may be, while at pleasure, like the Sun;
Thou dost but case thy splendour in a cloud,
To make the beam more precious in it shines.
In stormy troubled weather no Sun's seen
Sometimes a month together: 'Tis thy case now.
But let the roaring tempest once be over,
Shine out again and spare not.

There's some comfort.

Take pleasure in the scent first; smell to it fearlessly,
And taste my care in that, how comfortable
'Tis to the nostril, and no foe to feature.
Now red and white those two united houses,
Whence beauty takes her fair name and descent,
Like peaceful Sisters under one Roof dwelling
For a small time; farewell. Oh let me kiss ye
Before I part with you -- Now Jewels up
Into your Ebon Casket. And those eyes,
Those sparkling eyes, that send forth modest anger
To singe the hand of so unkind a Painter,
And make me pull'c away and spoil my work,
They will look straight like Diamonds, set in lead,
That yet retain their virtue and their value.
What murder have I done upon a cheek there!
But there's no pitying: 'Tis for peace and honour;
And pleasure must give way. Hold, take the Tincture,
And perfect what's amiss now by your glass.

Some humbler habit must be thought on too.

Please your own fancy. Take my keys of all;
In my pawn Wardrobe you shall find to fit you.

And though I outwardly appear your Drudge,
'Tis fit I have a Maid for private service:
My breeding has not been to serve my self.

Trust to my care for that. One knock. In; in.
Is it to me your business?

Yea, if you
Be Master Quick-sands Sir; the Masters worship
Here of the house.

I am so. What's your business?

'Tis upon that, Sir, I would speak Sir, hoping
That you will pardon my presumptuousness,
I am a Mother that do lack a service.

You have said enough. I'll entertain no Mothers.
A good Maid servant, knew I where to find one.

He is a knave, and like your worship, that
Dares say I am no Maid; and for a servant
(It ill becomes poor folks to praise themselves,
But) I were held a tydie one at home.

O you are a Norfolk woman (cry thee mercy)
Where Maids are Mothers, and Mothers are Maids.

I have friends i'th'City that will pass their words
For my good bearing.

Hast thou?

Yes indeed, Sir.
I have a Cousin that is a Retorney
Of Lyons-Inn, that will not see me wronged;
And an old Aunt in Muggle-street, a Mid-wife,
That knows what's what as well's another woman.

But where about in Norfolk were thou bred?

At Thripperstown Sir, near the City of Norwich.

where they live much by spinning with the Rocks?

Thripping they call it, Sir.

Dost thou not know one Hulverhead that keeps
An Innocent in's house.

There are but few innocents in the country Sr.
They are given too much to law for that: what should
That Hulverhead be a councellor, Sir.

No a husband man.

Truly I know none.

I am glad she does not. How knew thou I wanted
A servant.

At an old wives house in Bow-lane
That places servants, where a maid came in
You put away to day.

All, and what said she?

Truly to speak the best and worst, forsooth,
She said her fault deserved her punishment
For letting of her Mistress run away.

The news goes current. I am glad o'that.

And that you were a very strict hard man,
But very just in all your promises.
And such a master would I serve to choose.

This innocent country Mother takes me.
Her looks speak Wholesomness; and that old woman
That Bow lane purveyor hath fitted me
With serviceable ware these dozen years.
I'll keep her at the least this Gander month,
While my fair wife lies in of her black face,
And virgin vow; in hope she's for my turn.
Lust, when it is restrained, the more tvvil burn.

May I make bold to crave your ansvver, Sir?

Come in, I'll talk with you.

Prosper now my plot,
And hulk, thou art twixt wind and vva^r shot.

You're welcome Gentlemen.

Let's ha'good wine, Boy, that must be our welcome.

You shall, you shall Sir.
Within. Ambrose, Ambrose;

Here, here, anon, anon, by and by, I come, I come.
Jerome, Jerome, draw a quart of the best Canary into the Apollo.

This is a language that I have not heard.
You understand it, Gentlemen.

So shall you anon master Buzzard.

Your friend and Jonathan Buzzard kind gentlemen.

What excellent luck had we, friend Buzzard, to
meet with thee, just as thy Master cast thee off.

Just Sir, as I was going I know not whither:
And now I am arrived at just I know not where. Tis a
rich room, this. Is it not Goldsmiths hall.

It is a Tavern man -- And here comes the wine.
Fill boy -- and her's to thee friend, a hearty draft to
cheer thee -- fill again boy -- There, drink it off.

Off with it man -- hang sorrow, cheer thy heart.

And truly tis the best cheer that ere I tasted.

Come taste it better, her's another to thee.

-- And truly this was better then the first.

Then try a third. That may be best of all.

-- And truly, so it is -- how many sorts of wine
May a vintner bring in one pot together?

By Bacchus Mr. Buzzard, that's a subtle question.

Bacchus! whose that I pray?

A great friend of the vintners, and master of their company indeed.

I was never in all my life so far in a tavern before.
What comforts have I lost.

Now he begins to talk.

Nor ever was in all my two and twenty years under that Babilouian Tyrant
Quicks ands, so far as a Vintners bar but thrice.


But thrice in all that time?

Truly but thrice Sir. And the first time was to fetch a jill of sack for my
Master, to make a friend of his drink, that joined with him in a purchase of
sixteen thousand pound.


I, there was thrist. More wine boy. A pottle and a beer bowl.

The second time was for a penny pot of Muscadine, which he drank all himself
with an egg upon his wedding morning.


And to much purpose, it seemed by his wives running away.

The third and last time was for half a pint of sack upon his wedding night, of
later memory; and I shall ne'er forget it, that riotous wedding night: when Hell
broke loose, and all the devils danced at our house, which made my Master mad,
whose raving made my mistress run away, whose running away was the cause of my
turning away. O me, poor masterless wretch that I am. -- O --


Hang thy master, here's a full bowl to his confusion.

I thank you. Let it come Sir, ha, ha, ha.

Think no more of Masters, friends are better then Masters.

And you are all my friends kind gentlemen, I found it before in your money
when my Master (whose confusion I have drunk) took your Mortgages; And now I
find it in your wine. I thank you kind gentlemen still. O how I love kind
Gentlemen.


That shows thou art of gentle blood thy self, friend Buzzard.

Yes friend -- Shall I call you friend?

By all means, all of us.

Why then, all friends, I am a gentleman, though spoiled i'che breeding. The
Buzzards are all gentlemen, We came in with the Conqueror. Our name (as the
French has it) is Beau desert; which signifies -- Friends, what does it
signify?


It signifies, that you deserved fairly at your masters hands, like a
Gentleman, and a Buzzard as you were, and he turned you away most beastly like
a swine, as he is. And now here is a health to him, that first finds his wife,
and sends her home with a bouncing boy in her belly for him to father.


Ha, ha, ha. I'll pledge that: and then I'll tell you a secret.

Well said friend; up with tha^, and then out with thy secret.

I will friend. And the other two friends, here's upon the same.

I hope he will show us a way, out of the bottom of his bowl to find his
Mistress.


This fellow was happily found.

This was an excellent draught.

But the seeret, friend, out with that, you must keep no secrets amongst
friends.


It might prove a shrewd matter against my mischievous Master as it may be
handled.


Hang him cullion, that would turn thee away.
We'll help thee to handle it, fear it not.

Hark you then all friends. Shall I out with it?

What else.

I'll first take the other cup, and then out with it altogether -- And now it comes
-- If my Mistress do bring him home a bastard, she's but even with him.


He has one I warrant. Has he cadzooks?

That he has by this most delicate drink. But it is the Arsivarsiest Aufe that
ever crept into the world. Sure some Goblin got it for him; or changed it in
the nest, that's certain.


I vow thou utterest brave things. Is't a boy?

It has gone for a boy in short coats and long coats this seven and twenty
years.


An Idiot is it.

Yes: A very natural; and goes a thissen; and looks as old as I do too. And I
think if my beard were off, I could be like him: I have taken great pains to
practise his speech and action to make my self merry with him in the country.


Where is he kept, friend, where is he kept.

In the further side of Norfolk, where you must never see him. Tis now a dozen
years since his father saw him, and then he compounded for a sum of money with
an old man, one Hulverhead, to keep him for his life time; and he never to hear
of him. But I saw him within these three months. We hearken after him, as
land-sick heirs do after their fathers, in hope to hear of his end at last.


But hark you, friend, if your beard were off, could you be like him think
you? What if you cut it off, and to him for a father.


Pray thee hold thy peace.

My beard, friend, no: My beard's my honour.
Hair is an ornament of honour upon man or woman.

Come, come; I know what we will do with him. Mun, knock him down with the
other cup. We will lay him to sleep; but yet watch and keep him betwixt hawk and
buzzard as he is, till we make excellent sport with him.


Hey ho. I am very sleepy.

See he jooks already. Boy show us a private room.

This way, Gentlemen.

Down, Plumpton*park, c.

Indeed you were unkind to turn away
M^ maid (poor harmless maid) whose innocent mirth
Was the best cheer your house afforded me.

I am sorry sister, trust me, truly sorry,
And knew I which way to recover her
With my best care I would. Yet, give me leave,
I saw her overbold; and overheard her
Say, she foresaw that Arthur my sole enemy
Should be your husband. I'll marry you to death first.

Now you fly out again.

Your pardon again your sister,
And for your satisfaction I will strive
To oversway my passion. How now Arnold,
Me thinks I read good news upon thy face.

The best, Sir, I can tell is, the old Jew
Quicksands has lost his wife.

She is not dead,

Tis not so well for him: for if she were
He then might overtake her though she were
Gone to the devil. But she's run away:
But to what corner of the earth, or under
Whose bed to find her is not to be thought.
It has raised such a laughter in the town
Among the Gallants --!

And do you laugh too?

Yes; and if you do not out-laugh all men
That hear the joyful news, tis too good for you.

I am too merciful, I kill thee not.
Out of my doors, thou villain, reprobate.

Hold, Pray Sir, hold.

Never while I have power to lift a hand
Against thee, mischievous Villain.

Is not this passion, brother?

Forbear, sister.
This is a cause turns patience into fury.

Arnold, forbear his sight.

And my house too.
Or villain, look to die, oft as I see thee.

Turned out o^ doors! A dainty frantic humour
In a young Master! Good enough for me though;
Because tis proper to old serving-men
To be so served. What course now must I take?
I am too old to seek out a new Master.
I will not beg, because I'll cross the proverb
That runs upon old serving creatures; stealing
I have no mind to: Tis a hanging matter.
Wit and invention help me with some shift
To help a cast-off now at a dead lift.
Sweet fortune hear my suit.

Why how now, Arnold! What, at thy devotion?

I'll tell you in your ear, sir, I dare trust you.

Could earthly man have dreamt this Rafcal
Whose Lechery, to all our thinking, was
Nothing but greedy Avarice and cosonage,
Could have been all this while a concealed whoremaster,
To have a Bastard of so many years
Nursled in the Country?

Note the punishments
That haunt the Miscreant for his black misdeeds;
That his base off-spring proves a natural Idiot;
Next that his wife, by whom he might had comfort
In progeny, though of some others getting,
Should with her light heels make him heavie-headed
By running of her Country! And lastly that
The blinded wretch should cast his servant off,
Who was the cover of his villainy,
To show us (that can have no mercy on him)
The way to plague him.

Ha, ha, ha --

What dost laugh at?

To think how nimble the poor uzzard is
To be revenged on's Master; How he has Shaped himself;
Cut off his beard, and practised all the postures
To act the Changeling bastard.

Could we light
Upon some quaint old fellow now, could match him
To play the clown that brings him up to town,
Our company were full, and we were ready
To put our project into present action.

Gentlemen, we are fitted: take this man w'ye
He is the only man I would have sought,
To give our project life. I'll trust thee Arnold,
And trust thou me, thou shalt get pieces by it;
Besides, I'll piece thee to thy Master again.

That clinches Sir.

Go follow your directions.

Come away then.

Sweet mirth thou art my Mistress. I could serve thee.
And shake the thought off of all woman kind
But that old wonts are hardly lest. A man
That's entered in his youth, and thoroughly salted
In documents of women, hardly leaves
While reins or brains will last him: Tis my case.
Yet mirth, when women fail, brings sweet encounters
That tickle up a man above their sphere:
They dull, but mirth revives a man: who's here,
The solitary musing man, called Arthur,
Possessed with seriours vanity; Mirth to me!
The world is full: I cannot peep my head forth
But I meet mirth in every corner: Ha!
Sure some old runt with a splay-foot has crossed him!
Hold up thy head man; what dost seek? thy grave?
I would scarce trust you with a piece of earth
You would choose to lye in though; if some plump Mistress
Or a deft Lass were set before your search.

How vainly this man talks!

Get ye good den forsooth.
How vainly this man talks! speak but truth now,
Does not thy thought now run upon a Wench?
I never looked so but mine stood that way.

'Tis all your glory that; and to make boast
Of the variety that serves your lust:
Yet not to know what woman you love best.

Not I cadzooks, but all alike to me,
Since I put off my Wench I kept at Livory:
But of their use I think I have had my share,
And have loved every one best of living women;
A dead one I ne'er coveted, that's my comfort:
But of all ages that are pressable;
From sixteen unto sixty; and of all complexions
From the white flaxen to the tawney-Moor;
And of all statures between Dwarf and Giants;
Of all conditions, from the Doxy to the Dowsabel.
Of all opinions, I will not say Religious:
(For what make they with any?) and of all
Features and shapes, from the huckle-back'd Bum-creeper,
To the straight spiny Shop-maid in St. Martins.
Briefly, all sorts and sizes I have tasted.

And think thou hast done well in it!

As well as I could with the worst of'em tho'l say it.
Few men come after me that mend my work.

But thou ne'er think of punishments to come;
Thou dream not of diseases, poverty,
The loss of sense or member, or the cross
(Common to such loose livers) an ill marriage;
A hell on earth to scourge thy conscience.

Yes, when I marry, let me have a wife
To have no mercy on me; let the fate
Of a stale dovting Bachelor fall upon me;
Let me have Quicksands curse, to take a Wife
Will run away next day, and prostitute
Her self to all the world before her Husband.

Nay, that will be too good: If I foresee
Any thing in thy marriage destiny,
'Twil be to take a thing that has been common
To th'world before, and live with thee perforce
To thy perpetual torment.

Close that point.
I cannot marry. Will you be merry, Arthur?
I have such things to tell thee.

No, I cannot.

Pray thee come closer to me. What has crossed thee?
Is thy supposed slain father come again,
To dispossess thee for another life time?
Or has thy valiant sister beaten thee? Tell me.
It shall go no further.

Let your valiant wit
And jocound humour be supposed no warrant
For you t'abuse your friends by.

Why did tell me of marrying then? But I
Have done. And now pray speak what troubles you.

I care not if I do: For 'twill be Town talk.
My Sister on a private discontent
Betwixt her self and me hath left my house.

Gone quite away?

Yes, And I know not whither.

Beyond Sea sure to sight with th'Air, that took
Her fathers last breath into it. Went she alone?

No, No; My man's gone with her.

Who, the fellow
That brags on's back so; the stiff strong chained Rascal?

Even he.

The devil is in these young Tits,
And wildfire in their Cruppers.

Let me charm you,
By all our friendship, you nor speak nor hear
An ill construction of her act in this,
I know her thoughts are noble; and my wo
Is swoln unto that fulness, that the addition
But of word in scorn would blow me up
Into a cloud of wild distempered fury
Over the heads of all whose looser breath
Dare raise a wind to break me. Then I fall
A sudden storm of ruin on you all.

I know not how to laugh at this: It comes
So near my pity. But i'll to my Griggs
Again; And there will find new mirth to stretch
And laugh, like tickled wenches, hand ore head.

How does my habit and my arms become me?

Too well to be a woman, manly Mistress.

Wher's the pistol you provided for me.

Here Mistress and a good one.

Tis too long.

No Lady would wish a shorter. If it were
'T would bear no charge, or carry nothing hotne.

I'll try what I can do. Thou think me valiant.
I'm sure I have often felt it.

All the virago's that are found in story,
Penthesilea and Symaramis
Were no such handy strikers as your self:
But they had another stroke, could you but find it,
Then you were excellent. I could teach it you.

I dare not understand thee yet. Be sure
As you respect my honour, or your life
That you continue constant to my trust,
And so thou can not know how much I'll love thee.

There is a hope as good, now, as a promise.

Here at this Inn abide, and wait my coming
Be careful of my guildings: Be not seen
Abroad for fear my brother may surprise you.
There's money for you; and ere that be spent
Tis like I shall return.

Best stars attend you,
Mars arm thee all the day; and Venus light
Thee home into these amorous arms at night.

Be cheered my love; help to bear up the joy,
That I conceive by thy concealed Beauty,
Thy rich imprisoned beauty, whose in^ranchisement
Is now at hand, and shall shine forth again
In its admired glory. I am rapt
Above the sphere of common joy and wonder
In the effects of this our quaint complot.

In the mean time, though you take pleasure in it,
My name has dearly suffered.

But thine honour
Shall, in the vindication of thy name,
When envy and detraction are struck dumb
Gain an eternal memory with virtue;
When the discountenanced wits of all my jierers
Shall hang their heads, and fall like leaves in Autumn.
O how I laugh to hear the cozened people
As I pass on the streets abuse themselves
By idle questions and false reports.
As thus: good morrow Master Quicksands; pray
How fares your beauteous bedfellow? says another
I hear she's not at home. A third says no:
He saw her yesterday at the still-yard
With such a Gallant, sowsing their dried tongues
In Rhemish, Deal, and Back-rag: Then a fourth
Says he knows all her haunts and Meetings
At Bridgfoot, Bear, the Tons, the Cats, the Squirels;
Where, when, and in what company to find her,
But that he scorns to do poor me the favour:
Because a light piece is too good for me.
While a fifth youth with counterfeit show of pity,
Meets, and bewails my case, and says he knows
A Lord that must be nameless keeps my wife
In an enchanted Castle two miles West
Upon the River side: but all conclude --

That you are a monstrous cuckold, and deserve it.

Knowing my safety, then, and their foul errors,
Have I not cause to laugh? Yes, in abundance.
Now note my plot, the height of my invention
I have already given out to some,
That I have certain knowledge you are dead,
And have had private burial in the country;
At which my shame, not grief, forbad my presence:
Yet some way to make known unto the world
A husbands duty, I resolve to make
A certain kind of feast, which shall advance
My joy above the reach of spite or chance.

May I partake, Sir, of your rich conceit?

To morrow night expires your limited month
Of vowed virginity; It shall be such a night;
In which I mean thy beauty shall break forth
And dazzle with amazement even to death
Those my malicious enemies, that rejoiced
In thy supposed escape, and my vexation.
I will invite them all to such a feast
As shall fetch blushes from the boldest guest;
I have the first course ready --

And if I
Fail in the second, blame my houswifery.

Away, some body comes; I guess of them
That have jeered me, whom I must jeer again.
Gallants you're welcome. I was sending for ye.

To give us that we come for?

What may that be?

Trifles you have o^ ours.

Of yours, my Masters?

Yes, you have in mortgage
Three-score pound Land of mine inheritance.

And my Annuity of a hundred Marks.

And Jewels, Watches, Plate, and clothes of mine,
Pawned for four hundred pound. Will you restore all?

You know all these were forfeited long since,
Yet I'll come roundly to you, Gentlemen.
Ha'you brought my moneys, and my interest?

No surely. But we will come as roundly to you
As moneyless Gentlemen can. You know
Good Offices are ready money Sir.

But have you Offices to sell, good Sirs.

We mean to do you Offices worth your money.

As how, I pray you.

Marry, Sir, as thus;
We will help you to a man that has a friend --

That knows a party, that can go to the house --

Where a Gentleman dwelt, that knew a Scholar

That was exceeding well acquainted with a Traveler

That made report of a great Magician beyond the Seas.

That might ha'been as likely as any man in all the world.

To have helped you to your wife again.

You are the merriest mates that ere I cop'd withal.
But to be serious Gentlemen, I am satisfied
Concerning my lost Wife. She has made even
With me and all the World.

What is she dead?

Dead, Dead: And therefore as men use to mourn
For kind and loving wives, and call their friends
Their choicest friends unto a solemn banquet
Served out with sighs and sadness, while the widowers
Blubber, and bath in tears (which they do seem
To wring out of their fingers ends and noses)
And after all the demure ceremony.
Are subject to be thought dissemblers, I
(To avoid the scandal of Hypocresie,
Because 'tis plain she loved me not) invite
You and your like that loved her and not me,
To see me in the pride of my rejoicings,
You shall find entertainment worth your company,
And that let me entreat to morrow night.

You shall ha'mine.

To morrow night say you.

Yes gallants: fail not, as you wish to view
Your mortgages and pawns again. Adieu.

We came to jear the Jew, and he jears us.

How glad the raschal is for his Wives death.

An honest man could not have had such luck.

He has some further end in it, could we guess it,
Then a mere merriment for his dead wives niddance.

Perhaps he has got a new Wife, and intends
To make a funeral and a Marriage feast
In one to hedge in charges.

He'il be hanged rather then marry again.

Zooks would he had some devilish jealous hilding,
'Twould be a rare addition to his mirth,
For us to bring our antic in betwixt'em
Of his changeling Bastard.

How ere we'll grace his feast with our presentment.

When's the Buzzard?

We left him with his foster father, Arnold,
B^sy at rehearsal practising their parts.

They shall be perfect by to morrow night.

If not unto our profit, our delight.

Brother be comforted.

Let not the name
Or empty sound of comfort mix with th'air
That must invade these ears: They are not capable,
Or, if they be, they dare not, for themselves,
Give the conveyance of a syllable
Into my heart, that speak not grief or sorrow.

Be grieved then, I'll grieve with you: For each sigh
You waste for Millicents untimely death
I'll spend a tear for your as fruitless sorrow.

That's most unsuitable; you're no company
For me to grieve with if you grieve for me;
Take the same cause with me; you are no friend
Or sister else of mine. It is enough
To set the world a weeping!

So it is;
All but the stony part of't.

Now you are right. Her husband's of that part;
He cannot weep by nature: But I'll find
A way by art in Chemistry to melt him.
At least extract some drops. But do you weep
Indeed for Millicent? What, all these tears?

All for your love.

She is my love indeed; and was my wife.
But for the empty name of marriage only,
But now she's yours for ever. You enjoy her.
In her fair blessed memory; in her goodness,
And all that has prepared her way for glory.

Let me embrace thee sister. How I reverence
Any fair honour that is done to her,
Now thou shalt weep no more: Thou hast given me comfort
In showing me how she's mine. And tears indeed
Are all too weak a sacrifice for her
But such as the heart weeps.

Sit down brother.
Sing boy the mornful song I bad you practise.

Call you this mournful. Tis a wanton air.
Go you're a naughty child indeed, I'll whip you
If you give voice unto such notes,

I know not brother how you like the air,
But in my mind the words are sad, Pray read'em.

They are sad indeed* How now my boy, dost weep?
I am not angry now.

I do not weep,
Sir, for my self. But there's a youth without
(A handsome youth) whose sorrow works in me:
He says he wants a service, and seeks yours.

Dost thou not know him*

No: but I pity him.

O, good boy, that can weep for a strangers misery!
The sweetness of thy dear compassion
Even melts me too. What does he say he is.

Tis that Sir, that will grieve you when you hear it.
He is a poor kinsman to the gentlewoman
Lately deceased that you so loved and mourn for.

And dost thou let him stay without so long?
Merciless Villain! run and fetch him quickly.

O brother --

Sister, can I be too zealous
In such a cause as this? For hark you, sister,

There was no way like this to get within'em,
Now courage keep true touch with me. I'll vex
Your cunning and unnatural purpose, brother,
If I do nothing else.

Sir, here's the youth?

A lovely one he is, and wondrous like her,
O let me run and clasp him; hang about him,
And yoke him to me with a thousand kisses!
I shall be troublesome and heavy to thee,
With the pleased weight of my incessant love.
Youth of a happy kindred, which foreruns
A happy fortune ever. Pray thee, sister,
Is he not very like her?

If I durst
I would now say, this were the better beauty,
For it resembles Arthurs.

I'st not her face? you do not mind me sister:

Hers was a good one once, and this is now.

Why sister, you were wont to take delight
In any comfort that belonged to me;
And help to carry my joys sweetly: now
You keep no constant course with me.

This man
Melts me -- alas, Sir, I am a poor boy.

What, and allied to her? impossible!
Where ere thou liv'st her name's a fortune to thee.
Her memory amongst good men sets thee up;
It is a word that commands all in this house.

This snare was not well laid. I fear my self.

Live my companion; my especial sweet one,
My brother and my bedfellow thou shalt be.

By lakin but I must not, though I find
But weak matter against it. -- This my courage!

She took from earth, how kind is heaven, how good
To send me yet, a joy so near in blood!
Good noble youth, if there be any more
Distres'd of you, that claims alliance with her
Though a far off; deal freely; let me know it,
Give me their sad names; I'll seek'em out,
And like a good great man, in memory humble
Ne'er cease until I plant'em all in fortunes,
And see'em grow about me.

I hear of none, my self excepted, Sir.

Thou shalt have all my care then, all my love.

What make I here? I shall undo my self.

Yet note him sister.

I there's the mark my malice chiefly aims at;
But then, he stands so near, I wound him too.
I feel that must not be. Art must be shown here.

Come, you shall kiss him for me, and bid him welcome.

You are most welcome, Sir, and were her name
To which you are allied, a stranger here,
Yet, Sir, believe me, you in those fair eyes
Bring your own welcome with you.

Never came Malice among so sweet a people.
It knows not how to look, nor I on them.

Let not your gentle modesty make you seem
Ungentle to us, by turning so away.

That's well said sister, but he will and shall
Be bolder with us, ere we part.

I shall too much I fear. --

Come gentle blessing,
Let not a misery be thought on here,
(If ever any were so rude to touch thee)
Between us we'll divide the comfort of thee.

I have heard thy story often, and with pity
As often thought upon it, and that the father,
Of my best loved Theophilus, together with
His, then, friend Master Meanwell (who have since
Become each others deathsman astis thought)
By suits in Law wrought the sad overthrow
Of thy poor Fathers fortune; by which means,
Poor Gentleman he was enforced to leave
His native Country to seek foreign means
To maintain life.

Or rather to meet death.
For since his traval, which is now six years,
I never heard of him.

Much pitiful!

So is your story, Mistress unto me.
But let us dry our eyes; and know we must not
Stick in the mire of pity; but with labour
Work our delivery: yours is now at hand
If you set will and brain to it. But my honour
(If a poor wench may speak so) is so cracked
Within the ring, as 'twill be hardly solder'd
By any art. If on that wicked fellow,
That struck me into such a desperate hazard.

He will be here to night, and all the crew
And this must be the night of my delivery,
I am prevented else for ever, wench.

Be sure, among the guests, that you make choice
Of the most civil one to be your convoy,
And then let me alone to act your Mores part.

Peace, he comes.

I'll to my shift then.

Wher's my hidden beauty?
That shall this night be glorious.

I but wait the good hour
For my deliverance out of this obscurity.

Tis at hand.
So are my guests. See some of'em are entered.
O my blithe friend, Master Nathaniel, welcome.
And Master Arthur Meanwell as I take it.

Yes, Sir, a Gentleman late possessed with sadness,
Whom I had much a do to draw along
To be partaker more of your mirth then cheer.
You say here shall be mirth. How now, what's that?
Ha'vou a black coney berry in your house?

Stay Catelina. Nay, she may be seen.
For know, Sirs, I am mortified to beauty
Since my wives death. I will not keep a face
Better then this under my roof I ha'sworn.

You were too rash, Sir, in that oath, if I
Mav be allowed to speak.

Tis done and past, Sir.

If I be not taken with yon'd funeral face,
And her two eyes the scutcheons, would I were whipped now.

Suppose your friends should wish you to a match
Prosperous in wealth and honour.

I'll hear of none, nor you if you speak so.

Sir, I ha'done.

It is the handsom'st Rogue
I have ere seen yet of a deed of darkness;
Tawny and russet faces I have dealt with,
But never came so deep in blackness yet.

Come hither Catelyna. You shall see, Sir,
What a brave wench she shall be made anon
And when she dances how you shall admire her.

Will you have dancing here to night.

Yes I have borrowed other Moors of Merchants
That trade in Barbary, whence I had mine own here,
And you shall see their way and skill in dancing.

He keeps this Rie-loaf for his own white white tooth
With confidence none will cheat him of a bit;
I'll have a sliver though I loose my whittle.

Here take this key, twill lead thee to those ornaments
That decked thy mistress lately. Use her casket,
And with the sparklingst of her jewels shine;
Flame like a midnight beacon with that face,
Or a pitched ship a fire; the streamers glowing
And the keel mourning, (how I shall rejoice
At these prepostrous splendours) get thee glorious;
Be like a running fire-work in my house.

He sets me more a fire at her. Well old stick breech
If I do chance to clap your Barbary buttock
In all her bravery, and get a snatch
In an odd corner, or the dark to night
To mend your cheer, and you hereafter hear on it,
Say there are as good stomachs as your own,
Hist, Negro, hist.

No fee, O no, I darea notta.

Why, why -- pish -- pox I love thee,

O no de fine white Zentilmanna
Cannot a love a the black a thing a.

Cadzooks the best of all wench.

O take -- a heed -- a my mastra see -- a.

When we are alone, then wilt thou.

Then I shall speak a more a.

And I'll not lose the Moor-a for more then I
Will speak-a.

I muse the rest of my invited Gallants
Come not away.

Zooks the old angry justice.

How comes it Sir, to pass, that such a news
Is spread about the town? is my Niece dead,
And you prepared to mirth Sir, hah?
Is this the entertainment I must find
To welcome me to town?

She is not dead, Sir. But take you no notice
You shall have instantly an entertainment, that
Shall fill you all with wonder.

Sure he is mad;
Or do you understand his meaning sirs?
Or how or where his wife died?

I know nothing;
But give me leave to fear, by his wild humour,
He's guilty of her death; therefore I hope
He will hang himself anon before us all
To raise the mirth he speaks of.

Fie upon you.
Yet trust me, sir, there have been large constructions,
And strong presumptions, that the ill made match
Betwixt her youthful beauty and his covetous age;
Between her sweetness and his frowardness
Was the unhappy means of her destruction;
And you that gave strength to that ill tied knot
Do suffer sharply in the worlds opinion,
While she, sweet virgin, has its general pity.

Pray what have you been to her? I ne'er found you
Appear a suitor to her.

I ne'er saw her,
Nor ever should have sought her, Sir; For she
Was only love to my sworn enemy,
On whom yet (were she living and in my gift
Rather a thousand times I would bestow her
Then on that man that had, and could not know her.

I have done ill; and wish I could redeem
This act with half my estate.

This Devels bird,
This Moor runs more and more still in my mind.
O are you come? And ha'you brought your scene
Of Mirth along with you?

Yes, and our actors
Are here at hand: But we perceive much business
First to be set a foot. Here's Revels towards.

A dance of furies or of Blackamoors
Is practising within;

But first there is to be some odd collation
In stead of supper.

Cheap enough I warrant,
But saw you not a Moor-hen there amongst'em.

A pretty little Rogue, most richly decked
With pearls, chains and jewels. She is queen
Of the Nights triumph.

If you ^h^nce to spy me
Take her aside, say nothing.

Thou wilt filch
Some of her jewels perhaps.

I'll draw a lot
For the best jewel she wears. But mum my Masters.

Enter the house pray Gentlemen: I am ready
Now with your entertainment.

We'll follow you.

N^w for six penny custards, a pipkin of baked
Pears, three sawcers of stewed prunes, a groats worth
Of strong ale, and two peniworth of Gingerbread.

If she does live (as he bears me in hand
She is not dead) I'll tell you briefly, Sir,
If all the law bodily and ghostly,
And all the conscience too, that I can purchase
With all the wealth I have can take her from him,
I will recover her, and then bestow her
(If you refuse her) on your so you speak of,
(whose right she is indeed) rather then he
Shall hold her longer. Now mine eyes are opened.
Will you walk in.

I pray excuse me, Sir,
I cannot fit my self to mirth.

Your pleasure.
Mil. Have I with patience waited for this ^ou^,
And does fear check me now? I'll break through all,
And trust my self with yon'd mildeGentleman.
He cannot but be noble.

A goodly creature!
The Rooms illumined with her; yet her look
Sad, and cheek pale, as if a sorrow sucked it.
How came she in? What is she? I am fear*struck.
Tis some unresting shadow. Or, if not,
What makes a thing so glorious in this house,
The master being an enemy to beauty?
She modestly makes to me.

Noble Sir, --

Speaks too.

If ever you durst own a goodness,
Now crown it by an act of honour and mercy.

Speak quickly; lose no time then: say, what are you?
You look like one that should not be delai'd.

I am th'unfortunate woman of this house,
To all men's thoughts at rest. This is the face
On which the Hell of jealousy abused
The hand of Heaven, to fright the world withal.

Were you the seeming Moor was here?

The same;
And only to your secrecy and pity
I have ventured to appear my self again.

What's to be done? Pray speak, and tis performed.

In trust and Manhood Sir, I would commit
A great charge to you, even my life and honour
To free me from this den of misery.

A blessed tasque! But when you are freed Lady --

I would desire Sir, then to be convei'd. --

Whither? to whom? speak quickly: why do you stoop?

Pray let that rest. I will relieve your trouble
When I am freed from hence, and use some others.

Nay, that were cruelty. As you love goodness tell me.

Why dare you bear me Sir, to one you hate.

What's that, if you love? Tis your peace I wait on.
I look upon your service, not mine own.
Were he the mortall'st enemy flesh bred up
To you I must be noble.

You profess --

By all that's good and gracious, I will die
Ere I forsake you, and not set you safe
Within those walls you seek.

Then, as we pass
I'll tell you where they stand, Sir.

You shall grace me.

Now to our Revels. Sit ye, sit ye gallants
Whilst, Uncle, you shall see how I'll requite
The masque they lent me on my wedding night.
Twas but lent Gentlemen, your masque of horns,
And all the private jears and public scorns
Y'have cast upon me since. Now you shall see
How I'll return them; and remarried be.

I hope he'll marry his Moor to anger us.

I'll give her something with her, if I catch her,
And't be but in the cole-house.

Attend Gentleman.

The Queen of Ethiop dreamt upon a night
Her black womb should bring forth a virgin white.

She told her king; he told thereof his Peers.
Till this white dream filled their black heads with fears:

A whoreson blockheads.

Blackheads I sai'd. I'll come to you anon

He puts the blockheads on'hem grossly.

Brave impudent rogue. He made the speeches last year
Before my Lord Marquess of Fleet Conduit.

Till this white dream filled their blackheads with fear,
For tis no better then a Prodegy
To have white children in a black country.
So 'twas decreed that if the child proved white,
It should be made away. O cruel spite!
The Queen cried out, and was delivered
Of child black as you see: Yet Wizards sed
That if this damsel lived married to be
To a white man, she should be white as he.

The moral is, If Quicksands marry her,
Her face shall be white as his conscience.

The careful Queen, conclusion for to try,
Sent her to merry England charily
(The fairest Nation man yet ever saw)
To take a husband; such as I shall draw,
Being an Egyptian Prophet.

Draw me, and i'll hang thee.

Now I come to you, Gentlemen.

Now mark my Jeeres.

You must not have her: For I find by your hand
You have forfeited the mortgage of your land.

Pox o'your Palmistrie.

Now me.

Nor you: For here I plainly see
You have sold and spent your lifes Annuity.

The devil take him, made thee a soothsayer.

I find from whence your skill comes. Yet take me
For thy little Princess of darkness, and if
I rub her not as white as another can
Let me be hung up with her for a new
Sign of the labour in vain.

Nor you, sir: For
T^e only suit you wear smells of the chest
That holds in Limbo Lavender all your rest.

Would his brains were in thy belly that keeps the key on it.

This is the worthy man, whose wealth and wit,
To make a white one, must the black mark hit.

Your jeers are answered, gallants. Now your dance.

We applaud your devise, and you'll give me leave
To take your black bride here, forth in a dance.

With all my heart, sir.

Music, play a Galliard,
You know what you promised me, Bullis.

But howa can ita be donea.

How I am taken with the elevation of her nostrils.

Play a little quicker -- Hark you -- if I lead you
A dance to a couch or a bed side, will you follow me?

I will doa my besta.

So, so; quick Music, quick.

O ugly! call you this dancing; ha, ha, ha.

Do you laugh at me.

By your leave Gentlefolks.

O brave, o brave.

How now.

What are these?

Hack ye there, hack ye there,
O brave pipes. Hack ye there.
Hay toodle loodle loodle loo.

What are you men or devils?

You are advised enough: Sir, if you please
But to be short, I'll show you I am a Norfolk man,
And my name is John Hulverhead.

Hold thy peace.

You cannot hear o'chat side it seems.

I know thee not, not I.

But you know my brother Matthew Hulverhead
Deceased, with whom you placed this simple child of yours.

I placed no child in Norfolk nor Suffolk nor any
Folk I -- say thou mistookst me: I'll reward thee. Go.

I cannot hear o'that ear neither, sir.

What's the matter, Mr. Quicksands?

Ha'you any more jeeres to put upon us? what are these?

Hay toodle loodle loodle loo.

Get you out of my house.

I may not till I be righted. I come for right, and
I will have right, or the best of the City shall
Hear on it.

I swear the Rascals act it handsomely.

What art thou fellow? What dost thou seek?

Tell that Gentleman: He is an upright Majestrate
And will see thee righted.

I am a poor Norfolk man, sir. And I come to ease myself of a charge, by
putting off a child nat'ral to the natu^al father here.


My child! Am I his father? Dare thou speak it.

Be not ashamed on it, sir: You are not the first grave and wise Citizen that
has got an idiot.

Here's good stuff towards.

Ha, ha, ha -- with a Hay toodle loodle loodle loo.

How should I get him. I was never married till this month.

How does other bawdy Bachelors get children?

With a hay toodle loodle loodle loo, c.

Have you been a bastard-getter and marry my Niece.

Now it works.

I^e teach you to get a bastard, sirrah.

He needs none o'your skill it seems.

Hay toodle loodle, c.

Well, Gentlemen, to take your wonder off,
I will lay truth before you.
For a poor servant that I had, I undertook and paid
For keeping of an idiot.

Who, your man Buzzard?

Even he.

Hay toodle loodle, c.

'Tis like this is the child. But for a certain sum
Which I did pay, 'twas articled, that I should ne'er be
Troubled with it more.

Now what say you to that Sir?

'Tis not denied Sir, There was such agreement,
But now he is another kind of charge.

Why, he gets something towards his living me thinks.

Yes, he has learned to thrip among the Mothers;
But Sir, withal, to do more harm then good by it,
And that's the charge I speak of: we are not bound
To keep your child, and your childes children too.

How's that?

Sir, by his cunning at the Rock,
And twirling of his spindle on the Thrip-skins,
He has fetched up the bellies of sixteen
Of his Thrip-sisters.

Hay toodle, loodle, loodle, c.

Is't possible.

So well he takes after his father here it seems.

Take heed o'that friend: you heard him say it was his mans child.

He sha'not fright me with that, though it be
A great mans part to turn over his bastards
To his servants. I am none of his hirelings, nor
His Tenants I. But I know what I say; and I know
What I come about; and not without advise; And you
May know, that Norfolk is not without as knavish
Council, as another County may be. Let his man Buzz.
Be brought forth, and see what he will say to it.

Hay toodle loodle, c.

Wretch that I was to put away that fellow!
But stay! where is my wife? my wife, my wife --

What say you, Sir?

My Moor I would say. Which way went my Moor?

Your Ethiopian Princess.


is gone to dance with her in private, because you laughed him out of
countenance here.

Mischief on mischief! worse and worse I fear.

What do you fear, why stare you? Are you frantic?

I must have wits and fits, my fancies and fegaries.

Your jeers upon poor Gallants.

How do you feel your self.

Hay toodle loodle, c.

Ask your father blessing Timsy.

Hay toodle loodle, c.

Upon your knees man.

Upon all my knees. A -- ah. Hay toodle loodle.

What was't to you, you slaves?
Must you be peeping.

What's the matter now?

What was't to you, ye Rascals?

It is to us Sir, We were hired to dance and to speak speeches; and to do the
Gentleman true service in his house: And we will not see his house made a bawdy
house, and make no speech o'that.


What is the business?

Marry Sir a naughty business. This Gentleman has committed a deed of darkness
with your Moor, Sir; We all saw it.


What deed of darkness? speak it plainly.

Darkness or lightness; call it which you will.
They have lain together; made this same a bawdy house;
How will you have it?

Undone, most wretched. O, I am confounded.
I see no art can keep a woman honest.

I love her, and will justify my Act.

And I the best of any man on earth.

Thou speak good English now.

O Ruin, ruin, ruin --

Hay toodle loodle, c.

Why take you on so, for an ugly fiend?

She is my wife, Gentlemen.

How Sir, your wife.

In conceit you mean.

I say my lawful wife; your Niece; and so disguised
By me on purpose.

I said he was mad before, ha, ha, ha.

Now I applaud my act, 'twas sweet and brave.

I'll be divorced before a Court in public.

Now will I use Authority and skill.
Friends, guard the doors. None shall depart the house.

Mun. Vin. Content, content.

Shall I, Sir, and my charge stay too?

Oh --

Marry Sir, shall you.

I fear we shall be smoked then.

No, no, fear nothing.

You know your Chamber huswife. I'll wait o'your Master
To night. We will not part until to morrow day,
Justice and Law lights every one his way.

Is this your merry night, Sir?

Oh -- oh -- oh -- o --

Why roar you so?

It is the Cuckolds howl. A common cry about the City.

Oh o -- Buzz. Hay toodle loodle, c.

Now my good Host, since you have been our friend
And only council keeper in our absence,
To you, before we visit our own houses
We will render a relation of our journey,
And what the motive was that drew us forth.
'Tis true, we did pretend a deadly quarrel
At a great bowling match upon Black-heath;
Went off; took horse; and several ways, forecast
To meet at Dover, where we met good friends,
And in one Bark past over into France:
Here 'twas supposed to fight, like fashion followers
That thither fly, as if no sand but theirs
Could dry up English blood.

Now, by the way,
Suppose that supposition had been true,
And the supposed deaths of you, and you
Had moved your sons to combat in earnest,
And both been killed indeed, as you in jest,
Where had been then your witty subtilty,
My noble Meanwell, and my brave Rashly?
Ha! have I twight ye there?

Thou keepst thy humour still my running Host.

My humour was, nor is, nor must be lost:
But, to the question, was it wisely done,
When each of you might so have lost a son?

We had no fear of that Sir, by the Rule,
The common Rule o'th'world. Where do you find
Sons that have lives and Lands, will venture both
For their dead Fathers that are gone and cared for?
Nor was it only to make trial of
What husbands they would be; how spend, or save;
How manage, or destroy; how one or both
Might play the Tyrants over their poor Tenants,
Yet fall by Prodigality into th'Compters:
And then the dead by pulling off a Beard,
After a little chiding and some whining,
To set the living on their legs again,
And take 'em into favour; pish, old play-plots.
No Sir, our business runs another course;
Know you this Gentleman yet?

Nor yet, nor yet;
Best wits may have bad memories; I forget.

It is my part to speak. Mine Host, y'have known me,
My name is Winloss; a poor Gentleman,
Yet richer, by my liberty, then I was
For six years space, till these good Gentlemen
In charity redeemed me.

Master Winloss!
I thought I could as soon forgot my Chriss-Cross,
Yet (pardon me) you have been six years gone,
And all of them in prison saving one,
In Dunkerk as I wean.

It is most true;
And that from thence these Gentlemen redeemed me
At their own charge, by paying five hundred pound,
Which was my Ransom.

'Tis a rare example.

Worthy brass tables, and a pen of steel.

No more good neighbour Winloss. What we did
Was to discharge our conscience of a burden
Got (and 'twas all we got) by your undoing,
In a sad suit at Law.

I do remember;
And, without ruin I'll tell you, That sad cause,
In which you joined against him, overthrew him
And all his Family: But this worthy act
Of yours in his enlargement, crowns your piety,
And puts him in a way of better Fortune,
Then his first tottering estate could promise.

Shut up that point. You have heard no ill, you say,
Among our sons and daughters in our absence.

Not any Sir at all. But, Mr. Winloss,
You that have past so many sorrows, can
(I make no doubt) here one with manly patience.

Tis of my daughter Phillis! Is she dead?

Tis well and't be no worse with her: I fear
She's gone the the other way of all flesh, do you hear?

Why dost thou tell him this?

To have him right
His daughters wrong upon that wicked beast
That has seduced her.

Who is't? can thou tell?

Even the Ran^k-rider of the town, Sir, one
Master Nathaniel Banelasse, if you know him.

He has my sons acquaintance.

And mine's too.

You may be proud on'^, if they escape his doctrine.

But does he keep my daughter to his lust?

No, Sir, tis worse then so. He has cast her off
To the common, as tis feared.

Owretchedness!

How came thou by this knowledge.

Sir, I'll tell you.
I have, i'th'house, a guest, was once your man,
And served your son, since you went ore I'm sure on'c,
Though now he has got a young spark to his Master,
That has a brace of gueldings in my stable;
And lusty ones they are. That's by the way.

But to the point, I pray thee.

Sir, the young gallant is abroad, the man
Scults close i'th'^ouse here, and has done these two days
Spending his time with me in drink and talk.
Most of his talk runs upon wenches mainly;
And who loves who, and who keeps home, and so forth;
And he told me the tale that I tell you
Twixt Banelasse and your done and undone daughter.

Mine host -- cry mercy Gentlemen --

Nay, nay, come on.

I told you he was very shy to be seen.

My old master alive again? and he that he killed too?

Whom do you serve? was I so ill a master,
That, in my absence, you forsook my children?
Or how have they misus'd you? Why dost look
So like an apprehended thief? I fear
Thou serve some robber, or some murderer,
Or art become thy self one. If the Devil
Have so possessed thee, strive to turn him out:
He add my prayers to help thee. Whats the matter?

O honoured master! I'll keep nothing from you.
There is an act of horror now on foot,
Upon revenge of your supposed murder,
Of which to stand and tell the circumstance,
Would wast the time and hinder the prevention
Of your sons murder, and your daughters ruin.

O fearful!

Let not your amazement drown
Your reason in delay; your sudden hast
Was never so required as now. Stay not
To ask my why, or whither. As ye go
I shall inform ye.

Go, we follow thee.

What a fierce conflict twixt revenge and love,
Like an unnatural civil war, now rages
In my perplexed breast. There, fight it out;
To it Pel-mel my thoughts. The battel's hot.
Now for the day! revenge begins to stagger,
And her destracted Army at an instant
R^uted and put to flight. All conquering love,
Thou hast got the victory; and now I sue
(Like a rent kingdom by self-opposite thoughts)
Unto thy sovereignty, to be the liege-right.
Take me to thy protection, kingly love,
And having captivated my revenge,
O, play not now the Tyrant. A firm hope
Persuades me no: But when I shall
Reveal my self I shall obtain Theophilus love.
Which now is ten times sweeter in my thought
Then my revenge was, when 'twas first begot.
What, still alone? we have been seeking thee.

O 'tis the service that I ow you Sir.

Indeed you are too pensive: two whole days
And nights among us, and no more familiar?

May I crave your name, Sir?

That's to little purpose,
My business is the thing -- yonder's the star!
What young Gentleman is that your Mistress arm
Appears so courteous too?

One she thinks well on Sir,
No matter for his name, as you said, neither.

He seems some well graced suitor. 'Tis my fear,
If he should now -- I must be just however.

Sir, a Gentleman desires to speak with you.

Dost thou not know his name?

He will not tell it Sir.

You treacherous boy, do you bring you know not whom?
O 'tis the Gentleman I was so bound to, Sister:
The welcom'st man alive; Thanks my good boy.
What's she he brings in veiled, and this way leads?

Sir, though I am still a stranger in my visit,
To works of gentleness, I am partly known.
There (if you chance t'enquire of me hereafter
(When I shall more deserve your inquisition)
I may be found, if not exact in service,
A least a poor pretender in my wishes:
And so presenting this white gift, (more modest
Then the most secret duty of mans friendship
Can ever be) I take my leave --

This man
Would breed, at every time ht's seen, a wonder!
Sir, leave me not thus lost: let me once know you,
And what this mystery means? This bears a shape
I may not entertain: I have set my vow
Against all woman kind, since Heaven was married
To my first love; and must not willingly
Discover a temptation with mine own hand.

How shy and nice we are to meet our happiness!
Like dying wretches, '^raid to go to rest.
Because you shall be guilty of no breach
I'll open the Casket for you.

Bless me, it is --
Warm, so Love cherish me and comfortable.

O death, my hopes are blasted.

How is it with you, sir.

Might a man credit his own senses now
This were my Millicent. How think you, sister?

Indeed I am so, my Theophilus.

She lives, and he is lost to me for ever,
I shall be straight discovered too. False Love
Thou hast dealt loosely with me; And Revenge
I re-invoke thy nobler spirit: Now
Possess me wholly; let it not be thought
I came and went off idly.

Sir, something troubles you. See your kinswoman
My brother stands entranced too; Brother, brother*
Noble Lady, speak to him.

I was in my discovery too sudden.
Strong rapture of his joy transmutes him -- Sir,
Be not so wonder-struck; or, if you be,
Let me conjure you by the love you bore me,
R^turn unto your self again. Let not
A wandering thought fly from you, to examine
From whence, or how I came: If I be welcome
I am your own and Millicent.

And in that
So blessed a treasure, that the wealth and strength
Of all the world shall never purchase from me.
Heaven may be pleased again to take thee, but
I'll hold so fast, that we'll go hand in hand;
Besides, I hope his mercy will not part us.
But where's the man now more desired then ever
That brought you hither?

You ask in vain for him.
I can resolve you all; but for the present
He will be known to none.

This is a cruel goodness: To put thankfulness
Out of all action. Sirah, how went he?

I know not, Sir, he vanished suddenly.

Vanished! good Lucy help to hold her fast
She may not vanish too. Spirits are subtle.

This was my fear. Will you have patience,
And fit but in this chair while I relate my story.

I'll be as calm in my extremest deeps
As is the couch where a sweet conscience sleeps.

Tis now determinate as fate; and so
At the whole cluster of'em. Bless me ha!
My father living! Then the cause is dead
Of my revenge.

What is he killed out right.
Or else but hurt? Theophilus! my boy!
Dead, past recovery. Stay the murdress there.
Look you, Sir, to her. I suspect your son too
Is not without a hand in it by the hast
We met him in.

He is not hurt at all
My honoured father, as I desire your blessing,
But stricken with an ecstasy of joy.

Look up my boy. How dost?here's none but friends.

Sure, sure we're all then in Elisium
Where all are friends and filled with equal joy.
Earth can have no felicity like this.
If thisbe any thing.

Thou can not see nothing,
Look well about thee man.

I see, I feel, I hear and know ye all:
But who knows what he knows, sees, feels, or hears?
Tis not an age for man to know himself in.

He is not mad I know by that.

If I know any thing, you are my father --

Thou art a wise child.

And I beseech your blessing.

Thou hast it. Millicont, I have heard your story,
And Lucy, you betwixt you sooth his fancy,
He will be well anon. Keep'em company Arthur,
And Lucy, bid him welcome.

More then life, Sir.

You Dionysia would be chid a little;
But, Sir, let me entreat her parden^

Dry your eyes: you have it.
Go instantly resume your sexes habit,
And with the rest be ready, if we call ye
To Quicsands house. The rumour of our coming
Already calls us thither to be assistant
To justice Testy in a ponderous difference.

How does he now?

He's fallen into a slumber.

In with him all I pray.

He shall have all our cares.

Come my friend Meanwell. Now to Quick-sands cause,
To keep it out of wrangling lawyers jaws.
The face of danger is almost made clean
And may conclude all in a comic scene.

Come, we will hear this cause tried.

See the Judges
Have taken their seats, while we stand here for evidence.

My worthy friends, you're come unto a cause
As rare, as was your unexpected coming
From the supposed grave --

To the point I pray.

How quick you are! Good Mr. Rashly, know
(Though I craved your assistance) only I
Supply the chief place in Authority.

And much good do'c you. I have other business --
Your Niece Sir was too good for my poor son.

How's that?

Nay Gentlemen, we came to end
A business: Pray begin no new one first.

Well Sir, I ha'done.

Pray Sir fall to the question.

Bring in the parties.
The first branch of the question rises here
If Quicksands wife, my Niece, be dead or living
Speak Gentlemen. What can you say to this?

Quicksands affirmed to us, that she was dead.

Though, since in a destracted passion
He says she lives.

She lives, and is that strumpet,
From whom I sue to be divorced.

That Moor, there?
Did you wed her since your fair wives decease?

Tha^ same is she, and all the wives I had
That black is but an artificial tincture
Laid by my jealousy upon her face.

This is most strange.

Braver and braver still,
I aimed but at a cloud and clasped a June,
Will you be only mine?

I have sworn it ever.

Then I am made for ever.

Remove her, and let instant trial be made
To take the blackness off.

Then if her shame,
And my firm truth appear not, punish me.

However, your consent to be divorced
From Millicent is irrecoverable.

Before you all, I'll forfeit my estate
If ere I re-accept her.

Then she's free.

Now Mr. Banelass --

Now for the honour of Wenchers.

Your fact is manifested and confessed.

In fewest words it is.

Are you content
To take this woman now in question,
If she be found no Moor to be your Wife,
In holy marriage to restore her honour?

Or else, before you all, let me be torn
To pieces; having first those dearest members,
In which I have most delighted, daubed with honey*

This protestation
Is clear, without respect of portion, now,
Or that she is my Niece: For you must know
She is no Niece of mine that could transgress
In that lean kind: Nor must she ever look
For favour at my hands.

I am content, to take her as she is,
Not as your Niece, but as his counterfeit servant,
Hoping he will give me with her all about her.

My chains, and Jewels, worth a thousand pounds,
I'll pay it for my folly.

'Twil be twice
The price of my pawned goods. I'll put the rest
Up for your jeers past on my friends and me.

You are agreed.

To take her with all faults.

I take you at your word.

Hah --

Hell and her changes.

Lead by the hope of justice, I am bold
To fix here fast, here to repair my ruins.

The devil looks ten times worse with a white face,
Give me it black again.

Are we not one, you know from the beginning?

Get thee from me.

Sirrah you have your suit and your desert,
'Tis your best part to pass it patiently.

'Tis Winloss daughter; we have found the error.

I am confounded here. Where is my Wife?

I, that's the point must now be urged. The Law
Asks her at your hands. Answer me, where is she?

I am at my joys end, and my wits together.

You have brought her fame in question: Tis revenged
Now you are in both for her life and honour.

S^eak villain, Murderer, where is my Niece?

I have snar'd my self exceeding cunningly;
That quean there knows.

Take heed, Sir, what you say,
If she must be my wife. Hands off I pray,
These are my goods she wears. Give me'em, Phil.
For fear he snatch, I'll put'em in my pockets.

Sweet heart, my own will hold'em.

Sweet heart already! we are soon familiar.

You know we are no strangers.

Well Mr. Quicksands: because you cannot answer
(To put you by the fear of halter-stretching)
Since y'have engaged your word and whole estate
To be divorced: And you good Mr. Testy,
I^ you'll be willing yet that my poor son
To wed your Niece, as I shall find it lawful,
I'll undertake her safe recovery.

I have in heart given her your son already.

And he has her already.
As for example, see Sir.

See, see, the heaven that I am justly fallen from,
O may I yet find favour.

Never here.
Had thou not given thy faith to a divorce,
On forfeiture of thine estate, which thou
Dost hold more precious; or could now redeem
That great engagement; and then multiply
Thy past estate into a tenfold sum.
Make me inheritrix of all; and last assure me
To die within a week, I'll not re-marry thee:
Adulterate beast, that brok'st thy former wedlock
In thy base lust with that thy servant there.

What a pox no, I trow -- My wife that must be?

'Twas your own doing, to put me to my shifts.

The devil shift you, then you will be sure
Of change enough.

O shame unto my blood.

I will henceforward council all my friends
To wed their whores at first, before they go
Out o'their hands.

How can you answer this?

I utterly deny it upon my oath.

So do I, and safely for any act.

That's well again.

It was but in attempt, I told my Mistress,
Had it been done, sure I should ne'er have spoke on it.

Those are the councels women can only keep.

Nothing in act I assure you.

In him 'twas foul enough though.

O hateful vice in age.

'Tis an old vice grown in him from his youth,
Of which bring forth for proof his bastard there.

I fear we shall be whipped for counterfeits;
My long coats have a grudging of the lash.

I see my old Masters face again, and I will
Fear nothing.

Then I'll bear up again --
Hay diddy daddy, come play with the Baby
Dindle dandle on thy knee, and give him a penny,
And a new coat, o ho --

My grief and shame is endless.

Let not grief master you, Mr. Quicksands.

We are your friends, and pity your afflictions.
What will you give us now and we will release you
For ever of this changeling charge of yours?

And prove he's not your bastard. Speak now roundly.

I'll cancel both your mortgages.

A match. Now look you Sir, your quandam servant,
All but the beard he wore; for loss of which
We will recompense him.

O Buzzard, Buzzard, Buzzard.

O Master, Master, Master. Your servant and no bastard,
Nor father of your Idiot in Norfolk,
He's there, and well Sir, I heard lately of him.

How could thou use me thus?

How could you turn me away so?

Ha, ha, ha. Come hither Buzzard. Thou shalt not want a M^ster.

Nor I, I hope, while my old Master lives. You're welcome home Sir.

And thou to me my good old servant Arnold.

Well fare a misery of a mans own seeking;
A tough one too will hold him tack to's end,
This comes with wiving at ^hreescore and three;
Would doting fools were all served so for me.

To shut up all: Theophilus, take my Niece,
We'll shortly find a Lawful course to marry ye.

I will take care for it. Arthur, take my daught^r well bestowed.
With a glad fathers blessing.

And mine with it, wishing my daughter were as

Sir take no thought for me, till my strict life
(By making man, and the world mere strangers to me,
In expiation of my late transgression
Against maiden modesty) shall render me
Some way deserving th'honour of a husband.

Spoke like a good new woman.

How now! do you look squeamish on your fortune,
Sir her's a Gentleman shall maintain her blood
As worthy as your own till you defile it,
Tis best you cleanse it again.

Cadzooks I will --
Forgiv'me for swearing, and turn Precisian, a^d pray
I'che nose that all my brethren whoremasters spend no worse.

My father --

O my child.

Though Mr. Quickssands made a Mock-marriage with his English Moor,
I'll not mock thee.

Enough, euough. I hope all pleased at last
But Master Quick-sands here.

I yield to fortune with an humble knee,
If you be pleased, your pleasure shall please me.

Now let me be a modost undertaker
For us the players, the play and the play-maker:
If we have failed in speech or Action, we
Must crave a pardon; If the Commedy
Either in mirth, or matter be not right,
As 'twas intended unto your delight,
The Poet in hope of favour doth submit
Unto your censure both himself and it,
Wishing that as you're judges in the cause
You judge but by the ancient Comic Laws.
Not by their course who in this latter age
Have sown such pleasing errors on the stage,
Which he no more will choose to imitate
Then they to fly from truth, and run the State.
But whether I avail, you have seen the play,
And all that in defence the Poet can say
Is, that he cannot mend it by a jest
In the Epilogue exceeding all the rest;
To send you off upon a champing bit,
More then the scenes afforded of his wit:
Nor studies he the Art to have it said
He skulks behind the hangings as afraid
Of a hard censure, or pretend to brag
Here's all your money again brought in in the bag
If you applaud not, when before the word
'Twas parcel'd out upon the shearing-board.
Such are fine helps; but are not practised yet
By our plain Poet who cannot forget
His wonted modesty, and humble way
For him and us, and his yet doubtful play,
Which, if received or but allow'd by you,
We and the play are yours, the Poet too.

