THE QUEEN And CONCUBINE.

A COMEDY

BY RICHARD BROM.

Asperius nihil est Humili cum surgit in Altum.
-- Si vis vincere, disc pati.
LONDON: Printed for A. Crook, and Hen. Brom, at the Gun in Ivy Lane. 1659.

what if a Day, or a month, or a year
Crown thy Delights
With a thousand wished contentings?
May not the chance of a Night or an Hour
Cross thy Delights
With as many sad Tormentings?
Fortune, Honour, Beauty, Birth,
Are but blossoms dying.
Wanton Pleasures, doting Mirth,
Are but Shadows flying.
All our Joys
Are but Toys,
Idle thoughts deceiving:
None hath power
Of an Hour
In our lifes bereaving.
HOw blessed are they that wast their wearied Hours
In solemn Groves, and solitary Bowers,
Where neither eye nor Ear
Can see or hear
The frantic mirth
And false Delights of frolic earth:
Where they may sit and pant,
And breath their pursy Souls;
Where neither grief consumes, nor griping want
Afflicts; nor sullen care controlls.
Away false Joys, ye Murder where ye kiss.
There is no Heaven to that, no Life to this.
THe clouds of Doubts and Fears are now dispersed,
And Joy, like the resplendent Sun, spreads forth
New life and spirit over all this Kingdom,
That lately gasp'd with Sorrow.

Now the Court
Puts on her rich Attire, and like fresh Flora,
After the blasts of winter, spreads her Mantle,
Decked with delightful Colours, to receive
The jocund Spring, that brings her this new life.

The Queen comes on, Joy in that face appears
That lately was overwhelmed in her tears,

Health and perpetual Joy unto the Queen,

Thanks my good Lords, I am prepared to meet it.
How neer's the King?

At hand, my Sovereign.

Welcome that happy word that leads the way,
But yet he is not come, he is not here:
Never so sweet an expectation
Appeared so tedious: pray set on apace,
That I may live yet to an interview
With my loved honoured Lord.

That your delay
May seem less grievous, hear this by the way,
A brief relation of the Kings success
In this his late well-won Battle.

Be it so.
But mention not his dangers, good my Lord.

That were to make his Conquest nothing worth:
It would make Victory upon his head,
As she had flown into his Burgonet,
To shroud her from a storm, and not to sit
Or rather stand triumphant on a foot,
With displayed wings upon the utmost Sprigg
Of his high stourishing P^ume, vaunting her safety
So perched and so supported by his Valour.

Pray Mother hear the dangers too; the worst
Will make the best the sweeter: I could hear
Of dangers yet to come; and Women may
Discourse of Perils past each Holy-day.

Well said, young Prince, right of the Kings own Metal:
And gracious Madam, let me tell you, though
You do not love to hear of blood and danger,
Y' have brought a Warrior forth, I do foresee't:
I love to speak my thoughts, I hope you trust me,
A right old Courtier I, still true to the Crown.

How this old fellow talks! you said, my Lord,
You would discourse the Battle.

Excellent Prince,
I was in the way: but the Queen put me out on it.

Well, well my Lord, deliver't your own way.

Then, humph, humh, humh, in my own way.
But by the way, no way to derogate
From the Kings matchless resolution.
A word or two of the best Soldier
In all the world (under the King I mean,
I know my limits) that's our brave General,
Lord Sforza, Madam, your stout Country-man,
Though our Kings Subject now; that bore him so
At the great marriage-Triumph in Tourneament,
Tumbling down Peers and Princes, that ever since,
He's called your Champion, and the Queens old Soldier.

But what of him now in the battle?

Marry but this, That as we have a King,
And as the King brings victory, nay life,
Home to his Queen, his Country and our comforts,
Next under Heaven we are to give the praise
To this old Soldier, to this man, the man
Indeed, another man is not to be
(Except the King) named in this Victory.

You seem my Lord to honour Sforza yet
Before the King.

Excuse me gracious Madam,
I know my limits: what? before the King?
I am an old Courtier I, still true to the Crown,
But thus it is declared, that in the battle,
When in the heat of fight the mingled bloods
Of either Army reek'd up to the Sun,
Dimming its glorious light with goryvapour,
When slaughter had ranged round about the field,
Searching how by advantage to lay hold upon out King.

Prithee no more.

Good mother.

At last she spied and circled him about
With Spears and swords so thickly pointed on him.
That nothing but his sacred valour could
Give light for a supply to his relief,
Which shined so through and through his walls offoes,
As a rich Diamond amongst an heap of Ruins,
And so was found by the quick eye of Sforza,
When like a Deity armed with wrath and Thunder,
He cut a path of horror through the Battle
Raining down blood about him as he flew,
Like a prodigious Cloud of pitch and fire,
Until he pierced into the straight, wherein
The Royal Person of our King was at
His last bare stake of one life to a thousand.

I dare not hear it, yet.

Then in a word, old Sforza fetched him off,
And with his sword which never touched in vain,
Set him in the heart of's Army once again.

That I like well.

That did your Champion, Madam,
The Queens old Soldier, and your Father, Lady:
Do ye simple at it? such a Soldier breaths not,
Only the King except: now note the Miracle,
The King received and gave new life at once
Of and unto his Army, which new life
Was straight way multipli'd, as if the lives
Of all the slain on both sides were transfus'd
In our remaining part, who with a present fury
Made on with that advantage on the Foe,
That the whole field was won as at one blow.
I am prevented.

Now cease our Drums, and furl our Ensigns up:
Dismiss the Soldiers, hostile Arms surcease,
Whiles we rejoice, safe in these Arms of Peace.

Go Soldiers, better never stood the shock
Of danger, or made good their Countries cause.
Drink this to the Kings health and victory.

Heaven bless the King, and our good General Sforza.

Long live the King and Sforza, Sforza and the King,

The King and Sforza, Sforza and the King,
Equal at least, and sometimes three notes higher,
Sound Sforza's name then doth the Kings: the voice
Of the wild People as I passed along
Threw up his praises nearer unto Heaven
Ever methought then mine: but be it so,
He has deserved well, now let me again
Embrace the happy comforts of my life.
Through deadly dangers, yea through death it self,
I am restored unto my Heaven on Earth,
My wife and Son: a thousand blessings on thee.
Say, dearest life, whose prayers I know have been
Successful to me in this doubtful War,
How welcome am I?

That's more than I can speak:
For should I bring comparisons of the Spring,
After a Frosty winter to the Birds,
Or rich returns of ventures to the Merchant,
After the twentieth currant news of Shipwreck,
Redemption from captivity, or the Joys
Women conceive after most painful Childbirths,
All were but Fabulous nothings to the Bliss
Your presence brings in answer to my Prayers:
Heaven heard me at the full: when I forget
To send due praises thither, let me die
Most wretched, though my gratitude shall never
Sleep to the inferior means, even to the meanest
Soldier assistant to your safe return,
Especially to you good Sforza, Noble Soldier,
I heard of your fidelity.

My duty Madam.

Are you one of his great Admirers too?
The world will make an Idol of his Valour,
While I am but his shadow: I'll but think on it,
Indeed he's worth your favour, he has done wonders.

Let me now speak, I may not hear these wonders bounced,

You do forget your self.

What says my Lord?

Nay I have done.
Gonzago, you and I have changed no words yet;
I have brought Victory home, which may perhaps
Be checked at when my heat shall fall to ashes.
How will you maintain your Fathers quarrels ore his Grave?

I do not hope to outlive you Sir, but if I must,
I sure shall hope to keep your name and right
Alive whilst I live, though I cannot hope
To have so good a Soldier at my Standard
As Warlike Sforza.

This is more and worse
Then all the rest: the child has spoken plainly,
I had been nothing without Warlike Sforza:
I'll make him nothing, and no longer stand
His Cipher that in number makes him ten.
My Lords, my thanks to you for your due care
In my late absence.

All was Loyal Duty,
As we are old Courtiers Sir, still true to the Crown.

I have found you faithful.

It befits true Statesmen
Watchful to be at home against civil harms,
When Kings expose themselves to hostile Arms.

There's a State-Rime now: but Horatio,
Has not Petruccio visited the Court
Since our departure?

Pox on Petruccio.
Bless me, and be good to me: how thinks your
Grace of my Allegiance, and can ask
Me that Question?

Now he is in his Fit.

The Hangman take him. Petruccio King?
Peugh, peugh; I hate to name him.
How can you think your State had been secured
If he had breathed amongst us? That vile wretch,
Whom in your Kingly wisdom you did banish
The Court for a most dangerous Male-content,
After his just repulse from being your General,
When he durst stand in Competition
With brave deserving Sforza here, the best
Most absolute Soldier of the world.

Still Sforza!

Except your Majesty.

There is an Exception wrung out,

He come at Court by my permission?
I should as soon be won to set your Court
On fire, as see him here.

Send for him speedily.



And upon your Allegiance
Which you so boast of, let me have him here,
And very speedily; I'll have your head else.

Nay since it is your Highness pleasure, and
So seriously commanded, I will send
My own head off my shoulders, but we'll have him:
In what you can command, I dare be Loyal.

Look to it,

It must be so, this is one of his un-to-be-examin'd hasty Humours, one of his
starts: these and a devilish gift

He has in Venery, are all his faults.
Well, I must go, and still be true to the Crown.

Petruccio sent for! who for braving of
Brave Sforza here, so lately was confined.

I cannot think the Court must hold 'm both
At once, less they were reconciled, which is
As much unlikely: what do you think my Lord?

I know not what to think.

She Sforza's Daughter, say you?

Yes my Lord.

She's a right handsome one: I never knew he had a Daughter.


He brought her over a Child with me, when happily I came your Bride, bred her
at home, she never saw the Court, till now I sent for her to be some comfort in
your long absence.


Sforza's absence, I fear you mean.

And trust me Sir, Her simple Country Innocence at first
Bred such delight in me, with such affection,
That I have called her Daughter, to embolden her.

O did you so?

And now she has got some spirit,
A pretty lively spirit, which becomes her
Methinks so like her Fathers.

Very good.
I like her strangely.

What was that she said
To you Conzago?

That Heaven might have pleased
To have fashioned her out to have been a Queen.

Comely Ambition.

Reconcile all quickly,
Or you had better never have been born,
Then disobey my last command, which was
Neve^ to see the Court till I induced you.
Do you stare at me?

I but obeyed the Queen.
I hope she'll answer't.

No more, I'll talk with you anon.

Come Sforza, Welcome to Court, so is your
Daughter too, I have taken notice of her: O f^irest, welcome.
Come you both with me this night, weel Feast:
Pray bid us welcome all, as but one Guest.

I shall in all obey you.

And for this,
Less then a King I shall abhor to kiss.

Repulsed? disgraced? and made the scorn of the Court?
Is the advancement of an upstart stranger,
Because he is the Queens dear Countrey-man?
Have I for all my many Services,
Found the reward of being made an outcast?
Could not the King be pleased, though he advanced
Sforza unto the Honour I deserved,
To trust me in his service? could he think
My sword could be an hinderance in the Battle,
Or have delayed the winning of the Field!
And must his Court and presence which I have
With my observance dignified, reject me
Now, as a dangerous and infectious person!
Tis a new way to gratify old Soldiers.
So soon returned? I do commend thy speed.
The news at Court.

The King's come bravely home,
And every ear is filled with Victory,
But chiefly with the Fame of Sforza's Valour.

Sforza? Ser. Lord Sforza Sir, I cry him mercy,
The new Lord General.

Thou come too fast

So me thinks too, less 'twere to better purpose.

The Fame of Sforza's Valour, good if it last.
What other news?

I have told you all the best.

If thou hast worse, let's have it quickly.

You shall, That you may fly the danger.

What is't, without your Preface?

Here are Messengers sent from the King to you; pray Heaven all be well. There's
the old tutchie testy Lord, that rails, and never could abide you, since the
King looked from your Honour.


The hast made me amends, there's for thy news.
Is this bad news?

Truly my Lord, I think so:
For if the King had sent to you for good,
I think he would have sent one loved you better.

What? then the old Courtier? thou know him not.
I'll show him thee. He is the only man
That does the King that service, just to love
Or hate as the King does, so much and so long,
Just to a scruple or a minute, and then he has an
ignorant Loyalty, to do as the King bids him, though
he fear immediate death by it.
Call him in.

They come.

My masters, come along, and close up to me: my Loyalty defend me, I shall not
dare to trust me in this devilish fellows reach else. And thus it is Sir.


'Tis thus Sir, I can tell you.

Good friends look well to me.

You come with strength of armed men, to bear me
From mine own House which was my appointed Prison,
Unto a stronger Hold.

Look every way.

The King it seems now that his Nignion
General is Landed, cannot think him safe, and I not
Faster: which though I can prevent, I will not.
Come, what Gaol will you remove me to?

I would thou were in Hell for me:
No Sir, I come to call you to the King.

What? with a Guard?

That's for my Self. I know thou love not me.

Nor you me, do you?

Nor cannot, less the King could love thee.

Why perhaps he does, you see he sends for me.

Why if he does, I do, but 'tis more then I know, or can collect yet by his
Majesties affection.


Here's an Humour now.

I know my Loyalty, and I know the King has sent for you; But to what end I
know not: and if it be to hang thee I cannot help it. Look to me now my
masters. Nor do I care, that's the plain troth on it, while the King is pleased,
and thou were my Brother. I am an old Courtier I, still true to the Crown.


I commend your Loyalty: Come, we are Friends.

Look to me for all that.

Were you afraid, you came so armed and guarded?

That's because I would not be afraid: look to me still.

Indeed my Lord you are welcome.

Yes, as much as I look for.

What should the King intend by this? I fear no ill,
For I have done none; therefore I may go.
Perhaps he thinks to make me honour Sforza
Now in his time of Jollity, and be friends:
I need not go for that; he cannot do it,
Yet I will go to tell him so: my Lord,
My joy to see the King will post me faster
Than your grave Loyalty, or Massy Bill-men.

Yes, prethie keep before with thy back towards me, and so long I dare trust
thee.
Have an eye though.

Her Father hath surprised her then?

Yes, and means to hurry her away from
Court this night: I heard him threaten it.

But he must not do it, she is too sweet Flavello, and too fit for my embraces,
to be snatched away.


Now that she's ripe and ready for your use,
Like fruit that cries, Come eat me. I'll not boast
The pains I took to fit her to your Appetite, before she saw you.

How, my careful Agent?

At first sight of her Feature, I foresaw
She was compliable to your affection.
Then by discourse I found she was ambitious,
I plied her then with Pills that puffed her up
To an high longing, till she saw the hopes
She had to grow by. Pray stand close, they come.

Has the air of Court infected you already?
Has the Kings kisses moved by adulterate heat,
Swoln you into astubborn loathsomeness
Of wholesome Counsel? Come your ways; I'll try
If Countrey-Air and Diet can restore you
To your forgotten modesty and Duty.

What have I done amiss?

Do you capitulate?
But so much satisfaction as may make
Thee sensible of shame, I will afford thee:
Did thou not after Banquet, when the King
Heated with wine, and lust raised in his eyes,
Had kissed thee once, twice, thrice, though I looked on,
And all the Presence whispered their cold fears
Of the Kings wantonness and the Queens abuse;
Did thou not then still gaze upon his Face,
As thou had longed for more? O impudence!

Impudence? Sir, pray give it the right name,
Courtship, 'twas Courtship Sir, if I have learned
Any since I came here.

Brave mettled wench!

I am amazed.

Besides Sir, the Kings kisses
Are great inestimable Honours, and
What Lady would not think her self the more
Honoured, by how much the King did kiss her?

And should he more then kiss, still more Honoured?

It might be thought so.

Durst thou argue thus?

I know he dares not beat me here. Pray Sir
Let me but ask you this, then use your pleasure:
(Cause you stile Impudence, that which I call Courtship)
What Courtier sits down satisfied with the first
Office or Honour is conferred upon him?
If he does so, he leaves to be a Courtier.
And not the thing we treat of. Did your self
After the King had graced you once, twice, thrice,
(As he kissed me) expect no further from him?

She's wondrously well read in Court already:
Who in the Devils name has been her Lecturer?

Do but your Majesty observe that, and think
What pains I took with her.

How many Offices
Did you run through before you were made General?
And as the more the King confers upon us,
Is more our Honour, so 'tis more the Kings,
When most his Favours shine upon Desert.

I like her better still.

Insufferable Baggage.!
Dare thou call any thing in thee Desert?
Or mention those base Favours which the King
Maintains his Lust by, with those real Honours
Conferred on me, who have preserved his life?
Is it such Dignity to be a VVhore?

Pray Sir, take heed: Kings Mistresses must not
Be called so.

Dare thou talk thus to me?

Yes, Sir;
If you dare think me worth the Kings embraces,
In that near kind, howe 'er you please to stile it:
Sure I shall dare, and be allow'd to speak.

That word makes thee a Queen.

The King dares not
Maintain it.

And that costs you your Head.

Dear Sir, take heed; Protest I dare not hear you:
Suppose I were advanced so far above you
To be your Queen, would you be therefore desperate,
And fall from what you are to nothing? Pray
Utter no more such words, I'd have you live.

She vexes him handsomelie.

As I live she's mad. Do you dream of being a Queen?

Why if I should, I hope that were no Treason:
Nor if I were a Queen, were that sufficient
Warrant for you, to utter Treason by,
Because you were my Father; No dear Sir,
Let not your Passion be Master of your Tongue.

How she flies up with the conceit? d'yee hear?

Because you were my Father.
Sovereignty you know, admits no Parentage.
Honour, poor petty Honour forgets Descent.
Let but a silly Daughter of a City
Become a Countess, and note how squeamishly
She takes the wind of her Progenitors.

She has swallowed an Ambition
That will burst her: I'll let the humour forth.

You will not kill your Child?

Though all Posterity should perish by it.

Not for the Jewel in your Ear.

Impudent Harlot! she has heard me value
This Jewel, which I wear for her dead Mother,
I would not part with, whilst I wore my Head;
And now she threatens that: a Kingdom shall not save thy life.

Know where you are, Sir, at Court, the Kings House.

Were it a Church, and this unhallowed Room
Sanctum Sanctorum, I will bring you to your knees,
And make me such a Recantation
As never follow'd Disobedience;
I'll take thy life else, and immediately.

Treason! a Guard! Treason! c.

Heaven save the King.

Lay hold on Sforza, the dangerous Traitor.

'Tis Sforza is betrayed.

Away with him, see he be kept close Prisoner.
Flavello, see that his daughter have convenient Lodging.

Let me but speak; I hope your Majesty --

Let not a word come from him: hence, away.
What a most dangerous estate even Kings do live in?
When those that we do lodge so near our Breast
Study our Death, when we expect our Rest.

Be comforted good Queen, and I beseech
Your Grace to pardon me in this command
The King has laid upon me.

Lodovico,
I do, and must no less submit my self
To the Kings sovereign will then you: and though
I am committed to your house and custody,
I am his Highness Prisoner: and more,
Though I know not my crime, unless it be
My due Obedience, I am still so far
From grudging at his pleasure, as I fear
To ask you what it is supposed to be;
But rather wait the Event, which though it bring
My Death, 'tis welcome from my Lord and King.

Was ever Virtue more abused then hers?

Yet thus much, good my Lord, without offence;
Let me demand, Is Sforza still close Prisoner?

Yes, and Petruccio his Adversary
Governs his Place, and high in the Kings Favour.

I will not ask his Trespass neither, it
Suffices it is the Kings high pleasure. But Alinda^
Sforza's fair Daughter, what becomes of her?
Poor virtuous Maid, is she thrown out of Favour
Because I loved her too?

Alas good Queen!

What do you weep? nay then all is not well
With her, I fear.

Good Queen, I fear so too;
And that all ill proceeds from her to you.

I may not understand thee, Lodovico:
I'll still retain the duty of a wife,
Which though it be rejected, shall not throw
Me from the path a Subject ought to go.

Two such wives more might save a Nation.
But see Petruccio the now-powerful man, under tho King.

Horatio with him too, are they such Friends?

None greater since the King was pleased to grace Petruccio.

Madam, however my Person, no less then my Authority, I know is most unwelcome
to you; I must appear, and lay the Kings Command upon you, which you must obey.


I must? see, Lodovico, here's a plain-
Dealing Lord, that knows, my Love and my
Obedience to the King, and warnes me
Faithfully to observe it: good my Lord,
I will obey the Kings Command in you:
Lay it on me. What must I do?

You must go to the Bar, to answer to
Those Accusations that will be brought
Against your Life and Honour, as touching
Your foul Disloyalty unto the King.

He is a Traitor to the King and Me,
That dares accuse me of Disloyalty.
Patience assist me, and control my Passion.
The greatest Crime that ever I committed
Against my Sovereign, was, To be so near
The Vice of Anger in the presence of
One that he loved so well; but pray your Pardon,
Though truly those sharp-pointed words drew Blood
From my oppressed heart: and though you love me not,
I hope you think me innocent.

Would I could.

You do.

I would I durst speak what I think.

My Lord, you ever loved me, can you think?

Come, what I think, I think; my love to you
Was the Kings love, if it were love at all:
If he will say, he ever loved you, I can say so too.
But to speak truth, I know not if I did,
Or I did not; but now you're hateful to me;
That I dare speak, because he hates you soundly.
And your old Russian Sforza, that fell Traitor,
That would have killed the King: do you look up at it?
You may look down with sorrow enough:
Your Country-man, your brave old Champion,
He has Champion'd you sweetly it seems.
Is there no honest Woman?

What means this unknown Language?

Women are always ignorant of Reproof:
I'll tell you what it means, for that loves sake
You thought I loved you once. Or do you know
What Mars and Venus meant, when injured Vulcan
Had em in's Net? Good King, how were thou abused?
And this good honest, faithful, loyal Lord,
Full to the brim, of Merit, and true Valour,
By that Blade-brandishing Sforza, that mere Fencer*
To this great Martialist: but he is fast enough,
And all's come out, however you'll answer it.

What must I answer? I know not yet your meaning.

Nor ever shall, for me.

You'll know too much
I fear, anon. Come, Madam, will you go?
The High-Court stays your coming.

I must submit me to it, and its Laws;
But to a higher Judge refer my Cause.

Good Queen, thy wrongs are manifest, though none
Must dare to utter them, but in our Moan.

Mount, mount, my thoughts, above the earthy
Of Vassal minds, whilst strength of woman's wit (pitch
Props my Ambition up, and lifts my hope
Above the flight of Envy. Let the base
And abject minds be pleased with servile Bondage*
My Breast breeds not a thought that shall not fly
The lofty height of towering Majesty.
My power upon the weakness of the King
(Whose raging Dotage to obtain my Love,
Like a devouring flame, seeks to consume
All interposed Lets) hath laid a Ground-vvork
So sure upon those Ruins, that the power
Of Fate shall not control, or stop my building
Up to the top of Sovereignty, where I'll stand
And dare the World to dis-commend my Act:
It shall but say, when I the Crown have won,
The work was harsh in doing, but well done.
Flavello, welcome!

Hail, my Sovereign Queen.

'Tis a brave sound, and that which my Soul thirsts for;
But do not mock mine Ears.

Believe it Madam,
Join your attention but with one hours patience,
And you shall hear the general Voice of the Kingdom
Give you that stile, with large and loud allowance.

Stile thy self happy then, in what Reward
A Subject can receive, or a Queen give.
How moves our great proceedings?

Fairly, thus:
Eulalia, for now I must no more
Give her the Title that belongs unto
Your Execellence, of Queen.

Advance that Harmony.

Eulalia is brought unto the Bar, accused,
Convicted of that high offence, that instantly
Shall pull that Judgement on her, that shall crush
Her into nothing.

Appear the proofs manifest?

That was my care, it behoov'd me to work the Witnesses, who swore (in
brief) most bravely, that they heard Lord Sforza, whom you also may forget now
to call Father.


That without your instruction.

They swore, I say, they heard that Sforza boast
The knowledge of the Queen in carnal Lust.

Was that enough?

No, but it served to put
The question to her, Was it true or not?
No, cries the Queen, nor can I think that Sforza
Would lay that scandal on himself and me.
Those Witnesses were two cashiered Lieutenants
That Sforza should have hanged for Mutinies
In the late war, but threw 'em by, it seems,
To serve him in this Office: me they cost
Five hundred Crowns apiece, and well they got it.
But where I left: the Queen denies their Oath.
And though it had been true that Sforza had
Affirmed as much, that had not found her guilty.

What Witnesses were next?

Two dainty devils
Birds, a Doctor and a Midwife, who accused
Themselves for Bawds in the Action, and deposed
I know not how many, how many, how many times,
They saw 'em linked in their unlawful pleasures.
These were the Queens own people, and deserved
A thousand Crowns apiece, and had it instantly,
Afore-hand too.

What could the Queen say then?

She denied all, but in such a patient way,
After her foolish fashion, that it gave strength
To the Evidence against her; then she wept
For their iniquity, and gave them a God forgive ye.
And so attends the censure of the Court,
Which straightway will be given: they'll be set
Before my coming.

Hast, Flavello, hast,
And let thy next news be to this a Crown,
That she is not a Queen, and I am one.
This Father and this Queen I now could pity,
For being hewed out and squared thus to my use,
But that they make those necessary steps
By which I must ascend to my Ambition.
They that will rise unto a supreme Head,
Should not regard upon whose Necks they tread.

MY Lords and loyal Peers.

A new distinction
Between Spiritual and Temporal.

Good Lodovico, peace.

This is a Cause, the which, but for fair Order,
By which I am constrained to be a Judge,
Would rather drive me to a mourning Closet
Then to this Seat; to show my equal grief
Against the Crime and Shame of the Delinquent.
I see you're all amazed, and cannot marvel
At your Astonishment, who do suffer with you
In the great Change Honour compels me to,
Together with Religion, fairly urging
To an high point of Justice, which to utter
Draws faintness from my words, chilling my Blood
Like the departing Breath that separates Life.
For such I held her, and so many years
Retained her in the Closet of my Heart,
Its self-Companion: that till these proofs,
Which now like daggers by compulsive wounds
Have made their passage, she could never have parted.

Royal Hypocrisy!

The Proofs you see are plain,
That she was found -- Pray speak it for me.

In Adultery.

And that she sought the Life of fair Alinda
By Sword and Poison both: and of that Cup
'Tis like my self had tasted,
For my supposed love to that wronged Lady.

You have given her the Bed-right that belonged to your wronged Queen, these
twelve months.

Our Laws of Sicilie are so well rebated
With Clemency, and Mercy, that in this Case
They cut not Life from one of Royal Blood,
Only take off (as is on her performed)
All Dignities, all Titles, all Possessions,
All means to live, even to her naked hands.
And such, Eulalia, now is your condition.

To work for her living? if she were as young, and no honester then she for
whose sake this is inflicted on her, she might find something else about her,
then naked hands, to help at a living shift-


Now to this Censure, for due Orders sake,
And for which end this Parliament was called;
Your Voices are required: do ye all approve it?

We do.

We must.

What say you, Lodovico?

We do; Heaven knows against my heart.

My thanks unto you all, that do obey
So well with one consent your Sovereign Lord.
And sacred Sir, thus low, as it becomes me,
Let your poor Hand-maid beg, that you incline
A patient Ear to this my last Petition:
That as you cast me off, as an offence,
You will be pleased to think me not offended,
But pleased in all I suffer: for, Heaven knows,
I am as free from any Passion
Of Anger, Hate, Repining or Distaste,
Nay, as insensible of Grief or Sorrow,
Or whatsoever Anguish of the Mind,
As I was capable, for ought I know,
Of Joy or Bliss the first hour I was born.
Never made happy till I was your Bride,
In which blessed state I cannot but remain,
While you are pleased, and I obey your will,
Though unto Death, to Banishment or Prison.
Poverty is Blessedness, in which I'll pray
For pardon of the Sins of my Accusers,
And those that have suborned them.

O poor Woman!

So in the blessed continuance of your Days,
I shall pray Heaven to smile on all your Ways.

Nay, stay Eulalia, I have yet a Business
I would have pass the general Consent
Of this Assembly, in which your Voice is useful.
Flavello?

Upon my life, his Marriage with that Start-up,
That Snake this good Queen cockered in her Bosom,
Is not this Royal cruelty?

You wrong your Princely Dignity:
Turn to the King your Father, kneel to him.

And are not you my Mother?

I must and can forget what I have been;
So must not you: your Mother was a Queen.
My present fortune claims no Title in you.
Hurt not your own, by looking down on me.
This I will do as warranted by safety,
Not as a Mother, but Beadswoman, pray
For all that bliss on you a Mother may,
Good Sir, observe the King before his wrath.
Take hold upon you for regarding me.

Let your amazement cease, and now perceive
My Lords in general, that I your King
Am Subject to this all-deserving Lady,
And do require you not alone to hear
What I can say, but without all denial
That you approve, confirm what I will say.
I am by law no less then your consent
Divorced, and free from all impediment
To make my second choice in Marriage,
And therefore crave Alinda for my wife,
And that immediately we solemnize
Our Marriage, and her Coronation.
I hope none rates our will or his own life
So meanly, as to give least contradiction.

O let me lead your voices. Long live
Gonzago and Alinda, King and Queen of Sicily.

O gross Hyocrisie!

My Lord the Prince, pray let your voice be next;
The rest will follow. Why speak you not, my Lord?

She would fain seem to voice in your behalf,
But in a way that much persuades against you.
Do but your Highness note it.

You Sir, come from that Woman.

She was my mother when she was your wife;
And that's so late, I cannot yet forget it.
But I fear to offend.

O show it in your Duty then, young Prince:
'Tis true, the Law of Nature-wills a Son
To be a partner in his Mothers woe;
But Laws above that lay a strong command
On Sons to obey the Edicts of their Fathers.
A Fathers frowns are Comets threatening ruin.
Let all your thoughts be free from his offence:
The most Heaven seeks, is our obedience.
In all obey the King; think not of me:
I am no more, nay not so much to you
As is the Beggar whom you may relieve,
Since of all these comforts I am deposed.

Faith thou had not mine, good woman:
I must not call thee Queen now.

Or if you needs will think I am your mother,
Let it be only in the charge I give you,
That since Alinda blessed by providence
Must be invested with the Regal Crown,
You show her that obedience befits a Queen,
And your dread Fathers Wife.

I fear she'll turn him
Traitor, if he give more ear to her enchantments.

I'll show him a way to give her thanks.
Gonzago?

My Royal and dread Father.

Put forth that woman:
Do it without grudge, out of the Court,
I mean to seek her way. Do you refuse?

He does not, shall not, Royal Sir.
Only I beg that I may take my leave.
The wishes a true Subject ought to send
From the most humble heart up to the Throne
Of sacred Majesty, I equally divide
To you my King and Queen,
Professing by the Powers you present,
I part as well content with my condition,
Since it is your command, as ere I was to sit in that Promotion.

Sir, I may not sit to be taunted and upbraided thus.

Pardon me, mighty Lady, I am as far
From daring to do so, as from a Queen.
And whilst you love the King, and he is pleased,
I shall no less obey you, then I loved you
When I sent for you to the Court, and there into
this heart received you.

I am plainly jeered: hence that woman.

Away with her.
And let it be proclaimed according to the extremity of Law our Censure be
observed.

Alas, how can she live one night?

And now to your consent: have I it yet
For Marriage with Alinda? If you are pleased,
Then call us King and Queen.

Long live the King and Queen.

I mean Eulalia

Tis well: on to the ceremonies then. Kings were
But common men, did not their Power get fear.

It is oppression, Tyranny indeed.


Speak lower, good my Lord.


For fear of whom? of what?


You would not that the King should hear you, would you?


Faith if he did. --

Faith then as sure as your tongue's your own now, your whole head would be his
then.


If it might so excuse the Queen, I cared not.

It will do the Queen as much good, as the money it might be sold for in the
Market; That and the Appurtenances to it, would yield little at the Shambles.
Come my Lord, speak privately, and purposely keep your head on your shoulders:
it becomes the place as well as 't had been made for it. If the King have a
mind to turn away his Wife, I'll give him leave to turn mine after her, to wait
upon her, rather than to have my head bowled at her, though I were sure it
should kiss the Mistress.


Oh but the ensuing danger, my Horatio! The mischiefs that of necessary course
must follow, even to the ruin of the State, by the Kings dotage on his second
choice, draws blood from Subject hearts: Oh that lewd Woman!


She is a Woman of middle earth yet. But what shall we dare to say two hours
hence? Come, think upon Law and Regal Authority. The Kings Power Warrants his
Acts: I know as well as you the Queen Eulalia (Heaven bless her, I hope 'tis
yet no Treason to pray for her) is as virtuous a Lady as ever beautified a
Court, or made a Kings Bed happy, For all the Articles framed against her.


The perfect Pattern of Meekness, Patience, Obedience.

Of all that's good, or should be wished in Woman.

So obsequious a lover of her Husband, that she gave way unto his loose
affections, even to this now-she-start-up that supplants her.


She considered she grows old: she reads in her Sons face nigh twenty years of
the Kings love to her: and gives him leave to place it now elsewhere.


And is so far from limiting his Choice,
That she possesses it that seeks her blood.
My soul tells me the witnesses against
The Queen, are by this Concubine suborned.

I will not say so.

You cannot choose but think so.

My thoughts are warranted by the Proverb. But come, make up your Face, temper
your voice and looks with the rest of the most Honourable Assembly: shake off
this discontent, 'tis a disease by which you'll perish else:now all the Court's
in height; you to profess distaste! Come, be a looker on at least.


Upon a Court on Fire? O Horatio,
Bright Burning Troy gave not a dearer cause
Of willingness to those affrighted souls
She forced to leave her sinking in her ashes,
To fly for refuge to another Region;
Nor in their flight could they by looks reverted,
See danger in more horrible aspect,
Than I upon the ruins of this Kingdom.

Your stay, my Lord, may prevent danger.

Yes, if it could remove the Fatal cause,
The pride, the cruelty, the Ambition
Of that wild Fury, the outrageous Queen,
Who treads and tramples down the Covernment.
Consider this Horatio, and the means
To work this great effect: and I am yours,
To stay till it be done.

Alinda's Death.
VVho's there?

Is it not necessary? no body: what d' ye fear?
Or can you find how to preserve the State
At a less rate? you know too well the King,
How apt his Nature is to fell oppression.
The burden of whose cruelty long since,
If by the virtuous Clemency of his Wife
It had not been allayed and mitigated,
Had been a general subversion.
And now that Peerless Princess being deposed,
Whose virtue made her famous, and us happy;
And he re-married to this shame of women,
Whose vileness breeds her envy and our mischief,
What can we look for but destruction?

I dare me thinks a little hear you now,
(The Court being surfeited too with wine and noise)
And could almost talk to the point it self,
To your own ear.
'Tis fit somewhat were done:
I cannot say what: but if the wronged Queen
Be not restored, we show ingratitude,
How much, I may not say: enough to damn us.

I, now you speak.

And though I will not speak it: if the Strumpet:
Be not conveniently and speedily destroyed,
Though death dance with us in the enterprise,
We shall seem born more for our selves than Country.

Brave noble resolution!

Nay more, now I will speak.

This way, good Horatio.

That way, or any way; If Poison, Sword,

Policy or Strength may do it --

Speak lower, good Horatio: see the Minion.


What for him? my Ladies Game-keeper, that understands nothing but Monkeyes,
Parrots, short-nos'd Dogs and Starlings; Master of her Majesties
Foisting-hounds.


So, he hears you.


Let him; he has no Soul to understand, nor Language to answer a Man: he knows
how to diet, disple and perfume the small Cattle he has charge of; for which
rare Art, and catching Spiders for principal Pug, he is raised prime man in his
great Mistresses favour.


How the Petitioners flock to him!


Swarm rather, for they are Bees in his head; Oh! he engrosses all the Suits,
and commends them to the White Hand, whose disposing will make the whole
Kingdom black in Mourning, if Fate by us prevent not. See how he carries it! We
might talk what we would, for him. His well-ordered head is so taken up with
Particular Affairs, he minds no General talk.

But my good Lord, *fore others Ears and Eyes,
Pursue we our Design as all were Spies:
You and the Common Good have won me.

O I embrace you.


Oh -- Oh -- and Oh-ho -- O and alas! O and alack for O -- O -- O -- that ever
a true Neapolitan born, should live to see this day in Sicily! there O-again, ^
Queen -- O me -- what wilt thou do? O -- O -- what shall I do? O -- thou may
work and starve; O -- and I may beg and live: O -- but from thee I cannot live:
O -- I cannot, nor I wonnot, so I wonnot.


See, here's poor Andrea mourning as well as we,

And all the rest of the poor Queens cast-awayes.


But I can tell him comfort.


Oh -- I will hear no comfort.


Yes, and be glad on it too.


Is my Queen Countrey-woman called back again?


No, but the Queen Alinda has enquired for thee, to entertain thee into her
service, whilst we and all the rest of our late Queens servants are turned out
o'th'Court, and now at this high dinner time too.


She would eat me, would she not?


That would make it a Feast indeed.


But I'll not trust her on a fasting-night: Fools are meat then.


Well said Andrea, witty in thy sorrow: I know thou wilt back again for a new
Mistress.


No, no, take you your course, and serve her if you please,

I have played the Fool too long, to play the Knave now.

I'll after my old Mistress.


Thou may not serve her: that will be brought within compass of Relief, and
then thou may be hanged for her.


If I be hanged for doing good, pray let it not grieve you: and as I am an
Innocent, I'll never grieve for you though you be hanged never so justly.


We thank you good Andrea.


Take you your swinge, let me take mine I pray.


Hark, the King drinks now to his new Queen.


So, having turned his old Wife out of door,
A man may drink and frolic with his who --
Would have thought it? did you think to catch me?

Not I Andrea.


Catch me if you can: when it shall be Treason to say there is an honest woman,
I'll say my Countrey-woman was justly condemned of Adultery: and till then, I
know what to say: Catch me if ye can.


There again: now the Queen drinks.


Poor woman, at what River?


I mean the Queen Alinda.


O the new thing at home here; I will not call her Queen, not I: my
Countrey-woman is my Queen.


Why is not she thy Countrey-woman?


She was when she was Sforza's Daughter:
But she has turned a Father out of him.

As here come some to turn us out of the Court.


Away with them: out of the gates, away.


See, here are more of them: more of that hated woman's Retinue: away with all.


Beseech you, good my Lord: I hope we are true men.


As I am true to the Crown, not one of you pesters the Court a minute longer:
go, you are trash and trumpery: and I'll sweep the Court of all of ye: follow
your Mistress: go.


The Fool my Lord shall stay: the Queen asked for him.


Yes yes, the Fool my Lord, shall stay.


The Fool my Lord will not stay.


Will not? how dare thou say so? ha, Fool, ha?


The Fool dare say more than the wisest Lord dares do amongst ye: you will not
take my own proper goods from me, will ye?


See what he caries: I heard of Plate and Jewels lost to day.


Let's see, Sir, I will see.


Heyday, here's stuff indeed!


Your VVardrope cannot matched it: pray give me all again; or if you will be the
Kings and Queens Takers with that extremity to force my goods from me, then
present this to his Highness, and this to Hers; and tell them, 'tis all the
poor discarded Fool could spare them.


No Sir, you shall take them with you, and a whip for advantage, unless you'll
stay and serve the Queen.


No Sir, to you with an excusee moy,
If you be your Queens Fool-taker, you may
In Country, Court and City quickly find
Fools upon Fools that I shall leave behind.
New Lords (you know the Proverb) make new Laws,
New Lawyers of an old make a new cause.
New workmen are delighted with new Tools,
And her new Majesty must have new Fools.
New fools she wants, not having you about her,
While the old Fool makes shift to live without her.

Let the Fool go my Lord, 'tis but a Fool the less,
For he'll get wit by it, to wish himself here again.

If I get but enough to keep me from Court, I care not.


Farewell Fool, take your Trinkets with you.


Farewell fine Lords, adieu old Courtier.


The Court unclouded of this Factious crew,
Will shine on us that to the Crown are true.

Was ever man so hurried into thraldom,
And locked up in the ignorance of the cause,
Stronger and darker than his Prison walls?
But I must not be Sepulchr'd alive,
And therefore Keeper, though thy office be
More Devilish than thy visage, yet thy heart
May be humane: let me then conjure thee
To vent the secret forth but in a whisper;
Or should thou utter't in a Tempests voice,
As loud as are my injuries, thou art safe:
I can be here no carry-Tale: I am fast
In thine own custody, thou see:
I pray thee tell me, what's laid unto my charge?

All I can say, 'Tis the Kings pleasure, and you must obey.


Do you bark Sentences, Hell-hound?


My Lord, you're off your Command, and under mine,

You much mistake your self and me.


'Tis true.


Lions may rage in toils: but whilst they do,
They more enthral themselves: will you sit down,
And promise on your Honour not to force
My counsels from me? I'll deal fairly with you,
(My meaning is, to give him never a word)

I will not lift a finger up against thee,
As I am a Soldier: now prithee tell me,
What say they is my crime?
I can give it hearing:
Or tell me first if thou wilt, how fares the Queen?
What? art thou dumb to that too? Answer me,
Is my Antagonist Petruccio
Repeal'd to Court yet? thence may spring my mischief.
Why dost not speak? this is dogged silence,
In scorn of me, to mock my misery.
I may not wrong the Honour of a Soldier
In my Revenge, or I would thrattle thee.
You're very civil, Hell take your courtesy.

I pity him: but must not dare to show it.
It adds to some men's misery, not to know it.

It is decreed of me, that I must suffer
This Barbarous cruelty; and I'll bravely bear it:
I have not force these double walls to part,
Or mollify the Jailers harder heart.
May spirit then assist me to despise
And bear my scorn above my injuries.

Revenge has cast her self into my hands,
Strangling the Life of Sforza in these Lines:
His Head is in this grasp, but where is Honour?
Must that forsake this Breast? must the pure heat
Of heavenly Honour, yield unto the scorch
Of Hell-bred base Revenge? it must not, cannot:
For as the Sun puts out all baser Fires,
Where Honour shines, thought of Revenge expires.
Besides, he is below my Anger now;
And has no Life but forfeited to Law,
Or the Kings Fury, I'll not question which;
Nor was it justly, he gave me the Affront,
In being made Lord General, when I stood for it.
But the Kings self, in his Election,
He wronged not me no more then I did him,
When the Honour was transferred from him to me.
That's answered clearly, I acquit thee, Sforza.
But now my Loyalty, how shall I discharge
That special Duty I am here commanded,
(Stand back I say) to see the Execution,
And bring the Head of Sforza to the King?
What an addition here is of Advanceme^t?
To make me first a General, then a Hangman:
I'll do him better Service: Loyal Horatio
Would think himself now damned, to leave a tittle
Of the Kings powerful pleasure unfulfil'd.
Call the Keeper.

Here my Lord.

I am to see and speak with Sforza.

Then I doubt not but your Honour has brought Warrant.

My Honour be your Warrant: will not that serve?

I will not lose the Kings Grace for all the
Honours in the Kingdom.

Dost know me, or my place?

Yes, I both know and honour you, as far as my own place gives me leave: but in
this I must crave pardon; you may not see him my Lord, by a less Warrant then
the Kings own Signet, and that fetches him out, and it please you.


But have you been so strict to all men else?
Has no man changed a word with him?

Not since
These Keys commanded him, I can assure you,
Not even the Prince himself, who much desired it.
I looked as black on him, as upon you now.
I am no white Prison-Keeper, I, to venture
Mine own Neck for a Prisoner's, at a price,
And give condemned men leave to run away:
No, I am the black Jailer, I, and 'tis thought,
Lineally descended from Cerberus.

I must commend thy Care; see, there's the Signet.

I'll fetch the Prisoner.
May it please you to come forth, my Lord?

Have I then lived to hear Mans voice again?

Here's the Lord Marshal, and chief General
Of the Kings Forces, come to speak with you.

Those Titles once were mine, but now I must
Attend his pleasure that is Master of them.

All leave the Room, but be at hand.

We shall.

My first object from my long obscurity,
The man that hates me most of all the world?
It is: his news cannot be good. not good?
The better: 'tis best to know the worst; he cannot deceive me.

My Lord, I do presume I am unwelcome,
Because you are possessed I never loved you:

The Court yields me such Complement; this has
No ampler Comforts in it. But you're deceived,
For you are welcome, sour captious Lord, you're welcome.
Because (love me or love me not) you speak.
I have been here these two and twenty days,
And never heard the voice of Man till now:
Meat I have found, and Lodging; but for Language,
In what part of the world I am, I know not.
Proceed; I value your words well, you see,
That give you six for one; why do you not speak?
I have been used to talk with men that love me not,
And more with Enemies, I dare besworn,
Then Friends: come, speak, I pray, what is't you come for?

Alas! I pity him: his too too much vexation
Has over-tam'd him.

Will you not speak and tell me?

Pray let me ask you first; Have you been kept
So strictly from the Speech of all men?

Ever since I was committed, and from the knowledge
Of why I was committed too; nay, he that keeps me,
'Till now he called me forth, never spake a word:
If I asked him, what News? here he was with me:
Or when he heard from Cuurt? then there again:
Or, why I was committed? still the same answer.
So that I could inform my self of nothing.
Come, if thou be an honest Enemy,
Tell me something:
As thou dost wish my throat cut, tell me something.

You seem to take no notice of the cause of your commitment.

Further than this I cannot: 'Twas the Kings pleasure to command it.
Treason was cried; a Guard: away with him:
But for what cause, unless it were for drawing
My sword upon (O that Rebellions Girl!)
To save her from the danger of his lust,
(Which I tell you I was doubtful of) and so Sir,
Let me ask you, is she still about the Queen? (Queen.
My daughter Sir, I mean.

Yes, much about the

And the Queen loves her?

As dearly as her self.

Nay if you be a Soldier, now speak truly.

The Queen and she's all one.

Then there's some hope,
The King yet keeps fair quarter with her.
Women are quickly jealous.

He knows nothing,
I'm confident, of all these great proceedings.
Poor man! I pity him: but I'll put him to it.
Will you now answer me as y' are a Soldier
To some few Articles?

You have engaged me.

'T were shame he should die ignorant of at least
The Accusations are laid against him.

Come Sir, your Articles?

You are accused
Of an intended Treason against the King.

Who's my Accuser?

Even the King himself.

Umh, umh, umh: he should not be my Judge then.
It is some Devilish dream of his, or else
That Policy that Princes purchase Hell by,
With strong assurance without all exception;
That is, when Soldiers men of best desert
Have merited more then they have means to give,
To cut their lives by whom they only live.

You fly now from the question: y' are engaged by the Honour of a Soldier
Unto that Accusation: guilty or not guilty?

I am not guilty, as I am a Soldier;
And in that Oath I would not be forsworn,
To save as many lives, were they within me,
As perished by my Sword to save his One.

In that I am satisfied: now to the next,
If you will hear it; you shall promise me
To answer without passion I or no.

I will do what I can.

You're next accused
Of fowl Adultery with the Queen Eulalia.

Hah!

Guilty or no?

No Sir, nor dares there be
Such a suggestion in the heart of Hell.
And were he there, that thought, or could but dream
Of such a Scandal, I'd squeeze it out on's Brains.

Then I must hold you to your promise Sir.

A wrestling towards; away west, away.
Nay then I am betrayed.

Forbear I pray.

He comes but to insult and to torment me.

My Lord you much forget, is not this Passion?

Passion of heart! he hopes not for Salvation
That hears with patience but the repetition
Of such a Blasphemy. I must not die,
Until the world be vindicated from
The redamnation such an error threatens.

You see I could oppress you; but all forbear the room.

Do you come to mad me?

If you will be calm, I'll tell you what I come for.

As settled as a Rock beneath a mountain
Here will I sit, and hear thy loudest malice.

If this man be not innocent, virtue lives not.

Now tell me what you come for; and be sure
You ask no more abominable questions,
Whilst calmly I clear these, thus: By the Honour
And faith of a true Soldier, I am clear
Of these suggested crimes, which before Heaven
(Which knows my Innocence) I do not urge
To save my life from the Kings violent Fury,
Nor any way to close with thee in Friendship,
Now that my fortune is at worst. So, speak:
'Tis long a coming: I begin to think
It is some good, you are so loath to utter 't.

It is, if you can apprehend it so.
My Lord, I take you for my friend, and come
To make my moan to you; insomuch as now
I do conceive you Noble, Virtuous, Honest.

Foh! this is worse than all the rest, this stinks
Of the Court-putrefaction, Flattery, grossly.
But on I prithee: talk is such a noveltie,
I will hear any thing.

I could not see your virtue, when it shined
Thorough the radiant favours of the King:
It dazzled me with envy then: but now,
Like the red Sun through cold and mystie vapours,
I can behold it at the full.

So, so: umh, who: so much for my virtues:
What's your business now?

I say I come to make my moan to you,
Groaning beneath a weighty Injury
The King has thrown upon me.

Has denied him
Something I warrant, that he would have begged;
The making of a Knight, or some such foolery:
What was 't?

In putting a base office on me.

Is the great Marshals and chief Generals
Office, become so base?

No Sir, the Hangmans Office. Read that --
I am commanded there, and warranted
With present speed to bring your Head to him.

A prayer or two, by his great leave and yours,
And you shall have it instantly.

My Lord, you shall not undervalue't so:
That Honour which has won me to you, shall
Work better for your preservation.
I have much more to tell you, and strong Reasons
Why you should live: of the Queens infinite wrongs
And yours, wrought by your Daughters cruel Ambition.

This is a nobleness beyond Example:
Sure now you are honest.

There you see my strength:
If now for truth and Honours cause I strain
A point of Loyalty, you will engage
Your Honour to secure me?

I hold my Honour equal to the best,
And prize it still so far above my life,
That to save Kingdoms I'll not forfeit it.
Here in the sight of Heaven I do engage it,
For your security.

I ask no better. Keeper!

My Lord.

Dismiss that Guard, and give us way.

I shall.

Now come my Lord, virtue may be cast by;
But never overcome by Tyranny.

VVars Sword, Laws Axe, or Tyrannies fell Knife,
May overcome my Person, not my life.
For that is yours Petruccio.

Turned out of all, and cast into the world;
And that forbidden too to pity me?
No sucour, no relief to be afforded?
Heaven still is where it was, and cannot lose
The Providence it ever had: let those
That think me wretched now, consider that,
And be with me converted to a Faith
That will proclaim us happy. What's my loss?
What was the State and glory of a Court,
But steps and lights through dangerous Ambition,
To ends beyond our selves, in whose achievements,
We make our selves but nothing to ourselves.
And all that we are then, is to the world,
Which renders us great Titles: which taken off,
We then return unto our selves again,
And all the world is ours: I was not great
Till now; nor could I confidently say
Any thing was mine own, till I had nothing.
They do but sleep, that live in highest Pomp;
And all their happiness is but a dream,
When mine is real: nay, nay, I can prove it.
Their costly fare breeds riot, mine content:
Their rich Attire is but mere Pageantry,
Made to please their eyes: mine keeps me warm,
And healthful, when a cold becomes their sickness.
They boast of Honour and Gentility,
For their Attendants then, when the chief Honour
Of the best woman, meek obedience,
Is my own handmaid; and my Patience
A sweeter servant than Gentility,
Continually my other: for Council and defence, what have I now?
They have the helps of worldly wise men's brains,
And I the comforts of my fruitful Prayers.
They have tall big-bon'd servants for defence:
I the strongst guard of all, mine innocence.
What Music had the Court compared to this,
Or what comparison can all their sports
And Revels hold with those of Kids and Fawns,
And frisking Lambs upon the country lawns?
Which are my hourly pleasant entertainments
In all my wanderings: in which I have not
Hungered at any time, but I have found
Meat which I duly earned: nor ever thirsted,
But I have found a Spring that has refreshed me.
And am no sooner weary, then I find
A shelter or a shade to rest me in:
As now, in which a slumber 'gins to creep
Over mine Eyes, more soft then any sleep,
Could these my Senses when I lay of late
On Down, beneath the Canopy of State.

Sleep in thy Sainted Innocence,
Whilst Angels watch in thy defence.
Sleep whilst I charm these bubbling Streams
With Music, to make sweet thy Dreams;
Thy Dreams which truly shall relate
The Passages of thy Estate.
Note, first thy Foes in Court conspire
Against thy Life, and Villains hire
To act thy Tragedy.
Lo those the perjured Evidence
That suggested thine offence,
Are hired the second time to be
Co-actors in thy Tragedy.
They have their Fee, and now are sent
Towards thee with a vile intent.
Ill thrive their purposes. Now note
The wrongs that are against Sforza wrought,
Who lives from Speech of all men still,
Pent by the Kings abused will;
Not knowing of the Treachery
That was conspired against him and thee.
Nothing of all that's past knows he,
More then he must a Prisoner be;
Which doth him much impatience bring:
But the bad Queen instructs the King
How his vexation he may end,
Who strictly for his Head doth send.
What from these black intents shall grow,
Is not as yet for thee know.
Now, holy Soul, I must thee set
A course that must thy living get.
Thou must not beg, nor take for need
More then thy Merits proper meed.
First therefore, I thy Brain inspire
With a Divine Prophetic Fire;
Thou shalt be able to Fore-doom
The ends of many things to come.
Into thy Breast I next infuse
The Skill of Med'cine how to use:
Learned Aesculapius never knew
The use of Simples more then you.
Many diseased by Grief and Pain,
Of thee shall Health and Strength obtain.
Next Handy-Works and Literature,
With Education good and pure,
Thou shalt be able to bestow
Upon the Country's Youth, and show
The Elder sort how to improve
Their Wealths by Neighbour-hood and Love:
Now when thou from this Trance dost wake,
See that thou present Practice make
Of these thy Gifts, and fear not then
The Practices of Fiends or Men.
What soft? what sweet? what heavenly Trance was this?
I feel my self inspired with holy Flame
Above the heat of Mortals: sure I have
The Spirit of Prophecy, the Gift of Healing,
And Art of teaching hidden Mysteries.
Thanks Heaven, that first did send me Patience
To sweeten my Afflictions, and now
Plentiful means to live, for others Good.
Who live but for themselves, are but for show,
And stand like barren Trees, where good might grow.

Farewell, thou foolish Pomp, and Pride of Court,
Whose shine is but an Ignis fatuus
That leads fond Mortals from the path of Virtue,
And Tracts of real Comforts: thus I shake
Thy wanton Dust from off my Feet, to tread
The ways of Truth and Innocence: this Air
Breaths Health upon me, Peace, and perfect Pleasure.
Where the swoln Courts sophisticated Breath
Did but disease my Blood, and taint my Senses.

It is good Lodovico, though disguised,
I can no less then know him: and the poor Fool
That was my Servant: they come to relieve me
In these disguises, that I might not know
From whom I received Comfort.

To this way
The most unfortunate Queen inclined her course:
And see, already, how her VVants and Woes
Have worn her to the bone: Alas, she's pined!

And look you new Master, yonder's my old Mistress;
What Fools were we; that could not find her sooner!
Alas! I can see through her: there is not
So thin a Queen in the Cards.

Hold thee, good Woman, pray thee take it quickly.
I came now from a Feast where we had plenty,
And brought these Dainties, meant unto another;
But my dear Charity tells me thou dost want it.
I pray thee eat it; do not look, but eat it.

What Traitor art thou, that presents me Poison?

By all the truth and honesty in Man,
'Tis wholesome Food: see, I will be thy Taster,
Though in good sooth, it grievs me to beguile thee
Of the least Morsel: sure thou hast need of 't*
Good Woman eat, and let not Famine be
Fearful of Poison, or false Treachery.

Is it not Poison to a loyal heart,
To eat contrary to the Kings Command?

No, if it were, what a many would have been poisoned the last Lent, that may
live to be very good Subjects, very good Subjects all the year after, except a
few Fish-Dayes?


Alas, we are plain poor Country Folk, and hear no such news.


Why will ye urge so much against your conscience?
Have you not heard of my banishment, and the Kings Edict,
Proclaiming all men Traitors that relieve me?

We heard indeed the King had put away his old good Wife, and taken a new one:
but can we think you are she that was the Queen?


Yes good Dissembler, you do know it, and you;
As sure as I know you for Lodovico,
And you, Sir, for Andrea: Can it be,
That you that have been loyal Subjects, should
Now go about to forfeit thus your Lives?

Pray leave this fooling, Mistress: eat your meat;
And here's good Drink to wash it down: and then
If you have a mind to hang us, let the
Gallows take his due; for my own part, I had
Rather hang like a man, while I am good
For something, then you should pine away to nothing.

Fear not you me, pray Sir, nor neglect the care
That's due unto your selves, to injure me.

O dearest Heaven! do you think we'ld injure you,
That venture lives for you? no, gentle Queen.

Lo, there again, that's Treason too, to call her Queen.

No body hears nor sees; pray eat a little.

Do not I hear and see you? I am not safe
In my obedience unto the King,
To hold such conference with you that would
So violate his Laws: but let it warn ye
Off of this course; for I'll appeal to Justice
If you persist in this Rebellion.

Any woman but she, now in her Case, would eat such an Husbands Brains without
Butter, rather then forsake good meat; and but for this wilfulness in her, I
should not think her a woman, I. But as she is, new Master, we shall never do
good upon her: and therefore since your Grace has not the grace to eat this
meat, mark with what a grace or without Grace, I will eat it my self: do you
fear Poison?


Much good may it do thee.

Stay, now perhaps she'll eat.

'Tis like enough; I did but eat to get her an Appetite, therefore I'll even
eat on, till all be done, to get her the better stomach: now Bottle, to thee
again.


See, here come poor Folks, that perhaps do want
That which superfluously thou hast devoured.

I'll eat again, for that: I am as poor as they; and you never knew Charity in
Beggars towards one another. Bottle again for that.


O Misery! O Desolation!

Diseases, Sicknesses, O Calamity!

What Saints are those that they invoke so?

What is the Cause of these sad Cries, good People?

Go back, if you respect your safety, go;
And look not this way where the Air disperses
Nothing but foul Infection, Pain and Sorrow.
Return, I say, for here you appear strangers,
And run not to the Ruin of your selves:
This way is filled with Cries: you can meet nothing
But Lamentations of a thousand Souls:
Some Lame, some Blind, some Deaf, some Lunatic,
Some struck with Palsy, some with Leprosy;
All sighing, groaning, crying, underneath
The painful weight of Sorrow and Affliction.

What is that woeful part of the Country called,
That suffers this Calamity? and how
Did the Inhabitants there stand affected
To Goodness or Religion?

We are all sinful*
Yet no way to extenuate our fault,
Or murmure at the Judgement fallen upon us;
We have been held obedient to the Church,
True Subjects to the King, and friendliest Neighbours
Among our selves, all Sicily could boast of:
This part of it, or Province, being called,
The fair Talermian Fields, and is the same
Our Kings have customarily laid out
For their Queens Dowry: and has therefore been
Vulgarly called The Paradise of Love.

Stay there, old man: I have heard there is
Neither Lawyer nor Physician in all the Province.

None could ever get a living amongst them in all their Practise.
It seems they lived then civilly and temperately.

Nor Gentleman nor Beggar in their Confines.

Then sure their Wealth was all communicable.
There could not but be excellent Neighbour-hood.

And, which was worth all the rest, their Priests
Were ever the best good-Fellows in all the Country.

You're now upon the Confines of that Country,
And cannot escape some dangerous ill,
If you dare taste the Air of it.

That shall be tried; I'll have a whiff on it:
If I get a mischief by it, let the Fools harm be a warning to the Wise.

See more of those distressed Souls that fly
The foul Contagion,
Yet charitable to each others wants:
For here the Deaf conducts the Blind: the Blind
Supports the Lame: the Dumb removes the sick and feeble.
All that can make least shift for it, fly the Place,
Then do not you press torward it.

There will I.
Take up my Habitation.

You're not desperate?

Mark me, good Lodovico, note my Reasons:
This poor afflicted Province was my Dowry:
And the o'er-hasty judging world will say,
According to the Censure passed on me,
My Trespass drew this Evil on the Land.

Tis better that the world should judge so, and perish
For it in it's Ignorance, then you so wilfully
Be cast away: you hear that none escape.

None, Old nor Young, Man, Woman Child, all
In one kind or other, do feel Affliction.

Do any die?

None, though the most do wish
They might, in lieu of their sad sufferings.

And whither now do you intend your travail with your griefs?

We hope a better Air will cure us. But
We are advised by our Divines and Augurs,
By the best means we can, to make our Journey
Towards the Court, to send our sad complaint
Unto the King.

Hear now what he will say)

They find by Divination, that this punishment
Is fallen upon this Province by the Sin
Of the Adulterous Queen, whose Dowry 'twas.

Did not I tell you?

And that until
His justice take away Her loathed life,
This evil will not cease.

What, the Queen Eulalia's life?

Yes Sir; we hear she's banished, and forbid relief:
But nothing save her polluted blood must quench this flame,
In expiation of her Sin and shame.

Dare you stay longer here? pray let us fly.

Why then you think me guilty, Lodovico.

I know not what to think, but that I will not.

Was that your Priests opinion and advice?

Yes, and thus grounded, that our pains began
Just at the hour, the Kings Indulgency
Released her forfeit Life.

'Twas everso; Priests are but Apes to Kings,
And prostitute Religion to their ends.
Might you not judge as well, it was the injustice and the wrongs the innocent
Queen hath suffered, that has brought sense of her injuries upon her Province?
And that if she had died, her Dowry here with her had also suffered Death? to
make it nothing to the King, as he made her.


I, mark ye that: and that your false surmise
Against the Queen has brought this evil on you.

O now my pain increases. 1. O mine Eyes. 2. My Brain. 3. My Bones. 4. My limbs
are on the Rack.


'Tis plain, your fowl mistrust is the infection that rages in you.


Lodovico, peace: where is thy pain good man?

Here in this Arm shrunk up as it were seared with fiery Irons.


Blessed Providence assist me whilst with Prayers I use the gift thou gav'st me
for the cure of these afflicted People. Give me thine hand: what feelst thou
now?


A precious cooling Balm that has extinguished
The scorching heat I felt, and has reduced
My Flesh, my Sinews, and my Arteries,
Into their natural temper and true use.

Join that hand to thy other, and thank Heaven then

That made thee whole.

I do, I do.

Miraculous!

O sure you are some Heavenly Saint or Goddess.

Beware Idolatry, and only send
All praise to the power whose mercy hath no end.
Only do this for me: inform the rest
How you have sped, and win them back again,
To the next village: bid them be of cheer,
Whilst I make Holy Prayers for their help.
I'll come and live among you for my hire,
Which shall be cheap, believe me.

All we have
Will be too slight reward: first take my store.

I will but take my next competent meal.
I hope this will be thought but valuable.

I pray take more.

Go back I say with your sad company,
And comfort them with news of your success,
And a full hope of cure to every one
That's Partner in this sad Affliction.

With happy feet I shall spread it through the Country.

O happy woman, now no more a Queen,
But Holy Saint: I see how Providence
Means to advance thy injured innocence.
I'll dwell here now my self, and without fear:
For perfect health I think dwells only where
Good Eulalia remains: I have enough
To buy a Farm for me and poor Andrea.
But what's become of him?

I'll tell you, Lodovico: the poor Fellow
Is gone to taste the Country Air for me,
Lest I might be infected: you shall see
Straight how he speeds.

And that was honest love.

A Surgeon, a Surgeon! Oh a Surgeon!

How now, Andrea?

A Surgeon: Oh twenty Surgeons, bonesetting Surgeons.


What's the matter man?


I am out of joint. I'll taste no more of such contagious Aires, To save as many
Queens as I have hairs. Oh Surgeons and Bone-setters, Bone-setters and
Surgeons, all my Bones, all my Bones for a penny.

I have not a finger nor a toe in joint: my Legs,
my Thighs, my Arms, my neck.
My back and Crupperbone is out of joint.
Oh for a Sowgelder, a Surgeon I would say.
Out a joint, out a joint, I am all out a joint.

Thy tongue's not out a joint.

No, nor a Thing
I have that has no Bone in it: All else is out a joint.

This came of tempting Providence: were not you
Told the danger by the many that smarted of it?

I met them all dancing and frisking home.
The blind man made the way: the dumb man sung,
The deaf kept time to his Notes: the lame led on
The Dance to all the rest: whilst I can go
No further.

And now you repent you meant me so much good.


And now again I do repent that ever I did repent. Oh for a Stone-cutter, a
Bone-setter I would say.


Well Sir, give me your hands: stand up.

With as good a will as ever I stood to woman.

Now, how do you feel your self?

In very pretty plight, I feel I am sufficient.
Haugh, heigh --


Yes you shall venture Sir; and by the way,
I'll teach you to teach them to work and pray.

To work and play I pray you,

If there be Heaven on earth, it is this woman.

Then if there be a Purgatory on earth,
I'll venture through it for her, heigh, o, ho.

1. Health and Joy: Health and Joy.
2. O happy woman that ever she came hither!
1. Nay happy we that ere she came among us.
2. What shall we render her in recompense?
All that we have is too little for this woman,
This good woman, this holy woman, this she-Saint,
If there be one above ground.
3. O do not make an If at her, neighbour, lest the ground swallow thee quick
in thy Infidelity.
2. Now doubtless, and without all adventure, she is an unknown woman.
3. And therefore a good woman: for 'tis too true,
All those that are well known are even bad enough:
And known she will not be for all our entreats,
No not so much as from whence she came, we see.
2. And that counsel she may keep still for me:
For doubtless, and without all peradventure
If we had need of another such, 'it were in yain to seek her.
1. Sure 'twas from Heaven she came,
Where the whole stock of good women were placed long ago.
'Tis she I'm confident.

Our work lies fairly then before us.

These look like mischievous Robbers.

What can they take from us?

Your Life, I fear.

I have even dined, let 'em take away when they please.


Their looks are murderous.

Fear not, Lodovico: why look ye Friends, so amazedly? ha'ye lost your way? or
what do ye seek?


No, we have found our way, 'tis to you we seek: we dare come roundly to you,
for all your

Guard, your old Fool, and your young here.

O my unhappy Fears!

You will not murder me?

'Tis all the Office we are bound to do you.

Just Heaven protect me.

Call upon Heaven as you go thitherward:
We may not stay long Invocations.

Pray take me in your way, and run me through her, if you be honest Murderers.
Help: Murder, Murder!


O yes! O yes! O yes!


Silence Crier, suspend the Proclamation, to preventa bomination.

Heaven has sent us aid.

O we are prevented!

On, on; sa, sa; down with their VVeapons, up with their heels, till we insect
and rip up the entrails of the Cause: what an Assassinate was here attempted? O
infausta D^es! two swords against the naked vvomb of a Woman! and none but
weaponless men to assist her!


Senex Ineptus.

That is to say, Give me their Swords under my Fools Coat, I'll hurt no body.


Upon my facundity, an elegant construction by the Fool. So, I am cedunt arma
Togae.


For our attempt Sir, we will answer it: we are for the King.


Then we are for the King, Sir; in nomine
Majestatis, we command you to attend our present
Office, and then we will examine yours.

And then if you deserve the Gallows, you shall be sure on it: a short
breathing-vvhile shall be no hinderance to you. So Crier lift up your Voice,
and proceed.


O yes, O yes, O yes: By the Kings most Excellent Majesty, a Proclamation,
prohibiting upon pain of Death, any Relief to be given unto the banished
Eulalia.


Now say, Whereas upon just and lawful Trial.

Whereas, c.

The said Eulalia.

The said Eulalia.

I am that hapless she, that for relief will not beg, nor borrow, nor take of
ye.


'Tis she, and at the price of Life I will relieve her.


How? what have we done? In relieving her from killing, we are all become
Traitors.


That's an idle fear: we knew her not,
Which now we do, we may again reliver her
Into their hands, for them to kill her yet:
And then there's no harm done.

So let us give them their swords again; and
when they have done their work, to make all sure,
vve'll hang them for their pains, and so keep the Law
in our own hands while we have it.

O homines insani! quomodo erravistis?
The woman must be saved a manubus istis.
They are Catilinarian Traitors.

You Sir, have reason; you have found her Life
The King has pardoned: and although her Doom
In this her Banishment were heavy, and
A punishment even unto Death, but that
Good soul she works and labours for her food,
You find not yet 'tis lawful any kill her.

Recte dixisti Domine: therefore Sir,
You that are for the King, as you pretend,
Show us the Imperative mood or warrant for her death,
Or we shall put you into the Optativa mood,
By punishment to wish your selves dead oftner
Or more times than bona fide there be Tenses
In all the Moods of all my Accidences.

For my part I'll forgive them, if they will
Deliver truly who corrupted them,
To rid the world of this weary burden; that I may pray for them.

Can such a goodness deserve so fowl a Censure?

But first tell me: Are not you two the men that gave false evidence at my
Arraignment touching injured Sforza?


We gave no evidence, nor false nor true.

No countrey-woman, they had no such Beards. But I will try if I can make'm
like'em: O rare! what a nimble Barber am I? Lod. They are the self-same men,
the two cashiered Lieutenants that Sforza should have hanged for mutinies in
the late Wars.


What hinders now their execution?

Digito compesce labellum: silence good Pedro.
I do commend your zeal: but Periculum est in via,
We will walk safely: for this time therefore we'll do only thus,
Double our guards upon 'em, and away to prison with them,
Est locus in carcere quod Tullianum appellatur.
We will presume to know who 'twas that set you awork, before you go,

You will be made to answer it.

A word more, we'll hang you presently, and answer that too: Abite hinc in
malam Rem: away with 'm.


Ah Rogues, we'll hamper ye.

Kill a woman because she was a Queen?

We'll hamper ye, and halter ye, and do ye hear? hang ye.


Abi hinc malam rem, away with'm.

As I am Erudite, idoneus Adolescens,
A very towardly Juvenis. Cupis at{que} doceri?

What's that?

Wilt thou be a Scholar?

After you is manners.

Now by mine intellect, discreetly spoken.
Be but my Pupil, I will make thee one,
And dip thy Caput in pure Helicon.

Pray what's my Caput? and what's your Helicon?

Still a desire to learn: this is no Fool.
And by the company he's in, I do suspect,
Simile non est Idem: he's too wise,
To be the thing he seems but in disguise:
Some Lord of Court, his outside non obstante.

It is confessed Sir, I am Lodovico,
Sometimes a Lord of Court when this was Queen.

O Oedipus! I meant this Juvenal.

No truly Sir, your Simile non est Idem.
I am no Lord, what ere you like me to.
What I may pass for in the Country I know not,
At Court I was a Fool when she was Queen.

We dare not call her Queen now: but while we
Relieve her not, though we associate her,
We are the Kings true Subjects: and with your leave,
Disclaiming of all Honourable Titles,
VVe'll live amongst ye.

O gracious woman, so I may safely call you,
Who once preserved my life.

Mention not that.

I ought not to conceal it: therefore know
That some years past being employed to Court
To render the Kings Rents for this Province:
Which though I duly did, there was a Lord,
A strange officious one, that charged me deeply,
And all our Province, with detested breach
Of our Allegiance: at which my rage
Banished my reason, and confounded so
My senses, that without respect of Person,
Or Place, which was the Danger of the Law,
I struck him there in Court: and was adjudged
To suffer death for it, till you won my Pardon.

Were you that man?

And 'twas my
Cozen Lord'I warrant that you boxed.

'Tis he that brags so much his truth unto the Crown; I need not name him.


Sed nunc quid sequitur? Pray mark the issue of this Court quarrel. By the
way,'tis well you have renounced all quality of Court.

Here were no living for you else; for know,
Since this mans trouble, not a Gentleman,
Much less a Courtier dares breath amongst us,
But be as you pretend and write, but Yeoman:
You shall live Jovially with us and welcome,
At your own charge, your own Viaticum.

We have laid up
The murderous minded men in dungeon deep,
Clogged them with Ploughchains, Fetters and Horselocks.

VVe'l teach 'm to kill Queens:

Cave, caveto.

We mean this woman, this discarded Queen.

For all the Feasts, the Triumphs and the Glories
That have been spent, at price of great Estates,
In celebration of my high Advancement;
For all the King has in his present being,
His Love to boot, assured in highest measure;
Me-thinks there is yet wanting an Addition
To crown my Happiness: all's not safe hereafter;
I cannot safely say I am his Wife,
While the other seems contented with a Life. Flavello!

Most Mighty Sovereign.

O most Celestial sound!
Here's all your business granted.

Greatest and best of Queens! All?

See the Kings hand to all: do you mistrust me?

I only look for the poor woman's Pardon
That killed her Husband for his gelding the Priest.

If you but manage the Profits of my Favours with a discreet Hand now, you may
soon find the difference between a Minion, and the Son of a Dish-Maker.


I find it in your Gifts, my bounteous Goddess.

Oh Divine!

And would presume that
I my self were worthy
A place in the Calendar, might I do you Service,
That merited the smallest of your Graces.

Do you know the village where that woman lives?

Who, sacred Deity?

I'm very sick to name her or her Son.

O Eulalia; yes, the very House: 'tis in your Majesties way now, as you pass to
Nicosia: the King is ready, Madam, and calls away; he longs to be at the end of
his journey, to perform his Duty in the three Grants belong to you.


O but that Woman, and that hated Boy.

Eulalia* Madam?

Thou art a base
Ungrateful Villain to name her to me;
Thou hear me say, I dare not speak her name,
Yet thou dare stab mine Ears again, with it.
Had some received the Favours thou hast done,
Or could but dream of half*you're like to have,
I should not fear her Ghost; but thou art dull.

O let me take new spirit from your hand,
And say unto your self, She is sure dead.
But the King comes. I am enough inspired.

I will not only have you guiltless, Sir,
But free from least suspect; let but a spark
Of Discontent appear upon your Look,
I'll rip the hollow cave that holds the fire,
And with Death quench it.

I beseech your Highness,
If any alteration in my looks
Be found, or read, let it as well be construed,
It grows but from a filial fear t'offend.
I have forgot I had another Mother:
And humbly at the Feet of this I honour,
I beg her Aid, to win your Favour towards me.
Most gracious Madam, if you knew the Truth,
The fair sincerity I bear in Duty
Towards your Highness --

For what respect, young Prince?

The principal in the World: For that you have
My Fathers Love; and but to Wrong or Grieve you,
Were Stripes or Wounds to his Affection.
So much of my late Mother I remember,
To yield a Reverence to his Contentment, and shall for ever.

My Lord, my Love, what pretty meaning have you?
Do you bring your Son to mock me?

Ha! my Alinda, he's no Son of mine,
That with less Adoration dares look up
On thy Divinity, then the Egyptians
Gave to the Sun it self: but an out-cast Bastard,
And of the daring Giants ignorant Nature,
That warred against the Gods.

I would not move your Anger: pray let this win your Reconcilement.


O thou art gentle, and the life of Sweetness:
Come, my Alinda, I was calling you
To our intended Journey to Nicosta,
Where solemnly I will perform my Vow,
To grant the three demands I promised you,
In the full view of our Nobility.
Which by the Custom of my Predecessors
Have ratified and confirmed the Power
Of Queens, and made them absolute: have you thought
To ask things worthy of your Dignity,
Wherein I fully may declare my Bounty?

I, Sir, shall be so reasonable, that
I doubt not upon the way, or there at very instant,
To crave past my Desert.

O you are modest: but ask home, Alinda.

And by the way, Sir, let it be my Suit,
We give a Visit to distressed Eulalia;
Wherein we may do Charity fitting Princes;
(We may perhaps give Order for her Burial)

Thou art all Goodness: Come, all Friends, Gonzago:
But thank her Clemency.

An Earldom be thou sure of, wise Flavello,
To add to thy improvements: Though it be
No full Discovery, I'll make it serve,
As I will fashion it, to excellent use.
Poison or Sword thou heard him speak?

And in a menacing way: Now what may be
Conjectured by such words, from men whose looks
Show discontent against your Mightiness,
Rests most considerable.

Write, Flavello, write,
Write by that Copy in a States-Man's hand.
Alas, good men! I dare even swear for them,
How ere those words might fall in their discourse,
They had no thought of me: yet this surmise
Gives me an hint to try her Loyalty,
Or make her once more guilty: for my State
Stands by the King, as unto her his hate.
Read it Flavello.
Most Royal and most wronged Sovereign Mistress, be happily assured that the
time of your Restoration is at hand: and thatby no loss means then the death of
that she-monster that usurps your Dignity. All shall be determined at Nicosia,
by

Your devoted Servant unto death. Nameless.


'Tis well.
It needs no superscription: only seal it,
And think of your directions and disguise.
'Tis but your half days journey: and be sure
We are not far behind you.

I fly, my Sovereign.

Now to the King,
Of whose despite I still must sharp the sting.

No news of Lodovico yet, Horatio?

None since he stole from Court upon the Banishment
Of that false wicked woman, whom I cannot
Name to your face or forehead, but I tremble.

Because you fear all horned Beasts.

My Loyalty forbid,
And my infallible Truth unto the Crown,
But I were sensible of the injury.

I know thy Loyalty: but as for Lodovico,
How was my Judgement wronged in him!

And mine.

I thought my self as safe in that mans Counsel --

And so did I,
By my loved Loyalty, think my self safe
In his Advices --

Yet methought he had
A kind of slyness in his Countenance.

Yes, he had ever a kind of a sly look.

That still methought I had a Genius
That checked my forward love, and did inform me
That he would prove disloyal: and for that cause,
To speak plain truth, I never loved him truly.

Will your Majesty believe me? I would I might never rise
Into your Favour (and that I would not say
For all the Traitors Lands in your Kingdom,
Which were no small reward) if that were not
Mine very own conceit of Lodovico
That Traitor; hang him: what should I call him less?

Yet 'twas given out you loved him.

So 'twas thought your Highness did.

And that he was your yoak-fellow in the State.

Yes, when he's hanged he shall be King. How Horatio?

Your Majesty knows my thoughts: nay I thank my creation, I was ever
Just of your Majesties mind from my Nativity,
And in that faith I'll die.

Here's a true Statesman now!
Go, send Gonzago to me.

My sweet young Prince?
I shall: but ere I go,
Let me inform your Highness in my thoughts
Of the sweet Prince Gonzago: if ever King
Was happy in a Son, you are in him.

Go, call him to me.

Cherish him, good my Lord:
He will be a sure staff to you in your Age,
And prove a Statesman quickly: I cannot think,
Except in him and your undoubted Queen,
Petruccio and my self, True Loyalty lives.
And here he comes: obedience in his Face
Most brightly shining.

Wait without Horatio.
Gonzago?

My dread Lord.

Did you attempt
Against my strict command to visit Sforza?

It is most true, I did.

You are a Traitor.

Gracious Heaven forbid it.

What was your purpose?

First on my knees let me implore your Royal Pardon.

Well Sir.

My end was noble: as I thought, well suiting
The Honour of a Prince: I would have searched
Into the secrets of his heart by questions,
Whether he had intended or conceived
Treason against your Highness, as it is
Presumed he did: for which he was committed.

My self for that was his Accuser;
How durst you then make a scruple at it?

Still relying on your Pardon, I had thought
To have won confession of it from himself.

Suppose he had confessed it?

I had then
Concluded there had been a Probability
Of my poor mothers falsehood: yet I would have put
That Question to him next.

And say
He had confessed that too?

Then had I saved
Your Laws a needless labour in his death;
And with the same hand made that mother childless,
That by her folly forfeited her Husband.

Was that your resolution? but suppose
He had denied all?

All had then been nothing
But a Scandal to my mother and himself:
So good a Soldier would not be a liar
To save an abject life.

Sirrah, you are
His Bastard, not my son, in doing this.

You are my King, would I could say, my Father.

Within there!
Horatio, would you think it? this young stripling
Takes part against me with that Traitor Sforza.

Does your Grace think so?

Think so? I know it.

Then I know it too: Think, did you say? I think 'twas time to think it.

I knew it not till now.

As I am true to the Crown, just now I knew it too.

O do not so interpret, Royal Sir.

What can be said against it? has not his Grace spoke it?
What must be done with him to please your Majesty?

Convey him from my sight, and let our Marshal
Petruccio take him to safe custody,
Till our further pleasure.

My King, and Father.

Hence with him I say.

Great Sir, your mercy.

Did not I tell your Majesty there was not,
But in the Queen, Petruccio, and my self,
True Loyalty in the Court? Away you Traytorling.

My Lord, you are too severe.

What? in being true to the Crown? O my Loyalty!

No news yet? no return?

We shall have, Madam.

You made not choice of men of Resolution.

They were the same exasperate cashiered Soldiers
That swear so valiantly against Eulalia.

Many that pass for Soldiers dare swear valiantly,
That dare not fight.

Many that dare not fight,
Dare do a murder Madam, such a tame one too.
I am confident they have killed her: however, I have done my best.

Thou hast done nothing whilst that woman lives.
The work was not so course, that your own hand
Could have disdained it, Sir, if you had loved me.
So leave me, negligent Fellow.

Her first months Majesty hath wiped out
The memory of all her former days.
I must not lose her though: this hand then soon
Must do the work, be 't not already done.

How cheers my love? what ominous aspect
Hath wrought this sad Eclipse upon that Beauty,
Whose radiancie only is my life?
Cast by this veil of sadness: quit my fears,
And from my Brows wipe off a score of years.
No? what must then remove it? or dispel
These Clouds, that from the anguish of thy heart
Do cast this shadow ore my happiness?

I must not, will not name it: but you said
You would do something, which it seems
Your wavering love neglects.

Can I neglect
A duty that belongs to my Alinda?
Speak it again: and by my first nights bliss
I had with thee, by this kiss, and by this,
I'll treble in performance all my promises.

Y' are dull in your performances: I will
Not name a request the second time, although my life,
Your dignity, and your Kingdoms safety,
Lie on the rack for 't.

She will not name 't again:
Her last request was for the head of Sforza,
Her arrogant proud Father, whose perverseness
Checq'd at her due promotion; and whose life
Swollen up with Popularity, was my danger,
Threatening no less then ruin on my State.
She will not name 't again, poor tender soul,
Lest she might fall into the interpretation
Of an unnatural child: yet for my safety,
She suffers in desire to have it done.
I have prevented her desire, 'tis done:
I know Petruccio his Antagonist,
Who had my warrant and Signet for it,
Would not be slack in the execution.
Come, sweet, be fearless: that which your mild goodness
Is now so timorous to name, is done.

Is she pursued and put to death?

What she?

Nay, I have said again.

Sforza, my dearest life, the unnatural Homicide
That sought thy life and mine, is put to death.

What, my dear Father?

Was it not your Desire?
Here comes sure Testimony: speak Petruccio;
I will not ask, Is 't done? but speak the manner
How Sforza died.

A self-wil'd obstinate man:
Such as he lived he died: and gracious Madam,
That a more bloody Spectacle should not move
Your tender nature to compunction, I brought
But this inseparate Adjunct of his malicious Head
Against you, the King, and the whole Kingdoms good.

This is a token most infallible,
The Jewel that none but the cold hand of Death
Could ravish from him: 'Tis done:
The fear of him is like a storm blown ore:
'Tis done but this is yet but part of that full satisfaction
That must confirm my safety: Pray my Lord,
You fatal instrument of my Fathers blood,
Let me not look upon you.

Nay Alinda,
You must not be so sad: your gentle sorrow
In those obsequious Tears expressed, show nature
And Filial piety as he was your Father:
But think upon your wrongs, my dangers, and your own.

Alas my Lord, think you withal, a Father
Is not so early forgot. But sorrow leave me,
And do you give me leave to think, that now
It is no less a Child's part to embrace
Revenge then sorrow for a Fathers loss.

How means my love?

She lives that was his Ruin.
You may remember whom I mean: Eulalia.
Till now, I had no Plea against her life:
Only my care of you might wish her Death,
For your security. Her fowl Adultery
And secret Practices against your Crown,
Were nothing unto me, compared with this.
Now I have lost a Father: she the cause:
He suffers, she survives: where are your Laws?

Sweet, be content.

Content your self great Sir,
With your black infamy: sit down content
On your Majestic Throne, the President
Of Capital contented Cuckolds, do,
Till all your Subjects dance the Hornpipe too.

Nay dear Alinda, do but think --

Think what?
What on a course to be revenged on you?
To serve you in that kind my self?

O torment!

Or rather, let me think your lustful purpose
Was but to rob me of my Virgin-Honour.
And that you put her by but for a time,
Until my youth had quenched your Appetite;
Then to recall her home to your embraces.
She is your wife it seems then still: not I.

You have awaked me from a Lethargy
In which I was confounded: now I see
She and mine Honour cannot live at once:
She dies, Alinda.

And you may consider
A little further yet Sir, if you please:
You Father and maintain a Son (your own
I cannot safely say, and therefore more
Is my vexation) who demeans himself
Not towards me, like one that were your wife.

He's also doomed already, my Alinda.

It may prevent a greater strife hereafter,
Should he but live t'inherit Lands and Titles
That must belong to yours and my succession.

Thy wisdom inspired me: all shall be
(Be thou but my Alinda) ruled by thee.

Seal you that Grant: with this kiss I Seal mine:
My glories were eclipsed, but now they shine.

you're welcome Friends, your prayers and good wishes
Are comforts to me, yet without danger of the Proclamation.

Madam, the Court in all the Bravery
It boasts and borrows, cannot so rejoice
In the bright shining Beauty of their Queen,
As we in your enjoying in this plainness.
Their Bells, and Bonfires, Tilts and Tournaments,
Their Feasts and Banquets, Musics and costly shows
(How ere unpaid for) shall not outpass our loves.

Be you as confident, I will not wrong
A man among you: therefore pray reserve
What is your own, and warrant your own safety.

But how you'll live, we know not: we are now
In our old former Health: the Countrey's cured,
Your Practice at an end: unless you had
The common gift of most Physicians,
To make as many sick, as you make sound,
You will not find a Patient in seven years.

But I have other Arts: sufficient skill
In works of several kinds, the Needle, Loom,
The Wheel, the Frame, the Net-Pin: and choice of
Fingers works are most familiar with me.

And can you handle the Bobbins well, good Woman?
Make statute-Lace? you shall have my Daughter.

And mine, to make Tape-Purles: can you do it?

Yes, and teach all your children works to live on.
The which, together with my own labour,
May bring sufficient for my maintenance:
Without the idle help of Begging, Borrowing,
Or any way infringing the Kings Command.

You'll have a help beyond himself, but borrowing.

Something I have in Book, to help their knowledge,
And by practise give them literature.
Then when these serious works and studies toil us,
For Recreation, yet with equal skill,
VVee'l practice divers Instruments, Songs and measures,
That shall invite the Powers above to smile
On the content of which we them beguile.

Well Mistress, ours is the voice of the whole Country;
All which, or what you please of it, is yours:
Take this House: make your choice of servants.
Take our children: make your own Rates for their Education.
Our Purses and our lives are free to you:
Get what you can, that's your own: will this please you?

Yes gentle Friends, and with as much content
As ere I found in height of Government.

Take your possession then: and let
Posterity record, that without grieving
A Royal Queen once Traded for her living.

Eho, oh, io, where is my learned sister?

Why seem you so distracted?

Proh Sancto Jupiter!

Alas what is the matter?

Hei mihi Qualis erat?
Talis erat qualem nunquam vidi.

Sure, sure, his Scholars have over-Master'd him, and whipped him out of his
wits.


Corpus inane animae, hold thy peace.

Pray speak, what chance has happened?

Non est narr andi locus: Go forth and see. The enraged Rurals are in an uproar
loud, each one an Hercules furens, a formidabilis formidandus Hostis and quite
against the Law

Of nostrum est injuriam non infer,
Are on the point of making themselves merry,
In hanging those ill destined men by the neck
That sought so late to give your neck the check.

O let us fly to rescue them.

Yet I hope
Your hast will bring you short to cut the Rope.

Bring 'em away to present execution:
They have lien too long upon the Countries charge.
We have given 'em bread and water a whole fortnight.

You dare not do it: what Law are we condemned by?

Dare we not do it? that word's an hanging matter
Here in our Civil Government: dare not do 't Sir?
VVee'l do it; and when 'tis done, we'll argue Law with you.

When you have taken our lives, you'll lay the
Law to us: you cannot be so Barbarous.

Impudent Traitors! how dare you say we cannot? yet because we graciously are
pleased to put the Law out of our hands, and make you hang your selves, I'll
give you Reason: Silence on your lives. First, know, lewd men, y' are Traitors
to the King, In offering to be wiser then his Judgement, Which was but
Banishment to the good Eulalia:

Seeking most Traitorously to take the life
Of (I do not say the Queen, but) the Kings wife
Of most happy memory.

The good Eulalia?

the Kings wife?

That was:
You shall not catch us tripping Sir,
We are more than your match.

Good I do say she is, and good again
I dare pronounce he (...) that by daily pain
Works for her daily bread: and for bare hire,
Teaches our children so, that we admire:
The Infants who have understanding more
Then we their Parents have, or then
Our Fore-fathers before us had.

But brother Lollio, make not your speech so long: what is 't to them? they'll
carry none on 't to the 'other world: let's do what we came to do, even hang
'em. Then, as I said, we'll argle it afterwards.


But brother Poggio, better 'tis they live
A minute two or three, then such a Speech
As I am now upon, be lost.

See what y' have won by your delay! if she prevent not now
The good we meant her, I dare hang for 'm.

In tempore venimus with a Reprieve, quod omnium Rerum est Primum.

Alas, what mean you neighbours? would you now
For all my labours and my Prayers for you,
Blast me with curses of expiring men?
What trespass have I done you, that for me
You put these men to death against my will?

We do applaud your mercy, gracious Queen.

There now, there they deserve hanging for that:
They call you Queen, against the Proclamation.
Dare you maintain 'em in it, and now speak for 'em?

No, I condemn their faults, and blame their lives;
But have nor Power nor will to judge the men:
You have the will; but to assume the Power,
You take the Kings Right from him: you transgress
As much his Laws in spilling of their blood,
As they had done in mine, had they prevailed.

They do not intend to spill their blood, Country woman, they would but
strangle them: never pierce the skin, nor make 'm an hair worse men, if you
consider rightly what they are.


But to the point. This is the All and some: We meant you a good turn, and for
your sake to have hanged 'em right or wrong. Now since you will needs stand in
your own highway of women's wisdom, which is wilfulness


A most Elegant Figure!) Let'em and please you come to the Gallows another day
for killing you out right: who can help it?


Oraculously spoken: which of the Sages could said more?


'Tis not unknown to you, that I can speak like a Sage, and am one of the Sages
of our Precinct here for the Laity, though your learning lie another way among
us. I am a Sage, and will be a Sage.


And so am I, and will be: and but that wise woman, which is as much to say as
a fool for her labour.


Another elegant Figure.


But that, I say, she has gain-said it, we would; yet to show our selves Sages,
hang 'em up for Scarcrowes, to fright all their fellows for coming from Court
to kill women in the Country.


O how I love a Sage! how many Sages do you allow in your Precinct?


Some three or four main Heads: we have now only Pedro, Poggio and my self:

But we have many Powers under us:
These now are Powers that execute our Commands.
There is as much difference between a Sage and a Power,
As between a Judge and a Hangman.

But is not the learned Curate a Sage amongst ye?


No, as I said before, their learning lies another way: we allow not our
Clergy any Temporal Offices, for reasons known unto our selves.


Pray let me have a Sages place amongst ye then: I long to be a Sage.


Brother Andrea, you shall have my voice in your Election.


Sage Brother Lollio, I thank you.


But will ye now, if misericordially
This gracious Foeminine preserve your lives
from the Gallow Tree,
Become new men indeed?

I know they will
When they consider the most dangerous sin,
That threw them on their desperate Attempt,
And their escape from merited Punishment,
They cannot be so graceless, not to turn
To a reformed life: First know, young men,
Your former Act against me an Innocent,
Was Perjury by which I fell, yet flourish.
Consider there how black and fowl your Sin
Is rendered by my Crystal innocence:
Your next Attempt against me, was blacker, Murder,
The very word sounds horrow.

Gentle Madam,
Name it not then: but by your sacred mercy,
Acquit us of the Doom which we so justly
Have drawn upon our selves: and we will spend
Our lives in rendering satisfaction
To your abused goodness.

This is serious.

Or may the earth on which we kneel for favour,

Forced by the weight of our detested Sins, open.

Quick devour us.

So, enough:
I'll take your words.

But now you must reveal
By whom you have been wrought to these fowl Practices.

All, we'll discover all, though justly then we pay our lives to Law.


Good neighbours, Lollio, Poggio, and Andrea, conduct them to my House.


My self also will to be their securer convoy go,
For fear the Rustics may presume again
To stretch these penitent necks with halter strain.

You shall do well: I thank your Charity.

Well, since in these we are prevented thus,
Come more, we'll hang 'em, or they shall hang us.

Make me but once a Sage, and then fear nothing.


Thou shalt be one next Sessions, without all peradventure.


When we have taken these men's confessions,
I'll write at large each passage to the King,
Against the good Eulalia's will or knowledge

I'll be your faithful Messenger, my Lord.

Thanks my good Pedro: but remember Silence.
So deep in thought good Madam?

Never enough in contemplation of my Happiness.


It is your Heavenly mind that sweetens all things.


What's the matter man?

Doubtless and without all peradventure, more miracles.


The news, good neighbour.


O neigbours Poggio and Lollio, such a news, such a Discovery, such a thing is
come to pass, such a business is come to light, as your hearts never heard,
your Tongues never thought, nor your ears ever uttered: you cannot hear it, but
it will drown you in a Sea of Admiration, never to rise again in your right
wits.


Now am I mad till I hear it.


Thou shalt tell me first whether it be good or bad, or I'll not hear it.


It is good or bad I assure you: and therefore you may be gone.


I mean which is it? good or bad?


I say it is good and bad: and you may both stay and be gone, hear it or hear
it not, an't' please you.


Nay thou art in thy Jibes now: how good or how bad is thy news?

I pray thee neighbour, I do pray thee how good or bad is it?

Nay then it is neither good nor bad, but both: the best and the worst that
ever you heard in your life, and the worst shall out first: what do you think
of the woman that we have got among us?


Who, the holy woman? that we are all so bound to pray for? I hope no ill's
betide her.


Come, she's a witch: flatly and plainly said to be a witch.


Did not I tell you she was an unknown woman, and therefore a good one, quoth
you? but say I, doubtlessly; and without all peradventure, all that she did was
but a kind of witchcraft.


It cannot, fie, it cannot be: how is she found so? Countr. I do not say she's
found a witch, but she's accused for one.


By whom is she accused?


By two brave men at Arms that came from Court
With purpose to have killed her for the same.
To be short, They found her out, and naked swords they drew:
But as they thought to have thrust her through and through,
They both dead Palsie-struck fall to the ground.

And had no strength but of their Tongues to wound
The Fame she had.

Virtue can want no Foes,

With that they cried she was a witch, and swore
She also was that Queen which for a whore
The King had turned away.

This is indeed the best news thou could bring.

Now doubtlessly and without all peradventure, 'tis the Queen indeed: and if she
be not a witch, I am sorry I thought so, with all my heart: where be those men?
we'll hang'm presently.


No, the Queen, if she be the Queen, will not have them hurt more then they be:
we wet about to execute 'em: but she would not suffer it.


Goodness it self!


Nay without all peradventure, if there be goodness above ground, I said, and I
say it again, 'tis in that woman.


She would have cured 'em presently her self: but could not do it, because the
cruel Caitiffs would not confess their sins, as she made us, you know, before
her gift could cure us: by the same token I suffered an hours torment that I
might have escaped, because I was so loath to bring out that naughty business
betwixt me and the Millers wife.


'Twas well you confessed at last.


I, and they will be glad to confess, before they be able to stir hand or foot,
I warrant: and so I told 'm when I lodged 'em both lovingly together upon straw
in my Barn, too good for 'em; and so I told 'em too, for being Traitors to her
Holiness.


But where's our Holy woman?


Our Queen we'll call her now, without all peradventure.


Coming this way to her Court-Cottage here, but very slowly, though our two new
neighbours make the best way they can for her through the People that press
upon her so with thanks and offerings for their new Healths: but she takes not
so much for curing of a thousand mortal People, as I have spent in Turpentine
and Tar to keep my Flocklings cleanly in a Spring time. Hark, she comes: this
is her Music where ere she goes.


Heaven bless our Holy woman.


Depart good neighbours, good people all depart: she'll come abroad again to
morrow.
Within Heaven bless our Holy woman.

She thanks you all good People, pray depart,
To morrow you shall have the second part:
She shall appear again unto you; pray depart,
The men in Peace, the Wives in quietness,
And let your bigger children still the less.
Heaven bless our Holy woman.

So, now the Hubbub's gone: I pray pass on.
I shall be as weary of the Cottage, as of the Court,
If this noise hold: here's thrusting and crowding
As much as there, only here they have less Pride.

Was ever comfort in the Court like this?

I never lived till now.

Here come more of our weather-headed wise neighbours.

Heaven bless our Holy woman.

Heaven bless your Holiness.

Nay then Heaven bless our Sacred Sovereign.

This Homage fits not me.

We had not lived but by your sacred means;
And will no longer live then be your Subjects.

You go about to cast away your lives:
In serving or in succouring me, you fall
Into Rebellion against the King.

We have no King nor Queen but you.
Heaven bless your Majesty.

Heaven bless your Majesty.

That was pronounced bravely; O my brave new neighbours!

Y' are Traitors All.

In honouring our Sovereign?

I, well said, hold her to it.

How dare you call me so?

We dare, and can prove it good and lawful.
This Province is engaged unto you Madam,
The King made it your Jointure: and we find
No reason but you instantly possess it.

What, and the King alive?

He's dead to you.

Yes, yes, he's dead to you.

Well said again: that's a sound point, besworn
These be true Blades.

I tremble but to hear you,
And will not live an hour amongst you more
But with this freedom, To use my fair obedience to the King.

You shall obey the King then, and we'll obey your Majesty.

O let that Title die with my late Fortune:
Remember it no more, but let me be
As one of you; nay rather, an Inferior,
Or I from this abiding must remove:
Of which I first made choice in truth for love.

O Madam!

Take heed good neighbours,
Beware how you give Dignity or Title; therein you may transgress.

No whit good Madam. Observe the Dialect of France,
And you shall find Madam given there in Courtesy,
To women of low Fortunes, unto whom
'Tis held a poor addition, though great Queens
Do grace and make it Royal.

'Tis then the Greatness of
The Person dignifies the Titles, not it the Person.

And in that, Madam, you are in your content
Above all Title's proper to great Princes:
But setting this aside, how thrive your Scholars?

We go fairly on.
Here's one that knew no letter in the Book
Within these ten days, can read hitherto,
And waits for a new lesson: proceed hither --
And at your hour I'll hear you.

Yes forsooth Mistress.

Good Girl, well said: nay, nay, hold up your head: so, so, 'tis very well:
let's see your Samplar: what an hearts ease is here! Lod. Right in its perfect
Colours.


Nay she'll do well: now take me out this Flower. Keep your work clean, and you
shall be a good Maid.


'Tis here forsooth. Pray shall I hay a Joyn-hand Copy next?


No child, you must not Joyn-hand yet: you must your letters and your minums
better first. Take heed, you may Joyn-hand too soon, and so mar all: still
youth desires to be too forward. Go take your Lute, and let me hear you sing
the last I taught you.


Whither do you press? who would you speak withal?


O Sir, for Charity sake give us access unto the holy woman.

Who are you? or from whence?

We are poor Pilgrims man and wife, that are upon our way struck with sad pain
and sorrow.


Alas poor Pilgrims! here's she must do you good.

How divine Justice throws my Enemies into my hands? what are your griefs?


My wife is struck with dumbness.

Hold a little,
That's the greatest grief a woman can endure:
But trouble not thy self to seek for cure.
Too many a man in the world will change with thee
A wife that of her Language is too free,
And give good Boot.

Pray Sir be you silent.
And where's your pain?

Here in this hand;
Which I desire to show in some more privacy.

Because your Blow cannot be safely given here, you think.
O sinful wretch! thou had no pain till now;
Nor was she dumb till divine Providence
Now at this instant struck her. It is now
Just as thou say: and justly are you punished
For treacherous counterfeits. Lodowick search his hand.

His hand is withered, and lets fall a Knife.

As sharp to do a mischief as ere was felt on.

Now take off his false Beard: see if you know him,
And let the woman be unmuffled.

O Devils!

O the last couple that came out of Hell!

These are the other two that damned themselves
In perjury against you at your Trial.

How do you master Doctor, and Mistress Midwife?
Is this the Pen your Doctorship prescribes with?
This might soon write that might cure all diseases:
And are these the Labours you go to, Mistress Midnight?
Would you bring women to bed this way?

O damnable conspirators!

Pray take 'm hence, their time 's not come for cure yet.

Come away Pilgrims: we'll cure 'em for you,
If your own salves can cure you: O my sweet Pilgrims.

Fough, they stink of Treason damnably

What, shall we hang'm? drown 'em? or burn 'em?

They shall taste forty deaths, then take their own.

I, come away with 'em: they shall die forty times without peradventure,


You shall lose me, if you do any violence to any of 'em: but let'm be lodged
with those we took to day: I'll feed 'em all.


They'll be a jolly company.

Pray do as I entreat.

You shall in all command us.

I'll make my Barn a spittle for your conspirators till it be top full, and then
set fire on it, and please you.


Do you no harm, and fear none: send your Children.


Long live our Queen.

Your Queen? have you a mind to be hanged?
Queen? have you a mind to be hanged?

our School-Mistress, we would say.

We live secure in spite of Foes: and see,
Where Heaven protects, in vain is Treachery:
Who says out State is low, or that I fell
When I was put from Court? I did not rise
Till then, nor was advanced till now. I see
Heaven plants me 'bove the reach of Treachery.

O happy, happy Saint!

I would she had a Council: she shall have a Council,
And we will be the Heads thereof,
Though I be put to the pains to be President my self.

It is most requisite for her safety: her danger may be great.
A good guard then in my opinion were more requirable.

'Tis well considered: she shall have a Guard too: and we will be the limbs
thereof, though I be put to the trouble of Captain on it my self.


You will put on all Offices, yet count 'em pain and trouble.


Yes, and perform 'em too here in our Court of Conscience, for here's no other
profit to hinder the Duty: let them above do what they list; we will have as
much care of our School-Mistress, as they of their Semiramis: I speak no
Treason nor no trifles neither, if you mark it. But she must never know this
care of ours, She'll urge the Statute of Relief against it.


This is some Courtier sure that's with her; he smells illfavordly.


That made me dog him hither.


He shall not have her out of sight, that's certain.


Nor out of reach neither: a mischief's quickly done.


No Superscription, nor any names unto it. Most Royal and most wronged
Sovereign Mistress: (that must needs be me.) Be happily assured your
Restoration is at hand; And by no less means then by her Death that usurps
your Dignity: (a plain conspiracy against Alinda in my behalf.) All shall be
determined at Nicosia, by

Your Loyal Servants.

Nameless.


You know not the contents then, and are bound by Oath you say not to reveal
the senders of this Letter.


It is most true: only thus much I tell you, they are your noble and best
chosen Friends.


Heaven! can it be, that men in my respect can plunge into such danger?


So Madam, this being all I had in charge,
I must crave leave (indeed I do not like this
Opportunity, nor well the countenances of these Hobnols.

You are no messenger of such ill Tidings
To part so slightly: indeed you shall not.

She's honied with the news: I have already
Madam my Reward, and will no longer stay.

Then I must say, you shall stay: or I'll send
A cry as loud as Treason after you.

You'll wrong yourself and Friends then.

You wrong your self Sir, and we charge you stay.

By the command of Peasants?

How! you choplogical Rascal, Peasants!

Down with him into utter darkness.

No-violence good Friends: but if you will detain him
Till I give order for his liberty,
You do the State good service.

May it do you Service?

The State is finely served already.

Me most of all.

Hell cannot hold him faster then.

Madam, hear me.

Mad Ass, hold your prating till she calls you:
Mean time you are fast: 'twas time we were a Council or a Guard.

I thank thee Providence, I dreamed not of such ready help.
I am struck through with wonder at this Letter:
I could not at the first but think it a Bait
To catch my willingness to such an Act;
Or Gullerie to mock my Hopes or wishes,
In case I had such: therefore I desired
The Messengers restraint from being my Relator:
But now a strong Belief possesses me,
A ^oble Fury has stirred up some Friends
To this high enterprise: whereby I gather
My cause is weighed above, whence I shall see
How well my patience over-rules my wrong,
And my Foes ruined with mine Honours safety.
But let my better Judgement weigh those thoughts,
I do not seek revenge, why shall I suffer it?
My causeless injuries have brought me Honour,
And 'tis her shame to hear of my mis-hap.
And if by Treachery she fall, the world
Will judge me accessory, as I were indeed
In this foreknowledge of the foul intent,
Should I conceal it.
Then here's the trembling doubt which way to take*
Whether to rise by her Destruction,
Or sink my Friends, discovering their pretence.
Friends have no Privilege to be treacherous:
She is my Sovereigns wife, his chief content;
Of which to rob him, were an act of horror
Committed on himself. The question's then,
Whether it be more foul ingratitude
To unknown Friends, and for an act of Sin,
Then to be treacherous to the Prince I love?
It is resolved: I'll once more see the Court.
O my good Patrons, I must now entreat
Means for my Journey to attend the King,
On a discovery for the present safety
Of his fair Queen: she will be murdered else.

And let her go: we have shut up your news-bringer safe enough, will keep you
by your favour, short enough from hindering such a work.


Dear Friends, a small matter will prevent this world of dangers.


Would you have us to become Traitors, to
Supply your wants against the Proclamation?
If you be well, remain so: your Iudustry
Can keep you here: but for a Journey, that
Requires Horses and Attendants: money must he had*
Which we have not for such an idle purpose.

O hear me.

Will you neglect your House and Trade to meddle any more with State-matters?


And bring our necks in danger to assist you?
Let your own counsel advise you to stay.

How died the Boy?

Gonzago Sir, your Son?

My Son, my Son? you urge the name of Son
To work remorse within me, when I ask
How died that Bastard Boy; no Son of mine.

His last words that he spake to me, were these;
Go, tell the King my Father, that his frown
Hath pierced my heart: tell him, if all his Land
Be peopled with obedient hearts like mine,
He needs no laws to second his displeasure,
To make a general Depopulation:
But that he may not lose so much, I pray
That in my Death his misse-plac'd anger die,
And that his wrath have double force against those
That to his Person and his Laws are Foes.

Did he say so?

And then, as if the Spirit of Prayer
Had only been habitual in his soul,
He did implore Heaven's goodness to come down,
Lifting him hence to shine upon your Crown.

This Boy yet might be mine, though Sforza might have wronged me by the By.


This done, he prayed me leave the Room. I wept: In sooth I could-not choose.


Well, well, you wept, returned, and found him dead in's Bed you say.


Yes, in so sweet a Posture, as no Statuarie
With best of skill on most immaculate Marble
Could fashion him an Image purer, slighter.

No more.

I found his stretch'd-out fingers which so lately
Had closed his eyes, still moistened with his tears;
And on his either cheek a tear undryed,
Which shone like Stars.

It seems he wept and died.
Prithee no more: I cannot though forget
My threatenings were too sharp: I must forget it.
I charge you that you levy up our Army
Against those Rebels that we hear give succour
Unto the wretched cause of all my mischiefs,
That hated ill-liv'd woman.

O my dread liege?

The matter? speaks; how does the Queen?

O the sweet Queen! I fear, I fear, I fear.

What fear thou? speak the worst I charge thee.

I fear she has a Moonflaw in her brains:
She chides and fights that none can look upon her.
Her Fathers Ghost, in her I think: here she comes.

Where's this King? this King of Clouts,

Fearful effect of Pride!

This shadow of a King, that stands set up
As in a Press among the Rags and Vizors
That represent his deceased Ancestors.

What means my love?

Your love? where is your love?
Where is the preparation that you promised
Of strength to tear in pieces that vile Witch
That lives my souls vexation? your love?
You are a load of torment: your delays
To my desires are Hellish cruelties.
Are these your Promises?

I have given order with all speed I could.

You could cut off an old man in a Prison,
That could make no resistance, and you could
Vex a poor Boy to death, that could but cry
In his defence; that you could do; but this
That has so much show of fear or hardness,
As a few Peasants to maintain a Strumpet
Against your Dignity, is too much to do
For a poor coward King.

What a tyrannous Ambition
Has the Devil puffed up this Bladder with!

I fear her wits are crazed indeed. Alinda,
Hear me gentle love.

O my torment!

As I am true to the Crown, I know not what to say to this: she's falling mad
sure.

No, no, you dare not do it: your Army may
Perhaps in the dangerous Action break a shin,
Or get a bloody nose: it now appears
My Father (as 'twas voiced) was all your valour.
Y' have never a Mars or Cuckold-making General
Now left: and for your self, you're past it.

His' the other wife would not have used him thus.
Quiet Cuckoldrie is better then scolding chastity all the world over.

I see distraction in her face.

Did all your brave Commanders die in Sforza?

By the Kings favour Madam (not to stir
The dust of your dead Father) he has Soldiers
That know to lead and execute no less
Then did victorious Sforza.

Sirrah! you have stirred more then his dust; you have moved his blood in me,
unto a Justice that claims, they traitorous head.


My head? and Traitorous? I do appeal unto the King.

A King? a Cobweb.

And she the Spider in it I fear.
My Loyalty knows not how to look upon her.

If thou be King, thou yet art but that King
That owes me love and life, and so my subject.

Indeed Alinda; --

Yes indeed Gonzago,
Life by inheritance: for my valiant Father
Whose life thou took, gave thine, and so 'tis mine.
And for your love, you dare not wrest it from me;
Therefore deny not now my just demand,
In that proud Traitors head.

She's mad beyond all cure.

Examine his offence, my dear Alinda.

Is't not enough Alinda doth command it?
Are these the Articles you gave me grant of?
Is this the nothing that you would deny me?

Sweet, weigh but his offence.

His Head is my offence: and give me that
Now, without pause, or by the strength of Hercules
I'll take thee by the Horns, and writhe thine own off.

Go from her sight Petruccio; levy up our Forces,
And let the Boy Gonzago be embowell'd,
And sent as a forerunner of our Fury
Unto that Witch, contriver of these woes.

'Tis done, my liege.

Was ever woman barred her will, as I am?

Here's a fine woman spoiled now, by humoring her at first, and cherishing her
Pride.

Sure you have but mocked me all this while:
I am no wife, no Queen, but silly Subject.

'Tis a disease in her that must be soothed:
Sweet, thou shalt have his Head.

O, shall I so?

Go in, it shall be brought thee.

Mark what I say to bind you to your word:
Do it, or I'll not love you: I can change
Love into hate, hate into love most sweetly:
Let that man live to morrow, I'll love him,
And do fine feats with him, such as your the other wife
And Sforza did; but make much better sport on it.
They were an old dry couple.

Take this, take all.

I leave all to your Kingly consideration:
You know your charge: look to it, and so I leave you.

What wild Affections do in women reign!
But this a Passion past all President.
O 'tis mere Madness, mixed with Divellish cunning,
To hurl me upon more and endless mischiefs:
It has awaked me to the sight of those
My fury (sprung from Dotage) hath already
Laid in my Path, grim Spectacles of horror,
The blood of Sforza, and that tender Boy:
O let me think no further, yet stay there:
To plunge at first into too deep a Sense
Of soul-afflicting terrors, drowns the Reason,
And stupefies the Conscience, which delivers
Us over to an insensibility
Of our misdeeds, and of our selves: just Heaven!
Afford me light to see I am misled:
But let it not as lightning blast mine eyes,
Confound my Senses, make me further stray,
For ever coming back to know my way.

How fares your Majesty?

O Horatio! she's lost, she's lost, Horatio.

I would my wife were with her then:
And so would any good Subject say; I think.

What dost thou think?

Marry I think (and so would any good Subject think, I think) as your Majesty
thinks.


What dost thou think of Loyalty now?

Truly I think there's now not any warrantable Loyalty left but in Petruccio
and my self.
The Queen is now out of my Catalogue, and my Creed too.

What terrible, what hideous noise is this?
Kill him for Sforza, Sforza; kill him, kill him.

My Loyalty defend me! I know not what to make on it.

What art thou? speak: had thou the voice of Hell,
Denouncing all the Furies in it, I dare yet hear thee; speak.

O mighty Sir, Petruccio.

What of Petruccio?

O Petruccio! I tremble but to speak him.

Shall I then with the Prophetic Spirit of a King
Speaks of Petruccio? he is turned Traitor,
And animates the Soldiers against me,
Upon the discontent Alinda gave him
Now in her Fury: is't not so?

'Tis so, 'tis so: never ask him for the matter:
I thought so, just, just as your Majesty thought it;
And find withal, that now you have not left
A Loyal heart but in Horatio's bosom,
Now that Petruccio fails: I feared 'twould come
To that: nay knew't: O hang him, hang him,
False hearted villain! he was never right,
And so I always told your Majesty.

The cry comes nearer still: what does he mean,
To bring my Army on to Massacre
Me in my House?

Dread Sir, vouchsafe attention:
Petruccio is Loyal: 'tis his Loyalty,
And most sincere obedience to your will,
That brings him to the ruin of his life,
Unless your awful Presence make prevention.

Is then his Loyalty become his danger?

As thus great Sir, in the late Execution
Of Death-doom'd Sforza, which the Soldier
(Not looking on your Justice, but the Feud
That was betwixt Petruccio and him)
Resents as if it were Petruccio's Act,
Not yours, that cut him off: and still, as madly
Bewitched with Sforza's love, as ignorant
Of the desert of brave Petruccio,
They all turn head upon him: and as if
'Twere in his power to new create him to them,
They cry to him for Sforza, Sforza; or if not,
Petruccio's life must answer Sforza's blood.

Left you him in that distress?

He did prevail
With much entreaty, by some private reasons,
Upon their fury for an hours respite:
In which dear time 'tis only you may save
Guiltless Petruccio from a timeless Grave.

Thou art a Soldier, art not?

And have commanded in your Highness Wars.

Me thinks I should remember, but I'll trust thee.

I hope you'll be advised, though, how you run
Into this wild-fire of Rebellion.

My Fortune is more desperate then his:
I am beset and circled in with mischiefs.
Way-laid with heaps of dangers every where:
Yet I will on: Kings were not made to fear.
I'll fetch him off, and the more readily,
For my misprision of his Loyalty.
Could I think that man false?

No Sir, nor I:
By all means fetch him off: that Loyal General
Is tenfold worth the whole Rebellious Army:
Save him, and hang them all.

Have you no Faith, nor due obedience
Unto the King? this outrage is against him,
In me he suffers.

We obey the King,
And 'tis his Justice that we cut your throat,
For doing such outrage in the death of our brave General,
That had you lives more then false drops of blood,
They were not all sufficient satisfaction for his loss.

Your limited hour draws on apace: Prepare.

He's come within that hour, that shall relieve me.
Where is he? is he come?

You are betrayed:
He's fled and gone: no such man to be found.

Then Faith is fled from man: is Sforza fled?
Why should I wish to live, now Honour's dead?
Now take your bloody course, and in my fall,
Martyr the man that saved your General.

Saved him? how saved?

Sforza lives.

How's that? how's that? that, that again.

As I now live, I set him free from Prison,
Trusting unto his Honour to secure me,
In which I did abuse the Kings Authority
To the forfeit of my life.

This sounds: this sounds.

But does this sound well from a Soldiers mouth?

He is not now worthy of death, before He be well whipped for lying.
The King, the King, the King!

He could never come in a better time, to see how bravely we will do justice
for him.

How comes this Fury raised amongst ye Soldiers?
Have you forgot my Laws and Person too?

We honour both thus low: now gives us leave
To look like men, and give your Highness welcome
To see a General of your Election
Die with a lie in's mouth: your Soldier here,
None of the good Queens old ones.

Dare you both judge and execute this man?

We dare to kill the Hangman of our General,
And think it fits our Office best: though you
Have Law enough to wave our care and pain,
And hang him up your self: for he affirms
That he let Sforza live against your command;
And that's the lie we treat of.

I'll give you all your Pardons, and him Honour,
To make that true. Sfor. Your Kingly word is taken.
Noble Petruccio, thou art disengaged:
And if the temper of the Kings high Anger
Blow still above his Justice, let it crush
This cloud that holds a shower of innocent blood,
Willing to fall and calm his violent fury.

Our General lives: a Sforza, Sforza.

Sforza!

You have outdone me in Nobility.

I am all wonder: now this man appears
The Mansion and habitual Seat of Honour;
Of which he seems so full, there cannot be
An Angle in his breast to lodge so base
An Inmate as disloyalty: if so,
How was Eulalia false? or how Gonzago,
That tender Boy, the fruit of lawless lust?
There I am lost again: Great Power, that know
The subtlety of hearts, show me some light
Through these Cimmerian mists of doubts and fears,
In which I am perplexed even to distraction:
Show me, show me yet the face of glorious Truth; where I may read
If I have erred, which way I was misled.

Enters. O my dread Lord!

Thy news?

O my sweet Sovereign!

Art thou distracted too?

No Sir: The Queen, the Queen, the Queen's distracted,
And I am like to be, and you, and any man
That loves the King, unless some Conjurer
Be found to lay the Devil: I mean Sforza.
Sforza Sir (would you think?) that monstrous Traitor
Sforza walks in the Court without a Head;
Appeared unto the Queen: I found her talking with him,
Kneeling and praying him to give her Pardon;
Told him indeed 'twas she that sought his Head,
And that she thought, that being now a Queen,
She might by her Prerogative take Heads,
Whose and as many as she listed: but
She promised she would send it him again,
Or else Petruccio's first: or if he would forgive her
This time, shee'ld do so no more.
He seemed he would not hear her: then she beat
Her self against the walls and floor, and flies
To free her self by the windows: calls for Poison,
Knife, Rope, or any thing, whereby to follow
Her most abused Father. What to make on it,
As I am true to the Crown, I must refer
Only unto your Majesty.

O 'tis fearful!

My Lord, you saw not the Apparition, did you?

Not I: I saw him not: nor has the Devil
Power in a Traitors shadow to appear
Unto a Loyal Subject. Hah! my Loyalty
And Truth unto the Crown defend me!
See the very foresaid Devil at my Elbow,
Head and all now: avoid, attempt me not Satan,
I do conjure thee by all the virtues of a Loyal Courtier.

They are all too weak to charm a Devil Sir;
But me they may, your Friend.

I defy thee Bubsebel.

What do you see, my Lord?

Look there, the Apparition, there it is;
As like the Traitor Sforza when he lived,
As Devil can be like a Devil -- oh!

Fear not: he lives, and Loyal to the King.

Does the King say so?

Give me your hand my Lord,
The king will say so, if this be flesh and blood.

I, if thou be flesh and blood: but how to believe that I know not, when my
touch makes me sweat out a whole shower of pure Loyalty.


No more, Horatio: I find that my credulity
Has been wrought on unto my much abuse,
And Sforza now appears an honest man.

Who ever thought otherwise? or how
Could he in nature appear less then Loyal?
O my right noble Lord, I weep thy welcome.

Back Soldiers, to your duty: learn of me
Hereafter how to judge with equity.

Long live the King.

Now in the midst of my soul-frighting objects,
I cannot but applaud your mutual Friendship.

Yes, and how equally I affect them both.

O that mischance propitiously might be
A light to reconcile my thoughts and me.

May you be pleased Sir then to let the cause
In which your injured Queen, your Son and I,
And truth it self have suffered, be reviewed?
The mischievous creature that was drunk, now's mad
With brain-confounding strong Ambition:
She whom your ill-plac'd love Graced as a wife,
Whom now I am not fond of to call Daughter,
It seems is past Examination.

Mad, mad, most irrecoverably mad.

But let those Hell-bred witnesses be called,
And re-examined.

They are not to be found.

No? where is Flavello?

Not seen in Court these ten days.

Let me out-squeeze that Court-Sponge.
If I do not fetch out the poisonous corruption
Of all this Practice, let me yet be guilty.

From whence art thou?

Your Province of Palermo
Thus low submits in duty to your Highness,
The Service and the lives of whose Inhabitants
So truly are subjected to your Power,
That needless is the Preparation
Which with much grief we hear you make against us,
By hostile Force to root up a Rebellion
Bred merely out of Rumour.

Peace, no more:
I find the Province Loyal.

Who made doubt on it?
I'll undertake to find more Toads in Ireland,
Then Rebels in Palermo, were the Queen
(Queen did I call her?) that disloyal woman
And that sly Traitor Lodovico out on it.

See Sforza, see Petruccio, what Lodovico
That trusty and true-hearted Lord has wrote me:
He has ended all my doubts, good man.

Ah, ah! does not your grace come to me now?
I thought I would put your Highness to it for once,
To try what you would say: when Lodovico
Does not prove trusty, then let me be trussed.

'Tis a most happy Information.

I, do you note the Passages?

'Tis indeed worthy a Kings regard: you see your way.

Yes, yes, I know now what to do,
And mean to put it presently in Act.

This I foresaw would prove an hour of comfort.
The Stars themselves never saw events more plainly.

How full of April-changes is our life?
Now a fit shower of sad distilling Rain,
And by and by the Sun breaks forth again.

FEar not good Madam, trust my care and Reason.

Good Lodovico, though I thank your care
And love to me, yet give me leave to doubt,
That as that cruel and Ambitious woman
Hath overswayed the Judgement of the King,
She may pervert his Royal purposes
Of Peace and love, to your and my destruction.
Before you sent, would you had taken my Counsel.

To end all doubts, see Pedro is returned.

And happily: see Madam.

My Gonzago;
My Prince, I should have said.

Thrice-gracious Mother,
I thank Petruccio, who preserved my life,
For nothing more, then this one minutes Bliss,
In which I find your Blessing in a kiss.

Weep not, fair Sir.

The Lord Petruccio Madam
Presents you these.

Welcome my sweet young Prince.

I thank you Lodovico.

Now I see methinks a Court again.

We shall do shortly; for the King is coming,
And not in terror, but with Grace and Favour.

'Tis happy Heavenly news.

See here's an Inundation
Of Joys that do like waves overcome each other.
Brave, wise, and valiant Petruccio!
That could so happily deceive the King
By a supposed death, to save the Life
Of my sweet Boy: all that I can be sorry for,
Is this: Alinda is Frantic.

Can that grieve you?

He brings her with him: and I hope the change
Of Air, with wholesome Prayers and Physics Art,
In which I am not ignorant, may restore her.

Madam, the Sun shines fairly.

News, news upon news!

The Queen is killed: is not that it?

No nor the King neither, God bless him: they are both alive, with all their
Pomp and Train coming to see our School-Mistress.


Auspicious Providence!


They take us in their way, for they are passing to Nicosia, where the King
means to keep his word with the Queen, in giving her three what do ye calls?


Three Boons, as the custom is.


Boons? I Boons: I warrant she'll ask no Baubles.


O Mistress, you were careful for her, that comes
I warrant but to jeer you.

Patience would die, if 'twere not exercised.
But now it rests, that we prepare to entertain our Guests.
We must to welcome them make Holy day,
And give our Scholars leave to Feast and Play.
The Swains you say are perfect in the Dance;
So are my Maids: we'll leave it for the King.

I cannot but applaud your mind, Alinda,
But am not much affected with the Subject
On which you purpose now to cast your Favour.

More scorn upon my life, and rude vexation.

If my fair meaning Sir shall prove mistaken,
'Tis but a loving purpose lost.
(O that wretch Flavello!)

If she have further purpose then to raise
More sorrow by the Kings displeasure to her.

Let her alone, her Raign's but short we know.

Is this the sound of want and misery?

Of wantonness I fear, and Luxury.
(The villain had no purpose but to flatter.)
O Sir, why came we hither?

Mark the Camelion.

'Tis most sweet Music.

Such as the rudeness of the Country yields Sir,
Hayl to the King and Queen, and may the thanks
Which on my knees I offer at those Feet
That beautify and bless this humble Earth
Add many years unto your happy lives.

We have even seen enough: 'twas all I feared,
To find her knee-deep in Hypocrisy.

Seem not to turn away, most gracious Madam,
Before I show for which I hoped you came,
The manner how I get a competence to live.

Your work you say, though't be of the newest Frame,
I fear your Play is still at the old Game.
Both ways bring money: is't not so forsooth?

Enough, Alinda.

Too much, to tread upon Affliction.

What say you Lodovico?

I say Sir, the distresses of that Lady merit a
Kings Pity, and not such scorn
As I see cast upon her: but the best are women.

No more.

May it please your Highness sit, and note the Play
By which we gain when we lay work away.
The Song I taught you last.

These wenches will be a good help to you at wassel-tide.

We have variety for all the Seasons,
Of such poor entertainments, mighty Queen,
To show our much contentment in their welcome.

Goodness speaks in her.

There's for your Song () No, stay, I may transgress
The Law.

O Devil!

Let her jeer on.)

Not if you give it for her pains, Alinda.

Nay since you warrant it, let's pay and go.
Though I have heard such pains disputed Begging.

As all Arts are, by the Rewards they find.

Nay I beseech your Majesties.

What's the Feat now?

Sir, are you pleased to prosecute your journey?
Or do these Beauties and delights enchant you?

Ha? no, come, let's away.

Oh let me yet entreat your Highness stay.

Not a stroke more I thank you: we have heard
And seen enough: so much, as I must tell you
I cannot but commend your Parents Wisdom,
Who having Calculated your Nativity,
By which they had the foresight of your fall,
Prevented thus the Planets by their care,
By teaching you to live by Hand and Foot.

Did ever Daughter of a King thus suffer?
Or has she Pride to smile on Injuries?

Sir, you forget Nicosia.

Plots against me?

How's that?

She dreams of Treason intended against me.

No Divination against her own good, I hope.

Mighty Sir, hear me: not to implore your Bounty;
No not your thanks, nor Popular Applause;
But for I am your Subject and your servant,
Bound by your Allegiance as well to prevent
All Ills might pass against you, as to do none.
I could not think it but strict duty in me
To hasten this discovery.

Treason, and a Letter?
We have never a false Brother amongst us, have we?

If ever you held your peace, peace now.

It bears a face of Horror.

Cunning and Gypsy Tricks: will you to Nicosia?

What we meant there, we may do here as well.
The Treason's there intended: look ye my Lords!
How careless is this woman of her safety.

You Sir are careless: for if there be danger,
Where can I fear it but in this place only?
The world holds not an Enemy of mine,
But this enchantress you maintain against me.

Your motion and your own love drew us hither.

I would fain love her, and certainly I should,
But that she still begets fresh cause of Hatred.
She has some Devilish Plot in hand this Instant:
This show is but the straw that hides the Pit.

No enemy but she? to let her know she lies,
Even unto Profanation against that Lady,
I'll speak.

I hope you will not.

The King shall see his error.

Will you?

She her cruelty.

Will you, will you?

The world Eulalia's Piety.

Will you? will you?

What says Lodovico?

Most mighty Sir, we here confess and say.

We? you hear not me say any thing; do you?

What will you say?

That Letter was not ours.

That's well.

We easily believe it.

Nor any day or place as yet set down
Among our selves, for fact against the Queen.
I mean Alinda.

Nor fact intended was there, of death or danger?

'Twas wished at least by us.

Lord, Lord,
Lord mumb.

Our Guard.

King she's the General grudge of all thy Kingdom.

You do not hear me say so.

Their grudge incites my love: take em away.
Come my wronged Alinda: This place shall serve,
And this Assembly, to make a Kings word good.
Make your Demands: three things I promise you.
Ask what you will, even to my dearest blood.

Your Highness will excuse me, if I urge you
To bind it with an Oath?

Give me a Book.
What I have promised to my lawful Queen,
I will perform; ask freely.

Great Queen, vouchsafe to take an Admonition,
My last and truest Testimony of Love.
The rest were shadows to it.

Well, pray let's hear it.

Let your Demands be for the common good.
Not for your own respects: selflove may hurt you:
Beware Ambition, Envy, and Revenge.

The Oracle could not pronounce more wisely.

Is this your love? 'tis fear of my just Vengeance.
Therefore hear my demands, my King and Husband.
First I demand the lives of these conspirators
Lodovico and Horatio.

Bloody.

Next that your Son, m^ch of the Mothers Nature,
By Act of Parliament be disinherited.

O fearful.

Last, that this woman have her eyes put out,
And be for ever banished your Dominions.

Cruelty and Ingratitude past all Example

Was this your Charity? you have now declared it fully:
And I of both have made sufficient Trial.
Come here Eulalia, take now thy wonted Seat and keep it ever.
Thy poverty and patience have restored thee
By the just Providentce: while her Excess and Pride
Casts her before thee, to receive that Doom
She had devised against thy immortal Goodness.
Into perpetual Exile; hence, away with her.

Remember your Oath, my Lord.

My Oath was to perform what I had promised unto my lawful Queen: that's my
Eulalia.
And let good Lodowick and Horatio be restored.

Oh! proh! proh Nef as!
I'll have no hand in blood of any man.

More exclaimations? what distracts you now?

Coram Senatures acta est: sub Judice lis est.
Ocurvae in Terris animae: the Rustics
Have taken again the Law into their hands.
And will you tender clemency non justante
A Courtiet hang, his sweet Face nec invante.

What is his Name?

His Name is hight Alphonso
That Treason brought in Pectore Skonso

Who are the heads of the Judicious Faction?

Andrea, Lollio, Poggio, the Drudges
Have got the Peoples voice to their Judges.

Dare they do this?

Yes Judges they will be,
And kill, they say, the Snake of Treachery.

I hope we may come yet to stay their Sentence.

Pray bring us to the place: where if we can,
Let us avert their Judgement from this man.

And can these turmoils never have an end?
Unless we load our heads and shoulders thus
Our bodies eke with Justice Capa Pe.
And Pepper all our brains with Policy.

'Twas time to have a care: I, and a piteous care.

A pious care you mean.

Well pious then:
You'll show your own wit, whose clothes soever you wear
(So do the wits of the time) but as I said,
'Tis time we have a care, for though our Queen,
Our School Mistress I would say, be mercifully, idleful
It is fit that we be prejudicious in the State.

Ju-dicions Brother.

Jew in your face.
Trip me again?

Agree upon it, Brother Sages of the Bench.
My Brother Poggio here said very well
And learnedly and as I would have said my self?
(If you will take his meaning) to wit that as
Our Shool Mistress dotes upon
Clemency, it is fit that we run mad upon cruelty
Someeting her in the midst, we shall jump into the Saddle of Justice.

I do say so, without all peradventure
For if the Candle of her mercy be not put out,
We shall shortly, see more honest men then Knaves among us.

More Knaves you mean Brother.

I mean no more Knaves then your self, Brother.

Agree again, Sage brothers of the Bench: and let no private
Itch grow to a put like Scab.

Then the point:
Do not I understand the purpose of our meeting
Here in our petty Parliament, if I may so call it?
Is it nor for a Reformation, to pull down
The Queens mercy, and set up our Justice?
For the prevention of a superabundance of Treason
Daily practiced against her?

Most true. And is it fit therefore that you brabble among your selves, and
leave all worse then you found it?


No, we will make such a Reformation, that Treason shall not dare to peep over
the Hedge of her Dominion, but we will take it by the nose and punish it
indignely: most indignely will we punish it?


All this I grant: but before we sit and bustle on the Bench, because it is,
and that without all peradventure, the strst time that ever we played so wise a
part, is it not fit to take advice among our selves, how to deform our selves
in our office.


De did you say? in in you should say.


In with your Horns: how now?


Nay Brothers o'th Bench.


Does he think to control me? because he has been a Sexton, and a little more
book learned then a Lay man with an Amen forsooth?


Nay Brothers: this will control the business.


Or because he has been in many a mans grave before him, does he think no man
so deep in grave matters as himself?


Well, I forbear.


Shall he bid me In, In? as if I were not his inserior?


I forbear still.


I will show my self his inferior I, and a greater man then he; and to prove my
self a great man, let him hang one, I will save two.


Still orbear.


Pray Brothers yet agree: and remember we use no mercy


Let him that uses any mercy lack mercy, for my part.


Then let us sit, and fall to the Business.


Sit and fall: was that so wisely spoken of a book-learned man now?


Still I forbear Passion becomes not Judges,
Now bring in the offender, the new and last offender.

Pray think on your speeches.


I have made speeches that I hope shall make Traitors.


How?


Ashamed to wear their own heads on their shoulders.


A Traitors head is not his own head: 'tis forfeired by Law to the King; 'tis
the Kings head.


I say a Traitors head is his own Head: and a good Subjects head is the Kings
Head.


I say that's Treason: and the head thou wear is not thine own then, if thou
be a good Subject.


Wilt thou tell me that?


Passion becomes not Judges, Brothers o'th the Bench.

The offender comes,
Now they are hot, he shall be sure to smoke for it.

Whither do you hale me? you Pease-porridge Peasants:
Is this a place for me to come to Trial in?
If I had broke the Law, as I have not
I am a Peer, and do appeal unto
The Kings high Seat of Justice, publicly.

And will not our low stool of Justice, privily

Serve for a Traitor? ha.

Your selves are Traitors,

In succouring against the Law, a dissolute woman
Whom I command you, in the Kings high name,
To yield into my hands.

You shall be hanged first.


By whose Authority?


By the said woman's Sir.

She is our Queen and her Authority is in our hands.

That speaks you Traitors: and the King has Law against you and her.


When you are hanged he has: to the next able

Tree with him, and hang him presently.

Villains: you dare not so say.


We do all say Hang him with one accord:

If on cord will not do it another shall:
So come away Sir.

Stay: hear a speech first.

You dare not use me thus: dare you take Justice one ye?

Yes Sir, we can spy
Great faults in Noble Coats, with half an eye.
What though we nod? does Treason therefore think
Justice is adle brained? or though she wink
In us (as thus) that she's a sleep? or say
She take a nap, d' ye think she'll sleep for ay?
No, she but dreams a while, to circumvent,
Your vains hopes, with sharper punishment.
For if she be but jogged, no Mastife takes
Swifter or surer vengeance when she wakes.

I, hang him, hang him.

Is he not hanged yet?

Without all peradventure the Hangman means to hang for him.

Come Sir along, never hang backward, for up you must.

Stay him, my speeches will be lost else.

Your long speeches will loose our purpose again, without all peradventure.


Must I be mocked out of my life? and have
My death by hanging made a sport to Peasants,
In this blind hole of the Kingdom?

Why thou choplogicall Fellow, dost thou not think, there are as good men
hanged, and as good sport made of it too, in the bli^ holes of the Kingdom, as
in the very eye or open mouth of it? ha!


Away with him without peradventure

I am a Courtier, and servant to the King.

Come all the Court in all your costly Braveries.
And Treason in your Breech, we'll hang you for your Knaveries,
On tree in Hempen twine nay if you come
In open Arms, up shall you all and some.
For though for Tournament your Fames do fly
Run all at Tilt on us, we'll draw you dry.

Tell us you are a Courtier? we find here
F^u^s to correct, which you perceive not there.
So, now away with him, I have spoke my best.

And without all peradventure well said Judge Andrea:
How long must we say away with him? ha!

You hobnayl'd Rascals: can you think that you
Are fit to spy or corrects faults at Court?

Stay, a short speech for that, and turn him off.
Your shoes at Court are all too fine and thin:
To tread out snuffs and sparks of kindling Sin,
Which let alone the Rushes may take fire.
Then flame, then burn up higher still, and higher:
You warm you at such fire, 'tis we walk throughout
The hobnayl'd Common wealth must tread it out.

So, now away with him. Hang him first, d' ye hear
He has the bast clothes, that will encourage
The Hangman the better to turn the rest after him.

Whither away with him?

So, now you see what's become of your fine s^eches.

Will ye, against all my Counsels and requests
Persist to pull destruction by taking others lives upon your own?
And seem to carry it as in care for me?

No, 'tis in care of our selves, because we know
Not to breed our Children honestly without you.

Have I not often councilled and entreated
You would forbear?

Your councels and entreats
We are bound to disobey by Proclamation:
For we must grant you nothing.

Well found out.

And therefore if you say, Hang not this man We are bound to hang him; we will
show our selves the Kings Subjects not yours.


If you can answer't to the King, 'tis well;
His Majesty is here at hand.

Go leave him unto me.

The King at hand? 'tis time for us to look about us.

Must not we be hanged now?

It will be so, without all peradventure.

Release your Prisoner, set him free, and go send the rest of the confederats.

I was not bound till now
I have no power to move or stir a limb:
O sacred Queen, use mercy, in ad^udging me,
To present death, to quit me of the torment.
That rages all upon me, all within me.
The sight of you has shot more pains into me
Then I have drops of blood: O let me die.

I cannot give thee death: nor will my prayers
Be prevalent for thy cure poor sinful man!
Till rhou layst open the cause of thy disease;
(Thy heinous sin) by fair and free confession.

I hope no cure, and therefore ask no life.
But the Kings Justice to afford me death,
That is no less deserved then desired;
For I confess, This my Device was but
To make my way to you, to have murdered you.
Wrought thereunto by Alinda's Instigation.
More I confess; The Evidence against you,
Whereby you were despos'd, was false.
And all these witnesses which now do bring
Addition to my to my torment, did I hire
Both for their perjury past, and for their late
Attempt upon your life, with the Queens money.

Do you confess it?

Heaven Pardon our misdeed: it is most true.

Heaven grant you all your cures.

All blessings on the Queen.

All was confessed before by Fabio and Strozzo.
And you do well to seem so penitent:
I do forgive you: and will plead your pardon unto the King.

Your sacred mercy Madam, shall save a life then, to be spent in Praises and
Prayers for your Grace.


Go, and pray for grace to mend your lives.
So, let's now to the King.

Now look you about you: cast your Coats, and instantly
Hast to the Curat, he's preparing sports,
In speech and Dance, to entertain the King:
Go and assist him: that must be the way
To gain your Pardons.

Come then, let's away,
No longer Brothers of the Bench we'll be,
But of the Revels for his Majesty.

These troubles over: let us, now
Surveigh this part of my Possession.
I never saw before. I could contemplate
This late neglected piece of my Estate,
To be the happiest: sure it is no less,
To those that think on earth there's happiness,
The Air disperses pleasure and the Earth
Of fresh delight to every step gives birth.
Here plenty grows, and above it content,
Ore spreads the Face of all the Continent.
Eulalia, thou art happy, and did rise,
Not fall from Court into this Paradise.
Thy can it move my admiration much,
Thy virtue wrought the change, and made it such.

My Lord, the King is sad, what shall we do?

I am as sad as he, and should be dead,
If he were dead: and therefore no fit member
To make Him merry, I: try your vein with him,
Tell him your Daughters dying; that may cheer him.

Are you so tart Court Blain-worm?

Yet can I smile in midst of grief to think
How the Court malice hath been wav'd and punished,
By Rustical simplicity.

The Sun
Appears again in the Kings smiles: observe.

I thank your Majesty, that sweet smile revived me,

Who smiled?

not I, I'm sure did you: or you?
There could be no such thing: who dares be merry, when the King's sad?


Yes, here are some now coming, I hear 'm, that are merry in hope to make the
King so.


O my Enlalia!

Still the most humble Handmaid
To your high Majesty.

Thy words are sweet:
Yet to my guilty sense they are not less
Then thunder bolts; framed of the wrongs I shot
Against the Heavenly Region of thy mind.
And 'tis but Justice that the repercussion
Do strike me dead.

No Passion mighty Sir,

O my sweet Queen! but I am thunder struck

Old Lad, art there? still sick of the Kings disease.

If I may presume of any favour, vouchsafe a glance on these.

Beseech your Highness.

Thus have you seen great King in best array,
Nostri Discipuli have made Holy-day,
Whilst I their Paedagogue or petty King
Present in hand this little Royal Thing,
Yclep'd their Queen or Mistress: certe fallor
For that's the Royal School Misttess as we call her.
And this her under Usner: vey'ld is she,
Dreading the Power of shinning Majesty.
Might dazzle her Dancing: for nunc est saltandum,
And here are Lads and Lasses that at Random
Have left their works, as we the School Templum,
To follow us; 'tis Regis ad Exemplum.
The youth's are muffled for their better graces,
Though you may like their feet, youl'd blame their Faces
But I'll not trouble you with long Oration,
Because I had but short precogitation.

His Highness thanks you: and hath here disposed
An hundred Duccats in this Purse enclosed;
Drink it amongst ye to the Kings well faring,
And see there be no falling out in the sharing
So make your Exit.

Non simus ingrati
Rex Regina semper sint Beati.

Stay you a while.
You know my Story, Sir, and who have been
My strong abusers, and by me converced,
Therefore let me Petition: Royal King
You have by these discovered the abuse
That led you into error: and that light,
Which makes discovery of their black misdeeds,
Will show you to a Throne of greater merey
Then you can give.

I must confess I need it,
Be it as thou wilt Eulalia.

Go then, and thank the King.

Long live the King and Queen.

Here's goodness now.

I would the Devil had, 'm that thought ill of her.


And good King Pardon me, and my pure brother Judges, and Sages of the Dorpe
here, that would have hanged those Manufactors.


'Tis quickly grouted.

And I'll as quickly make them run mad with Joy.

My next suit is, (for now I'm set a begging,
You'll Pardon your Alinda.

She is not mine;
Should she recover, as Heavens will be done.

Recover? fear not, Sir, this Traunse hast drowned
Her Frenzy, and she'll live a sober life.

I shall forgive her,
But she must no more, in her recovery:
Be consort or acquaintance unto me:
But where's Posterity now? O my Boy!

Sir you have had but homely entertainment
Yet in my humble dwelling: now I'll show you
(Since you appear so tender and so good
A Father) the sweet comfort of a Son;
Pray fetch the Prince.

You cannot raise from death.

Can you forgive Pttrucio that deceived you
In his feigned death, to save a real life:

Forgive? he won me in preserving Sforza,
Let me but see my Son, I'll honour him.

See the most Princely virtue that survives.

lives my Gonzago?

If you my Royal Father be not displeased
With me, or my good mother, I shall live.

And long live my sweet Prince.

Let not my joy confound me! where's Petruccid?

Sforza and he are bringing the entrauns'd Alinda
(Your fair Queen to your presence.)

She is no Queen of mine.

No, hang her, hang her. This, this is the Queen.
A very Queen of harts: a better Title
Crowns not the best of women in our days.

Good Lodovico, may the merited Fame of thy fidelity,
While there are Kings on Earth, Show them to gratify
All trusty servants: love him Gonzago.

Love him? my Loyalty preserved,
I shall not desire the Princes love my self
If he not gived to faithful Lodovico,
My true yoke fellow in State and Commonwealth.

But here's the man Gonzago, whom thou owe,
A love of equal value to thy life.

I cannot Sir, in duty nevertheless
But fall before your mercy, which I pray for,
That durst assume the hardness to control:
Your Majesty Command.

There is a Loyalty after my own heart now.
Here a new Song, Ealalia unvailes Alinda.

Blessed Heaven! she lives and wakes I hope in health.

If she awake to virtue, she is welcome,
Into the the world again: but if she rise
With an Ambitious Throught of what she was
Or meet the light with a presumptuous look:
That renders her in thought but worthy of it:
By this blessed presence I will yet take leave.
To sink her under earth immediately.

Patience good Sforza, see what she will do.

Where have I been? or how am I brought hither?
Or where I am I know not: but that shall not.
Be unto me a wonder: for I know
Were it reveil'd, it could not be so strange:
A stotie as my self was to the world.
How have I wandered in the way of Error!
Till I was worn into an Airy vapour.
Then wrapped into a cloud: and thence distilled,
Into the earth to find a new creation.
'Tis found: and I am found in better state,
Then I was in, before I lost my Duty.
For in this second Birth: I find a knowledge
How to preserve it: Therefore if an Heart
Dissolved in its Tears may move your Pity
My noble Father, (if I may say Father,)
Whose blessing and forgiveness I entreat,
Let not your frown destroy my future hopes.

What a rich sound were this now, were it real!

As you may think I honour virtue Sforza,
I do believe 'tis really unfeigned.

It is Heavens goodness to your Grace then Madam.
The more to vindicate your injured virtue.
And manifest your merits to the world,
Thou art mine own again Alinda.

Note her further.

My suit is next to you King, Queen, and Prince,
Whose love, whose Piety, whose Innocence,
I have too much abused that to appeal,
My trespasses at large by due confession.
I should appear but more impertinent to each eye and ear.
My suit is therefore (though you not forget
I ever was) you will be pleased to think,
There is not an Alinda in the world.
So give me leave to leave it: and in this,
I beg my Fathers Aid, to be removed
Back to my country Naples; and in that,
Into the Magdalene Nunnery at Lucera,
To spend this life in Tears for my amiss,
And holy Prayers for eternal Bliss.

So thou art mine for ever.

She has anticipated my great purpose,
For on the reconcilement of this difference,
I vowed my after life unto the Monaste^ie
Of holy Augustinians at Solanto.

O mighty Sir!

'Tis not to be gain-said.
So hast we to Nicosia, where (my Son)
In lieu of former wrongs, I'll yield thee up my Crown and Kingdom.
Your virtuous mother (whom may you for ever
Honour for her piety) with these true
Statesmen, will enable you to govern well.

Who makes a doubt of that?

And let your study, Sir, be ever watchful
To cherish virtue, as to punish vice.
And see that you considerative be
Of Sforza, in the wrongs he felt by me.
His was the greatest loss.

Sir, I have won:
My wrongs are drowned in her conversion.

Good Sforza, see her placed as she desires,
In that Religious order. I have now
Plighted my Troth to Heaven, and so has she.

O may (Sir) such Wedlock never broken be.

Now with such melting silence as sweet Souls
From Bodies part to Immortality,
May we for better life divided be.

RIC. BROM.
THrough much distress, and many perilous ways
Our Queen at last with more then conquering Bays
Is Crowned with hearts: but now she falls again,
And we, except her glory you maintain.
Our good depends on you then, thus it stands;
She cheers our Hearts, if she but gain your Hands.


