THE NEW ACADEMY, Or, the NEW Exchange.

By RICHARD BROM.

LONDON, Printed or Andrew Crook, at the Green Dragon in Saint ^auls
Church-yard: And Henry Brom at the Gun in Ivy-lane. 1658.

IS this the entertainment you promised me in the Jovial Merchants house? Is
this the great interest you have in his huge hospitality? when by half an hours
attendance and entreats, we cannot obtain the sight of him.

I wonder at it; Sure some strange disaster has suddenly befallen him. He was,
last night the merriest man alive, drank healths; told tales; sung Catches;
Trowel the Bowl; Toss the Cannykin; and what not! and all for joy, that his
son, he said, was upon his return, whom he has not seen these dozen years,
since he sent him a little Lad into France, to be bred there.


I heard he did so; and that in lieu, by way of Exchange, he brings up the
daughter of the Parisien that breeds his son.


Right.


But is that daughter so exquisite a creature, as is this Merchant Matchills
own whom you so much extol?


They are both so equally handsome, and virtuous, that, be their dowries so,
and their consents alike, I'll take my choice of cross and pile for either,
with such a friend as thou art.


Troth, and that's friendly spoken, Mus.


It is so Val. yet not with some policy do I wish thee a fortune: for,
insooth. young Gentleman, though I like your person, and some of your
qualities, yet by reason of your wants, I find you something heavy on my
purse-strings; and my self scarce able to supply you. And, if we fail of good
matches, I must even turn you over shortly to the hopes you host of in your
City-Mystresses and Tradesmen's wives --.


Peace, prithee hold thy peace.

Friend Cash! Is your Master, Mr. Matchill yet at leisure (...) be seen?


He much desires, sir, to be held excused. 'Tis true that he invited you. His
dinner's ready; and his heart welcomes you. But he has met with an unhappy
news to day. --


I feared some ill. What is the matter?


His only son, whom he of late expected home out of France, we hear, is dead.


His daughter will prove a bouncing match then.


That's the impression the heavy news makes in you, Gentlemen.


Come, let's go.


Nay, Gentlemen, although my Masters sudden sadness shuts him from you. His
meat and wine are ready. There are some good company in his Parlour too, Pray
stay.


Are his fair daughter, and the French-borne
Damsel there to be seen?

Both. Pray be pleased to enter.

I hope his passionate fit e're you have dined will be past over. He is not
wont to suffer long under the hand of sorrow.

'Tis like that you shall see him ere you go.

In that fair hope we'll enter and fall to.


'Tis like you shall fall short though of your aim
At my young Mistress, who by this black news,
Becomes my Masters heir, and so the white
That all the gallant suitors of the City
And Court will level their keen shafts at. Where
Are mine own hopes then, that stood as fair
In competition for her, love as any,
When the great noise of her inheritance,
Shall drown each Lovers tongue, that cannot say,
It is a Lords at least, I rather wish
The young man had not did.

Where's my Boykin? my Friskoe? my Delight? my Cash? by what better name can I
call thee?


O me! Master Strigood, what make you here?


I come to comfort my brother in his sorrow.
His son is dead, they say. Ha! Is't not so?

And he is almost dead with sorrow: Back sir.
The sight of you, that are his sole vexation, will make him mad.

That is my way to cure him.
Madness drowns grief in any man. -- Probatum.

Good Mr. Strigood depart.

Good Mr. Cash, and Mr. Matchils man.
I'll see your Master. What! deny his brother?
His nowne natural brother? By the surer side too
We tumbled in one Pannier; though we had
Two Rippiers, Sweet sir, I am the elder too
Strigood was in my mother before Matchill
Therefore, because I have spent an estate
And he has got-one, must not I maintain
My self the better man?

Yes: if you had the wherewithal.

Sir, you had been as good have held your tongue.
Lend me some money Cash.

I have no money, sir, but what's my Masters.

Whose money, sir, was that you played last night.
Among the Knights and Braveries at the ordinary?
Gold by the handfuls, Cash! Lend me two pieces.

Speak lower, sir.

Lend me three pieces, Cash.
Before I speak too loud, whose money's that
You use to wear abroad at Feasts and Revels
In silver lace and satin; though you wait
At home in simple Serge, or broad-cloth, sir.

Be not so loud, I pray.

Lend me five pieces.
I shall grow louder else. Who pays your Barber?
I mean not for your Prentice pig-hair'd cut
Your wear at home here; but your Periwigs;
Your locks and Lady-ware that dangle in 'em,
Like straws in the bush natural of a Bedlam?

What mean you Mr. Strygood.

I mean ten pieces now; I'll go no less. Do not I know your haunts? --

You may; you trained one to 'em

Do not I know your our leaps, and vagaries?
Your tiring houses, where you shift your self,
Your privy lodgings, for your trunks and punks?
Your midnight walks and meetings? Come, the money.
And, hark thee, though thou modest my brother by it.
I'll keep thy council: thou shalt find me yertuous.
I want, he gives me nothing; and thou can not
Do him better service, then relieve his brother.

I am in; and must, to hide my old faults, do
Like an ill Painter, lawbe 'em over with new.

Quickly. I shall grow loud again else Cash.

Sir, I am in your hands, here are ten pieces.
I hope you will not think my Master for*^.

No; no for all he has that comes through thy hands.
My nimble Cash; and from his I am sure,
Though I were starving, I should finger nothing.

Will you go now?

I'll see him e're I go,
And dine, if there be meat in the house. What eate's
Are there within ^'ll draw a knife amon^ 'em.

This desperate old Russian, would undo me,
But he hopes to waste his brother by me.
He has spent himself to beggary; and would fall so,
But that he has pernicious fire in's brain,
That raging spreads to ruin others with him.
I must beware of him,
Is she come too?
Then 'tis deereed, my Master must, from sorrow, suffer in madness.

Go home Ephraim.
And have a care you suffer not my boy
To Straggle forth among his unhappy play-mates,
For fear of mischief.

It shall be my care.

What do you lock up my brother, ha? --

H' has locked himself up, Madam; and will suffer
None to come at him, till his sorrowful fit
Be somewhat over.

Not's own Sister, ha? --

Nor his half brother neither: yet he's here.

Is he here, ha? That Strygood? Is he here?
Hang him old reprobate. And beshrew thy heart,
For a young varlet, to call him our brother.
It is no marvel, if my brother Matchil
Lock up himself, and such a wickedness
Be in his house, as is that Strygood, ha --
Let him take heed, he comes not in my Nayl reach,
And call me Sister, or my Brother, brother,
Like a debauched old Villain, as he is.
O that my husband Nestlecock were alive,
But for three minutes, to send him to
Newgate, if he presume to call me Sister
But I command you in my husbands name,
Who was a Justice, when he lived, to thrust him
Out of your Masters doors, my brothers house.
Lest I be sick with the loathed sight of him.
You will not disobey this, will you, ha? --
If not, why stir you not? ha. --

I must remove
This fit of hers. There's but one way to do it;
And that's to talk of her white boy, she's fond on.

Will you not send him packing, ha? --

First, Madam.
(By your good Ladyships leave) how does your son
Sweet Master Nehemiah Nestlecock?

I thank you courteous friend. In truth, last night,
One of my Coach-gueldings fell lame, and I,
By that constrained to come afoot,
Was forced to leave my boy at home; or else
He had come with me, to have been a comfort
To his sad Uncle: But I would not now
For twice my Gueldings price, my child were here;
And that foul fiend in the house, whose very looks
Would fright him into sickness.

O good Lady!

I can't so soon forget the fright he took
At seeing the roguish Juggler once eat tow,
And blow it out of's mouth in fire and smoke,
He lay a fourtnight by it.

That's two years since.
And he was then but young, he's now a man.

Alack a child; but going in's nineteenth year.
Where's my Niece Joyce?

Within there Madam; so is Gabriella
The French young Gentlewoman to attend you.

I'll stay with them till I may see my brother.

I hope old Strygood, who now on the sudden
Hath slipped her memory, meets her by the ears first.
But the good minute's come, before I looked for it.
My Master now appears. He looks most sorely
Expressing more of anger then of grief.
I fear, old Strygood was so loud with me,
That he hath over-heard us, and I shall break
Before I am a Freeman.

Sorrow be gone
And puling grief away, whilst I take in
A nobler and more manly Passion;
Anger, that may instruct me to revenge.
My child is lost by treacherous neglect
In that false Frenchman, to whose seeming care
I trusted the chief comfort of my life;
My boy. Nay, read again. 'Tis written, here,
He was grown man:

His man, I think, he said.
Does your man trouble you. I do not like that

And here he writes that in his youthful spring
And heat of spirit, he began to grow
Intemperate and wild --

Wild! Are you there?

Which drew him on to riotous expense --

And there again, to riotous expense!
'Tis I directly that he's troubled with.

And sometimes into quarrels. What of that?
In all this he was still mine own. Oboy --

Some slave has writ some fearful information.
Against me, and he hugs and kisses it.

And had his Guardian had a feeling care
(Hang his French friendship) over my dear child,
As I had over his, these youthful follies
Might have been tempered into manly virtues.

I hear not that.

But I fall back again
From my revenge to grief. Away; I will not.
Here's the death-doing point. These slight disorders.
In my young forward son (I find it here)
Were, by his churlish and perfidious Guardian,
Interpreted no less then Reptobation,
And, by his ignorant cruelty, so punished.
For, here he shuts his ear and door against him:
When suddenly the loose licentious world
Soothes on his youthful, in judicious courage
To imminent destruction; so being engaged
In a rash quarrel, he in duel fell.
The Opponents sword was instrument; yet I infer.
Lafoy, his Guarcian was his murderer.
Farewell, my boy; and this is the last tear
Thou shalt wring from me. Something I'll do,
Shall show a fathers love, and valour too.
I'm young enough to draw a sword in France, yet.
But first -- Come hither, Sirrah.

Now it comes.

I purpose straight to order my estate
Look that you forthwith perfect my Accounts;
And bring me all my books of debtor and creditor,
Receipts and payments, what you have in wares,
And what in cash, let me inform my self.

'Tis as I feared.

I'll set all right and straight,
All statutes, bonds, bills, and sealed instruments
That do concern me, I have in my Closet
Or at my Councels, or my Scriveners.
I'll call in them my self. Why doest thou look so amaz'dly?
Would have me yield a reason? why, I'll tell thee
I mean to make a voyage; and, perhaps,
To settle and proportion out my estate
By Will, before I go. Do you as I command you.

Whatever he pretends, I know his drift:
And, e'te I'll be discovered by my stay;
Being run out, I'll choose to run away. --

My daughter in the first place must be cared for.
I'll make her a good match. My next in blood then,
My Knave-half-brother, and my whole fool-Sister.
But the best is, her Ladyship has enough;
And all I have, in Strygoods hands, were nothing.
Therefore I'll purpose nothing to him. Oh.
The Joy and Torment of my life, at once
Appear to me. I must divide them, thus.
Hence hated issue of my mortal foe
Whom I have fostered with a Parents Piety
As carefully and dearly as mine own.
While the inhumane cruelty of thy Sire
Has to untimely death exposed my son.
Thank me I kill not thee; so leave my house.
There's French enough in town, that may befriend you.
To pack you over to Paris; what's your own
Take w'ye, and go. Why cleave you to her so?
Forsake her, cast her off. Are not my words
Of force, but I must use my hands to part ye?

Dear, honoured father, I beseech you hear me.
In parting us you separate life from me,
And therein act a real cruelty
On me your only child, sharper then that,
Which you can but pretend done by her father.

Durst thou speak so?

I cannot live from her.

O monstrous. Pray, your reason. Why not live?

You know, Sir, from our Infancy we have been,
Bred up together, by your tender care
As we had been twin-borne, and equally
Your own; and by a self-same education,
We have grown hitherto, in one affection,
We are hoth but one body, and one mind,
What Gabriella was, I was, what I, was she.
And, till this haplesse hour, you have enjoined me,
Nay, charged me on your blessing, not to arrogate
More of your love unto my self, then her,

That was, because I presumed her father loved,
Or should have loved my son, your brother.

I never knew brother, or sister, I;
Nor my poor self, but in my Gabrella.
Then blame me not to love her, I beseech you
-- Upon me knees.

The art knee-deep in rebellion.
Unnatural Gypsy, since thou prov'st my torment
In being the same with her; and hast declared
Thy self no more my child, then she, whom now
I do abhor, avoid, with her, my sight.
Rise, and be gone, lest thou pull curfes on thee
Shall sink thee into earth.

O rather, Sir.
Let me, against whom your fury first was bent
Suffer alone the sharpness of your vengeance:
And let it not be said, because you surmise,
My father lost your son, that, therefore, you
Have cast away your daughter. Hurl me, rather,
Into the ruthless waves to seek my way;
Or do but take her, hold her in the arms
Of your paternal love, and I'll take flight
To wean her to you.

She cannot, may not leave me.

Out of my doors then, with her. --

What's the matter? ha --

Such as you cannot mend, dear Lady Sister.
What come you hither with your Ha -- for? Ha --

To comfort you, dear brother, if you'll hear me.
Your son is dead, they say; and here I find
Your daughter is rebellious against; our will.

You speak much comfort, do you not, think you.

But is it so Joyce? ha! -- I thought you, Joyce,
Would have rejoiced your father in obedience, Joyce;
And not afflict him with your stubbornness.

O this impertinent woman!

But my brother,
Let me advise you, rather then suffer her
To be an eye-sore to you, put her out,
Where she may learn more duty. If you please
I'll take her home, and show her how it should be

Yes, as you have shown your Nestlecock, your son.

I, there's a child! Brother, you'll pardon me,
If I aspire in hope, that he shallbe
Your heir, if Joyce miscarry in rebellion.

And therefore you would breed her. How the devil
Works in a covetous woman! Though a fool too.
Your sonne's an Ass; an Idiot; and your self
No better, that have bred him so. Do you tell me
Of your sweet sugar-chop't Nestle cockscombe?

Ha --

He's fit to inherit nothing but a place
In the Spittle-house, Fools College, yond, at Knightsbridge.

And did I come to bring thee consolation?
Now let me tell thee, I rejoice in thy
Just punishment, thy scourge of crosses. Thou,
That for these six years space* until this day,
Hast kept continual feast and jollity
For thy wives death, who was too good for thee.

Right, for she was my Master, a perpe^l
Vexation to me, while she was above-ground
Your Ladyship could not have spoke more comfort to me
Then the remembrance of that shook-off Shackle,
Which now, in my affliction makes me smile,
And were I on her grave, I could cut capers.

A further punishment, I pr^hecie
Grows in the neck of thy lewd insolence

I could even find in heart to marry again,
In spite, now, of thy witchcraft, my son dead!
My daughter disobedient! and your child
A very chilblaine. What have I to do
But marry again: all women are not devil^,
I may yet get an heir unto my mind.

Art thou here too --

Stay, you forget your brother, Mr. Matchil.
You have matched ill once already; and take heed
You match not worse, your children, though untoward.
And taking of the devilish Shrew, their mother,
Were likely of your own begetting; Yet
Your second wife may bring you a supply
Of heirs, but who must get them, first is doubtful.

Thy impudence amazes me.

Ha, ha.

I'm sick at sight of the lewd Reprobate.

Dee cast about for heirs; and have besides
Your daughter here, a brother and a sister?

Call not thy self our brother. He appears
U^nde to me, but thou insufferable,
I loath to look upon thee.

He has spoke
Against her Aunt, her Moon-calf son. I'll make her love me best, and
presently.

Brother, I say.

I cannot look upon thee.
Provoke me not to ^eech, I charge thee.

Give me leave to speak; Hold you your peace;
Hear but my brotherly advice; and when
Give your consent in silence.

hum hum, c.

Hear him not.

Nor you neither, hum -- hum -- hum.

I am not angry with you now; and therefore
I charge you, hear him not.

hum hum --

My advice is thus, that for your daughters good.
For mine own good, and for your Sisters good.
And for her son, your Nephew's good.

How's that? ha!

And chiefly for your own good, and the credit
A wise man would desire to hold in the world,
Think not of marrying, nor of buying horns
At the whole value of your whole estate,
But match your daughter while you have the means
In your own hands; give her a good round portion,
Here are deserving Gentlemen in the house.
Next, think of me your brother, that has spent
In down-right fellowship (heaven knows what
All fraudulent purposes to make any man
A miser or a gainer by it) a fair estate.
And now do want a brotherly supply.
A hundred a year or so: but above all
Fasten your land unto your Sisters son.
That hopeful Gentleman, sweet Nehemiah.

hum.

Now brother you may hear him.

What though it straggle from the name of Matchil.
Remember yet he is your mothers Grandchild.

Why dee not hear him, brother? --

hum.

As I hope
To be a landed man my self,
Had I a thousand yearly, I would leav't him.

Truly, I thank you. Now I'll call you brother.
You're a good natured Gentleman if you had it.
Come home, and see my son. -- Will you not hear him? ha

I need not, nor your self. I see you gape
Like monsters that would swallow me alive.
I know your minds; and I will do mine own.
And, thus it is. Stay, let me stay a little.

Look you how wild he looks.

He's falling mad.
Stark staring mad,

I would he had a wife then,
For nothing else can tame him.

So it shall be.
First, I'll be Master of mine own estate.
Next --

Take a wife to master that, and you.

Next, you Mademoiselle, (on whom with patience
I cannot look) forsake my house, and suddenly;
Linger not for a man to wait upon you,
But let your black bag guard you, 'tis a fashion
Begun amongst us here by your own Nation.
And if I longer must call you my daughter,
Forsake you her.

What mine own heart? dear Sir.

At your own choice. I can force her departure,
Though not persuade your stay, determine quickly
Either to leave her, and enjoy a father,
Or never more expect a fathers blessing.

Dear, mine own heart, leave me, obey your father.

It must be to my death then.

I'll be sudden.
Therefore be you as brief in your resolve.

Alas, poor hearts. Just so loath
To part was I and my son Nehemiah
Today when I came forth.

Niece Joyce, let me
Advise you. --

Pray, Sir, none of your advices.
Let her advise her self; whilst I impart
To you my next intention; which is thus.
To end your strife for shares in mine estate
I'll venture on a wife: indeed I'll marry

Will you so? ha!

Yes indeed La, --

If then
You'll estate nothing on me for my life
Give me a see to help you to a wife,
I can, a good one.

I'll none, Sir, of your good ones.
Besides, Sir, I'm provided.

You are not, are you? ha

Let it suffice, I say it, so quit my house.

Shall I expect then nothing?

Pray sir, do.
'Tis all I can afford you. You have wit,
Yes, you can dance, tread money out of rushes,
Slight and activity to live upon.
A nimble brain, quick hands and airy heels
To get a living.

Hah.

Pray fall to practice.

I may, sir, to your cost, if you put off
Your daughter with her Sweet-heart, her Mon Coeur
There, as she calls her. Dear, my Lady Sister;
You see how churlishly this Merchant uses us.
He has forgot, sure, he was borne a Gentleman.
Will you be pleased, I speak to you in your ear.

Any way, brother Strigood, Hang him, Nabal,
To warn me out o's house; and not alone,
To turn a stranger from within his gates,
But offer to cast out his child too, ha!

'Tis about that I'd speak, pray Madam hark you.

Noble Mr. Matchil, though we are your meat
Before we saw you you will give us leave
To take our leaves, and thank you ere we part.

O Gentlemen.

W'have heard your cause of sorrow.

But I have over-past it. Hark ye Gentlemen

You'll give us leave first to salute the Ladies.

Nay, if you love me, hear me first.

Your will, Sir.

Niece, you shall no way disobey your father
In being ruled by me.

So, so, it takes.

You and your second self shall home with me
Until his furious humour be blown over.
To which the first means is to (...) his fight,
And then let me alone to make your peace.

We thank your Ladyship.

So let us slip.
Home to my house together.

Hist brother, lead the way.

As glad as ever Fox was of his prey

'Tis even so, Gentlemen, sorrow finds no lodging.
In my light heart sometimes she knocks at door,
And takes a drink, but here she must not sit by it.

Y' are happy Sir.

Yet I have heard you say
You never tasted joy for divers years
Till your wife died: since when, a King of mirth,
And now to marry again is such a thing.

Yes sir, tis such a thing that I will marry
That I fore know can never disobey me
And I'll defy the devil to dishonest her.

Is she so ugly?

No, he means so virtuous.

Well-said, sir, you shall drink before me. Rachel, Mawdlin.

'Protest you shall though't be in my own house.

Now he resumes his humour.

Ratchel I say,
Bring me a kahn of sack.

But how can you
Presume before the dangerous marriage-trial
That she whom y'have chosen will be obedient.

D' ye think he has not tried her? There's a question

Well-said again. I was about to say so.
Rachel, some sack, I say. Yes, I have tried her, sir,
Tried her, and tried her again; all over and over
These five years day and night; and still obedient.

Then you are sure to her.

No, I never used
A marriage-question, not a wooing word,
But do all by command, she is so obedient.

And yet she's chaste and virtuous withal.

Well-said again, sir, so I was a saying.

But we have talked away the Gentlewomen.

No matter, let'hem go. Would they were far enough.

Come, the sack, the sack. -- Who taught you that courtesy maid.

Pray try a better to the Gentleman.
Protest you shall begin.

In your own house, sir?

^'ll rather g' ye my house, then break my word in it.


Y' are Lord here, and may command me, sir. And so my service to you.


I'll do you reason, sir.
Be ready with your Napkin, and a lower douke maid.
I'll hang dead weight at your buttocks else. So.
Is not this obedience, Gentlemen, Mr. Erasmus?
Mus, I will call thee Mus, I love to be
Familiar, where I love; and Godamercy
For your friend here; you both shall see my daughter.
But my French Damosel and I are parted
I hope by this time. So here's to you Mus.

To me, to me, to me.

Ha boy, art there? dispatch
Your curtsy quickly, and go cal my daughter.

She is gone forth, forsooth.

Forth, ha? when? whither?
La ye, she thinks I'm angry, and the finger
Is in the eye already. Is not this
Fear and obedience, Gentlemen? who went with her.

She went with my Lady Nestlecock, to bring Gabriella on her way they said.


I would
They were all in France together.

What, your daughter?

She comes again, I doubt not. Dry your eyes.
And drink that sack, without a curtsy, drink it.
You do not know my meaning, Gentlemen.
Stay: now give me't again. -- Now go and dry
Your face within -- without a curtsy? ha!
Now is not this obedience, Gentlemen?

But this is not the rare obedient piece
That you will marry?

You do not hear me say so.
But I presume, as much obedience
In her I have made choice of.

Marry a maid.
And we will be her Hench-boyes, if you please.

No, I'll have no such blades about my wives hanches.
But come, to end this tedious Scene, in which
I have past the Purgatory of my Passions
Of sorrow, anger, fear, and hope at last.
I am refined, sublimed, exalted, fixed
In my true Sphere of mirth; where love's my object.
And bloody thought of black revenge cast by.

Could your fair breast harbour a bloody thought?

For some few minutes, in which ecstasy
I meant to have gone, as other Gallants do.
To fight in France, forsooth, and charged my man
To draw up his Accounts, call in my moneys,
Thought to have made my Will --.

I saw your Cashier
Go forth even now with a sttong lusty Porter
Laden with money: I will not say my teeth
Watered at it.

But 'twas enough to make
A very true mans fingers itch.

I cannot
Think he is run away; but yet I like not
His carrying forth, when I say, fetch in money.
But this is from my purpose. Love ye mirth?
Let's in, and drink, and talk. That gives it birth.

I prithee now, I prithee, prithie now
Urge me no more in this case; for I cannot,
Nor I wo' not so I wo' not, I be jealous
Os mine own wife, mine own deat flesh and blood?
That's such a thing! I pidee speak no more on it.

You show you love Raf.

So I hope I do Nan.
My cock, my pity nittle nansie cocksie,
Do I not show my love when I deny thee
Unreasonable requests? I never heard
Of woman that desired a loving husband
To be a jealous Master over her.
Especially a City-Shopkeeper.
The best part of whose trade runs through the hands
Of his fair wife too! 'Tis unreasonable.
And thou the first that e're take up the humour.

And you the first that e're I knew besotted
Into a wilful confidence, which renders
Me to a vile construction; and your self
By leaving me to all assaults and hazards
Have got the reputation of a Wittal.
Or one that seems contented to become so.

Hon soit qui mali ponse.
My Cock, my Nansie Cock, my Cocksie Nansie,
Kiss me, and use thine own conscience: I scorn
The yellow sickness, I, let them all say what they will.
D'einty, come thou to me. I will not lose
An hairs breadth of my humour, nor retain
An ill thought of my Cocks honesty
For all the wealth in the Exchange, not I

I not desire you should, but only that
You will not seem so careless of my credit,
Exposing me to all temptations
Of the wild Gallantry of the wanton time.
By whom (although my chastity remains
Untouch't) my name and your discretion suffers.

Pish, Honi soit again: Cock, I defy
Calumniation and detraction I.
When I am jealous, let the horne-curse take me;
And let me be with hornets stung to death.

Still you fly from the point, I would not have
You vex your self with causeless jealousy
Over my constant love; but only seem
A little watchful over my reputation.
Whereby you may decline men's lewd attempts.
And not to throw me upon opportunities
To draw them on; as if I were a thing
S^ out, as in your shop, for common sale.

Cock, Thou shalt never tie me to it: not I.
I must not lose my harmless recreations
Abroad to snook over my wife at home.
Though have me like the hair-brain'd Point-tagger,
That used to hammer his fingers at one end
Of the shop, while's wife was bargaining at the other?
Not I; sweet Cock, pidee lets hear no more on it.
Now friend! Is your business to me or my wife?

This Superscription will inform you, sir.

To my dear daughter Mrs. Hannah Camelion, at her shop or house in or near the
New Exchange.


Take it quickly, what a Knave art thou to put a letter in my hands, that is
directed to my wife. Sbobs I would not have opened it for fonrty pound.


If all husbands in the City were of his mind, it were a Forest of fools
indeed.


Cock, I must leave thee.

Pray stay a little. This letter's from my father.


I hope the good Captaine's well.

Yes, very well, pray read his Letter here.

Cock, you shall pardon me. Not I.
I have a match to play at the ducking-pond.
Prithee fore-slow not my occasions, Cock,
As I forbear to pry into thy secrets.

Here's nothing but what I would have you see.

There's for your postage, friend. It needs no answer.


I thank you, Mystris.

But if you will not stay to read this Letter.
You shall not deny me one thing.

What is it, quickly? my sweet Nanny Cock.

Here, take this pen: write here a word or sentence.
What you please. But keep it well in mind,
And look that you be sure to know it again
When I shall shew't you.

'Tis done, there: I defy, and dare the devil and all his Clerks to
counterfeit my hand. So, my sweet Cock, a kiss and adieu.


Well Raf, remember that you won't be jealous.

Not I, Sbobs yonder comes one of the Blades,
That thou would have me have an eye to; He
That lives by his wits, and yet is seldom sober:
That goes so gallantly, and has no credit,
Nor ever buys with ready money; But
Barters commodity for commodity.
(Such as it is) with Tradesmen's wives, they say.
What call you him, oh Askal; there's another
Comes with him too. Into thy shop, good Cock.
I wo' not stay, not I. So, farewell Cock.

And farewell Coxscombe, some wife would say now.
I am much troubled at his silliness.
And would to right me, strain a woman's wit,
Knew I with modesty how to answer it.
Something I'll do.

Was ever such a humour in a man, as this mad
Merchant Matchil is possessed with.
To marry so, to spite his child and kindred.

He has made his daughter by it a match worth nothing.
And there your hope is gone.

And yours in me.
For as I said before, good Valentine.
I must return you to your City wives.
By the old trade to pick your maintenance
Out of em, as you boast you can.

'Tis well, sir.
And now to let you know that I can live
Without the helps of such cool friends as you.
I'll show you a present probability.

Doest see yond pretty mumping piece in the shop there?

Yes, is that one --?

One of the forty, boy,
That renders tribute in to my Exchecquer.

Did ever lie with her?

How plain you are. Not I, not I.
That*s her fool-husbands word.
Let it sussice that I have seen her thrice.
And that I lay with, drink, and wear her money.
O 'tis the sweetest Rogue.

How got you acquainted.

I'll tell you that, walking by chance as now,
Before her shop, where a young Gentleman
Was bargaining, he called me by my name,

Instantly her eye was fixed,
And straight ran over my delineaments,
Which I set to her view; and took occasion
To ask her how the object pleased her.

Bold-face.

I never lost by that.
She then demands, Is your name Askall, sir?
I answer, Yes. Pray of what country, sir?
I told her; when a sudden flaming blush
Did in her face betray the fire of love,
That was at the instant raging in her breast,
She looked me through and through. Sighed, turned away.
Then looked again under her hat-brims thus.
And thus I nimbly catched her with mine eye.

I, thou hast a devilish catch i'that same eye.

Sir, what I have, I have. I gave a leer
With that same eye that made her turn her whitesup.

But to the point.

Why do you think a woman's so quickly brought to the point?

What follow'd then?

I saw she was struck, and thus I gave her line
To play withal. I whispered in her ear,
The way to find my lodging and my service.
Next morning early comes a message to me,
Inviting me to dinner: Cheer and welcome
Plenteously flowed; and sir, before we parted
Upon some private conference, twenty pieces
Were clutch't into this hand, but with a caution
To be discreet and thrifty of her purse,
And keep a friend in store. I have been modest,
And have not struck her since, but for ten more.

And that's your last.

I le hold you ten o that
See she has spied me.

What lack ye, Gentlemen; fair cut-work bands, boot-hoose, or boot-hoose
tops, shirts, wast-coats, night-caps, what will you buy?


I come not now to buy.
But in plain terms to borrow. Do you not know me?

Not on these terms.

Sure thou mistake the woman.
This is not she, thou talk fo freely on Bounce.

She's cautious before thee. Walk off a little.
Now you may hear me, Lady.

Give me leave
A little, first to wonder at your rashness,
To talk so openly before a stranger.

My intimate friend: I'll trust him with my life.

What's that to my unblemish't reputation?
'Tis not your life can salve that, being wounded.
But thus it is, when women out of goodness
Hazard their fortunes to relieve the wants
Of such as you, that carry no respect,
But to your own licentious Appetites.
And think no favour's sweet, unless you may
Have privilege to boast them to our shame.

I do not boast of yours.

Pray, boast no more
Then you have found, and much good may they do you.
'Tis not poor thirty pieces can undo me.

No, nor ten more I hope; and that's the sum
I would entreat: all makes but forty pound.
I'll pay thee like a Gentleman, as I am one,
Either in money; or doest hear me, Rogue,
In what shall please thee better. Come, be wise,
Thy husband's a dull ducking Gamester. And
Kennels his water-dog in Turnbull-street.
We'll answer his delights with better sport.

There's your presumption.

No, 'tis my ambition.
When shall we walk to Totnam? or cross over
The water, or take Coach to Kengington
Or Padington; or to some one or other
Of the City out-leaps for an afternoon,
And hear the Cuckoo sing to the purpose? when?

A woman were a wise one that would trust
Her self in such wild hands as yours; to have
Her name made Tavern-talk among your blade,
And thrust in the 'list of your loose-hilted Mystresses:

O no; fie no: you cannot think how close
And careful I will be. Hark in thine ear.

I cannot blame this fellow now so much
For using of his wits to get his living,
Though in an idle way; as for traducing
People of worth and virtue, as this woman
Who I am credibly informed is virtuous
And too discreet for him to shark upon.
Therefore to grace himself, he slanders her.
I have always liked his company till now,
And shall hereafter be more wary of him.

Well sir, upon pour faithful protestation,
And vow of secrecy, liere's ten pieces more.
You have found a tender-hearted woman of me
Over your wants; and all the satisfaction
That I desire, is, that I may not suffer
Under a lavish tongue; 'tis easy payment.

Yes, but I'll pay thee better. Therefore tell me, when we shall meet and have
a spirtabroad.


Your friend stays for you, sir.

Pish, let him stay.

You slight him now, but he knows all your Councels.


By this good tongue, no more then the unbegotten Hans that I mean to clap into
thy Kelder.

Nor ever shall: doest think I am so foolish
To talk away my hopes? No, thou art my Fairy,
Pinch me to death when I discover thee.

Go to, avoid suspicion then, besides
I have occasions that do call me hence.

Your stay was somewhat long.

Yet 'twas to purpose.
As here you may behold, but I must make no words on it.
She has enjoined me that. O'tis a cunning Gypsy.

So't seems, by trusting thee that hast no power to keep a secret.

Troth, to tell you true.
My conscience will not beare't, I cannot be
So ungrateful to receive a courtesy,
But to acknowledge it.

Yet thou hast the conscience
To work a mans estate out of his hands
By his wives frailty, even to break his back.

'Tis rather to be feared she may break mine.
She's a tight strong dock't Tit.

O Tradesmen, why do you marry?

Why? to make Tradeswomen.
For Gentlemen that want money and commodity.
You know the thing that I call father in (...),
That had my mothers whole estate, and butied her,
Allows me nothing.

Thank your own sweet courses.

My courses are sweet courses, they serve me to live upon.

But I shall put you off
O'one of your sweet courses, or at least
I'll strain a point of friendship to be satisfied
Touching this woman, 'twill be worth discovery.

But why these cloudy looks? do not you like my courses? ha*

I cry thee mercy, Val.
I was upon our former subject Matchil.

I there's a hasty match clapped up. You asked
Why Tradesmen marry, there's a marriage now!
A humorous Coxscombe that could never laugh
In all his last wives days; and since her death
Could ne'er be sad. For him to marry his Malkin
For poor and course obedience. Well. I hope
To take my course in his house yet for all.
Her boasted chastity and obedience.

Would thou touch such a thing?

What, not for money?
She can pay well and her ugliness cannot fright me
I can do that work winking.

She can be no such woman.

Tell not me
What any woman can or cannot be,
You'll give me leave to try my fortune with her,

Yes, and walk with you towards it.

No news, no tidings of 'em, Ephraim, ha!
Was even sucg a escape?

Not since the Rape
Of H^llon^ I'm persuaded. I have searched
With narrow eyes (as I may say) with care,
And diligence in most secret places.
And can no way inform my self, what is
Betide of the young Damsels, or old Squire.
Your Niece, and the French Virgin, and the man
Unworthy to be called your brother Strigood.

O hang him Villain.

Doubtless 'twas his plot
To work upon your Ladyships good nature
To harbour them, that he might take the advantage
Of stealing them away.

What to do, ha?

To do? much may be done by his seducements,
On two such tender Virgins, though he should
But plant them in our suburbs: but my fear
Is that he has transported them beyond seas
Into some Nunnery. Your Ladyship
Knows he is adverse in Religion.

I know he is of none.

Satan will work.
The stronger in him, then to their subversion.

How shall I answer now my brother Matchil?
But he is justly served to marry so.
The thought of it torments me. Where's my comfort?
Where's Nehemiah, ha?

He's busy, Madam.

What, at his book? or at his music, ha?

That is, his Ballet, or his Jewes Trump. No,
Madam. He is busy at his exercise of Arms
With a new Casting top, a Cat and Catstick,
I bought and brought him home.

I thank you for them,
My careful discreet Ephraim. I like
His harmless exercises well.

I hope,
Your Ladyship can say since I have had
The Government of him under your Ladyship,
I have been careful of the Gentleman,
And have his love withal so much, that I
Dare say (I hope you'll pardon the comparison)
That had you married me (which was as likely
As that your brother would have taken his Maid.
I think that Mr. Nehemiah would not
Have run away in hatred of our Match,
As Mrs. Joyce. it seems, hath done of theirs.
I hope your Ladyships pardon, I understand
My duty.

And you speak but reason Ephraim.

I have given her there a touch of my affection.
Who knows how it may work?

Go call him in.
I would not have him over heat himself.

'Tis a good care. And Madam, by the way,
Let me advise, that since his riper years
Require, and that fair Propositions
Of marriage are tendered for him, that
We gently by degrees, do take him off
From childish exercise, indeed plain boys play.
More manly would become him.

You would have him
Do worse then, would you? and be nought, you varlet?
What! would you have him play at Mans-game, ha?
Fore he be married, ha! what, what! how now!
Is it but up and ride w'ye, ha!

I humbly
Beseech your Ladyships pardon, I will call
Sweet Mr. Nehemiah to your worship.

Go, you are an honest man. I know thou love him.
Indeed he's all my comfort and my care
And I must naturally respect all those
That do partake with me my care of him.

my boy Negh, Son Nehemiah.

F'sooth.

That's my good Lamb. Hold up thy head; and thou.
Shalt have a wife.

But mother f sooth, when I have her,
Will she play with me at peg-top?

At any thing, my boy.

And she have not good box and steel, I shall so grull her.
And then at Mumbledepeg I will so firk her.

But when you're married, you^ll find other pastime.

Whatever I say, I have a meaning though.
But yet, I doubt, I shall not forsake all
My old fagaries in a year or two.

I know thy will is good to leave thy wag-tricks.
And I commend your understanding in it.
It shows you man, and ready for a wife.

Amardla, f'sooth, I think so; I Amardla.
For I did beat a boy as high as my self
Yesterday, with one hand.

Where was thy the other.

The boy had but one hand f'sooth. I used both.

Well you are too witty to live long, I fear.
But as I was saying, son, I do expect
Sir Swithen Whimtby to bring his Niece.

Who f^sooth, the crying Knight, he that has wept
E're since his Lady died; and mourns in colours;
Speaks nothing but in verse, and gives me Ballats;
The old Knight Powel, that pronounces what dee call them?

Odes child and Elegies. He has been inspired.
With the infection of Poetry,
E're since his wives departure: and 'tis thought
Nothing can put him out, or cure him of it
But a new wife to kill the furious itch of't,

But is not his Niece too big for me? I would be loath
To be over-match'd.

O witty, witry, still.
But when she comes Nehemiah, What'll you say to her?

I'll give her the time of the day or the night
I warrant her, come at what hour she will.
Why if I eat not all before she come.
(And she must try her, if I do'nt) I'll ask her
If she can speak with plums in her mouth; and then
I'll offer her a long one and two round ones,
And nod at her.

You will not, will you, ha?

Mother, I know both what to say and do
I trust I am not to be taught to woo.

Too witty still, I say, to be long-liv'd.

But hark you mother f'sooth; I am told that you
Bear a months mind to that Sir Whimlby,
And a cross match is talked on betwixt you
And the old Knight, and me and his young Niece.
O ho -- is't so?

This is no crafty child.

Let me but see how you will handle him now
And mark how I'll come over her with small Jerks.

O you are a witty wag. A blessing on it.

Madam, Sir Swithen Whimlby and his Niece,
Mrs. Blithe Tripshort.

They are very welcome,
Noble Sir Swithen.

Noble Mrs. Blithe.

Sweet Knight, you're welcome.

Welcome, sweet Lady.

Still weeping.

O good Madam.

Still weeping for a husband.

Ha, ha, ha.

Mother, she puts me on it,
She laughs.

Laugh with her then.

Amardla, so I will, and if you laugh
At me, I'll laugh at you again, so I will.

Ha, ha.

Are you there with me? I'll be here with you then.
Will you eat any Sugar-plums? no, I'll eat 'em for you.
There's ha, ha, ha, ha, for you now.

Do you note, Sir Swithin, what a wag it is.
Walk into the next room Nehemiah. Did you note him?

Madam, to tell you true.
My love to you
Springs from the joy,
I take in your sweet boy
I can take no delight
But in his sight,
Nor any pride
Since my dear Grissel died,
In all, I see on earth or find in books,
But that which overcomes me in his looks.

O sweet Sir Swithen, you have all wooed and won me.

Then all my hopes are frustrate.

My son shall have your Niece, and for mine own part.
You loving him so well, of what's in me.
I can deny you nothing.

Gentle Madam.

She offers up her self; now may the proverb
Of proffered service light upon her.

Nay, Sir Swithen.
Let me entreat you to leave weeping now.

Madam, I cannot so
Forego my woe.
For while I strive
My solace to revive,
I do but still restore
My grief, before
That did beti'd
When my dear Grissel did.
And when your Ladyship appears in sight.
(Pardon) I cannot choose but cry out-right.

Alas, good Knight. He weeps pure Helicon.
He has not wherewithal to quench his love,
But his own tears. A wife would cool him better.
Why sir, does sight of me renew your grief?

O Madam, Madam, yes;
In you the bliss,
That I do miss,
I find enshrined is.
And till, to ease my pain,
I shall regain
In you the Bride,
That in my Grissel died.
So oft as she in you to me appears
My numbers cannot cease to flow in tears.

Good sir, collect your self, and be assured
I am your own, so Neh. may have your Niece,
With her full Dowry of four thousand pounds.
My personal estate is full as much.
That and my self are yours on the cross marriage,
You making me an answerable Joincture.

Is't come so near; I'll cross it, or my star*
Drop crosses on my head. O vain, vain woman,
To dote on Poetry in an old man.
Ladies may love it in the young and bold,
And when they are sick give gally-pots of gold,
For cordial Electuaries to cheer
Their crop-sick Muses; but to an old and sere
Man that out-lives his labours, who can be
So vain to give her self away but she.
I had been sitter for her, and I'll watch
Occasion yet, perhaps, to cross the match,
I can tu^n Poet too.

Dry now your eyes, and answer me in prose,
Are you content to yield to those conditions
I have propounded, ha!

I am content.
And now for joy could weep,
Finding my Grissel in your Ladyship.

I hope the young ones do accord as well.

Protest, I cannot abide you.

Nor I you.
Amardla, that I cannot.

They are agreed.
Madam, it seems they both are of one mind.

I do not like it. What's the matter Nehemiah?

She is no wife for me, she has broke my Jewes-trump; look you here else. And
almost broke my head with one of my bounding stones.


Bless my boy; she has not, has she, ha!


And yet after all that, and for all I offered to teach her to shoot in my
Trunk and my Stone-bowe, do you think she would play with me at Trou, Madam?
no, nor at any thing else. I'll none of her.

And yet I'll have her too. If she will promise to do as I would have her
hereafter.


There, do you note him there, Sir Swithen?
This child has no childish meaning in it, I warrant you.

No Madam, no, I know him inwardly
He is my joy, and she shall be conformable,
Or fare the worse.

She will, I know she will.
Will you not have my son, sweet Mrs. Blithe?

Sweet Madam, what to do? ha, ha, I shall be quickly weary with laughing at
him. His fooling will soon be stale and ^edious; and then to beat him would be
as toilsome to me; and lastly, to be tied to nothing but to cuckold him, is
such a common Town-trick, that I scorn to follow the fashion.


Can she talk thus? ha!

A merry harmless Girl.
Fear not, good Madam, she will come about.

A thousand mile about rather then meet him.

I much desire she would; for now my son
Is set a marrying, I warrant it pure thing
It is in pain, till it be at it: ha!
Pray bring her on, Sir Swithen, let him kiss her.
Poor heart, he licks his lips; and look how arseward she is.

Fie Blithe, be courteous, Blithe.

Mother, -- she has spit Amard just in my mouth.

Amard, what's that? if you speak French you wrong me.

Gip, Mrs. Tripshort. Is this the manners your Mother left you?

Speak not you of Mothers, Madam.

Sir ^w^then, will you s^e my child abused so, ha?

I can but grieve for it, Madam.


My mother is as good as your mother, so she is, for all she's dead.


I, well-said Neh.


Yes, it appears in your good breeding
Your fine qualities express her virtues sussiciently.

How dare you Huswife talk thus to my son, of me, and before my face too? ha!
Sir Swithen, can you think well of me, and suffer this, ha?


Alas, good Madam, I am down again I know not what to think of living woman
now.


Do you bring your Niece to abuse me?


I am so drowned in tears, that I cannot ^ee what to say to it.


Mother, Amardla, the more I look on her, the better I like her.


Say so, my boy. Besides, I have a conceit she can out-scold you* and that's
more then ever woman did, I think f'sooth.


For thee, I do forbear her.


By your leave, my Lady Nestlecock, I have brought a sister of yours here to
salute you.


Though unworthy to be of your Counsel, or at the Ceremony, I heard you were
married brother. And by a Sisters name you are welcome.


I thank your Ladyship.


Sir Swithen Whimlby! and your pretty Niece! well met, what affairs have you in
hand here? what do you cry for your old wife still or for a new one? But hark,
you Lady Sister, where's my daughter?


Now for a tempest. Truly sir, I know not.


Is shenot with you, ha?


No truly, sir.
She's slipped from me with her good Uncle Strigood.

That Thief has sold her then into some Bawdihouse
Was this your project for her education,
To steal my child to make a whore of her?
Are you turned Lady b^ud now for your Niece
Because you have no daughter? O the devil!
If there be Law, I'll trounce your Lady Hagship.

What, what? how now? do you taunt me, sirrah, ha?


I'll make thee an example.


Thou hast made thy self an example, and the scorn of thine own child in
marrying of thy drudge there; and that's the cause of her running away thou
may think, because she hates to live where she must call her mother that was
thy droile.


Droile, I think, she said.


Speak to her, I charge thee, on thy obedience to speak to her.


The droile is now your brothers wife, Madam, and in that setting your
Ladyships lavish tongue aside, as good a woman as your self, none dispraised,
ha.


Well-said Rachel, hold thine own Rachel. And so to you, sir Sw then.


Mother, come away, mother.


By and by, my boy.


Do you presume to call me drudge and droile, that am a Ladies Sister every day
in the week; and have been any time these three days, ha.


That's not every day in a whole week yet.


Thou shalt not dare to call me sister Huswife.


Cods so, and why troe? because a Lady scorns to be a huswife, ha. If you be
no huswife, I sc^rn to call you Sister, I; though my husband be your brother.
From whence came you troe, ha?


I know not what to say to the bold-face.


Pray f'sooth come away, I am afeared she'll beat you.


Thanks, my good child, but do not be afraid my Lamb.


Boldface, ha! Her brothers wife*s a bold-face, but her face is not varnished
over, yet like his Ladysisters face, but it may be in time when she learnes the
trick on it, and have as many flies upon it, though not so troubled with them, as
a bald mare at Midsummer, hah.


I know not what to say to her, she has charmed the virtue of my tongue.


I never heard her speak so much in all her life, Sir Swithin, nor half so
loud. hank heaven, she has a voice yet on a good occasion. And so far I'll
maintain her in it. Nephew Nehemiah, when saw you your Cousin Joyce.


O Lord, O mother f'sooth, look you, mine Uncle holds me.


Ah, naughty man, did a so go*me a stroke, and I'll beat it, ^h --.


Your wife has taught you to play the rude companion, has she? Pray take her
home sir, and let her discipline your own child if you have one, and let mine
alone. You know the way you came, sir; or if you have a mind to stay here,
Come Sir Swithen, come away children; I hope I shall find some other room in
mine own house, free from your assaults, if not, I'm sure there's Law against
Riots. Come Sir Swithen.


Not yet good Madam Nestlecock, you shall hear me.
You have enticed away, then lost my daughter.
And now you're a juggling with your widow wit,
And your small worm here, to catch up for Gudgeons.
Sir Swithen and his Niece, I know your plot..
She's not fit match for you Sir Swithen; and her son
Much less for your fair Niece. Come dry your eyes,
And look upon him, and not only look,
But laugh at him, I charge you.

I could now for him heartily.

Mark how his mothers milk drops at his nose, while I show you the mother and
the child.

He was her youngest son, and all that's left of seven, and dreaming that he
needs must prove a Prophet, she has bred him up a fool.


F'sooth mother he mocks me, oh. --

O profane wretch, worse then thy brother Strigood.

Do not cry, Nehemiah, peace, good boy, peace. So so.

A tender mother I must say she has been.
For till he was fifteen, none but her self
Must look his head, or wash his pretty face
For making of it cry. Laugh at her good Sir Swithen.
And before that, till he was twelve years old
She would dance him on her knee, and play with's Cock.

Ah ah ah ah. --

So well-said, Sir Swithen.

Just so efac my mother would serve me, ha, ha.
Is not this better then whining.
Yes, or perhaps then wiving either.

Do you say so.

Ha, ha.

Well said, Sir Swithen, laugh on. I hope I have done a cure on him, by showing
him a more ridiculous object then himself, to turn the tide of's tears.


Ha, ha.

Laugh still, defy the fiends, women, and all their works.

Ha, ha, ha, let the dead go, and the quick care for themselves. You buri'd
your wife, and cried, and I buried mine.

And laugh; which is the manlier Passion.

He knows not that he is married again.

You are the merriest Merchant, ha, ha, ha.
I think I shall not marry again in haste, ha, ha.

Well-said, hold there. And for your Niece
Let me alone. I'll fit her with a match.
I know a Lad that's worthy of her.

Ha, ha, ha. --

He^ll laugh too much, I fear.

He may at you,
For your officiousness.

How's that?

Ha, ha. --

To thrust your self into unthankful offices.
In things concern you not. Will you turn Matchmaker
For others un-intreated, 'tis enough.
For you, I hope, that you have matched your self, ha.

Hah! Do you hab, or talk to me?

Who else
Should talk or give you counsel but your wife?

VVell-said Rachel, hold thine own Rachel.

I am matched again.

Ha, ha, ha.

Pax, cry again, or burst thy self with laughing.

La. Ha, ha, ha. Laugh son Nehemiah.

Ha, ha. ha.

What am I? what do you make of me?

Nay, what have you made your self? best ask the Chimney piece that you have
married there.


Durst thou advance a voice against me, ha?

You did commend it in me against your Sister.
And I may better be familiar with you;
Hah, are you not my husband? I am sure
'Tis not so long since we were married, that
You can forget it, or ^epent so soon.
I am not now your slave, to have my face
Washed with your snuffs, nor to be kick't and trod on
Without resistance, nor to make you answers
Merely with silent curtsies, run when you bid go
To fetch and carry like your Spaniel,
In which condition I liv^d long enough,
And was content until ^ou freed me out on it.
Now free I am, and will be a free woman,
As you are a free-man, ha.

Ha, ha, ha.

O base-borne beggar.

You wrong your wife in that.

How she holds up the wife.

I never begged
Nor moved a lip to be your wife, not I,
You held my service portion good enough,
And for my blood 'tis no more base then yours,
Since both are mixed in marriage.

Come your way.
And let me hear you speak so much at home.

I hope I may be bolder in mine own house.
So Madam, for the love I have found in yours,
You shall be welcome thither, when y' are sent for.

What a bold piece of Kitchen stuff is this?
Brothery' are matched.

And catched ifacla, ha, ha, ha.

He has not a word to speak.

Follow me home and durst.

Yes sir, I dare without more leave taking, ha.

Was ever comb so cut.

Ha, ha, ha, ha.

There's a new Aunt indeed! she brought me nothing.

I have not laughed so much I know not when,
H'has made me laugh until I cry again.

Again, you are welcome, Sir, Mrs. Blithe
Now the unwelcome guests are gone, lets in
And dine, then will we after meat

Of Joinctures, Madam, and of Nuptials treat.

Right sir.

Love, as I shall adore thee for a deity.
Rid me of this ridiculous society.

GOod Mr. Matchil.


Mystris, be not so violent.


Ha.


I'll rather run my Country, Gentlemen, then endure her.


You were best to kill her then, and then you'll have no other course to take,
unless you stay and behanged.


I'll make thee glad to fly first.


From my house and husband shall I? from my possessions shall I? And leave you
all to spend in riot shall I? No sir, I'll stay and spend my share if you go to
that, that will I. And make all fly as well as you, and you go to that, that
will I, ha.


Whoop, whow.


Nay, fl be not so loud.


What did thou bring thou drudge thou.


That which you were content to drudge withal, I am too sure of that. The
drudge you speak of is no worse then your own wife, I am too sure o'that.


I know not what to say to her.


Did you not fay for better, for worse? And if 'twere worse then 'tis, 'twere
all too good for you. And that I hope I shall find some good Friend to know.


That I like well, I'll be her first man.


I trust you have found the drudge to be a woman fit to content a man, and if
you grant not that, some better man perhaps shall be a Judge, betwixt you and
the drudge.


Better still.


She threatens horns. I think.


Horns. I think, you said. If 'twere so 'twere too good for you. Cannot your
own wife content you, ha?


She holds up that point stoutly.


That shall be tried.


O for an expert Chyrurgion now to cast her in a dead sleep, and geld her.


In truth you will be both sorry, when your passion gives but least way to your
understandings. Mr. Matchil, let me persuade with you.


Never uniesse you bring her on her knees, to crave forgiveness at my foot.


If you but yield an inch he treads upon your neck, I will not give an under
spur-leather for you. But bear it out bravely, and I'll be your servant.


Mrs. Matchil.


Mrs. Match-ill indeed, to be so matched.


So matched* how matched? what from the hurden sinock with lockram
upper-bodies, and hempen sheets, to wear and sleep in Holland, and from the
dripping-pan to eat in silver, ^ha. Do you repine at your Match, ha. Is wealth
contemptible to you?


I was better content in my poverty. I have not been my self, Gentlemen,
since he married me.


You may be poor again as soon as you please, the door is open, depart at your
pleasure; you know the way to your old Aunt the Apple-woman, at Hockly-hole.
Take your knitting Needles again, and live with her, go.


No sir, I'll stay with you, and make you as poor before I have done with ye, as
I was before you had me Gent. I shall not be my self till then.


The devil you shall. Was ever such a crooked condition crept into a thing like
woman?


Yet this sir, is the rare piece of obedience
You boasted of, and said you would defy
The devil to dishonest her, I am sorry
Your judgement led you into such an error,
Already she's my Mistress.

Is she so?

Yes, and I^le call him servant, Gentlewomen use it.

Do so, Mistress.

If she, sir, be your Mistress, Then am I
Your Master-in-law, out of my house I charge you.

Doest thou conspire to grieve him?

Troth, sir, I did but jest. You have my pity.

All are not times for Jest, friend Valentine.


O my affliction!


Have a little patience, sir.

While I talk calmly with her.

Leave me then
A while unto my thoughts. Go into the house.

Pray servant help me here a little. Do so much
As wind up my Jack for me, my Watch I would say.

Her Jack* she's in the Kitchen still.
A pretty Watch this, Mistress, what did you pay for it.

Nothing, my husband ga't me.


Pity the Spring is broke, but I can get it mended.


Good servant take it with you then to the Jack-makers, I would say, the
Watch-makers. Come Gentlemen, shall we have a crash at cards?


With all my heart. What is your game?


I can play a many old games. One and thirty bone-ace, Tickle me quickly, and
my Ladies hole, and sichie. But you shall teach me new ones, though I lose
money for my learning, Gleek and Primero, Gresco saut, primofistula, I know all
by hear-say. Come let us have a bout at somewhat. I have money enough.


And I'll make shift to ease you of some on it.


Affliction on affliction hourly finds me,
And lays me on the Rack, tearing my heart
Like greedy vultures, O my heart, this heart
That I so long supposed impenetrable
By all the darts of sorrow, is now transfixed,
Shot through and through with torments, and by this.
This last made sensible of all the rest.
My sons untimely death, my daughters loss.
My Sisters follies, and my Brothers vices.
My servants falsehood, and the jeers of strangers
Now wound me all at once; and all through this
Predominant blow, pulled on me by mine own
Impetuous rashness. Let me here consider,
While my hearts torture keeps my soul awake,
The moving cause of all these ill effects.
Mine own unbridled wild affections.
Scorn of example, and contempt of counsel.
I cannot but observe withal, how just,
A judgement follows mine own wilful acts,
In the same kind of doing ills for ills.
For my lost son, I rashly wrought revenge
Upon an innocent Girl; and with her
Have lost mine own; and for th'unmanly joy
I took in one wives death, because a Shrew.
(Though otherwise virtuous) I am in another
Trebly tormented; not alone with noise,
But with a fear of unchaste purposes,
Which if they come to act, my purse must pay for.
I see my faults, and feel the punishments.
And rather then stand out in my defence
T'enjoy some peace, I will endure some sorrow
And bear it civilly. Within there.

Sir.

Go call your Mistress, pray her to come alone.
My resolution brings me yet some ease:
Men that are borne to serve, must seek to please.

Rachel.


Your pleasure quickly, I have left
My company, my servant, and my friend yond,
Sawing against one another at Corn the Caster; till I come to them.

And then all three to In and In, is't so?


My servant, and my friend and I are even all one.
They are the goodest Gentlemen, the best company.

Your servant and your friend.


Yes, and my servant plays for me now in my absence, as far as ten pieces go
that I left him. My plow goes there, though I am here.


Your plow makes vile baulkes of my money the while.


I am not so ill a huswife as you imagine. And my friend, and my servant have
promised to carry me abroad, to this town, and to that town, and the other town,
and whow, I know not whither. And my servant will have me to Hide-Park he
says, to see and to show all, as well as the brave Gallants.


This is gallant indeed.


And my friend will carry me to a whatdeecall, a new Academy, where I shall see
the rarest music and dancing, he says, and learn the finest Complements. and
other courtly qualities that are to be had for money, and such instructions for
the newest fashions


She will fly to the devil for fashions sake. Pray stay a little, and let me
talk calmly with you. You have almost broke my heart.


But not altogether, I hope. I would not win so great a game, without some
sport in playing it.


Hear me.
I know you put on this affected carriage,
But to try mastery, and the disease
Being so general among all women,
Is in you therefore more excusable.

O, are you coming?

Hear what I will say to you.
And find in that a husbands good affection.
I love my peace, and would preserve my honour,
Both which are in your breasts to save or spoil.

And can you think the way to purchase peace
Is by a war with me? hah, you are cozened.
Do you think your domineering looks, or noise,
Or blows, can fright me into quietness,
Or that you shall have honour by abasing
Your wife?

You will not understand me.

Hah.

Though I love peace, and would preserve my honour.
I'll yield in both to you, and can, (I have been
So us^d to thraldom) But the world, the world
Is such a Talker. --

I have found the man.

There I would save a reputation.

He's loath to bring it out; I'll close w'ye.
You'll be content so, I will suffer you
To bear a loud command over me in public,
That I shall carry it in private. Is't not so?

Truly wife, yes.

You'll give me leave to beat you
In private then.

Nay, we'll bar blows at all times.

But if I chance to give you a rap or two,
Or now and then a nip, and you strike me
Again, I'll strike you some way else, as you
Would not be struck. And so observe my carriage.
The Gentlemen are coming.

O, here they are.

And not by the ears: that's wonderful.

Sir, I perceive my error, and repent it.
Promising you in all my after life,
To be a faithful and obedient wife.

He has fetched her about, it seems.

Grammercy Rachel, bind it with a kiss.

And thus it should be.

Gentlemen, have ye found us?

With joy to see this reconciliation.

Thus shall ye see it ever, Gentlemen.
I knew she would yield, or I should make her heart ache.
What were a husband, if he were not Master?

You have won the sield, it seems, yet I may hope
I have not lost a Mistress.

Nor I a friend.

In a fair way, Gentlemen, I shall
Abridge her of no courtly privilege.
But no more haytie twaytie tricks, I charge you.
She shall not jaunt to this nor that town with you.
(I thank you for your care) nor to Hide-Park.
Nor to the Academy you tell her of, without my leave.

And do you say so Mistress?

Truly yes.
I am no such woman as you took me for,
With Mr. Matchils leave you may be welcome
Home to his house in good and seemly sort.
Put pray expect no further entertainment
Then he shall well allow of.

I have lost her.

This change is admirable.

Why do you admire it.
Is she not mine? how could you think she durst
Stand out in her rebellion? although the devil
Who soothes all Upstarts dispositions
Into an over-weening of themselves.
Possessed her for a time, had not I power
And virtue do you think to conjure him out?
What have I studied for, think you, e're since
My last wife died, but how to rule the next?
Go get you in, there's something in the house
Worth looking after.

I be sworn, he frights her.

Would I had you within to perform covenants.

What do you grow rebellious again.
Why stir you not else, ha? prithee Sweetheart
Respect my dignity, or only seem to do it.

Yes, I will only seem to do it.

He makes her tremble.

Gentlemen, I must about my house-^ffaires.
So, I take my leave.

Good Mrs. Matchil.

Aha.

And Mr. Matchil, at your own good pleasure.
Having in private something to impart to you,
I would entreat your presence.

Well, Anon, anon.

Your ear before I go good Mr. Matchil.

H'has brought her to her servile old obedience.

O -- oh.

That is a private touch, sir, of the business.

Pox of your Lobster claws. There waanip*

It will be worth consideration, sir.

Well, I'll come to you presently.

I humbly take my leave.

Any ill news that you change colour so?

No, nothing, nothing but a womanish fear.

Well, you are a happy man that have of recom her.

You know not me yet Gentlemen, I know a word in private would do it.


Yet she desires to have you again in private.

'Tis her abundant love, and pure obedience.

She comes again.

Since you're not yet disposed to enter, sir.
One word more, Mr. Matchil, if you please.

Oh, -- I understand you. Go, I'll follow you.

Again, I take my leave.

I must wear Lantern-hornes upon mine arms,
If she use this. Well, Gentlemen, at your own time
Lets see ye. My Rach. shall make you welcome,
And for me, you know me, I will still be Master. --
I come, I come, I come. So, farewell Gentlemen.

Ha, do you run?

What doest thou think of this?

I'll lay all the tricks I have against his brags.
She masters him in private, and that all
This show of her obedience is dissembled.
My hope revives again; we must abroad with her.
But tell me, what new Academy's that
You told her of, I understand not that yet.

Nor have I seen it, but we both will shortly.
'Tis but of two or three days standing yet.

Where is it? who are the Professors,
And what the Arts?

I'll tell thee all know.
It carries a love-sound; but I am told
It is but private lodgings kept by
Both men and women, as I am informed, after the French manner.
That profess Music, Dancing, Fashion, Complement. --

And no drabbing?

A little perhaps in private.
But guess now in whose house all this.

I cannot.

Even in your City-Mystresses, that lends you
Money so freely.

Who Camelion?

Yes sir, I doubt, your borrowing of the wife
Has broke the husband, put'hem off their trade,
And now they seek new ways to live by projects.

And could you keep this from me all this while,
Till I am there, each step's a tedious mile.

But not without me, good Val. We'll find a time.
Together, and our Mrs. Matchil with us.

Cock, I protest Cock, I commend thy course
Thou hast taken in brave Lodgers, gallant Guests,
Guests of the Game Cock; and my house is counted
A house of quality and recreation, Cock,
In civil sort and gentle fashion, Cock,
Sbobs Cock, I know thou would not have it otherwise
For all the wealth in the Exchange.

But Raf you care not
What people say, so I bring you in profit.

Not I, not I, my little Cocksie Nansie,
Not I, pish, Honey soit qui mali pens.

Some do not stick to say, I know what's what,
And that our house is no better then it should be.

Pish, Honey soit again, in the very teeth of them,
Let them all say what they will. Dainty come thou to me.

But I know what I know, and that our house is
Better then it should be, if some of them
Had but the keeping of it, that speak so ill on it.
And that the Gentlewomen in our house
Are well-condition'd, and as chaste as courteous.
And if you saw, (as they desire I should
See all betwixt their great Resorts and them)
You'd be in love with their sweet way of living.
Then for their dancing, 'tis so neat and graceful.
See them anon at practice.

Not I, Cock, I'll see nothing.
I will not leave one ducking pond, for ten dancing schools.
Yet I can dance, and love it: you know that Cock.
And though you are a Gentlewoman borne,
You took me for my legs, not ^or my arms.
Is not that a good Jest, Cock. Sbobs 'twas out before
I was aware. Here comes their father.

It seems he has brought in some new scholar.

Where are my daughters, Landlady.

Close in their chamber, sir.

Are none of our Academics come yet?

Not any, sir.

I look for some anon
Pray bid the Girls come down
To practise.

Yes, sir.

Sir, when I was a Bachelor, I practised,
Dancing sometimes.

Indeed, good Landlord?

And maugre wedloek, I have something left
Yet in these legs, that can express at least
Love to the quality.

That shall not be lost,
If I can further it.

I saw last night
Your new French dance of three, what call you it?

O the Tresboun.

I think I could make one in it.

This Gentleman's another, call the Music.
I'll try what you can do.
Cash, Thou art welcome, I am glad I met thee.

But that you had foreknowledge of my habit,
And seen it in my out-leaps, as you call them,
I might have past. But you in this disguise,
None but the devil himself that is your Inmate,
And lodges with you in it, could have known you.
Sure he devised it.

No, you are short.
I learned it of a Jesuite.
And 'twas but easy: shaving of my old
Gray hair and beard off; clapping on this perrule
After the fashion; having but few wrinkles.
(For which I thank my Batchelourship, I pass
For a brisk youth. But for my Hannibal eye here. And by my brothers
Courteous advice I have taken a course to live
Upon my stock of wit, slight and activity,
With nimble brain, quick hands, and aerie heels, as he told me, ha!

He could not think you would have stolen his daughter to have set up withal.

But now I care not
What the wretch thinks, so he discovers nothing,
I dare trust thee Cash, partly on thy Oath
Which I have taken you know: but more respectively
Upon your forty pieces here, friend Cash,
Which I have also taken: but most of all
For that I know you dare not make discovery,
For fear of Little-ease. That were a prison
Too fearful for such bravery to stoop into.

That keeps me still in awe. 'Tis well you know it.
But it is better, he has no suspicion
That I am run away.

The Musick's ready, sir.

Play then, -- the Tresboun.

'Twas very well done, Landlord, I protest
I love your house the better for your quality.

But if you saw me at the ducking pond,
Me and my Trull.

Your Trull?

I mean, my bitch, sir.
O she would ravish you.

Some other time.
Here comes your wife. The news good Landlady?

News out of France, your fame is spread abroad.

How out of France?

Two young French Gentlemen.
New come ashore, the daintiest sweetest Gentlemen
That e're I saw (now you'll be jealous Raf)

Not I.

Are come to lodge here, having heard
It seems, that you profess French qualities.
And instantly desire to be acquainted
With you and your sweet company.

Can they speak English?

One very well: and the the other can say
Tree Fransh crown for two English kiss already,
Now be jealous Raf.

Pish, Honey soit qui mali pens.

You can speak French, Landlord.

So much as you have heard, not one word more.
I assure you but this, Adieu Monsieur and so
I leave you.

Will you not see the Gallants Raf?

Not I, I wo'nt be jealous Cock, and so*
By the Back-door to the ducking pond. I go.

Enter then Landlady, where be these Girls?

Here they are come.

Stand aside Cash, and be not yet discovered.
Now Ladies, how do y'like your way of living?

I do not like it Uncle.

Troth, nor I sir.

We eat and lodge well; and we wear good clothes.
And keep our credit in the house we live in,
But what we suffer in our reputation
Abroad, is dangerously doubtful.

So, so.

Here we are viewed and reviewed by all comers.
Courted and tempted too, and though we're safe
In our chaste thoughts, the impious world may say,
We are set out to common sale.

So, so.

And so you are to the utmost of his power
I dare be sworue;

But Uncle, for the time that you intend
To stay, I pray admit no new acquaintance,
Nor any more, lest I for my escape
Venture a leap two stories deep.

Ha! you said?
You know I have disclosed you to no eye
That could take knowledge who or whence you are,
And for the foreign strangers, and such Townsfolks
As knew us not; what need we weigh their thoughts.
Their gold is weight; let that be all we look to.
While our deserving arts and qualities
Require it from them. If they think us wicked,
And hope to get Virginities for salary,
And pay for their deluded hopes before-hand.
What is our act but Justice on their follies,
In taking of their prodigal coin?

I hope,
You deal not that way for us.

Never fear it.

But Uncle, though you have taught us courtly
Gypsy tricks.
That somewhat trench upon our modesties.
Pray let it not be thought we'll sell our honesties.

Trust to my care.

And that's the way to do it.

And in that care be confidently seen,
By a deserving Gentleman, whom I
Present to kiss your hands.

I will see none.

You need not fear me, Lady; for I can
But tell your father, if you slight his servant.

Bless us! what Metamorphosis is this?
'Tis Cash your fathers man.

Is this the habit of a Merchants Prentice?

Is this the lodging of a Merchants daughter?

Has his great marriage turned my fathers house
Into a sumptuous Palace, that he keeps
Such costly men. Or doth the bravery
Of his late beauteous Bride require such gorgeous
Attendants? Pray what office may you fill
About her person.

Will you home and see?

We are betrayed?

Ha, ha, ha. Be not afraid of Cash.
I know him, and he knows us. He is our friend
And we'll be his. As for his bravery
'Tis no new thing with him. I know him of old.
This sute's his worst of four.
And he's one
Of the four famous Prentices of the time.
None of the Cream and Cake-boyes, nor of those,
That gall their hands with stool-balls, or their Catsticks,
For white-pots, pudding-pies, stewed prunes, and Tansies.
To feast their Titts at Islington or Hogsden.
But haunts the famous Ordinaries of the time,
Where the best cheer, best game, best company are frequent.
Lords call him Cousin at the Bowling Green; And the great Tennis-Court.
Thy fathers money
Would rust else, Girl. Keep thou our Council Cash.
And we'll keep thine, though't be to the undoing
Of him and all the wretches of his brotherhood,
That love their money, and their base desires,
Better then blood or name.

But can you hold
It good in any servant so to hazard
His Masters livelihood.

Can you hold your peace?
He's wise, and saves by it all this while: He knows
His friends are bound in full two thousand pounds,
For's truth, and his true service, and perhaps,
He is not out above one thousand yet,
Where's your wit now?

Mistress, I'll do you service, and be true to you.
I'd not have mist of this discovery. --

You see she hearkens to him. Talk aside Cash.
And touch her boldly.

I would not have mist it.
For all the wealth your father has: and at
Convenient privacy. Ple give you reasons,
That shall gain your belief to it.

The French Gallants.
I had almost forgot them. They are a pair
Of delicate young Monsieurs. If they have
But crowns enough, they are the likelicst
Merchants for my new Mart that I can choose.
She said they can speak English, that's a help.
For devil of French have I to entertain them.

See mine own heart, here's more temptation still.

I'll not endure the onset.

I le defend you.

Yet there are graces in their looks methinks,
That do invite my stay.

N' entendes vous, la langue francois Monsieur dittez.

I would be glad to hear you speak the language
I better understand, and that is English.
In which you are most welcome.

Your fair courtesy
Merits our greatest thanks.

I tanck you, sir.
I have bid France adieu to come and learn
De English very well; I speak a lietel,
But de English Mesteresse can teach de best.
I shall be glad to take my commencements,
Or my first Lessons from these Ladies lips.

A fine forward spark?

O sweet, O delicate.
Ladies, if you will breath into me English,
I shall, if you please, put Fransh into you.
Vne pour l'antre, dat is one for anoder.

So they might make a hot bargain on it.

Are these your Civil Gentlemen, Landlady?

He seems a little waggish: but the other
Is wondrous civil. He comes blushingly.

You are before me in the Salutation
Of these fair Ladies, Monsieur Galliard:

Il E'vray Monsieur Papilion, I kiss before, then you mose kiss behind.
But let me pray my tardinesse be excused

You pronounce English well sir.

I am glad
You like it Lady.

I like the others as well.

I have before spent many months in England:
And my great love unto the Nation,
Especially to the beauties of your Sex,
Retracts me hither, where my friend was never.
Till now that my perfwasion won his company;
And happily, I suppose, we are arrived:
That, to the sight and knowledge we have had
Of Music, Dances, Courtships, and Behaviour.
Through all parts of our Country, France, with an
Addition of all Italy affords.
Where (by all best opinions) even the choicest
Of such court qualities, and active graces,
Have had their Spring, we now, as Fame suggests,
Shall in this fair Society, discern
More then by all our former observation.

Report, sir, speaks too loud on our behalf,
And let me pray ye, that it not beget
Too great an expectation on our weakness,
By your too gentle suffrage. What we can,
We'll do.

O we dats de best. Do is de ting
De Fransh man loves: If all your both two daughters
Show all; all makes but more desire to do.
Speak I no good English, Mademoiselle?

I understand you not.

You no understand me,
Because you tinck I lie. But if you lie
With me, I make you understand me presently.

This hot-rein'd Mousieur takes 'em for the same.
Strigood would have 'em be I came in time.

At afternoon we'll have an exercise
Of courtship, Gentlemen. In the Interim,
If you will have to stir the appetite,
A dance before our Ordinary we are for you.

And we for you Alloun al Egremant Alloun
Monsieur Papillion pour l' honour de France.

What are your dances chiefly in request.

Good Landlady, bid the Music be in r^adinesse.
And then see dinner set upon the table.
We have Sir for Corants, -- La Miniard,
La Vemimde, Le Marquess, Le Holland,
La Britain, Le Roy, Le Prince, Le Montague,
The Saraband; the Canaries, La Reverree.
For Galliards, the Sellibrand, the Dolphin,
The new Galliard, the Valette Galliard and lepees,

'Tis all very good Monsieur Papillica Essontes
Mon Amy.

And hark you, Monsieur Strigood, you will be put to it.

I fear no French flashes. Bear up Cash. If we cannot dance them of of their
legs, our wenches can,
I warrant thee. Music be ready.
Gallants, what are you pleased to dance?

tells what, c.

Gentlemen, your dinner stays meat will be cold.

And we are hot, 'tis better that take cold then we.
But come, one table for us all.

Stri. Agreed, agreed, agreed.

I say so too.
But to my self reserve what I will do.

EPhraim, thou hast made me a man, both without, witness this sword and
within, witness this precious book, which I have gotten almost by heart
already.


But sir, beware you fall not back again Into your childish follies: but go
forwards In manly actions: for non progredi est regredi.


I know the meaning of that too, Ephraim. That's once a man and twice a child.
But if I turn child again, while I have teeth in my head, ^'le give Mrs.
Blithe leave to dig them out with Sugarplums, as she almost did these two of
them yesterday, with her knuckles. I would they stuck both in her bum for it,
till I we^e married to her, and that shall be shortly, they say, I wo' not
turn boy again for that trick.


I hope you will not.


Thou may be sure on it Ephraim: for if I would turn boy again, I have not
wherewithal to set up again. Thou saw that, as soon as I had tasted the
sweetness of this delic^ous book here, I tore and burnt all my ballats, as
well the godly as the ungodly. In my conscience as many as might have furnished
three Bartholomew Fairs, and then for love of this sword, I broke and did away
all my storehouse of tops, gigs, b^l^s, cat and catsticks, pot-guns, key-guns,
trunks, tillers, and all; and will I turn boy again can think? ye^ I am half
sorry, being towards a wife, that I did not keep them for my children: some
money might have been saved by it. And that is a manly and a good husbandly
consideration, I take it. But hang covetousness: There comes not a mouth into
the world, but there's meat for t; and if I find 'em not play games, their
mother will find friends, that shall, for them and her self too


I'm glad to hear such good things to come from you,

And hope that now your judgment's strong enough

To manage my affair. You know my mind, sir.


Amardla Ephraim, 'twill be hard to compass. For the old Knight will never let
me have his Niece, unless he have my mother. He means to truck for her,
though, I confess, I had rather call thee father then any man, I know, yet I
know not how to bring it about, unless he marry her first; and then she be
weary of him, and take thee afterwards to mend her match. I think it must be
so, Amardla Ephraim.


Now you fly out again, that's as impossible, as 'tis unlawful.


Within. Negh. Negh.


Peace, my mother comes.


Where are you child? Neh.


I hear her neighing after me, I'll do all I can for thee, Amardla Ephraim.


Look you ^onne, what kind Sir Swithin has sent you. A dancing frog, you would
think it were alive, and a ballet of burning the false prophets before they be
tried. And another fearful one of the new Antichrist.


Hang baubles, burn ballets, I am a man, and defy boys tricks.


A sudden change, I pray it be good.


Tell me of toys? I have a sword: offer me ballets? I have a book. Speak to me
of Sir Swithin, I'll talk to you of Ephraim that gave me these blessings; and
is fitter to be my father, (so he is) then the foolishest Knight of 'em all.


Bless my son from too much learning. That book has done him no good, I
doubt. He talks and looks so wildly of the sudden.


A ha!


What book is't. Let me see it.


I'll tell you first. It is a book all of Bulls, Jests and Lies Collected by an
A. S. Gent. Mother f'sooth, there be such things in it! If you never read it,
it is the rarest book that ever you read in your life. Open it where you will,
and you shall learn something. As here now. One refusing to eat Cheesecakes,
was asked his reason. He told them he loved the flesh well, but was afraid of
the bones. Then here's the next to it. One asking whence Lobsters were brought:
his fellow replied, one might easily know their country by their coat. They
are fetched from the red sea. Now would I might never eat more of them, as well
as I love them, if I know what Cheese-cakes were made of, or from whence
Lobsters came before.


Is this your book-learning? In troth thou make me laugh.


Laugh on, good Mother. And while you are in the merry mood, let me speak a
good word for Ephraim. I have a mind f'sooth, because he has made me a man, to
make him my father, f'sooth.


What, what! How now.

How durst you firrah, move my son in this? ha.


Madam.


Is it but so? ha!


Pray f'sooth hear him speak. He can speak Poetry (he says) as well as Knight
Whimlbie. Speak Ephraim.


Madam, Fa^re truth h^ve told
That Queens of old
Have now and then
Married with private men.
A Countess was no Blusher,
To wed her Usher.
Without remorse
A Lady took her Horse-
Keeper in wedlock. These did wisely know,
Inferior men best could their work below.

Mother f'sooth, Is it not fine?


Nay, Madam, more then so, I'll further go


But you shall not, Sirrah. What, what! how now! Is't but up and ride? ha! Out
of my doors thou varlet.


I must out too then, mother I am afraid, oh. --


Good Neh. be pacified, I'll give him a better answer.

But not a word on it now, sweet child, I pray thee.
Here comes Sir Swithin.

Ha, ha, ha, Madam, ha, ha, ha.


I marry Sir Swithin. This is better then O Madam, O --, when you washed your
handkerchiefs in the suds, and then to wring hem out in Poetry.


My tears with the memory of the dead are all fallen into Lethe; and nothing
but joy left in me, sinc my hopes are confirmed in your lap. And hang Poetry: I
study profit now. Therefore, look you, Madam, here is a draught of my
marriage-instrument to your lap.


His instrument being drawn, I must put up my pipe and be gone.


And here is another draught for sweet Master Nehemiah, for my Niece Blithes
Joincture.


O but she says she will not have me.


When did she say so?


Now, now, she spat the word out of her mouth. And I say, if she have not me,
you shall whine both your eyes out before you have my mother; and see ne'er the
worse, I warrant you.


A cross marriage, or no marriage, I say still.


I say so too, son, Sweet boy, be content.


You spoke well of him behind his back: and made me think you loved him, and
would marry him.


Behind his back, I may do much to please you. But when I look upon him, he
turns my stomach worse then a fool made of sour wilk.


Marry Gip, Mrs Queasy, my sonne's as sweet as you, I hope, and as wise as
you. And sucked as sweet milk as ever the good Cow your mother gave.


Ha, ha, ha.


Patience, good Madam.


I hope the cross marriage is crossed. This is untoward wooing.


Uds so! do you flirt out your unsavoury comparisons upon my son?


Flirt not you at me, Madam, lest I flirt your milk-sop under the snotty nose
here.


Yes, and I have a sword, and you have got ne'er a one.


You wo' not will you, ha! Do you fly at him, ha!


Fear not, good Madam.


Ephraim, save my boy.


Ha, ha, ha. --


She shall not hurt him. Leave her to me, good Madam.


I ever feared he was not long-liv'd he was so witty. And now I fear, she will
be the death of him. I would not he should marry her for a million.


Say not so, mother. I love her better and better still.

I never had play-fellow i my life, but we fell out and in again.

And I must and will marry her, I take my death on it aforehand.


O me! he is bewitched to her.


Leave all to me, dear Madam.


As I am to you, I think, Sir Swithin.


Let me alone with her: I'll win her, and he shall wear her* fear not. As ^
was saying, Madam, she speaks as well of him behind his back, as your own
heart can wish. And told me she was content to marry him.


Behind his back? did she so?


Yes truly, Madam.


Lo you there, mother, Let her marry me behind my back then: And when we are
marri'd, I'll make her stick to it before my face, I warrant you; or if she will
make back-play. I'll play at nothing but backgammons with her.


Well, Heaven bless thee, thou art but too good for her.


Speak gently, Niece, I charge you.


Madam, I hope your Ladyship shall find me too good for him. If e're he has
me.


Ha! say you so?


She means in well-doing, Madam.


Nay then, I thank you Mrs. Blithe. Assuring you that you shall be no way so
good to him, but I will be as good to you.


Agreed again of all hands. But look how she turns and keeps cut like my
Sparrow. She will be my back Sweet-heart still I see, and love me behind.


She is yet raw, and has not much been abroad to see the manners of the time.
In which my melancholy has been her main hinderance. But Madam, there is now
that is worth all our sight and observation; A new Academy, where they say, the
newest and most courtly carriage and behaviour is taught and practised both for
young Gentlemen and women. Have you not heard on t?


Yes Sir Swithin; and that the French tongue is taught there with great
alacrity; and my son is wished thither, but soft I warrant you.


But let him see it: at least in our company it will embolden him; I mean to
carry my Niece thither. I have been a Lover of Arts and Exercises; and know
somewhat since my youth. Pray let us spend one hour of this afternoon there.


Pardon me good sir Swithin.


But he shall not mother if you love me: for I mean to perfect my dancing
there; and to learn French there; For I mean when I am married to travel into
France. But I will first be perfect in the tongue I shall learn it the sooner
when I am there you know. Pray let us go to the Acomedy, what dee call it?


The Academy.


Say you so son? then come sir Swithin. Come Mrs. Blithe, we will all go.


I'll wait upon you, though my heart says no.


O mine own heart! how near were we both fallen
Into the Gulf of Ruin?

Thanks for our delivery!
We were upon the brink of main destruction.

Was ever such a Fr^end as this mine Uncle?
Pretending us his children too, and called us daughters
To those he bargained with to se^l our Maid head?

'Twas a most damnable practise sie upon him.

And had the Monsieurs been as capable
Of our Virginities, as he was of.
Their moneys, how had we then resisted.

By Venus (mine own heart) my Gentleman
Came up so close to me, that if my voice
Had not been stronger then mine arms (O me!
I tremble fon it yet) I had been vanquished,

But did you note the virtue of the Gentlemen?
When they were sensible of our fears and tears,
How gently they desisted and with what humanity,
When they perceived how we had been betrayed,
They pitied our conditions; and wooed homditly
Our loves in way of marriage. Provided that
Our births and fortunes might no way disparage
Theirs, being free and generous

I confess
I love them both so well, that if they prove
(As they pretend they are not) our inferiors
In blood and worth, I would take either of'em.

Troth (mine own heart) 'tis just the same with me.
I care not which I have. And mark a sympathy,
How equally all our ^ffections strike.
We both love them, they both love us alike.
But peace. Cash, though he has done us good service,
Must not know all. How goes it within Cash?

And why Cash pray. Have not you changed your names
From Joyce and Gabriella to Jane and Frances.
And is not your Uncle Strigood now become
Your father, by the name of Mr. Lightfoot
The nimble dancing Master? And must I still
Carry the name of Cash? and having lost
My nature too, in having no cash left?
(Pox of the dice) call me Mr. Outlash.

My father will fetch you home with an Inlash,
One o'these days.

But after you, fair Mistress,
Now to your question for the squares within.

I with the Frenchmen, and my Uncle Strigood.

Your father Lightfoot, you forget again.
There's a drawn match made: For the Monsieurs
Have taken their money again: And you have still
Your Maidenheads, I hope. But to have heard
The coi^e they kept, the wrangle, and the stir;
And how the young Blades put the old one to it;
Would ha perplexed you more then keeping of
Your Maidenheads from men you love.

You cannot tell that.

O how the old man chafes that you would offer
To make your moan to ^hem to move their pity,
And not to make his bargain good; and then
How they put home his baseness to him; to make sale
Of his own blood and honour in his children.
(They knew they said some parents in their country,
After their children were turned whores, would share
To live upon the profits, but to sell
Their souls before they were damned, fie; fie, fie, fie).
Till he confessed indeed you were none of his.
But children of some friends of his deceased,
Left to his care sor breeding; which he had
Plenteously given, and thought it might seem reasonable
To raise his money out of you again.

What an old devil is this?

Baser and baser still.
The Monsieurs cried, and swore if they could sinde
Your Parents were Gentle and virtuous,
Being their first Loves, they would marry you,
To free you from this miserable thraldom.

Brave honest Gentlemen.

Be advised though, Mistress.

I hope I shall.

Beware of Travellers, many pass abroad
For gallant fellows that have run their country,
For picking pockets.

And some you know at home
For cozening their Masters.

You are pleased.
But you have known my love; for Gabriella
Let'hem share her betwixt them. You and I
Made one, may soon make peace with the old man
At home.

O Rogue! I'll tell you more anon Cash.

Come Gentlemen, Monsieur Papillion.
And Monsieur Galliard, all friends, all friends.

A greed, agreed, sir.

And agree for me.
Agree poor tout.

Cheer up your faces Girls.
'Twas but my trial of your chastity.
And since you have stood firm, I am proud of you.
Trust me, 'twas but to try you.

We we All, but for try. Trimount, trimount.
No more, but all for try: no man can tinck,
But'twas too very moshe to take two hundred
Crowns for two pusillages, no, no was but
For try: but and she had not squeek and scrash too
Like to do leetel chat, I had Trimount
One, two, tree, five time, for all your try.

What's past let be forgot. According to
Agreement, Gentlemen, you're now content
To join with us in Academic fellowship,
And for your pastime profess Art and Science,
As we do for our profit: you're expert,
I find; and shall win wonder of our Nation,
To your own much delight out of their follies.

And then for Gamesters, Gentlemen. If you^ll play.
I'll bring ye those shall venture money enough.

We are planted to our wish.

All very good.
All very good; but I would see thee first.
What Ladies will come here to practise complement.

You are still hot upon the female Monsieur Galliard
Monsieur Papillion here flies over ^hem.

Ha, ha, ha, what will this world come to?

Landlady, the news?

The old will to it.
As well as the young I see.

To what Landlady?

To fashion following;
A Reverend Lady
Of fifty five; and a Knight of threescore
And upwards, are come hither to learn fashion.

Do you know their names?

Yes, yes: and them; 'tis that
Begets my wonder.
'Tis the Lady Nestlecock, and one Sir Swithin VVhimlby.

Wit be merciful unto us.

The Ladies man's without: who came to know if the house were ready to
entertain them; do you know 'em Mr. Lightfoot?


I have heard of the Lady. Cash, see if it be Ephraim.
He cannot know thee. Let him not away,
By any means, his not return to them may keep them back.

'Tis he, I see him hither.

Landlady, is your husband come from ducking.

Yes, overjoyed with the good sport he has had.
He'll play the good fellow then. Entreat him Cash.
To help thee, put a cup or two upon
That fellow; and hear^st me, spice his cup,
I mean, grave Ephraims cup with this same powder,
'Twill lay him asleep, and quickly.

I know the trick on it.

And Landlady, when the Knight and Lady come,
Say we are ready for 'em.

That I shall sir.

'Tis then an absolute contract. I am yours.

And I am yours as firm as faith can bind.

To which we are de witness. Be so for us,
I am her husband, And she is my wife,
Speak you.

Before Heaven, I do acknowledge it,
But sir, the Church must be observed,

For that.
We'll send for one Minister that shall marry
Us all at once. One kiss till then shall serve.

'Tis well done Monsieurs, I no sooner turn
My back, but you are on the Damsels lips.

A leetel in de honest way will serve,
But he shall know no-ting.

On with your Masques-Maids,
And take especial heed you blush not through them.
For here are some at hand will put us to it.

'Tis not my father, nor my Lady Aunt?

I cannot promise you. Be bold and safe.
Bear it out bravely, or our school breaks up
Immediately: and we are broke forever,
Besides, there is no startiug.

That's enough
To make a coward fight, and mine own heart;
We must stand stoutly to it, we lose our loves else.

Well, I am armed.

And I.

Fall into complement.

I muse we lost my man thus.

By your leave, sir.
Are you the Regent of this Academy?

I am sir.

And are those of your Assistants.

Yes sir, and all Professors of Court-discipline,
By the most accurate, yet more familiar
Rules, then have ever yet been taught by any,
For quick instruction both of young and old.

You promise very fairly. For us old ones,
We know and could have done things in our youth,
Which still we have a mind to: but we leave
The practice to our young ones: Here's a pair
Would fain be at it. We'll pay their admittance.

But I'd be glad to see first by your leave,
Some probability of what they shall learn.

And reason good, good Madam. Pray observe there.

Fair star of courtship, my unworthy humble self, a Professed servant to the
integrity of beauty, makes this

Clear testimony of your merits, that every eye that sees you,

Owes you his heart for tribute, and that unjustly your beholders live, that
live not in your service.


Mother f'sooth, is not this French?

Peace ch^lde. Hear more on it.

Noble sir, you are so exactly deserving in the opinion of all righteous
judgements, that the least syllable of your fair testimony, is able to
re-edifie the ruins of a decayed commendation.


The best that ever I heard, since I wooed my Grissel.

Was not that a sweet bout, sir?


Yes, yes, it puts me in mind of some sweet bouts I had with one before I
married her.


^as he married my Sister troe?


I am forced to give you over, Madam, you have such a preventing and
preoccupying wit in all things.


That goes like English Mrs. Blithe. I could learn some of that me thinks.


Best tell your mother so; she may rejoice at it.


There, Lady, was a taste of sweet complement between persons equally affected.
May it please you now to let your son pass upon this demosel. Who being to
her a stranger, and raw (as I imagine) in courtship, shall meet with
reprehension, that may be for his instruction.


Do Neh. speak to her.


Put of your hat and say --.


What! and her masque on?


That was well-said. Why are they masked, I pray sir?


We are commanded it by the policy of wise authority; for fear young heirs
might fall in love with 'em, and sink their fortunes.


You have well satisfied me.


What should I say to one I never saw.


When I was young and bold, I would have said, Lady, you are most auspiciously
encountered. And speak it boldly.


Lady, you are most suspiciously accoutred, I speak it boldly.


Auspiciously encountered man.


Auspicously encountered woman, I say.


I commiserate your encounter. 'Tis a most hungry, verminous, impoverish't word
sir. It seems you are a stranger by it, to the Innovation of courtship.


What should I say to that now?


He's a weak scholar forsooth, and would be glad to learn.


The acknowledgement of his weakness is the first greece of gradation to
perfection, and his gladness the scaling-ladder of resolution.


Pray f'sooth, can you teach me a complement to offer you sugar-plums, and eat
them my self: to save my manners and my plums too?


What a wag it is?


What walking dunghill is this? made of the dust swept from the house of
ignorance.


What, what! how now, ha? you are a Flapse to term my son so, ha!


O good Madam. This is but school play.


I'll put her by her school-tricks and no only ^nmask, but unskin her face too,
and she come over my heir apparent with such Billingsgate Complements.


Sweet Madam, no harm was meant, and nothing said in earnest: 'Twas merely but
school practice, but to show the sweet young Gentleman how he might be subject
to the scorn of Court, before he be seen in Complement.


Say you so?


'Twas told your Ladyship before, that by reprehension he might find
instructiou.


Right Madam; For no Fencer learnes his Science before he receive some hits and
knocks too: Oh, I have had many.


Nay, I am satisfied, and pray, that my rash error may prove pardonable Lady


Rather let me implore your mercy, Madam --.


'Tis well, 'tis well Lets hear an Interchange or two now, of complemental
acknowledgement of courtesies past betwixt Ladies, for the edification of ^his
fair one, who seems not yet to have taken notice of us, but looks of the
ground still.


'Tis not to find a fescue, sir, among the Rushes.

To pick out a lesson in your crisse-crosse-row of complement.


Sharp and sudden. She has a good wit I see.


Ob erve, good Blithe, observe.


Can your poor servant express acknowledgement enough, Lady, for favonrs so
incessantly heap't upon her, besides the accumulation of many secret benefits?


I cannot but admire, Madam, your noble and illustrious Gratitude, that can
give beauty to benefits of so low a birth and condition.


O my Grissel comes to my mind again, she was the gratefullest woman.


If such favours, Madam, should pass under an humble name, Honour would grow
idle, and a thankful Nature beguiled of her employment.


You'^l make my zeal hereafter, too bashful to serve your most curious
acknowledgement.


Curious acknowledgement! There was a third drawn out.


I am hound by many kindnesses, Madam, to celebrate the fair memory of you; as
the trouble of your Coach twice in one day, besides those inestimable Jewels,
the Monkey and Dormouse your Ladyship sent me.


I would you could lend me a sight of them forsooth, I love such things
devoutly.


You do but open a privy door to my thankful temembrance, Madam, for the
bounty of your Squirrel and Paraquitoe.


Fagh, shut that privie-door.


And shut in the Squirrel and the Paraquitoe to be stifled, shall she? O that I
could see hem!


Now Madam, and Sir Knight, Is not this neat and handsome?


Truly, truly, 'tis most admirable pretty.


Nay, if you heard our Lectures, saw our
Dances.
Relished our Music and harmonious voices,
Observed our Rules for fashion and attire,
Our many exact postures and dimensions,
Fit to be used by way of Salutation,
Of courtesy, of honour, of obeisance,
To all degrees of man or womankind,
From the low bent of vassalage, to the head
Of towering Majesty, you should admire.

But do you read and teach all these to your scholars?


Stand forth, Monfieur Galliard. Stay we're interrupted.

Up maids, and quickly; or 'tis not your Masques
Can keep you undiscovered. Go, be ready,
With Music and your voices, when I call to ye.

Why are we interrupted? pray proceed.


Mother, it is my naughty Aunt, so 'tis*


No matter, son, we'll take no notice of her.

I wonder at the boldness of the drudge though.

I can turn tail too, as well as the great Lady. Hab.


And do so, Mistress, give her a broadside.

Well-said, we'll make our party good, I warrant you.

Sir, we have heard your Fame; and love your Arts.
(...) pray that our ambition be excused,
Which drew on our Intrusion.

To me and to the place you are all welcome.


And so to all I hope, chiefly to you,
Good Madam Dowager, hoping in good time
I may get good, by doing much good upon you
How likes your L^p^my complement.

Do you bring your rude companions to affront me? Are you so hot? you stir up
your cinders before they be cak't.


Still in the Kitchin-dialect.


No ruder then your self, hah.


I brought her, Madam,

(...) advance my suit to you.

Will you see me abused

^ir (...), look to your Niece, the the other talks to her.


Kind merry Gentlemen, Madam, when I was young I would have done the like.
Their coming hither, was as ours was to note the instructions

That are taught here. Pray sir proceed. On with your exercise, that we may all
be edified.


We shall do so, sir.


But sir, your Gentlewomen,

That past upon our entrance where are they?

Sir, they were called in haste to private practice

With some great Ladies in an upper room.

Umh -- private practice. Well, I shall know all.


And they being absent, we shall for the present

Only deliver by these Gentlemen,
^me heads of Sciences.
A Song, a Dance, and then
Entreat you take a taste of a collation.
And all most fairly welcome.
The heads of our chief Arts. Your silence, pray you.

The first is the due carriage of the body,
The proper motion of the head, hand, leg,
To every several degree of person,
From the Peasant unto the Potentate;
To your ^nferiours how and when to use the Nod,
The Hum, the Ha, the Frown, the Smile,
Upon the fit occassion; and to your equals,
The exactest, newest, and familiar motions
Of eye, of hand, of knee, of arm and shoulder,
That are in Garb, in Congee, Cringe, or Shrug,
In common Courtesy, or Complement,
Lastly, for your Addresses to Superiors.
The Honours, Reverence, or Obeisance,
Proper unto the quality or estate
Of person whatsoever. And so much
For carriage and behaviour. In the next place
You shall have rules for the more graceful wearing
Of your Apparel, with the natural Reasons,
Why some mans hat does better in his hand
Then on his head, and why his coat hangs neater
Upon his elbow, then upon his back,
As also Reasons for Tunes bringing up.
And marriages, together of the fashions
Of man and woman, how his Caller, and her
Black-bag, came on together; how his pocket-comb
To spru^e his Perrule, and her Girdle-glasse,
To order her black pashes, came together;
How his walking in the streets without a cloak
And her, without a man came up together,
Of these, and of a hundred more the like.
We shall demonstrate reasons and instructions.
Shall render you most graceful in each fashion.
The next are skills in instruments, song and dancing

Enough, those shall be made familiar to you
By voice and action instantly. A Song there.

Admirable pretty still.

Are these your Gentlewomens voices, sir?

They are

What do you keep them up like Nuns,
To sing and not be seen?

Not always sir.
But may it please ye Gentlemen and Ladies,
Now to observe the practice of our feet
In active dancing.

That came I to learn,
And to speak French, do you think sir, you can bring
My mouth to handle the French tongue handsomely.

He's apt to learn, sir, I can tell you that.

Yes. I shall bring his Mout to it. But his Mont is yet a leetel too wide. But
he shall have some of de water datde woman use for anoderting, to bring it
better together, and he shall speak like de Fransh Lady.


Pray sir, if you can like the Ladies daughter of Paris properly.


Now Val. thou know the way.

I wonder sir, Amongst all your Arts and Sciences
You have so little judgement in a face,
Does his mouth appear wide to you? what false glass
Are your eyes made of?

What you mean?

Nay, friend.

Pray sir take no offence. Here was none meant.

Slander is no offence then. He has injured,
By breathing an aspersion on that face,
The life of beauty, and the soul of sweetness.
Wide mouth Y --.

Begar Monsieur, you shall no point out mouth,
No, nor out-face the Frensh man with your great Bull-beef, and Mustard English
looks.

Nay, gentle Val. forbear.

I'll stop.
This mouth that knowingly says he dares except
Against a tittle of his face or person.
But as he is an ignorant stranger, and
I must respect the company. I forbear.

However sir, I can but thank your love in 't.

Now it works in her.

Pardon my plainness, Madam.
I never was so taken with Masculine beauty.
And till I win a woman that is like him,
Or has been like him, I can but languish.

They told me I was like him, when I was younger.
And let me tell you y' are a comely Gentleman.
And be you but as honest as y' are handsome, you deserve well.

Vmh, 'tis a hard matter to bring those ends together.

Mother f'sooth. Here's a man now for you to make my father!
Beyond the Knight or Ephraim!

Were I free from the old Knight, I could look well upon him.

Come servant, come away.

By no means, Mistress, I do but sooth her up to jeare her for vou.
If you out-stay her not, you lose your honour.
She'll brag she has out-look't you. If you start.

Nay, and she go to that, I hope I can,
Look as ill favouredly as her self, or a better
Woman then she, and stay in spite of her, hah.

'Tis well done, Mystris, Madam shall I tell you.
But I would pray you not to storm, but laugh at it.
She says you are no match for me.

Ha, ha, ha.

And knowing I aim at none but some great widow.
Tells me she knows her husband's but short-liv'd.
I fear she means to break his heart.

Say you so?

No words, good Madam.

^et more whispering.
Pray Madam let us go. Niece come away,
For I fear Madam, as you wisely doubted,
This is no company for us.

Sir, I hope.
I am not yet so tied, but I may safely
Use my own ^reedom, I'll go when I please.

O Grissel, Grissel, when would thou have said so?

Loves power, I hope, hath won on destiny,
To appoint this day for my delivery.

Nay, good Sir Swithin, -- Ladies -- we have yet
Dancing to come, and a Collation promised.

Yes Gallants, now w' are ready, we but stayed for this fourth man here.

O Camelion.
Where is your wife? I hope your je lousy.
Locks her not up.

Pish Honi soit. I hate it.
No, she has been preparing of a banquet,
Which now is ready for you, worthy Mr. Lightfoot,
And your fair company; jealousy I defy
The ba^e horne A gue, Mr. Askal I.

What does he call you? Rascal?

Askal Madam.
My name is Askal. But the R in Master
Runs in^o't so, that sometimes it sounds doubtful.
I must be Knighted, Euphoniae gratia.
Sir Valentine Askal will come fairly off.

Now note me Mr. Askal, and tell me if ever jealous man came so lightly off.

Sir, your collation stays.

'Tis well, Gallants and Ladies
Wilt please you enter.

Agreed, agreed, of all sides.

INhospitable! 'tis inhumane, past
The cruelty of infidels.

Thou speak
But thine own barbarous cruelty, hollow Frenchman.

Abominable hypocrite.

Cunning Villain.

Fie Gentlemen, forbear this unknown language.
And either speak to others understanding,
If you speak Justice:

Give me then my son.

Thou hast thy son, give me my son and daughter.

Pray Gentlemen, if you'll not hear each other, yet both hear me.


I pray Captain speak.

You had his son to foster; he your daughter.
You faithfully affirm you sent his son
For England a month since.

And mine own with him.

You have confessed you put away his daughter.

And mine own with her, through her disobeence.
But 'twas upon advertisement by letter,
That he had first cast off my son to an
Untimely death.

Some Villain forged that letter,
And let me tell you sir, though in your house,
Lafoy's an honest and a temperate man.
You are rash and unadvised, what Lafoy speaks
I will maintain for truth: what you have done
I wish you could make good; But I may fear
You are marked out by your own wilfulness,
The subject of much woe and sad misfortune.

I know not what I am; but did you know
The number, and the weight of my afflictions,
You could not chide me thus without some pity.

Indeed I pity you, and now you're calm,
Know that Lafoy sent his son over with yours,
And but for some affairs he had with me,
In the Isle of Wight he had embarked himself
With them, and brought hem to you.

There's hope then yet
That my boy lives.

And is come over fear not.

You comfort me, and now Lafoy y' are welcome.

But to what comfort, having lost my daughter.

Lost or lost not, mine's with her. And I
purpose now to be sad no longer. For I think
I have lost my wife too, there's a second comfort.

Take an example here Monsieur Lafoy,
And shake of sadness; mirth may come unlooked for.

I have lost a son too, a wild roaring Lad,
About this town. And if I find not him,
I doubt not I shall find, that he has spent me
A hundred pound since I last heard of him.
By the way sir, I sent you a bill of change
Last month, to pay a hundred pieces for me.

'Twas paid. I have your bill for my discharge.
How now?
Have you found your Mistress.

Nor tidings of her, sir.

She has found then some good exercise, I doubt not.
That holds her so.

Sir, there's a Gentleman
Craves instant speech with you.

Who? or whence comes he?

He will be known to none before he sees you.
And, when you see him, he says he thinks you'll know him.
He's a brave gallant, one of the Alamodes,
Nothing but French all over.

Fetch him me quickly,
It is my son. Grammercie mine own heart,
That wast not light so suddenly for nothing,
Pray Gentlemen, who e're you see, name no man
To me, unless I ask you. He comes, he comes.
I'm grown a proper man. Heaven make me thankful.
Just such a spark was I at two and twenty,
Set clothes and fashion by. He thinks to try
If I can know him now. But there I'll fit him.
With me sir is your business?

I presume
You do not know me, sir.

As well as he that got him.
Pray Gentlemen keep your countenances. Not know you sir?
'Tis like I may have known you here to fore,
But cannot readily collect; perhaps
You are much changed by Travel, Time, and Bravery,
Since I last saw you. There he may find.
I partly guess, but will not know him yet.
Good Geutlemen say nothing.

What ails he troe.

He knows me, I fear, too soon. If now my plot fail, and he have a
Counterplot upon me. I am laid up.

Do you not know me yet sir.

Know you, or know you not sir, what's your business.

You sometimes had a son sir.

Now he comes to me.
I had sir. But I hear he's slain in France.
And farewell he. Mark how I handle him.
And what sir of my fonne?

He's dead you say.

I mufe the Knave asks me not blessing though.

But to supply his loss you have a daughter
That may endear a son, sir, to your comfort.

Whither now flies he trow! Sir, do you know her.
Or where to find her?

First upon my knees
Let me implore your pardon.

Now he comes home: And I can hold no longer.
My blessing boy, thou meanest. Take it, and welcome
To a glad father. Rise, and let my tears,
If joy confirm thy welcome.

I may not rise yet sir.

No? why? what hast thou done? where's young Lafoy?
My true friends son here? whom I now must lock
Up in these arms, amidst a thousand welcomes.
Where's the young man?

I know not who you mean sir.

Distract me not.

I fear you are destraught.
I know not him. How should he know my son.

Let me look nearer.

Sir, I am your Prentice.

Whow -- whow, whow, who -- my Thiese and Runaway.

Prav sir afford me hearing.

Sir, your cause
Requires a Judges hearing.

I have put me
Into your hands, and not without much hope,
To gain your pardon, and your daughters love.

'Tis roundly spoken. Gentlemen, I'll tell you.
This gallant youth, has gallanted away
A thousand pound of mine.

For your advantage sir: For
By this way
Of Gallantry, as you call it, I have travelled
Through the Resorts and Haunts public and private
Of all the Gallants in the Town. In brief
I have found your daughter, where she had been lost
For evet in your brother Strigoods hands.

Can bring me thither?

Is my daughter with her?

Madam Gabriella, the French Damsel's there.
And others, men and women, whom you'll know when you come there.

Good sir, lets hasten thither.

You'll aid me, sirs?

Yes, with our lives and fortune.

Be fearless Lady, and upon my life,
Honour, and faith; you are secure from danger.

Sir, I have put me in your hands you see
So liberally that I may fear to suffer,
If not a censure, yet a supposition
Of too much easiness, in being led
So suddenly so far towards your desire.
But my opinion of your nobleness
Joined with your Protestation, pleads my pardon
At least it may, the wretchedness considered,
To which I was enthralled.

It is not more my love
Unto your virtue, and your fair endowments.
Then pity in me labours your release.
Nor is it rather to enrich my self.
Then to save you from so immense a danger,
As you had fallen into by yielding under
Your Uncles weakness in so fond a match.

Bless me from being fool-clog'd.

Now you are free.
If you can think your self so, and but yield
Unto my present Counsel.

Do so Lady
Before you are mist within. Here is the Closet,
And here's the Key in your own hands, And presently I'll fetch a Priest.

You see
I still deal fairlie w'ye; and give you power
To keep guard on your self.

And yet I yield
My self your prisoner.

In: some body comes.
She will be yours. And let me tell you, sir,
I wish you as much joy with her, as I
Have with my Cock.

You have befriended me
In this good enterprise: And one good turn
Requires another. And now for that I told you,
Touching your wife, your Cock you so rejoice in.

Alas. alas, good Gentlemen, you would fain
Have me be jealous. Honi soit, you're short.

Stand by and observe.

Do you begin to boggle,
And when I send for twenty pieces, do you
Send me but ten?

What's that?

Nay mark.

I pray,
What have I had in all by your account.

At several times, you have had fifty pounds of my poor husbands money.

What's that to the free pleasure of my body
Which must afford you sweet and lusty payment?
You froward Monkey. But perhaps you have got
Some new-found Horn-maker, that you may think,
Deserves your husbands money better, for
Doing his Journey-work, one of the Monsieurs,
Or both perhaps in the house here under's Antlers,
It must be so, why else of all the town,
Must I be one of the last that must take notice
Of your new College here, your brazen face College
Of feats and fine fagaries? do you grow weary of me?

Do you grow wild? speak lower, do you mean to undo me?

Will the other fifty pound undo thee, I have lost
All that I had within among your Monsieurs.
And you must yield supply, or lose a friend
Of me.

What a way would so much money have gone
In betts at the ducking pond?

Will no less serve your turn then fifty?

No less. All makes (you know) but a just hundred.
And there I'll stick; and stick close to thee too,
Else all flies open. What care I who knows
Your credits breach, when you respect not mine.

'Tis too well known already; All^s too open.
My house, my purse, my wife, and all's too open.

O me, undone.

Was ever loving husband
So much abused?

Enquire among your neighbours.

Be patient man.

O thou close whore.

Take heed, sir, what you say.
Even now you said she was too open, sir.
You're in two tales already.

I fear he's mad
Or jealous, which is worse.

Pish, Honi soit.
He jealous, he defies it.

Do you deride me?
Sir, you can witness with me, he confessed
Receipt of fifty pounds my wife has lent him,
(False woman that she is) for Horn-making,
Job Journey-work.

You are deceived.

I know.
(At least I think) I am deceived in both.
My money and thy honesty, but the Laws
In both shall do me right, or all shall fly for it.
I'll instantly to council.

Hear me first.

By all means hear her first. Pray grant her that.

I dare not look on her, lest I be tempted
To yield unto my shame and my undoing.

Will you not hear your Cock, your Nansie,
Nanny Cock.

Time was you would not have denied me that.

Nor any thing, if my Cock had but stood upon it.
Such was my love, but now,

But now you're jealous.

Have I not cause?

Here's the other fifty pieces, take them sir.
They are full weight, and truly told.

Brave wench.

If you will law, sir, you shall law for something.

What dost thou mean?

I hope she'll humble him so,
That he shall keep our chamber-door for us,
While we get boys for him. A dainty Rogue,
She tempts me strongly now. Would she would call me
About it presently.

That money sir
May serve to countenance you among the Gamesters
Within, that blew you up. The Lady widow
May think the better of your credit too,
Being so good in the house.

I'll straight amongst 'em.

Council me not sir. All my joys are gone.
I cannot think now what a ducking pond
Can be good for, except to d^own me in it.

Alas, poor man, I was in this too busy.

Stay, you shall promise me before my husband,
That you will never more attempt my chastity.

That bargaine's yet to make. Though before him
I may say much, I will not stand to that
For all the wealth he has.

You shall protest
Then, fairly, as you are a Gentleman
You never have enjoyed me.

I like that.

No, no, I cannot safely, for in that
I shall surrender up my interest
In's house; and he may warn me out on it. No,
Take heed of that. 'Tis not his the other hundred
Shall make me slip that hold.

I am lost again.

What a bold thief is this! Pray hear me, sir.
You may remember that I asked you once
What Countryman you were.

Yes, when you first cast your good liking on me, and I told you.

Of the Isle of Wight: And what of that?

And you
Call Captain Hardyman, their father-in-law.

You wrong me basely, to say I call him any thing; for he gives me nothing.


You wrong him basely. Look you, Can you read.

I had done ill to venture (as I have done)
On Salisbury plain else. Hah, what's here
That daughter, I sent you order to receive for me an hundred pounds. If you
find that your brother the Spendthrift Val. Askal, (Zookes that I) be in any
want, furnish him according to your own discretion.

I am Val. Askal, where's the money? My hundred
pound, have you't.

It seems a Sister of yours had it.
Have you a sister?

He had a daughter by my mother, but
He plac^d her out a child, I know not where
Where's that young whore trow? Hannah I think
her name was. Hang me if (...) know directly.

My wives name's Hannah, sir.

I am that sister, brother, but no whore.

Now Val. your brags to make men think you lay with her.

You have your hundred pound sir. Look you, husband.
This is my fathers letter which you wrote on.
That which you dared the devil and Clerks to counterfeit, read your own hand.

Honi soit qui mali pens.

I must admire this woman.

Dost think I did not know thee.

No sir, nor would I that you should,
Till I had foiled you in your course,
And had my will to make my husband jealous.

My Cock, my Cock again, my Nanny cock,
Cock-all my Cock-a-hoop, I am overjoyed,
See, see thy father too.

This is the woman.
To whom I paid your money.

'Tis my daughter --.
My blessing on you. -- What are you here too.

And ask you blessing too. Your hundred pound Has bound me to it. Heaven bless
you, Here's half one still, yes, and the better half, for tother's spent.

O you're a great good husband.

I would be one. And here's a good rich widow
Now in the house, your countenance may help me,
My Sister and my Brother both can tell you,
How orderly and civilly I live.

O wag.

'Tis like sir, I shall prove your Furtherer.
What is she?

That Merchants Sister, and a Lady sir.
I would not have him hear.

Well talk aside then.

In that I'm partly satisfied.

I love you sir,
And waited on your wife but as your Sp^e,
For fear he might have led her to more folly.

But saw you not two such Damsels here?

Here are
Some in the house that would not be seen by us.

Because they thought you'd know them.

And if that
Old fellow be your brother Strigood, tis most strange

You know not him here do you?

No not I.

'Tis my man Cash.

Most wonderful.

We shall know more anon.

Pray haste sir, to discovery: I would f^ine
Once see my daughter.

I would see a little
The fashions of the house first.

Pray obscure
Your selves in that by room there, where you may
See and hear all that passes, nor can any
Pass out of the house without your notice.
The Gentlemen and I will mix again
With the Society, if they please.

Agreed.
Within Strigood. Where are you Gent'emen?

Come away Val.

Is not that the Hell-hounds voice?

Yes, 'tis your brother.

Good Captain go with us upon discovery.

I'll seat you to see all, and be unseen.

Do so good Cock. Do so now sir, I'll fetch the Priest.

O Gentlemen, you have lost such sport, the
Lady
And Merchants wife have been by the ears.

Could not
The old Knight part them?

He has done his best,
And almost lost his eyes in the adventure
Betwixt the Furies tallons*

But are they friends again?

And deep in complement.
Our school affords no such in act or language.

Sister, Indeed I am too much your trouble.

Pray Madam let me serve you truly truly.
I'll be your servant for a year and a day

Indeed, indeed you wrong your self, I am yours.

I am your servants servant, and will serve
Under your Ladyships Cook to do you service.

Indeed you may not.

If I may not be
Accepted for your household servant, let me
Become your Chare-woman* in any office
From Cupboard to (lose-stool, I can do all
To do your Ladyship service.

This now savours of Complement indeed.

In sooth, 'tis sooth, forsooth the tale I tell you.

Well acted mother.

Y' are too obsequious
Good gentle Sister.

I am short of good.
Gentle I grant I am, for I bite no body,
Command me then sweet Madam.

And very well acted Nant.

O you shall pardon me*

I am no Pope, for your sake would I were.

Your courtesy o'recomes me.

O not so.
I wish it could forsooth, would it were better for you.

Exceeding well acted o'both sides.
Mother and Aunt f'sooth, Amardla you have done it
Better then the two School-Mystresses to d^y
Could do their Whatshicomes, their Complements
I think you call them. But I have lost my Mistress
To complement withal. Mrs. Bli^he Tripshort
Has out-strip't me, Amardla that she has.

Where's he^ wise Uncle should have looked to her.

He's crying all about the house for her,
But cannot find her. How shall I have her now?

Thou shalt not have her boy, she's nought.

Then he's
Nought too. You sha'nt have him.

Nor will, I fear not.

Think of the Gentleman, mother that out-fac'd
The Frenchman for me. I would you had a thousand such in France now.

God-a-mercy boy.

Peace, hear a little more.

Sir; come away.

I have found a careless Curate, that has nothing but a bare Coat too loose
shall chopt't up presently. And give him but a piece, he'll fear no Cannon.


I am bound to thee for ever.

Whither goes he?

No matter, let him go t'untrusse perhaps.

I say she is in the house.

She's gone, she's gone.

She's flown out of a window, or chimney-top then.
I'm sure I wrtch't the door with epen eyes
E're since you entered, as my Lady charged me,
Lest her child might slip out to play i the street.

And I am here you see. He cannot see
He has no more eyes then a sucking pig,
And yet he weeps like a roasted one.

I am abused,
And r^nder me my Niece,
You have stolen her for your son.

My son defies her,
As I do you, old whining withered fellow,
That has no moisture in him but for tears.

That is my Cue. A young well governed man
Were fitter, Madam.

Where have you been servant?

I speak to my Lady.

My Lady, I think you said.
Are you so stout sir* hah?

I rather think he plays the cunning hypocrite
With his false tears, and packed her hence himself

My Lady minds you not, and I can learn
To give you a broad side too.

Madam, that cannot be, for I have seen
All that went out, or came into the house*
Since you. Here came a Church man in ere while.

A Churchman! then I fear she's clbsely married unto her wo and mine.

Perhaps to me.
Behind my back you said she would do so.
And before him came in your brother Matchil.

My brother, who her husband?

Yes, with others.

My husband, I think you ^aid What a foul house these washing days make?

Nay, 'tis no Jest Now ^dies let me tell you,
And sad Sir Swithin; pray lend all your ears.

Cash, we are betray^ Cash if we be not nimble.
I smell a Fox. Hy thee up quickly Cash,
And hurry down the wenches We'll make bold with
My Ladies Coach to hurry us away.

But not too fast, Go sir, fetch down the wenches.
Thou shameless Reprobate. Doest thou hang thy head now?
I'll take a course to hang the rest o'thee.
Your Ladyships well met at the new school.
So is your Chare-woman. Have you profited
By the devils doctrine here? you weep sin Swithin
For the iniquity of the times.

You mean
His Niece, pray Uncle did you meet her,
She's gone away too, after my Cousin Joyce,
And the French maid, I think, she is here again.
Amardla, wipe your eyes, and look Sir Swithin,
The the other honest Gentleman has found her.
And let him take her for his pains for me.

I thank your love. But sir, 'tis your consent
We only seek.

Sir Swithin, let 'em have it,

This is the Gentleman I would have spoke for:
In birth, in means, in person every way
Deserving her. Take him upon my word.

And Madam, since you stick but upon Joyncture,
Having heard lately well of his husbandry.

Thank a good sister, sir.

I will secure you
Three hundred pounds a year, your brother knows me.

With make good his word. Agree by your selves.

Upon these terms, 'tis like we shall agree.
Sir Swithin are you pleased.

Pleased or displeased.
It seems they are married.

Yes, I assure you,
I saw their hands joined, and I heard them both
Answer the Priest.

I will no longer whine.
Heaven give you joy, As you're your own, y' are mine.

There are more weddings in the house, your daughters,
Are linck't by this time to the two young Frenchmen.

His daughters? ours I fear? what French? where are they?

Here sir, undone I fear.

What are you married.

Jun: Sir, she is mine, I must and will maintain it.

Jun. And she is mine.

This is your son. And this
Is mine.

This is your daughter. And this mine. Each married to her brother.

Jun. Mon Pere Je desire vestre Benediction Jour pour moy ma fennue.

You are lost children all, was ever thread
By fate so crossly sp^n, so crossly wed?

I know not how to Bless you, or to look
On your incestuous eyes.

Jun. What is dat Incest,
We have commit noting, we have no time,
Since we were marry for so much as kiss,
Begar no point so much as but one kiss.

Be not dismayed. These marriages are none.
The error of the persons nullifies
The verbal ceremony; and 'tis well
They past not unto further rites: I'll find
A lawful way to clear all this. And then
As you and they consent, they shall exchange
And marry in due order.

Jun. Sir I tanck you.
You'ave speak very well. And we shall make.
De exshange presently. A new exchange,
De new Exshange indeed, for de husbands
To shange the wives before they can be weary.
Prenez mon frere, la voici la' un pour lautre.
Dere, is one for anoder:

Is each party
Agreed, and so content?

J. Gab. We are.

And we.

We we, I ensuis tresbien contult.

Provided that we have our fathers leaves and councels.

Can you seek fathers leaves or councels now,
That have run from them in your disobedience,
Into the snares of hell: too far I fear
To be releast. O hell-bred Villain.

Your brother of one side.

Lend but a patient care.
And by my hopes of your desired pardon
I'll quit you of your fear. 'Tis true, my duty
At my Arrival should have winged me to you.
But hearing of your late, ill talked on marriage.

O that root of mischief,
And of my Sisters flight as ^oth to appear to you,
As to presume a welcome; I was curious
First to observe the Town, and taste the news;
When more by Providence then accident,
Here we made choice of lodging, saw and liked
The practices of the Society,
Until this wicked man; (who still presumes
To call you brother,) finding us youthful strangers,
And (as he might suppose) wanton --

He made
A bargain with you for their Maiden heads.

told me that, and how that hellish purpose
Was virtuously declined.

O counterfeit Cash.

But must you therefore, knowing whose sons you were.
Marry you knew not whom.

Pardon me, sir.
Our loves were noble, and by due enquiry,
Fetched from each others faithful breast, the knowledge
Of each other.

What! and marry then
Each his own Sister? Riddle me not to death.

Sir, I have done. And now that I have said
The worst that might have happened by his practice,
To make his shame or his repentance greater,
Who only was my aim. We are not married,
None of us all are married one to other.

No, I assure you sir. Howere I li'd
At their request, (small matter for a friend)
I saw all the hurt the Priest did here to day.
That was upon them two there.

Thank you sir.

You shall be then: And so take hands in earnest.
Is't not a double Match Lafoy?

Without
All manner of condition I consent.

I am full of joy.

O can you pardon me sir.

Good boy, good boy. I know not how a City
Could stand without such Prentices. And hope
This wants few such. But what can thou now say
Brother, of one side for thy felfe. Speak quickly*
While the good humour holds me to be friends
With all the world: yet yonder's one lies heavy
Athwart my stomach.

You're full of joy you say.
And I say had it been within my power,
To have broke your heart, I had don't. Therefore in me
Be comforted and love me; for I find
I have no power to hurt you, and will therefore
Attempt no further.

Brotherly spoke in troth.
And worthily worth an hundred mark a month,
Shall have it.

Know then into the bargain, that
I forged the letter that suggeited to you
My Nephews death, in hope of means that way.

Honestly said agaiu. Now what say you?

I say that I am humbled on my knees.
I beg your pardon.

All's too well me thinks.
But hark, before you break up school, lets have
Ove frisk, one fling now, one cariering dance,
And then pack up.

Agreed, Agreed, Agreed.

Play then Les tous ensembles.

That's the French name on it, Uncle, 'tis in Dutch
called All-to-mall; and I call it in English.
Omnium Gatherum, 'tis the daintiest dance.
We had it here to day: I and my mother,
My Aunt and all can dance in it, as well as the best.
With every one in their own footing. Now observe.

You have done well. Now pray lets break up school.

But yet not break up house. My son and daughter.
Have given me power to call their Supper mine.
To which I'll give you welcome, Ale and Wine.


