'TWould wrong our Author to bespeak your Ears;
Your Persons he adores, but Judgement fears:
For where you please but to dislike, he shall
Be Atheist thought, that worships not his Fall.
Next to not marking, 'tis his hope that you
Who can so ably judge, can pardon too.
His Conversation will not yet supply
Follies enough to make a Comedy;
He cannot write by the Poll; nor Act we here
Scenes, which perhaps you should see lived elsewhere;
No guilty line traduceth any; all
We now present is but conjectural;
'Tis a mere guess: Those then will be too blame,
Who make that Person, which he meant but Name.
That web of Manners which the Stage requires,
That mass of Humours which Poetique Fires
Take in, and boyle, and purge, and try, and then
With sublimated follies cheat those men
That first did vent them, are not yet his Art,
But as drowned Islands, or the World's fifth Part
Lye undiscovered; and he only knows
Enough to make himself ridiculous.
Think then, if here you find nought can delight,
He hath not yet seen Vice enough to Write.

WE're made my Boys, we're made; me thinks I am
Growing into a thing that will be worshipped.

I shall sleep one day in my Chain, and Scarlet
At Spittle-Sermon.

Were not my wit such
I'd put out monies of being Mayor.
But O this brain of mine! that's it that will
Bar me the City Honour.

We're cried up
Of the sudden for the sole Tutors of the Age.

Esteemed discreet, sage, trainers up of youth.

Our house becomes a place of Visit now.

In my poor judgement 'tis as good my Lady
Should venture to commit her eldest son
To us, as to the Inns of Court: he will be
Undone here only with less Ceremony.

Speak for our credit my brave man of War.
What Meane-well, why so lumpish?

Pray y' be quiet.

Thou look as if thou plott'st the calling in
Of the Declaration, or the Abolishing
Of the Common-Prayers; cheer up; say something for us.

Pray vex me not.

These foolish puling sighs
Are good for nothing, but to endanger Buttons.
Take heart of grace man.

Fie you're troublesome.

Nay fare you well then Sir.

My Father still
Runs in my mind, meets all my thoughts, and doth
Mingle himself in all my Cogitations,
Thus to see eager villains drag along
Him, unto whom they crouch'd; to see him hauled,
That ne'er knew what compulsion was, but when
His virtues did incite him to good deeds,
And keep my sword dry -- O unequal Nature!
Why was I made so patient as to view,
And not so strong as to redeem? why should I
Dare to behold, and yet not dare to rescue?
Had I been destitute of weapons, yet
Armed with the only name of Son, I might
Have outdone wonder. Naked Piety
Dares more than Fury well-appointed* Blood
Being never better sacrificed, than when
It flows to him that gave it. But alas,
The envy of my Fortune did allow
That only, which she could not take away,
Compassion; that which was not in those savage,
And knowing Beasts; those Engines of the Law,
The even kill as uncontrolled, as that.
How do I grieve, when I consider from
What hands he suffered! hands that do excuse
The indulgent Prison; shackles being here
A kind of Rescue. Young man tis not well
To see thy aged Father thus confined,
Good, good old man; alas thou 'rt dead to me,
Dead to the world, and only living to
That which is more than death, thy misery:
The Grave could be a comfort: And shall I --
O would this Soul of mine -- But Death's the wish
Of him that fears; he's lazy that would dye.
I'll live and see that thing of wealth, that worm
Bred out of splendid muck; that Citizen
Like his own sullied Wares thrown by into
Some unregarded corner, and my Piety
Shall be as famous as his Avarice;
His Son whom we have in our Tuition
Shall be the Subject of my good Revenge;
I'll count my self no child, till I have done
Something that's worth that name: my Brain shall be
Busy in his undoing; and I will
Plot ruin with Religion; his disgrace
Shall be my Zeals contrivement; and when this
Shall stile me Son again, I hope 'twill be
Counted not wrong, but Duty. When that time
Shall give my Actions growth, I will cast off
This brood of Vipers: and will show that I
Do hate the Poison, which I meanet' apply.

NOw help good Heaven! 'tis such an uncouth thing
To be a widow out of Term-time -- I
Do feel such aguish Qualms, and dumps and fits,
And shakings still an end -- I lately was
A wife I do confess, but yet I had
No husband: he (alas) was dead to me
Even when he lived unto the world; I was
A widow whiles he breathed; his death did only
Make others know so much. But yet --

How now?
So melancholy sweet?

How could I choose
Being thou were not here? the time is come,
Thou'lt be as good unto me as thy word?

Nay, hang me if I ever recant. You'll take me
Both wind and limb at the venture, will you not?

Ay good Chuck, every inch of thee, she were
No true woman that would not.

I must tell you
One thing, and yet I'm loath.

I am thy Rib,
Thou must keep nothing from thy Rib, good Chuck;
Thy yoak-fellow must know all thy secrets.

Why then I'll tell you sweet.

Heaven defend!

'Tis true.

Now God forbid; and would you offer
To undo a widdow-woman so? I had
As leive the old Vintner were alive again.

I was not born with it I confess; but lying
In Turkey for Intelligence, the great Turk,
Somewhat suspicious of me, lest I might
Entice some of the Seraglio, did command
I should be forthwith cut.

A heathen deed
It was: none but an Infidel could have
The heart to do it.

Now you know the worst
That you must trust to, come lets to the Church.

Good Mr Hear-say, Nature ne'er intended
One woman should be joined to another.
The holy blessing of all wedlock was
T'encrease and multiply, as Mr Christopher
Did well observe last Sabbath. I'll not do
Any thing against Gods word. I do release you
Of all your promises, and that it may not
Be said you lost by loving me, take this.
Perhaps I may get you a contribution
Of the women of the Parish, as I did
The broken-bellied-man the other day.

Seeing you needs will cast me off* let me
Entreat this one thing of you that you would not
Make me your Table-talk, at the next Gossiping.

Indeed I pity thee poor thing, or rather
I pity thee poor nothing. Good Lieutenant
How dost thou? Thou art mindful of thy Promise?

What else my jolly wench?

Good sweet Lieutenant
Give me but leave to ask one Question of you,
Art thou entire and sound in all thy limbs?

To tell the very truth, ere now I've had
A spice of the Pox, or so; but now I am sound
As any Bell (Hem) wast not shrill my Girl, ha?

I do not ask thee about these diseases;
My question is whether thou'st all thy parts.

Faith I have lost a joint or two; as none
Of our Profession come off whole, unless
The General, and some sneaks.

My meaning is
Whether that something is not wanting that
Should write thee husband.

Ne'er fear that my wench;
Dost think the King would send me to the wars
Without I had my weapons? Eunuchs are not
Men of employment in these days; his Majesty
Hath newly put me on a piece of service;
And if I e're come off (which I do fear
I shall not, the danger is so great) brave Widow
We'll to it and get Commanders.

If you can
Leave me, I can leave you: there are other men
That won't refuse a Fortune when 'tis proffered.

Well, I must to his Majesty, think on it;
So fare thee well. Thine to his very Death,
That is a Month or two perhaps, D. Slicer.

Kind Master Shape, you are exceeding welcome.
Here hath bin Mr Hearsay, and Lieutenant

You may guess at their business, but
I hope you think me faithful.

I believe
The memory of your Husbands ashes, which
Scarce yet are cold, extinguishes all flames
That tend to kindling any Love-fire: 'Tis
A virtue in you, which I must admire
That only you amongst so many should
Be the sole Turtle of the Age.

I do
Bear him in memory I confess; but when
I do remember what your promise was
When he lay sick, it doth take something from
The bitterness of Sorrow. Woman was
Not made to be alone still.

Tender things
At seventeen may use that plea; but you
Are now arrived at Matron: these young sparks
Are raked up, I presume, in sager Embers.

Nay don't abuse her that must be your Wife;
You might have pity, not come with your nicknames,
And call me Turtle: have I deserved this?

If that you once hold merits, I have done;
I'm glad I know what's your Religion.

What's my Religion? 'tis well known there hath
Been no Religion in my house ever since
My Husband died.

How now sweet Shape? so close
Alone w' your Widow.

Sirs dare you believe it?
This thing, whose prayer it hath been these ten
Years, that she may obtain the second tooth,
And the third hair, now dotes on me, on me
That do refuse all that are past sixteen.

Why faith this was her suit to me just now.

I had the first on it then. A Coachman, or
A Groom were fitter far for her.

You do
Honour her too much to think she deserves
A thing that can lust moderately, give her
The sorrel Stallion in my Lords long stable.

Or the same coloured Brother, which is worse.

Why Gentlemen --

Foh, foh! she hath let fly.

Do y' think I have no more manners than so?

Nay faith I can excuse her for that: But
I must confess she spoke, which is all one.

Her breath would rout an Army, sooner than
That of a Cannon.

It would lay a Devil
Sooner than all Trithemius charms.

Hark how
It blusters in her nostrils like a wind
In a foul Chimney.

Out you base companions,
You stinking Swabbers.

For her gate, that's such,
As if her nose did strive t'outrun her heels.

She's just six yards behind, when that appears;
It saves an Usher Madam.

You are all
Most foul-mouth'd knaves to use a woman thus.

Your playster'd face doth drop against moist weather.

Fie, how you writh it; now it looks just like
A ruffled boot.

Or an oyld paper Lanthorn.

Her nose the candle in the midst of it.

How bright it flames? Put out your nose good Lady
Your burn day-light.

Come up you lousy Raskals.

Not upon you for a Kingdom good Joane,
The great Turk, Joane -- the great Turk.

Kiss him Chuck,
Kiss him Chuck opened mouthed and be revenged.

Hang you base cheating Varlet.

Don't you see
December in her face?

Sure the Surveyer
Of the highways will have to do with her
For not keeping her countenance passable.

There lies a hoar frost on her head, and yet
A constant thaw in her nose.

She's like a piece
Of fire-wood, dropping at one end, and yet
Burning in the midst.

O that endeavouring face!
When will your costivenesse have done good Madam?

Do you not hear her Guts already squeak
Like Kitstrings?

They must come to that within
This two or three years; by that time she'll be
True perfect Cat: They practise before hand.

I can endure no longer, though I should
Throw off my womanhood.

No need, that's done
Already: nothing left thee, that may stile thee
Woman but Lust, and Tongue; no flesh but what
The vices of the sex exact, to keep them
In heart.

Thou art so lean and out of case
That 'twere absurd to call thee Devil incarnate.

You are a dry Devil troubled with the lust
Of that thou hast not, flesh.

Rogue, Rascal, Villain,
I'll show your cheating tricks I faith: all shall
Be now laid open. Have I suffered you
Thus long in my house, and ne'er demanded yet
One penny rent, for this? I'll have it all,
By this good blessed light I will.

You may
If that you please undo your self, you may.
I will not strive to hinder you. There is
Something contriving for you, which may be
Perhaps yet brought about, a Match or so;
A proper fellow; 'tis a trifle, that;
A thing you care not for I know. Have I
Plotted to take you off from these to match you
In better sort, and am used thus? As for
The Rent you ask, here take it, take your money;
Fill, choke your gaping throat. But if as yet
You are not deaf to counsel, let me tell you
It had been better that you ne'er had took
It may stop some proceedings.

Mr Hearsay,
You know you may have even my heart out of
My belly (as they say) if you'll but take
The pains to reach it out; I am sometimes
Peevish I do confess; here take your money.

No.

Good Sir.

No, keep it and hoard it up.
My purse is no safe place for it.

Let me
Request you that you would be pleased to take it.

Alas 'twould only trouble me; I can
As willingly go light, as be your Treasurer.

Good Mr Slicer speak to him to take it,
Sweet Mr Shape, join with him.

Nay, be once
O'rerul'd by a woman.

Come, come, you shall take it.

Nay Faith you shall; here put it up good Sir.

Upon entreaty I'm content for once;
But make no Custom of't; you do presume
Upon my easy foolishness; 'tis that
Makes you so bold: were it another man
He ne'er would have to do with you. But mark me,
If ever I find you in this mood again,
I'll dash your hopes of Marriage for ever.

GOd save you Tutors both.

Fie Andrew, fie;
What kiss your hand? you smell, not complement.

Besides, you come too near when you salute.
Your breath may be discovered; and you give
Advantage unto him you thus accoast
To shake you by the hand, which often doth
Endanger the whole arm. Your Gallant's like
The Crystal glass, brittle; rude handling cracks him.
To be saluted so were to be wounded.
His parts would fall asunder like unto
Spilt Quicksilver; an Ear, an Eye, a Nose
Would drop like Summer fruit from shaken Trees.

For the same reason I'd not have you dance.
Some Courtiers, I confess, do use it; but
They are the sounder sort, those foolish ones
That have a care of health, which you shall not
If you'll be ruled by me. The hazard's great,
'Tis an adventure, an exploit, a piece
Of service for a Gentleman to caper.

A Gallant's like a Leg of Mutton, boiled
By a Spanish Cooke; take him but by the one End
And shake him, all the flesh falls from the bones,
And leaves them bare immediately.

I would
Not be a leg of Mutton here.

I saw
In France a Monsieur, only in the Cutting
Of one cross Caper, Rise a man, and come
Down, to the amazement of the standers by,
A true extemporary Skeleton;
And was strait read on.

Sure this man,
Good Tutor, was quite rotten.

See how you
Betray your breeding now! quite rotten! 'tis
Rottenness perhaps in Footmen, or in Yeomen,
'Tis tenderness in Gentlemen; They are
A little over-boyl'd, or so.

He is
A Churl, a Hind, that's wholesome; some raw thing
That ne'er was at London: One in whom
The Clown is too predominant. Refined
People feel Naples in their bodies; and
An Ach in the bones at Sixteen, passes now
For high dissent; it argues a great birth.
Low bloods are never worthy such infection.

Ay, but my Father bid me I should live honest,
And say my Prayers, that he did.

If that
You cannot sleep at any time, we do
Allow you to begin your Prayers, that so
A slumber may seize on you.

But as for
Your living honost, 'twere to take away
A trade in the Common-wealth; the Surgeons
Benefit would go down: you may go on
In foolish chastity, eat only Salads,
Walk an unskilful thing, and be to learn
Something the first night of your wife; but that's
To marry out of fashion.

Here's no Proofs,
No Doctrines, nor no Uses. Tutor I
Would fain learn some Religion.

Religion?
Yes to become a Martyr, and be pictured
With a long Labell out of your mouth, like those
In Foxes Book; just like a Juggler drawing
Ribbon out of his throat.

I must be gone.

Obedience is the first step unto science;
Stay and be wise.

Indeed I dare not stay
The Glitter works you sent to purge gross humours.

Being you will not take your Lecture out
Good morrow to y' good Andrew. This soft fool
Must swim in's Fathers wealth. It is a curse
That Fortune justly makes the City's lot,
The young Fool spends what e're the old Knave got.

SIr let me tell you this is not the least
Of things wherein your wisdom shows it self,
In that you've placed your Son in this good sort.

Nay nay, let me alone to give him breeding;
I did not hold the University*
Fit for the training up of such a Spirit.

The University? 't had been the only way
To have took him off his courage, and his mettle,
He had returned as Slaves do from the Galleys,
A naked shorn thing with a thin dockt top,
Learnedly cut into a Logic mode.

A private Oath given him at first Entrance
Had sworn him Pilgrim unto Conventicles;
Engaged him to the hate of all, but what
Pleases the stubborn froward Elect.

But we
Following another Model do allow
Freedom and courage, cherish and maintain
High noble thoughts --

Set nature free, and are
Chemists of manners --

Do instruct of States --

And Wars: there's one, look on him --

Do but view
That searching Head --

The very soul of Battle,
True steel.

H' hath been an Agent some few years
(A score or so) for Princes, and as yet
Doth not write forty.

I confess I can
Discover the Entrails of a State perhaps,
Lay open a Kingdoms Paunches, show the bowels
And inwards of a Seigniory or two;
But for your deeds of Valour, there is one,
Although I speak it to his face, that can
Write a Geography by his own Conquests.
H' hath fought o'r Strabo, Ptolomy and Stafford;
Travelled as far in arms, as Lithgoe naked.
Born weapons whither Coriat durst not
Carry a shirt or shoes. Jack Mandevil
Ne'er sailed so far as he hath steered by Land;
Using his Colours both for mast and sail.

I'd thought h' had been Lieutenant.

That's all one.

I've worn some Leather out abroad; let out
A heathen Soul or two; fed this good sword
With the black blood of Pagan Christians;
Converted a few Infidels with it.
But let that pass. That man of peace there hath
Been trusted with Kings Breasts --

His name is heard
Like Thunder, and that mere word, Slicer, hath
Sufficed unto victory.

He's close,
Reserved, locked up. The secrets of the King
Of Tartary, of China, and some other
Counsels of moment have been so long kept
In's body without vent, that every morning
Before he covers them with some warm thing
Or other you may smell 'em very strongly;
Distinguish each of them by several scents --

A grove of Pikes are rushes to him, hail
More frights you, than a shower of Bullets him --

The Dutch come up like broken beer; the Irish
Savour of Usquebaugh; the Spanish they
Smell like unto perfume at first, but then
After a while end in a fatal steam --

One Drum's his Table, the other is his Music.
His Sword's his Knife, his Colours are his Napkins*
Carves nourishing Horse, as he is used to do
The hostile Paguim, or we venison: Eats
Gunpowder with his meat instead of Pepper,
Then drinks o'r all his Bandeleers, and fights --

Secrets are ranked and ordered in his belly,
Just like Tobacco leaves laid in a sweat.
Here lies a row of Indian secrets, then
Something of 's own on them; on that another
Of China Counsels, covered with a lidd
Of New-found-land discoveries; next, a bed
Of Russia Policies, on them a lay
Of Prester-Johnion whispers --

Slights a tempest;
Counts lightning but a giving fire, and thunder
The loud report when heaven hath discharged.
H' hath with his breath supplied a breach.
When he's once fixed no Engine can remove him.

'Twould be a Policy worth hatching, to
Have him dissected, if 'twere not too cruel.
All states would lye as open as his bowels.
Turkey in's bloody Liver; Italy
Be found in's reins; Spain busy in his Stomach;
Venice would float in's Bladder; Holland sail
Up and down all his veins; Bavaria lie
Close in some little gut, and Ragioni
Di Stato generally reek in all.

I see my Son's too happy; he is born
To be some man of Action, some Engine
For the overthrow of Kingdoms.

Troth he may
Divert the Torrent of the Turkish rule
Into some other Tract; damme up the stream
Of that vast headlong Monarchy, if that
He want not means to compass his intents.

The Turkish Monarchy's a thing too big
For him to manage; he may make perhaps
The Governor of some new little Island,
And there plant Faith and Zeal: But for the present
M'ambition's only to contrive a Match
Between Sir Thomas Bite-figg's only Daughter,
And (if I may so call him now) my Son;
'Twill raise his Fortunes somewhat.

We have got
One that will do more good with's tongue that way
Than that uxorious shower that came from Heaven,
But you must oil it first.

I understand you
Grease him i'th'fist you mean: there's just ten Pieces,
'Tis but an earnest: If he bring about,
I'll make those then a hundred.

Think it done.

OUr life methinks is but the same with others;
To cousin, and be cozened, makes the Age.
The Prey and Feeder are that Civil thing
That Sager heads call Body Politic.
Here is the only difference; others cheat
By statute, but we do it upon no grounds.
The fraud's the same in both, there only wants
Allowance to our way: the Common-wealth
Hath not declared her self as yet for us;
Wherefore our Policy must be our Charter.
Well managed Knav'ry is but one degree
Below plain Honesty.

Give me villainy
That's circumspect, and well advised, that doth
Colour at least for goodness. If the Cloak
And Mantle were pulled off from things, 'twould be
As hard to meet an honest Action as
A liberal Alderman, or a Court Nun.

Knowing then how we must direct our steps,
Let us chalk out our paths; you, Shape, know yours.

Where ever I light on Fortune, my Commission
Will hold to take her up: I'll ease my silken
Friends of that idle luggage, we call Money.

For my good toothless Countess, let us try
To win that old Emerit thing, that like
An Image in a German clock, doth move,
Not walk, I mean that rotten Antiquary.

Hee'i surely love her, because she looks like some
Old ruined piece, that was five Ages backward.

To the great Vestry wit, the Livery brain,
My Common-Councell Pate, that doth determine
A City business with his gloves on's head,
We must apply good hope of wealth and means.

That griping Knight Sir Thomas must be called
With the same lure: he knows to a crum how much
Loss is in twenty dozen of Bread, between
That which is broke by the hand, and that is cut.
Which way best keeps his Candles, bran or straw.
What tallow's lost in putting of 'm out
By spittle, what by foot, what by the puff,
What by the holding downwards, and what by
The extinguisher; which week will longest be
In lighting, which spend fastest; he must hear
Nothing but Moyties, and Lives, and Farms,
Copies, and Tenures* he is deaf to th'rest.

I'll speak the language of the wealthy to him.
My mouth shall swill with Bags, Revenues, Fees,
Estates, Reversions, Incomes, and assurance.
He's in the Gin already, for his Daughter
She'll be an easy purchase.

I do hope
We shall grow famous; have all sorts repair
As duly to us, as the barren Wives
Of aged Citizens do to St Antholins.
Come let us take our Quarters: we may come
To be some great Officers in time,
And with a reverend Magisterial frown,
Pass sentence on those faults that are our own.

'TIs destined, I'll be valiant, I am sure
I shall be beaten with more credit then,
Than now I do escape. Lieutenant hast
Bethought thy self as yet? hast any way
To make my Sword fetch blood?

You never yet
Did kill your man then?

No.

Nor get your Wench
With child I warrant?

O Sir.

You're not quite
Free of the Gentry till y'have marrd one man
And made another: when one fury hath
Cried quit with the other, and your Lust repaired
What Anger hath destroyed, the Titles yours,
Till then you do but stand for it.

Pox! who'd be
That vile scorned Name, that stuffs all Court-gate Bills?
Lieutenant thou may teach me valour yet.

Teach thee? I will inspire thee man. I'll make
Thy name become a terror, and to say
That Have-at-all is coming, shall make room
As when the Bears are in Procession.
Hark hither Franks --

That's good, but --

How think now?

Nay he will pay you large -- lie.

Pay, what else?

Make him believe the Citizen's his Guest.
The Citizen that he is his.

Concluded;
Would you fight fair or conquer by a spell?

I do not care for Witchcraft; I would have
My strength rely meerlie upon it self.

There is a way that I ne'er showed it yet,
But to one Spaniard, and 'twas wondrous happy.

Think me a second Spaniard worthy Sir.

Then listen. The design is by a dinner;
An easy way you'll say, I'll say a true;
Hunger may break stone walls, it ne'er hurts men.
Your cleanly feeder is your man of valour.
What makes the Peasant grovel in his muck,
Humbling his crooked soul, but that he eats
Bread just in colour like it? Courage ne'er
Vouchsafed to dwell a minute, where a sullen
Pair of brown loaves darkened the dirty Table;
Shadows of bread, not bread. You never knew
A solemn Son of Bagpudding and Pottage
Make a Commander; or a Tripe-eater
Become a Tyrant: he's the Kingdoms arm
That can feed large, and choicely.

If that be
The way, I'll eat my self into courage,
And will devour valour enough quickly.

'Tis not the casual eating of those meats,
That doth procure those Spirits, but the order,
And manner of the meal; the ranking of
The dishes, that does all; else he that hath
The greatest range would be the hardest man.
Those goodly Juments of the Guard would fight
(As they eat Beef) after six stone a day;
The Spit would nourish great Attempts: my Lord
Would lead a Troop, as well as now a Masque;
And force the Enemies sword with as much ease
As his Mistresses Bodkin: Gallants would
Owe valour to their Ordinaries, and fight
After a crown a meal.

I do conceive
The Art is all in all. If that you'll give
A bill of your directions, I'll account
My self obliged unto you for my safety.

Take it then thus. All must be Soldier-like;
No dish but must present Artillery.
Some military instrument in each.
Imprimis six or seven yards of Tripe
Displayed instead of the Ensign.

Why, you said,
Tripe-eaters ne'er made Tyrants.

Peace Sir, Learners
Must be attentive and believe. Do y' think
We'll eat this? 'tis but for formality;
Item a Collar of good large fat Brawn
Served for a Drum, waited upon by two
Fair long black Puddings lying by for drumsticks;
Item a well grown Lamprey for a Fife;
Next some good curious Marchpanes made into
The form of Trumpets: Then in order shall
Follow the Officers. The Captain first
Shall be presented in a warlike Cock,
Swimming in whitebroth* as he's wont in blood;
The Sergeant Major he may bustle in
The shape of some large Turkey; For my self,
Who am Lieutenant, I'm content there be
A Bustard only; let the Corporal
Come sweating in a Breast of Mutton, stuffed
With Pudding, or strut in some aged Carpe,
Either doth serve I think. As for Perdues
Some choice Sous'd-fish brought couchant in a dish
Among some fennel, or some other grass,
Shows how they lie in the field. The Soldier then
May be thus ranked. The common one Chicken,
Duck, Rabbit, Pigeon. For the more Gentile,
Snipe, Woodcock, Partridge, Pheasant, Quail will serve.

Bravely contrived.

That weapons be not wanting
We'll have a dozen of bones well charged with marrow
For Ordnance, Muskets, Petronels, Petarrs;
Twelve yards of Sausage by instead of Match;
And Caveari then prepared for wild-fire.

Rare Rogue! how I do love him now me thinks.

Next we'll have true fat, eatable old Pikes;
Then a fresh Turbot brought in for a Buckler,
With a long Spitchcock for the sword adjoyn'd;
We'll bring the ancient weapons into play.

Most rare by heaven.

Peaches, Apricots,
And Malecotoons, with other choiser Plums
Will serve for large sized Bullets; then a dish
Or two of Peas for small ones. I could now
Tell you of Pepper in the stead of Powder,
But that 'tis not in fashion amongst us Gallants;
If this might all stand upon Drum heads, 'twould
Work somewhat better.

Will it so? then we will have 'em
From every ward in the City.

No I'm loath
To put you to such charge: for once, a long
Table shall serve the turn; 'tis no great matter.
The main thing's still behind: we must have there
Some Fort to scale; a venison pastie doth it:
You may have other Pies instead of outworks;
Some Sconces would not be amiss, I think.
When this is all prepared, and when we see
The Table look like a pitched Battle, then
We'll give the word, Fall too, slash, kill, and spoil;
Destruction, rapine, violence, spare none.

Thou hast forgotten Wine, Lieutenant, wine.

Then to avoid the gross absurdity
Of a dry Battle, cause there must some blood
Be spilt (on the enemies side I mean) you may
Have there a Runlet of brisk Claret, and
As much of Aligant, the same quantity
Of Tent would not be wanting, 'tis a wine
Most like to blood. Some shall bleed fainter colours,
As Sack, and White wine. Some that have the itch
(As there are Taylors still in every Army)
Shall run with Rhenish, that hath Brimstone in it.
When this is done fight boldly; write your self
The tenth or 'leventh Worthy, which you please,
Your choice is free.

I'll be the gaming Worthy;
My word shall be Twice twelve; I think the dice
Ne'er mounted any upon horseback yet.

We'll bring your friends ours to this large dinner:
It works the better eaten before witness.
Beware you say 'tis yours: Confession is
One step to weakness, private Conscience is
A Theater to valour. Let's be close.
Old Credulous, and his Son, and Mr Caster
Shall all be there.

But then they will grow valiant
All at my charge.

Ne'er fear't; th'unknowing man
Eats only Flesh, the understanding Valour;
His ignorance in the mystery keeps him coward:
To him 'tis but a Meal; to you 'tis virtue.
It shall be kept here.

No fitter place; there is
An old rich Clutchfist Knight, Sir Thomas Bitefig,
Invite him too; perhaps I may have luck,
And break his Purse yet open for one hundred.
A Usurer is somewhat exorable
When he is full: He ne'er lends money empty.

Discreet, and wisely done; I was about
To have prompted it.

Stout Mr Haveatall
Lets be sworn Brothers.

Pox! thou fear I'll beat thee
After I've eaten. Dost thou think I'll offer't?
By my next meal I won't: nay I do love
My friends how ever: I do but think how I
Shall bastinado o'r the Ordinaries.
Armed with my sword, Battoone and foot I'll walk
To give each rank its due. No one shall escape,
But he I win off.

You shall have at least
Some twenty warrants served upon you straight;
The trunck-hose Justices will try all means
To bind you to the Peace, but that your strength
Shall not be bound by any.

Surgeons will
Pray for your health and happiness, you may
Bring 'em to be your Tributaries, if
You but deny to fight a while.

My teeth
Are on an edge till I do eat; now will
I cousin all men without opposition.
I feel my strength increase with very thought on it.
Sword, sword, thou shalt grow fat; and thou Baton
Hold out I prithee, when my labour's done,
I'll plant thee in the Tower-yard, and there
Watered with wine thou shalt revive, and spring
In spite of Nature with fresh succulent boughs,
Which shall supply the Commonwealth with Cudgels.
Thou I first meet after this meal I do
Pronounce unhappy shadow; happy yet
In that thou'lt fall by me. Some men I will
Speak into Carcass, Some I'll look to death,
Others I'll breath to dust, none shall hold back
This fatal Arm: The Templers shall not dare
T'attempt a rescue; no mild words shall bury
My splitted spitchcock'd --

Oliv'd, hasht --

Dri'd, powdered.

Roasted fury.

IF what I speak prove falss, then stigmatize me.

I nas not what you mean; Depardieux you
Snyb mine old years, Sans fail I wene you bin
A Jangler, and a Golierdis.

I swear
By these two Janus heads you had of us,
And your own too, as reverend as these,
There is one loves you that you think not on.

Had be, none pleasance is me ylaft,
This white top writes my much years, I wis
My fire yreken is in Ashen cold,
I can no whit of dalliance: If I kissen
These thick stark bristles of mine beard will pricken
Ylike the skin of Hownd-fish. Sikerly
What wends against the grains is lytherly.

Me thinks you're strong enough and very lusty,
Fit to get heirs; among your other pieces
Of age and time, let one young face be seen
May call you Father.

Wholesome counsel! but
The world is now full Tykel sykerly;
'Tis hard to find a Damosel unwenned;
They being all Coltish and full of Ragery,
And full of gergon as is a flecken Pie.
Who so with them makes that bond anon
Which men do clypen spousaile, or wedlock,
Saint Idiot is his Lord I wis.

This is
No tender and wanton thing, she is a stayed
And settled widow, one who'l be a Nurse
Unto you in your latter days.

A Norice
Some del ystept in age! so mote I gone
This goes aright, how highteth she say you?

Mrs Joane Potluck, Vintner Potluck's widow.

Joane Potluck Spinster. Lore me o thing mere
Alouten, what time began she brendle thus?

On Thursday morning last.

Y' blessed Thursday,
Ycliped so from Thor the Saxons God.
Ah benedicite I might soothly said,
Mine mouth hath itched all this livelong day
All night me met eke, that I was at Kirk;
My heart began quapp full oft. Dan Cupido
Sure sent thylke sweven to mine head.

You shall
Know more if you'll walk in.

Wend you before me,
Cembeth thy self, and pyketh now thy self;
Sleeketh thy self; make cheer much Digne good Robert:
I do arret thou shalt acquainted bin
With Nymphs and Fawny, and Hamadryades;
And yeke the sisterne nine Pierides
That were transmued into Birds, nemp'd Pies,
Metamorphosers, wat well what I mean.
Tis is as Jollie now as fish in Seine.

CAn I lie hid no where securely from
The throng, and press of men? must every place
Become a Theater, where I seek shelter?
And solitudes become markets, because I'm there?
Good Sir, I know your tricks: you would entrap;
This is your snare, not your request.

Take heed,
He's noised about for a deep searching head:
I'll pawn my life 'tis a trick.

Leave off these Gins,
You do not do it handsomely; you think
Y'have met with fools I warrant.

On my life
A spy, a mere informer.

As I hope
For fortunes, my intentions are most fair.

A Gamesters Oath: he hath some reservation.

Yet did I think you true --

By all that's good,
You do me wrong to think, that I'd wrong you.

When I lay Agent last in new Atlantis
I met with what you now desire, a strange
New way of winning, but yet very sure.
Were not the danger great I'd --

Do you think
I will betray my self, or you, whom I
Esteem above my self? I have as yet
One hundred left; some part of which --

Faith Sir,
These times require advice; if it should come
Unto the Councels ear once, he might be
Sent into other Kingdoms, to win up
Monies for the relief of the State, and so
Be as it were an honest kind of Exile.

If I do ever discover may I want
Money to pay my Ordinary, may I
At my last stake (when there is nothing else
To lose the game) throw Ames Ace thrice together.
I'll give you forty pound in hand --

I may
Show you the virtue of 't, though not the thing;
I love my Country very well. Your high
And low men are but trifles: your poyz'd Dye
That's ballasted with Quicksilver or Gold
Is gross to this --

Profer him more I say.

Here's fifty --

For the bristle Dye it is
Not worth that hand that guides it; toys fit only
For Clerks to win poor Costermongers ware with.

You do not come on well.

Here's threescore --

Then
Your hollowed thumb joined with your wriggled box,
The slur, and such like are not to be talked of;
They're open to the eye. For Cards you may
Without the help of any secret word,
Or a false hand, without the cut or shuffle,
Or the packed trick, have what you will your self;
There's none to contradict you.

If you please
But to instruct me here is fourscore pound.

Do y' think 'tis money I esteem? I can
Command each Term, by Art as much as will
Furnish a Navy. Had you but five pound
Left you in all the world, I'd undertake
Within one fortnight you should see five thousand.
Not that I covet any of your dross,
But that the power of this Art may be
More demonstrably evident, leave in
My hands all but some smaller sum to set,
Something to stake at first.

He will tell you all
If you but seem to trust him.

Here I'll lay
Down in your hands all but this little portion,
Which I reserve for a Foundation.

Being you're confident of me, and I
Presume your lips are sealed up to silence,
Take that, which I did never yet discover;
So help you Fortune, me Philosophie.
(I must entreat your absence Mr Shape.)
I do presume you know the strength and power
That lies in Phancie.

Strange things are done by it.

It works upon that which is not as yet.
The little Aethiop Infant had not been
Black in his Cradle, had he not been first
Black in the Mothers strong Imagination.
'Tis thought the hairy Child that's shown about
Came by the Mothers thinking on the Picture
Of Saint Iohn Baptist in his Camels Coat.
See we not Beasts conceive, as they do fancy
The present colours placed before their Eyes?
We owe pied Colts unto the varied horsecloth;
And the white Partridge to the neighbouring snow.
Fancy can save or kill; it hath clos' up
Wounds when the Balsam could not, and without
The aid of salves; to think hath been a cure.
For Witchcraft then, thats's all done by the force
Of mere Imagination. That which can
Alter the course of Nature, I presume
You'll grant shall bear more rule in petty hazards.

It must, it must, good Sir I pray go on.

Now the strong'st fancies still are found to dwell
In the most simple; they being easiest won
To the most firm belief, who understand not
Who 'tis they do believe. If they think 'twill
Be so, it will be so; they do command,
And check the course of Fortune; they may stop
Thunder, and make it stand, as if arrested,
In its mid journey: If that such a one
Shall think you'll win, you must win; 'tis a due
That nature pays those men in recompense
Of her deficiency, that what ever they think
Shall come to pass. But now the hardest will be
To find out one that's capable of thinking.

I know you can produce an Instrument
To work this your design by. Let me owe you
The whole and entire courtesy.

I've one
Committed to my custody but lately,
The powerfull'st that way, I ever found yet;
He will but think he shall be abused in such
A Company, and he's abused; he will
Imagine only that he shall be cheated,
And he is cheated: All still comes to pass.
He's but one pin above a Natural: But --

We'll purchase him; I'll take up for it; old Simon
Shall have my Farm outright now: what's a piece
Of dirty Earth to me? a clod? a turf?

Because I see your freer nature's such,
As doth deserve supplies, I'll do my best
To win him or a while into your service.

If I should strive to pay you thanks, I should
But undervalue this great courtesy.
Sir, give me leave to think worship. Stay;
First will I beggar all the Gentlemen
That do keep Terms; then build with what I win.
Next I'll undo all gaming Citizens,
And purchase upon that: the Foreman shall
Want of his wonted opportunities,
Old Thomas shall keep home I warrant him.
I will ascend to the Groom Porters next.
Fly higher Games, and make my mincing Knights
Walk musing in their knotty Freeze abroad;
For they shall have no home. There shall not be
That pleasure that I'll baulk: I'll run o'r Nature;
And when I've ransacked her, I'll weary Art;
My means I'm sure will reach it. Let me see
'Twill yearly be -- By Heaven I know not what --

Ne'er think to sum it, 'tis impossible;
You shall ne'er know what Angels, Pieces, Pounds,
These names of want and beggary mean; your tongue
Shall utter nought but millions: you shall measure,
Not count your moneys; your revenues shall
Be proud and insolent, and unruly;
They shall increase above your conquered spendings
In spite of their excess; your care shall be
Only to tame your riches, and to make them
Grow sober, and obedient to your use.

I'll send some forty thousand unto Paul's;
Build a Cathedral next in Banbury;
Give Organs to each Parish in the Kingdom;
And so root out the unmusicall Elect.
I'll pay all Soldiers whom their Captains won't;
Raise a new Hospital for those maimed People
That have been hurt in gaming; Then build up
All Colleges, that Ruin hath demolished,
Or, interruption left unperfect.

'Twil
Never be done I think, unless you do it.
Provide the wealthiest Gamesters, there's but one
Thing that can do us wrong, Discovery.
You have no enemy, but frailty.

Night
And silence are loud names, compared with me.

I see the tide of Fortune rolling in
Without resistance. Go, be close, and happy.

Upon my Conscience now he cheated me;
I could have never lost it else so strangely.

What is a paltry cloak to a man of worth?
It barred men only of the sight of your body:
Your handsomnesse will now appear the better.

He was as like our Mr Shape, as could be;
But that he had a patch upon his Cheek,
And a black beard, I should have sworn 'twere he:
It was some body in his clothes I'm sure.

Some cunning Cheater upon my life won
His cloak and suit too.

There it is for certain.
Pies take him, doth he play for cloaks still? Surely
He hath a Fly only to win good clothes.

The Pox and Plague take all ill fortune! this
The second time that he hath cheated me:
My very best suit that I had!

How now?
What lost your cloak, and suit? A jest I vow;
I vow a pretty jest: 'odsnigs I guessed so;
I saw him have it on; it made him look as like you,
As like you -- 'Tis a Rogue, a mere Decoy.

A Rogue, a mere Decoy? and yet like me?

Nay hold, I mean he is a Rogue, when that
He hath his own clothes on. D'y' think that I
Would call him so, when he is in your suit?

No more of that good Andrew, as you love me
Keep in your wit.

Speak Tutor, do I use
To quarrel? speak good Tutor.

That wit Andrew
Of yours will be the undoing of you, if
You use't no better.

Faith I thought I might
Have broke a witty jest upon him, being
I've lost my cloak.

True, but he has lost his too:
And then you know that is not lawful wit.

Here's Mr Credulous, and old Sir Thomas,
They have some business with you.

Bring 'em in.

My business lies not here Sirs, fare you well.

For Gods sake don't you tell old Sim on it now.

GOd save you good Sir Thomas.

Save you Sir.

You're welcome Mr Credulous.

Come hither;
Whither do you steal now? what? where's your cloak?

Going to foils even now, I put it off.

To tell you truth he hath lost it at Doublets.

With what a lie you'd flap me in the mouth?
Thou hast the readiest invention
To put off any thing -- thou had it from
Thy mother I'll be sworn; 'tnere came from me.

Peace as you love your self; if that the Knight
Should once perceive that he were given to gaming,
'Twould make him break the match off presently.

Sr Thomas here's my Son; he may be yours,
If you please to accept him.

Father don't
Give me away for this: try me once more.

I like his person well enough, if that
You'll make him an Estate convenient.

He hath more in him Sir than he can show;
He hath one fault, he's something covetous.

Mary a very commendable fault.

He is descended of no great high blood:
He hath a House, although he came of none.
His Grandfather was a good Livery man,
Paid scot and lot, old Timothy Credulous
My Father, though I say it that should not.

I don't regard this thing, that you call blood:
'Tis a mere name, a sound.

Your Worship speaks
Just like your self; me thinks he's noble,
That's truly rich: men may talk much of Lines,
Of Arms, of Blood, of Race, of Pedigree,
Houses, Descents, and Families; they are
But empty noise God knows, the idle breath
Of that puff nothing Honour; Formal words,
Fit for the tongues of men that ne'er knew yet
What Stem, what Gentry, nay, what virtue lies
In great Revenues.

Well and pithy said,
You may work on my Daughter, and prevail,
For that young stripling: 'Tis a foolish wench,
An unexperienced Girl, she'd like to have been
Caught by Sir Robert Littleworths Son, if that
I had not banished him my house: a youth
Honest enough I think, but that he's poor;
Born to more Name than Fortune.

He is safe
For ever wooing. I have laid his Father
Out of harm's way; there's picking meat for him:
And God knows where he's gon; he hath not been
Seen this long while; he's sure turned vagabond;
No sight of him since the Arrest of his Father.
Andrew address your self too good Sir Thomas.

'Slid Father you're the strangest man -- I won't.

As God shall mend me you're the proudest thing --
Thou can not complement, but in Caparisons.

What's that to you? I'd fain say something yet;
But that I can't my losses do so vex me.

Come think not on it my Boy, I'll furnish thee.

Sir, though --

Nay, to it I say; help him Sir, help him.

Sir, though without my cloak at this time --
To morrow I shall have one -- give me leave
Barely to say -- I am your servant Sir --
In hose and doublet.

I'll do what you told me.

Take heed: if that you do it he will guess you're given
To idle spendings, and so cross the match.
I will invite him as to my self.

Do so.

Sir Thomas, if you'll please so far to grace us,
As be a guest to morrow here, we shall
Study hereafter to deserve the favour.

Although I do not use to eat at Ord'naries,
Yet to accept your courtesy, good friends,
I'll break my wonted custom.

You shall have it
With a free heart.

If I thought otherwise,
I do assure you, I'd not venture hither.

HArrow alas! I swelt here as I go;
Brenning in fire of little Cupido.
I no where hoart yfeele, but on mine head.
Huh. huh, huh, so; ycapred very wele.
I am thine Leek, thou Chaucer eloquent;
Mine head is white, but o mine tail is green.
This is the Palyes where mine Lady wendeth
Saint Francis, and Saint Benedight,
Bless this house from wicked wight,
From the Night-mare and the Goblin,
That is hight good fellow Robin.
Keep it from all evil Spirits,
Fairies, Weezels, Rats and Ferrets,
From Curfew time
To the next prime.
Come forth mine Duck, mine Bryd, mine honycomb.
Come forth mine Cinnamon.

Who is't that calls?

A Knight most Gent.

What is your pleasure Sir?

Thou art mine pleasure, by dame Venus brent;
So fresh thou art, and therewith so lycand.

Alas! I am not any flickering thing:
I cannot boast of that slight-fading gift
You men call beauty; all my handsomnesse
Is my good breeding, and my honesty.
I could plant red, where you now yellow see;
But painting shows an harlot.

Harlot, so
Called from one Harlotha Concubine
To deignous Wilhelme, hight the Conqueror.

Were he ten Williams, and ten Conquerors
I'd have him know it, I scorn to be his Harlot.
I never yet did take presse-money to
Serve under any one.

Then take it now.
Werme kiss! Thine lips ytaste like marrow milk;
Me thinks that fresh butter runs on them.
I grant well now, I do enduren woe,
As sharp as doth the Titius in Hell,
Whose stomach fowls do tyren ever more,
That heighten Vultures, as do tellen Clerks.

You've spoke my meaning, though I do not know
What 'tis you said. Now see the fortune on it;
We do know one another Souls already;
The other must needs follow. Where's your dwelling?

Yclose by Aldersgate there dwells one
Wights clypen Robert Moth; now Aldersgate
Is hotten so from one that Aldrich hight;
Or else of Elders, that is, ancient men;
Or else of Aldern trees which growden there;
Or else as Heralds say, from Aluredus:
But whence so ever this Yate ycalled is
There dwells Robert Moth thine Paramour.

Can you be constant unto me as I
Can be to you?

By Woden God of Saxons,
From whence comes Wensday, that is Wodensday,
Truth is a thing that ever I will keep,
Unto thylke in which I creep into
My Sepulchre; I'll be as faithful to thee,
As Chaunticleere to Madam Partelot.

Here then I give away my heart to you,
As true a heart as ever widow gave.

I Robert Moth, this tenth of our King
Give to thee Joan Potluck my biggest crumpe Ring*
And with it my Carcass entire I bequeathen
Under my foot to Hell, above my head to heaven:
And to witness that this is sooth,
I bite thy red lip with my tooth.

Though for a while our bodies now must part,
I hope they will be joined hereafter.

O!
And must we part? alas, and must we so?
Sin it may be no bet, now gang in peace.
Though soft into mine bed I gin to sink
To sleep long as I'm wont to done, yet all
Will be for nought; I may well lig and wink,
But sleep shall there none in this heart ysink.

SO now the Mortgage is mine own outright;
I swear by the faith of my Body now
It is a pretty thing, of my corporal Oath
A very pretty thing. Besides the house,
Orchards, and Gardens: some two hundred Acres
Of Land that bears as good Country corn,
For Country corn, as may be.

As I'd have it.

How now good friend! where dost thou live? dost thou
Know Caster's Farm?

Yes Sir; I fear 'tis gon:
Sure Caster's Farm is cast away.

A jest!
Good troth a good one of a Country one;
I see there's wit there too. Then thou dost know it.

I am afraid I shall not know it long;
I shall lose my acquaintance.

'Snigs another!
A very perilous head, a dangerous brain.

God bless my Master, and the Devil take
Some body else.

Um! that's not quite so good
As the other two; that some body else is me:
(Now you shall see how he will abuse me here
To mine own face) why some Body else good Brother?

The rich gout rot his bones; an hungry, old,
Hard griping Citizen, that only feeds
On Heyrs and Orphans goods, they say must have it:
One that ne'er had the wisdom to be honest;
And's therefore Knave, because 'tis the easier Art.
I know he hath not given half the worth on it.
'Tis a mere cheat.

'Slid Brother thou hast paid him
To the utmost, though he hath not paid thy Master.
Now is my wit up too: this Land I see
Will make men thrive in the brain.

Would he were here,
Who ever he be, I'd give him somewhat more
Into the bargain: a base thin-jaw'd sneaksbill
Thus to work Gallants out of all. It grieves me
That my poor Tenement too goes into the sale.

What have I done? now wit deliver me.
If he know I am he, he will cut my throat;
I never shall enjoy it: sure it was
Your Masters seeking friend; he would ne'er else
Have had to do with it; he that bought it is
A very honest man; and if you please him
Will deal with you. I may speak a word
In your behalf: 'twont be the worse for you.

I'm going Sir unto him; do you know
Where I may find him?

What if I am he?

I am afraid he is not half so honest
As you do seem.

Faith I'm the same; I tried
What metal thou wast made of: I perceive
Thou wilt not flinch for the wetting; thou may be
My Bailiff there perhaps.

And 't please your Worship.

So now the case is altered.

I do know
It was my Masters seeking, you would ne'er
Have had to do with 't else. He sent me to you
For the last hundred pound, by the same token,
That you invited him to the eating house.

(O this simplicity! he does not know
Yet what an Ordnary means.) I was now coming
To have paid it in.

I'll save your Worship that
Labour an't please you: let me now begin
My Bayliffeship.

'Snigs wiser yet than so.
Where is thy Master?

Sir, my Master's here
I thank my stars; but Mr Caster is
At an Horse-race some ten miles off.

Why then
I'll stay till he returns; 'twill be by dinner.

Your best way's now to send it; if by chance
The race go on his side, your Worship may
Fail of your purchase.

'Snigs and that's considerable.
Here, here, make haste with it; but ever thou go
Tell me, is't a pretty thing?

Of my corporal Oath,
A very pretty thing: besides the house
Orchards, and Gardens, Some two hundred Acres
Of Land that bears as good Country Corn,
God give you luck on it.

Right as I did say,
Even word by word. But prithee stay a little;
What Meadow ground's there? Pasture in proportion?

As you would wish Sir; I'm in haste.

Nay Bailiff
But one word more, and I have done; what place
Is there to dry wet linen in?

O twenty
To hang up clothes, or any thing you please.
Your Worship cannot want line-room. God be with you.

But this once and --

I must be gone -- The Race.

Little think thee how diligent thou art
To little purpose. 'Snigs I pity him;
What haste he makes to cheat himself! poor fool!
Now I am safe the wretch must pardon me
For his poor Tenement; all's mine. I'll sow
One ground or other every month with Peas:
And so I will have green ones all the year.
These Yeomen have no Policy i'th'world.

PRay y' entertain your self a while, until
I give my Mistress notice of your presence.
I'd leave a book with you, but that I see
You are a Gentleman: perhaps you'll find
Some pretty stories in the hangings there.

Thank you sweet-heart.

(A very proper man)
If it lye in me to do you any pleasure,
Pray you Sir use me, you shall find me ready.

I make no doubt of that: these Implements,
These chamber Properties are such ripe things,
They'll fall with the least touch. From twelve to twenty
They think that others are to sue to them;
When once they've past these limits, they make bold
I cannot say to woo, that's something modest,
But ask downright themselves.

Leave us Priscilla,
And wait without awhile.

Fair Mistres pardon
The boldness of a stranger, who uncivilly
Thus interrupts your better thoughts.

May I
Demand your business.

Under favour thus.
Not to use farther circumstance fair Virgin,
(And yet less fair because Virgin) you are one
That are the thought, the care, the aim, the strife,
I should not err if I should say the madness
Of all young men; all sighs, all folded Arms,
All o'r-cast looks, all broken sleeps are owed
Only to you.

I'm sorry I should be
A trouble unto any: if I could
Afford the remedy as well as now
I do your grief, assure your self that cure
Shall be the birth of my next Action.

That cure is my request. If that this were
Mine own suit, I had used no circumstance.
Young Master Credulous a proper man
(For sure he shall be rich) one whom the whole
List of our City-Virgins dote on -- you
Conceive the rest I know.

Alas, what ails him?
I'll not be slack to do him any good.

'Tis in your power. He is very much
If you will know it -- But sure you will not grant
If I should tell you --

If you thus presume
That I am hard, you only ask denial:
Your expectations crossed except you fail.

If you will know it then, he is in love.

I pity him indeed poor heart: with whom?

Even with your beauteous self.

'Tis not well done
To scoff one ne'er did injure you.

I vow
By all that's good, by your fair self, I am
As tender of you as that blessed one is
Who ever he be that loves you most. If I
In any case abuse you, let me be
More miserable than Little-worth.

Is he become expression? is his Fate
The period of ill wishes? sure he never
Deserved so ill from you.

I don't reflect
Upon his ruined Fortunes, but your coldness.
And sure I may call him unhappy, whom
You do neglect.

That man, where ere he be,
Is happier than your self; and were he here,
You should see him received and your self scorned.

I do not think so Lady; sure you would
Make more of me than so. I'll bring the man,
And so confute you.

It may be I might
Love you the better something for that Office,
If he might enter here.

Nay I could tell
You'd cast him off: alas you need not hide it,
I have it from himself.

Doth he think so?
Could I but see him --

If his sight can bring
But the least joy unto you (as perhaps
You'll take some pleasure in his misery)
You shall enjoy it.

I do fear you promise
Only to raise my hopes a while, and then
To triumph in their Ruin.

That you may
See how my breast and tongue agree, I'll leave
This Ring with you till I return again.

My Littleworth! fool that I was: could I
Not all this while perceive 'twas thee? why did thou
Defer my joy thus long by suffering me
To stand in the Cloud?

Alas! I ghess'd I'd been
Infectious to thee now; that thou would look
On a disease more mildly than on me:
For Poverty is counted a contagion.

I call this kiss to witness (which I wish
If I prove false may be the last to me
Which friends pay dying friends) I ne'er will be
Others than thine.

I like the vow so well,
That the same way I'll seal my promise too.
If I prove not as thou (that is most constant)
May this kiss be, that I may wish it worse,
Than that which is due to departing souls*
The last that I shall take from thee. I am
Sen there, but yet unknown to them that send me,
To be another Spokes-man. The man is
That foolish Son of Mr Credulous:
Thou must pretend some liking* 'twas thy Father
Granted me this access to win thee for him;
Be thou no way averse. 'T shall be my care
So to bring things about, that thou shalt be
Mine by consent in spite of misery.

Be secret, and Love prosper thy design.

Happy that man that meets such faithfulness.
I did not think it had been in the Sex.
I know not now what's misery. Peace: my Fair
Is hallowing the Lute with her blessed touch.

COme, o come, I brook no stay:
He doth not love that can delay*
See how the stealing Night
Hath blotted out the Light,
And Tapers do supply the Day.
To be chaste is to be old,
And that foolish Girl that's cold
Is fourscore at fifteen:
Desires do write us green,
And looser flames our youth unfold.


'T cannot be her, her voice was ne'er profaned
With such immodest numbers.

See the first Taper's almost gone,
Thy flame like that will straight be none;
And I as it expire
Not able to hold fire.
She loses time that lies alone.
'Tis the breath
Of something troubled with Virginity.

O let us cherish then these Powr's
Whiles we yet may call them ours:
Then we best spend our time,
When no dull zealous Chime,
But sprightful kisses strike the Hours.
What dost thou mean?

Only to please you Sir.

Sweetest of things was't thou? In faith I guessed
'Twould be no others melody but yours.
There have been many of your sex much given
Unto this kind of music.

Sappho was
Excellent at it: but Amphion he
He was the man that out-did all; 'tis said
Of him, that he could draw stones with the sound
Of his sweet strings. I'd willingly arrive
At some perfection in the Quality.

I do acknowledge your desires most prone.
This for your trouble.

I am not mercenary,
Your acceptance is reward enough.

You have it then.

Beauty go with you Sir.

YOur welcome friends, as I may say --

You do forget.

-- That am a guest as well as you.

Most noble sons of Fortune, and of Valour,
You grace us with your presence: you must pardon
Our small provision.

No variety here
But you most noble guests, whose gracious looks
Must make a dish or two become a feast.

I'll be as free as 'twere mine own.

Who thinks
On any thing that borders upon sadness
May he ne'er know what's mirth, but when others
Laugh at his sullen wrinkles.

We will raise
A noise enough to wake an Alderman,
Or a cast Captain, when the reck'ning is
About to pay.

Hang thinking, 'snigs I'll be
As merry as a Pismire; come let's in.

Let's march in order military Sirs.

That's well remembered most complete Lieutenant

COme my most noble order of the club.
Because none will else, let's make much of our selves.
His letter may procure a Dinner yet.

Cheer up Sir Kit, thou look too spiritually:
see too much of the Tith-pig in thee.

I'm not so happy: Kit's as hungry now
As a besieged City, and as dry
As a Dutch Commentator. This vile world
Ne'er thinks of Qualities: good truth I think
'T hath much to answer for. Thy Poetry
Rimewell, and thy voice Vicar Catchmey, and
Thy Law too Bagshot is contemned: 'tis pity
Professions should be slighted thus. The day
Will come perhaps, when that the Commonwealth
May need such men as we. There was a time
When Cobblers were made Church-men, and those blacked
Smutch'd Creatures thrust into white Surplisses,
Looked like so many Magpies, and did speak
Just as they, by rote. But now the Land
Surfeits forsooth. Poor Labourers in Divinity
Can't earn their groat a day, unless it be
Reading of the Christian burial for the dead:
When they even for that reason truly thank
God for thus taking this their Brother to him.

Something profane Sir Christopher.

When I
Levell my larger thoughts unto the Basis
Of thy deep shallowness, am I profane?
Henceforth I'll speak, or rather not speak, for
I will speak darkly.

There's one comfort then
You will be brief.

My briefness is prolix;
Thy mind is bodily, thy soul corporeal;
And all thy subtle faculties are not subtle,
Thy subtilty is dullness. I am strong.
I will not be conceived by such Mechanics.

I do conceive you though Sir Christopher,
My Muse doth sometimes take the selfsame flight.

Pauci, pauci ques aequus amavit.
But Quadragessimall wits, and fancies lean
As ember weeks (which therefore I call lean,
Because they're fat) these I do doom unto
A knowing ignorance; he that's conceived
By such is not conceived; sense is non-sense
If understood by them. I'm strong again.

You err most Orthodoxly sweet Sir Kit.

I love that though I hate it: and I have
A kind of disagreeing consent to it.
I'm strong, I'm strong again. Let's keep these two
In desperate hope of understanding us.
Ridles, and Clouds are very lights of speech:
I'll veil my careless anxious thoughts, as 'twere
In a perspicuous cloud, that I may
Whisper in a loud voice, and even be filent
When I do utter words; words did I call them?
My words shall be no words, my voice no voice;
My noise no noise, my very language silence.
I'm strong, I'm strong: good Sir you understand not.

Nor do desire; 'tis merely froth, and barm,
The yest that makes your thin small Sermons work.

Thou hold thy peace most vocally. Again.

I hate this Bilke.

Thou love because thou dost hate.
Thy injuries are Courtesies. Strong again.

Good Sampson use not this your Asses jaw-bone.

Thou'st got my love by losing it; that earnest
Jest hath regained my soul. Sampson was strong;
He killed a thousand with an Asses-jawbone.
And so will I. 'st, 'st -- good friend d'y'hear?
Here is a letter friend to Mr Meanwell.

Any Reversions yet? nothing transmiss'd?

No gleanings James? no Trencher Analects?

Parley a little with your stomachs Sirs.

There's nothing so ridiculous as the hungry:
A fasting man is a good jest at any time.

There is a Gentleman without, that willed me
To ask if you'll admit of him among you,
He can't endure to be in good company.

You're merry James; yes by all means good James;
Admit quoth he? what else? pray y'send him in.
Let's be resolved to fail out, now then he
Shall have the glory to compose the Quarrel,
By a good dozen of pacificall Beer.

Bag. Agreed, agreed.

My Coat allows no Quarrel.

The Colour bears't if you'll venture the stuff,
The tenderness of it I do confess
Some what denies a grappling.

I will try,
Perhaps my Spirit will suggest some anger.

Save you boon sparks: will it please you to admit me?

Your Worship graces us in condescending
To levell thus your presence humble Sir.

What may I call your name most reverend Sir?

His name's Sir Kit.

My name is not so short,
'Tis a trissyliable, an't please your Worship:
But vulgar tongues have made bold to profane it
With the short sound of that unhallowed Idol
They call a Kit. Boy learn more reverence.

Yes, to my Betters.

Nay friends, do not quarrel.

It is the holy cause, and I must quarrel.
Thou Son of Parchment, got between the Standish
And the stiff Buckram bag: thou that may call
The Pen thy Father, and the ink thy Mother,
The sand thy Brother, and the wax thy Sister,
And the good Pillory thy Cousin removed,
I say learn reverence to thy Betters.

Set up an hour-glasse; he will go on until
The last sand make his Period.

'Tis my custom,
I do approve the Calumny: the words
I do acknowledge, but not the disgrace.
Thou vile ingrosser of unchristian deeds.

Good Israel Inspiration hold your tongue;
It makes far better Music, when you Nose
Sternolds, or Wisdoms Meeter.

By your leave
You fall on me now Brother.

'Tis my cause,
You are too forward Brother Catchm.

I
Too forward?

Yes I say you are too forward
By the length of your London measure Beard.

Thou never could entreat that respite yet
Of thy dishonesty as to get one hair
To testify thy Age.

I'm beardless too;
I hope you think not so of me?

Yes verily,
Not one hairs difference 'twixt you both.

Thou violent Cushion-thumper, hold thy tongue,
The Furies dwell in it.

Peace good Sir Kit.

Sir Kit again? Thou art a Lopez; when
One of thy legs rots off (which will be shortly)
Thou'lt bear about a Quire of wicked Paper,
Defiled with sanctified Rhythms,
And Idols in the frontisepiece: that I
May speak to thy capacity, thou'lt be
A Balladmonger.

I shall live to see thee
Stand in a Play-house door with thy long box,
Thy half-crown Library, and cry small Books.
By a good godly Sermon Gentlemen --
A judgment shown upon a Knot of Drunkards --
A pill to purge out Popery -- The life
And death of Katherin Stubs --

Thou wilt visit windows;
Me thinks I hear thee with thy begging tone
About the break of day waking the Brethren
Out of their morning Revelations.

Brave sport In faith.

Pray y'good Sir reconcile them.
If that some Justice be in the Ordinary now
He will bind them to the peace for troubling him.

Why should he not good Sir, it is his office,

Now 'tis o'this side; o for a pair of Cudgels!

Peace Inkhorn, there's no music in thy tongue.

Thou and thy Rime lye both; the tongue of man
Is born to music naturally.

Thou thing,
Thy belly looks like to some strutting hill,
O'r shadowed with thy rough beard like a wood.

Or like a larger Jug, that some men call
A Bellarmine, but we a Conscience;
Whereon the lewder hand of Pagan workman
Over the proud ambitious head hath carved
An Idol large with beard Episcopal,
Making the Vessel look like Tyrant Eglon.

Profane again Sir Christopher I take it.

Must I be strong again? thou humane beast,
Who'rt only eloquent when thou say nothing,
And appear'st handsome while thou hid'st thy self,
I'm holy because profane.

Courageous Raskals,
Brave Spirits, Soldiers in their days I warrant.

Born in the field I do assure your Worship:
This Quarrelling is meant and drink to them.

Thou lie. Bag. Nay then I do defy thee thus.

And thus I am prepared to answer thee.

For the good Sts. sake part them; I am blind,
If that my Spectacles should once miscarry.

Caitiff, this holy instrument shall quail thee.

And this shall send thee to thy cousin furies.

I feel a film come o'r mine eyes already,
I must look out an Animal conductive,
I mean a Dog.

Pray y'beat not out his eyes in
Another hands.

Most strongly urged.

Your words
Are merely wind. James ho! what James! some beer.
They're mastive Dogs, they won't be parted Sir,
Without good store of Liquor.

I will souse them.

Drink to 'em Sir, if that you'll have 'em quiet.

Is that the way? here's to you my friends; a whole one.

Were it not for that good Gentleman you would smoke for it.

Had I not vowed some reverence to his presence.
Thou had been nothing.

Before Mars I was dry:
This valour's thirsty: fill to my Antagonist.

No, mine own dish will serve: I'm singular.
Few vessels still do well; I carry this
To drink my beer, while others drink their sack.
I am abstemious Rimewel: I hate wine
Since I spake treason last in the Cellar. Here
Give me thy hand, thou child of fervency.
Did thou mistrust thy spectacles?
It was no anger, 'twas a Rapture merely.

Drink, and excuse it after. James your help.
Come Man of voice keep time while that I drink.
This moisture shall dry up all injuries,
Which I'll remember only to forget;
And so hereafter, which I'm wont to call
The future now, I'll love thee stubbornly.
Your beer is like my words, strong, stinging gear.

Here little Lawyer, let's be friends hereafter;
I love this reconcilement with my heart.

'Tis the best deed that ever I did: O my conscience
I shall make a good Justice of the Peace,
There had been bloud-shed, if I had not stickled.

More blood been spilt I warrant than beer now.

That Inkhorn is a deadly dangerous weapon:
It hath undone one quarter of the Kingdom.

Men should forgive; but thou art far, yea far
From it O Bagshot; you're in love with hate;
Bless me! I see the Fiend still in his looks;
He is not reconcilable with drink;
He will never love truly, till he eat with me.
The nature of his Spirit asks meat:
He hath a Woolf in's breast; food must appease him.

Cold meat will do it, will it not?

Any thing --
That may employ the teeth.

Go James provide;
You are not merry yet.

To satisfy you
In that point, we will sing a Song of his.

Let's have it; I love these Ballads hugeously.

The Song.

THen our Music is in prime,
When our teeth keep triple time;
Hungry Notes are fit for Knels:
May lankenes be
No Quest to me.
The Bagpipe sounds, when that it swells.
Chor. May lankenes, c.

A Mooting Night brings wholesome smiles,
When John an Oaks, and John a Stiles,
Do grease the Lawyers Satin.
A Reading-Day
Frights French away,
The Benchers dare speak Latin.
Chor. A Reading, c.

He that's full doth Verse compose;
Hunger deals in sullen Prose:
Take notice and discard her.
The empty Spit
Ne'er cherished Wit.
Minerva loves the Larder.
Chor. The empty Spit, c.

First to break Fast, then to dine,
Is to conquer Bellarmine:
Distinctions then are budding.
Old Sutcliffs Wit
Did never hit,
But after his Bag-pudding.
Chor. Old Sutcliffs Wit, c.

Most admirable; a good eating Song.

Let us walk in, and practice it; my Bowels
Yearn till I am in charity with all.

A Christian resolution good Sr Christopher.

SWeet Sir I am most passionately yours,
To serve you all the ways I can. Priscilla.
Very well Penned of a young Chambermaid,
I do conceive your meaning sweet Priscilla:
You see I have the happy fortune on it;
A night for nothing, and entreated too.

Thou dost not know how I do love thee; let me
Make use of this, thou'lt have the like occasion.

Thou art the fawningst fellow Slicer -- Meanwel Hark here.

For Gods sake be contented Sirs;
I'm flesh and blood as well as you. Lieutenant,
Think on your Suburb Beauties; sweet Intelligencer,
I will by no means bar you of your Lady.
Your sin I assure you will be honourable.

Pox o'your liquorous lips; if that she don't
After this sealing forty weeks deliver
Something unto thee as thy act and deed,
Say I can't Prophecy.

If I don't serve him
A trick he thinks not of --

Did mark how he
Did apply himself to the Knight all dinner?
I am afraid he plays the cunning Factor,
And in another name woes for himself.

Let it go on; let it work something farther
'Tis almost ripe enough to crush; he hath not
Crept high enough as yet to be sensible
Of any fall.

Now is the time or never.
This night you know he and his Doxy meet;
Let me alone to give them their goodmorrow.
If that we carry things but one week longer
Without discovery, farewell London then;
The world's our own. He ne'er deserves to thrive
That doth not venture for it. Wealth's then sweet
When bought with hazard. Fate this Law hath set;
The fool inherits, but the wise must get.

MY Name's not Tribulation,
Nor holy Ananias:
I was baptised in fashion,
Our Vicar did hold Bias.

What, how now Mr Credulous? so merry?

Come let's be mad; by yea and nay my Son
Shall have the Turkish Monarchy; he shall
Have it directly: the twelve Companies
Shall be his Kickshaws.

Bashaws Sir you mean.

Well Sir, what if I do? Andrew the great Turk!
I would I were a pepper corn if that
It sounds not well: dost not?

Yes, very well.

I'll make it elle: Great Andrew Mahomet,
Imperious Andrew Mahomet Credulous,
Tell me which name sounds best.

That's as you speak 'em.

Oatemeleman Andrew, Andrew Oatmeleman.

Ottoman Sir you mean.

Yes Ottoman.
Then Mrs Jane, Sir Thomas Bitefiggs Daughter,
That may be the she Great Turk, if she please me.

The Sign of the half Moon that hangs at your door,
Is not for nought.

That's the Turks Arms they say;
The Empire's destined to our house directly.
Hang Shop-books, give's some Wine, hay for a noise
Of Fiddlers now.

The Great Turk loves no Music.

Does he not so? nor I. I'll light Tobacco
With my Sum-totals; my Debt-books shall sole
Pies at young Andrew's Wedding: cry you mercy;
I would say Gentlemen the Great Turks Wedding.
My Deeds shall be sliced out in Taylors Measures;
They all employed in making Mrs Mahomet
New Gowns against the time; hang dirty wealth.

What should the Great Turks father do with wealth?

'Snigs I would fain now hear
Some fighting News.

There's one will furnish you I warrant you.

Pox! -- Plague! -- Hell! -- Death! --
Damned luck! -- this 'tis! --
The Devil take all Fortunes: never man
Came off so* quite and clean defunct by Heaven --
Not a piece left.

What all your Ord'nance lost?

But one to bear, and lose it! all the world
Was sure against me.

'Snigs how many fell?

He threw twice twelve.

By'r Lady a shrewd many.

The Devil sure was in his hand I think.

Nay, if the Devil was against you, then --

But one for to be hit in all the time --
And that too safe enough to any ones thinking;
'T stood on eleven.

'Slid a mighty slaughter;
But did he stand upon elev'n at once?

The Plague take all impertinencies, peace.

These Soldiers are so choleric there is
No dealing with 'em; then they've lost the day.

'Twas ten to one by Heaven all the while.

And yet all killed at last? hard fortune faith.
What news from Bruxels? or the Hague? d' y' hear
Ought of the Turks designs?

I'll make thee news
For the Coranti Dotard.

Ay, the Coranti,
What doth that say?

O hell! thou foolish thing
Keep in that tongue of thine, or --

Good now peace,
He's very furious when he's moved.

This 'twas.
You must be venturing without your Fancy-man.

What Officer's that Fancy-man, Lieutenant?
Some great Commander sure.

Pox! let it go;
I'll win't again: 'twas but the Relics of
An idle hundred.

'Snigs and well remembered.
You did receive the hundred that I sent you
To the Race this morning by your man, my Bailiff?

Take him away, his wine speaks in him now.

Godsnigs the Farm is mine, and must be so.

Debate these things another time, good friends.
Come, come, have Patience. Od's my life away.
There's Mr Haveatall is mad; he will spit you,
If he but know you are a Usurer.

A plot, a plot to take away my life and Farm.

Fight as I live with any one. Lieutenant
Do not come near me now, nor yet thou Caster;
It works, before Mars it works; I'll take my walk,
And if I do find any one by Jove --

What's he foxed too? some drunken Planet raigns
And works upon the world; Provide my fancy
God Noble Patron: I'll win soberly,
I itch till I have beggard all the City.

Till that you have undone your self you mean. En.

Ey save you both: for derne love sayen soothly Mo.
Where is thylk amebly, Franklin, cleped Meanwel?

He's gone abroad.

Lere me whylk way he wended.

He is gon o'r the fields.

To the Knights house.

Why laugh you every del? so mote I gone,
This goes not aright; I dread some Covin.

Now will he meet with Haveatall; there'll be
A Combat worthy Chronicle. Let's go
And see how this grave motion will bestir him.

what, no man yet march by? who ever comes next
I'll give him onerap more for making me
Stay here so long.
So so here h'is; how shall
I do to know where he be a Gentleman,
Or Yeoman or Serving-man? I think
I'd best suppose him all, and beat him through
Every degree, and so I shall not wrong him.
What? who goes there?

Waes heal thou gentle Knight.

Waes heal thou gentle Knight? speak what art thou?
Speak quickly do: Villain know thou not me?

Now by my troth I know not your Name;
Whider I shall call you my Lord Dan John,
Or Dan Thomas, or Dan Robert, or Dan Albon:
I vow to God thou hast a full fair chine;
Upon my faith art some Officer.

Have you the pox Sir? speak.

No.

No? nor yet
An ach in your Bones!

No.

No? why then you are
No Gentleman; Lieutenant Slicer says so.
This cudgel then serves turn.

You will not foyn?

I will not foyn, but I will beat you Sir.

Why intermete of what thou hast to done;
So leteth me alone, 't shall be thy best.

I fancied you a beating; you must have it.
You shall not say but I will show you favour.
Choose where you will be hacked with my sword,
Or bruised by my Baton.

Dre not thy true,
And paynant Morglay out of Shete. Lo thus
Eftsoons Sir Knight, I greet thee lowting low.

Done lower yet.

Rues on my gray hairs.

Yet lower: so, then thus I do bestride thee.

Tubal the son of Lamech did yfind
Music by knocking Hammers upon Anviles;
Let go thine blows, thylke Art is no complete.

Dost thou make me a Smith thou Rogue? a Tubal?

Harrow alas! flet England, flet England:
Dead is Edmond.

Take that for history.
O brave Lieutenant now thy dinner works.

I nis not Edmond Ironside God wot.

More provocation yet? I'll seal thy lips.

A twenty Devil way! So did the Saxon
Upon thylke plain of Sarum, done to death
By treachery, the Lords of merry Englond
Nem esur Saxes.

Villain dost abuse me
In unbaptized language? do not answer;
If that thou dost, by Jove I'll strangle thee.
Do you make mouths you Rascal thus at me?
You're at dumb Service now: why, this is more
Unsufferable than your old patched gibberish;
This silence is abuse. I'll send thee to
The Place of it, where thou shalt meet with Oswald,
Vortigern, Harold, Hengist, Horsey, Knute,
Alared, Edgar, and Cunobeline.
Thus, thus I sheath my Sword.

Redoubled Knight
Enough, 'tis thy foe doth vanquished lie
Now at thy mercy, mercy notwithstand,
For he is one the truest Knight alive,
Though conquered now he lie on lowly ground.

Thou ow'st thy life to my Lieutenant, Caitiff.
Breath and be thankful.

I reche not thine yeft;
Maugre thine head, algate I suffer none,
I am-thine lefe, thine dear, mine Potluck Jone.

FAirest of things -- tralucent creature -- Hang me
If I do know what's next.

This meant to me?

Fairest of things -- tralucent creature -- rather
Obscured Deity -- 'Tis gone again.
Lady will you eat a piece of Gingerbread?

You might have better manners than to scoff
One of my breeding.

Hark; indad I love you.

Alas!

I vow I burn in love, as doth
A penny Faggot.

Hey ho!

And I shall
Blaze out Sir reverence if ye do not quench me.

Indeed now?

Though I say it that should not say it,
I am affected towards you strangely.

Now who'd have thought it?

There's a thing each night
Comes to my Bedshead and cries Matrimony,
Matrimony Andrew.

God forbid.

It is
Some Spirit that would join us.

Goodly, goodly.

Then do I shake all over.

Doth it so?

Then shake again.

I pray you now.

Then cry
(...) of things -- tralucent creature -- rather
Obscured Deity, sweet Mrs Jane,
I come I come.

Sweet Sir you are deceived:
I'm but her woman; here she comes her self.

Now as my Father saith, I would I were
A Cucumber if I know what to do.

Why how now Pris? who's that that uses you
So lovingly?

Fairest of things -- 'tis one
Tralucent Creature -- 'tis -- Ay that it is
One --

That would willingly run out of doors,
If that he had but Law enough.

I say --

Nay be not afraid: here's none shall do you harm.

'Tis one that brought his Pigs to the wrong market.
You keep your woman here so fine, that I
Had like to have made a proper business on it
Before I was aware. If any thing
Do prove amiss, indeed-law you shall be
The Father on it. But know tralucent Creature
I am come off entire, and now am yours
Whole, Andrew Creaulous, your servants servant.

Methinks you contradict your self: how can you
Be wholly mine, and yet my servants servant?

I do but complement in that (I see
Downright's the best way here) if thou can love
I can love too. Law thee there now. I'm rich.

I use not to look after riches; 'tis
The person that I aim at.

That is me;
I'm proper, handsome fair, clean-limb'd: I'm rich.

I must have one that can direct and guide me;
A Guardian rather than a Husband; for
I'm foolish yet.

Now see the luck on it Lady
So am I too In faith.

And who ever hath me
Will find me to be one of those things which
His care must first reform.

Do not doubt that;
I have a head for Reformation:
This noddle here shall do it. I am rich.

Riches create no love; I fear you mean
To take me for formality only,
As some staid piece of housholdstuff perhaps
Fit to be seen among other ornaments:
Or at the best I shall be counted but
A name of dignity; not entertained
For love but State; one of your train, a thing
Took to wipe off suspicion from some fairer
To whom you have vowed Homage.

Do not think
I've any Plots or Projects in my Head,
I will do any thing for thee that thou
Can name or think on.

Pray you try him Mistress,
By my Virginity I think he will flinch.

By my Virginity (which is as good
As yours I'm sure) by my Virginity
If that we men have any such thing (as
We men have such a thing) I do believe
I will not flinch. Alas! you don't know Andrew.

Can you obtain but so much respite from
Your other Soverains service, as to keep
Your Eye from gazing on her for a while?

If I do look on any woman, nay,
If I do cast a sheeps eye upon any
But your sweet self, may I lose one of mine:
Marry I'll keep the other howsoe'r.

I know not how I may believe you; you'll
Swear you ne'er cast a glance on any, when
Your eye hath baited at each face you met.

Blind me good now: being you mistrust, I will
Be blinded with this handkercheife; you shall
See that I love you now. So, let me have
But any reasonable thing to lead me home,
I do not care though 't be a Dog, so that
He knows the way, or hath the wit to enquire it.

That care Sir shall be mine.

I doubt not, but
I shall be in the Chronicle for this,
Or in a Balled else. This handkerchief
Shall be hung up in the Parish Church instead
Of a great silken flag to fan my grave:
With my Arms in it, pourtray'd in good blew thread
With this word underneath: This, this was he
That shut his eyes because he would not see.
Hold who comes there?

One Sir to lead you home.

Who? Tutor Meanwell?

Yes I do commit you
Unto your trusty friend, If you perform
This vow we may --

I'll say your sentence out,
Be man and wife.

If you'll do something else
That I'll propose.

Pray make your own conditions.

You'll promise me you'll not be jealous of me?

Do what you will I'll trust you.

never hire
Any to tempt me?

By this light (I would say
By this darkness) I never will.

Nor mark
On whom I laugh? --

No.

Nor suspect My smiles,
My nods, my winks? --

No, no.

Nor yet keep count
From any Gallants visit?

I'll ne'er reckon;
You shall do what you will.

You'll never set
Great Chests and Forms against my Chamber Door,
Nor pin my smock unto your shirt a nights,
For fear I should slip from you ere you wake?

As I do hope for Day I will not.

Give me
Some small pledge from you to assure your love;
If that you yet prove false, I may have something
To witness your inconstancy. I'll take
This little Ruby: this small blushing stone
From your fair finger.

Take it Sweet: there is
A Diamond in my Bandstring, if you have
A mind to that I pray make use of't too.

In troth a stone of lustre, I assure you
It darts a pretty light, a veget spark;
It seems an Eye upon your Breast.

Nay take it,
For loves sake take it then; leave nothing that
Looks like an Eye about me.

My good Andrew,
Because of thy resolution, I'll perform
This office for thee. Take my word for it, this
Shall ne'er betray thee.

Farewell honest Jany,
I cannot see to thank thee my sweet Jany.
Tutor, your hand good Tutor, lead me wisely.

Take comfort man; I have good news for thee:
Thine eyes shall be thine own before next morning.

He's a good friend of mine, and I presume
Upon your secrecy.

O Sir -- the Deed
By which it came was not more close. D'y'think
I would undo me self by twitting? 'twere
To bring the Gallants all about mine Ears,
And make me mine own Patient. I'm faithful,
And secret, though a Barber.

Nay, but hear me;
He's very modest: 'twas his first attempt
Procured him this infirmity; he will
Be bashful I am sure, and won't be known
Of any such thing at the first; you must
Be sure to put him to it.

Let me alone,
He knows not yet the world I do perceive.
It is as common now with Gentlemen,
As 'tis to follow fashion; only here
Lies the difference, that they keep in this
A little longer. I shall have so much
Upon your word Sir?

If you do perform
The cure by that time (twenty pieces Sir.)
You are content?

Yes Sir.

It shall be done
According to your own prescription.
Sit down I pray you Sir, this Gentleman
Is a good friend of yours.

Indeed he is
A very honest man as any one
Can wish to deal with verily.

Beleeve't
He loves you very well.

I am most ready
To do him any service truly; pray you
Good Brother don't delay me, I'm in haste.

Indeed, and truly, verily good Brother;
How could these milk-sop words ever get him company
That could procure the Pox? where do you feel
You grief most trouble you?

I'm very well.
What mean you Brother?

Nay, be not so modest;
'Tis no such heinous fault, as that you should
Seek thus to hide it: mere ill fortune only --

Surely you do forget your self.

Come, come,
He told me you'd be shamefaced; you must be
Wary hereafter.

(I do perceive
He is a little mad indeed; the Gentleman
Told me so much just as I came along)
Yes, yes, I'll be wary, I'll take heed,
Come pray y' dispatch me.

So, I like you now.
It is the custom of most Gentlemen
Not to confess until they feel their bones
Begin to admonish 'em.

You are in the right:
Good friend make haste; I've very urgent business.

Not rashly neither; Is your Gristle sound?
Me thinks 'tis very firm as yet to the touch.
You fear no danger there as yet Sir, do you?

No, I'll assure you. (He must have his humour;
I see he is not to be crossed.)

When did you
Feel the first grudging on it? 'tis not broke out
In any place?

No, no: I pray y' dispatch me.

These things desire deliberation;
Care is required.

Good Brother go t'your Chest.

How can I know what Med'cines to apply,
If that you tell me not where lies your grief?

Nay good now let me go.

I must not Sir,
Nor will not truly: trust me you will wish
You had confessed and suffered me in time,
When you shall come to dry burnt Racks of Mutton,
The Siren, and the Tub.

So now enough;
Pray fetch me what you promised.

Are you wild,
Or mad? I do protest I ne'er did meet
A Gentleman of such perverseness yet.
I find you just as I was told you should.

I lose the taking, by my swear, of taking
As much, whiles that I am receiving this.

I will not hinder you, if that you do
Prefer your gain before your health.

Well then
I pray you tell it out; we Tradesmen are not
Masters of our own time.

What would you have?

What would I have? as if you did not know;
Come come leave jesting now at last good Brother.

I am in earnest Sir.

Why, I would have
My money Sir, the twenty pieces that
The Gentleman did give you order now
To pay me for the Velvet, that he bought
This morning of me.

O! the Gentleman --

You should not make a laughing stock good Brother
Of one that wrongs you not; I do profess
I won't be fubb'd ensure your self.

The Gentleman!
Oh! oh! the Gentleman! is this the cure
I should perform? truly I dare not venture
Upon such de sperate Maladies.

You are
But merrily disposed?

Indeed they are
Too high for my small Quality; verily
Perhaps good Brother you might perish under
Mine hands truly; I do profess I am not
Any of your bold Mountebanks in this.

You're still disposed --

To laugh at you good Brother.
Gulled by my swear, by my swear gulled; he told me
You had a small infirmity upon you,
A grief of youth, or two; and that I should
Have twenty pieces for the cure. He asked you
If that you were content, you answered yes.
I was in hope I'd gained a Patient more;
Your best way is to make haste after him.

Now could I beat my self for a wise fool
That I was, thus to trust him.

B'w'y' Brother.
Before God a good one. O! the Gentleman.

Whiles early light springs from the skies,
A fairer from your Bride doth rise;
A brighter Day doth thence appear,
And make a second morning there:
Her blush doth shed
All o'r the bed,
Clean shamefaced beams
That spread in streams,
And purple round the modest air.
I will not tell what shrieks, and cries,
What Angry Dishes, and what ties,
What pretty oaths then newly born
The listening Taper heard there sworn:
Whiles froward she
Most peevishly
Did yielding fight
To keep o'r night
What she would have proffered you ere morn.
Fair, we know, maids do refuse
To grant what they do come to lose.
Intend a Conquest you that wed;
They would be chastely ravished.
Not any kiss
From Mrs Pris,
If that you do
Persuade and woe.
Know pleasure's by extorting fed.
O may her arms wax black and blew
Only by hard encircling you:
May she round about you twine
Like the easy twisting Vine;
And whiles you sip
From her full lip
Pleasures as new
As morning Dew,
Let those soft Ties your hearts combine.
God give you joy Mr Meanwell. God give your Worship good morrow.

Come let's be going.

Hold, a blow I'll have,
One jerk at the times, wrapped in a benediction
Of the Spouses teeming, and I'll go with you.

NOw thou our future Brother,
That shalt make this Spouse a Mother,
Spring up, and Dod's blessing on it.
Show thy little sorrel Pate
And prove regenerate
Before thou be brought to the Font.
May the Parish Surplice be
Cut in pieces quite for thee,
To wrap thy soft body about;
So 'twill better service do
Reformed thus into
The state of an Orthodox Clout.
When thou shalt leave the Cradle,
And shalt begin to waddle,
And trudge in thy little Apron;
May thou conceive a grace
Of half an hours space,
And rejoice in thy Friday Capon.
For an error that's the Flocks
Name Mr Paul, but urge St Knoxe;
And at every reformed Dinner,
Let cheese come in, and preaching,
And by that third Course teaching,
Confirm an unsatisfied Sinner.
Thence grow up to hate a Ring,
And defy an offering:
And learn to sing what others say.
Let Christ-tide be thy fast,
And lent thy good repast:
And regard not an Holy day.


Lay hold on them; lay hold on them I say:
I'll hamper them.

Hell take your headlong zeal;
You must be jerking at the times forsooth.
I am afraid the times will escape, and we
The men of them shall suffer now the scourge.

Let none escape.

'Twas godliness verily:
It was a Hymn I warbled.

Thou dost lye,
It was no Hymn, it was a Song. Is this
Your filthy Rendevow? you shall be taught
Another tune.

I do beseech you show
Merciful cruelty, and as 'twere a kind
Of pitiful hard heartedness. I'm strong.

I'm glad you told me so, I will provide
Your Ward accordingly. Drag 'em out both.

Let me but send to the Ordinary.

You shall not,
The Ord'nary hath sent to you: No Bail,
I will take none. I'll suffer no such sneaks
As you, t'offend this way. It doth belong
T'your Betters Sir.

Here's a sufficient Man
I do assure you, take my word for that.

This staff was made to knock down sin. I'll look
There shall be no Advowtry in my Ward
But what is honest. I'll see Justice done
As long as I'm in office. Come along.

NOw that I have made even Girl, with Heaven.
Though I am past the worst, and I perceive
My dinner only grieved me, yet because Life's
Frail, and uncertain, let me counsel thee,
'Tis good to be before hand still. First then
I charge thee lend no money; next serve God;
If ever thou hast Children teach 'em thrift;
They'll learn Religion fast enough themselves.
Nay, do not weep but hearken. When Heaven shall
Please to call in this Weary Soul of mine,
Be not idle in expense about my Burial;

Buy me a shroud, any old sheet will serve
To cloth corruption; I can rot without
Fine linen; 'tis but to enrich the Grave,
And adorn stench, no reverence to the dead,
To make 'em crumble more luxuriously.
One Torch will be sufficient to direct
The footsteps of my Bearers. If there be
Any so kind as to accompany
My body to the Earth, let them not want
For entertainment, prithee see they have
A sprig of Rosemary dipped in common water,
To smell to as they walk along the streets.
Eatings and drinkings are no obsequies.
Raise no oppressing Pile to load my Ashes;
But if thou'l needs be at charges of a Tomb,
Five or six foot of common stone engraved
With a good hopeful word, or else a couple
Of capital letters filled up with pitch,
Such as I set upon my Sheep, will serve;
State is not meet for those that dwell in dust.
Mourn as thou please for me, plainness shows
True grief: I give thee leave to do it for
Two or three years, if that thou shalt think fit.
'Twill save expense in clothes. And so now be
My blessing on thee, and my means hereafter.

I hope Heaven will not deal so rigidly
With me, as to preserve me to the unmelcome
Performance of these sad injunctions.

GOod health unto you Sir.

I have the more
By reason of the care you took in sending
A Confessor unto me.

I? a Confessor?
Sure there is some design, some trick or other
Put on you by those men, who never sleep
Unless they've cheated on that Day.

I hope
You do mean your Partners my good friends?

They ne'er deserve the name of friends, they do
Covet, not love. If any came from them,
It was some Vulture in a holy habit,
Who did intend your Carcass, nor your safety;
Indeed I know not of't, I've all this while
Appeared another to you than I am.
Perhaps you know me now. I'm he whom you
Pleased to forbid your house, whom Mr Credulous
Takes leave to stile lost man, and Vagabond.

That I forbad you Sir my house was only
In care to my Daughter, not in hate to you.

That I frequented it without your leave,
Was both in love to you, and to your Daughter;
That I have all this while lived thus disguised,
Was only to avert the snare from you,
Not to entrap you; that you might not be
Blinded by those, who like to venomous Beasts,
Have only sight to poison; that you might not
Ruin your Daughter in a complement.

This may be your plot, and this discovery
Feigned only to secure your own designs:
For 't cannot sink into me that they durst
Make mirth of my repentance, and abuse
My last devotion with a Scene of Laughter.

They dare beyond your thought. When parted this
Your Confessor?

You could not choose but meet him,
He is scarce yet at home.

If that you dare
But venture with me home, I'll almost promise
I'll make it plain they've put a trick upon you.

Though every step were so much toward my grave
I'd tread them o'r with comfort that I might
Discover this religious villainy.

COme my good Vulture speak what prey? what mirth?

What income my dear holiness? what sport?

Give me the Chair; imagine me the Knight
(When I sit down,) and (when I stand) the Confessor.
Thus I come in peace to thy soul good Son,
(Tis you must give it Father; I am ill,
I'm very ill; sit only now for Heaven.
My Soul would fain be flying, were it not for
A Sin or two that clogs her.) But for a sin
Or two that clogs her? take heed, don't so near
Your last deliverance play the Sophister
With Heaven. A sin or two? why, I've heard say
You're wont to screw your wretched Tenants up
To the utmost farthing, and then stand upon
The third Rent Capon. Then he answers me
In the small dolfull tune of a Country wench
Examined by the Official, for the mischance
Of a great belly caught at a Whitsonale;
(I could not help it.) Then it is your costome
When you invite, to think your meat laid out,
You write your Beef disbursed, are wont to call
For the return of 't just, as for a debt;
(True.) That two Chimneys ne'er yet smok'd at once
In all your Buildings; (All most true.) That you
Are wont to keep an untouched Capon, till
Corruption makes it able to walk out
And visit the Barn Door again: I could
Say much more, but I'd rather have you
Come so much nearer pardon, as t'accuse
Your self by your own mouth.

How grave the Rogue was?

(I'll do 't as strictly as mine Enemy.)

I cannot hold; I'll break in as I am,
And take my vengeance whiles my furie's hot.

Repress it Sir a while; h' hath but begun.

Then thus he dralls it out. (I do confess
I've been addicted to frugality.)
Son do not mince; pray call it Covetousness.
( Imprimis It hath ever been my custom
To ride beyond an Inn to save my horse meat.
Item, When once I had done so, and found
No entertainment, I beguiled the children
Of their parched peas, my Man being left to that
We make the emblem of mortality:)
What? grass you mean? (or sweet Hay which you please.)

Me thinks this 's truly coming to a Reckoning,
He doth account for's sins with Item so.

( Item I've often bought a Cheapside Custard,
And so refreshed my soul under my Cloak,
As I did walk the streets.) Cloaking of sins,
Although they be but eating sins, I do
Pronounce most dangerous. (I find this so,
I'd almost lost mine Eyes by it being justled.)

O thou rich soul of Roguery.

(Moreover
I once sung Psalmes with Servants where I lodged,
And took part with 'em in their lovely Relics;
Truly my soul did lust, they were Temptations.)
What sing that you might eat? It is the sin
O'th'Brethren Son; but that their Relics are
Whole widows houses.

O thou preaching Devil!

( Item I entered into a Chandlers shop,
And eat my bread in secret, whiles my man
Fed on the wholesome steem of Candle sewet.
Item, which grieves me most, I did make bold
With the Black Puddings of my needy Taylor;
Satan was strong, they did provoke me much.)

Wretch that I was to trust my bosom to
One so exactly bad, that if the book
Of all men's lives lay open to his view
Would meet no sin unpractised by himself.
I will rush in.

Good Sir keep close a while,

I see no tears, no penetentiall tears.
(Alas! I cannot weep, mine Eyes are Pumice.
But Alms I hope may yet redeem.) Alms given
In a large manner Son. (Won't fifty pounds
Wipe off my score?) If doubled't may do something.
(Can I be saved no cheaper? take this then
And pray for me.) With that I thus dismissed him.
Blessed Son, for now I dare pronounce thee blessed,
Being thou'st powered thus out thy soul -- The wolf!
The wolf! 'sfoot peace, we're in the noose:
We are betrayed, yon's Meanwell and the Knight --
Truly he is as good a man as any
I ever yet confessed -- don't look that way --
A very honest charitable man,
Full of sincerity, and true devotion.

Patience it self would now turn furious,
Let's for some Officers.

Discovered all!
Religion is unlucky to me.

Man!
Perfidious man! there is no trust in thee!

I never liked this Meanwell; I did always
See treachery writ in's forehead: I well hoped
H'ad been in Prison with his wench.

leave railing.
Along with me. There is left one way more;
The Cat may yet perhaps light on all four.

what gone? upon my life they did mistrust.

They are so beaten that they smell an Officer,
As Crows do Powder.

Watchman call you forth
The Mistress of the house, Imprimis, for
They have their lurking hole near hand most certain.

Denuncio vobis gaudium magnum,
Robertus de Tinea electus est in sedem Hospitalem,
Et assumit sibi nomen Galfridi.
Joy comes to our house. I Robert Moth am
Chesen into thylk Hospital seat*
Thylk Basin of Jone Potluck, Vintners Widow*
And do transmue my name to Giffery.
New foysons bin ygraced with new Titles.
Come buss.

Fie! Mr Giffery I swear
You make my ashamed before all this Company.

Sir, if you be the Master of this house,
You've harbor'd here a company of cheating Villains,
Which we are come to apprehend.

Pray y' look,
Search every Corner, here's no cheats. I'm sure
The house was clear before your Worship entered.

Make fast the Doors for fear they do escape.
Let's in and ferret out these cheating Rakehels.

'Tis very certain they are not in the house.

They had no time to get away.

Why then,
It may be being they are such cunning Fellows,
They have the trick of going invisible.

There's no place left unsearched but Pots and Mouseholes.

They're either gone or in the House that's certain.

That cannot be; the Doors were shut I'm sure,
And so they could not get out; the Rooms then are
All searched, and so they cannot be within.

I'll lay my neck to a farthing, then they're vanished.

Sunk like the Queen, they'll rise at Queenhive sure.

Most certain these are two of them: for this*
Old Knave, I'll take my Oath that he is one.

Confess, confess, where are your other Comrads?

I am as honest as the skin that is
Between thy Brows?

What skin between my Brows?
What skin thou knave? I am a Christian;
And what is more, a Constable; what skin?

You are mistaken friends.

I cry you mercy.

The Constable may call you any thing
In the Kings name upon suspicion.

We're cheated friends; these men of the Ordnary
Have gulled us all this while, and now are gone.

I am undone. Ne'er let me live if that
I did not think the would gull me, I perceive
Fancy doth much; see how 'tis come to pass.

Where is my Son God bless him? where is Andrew?
Pray God they have not taken him along;
He hath a perilous wit to be a cheat;
He'd quickly come to be his Majesties Taker.

I took one Andrew Credulous this morning
In dishonest Adultery with a Trull.
And if he be your Son he is in Prison.

Their villainy of my life. Now as I am
A Freeman and a Grocer, I had rather
Have found forty pounds; I pray go fetch him.

I'm sorry that your Son takes these lewd courses;
He is not fit to make a Husband of.

Do not condemn before you hear. I'll warrant
Though he be guilty yet he's innocent.

Hent him, for dern love Hent him; I done dread
His Visage foul, yfrounct with glowing eyn.

I come to excuse my ruder usage of you.
I was in drink when that I did it: 'twas
The Plot of those base Knaves, I hear are gone,
To teach me valour by the strength of Wine;
Naming that courage which was only fury.
It was not wilfully.

I do not reche
One bean for all. This Buss is a blive guerdon.
Hence Carlishnesse yferre. 'Tis a sooth saw,
Had I but venged all mine herme,
Mine Cloak had not been furred half so werme.

Now Sir you shall hear all. Come Andrew tell me,
How came thou hither?

Truly Mr Meanwel
Told me that I should meet with Mrs Jane,
And there I found her Chamber-maid.

D'y' see?
Your Chamber-maid Sir Thomas; out you whore.

Take heed what you say Father, she's my wife.

I would you're in thy grave, then 'twere the better
Fortune of the two.

Indeed this reverend Man
Joined us in the Prison.

Marriage is a Bond,
So no place fitter to perform it in.

Send for my Daughter hither, we'll know all.
What are you Sir?

A workman in the Clergy.

Yes, this is one I took at the Window singing,
With these three other vagrant Fellows here.

I was in body there, but not in mind,
So that my sin is but inchoately perfect,
And I though in a fault did not offend,
And that for three reasons. First, I did yield
Only a kind of unwilling consent.
Secondly, I was drawn as 'twere by their
Impulsive gentleness. Mark Sir I'm strong.
Thirdly, I deemed it not a womans-shambles:
Fourthly and lastly, that I sung was only
An holy wish. Once more Beloved.

Peace!
Y'have said enough already. How came you
To sing beneath the Window?

Mr Hearsay
Told us that Mr Meanwell was new married,
And thought it good that we should gratify him,
And show our selves to him in a Festennine.

That Rascal Meanwel was the cause of all,
I would I had him here.

Why? this is he,
Sr Robert Littleworth his Son, he hath
Disclosed their villainies; he is no cheat.

God save you Mr Credulous; you have
Forgotten me perhaps, I'm somewhat changed,
You see your lost man's found; your Vagabond
Appears at last.

Go, you are a gibing scab:
Leave off your flouting; you're a beardless Boy;
I am a Father of Children.

And your Son
Will be so shortly, if he have not ill luck.
To vex you more, that hundred pounds you sent
To Mr Caster, Shape in the habit of
A Country fellow gulled you of.

That Rascal;
Thou show thy wit to abuse an old man thus.
As God shall mend me I will hamper thee.
Thou'st been disguised here all this while, thou hast;
Would I were braid in mine own mortar, if
I do not call the in Question the next Term
For counterfeiting of the Kings Subjects.
Come away from him Sirrah, come along.

There's a Trunk they've left behind; I have
Seized it for you; so that you'll be no loser.

If you can find a way whereby I may
Reward this courtesy of yours, I shall
Confess my self engaged doubly to you,
Both for the benefit and its requital.

The appearance of your Daughter here suggests
Something to ask, which yet my thoughts call boldness.

Can she suggest yet any good, that is
So expert grown in this flesh Brokery?

O do not blot that Innocence with suspicion,
Who never came so near a blemish yet,
As to be accused. To quit you of such thoughts
I did receive a tempting letter from
That Strumpet that's gone out (as sin is bold
To try even where no hope is) I made promise,
But to secure my self, and withal sound
The affections of young Credulous unto
Your virtuous Daughter, told him he should meet her
Where I agreed to meet her Chambermaid.
The blame must all be mine.

'Tis her deliverance.
She hath escaped two Plagues, a lustful fool.

I dare not challenge her I do confess,
As a reward due to my service, and
If you deny her me, assure your self
I'll never draw her from obedience:
I will not love her to procure her ruin,
And make my affection prove her Enemy.

You speak most honestly, I never did
Think ill of your intents, but always gave
A testimony to your life as large
As were your merits. But your fortunes are
Unequal, there's the want.

What's there defective
Love shall supply: True, Mr Credulous
Is a rich man, but yet wants that which makes
His riches useful, free discretion.
He may be something in the Eye of the World;
But let a knowing man that can distinguish
Between Possessions, and good parts, but view him,
And prize impartially, he will be rated
Only as Chests, and Caskets, just according
To what he holds. I value him, as I
Would an Exchequer, or a Magazine.
He is not virtuous, but well stored, a thing
Rather well victualled then well qualified.
And if you please to cast your Eye on me,
Some moneys will call back my Fathers Lands
Out of his lime-twig fingers, and I shall
Come forth as gay as he.

I'll strive no longer
For fear I seem t'oppose felicity.
If she'll give her consent you're one.

It is
The voice of Angels to me: I had thought
Nothing in all the store of nature could
Have added to that love, wherewith I do
Reverence that name, my Father, till that you
Spoke this.

I know your former Loves; grow up
Into an aged pair, yet still seem young.
May you stand fresh, as in your Pictures still,
And only have the reverence of the Aged.
I thank you for your pains Mr Constable,
You may dismiss your Watch now.

A pox on it!
That after all this ne'er a man to carry
To Prison? must poor Tradesmen be brought out
And no body clapped up?

That you may not want
Employment, friends take this I pray and drink it?

Sir, when you're cheated next we are your servants --

LYe thou there Watchman; how the knave that's looked for
May often lurck under the Officer!
Invention I applaud thee.

London air
Me thinks begins to be too hot for us.

There is no longer tarrying here, let's swear
Fidelity to one another, and
So resolve for New England.

'Tis but getting
A little Pigeon-hole reformed Ruff --

Forcing our Beards into th'Orthodox bent --

Nosing a little Treason against the King;
Bark something at the Bishops, and we shall
Be easily received.

No fitter Place.
They are good silly People; Souls that will
Be cheated without trouble: One eye is
Put out with Zeal, the other with Ignorance,
And yet they think they're Eagles.

We are made
Just fit for that Meridian: no good work's
Allow'd there; Faith, Faith is that they call for,
And we will bring it 'em.

What Language speak they?

English, and now and then a Root or two
Of Hebrew, which we'll learn of some Dutch Skipper
That goes along with us this Voyage; Now
We want but a good Wind, the Brethrens sighs
Must fill our sails. For what old England won't
Afford, New England will. You shall hear of us
By the next Ship that comes for Proselytes.
Each soil is not the good mans Country only;
Nor is the lot his to be still at home:
We'll claim a share, and prove that Nature gave
This Boon, as to the good, so to the knave.

WE have escaped the Law, but yet do fear
Something that's harder answered, your sharp Ear.
O for a present slight now to beguile
That, and deceive you but of one good smile!
'Tis that must free us; the Author dares not look
For that good fortune to be saved by's Book.
To leave this blessed soil is no great woe;
Our griefe's in leaving you, that make it so.
For if you shall call in those Beams you lent,
'Twould even at Home create a Banishment.


