SAcred to your Delight
Be the short Revels of this Night;
That Calm that in yond Myrtles moves,
Crown all your Thoughts, and Loves:
And as the fat all Yew-tree shows
No Spring among those happy Boughs,
So be all Care quite banished hence
Whiles easy Quiet rocks your Sense.
We cannot here complain
Of want of Presence, or of Train;
For if choice Beauties make the Court,
And their Light guild the Sport,
This honoured Ring presents us here
Glories as rich and fresh as there;
And it may under Question fall,
Which is more Court, This, or White-Hall.
Be it so. But then the Face
Of what we bring fits not the Place,
And so we shall pull down what ere
Your Glories have built here:
Yet if you will conceive, that though
The Poem's forced, We are not so;
And that each Sex keeps to it's Part,
Nature may plead excuse for Art.
As then there's no Offence
Given to the Weak or Stubborn hence,
Being the Female's Habit is
Her own; and the Male's his:
So (if great things may steer by less)
May you the same in looks express:
Your Wear is Smiles, and Gracious Eyes;
When ere you frown 'tis but disguise.

ANd if you see not Women plead, an judge,
Raise, and depress, reward, and punish, carry
Things how they please, and turn the Politic door
Upon new hindges very shortly, never
Believe the Oracle.

Could I see it 'twould prove
An Antidote against old Age, and make me
Grow younger still without Expense or Art.

You sin past pardon Rhodia, if you doubt it.

The plot's most firm and strong.

The Means advised.

The carriage hitherto successful; we
Gain daily to our side.

Do they come in?

As to a Marriage; Offer money, Plate,
Jewels, and Garments, nay the Images
Of their Male-Gods.

The very name of Rule
Raises their Bloods, and makes 'em throw their Wealth
Away as heartily, as if they were
Young Heirs, or old Philosophers.

Why then,
There's one care saved Cosmeta.

What's that pray?

I was preparing strong Preservatives
Against our Lords came home, for fear of fainting
At their Arrival.

They'd have smelt indeed
Of Labour, Sweat, Dust, Man, and Victory.

And such gross Rustic scents, that a Court nose
Without the patience of a Stoic, could not
Have possibly endured them,

I believe
They'd have increased the Bill, and some would weekly
Have died of the Lords Return from the Cretan War:
What growth's your Plot of Madam?

O it ripens
Past expectation! See, Besides our selves
Eleven Court. Ladies on the Roll already;
Hyantha then sends word, that ten, or twelve
Very substantial Countrey-Ladies have
Subscribed three days ago.

My Province here,
The City-wives, swarm in, strive, and make means
Who shall command their Husbands first.

And then
Of Country Gentlewomen, and their eldest daughters,
More than can write their Names; 'Tis now past danger.

But, Madam, how'l you gain the men at home?

For that brace half of Courtiers there, Ganyctor,
Lerinus, and Iringus, they are mine,
Fast in the Net, if I but pitch it only.

Look where they come, pray swear 'em presently.

I'Ll give 'em but my hand to kiss, and 'twill
Bind 'em as fast, as if it were the holiest
Of the best Sibyls Leaves.

Favour your tongues;
Let's lie in Ambush here a while, and listen
What they discourse of.

Why of Women I warranty'.

Peace Rhodia, peace, close sweet Pandena, close!

Lerinus, this hath been the worst Spring that
I ever knew.

Faith it has', for Flora
Still challenged it before, but now Bellona
Hath got the time: Roses and Violets were
The fruit of the Season formerly, but now
Laying, and raising Sieges: Building up
And pulling down of Castles; Manning, and
Demolishing of Forts have signed the Months.

Where beauteous Ladies slumbered, were guarded
By the enamoured Lizards (as if Cadmus
In envy had reserved some Serpents teeth
And sown 'em there) hard watchings and rough Guards
Fill and make up the field.

Most smoothly said,
And like a Cowardly Poet.

There's a fear
The Women too will rise at home.

Their fingers
Itch to be tamp'ring with the wheels of the State.

'Tis very well my Lord Olyndus then
Is left at home.

How does his Lordship now?
Still angry that his Majesty would not let
His Sickness go against the Enemy?

He finds the hardest Wars at home, he hath
Visits, and Onsets, that molest him more
Than all his griefs. He now complains of health;
The eager Ladies do besiege him hourly,
Not out of love so much, as want of men;
Any thing now, that wears but Breeches only,
Is plotted, and projected for as much
As a new Fashion, or an Office 'bove Stairs,

They do call this their time of Persecution,
Swear they are living Martyrs.

Then the Punishment
Must make 'em so; I'm sure the cause will never.

A man is striven for as eagerly
As the last loaf in a great depth of Famine.

You won't believe what I shall tell you now;
Pandena and sweet Rhodia at this instant
Both love me, hate each other, eager Rivals;
The one enshrines her Mellons in pure Crystal,
And as the fruit doth ripen, so her hopes
Of me do ripen with it --

Monstrous fellow!)

The other counts her Apricots, and thinks
So many kisses grow there; lays 'em naked
And open to the Sun, that it may freely
Smile on her vegetable Embraces.

Good! do you hear this, Madam?)

Peace and let him on.

The one presents me, and the other presents me
Gums, Spicknard-boxes, Fruits, and early Roses,
Figs, Mushrooms, Bulbi, and what not? I am
More reverenced than their Houshold-God, and taste
Their store before him still.

Close yet for my sake.)

And proud Cosmeta --

Nay you must hear't out too.)

She, that, if there were Sexes 'bove the Moon,
Would tempt a Male Idea, and seduce
A Separate Hee-Substance into Lewdness,
Hath smiled, glanced, winked, and trod upon my toes,
Sent smooth Epistles to me, whom I let
Pass unregarded, as a suing Beauty,
And one that makes my triumph up --
Fair Ladies
You make my Triumph up in that I see you.

What? have you been at the VVars then Captain?

Madam
I've stood of the shore, and wished well to our Fleet.

If that be all, pray how comes so much Crest,
And Scarf, and Boot to be misplaced on you?

Is't not a time of War, dear Lady?

You follow
The times then, though you won't the Camp.

'Tis fit
We should be in the Field-fashion however.

Because you intend the VVars at home perhaps.

Troth the beleagering of you, Lady, will
Hardly deserve the name of a Siege; you'll yield
So easily on the first approach.

You do
Mistake her, Sir, she means, that you intend
To take great Towns at home --

Demolish Castles,
And high-built Pies at once --

Gain Sconces 'twixt
The first and second Course --

And in the virtue
Of the large Cretan Jar kill men at Table.

No Lady, we do stay at home to make 'em.

The Wars indeed 'll exhaust the Kingdom much.

And fit tis that should some way be supplied.

You won't corrupt me, Madam? pray forbear.

No, Sir, I will not do the State that harm;
For the Corruption of one Coward must
Needs be the Generation of another.

I'll warrant th'Issue will be truly valiant.

And how so Captain Stay-by-it?

Madam, he
Can neither fight nor speak: I'll tell you how.
That you're a Coward, Sir, is granted: Thus then;
Either your Father was valiant, or was not.

A very sure division, Lady, that.

If he were valiant, and you a Coward,
'Tis your Sons course next to be valiant;
But if he were not valiant, and that
You are a Coward of a Coward, then
Your Lineal Issue must be valiant needs,
Because two Negatives make an Affirmative.

A most invincible Argument!

This shall not
Serve I assure you, say what e're you will
You shall not reason me to your Bed-side.

No, Sir.

Not though we send you Mellons?

Ripened Hopes?

Apricots, Figs?

Vegetable Embraces.

And smooth Epistles? Go you vile abusers
Of what you cannot compass; because you nourish
Desires, you will discharge the sin on us.

Ladies you're much deceived: had you the Aphorisms
Of you are perfect, that each word should go
With a design, that not an Eye should be
Lift up, or cast down without mystery --

Could you force sighs, feign passions, manage looks,
Season your jests, speak with a Manner still --

Should you consult a Decade of Chambermaids,
And sadly advise with your Crystal Oracles,
In which Attire your Beauties would appear
Most strong; in what contrivance your sweet Graces
Would be most fierce, and overcome Spectators,
You should not have one look to quench the fire.

You shall be Vestals by compulsion still --

You shall make Verses to me e're I've done;
Call me your Caelius, your Corinnus, and
Make me the Man of the Book insome Romance,
And after all I will not yield.

You're got
Into a safe field of Discourse, where you
(...) sure, that Modesty will not suffer us
To answer you in a direct line.

You were
Wont to go whining up and down, and make
Dismal Soliloquies in shady Woods --

Discourse with Trees --

And Dialogue with Eccho's --

Send Messages by Birds, make discreet Thrushes
Your trusty Agents 'twixt your Loves and you --

Which Loves you called Nymphs --

When indeed they were
Milkmaids, or some such Drudges. This your rating
And pricing of your selves, and standing off,
Comes not from any bettering of your Judgements,
But from your Mouth's being out of taste.

Pray y' what
Employment are you fit for?

I'll assure you
None about you.

Their whole Employment is
To go Ambassadors 'twixt retired Ladies --

To ask how this great Ladies Physic wrought --

Give an account of the virtue of her Drugs.

Make perfect Audit of the Tale of sighs
Some little Dog did breath in his first sleep:
Go you Reproach and Refuse of your Country.

You speak most valiantly Heroic Lady.

Pray Venus you permit the Lords to rule
The Common-wealth again, when they come home

Know Sir, they shall not --

And you shall consent,
Aid, and assist us in it in spite of you,
Willing or ^willing, all's one.

We'll leave you.

Your Company grows dangerous.

'Tis half Treason
To hear you talk.

Before you 'tis very safe.
You'll never dare to engage your selves so much
In the Army, as to inform the King of't.

Come,
Let us away too.

We will vex 'em through
All sorts of Torment, meet 'em at each Corner,
Write Satyrs, and make Libels of 'em, put 'em
In Shows, Mock-Shows, Masques, Plays, present 'em
In all Dramatique Poetry: they shall
Be sung in the Markets, we'll not let 'em rest
'Till themselves sue to be of the Female Covenant.

BUt hold, here comes Eumela.

Lady Secretary
Unto our future State, God give you joy.

You bestow Offices, as City Mothers
After their Travail, do give Flowers between
Their House and Juno's Temple, to the next
They meet, or as you do your Ribbands, to
Entangle, not Reward.

Then you are Wise
And Politic still --

Of the Male-faction Lady?

And you will suffer by Prescription still?
But to be serious now; what do you do?

That which you would, if you should come to Rule:
Wake, Sleep, Rise, Dress, Eat, Visit, and Converse,
And let the State alone.

You're very short.

Indeed I am some what now in haste; I'm going
To meet a pair of Ladies, that would willing
Keep their own Sex, and not turn Lords.

You mean

and Malthora, those that are
Sad now, that one day they may be in History
Under the name of Turtles.

What Dialect may
Those Ladies grieve in? Doric or Ionic?
Do they make Verses yet?

Their Manners are
A kind of Satyr upon yours; though they
Intend it not, the people read 'em so.

Because they have laid aside their Jewels, and so
Blinded their Garments --

Because they eat their sweet-meats
In a black Closet, they are counted faithful,
The sole Penelope's of the time, the Ladies
Of the chaste Web in the absence of their Lords.

Your sadness would be such perhaps, if you
Would take the pains to show the Art of Mourning.

Is there another way of grieving then?

This is not grief, but stands to be thought grief:
They are not of such vaunting popular sorrow;
Their Tapers are not died in dismal hue,
And set in Ebon Candlesticks; they wear
No sad black Sarcenet Smocks, nor do they smutch
Their women, to be served by mourning Faces;
This were to grieve to Ostentation,
Not to a real friendship.

Is there friendship
Think you 'twixt man and wife?

You'll say, perhaps,
You, and your Husband, have not been friends yet.

Madam, you prophecy.

I might be thought to have done so,
Had I foretold a truth to come, but this
Is History already.

If they do not this,
Nor wear the day out in a hood winkt 100m,
Where there's no living thing besides the Clock,
Nor yet take Physic to look pale, what do they?

They grieve themselves, their Doctor grieves not for them:
They do that in the Absence of their Lords
That you would in the Presence of your own.

You see we look as fat, and fair as ever --

Your Kitchin's warm, your Box, and Pencils fail not.

-- We are as long in dressing as before --

And have the same Romancys read, the same
Letters brought to you, whilst you're doing it.

-- Sleep, and take rest, as then, and altogether
Speak as much wit as we did before the wars.

And to as little purpose.

Fie Eumela!
That you should be so obstinate, as to hear
Wealth, Honour, Pleasure, Rule, and every good
Knock at your door, and yet not let 'em in.

Madam, I know my Looking-glasse wo'n't show
The altering of the State, when it presents
The changes of my Face, and that I cannot
Order the Kingdom, as I do my Hair.

Yonder's your business; Madam, there are three
Sad things arrived, two Ladies and a Lute.

But shall I write you down before you go
The thirteenth in the Roll of the Asserters
Of Female Liberty?

If Liberty be the thing
You so much stand for, pray you give me mine;
I neither grant, nor yet deny; I will
Consider.

We dismiss you, Madam, then
Unto your serious Counsel.

Fare you well.

OCome, Eumela, thou dost know, without thee
Our thoughts are Deserts, Rocks, and Sands, and all
That either Nature's absent from, or hath
Reserved unto her self alone.

I bring you
Noise, Trouble, Tumult, and the World; but if
There were that power in my worthless presence,
That I could cast a day upon your thoughts,
You should not think of Places that are sacred
To Night, and Silence: Visits still, and Feasts
And the whole Ring and Throng of Mirth should stir
In your delighted Souls.

Prithee Eumela
Is there no secret ancient Grove, that hath
Stood from the birth of Nature to this time,
Whose vast, high, hollow Trees seem each a Temple,
Whose paths no curious Eye hath yet found out,
Free from the Foot and Axe.

If I could tell you
It were found out already.

Hast thou read
Of any Mountain, whose cold frozen top
Sees Hail in the Bed, not yet grown round, and Snow
In the Fleece, not Carded yet, whose hanging weight
Archeth some still deep River, that for fear
Steals by the foot of't without noise.

Alas!
These are the things, that some poor wretched Lover
Unpitied by his scornful Shepherdess
Would wish for, after that he had looked up
Unto the Heavens, and called her Cruel thrice,
And vowed to dye.

I prithee pardon me;
I live without my self.

But I have read
Of a tall secret Grove, where loving Winds
Breathing their sighs among the trembling Boughs,
Blow Odes, and Epods; where a murmuring Brook
Will let us see the Brother to our Sun,
And shew's another World there under water.

Prithee let's go, and find it out, and live there.

Our Ancient Poet Linus somewhere sings
Of some such thing.

Thou always dost deceive us;
Thou told us of an Echo too, and when
Thou brought'st us to it, thou had put Philaenis
Behind the Wall, to give us all the Answers.

Yes, and thy bringing in my Father's Dwarf
With Bow and Wings, and Quiver at his back,
Instead of Cupid, to conveigh us Letters
Through the Air from hence to Crete, was but a trick
To put away our sadness. But I had
Almost forgot what we came for, I prithee
Take up the Lute there, and let's hear the Ode;
That thou did promise us; I hope 'tis sad.
TO carve our Loves in Myrtle rinds,
And tell our Secrets to the Woods,
To send our Sighs by faithful Winds,
And trust our Tears unto the Floods,
To call where no man hears,
And think that Rocks have Ears*
To Walk, and Rest, to Live, and Dye,
And yet not know Whence, How, or Why;
To have our Hopes with Fears still checked,
To credit Doubts, and Truth suspect,
This, this is that we may
A Lover's Absence say.
Follies without, are Cares within;
Where Eyes do fail, there Souls begin.

Thou art a harmless Siren fair Eumela.

'Tis very true indeed; thou feed at once,
And dost correct our follies: but were thou
As we, thoud'st do the like.

For Love's sake tell me
Why should you seek out Groves, where the bright Sun
Can make no day, although he throw upon 'em
Whole floods of Light, Places where Nature will
Be blind in spite of Him? Why should you fancy
Caves fit to write sad Revelations in?
Or why a Lover stretched on shaggy Moss
Between two Beds of Poppey to procure
One Minut's slumber?

These, Eumela, are not
The Journeys but Digressions of our Souls,
That being once informed with Love, must work,
And rather wander, than stand still. I know
There is a Wisdom to be shown in Passions;
And there are stayed and settled griefs: I'll be
Severe unto my self, and make my Soul
Seek out a Regular Motion, towards him
Whom it moves to, and thou shalt shortly see
Love bleed, and yet stoop to Philosophy.

MAdam I must away; Olyndus yonder
Is hasting towards me.

Farewell Eumela,
Be ever happy.

And may some good God
Cherish thy Loves, as thou dost cherish others.

My Lord Olyndus, what's your business to me?

Virtuous Eumela, you must do me the favour
To give this Letter into the Princess's hands
With all the speed and secrecy you may.

I carry with me Night, and wings my Lord.

O my Olyndus, were there not that thing
That we call Friend, Earth would one Desert be,
And Men Alone still, though in Company.

GIve me my Javelin; hangs my Fashion right?
Three Ladies say thou? So! go fetch 'em in now.
What? goes the Tilting on I mentioned? Is there
No Just, nor Tournament yet granted out?

You're well appointed Madam.

How I hate
That Name of Madam, it befits a Chamber:
Give me the words of the Field, such as you'd give
To fairer Ladies pricking o'r the Plains
On foaming Steeds. But I do pardon you.
Shows not this Scarf and Fashion far more comely,
Than paltry piebald Ribbands, and young Bodkins?

You wear a rigid Beauty, fierce Delights.

Your Pleasures threaten, and your stubborn Graces
Tempt, and defend at once.

Why now y' are right.
And what say thou, my little Noon-tide shadow?
My trusty Pigmy?

Now indeed, and truly --

Hell of these simpering Protestations!
Thou sinful Inch of short Mortality,
Give Ear to my Instructions: here I swear
By the Sacred Order of my Lady-Errantry,
If thou effeminat'st thy discourse once more
With these precise, minced, Little*Sisters-Vows,
Thy breath is forfeit.

By that bloody Fashion --

I there's a Wench, spit from the mouth of Mavors
Bellona was thy Nurse.

-- And that fierce Javelin,
I'd rather see a Plume o'rshade your back
With a large, generous Carelessness; than a bunch
Of fiddling Feathers hang before you, just
As modest fig-leaves do in naked Pictures.

Thou little 'Vantage of Mankind, thou Grain
That Nature put into the Scales to make
Weight to the World, thou take me very much.

The Sable Fan, which you wore last upon
Your white Lawn-Apron, made you show just like
The Ace of Clubs, with a black spot in the middle.

Why how now little Mischief? is't not knavish
And waggish, like a very Page of the Court?

What use do you mean her for?

Have you not read?
To summon Knights from th'tops of Castle walls.

I fancy those brave Scythian Heroines;
Those Noble, valiant Amazons like you.

Nature did show them only as my Types.

There's nothing wanting but adventures: We
Shall quickly now requite the Errant Knights
That help distressed Ladies to their wishes.

I'll disobliege our Sex. If that you find
Any imprisoned, or enchanted
Tell him Machessa's his deliverance.
Said I Machessa? Hold! that word Machessa
Sails through my Lips with too small breath. I'll have
A Name that Mouths shall travel with: let's see?
We'll put a Prologue to it: So! I have it;
It is concluded -- Monster-quelling-Woman-
Obliging-Man-delivering-Machessa,
She, She is his deliverance: tell him so.

Do she that can; I would you'd change your Name;
'Tis longer than your Self, and if it were
Some three foot shorter, 'twere as high as I am.

See who 'tis knocks; you do not know your Office;
Bellona, hear my Name, and send Adventures.

THe Courtiers Madam; work for us! remember.
Pray stand aside as soon as we begin.

Save you Machessa.

I've a Name besides,
By which I mean Posterity shall know me;
The word is grown: 'tis Monster-quelling-Woman-
Obliging-Man-delivering-Machessa.

Sweet Monster-quelling-Woman-ob-and so forth-
Wee've brought a business to you.

Valiant Captain,
What is the Affront that's most in fashion now?

why do you ask me Lady?

Because you're wont
To receive most, and so can tell the newest;
Which now perhaps you come to have redressed.

What is the strength of the Subject think you Sir?

Why what know I?

Who should Sir, if not you
That have so oft been beaten by all sorts,
And all degrees of men?

Which Lady now
Sends you most Favours?

Which most Mellons?

Which
Most Gums, and Spikenard Boxes?

Who presents you
With the best Figs?

The plumpest Bulbi?

You,
And you, and you; you will not worry me?

By your Periwig, Captain, but we will.

By your
False Teeth we will.

And your glasse-Eye we will.

For Jove's sake, Madam.

S'heart I'm not breath-proof.

Alas, we have not begun yet.

Let's beseech you.

We will not be beseeched.

Think upon Rest,
As a past pleasure of your youth --

You shall not
Be idle quietly in the Presence Chamber.

You shall not tell lies in quiet to the Waiters.

Nor, when you've done, share in their meat in quiet.

We'll meet you at the Bath --

You shall not wash
Without disturbance.

At the Theater too --

You shall not misconceive good Comedies
Without vexation --

And at Flora's Park. --

You shall not cheat at little Horse-races
Without discovery.

In the Temple then --

You shall not kneel in quiet at the Altars --

We'll hearken, and observe --

You shall not have
So much free time, as to appoint a meeting
With her kneels next y' --

If that you're bid to Supper --

We'll stay you, though y'have got a warrant to
Ride post to eat.

Good Madam, be content.

And if you're set --

Hell, and Furies --

You
Shall rise, and prove perfidious to the hot
Crammed Fowl upon your trencher.

We'll subscribe --
Are you content?

And when you're weary of
All this --

We'll do all this again.

We'll keep you,
As they do Hawks --

Watching until you leave
Your wildness, and prove inward.

Hear y'Madam --

We will subscribe.

Come quickly then, lest that
We take a toy, and will not let you.

Stay.
The Gods have destined this should be the first
Of my Adventures -- go -- you're free.

Our thanks
Will be too small a Recompense.

The Deed
Will pay it self; Vertue's not Mercenary:
Or, if it be, mine is not. So; I do
Begin to come in Action now. To do
And suffer, doth engross whole Nature, and
I will engross both them; I'll set all free,
But only Glory; her I'll Captive lead,
Making her Trumpet only sound my Name,
That is, the Sexe's. I am all their Fame.
How goes your Business on?

Virtue and Fortune
Join in it both.

Eumela is come over,
Hath undertook the Machine, and hath promised
To bring it to that pass, that neither Queen,
Nor Princess shall gainsay't. Florina, and
Malthora both have given in their Reasons,
Which I have answered, and convinced.

If that
It come to any danger, let me know it.

Eumela welcome; does your business thrive?

Too fast.

What? have you sent to the Ports?

All's safe.
Machessa's ours you say --

Yes, and Philandra.

Cleora and Earina busy Sticklers,
Oenone and Hermione sent as Emissaries
To try the farther Cities -- Paria hath
A pretty stroke among the Privy Chamber.

You've lost no time.

Nor will, Cosmeta --
Psecas, and Dorcas, Cloe, and Plecusa,
Phillis, and Glauca, swore this morning all
As I was dressing.

On what Book I pray?

On the Greek Epigtams, Madam, or Anacreon,
I know not which: they bind alike.

What hopes
Have we of the Women of Lapythia?
How stand the Dames of Salamin affected?

Why Lycas sent to give them a fair Largess
Of Loaves and Wine, then, whiles that well cheers 'em,
Eugenia brings 'em a most promising Answer
From some corrupted Oracle, and so leads
The superstitious Souls to what she pleases.
This is a ground, a thing supposed. The Plot
Is wholly now upon Florina, there
It knits, and gathers, breaks, and joins again;
She's Wise, and Noble -- we must find a way
Not thought on yet to gain her.

But the Queen
And Princess --

They perceive the business ripens,
That it doth move the limbs, and can for need
Shift, and defend it self, and therefore do
By me make promise of a general meeting
As soon as may be: in the mean time, we have
Full leave to gather any Contributions,
Gold, Silver, Jewels, Garments, any thing
Conducing to maintain the Public Cause.

Goddess Eumela!

Go, fall off, the Princess
Is at hand -- I'lgoe mingle Counsels.

Eumela you are come most opportunely.

This to your Highness from my L. Olyndus.

You're happy that your Love is with you still,
That you can see, and hear, and speak to him.
Venus doth favour you more than the whole
Kingdom Eumela; Mars for her sake's kind to you.

I must confess it happy: but Olyndus
Cannot be brought to think it so; he fears
His sickness will by some be construed Love;
Which, if his Valour in his Country's danger
Durst give the upper hand, even at the Altar,
Though Venus did her self look on, he would pull
Out of his Breast, and cast aside, as some
Unhallowed part of the Sacrifice.

His King
Hath found him truly valiant. Ever I open
This Paper, you must state one Point, Eumela,
Suppose me busy in the holy Rites
Of our adored Venus: if by chance
I cast mine Eye upon some Princely visage,
And feel a Passion, is the Goddess wronged?
Or the Religion less?

Our Loves what are they
But hourly Sacrifices, only wanting
The press and tumult of Solemnity?
If then in the heat and Achme of Devotion
We drink a new fiame in, can it be ought
But to increase the Worship? and what Goddess
Was ever angry that the holy Priest
Increased her Fires, and made 'em burn more clear?

True, but suppose the Face then seen doth never
Appear more after, is not that a sign
The Goddess is displeased?

That it a while
Appears not, is to cherish, not extinguish
The Passion thence conceived: as Persecutions
Make Piety stronger still, and bring the Afflicted
Unto the glory of renowned Martyrs.

But is there then no hope but that? Alas!
This man perhaps might perish in some War
As now (But O ye Gods avert the Fate!)
And then the unhappy sighing Virgin fall
From that her feigned Heaven.

It cannot be;
Venus destroys her Deity, if she show
And then delude: she will not lose what once
S^' hath made her own; She that knits hearts by the Eyes,
Will keep the knot fast by their Intercourse;
If you have once but seen, and loved, permit
The rest unto the Deity. Will it please
Your Highness to peruse the Letter? 'tis
Of moment I presume: why blush you Madam?
And, while I ask you, why look pale?

Eumela,
The supposition's truth; lately, thou know,
I did assist at Venus Sacrifice;
He, whom I saw, and loved, saw, and loved too,
And now hath writ -- but let Olyndus tell him
I will not see him, though he were the Soul
Of all Mankind.

I will.

Hear me -- yet if
He have a true undoubted Friend, he may
send him, I'll meet him in the Myrtle Grove,
And tell him more.

I will obey.

But stay --
And yet that's all.

I go.

The Soul doth give
Brightness to the Eye, and some say, That the Sun,
If not enlight'ned by the Intelligence
That doth inhabit it, would shine no more
Than a dull Clod of Earth: so Love, that is
Brighter than Eye, or Sun, if not enlight'ned
By Reason, would so much of Lustre lose
As to become but gross, and foul Desire;
I must refine his Passion; None can woo
Nobly, but he that hath done Nobly too.

YOur Highness here alone?

But so long only
As gives you leave to ask. What? sad Florina?
I'd thought your Soul had dwelt within it self,
Been single a full presence, and that you
Had set your self up your own Trophy now
Full of true Joy.

Tis hard to cast off that
That we call Passion, we may veyl, and cloud it,
But't will break out at last. True Joy is that
Which now I cannot have.

How so Florina?

True Joy consists in Looks, and Words, and Letters,
Which now an Absence, equal to Divorce,
Hath wholly barred us of.

Looks, Words, and Letters!
Alas they are but only so much Air
Diversely formed, so the food of that
Changeable Creature; not the Viands of
True constant Lovers.

But, if I see not,
Is not my Joy grown less, who could not love
'Till I first saw? and if I hear not, can
I have the perfect Harmony of pleasure,
Who something ow to words that I first yielded?

Who ever yet was won by words? we come
Conquered, and when we grant, we do not yield,
But do confess that we did yield before.
But be those Senses some Contentments, Madam,
You must not yet make them the great, and true
Essential Joy that only can consist
In the bright perfect Union of two Spirits.

But seeing those Spirits cannot work, but by
The Organs of the Body, 'tis required
That (to the full perfection of this Joy)
Bodies should be near-Neighbours too.

I must
Confess that I subscribe unto the Princess,
And somewhat too to you: the Presence may
Conveigh, and fill, and polish Joy; but yet
To see, or hear, cannot be Joys themselves.
And where this Presence is denied, the Soul
Makes use of higher, and more subtle means,
And by the strength of thought creates a Presence
Where there is none.

Alas! how we do lose
Our selves in speculation of our Loves,
As if they were unbody'd Essences!

I would
Eumela now were here; She would tell us, All
Is the same Joy, as Love from sight, or thought,
Is the same Love; and that Love's turning to
Either of them, is only but a Needle
Turning to several points, no diverse flame,
But only divers degrees of the self-same.
Come Madam let's away and seek her out.

NOt see me, say you, though I were the Soul
Of all Mankind?

They were the words returned --
But if he have a true undoubted friend,
^nd him, I'll tell him more.

Have I deserted
^y Country, now in danger, where I had
^ook Honour Captive, and for ever fixed her
^s an Intelligence unto my Sword,
^o move and guide it? have I scorned my Fortunes,
^nd laid aside the Prince? have I contemned
^hat much prized thing called Life, and wrestled with
^oth Winds and Floods, through which I have arrived
^ither at last? and all this not to see her?

Doth she betray, or undisguise you to
^he State? Doth she forbid you, Sir, to love?
^ffection is not wanting, where 'tis wise;
^he only doth forbid you that you see her.

Only forbid me to be happy, only
^orbids me to enjoy my self; What could
^he more, were I her Enemy? Olyndus
^ast thou at no time told her, that there was
^ Cretan called thee Friend?

Why do you ask?

Perhaps She hath found this way to send for thee.

Though I have thought it worth the boasting, that
^haristus is my friend, yet by that Word,
^acred to Noble Souls, I never had
^o much access to tell her any thing,
Much less my Friendship.

Thou shalt go Olyndus.

When my eyes see her, yours do; when I talk,
Tis you that talk; we are true friends, and one,
^ay that one interchang'd; for I am you.

'Tis true thou art my friend, so much my friend,
That my self am not more my self, than thou art:
^f thou dost go, I go -- But stay -- Did not
^hou say mine eyes were thine? thou did: if that
^e so, then thou must love her too, and then --
Olyndus thou must stay.

She loves you so,
(As my Eumela doth inform me) that
No humane Image can deface the Print
That you have drawn in the Tablet of her Soul.

If that she loves me so, why then she must
Love thee so too; for thou and I are one.

Why then, Sir, if you go your self, the issue
Will be the same however, so, when she
Loves you She'll love me too.

We are both one
In hearts and minds Olyndus: but those Minds
Are clothed with Bodies. Bodies that do oft --
I know not what -- yet thou hast an Eumela,
A fair Eumela trust me -- Thou must go --
But use not any Language, Gesture, Looks,
That may be construed ought above Respect;
For thou art young and Beautiful, and Valiant,
And all that Ladies long for.

When I prove
So treacherous to my Friend, my self, my fair
Eumela, mark me with that hateful brand
That Ignominy hath not discovered yet,
But doth reserve to sear the foulest Monster
That shall appear in Nature.

I believe thee:
Yet something bids me still not let thee go.
But I'll not hearken to it; though my Soul
Should tell me 'twere not fit, I'd not believe
My Soul could think so.

How resolve you then?

Do what thou wilt. I do believe -- and yet
I do -- I know not what -- O my Lucasia!
O my Olyndus! divers ways I bend,
Divided 'twixt the Lover, and the Friend.

MMay't please your Highness, Madam --
I have a friend so much my self, that I
Cannot say he's absent now, yet he hath sent me
To be here present for him: we interchange
Bosoms, and Counsels, Thoughts, and Souls so much,
That he entreats you to conceive you spake
To him in me; All that you shall deposit
Will be in safe, and faithful Ears; the same
Trust you expect from him, shall keep your words,
And the same Night conceal 'em: 'tis Charistus
The noble Cretan.

When you said your Friend,
The rest was needless; I conceive him all
That makes up Virtue, all that we call Good
Whom you Olyndus give your Soul to; yet
I'd rather court his Valour, than his Love,
Did he shine bright in Armour, call for Dangers,
Eager to cut his way through stubborn Troops,
Even this my softness, armed as he, could follow
And prompt his Arm, supply him with fresh Fury,
And dictate higher dangers. Then when Dust
And Blood hath smeared him (a disguise more worthy
Of Princes far, than that he wears) I could
Embrace him fresh from Conquest, and conceive him
As fair as ever any yet appeared
To longing Virgins in their Amorous Dreams.

Fury could never from the Den of danger
Awake that horror yet, that bold Charistus
Durst not attempt, stand equal with, and then
Conquer, and trample, and contemn.

Revenge
And Hate I do confess, may sometimes carry
The Soul beyond it self to do, and suffer:
But the things then are Furious, not Great,
And sign the Actor Headlong, but not Virtuous.

He that can do this, Madam, and Love too,
Must needs be virtuous; that holy Flame
Clean and untainted, as the fresh desires
Of Infant Saints, enters not Souls that are
Of any foul Complexion. He that Loves,
Even in that he Loves, is good: and as
He is no less an Atheist, that denies
The Gods to be most happy, than the Man
That dares Affirm there are no Gods at all;
So he's no less an Heretic, that shall
Deny Love to be Virtuous, than he
That dares Affirm there is no Love at all.

But he hath left his Country now, when that
Her Wealth, her Name, her Temples, and her Altars,
Her Gods, and Liberty, stand yet upon
Th'uncertain Dye; when Danger calls his Arm,
And Glory should arrest his Spirit there;
And this to Court one, whom he knows not, whether
She may think Virtue a mere Airy word,
And Honour but a blast, invented to
Make catching Spirits dare, and do high things.

That you are Virtuous, is a knowledge, that
All must confess they have, but only those
That have not Eyes: For if that Souls frame Bodies,
And that the Excellence of the Architect
Appear in the perfection of the Structure,
Whether you have a Soul enriched with virtues,
Must be a blind Man's doubt: Nature dares not
Thrust out so much deceit into the World;
'Twould make us not believe her works were meant
For true firm Pieces, but Delusions only.

Though I must not agree to you, to pass by
What you have said, If I were Virtuous,
You must confess him so far ignorant yet,
As not to know whether I'd Love, or no.

This Knowledge is of more Extent than the other.
For being that to be loved is the Effect
Of your own worths, you must love all men's Loves
As a Confession of your Graces, that
Your selves have drawn from them. That which your Beauty
Produces, is a Birth as dear unto you,
As are your Children.

Should there more than one
Love us (if this hold) we must love them too,
And so that Sacred Tie that joins the Soul
To one, and but to one, were but a Fable,
A thing in Poetry, not in the Creature.

One is your Trophy: and he Loved as That
The Rest but Witnesses: thus Princes, when
They Conquer Princes, though they only count
Those Names of Glory, and Renown, their Victory,
Take yet their meaner Subjects in, as fair
Accesses to their Triumphs, who, although
They are not the main Prize, are some what yet
That doth confirm that there was worth, and force,
To which the Main did justly yield.

Be it then
That I do love his Love, I am not yet
Bound to accept it in what shape soever
It doth appear; the Manner, Time, and Place
May not be relished, though the thing be liked.

For these he doth expect your Dictates, with
As much Religion, as he would the Answers
Of Sacred Oracles, and with the same
Vow of Performance.

You must tell him then.
He must go back, and there do Honourably;
Succour his Country, cheer the Soldier, fight,
Spend, and disburse the Prince, where ever he goes,
Get him a Name, and Title upon Cyprus.
I will not see him 'till he hath Conquered, till
He hath rid high in Triumph, and when this
Is done, let him consider then, it is
My Father, my Subjects, and my Kingdom
That he hath Conquered.

I am an Agent only,
And therefore must be faithful.

But withal
To show that I reject him not, you may
Tell him, that being he hath such a friend,
Whiles he is absent I will love Olyndus
Instead of him.

But that my Friend is in me
I should have deemed it Sacrilege, to have had
A thought like that suggested. My Charistus,
Were he not something careful in his Love,
(I will not call him Jealous) were beyond
The Lot of Man: I must not tell him all,
Some may be hid; yet how shall I unriddle
The Mystery of this Answer? But the knots
That Love doth tie, himself will only find
The way to loose --

-- And here Charistus comes.
Souls once possessed, as his, are most impatient,
They meet what they should stay for.
Dear Olyndus,
Pardon that I expect not, but make hast
To intercept my Doom Others perhaps
May wait the punctual Minute, and observe
The just and even Period: but Charistus
Doth love too slow, when time, and Sun can bind him
Unto a regular Motion.

Would you had
Been there your self! would you had drunk in all
The Looks, Words, Graces, and Divinities
That I have done! I'm like the Priest that's full
Of his inspiring God, and am possessed
With so much rapture, that methinks I could
Bear up my self without a Wing, or Chariot,
And hoverc'r the Earth, still dropping something
That should take root in Kingdoms, and come up
The Good of people.

Let me ask thee then
As we do those that do come fresh from Visions,
What saw thou there?

That which I see still, that
Which will not out; I saw a Face that did
Seem to participate of Flames, and Flowers;
Eyes in which Light combined with Jet to make
Whiteness be thought the Blot, and Black hereafter
Purchase the Name of Innocence, and Lustre.
The whole was but one solid Light, and had I
Not seen our Goddess rising from the Floods
Pourtray'd less fair, less Goddess, I had thought
The thing I saw, and talked with, must have been
The Tutelar Deity of this our Island.

That I should let thee go! that I should be
So impious to my self, as not to break
Her great Commands, and so become a Martyr
By daring to be happy against her will --
But on Olyndus.

You may think this
The Height, the Acme, and the All of her:
But when I tell you, that She hath a Mind
That hides all this, and makes it not appear,
Disparaging as 'twere, what ever may
Be seen without her, then you'll thus exclame;
Nature, thou were o'rseen to put so mean
A Frontispeece to such a Building.

Give me,
O quickly give me the whole Miracle,
Or presently I am not.

Think, Charistus,
Think out the rest, as 'tis, I cannot speak it.

Alas! what should I think?

Conceive a Fire
Simple and thin; to which that Light we see,
And see by, is so far impure, that 'tis
Only the stain, and blemish of the World;
And if it could be placed with it in one
And the same Tablet, would but only serve
As bound and shadow to it: Then conceive
A Substance that the Gods have set apart,
And when they would put generous Motions
Into a Mortal Breast, do take the Soul
And couch it there, so that what ever we call
Virtue in us, is only but a Turning
And Inclination toward her from whom
This Power was first derived.

What present God
Lent thee his Eyes, and stood blind by, whiles thou
Did gaze, and surfeit on these Glories?

Others
Do Love the shape, the Gesture, and the Man,
But She the Virtue. Mark Charistus. She
Says She could Court you ring'd about with Dangers,
Dote on you smeared, and stiff with hoftile Blood,
Count and exact your wounds, as a due sum
You are to pay to Valour; All which when
I told her was in Love, she said I did
Present a spark, when she desired a full
And glorious Constellation -- to be short,
She says you must go back, do honourably,
Get you a Name upon the Cyprian Forces;
And bids when you have done all this, consider
It is her Father, and his Subjects, and
His Kingdom that you conquer --

And her self
That I shall lose by doing so. If I
Return, and Crete be Conquered, then She will
Count me Spoil, and Luggage; and my Love
Only a Slave's Affection. If I Conquer,
And Cyprus follow my Triumphant Chariot,
My Love will then be Tyranny: and She,
How can she light an Hymeneal Torch
From her loved Countries Flame? I am rejected,
Charistus is a Name of scorn.

What Fates
Dare throw that Name upon my Friend? To show
That she rejects you not, because there is
That Trust, rat Faith, and that Confusion of
Charistus and Olyndus 'twixt us, in the mean
While he is absent, tell him, saith she, that
I'll love Olyndus in his stead.

How! Man
The hast dealt dishonourably. This the Light?
And this the Fire that makes that Light a stain?

This I foretold my self: my good Charistus
Let not your Anger carry you beyond
The bent of Reason; can I give account
Of others Passions? did I first conceive
The words my self; then speak'em?

O ye Gods!
Where is the Faith? where the Olyndus now?
The hast been a Factor for thy self: I'd thought
I'd sent a Friend, but he's returned a Merchant,
And will divide the Wealth.

Far be that Brand
From your Olyndus! far from your Lucasia!
She hath a Face hath so much Heaven in it,
And this Olyndus so much Worship of it,
That he must first put on another Shape,
And become Monster, ever he dare but look
Upon her with a thought that's Masculine.

Peace Treachery! I am too cold; my Anger
Is dull and lazy yet. I'll search that Breast,
And dig out falsehood from the secret'st Corner
In all thy Heart, here, in the very place
That thou hast wronged me.

There is nothing here
That my Charistus knows not. 'Pray you open,
And search, and judge; and when you find all true,
Say you destroyed a Friend.

It is your Art
I see to woo, but I will make you speak
Something that is not Flattery.

Olyndus
Ne'er loved the Man as friend yet, whom he did
Feat as an Enemy. 'I is one part of Valour
That I durst now receive, conceal, and help you,
Here in the Bosom of that State, which hath
Cast out a spear into the Cretan Field,
And bid you War.

Thou hast already here
Betrayed my Love; thy falsehood will proceed
Unto my Person next. I'd thought I'd been
Clasped in Embraces, but I find I am
Entangled in a Net.

You're safe as in
The Bosom of your Father, take this Veyl
Of Passion from your Eyes; and you'll behold
The same Olyndus still.

The same Deceiver,
The same false perjured Man. Draw, or by Heaven,
That now should Thunder and revenge my wrongs,
Thou shalt dye sluggishly.

Recall your self,
And do but hear --

What words a Coward will
Fawn on me with, to keep an abject life,
Not worth the saving.

Witness all ye Gods
That govern Friendship, how unwillingly
I do untie the Knot.

Draw quickly, lest
It may be known I am the Cretan Prince,
And so my juster Fury be not suffered
To scourge a timorous and perfidious Man.

Though thou stand here an Enemy, and we have
The Pledge of all the Cretan State, yet know
Though all our Island's People did look on,
And thou proclaim'st thy self to be the Man,
They should not dare to know the Prince, until
I'd done this Sacrifice to Honour.

So!

I have not long to stay amongst Mortals now,
And then you may search all those Corners that
You talked of in my Heart. But if you find
Ought that is falsehood towards you, or more
Than reverence to Lucasia, may I want
The Honour of a Grave -- Hear O ye Gods,
(Ye Gods whom (but a while) and I am with)
Lucasia is as spotless, as the Seat
That you prepare for Virgin Lovers!

I
Have wronged thee, my Olyndus, wronged thee much,
But do not chide me; there's not life enough
Left in me to make use of Admonition.

If you survive, love your Lucasia; 'twill
Make your Olyndus happy; for the good
Of the surviving Friend, some holy men
Say, doth pertain unto the Friend Departed.

Virtuous Lucasia! and had thou Olyndus
Not been so too, my Gods had fought for me;
But I must dye -- Olyndus.

Heaven forbid
That my Charistus perish! I have only
Strength left to wish: If I can creep yet to thee
I'll help thee all I can.

And I will meet thee;
Let us embrace each other yet. The Fates
Preserve our Friendship, and would have us equal,
Equal even in our Angers: we shall go
Down equal to the Shades both, two ways equal,
As Dead, as Friends. And when Lucasia shall
Come down unto us (which the Heavens forbid
Should be as yet) I'll not be Jealous there.

O Me! Good Heavens! had you the Balsam, Lady,
Now that you told me of, 'twould do somegood.

This is Olyndus, that the honoured Stranger;
Brave Spirits are a Balsam to themselves:
There is a Nobleness of Mind, that heals
Wounds beyond Salves -- look not, but help Philaenis,
Gather the Weapons, and the rest up quickly;
Where two are wronged, I ought to succour both.

MAdam, ne'er fear your Dream, for that is only
The relics of your day-time thoughts, that are
Preserved by'our Soul, to make a Scene in the Night.

Have you not dreamed the like before?

Yes thrice.

Why then Paestanus now hath perished thrice,
Or else y' have sometimes dreamed in vain.

Eumela,
I told her this, and that her troubled Sleep;
Were one Love still waking.

We'll divert
This anxious fear. Reach me the Lute Eumela.
Have you not heard how Venus did complain
For her beloved Adonis? The young Poet,
That was desit'd to give a Language to
The afflicted Goddess, thought her words were these.

VVAke my Adonis, do not dye;
One Life's enough for thee and I.
Where are thy words? thy wiles?
Thy Loves, thy Frowns, thy smiles?
Alas in vain I call;
One death hath snatched 'em all:
Yet Death's not deadly in that Face,
Death in those Looks it self hath Grace.
'Twas this, 'twas this I feared
When thy pale Ghost appeared;
This I presaged when thundering Jove
Tore the best Myrtle in my Grove;
When my sick Rose-buds lost their smell,
And from my Temples untouched fell;
And 'twas for some such thing
My Dove did hang her Wing.
Whither art thou my Deity gone?
Venus in Venus there is none.
In vain a Goddess now am I
Only to Grieve, and not to dye.
But I will love my Grief,
Make Tears my Tears relief;
And Sorrow shall to me
A new Adonis be.
And this no Fates can rob me of, whiles I
A Goddess am to Grieve. and not to Dye.

Madam, they say 'twas in this very Grove
The Goddess thus complained.

HOw now Philaenis?
Are you turned Sewer to the Lady-Errant?

Lady I'm sent to wipe away the Blood
From these two Myrtles.

Bless me! what Blood Philaenis?

I hope the Song will not prove ominous.

'Tis fit we have some Wars at home too, else
My Lady would have no employment left.

What Wars? whose Blood?

A pair of froward Lovers,
Olyndus, and the Stranger, fought, it seems,
Here till they almost killed themselves: and when
Neither did fear, but both did faint, it seems
Olyndus leaned there, and the Stranger there,
And with their Bloods besmeared the Trees a little;
We did not think your Highness should have seen it.

Is this Olyndus way of mingling Souls?

Is this the Others Interchange of Breasts?

O Heavens! durst your Olyndus thus?

O Heavens,
And O ye Gods too! durst that other this?

Did he then stay behind for this Eumela?

And did he leave his Country to destroy
One worth it all, here in our very Bosoms?

H' has ruined one, whose like if Nature will
Show to the World again, she must lay up,
And gather, till she hath store enough of Graces
To throw into the World.

Olyndus stood
As high, and brave as he, his Enemy had
But this advantage of him, that he was
A Cretan, as by Birth, so too in Faith.

Were he the Birth of some unshelter'd Cottage,
He were yet fairer in the Eye of the World
Than ever Olyndus could have been, in that
He was a Princess's thoughts; 'twas I that loved him.

Although the Name of Princess be upon you,
And signs you Dread, and Sovereign, yet I must
Tell you that Love's a Princess too in me,
And stamps as much Heroic Majesty
Upon my Thoughts, as Birth hath done on yours.

Though, as a Princess, I could make thy Love
And thee forgotten Names, yet I depose
My self, and am thy Equal.

'Tis no need
That you descend, Love carries up Eumela
To be as high as is her Princess, and
In this sad Fate places her equal with
Her Dread Lucasia.

Hear, hear this brave man!
And if thou liv'st revenge it on Olyndus.

And thou the Spirit of my dear Olyndus,
Be thou still worthy, still thy self. Speak thou
O Nature, was there not the same clay knead
To make our Hearts? did not the same Fire kindle
Our Souls? and thou, O Love, was't not the same
Metal that wounded both? you must not count
The Princess into the worth of your Affection;
Love when he balances the Hearts that come
Under his Power, casts not in their Births,
Fortunes, and Titles.

Would some powerful God
Would change our Persons, and make thee Lucasia,
And me Eumela, that I might avow
The justice of my Love in spite of State.

Forbear Eumela.

'Tis the Princess speaks.

Nor Prince, nor Subject speaks, but Love in both.

HEre's one can tell you all.

Say, good Machessa,
How doth the Stranger?

Lives Olyndus yet?

Both live, but wounded much, yet hopes of both;
For they are Friends, and as their Minds have closed,
Their wounds may shortly too.

How fell they out?

I heard the Stranger, Madam, thus confess,
As our Olyndus did embrace him; Thou
Were honourable, my Olyndus, ever;
But I was foul, and Jealous: then Olyndus
Fell on his Neck, told him 'twas only heat,
And strength of Love; and vowed he'd never tell
The cause and ground of the Quarrel: but the Stranger
Swore by his Gods, and Altars, that he would
Go find, and tell, and ask the Deity
Forgiveness first, then him -- I heard no more
But only sighs from either.

'Twas too much --
That I should throw away my grieffor one
That durst have such a thought! Charistus, you
And I are both deceived in one another;
And, poor Olyndus, dearly hast thou paid
For both our Errors --
-- Machessa, as you love me
Be careful of Olyndus, for the other --
My care hath been more than he's worth already --

Eumela,
The Princess is much troubled, pray heaven your freedom
Did not offend her Highness.

I hope it did not:
Madam, if too much Love made me forge;
And pass the bounds of Duty, humbly, I beg
Your Graces pardon, beseeching you t'impute
My folly to my Passion.

Call it not Passion,
'Twas Reason to Contest: Love's Kingdom is
Founded upon a Parity; Lord, and Subject,
Master, and Servant, are Names banished thence;
They wear one Fetter all, or, all one Freedom.

There was some Spirit spake within me, 'twas --

Alas! excuse it not: all that do Love,

In that they love, are equal, and above none,
None, but those only whom the God denies
The honour of his Wound -- Eumela, hear me,
Charistus is grown foul, and thy Olyndus
Is now my Martyr, for my sake he bleeds,
And I, for this, will make Charistus know,
That he, who doubts his Friend, is his own Foe.

MY Lady Martial, and the rest Mercuriall,
Woman's the Gem of Heaven, in which Nature
Hath carved the Universe in less Characters;
A Piece of such Invention, and such Art,
That, where as in one common lazy Mold
Made for dispatch, she casts, and thrusts out Men,
As some things done in haste, she may be said
To build, and send forth us; yet (howsoever
It comes about) in all foretimes and Ages
Councels and Senats have excluded us,
Thinking us like those finer Wits, which spin
Themselves into such subt'le Fancies, that
They are too Curious to be employed,
Being as far from Service, as from Grossness:
But this hath been from Error, not from Trial:
Grant me their Composition stronger, grant me
Their Bodie's ruder, and more fit for Wars,
Which some yet here do happily contradict,
I cannot yet conceive, why this should bind us
To be their Slaves; our Souls are Male, as theirs.
That we have hitherto forborn t'assume
And manage Thrones, that hitherto we have not
Challenged a Soverainty in Arts, and Arms,
And writ our selves Imperial, hath been
Men's Tyranny, and our Modesty. Being then
Nature did mean us Sovereigns, but cross Fate
(Envious of her, willing that nothing should
Be perfect upon Earth) still kept us under;
Let us, in the name of Honour, rise unto
The pitch of our Creation. Now's the time;
The best and ablest men are absent, those
That are left here behind are either Fools,
Or Wise men overgrown, which is all one
Assert your selves into your Liberty then,
Stand firm, and high, put these good Resolutions
Forth into Action: then, in spite of Fate,
A Female Hand shall turn the Wheel of State.

Inspired Adraste!

Most divine Adraste!

If that you relish this let Mistress Speaker
On to the rest.

On, on, on, on, on, on!

Most Willing, most Agreeing, most Potent,
And most free Ladies, c. --
'Tis fit all things should be reduced unto
Their Primeve Institution, and first Head;
Woman was then as much as Man, those Stones
Which Pyrrha cast, made as fair Creatures as
Deucalion's did: that his should be set up
Carved, and Adored, but hers kept down, and trampled,
Came from an ancient Injury; what Oracle, and
What voice from Heaven commanded that?

Most true!
Observe that Ladies.

Sibyl's Leaf by Juno!

He that says Woman is not fit for Policy,
Doth give the Lie to Art; for what man hath
More sorts of Looks? more Faces? who puts on
More several Colours? Men, compared in this,
Are only Dough baked Women; not as once
Maliciously one called us Dough-bak'd Men.

'Tis no single
Voice; the whole Sex speaks in her.

Some few yet
Do speak against our Passions, but with greater;
Rail at our Lightness, but 'tis out of Humour;
Rather Disease than Reason; they being such
As wipe off what they spit. For Heaven forbid
That any should vouchsafe to speak against us
But rough Philosophers, and rude Divines,
And such like dull Professions. But we I now
Show them our Passions are our Reasons Edge,
And that, which they call Lightness, only is
An Art to turn our selves to several Points.
Time, Place, Minds, People, all things now concur
To re-estate us there where Nature placed us:
Not a Male more must enter Cyprus now.

No, nor an Eunuch, nothing that hath been
Male heretofore.

No, nor Hermophrodite;
Nothing that is half Male. A little Spark
Hath often kindled a whole Town; we must
Be cautelous in the least.

That then they may not
Regain the Island, all the Havens must
Be stored, and guarded.

Very fit they should.

Next to the Havens, Castles out of hand
Must be repaired, Bulwarks, and Forts, and Sconces
Be forthwith reared.

'Tis time we were about them.

Arms then must be bought up, and Forces raised;
Much, much is to be done --

Why let Machessa
About it straight.

I see agreeing Minds,
Your Hearts and Courage very ready, but
Where is the Nerve and Sinew of this Action?
Where shall we have the Money to do this?

We'll give our hair for Cordage, and our finest
Linen for Sails, rather than this Design
Shall be once dashed for want.

There's much already
Come in --

And more doth daily.

Hearts and Purses
Concur unto the Action.

We have Notes
Of the particular Contributions.

Her Majesty would have you read 'em, that
She may know what to trust to.

From the Temple
We do expect ten dozen of Chalices,
But they are hid, or else already gone --

This is not what you have, but what y'have not.

We tell you this, that you may not take it ill,
That we had not borrowed some of the Holy Plate.
Well then, to what we have -- First from the Court
Ten Vessels of Corinthian Brass, with divers
Pieces of Polyclet, and Phyd^as,
Parrhasius, Zeuxes, and Protogenes,
Apelles, and such like great Master-hands.

Statues, and Pictures do but little good
Against the Enemy.

Pray y' hear it out:
Rich Cabinets then, which, though they do contain
Treasure immense and large, have nothing yet
Within them richer than themselves.

What hold they?

Pearls, Rubies, Emralds, Amethysts, and Sapphires,
Crysolits, Jaspers, Diamonds, two whereof
Do double the twelfth Caract: besides Sparks
Enough to stick the Roof of the Banqueting House,
And make it seem an Heaven.

Well, on Cosmeta.

Twelve standing Goblets, two more rich and massy,
The one bears Bacchus sitting on a Vine,
Squeezing out Purple liquor, The other hath
Silenus riding on his patient Beast,
And Satyrs dancing after him. More yet,
Twelve other less engraven with less Stories,
As Loves, and Months, and Quarters of the year,
Nymphs, Shepherds, and such like -- This from the Court.

What from the City?

Purple Robes, and Furs
In great abundance -- Basins and large Ewers,
Flagons, and Dishes, Plates, and Voyders, all
Rich and unwieldy. And besides all this,
Gold Chains, and Caudle-Cups innumerable.

The Contribution's much --

But yet not ended --
Twelve City Ladies send us word, they have
Twelve Iron Chests, and rib'd with Iron too,
Wherein they do suspect there lies a Mine,
That hath not seen the Sun for six Olympiads.

Let 'em be got in suddenly; we must
Be hot and eager in our undertakings.
The VVealth's enough; the East was overrun
By the bold Macedonian Boy with less.
VVas't not Machessa? But I pray you nothing
From the poor Country Villagers?

Very little;
Hoop-rings, and Childrens VVhistles, and some forty
Or fifty dozen of gilt-Spoons, that's all.

Let it be hastily delivered all
Into her Majesties Treasury.

Under favour,
We think Machessa would be very fit
Both to take in, and to disburse.

It is not
For any private Interest that She asks it,
But for the Public good.

Perhaps. But yet
The People will think better, if it be
Entrusted in a Subject's hand, and Hers
Especially who never had a Husband --

No, nor a Child as yet.

Why be it so;
You shall dispose't Machessa.

I consider
The trust you give me: see the weight, and Nature,
The Price and Moment of the Cause; Know next
My Order binds me not to be endowed
With any Wealth or Utensill, besides
My Steed, my Habit, Arms, and Page; To which
When I prove false, let him that weaves my Story
(Whether he be a Courtier, or perhaps
A Scholar that writes worse) bring me no higher
Than to scratched Faces, and such Suburb brangles.
Truth is the Essence of our Order, we
Who are Errants cannot deceive and Be.

Let us away: though the Male-Gods may frown,
The Female part of Heaven is sure our own

Noble Machessa all your deeds I see
Tend to the Scope of Honour.

Were she seated
Upon the top of some high craggy Rock,
Whose Head were in the Country of the Thunder,
Guarded with watchful Dragons, I will climb,
And ravish her from thence, to have my Name
Turned o'r from Age to Age, as something that
Ought to outlive the Phaenix, and dye only
With Men and Time.

Though you Court Danger thus,
I hope you will not scorn bright Glory, if
She come an easier way.

I look to her,
Not to her Clothes, and Habit.

Will you be
Famous in History then? fill swelling Volumes
With your sole Name? be read aloud, and high
In the Cyprian Annals? and live fresh upon
The Tongue of Fame for ever? will you stand
High on your Steed in Brass, and be at once
The stop of Strangers, and the Natives Worship,
By one fair Peaceful Action?

Brave Eumela,
To say I'll do it is lazy; it is done.

'Tis the Queen's suit besides,
And She shall thank you.

Honour is my Queen,
And my Deeds thank themselves. But say, Eumela,
Quickly, what is't?

Why only send this Wealth,
That's put into your hands, unto the Army,
And so defeat this folly that they here
So eagerly pursue.

By Heaven I'll first
Scatter the Ashes of my Ancesters,
Burn and demolish Temples, or pull down
The Statue of our Goddess, whiles her self
Stood with the proudest thunder to defend it;
You ought to thank me, that you have popos'd it,
And yet still live.

But pray you reason it.

Follies of idle Creatures! who ever heard
Of Ladies Errant yet that stood to Reason?
But you that brag of Books, and Reading, and
I know not what unnecessary Learning,
Tell me, did brawny Hercules, who wand'red
In the Lion's skin, and Club, or well-set Theseus
That trod his steps, ever do the like?

No. Women
Ne'er came to such a pitch of danger yet
As to be banished all: then who ever trusted
Theseus, or Hercules with ten Drachmas? who
Could know their Minds that way? This single deed
Will make Machessa go beyond his Pillars,
And the other's Fame. They quelled but single Robbers,
You will defeat thousands of Rebels. They
Helped some poor Village, or some Town perhaps,
You will redeem a Nation.

Thousay'st something;
But I shall break my faith

To whom? to those
That have before broke theirs unto their Prince?

They'll curse me too.

As bold Machessa hunts not
The Praise of People, so she can contemn
Their Curse, when she doth well. Consider too
Nations will curse you more if you assist 'em.

But 'tis against my Order to deceive.

'Tis more against your Order to assist
Rebellious Persons against their King. Besides,
Doth not your Oath enjoin you to relieve
Distressed men? who more distressed now
Than is the King, and the Army? fear not words;
You are not Treacherous unto them, but faithful
Unto your self. Why stands this Helmet here?
Why do you wear this Fashion? to what use
Carry this Javelin?

Not to help women; no,
Men are my Oath. All shall be sent Eumela,
The King must have it: we'll be famous --

But
You must be secret 'till it all come in.

And you'll assist me in the sending of't?

Take you no care for that, 'tis done.

But will
The Queen not take it ill?

'Tis her great fear,
You'll scarce be brought to yield it up. Away,
Go, and delude 'em on, y' are safe, and may
Deceive in Conscience now.

Bellona bless thee!

But how shall we now conveigh it to 'em?

-- Heav'n's of the Plot! No fitter men. Jove bless me!
My Lord Philondas, and my Lord Paestanus!
This your appearance to me's like the first
Appearance to a new admitted Priest,
And I am quite as doubtful now as he,
Not knowing whether 't be my fancy, or
The God, that makes the Vision.

Dear Eumela,
Thou know we do appear to Ladies still
In very flesh and blood. Though we may talk
Of spiritual Love, my Lord, and I, you know,
Could ne'er creep in at Key-holes yet; I'm sure
We pay for the opening of the doors, Eumela.

My Lord you make Paestanus blush.

I hope
I am not so ill bred Eumela.

Troth
The Camp hath spoiled you both. The Cretan Ladies
They say are far beyond our Cyprus Dames.

Yes to cleave Logs, and carry Burdens.

But
I mean for Beauty.

In whose Eyes, Eumela?
In the Town-Buls?

They say the Gods have changed
Shapes, to come down, and visit 'em.

'Twas that
They might be like 'em then.

For Jove could never
Be a fit Husband for 'em, till he had
Got horns, and hoofs.

Saw you no Children there?

What then Eumela? had not you read of Creatures
That have Conceived by the Air? --

Don't think of any
Such thing as man? The Wind and Sun Eumela,
Get all the Children there; that makes 'em bluster,
And rage so furiously when they are old.

Come, we lose time; where is Malthora prithee?

Answer him not; by Venus, these young Husbands
Are as impatient as a hungry Courtier,
Or a rich Heir come newly to his Means;
Do you hear me ask for Florina yet?

'Tis not in fashion, Sir, to love your Lady --

At least you ought not to profess it.

I
Dare swear, though none professes less, yet none
Loves more than you my Lord.

'Tis in the dark then;
Day-light and Love are two things. But, Eumela,
What do they do for Men now we are absent?
Do they take Physic, or else Pray?

My Lord,
Their Griefs are in your places.

Have their sighs
Got Limbs, and Bodies? Can their sadness give 'em
Comfort at Midnight?

They possess it with
A kind of sweetness, are so tender of it,
That should they part with it, they'd think they had
A second loss.

How can they pass away
Their time with that?

Why 'tis as necessary
To them as Friend, or Confident:

But tell me
How does Malthora bear it?

Sir, she finds
That solitude in her self, that others do
Look for in Deserts.

Come my Lord, let'sgo
And help 'em to sigh for us.

They're to come
Hither my Lord: pray stand behind these hangings
Till I discover the whole Scene; In quickly.
Here, here they come.

BLess me Eumela! I
Must get me Men's apparel, and go see
How all things stand abroad; I did but close
Mine Eyes, and presently me thought the Ghost
Of my Paestanus did appear before me,
Wounded, and bloody, and as soon as I
Went to embrace him, vanished into air.

You are so fearful, Madam, and do fancy
Danger and death so strongly, that if he
Were at this instant present here before you
You'd not believe your Eyes. Madam Florina
What's that you look on so?

It is, Eumela,
The Picture of my Loved Philondas, as
He had his Armour on, (and O the Heavens
That he should ever be in such a Habit)
But Fates would have it so; 'twas young Protogenes
Took it before he went. Me thinks it sometimes
Doth move, and alter Colour, and endeavour
To get loose, and come out.

Have you the Picture
Of your Lord Madam too?

Yes here, Eumela,
Drawn by the same hand: is't not very like him?

Methinks they're neither true: I've both their Statues,
Though not in Armour, and as I remember
They don't agree with them.

Pray y' let's examine
To pass the time a while.

I've newly put 'em
Both into Habits, and me thinks they look
So fresh, and lively, that I might mistake 'em,
But that I know they're absent; look you here.
Does not this look more like Philondas far,
And this more like Paestanus than the Tablets?
You must not come too near: I'll leave y' a while
To view, and judge.

Good Heavens! my Lord Philondas!

My dear Paestanus!

I am come you see
A pretty jant here to fulfil the longing
Of a young Novice-Husband.

The first day
That Hymen joined us, brought not truer joy
Unto my Soul than this.

MY Lords, the Queen
Is come to make a visit to your Ladies:
What will you do?

Go and conduct her in.

Now Madam? does your Husband vanish, when
You offer to embrace him?

O Eumela
He's gone already. This his short appearance
Is only as the appearance of a Star
To one that's perishing in a Tempest.

'Tis
Only to let us die with some more Comfort.
Were they to stay Eumela --

This disjoining
Of Bodies, only is to knit your hearts;
You'll form their Pictures in your Thoughts perhaps,
And once or twice more look behind the Hangings.

Peace good Eumela! here's the Queen.

CHaristus,
Heir to the Cretan Kingdom lost say you?

Yes, and suspected to lye hid in Cyprus.

And this is that doth stop the War?

This, and
The Equality of Forces.

Do our men
Awake, and rouse themselves?

Rich noble Spirits,
And Minds that have kept Altars burning still,
To Glory break out daily, she wing how
Peace and Religion did not sink, but calm 'em:
This blast will swell 'em big, and high, and make 'em
Ride Conquerours o'r the Floods.

They do not sleep then?

No, nor watch lazily; the World will see,
He, whose blessed goodness hath kept War from us,
Hath not took Courage from us too; When his
Sad studied Councels did remove the danger,
They did not then remove the Mind. The Arm
Of this days Cyprus, if provoked, will strike
As deep as Cyprus six Olympiads backwards,
And the unquiet Cretan shall appear
But as he did of old, our Exercise,
More than our Foe: a people that we suffer
To breath, and be, to keep our selves in breath.

What doth the King?

More than the meanest soldier,
Yet still comes fresh from Actions: his Commands
Are great, but his Examples greater still.

With his uncovered head he dares the Thunder,
Slights hail and snow, and wearies out a Tempest,
Then after all he shakes himself, and gives
Rain, as the Heavens did before, but with
A more serene Aspect. He doth exact
Labour, and hardness, hunger, heat, and cold,
And dust, as his Prerogatives, and counts them
Only his serious Pleasures; Others Wars
Are not so manly as his Exercises,
And pitched Fields often are more easy service
Than his mere Preparations.

'Tis enough;
Y'have spoke a Composition, so made up
Of Prince and Soldier, that the admiring World
May imitate, not equal. Come, my Lords,
I have a business to employ you back with.

I must confess, had not this Action been
Tainted with private Interest, but born
From zeal unto the Public, then it might
Have been read Valour, as it is, it will
Be styled but Fury.

Madam it had then
Been only Valour, now 'tis Love and Valour.

Where those Religious Names, King, Country, Father,
Are trampled over, can you call it Valour?

If trampled o'r for you. To hazard all
These holy Names, of Subject unto King,
Of Prince to Country, and of Son to Father,
And whilst I spared to shed the smallest drop
Of Blood, that might be once called yours, to have
That ignominious Name of Coward hurled on me,
And take up all their Places; what else is it
But to esteem your self a Prize, that doth
Absolve me from all these, and make me stand
Above the rate of mortals.

Father, Country,
State, Fortunes, Common wealth, they are Names that Love
Is not concerned it; that looks higher still,
And oversees all these.

It is not Love then;
For that, as it is Valiant, so it is
Just, Temperate, Prudent, summons all those Noble
Heroic Habits into one rich Mass,
And stamps them Honour.

But that Honour is
A Valour beyond that of Mortals, striving
Who shall possess most of this Mole-hill Earth.

That Honour is a Justice, that doth see
Measures, and Weights, Axes, and Rods below it.

A Temperance not concerned in Meats, and Wines.

A Prudence that doth write Charistus now
A better Patriot, than the sober'st Statesman
That plots the good of Crete.

If he that cares not
For things, be thence above them; if he sees
More nobly, that doth draw the Veyl before
His Eyes to Lower Objects, then Charistus
Soars high, and nothing scapes him.

Fair Lucasia,
I am not so immodest, as to challenge
The least of these my self: but yet in that
I love your Virtues, they are all mine own.

And yet you feared I was another, whom
I durst not publicly avow. Do y'think
My Love could should stoop to such Contrivances?
Or if I meant a subject of such worth,
I needed to pretend a Prince?

It is not
Lucasia's Love, that dares not call the Eye
Of Day to try it: But where Love's engaged
To such a Treasure as your self, what can
Be thought secure? It stands and watches still,
And fears it's very helps; could any love
Lucasia and be careless, 'twere a fault
Would make him not deserve her.

Could you then
Think I could be so impious unto Love
As to divide Eumela and Olyndus?
Or else so treacherous unto Friendship, as
To part Eumela and my self? Being Hearts
Are Temples, and both sorts of Love most Sacred,
To have wronged either had been Sacrilege
Worthy the horridest Thunder.

Love drinks in
All that may feed suspicion, but is deaf
To what may clear it; 'tis engaged so much
To the Object, that it views the Object only,
And weighs not what attends it.

Where the Heart
Offends, you blame the Passion. Love it self
Is never indiscreet, but he that Loves.

Wisdom and Love at once were never yet
Permitted to a God, I must not then
Presume they meet in me. If Love admits
Discretion, if it Ponder, and Consider,
Search, and Compare, and Judge, and then Resolve,
'Tis Policy, not Affection: give it Eyes,
Counsel, and Order, and it cease. What
Though it first brake from out the Chaos? 'twas
To make another in the Creature. Distance,
Figure, and Lineament are things that come
From something more Advised; Love never leads,
It still transports. The Motions which it feels
Are Fury, Rapture, Ecstasy, and such
As thrust it out full of Instinct, and Deity,
To meet what it desires.

Alas I it self
Hath Eyes, but 'tis our Blindness that doth veyl them:
If Love could not consist with Wisdom, then
The World were governed by one general Malness.

'Tis not denied but that we may have Wisdom
Before we Love, as men may have good Eyes
Before they fix them on the Sun: but dwell they
A while upon it, and they straight grow blind
From those admired Beauties.

But if Love
Do not consider, why then doth it fear?
Why doth it form Chimaeras to it self,
And set up Thought against Thought? why is 'c alike
Tortured with Truth, and Falsehood? why afflicted
As much from Doubts, as Certainties?

This is
Not from Distrust, but Care; Love is not perfect
Till it begins to fear. It doth not know
The worth of that it seeks, unless it be
Anxious, and troubled for it: And this is
Not any thought of Blemish in the thing
It loves, but only Study to preserve it.

Who puts a Snake amongst Flowers to preserve 'em*
Or who pours Poison into Crystal that
It may be kept from cracking? Jealous
What art thou? thou could not come down from Heaven;
For no such Monsters can inhabit there.

Nor can it spring from Hell; for it is born
Of Love, and there is nought but Hate.

Pray y' tell me
Who joined it unto Love? who made them swear
So firm a Friendship?

The same Deity
That joined the Sun and Light, the same that knits
The Life and Spirit.

These preserve each other:
But that doth twine and wreath it self about
Our growing Loves, as Ivy bout the Oak;
We think it shelters, when (alas!) we find
It weakens, and destroys.

It is not Jealousy
That ruins Love, but we our selves, who will not
Suffer that fear to strengthen it; Give way
And let it work, 'twill fix the Love it springs from
In a staid Center.

What it works I know not,
But it must needs suppose Defect in one,
Either Defect of Merit in the Lover,
Or in the Loved, of Faith; you cannot think
That I give Others Favours, when your self
Boast such a store of Merits.

O Lucasia,
Rather than be so impious as to think
That you want Faith, I must confess a want
Of Merit in my self; (which would there were not.)
And being it is so, I was compelled
To fear lest one more worthy than my self
Might throw me from my happiness. Consider
That you are born to enrich the Earth, and then
If you will have one Love and not be Jealous,
You must convert your Eye upon your Eye,
Make your own Heart Court your own Heart, and be
Your self a servant to your self.

But doth not
This Passion cease at last?

It cease to
Disturb, but still remains to quicken Love;
As Thunder cease when 't hath purged the Air,
And yet the Fire which caused it still remains
To make it move the livelier.

Were it quiet,
What Hand, Charistus, would More sweetly move
The Orbs of this our Island? who fetch in
More frequent Conquests? and who more become
The Triumphs than your self?

Believe Charistus
Dreams; Errors, false Opinions, slippery Hopes,
And Jealous Fears are now his Spoil, his Captives,
And follow Love's Triumphant Chariot, which
His Soul sits high in, and o'rlooks the vain
Things of this lower World.

Lucasia did
Only retire, not fly; Let's to the Grove,
And by the Consummation of our Loves
Under those Myrtles (which as yet perhaps
Preserve the blushing Marks of those your Angers)
Appease the offended Goddess.

This your Union
Will make your Kingdoms join; Cyprus and Crete
Will meet in your Embraces.

Our Hearts are
Love's ord'nary Employment: 'tis a Dart
Of a more scattering Metal that strikes you;
When he wounds Princes, he wounds Nations too.

LAdy Machessa, opportunely met.

What store of Arms prepat'd?

The Country's laid;
Spits, Andirons, Racks, and such like Utensils
Are in the very Act of Metamophosis;
Art is now sitting on them, and they will
Be hatched to Engines shortly.

Pray y' how doth
The Muster-Roule increase?

As fast as Chloe
Can take their Names; we shall be all great Women.

Pray y' what Reward shall you and I have Lady?

Why I will be the Queen of the Amazons,
And thou of the Pigmies.

I, but who shall place us
In the Amazonian, and Pigmean Throne?

Who but our Swords Philaenis? when we have
Settled the Government here at home, we will
Lead out an Army against those Warlike Dames,
And make 'em all our Vassals.

These left handed
Ladies are notable Politicians.
The King of Monomotapa you may
Be sure will be your Enemy, or else
The Book deceives me. But the Agags they
Will sure be for you.

Who may the Agags be?

Why a black ugly People, that do turn
The inside of their Eye-lids outward, that
They may look lovely; if they catch the Amazons,
They sowce 'em straight, as we do Pig, by quarters,
Or else do pickle 'em up for Winter Salads.

How did you come by all this Knowledge Phil?
You are a learned Page.

Lady, do y' think
I never read to the Women in the Nurs'ry?
But will you lose one of your Breasts? tis pity
That your left Pap should be burnt off.

Why Gyrl?
What use will there be of it?

To give suck.
You must go seek out some brave Alexander,
And beg some half a dozen of Children of him,
Or else you'll be no true bred Amazon.

Must they have Macedonian Fathers then?

I think the Amazonian Queen doth swear
To no such Article when She is Crowned;
But ord'narily they do so; yet howe'r
Your Grace may send for the three Courtiers,
That you delivered from these Ladies here,
They would be glad to be employed in any
Such State-affairs. But I'd almost forgot
The Pigmies Conquest.

Have you read of them too?

Though some say that their Souls are only stopped
Into their Bodies, just as so much Quick-silver
Is put into hot Loves, to make 'em dance
As long as the heat continues; yet, believe it,
They are a subt'le Nation, a most shrewd
Advising People.

How'i you then subdue them?

By Policy, set Hays, and Traps, and Springs,
And Pitfals for 'em. And if any do
Dwell in the Rocks, make holes upon the top
As deep as Cups, and fill 'em up with Wine;
You shall have one come presently, and sip,
And when he finds the sweetness, cry Chin, Chin:
Then all the rest good Fellows straight come out,
And tipple with him till they fall asleep;
Then we may come and pack 'em up in Hampers,
Or else in Hand-baskets, and carry 'em whither
We please our selves.

A notable Stratagem!
You'll never leave your Policies Phil.

But yet
We must draw out some Soldiers howe'r.

There's no great need of soldiers; Their Camp's
No larger than a Ginger-bread Office.

And the Men little bigger.

What half Heretic
Book tells you that?

The greatest sort they say
Are like stone-pots with Beards that do reach down
Unto their knees.

They're carried to the Wars then
As Chickens are to Market, all in Dorsers,
Some thirty Couple on a Horse.

You read
Only Apocryphal History. Believe me
They march most formally: I know it there will
Be work enough for Soldiers.

We'll train up
All the young Wenches of the City here
On purpose for this Expedition,
A^d't shall be called the Female War.

I fear
They won't be strong enough to go against 'em;
They have an Enemy doth vex 'em more
Than Horse or Man can.

Who, the Cranes you mean?
I'll beg a Patent of Her Majesty
To take up all that fly about the Country,
For the Pigmean Service

I, but who
Shall's have to Discipline 'em so, that we
May fly 'em at them off our fists?

They fly
In a most war-like Figure naturally:
However we may have a Net cast o'r
The Artyllery Yard, and send for the Gentleman
That bridles Stags, and makes 'em draw Caroches,
He will exercise 'em in a Month or two,
And bring 'em to it easily.

We must carry
Six or seven hundred of Bird-Cages
And Cony-Coopes along with us.

For what?

To imprison Rebels, and there feed 'em up
With Milk, and Dazy-roots. I will so yerk
The little Gentlemen.

You must not play
The Tyrant o'r the Wretches.

You shall see
How I'll behave my self. This foreside blow
Cuts off thrice three, this back-blow thrice three more,
This foreright thrust spits half a dozen of 'em,
Bucklers and all, like so many Larks with Sage
Between them; then this down-right cleaves a stubborn
Two-footed Rebel from the Crown of the head
Down to the twist, and makes him double forked
Like a Turn Stile, or some such Engine. Others
I'll knock pall-mall, and make the wretched Caitiffs
Measure their length upon their Mother Earth,
And so bestride 'em, and cry Victory.

And what'l you do, when you are seated in
The Throne, to win your Subjects Love Philenis?

I'll stand upon a Cricket, and there make
Fluent Orations to 'em; call 'em Trusty
And Well-beloved, Loyal, and True Subjects,
And my good People: Then I'll mount on Horseback,
Shew'em my little Majesty, and scatter
Five or six hundred single pence among 'em,
Teach 'em good Language by cleft sticks, and Bay-leaves,
And Civilize 'em finally by Puppet-Plays.

Most studi'd, and advised!

The heart of Wisdom!

And Soul of Policy!

Come little Queen,
We'll go and make her Majesty acquainted
With all the Plot; 'twill take her certainly.

was all the Treasure shipped?

All, but the Pictures,
And Statues, they are reserved. I saw the Luxury,
And wealth of Cyprus sail. The Soldier doth
By this time gaze upon it.

The news, Charistus,
Of your Adventures here, I dare presume
Hath joined both Armies now. Me thinks I see
The Cyprians standing here, the Cretans there,
And, in a space between them, both Kings meeting
In a most strong Embrace, and so provoking
Clamours and shouts from both sides, and a joyful
Clattring of Weapons.

Beauteous Queen, your Virtues
Are greater far than Fame; and you your self
Greater than them! Though Gold and Purple do
Adorn your head, yet you have Wove your self
Far richer Diadems from your Royal Acts,
And made your self Immortal by producing
Immortal things. But though your wreath of Virtue
Hath made what ever the sun beholds in all
His course enamoured by you, yet if I
May pull one single one from out the rest,
There's none, for which you have more Altars raised
Unto your Name, than for that Noble Love,
Whose flames you keep still burning in your self,
And cherish in all others.

Sir, you have Conquered
A Princess, and in her a Queen: I am
The addition to your Triumph. We ow much
To you Olyndus.

I can challenge nothing
But my Charistus Friendship. 'Tis to him
You ow these seeds of Peace. Although his Father
Appeared so tender of him, that when he
Came hither secretly to view the Rites
Of Venus, which Lucasia then performed,
The aged Man hasted to the Oracle
To know what Fortune should attend his Son,
And, for an unexpected answer, did
Banish those Priests for which our King now fights:
Yet for all this, even in this heat of danger,
H'hath made another Venture, and the Kingdom
Now grieves his second loss.

Do you know the answer
That the God gave to his enquiring Father,
For which the King did banish all the Priests?

I may repeat it now, the Event assures me
It meant you no Misfortune. It was this;
Charistus shall his Country save,
If he become his Enemies Slave.

I hope the Event will not fulfil it.

'Tis
Fulfilled enough to make an Oracle true.

I hope you have no Enemies, and for Slave
The Gods avert it!

He's Lucasia's Servant,
There's that fulfilled; Cyprus is now reputed
The Enemy to Crete; but as for true
And real Enemies to you Charistus,
The World hath none so Barbarous; your Virtues
Have under this disguise showed so much Prince,
That they betrayed you still to any Eye
That could discern.

Honoured Olyndus, you
Out do me still. Friends should be always equal:
You must take off, and pare your Virtues, that
You may go even with me. I ow much
To you, Eumela, too.

Her service hath
Preserved the Kingdom, and refounded Cyprus.

Two Scepters are her Debtors.

But, Eumela,
You might have told me sooner, that Lucasia
Began to feel a Passion; you ne'er knew
That I destroyed true virtuous Loves; it is
A pleasure to me to perceive their Buddings,
To know their Minutes of Increase, their Stealths,
And silent Growings; and I have not spared
To help, and bring them on.

You have so favoured
Agreeing Souls, that all the World confesses
Your own is perfect Harmony. But where
The God is Blind, should not the Creature be
Silent, and Close? That which is bred by whispers
Would dye if once proclam'd.

If it were any,
It was a fault of Trust; 'tis more Injustice
To betray secret Love, than to make known
Counsels of State. Cupid hath his Cabinet,
To which, if any prove unfaithful, he
Straight wounds him with the Leaden Shaft, and so
They live tormented, and dye scorned.

No more;
'Tis well: I meant not to Accuse, but Praise.
Have you set some to watch, and signify
The King's Return?

Three peaceful Courtiers,
Lerinus, and Ganyctor, and Iringus,
Desired that they might bring the News, and so
Are gone unto the Port.

My Ladies, you
I hope will clear up now.

I have too much
Joy to express it.

Could you see my heart,
You'd view a Triumph there.

ANd't please your Highness
There are three Ladies wait without, who, if
You have a vacant Ear, are come to inform you
Of something near concerns the State.

The old
Vexation's busy still -- Pandena and
Cosmeta, and the other -- are they not?
Tell 'em they may come in -- How shall we do,
Eumela, now to stop their Clamour?

'Tis easy;
There's nothing yet provided; the Return
Of the King being now so sudden, 'twill amaze 'em,
And make 'em kneel for mercy to you, if
You do but threaten to disclose the Plot.

YOur business Ladies?

Please you to dismiss
Those Faces that have Beards?

Fear not, they shall not
Betray your Counsels.

Please your Highness then,
There's fear that our Design will come to nought,
Our Trust is falsifi'd.

How so?

We came
To ask Machessa about VVeapons, and
She presently demands, how many cases
Of Knives, what Forks we have, Tosting, or Carving?

Talk we of Swords, she asks what Crisping Pins
And Bodkins we could guess might easily be
Raised through the Common-wealth?

We spake of Armour,
She straight replies, send in your steel Combs, with
The Steels you see your Faces in, we'll quickly
Convert 'em into Greaves, and Gorgets.

If
This be not treason against the Female State,
Believe not Policy, nor me.

Why she
Was your own choice; you cried her up as one
That having neither Child, nor Husband, would
Take to her self the Commonwealth as both.

We do suspect your sadness sweet Florina.

And your retir'dness too Malthora, (as
Demure as you stand here) is deep engaged.

Nor is Eumela free.

Whence do you gather it?

Pray y' why those Myrtle wreaths? why your Gates dressed?
And your Doors Crowned?

In hope our Lords will shortly
Enter, and Crown 'em more.

Most evident!
Can there be bolder Falsehood? Did we not
Agree to keep out Husbands from our City
And our Minds too? And yet behold there are
Garlands and Flowers prepared; and they to be
Received as Lovers. Husbands are at best
But a sad kind of pleasure; one good Look,
And a Salute's enough at any time
For the Good-man of the Family.

Pray y' allow
Affection more Expressions; Love doth cease
To be, when that it breaks not out into
Those signs of Joy; as Souls cease to be Souls
When they leave off to show their Operations.

This is no time for vain Philosophy,
We are to have a fine State of it shortly,
When Ladies once begin to utter Axioms,
And raise a Faction against the seven Sages.

ANd't please your Highness, three Ambassadors,
Sent from the Cretan State, do crave admittance.

Usher'em in.

There's life you see in the business;
Let's yet be true. The fame of our Exploit
Already makes us sought to. There's an Honour
Not usual too l'th' Number of 'em; when
Arrived there three before from the same State?
And't please you, let Pandena, Rhodia, and I,
Manage their Entertainment?

Do so.

It shall
All be to th'honour of the Female State.

Prepare your self Pandena; here they come.

MOst Gracious, most Renowned, and most Beauteous.

Pray y' be not troublesome; We're taken up
VVholy with the Affairs of the Kingdom now.

When will your Ladyship have a Vacancy?

You are Impertinen; True Politicians
Do never use to answer on the sudden.

It is not now as heretofore; the times
Are grown more wise, and more reserved; there are
Matters on foot far greater; you must wait --
You are Ambassadors.

We should not think so,
But that you're pleased to tell us so; your usage
Hath a far different Dialect from your Tongue.

Were there not Women in your Kingdom fit
For this Employment? I perceive your State
Is utterly unfurnished, that it cannot
Send forth three Female Agents.

'Tis not, Madam,
The custom of our Master to commit
His Kingdom's secrets to a piece of Crystal;
That were not to Negotiate, but Betray.

You shall meet Women here, that are not Crystal,
Those that will find out you, and hide themselves.

You shall not need the help of an Interpreter
When we give Audience; Speak what Tongue you will
You shall be understood, each one of us
Hath more than one.

We easily believe it,
Though you should speak none else besides your Native.

Pray stand you by, and wait a while.

We obey.

Now will they think the better of us; 'tis
The way to bring our selves in Credit by
Neglecting of 'em thus. I'd have 'em know
We were to be saluted at their coming.

Their State is very unhappy, that it is
So unprovided: I believe these are
The very wisest in the Kingdom; for
They have no Manners.

You guess rightly, Madam;
The greatest Counsellors and Lawyers scarce
Know how to make a Leg.

ARm, arm, arm, arm,
The King, and Lords are within sight. Here Madam,
Pray take my Sword, and Helmet.

Worthy Gentlemen,
Doy' come to proffer aid from the Cretan King
To help us against the Men?

No Ladies: we
Come but to tell you that the King is Landed,
We are your fellow-Subjects.

Fellow-Villaines
Among your selves. Eumela, we may thank
You for all this.

But Sister of the Sword,
Great Lady Stickler --

Be patient pray y' a while -- Take you this Helmet,
And you this Fashion Sir, and you this Lance;
Ambassadors still must be dismissed with Presents.

Where is our Plate?

Our Wealth?

Our Jewels?

Folly!
Did not my Order bind me to assist
Distressed men?

Who would ever trust a Woman?

The Queen will give y' a fair account.

'Tis no
Time to debate things now. The truth is, all
Was shipped, and sent the King, as one great Present
From all the Cyprian Women. If you do
Desire that he should know how it was raised,
For what intended, by what means diverted,
I'll bid him spare his thanks, and tell him 'twas
Not Bounty, but Misfortune that directed
This vast Supply to him.

We hope your Highness
Will be so Gracious to us, as to let us
Make the best use yet of our Evils. 'Twill
Be something, if that, which was meant Sedition,
May now be took for Contribution,
And we esteemed Relievers of the Army.

I do engage my Royal word, you shall
Be put in the Annals as good Members of
The Cyprian Commonwealth. But hark, the noise!
The Horses, Trumpets, Priests! They come! stand off.

ACT. V. SCEN. VIII.

APollo, who foretell'st what shall ensue,
None speaks more Dark than thou, but none More true;
If Heard, Obscure; but yet if Seen, most Bright;
Day's in thy Visage, in thy Sayings Night.

Day's in thy Visage, in thy Sayings Night.

Venus makes good what he Decrees,
And Love sulfils what he foresees,
Thus Gods help Gods, thus Mortals ow
Much to the Baize, much to the Bow.

Much to the Baize, much to the Bow.

Phoebus as Praesent shows us future things,
Our Trivets Counsel give, our Trees teach Kings,
And whilst our Oracle instructs the State,
What ever the Priest shall say the God makes Fate.

What ever the Priest shall say the God makes Fate.

What are your Trivets to Loves wings?
They Teach, but these do Conquer Kings:
Venus to Fate adds all the bliss,
She that makes Doves, makes Kingdoms kiss.

She that makes Doves makes Kingdoms kiss.

Thus then the Myrtle and the Baize we join.

And in one Wreath Wisdom and Love Combine.

I never reigned till now. You needed not
Have sent that Ample Treasure; I had all
Wealth in your Loves. Come, Great Din^machus,
As they joined Voices, so let us join Hearts.

Sir, your Embraces vanquish far beyond
Your Sword, though happy; you march Conqueror
More by a Glorious Peace, than if your Arm
Had scattered Deaths still as you passed; your Throne
Grows hence; y'have gained what ever you have not ruined;
Your Power rules Cyprus, but your Fame the World.

Hate only is between the Ignoble, when
The Good dissent, tis only difference,
^malice; Virtue flames in both, and so
^hmust the other Love; their Discords are
More blameless than the Embraces of the Bad;
'Tis to stand off, rather than bear a Grudge.
And if they fight, when ever they do lay down
Their VVeapons, they lay down their Anger too.
As we affect then to seem good, and are so,
Let one Oblivion wrap up what hath past
On either side.

But I must first ask Pardon;
I've wronged a Deity. Great Apollo, be
Thou still propitious. Here I do restore
Thy Blameless Priests. What was but only Darkness,
I thought Contrivance; and the Priest not Loyal,
Because the God was pleased to be obscure:
But now the Event lends light to that, and Me;
And my Charistus doth his Country save
By being thus become his Enemi's Slave.
Peace rest upon 'em both; Apollo spoke it,
And Venus hath performed it.

As they joined
To make us happy, so let us pay back
United Thanks, and join their Deities in
A double Feast. It is not Men's Lot only
To need each other; even the Powers themselves
Give and take help. Affection brings about
What Counsel cannot. Thus the Gods have lent
Love unto Wisdom for an Instrument.

THough we well know the Neighbouring Plain
Can strike from Reeds as high a Strain,
And that the Scrip, and Crook
May worst our Poet's Book;
Like Fairies yet we here could stay
Till Village Cocks proclaim the Day:
And whiles your Pleasure is the Theme,
Feed and keep up the Dream.
But Sleep beginning now to shed
Poppies on every Bed,
Love stayed his hands, and said our Eyes
This Night were made his Prize:
And now (instead of Poppies) flings
These wishes on you from his wings.
The Calm of Kingdoms new made Friends,
When both enjoy their Hopes, and Ends,
The like in you Create,
And make each Mind a State:
The thoughts of Princes, when they do
Meet Princes to coin Princes too,
Possess your Breasts with Fire and Youth,
And make each dream a Truth:
The Joys of Friendship after Fight,
Of Love's first happy Night,
Of Lords returned, make you still greet,
As when you first did meet.
And, quitted thus from Grief and Fear,
Think you enjoy a Cyprus here.

