THE BLIND LADY A Comedy.

BUt upon what injury, Phylanter?

Love and Ambition, Sir, those two great injuries
Of men's seduced minds, which fill the thoughts.
Full of Revenge, not with the justness of it.
What Mironault has done, moves not my hate;
But what he may, my fears. By her, a Kingdom, Sir;
And, with her self, a World --
Falls in my arms. How slow you are to crown
Me and your self with happiness?
You can love neither, and deny.

But are you sure he comes?

I am certainly informed so.

Yet consider, son, how will the King resent,
That whilst he's paying his duty to the Princess,
He should be there surprised?

That is your part for to prevent, Sir,
Telling the King, (such minds are ever jealous)
That his designs were to surprise the Princess.
'Twill appear service then, and may destroy
My Rival's interest, if not advance my own.
Those, Sir, that traffic in these seas,
Fraught not their Bark with fear^:
Besides, there needs none now.

Yet think again, though, as you are my son,
I can deny you little; and 'tis more just
You should, deny your self, and not obey
These hasty passions. He ne'er injured you;
Or if he had, there were a nobler way
For your reven^e than this. You are angry
That the world's pleased with him, and that he may
Enjoy a bliss you wish for; or, at least,
Because he wishes it as well as you;
A Quarrel which Mankind must lay aside,
Or all be Murderers.

You told me, I did obey my passions,
To those you give your reasons then:
As much you may expect from them,
As if you told the winds they blew. too hard.
Think of the Cause, then judge of the Effect.
'Tis Love -- Love for the Princess too,
For whose fair sake, Who'd not attempt
The angry billows swelled with horrid storms,
The Sea-gods Pyramids, when every wave
Bears too, like those, within its womb a grave,
Or dangers yet unheard of? Determine, Sir,
For I resolve to act; and let the story then
Come to his unprepared ears.

Well, that I may proserve you
From some more unadvised course, (if more can be)
I'll do it; but take heed
Of letting violence be offered to him:
Preserve thy self free from so foul a crime.
Love's way lies not through blood. Consider too
What we now go to act; nor blush
To think thou did do ill, or that 'twill throw
Aspersions on thy judgment, to dislike
The folly thou had dotingly embraced.
He's wise that sees his error at the last,
Who weighs all these in perfect scales,
Shame of his crime, and not his wit, prevails.
Farewell, I leave you to your thoughts.
-- I'll on my way to night.
Heaven direct and prosper you.

How nice his conscience was -- now to my business.
And thou, great god of Love, that rul'st my heart,
Attempt but Fortune with as kind a Dart;
That whilst I reach at what can scarcely be,
Fortune as madly too may dote on me.
-- Now all things but design
Leave me -- and yet -- it looks but oddly,
To put off all this honesty at once,
And to have none about me.
Or was it ever mine? sure I borrowed it,
And 'tis a thing that's taken up on trust;
I owe the world so much; I'll think on it
When I can pay it. Lycespes, welcome,
I was resolved just now to seek you.

You would have found me still prepared to serve you.

You are my noble friend, nor will I say,
That I shall try it now; this only can
Preserve it. But words are wasters of our time,
And robs us still of action. As fast then as you can
Get all our friends in readiness, as many
As possibly you can, well armed and mounted.
Return with all the speed your Love can make.
As we go you shall know all,
The rest must live in ignorance.
What Power now to invoke I hardly know,
Yet every god has felt what Love can do.

COme, the Princess is hard at hand:
And if we haste not, she may overtake us.
To night too, we must lodge the Deer.

We need not care for that; this Forest
Is so well stored, that Game's in every Thicket.
It causes the Princess constant progress
Into these parts -- But who are these?

'Tis the brave Mironault.

Well overtaken, Huntsmen,
Is the Princess
Yet far behind?

No, my Lord, he is almost in sight.

I thank you --
-- Whither does Love thus hurry me?
A Tyrant that denies the smallest hopes,
Where he gives largest wishes!
The greatest Beauties are like greatest Wealths,
Subjects for all men's wishes, not their hopes.
Fears share with Love the Empire of the heart,
Rendering alike the Lover and the Coward.
Danger's the awful Mistress of the one,
Who fears to tempt her, lest he should endure
That fate too quickly, which he knows is sure.
So, whilst the other's Mistress too is ignorant,
Only more slow, the pining Lover dies,
And that sure fate but hastes, if she denies.

Dear Sir, let not grief thus torment you.
You should have there a nobler Guest, your Reason;
And were that there, there hardly could be room
For such disorders. Passions are like Thieves,
That watch to enter undefended places,
And rob you too of all that put's a difference
Between Wild-beasts and Man. Yet, mistake not;
Your grief, if not despair, is the fond passion
I speak against, and not the love they spring from:
That were her injury, to whom alone
All is due, as Rivers to the Ocean.
Yet Nature has decreed, that she must love:
Believe your worth and your devotion then
As great as any --

O Hyppasus --
'Tis easier far to counsel than to act;
And every one's provided with the wisdom,
That has not interest in the misfortune.
And those that in Feavors, though 'tis their ruin,
Wish Rivers of drink; the standers by,
That then advise, and, may be, wonder at them,
Would, in the same disease, do just so too.

You know not, Sir, but this great goddess
May be a little merciful: by this hand,
If she be not, I'll be revenged,
On half the Sex at least, by proving rigorous
To those poor Wenches I have prated to;
That's every one almost that e're I saw -- Then forsooth
Will the poor creatures wish their amorous heads
Filled with Romances, pine, and die,
With Willow-garlands under Myrtle-shades:
And grief for them will kill the Mothers too.
Your Princess shall not have many Female Subjects.

I thank thee, good Pysander, for attempting
To mix thy mirth with my opposing griefs.
But they are contraries, and cannot meet in one.
-- but let it perish withme -- I must again
Desire your secrecies.

Nay that's --

Pardon me, Hyppasus --
I know it's needless to repeat
A wish of mine to either of you:
But what men's thoughts are full with, issue forth,
With too much haste and freedom.

Will you take my advice, Sir?

Nay pray, Sir, hear him.

Come, what is't, Pysander?

Wholesome extremely! For the kind constitution
Of a decaying Lover; this is the short Receipt.
In the first place, make your self -- very -- drunk.
Nay, nay, you need not wonder; by divine Bacchus,
'Tis a rare expression of passion to court disorderly,
To make a mere Chaos of one's self, and then give her*
The honour of Creating you; then, besides,
All truth and all good nature will appear.
If this be not the way to be considered, I'll be judged --

How do you like it, Sir?

There's kindness in it to me, I know, Hyppasus;
And were I capable of mirth, it might produce it.
But Grief and Love are thronged together,
And have scarce room enough.

Have either Joy or Grief, we'll share with you;
Nor was't our fears of having part
That made us wish you none; we value you
And our own lives at the same rate:
We wish them free from all misfortunes,
Yet share all willingly rather than part.
But we must alter now that show of trouble
Which we have given our selves; for the Princess
Must needs be near.

See Hippasus --.
I had forgot the subject of my thoughts,
How greedily I wish, yet fear to see her!
Like some poor Votary, whose holy thoughts
Sets off so much, the joys of Paradise,
That it employs as many fears as wishes.
-- Hark she comes! You Powers above,
Lend Love and Fortune now their eyes,
To help, or see at least, their sacrifice.

You 're well met, my Lord,
Was it a chance,
Or your design that brought you?

'Tis all I have about me of ambition,
And of large wishes, that I may often
Have leave thus to present my service.

Your service, Sir, has been so much considerable,
That I should be alone guilty of folly,
Did I not value it at such a rate,
As the whole World have set upon it.

If I had such a power, to oblige
As much, as you are pleased to say I have;
The World's applause, could not so much reward
My services, as your receiving of them.

My interest, next to my Father's,
In this obliged Nation by your valour,
Has made it gratitude ever for me,
To avow that and more.

I have then much of my best wishes crowned,
Yet should you know all that my heart conceals,
Though it be much like this, you'd be displeased
With what you have pretended to allow.

I cannot find this guilt about me, and can less guess.
How you should have a thought that should displease me.
You cannot but oblige, and I as hardly
Can tell what's injury, if you should do it.

This is a kindness, still admired Princess,
That I must never ask the meaning of;
But to my flattered fancy, so interpret
As you would never do: yet 'tis unjust,
That I should use, the least kind word from you,
With an advantage to my self.

Sure, I may give you leave to do it,
For such a confidence I justly have
Of your great virtues, that you ever
Pursue your own advantages with others.

'Tis true, to the undeserving World,
I can perform all this, only to you
I am unjust, that never wish
A good to you, when I desire most.

I hardly understand you: if I do,
The world is more obliged to you than I.

Such a strange Character, my fate
Has thrown upon me, yet my self,
And all that World, which seems so much
Beholding to me more than you,
Are as much less in my esteem,
As are the sands unto the mingled jewels,
The Negro brings up from the Deep together.

Is there a possibil^y to know,
Your meaning then?

You should, if I were sure you would forgive it,
Yet thus much take in guesses. Could Shades be sensible,
And wish the embraces of the Sun, were not that Lamp,
Injured by that which loved it, could rude beasts
Be passionate for Empire, and not injure
The Throne because they loved it. 'Tis I
That am more dark then all those shades,
You brighter then that Sun; 'Tis I
That am that Beast robbed of all reason.
And you above all Empires; I have acknowledged
My unsuspected guilt, because t'was so,
And though I cannot leave my Love,
I may my Life. --

You have done more than given me leave to guess,
And since I have my self been guilty too,
In giving you the occasion I shall forbear
Such a displeasure as is due, and let you know.
T'was easy too for me to err, that could so little
Imagine you to be so guilty: I shall add
Only thus much, that as you value
My presence or esteem, repeat no more
Any thing of this nature -- Come let's on:

So Merchants for a tempting venture
Bankrupt themselves; yet what wealth had I
Before I knew my poverty from her?
'Tis nothing I have lost, the difference is,
That I have something now I wish to lose,

She is not, Sir, a greater enemy,
To your content, than you are to your self:
'Tis you enlarge her frowns by fancied fears,

Those that are free from danger, my Hyppasus.
May look and wonder at another fears,
That is environd with it: 'tis Concern
That is the excuse for Passion; were you my Rival,
The Counsel would be juster if you gave it,
-- Come we must not stay behind, --
There's nothing but a Lover pleased with sufferings.
All other rigours of this World,
Our wishes and endeavours still oppose,
The Prisoner hates his bolts, whilst he remains
Pleased not so much with sreedom as his chains.

TRust me a little, Fortune, with my self,
I do not ask thy aide grow big my hopes,
And swell unto a Throne,
To Crown my Love, and my Ambition on;
From thence I'll view the thing called Honesty,
And grieve 'tis so contemned, and ought to be.
-- Man is like pliant Wax,
That yields unto a fair Impression,
Though sent not from the noblest Metal:
And, in this world, it bears an equal show
To seem but only honest, or be so.
And when the Crown's once gained, there needs no fears:
Crimes change their natures then, or Men change theirs.
-- Dye -- Scruples -- in my thoughts,
And let my mind be a preposterous grave,
That bore you first, to bury you again:
-- and your base issue -- Fear --
Dye too, when Beauty and a Crown's so near.
-- Lycespes welcome; what news?

All as you would have it, Sir:
The Troop is marched, and stays you in the Wood,
Between this and the Castle.

Let's follow then;
For Time's a busy Offerer of our Interests
To every check of Fortune.

We make some threescore Horse,
Which will be three Divisions; one for each Port.

Let Martianus command the last.
As we go, I'll give you perfect Orders.
I wish they had some means to cherish a Resistance,
That he may help to his own ruin;
He must not live to plead his innocence.
But Time, that never will be staid,
Calls us to act what we have scarcely waigh'd.

YOu're welcome now, my Lord, and I desire
No cloud may dwell on any brow;
Let no such prejudice happen amidst our sports.

If you be not obeyed, admired Princess,
Where you command, it is extremely strange;
And yet, I fear, 'tis possible.

As possible it is I may suspect my power.
But, my Lo^d, I had forgot to put you in remembrance
Of perfec^ (...) story you began,
As you ^ it, of unhappy Lovers.

The Princess, Madam,
Was taken by Phylanter, whose great valour,
Shown in that day, deserved all Prisoners:
To whom he nobly offered Liberty,
Without a Ransom, or Acknowledgment
Unless to you. Before she thanked him,
She made enquiry for the Prince, my Prisoner;
As if she knew not how to use
Freedom nor life without him; and by reason
That he was full of wounds, Phylanter
Waited upon her to my Tent; at the first sight
Of him she so much loved, covered with wounds,
She stood amazed, perhaps too wished her self
What she appeared, but a dead Statue.
At the same time he raised his feeble eyes,
Which seemed to take unkindly her delay.
At that she came, and kneeling by him,
Made such expressions of unfeigued grief,
That though we understood not what she said,
Yet that was plain enough. He now grew speechless,
(And she almost) yet still with signs,
That seemed expressions of more trouble.
For leaving her then all the world
Within her arms, he died; she but stayed
To be assured that he was dead. Then with a haste,
That showed a willingness to follow him,
She drew a Vial from her bosom,
And drank it off, before that we could hinder her;
Whose violence, on an enfeebled heart
By so much grief, with unbelieved haste,
Wrought Execution.

Poor Princess! 'twas her hard fate to love;

She had been else no more concerned,
Than those that now survive.

And she perhaps as unconcerned to dye.

Nothing but a deserving Love
Could have taught her a way so glorious
To end all cares. She now enjoys him too,
Or else insensible that e're she lost him.

Did that young Prince command that day the Army?


Yes, and, as we learnt, he was the Heir

To the Tartarian Empire.

'Tis nothing but a Prince
Could have been so unhappy to lose at once
His Love, his Life, his Empire.

My Lord --


Ha


Let not the Princess see it:

The Castle is surrounded by a Troop of Soldiers,
Commanded by Phylanter; I fear you are their aim.

I?


You may guess the causes, Jealousy and Baseness.

Think, or you're lost.

Ha -- 'tis very happy.


I don't understand that.


I'll press them nobly: Are they many?


They are divided, as we guess. The gates are yet kept shut.


I'll go view, and ins^antly return.


The Devil on the mischief! if their aim

Be towards me, it must be for my life.
A Parley cannot save me, I am resolved
To sell it.

Upon my life, Madam, there's some disorder.

View but the eyes of Mironault.

My Lord, why are you moved?


I, Madam?


Pray, Sir, let me entreat of you the cause.


Nothing that ought to give you trouble, Madam,

There's something that requires
The presence of my Lord without.

If there be any that would speak with him,
They shall be here dispatcht.

That cannot be, Madam.

Come, my Lord.
There's something I can guess at (if I be not deceived)
That does assure me, I may command you.
What business breeds this alteration?

I dare not disobey you;
The Castle is surrounded by Phylanter
With Troops of Soldiers; and, as we guess,
My life's their aim.

The Castle surrounded! and your life their aim?
It is impossible: they dare not think it.
I will go see their rudeness.

Not for the world, they know that you are here:
And their intents they'll act unto their power.

Is there a better way?

Yes any, rather than dye tamely,

For heaven's sake, Sir, resolve: Phylanter's now,
Forcing the gates, being denied entrance
For all his Soldiers, who loudly now
Call you, A Traitor. Upon one side
Which I'll conduct you to, it is most probable
You may escape --.

Ah me!

May I believe, (fair wonder of your Sex)
That though your cruelty designs my fate,
Yet you're displeased, that these should be
The Executioners? I shall then dare
To oppose all their furies, that my Life
May be Love's sacrifice alone; forgive me too,
If I dare own that Love, you frown upon.
You need not scruple to grant this --,
To any that must ask no more.
And may that peace, you give my dying thoughts,
For ever live with yours --.

Pray say no more, think of your safety,

See, she weeps --.
With pity ever dwells forgiveness too,
My wishes then are crowned, and I can have
No greater, unless that it were possible,
I might hope more and live.

O Mironault! --
So much confusion mingles with my thoughts,
I know not what to say; and yet I wish
That you might live, and cannot be displeased,
Though hope should be the cause.

So Sailors in a sinking vessel,
May see a calm begin --. This treacherous world,
Never wants mischiefs to prevent
The greatest blessings that are near-approaching,
To crown man's greedy wishes. --
But I mistake, to doubt that Life
Which you have given leave I should enjoy.
Who only have the power of it. This shall witness,
How much I covet to preserve,
What you wish safety to; nor is it possible,
That I should unsuccessful prove,
That have no other use for life but love;

The gods protect and guide you, O Phylena,
What's to be done?

Collect your self, dear Madam, all may be well,
Let's to a window, that o're-looks that side,
Where they intended to break forth.

I dare not see him fall.

Fear not Madam, Heaven will preserve.
So fair a Life, that has your prayers too.

Hark, they are engaged, lets see if it be possible,
To give him more assistance than our wishes.

STay hasty drops, not to preserve
The life that does pursue you.
But the blessed shrine, where Mirramente dwells,
See, 'tis not my wishes stays the purple current:
Man's still most near to dye, when he would live,
And live when he would dye; calamity,
And, the more dangerous extreme, prosperity
Commits this violence upon men's wishes.
Yet since the gods denied for either cause
To destroy life, or to protect;
In stead of Choice, we should oppose Neglect.
Hark, the noise increases still.
-- sure they are lost --
They fought it nobly, though, if my ears
Deceive me not, I hear some coming.
Ha Hyppasus and Pysander!
Then I am happy in spite of all misfortunes.

Dear Sir, you cut your way so nobly,
We should have reached you sooner else.

And so we had Sir, but two or three goodfellows
Still s^aid us upon conference --

Well, here's no staying, we must forward;
But whither, Heaven knows; 'twas an unworthy action.

For the honourable part of the story,
We'll, if you please, comment upon it hereafter.
In the mean time, 'tis more needful to observe
What a condition we are in to help one another.
Hyppasus would make dainty whistles,
My bones are already rattles:
The best house of receipt I know would be an Hospital.
A noise again -- On, good Sir.

The most by-ways must guide us.

Heaven direct us --

O what a speech could I now make
Of this frail world. But however,
I'll not stay now to do it.

HE cannot sure escape.

Rather believe he must, there is a better fate
Reserved for so much worth. Our hopes are now
The policy as well as justice of our hearts.
You know we did discern, how over the plain
Some hasted single, and Pylander said, they were divided.
At first you saw how fast he made his way,
Triumph and Danger waiting on his Sword.
The villains too, like dull opposing clouds,
Gave way to the fair Sun; And then Phylanter
Was on the other side.

Alas, Phylena, Fears are so powerful,
That in concerned breasts they govern all.

It is our follies that enthrones them so;
And to just wishes hopes are much more due:
Use them, dear Madam --

I need not blush, Phylena, to confess,
(And yet I shall, whilst I am doing it)
That I have more concern for him
Than others have. When you know this,
You will not judge your counsel then
So easy to be followed --

Pardon me, Madam, if I confess,
That I believed as much when I advised you.
I have had many reasons for such thoughts
From yours, though greater from his virtues.

O Phylena, advise me how to do, not how to grieve.
I see I must be forced to a hard exigent,
To let him perish, or in his relief
To appear too concerned, though not too just.

Your reason, Madam, will not have leave
To decide that; 'tis Love will be the judge
Of all his dangers. But now, Madam,
What is the next thing we must act?
Or must we suffer too?

Nay, Heaven knows; I sent one to enquire.
Now -- what's the matter?

They say, Madam, they came for Mironault,
Who had designs upon your Highness.

And have they taken him?

No; but we hope they will.
He has left abundance hurt and dead.

Go, be gone you fool; you are all suspicious rascals,
Fain would be thought State-wise.

Madam.

Be gone, you hoping Coxcomb.
There's something more in this, Phylena.

I cannot guess, unless it be Phylanter's jealousy,
Urged by your constant favours unto Mironault.

Its possible. Hark, a noise; we shall be more informed.

-- Escaped --
Now by the gods your lives shall pay for all.
You dogs and Cowards --
-- Madam, I humbly crave your pardon,
My passion makes me hasly, when your Cause
Gives the just anger.

My cause, Sir?

Excellent Princess, Yours; for this foul man
That seemed to pay his duty to you,
Bore in his breast a traitorous design
Here to surprise you; which I hearing of,
Straight hasted to prevent it, though my fate
Was too unhappy in the loss of him.

Ha!

But let --

Dost, thou not blush, or blush for me at least,
That I have let thee injure Truth thus long*
And wronged an innocence, which never dwelt
Within thy infant breast? Stay not to reply,
But leave me with your tumults.

Then I am lost; my last stroke now I'll strike,
And strike it bravely too -- Despair,
Thou ha's the noblest issues of all ill,
Which frailty brings us to, for to be worse
We fear not, and who cannot lofe
Is ever a frank Gamester.
Nor will I fall alone, should he enjoy her,
I should repining dye. Envie's the vice
That never leaves us till we fall from that,
The best ompanion of a hasty fate:
I'll cherish it as others would a Virtue.
He that declines himself --
-- when Chance or Fortune has declined him first,
He learns of those mean helpers to do worst.

IT was this day, Sir, that he intended the surprise;
And, notice given my son, with such few men
As he could get in readiness, he hasted thither.

'Tis well; but take heed there be no foul play in it.
For Mironault has ever appeared
A subject fit to ruin mean suspicions.

Love, Sir, can alter all; none more than I
Did hear (and wonder, with a pitying thought)
This error of his hopeful Youth; but when I think
He is a Man, and Youth dwells in his veins,
That still pr^pares for Beauty and Ambition,
The easy heart. Then look upon the Princess,
And see in her the pain and pride of Nature,
Her fresh unsullied beauty, that would tempt
The gods to gaze and love; I could almost forgive --
-- but must believe.

Ha!

To add unto the power of Love, and alf those joys
Her heavenly beauty brings a Kingdom too:
Crowns the ambition of his high-fed youth,
That makes all dangers less, from whose high top
They see it lessened in the common vale, and only fit
To tame the spirits of the meaner minds.
-- he that dares do,
Will act what his ambition tempts him to.

I know not; I would see just to all, and would be safe;
And Injuries are as unpleasing to me as Injustice,
I would not bear the one, or act the other.
When malice spreads a rancour in the breast,
That needs a policy to bear it forth,
The minds of Kings most think to fit with jealousy,
As ever apt for that; believing still,
That all such fears dwells with their height of glory.
Take heed, my Lord, that this so loose opinion
Leads not your tongue, and casts that brand on me.
I believe well of all. On farther proof
I shall think best of you.

Would I were well off.
We have not yet (Great Sir) so little left
Of kindness to our selves, to play with Thunder;
Nor yet so mean --
A thought of you, to let you live in danger.
Heaven knows all the ambition that now rules our thoughts;
And all we hope for that should crown our wishes,
Is to appear loyal to you, we are as free,
(Whilst you are so from danger), as a young Lamb
From hate or malice.

Nay my Lord, you do mistake, if you believe
You suffer in my thoughts, I am prepared
Still to reward your care, equally so
To punish or preserve his crime, or innocence.
When Kings do fall from this, and let each wind
Conduct them with its giddiness;
Their Kingdoms at the last, must suffer ship-wrack.
Perhaps your innocence, may once as well
Suffer unheard, from some malicious tongue:
I never yet harboured an ill opinion,
Raised from suspicion, or a meaner thought
From others envy, nor yet forget
To cherish those, whose loyalties are greatest.
Justice is still impartial, and all Kings,
Should only hold her scales: he that strives
To weigh down one with power, is unjust
To that Great King, that put him first in trust;

I'm lost --

But my Lord; we give you thanks now for your early care,
We would have none discouraged, to be loyal,
'Tis that which will adorn you here,
And help you to Eternity hereafter,
Whilst men are just, pleasing rewards will live
Within their breasts; greater then I can give.

He's gone. --
-- I would his honesty were too,
That sits upon him like so fit a garment,
The workman's paid, to have the credit of it.
He will help the gods to many cu^omers.
How now!

My Lord; --

From whence come thou, -- Ha, --
What news? my mind mis-gives. --

From your Son.

Why, what's the news?

But ill, -- when that your son
Had round beset the Castle, and all thought sure,
The gallant Mironault, in his fearless mind
Weighing the bonds of death, and of an enemy,
In perfect scales; the first appeared the lightest,
And through one Port, bravely with his two friends,
Issued like Lightning which foretells a Clap,
And Thunder follow'd too: whilst in despite
Of their resistance, through their lives
He forced his way and safety. --

And so escaped?

Yes, but they are still pursuing; the Princess too,
When that your son appeared, as if her eyes
Had borrowed, rage from the afrighting danger,
That Mironault was in; upon her brow
Enthroned it with revenge, and so with threats,
Left him unto his fears, who by me
Desires you to retire straight from Court,
Whither the Princess now directs her haste,
And march with all your forces; no other way
Is left to make Conditions. In the mean time,
He's still pursuing Mironault.

'Tis unhappy.

Necessity has left no other means:
Without this, he bids me tell you,
You may dye tamely.

Well, I must go; it is the fate of guilty men,
That such should seek at safety through more crimes.
Men are unhappy when they know not how
To value Peace without its loss;
And from the want learn how to use,
What they could so ill manage when enjoyed.
Ambition gives this blindness, yet permits
The eyes to gaze upon her tempting baits;
But in attempting, not what dangers are,
They see the Throne, and not the blazing Star.
Thus foolish his ungoverned youth
Has made us both alike,
Who, rather than to share a common good,
Ventured through danger at uncertain glory:
Nor could my power or prayers persuade him from it.
With such a grief the Ruler of the day
Shook his illustrious tresses, when he heard
The ambitious Phaeton make his bold Request,
-- who did prefer --
Before the counsel of the god himself,
The long'd-for glories of his glittering Throne.
Yet Phoebus mourned, the bonds of Nature tie
Faster then our own good or honesty.

THat I had wings, Phylena; this revenge
Justice it self will follow.

Pray heaven, Madam, no designer
Has been before us.

It is my fear.

But yet,
You may be confident of your father's temper,
Which does dispense Justice with deliberation
Besides your interest.

Would we could learn what were become of him.
They still pursue him, sure; and heaven preserve
His noble life from an untimely fate.
How the State-rascalls too were pleased
With the suspicion of a treacherous danger;
And grew as busy as a new waked Fly,
At the first news of Summer.

There is a baseness runs through all their veins,
And ranckles in their bloods, which to their children
Descends; a loathed Inheritance.

But who are these?

A very handsome person.

Extremely fair, I swear; she bends this way.

Excellent Princess --
Pardon the rude griefs of a distressed Maid,
That throws her at your feet; for your clear eyes
(Which sends a comfort upon pleased beholders)
To see and pity; you, that nature gave
Perfections above all; 'tis you alone
We must believe excells in goodness too.
Nothing that's ill can have so fair a dwelling.
You shall have still a Virgin's prayer,
That yours may ne'er successlesse fly
To those above, that those fair blossoms
Never have cares for to disturb their calmnesse,
Or force a wrincle on those snowy plains;
But may the beauty of a peace within,
Preserve and equal those your outward lustres.

Rise, pretty Maid, you should have asked and tried,
Whether at first I had been worth these prayers.
She must be very good that does deserve 'em*
See, Phylena, flowers, I swear,
Receive not so much sweetness from fresh drops,
As she from those. Her grief adds to her sweetness.
What is it, gentle Maid, you would desire?
Promise your self, if I can help you in it.

The gods reward you. Let me but blush,
And I will say, the act may too; he is too near
That I should tell you more. And yet, me-thinks,
He does deserve as much as I can say;
And his cause named to my poor heart,
Seems eloquence enough to move a pity.
Pardon my disturbed passions.

Nay, fairest Maid --
You injure me and your own hopes together,
To keep me in suspense: I would as willingly
Yield you my aid, as you could haste to ask it,
For the ble^ subject of your fair opinion.

I do not doubt your goodness; pardon the throng
Of all my tedious griefs. Know then,
You best of Princesses, for sure his name
Has reached your ears, the unhappy Mironault,
That much deserved to live, is like to fall
By bloody and unworthy hands.

O Phylena! I'm lost.
In that beauty is all my comfort buried.

Madam, what do you mean?
Madam, for heaven's sake; why, Madam?

I prithee let me go, thou art too cruel.
I shall enjoy peace undisturbed hereafter.

But hear her out, and do but search the truth,
Then I will let you die. I would not for the world
Any should guess the cause.

Alas!

Why, if they do, they cannot condemn the grief.

O Phylena, when Love has entered in the outward Forts,
Yet there is still a small reserve of Reason,
Which Love laughs at, rather than thinks it worth
His rage or storming; for he knows it must
Perish and starve, when the relief
Of all the nobler Faculties are kept out
By the insulting Conqueror, who contemns
All the attempts I fain would make against him.

I see I am decreed to all misfortunes,
That I should now disturb you too, who, heaven knows,
I willingly would please. Why do you turn
Away your head? How often have I heard
His prayers sent to heaven for your joys,
That now denies to look upon his woes?
I'll kneel again, for in such a cause
It were impiety to rise successelesse.
Nothing but Seas and Winds are deaf to prayers,
And Beasts to mercy; who would expect
A hidden form in undisturbed skies?
Or in that clearer breast a cruelty?
If you deny, I'll grow a fixed Monument,
Still to upbraid your rigour.

O Phylena, why do you let me languish?
In her beauty dwells an undoing lustre.

What mean you, Madam? can you believe
The world can show a subject for your jealousy?

I see I grow a trouble, I durst have sworn
You had been more charitable. How often have I heard
The now unpitied Mironault affirm,
You were the treasure of this world's perfections;
And wondered any thing but your fair self
Should know what joys were. Perhaps you too
Believe as much, or else you could not think
All his unpitied miscries are just. Had Nature
Given you a Brother, and your early loves
Blessed undisturbed from Nature's fruitful Cradle,
You would have begged -- as now --
His hopeless sister does.
But sure I should have pitied more.
And yet perhaps our interests makes us partial:
Yes I could wish I had your power to try.

Now, Madam --

Forgive me, gentle Maid; it was the power
Of thy told griefs that seized my faculties,
And left me able to do nought but grieve.
Forgive the time I lost to share with thee:
You may forgive the injuries of kindness.
And though my self were witness to the action
Thy griefs made it a new afflicting story.
Each storm renews in Merchants minds
The story of the shipwreck. Nor do I blush
To avow this, since I must not lose
The justness of my breast, that does believe
His innocence above suspicion.

May heaven inspire you to wish well,
And grant your wishes too, you might have then,
Perhaps, a joy as great as he would have,
Did he but know you pity him.

In the performance then of what I say,
He will have more; which I so much wish him
That you shall witness all pursued with haste.
Nor shall you be a stranger longer to me.
Yet I shall blush, although I give you leave
To see the partiality: but more time
Now spent in grass or leaves, would be his injury.
And we may ruin, what we would relieve,
Should we without attempting succour grieve.

WOuld I were a Dog, and could lick my self whole.
I shall be as fly-blown, as a ruin cheese,
How i'st Hyppasus!

But scurvy, would we might rest.

O me;
'Tis an unhappiness, that I should bring
You into these misfortunes, you have deserved
Better of me, and yet you may forgive me,
I would have shared as much with you.

We would not make such an excuse then, Sir.

You chide me nobly, I find, I need some rest.
And yet by all those powers, that caused these mischiefs,
My life shall end them, e're I'll be his prisoner.

Nay, we'll all dye; I hope 'tis no offence
To talk of saving our sweet lives;
In order to that, this next fair house
Must be our Garrison, 'tis ten to one,
But there we find some three or four brown loaves,
To victual us for a day; perhaps a sample
Of good seed-Corn, lies in the parlour Cubbard;
We shall eat moderately, come we must advance
And storm it.

You have no other way Sir, we are so weak,
There is no refuge else, and we are still
Hotly pursued, if they intend our mischiefs,
We may hold out against that petty number*
If they raise more, we too shall have relief
By the Princess, or your friends; if not,
We may make some Conditions. --

A wretched shift, and yet it may preserve us,
But let us use it nobly: Heaven guide us.

I'll advance, and knock: Within there*
Ho!
He struck so hard, the basin broke, --
Ho! what a Tarquin's here,

Who have we here?

Two or three strangers that have lost their way.

And you would be directed.

Pox on your nimble Charity;
We have been set upon by thieves, and hurt,
And must desire some small refreshment.

Why, this 'tis; The age is grown so perfect now,
That all fall's in the way of Begging,
And by the word Refreshment.

Nay, Sir, none of your moralities on the age,
Help us to the speech of the Master,
Or Mistress of the house, It must be so, Sir;

Here's neither.

What the Devil i'st.

A Lady.

Plague on your formal Coxcomb.
Lets see your Lady then,

That's more then she'll do you.

By this light, but she shall.

Had she sworn so, she had been for-sworn;

Sir, we would willingly be Civil,
Pray let's receive your Lady's answer,
But no more of yours:

You shall have it. --

This Rogue has bag pipes in his Lungs.
A mere Land-Remora, we wanted but the plague
To have heard his pedigree;
He had learned the policy of the old Roman,
To ruin by delays; we might have fainted
Under his wise Cunc-tator-ship.

'Twas a rare Scene, be sure, Pysenor,
You shall have none of the best drink.

When she comes, you shall be chief,
And we your humble servants.

And I'll be insolent enough: now Sir,
For such a Bird as the Princess.

Nay Pysenor. --

Hang it, this love, 'twill make your wounds ranckle.
There's nothing like a merry plaster.
Hark, I hear them rustling,
Mercy on us, what have we here,
December, with the too scurvy months at her heels?
She ha's dug up all her ancestors;
And wrapped their winding sheets about her,
I'll advance.

Where stands he, Peter*

Straight on; now must not I proceed
For fear I should discover, she were blind.

Whither a devil will she march
Hippasus, lie down in the way,

And be hanged, put on your serious face,

Save you sweet Reverence.

Are you the Gentleman? Peter, is this he?

Yes, forsooth.

Slight, she would have her man make affidavit of it,
We are those Madam, that would fain obtain
Some pity in your eyes, -- why, -- she's blind,
Blind, as an old Do-Cunny. --
We want a Charity, and we hope
That your grave years, ha's taught you that fair story,

From whence come you?

We are Gentlemen, and have been hurrby thieves.
You need not fear to help our hard misfortunes,
Our weak Conditions cannot threaten danger,
You may believe, we would deserve your kindness,
And our lives, which if you preserve,
Shall wait upon your beauty.

What a dissembling tongue the rogue has,

We went as long, as we could gain a leave
From weakness, as unwilling --
To be a burden to any, but our fates
Threw us on you, for which we dare not chide them.

This rogue would court a bitch --

Sirrah, I'll fit you. --

A fine well-spoken gentleman.

For if we did, we should be too unjust
For you must needs be good, because the gods
Let you so long live to instruct the world,
-- Or else afraid of your blind company --
But at your feet --
We throw our selves and all our miseries,
And cancel fear, whilst we exp^ct to hear
Our doom from your fair lips.

Quinever.

Madam.

I'st a handsome man?

Yes indeed, as e're I saw.

I feel just such a Qualm, as I had
When I was still falling in love, he has a sweet tongue.
Noble gentleman, you're very welcome;
You shall have all you want, pray come near:
Indeed, I am much taken with your speech,
'Tis very courteous, once in my youth
I understood these complements,
And have not yet forgot them;
I shall remember them more fresh
If you repeat them.

Why so, I shall be engaged to tell tales
In the chimney-corner.

Peter, Go in, get the best chambers ready;
Let them have something presently to eat.
Pray come ^n, you're very welcome.
Your hand, good Sir.

We are your servants. Now do I walk
Like the great Turk, that newly has put out
The eyes of an old kinswoman. Here we shall find
Good Fortune sure, for that whore too is blind.

HOw much unknown is real happiness?
And all are cheated with the name of thing?
Or we are all deceived, or else the joy
Grows poor by the enjoyment; to me
A Crown's a glorious misery,
Suspicion waits on all our appetites,
And sleep not pleases but affrights.
Kings have hard ways for to preserve a Crown,
To give to others fears, and hide their own.
The way's but narrow between frowns and smiles,
To avoid both Contempt and Tyranny.
For either is a Rock to split upon
This glorious and frail Bark of Majesty;
When-People do not ask, and yet Kings give,
Content and safety with them both may live.
But when they venture to reform the State,
Princes must suffer then
By their own fears, or by their people's hate.
They hide still what they mean in a redress,
And know ill acts are buried with success.
Seek peace in storms, and in disorder safety,
-- Till in a Chaos they have felt
Constraint and Freedom undistinguisht dwelt.
Their first fond way to reach at Liberty
Is, to assault those they believe too high.
And had the gods not Thunder, sure there are
That would attempt --
-- to light a Candle at a Star.
But Kings, like Suns, that at some time must pay
Their lustres in another Sphere, must leave
Stars fitted with influence to direct this night.
-- Yet, like the Queen of Night, to know,
That to his beams their lustre they do owe.
O Symathocles, you're welcome; Did you dispatch
What I directed you?

I did, Sir; and the Troops were marching,
But the arrival of the Princess prevented.

Is she come, then?

But now arrived, Sir.

'Tis well, Symathocles.
You have heard sure of the late accident:
'Tis odd; What think you?

'Tis hard to guess, Sir, easier far to doubt.
The Princess must inform us all.

I have suspended too my thoughts in this.
Haste is an ill companion still to Justice.
And whilst we hear at distance things unprov'd,
The story of their lives prevails still most,
That has been fair in Mironault. Yet our frailty
Guides us to unsuspected acts, so may the best of men
Fall to the least suspected crimes; that weakness
Crows with our years, and alteration^s still
By Nature nur^.

You have weighed, great Sir,
Things in so just and serious a scale,
That whilst thus evenly you preserve your mind,
You'll need no other Oracle; mean hasty fears
Still tyranny begets, non can deserve
Their safety, that attempt it that way
That poorly tells the world, he fears the reach
Of common hands; none but the Eagles gaze
Upon the Sun, unless it shrinck in clouds.
Nor do the common eyes attempt your glories,
Till shrouded in your fears. He's still most safe
That tells the world, He cannot be in danger,
For they'll believe it then, and 'tis most just,
If they will borrow fears, that he should trust.
Justice will then be ripe, when every thought
Takes its slow birth neither from fear nor passion.
And 'twill be fruit worthy a King to bear,
And bless the appetites of them that gather.

You have hit my thoughts; See,
Here comes more Information.
I'll see if she'll begin.
-- Rise, you are welcome.

I must not, Sir, till I receive
-- more then a common Blessing --
Your Justice is enough to case my fears.
Yet pardon me, if so much of Woman rules me,
To tell you all I suffered.

What mean you?

Great Sir, you might believe indeed
I should be undisturbed, where you procure
Peace from your careful thoughts. And sure it was
The child of Insolence and high Contempt
That cursed attempt the ruden^sse.

It was so, but to the matter.

When at my journey's end I was arrived,
Thither came Mironault in his own language
To pay a duty which he owed your child;
Where being scarcely rested, and resolved
With the next rising Sun to seek our sport,
But word was brought, the Castle was surrounded
By Soldiers, commanded by Phylanter;
Their business was for Mironault, w^o they said
Went to surprise me there, who only came
With two brave friends, and I dare swear with thoughts
As innocent as Infants; when he heard
The Castle was be-set, seriously weighing
Not Justice sought his life but Treachery,
Disdained to fall upon so mean a score.
As an ungoverned Torrent issues forth,
Bearing down all before it, and in the action
Finds its unknown power, when its streams
Are with a stop resisted, o're-whelming
What was believed beyond its power before.
So from resistance his disdaining rage
Achieved a victory, which his thoughts
Would ne'er have hoped nor aimed at; still Philanter's rage
Pursues his noble life. This is enough
Whilst you are just, nor need I to repeat
The injury to me.

But they perhaps
Might have a secret message of the intent
Of Mironault, you would be loath I see
To have one testify as much.

You cannot find one so extremely bad,
So far from being to himself a friend;
His story in the world has nobler truths,
Than to be fouled by any base accuser.
If all were true, it is your justice sure,
And not their fury, that should punish.

For farther satisfaction of you; Who waits there?
Go call the Lord Albertus hither.

In this petition too, Sir, oyns with me
This Maid, who from one womb
With the unhappy Mironault took her birth:
You will have many knees as he has hearts;
And yet none needs to beg, for you are just:
Yet you must pardon those loves that mix with fears.
We oftner then we need wipe precious Jewels.
His value makes us foolish.

He is beholding to you --
How now --

The Lord Albertus, Sir, is fled
As soon as he came from your Majesty,
He instantly took Horse.

He was in haste -- Symathocles --

Sir.

Gather the Forces in a readiness
That were to meet my daughter, then wait
For further Orders.

I shall, Sir.

Your pardon, fair Maid, that I seemed so to forget you;
It only was my care, you shall have justice
And should have had without an Advocate,
Your beauty though's a great one.

The gods preserve your Majesty, with your years
May peace still grow, that give it unto others,
Till you shall go to have eternal rest.

Thanks, gentle Maid, the rich Arabian Fumes
Are not so sweet to the delighted gods,
As thy calm prayers from thy harmless breast.
Come hither, Mirramente, I have not been
At leisure yet to bid thee kindly welcome.

Pardon me, Sir, that I must once again
Trouble your ears, nor think too lightly, Sir,
Of my request, it is the child of gratitude.
I would in person, Sir, relieve
Him, that has suffered for my sake,
And in my sight contemned.

Symathocles, would you not take it ill
To have a General put over your head?

Not, if it may serve you, Sir.

Look here, Symathocles, this Amazon has begged it.

She does the better, Sir, if there be danger
From her fair name we all shall fight in safety.

Well, take your course, on more intelligence
Move as you please.

Excellent Princess,
-- How happy I am now to be your Soldier,
Let those be judge that would be sure of victory.
So fair a Cause fought by so fair a General,
-- Can never be forsaken
By Victory or Fortune --

I thank you, Sir, nor can I think my self
Less happy in so brave a Soldier; if you please
For to dispatch before for some intelligence,
We'll instantly away.

With all speed, Madam.

Excellent Princess;
Which way to tell you all my heart returns
I know not, the gods in blessings thank you,
Who still assist the innocent and mean,
Because they made them so;

I thank you gentle Maid, from hence my friend,
You cannot cheat my confidence, you'll deserve it,
So does your Brother all my best assistance,
I reckon it my happiness, to procure
Your joys and safety; that I may then
Have mine more perfect.

Now all the powers defend, they should not be:
You never sure broke yet an hours repose
With a dis^urbing dream; in that calm harbour,
All thoughts have been secured from storm,
May they be ever so. --

Thy brother's cause deserves as much as that.
-- A thousand blushes stop me, --
Besides thou may be much deceived: the ship-wrack past,
The calmest waters may conceal the fate,
As well as the insulting waves,
-- Why do^st thou weep. --

To hear, you have been sad, O Madam,
^ardon me, to say an undiscerned power
Joins my affliction to your grief;
Forgive me that, I cannot choose but dare,
To accompany you in any thing.
There's something tells me, that I ought to love you
More then the world does, yet that's very much.

When I first saw thee, dearest maid,
I could have sworn as much,
And yet thou did not please me then,
Come, I shall disturb thee, 'tis an unkindness
Not to be pardoned, to let thee share my griefs;

Now you afflict me more: Is there a way,
To be a friend and stranger to your breast,
Though 'tis ambition, to be an humble one?
'Tis virtue, not your greatness crowns my wishes,
And I shall fear, that you will think me only
A friend to that, or else not worth the other.

I do not doubt thy Love, the story will
Disturb me, when I tell it, perhaps thee,
And yet it must return to me unhelpt.

How do you know? the meanest thing in nature,
May bring an unexpected aid; Giants that pass,
And lets the obstacles alone, do less
Then dwarfs that do remove them: as they are
Shut in your breast, fed with that precious food,
How can they ever starve? they may at last
Consume your stock of joys, he does like you,
That would defend, within a fair built Fort,
His enemies against his pressing friends
And patiently destroyed by those he saved,
If you believe me worthy, the gods have then
Finished their parts; for they decreed us most
To one another aid: So to increase
Our joys that way, and lessen all our cares,
For still imparted comforts do increase,
And grief divided to a friend grows less,
Our natures too are like o'rec^arged springs,
Willing to vent themselves, and so are you,
Had I but as much worth, as you have trouble.

I am not proof against thy perfect kindness,
I will keep nothing from thee, but be sure
You quickly understand me, my blushes too
Will tell t^ee half the story, what dos't guess?

That you should have no cares --

Can love have any?

What in this world shall ever be so happy?
I hope it is not that --

And why?

A thousand times I have heard my brother pray
That day might never be, I wish as he does too.

Your Brother would not have me then?
-- How innocent she is! --

He thinks it were unreasonable
That one alone should make the world unhappy.
Weighing their own misfortunes from his joy's
I hope it is not that:

'Tis that I swear. Love has caused all my trouble,
And if thy brother thinks me such a blessing
Why doth not he then wish it?

Alas he dares not welcome such a thought
He only dares to wish none else should have you;
But who must be so happy?

Your Brother.

Madam?

Wonder no more, I could have told
When I first saw thee that me-thought I loved thee
As I would do a sister; yet I was jealous too:
Nay I shall blush, as much as thou can wonder,
Yet he deserves my Love; sure you did then
Read a confusion in me; and I am still,
Disordered by my fears;

O Madam, --
-- Pardon me to say the gods have justly so
Decreed that it should be: for I have heard
Him sit and please himself with stories of you,
Till he has made his griefs too monstrous,
And I thought then too prodigal of comfort,
Yet now I think it was all but due to you;
And though I am turned of his religion too
And can think nothing superstition in it,
Yet you may spare the sacrifice.

Sweetest maid,
I have some reason to believe he loves me,
He cannot sure dissemble; Were thou ne'er yet in love?

Never;

Pray that thou never may, or that it ne'er
Have fears for it's Companions, night will wear
Disturbing blackness and not quiet shades,
The light will be too cheerful, whilst you fare
Like an impatient Sea-man that would fain
Attain the Port, the gentlest calm
Makes mad, and crossing storms disturbs
But from our own experience thus we raise
Advices that are chid and and scorned by Fate
Who oftenest sends what we least wish, and makes
What we most covet most unfortunate:
But now to his relief, for time
Pursues his course with an impartial haste
And my revenge must sit upon his wings.
You Powers above what now is just assist:
Their thoughts were poor, that trifled time and wished.

TO be still subject to calamities,
We all must bear: yet not esteem it hard
Our frailty sets this odds from higher powers,
And their dis-orders are appeased by ours,
It is a hard injunction of the gods
To set our natures and our selves at odds
When they afflict though due unto our crimes,
Yet they give to the nature that repines
Though if we use it well, none but they give
That blessing, that we are displeased to live
'Twas life first cozened man, and did entice
By knowledge its fair gift to cheat him twice;
Man was a happy stranger to himself,
When he believed his ignorance his wealth;
Did these Extremes our knowledge ne'er employ
We should have less of cares, though less^ of joy,
For in the mind, they never gain a height
From their own natures but each others weight;
Thus truly man has either more or less,
From what he had, not what he does possess.
As if the god's would give us nothing here
Worthy of our affections, but our fear,
For should we fall from happiness the store
Makes us more wretched of those joy's before.
Such a disease is life we hold so dear,
Health's in the other world, our Physic here;
-- O -- Hypposus -- what's to be done
Fortune has strangely jaded us --

Heaven knows: I am confident we are pursued,
The house is strong, had we but any men
We might resist their numbers, and by that time
They have supplies, we may have too relief.

Where's Pysander?

Shifting from the old blind Lady, who follows him
As if he were her dog and led her,
And as the devil would hav'it, her reverend blindness
Is at a venture ^am in love

We must resolve of some thing, and whats most hard
In ignorance, and without any aid: so may a ship,
With wounds in pieces torn, expect as well
To sail or fight; --
-- And yet me thinks there might be made
Some use of this Pysander's fooling.

By the Mass it's true, she has Tenants
That were obliged, without all doubt to assist her
In the holy War; they live here till they dye
Of the infection of old age; see Sir,
Where Pysander comes marching with her maid.

Let's conceal our selves a little, and observe.

Nay, by this light I'll ne'er lye for the matter.
If thou hast no faith ^hou'lt be damned.

Say you so, Sir?

How could thou choose but guess it? did thou e're know
A dunghill without a Cock upon it. Mere sympathy
Guides me to love thee, dost thou not find
Some such kind of thing for me?

Indeed I have a grudging towards you.

The devil take up the quarrel.
Nay 'tis grown to that I dream on thee,
Me-thought last night I rode a Flanders Mare,
And every night I dream of a fresh Beast,
And then I think on thee.

What means the Rogue?

Peace, on my life he has some farther purpose.

Lord how she I wells, hold a stick of fire to her
And she'll peace.

But since I love you so, you must assist me
In what I told you, for I should be loath
Now to be taken from thee; and I know
The rascals will attempt the house for me.
This can be brought about no other way,
But by report that I should marry
Thy Lady, for then all her Tenants
Will be the willinger to assist me.
But all this while thou shalt be dear Lindabrides,
Thou shalt rule and govern; and for thy comfort
Above pragmaticall Peter; and, by this hand,
If he at all cross us in this design,
I'll hang a thousand crackers at his britch,
Then throw him off from some high Tower,
In a high wind, hung between bladders;
And all this for thy love.

And will you still be constant?

As a Bell, still in one Tune:
And that we may be sudden, and I safe
To follow our Amours, persuade thy Lady
And instantly conduct her this way.

I'll take my leave first --

Slid, her lips are lined with Cosier's wax,
She kissed me in a full Career.
Sure she has hoarded up a store of onyons
In her dry chaps, to butter against winter.
The Devill's troubled but with one Dam, I have two
-- And there's a formal Weathercock,
They look which way the wind sits by him,
That from deliberation fetches wisdom;
And when he gapes at bed-time, 'tis a clinch
For my blind Mistress now, whose chaps are mewed
Of all their teeth, which yet she hopes again
Will spring like a felled Copice, and from the gums
New sprouts shoot up, she's almost deaf,
Would she were dumb too, for her tongue's obliged
To supply other organs, and tells us all
Her life, perhaps the History
Of twenty years a time -- This thing
Must I make love to, with brevity and ease.
I'll go through all the scenes of Courtship with her,
She shall have Serenades on an old Jews-trump,
That was Pirk-abboths, an emblem of antiquity,
And all my little Oaths shall be
By Cupid's Eye and hers, the Devill's in it
If I am then forsworn -- O how now,
What are you bolted? Come Gentlemen,
What's to be done? Hyppasus, thou were wont
To be nimble at sudden chances.

How insolent the Rogue is? now he thinks
We know not his design.

Nay, Pysander, we referred all to you,
We only are your poor friends.

Well, a Mathematician would not have breath enough
To tell the kindness of my Stars --

But for this rare fortune --

Why my old vessel is sailing this way,
When she appears, stand close
And you shall hear it.

Come I conceive, and did over-hear
Some of your policy, and believ't
There is no other way to save us now.
If we can get but men, 'tis but throwing
A work up in two places, the other parts
Are strong enough.

That shall be my care too, but when you see
The old Beldam coming, be sure you vanish.

We must be quick, our time has straitened us.
As soon as they can have intelligence
They will be here.

What if we could send away to Court?

I'll rather perish than believe I can
Be worth her care.

Why thanks then to Pysander
That believes himself --
Worthy his own --

Would her Ladyship were come.
Prithee Pysander let's have no time delayed
In asking how she does, and what's a clock.

Thou hast reason to be more confident of my wit.
-- See where they come --
And like the Graces leading one another.
Let's over-hear a little.

Indeed he is a proper Gentleman,
And 'tis great pity he should suffer.

It is indeed, I would not for my Maidenhead
It should be in your house.

Nor I by this light.

I think as much; indeed he speaks as well
As any that I knew these six King's Reigns:
Where is he, Quinever?

He said he would be hereabouts.

Now Pysander uncouple them.

So I may be hunted, but I'll advance.
-- Save your sweet Ladyship --
I took the boldness, urged by my love,
To trouble your kind ears with a petition.

You're very welcome, I shall be glad to hear it;
And though I am old, and people think decayed,
I can tell how to judge a worthy Gentleman.
Hey ho, in my time I have heard many complements,
And blessed was he could gain but a good look.

He shall be damned now that does.

The world and I am altered.

A Carthusian swear the world is,
-- I'll swear for thee.

And yet I have warm blood now in my veins,
And it will beat sometimes: I have heard men say,
That age has vigour lies within.

She'll tell me by and by she can fart fire.

And so indeed --

I must interrupt her; But you forget
To hear what your poor servant asks.

I pray what is't?

First I must beg you, that you'll have the confidence
To believe, I love you; old Lutes
Still sound the sweetest; many a man
Has travailed many miles, and tedious ways,
To see a lesser monument, and since I love you,
I would preserve my happiness, sure you ought then
To return equal kindness.

By my troth, but justice, and indeed, I will,
I shall not be so cruel to grieve you long
So worthy a kind gentleman; I esteem
A tedious coyness vice, you put me in mind
Of my old principles, in my Grand-mother's time.

That's according to a new account,
Three hundred years before the world begun.

And as I was saying in her time
Matters were quickly ended, I am still
Of the old fashion.

In short, then, since you see I love you,
I must beg your assistance; for these rogues
That hurt us, as I hear, are now hard by.
Your Tenants, and a few servants would with ease
Defend us from these wanderers, that I may
Enjoy my happiness with safety. This your Commands
With ease may finish, and I bless
The fate that brought me hither.

I pray your self command them,
You shall have full power, that in time
Must be my husband.

Plague on your nimbleness, how she mumps, --

When my last husband Sir Percivall died,
I little thought to have had another suitor;
But you men have the power to win us,
And I can tell you, such a tempting Gentleman.

For ought she knows, a Sign-post
With Friar Bacon's brazen head upon it, --
-- If you please Madam, I will attend you,
When your Commands have settled us in safety,
I shall presume to tell you my Love's story.

I shall be glad to hear it, pray lead on,
What you Command, shall be a law. --

Yet Hyppasus, we breathe; and safety now
Begins to wear an easy shape.

The rogue has worked them finely. --

By Heaven, he is the best composed man,
I e're yet knew, for in the worst extremes,
His cheerfulness, and judgment is the same;
We are prepared; if they find us now,
Phylanter's bold to bring them on to action,
Fortune but guide, an equal sword to mine,
And borrow frowns from all the destinies
To hang upon thy then contemned brows.

But I believe, they never will attempt us
But seconded with more, for they will fear
What may proceed from Court.

Never believe, he would attempt this action,
But with some feigned story to my prejudice.

But the Princess, Sir, seemed to resent the injury,
She is too noble, meanly to suspect.

Alas, Hyppasus, they before corrupted
His goodness that should incline to her,
These flatterers beset the thoughts of Kings,
As an ill enemy besieges Towns,
First poisons the fair springs.

These are the worst of fears, we may as well
Hope, that his judgment scorns unlikely stories.
But let the worst that fortune can prepare
Fall unregarded on us, the least defence
Will help us to the noblest fare.

Nobly resolved. --

And when we fall so brave,
The world will find more loss, then we can have.

NAy, you had best teach her to beat a drum,
Do you think to make her now an old blind Amazon.
We shall have the Sheriff to send warrants for u^,
Thus to raise Forces, and not se d^fendo;

Lord, how wise you are good Peter, at least
You would fain s^em so, I can tell, I'm sure,
Where you have all your wisenesse.

Where, good Quinever?

All your law, out of the two old leaves
That lye behind the parlour-cupbord;
Piece, they say, of an old Stature book,
Which has been rotting there these twenty years.
And for your other talk, 'tis taken out
Of your old Erra-pater; and you, forscoth,
Must seem to be more wise then all of us.
I'm sure, when you made love to me,
And once were out of these two trodden roads,
You could not speak a word, but just, How do you.
And that repeated over with variety,
Of scurvy tones, nay. --

Why, art thou mad, or dost thou think it fit,
My Lady, should defend all wandering strangers,
And enter into wars? I am resolved
To change my station, they are digging up earth
Before the Gates, I can't pass by,
But I must think of graves, men too brought in,
I think, to fill them.

Hang your sheep's face, I see that now 'tis fear,
That your wise worship with your wonted ease,
Should not at leisure drink your morning draught,
And at the Alehouse for two pots
Hear your self praised,
And bribe a man to come to you for counsel
That never had need of any, you have worn your Gloves out
With biting your thumbs ends, to appear wise.
All this put together, got from my Lady's purse,
Thou hast been as chargeable as a Regiment.

Why, Mrs. Quinever, sure you once had
Better opinions of me, though you now
Wash every day your best handkerchief
With yellow starch, and your laced quoiff,
Till it now hangs as if the devil
Had srighted you through quicksetts, not a post
But must be beaten for the rotten powder
To make your hair sit well, and all in hopes
That some of these should fall in love with you.
I was once thought worthy, then I was honest Peter.

Marry come up, what, love that transparent nose of thine
That gives the Serenades when thou sleep?
Or thy wide mouth like a dead Lobster's claws,
Or thy starcht ruff like a new Pigeon-house,
Your garters tied above your boots; as if you feared
Your leg so well provided would be gone.

Why I thank you sweet Mistress Quin^ver go on
And be all mad whiles I lament you sober:
Nay you shall fight by your selves for Peter,
You'll make an excellent ammunition-Girle
Get a bottle to carry hot water in, in time
You may arise to be a Sutler's wife.

I'll have your wise head fitted for all this
And heer comes one shall do it.

O sweet Mistress Quinever

No fawning now you whelp.

Mrs. Quinever well met, I was seeking you.

I am happy I have found you.

How go matters? we have got some 50. men.

All goes well: but this wise Gentleman
(Whose wit lies in his breeches, for 'tis all
He has to know when he has need)
Is much displeased at our preparations,
And asks me if you mean to make
My Lady a blind drummer

And cannot you convert him?

No indeed.

Why thou ungrateful piece of wise formality,
How oft hast thou had warning to be wise?
I have threatened thee thou should never go
Without a rime-pind at thy back
Which should be thy own grievous Chronicle.
I told thee too that I would have thee painted
Riding upon an Ass and reading Seneca,
I thought this might have tied thy tongue.

Good Sir:

Nay hear and mark me, if thou dost ^r'e again
Seem to be wiser than thou art, and cross
What now is done, nay if thou dos't not help
And put thy assisting hand to it, thou shalt ride
In a hot day upon a well lined saddle
With soap in thy new grogram-breeches, till it work
Like new tunnd beer, and every day
When thou sitst down to dinner one or other
Shall pull away thy stool, I'll spoil thy gravity,
Or noint thy feet with butter, whilst a dog
Shall lick and tickle thee, and if any comes
Here to oppose us thou shalt seem a stratagem:
For on the walls we will set thee, like a thing
Stuffed up with straw, only to make them spend
Their shot upon thee, and in thy turn
Thou shalt do duty too, and every night,
Be sure to have alarms. Speak what you'll do.

I did but utter my opinion: I shall conform.

It's well said, and I forgive you,
But take heed you err no more.

You need not doubt me.

Come wench, now we breathe in safety,
And thou proud Peter's conqueror.

The Devil go with you; he has conjured me.
Did ever Turk think of so many torments,
And in what order too he marshalled them?
I am not yet out of a chilling sweat;
Nor shall I get now of enchanted Quinever
One drop of good hot water, God deliver me
From this strange hurly-burly; and yet I dare not fancy
A good strong halter and a handsome beam
I'll go to sleep, for I am now
Afraid of all things.

THe intelligence is certain they are here,
At an old Ladies, and all hurt; we cannot miss them.

Those that I left preparing now come up
Make us 400. strong, your father too
Follows with more.

We must attempt them (though) before relief
Can possibly arrive from any place,
And if we take him we are sure to make
Our own conditions, the best we can expect:
Our resolutions arm us for the rest.

We are prepared and I believe there's few,
That serve you, question policy or danger.

Ye nobly all oblige me, and for your sakes
I could even wish I never had attempted
What I must scorn now meanly to repent of
But ill intents when they least prosper
Then mu^t be most pursued, to reach again
Our first condition,

Nay Sir, I think it were no harm,
To wish us fairly off.

I would we were, but I am armed;
To dye I fear not, and yet I would
Fall with some pretty character about me,
At least I'll make the Kingdom joy
It had so brave a spirit, and like Rome glory
(In spite of fame) in Catiline who died
At once men's envy, and her pride,

We must loose no time Sir, the night
Conceals us, and as yet perhaps
They have had no intelligence,
The house is near at hand -- shall we parley?

'Tis the best way to find their confidence
Nor can it be a prejudice to us; we traffic now
Only for what we'ave lost: "If we survive
"We will find at least a nobler way to thrive.

SO that work's now finished.
Let all the guns be brought into the Hall,
'Tis to defend the good old Lady
From the rudeness of Rogues; 'twill be casie work.

Yes, yes, we'll tickle them.


I'll sweep 'em with my father's old Fouling-piece.


Bravely resolved; but perhaps.
There may be yet no need on it, however
'Tis wisest to resolve against all dangers.
Well, my good Lads, be in a readiness, if any come,
VVee'l ring 'em a peal shall make 'em forswear
Such Holi-daies: they all die rather than wrong
Sir Percivall's widow. Now all unto your places.

Agreed, agreed.


Now could I hug my genius, that through all
Has brought me to this harbour; and yet to think
If we should escape, what my engagements are,
Imprimis -- To marry this old Lady Cow,
And play at Blindman-buff, 'tis as good lying
With Bulrushes or penny Faggots; she's mortality
Beyond a Death's head and Memento;
And yet she bridles as if she were but now
To be new-back'd and ridden; I have heard
Of a dead body that has long been so,
And yet retain its form, but when once touched
Crumbles to dust; for ought I know she may do so too,
And I be hanged for embracing Mummy.
But certainly I shall touch her gently,
For 'tis a remedy to see her dressed
Against all carnal thoughts, beyond bathing
In Rivers in a frosty night.
She follows me, and asks a thousand questions
Among the rest
Enquired what I was making at the gate?
I answered her, a Curtain: then she mumpt,
And asked, If 'twere not for her wedding-bed.
She made the truest Hieroglyphic
That ever blind Egyptian hit upon,
For 'twas of earth, and I most fairly hope
'Twill be her wedding-bed; bar death,
The devil cannot find another Rival.

Pysander come, we must to action.

As how and how?

Phylanter's here hard by already,
And without doubt knows we are lodged.

Why -- then -- he'll knock us, or we shall knock him.

It's worth no greater care, my brave Pysander.
Fortune and you have done your parts,
To give us something to employ your valours,
They now shall buy us bravely.

Nay, I'll not sell my self at any rate,
I begin to have a wondrous value
Of this small composure of Pysander, if you mark it
'Tis very lucky to see an old blind Lady
-- should fall in love with it,
One that runs her nose against posts.
But come, Sir, since these Lads will never leave us,
Let's in and provide for them, they may have
A better welcome than they dreamt of,
Unless Gunpowder lay last under their pillows.

They shall hear us --
In louder language then they do expect.
The gods but lent us life, and we still pay
Them interest, as casualties and sickness;
Death is the Principal, which when we restore,
We owe the world and gods no more.

Why, its exceeding well; we shall be all
Clean out of debt in the other world then;
Our Creditors are strangers there, so are they here
To me, I'm sure; and in the other world
If I should want, and thither must,
There's store of faith, and I'll take up on trust.

THis is the house sure it should be
By the description -- How -- Works thrown up?
All's quiet though; we must be cautious,
There may be else some trick in it.
-- Summon the walls --

Within there, ho -- ho --
Sure they lie buried in security.
As confident of power and success,
As if the Destinies slept with them too,
And waked at their command.
Let's wake them all -- and yet 'tis hard
To rouse an innocence to disorder,
'Tis that I fear is their security.

O Lycespes!
It is as great a crime (when past) to think
Of things ill done, as 'tis unthought to act
The ill before; he that does one first cheats himself,
The other cousins him: now to be nice
Is vain, for us that have been cheated twice.

Within there, ho --

They are dead.

No, we live, Phylanter,
And far less fear that fate than you,
That have so many crimes to sink your thoughts.
Spare your pains of asking us to yield,
VVee'l sooner find the worst of all extremities;
Danger will lose its nature when you bring it.
-- Nay do not stay --
In expectation to hear me ask
Why you have thus unworthily thrown off
The name of Honesty: Some may fall
Not worth men's pity, but their scorn,
And so do you.

You're very high, so let your actions be,
Your crimes will need it. But I see words
Displease you, you shall have louder Rhetoric.

Fear not, thy baseness has taught us to understand
That language.

You, Lycespes, you Treason-hunter,
How, I wonder, did it happen, we did not meet
Your storming worship at the gate?
Pox on you, you were untrussing a point,
The old fighting looseness.

You're merry still Pysander, and very brisk,
Are you so well already of your inlets.

Hang you, if you bleed as much
As a staid man would let out from a witch
To save himself from enchanting,
The Physicians, Apothecaries, and Surgeons
Must stand about thee, like Pensioners;
If Hyppasus and I, can but get a willing cur,
We are licked whole, a dog's our only Mountebank.

Very well Sir, when I visit you,
I'll bring a spaniel in my hand.

Hang the couple of currs, say I,

Your resolution's heard, I'll urge no more,
But leave you to your fates, only thus much,
By me the Princess sends this punishment.
The danger now grows bigger sure, --

This is mean Phylanter, and you still trifle honesty,
And I time and honour: let the storm come,
-- And he that seems to fear,
May he unpitied fall, without a tear.

His Courage still is excellent, great power of love,
That made me give so much to her,
I left none for my self. Lycespes draw round the house,
We^'l storm it instantly, dye all you lesser thoughts,
That at a distance tell your formal tales,
Or else come nearer, and wear noble shapes,
The distance makes you mistier, the dice are cast,
The event will punish or reward what's past,

IS my Captain here?

Now entered, and like your Ladyship.

Very well, leave us then: Come near good Captain.

Mercy defend me. A dressing, or setting up a Barber's shop,
Here the teeth lye, what's this an old head?
A lecture for the best Anatomist; like a rusty Clock,
Taken a pieces to cleanse all the devices,
Set them together some engineer for me.

Pray sit near me, Captain,

I do.

O Captain, what a hideous noise
Was there en now of bouncing, pray what i'st?

Only some wandering Raskalls at the gate,
They'll have their errand suddenly.

I would they were gone, truly at the first noise,
I brake one of my pots of Mit^ridate,
With Dragon-water, good for the head and stomach.

Was there ever such an old Almanac,
At the end of the year Medicines set down?

Besides the great disturbance from your company.

Nay, you see when I have freedom
I use into my own advantage,
Visit you before you're ready --

I shall be ready presently, the time will come
You shall be welcome to me quite undressed.

The Devil of thy young bones
Locked in thy old Cabinet.

I shall unparrell then faster than now I dress me;
You'll help to pull out pins I'll warrant you.

Rather drive in wedges --
Why you know we men must court,
You would be bashful else, and it were pity
To loose that time which should be better spent.

You say true indeed.

Come Madam, pray dress your self
I'll serve you instead of a better chambermaid
S'death would she were once furnished
One may dress and undresse Long-lane as soon.
What want you now, Madam?

My night-rale, good Captain.

I shall give her a sheet instead on it,
It lies about her like a casting net
'Slid I have given her never a wascoat,
And now will she call for her farthingale,
I must make haste but cannot go without her;
For her wise tenant's now before they fight
Will see their Land-Lady

My farthingale, good Captain.

I thought so, now is she like an old Camel
With that hideous mount on her unfurnish body.
Mercy how have I set her out! she may make
Good harmony; for she's composed of different notes
She would yield a man more money to show
Than an outlandish beast; my sweet Quinever
I have employed to stave off formal Peter
From making tenants seem as wise as he.
What want you now, Madam?

My Periwig, good Captain.

Which way to set this on now, is the question:
'Tis no matter I can't mistake now
More than I have done.

I thank you Captain, I hope you and I
Shall live happily and comfortably together.
I was told, my seventh husband
Should be a wondrous honest and an able man.

That, experience will let you know: I shall tell you
A merry tale towards bed time that will cure
The cough of th'lungs.

And make one dream huge pleasantly
And that's a sign of youth I can assure you.

That and your toothless Chap's are main ones.
If surious Medea had thrown thee
Into her age-renuing Kettle, thoud'st have leapt out
With a medley of years upon thee.
Hark, a noise! by heaven it increases still, hark

O Captain, a noise!

Nay there's two now in the Devill's name:
It still increases, come Madam you must down.

'Sdeath, Pysander, they are falling on
The men stand all at gaze
And swear they will see their Land-Lady,
We are all lost without some help.

Madam, you must needs walk
And encourage your tenants, to send these fools away
'Twill defer our Marriage.

Pray lead and I will follow.

Come Hyppasus, how fares the noble Mironault?

As a brave Ship hemmed by a raging storm
Resolves to throw the balance ore,
Lose all and perish carelessly:
But come, we trifle time.

Along then, and for your blind Ladyship
If you had no tongue
You should make signs to your tenants.

COme Lycespes, is the alarm given
To amuse them on the other side?

Yes.

What resistance does appear?

As yet all's wrapped in silence.

Where did the messenger say my Father was?

At hand Sir with 5000 men; were it not best
We should defer the storm till then?

By no means; we will attempt it first,
For by that time they may have relief
Come from the Court, my father's sudden flight
Confirmed the least suspicion, helped by the Princess too.

It could not choose, you have thrust your self
Into a troubled Ocean.

I know it, and now must sink or else go on,
There is no choice in Crimes but of our Fate,
The affrighting freedom of a wretched state.
We cannot hope ere to return again
Back on our fancies to our first conditions,
What tob'd us of the safety we enjoyd
First made us to contemn it;
'Tis a stayed gamester too, that would give over
Upon the losing-hand; the most metl'd, or let it be
The maddest one, would stake on all his wealth,
Venture to tire Fortune or himself.
We have bargained now, and chopped a Peace for War
'Twere foolish to d^pend on ought but Victory;
For that will change our acts, or others natures:
The vanquished wear the crimes, and all will fear
To judge or question what they too must bear.
This slender gloss I know must startle thee
That has so much of honesty and courage;
And if we fail I'll quarrel with my self
That cousend thee to follow what thou once
Did love with'honour: fearing to be unjust
To friendship, made thee more unto thy self:
I have used thee as some that have seduced
Young men into bad company, thou hast found
Things much unworthy of thee --

Tis true, dear Sir, I will not face a lye:
Our acts have given me both amaze and trouble,
The last I threw behind me, may the World
Forget the rest, there is a Fate hangs over all
That shows it's force when it resolves to strike
When we can act at once, at once dislike,
And it is the sad necessity that we must
Persist in crimes again to reach the good
That you intend; this nobly does deserve
My friendship now, and if we fail
-- The world may yet believe*
Our thought's were better, let them choose to grieve.

Set on then, brave Lycespes, danger not found
Women frig tchildren with, and perils met
Uncheat us of our lives, that rendered us
But an unhappy treasury for our cares,
Made monstrous by our joys, the hopes and fears
That spring from them, only the stock we spend on.
This cannot add, I know, to thee; and I should blush
If it could ought to me. But 'tis men's pleasure
To undervalue what they think will go,
And they must loose -- the world's fond nature's so;
And 'tis the bravest scorn ill men can have,
To change this world, as freely for a grave.

NOw the Devil raise a Barricade, I am stormed too;
I have peppered the Rogues on my side,
I must go see how the other fares.

Is he here, Peter?

Straight on, an't like your Ladyship.

Pray stay, sweet Captain; Oh, oh,
All my corn's a-fire, good Captain.
Straight before still, Peter?

Yes Madam.

By this light, Sir, I'll direct your nose to the wall,

Good Captain, all, all, my corn, oh, oh;
The great Barn's on fire, look how it burns.
Is this your kindness? pray, your hand.

Pray take this for interposition.
It will not do, she'll run her head
Against something or other, and beat her brains out.
-- I must place her in here --
What's this, a Corn-house -- Here Madam.
Give me your hand, rest your self a little,
And I'll be with you presently: and for you, wise Sir,
Let her alone, till I, like a good Midwife,
Come and deliver her: This, Sir, you had best observe.

Why its very well, I thought at least I might have given her
A hot fire-shovell to have baked a cake upon.
Nothing troubles me --
But that the Rats and Mice may play with her nose.
I thought she would be brought to this, Mrs. Quinever
Is employed in casting bullets with a face
Like fiery Sol in Leo, if this hurry hold long,
My poor old Lady may wish she had lost
All senses as well as seeing; for god knows
The employment for the rest are miserable.
Hark, a noise, they are at it, much good may it do them;
To run away it is impossible, and from my chamber
I can see all the shooting; it has made me wish a thousand times
I were as blind as my old Lady, I'll to her in the Vault,
I never thought my self too safe, he that did,
Let him leap Towers for Peter.

BRave Hyppasus, how to forgive my self I cannot tell,
For all that you have suffered.

Still on that strain, Sir!
We could not serve you thus if we repined,
Or feared to suffer for you; wrong not our honesty
And courage both.

They are too excellent, I swear it were a pleasure
To share in danger with you, were it not a pain
To see you there -- Gallant Pysander,
You brought us timely aid, and from our sinking fates
Raised us again; but you had quickly done
On the other side.

O mine were pitiful rascals,
Yours came to their business handsomely.

They did indeed, Phylanter first
Advanced before his men, bold in despite
Of all his crimes, and careless both alike
Of honesty and danger.

He was the wiser; To what purpose
Should any one be thrifty of, that the world
So little cares for, this trifle Honesty.

Come Pysander, you must get the Soldiers dressed,
That have been hurt, we may have more need of them.

Yes, yes, as far as her Smocks will extend in Lint.

I find I need a little dressing too.
-- Let's in, and there --
Provide for after-claps of treacherous Fortune.
We must not fear a Frown, or court a Smile;
One may the Wise, the other the Brave beguile.

HOw far is't to his Quarters now?

A little way, Sir.

Be sure that all the Soldiers march in order,
And on their lives no outrage to the Country.
Let all be done in silence. No Scouts returned yet?

Not any, Sir.

I am jealous of this Court, the King inclined
But little, suspicion could not mingle with his nature,
The Princess has confirmed him sure; we act
On the uncertain'st Stage, the strangest parts
That ever yet were played, I would the world
Would take it so. We have now stepped
Beyond the power of Retreat or Fortune,
The one's too poor for us, and we for the other.
We are like tired Gamesters with ill Cards
VVeary to hold the game, and yet play on
To save if not to win; perhaps
If we prevailed, Ambition would as well
Play on the game as now we do,
Though from a modester design.
How little ought man to be trusted then
With power in this world, when even the things
He aims to thrive by are the crimes of Kings,
Good Princes, like best Jugglers, still find first
The lesser sleights of others. How now,
What news?

As we were scouting on the way,
Which leads unto Cracovia, we espied
The Body of an Army moving within
Two hours march.

Ha, it must be so -- she has don't.
Bid instantly Botiscay march with haste,
For fear we are hindered joining with my son.
Amidst these crimes a little policy does well,
It must be so, all we can hope for now will be to make
But good conditions --
-- To put it to the venture of a day were madness,
We can have no supplies, they may have more.
And yet -- I know not what to think,
Distractions mingle with my thoughts,
And we still lose our judgments with success.
Our resolutions waited on us then
Like servants wanting wages. All Mankind
Is one of those two Cowards,
-- Either to wish to die
When we should live, or live when we should die.
Some fear, some wish, too early, or too late
Most fall, yet none must choose his Fate;
Those that prepare for every storm, do seldom cast
Themselves away,
It is but bravely sinking at the last.

No news yet?
1. Not any Madam.

Leave us, and give notice when any comes.

I shall --

We have not now sure far,
And yet me thinks 'tis along while
Ere we are there, time is thought
The fastest undiscerned flying thing
That is, but yet Love's wings are swifter,
Swift wishes imp his ragged plumes
And pull the feathers from the wings of Time,
-- And every hover bears
Double proportion from our hopes and fears.

This pretty way of account Madam, will rise
Unto a sum of ages, added
To what now Mironault's a heaping,
'Twill make a new Chronology,
But we still reckon on the old account.

You're merry still, Phylena, when your day comes
You'll give me leave to do the same.

Yes Madam, we both agree,
And yet you shrewdly once suspected it
Of this fair maid,

You make me blush, she way forgive me though
For she deserved it,

O Madam, --
Could you fall so much below
The power of all your beauties in such fears
That you could justly let suspicion dwell
Where you pretend an interest? The Rose as well
May drooping hang it's fragrant head
Jealous of meaner Flowers, and the Sun
Suspect his light when mortals kindle fires.

Nay Amione you court me now
I will not call it flattery, whilst it comes
From thee, for that's a crime
That dwells with crooked natures, yet it was
Mistaken kindness.

'Twas you mistook it sure, for none will find
Themselves deceived that love you,

How now, what news?

Just now for certain, Madam
The Lord Albertus joined unto his son
With a great Body,

They have not yet attempted ought.

Yes Madam, before his Father's coming,
Phylanter stormed the house.

Ha: hast thou learnt no particulars?

Yes all, for before the Lord Albertus coming
The smallness of their numbers gave us freedom
To enquire near the place of all particulars,
-- And thus it was,
Soon as Phylanter had found out
The house they stayed at, presently he guest
That wounds had caused their stay, by reason
They strove to reach no place of more security
And so indeed it was; guessing besides,
They should have small resistance: upon these thoughts
Phylanter draws about it, then summons them.
But in the midst the gallant Mironault
Hinders the parley with a hasty scorn,
As if he meant to drive no bargain,
But sell at his own rate, at which
The bravely bad Phylanter swelled with rage
Prepared to give th'assault, and in the head
Of all his men advanced (some distance) first,
To bring on ruin great as was his crimes,
Or else to perish with them, and seemed half willing
To be forgotten on a noble score;
So equally divided, or to hide
His mischiefs in their Fates, or in his own.
The storm grew hot, yet still Phylanter urged
Beyond belief, now out of Love with safety,
Because his foes in spite of him enjoyd it
(With an unlooked for power to resist him)
Branded the name of Fortune with a whore,
As if they had begot supplies upon her;
On the other side his men sees shrinking from him,
When mad with rage he easily retires
With such a look as longing Lovers send
When they must part, so much he coutted danger,
And now retreating with his drooping forces,
The gallant Mironault like a bright Sun
Broke from the smokey storm, and issues forth,
Acting new Tragedies, till, being jealous
More forces might come in,
In order they retreated, and for certain
Phylanter both and Mironault are hurt.

O me!

Madam send off the messenger, Let not him see
The least disorder.

Go instanly, and bid Symathocles
Let all the Army march in readiness to fight.

I shall.

And acquaint him with all you know
Nay do not hide thy tears Amione
They can't displease me, wench, nor shall I think
That there is grief enough for him,
Though I am fully stored.

Alas, what a condition Fortune throws him in?
Did he but know by whom he were lamented
He could not have so much of joy,
As grief to think how he was ravished
From the loved mourner;

I prithee peace; not that I fear
To have more grief for him, for I have that
Within me has made that impossibility,
But to enlarge thy own, 'tis true too
That I should give thee counsel not to grieve,
But I shall grieve the while, yet if thou think
I wrong thy kindness then wee'le mourn together
And join our stock of tears, for no one store
Is worthy of him.

Though nature made me partial, it robbed me not
Of so much reason, to be so impudent,
The Fates perhaps, or some great power
That has a special care for you, or kindness,
Preserved you for themselves, and lent you to the world
As the S^n was, not for the happiness
Of one alone but all.

May we not yet amidst our greatest grief
Believe it is not dangerous; for after he was hurt
They leisurely retired.

Would I could so be satisfied --
And yet that clearly justifies we wish
Our own contents, then when we raise
Our fears to equal power in our thoughts
Of what we doubt, yet what we wish to have;
None e're yet wished a life, but feared a grave.

'Tis true Amione, those torturing ^ivalls
Hope and fear are ever whispering,
And they that have most need of one,
Have ever most of the other. When I think this,
Though I would willingly pretend to counsel,
Or any thing would ease thy grief, I must
Believe it both impossible and needless.

Were it not just to linger then no longer
In all these doubts, since we might give them ease.

As how can it be done?

I would attempt to see him, I only want your leave.

It is impossible, the ways are all shut up.

I do not mean to go concealed.
They say Phylanter is so much a Gentleman,
He will not certainly deny a woman.
Fear not, Madam, 'tis but two hours time,
And I am there, or here again.

I can deny thee nothing, not this I'm sure;
If thou see him, tell him, that Love and Constancy's rewarded
In the other world, and will be so in this.
Tell him, I wish his happiness
And mine own together. And be sure
You take a Surgeon with you.

My service, Madam.

I will not fail, Heaven keep you.
May I return with such a blessing
As I now bear to him.

Farewell, dear Maid. Phylena, now
The time draws near of joy or misery,
-- We live at an uncertain rate,
Or flattered still, or else displeased with fate.

I Should chide now, but the condition of your fortunes
Cannot be that way helped, nor are you fit
For a disturbance, I hear you have succesless
Stormed the house; Why stayed you not till I arrived?
'Twas folly to attempt it with so few.

But that has happened now which I then feared,
For I did guess supplies would come to them
As soon as you to us. Besides, who would have guest,
Or now can think, how they come by their aid?
Had we proved fortunate, we might have made
Our own conditions.

In that you have hit my thoughts, for now we must
Not lose our selves by fear or folly;
The one's too mean, the other but a madness.
And we must look on these we have
Without a hope of more, and on them
As an increasing body; by this we are constrained
Upon the nick to make our compositions,
Or put it to the venture of a Day;
The first's the better, were the last the likelier.
For I believe that, passion laid aside
That first incited these rash thoughts and actions,
You look upon it as not to be pursued,
But fairly to be le^t. Men may err,
It is the influence of Chance and Nature,
But to pursue it, is their own -- Lycespes --
There is much due to you, you were still honest,
And most a friend in danger,
Who are in safety only are their own.

My Lord, I always owed your son as much,
And did resolve to pay it, till I had cause
To leave, or feared to avow it.

You are still noble. But Phylanter,
What certain intelligence have you?

We know, Sir, the Army of the King
Is hard at hand, they say the Princess too
Is with them.

I ghess'd as much, and for that reason
I left the Court, for I heard
That she was big with rage -- Well,
The time's now short, and something must be done:
Let all be in a readiness, and prepare
Nobly to reach success, or ill to share.
In the mean time we'll presently advise
The honorablest way for composition.
For to be safe and good is better far,
Than trust our crimes unto the chance of War.

HOw have I thus been cousened! how monstrous too
It seems, still to pursue the crimes I loved before:
To be uncousened, though 'tis just, seems poor,
When danger gives the wisdom: how low we sink
When we once fall below our selves!
We still must fear what others ought to do.
In crimes none can be wise and gallant too.
All this besides for an uncertain Beauty,
Nor yet possessed or gained, the Persian so
Spends all his wealth and prayers on the Sun,
That equally dispenses unto those
Which ne'er adored him, his warm comforts too.
Farewell to all your Sex, that cannot be
Beloved, but with unthrifty misery.
The Lover that's unloved, like me, must waste
His store of Love, the Loved may longer last.
They that join Stocks, with ease our-spends
Him that runs on unpaid and lends.
Farewell: I will uncheat my self and you,
For when I loved you first I cousen'd two.

My Lord!

How now?

A woman at the door
Desires admittance to your Lordship.

Thou rave! a woman?

So I told you.

Nay, I might wonder, for such and I
Have now so little business with each other,
That by my troth 'tis strange.
Seems she a person of any quality?

Yes.

Handsome?

To a miracle.

The Devil on the wonder! business with me?

So she earnestly expressed.

Bring her in.
Curse on the Sex, Civility must wait upon 'em,
Their weakness makes us fools, or else their beau^ies.
Ha! 'tis that indeed that charms us from our selves,
And all the handsome actions that we do
Seem offerings to their powers, as if the Sea
Should send a tribute to the little Brooks,
Such a preposterous thing is Love, 'tis like
The folly and the crime to make a god
One's self to worship -- Now for a trap
I shall be shy of these fair baits.
-- What subtle trick --
Must this fair Instrument bring about? --
-- I will be deaf to charms -- She comes.
Ha -- extremely fair --
Come perhaps for to revenge
The scandal of her sex upon me -- Is it on me
Fair maid, that you would lay commands?

A comely man, pity that form
Should harbour so much baseness.
It is you, Sir, I must petition; for commands,
Though they might seem fair attributes to our sex,
Yet when you know, to whose much hated name,
Nature has made my Love a debt,
You will believe, Thardly should petition.

I rather shall consider this fair thing,
To whom a hated name can owe an interest,
-- But you have heard --
Stories perhaps, not much becoming me,
Made up of others envies and my crimes,
Nor can I tell a good one of my self,
But that I love an innocence like yours,
And only that, for you to have a confidence,
I hardly shall deny you.

The world has sure belied him,
-- Nay, Sir,
Nature commands, that I should ask,
Your fair encouragement has given me hopes*
Not to be quite denied, and I am sorry
That I must now beg a civility,
And dare not own requital; 'tis the first time,
That justice and ingratitude were friends.

You still believe me too unworthy: they that do
An act that does deserve requital,
Pay first themselves the stock of such content,
Nature has given to every worthy mind,
If others should be bankrupt --
Pray torture me no more but ask.

He would deceive me strangely,
Know then, the sister to wronged -Mironault must ask:
Does it not startle you?

You see it does not.
He that has injured Mironault, will grant it,
Trifle no more.

Tis only then your leave that I may see him,

And happiness attend you, you shall have
A conduct with you; -- I did not think
That I should find so much of joy,
In that small time I have to bustle here,
As your loved power has given me,
Pardon me, if I dare attempt
To have a little peace within me,
Still to remember you, I fear I must,
Though both should be unwilling.

I shall promise Sir, I carry no intelligence.

Urge it no more, I do not fear,
Nor am I ignorant, of what a storm
Is falling now upon me, only grieved
That I durst bring it to it, and yet now pleased,
That I dare bear it: choice in crimes,
Is the worst part in man, and good from fear,
The meanest. But I have said to much, only thus,
The last of all my thoughts, shall be of you,
They may be good: Nay, do not wonder,
Nor be so much concerned for one so lost,
To frame an answer from a smile or frown,
I will conduct you on your way, as you come back,
Others shall wait you, for your eyes
Shall not be injured with an hated object.
Here in this world, my fate, the quarrel ends,
-- In the other sure, we may meet friends.

NAy, for certain, Sir,
We saw a body marching, which cannot possibly
Belong to the other Army.

Why, I did always believe,
My dancing days were not quite done.

I know not what to guess, nor do I wish;
For in extremes, less cares give noblest thoughts,
Designs of wishing, are the cheating joys
Of fearful men, 'twere foolishness beside;
A careless hope looks handsomely.

We shall so justify our selves, but I believe,
'Tis not unreasonable, to think our innocence
Should merit some protection, the Princess sure
Will not be last in justice.

Urge it no more, nothing is worth her care,
'Tis some as bad as those, come to assist them.

There's one without, Sir, that would desire
Admittance to you.

Who i'st.

A woman.

A woman? I cannot guess, --
-- Let her come in.
What should this mean, deceive me not too much,
Fond hope, nor puzzle me, for if you do, -- at last,
I shall grow careless of my joys and you;
Ha! Amione, -- welcome,
Welcome, above all joys but one.

Perhaps, welcome as that, I have much to say,
But I must first be civil. Brave Hyppasus,
May you ne'er know extremities, but if you should,
May you find such a friend, as you have been.

Were I not nobly paid in his desert,
I were in this?

The same to you Pysander, for to thank you
In any other Language, were too poor,
And much unjust, for to divide,
What you so nobly joined in.

Now have I forgot, what Hyppasus said,
Pray take his answer in good part for us both.

You'ar merry still, Pysander.

I confess, nothing went ever near my heart,
Unless it were your Love, but what avails sighs and tears?

Very well, Sir.
Dear Brother, pardon this injury of gratitude,
That kept me so long from you; forgive me too,
If joy disorders me, I have enough
To see you safe.

Dear Amione, how long we shall be so,
Heaven knows, yet 'twas a great advantage
To live thus long to see thee: but how wast possible
You could get hither, or from whence now come you?

Why, Phylanter's great civility,
Brought me safe hither.

But from whence?

From the Army.

From whose Army?

The Princess.

Ha! --

I will defer your joys no longer
From the Princess, who bid me tell you,
That faith and constancie's rewarded
In the other world, and will be so in this?

Thou would not mock me sure.

I do not.

O* Amione, Did thou but know the joy of every heart,
That at this hour, has its wishes crowned,
Thou might then guess at mine.
And is she there in person?

Yes, attended with a gallant Army,
Much stronger then the enemy, you might
Discern them sure; and resolved as soon as I return
To offer battle. Is Phylanter,
Prepared to fight?

With any thing in spite of all his crimes,
Resolves to perish bravely, so great a villain
Ne'er bore so brave a mind, -- tis a question,
Whether he thinks, there's such a thing as danger.

We heard indeed, he stormed it bravely,
And that your hurts were of more danger
Then I perceive they are; 'twas the report
Of that which brought me hither.
Nor must I stay, the Princess laid commands
Of my immediate coming back; at more leisure,
You shall have all my story, in the mean time,
I must needs tell you, you are like to be
Extremely happy; O Brother, never was so much sweetness
Guarded so sure from crimes, if ever breast
Were Sanctuary for virtues, it is her's:
She will deserve your love I fear much more,
Unless its possible, men should be constant.

This is not kind Amione, her value
Will make me wise still to preserve my riches;
And benefit is mans design.

Man seldom though pursues his own advantage,
Women like Towns, once won are slighted:
What we already have within our powers,
Has less esteem then unatchieved things.

Urge it no more, one may as well be weary
Of the Sun's constant shining, as her influence:
He never rises, but he seems to bring
Fresh glory from the East* and every day
Will add a new discovery of her virtues,
That she will never seem enjoyed enough.
Besides, though man's composed of faithless matter,
The Soul of one may be of nobler use
Than others are, and with that Soul
Man had not been so nobly put in trust
Had he not means left free to be unjust.
Come, so much eternity as my love must have,
Must not be told in such a little moment
As you have now to spare, nor will I injure
The little time I have with thee,
When we shall meet again heaven knows:
For friends once pawned to distance there is a danger
To bankrupt hopes.
You must expect but poor besieged welcome
-- Who such relief as Anchorets have
At least shall find in an expected grave.

WHat is the next thing how that must be done?
How weary all the World and I
Am grown of one another? I should be friends
With this disguise, could it but hide my crimes:
But night it self that great disguifer,
Wants power to conceal the least of crimes
From any troubled breast, when man would fain
Be unacquainted with himself again:
'Tis just too, when we have our selves betrayed
That we should be then of our selves afraid
Ambition only is our nature's folly,
That robs us of that little stock of reason,
We have at temperate and idle hours.
If we but take the inventory of our selves,
There we shall find such perished stuff
By rage and passion, that 'tis just
We should be once forgotten in the dust;
-- But for my new design -- ha -- 'tis odd
To throw my self into the power of them --
As if 'twere meanness, or something poorer; fear --
-- Yet -- let it dye
Ha -- she comes --
-- A Persian's cold devotion thus,
Receives new warmness from the rising Sun
-- It must be so --
He that would hide Love kindled once within,
Rakes but his fire up to keep it in.

We take our leaves now Madam, for we see
There's one attends you from the
Lord Phylanter,

Madam, my Lord Phylanter sent me hither
In his own language to present you Safety
Great as you merit.

I thank you Sir, he has obliged me nobly:
Had he forgot his crimes, I should forget
He were an enemy.

He bid me tell you farther,
That he had waited on you here himself,
But that he feared to injure your fair eyes,
That should be only pleased with welcome objects.

Ha: perish you easy thoughts, that start
At hearing of that name, yet when you think of him
I may forgive you, if you then
Frighten your selves, --
And yet it may be Love; ruins of Love
And lightning are alike --
For, what would willingly resist
They both consume; I shall attend you Sir,
If you please to lead the way --

COntinue still worthy Lycespes,
To let him know repentance needs no blushes.
Or that 'tis necessary for Fate or us,
To pursue cruel actions, yet with a gentle hand
That no distraction mingle with his nature;
For he is young, and youth's unsettled fury
Is ready still to act,

I have Sir, with a gentle hand
Touched all the story of this madness,
And find him too, like an experienc't gamester,
Ashamed to have been cheated, but resolved
Wisely no more to venture at that game:
Our whole designs must needs therefore now
Aim, but to bring us off, and yet prepare
Not to want courage in the meanest Fortune.

'Tis all that can be said in our Conditions,
In order therefore to our sad affairs,
Wee'le instantly dispatch a Trumpet
To offer fair conditions, or any thing
That may not sound like mercy from another:
That's an unworthy way to add
To other's fames, in ruining our own;
And yet our whole desires shall be low,
Indeed they must, for the extremity
Of every unresisted Fate makes poor
Their thoughts that were as rich before.

YOu have now, Sir, performed that civil part,
That alwies shall enforce me to esteem
The Lord Phylanter, and may this Sir
Tell you my thanks.

Madam, reward can not be due
To this small service, though I may do
What may perhaps seem to deserve
Something of that nature, but I must first
Desire you to prepare for to believe
Not ill of him, that thinks your wrongs
Deserve devotions, greater than his trust.

What mean you Sir?

Would it not be worth a reward at least?
That you might have within your power
The ease of all your hard misfortunes?

Certainly 'twere; the sound bears greater joy
Than possibility.

I know sometimes, that Treason seems
But ugly in the justest cause;
Though I believe that never yet,
A power like yours commanded it.

Still I understand you not, pray to the matter.

To be short then, know Phylanter loves you,
Your seeming kindness will have power
To draw him where you please, for to my breast
He has committed all his thoughts,
And bid me judge when I should see you,
Whether he had not cause for all his passions,
(Indeed he has) so much his crimes are greater;
Nor is it more injustice to his trust
Than due to you to tell you, if you please,
That I may bear some feigned kindness from you,
I'm sure 'twill bring him any where,
That you may easily surprise him.

But do you think he has lost his reason so?
To trust himself without his guards,
And his surprifall then will not be easy.

Alas, his reason's like an helpless friend,
Left and forsaken, and nothing but your name
Must be forgiven, that would attempt to lessen
His thoughts from what he has done, you need not fear
He can be over-wise that loves so much,
Nor will his reason tell him that 'tis due
To all his kindness.

Nor is it sure.

But to his former story 'tis, and present actions;
For though repentance only at your name
Has power in his thoughts, yet he contemns
To have that Virtue on a meaner score,
His crimes to all the world besides continue.

And they may better be the punishers.

I grant you, were it in their power
As 'tis in yours, and they would then
Do sure as much for you.
'Tis but the least command from you,
My life on it, I bring him where you think best
He may be with most ease surprised.

But should not you consider?
That though this punishment be due from me,
The treacherie's unjust in you.
How much it is the business of mankind
To make a bargain for their honesty,
And yet not think how little that will yield
To others, which they make so cheap,
Man's like a barren and ungrateful soil,
That seldom pays the labour of manuring.
How has Philanter injured him, or I obliged him?
That I could at first upon a lesser score
Share with his crimes, and on a meaner now
Basely dislike, as if his choice were just,
Whose equal ease accepts and forfeits trust.
^'le tell him too 'tis base, how fain would Love
Tell his own story, through a nobler cause,
And blushes sure as well as I.
-- It should be for Phylanter --
Ha! Deceive me not fond eyes, it cannot be
I owe amazement now so much --
-- It must arrest me.

Wonder not, fair Amione, nor fear
I'll beg your pity, that contemn my own,
And yet for many reasons think I love you;
Though I believe my time will hardly give
Me leave to reckon them -- Only consider,
That I durst here avow it, I could have fallen,
Its true, as nobly with my fellows,
But much more happier here; I would have weighed it too
More leisurely in reason's scales, till a thought
Of you broke in, and ended the dispute.
I have at my own rate procured my happiness,
Nor have I done less sure for you; 'tis the first service,
And likely too to be the last I e're shall do you.

O Phylanter, you should not trust
Revenge, and all your crimes at once
In any power, though I perhaps
Shall fear to be a murderer, so to make
My self as bad as you.

Why I confess, I willingly
Would be as good as you, but that's a lesson
Hardly to be learned, and yet it looks
Much like the way to read it often;
As I have done your virtues.
I say not this to tempt a mercy,
I have deserved a great deal of unkindness;
But not so much as now to fall
A sacrifice to any but your wrongs.

I know not what to say --
You may repent, perhaps grow good;
Pray try.

'Tis true, I think I might;
But 'tis a question still, whe're you'd grow kind.
And indeed, the fear of that great danger
Made me contemn the rest. But I trifle time,
By all that's charitable, let me not fall
By meaner hands. Hark, some Soldiers.
Use this for pitty's sake.

Alas! ah me!

How now? who have we hear, Philanter?
Treason!

Treason, treason!

Nay, then I must use it.
Villains, I have a little business here,
I might have spared the reason though to you
They have raised the alarm; yet, Amione,
Free me from this mean ruin.

Pray put on your disguise again,
You may yet escape.

I'm glad it is impossible, you see it is,
O Amione; had I but loved you at a lesser rate,
I might have found a soberer expression.
But yet remember, a mad-man seldom loses
His kindness with his judgment.
A noise again! hell on their yellings!

By that love you bear me,
Put on your disguise.

Never, till my safety be worth your care.

O Phylanter, though your condition needs it,
'Tis too soon for me to say it, yet I will tempt my
To tell you, I would have you safe.

That now my fate is unavoidable, the gods blushes
Perhaps provided, lest I should surfeit
Of joys in this world; yet I shall have
Enough, if you believe, no dying mind
Can have more joy, or living love.
'Twas my grief at first to love you, and now
My fear at last you should not know it.
'Twas all my business too before my end.
I could wish one thing more, to be resolved,
Whether in the other world (where wise-men tell us,
There is such store of love) our joy shall be
Greatest, to meet those friends we loved best here.
-- but I shall be resolved. In the mean time,
What e're becomes of me,
Let your kind thoughts
-- admit sometimes this minute's memory.

Alas, think of your safety; Hark! they come! yet
Let your disguise and me protect you.

When I have your protection -- I need need not this disguise,
Nor will I wear it. They come.
My dear Amione,
For ever live as happy as I die.

Here! here! on! on! on!


Villains, you shall buy me bravely.

Hold, on your lives; how, Phylanter?

The same, you need not bid me welcome,
Nor tempt me much, Symathocles.

O Phylanter, be yet more temperate;
Pray, Sir, let me obtain a little hearing.

You may command it. The Princess!

O Madam, let me beg
That no amazement dwell upon your eyes,
Nor any thing but mercy.

I have both ready for thy sake -- How --
-- Phylanter -- What Riddle's this --?

I owe that name indeed, but with less blushes
Than I did once.

I promised not to wonder, my Amione;
But this is strange.

You promised mercy too.

Have you an interest in his pardon then?
Blush not,
I'll ask no more -- Phylanter --
This story shall be perfect at more leisure,
And all things else shall be deferred
But my forgivnesse. I do believe
(You came to fetch your pardon in so much danger)
You can repent or any thing, but deserve
The happiness preparing for you.
Come, Amione, thou hast brought back
An unexpected friend. May this success
To every one bring equal happiness.

HAs no one yet brought any news?

Not any, Sir, O misery!
Betrayed by some slight. How now?
From whence come thou?

My Lord, your son desires to meet you;
And withal you would not wonder,
That with the Princess he waits your coming.

Stranger yet! some farther mischief sure!
Lycespes Draw up the Army instantly.
We must not be thus cousened.
Came you from my son?

But now, Sir.

And is he with the Princess?

Yes, Sir.

Where?

Now coming to the House.

With all her Army?

Only with a small Guard.

There may be something then.
Fortune I'll think if now thou shew'st thy care,
Thou can redeem as well as bring despair.

IS this the house, Phylanter?

Yes, Madam.

Pray summon it.

'Twill now be yielded, Madam,
Far easier than 'twould once. Within there, ho!

How now, what news, O Phylanter?
Is your troublesome Worship there again?
-- how now, the Princess too?

The same, Pysander.

Now truly Madam, do I think
I had best call Mironault to unriddle this.
-- The labour's saved.

Mironault.

Ha. --

Do you not know me?

Yes, and others too there.

This is injustice Mironault,
Can you let wonder keep you thus from me?

I had forgot, it's true, 'tis Mirramente,
And serupulous thoughts were sins unpardonable,

If I should stay to consider what this means,
I should be the last should know it;
I'll even descend too.

Mironault,
-- Though these strange objects might deserve a story,
'T would take up time, and I shall think it cruelty
To rob thee of one minute's joy, if I can give it.

If you can give it? have I thus long
Loved you, and loved you religiously, now to have
All my devotion questioned?
Can sick men joy in health? or liberty
Be pleasing unto captives? In your kindness
Lies all my health and liberty.

Nor will I fear to avow it, dearest Mironault,
No thoughts of crossing danger e're shall fright
My Love or me.

It's true, I am unworthy of you; but so are all,
And he that parts me from you,
Must join me to a colder Bride.

And more than you, gallant Mironault,
Wonder no more, nor think on stories past,
But that to come, Phylanter will appear
As worthy of your friendship,
-- As he was once of hate -- but stay
I had forgot to ask your pardon. Indeed
Here's one may better do it, whose fair opinion
-- Will promise for me. --

Brave Sir, I hated still your crimes not you, so did she,
And if she love your Virtues, pray believe
I am her brother too.

Madam, I see
A little honesty will make one impudent
That I must now beg pardon for others,
That scarcely should have hoped if for my self.

Rise my Lord, you need not now
Of any doubt your pardon.

Excellent Princess, I shall deserve hereafter
What an unjust necessity made me shun to testify.

Hyppasus and Pysander, I must not now
Forget your share in thanks,
That did receive your part in danger.

Nay your Highness cannot be better pleased than we
That all the danger's past, to say truth,
Hypasus and I were clearly your Platonic,
And made up the Romance.

Captain.

How now, what's that?

Why nothing Madam,
Only an honest fellow killed in the storm,
And now his ghost walks; in his life time
He was a talking fellow, Hyppasus you know it.

Hang you, what do I know?

Why, Captain, Captain?

Plague on you, would you were gagged.

This is strange!

Nay your Highness need not be troubled,
I'll have a Scholar shall lay it at my own charge.

Well Sir, if you'll be at that cost, I'll be the Scholar,
To raise it at my own.

Pox on your conjuring fools-head,
By this light she rises --
Like Ceres with Plenty about her,
Lord, how Peter stares!

Captain, Pray, your hand

Here forsooth.
Now have at the Princess, la, ra, ra, ra
Your Highness may be pleased,
To pardon her usual exercise,
She was the best tilter in her time
That ever ran.

O Captain, pray your hand,

Now have I ague: what tends
This whisperig to?

Come Pysander,
The god of Love himself is blind,
She, or her estate (I hear) is very fair.

Why, is your Highness in earnest?
And please you she's some sourscore,
A dog were as good a husband for her
To lead her up and down.

Madam, Will you consent to have this Gentleman?

I have already yielded.

And be hanged 'twas before you were stormed.

Come it shall be a match, she'll make you her Executor.

Well, we'll all be marri'd then. Hypassus
If you please, you shall have Quinever.

We are all happy then; we need not fear,
Unless my Father frown.

We shall unwillingly throw off again
Our Loyalty to him, and yet we shall
Be very ready to embrace a witness,
That we dare dye for Mironault.

You nobly all oblige me, and I must tell you
My dearest Princess that I cannot fear,
Whilst I enjoy your Love, for that has raised me
Above the power of Fate or danger,
Nor have I leisure to think on any thing,
But of those joys are falling now upon me,
Which neither time or age can ever lessen;
For still your Virtues like Medea's charms
Shall bring fresh beauties to my happy arms.

We Bridegrooms disagree, for every day
Will oblige most that adds to your decay.


