THE NVPTIALLS OF PELEVS AND THETIS. CONSISTING OF A Mask and a Comedy, OR THE
The Great Royal Ball, Acted lately in Paris six times BY

ALSO BY

LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Ancor in the lower walk of the New Exchange. 1654.

PEleus King of Thessaly being enamoured with Thetis, and crossed by two potent
Rivals, Jupiter and Neptune, doth so carry the business by the Counsels of
Chiron, and by the succour of Prometheus, that both the Gods are at the end
excluded of their pretentions; Neptune desists by reason of his old age, and
Jupiter being the elder of the two, but much more considerable, doth
voluntarily renounce his interest. Whereupon Thetis being plainly persuaded of
the constancy, and fidelity of her Lover, gives her consent to marry him, so
the Nuptials are celebrated with a great concourse of Gods and Goddesses.
Prometheus also having done good service in the business, and to put a period
to his troubles, is there also present, and brings with him the Liberal and
Mechanic Arts which he had invented; Discord also would fain have been
there, but that she was ashamed to appear upon the theatre, having been chased
out of France, and it had been to no purpose for her to disturb so joyful a
meeting.

Madam; I Believe, no discerning Reader will question my Judgement in point of
Election, nor accuse my Election of much presumption in Dedicating this
princely new piece to your Ladyship.

Touching the first, the Fancy coming from that Country which doth challenge
as much Interest in your Illustrious blood as England, I humbly conceived it
might well become your Ladyship to be Patroness thereof.

Touching the second reason, it having been not only Represented, but Acted so
many times (and reserved yet for entertaining Pimentel the Spanish Ambassador)
by a Great King in person, with such a number of Princes, Princesses, Nobles,
and above a hundred Representators besides, so that the charge of the scene and
shows amounted to half a million of French liures; But above all, it being an
invention so cried up, so well contrived and traced, so full of wit, and
variety of Musical airs, with other gentilesses; I deemed it would be a thing
not unworthy of your Ladyships private entertainment.

Lastly, Madam, the Fancy being so fresh, and suitable to the season, it comes
to usher in a happy and healthful spring to your Honour, attended with
affluences of all Felicity present and future, according to the humble and
pregnant votes of

My most Highly Honoured Lady, Your thrice-Obedient and devoted Servitor JAM.
HOVVEL.
May 1654. AT the opening of the Theater, Apollo and the Muses appear upon the
top of a Mountain, on both sides thereof run two Rivers of Thessaly, and the
water-Nymphs being separated in two Quires, fall into the praise of Apollo,
inviting him to come down and give a happy Augury to the Loves of Peleus; The
said Mountain stoops by little and little, whereupon the Rivers and Nymphs
retiring, Apollo and the Muses fill the Stage, and compose the first entry of
the Ball.

MOre bright and better made then all the Gods,
Superior to the rest of Deities by ods,
My ForeSPEAKER with immortal beams is crowned,
Victorious beauties I raise from the ground,
I after Glory always run,
Not after Daphne whom I shun.
That fierce destructive Python I did quell,
That ugly horrid Serpent hatched in Hell,
Rebellion, which had poisoned far and near
Fair France I chased from off this Hemisphere:
I rather had this Monster slay,
Then with my Daphne sport and play.
Yet it must be at last, early or late
I must a Female court, it is my Fate,
And though I am all God, yet there's a she,
Whom with love glances I must deify.
And what Nymph, Goddess, Queen, or Muse
To be my Daphne would refuse.

My stemm is more then of a mortal race;
For to great Henries Granchild all give place:
My Innocent and young aspect,
Inspires both pity and respect;
And he who loudly would complain
of Princes falls and Peoples reign,
Of angry stars, and destiny,
Let him but cast his eyes on me.

I turn this charming look
Sometimes to Doomsday book;
These eyes, where in his throne
Love sits, make many moan;
My Rosy cheeks, my quickening fire,
Mad the beholders with desire:
And though I am but a young thing,
Blown as it were but in this spring;
My office is the History to tell
Of what a thousand years ago befell.

The Mouth of Fame doth tell,
In Mine the graces dwell:
So red, so small, Loves Queen
Had not, nor ere was seen;
A hundred beauties more
I have in bank and store;
Yet none esteems them less:
I nature rather bless
For those inward parts I have,
Which will last me to my Grave.
Though I with musique use to cheer the mind,
Yet in my Pipes no foulness you shall find.

There is no heart so free
But it will yield to me;
I have the true supremacy
Of beauty both in front and eye:
My glances able are for to recover
The sickest amorist, the palest lover:
My Comedies, if that you listen well,
Are able to redeem a soul from hell.

The stars in their career
Are not so bright and clear
As is my mind, which 'bove the Elements
Doth soar to view those high syderian Tents.
This port, this countenance, and eyes
Show I did drop down from the skies.
I study their Aspects and Influence,
Their Motions, what good descends from thence.

If for a mortal I am taken,
You may perchance be there mistaken,
I dart a ray will pierce the heart,
And make the center of it smart:
I carry such a Majesty,
Which represents Divinity:
The graces all in me do dwell,
Contending which shall bear the bell:
I do preside in Masks and Dances,
Wounding the looker with my glances.

Beauty a treasure of high rate
Is my companion and my mate;
Of virtues I have such a store,
That could enrich a thousand more:
I raise my spirits to enhance,
(When I am in poetique trance)
By high heroic verse the acts
Of noble Champions and their facts:
The Sock I scorn, the Buskin me
Doth raise to immortality.

Although my countenance be grave,
Yet pleasure and delights I have*
I look on Death and Destiny,
Yet are my strains Divinity:
The passages of virtue I rehearse,
Though in an Elegiack Tragic verse.

A hundred objects I do see,
Although at my Nativity
They say I hooded was, my song
Will carry one to heaven along,
The various postures I do show
Will make the Gods themselves to bow;
I am the glory of our hills,
Where joy both heart and spirit fills.

Let my heart go loose more then to one,
If I do love but three, I leisure have
To sell love by retale;
I cry; I sigh, and ready am to hang,
Yet then I vanish in the height of passion.

The beauty which me charms is like the spring, we ought to love each other,
she is fierce, and so am I. A young forceresse may well become a Magician of
twenty years.


Who can make scruple of my art and skill,
My reasons in due time have Energy enough;
If I look fair in any part,
I'st not a trick of Magique Art?

I have enhanced my gallantries so high,
That Neptunes Court is glorified thereby.
They equal the exploits of Paladins,
Whose fame the Earth with Echoes dims,
What a poor thing it is to be
A demi-god by land or Sea?
Yet I am one, I'd have it known,
It is no stain but a renown,
In the fair field of love for to be so
Where joy sadness, flowers and weeds do grow:
And for the water-Nymphs none can express
Better then I whether they are fish or flesh.

With a Nymph both fair and cruel;
The Fates have called me to a Duel
My torments endless are, my breast
with the Sea surges have like rest.

1. In my fine hooks there's danger, then beware
I am a fairer Fisherman by far,
Then love himself my hook and line
Can catch a creature though Divine.
2. Husbands their cares do double, lest one day
I fish within their ponds and catch the prey,
So subtle is my wit, that none can see
Where I do fish those things which flow from me.
3. I will lance out when Age improves my flanks,
In the mean time I keep upon the banks
For corrall on Vermilion lips I fish,
And who will hinder me to have my wish?

It is not for me to fish for Corrall here,
I to another Coast my course must steer,
A fatal ground
Which Seas surround.
There I must fish upon an angry Main,
More then two Crowns and Scepters to regain.

I have the same bait, hook and line
I had when I could scarce tell nine,
A few there are
Though ne'er so fair,
If I am set
Can escape my flaxen net.

Upon the side of a still peaceful pond
I use to fish, and dare not go beyond;
The time will come that I may also seek
The Rivers Banks, and happily a Sea-creek.

As straight and slender as a rush
I use to cast my line, and push
It on, but I do only catch
Small things, I cannot yet attach
Great wel-grown fishes, one might make
Good cheer with those I cannot take.

Of this sweet Trade of Fishing I intend
To be one day a Master, and so mend
My fortunes, now, the greatest skill
Of a true Fisherman is to be still,
And patient for a while, to make no hast
So he may compass well his ends at last.



Thetis, Jupiter, Juno, a dumb Quire of the Furies of jealousy* Jupiter being
encompassed with pomp and Majesty, descends from the Air in midst of a great
cloud, and propounds to Thetis all the tender passionate things which might
oblige her to be his spouse; but she refuses this honour out of high respects
she owed to Juno, who had been so careful of her Education; whereupon Jupiter
was upon point of carrying her away; but as he was wrapping her within the
cloud wherein he descended, Iuno comes in a whirlwind not so violent as her
rage; And after a loud fit of scolding, having brought the furies along with
her, the earth opened and disgorges a huge horrid Monster; At sight hereof
Iupiter letting go his prey, and putting off his design till a more convenient
time, returns to Heaven.

In the mean time the Furies extremely well pleased to have so opportunely done
such a piece of service to Iuno, dance all before her, whereupon the goddess
Iuno having thanked Thetis for her virtuous resistance, takes the furies up
with her in the same whirlwind which brought her down to persecute Iupiter in
his repose, and in his glory.

Spain, fly from this young fury, fly away,
She comes to daunt thee, and with torch in hand
Through every corner she doth force her way,
To find thee out, against her thou can not stand.
She persecutes the bad, and makes them read
Their guilt within their looks, nay, the same time
They mischief work, and do commit the crime,
She glides into the Conscience fear and dread.

Believe me not, to trust in me forbear,
A fained sweetness on my front I wear,
Of me there may be some mistakes,
for I do hide my claws and snakes.

My face is lovely, sweet and debonnair,
Such as an honest Fury ought to bear.
My heart some poison may contain,
Yet serpents lodge not in my brain.

PEleus being conducted by savage men and women, meets with Prometheus upon a
Rock with his Eagle which gnawes upon his heart, and having made a light
comparison of their torments, Prometheus assures him that the Oracle of Delphos
had foretold that Thetis should bear a son greater then his Father; and that
Iupiter also without doubt should be constrained to renounce his pretension,
and that Mercury having been sent in his behalf to Iupiter, to acquaint him
with the saying of the Oracle, the business should end to his contentment:
Peleus hereupon returns to Thessaly extremely comforted, and the savages upon
hopes that Prometheus should be freed from his torment, and that Peleus should
obtain his hearts desire, could not more lively express their joy then by a
dance.

We value beauteous cheeks, and how
They must be used we also know,
Nor such rude savages are we,
But civilised we soon may be.
Jupiter, Mercury, a dumb Quire of Wood-Nymphs.

Jupiter meets with Mercury in this fair Palace which he had caused to be
prepared in the secret place about Caucasus, to celebrate his Nuptials there
without the knowledge of Iuno, and devising the means how to conduct thither
the new spouse; Mercury gave him notice what the Oracle had said; Iupiter being
therewith surprised, and fearing that the same distaster might befall him
there, which had happened 'twixt him and Saturn, makes love to yield to
ambition, and retires to Heaven after he had commanded Mercury to make it known
that he would think on it no more, nor do an act so injurious to his Authority;
the Dryads being Land-Nymphs, fell to be jealous of the good fortune of Thetis
a Sea-goddesse, being there as spies to give account to Juno of all the
purposes of Jupiter, and they express by a dance the joy they conceived that
Jupiter had altered his resolutions.

The King, the Dukes of Joyeuse, and of Roquelaure, the Marquis of Genlis,
Monsieur Bontemps, the Lords of Lorges, Desairs, le Vaiser, Verpre, Beauchamp,
Molier, D'Olivet.

A Nymph as great as generous,
In Oaks as green as precious
I lead a happy train:
My youthful branches taper so,
As if to heaven they would grow,
And stars salute would fain:
They spread and shoot so bravely out, that they
The glory of their root will not betray.
By their rind you well may know
With what strength and Sap these grow,
and whence it springs.
They may be fit Caesars to make,
Or Alexanders for to shake,
with thousand earthly Kings.
About this proud and Royal Tree
Others do grow, but modestly
They creep more humble then the grass,
So that one day 'twil come to pass,
This Tree of Heaven may be made
Unto the Europian world a shade.

While the seasons, rude and cold,
I wonder none with me makes bold
My wood hath this rare quality, it shall
Burn, warm, and make no noise at all.

Some hold me for a merry wench,
And that I care not much for Continence,
I am the greatest babbler I confess,
And imitate Vergonda by my tress.
There is no Forest but doth feel
The strokes of my victorious steel,
As soon as I do haunt a cops of wood,
To bring the Axe among them were as good.
I have my vanities, besides my Age
By right of Impudence sometimes doth rage,
And if a Tree cleffed may chance,
They presently impute the cause to me.
But to conclude, sweet Nymphs, my pleasures shall
Never hurt yours, therefore doubt not at all;
To my beloved trunk i'll so adhere,
That for to injure others none shall fear.

Within the bottom of a Grove
A Satire thereabouts did rove,
Who held my honour at a bay,
But hard it was for to display
Whether a real Satire, or one clad
Like Satyrs, or indeed a true Dryad.

The Cavaliers of the Principal City of Thessalia being afflicted for the
cruelty of Thetis against Peleus their Monarch, do bring in a combat at
Barriers to the honour of Mars: in the mean time they offered sacrifices on the
other side to the same God, with supplications, that he would employ his credit
with Venus for the return of Peleus, and for mollifying the heart of Thetis;
At this same time the Statue of Mars having spoken and foretold all good
auguries, the Knights quit their arms and dance.

Attend me Lawrells, this combat's made
To gain the glory of those irons which hold
Me captive, therefore I must be more bold
Then any, and employ my trusty blade.
What force can lance or sword
Against me then afford?

Be not my friends at all astonished
To see a man only for back and head,
He happy is who is a beast
Backward, and not above the breast.
I find no incommodity
That I am such a prodigy,
Half a man sometimes may need
Half a horse for better speed.
When I have moraliz'd by sense,
(Within my cell) neat and distinct
Unto the stable, I withdraw me thence,
From Reason taking pleasure in instinct.

If that my pride appear, I reason have,
For I instruct all gallant men and brave,
Lucre makes me not mercenary,
But I do teach all frank and free,
If among my schollers
I can afford the rest a good long day.

This young Academist doth learn so well
His part, that all the rest he doth excel;
His present (and his future) Grandeur show
All mortal his high virtues are below.
This Master piece to perfect, it seems that
Fortune with Nature did cooperate.
The Bodies exercise is his delight
Against his own in many an eager fight;
He beaten hath the iron, and made them fly
A fair presage of future victory
He greater things prepares; And Spain shall find
How dextrous he will prove in every kind.
He cannot broke any should him exceed,
Whether he runs, or leaps, or mounts the Steed,
In dancing neatly none surpass him shall,
The world admires him, only the Ladies are
Wary, nor dare they what they think declare.

Peleus doth all he can to gain the good grace of Thetis, but she continues
still in the same rigour, and as Proteus daughter, takes advantage of the
privilege of her birth to deceive Peleus by various shapes, yet he faints not
in the pursuit, but begins to add boldness to affection: at last Thetis
transforms her self to a Rock, which Peleus embraces, and protests to
perish rather then forsake her; at this last proof of Constancy and love,
Thetis yields, and accepts him for her husband; hereupon all Peleus Court falls
into an excesss of gladness, which makes the Courtiers to fall a dancing.

The Duke of Candale, the Marquis of Villequier, and of Genlis the Count.


This youthful Courtier hath so high a look,
As if for some great King himself he took,
He's forward, bold, and cannot be alone,
Nothing doth please him more then to come on:
He sure will something do:
The charge we see he hath is honourable,
And for his age very considerable,
Some lofty spirits would be glad with less,
But he doth far more glorious things profess,
sure he will something do.
He ordinary titles doth excel,
He would do better, though he now doth well,
Had he no process with a neerally,
Which yet doth set an edge on Majesty,
Sure he will something do

The Court would not so splendid be and brave,
Were I not there, nor half that lustre have:
We are the 'ffects of one another,
We laugh, and play and sport together,
The Courtier may do Fortune a good turn
As well as she to him --

Fortune and Love are two odd things,
The one is blind, to'ther hath Wings,
It is a tedious task and doubtful gain
The true good-will of either to obtain;
For me, I like the lover, who doth go
By way of storming, and ends quickly so.
I will not knock too long at one hearts door,
Lest in the mean time I lose hundreds more.

In the Court a number te^ds
To divers projects, divers ends,
All opposed to one another,
The sisters oft do cross the brother,
Touching my self, I hope to expedit
My business by my charming face and wit.

I trace the earth all over by account,
As far as Pindus or Parnassus Mount;
I Corinth view, where every one
Cannot arrive, 'tis I alone
Who can by Land-skips, Maps, and Instruments,
Measure all Regions, and their vast extents.

In me a comely spritfull grace,
Makes Vnisons throughout my face:
A charming harmony
Moves betwixt lips and eye:
Sometimes I melt, bring sadnesses and smarts,
Which shows I am not welcome to all hearts.

My youth, my hue, my eyes do prove,
The strongest Reason in the School of Love
Is Beauty, 'twill convince the most austere,
And make a Fool of a Philosopher:
I pray let this serve for an argument,
I merit on Parnassus Hill a Tent.

My mind is not so mussled among the clouds,
But I can know the causes which by crowds
Puzzle us here below; the stars when I
Was born, did smile at my Nativity,
The Heavens did power their graces in such store,
That ever since it makes me them adore.

Though young and innocent, I have some fits
Of the Green sickness, yet I well may sit
Among these sisters, to my A. B. C.
There's not an Art but 'tis an obligee:
The ground-work I do lay, cut out, and trace,
Therefore on Phocis Hill let me have place.

I useful am at Court, Hearts will not yield
I snatch away, and so do win the field,
I conquer with my tongue which I do file,
When I a charming beauty would beguile.

My youthful charms make many hearts
With groans, and sighs, and sobs to smart
Beyond computing, yet could I
To number them my self apply,
But that thereof I make a small account,
They to so many Ciphers do amount.

Having immortal beauty in my face,
Where roses bloom, and Lillies still have place,
What reason is there I should jealous be?
Poor Mortals be not so deceived in me;
I jealousy do scorn with foul disdain,
I'll neither give nor take it, 'tis a grain
Of cursed, seed that naturally doth bear
A dry black leaf, which will the heart strings tear.

I am as serious, as Cupid is a sot,
I turn his flames to virtue every jot,
Madam de Puy knows well no Blonden is
So frequent with chaste maids though full of wish.

In the behalf of Love whose pleasing bait,
Have done me such good offices and bad,
I must begin my Labours, and go clad
On Venus shrine, and Altars for to wait;
I find my veins and passions all as hot
My heart as vigorous as 'twas at first,
There's nothing in me that's decayed a jot,
For glory also I ne'er more did thirst:
Only my feet are not so quick, as when
I deceive did my host, and may again.

Peace, sure thou'lt come at last so much desired,
Who hast to heaven thy self so long retired
And we must be
Thankful to War for thee.
Behold she comes, and she to me is sent
To make me have a timely sentiment
Of Europes doleful case, lo, she doth bring
Laurels palms, fit presents for a King.
Ye charming Femals, from your eyes
It is, that wars and tumults rise
You dart the thunderbolts of strife,
You have your trumpets, drum and fife,
Venus we know is Mars his wife.

By toiling much both night and day
In Mars his field, Venus dales,
I glory have obtained, they say,
Having still propitious gales;
I have got Laurells, but the bloom
Is passed, the fruit is not yet come.

Ladies, from this tender spray
There may some danger come one day,
Ye with caresses flatter him, he you,
Ye kiss, hug him, but you'll find it true,
It is a Lions cub which yon do stroke,
Who with his paw in time may make you smoke;
He sports with you, he smiles and mocks,
Plays with your jewels, fancies, locks,
But take ye heed, for he at length
Will gather more increase of strength;
Yet, I foresee he will wean quite
Himself from all such soft delight;
And marching in the steps of his great sires
Make Glory the sole Queen of his desires.

All those Loves I do behold
Brighter then the burnished gold,
Are nothing if compared with me,
Whether Fire, or Light they be,
I do discover in effect
I am all love, when I reflect
upon my self --

I peep to hear what lovers say,
When they whisper sport or play;
And sometimes lay
Traps in their way.

If he be as discreet as is his mother,
He will neglect the love of any other,
But if the father he be like unto,
He mistresses will have Beauties woo.

Our talents are diversified,
Each one hath his perfections aside; For me,
Till I have wings, 'tis meet
I fence my self with feet.


