THE NUPTIALS OF PELEUS AND THETIS. A NEW ITALIAN COMEDY, Whence the preceding
MASK was extracted; Made English by a nearer adherence to the Original, then to
the French TRANSLATION.

-- Non seria semper.

London. Printed for Henry Herringman, at the Anchor. O Living Treasure of the
glorious Sky,
Who by thy piercing all surveying eye
Dost in thy golden Armour conquer Night,
And so in triumph usher'st in the Light:
Among the glittering Stars thou dost not shine
With greater Lustre, then amongst the nine
Aonian Sisters* O descend and daign,
Great God, (leaving a while Olympian Reign)
To feast with us: a joyful Augury
Vouchsafe to Peleus passions, whose pure breast
May justly merit Hymen for his guest.
To the eternal Laws of Love,
The highest Gods and Saints above
Are Subject: Monarchies and Scepters yield*
To Love, and crown him Victor in the field:

WHy do you thus your self torment?

Chiron, How shall I find content?

Pursue your hopes, and onward go*

Is't possible I should do so?
When on my heart a beauty lies
That is descended from the Skies;
A beauty that's all moving and immense,
That hath over me such an omnipotence?
Moreover, I two Rivals have,
No less then Gods, who me outbrave
For Neptune with his Trident, and great Jove
Are my competitors for Thetis love.

Peleus, Why do you thus your self torment?

Chiron, Where is it I should find content?

Then follow your fair hopes, and onward go.

How is it possible I should do so?

Listen to me, gray hairs do but in vain
Attempt young beauties, they will them disdain
Though they be Gods: Neptune is rich in years
As well as Treasure, Thetis will him jeer.
For Jove, besides his age, his rapes and wiles,
How he so many Ladies did beguile
Will make her shun him: but if you desire
To compass your designs, and quench your fire,
Behold those Magies that with charmed flight
Will guide you safely to Prometheus sight,
Who being bold and wise, is th'only man
Who in this Enterprise you pleasure can:
He is no friend to Jove, who him torments
With such eternal pangs, therefore he will,
To help you, exercise his utmost skill.
Wherefore take my advice, and hence away
To India, through the air cut out your way.
Delay is always dangerous to Lovers,
He ne'er obtained his ends who hums and hovers.

This Aerie journey I will undertake,
But though herein Fortune my friend I make
Yet are my hopes but small, I have a hint,
That Thetis's cruel, and her heart is flint.

When modest beauties to excuses fall,
You must not presently it rigour call.
The heart oft-times desires what lips deny,
For a huge distance doth betwixt them lye.

Could it unto my Love-sick thoughts appear
That what you say hereto is true and clear,
Those pangs I suffer in my breast
Would turn to case, delight and rest.
But fall what will my fate portends.
I still will glory in my ends,
Which an unmeasurable joy distils,
And my so high-swoln heart with comfort fills.

Let a true Lover never lose
His hope or courage when he woos:
The more his suff'rance is, the more
Sweetness is kept for him in store.
In Cupids gentle kingdom nothing is
Impossible, but one may gain his wish.

Go on then happily, for who doth know
But that your constancy may tell you so?

On, on, then to my Magies I will go.

The Quire of Tritons and Mermaids.
At such a splendid glorious show,
What heart but would turn fire and tow?
A Pomp so rare, a sight so fair,
Is able to perfume the air:
Nor Morn nor Sun did ever view
So bright and ravishing a hue.
At such a splendid glorious show,
What heart but would turn fire and tow?
There is no fence I find,
Love will invade my mind.
In these moist fields my Rivers run in vain,
To quench my fire, or tepifie my pain;
Though I in midst of waters lye,
Yet do I melt, dissolve and fry;
But Thetis, you at last will find it true,
To be more fool unto your self, then you
Are cruel unto me. Will you refuse
The richest of the Gods, Him who doth use
To give those gems that beauties do adorn,
Thence, where the Queen of Love her self was born?

Aurora commonly doth rise
Cheerful and smiling to our eyes
But suddenly we oftentimes do see,
She falls a weeping upon flower and tree.
If you desire the cause I should unfold,
It is because her

Thetis, Be not deceived, though I be gray,
My waters still are green, and so they may
Be wholesomer then Springs, which by and by
Upon the least drought grow shallower and dry.
Youth is unstable, heady, rash; but age
Is constant, cautious, provident, and sage.

I do confess, that you discourse, and reason
Like a quaint Amorist, although the season
Of Love in you be past. It was for Love
The Heavens made Youth, for which the Gods above
Have journeyed down to earth; no other age
Is fit a Female beauty to engage.

Perfidious thing, I plainly now do find,
Thou art unto another more inclined.
Come winds and tempests, and with my lament
Your blasts unite; Come, come incontinent,
Let hispid blust'ring Boreas from the North,
Bring all the Haracanes and Whirlwinds forth,
Blow off, and banish from my Kingdom quite
This impious Girl so full of hate and spite.
Revenge the quarrel of your King,
And with your vengeance Justice bring:
Shall she in my Dominions dwell,
Who hath inflamed my heart with fire from hell?

Ungrateful, rash, and foolish Nymph, can thou
Slight thus the greatest of the gods below*
The grief will be thine own
When thou art wiser grown.
Neglected Amorists may learn from hence,
Against blind Cupids arrows a true fence*
Disdain of beauty a revenge may be,
Though not of love th'expected remedy:

Now that the fury of the wind
Hath left so sweet a calm behind:
Now that the storm is gone,
I pray let me alone
To vent unto my self my moan.
Oh me, I find that ambushes are laid.
To take me and entrap poor silly maid:
What will become of thee my heart?
You are like to suffer many a smart.
Oh me, Oh me,
Poor heart what will become of thee?
Thy chastity Love studies to surprise.
He's sly and cunning, though not always wise;
He Armour hath of every sort
For to assault a female Fort:
He prays, complains, and pines,
He menaces and whines
Now, if another God should join
With him, who can me then essoyn?
Oh me, Oh me,
Poor heart what will become of thee?

What can blessed heaven me avail,
If still of my desire I fail?
Celestial joies, if they to sorrow turn,
Far worse then all Tartarean tortures burn*
O Thetis, thou alone
Hast made me quit my Throne,
Thou give him law,
Who Gods doth aw^
It is my destiny and luck,
By thee for to be deadly struck;
And that which is the greatest wonder,
Thy beauti's stronger then my thunder.
But come, O come, my Fair, increase my bliss,
And let's cohabit both in Pardise.

O no,
Not so.

Come and be partner of my Throne
Which Hymen offers thee alone;
That Empire Love hath thee designed,
Come, come my Fair, be not unkind.

O no,
Not so*
The heavens forbid I should be said,
(Poor innocent and silly maid)*
For to be such a Rebel as to wrong
Her
From my first cradle: I had rather die
A thousand deaths, and scorch in Tartary.

If you will use such slight Apologies,
To him who can command both lair and Skies;
To clear your error, and my pain assuage,
I must use force, my Dear, but far from rage.
Cloud,

Oh me.

What ails my soul?

Aim, who helps me?

What mortal Creature's he
Can thee reprize from me?

Disloyal Jove,
Thou should so oft thy Faith thus violate?
But since in Heaven no Justice can be found,
Or Piety among the Stars, the ground
Shall open, and styx shall belch forth furies fell:
Come then appear, ye ghastly dames of Hell;
And help to vindicate
The justness of my fate.

Farewell my Thetis, so enchanting bright,
But know I do not thee abandon quite.

Great Goddess, I no pardon crave of thee,
But pity; though unfortunate I be,
Yet I am guiltless, and from foulness free.

Such hazards to escape is no offence,
Much less misfortune or incontinence.

Sweet gratitude doth always rest
In a' well born gentle breast:
The Gods desire no more
For those blessings in such store,
Which on us Mortals every hour
They in silver showers do pour.

Unfortunate Prometheus, how thine
Eternal torments are like mine!

Ah, who is he*
Thus speaks to me?

Tis Peleus King of Thessaly,
Who may thy mate for torture be.

I from the body of the Sun
Stole fire e're scarce the world begun.

And I some fiery glances took
From Thetis all enchanting look.

Jove chastneth my temerity
By this voracious

Prometheus, it is Jove the very same
Torments likewise with jealousy my flame.

But yours one day
May find allay.

But when, and how?

Ah, ah, my torments grow.

O cruel pangs some truce and respit give,
Prometheus may with counsel me relieve.

I have received advice from Mercury,
The Thunderer will Thetis fly,
And his Ambition place (as you shall prove)
Before her Beauty, or his flames of love;
To credit this you may be bold,
For by the Oracle it is foretold.

If it be true what issues from that vioce,
My soul shall carols sing, my heart rejoice
There never was so coy and cruel she,
But only sought by one, may conquered be.

Go, go, return where thou did leave thy heart,
Thou shalt find ease for thy corroding smart.
In the vast sea of Love who e're doth sail
Must lose no wind, and then he may prevail.

For this sweet counsel thou hast given me,
May heaven, O Prometheus, set thee free.

The Thunderer may be
Less cruel unto me.

O dear, and solacing, sweet blissful Hope,
How comforting art Thou to those who cope
With rigid beauties? thou dost periods put
To black despair; the Gods did justly shut
Thee out of Hell; Thy breath though ne'er so small
Would ease the damned souls in Pluto's Hall.

And you my faithful guides unto this place,
Enjoy the comforts also I embrace;
Be all partakers of my hopes, and share
Some of my joys, which past expressions are.

Well,
What did the Oracle at Delphos say
Touching my love to Thetis, tell me, pray.

Apollo from the Tripod did pronounce,
The Thetis (all will see)
Shall greater then his Father be.

How can that be? unless the fates renew
In me my

That which Prometheus told me also is
No less infallible and true then this.

Then I do find that it doth me behove
To leave commanding Heaven, or not to love.

Which do you most desire,
To serve or domineer?

I hold Love's golden fetter,
Then any Empire better,
The one doth thousand sweets instil,
The other the brain with cumbers fill.

Permit me, mighty Jove, to tell you 'tis
Folly of a Mortal still to wish,
Under the vail of good, to meet the bad,
Which goes in Virtues habit often clad.
But you which over the Spheers do sway,
And such coruscant beams display;
Can you be so transported, as endure
That a blind lying Boy should you allure,
Who will vapour every where,
That he did fetter Jupiter.
Thetis, suppose, an idle wench should prove:
Have you not Goddesses enough above?
If you Olympus loose, where will you find
Throughout the world a Kingdom of that kind?

In your Discourse you go so strongly on
That makes me half of your opinion.

Nor can you any true content obtain
Whilst you are compassed with a double pain.
Juno pursues you with her Furies here,
And Thetis may perhaps fly from you there;
The one is doubtful, the other is jealous still,
Both may confederate to cross your will.

'Tis true, that Juno me pursues,
And raises furies by whole crews.

She every where doth stir and wheel about,
She doth disturb all Heaven to find you out.

Then Mercury, go and proclaim
From Pole to Pole that I disclaim
Thetis, and will no more my Honour maim.
Go speedily.

Jove, I will fly.

Fair Wood Nymphs let this day be Festival
That I my wonted freedom did recall,
Which impious fate and beauty did conspire
To captivate with false and fatuous fire.
Fair Wood Nymphs let this day by all
Be kept hereafter Festival.

Great God of War, the prop, defence and stay
Of Empires, intercede that Peleus may
(By favour of that
Thou dost adore, and art to serve so prone)
Return to sway again fair Thessaly:
Behold that amorous Warrior with mild eye.
And you brave Champions propitious make
Our vows and Altars; let the welkin quake
With the high clashings of your Barriers.
Peleus at his return will pay you your Arrears.

But stay a little, stay,
Our Oracle will something say.

At last the King of Thessaly
Shall home return with mirth and glee.

O news more rare
Then Indian Pearl, and sweeter far
Then that Hyblean juice the Attic Be
Stov'd in her cell for Joves Nativity;
And will King Peleus come again?
Then Thessaly shall swarm with men.
O news more rare
Then Indian pearl, and richer far.

FOR him who parts from his delight
Time makes too quick and rapid flight,
But who is travelling to see his Love,
Each moment unto him an age doth prove.
Hope still with doubts, fruition with fear
Is commonly attended every where.

I with my companions here
Did think to find you full of cheer.
Now that you are a Champion over the Gods,
Of whom for Faith and Love you have such odds;
Why do you thus afflict your self with pain?
Faint heart did ne'er a Ladies favour gain.

Sometimes my spirits are alert and high,
Then they begin to languish presently;
Because I fear that Thetis heart
May Marble prove; hence comes my smart.

You are deceived; when Thetis knowledge had
You left fair Greece, and undertook so bad
And hazardous a journey to find ease,
The fury of your passion to appease;
She with a pitying paleness then was struck,
And sighing said, The Stars send him good luck.
Go, lay close siege, and let her see
You are resolved for Battery.
The Female who believes she's truly loved,
Need not by too long Prayers to be moved.

Your counsel's good: now with alacrity
I will both Love and Fortune try;
And of the business you shall quickly see
I'll make a shaft or bolt. But where is she?

I'll go in quest of her.
In the mean time let my Disciples dance,
We will be fortunate in spite of chance:

Love, if you will enter like a friend,
Lay down your Arms, let peace attend
Your purposes, and so you may
Be welcome, and so win the day.
If boisterously you me assault,
Come not near me, but make a halt:
Be sure not to torment my heart,
Or with your passions make it smart.

O Thetis, you desire to shun
That which your self to me have done.

Ohime.

My Dear,
What do you fear?

Ohime, when you were far from hence
Love did do much for you; but now
You are so near, I fear with violence
He will assault me with his bow.
I pray retire.

Will you with such a heart of flint and steel
Convert those pleasing passions which I feel
To pangs? Shall he still languish
With tears, with doubtfulness and anguish,
Who loves your eyes
More then the Stars or Skies?

These words an amorous pleasure do instil
Into my breast, my thoughts with fancies swill;
Fool that I am, I who have made a vow
To any Love enchantments ne'er to bow;
I who two Gods for marriage did refuse,
Shall I yield now
And love-sick grow?
I pray retire.

From those fair eyes I will not part,
Who have infused into my heart
Grief, and content, with constancy;
All Trophies of your chastity,
And of my Faith: where ere you go
I will adore your shadow too and fro.

Against such a charming violence
If I can find no guard or fence,
I'll have recourse for quenching of this fire
Unto the Arts of Proteus my great Sire.
Peleus will then desist, unless he fall
In love with Lions, Monsters, Rocks and all.

Dear, Whats that you whisper?

May your laments
Find their contents.

Oh pleasing accents!

But Peleus now I will you disabuse,
They are feigned fancies which you thus amuse
When you made me the object of your mind
You took me for a Nymph,
I am a ravenous Lion, a hard Rock,
A Monster that wears clouds in lieu of smock.

My sweetest friend,
What do you now intend?

I'll wrap my self within that cloud:

Do not do so,
O heaven bless me, what do I see!
Can such a beauteous Creature turn to be
A beast of such immane ferocity?
You cannot fright me, or make an escape,
My Thetis I'll pursue in any shape.
What do I see?
And shows that you are cruel, fierce and fell.
But all this cunning will not serve your turn,
The more you horrid are, the more I burn.
A Sacrifice of sighs and groans
I'll offer though you change to stones.
Dear, take your shape again,
And ease me of this pungent pain.

O God,
The more I monstrous make my self in show,
The more my spirits melt, and gentle grow.
I am almost in Love.

Almost! That word my panting breast doth pierce,
And shows you still are cruel, fell and fierce,
In lieu of solacing my love-swoln mind,
It leaves a double agony behind,
Ohime, what Lions, Monsters thus oppose
My virtuous Love, and make themselves my foes?

I know not where to turn, my spirits are
in such a strange confusion, yet I dare
Not say I love as yet; my hot desire
I will suppress and quench this raging fire.
The tongue shall give my heart the lie;
I'll make no haste,
Though I must yield at last,
There is no remedy.

Dear Thetis, cast on him a pitying eye,
Whose breast for thee with candent coals doth fry.

Distracted soul, 'tis too too true,
I must bid now Virginity adieu.
But sure my lips and faltering tongue doth err,
Oh did my heart do so; I must prefer
The heart before the tongue, because the last*
Less noble is; in the Heart Dame Nature placed
The pure arterial and illustrious blood;
I fear that I am too well understood.
By Peleus.
Ohime, by soft degrees I find
That cunning little God, though blind,
Doth make his way into my breast,
Maugre my self, I must make him my guest.
Yet I must try once more this Boy to mock,
And turn my self into a senseless Rock:

Have I again lost Thetis?
Must I to stones and rocks make now my moan?
O precious crystal Rock, thou now dost hold
A gem more rich then Diamond or Gold;
I fear that at the foot of this hard Rock
My Hope will shipwreck by a fatal shock.
But for strong water made of Mercury,
I'll try with tears this Rock to mollify.
My heat is such, 'twill me to ashes turn,
Then will I make this precious Rock my Urn.

Love, Lo, I yield, I can no more resist
Thy all subduing power, or persist
In my first purposes, thy dart
Hath split in two my tender heart.
Who have no hearts at all are only fit
To cope with thee, and fence away thy hit.
Lo Peleus I am thine.

Hold heart, do not too wide thy self dilate,
Lest by excess of joy I draw my fate
Too soon upon me, and so dye
Ere I make use of Victory.
And you my faithful followers rejoice,
And cleave the air with your triumphing voice:
You have been sharers of my misery,
Now you shall share of my prosperity.

Now our Desires
Do flame with equal fires.
And there doth nothing want but constancy,
For to complete both our Felicity.

Thetis, Thou art my chiefest good.

And you my heart and precious blood.

Behold the Gods are come to be our Guests,
And learn of us what it is to be blessed.

Peleus, We now are both from tortures free;
You Hymen helped, and Hercules helped me.
And to oblige us further, they are here
To mingle joy with us, and make good cheer.

To them who languish
In pain and anguish,
Love gives at last
A sweet repast.

Just heaven ne'er fails, and Powers above
To recompense a virtuous constant Love;
Grief, cares, and pain
Turn all at last to gain.
By this we find adversity to be
The surest road to true Felicity.


