HA, ha, ha, Hoop, what comes here, a Brat of my own bringing forth?


Zounds thou lie, I am no Monster like thee, I scorn to loose the least title
of my usurped Honour. Am not I the powerful mighty and invincible stamp of
Tyranny, to whose shadow all must and shall bow, or else expect the terror of
my Thundering Ordinances, Votes, and Declarations, how dare thou to question
my impregnable Force to whose Command Armies were subject.


What force hast thou? Wilt thou deny me, thy own Mother from whence thou had
thy first Birth, breath, life and being was not I the first Arse, or stump from
whence all misery befell man, did not I seduce the Woman to the destruction of
all men? and am thy own creator?


No my name is beyond thy stinking Pedigree, is not Rump an Honourable name.


And is not my name the very same, but one of better narure.


What! dost thou spit at me?


Would it were mortal poison for thy sake.


Oh cursed Varlet, the very scent of thy stinking Sallyport would infect a
Toad.


Out of my sight, thy very breath infects my eyes.


Some dismal Fiend confound the substance of thy Hellish shape.


Art thou like bloody Nero to murder me thy own mother? who did thou learn
this cruelty of.


None but thy self?


It is true I caused Cain to murder a fourth part of the whole would, I his own
Brother.


And with these bloody Paws I murdered my own King; And world do my Gen.
Monck too, were I in place again.


Out Devil murder thy King?


I and would murder thee too, were thou a King.


I had rather be a Peddler, far be the thought of it from me; but where is thy
Conscience?


In the Exchequer, had it not been so, I had never embrewed my hands in blood
for cursed gold. But is there no more Murderers but I?


Here comes many more of your Comrades:


I murdered my Sovereign Lord and King Constance, and many more besides.

Etheldred, I murdered mine own Brother Edward to possess his Crown, and
subtly caused all the Danes in one general banquet to be slain,


And I murdered my King Edmond Iron-sides.


Did not I go before you all? I can scarce number the Catalogue of my murders
plots and treacheries; I murdered Hewet, Love, Slingsby, and many more,
besides I caused Sindercomb to be poisoned, and to clear my pretended innocence
laid it on himself. And I gave Tithes to the Priests to make all amends. I
always stool a Goose and stuck down a Feather. Nay rather then leave my old
Trade of Murder, I hanged many of my ow Soldiers, as I did a Drummer in
Ireland, for taking a Mutton from the enemy, and two at Edenburgh in Scotland.


And I (through thy persuasion after I had swore fealty) murdered Thompson and
many of the Burfordians.


And I because the blood of men could not satisfy me murdered the harmless
Bears on the Bankside.


And I think thou art well requited?


Indeed I find so for I did not only murder the Bears, but pinch the poor of
measure while on earth, but have it large enough in Hell.


I and good reason too, you have your firing free Noble Colonel.


I but though firing be cheap, water is dear, there's never a Tankard-bearer in
Hell; therefore I have little hope of help.


What pratling's here? Did not I teach you all to murder?


And what have you all done that I have not been forward in, I have destroyed
all Laws, Break Oaths, Covenants, committed, Sacrilege, murders, Plunderings,
and would have done more, had not I been prevented, by a company of Secluded
Malignants of my own creating. And shall not I be received to sit in Council
among you.


I But first setting by all Ceremonies, Mrs. Rump, is not my name more Ancient,
and I more Honourable, art not thou a brat of my own Hatching?


No, I come of noble blood; which I have gained by noble murder, the Scarlet
die of which lies still in my stained Conscience; But yet not thy Brat.


Grim fiend thou lyests for the very substance of thy deformed shape, was
framed in Hell, by Mulciber Blacksmith, who Anvell'd thee out of my horrid,
Black, and putrifi'd, Excrements.


I charge thee be gone, If not I shall force thee to an Oath of Abjuration, and
if that be performed thou may by thy perjury become one of my Counsel.


What dost thou intend to swallow up my blood as thou did the blood of thy
Sovereign Lord and King?


I do so, my delights in nothing more then Martyrings Kings, and to have my
hands smoking in the blood of Princes; Oh the Son of him, who was the
sacrifice of my youth! his escape is the chiefest of my torment, who now is
like to be advanced to my destruction.


Thou Damned Hedgehock, what repent now its too late for that. Thou may now
travel with thy late born Babe of Reformation at thy back in a blancket like an
old Irish Bennoot: but whose there Mulciber.


I come, I come, I come, Whats here to be done, a piece of my own work, I'll
finish it? come away thou lousy Rump, now will I have thee to my Anvel; and
beat thee into a better form that thou may seem some what.


Oh good Sir, where shall I go?


To Hell the fittest place for thee, Earth is not to be pestered up with such,
cumbersome bundles of baseness, I shall Anvil the into some better form
quickly.


Will no dungeon serve turn, but that ugly loathsome and miserable place of
torment?


No place but one?


What place dost thou mean.


I mean that stinking poisonous place called the I'll of Jaqueses, where the
black horrid excrements of all sinners may Float upon thy loathsome Soul, and
smother thy loathsome Brat of cursed, Usurping and Tyrrannical Reformation to
Eternity, as a Revenge on thee for thy cruelty committed on thy Right and
Lawful Sovereign Lord the King.


YOu that have seen this stinking Lump of Earth,
Conceal her Name, since her prodigious Birth
Is not worth minding, for her fatal fall
Was great, I, and her Virtues none at all;
She's not worth eating boiled or roast at Supper,
Who had her Birth and Name from Plutos Crupper.
Of's very Excrements, you all may tell
By Mulciber her Corps was forgd in Hell.
Let all Spectators now together jump
Upon this noisome, beastly, stinking Rump,
And say, here lies interred a clod of Clay,
Who killed her King, her God and Soul away,
She sold, and that for Nasty Pelf,
But now Old Bawd she is defunct her self.
Since she is dead and gone good People all
Lament in Sack at this her Funeral.
Cursd be the Divils Are -- from whence did Spring
This hellish Rump, to Murder Charles Our King:
Yet by his Son we shall true Peace enjoy
Singing with Eccoes loud Vive Le Roy.
LONDON, Printed for Theodorus Microcosmus. 1660.


