WHatever Element we light upon,
(Great Monarch bright Queen) 'tis yours alone.
Shook from my station on that giddy Shore,
That flotes in Seas, in wretchedness much more,
I hardly escaped to tell what storms arise
Through rage of the Inhabitants: mine eyes
Behold a wonder; Blustering Tempests there,
Yet Sun and Moon fair shining both so near.
Should your Land stagger thus, I wish the Age,
Might end such acting sooner then the Stage:
Yet in these Tumults you shall only see
A tottring Throne held firm by Majesty.

Well met sweet Morphe,
Empress of my heart,
And all hearts else, if made of flesh like mine.
You must not pass untouched.

What mean you Sir?

To print you Mine;

Hands off Sir Amorous.

Why should such coyness wrinkle such a Brow?

Why should such boisterous incivility
Defile your Courtship? All your courtly Arts
Of Singing, Playing, Dancing, Poetry,
Will grow suspected pleaders of mere Lust:
Forbear for my sake: this rude force in you
May chance to blot a white repute in me.

The blot I'll thus rub out.

I'll wash it thus.

How can the eye, that sees not love the light?
Blame your own beauty if you blame my Love.

I blame the Expression.

If the thing be good,
Expression makes it better.

Yes, if chaste,

Chaste Love is nothing.

Nothing to the unchaste.
Forbear I pray, and fear a near example.
Do you not know the King hath taught the Passions
Within this Floating Isle more modesty,
By banishing your child Concupiscence?

Others perhaps shall quickly know I know it,
And that I know it as rough tyranny.
What for a trick of youth such Discipline?
Doth breeding Subjects call for Banishment?
Or giving life deserve a civil Death?
Hold; stand; in vain you strive; I am resolved;
Should now the King look on, and call a Kiss
Treason, should poison punish this sweat touch,
Thus far I durst presume.

Shame on your rudeness.

Are not our Eyes and Lips and touch our own,
Not to be used without a special warrant?
At length we shall not satisfy mere Nature,
Nor spit without a Counsel. If my Girl
Partake my spirit, then like me she'll try,
What fury Love can in the Passions raise,
To shake this Stoic from his chair of Rule.
I'll move my Fellows.

How? not fight this Duel?
Duel forbidden to the Valiant?

Some other cause, it seems, moves these already.

Be sure, Irato, by Prudentius law
Personal Valour now is nothing worth.
Hope with his Pen, Sr. Timorous with his knife,
Or Desperato's man with single Halter
May pass in equal rank with you, or me,
Or Captain Audax.

Not with me, I trow.

Yes, if this Law should stand.

Not so however.

Not if?

If to a generous Passion?

I see these sparks are glowing. Noble Sparks,
Let Amorous add fire. Love burns with Hate.
Thy Hand Malevolo, and against the King.

Why what's your grief?

My Daughters Banishment.

Great cause: yet none need press a single grief:
We find our selves all pinched of liberty:
We walk in chains, called Justice, Temperance,
Such rusty curbs; and none can further start
Then the strict keeper will allow us length.

Tis so; we're used like Dogs, or ring'd like Bears;
Whither Prudentius leads us we must follow:
But if we take a loose, or swell and roar,
We must be whipped for it; Sirs, Prudentius whips us.

Can this be brook'd by them that draw the Sword?

And amongst them, by one that will exact
Life for a word, pay death for crabbed looks?

And amongst them, by one that scales the wall,
That swims in Armour, flies against the mouth
Of thundering Ordinance? must also He,
Must He be ordered by a sit still thus?

So he hath been. For my part, if I broach
Some biting Libel, venomous word or Book
Against some prosprous Object which I hate,
My Ears are questioned. Locks which I have scorned
Must hide my Ear stumps.

And me thinks I spy some want upon your Nose.

Is your spleen up?
Rage for your self. You also may remember
Brave Lord Irato when you hardly kept
Your Neck. Some fellow Peers, for as few blows,
Have lost it quite.

My Veins will burst.

And Captains
Not to be numbered; All as bold and stout
As Audax here, for undertaking reskues,
And following them too far in open streets,
Have been casheered of Lberty and Life.

But shall not be again. I'll hang the Law.

Then as for you, Sr. Amorous, you may talk
Not only of your Daughters Banishment,
But of your Sisters whipped, your carred Aunts,
And Mulcts upon your self.

The truth to tell,
My hard restraint is worst of all. I live (If it be life) confined to mine own
Bed: Prudentius bridles up my mouth from kissing,
Yea and from speech, and calls that stinting manners.
I cannot cast a fair inviting look,
But he pulls back the Nerve. I scarce dare think,
Or sigh beyond my stint. One Sigh a day
Is all that I must spend for her that keeps
And may command my breath. Prudentius
Locks up my wind like Aeolus; 'tis calmed,
And may not issue forth to bear a whisper.

Mend your Comparison. Prudentius
Like Aeolus? No, Aeolus sometimes
Permitts a Tempest: does Prudentius so?

The Passions cannot stretch beyond his line,
But they are censured, Perturbations called,
Breakers of Peace; if calmed, they nothing are:
We lose both Name and Nature by restraint.

For what's a Lord I ask you but his Anger?

Or what's a great man but oppression?

A Captain but his Cutting?

And a Knight
What but his Pleasure? O this frost of Reason
Hath numd my Joints. I that with sprightly vigour
Dancing to please my Mistress, could have rose
To fetch her from the Moon (had she been there)
Or as she stood salute her, now have lost
Those active legs, and not by doing service
To any Creature but Prudentius.
I live a Hermit in the Court; to me
It seems a College or a Nunnery.

To me a Prison.

A mere School to me.

To me an Inquisition: worse: a Hell.
Where Objects still we meet, and may not reach.
You Amorous like Tantalus behold
Two red white Apples in a well made face,
Which you as soon may touch as reach the Sun;
Which doth but scorch the gazer.

I'll to Hell:
Tis less to starve for Apples then for Cheeks.

You being stirred Irato thirst for blood,
And thirst you may, but not be satisfied:
You must take blows and beare'em; your Reward
(O poor!) is to overcome by suffering;
As now I kick you; stand: you must not rage,
For this is Patience; now I pull your Nose;
You must not fume, least you impatient prove.

Let me kill thee, or serve Prudentius still.

you must keep Peace. I speak but as a Friend;
And only tell what you have told your self.
You Audax, like Ixion, though you dare
To set on Heaven, must wheel about your self
When Reason bids you.

Audax will run on
Though thunder meet him.

Yes; but I my self
Like Titius vainly feed the Vulture Hate
With mine own heart, and wreck it not on others,
Those Favourites which I hate. Shall this be ever?

How long shall I like to a painted George
Advance my idle Sword? What must I strike
Like Jack o'th clock-house, never but in season?

How long shall I like a grim Statue stand,
Look hatred and use none? Prudentius
Hath he Medusa's head?

Hey ho, how long!

How long shall I like a fell Mastiff held,
Yelp for the glorious danger that I love!
Water it self if bounded in too straight,
Will foam and swell and break thick bonds of Rock.
I wish we Passions were as strong as water.

My limbs I will fling
Out of joint, and sing,
And dancing will shake my hair:
Not how at each beck,
Nor break my neck
With sorrow and deep despair.
Such a chirpiu din,
with mirth within,
And a head not needing a clout,
Is much better far
Than a careful chair,
And a wreath of thorns without.
The Boy may be our Tutor. Hilario my Boy!

Sir.

We were taking care how thou may be merry thus always; never be checked
for drinking, for singing, or for playing thy pranks.


I imagine your design: and thereto promise, give, grant, let, set and submit my
full assent and consent: In witness whereof here's my hand with a clap, and my
seal with a kiss; Your son and servant Hilario.


But stay, whence now?

From my blubbering Sister Concupiscence;
who desired me forsooth
To arm and conduct her to Lady Fancy.

And whether bound?

I go to be merry with or upon
Melancholico and Desperato,
Either to quicken their dumps, or by laughing
at their dullness to heighten my self.

Where are they?

Not far; close by; here at the Hart.

Courteous Sir, send them hither,

I shall or will Sir.

We must no longer ripe up greivances,
But think of Remedy.

Passions must not stay.

Why with a murrain do we stay to say so?

In brief do all consent to free themselves
From this oppession?

What a Question's that?

Give a Command that it be asked no more.

We all consent.

All are not here.

Indeed
We want two serviceable men now sent for.

Delays intolerable!

We want besides Sir Timorous Fear all.

We'll force that dowty Knight
To know his good when all is done; and so
Prevent his Treason.

Consultation too.

And where is Livebyhope?

No matter where.
His hopes will make him turn to any side
That shall succeed.

For female Passions,
Their fortune lies in ours.

Then to proceed,
The way to free our selves lies, thus, or thus;
Kill, or dethrone Prudentius.

I begin To think on Sr. Raviliack, and Sr. Garnett.

The boldest way is safest.

Yes, if bloodiest.

Or if he will escape.

Let him go far enough.

Then who shall do the fear?

I.

I, or else
I'll kill some other; what? should I for get
My ancient Trade of killing?

Let him do it
Who first hath opportunity.

To this We all must swear.

By all the wounds which on my flesh are scored,
And all the ghosts I've made.

By all attempts
And all the mines of Bullets in my Entrails;

By all my pangs of hare and black designs;

By all the goodly Nymphs, and Morphe chief.

Do ye long for action? have ye too much Peace?
Orecloy'd with blessings? you Malevolo
Bend hate against the unjust.

My hand is cramped;
Strike Audax.

O his brow! I turn to fear.

You Amorous love true beauty, Honesty.

Thy spleen Irato.

Thou Irato fight
Merely for public peace.

Sweetness!

Witchcraft!

Audax, be bold, but stay till I have bid

S't. Liveby hope

I must attend his Majesty.

Go back, and secretly oreheare this meeting.

Ha! What Schooling call you this?

What Vision?
That Eye of subtle Intellectus Agent
Troubles me somewhat; and I doubt of Liveby.

Now I could kill my self.

Now I, Prudentius
He came upon us like the Basilisk,
Or like a Wolf; but had we seen him first --

You could not do it then: never by day.

Why so?

You saw the cause. His flaming Temples
Strike with such charming Power, such secret Spells,
That if you see the Light upon his Face,
Your spirits quail; it must be done by night.
And Desperato, he must be the man.

Why He above All Us?

Tush, we are foyld;
Already foyld; and may be so again.
Besides Irato spends himself: he's now
So full of heat, I doubt he will then grow cold.
But Desperato to his mischief goes
With art and argued resolution,
Strong in cold blood.

I perfectly abhor
All Judgement, Plo^s, and Consultations*
To canvas thoughts, to toil and vex the
In weighing means, and picking out the best,
This is as bad as to have served Prudentius.

And how thinks Audax?

So. Or else I'm mad.
To plot is base; and to demurr contrivance
Of things that should be done, as soon as thought,
Is foolish too. What turn our powder up,
Then smother't under ground, then by degrees
Give fire! Such creeping mischief hath no luck.

Come Martial Law, come Captain Martial Law

And wise Malevolo, when have you e're heard
Of great attempts without the hand of Audax?
Come we'll too't presently.

Even as you please.


Il now run with this Least I may come too short of telling more.

Only this word.

Then yet I'll stay.

Be sure,
If you miscarry we are all undone.
Go with Vlysses in this night-attempt,
Be each of you to him a Diomed.

Stay till they come.

Lo here they are. Who else?

What and Sr. Timorous too? Come* mend your pace.
What? doth Prudentius moderate your feet?
And make you snails as well as slaves?

Free Passions,
(So ye must be) we know your greivances.
Brother Melancholy, discreet you are,
But not expressive; unprefer'd you are,
Because precise; but say, would you with State
Insold your arms; look sad, and feel content;
Live careful over bags, retire your self
To solemn grief in Temples of delight,
Sigh in a Sisters bosom, and complain
Of Persecution at a plenteous Feast?

Yes, yes. I'll answer for him.

Sooth, you may.
Sadness is pleasant, but the cause is not.

And Desperato, once my old Comrad,
Once Noble, and again to be the same,
But now as void of cash as of employment,
Would you, in Peace forgot, bard of a Pension,
Having no lands but bare high-wayes, now run
All hazards for new Fortune?

Yes apace.

Why parley then? can he not first draw blood?
Do Cutters ask what money have you first?

Blood and Cutters? his speech is rough.

he's mad.
Say on.

Nought's done through such long talk.

Such Choler.

Would thou have power to raise more flames then Nero,
To fire the World, prevent his final doom,
Stare awfully, stab others with applause,
Hang, drown thy self, to immortality.

Such change I long for; rows'd from Lethargy
I am revived.

Thou lie, thou art not yet.
Hold, hold thy hand: I did but tempt thy mettle,
To search the truth.

And Sir, 'tis well you say so.

This Bully,s right, why now I'm pleased

Sr. Tim.
My fellow Knight, you know (but do not tremble)
How oft the King hath misimpos'd on you
Those dreadful, those horrible, terrible

Good Sir.

Those heart-labouring employments,
Which Audax begged.

I pray.

He sought thereby
Merely to vex and to disgrace your spur*
But would thou hug thy Pillow or thy Love
Without disturbance, or the noise of danger?
How say?

I love to live, and love in safety.

Then in a word.

He first kick hence this Knight,
He will prove a five through fear; his trembling humour
Will shake our secrets out.

Which to prevent,
He stirs not from this company.

Then know,
Our common medicine is Prudentius ruin.
Last comers, do ye twist in full consent?

We do.

then kiss the Sacramental Sword.

Sr. Tim. you came unsought, but being come,
You must consent, or will be beaten too't.

I, I do consent -- but caution must be had;
This is no common sport: what Engines use ye?

Not you, be sure. Will Desperato join
With me and this brave Count?

Yes, and strike home.

Then for the time: we think close midnight best.

And fittest; cause the crowned
Fox is watchful.

Be sure you take disguise to pass unknown,
Though it be night.

O wit and valour both!
Vizards to Passengers will be but signs
Hanged out to move suspicion; and to leave
Him ignorant whom we assault is loss*
Unto the glory of our bold revenge.

What shall be done with Memor the Recorder,
One whom I hate, yet have no reason for it,
Like an old debt-book, or mine own Conscience*
Shall he be blotted out, or shall he stand?

Alas he's all Record, Example, Custom,
What's done Quadragesimo primo Henrici tertii,
Tricesimo primo Henrici octavi;
And these suit more with Passion then with Reason.

What shall be done with Common sense the Judge?

He also more inclines to sense then Prudence,
Leanes to the Commons rather then the King.

As for the rest, they ne'er shall trouble us;
Cut off the head, we need not fear the Members.

Who shall succeed? I mean, in place, and show,
Not in the tyranny of strict Command;
Who shall assemble, lead, encourage us,
And give some fashion to our Commonwealth?

What say to Fancy? will not Fancy do it?

No better choice: for Fancy nearest is
To unyoak'd Passion.

And 'tis most proper,
That since by Passion this revolt is made
From Reason unto Sense, the Rule should pass
From man to Woman.

She, she, Fancy she.


First to the Agent of Prudentius;
And then to bear first news to new Queen Fancy.

She, Fancie's Queen.

She'll be a pleasant Mistress
Rather then Governess, leading each Passion
Whether himself inclines. Nay she'll invent
New Objects for their several content.

Silence through all the Court, the King would rest.

Let him Eternally.

The time grows nigh.
You three to the task of Blood: the rest to Fancy.

I doubt this earnest talk portends no good,
The business hath been hot. --

We would be private.
Liveby the Relator is most creditable.

A right ingenuous man.

And you have sent him
To take advantage of the changing State,
With Caveat to reserve his heart for Us.

The Pinch and my best thoughts did so instruct me.

Tis well, I dearly thank your sharp observance,
Suspecting Treason by their startled brows;
And then your art of finding out, and now
Your Providence for our Restablishment.
But O, O this ungrateful Rout, whom I have taught
Both how to Fear and Love, and what to Loath,
Wherefore to Greive and Joy, and in what place
To rouse their anger and audacity
By Rule and Circumstance, and with such Sweetness
As might befit a Wooer more then King.
Have I these Vipers bred within my Breast
With greater Care and Pangs then can a Mother
The Child within her womb? have I broke sleep
Tossed after slumbers, early rose, and spent
The day from Sun to Sun in painful Counsel;
Sent Birds about their Coasts, sent Eyes and Tongues
Abroad the world, to watch and guard,
and work,
And keep all safe, and make them great, for This
For This Reward? Ask Heaven and Earth, if I
Have not with utmost care procured them Bread,
Cloth, Health, Peace, Manners, and Religion!
For Prudence is the womb and Forg of all
This mortal bliss. What ere I took from Them
Was for their use; like Vapour now exhaled,
And soon returned in Showers to fat their Land.
Oft have I bore them under both these wings,
One under each, when they inclined to Fury,
Would push each other down a Precipice,
Not steep like the Alps, but steep on either side,
There on a narrow ridg, an edg, a Third,
(Such is the mean, so placed betwixt two Gulfs)
I bore them in their Strife. For this and more
They have not paid (what's cheaper?) Single Duty.
Nothing but Grudgings, Whispers, Evil words:
These are their Thanks.

The greater glory yours:
What Crown like This to govern out of alms!

But now they seek the Crown; my life they seek.

They'll beg hereafter that you'll take the Rule,
Which now they wrest out of your hands.

Perhaps.

Mean while your life is safe.

And while 'tis safe,
Though they forget their Duty, I, le not leave
A Fathers care, but will be still a King
In love, though not in power.

This is a sign
Of future greatness. Then cast off this Crown
As but the sheddings of renewing State,
Now to be burnished. Leave it on your Pillow:
For that they seek. But it returned shall be
With double service both of Heart and Knee.

Be Thou my Prophet.

Ware; the Caitiffes come.

This Torch must out, or some must blind their eyes;
And look not all at once, least all be
struck.
The Chamber's here.

Come set your Points
And Postures right; stand sure.

Why should not I
Step in, and daunt them?

Tis not safe to tempt
United Impudence too far: withdraw.

When Folly's ripe, I'll to my Diligence.

And I to serve you with Intelligence.
I'll guide you to some Cloister.

Now: there's the Nest.

But what? the Eagle's flown.

Damned Treachery!
Treason amongst us Traitors!

Less Resolution
Then mine had served this Task.

How'ere my Lads,
Our Labour is not lost. Here's what we seek for.

Thus when the Beaver smells the Hunters aim,
He throws away the price of his escape.

Now shall I offer what affront I please.

I'll stab with honour at what word mislikes me.

No Peace shall stand unless our pleasure make it.

Fancy, we come. Stay, hark, stand, hark. This sound

The Sirens make, because Fancy shall be crowned.
The Scene turns to Fancies Court.
The Day appears in Scarlet; and the Sun
Seconds the luster of our rising Queen.
I ne'er longed more for night, then for this morning.

Twill be to you a double day, and bring
Your Mistress Majesty, you Liberty.

Fuga, the case is altered; he that banished,
Himself is vanished. Thus the King and I,
Or I and he, are up and down like Buckets.
Ha wench! these Moral men are taught,
I trow,
What 'tis to wrong kind hearts. Return with me
Periwigs, Powders, Fucuses for Ladies,
Chioppiens for short, for crooked Farthingals;
For tainted Artificial breath; Teeth moveable;
Such as may serve a Family by turns,
To eat, and laugh abroad: now welcome helps
For all decays of Nature, Arts for allurement;
Be licenced Ladies for Variety
Now to mistake your Servant, Usher, Page,
For your own Lords, and without Heresy
In marri'd State.

Fie Madam how you talk!

How talk I Madam Simpers? do not thus
And broader too as mincing Dames as you,
When met together? Do you see your Servant?

Sr. Timorous Fear-all inches and inches to you
Just like a Spy.

And still he comes in secret
Least he be spied.

What's this? a silent motion?
The Bill hung out will show us what it is.
Lady, I dare not with the praise of arts
With any thing but Love assay your parts;
Which are so rare, that when I strive to write,
The scant Expression seems not Love but spite.
Well wrote Sr. Tim.

You cannot say well spoke.

Can you not use your mouth? no way, Sr Tim.?
Why do you love? you are not fit to love;
Think me your Mistress; now address your self
In form befitting.

Hum!

I must make up
Your will with my performance.

Hum -- I fear Fuga will frown.

Thy Mother was a Fuga.
Nor give nor take? not in a fair Salute?
Tongue-tide and Lip-bound too? O that it were
In fashion for my Sex, my Sex, to woo.

Lady, you seem to me in word and action
Too loose and open.

My Complexion
Is I confess the same with Messaline's;
We might have lain together in one Egg
As well a Helena and Clytemnestra.
To me no such desire as of our Like,
No Joy like Union. But your ears and age
Want breeding yet;
I'm sorry for offending:
I thought I knew my Sex; but if I do not,
I know my self.

What here ye whirlygigs, while Queen Fancy calls you? Where's Concupiscence,
where's Concupiscence? After all your Starching, Quilling, Turning, Seeking,
Pinning; after your Jury of Peddlers, Tirewomen, Lacemakers and Semsters, still
where's Concupiscence? Your Lady Fancy finds many grievous defects; there
wants a Pin or two at least. One of her ribbon Fancies are loose; a long hair
hath un weaved it self out of its curled Sphere, and passionately broke forth
out of Order. Fly, fly, ye Baggases.


Baggases?


As for my Sister, she's one I'm sure: She colours for it; her willow gown
with ^ay me forsaken wretch is a Challenge, a mere Challenge to all
pittiful-minded Amoroses: She's true touch, all the world can tell. Wu'd you
were so too Lady for Sr. Tim's sake. Stay Fuga, you must stay one minute; for I
must show on you how Sr. Tim. must woo.


I see every one's ready to be a Dunces Teacher.


Thus Sr.


This is Loves Trenchmore.


Fie on you all.


A prity wench. Sr. Tim, but that she's sawe'd
With some of her Fathers Humour; this coyness calls her
Ma'evolo's Daughter. But what of that?
Every coy lass is of Cockeril condition,
And must be wooed as Cockerils fight, chase and retreat;
And then she'll love you like your shadow;
Fly thou, she'll follow; follow thou, she'll fly,
For I say no, and for her no say I.
Thus when a long time ye have turned backs one to another,
Ye may at length turn faces.

Sr. I shall sometimes
Repair to your wit for my direction.

You may -- and I shall readily afford it to your folly


For mine own merriment.

The Queen's at hand.


And they not ready yet with their tedious Phantastticalia!


Just in that Posture, Madam, as you walked,
Horacius killed three men.

Three? what no more? Why, I have killed three hundred, would three thousand.


Where's that appearance which we have expected? And where's my glass?


You have one in your watch.


That's not big enough. Run Fuga; come hither Concupiscence, pin this
handsomer.


Au. Desp.








Boy, fill up the Time with noise.


Hail thou great Queen of various Humours,
Some loving hearts, some raging tumours,
Some sadder souls embracing Rumours;
Such a mixed crew
None yet ever knew
So steady and true
As these in heaping honours on you.

Great goddess, most adored of men, behold,
Amorous thy lovingst Passion, brings the rest
To offer at thy Feet Ensigns of State.

I that unsheathed my anger with my Sword
To make thee great, present this Sword of Justice.

I that with Plots have wrung this awful Secpter
From other hands, will hold hold it fast in thine.
I'll find or make new matter of great ruin
To raise thy Throne,

This massy Crown of Gold,
The price of nightly danger, won by Audax,
Left by Prudentius, let it crown thy Temples,

Else let thy shining brow recrown this Laurel,
Worn but by Caesar Monarch of the world,
And thy Ovidii, makers made of thee.

Let Desperato wrap thy semal head
With Imniu State, the Crown of that grand Seignior
Who worships most these two, Woman and Fate.

But Timorous brings the Persian Cydaris,
Which dropped from Xerxes Temples in his flight.

Liveby a Crown of Feathers here presents
To represent the light and easiy yoke,
Which all the Passions hope.

Model thy Tireman
Offers for company this Crown, not costly,
But yet of pretty Fancy, new Invention.

We thank the wit and pains of all your service.
We will wear these Crowns in turn, and try them all. Liveby, reach hither. --
Where's Recorder Memor?

Here.

First take this, the chief true real Crown.

These were the honours which Prudentius wore.

Were those his honours? they shall ne'er be mine.
Those only I except.

Wisely excepted:

Great Lady, say not so: put on this Crown,
And with your Head crown it: then let your Hand
Give Life unto this Sceptre, and to Us:

I'll rather not be Empress, then assume
Or that, or this.

Say so?

Prettiest of pretties;
We here would have a Queen, and she'll not wear
The Badge and Ensign that should make her so.

Is none a Prince, but she whose head supports
The burden of a Crown?

Indeed Authority
Lies not in this: then Kings could do no more
Without the leave of this Authentic toy
Then can a Constable without his staff.

A Crown would crook my neck, which for a Realm
I would not mar.

Nor mar that Ruff for three.

If this condition needs must be enforced,
I willingly resign what you confer.

Then some of us shall be a gainer by it.

Do not so slight the labour of your Servants,
Who ventured far to gain this wreath; in which
Lies the significance of all the rest.

Let her refuse once more.

My Noble friends,
It signifies too much, too great a Care,
Too high Command. Should my free wandering thoughts
Be hooped and compassed in with weight and care,
Or should that staff keep down your sprightly humours, Fancy might then be
styled Prudentia.
No; though I reign, provide your selves live free.
This only is my Law, that each man use
His proper humour, be it Vice or Virtue,
Inordinate or stayed. Who minds his pleasure
Shall best deserve; my self will teach him how;
And guide him in it. For your own sakes and mine,
Offer no more that badge of Tyranny.
Fancy beyond all Fancy.

Plague on Dissemblers;
First on her self; then on these rascals here;
Who first persuaded her to take the Crown,
And then admire her for refusing it.

Pleases your highness with your radiant hair
To grace some other badge of Majesty?

To show I do not quite reject your Favours,
Nor slight the proffered Rule, reach me the Laurel,
And then the glass.

Even thus did mighty Caesar!

Tis too Imperious This.

Wit beyond Caesars!

Excellent Lady!

Tis too Imperious
If rule it mean; if height of wit, too low:
Tis like a Tavern, Bush and begs for sale,
Which Fancy scorns. Small Poet, take it you.
What's next? the Turban. -- What a Turk am I now!
Had I with this a large Seraglio,
I'd lend them to Sr. Amorous. -- The next. --
This Persian Cydaris hath made some Sophies
That scarce were wise before: when I sit next
In Solemn Counsel, I'll wear This. -- But now; --
This feathered Crown like a Mercurial hat
Shall lift me from the ground; herein I'll grace
The present Fashion. -- The Tiremans Coronet
May be in Fashion too; and pity 'tis not;
I like it well. -- But Liveby, tis your Favour
That must take place, and give us Majesty.
Set it on firm, and somewhat glancing. -- So.
I, marry Sir; why, this befits us right.

Wu'd I had brought my Fools Cap to present her,
My fools Cap would have gotten the start of Favour
From Live by for ever.

Thanks Liveby, and I'll study a Reward.

Your humblest Creature.

This fits the Quality
Of our intended Rule, which shall be light,
Light as your Liveby said, and soft and sweet,
And various, and pliable to every passion.
I'm bound to All, and much to Amo ous,
And most to Liveby For besides this present,
You brought me tidings first of this advancement,
And Crowned me in my Ear. Who likes the news,
Must needs regard the teller. -- One I miss
Amongst the Passions, Melancholico.

He sullen grew because he might not bear
The massy Crown. --

-- Now he hath brought himself.

And somewhat else.

Although I wanted Grace
To plant the massy Crown upon your head
In the true substance, yet I found a way
To crown you in this Picture. Here's the Painter;
And here a tried Musician; men of Arts,
Which Melancholy much affects.

And I.
But mend your peace. That Crown delights not me.
Some sudden business calls me to confer
With certain Female Artists! -- Liveby,
Take you the keeping of those Ornaments. --

What? have we made a shuttlecock our Queen?

Stay, I had quite forgot to strew mine honours
On these deservers. You Malevolo
Be our chief Counsellour: be you Irato
The Lord Controwler: Livebyhope shall be
The Master of Requests: you Amorous
Shall be the Master of our Ceremonies;
For which here's Poet, Painter, man of Music,
And man of Properties: I give you leave
To use them for your self in wooing Morphe.
But you my Poet whom I well respect,
Shall be my Secretary, and you shall turn
The long-breath'd stile of Proclamation
To Lyrick Verse.

Most understanding Queen!

A pretty Cur! my hands now itch to try
Whether he be true Spaniel breed, or no;
O I could beat and kick him, and see whether
He'll fawn then to. -- You were not best to flatter
Your self into an Earldom, one degree
Above mine Honour.

Take heed my Lord: he's likely to be great;
A Favourite can hurt.

What then? must I
Therefore take heed? bid me take heed again,
And it shall be the last, last Caution,
You ere shall give. What? give a Lord
good Counsel?

The rest, if they themselves can find a way
How I may pleasure them, I'm crowned their servant:
You know your Law; each man pursue his humour.
I'll rule by Fancy since I am Queen Fan;
And use as little wisdom as I can.

And so it seems.

Ha ha ha ha ha ha --
How merry shall I live! --

Sr. Shall I mend This peace?

Mend! mar, or break it if you will.
Now shall I turn far more precise then ever,
And praise Prudenius days throw discontent.

Slighted? contemned? bafled? fools preferred?
I'm well rewarded.

Hark Sr. Timorous,
You gave me Counsel.

Out of Love indeed Sir.

You gave Prudentius warning to escape.

Not I, indeed not I, Sr. Amorous knows

How ere I'll kick thee now, cause tis my humour;
I'll take thee to be Liveby, tis my Humour.

The Queen shall know how you
have kicked my Knighthood.

I kicked thy breech, two foot above thy Knighthood.
I trust I shall have cause to kill thee too.
Mean while, to stir my choler, I'll controwle Roughly, most roughly.

I to feed my humour,
(For little I shall have to feed my body)
Must run some desperate course. The stream of Favour
Runs cross from me, to Hope and Amcrous.

Did we expose our selves to utmost danger
To gain a Crown for Her that more regards
A Cap and Feather?

I her Counsellour
Who alters with each puff, more flickering
Then Flag or Streamer? Then I'll write on Sand,
Or print the Air. But still I wonder much,
How Liveby being absent from our Counsels,
Carried the first Intelligence. His telling
In Her esteem outweighs our Action.

This shows what women love, the Tong and ^atling.

How says this man of Fate? is Livebyhope,
That primrose thing, that forward bud, long lived?

Ha! I think no; unless I may control him
To be no Favourite.

Men of that calling, If I might counsel them for their best safety,
Ought not to live too long. For we can hate.

Challenge.

Or stab.

And call these things our Humours.

The safest Armour is un weapon'd boldness.
Thus privileged I'll trust their savage hands.
All happiness, that is, true Liberty
Unto the Passions; how d'e like your choice?

First tell us where Prudentius hides himself.

Within a Sanctuary, where his thoughts
Are sequestered from earthly cares to heaven.

Our choice we like beyond Prudentius,
Just so, as Fancy Livebys feathered crown
Beyond my Golden.

We like the power of choosing.

And some variety though joined with loosing --

Who ere Usurps, considers not his task,
How he must sooth the lowest of his villains,
Give highest place and all to every one,
Else all will be displeased. The King shall know,
What seeds of discontent and headlon folly
Appear already in this warring state.
Closed in too safe, they broke their hedge; what less
Then wandering now through wretched wilderness?

I think your cause exceeds the Cognisance
Of common sense. He like a Juryman
Can only sinde and judge the outward fact:
As whether now your kicks look white or blew;
Whether his threatening words were high or low;
What favour follow'd, whether sweet or sour;
Whether the kicks were Rough or gentle; (Rough
Your Grinkling says) These with some other notions
Thereto belonging, as the quantity,
The Figure, Number, the swift motion,
Or ceasing of your kicks; these he can judge of.
But as for higher speculations
Of Passions rising out of mere conceit,
How it was raised, what punishment is
due,
This proper lbyelongs to Fancie's audience.
Was there no cause?

None given, but apprehended.

The worse for you; this shows there was no malice,
But single heat. Were the kicks thick and many?

Six strong ones in one instant.

Still the worse.
It shows mere heat. What said he, 'twas his humour?

Even so.

Yet worse. Tis Law, that every Passion
May follow his own humour. Anger's his.
Besides he's writ a Lord: all things considered,
I give you counsel to be patient,
To ask if he be pleased to give you more;
To break a Tooth, pull Hair, strik out an Eye.

Accept my thanks: I see the Law it self
Is very Timorous against great Persons. --

I now can see no use of Law at all,
Law is casheer'd: where all things are permitted
What need of plea? what can be called unjust?
And are not these the Popular days we looked for,
When we expected Cunning should be Sovereign?

In mischief we must use the men we hate.
You are the man I seek. Have you considered
Those State-projections?

Sr. we want some Laws,
Such as were made for certain Lord Protectors.

Indeed this lawful murder is an Art
Of Excellence, and yet as easy too
For Statesmen Lawyers as Physicians.

An Art familiar in the Roman State,
As ancient too as the first Monarchy.
O I could tell you Laws worth millions to us,
By fair intrapping of the wealthy Clergy.

Have you no model to ensnare a Prince?

Henry the third, though wise and valiant,
Was caught in a strong line knit by himself,
Here ith mad Parliament,

As how?

Twelve Peers
Under pretence of evil Officers
And grand abuses, were selected out,
Strengthened with Laws to prune Prerogatives,
To tutor and reform the State; to size
The Kings expense, and to appoint him Servants,
Both menial and forinsecal.

I'st possible The King should seal to this?

O Poverty,
She to Obedience is the Lay-mother.
As some say Ignorance is the Clarklike,
Betwixt Superiors and Inferiors,
Look either way, this rule is mutual,
The poorer must be servant to the richer.
Henry brought low with various Action
Could not subsist without their subsidies.
Keep thy Prince poor, then thou shalt rule thy Ruler,
And subject thy Commander.

This we tried To fasten on Prudentius: but he
Too wise, too frugal was. Now Fancy
Through giddiness of mind, and vast expense,
Will prove less wary and more prodigal.

Let some insnareing Law be once proposed, Fancy will yield, not ponder.

Well, think you;
I'll speak and speed. O 'tis the praise of hate
To practise ruin and pretend the State.

But Sir, I trust upon your furtherance
About impropriations.

You I'll remember
First, or my self I ever shall forget.

The Cydaris well fits me; now must I
(...) ^er this Persian Crown with mutual fitness.
What thing was proper to the Persian Kings,
Say Memor.

Persian Kings did wed their Sisters.

Though in my Person thus I cannot wed,
I'll licence others. You Hilario
May, if you please, enjoy your lively Sister
Concupiscence.

I thank your Majesty
Both that I may, and may not; for to me
Nothing so pleasing is as Liberty.
I would not be bound to that neither, though I love it best;
If I were, I should long for the prison.
Bind me to be rich, I shall play at Ducks and Drakes with pieces;
Bind me to my good behaviour, I shall feel an itching desire to beat the
Justice.
O what a Prentice should I make! I should run away no oftner then I came in
fight
Of the threshold. And most of the Passions,
I think, have a spice of this humour.

But can no bond please you like Liberty?

Neither bond of Matrimony, nor bond of friendship,
Nor bond of Usury, nor bond of iniquity;
I rejoice in the present, I desire nothing, and therefore would be tied to
nothing.

Concupiscence your Sister's of another mind.

I could well endure to be bound, so I might be loose too.

The Theme which I proposed was Royalty,
No less then Persian. Then Concupiscence,
How is't we are so thinly waited on,
By Female Passions? are there no more women
Of Passion kind?

Of Passionate enough.
But to say Truth, the Female Passions
As soon as they are born, turn all to sins
And they are all my Children.

Then have you
More Daughters far then Danaus, or Margaret
Countess of Henneberg: whereof one did equal
The weeks, and the other the days of the year
With numerous issue.

I have more by thousands.
I'm as Fruitful and quick of Delivery
As any Vermin, spreading as Potatoes;
My race ruas over the World.

Or what age are they?

As old as my self very near.

Then you
Continued a maid no longer then Quartilla.

O never at all that I can remember.

You bear your age exceeding well.

I hope
I shall be young forever; I have the virtue
Of making old folks young by touching them.

Are none of those your Children ripe and handsome
And fit for our attendance?

Pride my Eldest
She is the likeliest.

Let her be admitted.

She's now in the Spanish Court; but when she comes --

Then the Court and her Mother will teach her to fall both ways,
Forward and Backward.

Till she return, is't not in Fancie's power
To change a Sex, and make some Passion Female?

The like hath been; I have heard of a Female
By mere force of Fancy turned Male. So Iphis
A Maid, in love with a Maid, was transformed
Just on the marriage Eve. Tiresias
Was Male and Female annually by turns;
Some Hermaphrodites have been both at once.

Wud I could live and turn Hermaphrodite.

Wud I could live and be of neither Sex.

What think ye of transforming Amorous?

He's undone then: he cannot show his legs, nor use his Postures
Nor enjoy his Idol Morphe.
No, change Sir Timorous,
He's as fearful as a Hare, and may be as changeable:
He hath many Symbolical conditions of womanhood already:
He is Female in every part but one, and half Female in his clothes
Give me but an Inch of Ribbon from Fuga,
and I'll undertake to present him
The Lady Timida.

Fuga
Give him one of your changeable Fancie's,
Thus first our selves must whet our own Invention;
Else others will not stir. Men do not strive
Methinkes to please me as they ought to do.
No other rarities these many Ages
But Powder, Printing, Seaman Card, and Watches?
So much vain dotage for the fond Elixir?
Why are not yet my Christals malleable,
To make our Gold no Gold, and foil the Di'mond?
Why want I Instruments to measure out
The Year, the Day, the Hour, without the help
Of Sun, or turning of these tedious wheels?
Nothing to carry me but Barges, Coaches?
Sedans, and Litters? through the Air I'd pass
By some new waftage* I must have my house
Conveyed by wheels and sails and plummers hung
In some deep pit, deep as the way is distant,
To hurry me, my Family, and it,
Whether I please. I'll travel like the Snail,
With all my house; but swifter then the Falcon.

Rare Lady!

Ravishing Inventions!

Why have not I not my Beds stuffd all with wind,
Baths filled with Maydew, Flowers preserved till winter,
As well as Snow till Summer: choicest Fruits
Growing and ripe in midst of January?
Why have not I Ponds running through my Cellars,
For Bottles and for Fish called by their names?
Why not in drough an Artificial rain,
Scattered by spowtes, to cheer my Paradise?

I wish you had these things; I ne'er saw such.

Cheap I can have Aeolian bellows made
Within the Bowles of Andirons, where the water
Shall blow the fire by which 'tis rarefied.
I will have Vaults which shall convey my whispers
In steed of Embasies to foreign Nations;
Places for Echoes to pronounce a speech,
Or give a Suffrage like a multitude:
Consorts well played by water; Pictures taught
By secret Organs both to move and speak:
We spend our selves too much upon the Taylor;
I rather would new mold new fashion Nature.

Pleases your Highness to behold a Show,
Wherein some Passions are displayed by Dreams
How they affected are by Day.

I'll see it.
What means that whisper?

Tis an honest project
Thought on by Memor, out of love to Churches,
To buy back saleable impropriations
With charitable money. Doth it please you?

This task was fitter for Prudentius
Then Sense or Passion. This although I grant,
Yet take it with condition. Memor knows
Conveyance old and new, the Right and Wrong.
In things not sacred he may use his cunning,
In this he must be just. To you I say,
It was not seasonable to move this business
When Shows were coming.

This your self did move
By asking.

Now.

Then make you here a Law,
That none these three days shall prefer a Suit
Or motion under forfeiture of life.
Me you shall find content; I'm no Troubler.

This trap is laid full right.

Stay, stay great Queen.
This Law will seal my mouth, and tie your hands,
And stop the necessary speed of business,
Whereby your Crown may be dissolved.

Away,
Away Malevolo.

My snare for Liveby
Is broke, but violence shall it supply.
You Memor have your wish.

Morpheus in a Cloud-coloured Cassock with a wreath of Poppies and a Caduceus
from a black Cell. Then at his call, six sleeping Persons in their night caps
half down their Faces, and in their wastcoates, representing in their clothes
downwards Memor, Malevolo, Irato, Timorous, Hilario, Desperato. Morpheus shakes
his Caduceus over them severally as they stand in Couples. Being moved they
fall successively into their proper gestures, and lastly all dance together in
those gestures.

I Morpheus King of Dreams, whose might
Can equal Fanci's in the night,
Have caused the night six dreams to send:
As I appointed they attend
Now Memor turn thy Books and prate,
Plead with thy hands and fees then take.
Shrug, scratch, Malevolo, and grin,
Grasp thy foul heart and feel thy sin.
Irato, bend thy fist and draw,
Offer to thrust, keep fear in awe.
Shake Timorous, offer to fly,
Begin to sink, offer to die.
Hilario clap thy hands and laugh,
Skip, leap, and turn, offer to quaff.
Despair start, stand, and crush thy throat,
Then stab thy breast and groan death's note.

Whose labour was this sport?

Livebys invention and my contriving.

For this I'll send you to your dearest Morphe.
Go at what hour you please, and say I want
Her company at Court. You, Hope, for this,
And for preventing that pernicious Law,
Ask what you will.

Grant the Monopoly
Of Watches, or of Beavers. Fan take them both;
And ask again.

When woodlands shall be turned
To other use, grant me a twelfth as forfeit.

Be it confirmed*

I was about to ask
The Patronage of Churches in Sea-towns;
Where popular choice maintains a Faction
Brought in with Merchandise from foreign parts.
But that were better taken to the Crown.

Take what thou wilt. Thou
begst to give us share.
None can please all, the best the better fare.

By this way Sir Timorous should come; whom I as sent from his wronged Lady
Fuga have engaged in a quarrel against Audax. And yonder comes the pitiful
Earthquake most lovingly trembling.


What should I do here? some desperate knave or other, Desperato himself (it
may be) hath robbed me of my best weapon. I thought not to have fought with
steel, but with Gold; and to have brought this needy Captain to an honourable
submission by dint of Cash. What disasters have I? That unreasonablly wicked,
that divlish two faced Cutter knew me too well: for when I drew this harmless
blade, he looked upon it as slightly as upon a riding wand; and bad me
familiarly put up that, and draw my purse. Certainly I have too much of the
Mother; I am that which they call a Coward, and all the world knows it.
Wherefore (O Ribbon) I take it extreme scurvily of Fuga, that she being of the
same temper her self, doth not consider her temper in me.


Now this Craven stands as ticklish on the point of running as a Bowl on the
top of a ridg.


Two steps further I'll move. I have been coming a quarter of a mile these two
hours at least; and yet I sweat till the very drops run a race; my shaking
fever is turned to a cold sweat, and that's a true Prognostication of death.

Good night to all the world; for this is that fatal peace of ground which I
shall anon-measure with my Carcass. Never a Bush nor Hole here? though it be
called Champion ground I shall not fight: perhaps I shall make use of its
plainness, and give ground a mile or two; that shall be my way of fighting.
For if I the Challenger stand still on my guard, it will not stand with mine
honour: And then while I keep my backsword point still in his face (I have seen
the play at cudgells) he will wheel about me, and falsifying a blow at the
head will strike me just on the legs where my heart lies. Then shall I be quite
spoiled for running away; which I think I had best do presently, for I hear him
coming. O --


Now I see Sir Tim, thou art a Lad of mettle.


Mettle? I protest Sir I had rather drink this cold iron filled small to dust
and be a Lad of mettle so, then to thrust it whole into any mans flesh
whatsoever; much less into my Enemies. You see then what power Love hath, and
how Fuga is beholding to me.


Most dreadfully.


Is not the time yet past? I think I may retire with honour, and say he durst
not meet me.


It wants yet half an hour. If you hold not out your time, then he'll assault
you openly in Court, and make your shame public, which otherwise will be but
private. I'll stand secretly by you, and if need require will step in and part
you.


Stand not far off I beseech you for when I am killed I shall not be able to
call. -- O my heart! -- the Gyant's coming -- O -- Hilario -- Malevolo passes
by.


Saw you not here Irato?


No believe me Sir; no I thank heaven. Hilario! -- Now comes Audax. O -- I have
but a minute to live. Irato passes by.


How now stinkerd, how does thy breech? saw thou not here Malevolo?


He past by in hast; just now in hast. -- Well. Two Furies are past. I'll not
wait for the third, go Love and Honour whither they will. Hilario! -- I fear he
hath left me. I'll raze my Flesh with a slight cut, and swear I received that
wound in fight. But now I think on it better, I have an issue under my left
arm; I'll force that bigger till it bleed, and swear that into a wound. For
sure a fresh one would be far greater pain. Soft, I am loath to suffer so much,
if I may choose Hilario? --


What a Champion are you? not dare to look a man in the face?


Sweet Hilario, I consider thou hast no Sword to help me: stretch thy wit, and
invent some speedy way, how I may escape with honour, and not fight?


You cannot possibly escape fighting.


Sweet Hilario do not kill me before hand with saying so.


Why then will you be ruled by me?


In any thing, any thing. Quickly for love of Life.


I have promised to furnish the Queen with a new Lady attendant.


What then?


Put on Woman's apparel, you shall be she; by name of Madam Timida.


Ha! Say on.


Then shall you be free, not only from this quarrel, but from all future
beatings and challenges.


Safe and sound!


Then shall you have perpetual access to Fuga, bully.


Safe and delicious!


Then to steal her affection you may habit your self like her.


Safe and wise!


Then as for you honour, who can upbraid you when you are no where to be sound:
twill be supposed by your sweet friend, that you died in her quarrel, Audax if
he himself talk will be dangerously questioned.


But will you be secret?


For mine own sake, mine own sake, Sir Tim.


Dearest Hilario, thou art my preserving Angel.


Make hast, before you can new cast your self I'll come to present you.

Poor snake, I delivered no Challenge; I only frighted him to a more willing
Metamorphosis.


Hey ho for a husband; Two three, or more,
As many as I meet; 'tis fit, that we
Ladies Attendant should be qualified
For three at least.

What ere the habit be, this is the Face
The Voice and language of Concupiscence,
Why, how now Sister, taking the Air alone?

A safe Conscience never fears any man.

I think thou fear not any, but love all.
Such was thy wont; and hast thou now a Conscience?

Be grave or silent, know I'm rectified.

Pox on your train: by feigned honesty
You seek to woo me. I'll unvaile you straight.
What think you of two husbands, three, or more,
As many as you meet?

Why did thou hear me?

Ladies Attendant should be qualified
For three at least.

That I spoke merrily.

If thou had ten, thou still would cry more Hymens.

If so you think, think on, I think so too.

But when will all thy maidenheads be spent?
Tell me sincerely, truly, and bodily.

They come again like Teeth, I'm breeding now.

Then are thy maidenheads like Hydra's heads,
Not to be tamed but by a Hercules.
Who has the next?

I am resolved to part it
Betwixt a Courtier and a Citizen:
The Courtier has the maid, the Citizen
Shall have the head.

Sister, I cannot wed you,
You have too much complexion for my use:
But I'll provide you one shall bear the name
Of Husband.

Let him be honest, quiet.

Of you own garb, say he be Melancolico.
And so I'll rid my self of Fanci's march.

I care but for his shadow having Servants.

Farewell Carnality.

Hilario thinks
He took me, when alas twas my intent
The Boy should overheare, and so become
If not a Husband, such an Officer.

What's here? Concupiscence?

Nor stare, nor startle;
As I hope to look saire, I'm nothing changed
In mind or body. No where, but in habit.

And why in This?

O for Variety.
Fancy permits all change. This dress sometimes
Pleases the Courtier better then his Ladies.

Is it but so? come then my Paphian drum,
I'll brace the close.

Soft Sir, you march too fiercely.
I have a task which first you must perform;
I fear you will not do it; you do not love
me;
Promise me first; the task I can assure you,
Befitts your Valour, and will pay it self.

Is it to kill the Queen, that thou may reign?

No, nor her maid; thou shalt but use her kindly.

Speak plain, be bold.

Then thou shalt ravish Fuga.
She twits me with my Servants, Favours, Looks,
My Words, and scapes: in This you bear a share.
If this to me bring shame, you are not free.

Is this your heavy task? no more but This?
Only to ravish? is not the work Reward?
I'll do it effectually; Her self shall thank me.

But I'll outthank her far; I'll ravish thee
With fast embraces. Take this kiss in earnest
Of future payment. Though I seem a Vestal,
To thee I'm Venus.

Venus, be secured.

Then, when her fruit shall swell, and I stand simpering,
Turned to a seeming Saint, O how I'll triumph
In grave reproof and holy Admonition!
This 'tis to be too chaste. -- here come the Stagemen.

Sir you and we were acted at the Court.
We losers are made laughing-stocks, and sport
For open Stages.

Tell my Sword the Author;
That it my write his doom upon his flesh.

This Creature can inform us.
Who I pray
Were your late witwrights in the Masque?

Hope pend it,
My Father Amorous (without Offence)
Contrived the Show.

This trick Malevolo
Was chiefly meant to you, because your pen
Hath scourged the Stage.

However Lord Irato
Shall act a red Catastrophe on Liveby:

I'll watch his haunt and hunt
him to his fall;
You Amorous too. This mirth of theirs at last
Shall close their sweetness with an Aloed taste.
These once removed, who can be great but I;
Whose word shall sway but mine? Then power is sweet
When Rubs are made the stairs to mount our feet.

Whatever chang succeed, still wretchedness
My old inseparable mate hangs on.
Therefore I seem ridiculous; my grief
Is others mirth; Malevolo says I'm acted*
Henceforth I'll find new Company: since Fate
Bars me from others happiness, I'll spread
My misery to others; and I'll thrive
Merely in spite, to make men miserable.
This is my humour; 'tis begun already.
The Gold I took from Timorous, if questioned,
I can defend; I took it in my humour;
And that's good law; I took it in a humour
Most desperately bent; and it hath made me
Such as men see, an able man for mischief;
Clad me in the outside of a mystery,
Furnished my shelves with Pots, with Boxes, Names,
Slight Medicines, and strong Poisons. Time hath been,
When I in War served Death a Prentiship;
There learned to open Veins, to lance and kill;
Now I am free o'th Trade; a Soldier then,
Physician now; I'll do the self same work,
But now more Artificially. --

-- The godly
(...) in distress; the wicked, that usurp
The Childrens right, do here grow fat and prosper:
Wherefore I thought of drowning. Verily
^ulesse that Conscientious Lawyer,
Good Memor, from rebought Impropriations,
Had thus deducted and distributed
The better part to us oppressed Brethren,
Affliction some, and some Devotion
Had brought me to despair. Now I'll not see him.

Methinkes dejected Melancholico
Should prove fit Timber for my fatal work.
What, Melancholico? not know your friend,
Whose medci'nal skill cures Body, Mind, and State?
Trust thou art not over lucky; art?
Dost feel no misery?
I thought ere this should have had thy custom.

Verily
My sickness could but little cure your purse.

It might have brought me practise howsoever,
And that's the only Fee of new professors.

But are you then indeed a true professor,
And one of Us? Sooth I profess sincerity,

Hath not the same which caused sincerity,
Caused a foul spleen? no Hypocondrick Vapours?

For that a godly Lawyer gave me physic:

Then take it next from a Divine.

That Lawyer
First took it from Divines, then gave it me.
And I can give you counsel to your physic:
You have a fair advantage in men's sickness
To prick the Conscience, and to let them know,
Their only way is to relieve the Breren,
And (...) their stock of holy usury
For new Plantations. You shall have a share.

This is a verier rogue then I my self.

And what I pray moved you to turn Physician?

Want set me on, a booty set me up.
Now let me know of mutual courtesy,
What was your Dos?

'Twill buy all yours; 'twas Gold.

Why then, thou'st run unto presumption,
Not to despair. I hear you are to marry;
Which if thou dost, then thou wilt come to me,
For Ratsbane, Hensbane, some such wholesome banes,
To cure thy bands of Matrimony.

Hence.

Friend Melancholico,
How is't? Sister, stand by a while. Methinks
Upon a sudden you are grown brisk and cheerful,
Fit company for me, nay for a wife.

You'll never leave your waggery and jesting.
" You called Peculiars rags of Popery.

Sometimes you are too sad and solitary:
Is this jesting? and solitariness
Requires due Recreation; Is this jesting?
And Recreation much consists in
The yoke of a meet helper; you may call
This jesting too; but is't not sport in earnest?

The Saints allow no sport.

Then love in earnest.
You know you cannot well converse with men;
Your looks are indisposed, your language sparing,
Your manners different. But to a woman
A long Parenthesis of busied silence
Does passing well. Then in her company
You have a world, and none to contradict.
And in her Ear you may reform the Church,
Or purg the State, as safe, as if you spake
Unto the Air or whispered to your self,
For so she is. Think on a wife.

No wife.

Then on a spouse.

Now you say somewhat.

Now.
He'll marry words not substance. The word whore
Would have spoiled all. This blockhead suites with me
As frost with fire. But for your sake I'll thaw him.

Have you not injured that fair promising Sister
By leaving her alone?

She meditates.

She walk gravely, turns her eye devoutly.

The white's pure, the black as full of Adultery
As thou art of Hypocrisy; she harbours
A good conceit of you. Shall she concive Further?

If that her name be right.

She was Concupiscence, now called Temperance Sister
This is your Husband whom I so commended.

I choose not for my self.

Sister and Spouse,
If so you please, our hands sha'l us unite
Marches are made in Heaven; few words suffice
The Night consummates. As for other rites
I hold them superstitious Ceremonies.
I had forgot her Portion.

She's a widow,
He show you her Estate.

He first retire
And clasp her hand in zeal.

my Lord and Bridegroom.

The Divel and his Dam you are. Come Brother.

Once more. I like your meditation,
But do not spend your self therewith too much.

Now I am double sheltered in my hear,
With name of Husband, and this formal guise.

Now welcome Servant; have you won the Fort?

Hell take her, she's a man.

A man?

Just so I found, scarce left him so.

O you mistook. Sir Timorous is transformed to wait at Court:
Twas Phanci's own device. O I could laugh.

I made him so much woman as to cry;
" Else I had made him woman with my Sword.

Alas poor Timida.

The thing so trembled,
No leaf nor ague like him.

Ha ha ha.

Did you intend to put this trick upon me?

No by the kisses which shall satisfy
Thy height forthwith, and pay thy error full.
Besides I'm satisfied with this mistake
As well as with the right. Aspersion
Shall blot the name of Fuga full as much.

What's this? the He or She?

No matter which.

If it be she, I'll ravish her; if he,
Then thou shalt do it.

Neither* tis done enough.

Tim hath a fine time on it.

Come, you have a better. --

Is this to be a woman? O I could tear,
As timorous as I am, my lawns to rags,
And scratch my face, and stick my heart with pins,
Or straight turn valiant. Wud my Fuga knew,
What she hath escaped through me.
And here she comes.
O Fuga, female habit and strange sufferings
Have lent me tongue enough. Now I can speak;
And boldly say I have deserved your love.

Wherein Sir Lady?

Now in this your habit saved you from a hideous ravishing. Audax with whom I
should have fought, came on me
With love more rude then rage, blasted my face
With breath like brimstone, turned my limbs like twigs;
I live by miracle.

You came too near
Uuto a Sex from which you should keep further.

Shall I not then be near and dear unto you?

Experience tells you what a boisterous thing
Tis to be ruffled by a man.

Still so? Why I have been a woman for thy sake;
I hear within these weeds a mind as tender,
White skin, blew veins, and arms as soft as thine.

But still you are a man, and I still Fuga.

Nothing can merit love from pevishnesse.
What shall I do? I'll straight turn man again,
And suffer for my self. Farewell coy woman,
Ungrateful, and unwise. My ravishment
Is fairly past, but yours may be the next.
How ere when I appear my self, the noise
Of what is past will light upon your name.
I bore the loathsome suffering for thee,
Now shalt thou bear the foul reproach for me.

Much I was overseen, too much extremely;
I could run after him; but if he turn
I shall run back again. O I am lost;
My Honour, Safety, and perhaps some liking,
All these are lost, with these I'm lost, lost Fuga.

This change of State gains me small perfect pleasure.
Mere meditation on Morphe's beauty
Will not suffice. Come Fuga, since thy Ocean
Cannot be minish'd by some drops, give freely
What Audax forced.

That I am miserable
Is't not enough, unless I bear more burdens
Of common scorn, or (which is worse) true staining?
Good Sir, of all the Passions you are gentlest;
Though you esteem me light, which I am not,
Yet take some weight unto your self. Consider
That after this you cannot worthy be
Of Morphe, never woe with confidence.

Thus still a Female Sermon puts me by,
And I gain nothing by my Liberty.
Once more I ask.

Once was too much before.

Once more.

First kill me.

Then to make you quick
Is past my cunning.

Joy to you Madam Fuga, you know why.

If I could give you Joy of what I loath,
And you delight in, this if I could do
Without a sin, I would.

Is false report
Worse then true guilt? how i'st this filthy Strumpet
Looks like a Saint, and I as foul as hell?

Lady, an Eye refined sees more then dull ones,
And Holiness far clearer then Uncleaness.
I wonder what loose words and actions
Have passed from you, to give incouragment
To the kind ravisher; for I have heard
None can be ravished without some consent.
Be humbled, know you fault, live chaster Lady.

Sure I should think I'm guilty.

Out upon thee.
Fie Temperance, what here? wilt thou have Eggs
And rotten Oranges flung at thee too?
What can you choose no other company
But this lewd, cracked abominable peace?

You see your company is scandalous,
I must take leave.

If there be any power
To see and judge, I challenge his assistance.
What have I done, unless too steadfast coyness
Be now accounted looseness? what's my Crime,
That such a general storm of loud disgrace
Conspires to bear down Innocence? Hold heart,
Hold my weak spirits: for if this continue
I shall grow desperate. --

-- Pity me Father,
My name is stained beyond all patience.
Sir Timorous having foolishly put on
My shape; in stead of me was rudely ravished
By blustering Audax. The reproach is mine.
You know a darksome cloud can much obscure
The face of water though as pure as Crystal.

Audax shall rue this base attempt, whose shadow
Blots your opinion, and portends more danger
Unto your Person. Cast your cares on me.

I may communicate, not cast them off.

I thought to use him in a bold design
Against Liveby, and I will; 'tis dangerous
Unto himself. If combat rain one,
Vengeance pursues the other: thus I'll make
The vanquished and the victor both my prey,
And whilst they fight, my self shall win the day.

What, you that Office? know your turn; give place
First to your betters. You be General?

Yes I. And know, that whilst I hold a Sword
To prove my worth, the Sun beholds none better.
Neither your Lordship nor Controwlership
Can dastard me.

But I shall teach you distance.

Make me draw back one inch, and gain this place,
Then thou gain'st That. Be calmer good Irato.

Unwing the Lightning, stop Araxes floods,
Then may thou stop my wrath, and guard thy self
Against my stroke.

Hold, hold; what means this Fury?
May I be Umpire in your difference?

Know it you may; this feirce and haughty Lord
Crosses my aim, and stands Competitor
For what he understands not, to be General.

Not understand? give way Malevolo.

You may be fit to quarrel in a Tavern,
But not to lead an Army.

Give me scope;
Unless thou would be broached on the same blade,
And coupled plunge in Styx; open the way.

Why would you seek this Office?

Cause I scorn
That any man should be preferred before me.

And why would you?

Because I can do service;
And would gain honour, equal unto His.

There's yet no Army levi'd, there's no cause,
But doubtful Rumour.

When there is, I'll lead it.

Yes, both alike; while you contend for shadows, Liveby will bear the substance
from you both.
Rid him, then you may talk.

What says Irato?

Agreed.

Then you shall take him now in the Evening,
Coming from Intellectus: there's his haunt, --
Now try your fury on a third; for I
Stanch'd not this combat out of love, but hate,
To turn them hot, and mad, on Liveby's blood;
That done, meet seas again; I'll be no Isthmus;
But spur their heat, and clap them on the shoulder.
For I my self first raised this bruit of war,
For fuel of some new commotion;
Which luckily takes fire betwixt these two.

Now Amorous; you sit in Fortunes lap,
Your Mistress sits in yours; you spend your days
In Honour, and Delight.

I shall the more,
If with your liking.

Mine? I am your Theme
For mirth at Court; one of your Hobby-horses: And glad of such perferment; but
I'll dash
And poison your sweet delicates.

Your hate Shall not break off my Scene of Love.
Stand there,
And send thy notes like shafts through Morphe's Ear.
Sweet Morphe lend a feeling ear
To the soft strains wherein I bear
My soul, and sigh it out to thee
Composed of sweeter harmony;
With one kind word or smile
Reprive the man a while,
Who life doth crave
Thy print to save,
And fears to make his breast, thy Pictures grave.


With such fond circumstance of open wooing?

I'm glad at any rate to hear your voice,
Though sent in chiding. But my dearest Morphe,
I have a business to you from the Queen,
Besides mine own.

This you pretend to wrong me.
Though I be loyal, yet my loyalty
Ought not to make me Traitor to my self.

If I be false or any way immodest,
Accuse and shun me.

Shall I then believe you?

Add to that curse a greater if you can,
And may it fall upon me.

Well, I come.

Now having liberty to act my will,
No Law but this vain curse to hold me in,
How shall I bear my self?

What wills the Queen?

She calls you to her company at Court.
She wants your privacy; you likewise want
Her public presence: O you wrong your beauty
By shutting such a Jewel from the gaze
Of solemn adoration.

Pray excuse me;
If I have beauty, let me keep it well.
The various Fashions, and new Fancies there,
In the opinion of us plainer beauties,
Do but Sophisticate the Elements
Of native Colour, and distort the lines
Of proper figure. What should I do there?
Say I am sickly, as this news hath made me.
Farewell Sir Amorous.

Nay, tis not modesty
But blunt stupidity to part so soon.
May I not walk and take you by the arm,
And pass a fair discourse? what hurt in This?
May I not feed my spirits with the air
That fans your cheeks? lighten mine eye from yours?
Is this immodest?

Hark.

'Tis the clash of weapons.

Help Amorous, help. -- O -- it comes too late.

Ignoble Swords, and bloody butcherers!
Who would believe that two such Hercules
Should join against a single Hylas thus.
It was not manly. -- Morphe -- O my life!
This hideous sight hath struck her gentle spirits
With frighted numnesse. Water, spirits, help. --
Out strip the wind, fly for a Physician. --
I'll rub her Temples, rouse her by the name
Which she best knows: Morphe.

O!

Life there appears;
Is there none here? how should I save them both?
Help there, 'tis but a Sown. I feel some breath.
I'll bear her hence. -- O that my arms might clasp
Her living thus, and willing. --

-- Hence did thrill
That piercing noise. What's here? see false mine eyes!
Poor Liveby slain? then for thy Sovereigns favour
Thou died a Martyr.

O, Intellectus help.

He speaks; there's hope of life. If Art can save
A third so mangled, thus I'll bear thee to it.
Although my breast have used to bear it's burden
Within, and not without. --


Unto your Lady. Let the Physitan
First speak with me. -- Now to my second load. --
What? vanished? I have heard of walking ghosts,
Never of walking carcasses. Then surely
The Murderers have dragged him hence. His blood
Will rise upon their cheeks; and it shall speak
Loud on my Tongue. --

-- Now in my Turkish Turban
I walk to find Sir Amorous in his heaven.
Be not so deeply discontented Fuga.

Unless you clear me openly, I die.

I find you Amorous somewhat near your Center.
Your Morphe fittest is to be a Queen.
I go to wait on her, and fetch her home
With me.

Sweet Soul (that's all she is by this)
I cannot tell you in what world she is,
Nor where I am my self.

And why?

She's dying,
Frighted with such a dismal accident,
That when I tell it, I much fear your highness
Will be as weak as she.

Speak, I am armed.
Where's Livebyhope?

The same I fain would know:
Last when I saw him, he was laid for dead.

How dead?

Tis so. Just now: not far from hence,
Two bloody Villains, Audax and Irato,
Pursued and sped him with two mortal wounds.
I ran to help; Morphe fell in a Sownd;
I bore her hence; mean while his Corps were gone.

I am perplexed beyond my power of bearing.
My arm is lopped, my Kingdom is all tumult*
The Passions taking vantage of my Law,
Follow their humours to their mutual ruin;
And run like Vessels till they quite run out.

Mix some ingredient to excite her Love.
Doctor, thou shalt be rich,

I'll fit you all.
Morphe for physic sends, Malevolo
Hath purchased me long since to give her poison;
Sir Amorous buys a Love-pill: I my self,
Even I, that will be Master in conclusion,
Intend to mix them all: then fight confusion.

Pleases your highness to decide by choice,
Or leave it to our Swords, who shall be General?

Then I am bound to honour one of them
For their good service. Bloodhounds, have ye murdered
One worth you both? and dare to ask reward
Of me? of me so wronged? So both will join
In mutual revenge, and fall together,
Fight for it.

Fond Queen, what if our rage proceed,
To hew Sir Amorous for telling this,
You for distasting? all will be but humour.

Then give us not occasion to proceed.

Proceed, I pray you, do. Lo, here's my breast.
Tent it; to find the grief which I conceive
For Livebys Death, and your more horrid Lives.
What, have ye surfeited with blood? good Amorous,
Do it thou, do it straight: what these refuse as Rebels,
Do as a Friend. Kill me, but kill me gently,
With some sad strain under this spreading Oak.

I hope 'twill ease not kill you.
Sing of Venus.

Once Venus cheeks that shamed the morn
Their hue let fall;
Her lips, that Winter had out born,
In June looked pale:
Her heat grew cold, her nectar dry.
No juice she had but in her eye,
The wonted fire and flames to mortify.
When was this so dismal sight?
When Adonis bad good night.

The same which turned her beauty, turns my Fancy,
Alas poor Liveby. -- What dee mean to thrust?
Fie what a press is here? stand off; for I
Am but a Cloud: your Elbows pierce me through;
Your hot and angry breaths will straight dissolve me.
And I shall crack into a shower of Tears.

Alas she's crak'd indeed, the
Queen's distempered.

Do you not see, and hear a Lamb there bleating?
Pray kill him not, he bears the head of Liveby.

In a mad world what use of place? what business?

Now had I any anger left, I'd shred
That Fiddler into Atoms.

O, I'm struck
(Plague on Malevolo that fets us on!)
I'm struck at heart with leaden heaviness!

I feel my veins now curdled; what success
But Horror of this Fact?

I see and hear
Enough to grate me. O that plotts well laid
Should thus be dashed and foyld. --

-- That naughty Boy Hilario hath matched me to the Divel.
Hell flames are in her; she hath stuck a brand
" Into my bones; I sue for just divorcement.

Did not you snuffle till you matched my Daughter?
Peace, or you'll shame your self.

A pretty Picture, Here's Day and Night united in one peace;
Look here a Swan, look there a foul black Raven.

Justice great Queen against a multitude.

That's hard to be obtained.

Against Irato, Tilario, Desperato, Audax:
Some beat, some cheat, some rob, some ravish me.

What say? Go on and still that howling kennel.
I know you well, for all you are a Tortesse,
And have lived like a frog in diverse Elements.
Of what Gender are you? Go learn of Protens
How to do tricks. If you be dull and blockish,
You must be beaten. Come to me for Justice?
Judge one another, or get you all to Liveby.

He's in his grave.

And therefore get ye to him.

No doing's here: I'm gone.

And I: but whither?

No Amorous, Liveby sleeps, but Morphe's dead.

Heaven help you Lady.

But I can soon restore her.
" Take you the sent of a Travellers toes,
" The sneeze of a Sleeper fresh from his nose;
" The fat of a Friar well fed with fasting,
" The lean of a Drunkard consumed with tasting;
" The juice of a Lemon tha's civil at seasons,
" Twelve dancing Capers, ten lunatic Reasons;
" Two dying notes of an ancient Swan,
" Three Sighs a thousand years kept if you can:
" Some scrapings of Giges his Ring may pass,
" With the skin of a Shadow caught in a glass;
" Six penny worth of Thoughts untold,
" The jelly of a Star before it be cold;
" One ounce of Courtship from a country-Daughter,
" A grain of Wit, and a quart of Laughter.
" Boyle these on the Fire of Zeal or of Lust,
" With some beech Coals, least the Vessel bust.
" If you can get these Ingredients, I'e compound them for you.
" Then when she is perfectly recovered, she shall be married
In rich cloth of Rainbow laced with Sun-beames.

I hope Desperato hath given her other Physic.

Desperato? is he her Physician?
Since hope is dead, we all must to despair.

Pardon the messenger if he relate
What he could wish were false. Morphe once was:
But after physic brought by Desperato,
Raging and crying Amorous, She died.

Lo now, believe your Cybill next.

-- If madness
Be now so near allied to prophecy,
I shall grow Prophet too. What angry Star
Thus frowns on all the Passions, most on me?
Ere since Prudentius days, we only toiled
In wretched mazes of confusion,
Mischief, and discontent. I have not passed
One hour in those delights whereof I dream't;
And now the object of my happiness
Is clean extinct. But how? O there's the torment!
My torment's doubled through my self the cause.
Cursed be my heedless Love, which not content
With likely hopes, with honest ways of wooing,
The ways to long injoining, headlong ran
To arts forbid. She had such Innocence
Even in her body, Temper so unforc'd,
That violent mixtures tending but to Love
To her were poisons. Yet methinks, sometimes,
There's Death in Desperato's looks; perchance
He's divel in his dumps, as I in lust.
Where shall we find the bottom of our woe,
Who but on Passion have no ground to go!

The Scene turns to the house of Despair. A Table there laid.

Grow blacker yet my thoughts, grow blacker yet:
Your Plummets have not fadom'd the full depth
Of Passions misery. I have invited them;
But I must chang their Cheer; and make it stronger
Then food and bare discourse. I only live
For others-death, and then I'll fill the heap
With mine own ruin: rather with mine ease:
For now the Passions flow like shoals of Fish
Into my net; they sue to me for Counsel;
Even to me; whose joy is in their death.
Just so the fearful Dear pursued with dogs,
Flies to the keepers lodge, a surer Fate.
To poison is dull art; my self am sorry
For doing ill so poorly; my design
Is now more glorious; for I'll make them act
Their death upon themselves, and thank me for it
Amidst their groanings. There have been with me
Fancy herself, distracted for her Liveby;
Irato, Audax for massacring him;
Sir Timorous and Fuga for impatience
Of their abuse. Unless Recorder Memor
Skil'd in the Law, have ways to escape my Noose,
I doubt of none. I've bid them to a Feast;
But such a one, as Tantalus would shun;
Where I shall feed on all the guests that come.

Black Desperato, did I lay two thirds
Upon thy spindle? hast thou cut them both,
Morphe's and mine?

Why Sir, I mixed your Philtre.

She lives not me to love nor to be loved.
Did thou mix nothing else?

You know sometimes
That Death and Cupid do mistake their sh^es:
Had I mixed Poison too and served two humours,
Both mine and yours, it might be well digested. --

If I had not a dear request unto thee,
To give me of the same, I would exact
Thy life for hers, however it was spilt.

If I had not designed to kill some others
Out of mere kindness, thou shoulst try my skill
Of letting blood as well as giving physic.
But since I owe thee kindness out of hate,
Come to my Banquet, thou shalt have thy sauce.
There thou shalt meet thy friend Malevolo,
Who shared in this, and gave as much for Poison
As you did for your Philtre. I dealt honestly,
And pleasured Both. Come, thou shalt have thy sauce.

Divel, I thank thee. --

-- Now* Malevolo.

To hate was still my honey. But this gall
Of being hated totally of all,
I cannot bear: for now I cannot hurt,
Having no Credit. Give me from thy store
A dram of Poison. I have been thy friend,
Let it be strong.

First shake hands you must
With all the Passions, or at least make show
Of formal reconcilement: stay a while,
My Guests and Cheer are coming. --

-- Have we found
This monster here? we will send thy ugly soul
Unto her fellow Fiends for tempting us.

I prompted you to kill. Were not you ready
To do as bad as I could say? Mean while
I turned you from destroying one another.

Twas for thine one black Ends.

And say it was:
Might not I hate, as well as you might kill?
My humour was as lawful.

Had thou kept it
Home to thy self.

I labour not excuse,
But accusation of your equal Crimes.

He says the right; and hospitality
Doth now require, ye should defer your Broils.

Sir, here's a Crown, (and tis the worst of mine)
Not to be matched in all the globe of heaven
Now shall I feed upon Ambrosia?
Most divelishly. What gods are these two Mars-es?

Hell is broke loose; here are more Fiends then two.

It shames me to look up; through grief I cannot.

Wud I could die a sleep in some dark hole
Unknown unto my self and all the world.

Malevolo, the art damned.

How know you that?

And thou must sink to hell now instantly
For killing Morphe. Thou shalt drink the same
That very Poison.

Well, so you'll begin.

Now Sister you are right: now you can snuffle
' As well a Melancolico. Care of fiction
" With help of somewhat else hath brought perfection.
" None come in Pomp but you: weakness is stately.
" Twere brave if these two beasts that draw without
" And these two rotten carcasses within
' Made it not look so Cart-like. My clean couple,
If you would be divorced, there's none can do it
Like Desperato; he can seperate
At a worlds distance; that ye ner'e shall meet
To clamour me or others, or your selves.

A pretty kind of Coach; one horse before
And one behind!

Horses? why, these are Men.

I see it now; it is the glassmans pack.
Have you good choice of Glasses, made in Figure
Of Guns and Trumpets, or of Rats and Owls?
Last time I saw the like, I bid a Gallant
Begin a health, and after break his glass:
So did the rest; but do not do so now,
Least for a Glass some should mistake a Lady.

Femals are Venice mettle.

These sad men
Use to be sumptuous in their Feasts.

And witty.

I fear 'twill be too great.

Too tedious.

Welcome and bold I'll be. --

-- Aerious Queen,
Here are no Phoenix eggs; had nature any,
You should have some: and eggs sublimed with Amber
I thought too mean. I have not now selected
Rare filling meats, but rarely physical,
And swiftly curing all the maladies
Which time can throw upon the face of man.
Each dish contains a general remedy,
Beyond the Elixir, or the golden Liquour,
Though it were drunk in the Antimonial Cup.
Open and try.

What's here? Knives, Bodkins, Daggers?

Ropes, silken, hairy, hempen?

Little papers,
Of witty, loving, raging, sleeping poisons?

There's Wine to temper them.

So, where's the Wine?
I still come somewhat merry to a Feast,
And still go merrier back. This is my mess:
All this to all.

Is this our entertainment?

Could Art invent, or Wealth procure you better?
The Greatest, Wisest, Stoutest, and the fairest
Have chose these Cates to relish their last palats:
Have you not heard of Mithridates, Cato,
Of Hannibal, and Cleopatra? These?
These gods on earth have travl'd to their home
With such provision. Taste. One taste of these
Forever frees from Hunger, Thirst, Want, Grief:
These are receipts for immortality.

But through a mortal way.

That sleeping Dos
Will steal thy fearful soul insensibly.

Then that shall bear me hoodwinked unto Lethe;
There I'll forget my wrongs.

Manners however;
First let the Queen begin. I broke that Rule
My self, and therefore m^m. -- Well danced youd Scaffold.

These things the most of you desired; All want,
You're welcome all.

No, no more I thank you.

Death to the wretched soul as needful is,
As sleep unto the weary. Why should men
Condemned to misery thus toil to mend
Their Fates which cannot alter?

This Desperate
What a gift he has! he never was at the University;
Never took Orders, and yet lectures as good Divinity
As commonly we find in most Dutch Systems
Or City-conventicles.

Pleases your Highness
To choose and give the signal, that we all
May wait upon your dying.

Reach me then
The witty poison.

Me the loving mixed;
That when I die, embracing her Idea,
My Soul may keep that print, and bear from hence
A heaven within me. He that stripped of flesh
And lust still loves, will show true love indeed.
But you Malevolo shall take my part.

My place in heaven is sure; what need I hast?
Yes, because I live in hell.

Then take these banes
Mentioned before.

Do; as good he poison thee
As thou else drown thy self.

Poison I have too much,
Already, and in vain. Reach me your halter.

Ho ho ho; a halter? a dagger, he's so rotten,
He'll ne'er hold hanging. Now for my part, sleep
Kills me sufficiently; I'll die before hand.

In lust I lived with man; to kill that sin
Lend me that poniard, so I'll manly die.

This Bodkin is my husband; this alone
Shall know my flesh, and find I was a Virgin.

Come join Irato, as we lived lets hang,
Two nooses and one rope will serve us both.

Tis a dogs death, and therefore not unfit.

Ho ho ho.

Choice I neglect whatever can dispatch
Loathed life is sweet. My hate would fain turn home,
But cannot: Still me thinks I feel content
In seeing such a fruitful race of mischief,
Because it sprung from me. If Fancies madness
Had not unhinged the course of my design,
And brought remediless confusion
On all the Passions here at once; unseen
Beloved and honoured, I with Art and Pleasure
Had done what Desperato does by chance.
He only held the Net; I hunted in
The store of game: The praise is mine. And now
I die not with remorse of hate, but want
Of objects to be hated. Thus the worm
Having consumed the Orb wherein it lived,
Doth lastly turn its hunger on it self.
Should I survive I could not find more work,
Unless I learn,d to pity what is done.
That's worse then death.

When I have rid you all,
If I slink off let all the world besides
Fling stones. In such good company to fall,
Must needs be lightsome. And before out death
A Hymn is necessary. Then sing good Fellow.
An Attendant sings in a base.
Come heavy souls oppressed with the weight
Of Crimes, or Pangs, or want of your delight,
Come down in Lethe's, sleepy lake
Whatever makes you ache.
Drink health from poisoned bowles
Breathe out your cares together with your souls.
Cool Death's a salve
Which all may have
There's no distinction in the grave;
Lay down your loads before deaths iron door,
Sigh, and sigh out, groan once, and groan no more.

Ha! thou come to challenge: but thou art spirit,
I cannot wound thee. Stay some few short minutes,
Till I have quite undressed me of my flesh;
And stand on equal terms, then I will fight.
Else if thou can, kill me; and take my flesh;
Then I'll kill thee again. Thus over and over
Wel'l kill each other and be ghosts by turns.

My anger is not high: I only guess
He comes to show the way to following ghosts.

I gave him once a house, my most remote,
Perchance 'tis in Elysium, he invites me.

But Morphe stands as if she bid me come
Like a clear spirit fitly to salute her.

Why should that sight fling Ice into this heart?

and Fug. O horrid!

Come what will, I can but die.

Hath this shrewd Scholer conjured up these ghosts?

I see you are amazd; the snares of death
Are tangled on your hands: you think these sights
A pair of ghosts; feel, and when you feel them
True flesh, alive and warm, next you must know
They are a token sent from Prudentius.

How? from Prudentius? hath he raised the dead
And wretched both at once? and sent me Morphe?

And given me hope again? a dainty show,
Who'ere contrived it.

Be thou shade or substance,
Since thou appear'st in such a lovely shap,
My soul I'e mingle with thine airy hand,
And strive to suck from thence the hated poison.
But soft, I may do rashly.

Know once more,
These are not ghosts, nor ever were; but live
Preserved with care, and sent with love from him,
Whom ye refused, your King Prudentius.

By heaven, true flesh and warm.

Why speaks not Hope If he have breath?

Speak: free us from thy blood,
For which we have been angry with our selves.

Speak, if thou can, thou must.

I feared to startle
Unsettled heads with unexpected speech.
High Mistress, your distracted grief for me
Had almost killed me when I was recovered.

I am recovered by this voice.
Then tell me
Thy preservation.

Audax and Irato
Know how they left me.

Kill us for amends:

Alas your death's would profit me no more
Then mine could you: but gracious Intellectus
Found and relieved me, while Sir Amorous
Carried in Morphe.

Him I took up gasping
Tempered like Ice before it thaw and crack,
In such a glimmering state of doubtful life.
As Candles have before they blaze and vanish.

These ropes will all be mine.

And her I saved.
By looking on her mixed and poysnous physic.
The simples I extracted, and gave out
The same effect which likely would have follow'd.

Pardon my fault, I nothing mixed but love,
Those villains added poison.

Heaven forgive
As I forgive you all.

Give me some poison,

Although I love thee not
Beyond an honest man, I cannot see
Thee die neglected.

What a coil is here
With ghosts? I cannot take my rest for ghosts.
People, you're welcome to this world. How fare
My fellow sleepers, ghosts, your Countrymen.

Thank not my care for this, but thank Prudentius;
Ask not what Genius sent me to relieve
Expiring Hope, it was Prudentius:
Ask not what star compelled my timely visit
Of Morphe poyson-trap'd, it was Prudentius.
From him proceeds their preservation;
And yours in them. Snatched from the jaws of death
As lights blown in again you live through him.
This is your cast-away, your dross, Prudentius.

I think we wronged him in our heedless anger.

And yet his love seems payment for desert.

How shall I rule this crazed and tottring State?

I smell in what half point the wind is turning.
One breath will carry all the Passions
Back to Prudentius sails. Now for a fetch.
Well, I'll prevent them all. Call back Prudentius,
Let's sue to him for grace.

Call back Prudentius.

Tis quickly done. If this way lead to peace
I opend it; but still I would stand safer.
Audax, you have a Drum. Now do not you
And Lord Irato end your business sneaking.

Liveby you kept the Crowns: go with him Amorous,
Carry his own: I ne'er esteemed the Golden.
I can be Queen alone, and govern subjects.
Of mine own making; more, then Kings can muster
Or Earth bring forth.

I'll take Recorder Memor
To lay our suit in form. Then on our knees
We will beg to serve him so, even so forever.

Come, to our old new Sun.

He's in his Court;
And now me thinks his presence guilds the walls.

Though weak we will go along.

Weak legs can kneel.

This peace of mine own banquet le assume
And walk in penance of a solemn halter.

I'll go some nearer way, and recompense
My forward breach with much more forward duty.
For this Event spun out by Intellectus
Makes me think honesty may weigh with cunning.
Some sheep, some Fox will make a perfect man.
However, me thinks, these Sword-men might compound
Our Peace in Arms, and plead with violence.

Without a Seizin no possession.
Your Crown is undefiled, untouched.

Place thou
The world in my balance, place in theirs
All Levity, then weigh them both. Next tell me
How ended those commotions which arose
Betwixt the third King Henry and his Rebels?

He sentenced his Metropolis to flames
Their goods to his Exchequer, and their lives --

No more. Should I do so? do not I know
What dooms have passed upon untrusty
Lawyers? --

I Sink before your mercy, be it like Henries.

Kneeling is but a Subjects Complement. I sink.

And I.

we might have stayed to hear What means this Drum.

-- We have descried a Fleet;
And therefore called to arms.

Submissively
We prostrate our repentance with a suit,
That I and Audax may decide in Duel
Who shall be sacrificed for both to justice,
And the Survivor may be General.

The Fleet which you suspect, is your defence;
Unknown to you I sent it forth to guard
This Island from the dangers you have called,
By Tumult, Lust, Debate, and Discontent.
As for your Duel, 'tis a Savadg fury
By us forbid. But you have lately tried
A new found Duel, (was it honourable?)
Two upon one. Or was it Captain like
To kill a friend? In any likely way
Hope would have further'd Audax: but when boldness
Grows impudent it turns a foe to Hope.

King of Affections: --

Queen of Inventions. --

Unless you think your self beholding to me
You are not fit to be my King. The
Passions
I have so suffered in absurdity,
That now they beg your reign which they shook off.

I see there is some mirth in misery.

I kneel unto your grace to use me so,
As one that hath been Queen, and yet no Queeen,
Rather a show then Sovereign. I walked
But in mock-majesty. Say it were true,
I sought it not, and what is worth a taking
If not a Kingdom?

Down my frolic joints,
Kneeling is now in fashion. Down, down Fuga;
Concupiscence and Melancholico
Favour your selves with kneeling.

I kneel not
To thee, but to thy power; I kneel to thee
But not adore thee.

Pardon.

-- Thus attired
I wear my sentence. Sir, I can but offer
That power of doom which I my self might take.

If you ask pardon, ask it of your
Prince;
For I nor am, nor will be.

Royal Sir,
Why have you given us lives, if not to take
Or to preserve them?

Hope, speak for us Hope.

Be pleased thou god on earth.

I likewise join
In this request.

I'll send them Epimetheus
My Brother Afterwit; and he shall rule them.
Those fools whom Prudence cannot prerestrain,
The lash of Afterwit brings home again.

We will die upon this place.

And each man turn
To his own grave.

Do, and do not burden
Me with new cares for new Rebellion.

We groan unto you?

Why? for here are many
That would be Kings, Amorous, this gay thing,
Which overlookes a
Kingdom, may command
All Choice of pleasure: take it for that use:
No? then Malevolo to devour your flock,
To engross the Elements, and let none breath
That may resist, and only spare a few
That may for fear do service, i'st not glorious?
Work with this Engine. No? are you grown modest?
Then Desperato, what a life it is
To have the power of hanging, or of causing
Some to prevent the gallows in their prison.
What, hang your head so dully at a Crown.

This is to offer Sallets unto dogs.

Irato, anger is a Kings perfection
As roaring is the Lions. When his eye
Darts lightning, when he snaps his dagger hard
Cries hah and starts, doth he not then seem god like,
And well deserve the name of Thunderer?
Be thou that Jove. Not you? Then Captain Audax.
You took great pains to win, now wear this Crown.

Any but yours I would.

Could ye get Crowns
Abroad as soon as pull off one at home,
Ye should be Kings or Deputies all over.
Now there can be but one: would that be Memor.

In all records I find no Lawyer Crowned.

A Lawyer needs it not: to pen the Law,
And then interpret it as much as making.

Fancy you must be troubled once again
With this bright load.

I loathed it at the first.
Grant me the Sovereignty of changing fashions,
Promotion of new Projects, leave to wear
Such Coronets at these, I ask no more.

When I am King, be this thy Royalty.
Poor Diadem, since here thou can not get
A Master, lye thou there for the next commer,
Or sink into thy Oar. -- None stoop
to take thee?
What all refuse, I once refused of all
Am fit to wear.

Long live Prudentius.

Then once more chained in Gold, I'll bear your burden.
Henchforth to awe your folly, be assured,
None of your crooked actions words or looks
Hath escaped my notice. They camefresh unto me
With tongues of spirits: But I'll leave the chiding
To your own Conscience. Now, thus reconciled,
I'll pardon your deserts, cannot reward them.
If you expect in sign of peacesome matches
You are deceived. Amorous shall not wed
Morphe, without a fair probation.
And Timorous I forbid; such must not marry
As have no mettle, least they spoil their race.
But Melancolico and Concupiscence
Shall keep their state; in the suburbs, or new-England.
Now rise. For show of future correspondence,
Rank your selves friendly with your opposites. --

I live not by my line of life, but yours.

Love is a willing Passion, full of sweetness,
But not so serviceable as loyal hate;
This loves with zeal and with comparison,
Works against all for one. to serve your State
Let others love, whilst I for you shall hate;
My self, if that you please; and others so,
That hate with virtue hand in hand shall go.

Tis well, tis very well. Live as you look,
Irato bear the Sword: I'll view them all.
Thus betwixt love of good, and hate of ill.
With slight of this; and chaste desire of that,
With sadness to be wise, joy for good ends
Boldness for just attempts, Fear of unfit;
Hope for true peace, despair of nothing less
Then mere Impossibilities, we will walk
To Immortality upon those lines
Which a wise Princes breast nought else defines.

BY this short Model of self-policy,
We find what use of Outward Sovereignty.
The Isle is settled, rage of Passion, laid,
And Fancy stoops to Prudence. Things so staid,
Our Scene which was but Fiction now is true;
No King so much Prudentius as you:
Whose Rule is Reason, Throne the heart; And now
No souls so Passionate as we; that bow
Both with the weight of Duty and of Debt.
Henceforth our hearts all motion shall forget
But yours. Your Rule alone is fit to sway;
Yet we no less your benefits obey.
Twixt both, our loyalty will nameless prove;
That makes it Virtue, these will have it Love.
THe Isle is settled, Rage of Passions laid
Fancy to Prudence bows. Let all be staid
In your Acceptance too, and then each breast
Will cease its Floating, and as firmly rest
As doth our Scene. One Passion still would prove
An Actor when the Scene is shut, Our Love.

