Most Sacred Sir, TIme on his bended knee your Pardon Craves,
Having been made a Property to Slaves;
A Stalking-horse unto their horrid Crimes,
Yet when things went not well the fault was Times.
My Fore-top held by Violence not Right,
Died the Suns Cheeks with blood, defiled the Light:
That all Men thought they eased their misery
If they could but Securely rail on me.
These Clamours troubled Time, who straight grew sick
With Discontents, as Touched unto the Quick;
And so far spent 'twas thought he could not mend,
Rather grow worse and worse; All wished his End.
Nay, was concluded dead, and worst of all
With many a Curse they Peal'd his Funeral.
Now see the Change, Since Your arrival here
Time is Revived, and nothing thought too dear
That is Consumed upon him, ne'er was he
So Iov'd and prayed for since his Infancy.
Such is the Vertual Fervour of your Beams,
That not Obliquely but directly Streams
Upon your Subjects; So the Glorious Sun
Gives growth to the infant Plants he smiles upon.
Welcome Great Sir unto your Peoples Love
Who breath their very Souls forth as You move.
Their long and tedious Sufferings do expres
'Till now they ne'er had Sense of Blessedness.
The Cheer'd-up-Citizens cease to Complain,
Having Received their Cordial Sovereign.
Among the Rest the Skinners Company
Crowd to express their Sense of Loyalty
And those born deaf and dumb and can can but see
Make their hands speak Long live Your Majesty:
Whose Royal Presence cures the Wounded State
Re-guilds Times Coat, and gives a turn to Fate.

Most gracious Sovereign, BOund by allegiance, Truth, Daughter to Time
(Long since abused) Welcomes you to this Clime,
Your Native Soil, to which you have been long
A Stranger; Now Truth should not want a Tongue,
Although she hath been Murdered by Report
She's now Camp-Royal and Attends your Court;
And as in Rules of Strict Divinity,
He that desires the Judges Clemency,
Must first Condemn himself, and so prepare
His way for Pardon, 'tis your Kingdoms Care;
Who do confess whilst other Nations strove
Which should be happiest in your Princely love,
Were so insensible of that blessed heat
A Pulse they wanted Loyalty to beat;
With Penitential tears they meet your Palm
Showing a Loyal Tempest in a Calm.
Then from your Rays of Majesty they do
Derive such Joy speaks no less Wonder too,
Children that hardly heard of such a thing
Now frequently do cry God bless the King.
Nay though their damned Sires instructed them
To hate the Cask'net yet they'll love the Jem;
Such is your Radices that you Refine
Sublunar things to Species more divine.
You have new Coined all hearts, and there Impressed,
Your Image which gives Vigour to the rest
Of their late stupid faculties that now,
They'll pass for Currant, and true Subjects grow:
The untainted Clothiers Company by me
Their Instrument, pray for your Majesty;
May you live long and happy, and Increase,
For ever Crown the harvest of your peace;
Since graciously you have deceived Our fears,
Instead of Wars brought Music of the spheres.

Most Mighty Sir, FAme, that ne'er left you at the worst Essay,
Welcomes you home, and Glorifies this day:
You whose blessed Innocence and matchless Mind
Could ne'er be stained or any ways Confined,
Has stood the Shock of Fortunes utmost hate
And yet your Courage did Outdare your Fate;
That even those Fiends (for sure none else could be
Your Enemies) admired Your Constancy;
Commending that they most did Envy, so
Against their Wills your Fame did Greater grow:
And when those Miscreants against you did prepare,
And thought You Sure, Your wisdom broke the snare.
'Twas strange that through the cloud none could descry
A Spark of that fulness of Majesty.
But Heaven that Orders all things as it list
Shut up their Eyes in an Egyptian Mist.
You have past many Labyrinths, are Returned
Now to Your People who long time have Mourned;
The want of Your warm Beams they have not known,
A Summer since your Father left his Throne;
That like the benumbed Muscovians they now run,
With eager hast to meet their Rising Sun;
And if the Rout in Uproar chance to be,
It cannot be Judged but Loyal Mutiny;
Since that You do their Golden Times Revive,
They to express a Joyful Salve strive;
Blessed Prince thrice Welcome is the general Cry,
And in that speaks the Grocers Company;
To which the present Mayor a Brother is,
Whose Loyalty finds happiness in this,
This Royal Change, Fame now shall spread his Wing,
And of your after Glories further sing;
Since in Your self You are a History
A Volume bound up for Eternity.

THE Chamber Windows and Penthouses to be covered with Tapestry, or such
hangings as may glorify the day.

The Streets from the South end of the old Jury, to Temple Bar, are railed on
both fides the way where convenience will permit; The several Companies in
their Livery gowns and Hoods, with Banners and Streamers lane the Streets, in
expectation of his Majesties Approach, from the great Conduit to Temple Bar.

The Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and their Retinue, are all mounted and divided into
two Bodies, several choice persons out of the several Liveries in Plush Coats
and gold Chains ride also.

The Gentlemen of the Artillery completely armed.

Threescore and twelve of the Sheriffs Officers mounted in Scarlet Cloaks, and
Javelins in their hands, divided into a Van and Reer-guard from and to
Whitehall.

The main Body is ranked out two by two consisting of the two City Marshals and
their twelve Attendants, eight Waits in Scarlet coloured Jackets, with the
Cities Badge on their Sleeves, and Cloaks with silver lace one Quartermaster,
Mr. (...) carrying the great Banner of England, after him 26 Gentlemen of the
black Robe, that is to say, beginning with the two Secondaries, and ending with
the Common Sergeants.

Then the City Waits in their gowns and silver Chains, one Quartermaster, one
Conductor; The Common-hunt carrying the Kings great Banner, and the Water
Bailiff on the left hand of him, carrying the Cities Banner; after them the
Town Clerk, and Mr. Chamberlain, the Common Crier and Sword bearer; after them
the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen.

Then six Trumpets and one Kettle Drum, one Quartermaster, one Conductor, Mr.
Bromley carrying the Banner with the Crest of the Kings Arms, Mr. Burt on the
left hand of him, carrying the Cities Pendent, and in the Rear of them one
carries a Pendent with the Grocers Arms; in the Rear of him 32 Gentlemen of the
said Company, and then follows 298 Gentlemen of the other 11 Companies, placed
according to their Degree: BeTween each of the said Companies is ordered 4
Trumpets, one of them carrying a Pendent with their Arms.

Note that the Grocers, Skinners, Merchant-taylors and Clothworkers, have each
of them 52 select Gentlemen to ride, the rest of the Companies but 24.

Then of the other 12 Companies consisting of 156 Gentlemen, besides 28
Trumpets, 12 Pendan^-bearers, that is to say, one Pendant-bearer and two
Trumpets between Company and Company, only the head of the Dyers Company have 6
Trumpets, and being the first of that division have a Quartermaster, Mr.
Alexander carrying the Scottish Banner, and Mr. Knight carrying a Pendant
therein.

Then ten other of the Companies, of which the Sadlers being chief, have 6
Trumpets, the other nine Companies but two a peace. To this division is
appointed 10 Pendant-Bearers, and one Quartermaster; Mr. Bancroft carrying the
Irish Banner, Mr. Blinkensop carrying a Pendant with the Cities Arms, and 164
Gentlemen in Plush Coats following.

The Seventh Division consists of the Sheriffs Officers aforesaid, with 6
Trumpets in the Front of them.

The eight is the gentlemen of the Artillery-ground, who fall in the Rear of
the Sheriffs officers.

The several Bodies being drawn out, the Officers of the Poultrey lead the Van
after them.

The Gentlemen of the Artillery after them.

The Divisions of the Black Robe after them.

The Lord Mayor and Aldermens Servitors.

After them the three Divisions of Citizens in Plush Coats, c. beginning with
the Grocers Company, and so follow in Order; the Officers of Woodstreet
Counter, being the Reer-guard.

In this Order and Equipage, the whole Body moves through the Old Jury,
Cheapside, Paul's Church-yard, Ludgate, and so to Whitehall, the Gentlemen of
the Artillery Ground guarding one side of the way, and the Gentlemen of the
long Robe the other, through which the Lord Mayor and Aldermen with their
retinue pass to Whitehall; the elder Aldermen face about, and the Chamberlain,
Town Clerk, Swordbearer, Common Crier, Common Hunt, Water-bailiff, c. match up
to the head of the youngest Aldermen, and there place themselves.

The Gentlemen of the Artillery, and Poultrey Counter, Poultrey Officers quit
their ground, and fall in the Rear of the Woodstreet Officers, c.

His Majesty attended with the Lords of the Upper House, the Commons in
Parliament, Lords of His Majesties most honourable Privy Council, Barons,
Viscounts, Earls, Marquesses and Dukes, the Lord Mayor, Lord Chamberlain, Lord
Chancellor, the Lord Treasurer, the highly accomplished Princes the Dukes of
York and Gloucester; takes His Way for Guildhall; and at Fleetstreet Conduit
makes a stand, where He is received by a person, representing Time in a very
glorious Pageant, who Addresses himself to His Majesty on his knee in the
manner aforesaid.

And so His Majesty, the two Dukes, and the rest of the Noble Retinue and
Gentlemen, pass on to Paul's Church-yard, where they are entertained by another
Pageant, very much amplified and adorned, in which is seated Truth, who makes
her Address as aforesaid.

Another Pageant presents its self at Foster-lane, being a large and goodly
Fabric, a Trumpeter pl^ced on the Top, where it was intended Fame should
speak* But at the great Conduit in Cheapside, Fame presents her Speech.

At Paul's Chain is another Pageant in the Nature of a Droll; where is presented
the Figure of Industry, and the Carders and Spinners, in relation to the
Clothiers Company.

At Cheapside Cross another Droll, where Pretty and the Tumblers play their
Tricks.

A lane made from the Northwest corner of the little Conduit, toward the great
Conduit as aforesaid, through which the whole body pass, consisting of the
gentlemen of the black Robe, and Aldermen into Guildhall yard. The Sheriffs
Officers dismount at the North end of St. Lawrence Lane, delivering their
horses to be conveyed towards Woodstreet, in Order to his Majesties Retreat
after Dinner, and themselves betake them to their several Services in the Hall.

The Peers and Commons dismount at Guidhall gate, and by the Conductors are
directed to their several Rooms for Entertainment. Their Coaches are driven
through Aldermanbury, Cripple-gate, White-Cross-street, Finsbury, c. in regard
of their Number.

The Lord Mayor, Lord Chamberlain, Lord Chancellor* Lord High Steward, Lord
Treasurer, the two Dukes, and His Majesty ride up to the Porch of the Hall
before they light.

Carpets are spread from the Hall door to the Retiring Room for His Majesty to
tread upon, where the Conductors make a Lane to pass.

The Master of the Horse, and Captain of the guard also ride into Guildhall
yard, and dispose of themselves c.

Note that the Secretaries, Clerks of the Council, Clerks to both Houses, the
gentlemen of the Bedchamber, the Masters of Requests, the Master of the
Ceremonies, Yeoman of the Mouth, the Sewer, the Carver, and the Butler to his
Majesty, are admitted into the Hall and no other.

The new Council Chamber in Guildhal, is appointed for His Majesties Presence
Chamber, and Banqueting room.

The Old Council Chamber, Orphans Court and Lobby, ornamented accordingly, is
ordered for Reception of the Lords of the Council, Judges, and other Nobility.

The Majors Court for entertainment of the House of Commons.

In the Great Hall. [His Majesties Table.]

The Hasting towards the West is appointed for his Majesty and his Royal
Brothers to dine at, where a Chair of State, and other Ornaments answerable are
placed.

The part of the Hall lying between the Eastside of Little Ease, and his
Majesties Hasting Eastward, appointed for the House of Peers, Lords of the
Council, and Judges to dine at, c.

At the West part of Little Ease in Guildhall (ornamented accordingly) the
House of Commons are to dine.

Notice given that His Majesty and the rest are in their several retiring
Rooms, every Officer, according to his Condition and Quality, employs himself,
the Conductors placing the Servitors (being clad in Plush) side by side from
each Dresser to their several fables, on which they are to attend.

At the sound of the loud Music, the whole service is immediately set on each
Table.

The Lord Majors and Sheriffs Officers are divided into Parties, and placed as
Servitors to each Table.

Note that all the Servitors wear his Majesties Colours on their Arms.

His Majesty during Dinner time, hath several Musical Complisances both
Instrumental and Vocal.

That ended, His Majesty and the rest retiring, is presented with a Banquet.

After which his Majesty being ready to depart, the gentlemen of the Artillery,
c. placed from the South end of the Old Jury, to the West end of Cheap-side,
with Trophies and Trumpets, receive his Majesty, being placed on the left hand
the Street, the several Companies on the right.

The Lord Major, Aldermen, and whole body attending his Majesty to Whitehall,
the Lord Mayor hath the honour to wait on him into the Presence Chamber, In the
interim the gentlemen of the Artillery, and the rest prepare for their retreat
expecting his Lordships return, which being discovered, a volley is given, and
every man departs to his home.


