DECLAMATIO IN LAVDEM nobilissimae artis medicinae.

A Declamation in the praise and comedation of the most high and excellent
science of Phisyke / made by the right famous clerk doctor Erasmus of
Rotherdam / and newly translated out of Latin into Englyshe.

CUM PRIVILEGIO REGALI.

The praise of Phisyke.
THe ofter the science of phisyke with curious and laboured oratios hath been
here in this place before ye more {per}t of you comed, Attecion
that of men of singular eloquence (most noble audience) so much surely the
less trust and confidence have I, that I shall either satisfy so great a
thing, or answer to the expectation of your delicious ears. For neither a
thing in manner divine, our rude infancy shall easily attain, nor a vulgar
and come oration of a thing so oftentimes herd may in any wise escape
painful tediousness to the hearers. But yet, lest I shulde seem to be
defectyfe, disobediet to the right wholesome ordinance of our fathers, which
have judged it mete and expedient with solemn orations the hertes and
courages of youth to be awakened, kyndeled, and inflamed to the study,
admiration and love of this noble science / my self also purpose to assay, to
my power (if so be your attetifnes and gentleness will vouchesaue to help me in
my speaking, tenderly fauorynge whom your authority has driven to take this
office upon me) of the right excellent science of phisike the dignity, the
authority, The proposition,
profit and necessity, I will not say to open and expound, which were
utterly an infinite business, but in a brefe sum only to knyt up, and as it
were to show to the sytes of the studious youth a glymmeryng (as a man might
say) through a lattes^e window of the most copious and pleteful treasours of
a rich queen. Per transennam.
Of whom truly this (if there were nothing else) is a sovereign and excellent
praise, first that she neadeth not at al that any ma should her commend or set
forth, being set forth sufficiently of her own self with the utility, The
excedynge praise of this science.
and profit, which makynde takes by her, and also by the necessity and need
that we have of her. Secondarely that where as she hath ben already so oftymes
of excellent wytte^ commended, yet she finds of her self always to wits
also that be not very pregnauut new matter to praise her, so that it neadeth
nothing to praise here (after the come usage) with envious and hateful
comparisons not without the prejudice and slander of other lernynges and
crafts. Nay rather this thing is more to be feared, lest her own propre and
domestic gifts and qualities, lest her natural and germane amplitude,
left her majesty greater than is man estate and capacity, no mortal
man speech of tongue can compass or attain. So that she neadeth nothing
at all to be auansed and lifted up, other with any despiteful rebukes of other
crafts, other with some borrowed and painted colours of the rhetoricians, or
with the iugglynge castes of amplificacions. It appertains to mean beauties,
A sentec^
by comparison of the fowler, or by gorgeous deckynge and payntynge, to be
set forth and commended. But things truly and of them selfes excedyngly
and passing beautiful, it is enough to have showed them ye naked to the eye.

For now first of al (to haste us to The dignity and the auctoritie of
phisike.
our matter) the other scieces I can not deny because there is none of them but
hath brought some great commodity and profit to the life of ma, have ben in
high pryse and reputation. But of phisike in times passed so woderful to
mankynde hath ben the invention, The inuecion of phisike.
so sweet the experience that the authors and first inuentours thereof, have
other ben taken plainly for gods (as Apollo, Apollo.
and his son Aesculapius) ye rather, Aesculapius.
as Plinie witnesses, every thing invented in this faculty and science was a
cause sufficient to deify and make gods those that ware the inuetours, or at
lest, they were esteemed worthy of heuely and divine honours, as Asclepiades,
Asclepiades.
whom the I^iricans receyuyng in manner as a god, gave him eagle honour with
Hercules. Surely I do not allow that the antiquity did in this thing, The
zele of y^ old fat^er toward phisicias
but yet I can not but praise and commend their affection, zele and judgment,
which ryghtly both thought and declared that to a konnyng and faithful
phisicion no sufficient nor worthy reward can be yielded. For, if a man
rec^unteth with him self, howe many-fold diuersite there is in the bodies of
ma, how great variety of ages, The difficult of phisike.
of male and female, of regions, of ayers, of education, of studies, of
customs, howe infinite difference in so many thousands of herbes^ (though I
speak nothing at this time of the other remedies) which grow in sondry
countrees, some in one place and some in an other, Than how many kinds of
diseases, which Plinie writes were rekened up in old time iii.hondreth by
their names, beside the members and parts of every kind, of which al, howe
innumerable a multitude there is, he shall easily guess which only knows
howe many forms and fashons the fevers or ague hath (so that of one the
residue may be esteemed) beside those which daily increase new and new, nor
none otherwise increase, than if of purpose they seemed to have taken upon them
open wars with our craft. Beside, more than a thousand peryls of
poysoninges of which howe many sorts there be even so many kinds of dethes
therbe, requiring as many differetes of remedies, Beside the daily casualties
of falls, Casualties.
of ruynes, of bra^tynges, of brennynges, of wrestynges out of joint, of
wounds and such like which in manner do compare in number with the very rought
of diseases, finally he yt ponders with hi self, The knowledge of Astronomy is
requisite to a physician
how great difficulty is in the observing the heuenly Planetes which, oneles
the physician knows, aftentymes that shall be a poynson which is give for
remedy. I will not here rehearse the oft desceyuable tokens of diseases, other
whether ye behold the hauour of the colour, or enserche the signs of the
urine or observe the harmony of the pulse, eue^ as who shulde say the evils
of mankynde were all to gether bent and set to deceive and mock their
enemy the physician. So great a quantity of difficulties and hardenesses on
every side come about and ouersprede them selves that it is harde for me them
all with my words to compass. But, as I began to say, al these varieties of
things with study to attain, these obscur^ties with wit to comprehende^
these difficulties with labour to overcome, and persyng through the bowels of
the earth, bultynge out every where the preuities of al the hole nature, out of
all herbs, shrubs, trees, beastes^ precious stones ye finally out of eve the
very venyms poisons, to al the evils of mas life, lively effectual remedies to
s^ke, of these the right due vs^ out of so many authors, so many scieties ye
even out of the very sterres plants to fetch, These I say so hid, with
care to rote out, so harde, with the powers of the mind to win, so many, with
memory to compass, so necessary to the preseruacio of al makynde to bring
forth abroad, do it not seem utterly beyond mans compass, plainly a certain
divine thing? Phisike is a certain diuyn thig.
Let no man have envy at my saynges. Suffer me boldly to speak that which is
true as the euangel, I do not boste my self, but I extolle magnify the very
sciece. The effect of physike.
For if to give life is the propre peculiar benefit of god, surely to keep
preserve it when it is ones give, and to retain it still when it is even now
fleing away, we must of necessity confess to be a gyfte and benifite next
unto gods, howe be it not so much as yt former benefit which we will have
appropriate only to god, the plucked not away from the phisiciens cra^te,
which antiquity although they were light of credence geuyng, yet vndowtedly
they were full of gratitude and kyndnes. For by the help of that worthy
phisicion Esculapius, It was thought in old time that the cra^t of physicians
raised the deed again to life.
it was thought in old time that Tyndarides and after him many mo returned
forth out of hell into life and light again. Xanthus an historiographer leuyth
to us in w^ittyng that a yonge Lyon which was slain, and also a man whom a
dragon had killed were restored again to life by the virtue of a certain herb
which they called Ha^in. More over one Iuba witnesses that in A^rike a
certain {per}soon was called again to life by an herb. Iuba.
Nor I do not greatly pass although some persons perauenture will give little
credence to these. Surely (the thing that we go about) these wonder^ull
effects of phisike do so much the rather augment and increase the admiration
of the science, the more that they appear to be beyond the credens of the
truth and they constrain men to grant that thing to be of an incomparable
excellency, which in manner seem to surmont the truth. Howe be it concerning
him which is restored to life, what recks it, whether the soul be put again
by gods hadworke into the forsaken lymmes, or by the craft a^d cure of the
phisicion, the life or soul of ma utterly buried as it were in the body and
oppressed with the powers of the disease which like a coquerour has gotten
the upper hand, be raised and subtly fetched out hold still, which else should
without fail forth with have departed away? be not these two thiges in manner
of like virtue and egal power, to restore the deed, and to save him which by
and by should have dyed ^But Plinie rehearses very many and that by name in the
seueth book of the history of the world, Plinie.
which after ^hey were deed and borne out on the bear revived again partly
in the very pit where as they should be buried or (according to the usage of
the country in the pyle of wode wherein they shulde have been burned, which
pyle was called of them Rogus) partly they revived many days after they were
deed and before any burial. This we take for a miracle and a wonderful thing /
which a chance and a casualty hath given to a few. And is not it than much
more to be wondered of / which daily our science gives to many? howe be it I
can not deny but the goodness of god is to be thanked for this our science, to
god we owe it / to whom, there is nothing but that we owe^ lest perchance a
man would think these to be spoken more presumptuously and arrogantly than
truly. Of many diseases such is the violence and strenght, that death is
certain oneles the present help of the physician be at hand, as that kind
of trance which is wont to chaunc^ most to women, and as a deep and profound
syncopis, the palsay, with such^ like. Nor there is commonly none but that ones
in his time other sees or hears of such examples of what nation so ever he
be. He than which in this case drives away death which even now hangs
over the patients heed and ready to stryke with his dart, he (I say) that thus
calls again life suddenly oppressed / is not he always to be had and
reputed in a manner as a certain merciful god? yes vndoutedly. Howe many men,
think ye, were buried before their day in old time before or the witty
invention of physicians had found out the strengthes of diseases the natures
of remedies? howe many thousands of men at this day do live and farewell
which shulde never have ben borne oneles the same our craft had invented
as well remedies for so many dangers of chyldbaryng, as the feat polecie of
mydwyuyng? So eve forth with in the very entry into life as well the woman that
lies in and laboureth^ as the child that is in bearing with lamentable voice
cry for the wholesome aid of phisicias. To the phisicias craft he owes his
life, ye which as yet hath not received life, while thrugh it abortions be
prohibeted, whyl power is give to the woman of receiving reteinyng mans sede,
finally while the power also of deleuering and brynging forth the child into
this world is give. That if it be truly spoken of them in old time. Deus est
iuuare mortale, that is to say. A Latin proverb.
To help mortal men, is to be a god or ye pro{per}te work of a god, truly i
my mind yt noble proverb of the Greeks (...) which is, A Greak proverb.
that man is a god to man, other hath no where his place, or upon a faithful
and good physician it shall be principally verified and have place, which not
only helps, but also saves And is not he than an exceeding vnkynd person and
in manner unworthy to live which phisike the second (next god) parent of life,
the defendresse, the saueresse, the protectress can not find i his hart to
love, to honour, to magnify, to worshipe? Of whose aid and socours there is
no person but needs continually, for o^ the rest of crafts neither we all,
nor yet always have nede^ but in the profit and vtilite of this, al the hole
life of man stands, for imagine diseases were gone, imagine prosperous health
to be with every one, yet how shall we keep it, oneles the physicyon taught us
the diuersite of wholesome and vnholsome meates, oneles he taught a way and a
form to diet our selves? Age is a grievous and painful burde to mortal
creatures, which to escape is no more lawful for us than death it self.
Phisicia^ craft kepeth back age.
But yet this age through the help and payne of the phisicion chaunseth to
many men, both later tha it shulde else have done^ and also much more easelier
and lighter. For it is no fable, that by the quinte essentie (as they call it)
agednes driven away, man doth floryshe and wax a yonge man again by casting
a way (as it were) his old skin, since there be both in writtynges and other
wyses, many records of the same. Nor again not only of the body which is
the viler part of man this our craft takes cure, nay rather it takes the
cure of the hole man^ although that the divine and professor of Theology
shall take his beginning of the mind, and the phisicio of the body. For
truly, The physician cures the hole ma.
because of the most straight alliance and knot of familiarity of them
twain to gether, like as the vices of the mind do redownde into the body, so
again on the other half the diseases of the body other do let, or else do
utterly quench the streght and power of the soul. who is so styffe and
strong an entyser and mover of abstinence^ of sobrenes^ of mesuryng ire, of
fleing heuynes, of eschuyng surfete, of casting away love, of refraining the
lust of body, as is the physician? who more lyueshely and effectually
counsels the syckman that if he will live and feel the wholesome help and aide
of the physician that first he repurgeth his mind from the filthynes of vices?
The same physician so oft as he by giving and prescribing a form and manner o^
diet, or by ministering of medicines do minishe the colar or black Iaundies,
refresh the feeble powers of the heart, underset the spirits of the brayne^
pourge the instruments of the mind, mend the wit, repair the habitation of
the memory, and change the hole ha^our of the mind into better, do he not by
the outward man (as they cal it) save also the inward? He yt restores the
frantyke, the mad man^ the lethargike, ye siderate, the lymphat do he not
restore the hole man? The diuins effect and work is, that men convert them
selves from vices, but the physician brings to effect that there may be one
that may convert him self and forsake his evil living. In vain were he a
physician for the soul, if the soul already be fled, for whom the salve was
prepared^ when the palsay, the apoplexia, or any other sudden scourge do take a
wicked man which disease will sooner take life away tha suffer him to think of
the amendemet of his life he that restores this person which else shulde have
ben miserably buried i his synfulnes, doth he not i manner cal back again from
hell both body and soul? Surely he sets again the man i that plyght state,
yt now it may be in his election wheter he will flee or not eternal damnation,
what shall the divine persuade the person that raves, or is i such taking that
his wittis senses be clean taken from him, if he can not hear him that goes
about to persuade and counsel him? what shall the preacher or the curate move
the frantyke, if the phisicia do not first of al repurge the colour? Charity
and the other virtues wherein the felicity of a christia mans life doth stand
hinge chefely and principally of the mind I deny not, but hycause this mind
being so knit and copeled with the body must of necessite (will he or will he
not) use the instrumetes corporal, it comes to pass that a good {per}t of a
good mind doth depend upon the nauour teperature of the body. An unhappy
temperature of the body which we cal commonly a complexion (the Greakes cal it
crasis or sistema) draws many men to synfulnes yea in manner against their
wills stroggelyng wra^tyng against it, The phis^cia doth a nende an evil
complexion.
while the mynd^ which ^ytteth on the horse back gydeth the brydel i vain,
dig the spurs in vain but maugre his will is constrained to follow heedlong
the wyld and furious horse. I grant it is the power of the mind which sees,
it is the power of the mind which hears, but yet if any infirmity take the
eyes, if th^ poores and is^ues of the ears be stopped besieged with any gross
humour, i vain al for nought has the mind his power. The mind hates, ye
mind is angry I agree well / but yet the vicious corrupt humour beseging the
orgas or instruments of the mind is the very cause why thou hate hi whom
thou iugest worthy to be beloved and art angry with him with whom thou would
not. Plato confesses the sum chief of philosophie to consist and lye here in,
Plato.
if the affections obey the reason, but to bring this matter about the physician
is the chief helper whose work and labour it is that that part of man shulde
have his strength and savour by whose arbitrament and guidyng al things be
done, which be done well and laudable If they be judged unworthy to bear the
name of man which after the fashion of brute beasts be drawn and carried with
lusts and sensualities, surely than we owe to the phisicias a great part of
the worthynes of this name^ which being an high and great thing in private
and common persons, howe much more greater and nobler benefit is it being
wrought in a prince. A physician most necessary to price^
None estate is more encombered with such evils than the estate of most
fortunate and blessed kings. what array what busynes and mischife shall the
corrupt^ brain of one person styer? In vain may they that be of his
counsel cry out against him, thou art mad sir ^ynge, come to thy self
again, if so be that the physician with his c^afte restore not his mind and
wits again unto him, nether it willing nor feeling. I^ the Emperor Caligula
had had a trusty and fayth^ul physician, Caligula
he shulde not so with poysonynges pryue morders have raged to the great
destruction of mankynde. And for this very cause it is comely used through out
al the uacions of y^ world yt the prince keep nor abide in no place without his
phesicias wherefore the wise princes in times past have given to no sciece more
honour or reuereuce than unto phisike. The honour had in times pa^t unto
physike.
For Erasistratus (to pass over with silence the residue) nephew by the
daughters side to Aristotle for the helyng o^ king Ant^ochus was rewarded with
an hudreth talentes of Ptolomeo his son. More over also the holy escripture
of god comaundeth due honour to be had to the physician not only for the
profit and vtilite which thereby arises but also for the necessity so that
the ingratitude and vnkyndnes which is toward other well doers and weld
seruers, Honora medicum
is against the phisicia an impiety or vngodlynes, since that the phisicia as
it were the helper of divine benefit save up and defend that with his art and
sciece which god hath given to ma most dear and best, that is to say life.
we have nothing but we may thank our father and mother for it^ because by
them we seem i manner to have received the benefit of life. But we owe more in
my mind to the physician to whom we owe oftymes the thing which we owe only
but ones to our paretes, if yet we owe any thing at al unto them. we owe
charity and a certain natural zele to them which drive away the enemy from
our neck, and do we not owe much more to the physician which for our health
and preservation fyghteth daily with so many mortal capital ennemies of our
life? we adore worship kings even like gods, because it is thought that they
have power of life and death, which yet although they may kill yet surely they
can none otherwise give life but in as much as they bereave and take it not
away, ^uen as we say that thieves do save those men's lives whom they murder
not, nor these princes can give none other life, but the life of the body. But
howe much nearer doth the benefit of the physician approach to the benignite
and goodness of god, which draws even out of the mouths of death with his
craft, wit, cure, and faythfulnes the man which was even now destinat
appointed to the fyar of hell. In other things to profit man, we call it an
humanite or a gentylnes^ but to save a ma even in the very daungeer of body and
soul is more tha a piety or godlynes. Put here unto, that what so ever is
great and excellent in man, as lernyng, virtue the gifts of nature or what
other thing so ever it be, of altogether we thank ye art of phisike, in so
much as it saves and maintain that thing without which we could not keep
up the residue. If althynges be for man, Argume^ations.
and the physician preserves ma undoubtedly we may thank the physician for
all. If he lives not, which lives accombred with diseases, and the physician
is he which restores preserves the prosperous health is it not coueniet to
recognise hi as the paret of life? If immorta^te be a thing greatly to be
desired wished for, ye industry of the physicians doth (asmoch as may be)
counterfayt it, which with their diligence attempt to prolong i^ so far as
is possible, for what shall I here recount unto yo^ t^e comen^y known exaples,
Pythagoras / Ch^pp^s / Plato / Cato sensorius / Antonius / ^astor^ beside these
innu^erab^e other of whom the most part by the observation and marking of
phisike did prolong their life beyond an hundred years without sycknes,
neither the freshness of wit endulled nor abated, nor the surenes and styfnes of
memory not shaken, nor yet the senses brosed or enfeabled. I pray you is not
this to show as it were even now here in this preset life a certain spyse,
represetacion, or image of immortality? Also Christ selue him the only
author redeamer and conqueror of immortality toke a body upon him which
though it was mortal, Christ was never sick
yet it was combered with no disease he abhorred not the cross but he abhorred
diseases. And were it not a fair a godly thing for us, also in this part to
follow to our power our prince lord? The apostles lived in manner al a long
life, The apostles.
we read the beten, we read them slain, but we read not they were sick. By
what means so ever this thing chaunsed unto them, surely the physicians craft
parforme the same to us, which their felicity performed unto them For I count
not the worthy to be herd which no less vnlernedly than vnshamefastly are wont
to caste this in our tethes, A confutacion.
Virtus in infirmitate perficitur. That is to say, virtue is perfited in
infirmity, dreaming that Paule was combered with grievous heedage, where as he
calls the infirmity, either the temptation of the mind, or which is nygher
to the truth the bacbytyng persecution of wicked persons. But the same self
Paule, among the apostolical gifts rehearses also the gift of curing or
healing. Donu curationis.
More over this also augments the glory of phisike not a little, that as well
the majesty of the emperors laws, as the authority of poPes laws do frely
submit them selves to the judgment of physicians as in cases of nonage which
they cal pubertie, in cases of chyldbyrthes, and poisonynges, also in certain
questions touching matrimony. O a new and strange dignity of phisike. They
go upon life and death of a man, and the sentence of the judge hengeth upon the
foreiudgemet of the phisicia. The charity of the pope when he pardons any
thyng^ he pardons or license the none otherwise oneles the phesician allows
and counsels the same. Also the pope in his decrees, that bishop which is
complained upon to have any foul or horrible disease by the judgment of
phisike jugs him other to be put out of his byshopryche or else to be restored
again to his place. Also saint Augustin comedeth al things to be done by ye
advise of the physicians although the patient would not. Augustin
Also the honour which is due to the physician that is the reward of his
craft and labour the same saint Augustin writes very well yt it is wrongfully
taken away of him that with old it, as of an iniuste possessor and occupeyng
with an evil conscience that which is an others and not his, ye more over these
persons which with certain orisos and prayers made to the same purpose drive
out of men's bodies wicked spirits and devils, oftetymes take physicians with
them to have advise, as in those diseases which by pryuy and secrete means do
mar and corrupt certain organs instruments of the ^enses and spirit and do
so counterfeit a demoniacal spice, that they can not be discerned but of very
conning physicians, other whether they be certain grosser devils (as it is said
^heyr natures to be divines and sundry) which can fel^ the cure of the
physician, or whether th^ sycknes remains so deaply i the most inward
parties of the mind that it seems to be clean strange and of an other
nature^ than the body is. An example.
In prove and witness of which thing, while that I repor^ unto you of
innumerable exaples one which I saw herd my self I pray you to hear me
patiently. Panacens a physician of an excellent and renowned fame floryshed
when I was a yonge man and was of my singular acquaintance. He (I present being
witness) re^tored to health a certain person called Phlyari^s a spoletan borne
which by reason of vermyn was fall into a new kind of madness in so much yt
in his sycknes he did speak very well Dut^he which thing before when he was
hole (it was manifestly known) that he could never do. who not conning nor
scene in phisike would not styflye have sworn that this man was possessed with
some spirit? But this physician with an easy and ready remedy did restore him,
to his right mind again. And when he was ones restored again to him self, he
neither could speak nor yet understand the Dutche tongue. That if perchance
some men would contend with me and say that this man was in dede possessed
with a devil, surely this thing do most of al advance and set forth the noble
science of the physicians to which (it is manifestly proved) that the wicked
spirits do also obey, which our noble science is not only the ministre but
also the counterfettour and folower of the divine virtue and might as well in
the restorynge of life, as in casting forth spirits. Nor there lacked none
which slauderously reported that this thing was wrought by art magyke or
wytchecraft, whose slander I do turn to the great glory praise of our art
whereby those things are brought to pass which the vulgar and lay people
believes to pass mans powers. wherefore not without great just ^auses in the
old world when vile gains and foul pleasures had not as yet vitiate nor
corrupted al to gethers, The regard of phisike i old time
among all other sciences the only art of phisike was chiefly regarded of the
diuyne and most noble men, of most happy and rich princes, of most renowned
senators, nor there was no craft more acceptable to mankynde, for that great
man Moses Moses.
(as it is thought) did in his laws make distinctio of his meates by none
other wisdom or pollecie tha by the reason of phisike. Orpheus
Orpheus the most oldest of ye Greeks did bring to light many thynges^ (as it
is read o^ him) of the natures and powers of herbs. Homere.
Homere him self which was without question the only fountain of wits is
much busied both i the rehearsal of herbs and in the praise of physicians. He
also painted describes unto us Moly, The herb called Moly.
of all herbs (as Plinie witnesses) most commendable which is good and
effectual against poysonynges, the invention of which herb he assign and
attribute unto Mercurie, with this herb he arms his wise man vlysses against
the drynkes of the voytche Circe. Nepenthes.
The selue same Homer shows yt Nepethes an herb ought to be had in feasts,
by cause it drives away care and heuynes Moreover he rehearses and rekeneth up
oftymes with great honour Machaon, Machao,
Peon, Peon.
Chiron, Chiron.
Podalirius as excellent men in this faculty, Podalirius.
by whose cure and handewerke he fayneth that not only the noble the dukes and
princes were helped, but also ye gods them selves meaning without doubt and
signifieng unto us that the most high princes have need of the help and
socours of the physicians, and that the life of them is in the phisicias hand,
which in al other seem to have jurisdiction power both of life deth^ ye what
will ye say if the selue same poet in the.xi. book of his Ilias has renowned
and nobilitat the profession of this science withe the most high and singular
commendation that can be given, sayng. The only phisicia is to be had in
greater pryse and reputation than a great nombre of the rest of men, Again in
an other place he notes and makes the physician that h^ called him learned in
al things, openly testifienge that which is matter in dede that this science
do not stand in one or two lernynges but in the knowledge and circuit of al
arts, and more over (beside the exact wit) in the much ur and experience
of things. pythogoras wrote of phisik
The great clerk pythagoras of the yle of Samos to whom the people of
ancient time did attribute a certain divinity left behind him (as we read) a
noble volume of the natures of herbs. what great philosophers did study phisik
Mithridates king of Potus
And to pass over with silence Plato, Aristotle, Theophrast, Chrisippe, Cato
Censorius, and Varro, whose study it was to intermeddel this science other
with their gr^t studies or else with their great payne businesses, surly
Mithridates king of Pothus was not so greatly renowned neither by his realm
though it were never so rich, nor by the woderful knowledge of the.xxi.
strange languages which he both understood could speak as he was by the
knowledge and experience of phisike, which thing declared him a great man in
dede, which noble king (Plinie being mine author) lef^ in writtynge
commentaries, exampl^ and experiences or effects of this science. By whose
name yea even now at this day there is a soueraygne kind of triacle named.
Now comenly it i^ couted a princely pastime and mete for a noble king to play
at dyse, The (...) of old princes lords
to hunt, to do trifels. But in times passed to the princes and rulers of the
people of ^ome nothing was regarded more their care than to further the art
and science of phisike with bringing home new and strange herbs out of far
countrees, nor to that people which at that time had the dominion of al th^
world there was no manner of gift, no manner reward is more welcome and more
acceptable, Christ called hi self a phisicia^
yea what that Christ him selue the author and prince of al disciplines and
teachynges professes him self to be not a great doctor or a great
counsellour of the law, not a great Rhetorician^ not a great Philosopher, but
a great physician, while when he speaks of him self saith that they have no
neade of a phisici^n which be in helthe, and while he resembling him self
unto a Samaritan pours oil and wine into the wounds, and while he
tempering the earth with his spytel, sprede it on ye eyes of the blind man,
Christ gate the love o^ the people by hel^g their infirmities.
what that the self same Christ chiefly by this commendation what time he was
as yet unknow to the world did by little and little wind him self into the
minds and affections of men, not with gold, not with empyrs, but with the
remedies of sycknesses. The thing that he did with a beck, or with a word of
his mouth, the same the phisicia doth to his power counterfeit and follows Nor
there lacks neither to those remedies and medicines a diuyne power and
virtue, for the operatios strenghtes of healing is even from god to this very
purpos and intent given to things. Nor he hath instructed the apostles with
none other viauger more than with the gift of healing, comaundyng them that
forthwith with this desert and benefit they shulde win the favour of their
ost that lodges them, healing ({que} he) their infirmities and diseases and
anoyntyng the sick with oil. S. paule plaith ye physician
That great man Paule when he counsels his disciple Timothie to take a little
quantite of wine to stablyshe his stomach the feblenes of his brains, doth he
not openly take upon him the parts of ^ physician? But what wonderful thing is
this in the apostle, The angel Raphael.
sith the angel Raphael healynge the blyndnes of Tobie got hereby also his
name among the writters and students of divine things? O howe heuenly and
right holy is this science, Raphael is interpreted medicina de^.i. the phisik
of god.
of which the heuenly minds have their dominatio? Among mortal people some
study profess one science, some an other, but only this science ought to be
studied of al, sith it is necessary to al. But alas alas ye crooked and
perverse iugementes of me. No ma can abide to be ignorant of coin, which is
currant and lawful and which is unlawful or couterfait, lest they might
perchance be deceived in a thing most vile and of little importauce, but they
will not study to know by what skylles and means they may preserve that which
is the best thing that they have. In money they believe not other men's eyes. in
the matter of life and helthe do they blynfelde (as they cal it) follow other
men's iudgemetes? That if the absolute and parfite knowledge of the hole sciec^
can not chance but unto a few which have appointed and as I might say
dedicate their hole life to this only study, It is very expediet for every
man to learn so much phisike that he may preserve his own he^the.
at lest it were mete and convenient that of that part of phisike which
appertains to the governance and preservation of h^lth no person should be
ignorant. Although to say the truth a great part o^ the difficulty hardness
comes not of the very science but other of the bungerlynes and blind
ignorance, ^r else of the vain glory ambition of lewd phis^ias. Always ye
among the wild and barbarous nations the name of amity hath ben couted holy
and honourable, and he is take for a singular and ^ure friend which is a
copaignon and a fellow both in prosperite and in adversity because yt the
comune sort of fren^es, like as swalowes in somer, Swalowes.
so they in wealth prosperite be present and at hand, but in adversity, like
as the said swalowes against the coming of wynter^ fly away. Birds called
Se^eucides.
But howe much more sure substantial a friend is the physician which (after
the example o^ certain birds which be called Seleucides which as they say
ca^ ^o where be espi^d of the inhabitants of the mountain of Casius but when
they need their socure help against the violence and power of great
butterflies destroyng their corues / when all things be well and sauf he never
puts him self in peryl, but in such casualties in which both the wy^e the
^hildren oftentimes forsakes the man as in the fransie, the lowsy evil (which
is called Phthiriasis) and the pestilence the physician only is constantly
prese^ ^nd he is present not with an unprofitable service, as the most part of
the rest^ but he is preset to help, he is preset to fight with the sycknes for
life death of his patient, yt many times putting his own life i jeopardy. And O
more tha unkind {per}sons which preserved by the service of such a friend can
find i their hertes when the jeopardy is now drive a way to hate the phisicia do
not rather r^uerece worship hi in stead of a parenteA come friend yt bids the
good morrow, or good eve so oft as they mete hi, i^ for his kind salutatio
called to super, he yt takes the curtesly by ye arm^ him they recompense with
like kyndnes, and will they shake of such friend when they leave neadyng of him?
and for this very cause shake him of, because they {per}ceyue that they be not
able (were they never so rich) to yield due thanks unto his kind
deservings? That if he is the best man which most profit the come weal,
than surely he that covets to be best ought pricipaly to study this faculty.
A comendatio of the gains and lucre.
But now if there be any of thi^ appetite which had rather measure the prisel
of things with profit gaynage (albe it this art is more high more divine,
than that it should be esteemed by such reasons) yet I say if there be any of
that appetite which regard lucre gains, this art will give place to none other
science neither in this behalf, for there was never none more fruteful, and
auaylable, and so ready a craft to get riches sodely as this. Erasistratus.
Erasistratus of who I made mention before was as we rede in Cronicles rewarded
of king Ptolome and also Critobulus an other physician was rewarded of
Alexander the great^ with rich and in manner incredible gifts, Critobulus.
howe be it what reward can not but seem to little whiceh is given to the
saviour of the life of him for whose only life so many thousands of men did
put their bodies and lyfes in ^eopardie? what shulde I now make reher^al of
other noble physicians, as of the Cassians, the Caipitans, the Arunkes, ye
Albutis, of whom Plinie writes that they had unmeasurable gains in Rhome
as well with ye prince and emperor as with the people. How be it what search we
these histories out of old times, as though at this day every man can not
remember enough whom this science hath brought up to riches ahoue the riches
of Cresus? Rhetoric, or poetry, find none oneles he be excellent. The
musician except he be passing conyng he hath but a cold supper. The man of
law hath thine gains if he be not deeply and profundly studied. Only phisike
finds and supports him which is but so so learned. A mean sight in phisike
gets a living.
Phisike consist in innumerable disciplins, and in infinite knowledge of
things, and yet it is oft scene that one or two medicines or remedies shall
find a foal that have no lernyng at al. So that in no wise this art ca be
condemned of barennes. Put this ^o, yt of other crafts there is no ready gains
in every place. The physician where so ever he goth gets his living.
The Khetoritia may blow his nails among the Sermates. The Civil law is not
so highly esteemed in England. But the physician whether so ever he goes, in
what parts of the world so ever he kepeth hath his honour worship, his
viauger follows him. So that also the comune proverb of the Greeks can be
applied better up on no science than it is upon this, A prouerb^.
(...) ^he craftesma gets his living where ever he goes. A confutation.
But plinie or surly other yt Plinie speaks of, take great indignatio and be
highly discotented yt the profession of phisike should be a gayne^ a lucre. I
grant, this faculty is greater tha yt it should be subject seruiable to lucre
gains. I grant it is for vile occupations to serve for gains. ^ut again on
ye other side how g^eat an ingratitude, what an vnkyndnes were it to do fraud
and deprive this science only of his mede to which no due no^ sufficient mede
can be requited? A noble physician even like a certain god will save frely
without reward, he will save yea them that be unwilling to be saved but again
it is an impieti^ and an vngodlynes not to considre and acknowledge the benifite
of the godly person. He little pass on thy reward, but yet thou art worthy to
be punyshed by the laws for thy notable ingratitude. But yet this
natwithstadyng I know right well that this noble sciece hath ben evil spoken of
both in times passed among the old fathers, and also now at this day is evil
defamed among certain vnlerned {per}sons. This art pleased not Cato not because
he damned the very thing, Cato dipraysed this science.
but that he could not abide ^he vain glorious profession of the Greakes,
being him self a mere Rhomane. And he gave so much to experience, yt he wold
not have it a science. But the self same Cato judged it expedient that all the
philosophie of the Crekes were utterly expelled and banished the city, for ye
gross and hard man thought that brassica and oft vomits did suffice to purge
mans body, and yet he him self so styffe an ennemy of physicians by the
observation keeping of phisike did (as it is written of him) preserve his might
and strength hole and sound even unto his very extreme age. Also ye rude
vnlerned people cast in our teeth, that the physicians are licensed with out
punishemetes to kyl me. Mary for this cause the rather good physicians are to be
magnified and highly comed which where as it is in their hand not only
without punishment but also with mede to kyl, An objection.
yet they had rather save. That they may, i^ is a power, that they will not, it
is their goodness. It is recited now in every place at ale houses taverns among
drokardes this proverb. A proverb of ^oles.
Qui medice viuit misere^ viuit. He that lives after the rules of phisike
lives wretchedly. As though it were an happynes and felicity, the body to be
swolen and stretched out with surfettyng, to be burst wit^ the pleasu^e of
the body, to wax foggyshe with drinking of good ale, to be sepulte and drowned
in sleep. But these Sycophates and bakbyters what needs it to refel with my
oration, sith they them selves paye sufficient penalties to our art for their
skoldyng, being ^one after wrested with ye g^ut, amassed with the palsay,
dotynge and lacking their wits before the due time, waxyng blind and
blereyed before age, and tha at last being i this wretchedness they rechaunt and
singe a new songe praising (as Stesichorus did) but al to late phisyke which
before they dyspraysed. And yet to these persons though they be most unworthy,
ye goodness of the art dysdayneth not to lay to, her helping hand, and to
succour them as much as in her is. Out of Aristophanes.
There be some maligners also which borowyng a tawnt out of yt old comedy
called phisicias, scatophagos, that is to say, deuowrers of turdes. As though
for this very cause they deserved not chyefly to be praised which to the
entente they would secoure and help the miseries and calamitie^ of men, are
contented from their hyghnes and sublimity to humble themselves unto these so
vile services, but if the physicians were as scornful and dysdaynfull as these
be full of skoldyng raylyng, they might on every side dye a pace without
controllyng. But our art has this one thing comune with good kings, that it
doth good and has an evil name. And though there were most of al (as there
be) in this sort and kind of men, The leudnes of certain evil phisicias makes
not phisike to be e^yl.
which bear them selves for physicians which be nothing less tha
physicians, if there be which for remedies ministre poisons, if therbe which
for gains or vain glory do counsel their sick patietes amiss, what is more
agayn^t al reason ^quitie tha to wre^t and detort the vices of men to the
slaughter of the science? There be also among prestes auowterers and evil livers,
there be among fryers, monks, and other religious persons murderers, maquellers
and pyrates^ but what is this to the religion which is of it self the best
thing that can be devised of ma? There is no profession so holy but that
nourysheth a sort of naughty packs and ungracious fellows. It is a thing with
all vows to be wyshed^ that al rulers princes were such as becomes, them to
be which be thought worthy of this name but yet not because of this is the
office of a prince to be damned, that some under that title play the pyllers,
tyrants, an ennemies of the comune welthe. I would wish also my self that al
the physicians were, truly physicians and that the greake proverb had no
place in them. A proverb.
(...). Many dryuers of the ox, but few plowers of the earth. I wold wish y^
that holynes and purenes were performed of al physicians which the most
worthy physician Hippocrates requires o^ his scolers whom he swear with a
solepne other. S^ tu Hippocrati^
But yet we ought to endeavour our selves unto it, although we se it not
performed of the most part of them that profess this science. The epiloge or
perclos^ of this oration.
But because (O right worthy audience) the cause which I now plede hath so
great plenty and copy of matter in it, that it is very hard to find an end
of speaking, lest I shulde not perform that I promised in the beginning I
think it now due time to gather to gether i a gross sum all the praises of
it. For if so be many things are commendable only by reason of antiquity,
than surely this art or science was found, first of al other, even for very
necessity. If the science be made the noblear by reason of the first authors
and inuentours and inuentours of it, this science was ever thought to be
invented of gods. If honour adds any authority, no other science hath
deserved divine honours so universally and so lunge time. If those things be
of great reputation which be regarded and allowed of most high men / this
study hath not only delyted but also renowned and auanced most high kings
potestates. Di^sicilia quae pulchra.
If those things that be herd, be also fair and godly / there is nothing
more buysy more laborious than this, which rested i so many disciplines and in
the serchyng out and the experience of so many things If we estyme the thing
by the worthynes and dignity thereof / what thing is more excellent than that,
which goes more nyghe to the bounty of god? If by the faculty and power, what
thing is of more might and strength / than to have the power restore again the
hole man to him self which else shulde certenly have dyed? If we mesure the
thing by necessity / what is so necessary as that, with out which we can
another live nor be borne? ^f by the virtue, what is more honest, than to save
mankynde? If by the vtilite profit, the v^e of nothing is neither greater nor
wither. If by the gains and auauntage, other this sciece must needs bring
in great lucre and riches, or else men be very vnkynde^ wherefore for your causes
I greatly rejoice (o most excellent and famous in this science? A gra^lation.
whom it hath chanced to excel i this most goodly kind of profession. An
exhortation.
And you (yonge men) I exhort this science to love embrace with al your
breasts, ^pon this set your studies with all the veins of your bodies, which
shall bring unto you renown, glo^rie, authority, riches / by which ye again
on your part shall bring to your friends, to your native contre, ye and ta al
mankynde no small profit and vtilite, I have spoken.

Thus ends the declamation of Erasmus in praise and commendation of Phisike.
(...).
Imprinted at London in Fletestrete by me Robert Redman dwelling at the sign
of the George / next to Saint Dunstan church.


