OF The duty of a faithful and Wise Magistrate, in preserving and delivering
of the common wealth from infection, in the time of the Plague or Pestilence:
Two Books. Written in Latin by Iohn Ewich, ordinary Physician of the worthy
common wealth of Breame, and newly turned into English by Iohn Stockwood
Schoole-maister of Tunbridge. A Work very necessary for our time and
country, where the Plague rages so sore in many places presently, or which
hereafter shall be visited, which God forbid, if it be his will.

Psal. 41. Eccle. 7. Well is it with that man, who wisely handeleth the sick:
for at what time he shall suffer any adversity or trouble, the Lord in like
manner will help him again.

Imprinted at London at the three Cranes in the Vintree by Thomas Dawson: 1583.

To the right Honourable S. Iohn Blank, Knight, L. Mayor of the most renowned
City of London: and to the Right Worshipful M. William Fleetwood Sergeant of
the Law, and Recorder of the said City: and also to the right Worshipful,
the Sheriffs and Aldermen, with the whole state of the same city: Iohn
Stockwood Schoolmaster of Tubridge, wishes a most plentiful increase of the
spirit of wisdom, and al necessary graces, for the government of so great a
people, as may be most to the glory of God, the profit of his Church, and
welfare of the common wealth.
AS mankind naturally ever since the fall of our first parents Adam and
Heuah (right honourable and Woorshipfull) hath not ceased in it self, forsaken
of God his spirit, to grow from bad to worse, from evil to start nought, or
(as the Psalmist speaks very properly) to walk in the counsel of the
wicked, to stand in the way of sinners, (which is a thing most lamentable and
fearful) to sit in the seat of the scornful, that is, to clime those staiers,
and scale that ladder, whose steppes being sin, and staves iniquity, cannot
choose but fail them coming once to the top, and to cast them down to that
horrible downfall of perpetual ruin and everlasting condemnation: so GOD a
most just judge, and yet with all a most gentle and loving Father to such as
are his, hath used and tried from time to time all manner of means and ways,
to bring the same out of thraldom to llbertye, out of prison to enlargement,
out of misery to joy, out of pain to pleasure, out of ignorace to truth, out
of darkness to light, out of wretchedness to happiness, and out of hell to
Heaven. He hath proved and assayed all kind of remedies, wearying as it were
himself for our amendment, and hath nothing at all in a manner prevailed:
he hath myldely entreated us in the dealing of a Father, he hath seuerelye
handled us in the person of a judge. The heavens have burnt above us in
strange manner with fires, new Stars, Comets and unwonted lights: the
earth beneath us hath trembled and quaked at the judgements of GOD, as notable
any longer to bear the burden of our sins, yet man hath nothing at all been
moved. He hath plentifully sent forth his word; and great have been the
number of his Preachers: but his people have stopped their ears like the deaf
Adder, and will not hear the voice of the Charmer, charm he never so wisely.
He hath pyped unto us, Mat. 11.17.
and we have not danced: he hath mourned unto us, and we have not lamented.
He hath blessed us in the City, Deuteronomy. 28.
and blessed us in the field: he hath blessed the fruit of our body, and the
fruit of our ground, the fruit of our cattle, the increase of our kine, and
the flocks of our sheep. He hath blessed our basket, and our dough: he hath
blessed us coming in, and blessed us going out. He hath caused our enemies
that have risen against us, to fall before us, they have come out against us
one way, and have fled before us seven ways, in so much that all the
nations of the earth see this, and wonder at the same: yet cannot all this
make our Realm of England thankful. What then remains, but that, if we go
on still wallowing in our sins, adding contempt unto vnthakfulnes, as
drunkenes unto thirst, the Lord will turn al these his former blessings, unto
new unwonted curses: cursing us in the town, and cursing us in the field,
cursing our basket, cursing our store, cursing the fruit of our body, and the
fruit of our land, the increase of our kine, and the flocks of our sheep,
cursing our coming in, cursing our going out, sending upon us trouble shame, in
al that we put our hand unto, making the heaven over our head, brass; and the
earth that is under our feet, yro; smiting us with a consumption, with the
fever, with a burning ague, and with fervent heate, making the pestilence to
cleave unto us until he hath consumed us from the land, which we possess and
dwell in. For we are not so witty and cunning in committing daily and hourly
new sins, but the Lord is as expert skilful in ordeining new plagues to
correct and chastise the same withal. We see how amongst other his scourges,
sent no doubt for the amendment of his chosen, and for the warning of the
reprobate, that these are but fleabitings unto the torments that are reserved
for the in the life to come, how the plague pestilece now furiously rages
almost in every corner of this lad, a sickness that every man so greatly
trembles at, no man fears to deserve the same: a disease so usual,
especially in your most honourable city of London, that albeit it were somewhat
feared at the first, yet use hath now at length made it unto many so familiar,
that there is little more regard had of it then of any other common light malady.
A great number, among the same, some also of no small account (at leastwise in
their own judgment) contrary to reason, philosophy, physic, divinity, yea
experience it self, absurdlie and fondly both by word example, mainteyning ye
same not to be infectious, or that it may be take one of an other, which
makes the so vndiscreetely, unadvisedly, nay so vnchristianly rashly, where
there is no need, without any fear of themselves, or regard of others, to
resort keep copany with such as are infected, under a pretence of christian
charity, but indeed of a blind zeal without knowledge: yea and many times to
win the commendation glory of not fearing, or rather contemning death, this way
procuring untimely death (I speak not of the vnchable determination of God,
but as may be guessed by the ordinary course of nature) both unto them selves
and also many others, to the displeasure of God, and the loss of the common
wealth: not that I think it unlawful for one Christian in this kind of
sickness to visit an other (whereunto Godliness, religion, and Christian
duetic doth bind) but that I would have al needless resort restrained,
being, although not the only, yet in my judgement, the chiefest cause of the
spreading and scattering abroad of the same. But hereof (I mean whether the
Plague be infectious or no, and whether, and how far it may of a Christian
be shunned and avoided) there is a very notable and profitable Treatise,
written by that famous and Godly Divine Theodore Beza, in Latin, and not
many years since by me turned into English for the benefit of my country
men, whither for shortness sake I send the Reader that is not already
satisfied. As for you (right Honourable Worshipful, whom in the Lord with all
humility I reverence, and on whose shoulders lies the heavy charge of
governing this noble city) I am fully resolved, that you are otherwise
persuaded, thinking the Plague not only to be infectious, but that it is also
your parts and duties so far as in you lies, and by the wisdom and
policy of manne, not contrary unto the word of God, may be attained unto, to
labour to stop, prevent and hinder the contagion of the same. To the
furtherance forwarding of which your Godly purpose, I have taken pains to
English this very excellent and singular Treatise, the Father of it being a
Dutch man, the child a Roman, not by country, but by education: the which
being committed unto my tuition, I have taught in fourteen days space to
speak this mother tongue of ours in such rude and homely manner as you see;
hoping that the plainness and simpleness of his speech may be pardoned and
borne with in regard of his short time that he had to learn, not that he
would win praise for his quick capacity, but seeing the occasion of God his
so general visitation, he thought, that if he might be heard speak before
your H. W. he might happily say some thing that might turn to the common
benefit, having meant ere this time to have presented himself unto you under
his masters simple dedication, saving that I know not howe it falls out of a
preposterous overthwart course, that good things can hardly pass the press,
when as unprofitable and hurtful Pamphlets have very quick and to too speedy
passage. Whatsoever good and wholesome counsel he shall give, he trusts shall
at your hands not only be friendly accepted, but diligently followed, put in
practise, as occasion and opportunity shall be offered, craving pardon for his
wants, imperfections, nothing doubting but they shall be supplied, either by your
own grave wisdoms, or else by the learned advise of Godly and skilful
Physicians. It is enough for him to have broken the ise, and to have showed the
way for others, ministering matter of further deliberation, what manner course
ought to be taken for the taming and mastering of this so fierce and cruel a
Dragon, (for so I read this sickness of the plague by some very singular
Physicians to be termed) before he be suffered to approach too far within
your borders. We see what preparation is used of every man to withstand his
own private enemy: what care every good husband hath for the fortifiyng of his
house against the lawles attepts brekings in of thieves: what public diligence
is showed, strong munition had always in a readiness to keep out the power of
the foreign soldier: howe much more then stands it you upon, all other
godly and faithful magistrates, to employ al your endeavours, to communicate
and impart all your counselles, to bend all your devises, to stop in time the
dangerous assaults of this bloody Lion, yt rages so fiercely in most places
of this realm at this time? If delay in all perils be dangerous, it cannot
choose but in this disease, which like a swift devouring fire consumes all
things before it as it goes, but be very perilous and hurtful. Meet with
therefore the beginning, least remedy come too late: when the disease by tract
of time is grow to such strength, that it can very hardly, and not without
much trouble be cured. A little brack in a Wall made to keep out water, taken
at the first, may quickly be stopped, which being suffered but for a small time
to have his course, makes such a breach as often turns to the drowning of an
whole Country. The fire that is espied when it first takes hold in the thatch
or timber of some house in a Town, may easily at the beginning with a little
help be quenched, which catching strength by spreading, causes sometimes the
pitiful desolation and utter burning to ground of all the houses and
buildings in the same. After like manner it fares with this vnrulye stream
of the Plague, and unmerciful flame of the Pestilence, if you give it leave by
spreading and scattering abroad, once to gather force and power, it many times
makes riddace of whole towns, clean sweepeth away huge and mighty Cities,
whereas being wisely looked unto at the first, after such order as in this
short Treatise is prescribed, it often passes away without any great hurt
or harm dooynge. You have heretofore felt of the inconueniece that hath
grown by delays in this kind of calamity. Let therefore your former harms
make you beware against time to come, in recopesing the former slackness, with
new speedy diligence. And above al things have especial regard to make sharpe
laws for the punishment of such as needlessly resort to those that are infected,
and for such as having been taken with the sickness presume to come abroad, and
to thrust the selves into the copany of others, before they be thoroughly
cured. For these two ways this disease may woderfully be increased, whereof
in this small discourse you shall read very strange and wonderful examples. I
know there be that reason, that the days of man are numbered: that the time is
set the hour limited, in which we shall all die, and hereof infer, that
albeit we never so much, nor so often haunt the company of the infected, yet
it skills not, we shall not die before our time, c. But this Devils
argument (so I call it, Mat. 4.6.
because the Devil uses the very like reason in the tentation of our Saviour
Christ) shall find no countenance before your H. and W. as I trust. For it is
a very bad kind of reason from the etetnall and secrete decree of God known
only unto himself, to go about to take away all ordinary mean to be used
by man. True it is, that no man shall die before the time which God hath
appointed, which time because it is unto us most uncertain, we are to use the
lawful means which God hath ordained for us to sustain our life withal.
Otherwise, if all ordinary means be to be refused, let us eat no meat, for
we shall not dye before God hath appointed: let us wilfully destroy our
selves: for we shall not dye before GOD hath appointed: yea let the robbers
and murderers by the high way side that lay violent hands to take away the
life of man, escape unpunished, because they have not killed any man before his
time by God appointed. Which reasons look howe vain, foolish, wicked, and
vngodlye they are: even so vain, foolish, wicked, and ungodly is this; I
shall not dye before the hour appointed by God, therefore I will without all
regard either of my self or others, when there is no cause or need, go unto
such as are infected, to the hazarding not only of mine own life, but also
the life of many others. Christ when as the Devil (the Father of such kind of
arguments) alleged the charge of God give to his Angels over him to keep him
from hurt, to persuade him to cast him self down headlong fro the pinnacle of
the temple, whereas he might use the ordinary means of going down by the
stairs, told him that so to do, was indeed to tempt God. The Heathen
mariners, in whose ship Ionas was, at the strange rising of the tempest,
Ionah. 1.5.
threw all their goods into the sea, for the safeguard of the ship, and
saving of their own lives, which they needed not to have done, if they had bin
of the same opinio with these odd fellows, but thus to have determined the
matter: we shall not die before our time, we will therefore use no means at all
to save our selves, but let God work. I am ashamed to stad so long herein, but
that I know that this fond reason carries away great multitudes, not only
into the inconveniences aforesaid, but also to the utter contempt and despising
of the most commendable art of physic, as a thing unprofitable and
needless, the which GOD notwithstanding hath given for the singular help,
profit and comfort of mankind, which question is by occasion hadeled at
large in this selfsame Treatise, the which I have presumed to offer unto the
gentle acceptance of your H. W. as the meetest Patrones for such a work,
who, as you have the charge of government of this most worthy City, so I
persuade my self, that you will very carefully seek in all respects the
welfare of the same, and so far forth allow of the good advice of this
Author, as you by your wisdoms shall judge to be most meet and expedient.
The principal and chief course is, to begin at true and hearty repentance,
(which is the first thing that the maker hereof Persuades in such a case)
bewailing every man his former wicked life, with prayer and fasting, renting
your hearts, and not your garments, and commending most humbly your
afflicted estate unto the merciful consideration of our heavenly Father: and
then to use all other lawefull remedies that may be thought necessary for the
avoiding of infection in so dangerous a disease.

To which end I commend commit this little book to your through insight and
near consideration, to be followed where it is profitable, to be supplied,
where it wants, to be corrected, where it is faulty, and to be refused, in
what point soever it shall unto your wisdoms seem not profitable, or
convenient for your state and government. The Lord bless your H. and W. with
the true fear of his name, and a careful desire as well of the health of the
souls, as the welfare of the bodies of the people, committed to your rule
direction. From Tunbridge the 19. of May. 1583.

Your H. and W. most humble in Christ, Iohn Stockwood, Scholemaster of
Tunbridge.

A short admonition unto the gentle and courteous Christian Reader.
THis small treatise (right gentle and courteous Reader) coming unto my hands
at such time as God began afresh to visit the City, and many other places
of the land with the fearful and dangerous sickness of the Plague: after the
diligent perusing viewing of the same, thinking it as well in respect of the
matter, as in regard of the present time and occasion, a profitable discourse
for such my godly country men as understood not the Latin tongue: according
as my leisure best served from my school charge, I have occupied my self in
turning the same into our English and mother language, which being
communicated with diverse of my godly, worshipful, and learned friends, both
Divines, Gentlemen, and Physicians, they have thought it a work very well
worthy the publishing and setting abroad, to the benefit and profit of all
such places, as it should seem good unto God to punish with this kind of
visitation. I have therefore consented to let it pass the press, and come
under thy godly view, and diligent examination, giving thee before to
understand, that in some places names of fishes which thou shalt meet
withal in this discourse, I have retained still the Latin name without any
Englishing of the same at al. This thing I have chosen to do purposedly, that
thou might resort unto some learned Physician, herein to use his skilful
advice, rather then by my guessing at all adventures at the Englishing of the
same (which I could neither learn out of any Author, nor come to understand
by conference with others, albeit very godly and learned Physicians) to bring
thee into an error, having more regard unto thy right instruction herein,
then unto mine own estimation, judging it better in this behalf to be
counted ignorant, then by bold adventuring, like blind bayard, to be worthily
deemed fool hardy.

Thy loving brother in Christ, Iohn Stockwood.

The Preface of the Author unto the Reader, of the causes of the pestilence.
Alex. Trallian. li. pri. cap. 1
IT is a received opinion among Physicians, that the first part of all healing
curing, must be called back unto the knowledge of the causes, and
judgements. Whereas therefore the learned do often dispute of the cause of this
so horrible a sickness, the which we cal the Pestilence, and the public
curing whereof we are to set down: it seemed unto me to be worthy the travail,
in few words to declare this matter, yt so much the more easily and diligently
every man might do his duty, in taming or assawging this dragon, as Galen
rightly terms him. For not without good cause it seems unto some a thing
worthy to be marveled at, that so many oftetimes do die in one house, into
which this infection once gets: Every plague comes not immediately from
God.
and that such as betimes fly thence many times remain unhurt. Which thing
they which suppose to come to pass by vnauoidable destiny, or affliction
immediately sent fro god, speak in my judgment, indistinctly and unorderly.
For such a plague is wont to happen not by common tokens, yea and very seldom,
and that miraculously. And I nothing doubt that God doth wink at many things,
and doth not at all times defend us, which thing notwithstanding he is able
for to do: or to speak more properly, that he doth oftentimes use the Devil,
yea, men also, and which more is, our selves, to try our selves withal: so
far of is it that I would by any means deny it. Moreover this likewise is
a rare thing, such as many old men have not seen in all their life, that a
plague should grow of the infection of the common air. For in this case it
must needs be that many manifest signs go before. Wherefore we see the
Astrologers many times to be foully deceived for want of due consideration of
causes. For how can they always without error observe and mark so hidden
natures of so many things, and so diverse coniunctions and disiunctions of all
the stars? Therefore forasmuch as it is not lawful, neither altogether to
shut out God, nor rashly to make him the Author of our error and oversight,
according unto the judgment of the most learned and grave men, both
Philosophers and Physicians, and also Divines: this may well be affirmed, that
every pestilence in deed, like as other diseases even in the judgment of
Hypocrates) and all adversities are of God, but yet notwithstanding have not
all one nature: for there is one kind of plague which may be said to come only
from God: 3. sorts of plagues. 1. From god.
and another natural: the third, received by infection. The plague from God,
when as it rises either immediately from God, or by the ordinance of God (as
Alexand. Bened terms it) and by no oversight of nature, by no placing of the
stars, or through the threatening of no Eclipse, nor through the default and
rash headdines of men, that is, when as it is sent by the mere pleasure and
wrath of God, being angry with men for their sins. And this is a most heavy
case, and growing suddenly, rages very hotly against those (for we do not
affirm the chastising of the Lord to be like a bickering in the dark) who
are not marked: the which we cannot avoid either by flying or medicines, or
ought to seek to avoid, but the way is only by supplication, prayer, and
purgings. It is also oftentimes to be perceived by plain and fearful tokens
from God, or by the voice of God himself, or his Prophet.

2. The natural plague.
The natural pestilence is that, which comes of causes by means, and such as
consist in nature. This by some is thought to be of three sorts, either by
means of the air, or of the water, or of the earth* of others twofold (which
comes in a manner all unto one point) namely common and private: of the which
the one is not properly called a common disease, D. Hierom. ca. 9. in Mat. Luke
4.
albeit many times it be the cause of a common disease, that is of a common
plague. Now concerning that plague which happens by reason of the air, or
of the water, or of the earth, they say that it hath not God either the next,
or the proper cause, although it have him as her Lord, to whom it is forced to
obey, at whose beck it is ruled. Yet this plague many times doth so furiously
rage, that it wastes away most famous cities, most mighty provinces and
countries (from whence it seems to have the name Epidemia, that is such a
sickness as haunteth a whole country or people) destroys whole kingdoms,
utterly takes away the former plight and countenance of a place, blind for
the most part (I speak after the manner of men) uncertain, inconstant, roving
all abouts, vntreateable, raging without any law, taking away whomsoever it
meets: without any regard either of nobility or common sort, infecting all
things sometimes far wide fro the East unto the West, yea raging unto beasts,
unto trees, unto the fruits of trees, of ye earth (from whence comes that
starring which the Greekes call Astrobolismos, Hiero* Card. de rer. vary. 15.
cap. 18.
or star blasting) and finally unto fishes* the elements being infected by ye
noysom meeting (as it is thought) of Saturne and Mars in the house of the
virgin, or of the Twins, through the Eclipse of the Moon, or of the Sun,
such other like added circumstances. This miserable sickness, comes many
times upon me so suddenly, that many within the space of 10. or 20* hours
without any ague, amongst their doings at home or abroad, or their public
business, without any certain sign either of urine or pulse, in the Church, in
the high way, in public offices, yea sometimes in feasts (O lamentable
condition of mans nature!) are taken away in a short time upon the sudden,
Cor. Cel. lib. 1. cap. 10.
being merry, iocond, and fearing nothing. Wherefore in this kind of pestilence
they think this singular remedy (fly quickly, far off, come slowly again) to
be a most safe preservative.

3 The plague by infection. Francis. de pedem. cap. 6 de Febr. putre.
As for that plague, which hath his original and beginning from infection, the
same is gotten either by companying or lying together, or by some disposition
from the party that is infected with it, and comes through the mere
negligence of men: albeit at sometimes it rage as hotly as the 2. former, when
it lights upon fit bodies, that is, such as abound with il humours, or are
prone unto rottenes, Pet. Bayr. de med. morb. distinc. 21. trac. 2. cap. 3
as fire amongst stuble and daily takes strength through the carelessness of
such, as are unwary, and despise good counsel, and lives by moving it self,
and waxes strong by spreading abrod: so that of a private hurt there grows a
public, of a particular an universal in the end, like as of a small spark, a
great fire, and according to that saying of the Poet, One naughty man oft
times doth make a City whole be punished.

This kind of common sickness was not known either unto the Greekes or
Arabians, as Cardanus witnesses, with whom I easily agree. For when as they
lived more temperately, De variet. rer. 8. ca. 46.
and in time sought the help of the Physician, and received the same, and
kept company warily with such as were sick, they did the more easily let
the spreading abroad of this sickness.

Which things standing so, it may easily be understood, after what sort the
scripture reports the plague to be sent upon men by God, and by what means
he delivers such as obey his commandments from the same. For I willingly
grant, that no hair falls from our head without his will, that there is no
evil in the City, which the Lord hath not done* But again my judgment is,
that these things come not always immediately from God, in such sort as he may
be said to be the next cause of them: nay they are to be said more rightly
more properly to grow from their own, Ch. Pezel. 3 part. arg. Philip. de
necess. fat. arg. 7. W. Musc. Loc. com. de afflict.
and from such nature of next causes, rather then in respect of the providence
of God. Because that every thing is to have his name from his inward or next
grounds, that is from his own nature, and not from outward causes. For what
if a drunken man should fall into the fire, or into the water: or through
having his stomach ouerquatted with meat and drink, seeking to procure vomit,
should break a vein of the breast, and so come into a phthisicke, will you
rather lay this unto GOD, then unto the intemperancy of this drunken sotte? If
a man living in idleness, and daily surfeiting, glutting him self
unseasonably and vnorderlie with too much and moist meat, wallowing in
riotousnesse, given wholly to whoredom, dauncinges, bathes, sleep, using one
while the cold, an other while the hot air, gathering great store of rawnes
and fleam especially in the winter, and in a cold country, in a rainy whether,
by nature moist, gross, in age very old or young: if such a one (Isaie) fall
into a quotidian ague, will you not rather impute it unto the nature and
negligence of the man, then unto the providence of God? But if besides the
simple rottenness, these humours gathered together, and through the
continuance of time by little and little waxing worse, Ioh. Farn. de feb. 4.
cap. 17
and partaking with some poison, shall have hurtfulnesse from else where: and
that happily there be added hereunto the infections of the air by infected
fens, lakes, deunes, caves, the carcasses or dounge of men and beasts, or of
some other more strong savours, and that the proceed of the inordinate
excesses of times and seasons, and do pearse into the body of man already apt
to receive them, or with meat, or with the air, or with any other means
else: If, I say, these things thus fall out, and bring forth the pestilent and
evil agues of their nature, who will not rather lay the fault upon the nature
both of the air and rottennes, and also upon the rashness and heedelesnesse of
men, then upon the peculiar and mere punishment of God? So that the Gods in
Homer do justly in this sort complain:

Alas how mortal men on Gods do every foot complain: affirming that their
miseries from us proceed, when as their own deserts wickedness beyond their
fate do cause their punishments!

For some are wrapped in the like error in a manner, in the which some of the
interpreters of Hippocrates are entangled. 1. Epid. 1. Gal. in prog. Hip.
come. 1
For when as he willed the Physicians to mark whether there were any thing
from God in the disease, they (says he) drew this hereunto, as if men were
stricken with sickness, through the anger of the Gods. Which Galen in his
Commentaries according to the meaning of the same Hippocrates, doth utterly
deny. For albeit both of them judged not distinctly and plainly enough of this
matter, as being void of the true knowledge of God: yet what things soever
have causes unknown to some body, or far contrary unto the opinion of the
common people, are not by and by notwithstanding to be said, to be simply
divine or from God, although peradventure a man may term them wonderful.

What is the cause then, will some man ask, why so commonly and constantly men
do judge this sickness of the plague above al others, to be a punishment sent
from God? It is because, that for the most part they find it to be a grievous
and cruel evil? For the old Writers as well Greekes as Latines use to call
that holy or divine, which is unusual, vehement and wonderful. Be it so, yet
this is euidet by the testimonies of learned and godly men, that, as hath bin
said in the beginning, it is not always a punishment immediately sent from
God, as they either of ignorance, or too much scrupulosity and spicednes of
conscience have persuaded themselves. S. Hierom says, Hieron. in Mat. 9.
that many infirmities of the body (which indeed is to be granted unto him)
do come because of sins: ergo by the self same saying he seems to show,
that many do happen for other causes, that is by nature, or through the
vnaduisednesse and negligence of men, which thing Luther confesses willingly
of the plague of Witeberge in the year 27. And Basilius the great, both in
deed and name, affirms that all sicknesses are not of nature, or of careless
diet, or other originalles, which Physic may help, but oftentimes to be God
his whips for sins, sent of God for our conversion, according to that
saying: Whom the Lord loves, he chastizeth: yea he chastizeth every son,
whom he receives.

Doubtless, where he saith not all, and oftentimes, he by the self same
confesses, that some scourges are of nature also, and many times not to come
immediately from God. I could prove the same by many and most manifest
testimonies of most excellent and chief men, but I think there is no man,
unless he be all to gether void of eyes and mind, or wedded to his own
opinion, have his wits on wol gathering (as they say) which will deny the same.
Wherefore since that which we say, is agreeable unto truth, away with their
unskilful standing in their own opinion, who being persuaded, that all plague
comes immediately from God, would have no endeavour, no travel used by men to
the driving away of the same, but that only with the Heretikes called
Euchites or Prayarres, There are too many, even among professors of this fond
opinion.
we ought to fly unto prayer supplications: prattling that al the labours and
charges of men are in vain and unprofitable: the which opinion there be some
that have of al other diseases. For we have to think far otherwise, who when as
we do godly confess that all things are subject unto God, and governed by his
appointment: yet do hold that many things come to pass through our own
default and course of nature, the which after God, both may ought to be
remedied, avoided, yea and also changed by the help and travail of man.

To the right Honourable the L. Consuls, and to the right Worshipful the
Senators of the Common wealth of Bream, Stadeen, and Boxtehud, his Lords and
Patrons most highly to be reverenced, salutation and tranquillity.
IT is a thing to be lamented, (right Honourable Worshipful) that the nature of
man, The miseries of the life of man.
through the fall of our first Parent, is run into such misery, yea, and so
far blinded, that is, must continually bear not only many discommodities,
tentations of Satan, persecutions of men, wars, troubles, famines, al kind
of diseases, and finally death it self, but also that it neither understands
the causes of these evils, nor yet seeks or receives fit remedies for
the same.

For there are many of so peevish nature, that if they know any, that can both
show the their grief, also give them medicin against the same, be moreover
willing so to do, they think that they are rather to laugh at them, to bear
grudg and hatred against them, then friendly to hear them, or to give them any
reward for their labour. Which despite, if any in the world, truly Divines
Physicians are wont especially to feel: as who then at length begin to be
hated of some, when as they have done them most good, do prove indeed by
experience true, that which Xenopho affirms, namely shamlesnes to be the
companion of vnthankfulnes. Which thing although it be so, that I my self
sotimes have had proof hereof, yet have I not judged, that I ought therefore to
slack diligently to do the duty of a Christia Physician, both in studying out
of such things, as are profitable, in putting the in practise which I have
found out, by al means that lies in me, with hand and foot. Wherefore, when
as certain years past, following the counsel of Mesua, wherein he bids in
althings to set God before, I have published, and put forth 2. treatises of
matters in divinity, which are the true Physic of the soul: in the one
whereof, which is written against the absurd and fond heresies of our time, I
have gone about to root out false opinions, being as it were corrupt humours:
in the other, which is entitled, of the knowledge of the will, grace of God, of
the fruits signs of this true knowledge, my meaning was with sound doctrine of
Christian religion, as it were with good holsom nourishment, to feed and
strengthen the unskilful: I many times thought, and hereafter will think, if
God spare me life, according to my power, to perform the same, in mine own
proper profession, that is, in the Physic of the body.

But whereas I have spoken of Divinity, The study of divinity appertains
unto al.
I would not have it so taken, as if I meant rashly to thrust my sickle into an
other man his harvest, to play the busy body. For letting pass great weighty
controversies, I only dealt with those things, which are approved of al, or
inveighed against such things, which are improued of the better sort, and that
with such reasons, which I have learned marked, both in the schools and also
in the Church Wherefore I think it no unlawful thing, if the scholar render
some part of his Lesson: since it is manifest by the testimony of al men, that
from the first beginning of the world, even unto our time, it is not only
right and lawful, that men endued with the use of reason, might judge of
religion, but also that it is profitable and necessary, that they be able
perfectly to judge, that is to say: to discern and know the false from the
true, the hurtful from the wholesome, the counterfeited by men, from that which
is delivered by God. For like as al men consiste of two parts, that is, of a
soul, and of a body, so also there ought to be in al men a twofolde action:
one, wherewith it becomes us to magnify God, and to praise him: the other,
whereby we are bound to employ our study and travail upon the Common
wealth. And as there is notwithstanding great kindred amongst them selves,
between these two parts, albeit they be distinct and several by nature: so
these actions cannot without great wickedness be parted asunder, the one from
the other.

Wherefore they do very wickedly, which do so follow their wordly business,
either public or private, that they have either none at all, or else very
small regard of divine matters: and not like men, which for the study of
divinity do for slow their matters at home abroad. Unto with judgement your
wisdom also gives most honourable witness, whilst in your Cities you
study not only this, that your citizens may live together commodiously and
quietly, but also being instructed in the doctrine of salvation most rightly,
may walk godly and holily. For where but one of these things only is cared
for, it cannot be, that the Common wealth the Church can any long time be
happily governed. Which thing, besides the examples of certain other
countries, the most afflicted kingdo of France, and the miserable Provinces of
the low Countries in Flaunders (alas for pity) do at this day declare. For
what other cause is there of their misery, such almost as hath not been heard
of, than the contempt of pure religion, the not caring for the truth of God,
and the wicked persecution of those which were followers of true godlines? For
whilst the magistrate doth rather seek to maintain his own authority then
the pure service of God, constreineth his subjects to obey his will, rather then
the will of God: And finallye gives ear to the counsels of most wicked Doeg
and Machiauel, rather then unto the counsels of Gamaliel and Abdias: there
must needs follow such effects, as there have gone causes before. And because yt
I know you with al your heart to detest this hurtful opinion mere tyrannical
kind of government: rather endeavour hereunto, that it may go very well with
your subjects of your dominio, as well in mind, as body, I cannot choose but
highly commend this godly meaning, most holy care of yours: and not only comed
it, but also according to my duty with my labour travail such as it is, to help
forward the same. For as much therefore as at this time yt same sore sickness of
the plague, De there. ad pison.
with Gale doth rightly term a cruel Dragon, doth begin to breed every where
through out al our country of Germanie in a manner, is very hot in some places
not far from us, and as it goes, like unto a Canker, eats up all the
things that are next unto it: many learned Physicians have written diligently
of the curing of those, which are taken with this disease, also of the
preservation of every particular person, have left their counsails in whole
books, a practise greatly doubtless to be commended: but because I have
perceived this their endeavour not to be sufficient, but that ye infectio is
daily nevertheless increased, grows with his stirring, gathers strength by
going, especially because there is no public course order taken for the
avoiding of this evil, I have considered, that there is need of so greater
help, namly, which must be used by the authority of the magistrat, in whose
travel the chief hope of staying this misery consists lies. Concerning with,
when as in times past I had gathered something, which I had noted in most famous
Cities countries, partly by use and experience, partly had judged to be
agreeable unto reason, I thought it might be a work worth the travail, if I
should beat it again upon the anuil, set it forth: that if happily so certain
could be persuaded, yt for the turning away of this evil some thing might be
done by the travail of man, they might have some course to follow: and that if
they should think some thing to be wanting in my counsel and treatise, they
might in deed and travail themselves supply the same. For this cause is not
such, which may content it self only with fine speech fit laying forth of the
matter, but such as being once with wisdom advised upon, must betimes be
accomplished, and (as they say) be brought into action.

And whereas right honourable my meaning hath been to dedicate this my pains
jointly to your L L. there were two causes especially moving me thereunto: of
ye which the first did seem to bind me as it were by a certain duty: as in
whose dominion I have now spent almost these 18. years, have had a public
stipend of the common wealth of Breme in especial, and minding in a manner
there to end my life, that of whom I have received most benefits, to ye same I
might redder again as much duty as in me lies. The second was considered of me
in the mystery of your number cosisting of three, whilst that in this
Bishopricke you seemed unto me as it were in one body to represent three
principal members, the brain, the heart, and the liver, and in great consent
of minds, in agreeable government of your subjects, and finally in peaceable
following of true religion, to resemble a most beautiful harmony of a
trinity: wherein I judged my self to owe this duty not to one of 3.
(especially since this care appertains indifferently unto all magistrates) but
unto three rather in one. Wherefore it shall be your part (right honourable
and most reverend Lords Patrones) to take in good worth this testimony of my
ready good will and service, and to take as commended unto you, this care of
the common safety, which I have here in some measure portraited and drawn out.
Which things if at any time they shall be overruled by the ordinance of God,
which cannot be called back, it shall be sufficient to have approved your
endeavour and good will unto men. Christ Iesus the true turner away of all
evil, and the Physician as well of the body as of the soul, begot of
unbegotten, God in man, true life in death, (that I may end with the words of
Egysippus) preserve you with your subjects unhurt of this deadly infection,
and always in good health. Dated at Breame in the year 1581.

Your H H. most bounden, Iohn Ewich, D. of Physic.

Of the duty of a faithful and wise Magistrate, in preserving and delivering
the common wealth from infection, in the time of the plague or Pestilence. The
first Book.
That the care and charge of the common wealth belongs unto the Magistrate.
Cap. 1.
ESAIAS the divine Prophet, Homer the chief of Poets, Essay. cap. 49.60. Homer.
Iliad. 1. Plato 4. de Republic.
the one enlightened with the heavenly law, and the other with the law of
nature, have adorned and set out Princes and Magistrates with an excellent
title, whilst the one in his tongue calls them Omenim, that is to say,
Nurses, to wit of the Church: and the other terms them Poimenos Laon, that
is, Pastors, or Shepherds of the people: to wit for this cause, that they
ought with wholesome laws, and good discipline, to govern, and defend their
subjects, and also after a sort provide for them such things as are necessary
for their food living. For albeit they do not as Parents to their children,
put in every one his hand, what to eat and drink: albeit they nourish not us
being idle, yet when as by wise policy they bring this to pass, that nothing
be wanting, what every ma labours either by traffic, or travel, or goods to
get, and that what by honest means is gotten, the same he may in safety
possess, and with gladness enjoy, they have not without a cause given unto
them this honourable title and commendation. And as it is not sufficient for a
diligent nurse faithful Pastor to have provided for his nurse child, A
comparison.
flock, such things as are requisite needful unto the necessary uses of life,
but also they be careful to turn away ye things which might endammage their
health, to provide wholesome remedy for them being in danger: So also the wise
and faithful Magistrate ought not only to have care and diligence for those
things which concern the trade of lawful traffic, and diligent practise of
handy crafts, the preserving of peace, and keeping of quiet among the Citizens,
but also he ought to prohibit or let those things which may either take away
the same, or greatly weaken, or infect the whole society and fellowship with
daily contagion or infection, assail and destroy with miserable ruin, the
life of every particular member: Galen ad Pison. cap. 2.
judging the looking unto the common safety to be the chiefest part of his
rule and office. For if they be Gods (and as the Psalmist himself both king
and ruler terms them) the sons of the most highest, Psal. 81.
certes it is their parts to know, that they in this point are with all
diligence to imitate and follow GOD, of whom we daily crave both things
needful, and also pray to be kept from things not needful or hurtful:
that they furnish the City, not only with profitable, necessary, and
wholesome things, but preserve deliver it from things also unprofitable and
hurtful. Which things when as the heathen saw, albeit ignorant of the true
God, that this was a thing highly needful, and in a manner heavenly, they
called their Kings and Rulers of the people, Gods, not proportionablie, as
the Iewes and Christians, but in very deed, began to honour mortal men with
honour divine or belonging unto God. For when as there never yet was any
nation so barbarous, which had not some feeling of ye godhead: Rom. 1.
nay when as the Apostle in plain words affirms, yt for this same cause ye
very Gentiles are without excuse, because ye they had written in their minds,
which might be known concerning God: who would think them so foulie to be
deceived, in that they judged those to be, to be honoured for Gods (which
Plinie said to be a divine thing) who they saw to employ al their endeavour to
help others? Lib. 2. not. hist. cap. 7.
For albeit they did not rightly give unto many, that thing which was due unto
one: yet by the power of nature they profited thus far, that they almost
atteyned unto the knowledge of the nature and office of God, although they did
not rightly worship him. Moreover ye Apostle in an other place compares the
Church unto the body of a man: for as the members of a man have every one
their power and office, yet are all governed by the only virtue of the brain,
desire and embrace things profitable; shun things hurtful: so also the
magistrates, who in this external or outward society or fellowship, are the
head of the common people, ought to set before the other Citizens profitable
things, and keep away things hurtful, that they may be said truly to
fulfil the office of Pastors and Nurses.

But if any man will say, that it is the proper office of God, Objection.
to preserve and govern mankind, the which in his singular counsel he hath
made: I answer, Answer.
that this indeed is true, but yet as God by the ministry or service of man
doth teach us, deliver us from sin, make us partaker of his grace and save
us, albeeit in very deed these same are not the works of men: even so he doth
govern and preserve the life of man by the service of those men, who he
chooses unto this office, and suffers to be partakers of this praise.
Hereuppon Romulus, Cic. de leg.
which builded the City of Rome, and is thought to be that Quirinus, was by
a certain right reckoned in the number of the Gods, Romulus. Aug. de
ciuitate Dei, 2. cap. 15. Hercules.
because that he showed himself a loving and bounteous governor unto the
people. Hercules borne of Iupiter and Alcmena, got not only this name, (for
thus the Oracle answered, Immortal fame by helping me, thou certainly shalt
win) which was advanced with immortal honour, but also was registered in the
bedroll of the gods, because that with vnweariable toil, and most singular
labour, he killed such mosters, as endammaged men, and brought them great
danger. Apollo and his son Aesculapius because of their physic, Apollo.
Aesculapius.
wherewith they did much good unto men, obtained the name of gods. I blush at
the telling of it, our Elders through a like error builded temples unto many,
gave honour unto them, such as belogeth unto God, of who it is scarce certain,
whether they ever were in ye world, or at least wise any light opinio, yt they
have performed unto others such like duty. Wherefore, albeit we judge them to
have committed no small fault: yet in that they acknowledged them to be worthy
singular renown which did good unto many, I think their infirmity or weakness
rather to be to be excused, then to be followed. For this doubtless out of
their too much lightness in belief is manifest, that it especially cocerneth
those which have the rule of others, Galen. ad Pison. 2.
to procure maintain the safety of their subjects by al the means they can,
all things yt might empayre the same being betimes wisely taken out of the
way. Wherefore who will make any doubt in this state of things whereof we here
entreat, namely, of the infection of the plague, that the godly wise
magistrate ought to deal not slowly, but lustely, In Epistola ad Crate.
(for here is no room for sloth, that which Hippocrates affirms, delay in
all diseases to be dangerous, the same in this death bringing sickness
especially falls out) not sparingly, but plenteously, not only to provide
for things healthful, but also that concerning things hurtful, he ought to
be careful in time, wisely to turn away the same? For whereas the plague is a
most hurtful also most infectious disease, yea (as Galen speaks) as it were
a certain drago, Vide Octauianum medic. in praefat. operis sui.
which breaths out poison against ma, utterly denies all truse-taking, very
seldom comes unto conditions of peace, he greatly offends against the
rule of charity, whosoever according to his ability doth not seek and bring
some aid, as it were a preservative, to master this Dragon, and the
Magistrate most of all, who in this common calamity or misery both can and
ought in comparison of others to do most. Neither in this case ought the
authority of certain worthy and most learned men to move us, who seem too
vndiscreetely for to deny, that this care appertains unto the Magistrate,
whose office (say they) it is not to rid men from diseases, but only to
maintain the safety and peace of our life and goods. For it may even out of
their own words be proved sufficiently, that albeit the magistrate ought
not to cure the diseases of every several man, or preserve them from such as
do not openly range, nor have common causes, (for this is the proper duty
of the Physicians) yet when as they hold it to be belonging to their charge,
by their service and authority to perform, that their subjects may live
commodiously: who sees not, that this commodiousnes doth also appertain unto
the health of the body? Which thing he that believes not, the same hath never
seen, howe miserably all the duties of men are cumbred, the order of the
Churches, the exercises of Godliness, the instruction of youth, the traffike
of Citizens, whereupon must needs ensue a most grievous destruction of
particular persons, when the plague troubles a City or country. Wherefore, I
appeal unto thy self, whosoever thou be that art of this opinion, that thou
think not it to be the duty of the Magistrate, to preserve the common
wealth from diseases (and especially common diseases) do not such sicknesses
seem unto thee to be, to be numbered amongst other incommodities? And can men
live together commodiously, when as these diseases do rage? Doubtless this
can thou not affirm, if ever thou hast had experience before what the Plague
is, or what it may work, where it once hath prevailed? Why then, say I, doest
thou think it a thing not apperteining unto the duty of the magistrate, to
deliver me from such diseases, Le. Lemnius 2. de occul. not. miracul. cap. 4.
that is with public care to defend? I pray thee hast thou not seen that which
is usual in all well ordered common wealths, how diligently in cities the
Magistrate provides and storeth up such things as serve for the use of
war? How carefully he prepares weapons? How busily he retains garrisons
set in a readiness? Especially when he is in fear of some hurt to ensue? and
to what end? but that men should live commodiously. Wherefore are horses
kept; ships built; walls repaired, treches dug, towers set up, and banks
cast: but that the citizens should live more commodiously in safety against
the invasions or assaults of the enemies? Dogs are maintained for the like
cause, nets are pitched, hunters are hired, and troupes of country people
draw together, if at any time wolves or such like beasts do trouble a
country. I remember in the kingdom of France, that certain Leopards, which
the king uses to keep, did break out of ward, and in every place slue the
country men. The whole country was mustered, neither cost nor labour spared,
until they had rid the land from that fear. How much more justly then in this
calamity misery also ought there some prouidet course to be take, whereby this
so mighty an enemy, cruel beast may be kept away from our throats, which in
a very short time is wont to range very far, as it were a Canker, eat up
every thing yt is next it? To the end that the clean in the old Testament
should not keep company with the unclean Lepers, Lepers.
by the authority of the Magistrate, there was made a separation, neither were
they received among the other people, before that they were by the Priests
appointed to this office, judged cleansed after they were viewed naked. In like
manner at this day after a certain resemblance of them (for the disease is
not all one in them both, nor all one cause of separation) those with us which
are infected with the Leprie, called Elephantiasis, are by a public censure,
view, The Leprous called Elephantiaci.

The common wealth of the Venetians.


removed from the company of other men. The same custom, and with the same
wisdom in judging ordering the sick of the plague, keeps the most famous,
and almost in the whole world the most mighty common wealth of the Venetians,
according unto the pattern of which wisdom I have rudely drawn this
treatise of mine such as it is. The same doth Antwerpe a City almost in
populous trade of merchandise, Antwerpe.
and renown of name, like unto this. In the most noble City of Padway,
Padway.
I my self have seen, when as then I there studied Physic, the Magistrate,
calling together the Physicians, and hearing the cause opened by them, which
then grew only of infection, to have let pass no travail, no charges, to
preserve and deliver his Citizens from the same, the which he happily
accomplished in short time, albeit the disease were scattered through the
whole City. I can avouch the same of Philip the Landgraue of Hassia, Philip
the Landgraue,
when as the Plague began to grow in the parts near unto him, who so
carefully, and so fatherly dealt by the advice of his Physicians, which was
published through al his dominios, yt he may worthily be a pattern, for other
godly and wise Princes magistrates to follow, of the which in the next Chapter
shall be spoken more at large

Lastly, ye like did ye magistrat of our worthy, of me much to be honoured,
common wealth, when as in the year 1565. he had intelligence that this wild
beast through the unwary dealing of some, had invaded or assaulted a few
houses of his city: They called me into the Senate or Counsel house, and
asked my direction and advice, how they might preserve without hurt the people
by GOD committed unto them, of a godly care, and unless I greatly be
deceived, a care indeed most beseeming a Christian Magistrate. Which things
being so, if princes Magistrates be desirous to maintain their name (which I
said in the beginning, to have been given them not only by the Prophets, but
also by wise men among the Heathen) and will be indeed, as they are called in
name, Nurses and Pastors, they must think that it stands them upon,
faithfully and wisely to handle the matter, that in such a time of the plague,
they let pass no care, which may by any means make for the turning away of
so deadly and infectious a disease, and for the preserving and delivering of
their subjects from the same.

That the Magistrate before all things proclaim a public repentance. Cap. 2.
But some man may peradventure say, you so deal, Objection.
as if ye whole matter lay in ye foresight strength of man, and make no mention
of the help of God, on who hangs all hope of victory, especially in so
doubtful a battle: when as notwithstanding by the judgment of Mesua himself,
it is manifest, that in al things which we do, we ought to set God before,
that we may make proof of all things with more safety and boldness. I
answer, Answer.
when as I speak of the duty of a faithful Magistrate, and being my self
a Christian, deal with Christians, that my meaning is, to have these two
things, that is to say, the grace of God, and travail of man, so linked
together, that the one be not void of the help of the other. For Hippocrates
hath said both very well, Lib. 1. de Insom.
and very godly: It is indeed seemly, and very good to pray unto the
Gods, but yet man himself ought to do some thing, He held of many gods
like an Heathen.
and withal to call upon the Gods? Why so? Because man without God can do
nothing, God without man will not do all things. God indeed is bouteous, man
very poor needy, when as he hath nothing which he hath not received at his
had, but god loves to be asked, yt me by this mean should acknowledge their
need: whereby we should be driven to obey him in whom all our happiness doth lie.
If (say Moses Aaron) thou shalt diligently hear the voice of the Lord thy
God, and do that which is right in his eyes, and shall obey his
commandementes, and keep all his statutes, I will send no grief upon thee,
which I have sent upon the Egyptians, because I am the Lord that heals
thee: but if ye shall not hear me, Leuit. 26.
saith God, and shall not do all these commandments, and if ye shall refuse
my statutes, and fulfil not al my precepts, but shall rather make void my
covenant, I also will do this unto you: I will visit you with fear, swelling,
and a burning fever, which shall consume your eyes, and make your life to
pine away. Likewise in many other places there is especial mention made of the
plague, which god either threatens unto the disobedient, or from the which he
promises to deliver the godly: so that there is no doubt, that albeit we
understand that every plague is not the peculyar and proper punishment of GOD,
Number. 14. Deuteronomy. 28. Ezech. 5. 14 2. King. 2. The first and chief remedy.
nor yet always immediately sent of God, (which is a thing chieflye to be
observed and marked) but sometimes comes either by the course of nature (as
hath been said before) or through the fault and neglygence of men: yet
whatsoever original and beginning it hath, always and before all things,
we must fly unto the help of GOD, unto whose mighty hand we most
assuredly believe all, both sickness and health, life and death to be subject.

Wherefore, when as it is manifest, that this cause also, which we now have
in hand, doth especially concern the Magistrate, according to his power to
preserve his people from the danger at hand, and from the infection of
sickness, or to deliver them from the same when it is come: First of all
let them have this care, that they them selves turning earnestly vnfeignedly
unto God, proclaim unto their subjects universally, and proclaimed, execute a
public repentance, which is wont to be showed by prayers made both privately,
and also in the solemn assembly, by alms and absteyning, not only from
meat and drink, but from all riot, dancing, and banqueting: after the
example of the people of Niniuie, The Niniuites.
unto whom when as the Lord by his Prophet threatened punishment for their
sins, the king enjoined a fast of 3. days, not only unto the men, but also
to the bruit beasts, besides other works of repentance, that by this means
they might reconcyle God being angry, unto them. When as Dauid had
transgressed the commandment of the Lord, there was sent upon the people so
fierce a pestilence, that in the space of three days there died 70. thousand
persons. 2. Chro. 20.
With the which plague Dauid being moved, confessed unto the Lord his sin,
and by prayer obtained at his hand, that forthwith all that affliction
ceased. The like is read of king Ezechias, when death was threatened unto him,
Ezechias.
yet through earnest turning unto God, and bitter weeping, his life was
prolonged by the space of fifteen years. It is also read that in the days of
Elias, Elias.
when as the heavens had bin shut up three years and more, and that it reigned
not a drop, whereupon followed a miserable dearth of victuals that at the prayer
of Elias, this scarcity was recompensed with sudden plenty. Hitherto may
worthily be referred the commendable fact of the most honourable prince, D.
Philip the Landgraue, The Proclamation of Philip the Landgraue.
whose publik writing concerning this matter, turned by me into latin, I have
thought good to set down, as the perfect pattern of a faithful and wise
Magistrate, for all men to follow: and thus it is in English: We would have
it known to all and singular our subjects, howe we are given to understand,
that the infectious sickness of the plague doth sore rage round about in
places, near unto our dominions, insomuch that it is to be feared, that it
will come also into our Territory and Country, and assault our subjects. For
as much therefore as without all doubt, such a Plague is a punishment for
sin, we do all men to understand, that first of all the turn earnestly
unto God, desire of him pardon for their fault: Secondly, that they use them
selves moderately in eating and drinking, put their trust in God, who is the
only and true Physician for our grief. We have also of our loving mind to
do good unto our subjects, called together our Physicians, and commanded
them to take advice, and by common consent to consulte and prescribe remedies,
as well for the poor as the rich, wherewith next after the calling upon of God,
every one may preserve defend himself against this deadly and infectious
disease, or if he be taken with it, howe he should order himself, and be
healed, as by order is plainly in this our writing set down: according unto
the direction whereof, let every one after his power govern himself: but that
above all things, that he know howe he ought to trust in God, who is our
only aide in troubles, and steadfastly to cleave unto him, c. These are the
words of the most virtuous and gentle Prince: the rest which appertains
unto the order and kinds of the medicines, I will not here express. Last of
all, of a like testimony of Godliness, and love towards his Citizens, our
Magistrate also in the year 65. when as our City was visited with the Plague,
gave commandment unto all the Ministers of his Church, that they should often
call the people to repentance, to the duties of charity one towards another:
to be short, that they should diligently and daily exhore them to the looking
unto the health of them and theirs, according to the rule prescribed published
by me at his commandment. For they did acknowledge that which the Apostle
said, to be most certain true: God is faithful, will not the death of a
sinner but that he should turn and live. The which thing he plainly proved,
when as he gave his only begotten son unto death, and that unto the death of
the cross for our sakes. Also S. Iohn teaches us, that we should not sin:
and that if we sin, we have an aduocat with the father, who makes
intercession for the whole world. In these most praise worthy examples shine
forth, and are showed not only a true care of the magistrat towards his
subjects, but also especial godlines towards God, and fruits of the truth of
the Gospel. Through the following steps of the which, every one for his part
also ought to be stirred up stregthned to pray unto god, vndoutedly believe, yt
it appertains also unto him, which Christ said unto ye sick of ye palsy: Son
be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee: Also to the Leper, I will that
thou be healed, be thou clean.

Of ordeining preservers of health. Cap. 3.
Being now fortified with these preparatives, and as it were spiritual
weapons: namely with a good conscience towards God, sure trust of ye
forgiveness of our sins (which are the first and chief causes of all
miseries) showed us, and grace promised, the faithful and wise Magistrate
ought to follow the usual and commendable custom of common wealths in the
time of war. And what is that? When there commethe news, that some mighty
Tyrant, whom we suspect for to bear us ill will, is in arms, hath
gathered a power, and lies lingering about our borders, and that it is not
well known upon whom first he will make assault, they use to appoint their
Generals and Captains, which are bound unto them, and with these when as
the whole Senate, or Counsel are without power and victuals, they take advice
howe they may peradventure go against their enemy, that betimes they may
drive him from their Coasts. The like we do when as counsel is to be
taken at the same time for public munition, for walls, for banks, for
gunnes, and all kind of armour, that search notice may be taken by calling
together the Ediles, Carpenters, and artificers, what they have already, what
is wanting, what time and charge is needful for the furnishing of such
things as lack, that laying their strength together, and diducting or taking
out the charges from the whole sum, we may know howe long we are able to
wage battle. So surely, with no less carefulness, Eccle. 18 Ruffin. in
praefat. histo. Eccle.
in the rifenesse of such infectious diseases breeding, ought the Magistrate
for to do, that calling together the physicians, provision with all diligence
be had, howe, after the calling upon OOD, and the commending of us and our
affairs faithfully unto him, so far as by the travail and power of man, may
be, we may meet with the disease as it is in coming, and look not for
this: Too late the medicine is prepared, when tract of time the grief hath
rypde: nor, when the Steed is stolen, that then we shut the stable door:
Which is not only a point of great foolishness and madness, but also against
the duty of a faithful and wise Magistrate, which we have taken in hand to
set forth. Unto which matter, albeit there be required more wisdom and
experience of things then I acknowledge to be in my self: yet because this
argument hath been thoroughly handled of none before this time (so far as I
know) and published in writing, if I bring to pass nothing else, yet I shall
procure thus much at least wise, that I shall stir up either such as are
better learned, to supply with more skill, that which in me is wanting, or
that they unto whom this charge shall be committed for to execute, may
perform that in deed, which shall be lacking in my words. For me it shall
be sufficient to have made proof, if not of any singular labour, yet at the
least of a notable good will to benefit men. For this cause is not such as
contents it self with fine speech, but which being wisely well advised
upon, ought speedily to be put in practise: and that which Plato hath said
of all virtue, that it is begun of understanding, whereby is inquired what is
to be done, ended in fortitude, whereby it is finished in act, the same
doubtless in this matter is especially needful.

Where then at length or from whence shall we take our beginning? namely,
Preservers of health.
from the very same persons by whose appointmet in a manner all things which
hereafter are to be ordained, must be done and ordered: and these also as in
name, so likewise in deed shall be preservers of health: not many in number
(for nature hath ordained a few to bear rule, and many to obey) but only
three, chosen out of the whole company, partly of the Senate, or as it were
the Bench, and partly of the other Citizens, as they shall be thought most
meet for that purpose, sound in manners, fearing God, endued with experience
of things, and reasonable knowledge in learning (if it may be) beloved of the
Citizens, careful for the public health, faithful, grave, yielding nothing
to their private gain, glory, love, hatred, envy, or any affection. If any
thing fall out, with they are not able to deal wtal, ye same they shall bring to
the whole Senate or Bench, and from thence as from a common head spring, shall
ask what is needful to be done. And they are to consider, and most
certainly to persuade themselves, that the way to remove for ye most part so
great an evil, doth next after the help of God, consist and lye in their
travail and diligence. For as it belongs unto the Physicians to provide that
the bodies of particular persons fall not into the Plague through the
constitution of the air: so shall it be the duty of these preservers, to let,
or take away the public and outward infection.

Now if it, which I say, shall seem new unto any man, let him understand
that I here go about a new in deed, but yet very necessary point of
policy. For it follows not, that if a thing be new, it is therefore also
hurtful: for all things which now are old, were sometime new: and such new
things as notwithstanding with advice and reason are now taken in hand, and
ordained, may with good success receive age, become old. And whereas in all
parts of ye common wealth, there are certain with wisdom made rulers, which
take charge of the same as ye Ediles for buildings, ye Tribunes for war, the
Masters of schools for places of learning, the viewers of Drugs for
medicines. Moreover, when as in all things order is better then disorder
always, and that God him self is the Author and defendor of order, I hope
that wise men will easily grant, that common wealths may admit and receive
this newness. For albeit at the first it will seem somewhat hard unto such as
are not acquainted with it, yet by use it will wax gentle, and become more
acceptable or better liked. For as Balthazar Castilionensis hath said very
well, De Aulico. lib. 1.
an Italyan writer: Use can do more then reason, in bringing in of new
things, and putting away of old. Now what I would have looked unto by this
new Magistrate, and what order by them is to be appointed, as well in persons,
as in all other things: Moreover, howe the hole and also the sick, (so far as
pertains unto the publik charge, for here regard is not had of every
particular person) ought best to be provided for, I will diligently, plainly,
and distinctly, as being thereunto by the whole Senate or bench required (for
so doth the regard of mine office always require) hereafter endeavour openly to
show, and set down every thing severally in his Chapiter.

Of Physicians, Surgeons, and Apothecaries. Cap. 5.
THese therefore appointed Preservers (as I termed them) by the common consent
of the Senate or bench, and by ye assent of the Citizens (if need be) the
first thing of all, that they shall think they ought to see unto, shall be, that
they provide the common wealth of Physicians, Surgeons, and such as they
commonly call Apothecaries, such as for years, fame, experience, honesty of
manners, virtue, and the fear of God, they shall judge to be best liked and
fit. Which conditioned men, if happily the common wealth have not, or ca not
have, (for it is an harde thing to find such, and so perfect, especially in so
dangerous times) yeat at least, that they be careful, to have them in the
next degree, and that they may be commended, excel for faithfulness,
temperancie, painfulnesse, and reasonable experience. And these being hired for
a convenient stipend, bound by oath unto the common wealth, that they take no
occasion to start away, for fear of the sickness greatly increasing (such is
man his weakness) they must severally every one of them be put in mind of
their office: namelye, that manfully shaking off the fear of death, they
lustilye employ them selves to approve their faithfulness and service both
unto God and man: considering that God is the beholder and judge of the things
which they do, howsoever they may be hid from the common people unskilful in
the art. If they do any thing through error or deceit, that it shall not be
unpunished: but if they shall behave them selves in their office diligently and
faithfully, that then they shall receive a far greater reward after this
life, then can of men in this world be paid unto them. Well shall it go (saith
the Psalmist) with that man, Psal. 40. Eccle. 7.
which faithfully deals with the sick: for at what time he him self shall
suffer any trouble, the Lord in like manner will help him.

The Physician privately must be put The Physician.
in mind by the preservers, Hipp. de decenti ornatu. Item in lib. de praec.
med.
that he often consider, how great an hope of al men he takes upon him,
whereby all the Citizens will have him in admiration, and reverence him as it
were some God, sent down from heaven. Also how great good will he shall win
among the men of all degrees, who with good success shall use his help, and
be healed: and how notable a name he shall get amongst others, which shall not
be forgotten, no not after death. For albeit the unthankfulness of some be
very great, especially towards Physicians* yet many will be so bounteous,
that with their liberality, they will bounteously recompense, that which
others of covetousness foreslow to do. That it is the part of honest men to
have more regard of their duty then of gain, and rather to seek and have
an eye unto the health of the Citizens, (whereunto a Christian physician ought
to refer and apply all his labours) then either unto promotion or riches. And
therefore that he show him self gentle and courteous unto al persons, that he
afoord the poor not only his service, but also his monnye according to his
ability: and that of the rich he receive the reward, which they give him
with such modesty and cheerfulness, that he may seem to love the gift for
the men's sake, and not the men for the gift sake: that ambition and the wicked
desire of having, beecommeth bragginge and vaineglorious Thessalians and
Paracelsians, not such as are desirous of their own health, or the health of
their Citizens: But rather let them study night and day, that whatsoever is
profitable, whereby with his art, he may from so dangerous an enemy preserve
and cure those that are committed to his trust and charge, let him use the
same betimes, and wisely in the fear of God, that he may so near as may be,
come unto that point, speedily, safely, pleasantly (wherein doth consist the
whole office of a wise godly Physician.)

Let the Chirurgions be admonished, Surgeons.
that they show themselves ready and wary in all things. Also, that they
impart their counsels with the Physicians, and do all things by their
appointment. For, albeit that now adays through the fault as well of times as
men, it be a several profession, which in times past was one: and that this
part which is called Chirurgerie, be translated unto them: yet they know,
that there are many hard points in it, which unless they learn of skilful
Physicians, and deal by their counsel, they shall not be well able to keep
their standing, and shall many times to their own shame bring slander to so
worthy an art, and through their negligence and unskilfulness be evil spoken
of diffamed amongst others. Let them therefore be persuaded, that it is neither
shameful nor unseemly, which Solon said of him self, Hipp. de praecep.
I wax old, always learning somewhat. And that which Hippocrates saith: In
the danger of a present matter, ignorance casting as it were a cloud of
darkness, others also must be sent for, that by common consent, the cause of
the sick body may be enquired on, and known, and that they may be fellow
workers in helping him. For (as the same says) in continuance of the grief,
the sickness increasinge, for want of counsel, many things at the
present are forgotten. But let our Surgeons have ready stuff fit for the
making of ointments, plasters, and medicines, moistening (for with these
instruments in this sickness for the most part their art is finished.) And let
them not lack lances to open the vain, nor knives to cut, nor irons to
sear, if the sore or impostume (as many times it happens) shall break out.

Fynally, The Apothecaries.
let the Apothecary be instructed, to have in a readiness all kind of needful
remedies, as well simple as compound, expulsiue, preservative, c. and let him
faithfully minister them by the appoyntmente of the Physicians according to
the need of every one, and sell them for a reasonable price. Let him consider
that in a manner ye whole direction and success of the counsel and action of
the Physician and Surgeon doth depend on him. For what shall profit them
to deal artificiallye and painfully, if he vnfaythfullye and carelessly
minister those things, whereby the art and whole charge with praise is to be
executed? Let him not think, that he hath now gotten an occasion to rob and
spoil, when as he sees the Citizens in extreme necessity, compelled to
come by flocks unto his shop: but rather that he is as it were a cooke (by
which name, my meaning is not to impeach his commendation, when as neither
Galen him self any thing at all reproaches ye unworthiness of Physicians, in
comparing his art unto repairing of old rotten houses) which ought to assuage
and satisfy the lusts and hunger of many: or as the steward in the hall of a
great prince, which gives meat and drink at the commandment of his master
unto the whole family, according unto the diversity of office, age, and
dignity: Wherefore the monnie which he receives, let him account not again,
but a consideration of his charge and labour. For they that hunt after gain,
are not wont to follow just dealing, but covetousness, nor the health of their
Citizens care they for, but regard their own vnfillable greediness. Pety
Physicians and Experimensers roging up down the country.
Such as are those petty Physicians, that rog about the country, and to the
killing of many a man: these Experimenser Iewes, Paracelcists, Alchimistes,
jolly brave fellows, that is bragginge and vain boastinges, Thessalian
witches and Sorcerers, men (a certain few excepted) lewd and wicked, which
do not only confound and corrupt the end of a most notable and divine art
(for so is the ancient and old Physic called by S. Paule) but also do
miserably defile and mar the rules thereof, and that which is more
shameful then these, with manifest iuggleries diffame it: whom godly and
learned Physicians do worthily lament and dislike, that through the too much
favour of Princes and Magistrates they are suffered. For when as Physic is an
art fet from the most inner secretes and closets of nature, and seeks her
causes and principles in natural philosophy, which is known to few Princes:
Moreover, when as these Rudesibies and ignorant doltes, or at least wise
cosining runagates amiss instructed, An usual thing in many places, which I
have seen often in Germany.
commended oftentimes by the letters testimonial of many, are woonte no less
shamelessly, then boldly to vaunt themselves and their wares: The Magistrates
that are by nature somewhat too mild, are soon deceived, especially drive by
some notable necessity: so that they give both hearing and entertainment to
such lewd losels, which thing notwithstanding, if they would deal wisely,
they ought not to do, nor should so rashly commend such dishonest persons with
their honest testimonies. For it is a wonder to see, howe with these sealed
titles and writings, the common people, yea and they them selves are besotted,
puffed up in pride, and shamefully deceive many others. Would to God
therefore, which thing al good Physicians wish for, there might be some open
examination and punishment, to punish this their deadly boasting, or at least
wise to bring it down, that they should not dare so easily to give out them
selves falslye for physicians, forthwith to practise so high an art: I wold it
might be by law forbid, yt any man should give to any to drink, medicines,
especially such as serve for purging, unless he be allowed by public
authority: Good God, of how many deceits, of howe many errors, of how many
dangers, that I say not privy murders, should mankind be delivered? I would
to God, I say, we might once see that day, in which this foul and filthy
stable might be cleansed: To the great benefit of the common wealth they are
punished, which set to sale naughti wares: they are punished which sell bad
fish, or flesh: moreover, not so much as a coblar in any kind of handy craft is
admitted publikly to practise his art, unless having served a certain time as
appretize, he can approve himself unto his M. and are they to be let go scot
free, who at their pleasure, in so secret stable or dodging alehouse, where ye
host is a baud, the M. an harlot, the man a lecher, deal with those things
wherein consists the public and private health, or else being decayed, is
restored, do al things deceitfully, betray set to spoil ye health of men
rashly and ignorantly, and (to speak in a word) with heinous treachery in
s;teed of life do minister death? What plague can happen unto a common wealth
more plaguy then this one plague? But I cease with more words to inveigh
against this rake hell Rabble: because there is good hope, that our preservers,
which we make, in so heavy an estate of things, where otherwise many things use
to be don rashly* will not deal loosely, nor by any means handle ye matter so,
but yt they will course away lustily these harmfull Rascals, greedy cormorants,
that those their phisitios, who with due advise the have once received, who
they have had commended by honest testimonies, whom they have got by ye grace
of god, as men endued with virtue, faithfulness, teperacie, godlines, with
knowledge in learning, ye same they will courteously entertein, use maintain with al
kind of favour. Last of al, it shall not be lawful for these to go to any other
diseased persons, then those, which are sick of the plague: which also is to be
determined (yt al occasio of infectio may every where be avoided) concerning
other officers publikly hired for this purpose. For when as it may so fall out,
yt they may carry with them in their garments the infected air, Marcil. Ficin
de Epid. cap. 2*
who yet by reason of the strong state of their nature, or medicines
preservative, which they have take or for yt they have now a good seaso bin
used unto such an air, it do not infect them selves, yet being brought unto
such as have not bin accustomed unto the same, or as are already weak with
sickness, and in danger of every injury, may easily hurt them, what folly (I
pray you) were it, to draw from him poison, of whom you look for remedy? what
poiso? Namly such as received only by breath, or, ye which is more wonderful by
the only transpiration or breathing through of the arteries and veins, doth
sometimes bring present danger unto an whole family, and sometimes unto a
whole City and Country. For it can scarce be told, howe greatly the
corruption of the air about us, and howe fast the poisoned quality doth
cleave unto garments, and chiefly woollen, and how the breath in fetching the
wind doth infect, and as it were with a secrete flame set on fire the veins
and arteries, being the instruments of life. And let these things thus far
have been spoken of the Physicians of the body. Let us hereafter go forward
unto the ministers of the Church, who have the charge of souls.

Of the Ministers of the Church. Cap. 5.
THose now being chosen and allowed, which have the charge of the body,
hereafter provision must be made for spiritual ministers, who may instruct the
sick in faith towards God, and comfort them up with hope of salvation, take
care of their souls, whom the preservers shall so choose in every Parish,
that they take not to so weighty a matter, whosoever comes first to hand,
but such as they shall have known to be singularly given unto godlines,
holiness, sobriety, and chastity. For they that hitherto have had no care of
true godlynes, cannot profitably exhort any man thereunto. And the intemperate
will beestowe most of the time upon their cups, and will be unprofitable unto
them selves, much more unto others: especially seeing this opinion is settled in
the hearts of many, yt they think drunkenness and plenty of wine to be a
notable remedy against this sickness. As for the incontinent, there will be
great peril, when as in these times many occasions of sinning are offred, and
that without punishment, least they commit some such heinous wickedness, for the
which God being rather provoked, increase ye punishment, the knoing it, keep
the same away. And further, they must not be covetous: For in this state of
things, no otherwise the in war, or burnings of houses, Five hanged at Padway.
many things lie open unto ye spoil: for which kind of fact I saw five hanged
at Padway, in the year 1556, after whose execution the sickness in short time
ceased, as if the wrath of God through the punishment of so lewd a part had bin
assuaged. They must besides be upright men, courageous, endued with mean
learning, but not with mean charity: let the be wary, not rash, let them
consider that they have every day death before their eyes. Wherefore let them
put their hope and trust in God alone, look for at his hands, rather an
heavenly then an earthly reward of their labours.

But if peradventure there can no such be found among the ordinary
Ministers, out of the rest of ye people there must be chose such, which come
unto the next degrees of ye foresaid virtues. For in this miserable time ye
things of most perfection come not always to be had. Therefore, as they say, As
we can, when as we would, we may not.

When such at length are chosen, whom the Preservers shall have judged meet and
sufficient for every parish, it may not by any means be suffered, that they
go to any other then such as being taken with the plague, require their help.
For I have said before, and say still, that not only the outward and common
infectious air, but also contagious breaths and infectious breathings, or
blowinges, which are gathered, afterwards imparted to ye hole: others that are
sick by the keepers, by such as sit by the, by the ministers of the church
going hither thither, stading by the infected, yea many times also by them that
are dead, ought specially to be avoided. Which thing, when as by daily
experience we are taught, have proved also unto us to be true, by al means we
have to take heed, least that we leave the cause of this so great a disease in
others, whom with al diligence we have, for fear of infection put a part.
Hereunto you may add, which we have oftetimes no less experience of, yt many
sick persons also (I speak not of such as are infected with the plague) albeit
they be not infected with the company of such ministers, yet they will
nevertheless refuse their presence for fear of the infection. Whereupon also
this inconvenience will arise, yt they had rather receive never so simple
comfort at the hands, either of some of their own household, who for the most
part are unmeet for this purpose, or else dye alone, then to undergo a double
mischief, or receive the usual Sacramentes of ye Church. Which thing, whether
otherwise it be godly, or not godly done, albeit it be not greatly material
here to discuss, yet upon ye occasio offered, I will set down certain reasons on
both sides, whereby the students in divinity may be stirred up to examine ye
reason of this known practise of our elders, how far it may be allowed, is
needful for the sick persons, they them selves may judge: least any man might
think yt I wold foreiudg or prescribe the skilful learned Divines.

They therefore which hold, that ye private receiving of the Lords Supper may
or ought to be left undone of the sick, give counsel, Of private receiving of
the Lords supper.
that whatsoever such rites ought to be done, be done in time, and in the
public assembly, Reasons of the that deny it.
which they say proceeds partly from ye ignorance of the common people,
partly of distrust, and not to be without suspicion of a kind of superstition.
remembrance of the death and benefits of Christ, that it cannot conveniently
comely be done of such as are half dead, and stricken with the fear of
death. Thirdly she cast roses and pearls unto swine, and give that which is
holy unto dogs. Fiftly, Hyppocrates himself, who hath said of unwholesome
or unclean bodies, that the more they are nourished, the more they are hurt.
Which Plato and Galen in like manner affirm of unclean souls, unto which if
you offer wholesome and nourishable speeches: that is, admonish them of virtues
or vices, they wax not only not the better, but also the worse. Wherefore
wise Physicians, when as they doubt of a disease, or of strength of the sick
body, therefore what will be ye issue, they are wont to follow ye more safe easy
medicines, not such as may bring into danger. Lastly, they say yt not so much
as the form, which gives unto every thing his being, is observed and kept in
that private ministration unto the sick. For Christ unto his Apostles, that
is, unto the Church present, and gathered in one, and not to one particular
person, divided the Supper, and said not take, but take ye: nor eat, but eat
ye: Finally, not drink, but drink ye: wherefore S. Paule in rehearsing the
ordinance of Christ, bad not every man to eat his own Supper, but one to
tarry for another, that it might truly be called a Communion, and that by the
breaking and partaking of one loaf, might be showed a lively growing together
in charity to be made, and also an incorporation into Christ, and our
neighbours and the receivers present. And these things are so liked of the one
side, that they would never have this sacrament ministered to any, but in the
public assembly. For whereas it seems unto some, that as the word may be
preached every where, and set forth to men alone either sick or whole: so
also this Sacramet of our Communion, may privately be rightly ministered unto
one, they think that the comparison is not alike. For that every kind of
ministry hath his manner form as it were, without the which they cannot be
the thing that they are called, albeit all things tend unto the same end.
What that properly it is no part of the ministry, unto sick men, or unto
others privately without the public assembly to have the word read,
preached, and with the same, others to be admonished, instructed, and
comforted. For that this may be done of any, and so is wont to be, yea even
of women, unto whom notwithstanding the public ministry is not permitted,
wherefore they think that here is a dislikelihood, and that their cause as yet
stands: namely, that the receiving of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper ought
not to be private, but public, and common unto many.

The reasons of them that maintain private receiving.
On the contrary side, others contend that this use and custom of private
receiving of the Supper of the Lord ought to be retained, if not at all times,
yet at least wise, when the whole congregation receives it in the Church. For
albeit Christ (say they) peradventure did it not, as who held the Supper only
once with his Apostles, hereof yet it follows not, either that it is not
lawful, or that the Apostles and the Church which followed them, did it not.
For such as were absent might be let upon lawful causes, as by sickness,
or age* or other occasions, so that they could not resort unto the public
assembly. Hereupon the old fathers of the true primatiue Church, used to
impart it as well to such kind of persons being in health, as to those yt
were sick, to the one as the cognisance, and badge of peace and agreement of
faith, and to the other as a passport to them that were going away. For when as
the Church is as it were one united and whole body, and that Supper appointed
for the whole Church, there is no cause (they say) why she may lawfully deny
it unto some certain members being absent, upon some ceraine lets. And whereas
it is said that the Church is uncertain of the faith and mind of such
persons, albeit this peradventure may have place in those whom it is manifest
to have led a loose and lewd life before, in such as are unknown unto the
Church: yet this principle ought to be retained, which hitherto hath bin used:
The Church doth not judge of things yt are hidden, and whosoever do confess
with us with one consent Christ, and in plain words acknowledge that they
repent of their sins, being by Baptism ingrafted into the common body of the
outward congregation, that of these we ought to hope well, and to make them
partakers of the outward benefits of the Church. For (say they) there is not so
great danger, as seems unto others for to be, and that here there is no more
poison given in steed of medicine unto them that crave it, the there is to
those that are in body body present, and gathered together in the congregatio.
And that we must not so much regard unto whom it is given (so that they be not
open enemies of religion, or by force of the disease driven out of their
wits) then what is given. For that the chief end of this Sacrament is, that
Christ should assure us, yea, make us partakers of his promise, benefits
purchased with his own blood (which on yt high altar of our redemption he shed to
set men at liberty) yt he should arm us with faith hope, knit Christias
together with the bond of mutual love, inflame the as it were with a certain
fire of love. Moreover, when as ye sacraments are a part of the word, as it were
certain visible words, the which also according unto ye mind of others, bring
no other thing, the the word it self preached heard, albeit they do it by
another mean, they say there is no cause why sufficient, wherefore we should
more withhold them then this from any man, who thus far, as concerns
outward conversation, have bin our brethren: for who can judge the hart, but
God alone? If they have heretofore lived somewhat more at large, may it not be
that either a short admonition of the minister, or a little breathing of the
holy Ghost, may raise up in them some small spark, the which by all means to
cherish, so as it be not against godlines, shall not be unprofitable? Howe I
pray you ca it chose but be against ye wisdom of a Christia, to deprive them
fro thanks giving remembrance of the Lords death, who in their heart feel
themselves to be moved to celebrate keep the same with the church, that is,
with their body, albeit in situation of place absent therfro, wold declare
themselves to be a member thereof, to be short, are desirous to testify before
others, yt they are displeased with their former life? Last of al, these lean so
far to this opinion, yt they think the supper of ye Lord to be no where more
rightly ministered, the among the sick. For here is in deed retained the true
form thereof, in the which it was first instituted: namely, at the point of
death, or upon some other urgent great peril, some sharp admonitio going
before. And to be brief, a lively faith, hope of salvation, earnest prayers,
an ardent mind following: yt is, altogether earnestly. Which consideration hath
so far liked some, that they have thought yt there could be not better
reformation of the mass, yt is of ye abused supper of the Lord, the to have it
made by this rule.

These things I minded to say here by the way, the which albeit they do but
smally appertain hereunto, and have been spoken as it were besides the cause,
and that I my self leave the matter in suspense to be determined by my
masters the Divines and Governors of the Church: yet hereof would I have
our diseased people to be admonished, that touching this matter they quiet
themselves, and be not troubled in mind, if happily either through the
cruelty of sickness, or for other causes, they cannot at that time be
partakers of this Sacrament, as cocerning the outward ceremony. For if the
Heathen Poet have judged it sufcient, so far as able thou shalt be, the
immortal Gods to serve: why should not rather we Christians, who by the son
of God are delivered from all bondage, persuade our selves the same, and
believe that God, who searches the hearts and reins, and requires not so
much the fact, as the mind, will as well be present with us by his spirit, as
if in the very deed we had fulfilled all the Ceremony? For this is that
spiritual eating or Communion, which our Elders also believed to be done in
mind, and faith, and to make us no less partakers of the body of Christ
bringing salvation* then they are which use the outward ceremony: if so be we
can say with a constant and steadfast faith: Lord, I am not worthy that thou
shouldest enter under the roof of my house, but only say the word, and my
soul shall be hole. The Lord himself in Iohn saith, I stood before the door
knocked, if a man hear my voice, open the door, I will come in unto him, will
sup with him, and he with me, c. And S. Augustine bids us believe, De
ciuit. de^. lib. 21. ca. 25.
and saith, that in believing we have eaten. Also in another place he saith, He
that is in the unity of Christ his body, that is, in the joining of the
members of Christias, the Sacrament of the which body, the faithful receivers
are wont to take at the altar, By Altar, he means the ^ble of the Communion.
he indeed is to be said to eat the body of Christ, and to drink his blood.
Let Christians therefore persuade themselves of this, if they cannot by lawful
means be partakers of the earthly part of the Sacramets, that the heavenly may
abundantly suffice, the which at any time by faith to receive is no hard
matter. The same also I dare pronouce of the comforting and strengthening,
which by the ministers of the Church is wont to be made unto the sick, that it
is sufficient, when as it cannot be had otherwise, if they be used by private
persons. Which thing that it is not diligently done, the cause is in the
shameful slouthfulnesse of the common sort of Christians, who always learn,
and never come unto the knowledge of the truth. For many so carelessly hear
the public sermons, A cammon fault.
that they bring not so much profit from thence, as that in the extreme
necessity of sickness or death, they can be able in any point according to
the will of God to instruct, or with godly consolations to strengthen either
themselves, or their household, who truly ought to know this, that as it is
not lawful for schollers in the school to be idle hearers: so also that it
becomes them not to come unto the Church as it were to behold some play of
runners about the Country, but as it were unto that place, whereas both
Christ himself the son of GOD sits as ruler, and the angles mark the
hearers, within a little while after as it were to take an account of every
one, of the fruits of their diligence, and seuerelye to punish the negligent.
I pray you, if we saw these things with our eyes, would we not promise to
deal earnestly and diligently, and in no case negligently and carelessly? A
Tale.
In the lives of the fathers we read, that a certain religious manne, when
as he diligently marked the Monks according to their manner singing, that he
saw the evil spirits to creep into some of their throats, and to provoke
them to coughing, and to slyde into the noses of others, and make them to
neese, to enter into others ears and pull them, to shut up the eyes of
others, and to cause them to sleep. Which things although they be fabulous
or but a tale, yet they plainly signify, that our rechlesse negligence, and
slouthfulnesse comes from the Devil the Father of laziness and sloth, and
that it is wicked carelessness. But hereof more then peradventure I ought.
Wherefore, now I return unto the matter in hand.

Of order to be appointed among the Citizens, and of leaving of public
meetings and assemblies. Cap. 6.
THere must also an order be set down among the Citizens, to avoid public
asseblies, games, feasts, drinkings, marriages, daucings, fayers, schools,
churches, public bathes, For besides that in many of these there is great
offence committed not only against the body, but also against the soul,
there is also no small danger of getting and scattering the infection.
Wherefore, wise men give counsel, that at such times we should very seldom come
into great companies of men. For there is no man so unskilful but he knows,
that where as al things are done without consideration as it were in a mingle
mangle, yt there the infection is spread farthest, and infects many. As when
the taverns typling houses, whither they go to drink, are open unto al daily,
ye market also, ye shambles, public places also in which linne is washed, and
diverse sorts of people are wont to be mixed together, are haunted. In this
case therefore laws must be made by the preservers, whereby such meetings may
be forbidden, or else severed into diverse places and times.

And first concerning Churchmeetinges, Of order to be kept in the church.
this counsel is to be given, that they come not by heaps, or by thronges,
neither in, nor go out, and that they flock not by great nubers into one
Church, where they shall be driven to fit straightly and near together,
especial in one City: whereas there are more places fit for this purpose, in
the which the divine service, that is, the expounding of the word of God,
and administration of the Sacraments may be done. For albeit these things may
peradventure seem unto some to be but small, and of little importance, yet
nothing is to be omitted, which by any means may make for the turning away of
the infection. And that which Cicero said, that when as we ought to do for
the benefit of men, and do service to the fellowship of mankind, nothing is to
be kept close, whatsoever commodity or store we have, the same especially ought
to have place at this time.

If marriages be to be made (albeit whom Of marriages.
can these contractes like in such an estate of things, in which if at any
time else, the counsel of the Apostle ought to prevail, that for the present
necessity it were better to remain single) let them be kept with a very
small number of persons, and without all pomp. As for drunkenness and
gormandize, Tob. 2. Amos 8. 1. Match. 1. Prou. 14.
dauncinges, and other not necessary or rather dangerous and hurtful
ceremonies and fashions, which for the most part are wont to be used: let
them be sent packing far away, least (as it is in the Proverb) this sweet
meat have sower sauce, and least they bewail the next day the oversight
committed the day before. But chieflye drunkenness is such a vice, which
doth not only greatly offend God, where it is left unpunished, but also
draws with it other most horrible sins, as blasphemy, perjuries, bawdries,
wrongs, murders, incests, adulteries, fornications (al which for the most
part are wont to issue out of ye ugly serpent, do provoke the wrath of God
against ye whole nation, Marcil. Fic. de Epidem. cap. 24.
) I will not say, yt those which daily use this customable glutting quaffing,
are more subject to this sickness, harder to be cured. Histories report of
Socrates, for yt he lived teperatly, yt he always was of sound health, although
he lived in many great plagues, which reigned at Athes. For (as Aristotle Galen
say) there is such a constitution in sound bodies, yt they seldom be infected
with ye plague, or if they be, yet they die not. On ye other side, it is
manifest by ye exaples of many newly take with the plague, Leonar. Fuchs. de
medic. mor. li. 4. Alex. Aphr. 1. Prob, 83.
yt when as they have plentifully filled themselves with wine, they have come
into great dagger, miserable present death. For in this case, if at any time
else, the counsel of Gale is most profitable, where he saith, that the body
must be pure sound winded. Wherefore, it is not only ye duty of ye magistrate,
to make a law set a sharp punishment against such gluttos, but they themselves
also, if they will seem Christias, not rather altogether Pagas, must take heed,
yt they run not into ye sharp saying of S. Paule, Detestation of drunkenness.
in which is pronounced, yt drukards shall be shut out fro ye kingdo of God, let
the remember always ye commandment of Christ, where he saith: Take heed that
your bodies be not ouerloden with surfeiting drukennes. Which commademet they
which so carelessly dare set themselves against, stir up others unto ye like
riot, I cannot judge how they should not be plain Antichrists. For what is more
Antichristian, the directly to cast off ye comademet of christ: to command ye
which Christ forbids? But I will not here more largely rake up this puddle,
when as such offences ought not so much to be kept under with arguments as by
laws.

Of dauncinges.
As for these daunsings friskings, which are wont to be used so unseasonably, to
wit, straight after meat the table taken away (for thus have many persuaded
themselves, if no man will dance that is sober, except it be a mad ma, that they
deal very wisely, if they do it when they be drunk, that is stuffed and
crammed till they are like to burst again, with wine and meat) these are to
none more hurtful the unto ye dancers themselves, namely, gathering together
abundance of raw humours, which oftentimes do quickly engeder great
rottenness, and obstructions, or stoppings of the veins, whereof are wont to
grow hurtful and pestilent fevers. And hereof says Leonarth Fuchsius a most
excellent Physician of our country of Germany, that he by experience hath
tried, that many whilst they were in dancing, were infected with this plague
and died.

Further I said also that public bathes were for many causes to be avoided,
Of public bathes.
which in such a time is as it were a present deadly poison: for that many and
diverse sorts of me one with an other use to be gathered together in that same
vaporous or reeky air: of the which some not long before were infected with
this disease, and now by sweating wold empty out the remnants of the same:
others being anointed with sundry medicines and preseruatiues, of the which
every one brings his several filth, and infectious breaths, wherewith they
fill that same air shut in, the which air received by those which are there
present, have their bodies now rarefied or made thin through the heate, is
very easily drawn in by the mouth and nostrils, and also by the pores or small
holes of the skin being opened, and many times being carried unto the heart or
brain, or liver by the arteryes and veins, may very speedily corrupt with
infection.

Now concerning houses of learning and schools, in which children come
together, Of schools.
what shall I say else, then that it seems very convenient, and in manner
necessary, if we will avoid the spreading of the infection, that those which
cannot be brought unto a place more commodious, be for a time shut up, and
that the youth be rather taught at home, albeit with never so small profit, and
give themselves to private readinges, then with so great danger by heaps to
come together. For the age of children and lads, as being given to feeding,
intemperate, tender, thin, unwary, is wont to be more subject unto this
sickness, then it that is elder of more years. Wherefore, Rhases the chief of
the Arabia Physicians, and after him Franciscus Valleriola Physician of Arles,
give counsel that Infantes and children be with speed removed fro infectious
places into an other country, where they need fear no danger of infection.

Of yearly fairs.
The like may be judged of common and yeerelie fairs, also of funerals or
burials, whereof in their place shall be entreated more at large.

Unto this Chapter, let the Preservers add this, and earnestly advise upon it
with all the Magistrates, namely, whether it were better for certain poor
people, which get their living by begging from door to door, and by reason
of their needy life feeding on every thing, are more in danger of this
disease then others, go unto, and run about all streets, chiefly such
houses where dead corses are, and seek unto all men (for cruel necessity
drives them out of their own poor Cottages) let them I say consider, whether
it were better to send them some whither else, or to maintain them by the
common charge at their own houses so long, until ye sickness slack, that by this
means occasion may be taken from them of running up down, of receiving, and
scattering the infection. For it can scarce be said, howe great and present
danger doth hereby grow unto the whole city. For which cause I have seen in
the most famous city of Padway, after this same manner meat daily by the
common charge allowed, not only unto the poorer sort, but also unto them of
reasonable wealth, which either had been with the sick, or were them selves
infected, that so much the more easily they might be kept within their own
walls at home. Of maintaining the poor.
And it were a thing highly to be wished, that not only in these times, in
which especially necessity doth require the same, but continually and
always care were had of all common wealths, that the poor might be
otherwise maintained, then by this shameful, and unto Christians reproachful,
running up and down, by which they inure themselves unto nothing but idle
life, and all kind of naughtiness. Which thing that it is not done, I see no
other let but our own gross negligence. For in our part of Christendom,
there is scarce any village so mean, but that it were able in some reasonable
sort to maintain their poor, if so be the Magistrates did mind the matter,
and that wisdom and order were used. The which after what manner it might and
ought to be, albeeit I have this good while been in devising, yet after I
saw, The regiment of the poor traslated by M. Trip a Preacher.
that the most godly, and in all kind of learning the most skilful divine
Andreas Hyperius diligently and sufficiently to have set down the same, there
is no need of my declaration.

This also in this place I have thought good to call into counsel, because
that oftentimes there are many fearful, many weak by nature, and unfit
to do service in the common necessity, whom it were better to live some where
else, that it might be both more commodious for them, and the common wealth also
less charged, whether it may be ordained, to set these at liberty, to get
them selves for a time unto some other place. For although that some either for
religion sake, or for shame dare not to leave their City oppressed with common
misery, and will not seem willing to fly the hand of God: yet if by the
advice of the Magistrate it shall be thought good, and that it be done for the
end which I have said, I doubt not but that with a good conscience it is
lawful. For this way it shall come to pass, that the less multitude of
people there is, so much the less infection there shall be: and the less
infection there is, so much less dying and more speedy deliverance is to be
hoped for. For like as when the rot is gotten into an heap of Apples, the
more lye gathered together, the more it increases, and the longer the rotting
endures: so also here it comes to pass, that if once the Plague be crept
into a City that is populous, we see the sickness daily to be increased and
cherished a great while, which thing is not wont in such sort to happen in a
place less peopled, if the other things which we have said already and
mean to say hereafter, be observed.

Of order which is to be kept in the buying and selling of things necessary.
Cap. 7.
ANd thus much of order to be kept among the Citizens: hereafter we must see
concerning the selling and buying of things necessary: that as before care was
had of medicines for the body, and of sacrifices Sacramentes for the soul: so
also provision be made for the Citizens of nourishments, vitayles, meat and
drink. For if Diogenianus have said truly, that by the things wherewith we
live, by the same also we get sickness, it is a thing doubtless greatly material,
that not only things hurtful be not brought into the city, but also ye
things good profitable should be brought, but with such a Proviso, that the
things yt are to be brought in, Th. Taber. de pest. lib. 8.
be set abroad, and sold with least danger. Here therefore laws are to be
made, what kinds of meates may be lawful to be sold, what not: also for what
price: lastly, in what places, and a certain penaltye by the Preservers to
be set upon the offenders.

First therefore must straightly be forbidden, that none of the country or
indwellers set to sale, or sell sweet cherries, prunes (except vngary damask)
new grapes, figs peaches, pears, mellow sweet apples, melons, pippins, and
least of all cucumers, the which (as Galen witnesses) have great store of
juice apt to putrifiyng: Marcil, Ficinus permits Gourdes, and Rhazes, who
dwelled in Egypt, where there is much drought, in a season very hot
grants herbs, and Summer fruits, such as are cold and moist: which is
scarce lawful for us in this country to follow. Secondly, Meates not to be
eaten.
diligent heed must be taken, that no man sell opelie corrupt or il dressed fish
flesh, amongst which also must be numbered, although it can hardly be
forbid, to youg lab veale, which in certain great cities is wont very ill to
be done: also fish yt are not scaly, soft, take in rot pooles, as eels,
laprous, lapreies, Fish not to be eaten.
the fishes called albuli bustomi. For it ca scarce be told, what apt matter
al, these do minister unto rottenes. In ye steed therefore of al these, are not
only to be admitted, but also to be desired, by ye preservers procured such as
are holsom, ingeder good blood, may be some let unto ye sickness growing: as are
among the sumer fruits, damask vngary prunes dried: Fruits to be eaten.
raysons, corinthes, sower peaches, pears which are wont to be laid up against
winter, quinces, bitter almods, capers, walnuts, sower cherries, especial
Pomgrannats, orages, limons, and citrons. Among the herbs are, Lettise,
Succorie, Milkethistle, Purslayne, Herbs to be eaten.
Orach, Spinach, Sperache, Carduus benedictus, Baume, Sorrel, Burrage, Burnet,
Rue, Betomy, Rosemarie, Sage, Isop, Cheruil, Parsley, Fenell, and such like.
The which when as all men have not, neither can have, it shall not be
unprofitable, to buy them daily of the Gardiners, that bring them to market.
Fishes to be eaten.
Fishes which at that time may be eaten (albeeit every country may measure
this according unto the nature of ye place, for all lands bring not forth all
things) shall be chiefly such as be amongst stony places or grauelly, as
Gougeons, Loches, Pearches, Pickerels, Breames, Trowts, Soles, Sticklebagges,
Bleakes, Barbels, Carpes. To teach that these should be sod in Vinegar, or
small wine, albeit it be no small remedy to preserve health, yet doth it not
pertain to our present purpose. For here is set out the duty of the
Magistrate, and not the diet of particular persons. Flesh to be eaten.
Wholesome flesh are, Chickens, Capons, Hens, Partridges, Pheisantes, Wood
doves, Turtles, Pigeons, the Attagen, Thrushes, Starles, Sparrows,
Chaffinches, and all small birds that live in woods, bushes and vines: also
kids, fat Calves, and of reasonable age, Roes, Hares, Harts, Cunnies, Oxen,
Weathers. Neither are spices altogether to be overpassed, the use whereof the
richer sort (for the poor make hunger and labour a sauce) may use as
preseruatiues in saucing their meats. Spice to be eaten.
And they are these, Cynnamom, Saffron, Nutmegs, Mace, Cloves, whole Pepper,
for ye strength thereof being of a thin light substance, is easily dissolved by
feathing, doth heat overmuch. And thus much concerning meates.

There must no less care be used concerning drink, that none at al be
suffered, Beer*
which may in any respect be a nourishment unto rottenesse: and again such
must be provided as is wholesome, by the counsel of the Physicians, according
unto ye custom of the place. I would not speak any thing unto the prejudice or
fore judging of others: yet can I not allow of all kind of drinks a like.
Manardus a very learned famous Physician of our time disliketh all Beer in
this sickness: but because he was an Italian, and accustomed only unto wine
(for Italie scarce knows our Beer) his judgment in this point is not
greatly to be accounted of. For I dare certainly affirm, that our double and
single Bream Beer, also the Beer of other cities adjoining, is not vnholsom,
especially, if it be clear, well sodden, reasonably hopped, and not to high
coulored, for so it may dry the bodies, and strengthen the powers, clear the
spirits, and after a sort like unto wine, make glad (as the Psalmist speaks)
the heart of man. He that is desirous to know the virtues of every kind of
beer, let him read the treatises of some written of this matter, and examine
them according to the rule now set down, which is applied unto the state of
time, in respect whereof we have directed this our whole advice. I have spoken
first of Beer, because this hath the first and chief use with us: yet in the
mean season I deny not, Wine.
but that wine deserves especial commendation, and is far better then
Beer* or any other kind of drinks, if it be pure, not to strong. The chief
praise is give to white wine, pure, ripe, well smelling, old, austere, rather
the sweet: neither is claret wine disliked of a thin substance, of reasonable
age, not striking the head. Let the same judgment be concerning made wines of
Wormwood, Cardus Benedictus, Betonie, Sage, Rosemary: but of whom, when, and in
what quantity these are to be used, perteineth not unto this place. Thus
far therefore of drinks and meates: other things concerning food, as not
necessary, I purposely pass over, least I might seem scrupulously to deal
with every small matter.

For the price of these things, Of the price of things.
which was the second thing set down, this only I am to counsel, that there
be used by ye preservers reasonableness, not only as Aristotle requires in
the exchange price of things, and equal unto the wares, but also such as hath
regard unto the poverty and ability of the chapmen, according unto the estate
of the persos, the same in such sort yt whilst ye one is had care of, the
other be not burdened And because ye judgement in this case is hard, this
equity is to be left unto the discretion of the sellers, with this caveat
Christian remembrance, yt they have not so much their minds greedily set upon
gain (which in this state of things is in no case seemly) as upon that saying
of ye Apostle: Love seeks not the things, which are her own. Again, They
that will be rich, fall into tentations: again, let no man beguile his brother
in bargaining. For what shall it avail thee so greedily to scrape together yt
thing, from which thou ought to fear, least thou be take every momet? Thou
fool (saith Christ unto ye rich ma in ye gospel, which here I may say unto
thee, O whosoever thou art with in this como mystery hutest after thy private
lucre) this night shall thy soul be taken from thee, and then whose shall they
be, which thou hast gathered together? Wherefore thus rather we ought to
determine with our selves, that we in this world possess nothing as our own,
but only are stewards of another man his goods. If we have gotten any thing to
our master with our labour honestly, the labour will end, but the reward remain:
but if contrariwise, we shall have burdened our neighbour with dishonest and
unlawful taking, the iniquity will remain, the gain have an end. Besides this,
my request is also in this case, that princes such as have customs tolles,
would yield somewhat of their right, unto these cities people, which being
visited with this sickness, are both overladen with their own charges, also
cannot use their wonted traffic.

Lastly, also as touching the place, wherein all things pertaining unto meat
drink, Of places meet for sale.
are to be sold, some thing must be added. For it seems not convenient, that
all things should be brought into one market. For so it must needs be, that a
mighty multitude of people should come together, that the savours of diverse
things, many times also filthy strongly smelling must be mixed together, which
thing doubtless will give no small occasion of rottenness, which, if we will
avoid, the infection must with all diligence be shunned, as hath been often
said already. There must therefore be ordained many places, in sundry parts
of the city, where those things must be set, which pertain unto food, and are
needful for every one. Let there also be a several market for flesh and
fiish, for herbs and fruits, that all discommodities, which may arise by the
mingling together of a multitude of people, and bringing of things saleable,
may with al diligence be avoided.

Of purging the air, cleansing the streets, putting away of kine, hogs
geese, c. Chap. 8.
Such things as concern meates and drinks, have been set down in ye chapter
next before, wherein, when as we thought good to prescribe among other things,
several places for the sale of ye same, that the spreading of the infection
might be hindered, and yet nevertheless the rottennes, whereof oftentimes the
same takes not only his beginning, but also increase, can hardly be kept from
those places, it follows by good reason, yt we briefly treat of purging the
air, of cleasing the streets, of keeping away kine, hogs, and geese, the
which do greatly defile the same. For I see that al the learned, yea and the
common sort also do hold this: namely, that the causes are to be taken away,
if we will take away ye effects, which grow of the causes: also, that the pure
air doth make much to the strengthening of the spirits, and unto health, so
that it hath given occasion of a proverb: Such air, such mind: also it is
known, that nothing doth so much dissolve the powers as stench. And because
the streets can not be kept clean, First.
nor consequently stench, rottenness, and vnpurenesse of the air to be
let, so long as such living creatures are suffered, which engender store of
such filth, these must be put into some place without the City, which seems
fit for this turn: namely, which is near the river, if it may be, that their
filthy excrements may be purged into it, or else that from thence the stinking
reekes as little infect the City as may be. For the doung and excrements of
those beasts, which I have spoken of, do more then will be believed, infect
and weaken the spirits and principal members, as the brain the heart, c.

There is alike fault unto this, and too abominable (the which I marvel to
be suffered in worshipful Cities, and I shame to speak it) that the
streets, and allies, yea and the Church yards also, are every where in some
places so defiled with ye doung of shameless Roges and Beggars, that which
way so ever you turn your self (with reverence be it spoken) you will think
you see not a public and commendable way in the City, but a vile and beastly
Iakes. The like in manner you may say of lye water, wherewith linen clothes and
vessel are washed, the which maids are wont commonly to caste before the doors
of the neighbours, when as they cannot abide it at their own houses.

Wherefore the Preservers must do their endeavour, that when as they have
freeed the City from these beasts they also command these filths to be
carried all away, and by law decree, that none hereafter do either maintain
or admit any such filthines. The which yt it may the better be observed, there
must be made in place fit for that purpose, sties and stables in such manner as
hath been said: also public houses of office, and sinckes under ground, into
the which may be carried all such kind of foul stuff, which places when
they begin once to be full, let them be covered with lyme, to drink it up
withal: for the other practise, which is used in carrying it out, is not
without danger at that time.

Ditches about Cities.
Afterwards also the Ditches, if there be any within, or without the City (for
the walls of Cities many times are wont to be compassed about with ditches,
which often serve the common people in steed of priuies, whilst they carry
out into the same, as into some foul hole, all their filth) Also ponds and
standing waters, if from out of them there be suspicion of any evil reekes
(as when Flax and Hemp, or Tanners skines are steeped in them, or when as
houses of offices by vautes under the ground do empty their sincks into
them) they are either to be filled up with earth, or by trenches to be let
out, and carried away: or finallye, if it may be, they are some certain
times to be scoured, by lettinge in some swift brooke into them. For such
many times (as Paulus Aegineta doth witness) are causes procuring contagious
and infectious air. Li. 1. Cap. 49
The same do all Physicians, and many great Divines think of Churchyards, of
the which somewhat more shall be said in the second book. Of Africa we read,
that it was sometimes infected with a great plague, by reason of a corrupt
breath fuminge up from sea lopsters cast up on the shore, and there dying.
Alex. Ben. li. 1. de pe. ca. 1.
The same witnesses Alexander Benedictus, to have happened sometimes after
great earthquakes. For (saith he) a filthy vapour lying a lunge time resting
and moulding under the earth, as it were in everlasting darkness, may
infect the moist and pure air, and bring new and evil fevers: Such as
histories record were sometimes at Venice, by means whereof all women almost
that were great with Child, were delivered of their Children dead before their
time, and anon after dyed of the plague, the same year. For whereas some
laid the cause hereof upon a Dragon, which lay lurking in those Caves, it
was but a tale. It is needless to bring hither more examples, albeit it might
be done in great plenty. For experience and reason, two chief causes of
making things to be beeleeued, do agree to this opinion. Wherefore the
Preservers must take great heed, least, when as they have used other kinds of
industry and payne taking, and leave beehynde these present breeders of
corruption, they lose both their cost, and also their labour.

But here peradventure some manne will object unto me that common sayeinge:
Purging of the air.
that one poison is driven out with an other, likes as one nail with an other:
Also the usage of some Nations, who at such times are wont not to keep or
cleanse the places infected from evil and filthy savours, but to fill and
stuff them. Whereof Alexander Benedictus recites a story of his time,
worthy to be remembered, A (...) story
concerning the country Sarmatia, the which also he thinks may be
confirmed by natural reason.

A certain noble Merchant, (says he) of Creta Li. de pe. ca. 6
, when as he traded Merchandise in the Country of Tauros, and that a most
cruel Pestilence was grown by reason of the corruption of the air, by means
whereof there was no end of dying, reported, that he saw a Physician in that
notoryous death of men, a dweller of that place (for the Sarmatians do
inhabit there) who commanded Dogs to be killed, and every where to be
cast in the ways and streets, which Dogs being swollen up and rotten,
filled the air with a filthy savour, and that by this remedy the City was
straight restored to health. Also that the Sarmatians are woonte often to use
this medicine.

For the Dogs putrefying changed the nature of the air, which was only
hurtful unto the men. For so doth vnlykenesse and discord of things
work, and one poison is maystered of an other. Zoar.
Which thing also one Zoar among the latter Arabian Physicians doth affirm.

This story tells Alexander, the which least any laysie bones might
allege in defence of his sloathfulnesse, whilst he is desirous to avoid
such means and labour of cleansing, as wise men do counsel: or least any
manne should rashly follow that, which he understands not howe it is done,
the cause of so vnhearde of, and unwanted remedy is to be sought out. I
grant therefore it to be true, that one poison sometimes is driven out with
an other: but when that shall be done, there must needs be a manifest or
secrete contrariety of qualities between those things which drive out one
another. For otherwise the one will not only fly from the other, but will
rather come unto it, and will be joined and knit in felloweship more
strongly and neerelye: For concord (says Hyppocrates) cleaves unto and
dwells with concord. But things disagreeing use rebel, fight, and disagree
among them selves. It is also commoly said, that like things are not only
preserved with like, but also increased and strengthened: as fire uses to be
increased with oil, Naphta is a kind of chauky clay, that burning with fire,
the more water is put to it, the greater is the flame.
Naphta, brimstone, aumber wood: heat with heate: the Ague with rottenness of
humours: the Dropsy with drinking of water, Choler with the eating of Capons,
and the poison of the plague (as Marcill Ficinus saith) with wool. And this
contrariety of qualities which I spake of, when as it proceeds from an
inborne quality, which in diverse kinds of things is diverse and oftentimes
hath manyfolde causes, even according unto the nature of the place,
constitution of the air, temperature and disposition of the subject or thing
it is in, and finallye according unto the proportion of the poison and agent
cause, it doth wonderfully vary, and may rather be understood by the
falling out of the thing, then by any steadfast reason. What shall we say then
unto the question put forth? Is this cure done by any manifest quality? For
the nature of Dogs is dry, and the rottenness, wherewith for the most
part the plague is joined, is said to be a corruption in a moist body. Or
shall we say, that the stench of Dogs putrefying is by a certain secrete
quality repugnant unto the nature of the plague? Truly, I dare not say so, in
as much as this cannot be proved (so far as I know) by the authority of
any, but only by the custom of that country, and the experience of that
soil agreeable: namelye, that there a certain singular plague, a singular
nature of Dogs, a singular temperature of men, a singular air, and such
other things as are in this case required, do all agree in a certain
singular quality, which in other parts of the woorlde, in other natures of
beasts and men are not in al points so like. Which cannot be doubtefull
unto them, Clementius Clemen. de not pest.
which are endued but with reasonable experience of things. For the poison and
infection of the Plague is not after one sort, in all times and places.

Men also and other kinds of living creatures do greatly differ within them
selves.

There is such a Plague, as in which chiefly Fyshes dye, sometimes
fourefooted beasts, sometimes Birds, sometimes Mankind, and amongst
mankind sometimes Women more then Men, and the younger more then the elder.

Hieronimus Cardanus a man most skilful in many things, Li. 4. de var. rer.
cap. 4. Scrib. Large. in pref. de compo. medi.
makes mention of a certain plague at Basil, with the which only the
Heluetians, and not the Spaniardes, or Italians, or Frenchmen, which were in
the same City, were visited, which truly were to be wondered at woorthyly,
unless we knew the variety of things to be endless, and the greater part
(as Aristotle, the chief of Philosophers confesses) to remain always
unknown unto us. Therefore to conclude this doubt, De anscul. Phis.
I think that we ought rather to follow the authority of most famous men,
as well old as new, which have handled this cause, when the received custom
of barbarous people of one strange place, by what experience soever, in which
place also peradventure the last do not agree with the first in one
continual course.

Wherefore, sithence we know, The power of fire.
that a great part of such deadly mischief doth depend on the corrupt,
rotten, and infected air, and that fire above all things doth resist
corruption, let us rather use fire, following Hippocrates, then these
outrageous stenches, which may greatly hurt even those that are sound: Let
our streets shyne with fire, let our air burn with fire, the goodness of
whose substance howe great and subtyle it is, read Albucasis the Arabian
Surgeon in the first part of his Chirurgerie, Chapter 1. For the fire is
most pure, Discor. 6. cap. 36. Plin. not. hist. 36. cap. vlt.
and purifieth all things, whereupon Eusebius in his church history doth
witness, that the Chaldees in old time did worship it, as a mighty GOD.
Water doth cleanse but the outward part, and cannot wash the inner, Li. 11.
ca. 26
because it cannot pearse unto them: but fire, when as by his force he goes
through all things, leaves nothing untouched, and when as it is by nature
most pure, as hath been said, it doth also most speedily cleanse all
things. Wherefore, when as at the last judgement Christ shall most fully
purge all the whole world, the scripture says, that he will come furnished,
not with water, as in the time of Noah, but with fire, and finish so mighty a
work. For by fire we see all cloudiness to be scattered strongly, all
superfluous moystures to be consumed, Auicen. de med. cord. tract. 2. ca. 20
ye air to be purged, ma his heart to be kindled with gladness: to wit, the
troublesome and gross vapours being scattered, and strength added unto the
wearied members: so that it is not said commonly in vain, that as fire is a
singular ornament of the house, so also it is commodity of men to be wished
for: in so much that the Poet doth not in vain ask this question: What more
profit brings then fire? And I, if I should be demanded, what is the chiefest
thing in preseruinge a Town from the infection of the Plague, as he to him
that demanded, what was the chief point in an Orator: the first, second,
and third time answered, action: so I by good right might answer, that the
first, second, and third help, is fire: because that all the best being
taught by reason and experience have so set down. For fire is unto air as a
triacle, which dries up his rottenness.

Moreover drying up is the chiefest thing, wherein Galen says, the intention
of healing of this sickness doth consiste: when as moystenesse, wherein
happens rottenness and corruption, is too much. Aristotle also says, that
all the Elements do putrefy, except fire. Wherefore, when as the air hath
gathered corruption, 1. de diff. feb. Metheor. 4 ca. de putred.
(I mean such corruption as comes of vapours, or breathes myxed together,
and drawn out of the earth or the water) which air, like as the stomach in ma
receives al kind of meat and drink, so doth it receive the fumes and
reekes of all things, nothing can be more profitable then fire, which doth
not only assume as the air, but rather consume all corrupt and rotten
vapours. For as that fire, or heate, or rather heating virtue, such as is in
Zedoaria, Baume, Cinamom, Angelica, and many other such like, cleanses the
natural spirit of man, and keeps away pryuate infection: so our
artificial fire, of the which we here entreat, shows forth his use in the
outward air, and keeps and drives away the common infection, with
singular admiration and profit.

Wherefore leaving that natural fire unto Physicians, who are employed about
ye curing of private singular persons, our Preservers shall have care hereof,
that in time causing to be carried the wood of Juniper, Oak, Vines, Beach,
Cypres, Pine tree, Pitch tree, or also of Willows, they command great fierce to
be daily made every where in the Cities, Great Fyers.
but especially where there is danger presently, or else shortelye like to
be: And they in a manner, after like sort, although dislike faith, that in
times paste the old heathen at certain set times ordained perfumes,
Waxtorches, great fierce, solemnly to cleanse and purg the Towns and Fyelds
near adjoining, both from corruption of the air (as I verily suppose) and
also from Deuilles, who notwithstanding, for that they are used unto the fire,
it is likly that they are not feared nor hurt with the same.

Let them I pray you for GOD sake follow that most excellent Hippocrates,
which with his wisdom (as witnesses Thucidides) delivered Grecia sometimes
from the pestilence of Aethiopia, and therefore was rewarded with a golden
crown. Also Thales, the Philosopher of Milesia, Aet. Amid. 2 ser 1. cap. 94
tetra. Paul. Aeg. 2. ca. 35
who only by making great fierce delivered his country Acron from this plague.
Let them follow, I say, rather the example of these, who for their wisdom
have gotten everlasting praise throughout the wholeworld, then the barbarous
and foolish custom of those barbarous people.

Of the driving away, or keeping at home of Dogs, Cats, and other tamed
household beasts, which are wont to run up and down. Cap. 9.
Having in the Chapter before going set down a way to cleanse and purge,
which I said to consiste in remoouing unclean beasts, in carrying away the
dounge and filth of the streets, in filling up, or amending of ditches and
pooles: and finallye, in cleansinge of the air by fierce, in this place we
must see what may according to profit and reason be judged and said of
Dogs, Cattes, Goats, and other tame beasts running up and down.

Here therefore straight way after the beeginninge: I would have a law made
by the Preservers, for either the driving away, or killing, or diligent
shutting up and keeping at home of such things. Which truly certain common
Wealths do wisely observe, so that at certain times of the year,
especially about the heate of the Star called Syrius, when as the Son
enters into the sign called ye Lyon, Dios. 6. ca. 35
which time they commonly call the Dog days, they command the Dogs to be
killed, the cause whereof I judge to be this: When as the Dog, Part. 1. de
feb. cap. 17.
(as Galen witnesses, albeit Gordonius otherwise no ill Author thinks him
to be melancholyke) is a living creature very hot, and by nature choleric,
and hath the holes of his heart very straight and narrow, at that time when
as the heate of the air is most burning and parchinge, the humours of his
heart being inflamed, and blood above measure rising up, he easily runs
mad: whereof afterwards ensues great and present danger, both to men and
also unto other beasts.

Now, if the like may be said here, not only of Dogs, but also of
Cattes, The comparing of a mad dog, and a dog infected with the plague
together
and other such like, as well tame, as tamed beasts: Namelye, that they may as
well as men take this infectious poison of the Plague, as it were a certain
madness, and unless they be kept at home, carry it unto others, they them
selves many times remaining without hurt: ought not the same course also to
take place in this state of common infection? Nay, so much the rather ought it
here to be of force, and to be followed, by how much more the danger ought
to be feared, not only of being touched and bytten of them, as when they be
mad, but also of the common air by them infected, and of powringe and
bringing the infection unto others, whilst they continually run up and down
hither and thither.

Moreover, that which is worse then madness is here to be added: for Dogs
infected with the Plague, as when they are sick of other diseases or harms,
they for the most part come home to their own houses, and fawn upon, and
get them near unto them of the house, as hoping for help at their hands,
or taking as it were sanctuarye among them, so that after the example of Iuda
the traitor, they sometime wrap their Master in this danger, and beetraye
him: whereas mad Dogs contrariwise for the most part flying as well the
known, as unknown, Dio. 6. ca. 35
get them selves into wooddye places, and do show them selves so open
enemies, that a man may beeware of them, and shun them, and do seldom
assault and fly upon any other then such as meet them, or set themselves
against them. Again, The dog infected with the plague, far worse then the mad
dog.
such Dogs as are taken with the infection of the plague, oftentimes through
the vehemence of the disease hyde them selves into some secrete corner, and
there dye priuilye, and being dead, before the matter be known, lye
sometimes a lunge season rotting, and defile the air with infectious vapours
or breaths, and so not only alive, but also dead, do very much hurt,
which in mad Dogs falls not out in any such sort.

Lastlye, if you compare together both the kinds of diseases, Scrib. Large. de
compose. med. Alex. Be. 26 cap. 16. Mathiol. li. epist. 6.
albeit both of them do rage with deadly danger, yet madness is less
hurtful, because, that for the most part it gives longer time of truce,
and doth not so speedily overthrow all the powers of the infected body, and
therefore brings not so swift destruction as ye plague. For the plague is so
subtle of fine, pearsinge, vehement, and finallye so hurtful and enemilike
an infection unto the vital spyrite, that it canne pass through what passages
of the body soever, and in a few hours take the castle of life, and bring
death. Which thing, since it is so, if we think mad Dogs to be by all
means to be avoided, it is much more agreeable unto reason, that Dogs
infected with the plague should be auoyed.

How dogs, cats c. may infect others, and not be hurt them selves*
But one thing peradventure will seem incredible unto you, that we have said
that Dogs, Cattes, c. do remain sometimes vnhurte them selves of the plague,
and nevertheless to bring it unto others, and to infect them. The reason
whereof to yield is no harde thing. For this happens by the disposition of
the subject or body that takes it, in which disposition according unto
Aristotle, Galen, Auicen, and other singular Philosophers, the bringing to
pass of the thing doth chiefly consist. For when as the subject is apt, then
the efficient cause, albeeit never so weak, can quickly bring forth the
effect: like as a small spark of fire doth quickly fire straw, or brimstone.

As again, when as the efficient cause is strong, then also is it able to
subdue the matter, albeit not apt, and to work upon it at his pleasure. For
albeit Brimstome doth sooner take fire then wood, and dry wood or cleft into
sheuers, Alex. Aphrod. 1. Proble. 85.
sooner then green or whole wood: yet a burning fire or fornace sets on
flame confirms as well great as small, as well green as dry wood. For ye
vehement power of ye efficient cause, as I have said, doth most speedily
dispose and work upon the matter put under it. Hereupo Marsill Ficinus a
singular Physician, De Epid. cap. 2.
a philosopher, reports of a certain plague of this time: namely, in the
year 1479. in a quarter of Italie called Corregium, that Cattes and Dogs did
sundry times bring the Plague fro one house into another, they themselves
being neeuer a whit hurt with the infection. The same is affirmed of a
certain other, which was infected with the Plague by his horse, of the which
notwithstanding the horse felt no hurt. All which things are said to this
end, that it may be understood, that the matter ought not to be handled
carelessly, or negligently, that our Preservers should not think and persuade
themselves, but that this hurtful kind of infection is to be kept away and
extinguished or quenched with all their power, all their endeavour, and finally
with all care and foresight.

Of not receiving of travellers and strangers into the City, nor of bringing
in of things without a testimonial of the health of that place from whence
they come. Cap. 13.
BUT truly the Preservers shall in vain altogether with this travail and
diligence look unto their common wealth, if they use not like wisdom in the
receiving in or shutting out of either men or things that come from other
places, when as this sickness is now rife every where, and is at this time in
a great part of Germaine. For what shall it avail to have removed the Filth of
our own places, if we will receive again the corruption from others? For as
this is a commendable travail of the Physicians, that when as by purging
medicines they have first cleansed the bodies of the sick, they afterwards
wisely take heed, that they gather not again like superfluities: also that no
remnauntes of the disease remain, the which might cause it to come again:
even so also this Magistrate of ours (whom in this case we have said must be
a general Physician) must do his diligence in the universal and common body
of the common wealth, and orderly provide for al, that not so much as the least
piece of infection be received or left behind, whereupon new wrackes and
dangers are to be feared. For (as the Poet saith) The flame that is not looked
unto, Alex. Ben. lib. 1. de pest. cap. 2.
doth straight again recover. And who is ignorant that the Plague (as hath
often been noted already) is a disease very infectious, and not only in men
and beasts, but also in diverse things, as in cloth, old iron, wood,
vessels, bedstedles, packs, linen, wars, household stuff, money, and most
of all in woollen Garments (unless you take marvelous great heed) may lye a
long time enclosed, upon occasion offered with great destruction far abroad to
spread his infection? For as a mad dog carries about his poison oftentimes
many days, Gal. 6. de locis affec. cap. 5.
yea in the judgment of some, many months sometimes, and also years, before
he feel any hurt, so it is apparent by almost infinite histories, Gordon. de
Febr. part. 1. cap. 17.
which partly I my self, and partly others have observed, being Physicians of
credit, that it happens also in this disease. For I remember certain years
ago, when as Colonie was visited with a sore plague, Alex. Ben. li. 26. cap.
16.
that a certain maiden of a worshipful house, with her mother and another of
her sisters fled out of the city, Leuin. Lem. de occul. not. mira. cap. 5.
and sought health by going aside into another air: the which maiden albeit
she went out hole, and came into an healthy place, yet within three days
after she was infected and dyed: whereof there was no other cause, but that ye
plaguy infection did stick styll either in the garments of them that fled, or
in the open ways of the skin, or veins not so near the heart, and did not
trouble her, before that it touched the very heart. For it is a light and small
vapour or reeke, A description of the plague.
which is not at such deadly feed with the other members as with the heart.
For which cause Marsill Ficinus is not afraid to affirm, that it may lie hid
in a man sometimes two months without hurting them, which if it be true, as
it is very likely, some do to far of, and too darkly caste off this cause
upon the influence of Saturne, staying the influence of Mars. And Bern.
Cronenburgius, otherwise a most expert Physician, might have more plainly and
effectually answered certain prattlers, and of ignorance blaming such as fly
away from places infected with the Plague, then by finding I know not what
fault withhumours, and vnorderlie diet: by which means in deed, some Ague or
small sickness, but very seldom the Plague uses to grow. For I do know
concerning this maiden, Clementius Clement. cap de pest.
that for the godliness of her mind, and singular knowledge and fear of God,
hereunto being adjoined the ripeness of her age, the especial care of her
mother being present principally in such an estate of time, that she offended
a little or nothing at all in her diet, nor was cumbred with no ill humour. But
if this notwithstanding seem harde to be credited of a maiden, whose sex is
fleeting, I am able to affirm the same of both the daughter, and also the wife
of a most skilful Physician, both the which after the same sort, in another
place, whither they went aside for safety sake, were taken with the plague and
dyed, whom it is likely, neither by the means of unwary diet, nor by the
nature of the vnholsome place to have taken there the infection, but to have
carried it thither with them. But if yet now these things cannot make you fully
to believe, so that you can allow that which I say, I will bring more strong
reasons. I remember that Padway a noble City of Italie on this side the Alps
(which now they call Lombardie) subject unto the dominion of the Venecians,
Ann. 1556. A Plague at Padway.
was almost wholly infected by one scholar (whose house was not far from
mine) which came fro Venice infected with the Plague. A plague at Hamburg.
Anno. 1566.
How fierce cruel, and strange a Plague ranged at Hamborow a few years ago*
had his beginning by ye infection of one ma, A Plague at Breme. 1566.
which came fro Dansk thither, me of credit, Citizens of the same city have
reported. At length to come unto our own home, our common wealth also, through
the fault of one infected person, which was brought from Hamborowe unto us
sick at the same time, within a very few days was infected, so that no street
almost was free from that sickness: albeit again so few died therein, that
none of all the Sea Cities (when as every where they were visited with the
plague) lost so few men: through the singular mercy of God no doubt, the
wisdom and travail of the Magistrat Physicians: which two God himself would
have joined together, doth not at all adventure bestow upon us his help without
the service of me. This therefore may suffice of the infection scattered gotten
by men. In the which we have understood this to be most profitable and
necessary for the common safety of all, if the common people be not so rashly
(as vsualie is wont to be done) mixed together, nor leave be granted for
every man at his pleasure without order or consideration, to go whither he
will.

Concerning the things them selves, which being brought out of infected
places, have withal brought the infection, so many examples come to hand, that
time and paper will sooner fail me then examples, if I would rehearse but
the least part of them. Letting go therefore the eldest, which by reason of
their age purchase the less credit at our hands, let us speak of a few at
the least, and such as have happened but a little before our time, or else in
this self same time of ours. There is a story recited, known unto many,
worth ye noting: 1511.
When as Verona in the borders of Italie was besieged by the Emperor
Maximilian, there happened a Plague in the camp of the Germanes, so that 2000.
or thereabouts dyed of the same. In this slaughter this was found out for
certain, that 25. soldiers were infected and died one after another, by
means of one leather garment. For as one departed, straight way came an other,
and took the garment, as a booty for him, and put it on. And so far went on
this destruction, until that the cause of this death and infection was spied
out by the Surgeons. Which thing being known, this leathren pylch which
was in deed infectious, was cast into the fire and burnt, and after the
punishment thereof, the plague by little and little slaked, and at the length
quite ceased. Alexander Benedictus (who lived in the year 1493.) makes report
of a certain like matter, which happened at Venice in these words: I heard
(saith he) in the days of my father, that in the city of Venice in the time
of the Plague there was a certain mattres suspected, Venice.
and cast into the inner part of the house of a certain commoner of the City,
and after seven years sought out again, which the good wife of the house
willed to be dressed up. For by lying long mustying in a secret corner, it had
gotten a great infection, by means whereof, the servants were forthwith
taken with a sudden plague. A story not dislike unto this, albeit he had it
not first from the party, was once told unto me, which else where I have
set down in Dutch, the effect whereof is thus: In the year 1564. when as
Coloine was sore visited with this sickness of the Plague, A strange story.
a certain Carrier, who dwelled four miles from thence, did by chance bring
certain wares thither, and again brought home with him (alas a most hurtful
reward for his labour) this infection, and in short time died of the same.
Six weeks after (for so long did the poison keep in without any harm doyng)
died all the children in the same house, and all the servants, the good wife
of the house only remaining alive. This being done, the sickness stayed
without any hurt almost two whole months. But when as al men hoped that all
was well, behold, the widow that was left, did by chance give the shirt of
her son that was dead unto ye son of a poor body her neighbour, wherewith
the child being covered in the night, and on the sudden infected, died
forthwith together with the whole household, ye mother again excepted. The which
when after ye same manner as before, it had now stayed a log time, at ye length
there came certain strangers to dwell with the widow ye was left, ye plague
which was thought to be dead, revived again, together destroyed the al,
continued so raging until January, until yt at the last it also being conquered
with the winter cold, died, not without ye great rejoicing of the neighbours. There
is another no less sorrowful example to be added, which I have observed in our
City of Breme. for a certain smith dying of ye plage, his heir of ye same
occupatio, being too greedy of ye goods yt were left, Another example.
alas together with the housholdstuf, brought both the sickness death also into
his house. For when as among other things, there was a vessel to bath in, made
after ye manner of ye country, he with 5. of his family washed in the same,
Plague in vessel,
the first night they were al infected with the plague, died. Histories
doubtless worthy the noting unto the which albeit a man shall hardly find the
like, yet this which I may self have seen, I cannot keep close, namely, the
famous city of Venice, to have bin almost wholly infected only with vessel
certain garments which were privily brought thither fro Iustinopolis: albeit
through the singular wisdom of the magistrate, the vnweariable care of all
degrees, trusting unto the help of God, it neither continued long, nor took
away many. The like almost happened not many years since in the county of
Hoyen near unto us, Another example.
that a woman's garment being brought in a certain Village from the City of
Hamburg, where then the sickness was, within a very short time there dyed
fifty: and unless by and by through the grace of God it had bin stayed by the
labour and wisdom of the rulers, it had doubtless crept further, especially
through ye rashness of ye poor country people, for want of counsel what to
do. Unto these I could add (unless some man might think the meeter to be
suppressed because of the outragiousnesse of the matter, Padway.
then to be put in story published) such things as I my self have seen in
the city of Padway, namely, that the infection was woderfully incresed through
certain things infected with the pestilet air, being partly cast privily into
other houses yt were sound, partly give unto young children for gifts. The the
which fact it is yet more wicked, which was told me as I was writing this
book, of a certain famous city in Germany, namely that there were certain
layers forth of the dead, and such as carry them to Church, who being
either hired of some for money, or through their own greedy covetousness, that
they might make their profit by the disprofite of others, A wonderful thing.
infected the public Conduits and Cesternes with the infectious matter which
they had taken of the sores of such as were sick of the plague. O heinous fact,
cruel, wicked, and in the memory of man unheard of. The wicked Sorceresses,
whom they commonly call witches, deserve no question a great punishment, albeit
in many places too rashly, and sometimes unlawfully (let me here say this by
the way, He seems to dislike with certain others, the putting of witches to
death, an opinion which by the word of God cannot be mainteintd, quod pace
illorum dictum velim.
for learned men at this day have thoroughly canuazed this matter) they use to
be handled, Moloch casting water or fire upon them on every side, who is wont
to be delighted with such sacrifices: but shall these poysoners which infect
with the plague, seem unto you worthy of less punishment?

Wherefore, when as we have now understood, of how great weight a thing it is
unto the preserving of the common wealth, how necessary a medicine to keep
away infection, that we do not rashly receive either men, or things of what
sort soever, that come from infected places, and this so much the more (if we
believe Cardanus) by how much those places are more East (for the Plague
says he, like as other things, is wont as it were with the daily moving of
the heavens to go from the East into the West) when as I say, these things are
thus, our Preservers must use such heed taking, De rer. var. 15. cap. 17.
that appointing and ordeining Warders at gates, they receive no stranger, nor
suffer any things to be brought in, unless they have some written
testimonial, or sealed, being worthy credit of not being counterfeit. The
same also must be observed in Citizens, if peradventure (as they are wont to
do, which have more regard unto wealth then health* For through Sea, and Land
the mechaunt runs unto the Indes, Scribo. Large. de compose. medic. in
Praefat.
for wealth and gain) they come home from an other country, and from places
suspected. For albeit that this neither will be sufficient to take heed,
whilst rash headded persons, and full of prattle will some times go about
either to deceive the Porters, or openly to withstand this order as an unusual
bondage: yet many honest men will be made the more circumspect, and will
consider that our laws are not perpetual, but teporall, which also are made
for their health sake, and shall last so much the less while, by howe much the
more sooner and timely they meet with the sickness coming, and the more
diligently turn it away. For in a common adversity every man ought to put to
his helping hand, and to have more care of it, then if it were a private cause.

Objection. Hipp. 1. aph. 1. Rom. 12.
But if any man shall think that it is against charity, for that I hold that
men and such as are our brethren, are to be shut out, of the which many fly
unto us as unto a sanctuary, as it were from a deadly enemy: unto him I must
make this answer, that I wold have no man forsake, Answer.
or in any case to be destitute of our help, but yet there ought to be a set
and steadfast way and order in using of help. True charity begins at it
self, but ends not in it self alone: But rather it stretches out it self
as far as it can, to every neighbour, and according unto her power,
imparts her help with every man, and as Ambrose saith of liberality, is
commended of her faith, cause, place time. For what a kind of charity should
this be, to receive one sick sheep into the fold, and to bring the scab unto
the whole flock? If charity be a virtue (as no doubt it is a singular and a
divine virtue) it cannot be void of wisdom, which doth as it were give the
shape unto true virtue, whilst (as it is manifest out of Ambrose) she hath her
eye set upon necessary circumstances, with the which every virtue is perfected
and finished. For albeit charity have no end, as it is also usually said,
true love can skill no end to have, yet will she not be carried away with
rashness, and as I said even now, will not be void of wisdom. But after what
way and order, I think this duty of charity to be to be handled, shall in
that which follows be spoke more at large. Here therefore let be the end of
this first book.

Of the duty of a faithful and wise magistrate, in preserving and delivering
the common wealth from infection, in the time of the plague or pestilence. The
second Book.
Of those into whose house the Plague is gotten. Cap. 1.
THat part being finished, which rather concerns those which are whole,
then those which are sick, and therefore may be called a certain public
preservative, it remains that following the practise and order of excellent
Physicians, we treat in the same sort of that part of physic which is called
Pharmaceutica, that is, of the way to heal and deliver from sickness: if
peradventure either immediately from God, or upon some other cause this fierce
disease and cruel dragon (as Galen calls it) have assaulted the house of any
man. And yet let not any man look here to have particular medicines for
every private man set down, but yt which in this case the faithful and wise
Magistrate by public duty is bound to do: that a general way being found out
and ordained, whereby regard may be had both of the sick, and also of those
which are conversant with the, the whole infection may be the sooner quenched,
and bring less hurt to the city.

Wherefore in the time of such sickness raygning and infecting, God first to
be called upon.
in the first kind we have said already at the beginning, that we must fly
unto God alone, crave pardon of him for al our sins: in the latter kinds
after the calling upon of God, the preservers must first of all and forthwith
have care of this, The infected house to be marked out by some token.
that the house infected be noted and marked out by certain signs tokes, as
by setting of torches before ye door, which after ye manner of the Gentiles use
to be carried before the dead, or by clubs betokening punishment, or rolls of
straw, or hanging up a black, white, or red sheet, signifiyng sickness or
death: and with all that the whole household be charged, that they venture not
to go abroad unto others, nor to receive any unto them, for the space of vi.
or vii. weeks at the least, if also in the mean season they have used
sufficient cleansing of the house other things, which shall hereafter expressly
be spoken of. If any of his own accorde shall come in unto them, let him be
bound by the same charge, but for a shorter time. In the mean season if they
have any thing to do abroad, they must cause it to be done by others. For
there ought greater care to be had of a whole society and fellowship, then of a
private family or household,

Objection.
But if any man shall think it an unreasonable and cruel law, to have sound
men shut in so straightly, for so long time, especially in houses infected with
such deadly poison, would also suppose this Proverbial chief medicine to be
better for them. With all speed, far off, long ere you return again: and
finally, that it is not convenient for the sick themselves, especially if the
house be not commodious, that they should remain so shut up, not sometimes to
use a more free air (for al keep not their beds:) truly they which say this,
seem to say neither nothing, nor al things. Answer.
For I my self think it to be nothing safe, often to use the company of the
infected, daily to draw the corrupted air. Therefore in the Chapter following
we will consider, by what means we may find remedy for these streighnesses
discommodities, the which whilst they can be hurtful unto none, they may be
greatly profitable unto many. For to grant them free liberty to keep
company among others, should be too rash and barbarous, and in a manner that
which Luther also saith in this case, Luther.
we should seem to follow them which would put lice into skins, or flies
into a chamber, or keep fire in their bosom, saving that these things are
lighter then that they may be compared with this evil. And when as we
manifestly find, that this only disorder is the cause, that the infection
many times is so speedily and so far and wide scattered abroad, we must not
by any means use the matter so, that through our own default and negligence
we our selves increase our own wounds. Not that I deny, the plague sometimes
to come by the corruption of the common air (which notwithstanding is very rare
or seldom, a thing yt many old me have had no experience of) and forthwith to
take very many, scatteringly without infectio: neither also that I am
ignorant that God being angry with our sins doth sometimes use this whip
against us, to drive us unto amendment of life, and to put us in mind, of our
obedience and service towards him (for this is apparent both by profane also
holy histories) I do not (I say,) deny this, neither do I affirm that in
this case the remedies of man do any great good, but we ought to hope well that
these things will fall out but seldom, and when they do fall out, they
bewray themselves by very evident and especial tokens. As it is plain
concerning Aethiopia, by the testimony of Thucydides: also when as God
punished the army of Maximinus, persecuting the Christians, with so great a
multitude of the that died, Eccl. hist. 9. cap. 9.
that the carcasses were every where left unburied. Which also the history of
the kings reports of the host of Dauid. Who wold deny these things? 2. Reg.
24.
but I say once again, yt these things are seldom seen, not agreeable unto
the plague of our countries, whose beginning, cause, and proceeding, be that
we may many times evidently enough lay down, therefore so much the more
diligence and care ought we to use, that the evil which through our own fault
and blame we have gotten unto us, or through our slouthfulnesse received, the
same also with like endeavour and travel we should amend drive away.

Wherefore, when a house is so marked, as it were condemned for an infectious
Lepri, ye household either of their own accord and private charges, if they be
able to pay, or by the persuasion and charges of the preservers, if they be
poor, must by and by send for the help of the Physicians appointed for that
purpose, Eccl. 38.39.
and making their prayers unto God, not grudgingly, but cheerfully, and with
good hope admit them and receive the in al things that shall be needful. For it
is to be thought, that the benefit which God here in will show, the same
oftentimes he gives by the Physicians as his ministers, no otherwise then the
good man of the house is wont by his stewards to give and point out meat and
drink unto his household. Leuin. Lem. de lib. Bibl. cap. 1. Sap. 8, cap. 2.
For Phisitios and physic are the good creatures of God and his ministers,
the which by the commandment of the Apostle we ought to use with thanks
giving. The which cause (albeeit besides the cause) let it be lawful for me
with the good leave of the reader, because of the unjust judgment of some
unlearned persons somewhat more at large in this place to handle.

For first of all Iesus Syrach, a man amongst the Hebrewes singulerly endued
with godliness, wisdom, and the knowledge of things, and finally with the
Spirit of GOD, Of the use and praise of physic.
hath left thus written: Honour the Physician, for the Lord created him for
necessity. Physic is from the highest, and of the king he shall receive
rewards. Eccle. 38.
The Lord hath created medicines out of the earth, a wise man doth not despise
them. Give place to the physician, for the Lord hath created him, thus saith
Sirach: what I pray you means in this place this doubled and often repeated
word creation? what means his beginning commendation, but that we should
understand yt the Physician physic is the gift of God, the which it is not
only lawful, but also who we ought to use, when need is, necessity requires?
and yt those doubtless are unskilful, very ignorant of ye counsel of God block
beads, who do judge physic to be needles and unprofitable, when as without
al doubt it was give of God unto mankind, for the preserving repairing of
health sake. Scrib. Large. de com. med.
Hereupo also the very heathen have acknowledged the excellecy thereof, when as
they write yt not ma but God was inueter of ye same. Polyd. de invent. rer* 1.
cap. 20.
For Apollo who they make ye Author thereof, they worshipped for a God: and
Aesculapius his soon, who somewhat more finely garnished ye same, because of his
singular skill in the art at that time they vouchsafed ye like honour: Homer,
Corn. Cel. lib. 1.
albeit he makes no mention of ye beginning of physic or of phisitios, yet
doth he not doubt to renown it with a most excellent commendation, when he
saith: that man which hath in Physic skill, the same all others far doth
pass. Which thing ye old romaine emperors acknowledging, did pay yearly unto
phisitios a very large stiped, Lib. not. hist. 29. cap. 1.
of 205. Sestertia (as Pliny reports) when as they payed unto ye professors of
other arts but only an hudreth: albeit in ye times following they were again
by a law made, banished ye city. Which was enacted by reason of the boldness of
certain unskilful persons, who did abuse physic. For covetous me set on fire
and blinded with the hope of gain, are oft carried headlog to the adueturing
of any thing, sometimes refrein not fro yt which is horrible to tel. Who neither
mindful of the oath of Hippocrates, nor of the honour or safety of themselves
or others, range up down like robbers where they be freely without
punishment. But we who being enlighted with the light of the Gospel, ought to
esteem of every thing not by the abuse but by the lawful use, do in such
sort use it, that we acknowledge it to be given not by the counsel of man, but
by the benefit of God, for the prolonging of life, so far as concerns
outward helps and aids. The judgment of Luther in a little Dutch book of
the plague, set forth at Wittenberge in the year 1527. is most grave and
godly, and a doctrine fit for this our business in hand: God (saith he)
hath created physic, Luther.
and given the mind, that every man should have care of his own body, be in
health and live. Who soever will not use these, when as without the hurt of his
neighbour, he may, the same betrays his own life, and there lacks little
but that before God he is made a murderer. For by the same reason he may
despice meat and drink, raiment and housing, and trusting too much unto his
faith, say, if God will, he can preserve me without al these things. Then the
which folly this is yet greater, that he which after this sort casts the
care of his body, and not seek that remedy against the plague, which he may,
may hurt and infect others also through this his negligence, who peradventure,
if he had suffered himself to have been looked unto, had remained unhurt and
alive. Whereof it comes to pass that he gets unto himself the blame of
an other man his death, commits murder unto God. Such men do in deed no
otherwise, then as if a man in a common firing* would not come and help the
City, but let the fire alone, that the whole City might be burned: namely,
upon this trust. Doubtless if God will, he can without water quench the
fire. But friend, thou ought in no case so to deal, nay it is shameful
and unlawful, which thou perswadest thy self: but rather use remedies and
medicines, and do whatsoever any way may help, perfume thine house, Orchard,
and street, fly the infected places, and men infected, whereas thy service is
not required, and so behave thy self as one willing to quench, and not
maintain the public flame, c. For the words which follow, albeit they be
spoken very finely, yet at this time I purposedly pass them over.

Away therefore with this more then barbarous opinion, and Cyclopical or
Giant-like stubbornness, whereby many call and defame Physic, as superfluous,
or an Art only to pick men's purses, as they do all other liberal sciences,
yea and philosophie it self as a certain sophistry, which thing Plato also
himself doth, for fault not of the things, In Gorgia.
but of those persons that profess it.

Objection.
But if any man shall say: if the use of your Physic be so necessary, and
divine, as you affirm, wherefore then doth Syrach himself, 38
whom you have cited in the place by you alleged, bid the sick go unto
God, and to desire health by prayer? Why doth Saint Ignatius a most godly
bishop and martyr call, Epist. ad Ephes. Theodor. dialog. 1.
only Christ the bodily spiritual Physician, and in death also (I say not in
sickness) the true life? But I will also my self give the adversaries a
weapon which with me is of no small force* when as I departed out of Italie,
Sebastianus Laudus a singular man, the Reader of Physic at Padway, and my
master (whom for honour sake I name) for a perpetual remembrance of his
faithfulness towards me, wrote with his own hand in my book: Remember that
only God doth cure diseases. If then only God, what need is there of others?
Doth God want servants for to help him? If Christ be the only Physician, which
takes away our griefs, as the Prophet is witness, and as he himself hath
testified by so many exeamples in the new Testament, whom shall we need besides?
For surely that is done in vain by more, which may be done by the fewer. And
of this judgment there are also many found among the Christians, not unlike
unto the old heretikes called Euchitae. But I answer, that albeit God needs
not the help of any, but rather is the only Physician, as well of the body as
soul, Answer. Esai. 38. 4. Reg. 20. Tob. 6. 11. 3. Reg. 4. 8. Ioseph. 2.
and yt we do confess al health to depend on him, to be to be craved at his
hand: yet nothing lets, but that the Lord and master may commit many things
unto his servants, do by their hands, what he will: like as every work man uses
tools, unto whom notwithstanding the praise of the work done, properly is
neither due, nor ascribed. And I said before ye God will be asked of us, and
without means many times will give nothing unto us, yt which means he hath
made for this end, that we should use them unto our profit, like as Christ
himself, and holy men of God, when as they could obtain them (for otherwise
the grace and power of God is not tied unto them) used them, and were wont to
use them. Wherefore when as these say that God only cures diseases, it is to
be referred unto the chief cause, which is God, not unto the instrumental
cause, as are men. And Syrach, when as in the beginning he had commended the
instruments themselves, and means, as it were divine and healthful means,
least happily any man trusting unto these, should cleave unto them as the
principal and chief causes, and should forget God, in the end of the
Chapter, as it were in the use of these things, he doth admonish us, that
we have GOD before our eyes in our whole work, that we ply him with prayer,
and request prosperous success at his hand. As if he should say, Physic
in deed is a divine and excellent thing, but without the power and grace of
God (which power is obtained by only prayer) it brings forth no happy
success. Which was no doubt the meaning also of Herophilus, Herophilus.
albeit a profane, and Heathen Physician, when as he saith, That Physic is
both nothing, and again, that it is the hand of God: nothing (I say) as I
understand it, of it self: and the hand of God, joined with the grace and
power of God, and used in season and rightly. Then the which in mine opinion
nothing can be spoken more truly and Christianly. And the self same may we
say, if it be lawful to compare great things with small, The sacramets and
medicines are means.
of those means which are set forth unto us unto the health of the soul by
Christ, as these are for the halth of the body. Although some which think
they can cunningly blind the eyes of wise men, or steal fire from Iupiter
out of heave, are wont greatly and wickedly to extenuate or lessen the dignity
of these also, Theod. 2. Fabul. haeret.
when as with much a do they can allege nothing but the abuse and faults of
the receivers, and do only bewray the stink of the Astrodutiorian and
Messalian heretikes.

But least any man might think that I serve mine own turn, whilst he
hears me so diligently pleading for Physic, I will not pursue any further
the commendation of a thing sufficiently praised of it self, but will join
yet one article more unto this present Chapter, Question.
very necessary in my judgment in this cause. For a man may ask a question,
because that so earnestly diligently I persuade all companying with the infected
with ye Plague to be to be avoided, how I think those poor women to be to be
dealt wtal, who in these infected houses, either in health or sickness fall in
travail, (which thing to have happened unto many, the which for the most part
have dyed, I my self can be a live witness) Ought they to be forsaken of the
neighbours? What like vncurtesie in the memory of man, hath there been harde
of? Here is need of a double answer. A duble answer.
First if any women moved not with rashness, but Christian charity and love
(the which assuredly we owe one to an Eccle. 3. 7.4. Rom. 12.13.
that afterwards they come not without discretion by and by unto their
household, unless having changed their apparel, and for a certain time they
abstain from the company of others. Secondly, that which more preservers in
this case also to keep a certain order, that they get midwives and other good
honest women, especially the wives of the ministers of the Church, of the
Surgeons, Apothecaries, Physicians, those whom we appoint to carry forth
bury the dead, if there shall be any fit, and will do the same, for the
executing of this charge. There they shall in no case lack the help of woman
kind, albeit they have not always at hand those which they are wont to have in
time of health, after the example of those, which by reason of the Leprie are
separated from the company of men. Let them therefore require no more of
others, then they would have others require of the in this case. For so doth
charity bid, not to seek the things which are her own, if it cannot be done
without the hurt and danger of our neighbour.

Of building of certain public houses, called Plague houses. Chap. 2.
I Promised in ye chapter before going, yt I would set down a way, whereby such
as had rather go out of the infected houses, or the sick yt are desirous to
change ye air, may be profitably provided for. The which, yt it may fitly
wisely be done, our Preservers must go about a work something greater and
more chargeable. For I will yt two houses large enough, in every point fit for
that purpose, which shall be called, Plague houses, be built of matter coueniet,
in a place air, good, both for the that shall use ye same, and also for the
City: in such sort notwithstanding yt not so much gorgeousness as
comodiousnes be sought, that the charges be reasonable, the use necessary: of
the which severally we must briefly entreat.

And first of all concerning the matter, the same must not be clay, The matter
of the Plague houses.
loom, turfs, or straw, but wood, stone, lime, because that putrifiyng doth
more easily happen, and the infection hang more longer in them, then in these.

Secondly, touching the place and situation, The place.
whereunto the air is also annexed or knit, this is to be observed, that it be
either in some out corner of the city, or (yt which I had rather) without the
City: not low, but open unto the Sun, high, by a river side, if it may be. For
the farnesse fro others will further the let of infection: the height will
yield a more wholesome air, and make the Sun, which refreshes all things, to
have more passage unto it: the river shall receive al ye filth excremets, which
in such houses is wont in great abundance to be heaped together. Hitherto
also pertain large orchards within the precinctes and compass of the same:
also green walking places, gardens, in which are wholesome trees, pleasant
grass, sweet herbs, flowers giving forth pleasant savours far and wide,
and finally there must be springing waters.

Now the manner and form of building is after such sort to be thought upon
and devised, as the commodity and necessity, The form.
and not gorgeousness doth require, as I have said before. That largeness
therefore must be kept, which is agreeable unto the City not in Geometrical,
but Arithmetical proportion. Let the height be twice as great as the breadth.
Let the Chambers also within be of a reasonable largeness, furnished with
Chimneies, such as the wind may blow through, not dark nor close, the
windows, as also the whole building, opening rather to the North, and Eeast,
then unto the South or North: there must also be Bathes there, of the which in
this our cause there is great use. And this whole manner of building
appertains unto many things, and plainly shows, howe great their error
is, which do so build the common Hospitals, that the wind cannot pearse
into them, then the which, especially in this disease, Of common Hospitals.
nothing canne be thought and devised more hurtful. Neither is it any
marvel, if oftentimes the poor soul that is brought hither, dye so much
the sooner. For albeit he be not sick of this disease, but of any other
lighter sickness, or also of a simple fever: yet being received in that
impure air, laid upon foul and stinking beds, he shall seem to be
choked, and to dye violently. I will not now speak, howe indiscretlye they
which are sick in these houses, are oftentimes provided for of meat and
drink, and other necessaries. Of which neglygence they one day shall give an
account unto GOD, who being rulars in these offyces, deal so vnfaythfullye,
when as they are no small cause of the death of the miserable sick persons.
Diligence therefore must be used, that all such houses, if it may be, be
builded by some Brooke, and in a place (as hath been said) open unto the
wind and air, that they may be thorough blown, and things defiled may be
often washed and cleansed. For the impure air may very much hurt even them
that are whole, the which daily experience shows. Also I said, that they are
to be builded in an high place, with many windows, especially towards the
North, from whence the air is more healthy. That ye windows also ought often to
be opened, I need not tell, for the thing it self doth teach it. All which
things, if they be not diligently observed, they will bring more hurt then
profit, and they were better to be burned (I speak of many common
Hospitals) in such a time of the Plague, then with hurt to be suffered, as
it is the counsel not only of Physicians, but also of Philosophers, and wise
men in Common wealths. Marcus Varo being sometimes at Corcyra, Varo.
and seeing folk lye sick commonly in every house, bringing in the North
wind at new windows, and shutting up the South windows, and altering the
gate of the house, is reported to have preserved his companions and al his
family in health.

So Tholosa a city of Aquitania, Tholosa.
famous in respect of the Byshopprick, university, high court, when as commonly
it was wont to be visited with a continual plague, because that the houses in
the tops or upper parts towards the high streets being builded with
certain appentices (under which men go safe from the rain) did hinder the
blowing through of the wind, Leui. Lem. 3 de occul. not. mirac. 3.
it was by the kings proclamation commanded unto al the inhabitants, not
only to take away those appentices, but that they should forecut and draw
in from the very bottom even unto the top, such houses, as seemed too much
to narrow the publik way. With woondefull pain taking and speedy work every
man plies his business, a man would have said, that they meant to pull down
and build up a new the whole City. But what was brought to pass? I will tell
you that, which I may say truly: for I was an eye witness, the winds
having somewhat a more free entrance, it made a notable drawing up and blowing
abroad of the vapors, and the plague did not so often haunt the City, as it
was wont to do, and did also less harm. A rare example of wisdom, the
which albeit it were not done without great charges, yet if the case should
so require, it is worthy the following, especially in our plague houses, in
whose setting up it may more easily be taken heed of, that they may be so
builded, that afterwards they need not be pulled down again. And because I
have once entered to speak of the hurtfulnese of ye close air, Of the
hurtfulnes of close air.
I hope I shall do a thing worth the travail, and such as shall refresh the
weariness of the Reader, if I shall allege a certain few, and the same very
fearful and strange histories, In append ad fin. 9. ca. lib. 1.
concerning this matter.

In Hieronimus Cardanus in his book de Variet. rer. it is thus read: The 23.
day of July, in the year 1556. there happened a wonderful thing, whereat I
my self was present: Iacobus Philippus Cernuscus a month ago, wills a
privy to be dug up out of the earth, and to be sieled, roofed and vaunted.
When it was finished, that ye vaut might be made sure, he commands it to be
shut up. Twenty days after he opens it, he bids the wooden pieces,
wherewith they made hollow the vautes, to be drawn out: one that was hired
goes down by a ladder, when he came unto the middle of the ladder, he fell
down dead. The master, when as he saw him not to return, goes down him
self, and when he came thither, he by and by dyed. They that stood by put in
the third, who being on the middle of the ladder, said: be of good cheer, I
will bring up the other, but when as he once put his head under the vaute, he
straight way fell down dead. The fourth fell down dead likewise. The fifth,
called Matus (which in our tongue is a fool) being a very stout fellow went
down, but he put not in his head, with a hook pulled out one of the dead.
Thereupon being made somewhat bolder, he came again, and went down so
far, that he put under his head, and by and by fell down. When they had
pulled him up, and perceived that there was yet breath in him, with using
helps by little and little they got life of him again, and sense, yet he
remained dumb until the rising of the Sun the next day. I, when as he
begun to speak, asked him certain questions, but he only remembered, that he
went down: they put in also a dog, and he was drawn out half dead. They
uncovered the place by the commandment of the Magistrate, at the mouth of the
den they see without any hurt, running water. Thus much Card. And because no
certain cause appeared, there were some which supposed, that a Basilisk
Serpent lay lurking there, which Basilisk, after the opinion of the common
people, is thought to come of the Egg of a Cock, being hatched by a Toad: The
fond opinion of the generation of a Basilisk.
the which I willingly with the learned and most fine Writer L. Lemnius, the
Physician of Ziricaeum do think to be but an old Wives tale: L. Lem. 4. de
occul. not. mirac. 12. Diosc. ca. vlt. in hunc Mat. ibidem.
When as rather the stench, poisoned breathes, filthynesse, strong smell, and
stink, are they, which come out of foul and filthy places, take away the
breath, and sometimes strangle a man. Although that there is no cause why any
man should doubt that venomous beasts, which lye lurking in such holes, do
sometimes work the same.

The like unto this was sometimes told me by an eye witness, and such a one,
as no exception is to be taken against: to wit, the most honourable reverent
L.L. Georg, of worthy memory, Duke of Brunswike, and Bishop of Bream, c, of
a certain Fountain of Petershag, A fountain of Petershag.
(which is a Castle under the Bishop of Mind) breathing out a wonderful
infectious savour, which when it was sometimes scoured of the filth, whatsoever
living thing was put into it, was by and by choked, and by death (that I may
speak with Pliny) made trial of the force of this water, and that so long
until at length casting in, and setting on fire a vessel filled with ship
pitch, herbs and sweete-flowers, it was so cleansed, that afterwards there
might be going into it without hurt, and every manne might occupy of the
springing water thereof without harm.

The lake of Puteol.
With these stories agrees that of the Lake of Puteol, near unto Naples, into
the which a Dog being cast, dies within a little space: if when you have
taken him out again, you plunge him in the stream neereby, he revives. Also
that which I my self have seen at Menapis, in the Lordship of Burchbrull
(which is under William of Braunssberge a most noble Gentleman, William of
Braunssberg.
and excelling as well in all kind of virtue, as in the praise of a most
ancient and most honourable pedigrew) of a certain Wine cellar newly
builded, casting up so sore a smell, that it could serve for no use. But more
of this sort might be brought, if I did not avoid tediousness, and being too
long. These therefore may suffice, concerning the matter, situation, and form
of the building: I will go forward to recite the wealth, number, and use of the
same.

Fourthly therefore, The riches of the Plague houses.
provision must be made for the rich, wherewith our plague houses are to be
furnished: which being once appointed according unto the estate and ability of
every City, it is to be hoped, that by little and little, through the
lyberalytie of good men, they will wax greater, and increase every day.
Although in this case no other riches are sought after, then such as are
needful for the maintenance of those that need, and the preservation of the
building. And because the Plague doth not always reign, therefore there shall
not need to be any yearly charges made, but, as I have said, so much as
shall be requisite for the reparations: If there be any overplus, that shall
be laid up, either for the necessity to come, or to be to bestowed upon the
use of the poor.

Now I said at the beeginning, Two Plague houses.
that two such houses were to be builded: namelye, the one for such as are yet
sound and well, but yet by reason of the company at home, which they have
had with the sick, are to be suspected and feared: and the other for those
which lye sick, infected with the plague.

And as for other points, they may be like, but they must be convenient way,
the one from the other. For it hath been marked, that this sickly infection
hath been increased, eve by the enclosures of ye walls, and standing and
touching of the houses together. And they must in such order be severed the
one from the other, that in receiving the North wind, and Sun beams, the
one be not an hindrance unto the other, nor be any let to receive the free
air: especially that the South wind out of the house of the sick with his
blast, bring no disease and plaguy vapour or stech into the ground of the
whole and sound. Therefore also it shall be more convenient, at that side to
have no windows at all, or else to keep them shut.

And hereof now also (that which in the last place was set down) appears
the use of these houses. The use of the plague houses.
For, when as we judge this disease to be by all means to be avoided, as a
present and deadly poison, the which unless it be diligently taken heed of,
doth most undoubtedly infect, therefore the first use of this new building shall
be, to receive those, who are infected as it were with a deadly lepry, that
the other citizens may be in so much the less danger. The which of how great
weight it is, if any man will believe me, who neither have any cause to lye,
and am sorry that there are many, who in their books do lie notoriously (let
it be lawful for me to speak so with Galen, in a good testimony of my
conscience) I canne show by many most true histories, yt which partly I have
seen and lived, and partly have heard of others worthy credit. For when as
being yet a boy, I went to school in the City of Dauentrie, where was then a
most flourishing school, one of the schollers was taken with the Plague, A
scholar of Dauentry.
which dwelled in his brothers house, surnamed Hercules, because of the
singular strength of his body, my bourdfellowe, who, because he was removed
beetymes into a private house, unto the which others had no access, never a
one besides was infected with this disease, or died. Afterwards, when being a
young man I studied Philosophy at Colain in the College of Arts, a certain
gentleman our schoolfellow, one amongst many, A student of Colain.
when there was at ye time no plague, died of ye plague: to wit, because his
disease being known, he was by and by carried unto a peculiar and an appointed
place for this purpose. Three years after, when I dwelled at Paris in the
College of Monachus, I saw among two thousand boys only one cooke visited
with this sickness, and by and by carried aside unto a little cottage, which
was builded in a large Orchard for this purpose, to die there, A Cooke of
Paris.
the rest of the company remaining altogether safe and sound. At the length in
the Cities of Venice and Padway* yt which it delights me often to remember,
when as there I haunted the Physic Schools, I saw somewhat hot
beginninges of the plague, the which notwithstanding by this wisdom, and
putting a part into such houses (for they have them always in a readiness)
and by severing the hole and the sick, besides other kinds of policy, and
pain taking, in a very short time for the most part were appeased So true is
the common proverb, He that will fly smok, must fly the fire.

The second end shall stand them more in steed, whom the danger in deed is
nigh, but which yet are not infected with the same. For when as the houses of
many are very vncommodious, and more apt to nourish the corruption, then to
remedy the same: also when as the men that dwell in them, are often poor, or
servile persons, or weak of nature, which do tremble at the very name of such
a sore disease, whereupon also they are in the more danger, I would so have
them carried out of their infected houses, that they should forthwith be
brought in ye plague house, and there in every point after the same manner to be
handled, after which I said, they were to be handled before, when as they were
shut up in their own houses, saving that here they may have free air, and
liberty to go abroad, if they will walk forth, for the recreating of their
mind sake. But how many days are requisite for the cleansing of those, which
are so carried forth, that they may freely return again into the City and
company of men, because that the same time neither ought nor can with safety
enough be prescribed and appointed unto al, this judgment must be left unto the
Physicians, as it were unto the Priests for this cruel leprie. To which
purpose so speaks Luther in his book of the Plague, Luther.
handling the same matter, which we now have in hand: If GOD (says he) in the
old Testament willed those to be severed, and put apart without the City,
which were defiled with the lepry, to avoid the infection, howe much more
justly may we do the same in this dangerous sickness, that forth with, so
soon as one is infected therewithal, he either of his own accorde remove
himself, or cause him to be removed, that the infection may in time
bequenched, not of that sick person only, but of the whole society and all
the City, the which, if the infected have free leave to go out unto others,
may by this means be infected. For such is at this time our plague of
Witeberge (he speaks of the year, 1527.) namely, that it may seem as
begun only by infection, so also gon thus far as it is. For the air
(thanks be to God) is hitherto pure and healthye, and of mere rashness and
negligence some, and the same in deed very few, have ben infected: albeit
satha with unwanted fear do trouble us, and make us cowardharted. For with
sundry crafts the enemy doth sport and play in the hearts of men, and doth
them strike with fear most vain.

Therefore this counsel of so most wise a man is not lightly to be regarded,
but diligently to be followed as I think, so lunge as conveniently we may,
to wit, when as the disease is yet in the beeginning, and hath not infected
many, Eccle. 18. Pers. sat. 3.
nor assaulted the common wealth in many places: whereunto this our counsel
chieflye tends, that it may rather be a forebewaring of this disease, then
an experience of the same. For when the grief through long delay hath got
strength, there can scarce any thing be done certainly and wisely, but we
go at all adventure, and many things are to be suffered: like as the
Master of the ship seeks out many things at hab nab (as they say) when as
cutting now the seas, he is doubtefull of the dangers and also of his life.
Not that I would have men at any time go from the right rule of reason,
albeit the success answer not according unto reason, 2. Aph. 52.
which should flatly be against the counsel of the reverent old man
Hyppocrates, our Physician. But it comes to pass, it comes (I say) to
pass, that as in the heate of battle, and amongst weapon (as is wont to be
said) laws are silent or mum, so also in this streightnes sorrowful plight of
things a small regard is had, either of the best or rightest order. For as
there one while the stander bearer, one while the defender of the same,
sometime the soldiers of the rereward, or Sergeant of the band, and
sometimee also the general of the army, by whose appointment all things use
to be well governed, are on the sudden taken away: even so it fares here,
where no less slaughter, nay some times also a greater happens, not only
the common Citizens, but also sometimes those, in whose hand lies the
authority of ordering this policy, which we describe and set out, are unlooked
for pulled away, and together with the ruler of the sterne, is the sterne lost
also. The which case to prevent and meet withal in time, this our order and
platform such as it is, was taken in hand and set forth for.

Whether it be lawful for Christians in the time of the Plague to fly, and
to leave their City with a safe conscience. Cap. 3.
NOw albeit I may seem already to have spoken much in this matter of the
severing of the infected: yet because of the affinity or kindred of the cause,
and diversity of opinions, I will join hereunto a very common question,
disputed not only by the Divines, but also by the learned and Christian
Physicians: namely, A question.
whether in the time of the Plague it be lawful for a man for a season to
forsake his City, and to fly with a good conscience. Of the which matter
because there are sundry opinions, I will briefly plainly rehearse the
reasons on both sides, and in the end also will set down my judgment, which
shall be a mean between both, gathered out of the foudations grounds of the
parties at variance.

That it is lawful to fly.
The former therefore say, that we read not of any of the Saints holy men,
which feared not death, and therefore that they feared Ephe. 4.
That no man ever hated his own flesh, but rather to nourish, cherish, by all
means to maintain and preserve the same. Abraham (say they) for fear of
death, Gen. 20.
called his wife Sara by the name of sister, and had rather to make a lie, the
to come in dagger of his life. Iacob fled into Mesopotamia, that he might not
fall into the hands of his brother Esau. The same doth Dauid whilst he flies
from king Saul, Psal. 3.
and his own son Absalom. Elias otherwise a most bold man, and who with his
own hand had slain the Prophets of Baal but a little before, yet feared
with the threatenings of Iesabel the Queen, conveyed himself a side into the
wilderness. Moses when as he was sought after by the king of the Egyptians,
fled into Midia. Therefore (say they) it is not only lawful to fly death, but
other also the whips of God being angry, as hunger, tyrants, burnings,
ouerflowinges of waters, cold, Ruth. 1. Leuit. 26. Ezech. 5.4. Hierom. 14.
Deuteronomy. 28.
heate, captivity, wild beasts: to be short, all kinds of diseases, agues,
disenteries, uncleanness, the Leprie, the french pockes. c. Which things
sithence they are so, it shall be much more lawful to fly the plague and
Peter being bold, and having trust, walked Mark. 16.
And Christ will not have the weak to be despised. Moreover, it is evident
by the doctrine of all Physicians, that such is the nature of infection, that
going from one subject and body into another, that is next and fittest to
receive it by due and convenient distance, it doth infect and corrupt the same:
for two things are required, that there may be an impression, or printing and
marking: Gal. ad Pyson de Theriae.
namely, aptness of the subject and nearness. Therefore when as it is
manifest by their own judgment, and also daily experience, that the plague is
a most infectious disease, as which is wont to be taken by the drawing in of
the corrupted and poisoned air, they in deed give counsel, that it be
shunned, so much as may be, and amongst all kind of counsels* they
confess that none is better, then is speedy flying away, long tarrying forth,
Leonarth. Fuch. 4. de med. morb.
and slow returning again. For there is no way more commodious to avoid the
infected air, none more safe, when as the air must always be drawn yea
even against our wills, and it is draw, such as it is. And they say that the
same remedy is with so much the more speed to be used, by howe much the
evil is more hurtful and present. That we ought to fly the further, to the
end a more healthy air may be found. Finally that we must return the more
slowly, that we may be the more sure of the cleansing of the corrupted air.
Hereupon they think in time of the plague these three aduerbes, (quickly,
far, slowly) to bring more aid safe remedy, then 3. of the best furnished
Apothecaries shops. For the plague (as Gale unto Piso is author) with an airy
body is as it were a certain dragon, no common dragon, but such a one who when
as he is not seen with the eyes, doth privily and by stealth, lying as it were
in ambushment, every where breath out his poison upon men, and no common
poison, but such as increasing most speedily, may in a very short time devour
the whole body of the common wealth. Mars. Ficin. de epid. cap. 6.
For the ill quality of the air (saith Galen) is made a ready change unto
corruption: and when as men through the necessity of breathing cannot avoid
danger, they do by the mouth draw unto them the air it self* as a certain
poison. Wherefore the same Galen calls and praises Hypocrates, as a man many
ways wonderful, for that no otherwise then by the changing of the air, he
cured that Plague which out of Aethyopia had assaulted the Greekes. For when as
he had commanded a fire to be made throughout the whole City of Athens, he
cast into it not only a bare heap of wood, but flowers garlands of most sweet
savour, also most fat smelling ointments, that the men might draw in unto
themselves the air thus purged as an aid and help for them. Lastly (say most
part in safety? How few also of those die, which depart out of infected
Cities, we our selves daily see: so that in this case they Demosthenes to have
place, the man that runs away, will fight again, Now if it be unlawful and
sin to shun such places, or by going aside to leave the, then to live also,
the which notwithstanding is a singular gift of God, after a sort shall be sin.
But God will have us so long to have care of our life, which he hath given us,
until he take it away, which gave it unto us. For we are in this world as it
were his soldiers, and for the most part set in the fore front of the
battle, from whence we must then only retire, when as it shall please him for
to call us. And he that either of negligence or rashness forsakes his
standing, shall be counted guilty of treason. And these for the most part are the
reasons of the that hold it lawful, as to fly death, so also according to
our power to fly sickness.

On the other side the other with no less earnestness affirm the contrary.
For when as diseases (say they) especially universal diseases, That it is not
lawful to fly.
are the punishment of God for our our Father, but rather to appear before
him, and patiently to wait for stripes, Wol. Musc. in explan. psal. 86.91.
like unto boys, that have played some unhappy trick. For they say that the
examples alleged by the adversary part, make mention, not of the plague, but
of death, yea and of such a death as by the persecution of men is laid upon us
(between which two things there is great difference odds.) For that we may
escape the hands of men, but not of God. And that men oftentimes have unjust
causes of persecuting, as tyranny, desire to reign, revenge, covetousness,
ambition, envy, anger, hatred, reproach, quarrellyng, lechery, incest,
stealing away or desiring of another man his wife, which things are wont to
stir up men to persecute others: but that God doth punish no man save only
lawfully. Hereunto is added, that the punishment of men is not always taken
in hand for amendment, but often for revenge of some lewd act: For the
magistrate (saith the Apostle) bears not the sword in vain, but is a
terror and fear unto the wicked, and such for the most part were the
punishments of the old Testament: But God who is made a father unto us in
Iesus Christ his son, Prou. 2. Heb. 12. Ephe. 4.
doth not punish us for revenge, but for amendment. For whom he loves, the
same he chastises. He is also faithful, suffers us not to be tempted
above our strength: But tempts to make it knowene, Aug. sermo. 24. de tent.
Deuteronomy. 33. Iacob. 1. 1. Pet. 4. Psalm 17.
whether we love him or no. And him that abides this tentation, the same doth
Saint Iames pronounce happy, because when he shall have been tried (saith
he) he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord hath promised unto
them that love him. Hereupon saith S. Peter, Well beloved, marvel ye not,
when as you are tried by fire, for this thing is done for your trial. And
Dauid calls God, the Saviour of such as trust in him: for there is a promise
of his, in which it is said: Call upon me in the day of thy trouble, and I
will deliver thee. Psal. 50.
These things cannot be said of men which persecute us: like as neither can
that, whereas the book of wisdom calls God the lover of the soul: because
when as we call for his help, he cannot forget his office and mind towards
us: as he who hath taken upon him the name of Father, as a most notable token
of his good will towards his creature, and given it peculiarly unto himself,
and doth yet daily and bountifully by infinite benefits show his goodness
powered out upon us, and by his prophet Ezechiel cries out: I will not the
death of a sinner, but that he be converted and live. Again by Esayas, I the
Lord thy God teach thee only profitable things. Again, by the Apostle Paule,
that he will have all me to be saved. And can these things I pray you (say
they) be spoken likewise of angry tyrants, and those that revenge themselves on
us, such as are the examples alleged by the adversaries? Wherefore who would
distrust God so bounteous a father, and driven as it were by despair, fly his
chastizement taken in hand for our great profit. They say further,
especially such as are fullest of tongue among them, that it is regard the
authorities alleged out of the word of God and holy Scriptures: for that
Physicians seek the health of the bodies, not the health of the souls: of
which duty being mindful, they leave unto every man the care The band of
charity.
wherewith we are bound one unto an other: and especicially of ye charity of
those which live in one city, or yt which is more, in one church, being sworn
together in one spiritual league other, are joined together as it were into one
loaf and body. For what a monster or strange thing (say they) were this, if
some one member of our body have caught some harm, or shall peradventure catch
hurt, shall it therefore be forsaken of the rest of the body? or shall it not
rather by all means be helped? Or if some one part of the city burn with
fire, shall it not therefore be succoured, but shall the town because of the
danger be fled from and be forsaken? If a man fall into the hands of thieves,
and being wounded of them be left half alive, shall it beseem us after the
example of the Leuite and Pharisie to pass by him, not rather with ye
Samaritane to come down from our horse, that is to say, to come down from our
own commodity, to repair ye hurt of our neighbor, courteously according unto
our power to help use him? That verily should be to Heathenlike, and
beastly. S. Iohn saith: Whosoever loves not his brother, is a man slayer: and
how doth he love him who being left in great distress by flying away he
forsakes? Eccle. 1. Psalm. 40.
Is it not cast in the teeth of Sodome among her other sins, that they
forsook and cared not for their neighbours? And to speak at a word, what (I
pray you say they) shall be the principal article of God his last accusation,
and condemnation against us, saving for that we did not in time help those
which stood in need of our help, did not do them good, did not aid them
with our counsel, goods, and travel? Psal. 41. Mat. 25. He means that by
the fruits of a true faith we must show our selves to perteine unto the
kingdom of heaven bought for us by Christ.
For (say they) we must after a certain sort buy heaven, whilst we live on
earth, if we will ever enjoy the possession thereof: we must buy (I say) not
for so much money as it is worth, but by a singular good will and love towards
GOD and our neighbour, through the only liberality of the Lord God, and the
stepping in of the Suretishippe of Iesus Christ his Son by his own blood,
who undertook for us, and bound himself unto his father.

To conclude, they which maintain this opinion (I speak of some, not of all,
for many of them have more wit) will have us so far forth boldly to
contemn and despise all both sickness and death, that they will scarce grant
any use of physic unto men, but contend that all things are to be committed
unto God alone: following the Euchite heretiks, of whom I have spoken before,
who judged al things both troublesome and prosperous to be to be kept away, or
obtained by only prayer, contemning and despicing all other means.

We therefore, as we have promised, will now set in between these two parts
our judgment, the which if any man shall happily dislike, we willingly give
him leave to appeal whither soever he will. First therefore my meaning is not
by any means to undermine charity and the love of our neighbour, the which no
doubt ought to be more dear unto us then our own blood, Rom. 5. 1. Cor. 12.
like as the son of God himself, whom we believe to be set forth unto us
by the father, not only for an attonment and ransom, but also for an example to
follow, gave his life for us. Further, in the former part I wish this, that
they would more diligently consider and weigh, what it is to be bound unto
some certain company, either by the common law of Citizens, or by public
duty. For albeit peradventure that we owe more unto our wives, children,
kinsfolk, then unto others: yet that cannot be understood, when as the
question is of the helping of the common necessity of the whole weal public,
whereof thou art made a member and part to do service unto the universal body,
and the which also is far above all both affinities and kinreds. For, for this
calling sake, the which is no doubt of god, every ma is bound to follow ye
other. He that forsakes not father and mother for my sake, is not worthy of
me. Therefore ye former law is corrected by the latter, constrained to give
place unto it: and he that before was bound unto his parents, so that he is
compelled to obey them, he afterwards by a more general law ought to leave
Father and mother, and to follow God, calling him another way, that is, that he
either cleave unto his wife, or that which is of more weight, unto the whole
common wealth, or congregation of the Church. Yet let no ma understand this so,
as if in the same degree we did not owe more unto our household the unto
others, but I speak of diverse kinds conditions of duties. In the latter
opinion I find want in this point, that they do not plainly enough judge a
cause of so great weight. For albeit it be a certain Stoical hardness
clubbishnes, with such stedfastnes to tarry for abide so great an evil preset
danger: yet al me simply neither can nor ought to be bound unto one law. For by
what means otherwise, can so many holy fathers be justly excused, which are
read sometimes to have shunned such dagers, I cannot see. My meaning is, neither
to have the one too fainthearted, as it were distrustful, nor the other too
hardy or rash: but there is a mean to be chosen of the both, in the which we
are wot to go in most safety, wherein al virtue doth consist, ye common people
uses to say very truly. which things being diligently considered, What is to be
done in a plague or sickness immediately sent by God*
thus I say: if at any time it may be gathered by certain tokes, yt the plague
or any other kind of general sickness, hath grow through no gross negligence
sluggishness of me, or through any natural default (which in this point is
diligently to be marked) but rather by the manifest mere indignation wrath of
God, as sometimes it is apparent by the voices of ye prophets, other undoubted
church histories of the time of our elders, then I think yt the rod of God our
Father ought in no case to be fled fro. For who is so rude, as to believe yt
his chastisemet is a fighting in the night, which at al adventures strikes
them that come first to hand? nay rather let the faithful persuade themselves
assuredly of this, that albeit in the reigning of such a Plague No, Dauid,
Ezech. 6.14.
and Iob were present, yet through their righteousness they should but save
their own souls. For cocerning such it is true, which uses to be said, that
it is foremarked out by God, who and by what means must be spared. But if, as
in these times it chieflye comes to pass, What must be done in sicknesses
procured by our own negligence. c.
and as Luther says of the plague of Witeberge 1527. through our own
vnwarines rashness, yt I say not envy despising of good counsel such common
sicknesses do arise, visit some certain city particularly and by little
little infect those especially with are next, as pitch doth those yt touch it, I
nothing doubt (I say) but that it is lawful for the godly wise to fly and
shun such places, especially having a decree of the Magistrate set down to
that effect, as hath bin said before. For why, if my neighbor will of purpose
set a fire his house, shall not I fly from the flame thereof? But if it be also
ordained by the authority of the Magistrate, that he yt hath no stomach to
tarry, may depart, setting his things in such order before hand, that nothing
be wating unto any body, which in these distresses should be greatly needful:
his conscience in this case may be altogether free: but if he command it, there
can be no resistance with a good conscience. For the same in this behalf is
behooueful oftentimes, which is in great fires and burnings of houses, to the
queching whereof, because al persons are not fit, some certain in some cities,
are appointed, who only undertake this charge, is not lawful for others to
come run unto it: or that which is done in the besiegings of cities, that old
men, women, children, weak persons, who may be only a cumbrance, no help unto
the common wealth, be for a time put a side into a more convenient haven,
until the city be delivered from the enemy.

And this way I both a Christian, also a Physician, leaning upon the grounds of
Philosophy divinity, without affection love to the parties, (as in other
matters) the which hath always done much harm to all truth: moreover
diligently examining the reasons on both sides, with a well advised mind have
judged, that the parties at variace may be made friends, unless of striuers
they will become wranglers. But yet if any man (that I may repeat this again)
will peradventure complain as one not contented, I grant him the Apostles, let
him appeal unto what higher judge he will: or returning to the old fathers
doubtless worthy men famous for godlines, learning, and wisdom, let him renew
wage his law a fresh. I being dispatched out of these matters, return to mine
own business.

Of carrying forth of the dead, and accompanying the corse to the burial.
Cap. 4.
IF it now fall out (which is usual in such a state of things) that some
dye, which are anon to be carried forth and buried, because such a matter
requires diligent heedtaking for the letting of infection here also must be
seen what way may be found out by the preservers, that it may be done with as
little dagger as may be. And it consists chiefly in 2. articles, to wit, by
whom, how this thing ought to be done. Here therefore it shall be needful to
follow the custom of our Elders, who had a certain kind of Mokes* whom,
because they were for the most part vnlerned, they were in some places called
Ignorant brethren, Ignorant brethren.
or Begardes, as if you would say, Keepers of the sick: or Lollardes, because
they mourned for them that were dead. Whose office was, to attend upon the
dead, which required their service, but especially, to serve such as had the
plague, and the same privately, sometimes also by admonitions to strengthen and
comfort them, and to put the dead in coffins, to carry them to burying. A
custom verily not to be despised. And there is extant or abroad a certain
treatise, which goes under the name of Saint Hierom, but falsely, in which the
first degree of orders in the Church is ordained to be of them, which bury
the dead, which office now a days is counted most vile. But howesoeuer it
be, there must needs be some certain appointed, and hired upon a public
stypende, men not of ill name, nor spendthrifts, nor of the very basest
condition, of the which some shall be called Sockers, or Buriars, or Dressers
and layers forth of the dead: other Tumbe or Grave makers: others Cleansers
and carriers forth of the dead: and their office must be to dig graves, to
make Coffins, and to put the Corses in them, to carry them forth and bury
them. Moreover also in such manner as we shall hereafter set forth for to
cleanse, wash, and make clean the infected houses, and al things appertaining
thereunto, so far as of them shall be required. And these being thus hired,
shall eftsoones be by an earnest other, certain penalty set down restreined,
that they go to no other nor make graves for any other, the such as lie sick of
ye plague, or are dead, but yt they keep themselves either at home, or go
abroad marked with some mark, as a white wand, or some such like thing:
neither yet so notwithstanding that they mix themselves in the company of me,
or come near unto them.

I would moreover have the admonished, that they persuade them selves to take
in hand and execute this charge vile and reproachful before men, not so much
for lucre sake, as for the common band of charity and humanity: but yt they
should know yt they do a most godly work: which sometimes holy me of God, nay
Angels themselves are read to have done.

Therefore that they behave themselves soberly, Hist. eccl. 9. cap. 8. Tob. 1.2.
Deuteronomy. 24. Bull. 1. de orig. cr.
quietly, honestly use the corses of the dead, as which shall be again the holy
houses of the souls, and renewed again with their souls, albeit for a time
only they have departed from them, shall rise again out of ye earth, and being
lightened with heavenly glory divine brightness shall live with God for ever. We
do greatly esteem, Certain comparisons.
and give singular reverence unto those infants of great princes, whom we think
shall in time to come possess the kingdom, be rulers of so great honours, shall
we despitefully or vnreueretly handle those bodies, in the which we shall one
day see our God and brother Iesus Christ after like sort clothed, shall reign
with him for ever and ever? It is an heinous offence, by any means to violate
temples made by the hands of men, and he which did ease himself in the temple
of Apollo Pithius, is noted with an immortal infamy, and thought to have
committed a most great offence, how much less shall it be lawful for us, to
handle despitefully and rashly the temples of the holy ghost, as if they were
the carcasses of bruit beasts, after the manner of the Cinik Philosophers? them
down, but handle them softly handsomely, lay them down and cover them, it is
therefore much more meet and comely, reverently to lay down our dead that
sleep in the Lord, in this bed out of which they shall be raised up unto life
immortal. What

But some man may ask this question, Solemnity honour in burial.
what solemnity then, and as it were public honour shall there be, wherewith the
dead are wont to be carried forth unto their grave? In sundry cities sundry
customs are observed, but we in this case require as little solemnity as may
be. Not that I deny it to becoe christians to be honourably buried, but these
times require other manners. And because that now pride creeps in by little
and little, as in times past through the covetousness of Mass Priests, and
through abuse defiles a thing otherwise commendable. Budaeus and Va^aublus in
France.
I have known great men, who have by will diligently provided, that they
would be buried without all pomp. But these are outward things and
indifferent, for the which either admitted or omitted no man ought to be
judged. For albeeit the prayseable custom be not rashelie to be despised,
yet it is reason, that the solemnity give place to necessity: which
necessity in the judgment of all wise men, is not subject unto law, but the
law ought to serve and be subject unto it, which might be proved by many
examples, if it were needful. But if men can not otherwise be persuaded, but
yt there must some solemn fashion be used, the same ought to be most moderate
or measurable, least any hurt might grow thereby unto the whole society or
fellowship, least (as that same Cato said) in death it self we might seem to
be ambitious and proud.

None of the kin to go into the houses of the infected.
Furthermore because it is the manner in some Cities, for such as are near in
kin at that time to go into the house of the sick, there must commandment
be given, that this be not lawful for any: for the houses of diverse are
very straight, and stinking, which stink moreover is not a little increased
with the breath of sundry men, and may do very much hurt to tender and
weak natures, and such as are not used to it.

Again, None of the infected to accompany the corse.
none out of the infected and corrupted houses must be suffered to accompany
the corse, albeit custom require it never so much: likewise as we have
before appointed these things to be diligently observed. The same is to be
judged of heaps of children that are schollers, who in some places are wont
to be and sing at burials. For they are always in more danger of taking the
infected air, by reason of their tenderness of age, and unwary kind of diet.
All which things that they may by one way be avoided, I lean unto this
opinion, whereas I have said before also, that all multitude of people is to
be shunned, that this custom be so long broken of until the public
sickness cease and assuage it self. For the ceremony is not so much to be
regarded, that for it sake we should endanger our health. For ceremonies
ought to serve us, and not we ceremonies. And we have bin long sithence
persuaded, that what soever of these things is done, that it is not done for
the help of the dead (as our Auncetors have fodly believed) but for the
comfort of them that be alive (as S. Augustine speaks in another place)
namely, whilst they see, that even after death there shall some regard be had
of them, and that there is hope of another life, which may comfort in us this
sorrowful departing. But if any will pretend and allege the duty of charity,
the which by this means may seem to be diminished, and as it were withdrawn
from the poorer sort, they shall easily be pacified, when as they shall see the
same order to be observed in all. As for such as moved with a singular zeal
shall more earnestly urge and cal for this old custom, in them their zeal is
to be praised, but knowledge is to be required. They must be instructed
therefore, that they may learn in what things the duetyes of sincere
godliness and chastity do consist, That the true honour true burial customs,
is the praise of virtues, and remembrance of valiant deeds done, the which
albeit it be lawful in deed to solemnize with outward shows, yet is it not
always expedient. To be short, that the public health is more to be
regarded, the zeal of a few private persons, that I say not the will of
superstitious men, not rightly instructed: for too hot zeal and joined with
ignorance is superstition.

And these things as we have said, What superstition is.
the Preservers must command diligently to be kept: whereunto also they shall
add this, that neither the chesting of them, nor the carrying of them forth to
their grave, be done either too slowly, or too hastily. For the one may bring
danger of increasing the infectio, to wit, Le Lem. de occult. not. mir. 2. cap.
3.
by carrying of ill vapours or reekes fro the rot carcass, sometimes also
intolerable savours, and doth greatly hurt the hole: the other hath sometimes
been hurtful unto them that have been thought to be dead, but were not yet
dead in deed. Lib. 1. de peso cap. 1. Plin. 7. cap. 52.
We know, saith Alex. Benedictus, some to have been drawn to their grave by
the hands of the buriers half alive, others of the Nobles to have been put
into their sepulchres, whose life as yet lay hid in the corners of the hart.
One of the noble matrons so buried (namely at Venice) a little while after was
seen dead, who notwithstanding sitting up, and removed from her place among
the dead carcasses had revived, Certain histories of some that have been
buried alive.
whereof her torn hair, and breast rent with her nailes were a great token.
Alas, howe often being alive among the dead, did she call upon the gods in
vain? The same hath been told me of a certain other, the which being
great with child at Padway, and thought to be dead, and buried, a little
while after in the very sepulchre, brought forth alive two twins, who with
their crying, admonishing the keepers of the Church in the night of their
miserable case, together with their mother were delivered from the danger. And
least any man should marvel that they could remain alive, who could not
choose but be choked by reason of being kept from drawing of the air, let him
know that it is the manner of the Italians, that worshipful houses have
peculiar places in the churches, to wit, large cellars and vaunted, in the which
they lay their dead, put in no coffins, nor covered with earth. The like in
manner is manifest, that by ye testimony of a public table painted and hanged
up at the Church of the Apostles, concerning a certain woman of Coloine, who
albeit she were chested, and covered with earth, yet delivered by chance, and
returning unto her husband lived with him a long time after. For when as he
which buried her, minded in the night time by digging up the grave, to fetch
away a ring which was left upon her finger being buried, with that stirring and
pulling, her poor soul being raised up again, which was thought to have
been departed from her body, whereas it was but only in a sown, revived. Last
of all at Tholossa in Aquitania I knew a poor fellow, who being buried after
the same sort but being neither put in a coffin, nor covered with earth,
returned again unto life, which falsely he was thought to have lost, when as
he was rather taken in a long trance, at that time when as many dyed daily
of ye plague. What shall I say more? It is no easy matter among so many
dangerous great evils not to commit some folly oversight. Wherefore we must
deal both wisely and courteously, least whilst we go about to save the life
of the one, we rashly betray the life of the other.

Of a Church yard to be placed without the City, and of the manner of
building of the same. Chap. 5.
THere remains that we speak something also of the place of burial, the
which in respect of ye rest, wherein we wait for life everlasting with God his
blessed Angels, or bodies being laid in the earth, Koimeterion
is called a sleep Chamber, or as we usually speak, a church yard: of the
which, when as it is the opinion of all Physicians in a manner, that there do
arise from thence infectious and corrupt exhalations or reekes, which do
infect the air, and wonderfully increase corruption (insomuch yt also in the
keeping of a healthful diet, they would have men's houses to be far from
church yards) this care also must be taken in hand by ye Preservers of health,
that laying their heads and purses together, they build church yards in a
place most fit for that purpose without the City. Which thing besides the
profit shall not a little make also for the public decency comeliness, the
keeping back of profaning and abusing the same, far unbeseeming christian
Cities untolerable, as it is eloquently gravely some where written by Martyn
Luther, whose words because I have judged the meet to be set down in this
place, I have thought good thus to translate: The judgment of M. Luther of
churchyards.
First of all (saith he) I leave this to be discussed by the iudgemets of
physicians, who understand this matter better then I, whether it be done
without danger, to have Church yards within the walls of Cities or no. For
truly I cannot tell, whether any vapour be drawn out of graves, which may
infect the air. Which thing if it be so, that shall be cause sufficient that
they be builded without the territory of the cities. For we have said a
little before, that all men at all hands are bound to resist infection, when
as God himself hath commanded us to have care of our body and life, and when
as he bids not the contrary, to take heed unto ourselves from perils:
again with a stout courage to despise dangers, when as the case so
requires, so that we may seem ready unto him alone, both to live and also
for to die. For no man lives unto himself, neither doth any man die unto
himself: as Saint Paule speaks in his Epistle unto the Romanes. Chap. 14.
And this I am assured of that among the old as well Iewes as Gentiles, as
well godly as ungodly, this was the custom, to have their burials and graves
without the City, who notwithstanding were no less witty nor wise then we.
That which I have said, the Gospel of Luke doth show, when as Christ before
the City Naim raised from death the son of the widow. For the text saith,
that he was carried without the City to be buried, and that many followed him.
So that there is no doubt, eve by the usage of this one place, that those men
had their burials without the walls of the City: as also it is evident that
the sepulchre of Christ himself was without the City Hierusalem. Abraham
bought himself a peculiar place in the field Ephron, where all the fathers
used to be buried, whereupon also the Latin word hath his original, that the
dead are said to be carried out, that is, to be carried out of the town or
City, which we call to be carried to burying. Albeit some nations used also to
burn the dead carcasses, Burning of the dead.
and bring them to ashes, that there should nothing remain, that might infect
the air. This therefore shall be my counsel, that following the examples of
these, we build our Church yards also without the city. And verily as ours
of Witeberg is placed, not only necessity but also honesty and godliness
ought worthily to admonish us, nay to force us, that another should be builded
without. For it is altogether beseeming that such a place should be reverend,
in a quiet room, aside from the high way, as in the which a man might be
with some religion and deuoutnesse, to think upon death, the resurrection,
and last judgment, and to pray. The place (I say) ought to be honourable He
means not popish holiness, but a separation from common use.
holy, that no ma should enter into it without fear reverence: when as it is to be
believed, that there are not wating there many of the saints elect of god. As
for ours it is any thing, rather then a sleep chamber, or church yard, nay it
is almost nothing else, the 4. or 5. common streets, and 2. or 3. maket places,
so yt in a manner there is no place of the city more trod more unquiet. Over
this as well Cattaile as men do course day and night. Into this every ma hath
either a gate open into his house, or else a way made, in this all things are
done, and oftentimes some such thing, as ought not to be named. Hereof it
comes that all reverence and honour towards the monuments, which are there
placed, is key cold, neither are they any more esteemed, then some vile
Golgotha, into the which the carcasses of bruit beasts are cast aside: so
far that the very Turk doth not suffer his Church yards so irreverently to
be profaned, as we in name Christians: when as it were meet, as I said
before, in this place for us to renew the memory of true godliness, of death,
of the resurrection, to think upon the lives of holy men that lie buried
here, and to give He speaks not of worshipping the dead, but of thinking
reverently of them.
honour unto their ghosts. Now howe can these things be done conveniently
in a place lying so open and common unto every body? Truly for mine own part,
if there be any honour at all to be sought in burial of mine, I had as leeue
be buried in the River Albis, or in a wood, as in such a Church yard. But if
it were in an other place severally without the city, whereunto there were no
common entrace or passage through for every body, then doubtless it would
seem a thing religious, honourable to behold, and holy, which might stir up
the comers thither unto the study of godliness. And this my judgment, he
that list may follow: If there be any better thing revealed unto an other, let
him use his own judgment. I am not Lord over any man. Thus far the opinion
and mind of Luther, the which I have laboured to interpret and translate not
so eligantly, as faithfully and plainly, when as it seems a matter of great
weight, of which we entreat, and that of greater weight, then commonly it is
supposed to be. For, albeit it be reported of certain people, that they use
every man in his own house to keep their dead put in Coffins, like as we in
a manner as fondly bury in Churches, such as many times are not worthy of the
high way: yet that is too barbarous, and unless they be well dressed with
many precious things, vntolerable.

Now, concerning the situation and manner of building, The situation of the
churchyard.
it shall be more agreeable unto reason, that it be lying more toward the
North, then the South: and that it be set rather in a high and dry place, then
in a low and wet place. For as it hath been said before, when as there
arises always out of Church-yardes abundance of infectious exhalations and
breathes, and corrupts the air, the situation, lownes, and moystnes of the
ground, may not a little increase this inconvenience: which they witness, who
sometimes white linen clothes there. For many times they find that they
gather an unpleasant smell from out such places: by which means it likewise
happens, that often in low and foggy places, kitchens valleys there appears
a certain fire gently touching without any hurt, the hair or garmens,
Aeneid. 2. vrb. cond. 1.
as Virgil writes of the child Ascanius, and Titus Liuius of Seruius Tull.
For this comes of a certain fat moystnes, or clammy fatness, which is there
more plenteous, whereof arises somewhat a thick exhalation or fog, but yet
not so hot, that it can get up unto the highest regio of the air, much less
that it can get above it. Wherefore by reason of the coldness of ye place, it is
driven down, and either through the rubbing of it self hard together, or by the
restraint of the extreme cold, Fools fire.
is by the force of it own heat set on fire. As they also say of ye roving and
wandering fire (which some call fools fire, Pliny names it Castor Pollux, ye
Greeks term it Polydeukes) the which is wont to follow or go before such as
travel in ye night, especially such as ride or go by sea, not without some
frighting of the ignorant, which think it to be a spirit, whereas it is a
thing altogether natural and harmless, the which hurts no body. But because
we are fallen into the mentioning of this natural imagination, I will add
hereunto, Whether it be natural for dead bodies to be seen about graves.
that wonderful fabulment or tale, which Hier. Cardanus reports of certain
dead me, that were wont to be seen about Sepulcres and Graves. The which,
least any man should think that I forge upon him, when as it is a thing almost
incredible, I will set down his own words: Dead bodies (saith he) to be seen
in fields about graves, and especially murdered, De vari. rer. 16. cap. 93.
and not deep buried, which in their life time were fierce and cruel, to be
seen I say, in the night time, and chieflye of such as are ignorant of this,
is a thing altogether natural: When as the moist and fresh body of man in
the grave, doth cast up a vapour always of one likeness according unto his
greatness, which carries the shape of a man. Whereas in times paste, when the
bodies were burnt, and put in a vessel, no such thing was seen. This saith
he, fearful doubtless to be heard, but much more to be seen, and the
which I rather refer unto a cunning mockerye of the Devil (for Satan
mocks in the minds of men, and after the manner of Iugglers, makes many
sights to appear, by the which he drives the fearful either into a vain
fear, or else unto idolatry) then unto the truth of a natural thing, if so
be also that they be done, as they seem to be done. The which also may
hereby be understood, in that he saith, that they are cheflye seen of those,
which are ignorant of the matter. For the Devil can sooner deceive these, as
who a good season have tossed these things in their minds, and in their
though and power of imagination do conceive and bring forth unto them selves
the fantasies and imaginations of such things, Vain imaginations.
so that they think they see outwardly, the thing which they have imprinted
and shaped in their own brain the which is no new thing in those that are
sick of the Iandice, and in melancholic persons. And that such visions do
seldom or never appear unto stout men, because that by reason of their
couragiousnesse they never fear them, or do once so much as conceive
imagination of them, Theodorus Bysantius, and after him, De praestig. them 2. ca
24. Hip. de virg. morb.
the most worthy Physician Iohn Wierus doth testify: Wherefore, if Cardanus
had said further, that those spirits had oftenest been seen of Children,
women, fearful tender, and sick persons, who by reason of the weakness of
their mind and body, are troubled with continual fear and vain dreams, that
which he saith should of me more easily be credited. But now I cannot choose,
but put it among the true tales of Lucianus. In these things I am to stay no
longer, if I shall only add this one thing, that those which do in such
sort asscribe all things unto nature, do oftentimes delight them selves in
vain with their own error, and do embrace the Image of Helena, for the
Goddess her self: when as the most of such strange woonders are often done
by the slights of Deuilles (as I have said) and many also rather by god his
miracles, whereof men can yield no reason, then by any natural cause. Cardanus
therefore a most learned man must pardon my being against him in this point, for
as much as by his own testimony, it is always lawful to doubt of a general
truth, howe good soever the man be that affirms the same.

And whereas I said that the Churchyards are to be placed towards the North,
it hath the same cause, the which hath been alleged for the building of the
plague houses. The northwind
For the wind which blows from this part, with his thinness and pureness,
doth easily consume and scatter abroad all thick and troublesome vapours,
and cleanses the air. Wherefore he will not bring any infectious smell, or
hurtful breath into the City, the which we have proved to be usual to rise
out of such places.

The figure of the churchyard round.
Furthermore, although it be but a very small matter: yet that all the
circumstances may be agreeable unto the nature of the thing, it must be made
of a round, and not square, or any other figure, and compassed with a stone
wall. Why so? whether because this figure of al other is the most capable? or
because it is the most perfect? When as all other are found in this?
Verelye for both causes, but ye former is of less force, the latter hath a
more fine signification. For when as oftentimes many are to be buried,
chieflye at that time, it shall be profitable, that the space be large, least
we be driven to break up and open some graves that are not very old, and
to make bare corses half rotten, which will be evil favoured and lothsom, and
brings danger of infecting the air. The roundness of ye figure betokens
perfection, both that which they that lye there, have already received, that
also which they yet look for. In which consideration the heaven it self is
round, and those which we reckon for saints, and which are appointed unto
blessed eternity euerlastingnes, unto the same we are woonte to paint a round
figure. For there is no end of the circle or sphere. It may also signify, that
which the Greekes say: Al things belonging unto man, Al things after a sort may
be said, to follow the moving of the heavens.
are as it were a round circle. For when as al things with are under heaven, do
after a sort frame them selves unto ye first moving of the firmament, going
from life it self as from the East, unto death, as unto the West, they finish
their circle with the motion of the whole heaven: like as he which is returned
fro whence he went forth, is said to have ended his course and circle.
Hereunto also appertain the grates of iron before the door of the Church
yards, These mysteries of this section may most of the happily seem more
curious then needful.
and the doors or gates, when as they are opened, falling to again of their
own accord, and shutting themselves, that the bruit beasts cannot come into
them.

But now it is time, that making an end of this Chapiter of the place,
situation, figure, and ornaments of common burial, I go unto other matters
of greater weight, then those of which we have hitherto entreated.

Of the cleansing of houses, and things infected. Cap. 6.
IT follows therefore in order, that when as the sick, and those suspected,
which have been with them, have now either been carried out, or the dead
buried, we speak some thing of the cleansing of the houses, and of such
things as are in them. For this industry or pain taking seems to serve for
many things, nay without the which all other labours are taken in vain, and
the mischief doth eftsoones grow again, yea after long resting, taking again
as it were new strength, doth sometime rage more fiercely, then at the
beginning. For truly without al question, it is a thing worthy the wondering
at, why oftentimes so many men die in one house, in the which some body hath
died of the Plague. The which thing, when as none of us doubt to happen
through the poisoned air of yt infected place, we must altogether follow the
practise of the old Testamente, when as the leprye usual unto that time
accustomed to cleave not only in bodies, but also in garments, sheets,
walls, and other parts of the house, so that those things were not only to be
washed, but also sometimes to be burned. In like manner (I say) we must deal
here, when as the poison of the Plague is no less wont to infect al things,
and many times hides it self in the chincks and walls, and lies hid many years
doing no hurt, until that getting an occasio to do harm, it breaks forth with
great force, and infects as many as come with impure bodies, and take in the
same by their mouth, or other passages of their body, and cease not from
hurting, before that either the subjects fit to receive it are removed, or the
naughty quality of the air, be sufficiently amended and scattered. So Alex.
Benedictus tells of a certain mattres, A Mattres lying seaue years in a
corner.
which through the negligece of the servant being vnwasht, and undressed, lay
cast in a corner a long time, and when as after seven years it was brought
forth, and occupied, that which in the mean season by means of lying still,
and of the cold, was unhurtful, being stirred up again with the heate of
the place and of men, and drawn in by the pores or small holes of the skin,
showed forth her poison, to the destruction of the whole house. I recited a
certain like thing before of a leathern garment, and diverse other infected
things, of which I had experience. For it is manifest and undoubted, that the
pestilent air may lye lunge in such places and household stuff: the which,
if it be stirred up, and get into a corrupt and impure body, it very easily
kindles. In appen. ca. 9. li. 4. de rer. variet.
H. Cardanus indeed a manne much red in histories, tells, how yt in a
certain Village called Lachiarella, near unto Millain, at the burial of a
certain old woman, there were found two chests full of lynnen cloth, and
clothing, hidden for fear of wars by the space almost of thirty years.
The which being opened when as they curiously searched, as the manner is, they
found nothing corrupted in them, yet as many as were present at it, or touched
handled the things that were laid up in them, either then or afterward, dyed
al within three days. Marcilius Ficinus also affirms, that walls, old iron,
and such things as be made of wood, unless they be helped and remedied by
washings, perfumes, De Epid. ca. 24.25.
and fierce, do keeepe still their infection a whole year, or more also. Also
that garments of woollen, and such like, unless they be often aired, washed,
perfumed, or be hanged by the fire, or in the wind or sun, do remain three
years and more, infected. You know (says he) that the smell of an hoar
orange is kept many years in the box wherein it did hoar. Likewise, that the
smell of the moss or down in ye silk worm cotinueth long, such as it was before
in his silk worm. Truly as oil is nourishment unto fire, Wool keeps the
infection a long time.
so wol is a norishmet unto this infection, doth so nourish it, that it doth
not only preserve it, but also increase strenthe it. Also in an other place:
As cocerning (saith he) the disposition of the only air, he understands
the common and not the private air) only speedy taking is sufficient: so when
as al men, who soever they are, have remained three months free from this
sickness, it may be judged, that the air is now purged. But be thou most
wary in coming near unto, Alex. Ben. 1 de pest. ca. 3.
or in touching of those things, which hold the infection faster then the
air doth. The boughtes of fornaces or ouens in walls do keep the infected
quality longer then wood. Wherefore all things are diligently to be purged,
with fires, washinges, ayering, purfuminges, smells c. Men for the most part
are cleansed in the space of 14. days. Houses, wooden things c. in 21 days:
clothes, garments, and such like in 28. days. Horses, money, household,
fardelles, and such like, unless you deal marvelous warily, are wont to
keep the infection a long season. Wherefore be thou watchful, wary and
wise, and provide for all things in order.

These things hitherto in a manner hath Marsilius Ficinus, at the end of
which words, that I may begin, I do by all means exhort and admonish
our Preservers also, unto whom I must return again, that they use especial
wisdom in this point, and diligently provide for all things in order. And
first, that they give commandment, as I have said, by whom this cleansinge
must be done, and secondly, howe it ought to be done.

Wherefore, if they be yet alive, Who ought to be appointed Clensers.
and in health, which were left in the infected houses, this charge must be
committed unto them, a threatening and penalty being set upon their
negligence. But if the house be clean rid of men, this business must be
done by those, whom we before have named Buriars, Carryars forth, and
Sockers or Dressers and layers forth of the dead. And these first of of the
company of men. Fourthly, touching settles, tables, garments of some price,
cloths, beds, c. they must not only wash them with a special care, but also
soak them in lie, beat them, and hang them out on breathing in the air: For
if it be not so done, it is to be feared, least the infection be not
sufficiently no free vent, they do much longer keep, the hidden and imprinted
infectious poison of the Plague, then those which are in an open and free air.

Of keeping of those, which have been in infected houses. Cap. 7.
WHat order is to be taken for those which have been in company with the
sick of the plague, albeit I have made some mention hereof before, yet in this
place something is to be said thereof again, and that more expressly, for it
seems not to be convenient, yt they should go every where up and down at
their pleasure, or occupy their common trades, setting open their houses straight
after the dead corses are carried to burying. Therefore they either have been
with them of necessity, as household servant, which tended upon the sick,
and Physicians, Surgeons, Preachers, which applied medicines unto the body
and soul, and briefly others that carried forth ye dead to burying: or else
they were with them not of necessity, Those that once or twice have visited
the sick of the plague.
as those which came not unto them daily, but by the way peradventure once or
twice to see them. These if they use some diligence in cleansing their bodies
and garments, it shall be sufficient only for the space of 14. days to keep
them selves within their own houses, if so be that no worse thing have
followed. But they which have done the office of Physician Surgeon, it hath
been already set down, that these ought to refrain the company of other men
the whole time of the Plague. The household, and such as have daily kept
company with the sick in one house, have need of a longer time to cleanse
them. But if ye be minded to give them leave to go abroad, nevertheless for
the auoydinge of infection, they must be forbidden public Churches and other
assemblies, unless they openly carry with them a little staff, or white wand,
as a token of the plague, and that notwithstanding they diligently shun ye
company of the sound. If any shall refuse so to do, they are to be punished
by a sharpe decree of the Preservers, that for the space of six whole weeks,
they venture not to go out of their houses, yet ought they much more
straightly to be kept in, Such as have had the plague.
who themselves have had the Plague, although now they be never so much
healed of it. For in such a cleansing there needs the space of two months.
But they of all other most straightly, which presently yet now have the Plague:
of the cleansing of whom what ought to be decreed, because they have yet now
to wrestle with death, it cannot be set down. For albeit they be for the most
part weaker, then that they can go abroad out of their houses, yet it
sometimes falls out, that the sickness grants them truce for certain
days, when as the poison cannot go so speedily unto the principal members,
nor take the Castle of life, being let either by the thickness of the
body, or by the natural strength of the bowels, or else by the less or weaker
quality of the disease. These then are wont willingly to shuffle in themselves
among the assemblies of men, led either by a certain simple error, for that
they think, that they the selves shall be delivered, if they can rub their
disease upon others. For such wit hath the old Devil the master of mischief
to endue men with false belief, and (as the common people saith) to turn the
wheel, promising vain hope of health: or else they are led by error joined
with lewdness: that is, with a mind to commit a most notorious and cruel
offence, namely, to infect and kill many other with them. For some are of so
pestilent a mind, that they far exceed the pestilence of the body. He that
hath not had some experience in the world, A pestilent kind of people.
nor seen the towns of many men, nor known the mind, will scant give
credit unto my words: but in truth I can boldly avouch, that I have seen
with these eyes, them, who, when as they have had the sore running upon them,
so that they could not doubt of the sickness, have thrust themselves into the
Church, secretly have together with others received ye bread of the Lord, and
out of the same cup have drunken the wine of the Lord: I tremble at the telling
of it, albeit at that time there ensued hurt unto none thereby: the Lord
doubtless so providing, who doth deliver us from all evil. But who would not
think such fellows rather Devils (I speak with M. Luther) then men? Or at
the least wise to be most pestilent men, then whom the pestlence it self is
more gentle? And as privy murderers, do one while thrust these into the
heart with a dagger, and another while these, the which it is not known unto
whom it may be laid, so these most notorious infected murderers, and mad
dogs, do here infect a boy, there a man or a woman. And when according to their
power they have infected all things, they prate that their fault is to be
laid unto none but unto the will of God. And they rejoice and laugh in their
sleeve, as if the matter were well done, when as they hear of the miseries of
others, of the which they themselves were causes. O most cruel poisoning: the
which ought by no means to remain unpunished, nay is worthy either of equal
or also of greater punishment then the murders of common robbers. De varieta.
rerum 15. cap. 8.
Cardanus tells howe that it happened at Casalis a City of Salassia in the
year 1536. that certain conspired together (namely forty men and women
together with the hangman) that they would make annoyntment, wherewith they
would annoynt the bars of doors, that they which touched them, might be
infected: and would also make a powder that being secretly sprinkled upon the
garments of men, should work their destruction: (the plague had been
extreme in that place a little before, and now was ceased) but their
conspiracy being found out, they were all put to death with singular
torments. They confessed also, that they had determined at a solemn pomp upon
a certain Saint his day, by anointing the seats to slay all the Citizens,
that they had prepared above twenty pots for this purpose. They attempted
the same also sometimes at Geneua, and were executed. And is the fact of these
I pray you more heinous, then of those who I have spoken? Or who would think
that men baptised with the Baptism of Christ, and ordained unto the kingdom
of God, could fall into so great a wickedness? Who had not rather live among
beasts, the in one City with such altogether unworthy of the names of men?
Wherefore it behooves our Preservers to be stout punishers of so great
enormity or disorder, that for the common safety of the society and
fellowship, they suffer not such privy enemies and wicked traitors to go
scotfree, after the example of most worthy common wealths, of which there
hath been mention made.

The duty of such as be recovered of the Plague.
Further they which have been sick of the Plague, and now are somewhat
recovered, ought voluntarily to admonish others, to shun their company, for
when as they, being in this misery have been courteously helped, having now
recovered health they ought again to consider, that they drive not others into
the same misery, the which were a trick of most unthankful persons. If God
himself (saith Luther) in the old Testament commanded, that the Lepers
should be put a part without the City fro the company of the people, for
the avoiding of infection, and that they should not be received again unless
they were judged cleased, it behooves us much more in this dangerous infection
to follow the same: neither in this case may we be unruly and disobedient, c.
For I have before rehearsed more, spoken Christianly by him to this purpose. In
the which, to speak freely, albeit the cousaile of seperatio do greatly like
me, The leprie of the old testament.
yet do I not think this opinio to be allowed of al, in the cause, wherein this
danger in the infectio of ye Leprous is thought to consist (unless
peradventure this sometime happen for the contempt of God his commandment:
for their company was very straightly forbidden) into the mention of which
thing because I am fallen again, and have often before spoken of it, I will
not refuse to repeat it again in few words. For first it is not certain
that the Leprie of the old testament was a disease, hurting the actions of
nature, or curable by any counsel or remedy of man: nay in the opinion of S.
Augustine, De ciuit. dei.
it was rather a defiling and uncleanness, in deed not common, but especially
sent by God, then a disease of the body, and (as he speaks) rather a blemish
of the colour and skin, then of health, or of soundenesse of the senses and
members. Wherefore the Scripture also doth oftner use the word of cleansing
then of healing, when as it speaks of the curing of this grief. And in my
judgment certain famous Physicians do very well distinguish this our
Leprie, which is called of the Greekes, Elephantiasis, from that of the
Hebrews, which of the is named Saharath, and of the which mention is made in
Leuiticus and in the Euangelists. For this disease (say they) is not of them,
which thorough error are wont to happen in six not natural things, where as
it is indeed a grief proceeding from the wrath of GOD, Amat. Lusi.
which according to the nature of the sin is wont to happen not only unto
the bodies of men, but also unto garments, and the walls of houses, in the
which those transgressors dwelled: according to the greatness (I say) of the
fault. For if the fault were small, certain small spots did arise in the
walls of the house: if it were greater, they did cleave unto garments: but if
it were a most great sin, then the body of the sinner was defiled with the
same. And those that were suspected of this Leprie, were judged of the high
Priest by the space of fourteen days, whether they were to be shut out of
the company of men or no. For there was no need of the help of man to the
curing of the same, but only of the hand of GOD. All which this (like as
many other) are now ceased.

But concerning this our Elephantiacall Leprie, Elephantiasis, or Leprie of our
time.
which doth most greatly differ from this other, this is manifest out of the
books of Physicians, and nature of the same, yt it is a disease coming of the
fault of the bowels, humours, very fierce and as it were a canker of the whole
body: the which in times past (as histories report) was peculiar unto Egypt:
and not seen in Italie before the age of Pompeius Magnus. What? that even at
this day it is more seldom in Italie, then in our country of Germanie, Ant.
Be. de abd. morb. cau. cap. 98.
or the lowe countries of Belgia near unto it, or in France: the which some
write to happen unto the one, because of their vnsodden meates, and unto the
other by reason of the constitution or quality of the air: Lib 2. ad ad
Glauc.
but howe truly, see they, which make themselves so ready arbitrers, and as
it were vmpiers in weighty causes and controversies. For Galen thinks that
it is seldom seen in Germanie, often in Alexandria, looking peradventure unto
his times: I with Amatus Lusitanus do rather ascribe it unto their ill manner
of diet. For they indifferently without any choice or order feed on fish,
podware, some fruits, milk, Not. histo. 26. cap. 1.
and white meates. The Leprie called Elephantiasis is described by Plinie after
this manner, that it is said oftentimes to begin at the face, first in the
nose, as it were a little Lentill, anon going over the whole body, spottie,
of diverse colours, and the skin unequal, in some place thick, in some place
thin, with an hard or rough scab, last of all increasing and eating the flesh
to the bones, the fingers and toes swelling both in hands and feet. This is
the definition of Plinie. That manner of curing is chiefly commended by Galen,
Gal. 11. fac. med. simp.
which is done by the use of Vipers flesh: the which I my self also in
Italy, have heard to be commended by most excellent Physicians, and have
seen also fitly used. But these things are not for this place. But this
heereout appears, that there is a great difference between the
Elephantiasis, that is the Lepri of this time, that, when in the old testament
was an especial punishment of sinners, both as concerning their nature, and
manner of curing: the which Leonhardus Fuchsius hath also observed in his
Paradoxis: Lib. 7. ca. 16.
but not in like sort Franciscus Valleriola in his medicinal enarrations. Lib.
6. cap. 5.


But some man will object: Objection.
yet both of them must be infectious, when as both that are infected with the,
are separated from the company of men. I answer, Answer.
what if there be not in them both the like cause of separation? For
peradventure they were for this cause separated among our ancestors from other
men, because it was a foulness and certain filthiness that God would not
abide in his people: as which it behooved to excel in the cleanness as well
of body as of mind: or for that they which were defiled with these spots,
should sustain some punishment: to wit, that both they should abstain
from the company of others, others likewise from theirs: which thing in the
judgment of some was an Image of our excommunication at this day, which they
commonly call bannition or abannition, that is absence for one year. But our
Leprous are herefore removed from the company of men, because they have a
disease both grievous and also infectious: Gord. par. 1. cap. 22.
Albeeit to speak as I think, I do not judge the infection to be so great,
as many do suppose. Nay rather in my judgment that disease is more
infectious, which in our time we call the French pockes, because of either
the beginning or propagation and spreading from thence, and the which Ioan.
Manard. judges to be a kind of Elephantiasis, Epist. lib. 7. Epist. 2. Iac.
Syl. in praefa. Isag. not. hist. 26. ca. 1.
but not truly in my judgment: albeeit that it be not so dangerous,
especially at this day, when as the force thereof waxes weaker by little and
little, so that we may hope that it will at length cease altogether, as of
the tetter which Plinie mentions, there remains at this day no tokens.
But as concerning the Elephantiacall lepri, I have often diligently enquired
of them, which were diseased with it, but I could seldom understand that
any was infected by their company, albeit those that are sound are often
conversant with them, Leonb. Zac. 9. in Rha. ca. dephthis.
nay (that which is more wonder) albeit the sick husbands use the company of
their sound wives, some times beget sound children: which should be
incredible, if the force of the infection were so great, as it is thought of
many for to be. Which things sithence they be so, and yet nevertheless they
are put apart from the company of other and that with great carefulness, for
what danger soever of infection, or at leastwise suspicion of infectio: I say
again that which I have often said already, that there must far more
care be used in the infection of the Plague. But these things peradventure may
seem more at large debated then was meet: which the indifferent Reader will
easily pardon me, if he shall consider that it is not unprofitable, that
sometimes we be put in mind of sundry matters. For this thing stirs up
wise men to a more diligent searching out of truth: which truth, as
Pythagoras said, is drowned and hidden in a most deep well.

An admonition unto every subject of the common wealth, to employ his service
to keep away the common danger of infection by the plague. Cap. 8.
But peradventure there will not some be wanting, who with discontented minds
will speak against these our constitutions or orders, either for that through
lack of judgment they cannot thoroughly weigh and understand the matter, or for
because they cannot away with such counsel, whereby they perceive themselves
to be brought into order: for the common sort uses to be unwilling to bear
all yoke. But these are forthwith to have their answer. Such as think the
Plague to come always immediately from God.
As for those who persuade themselves that the Plague comes always
immediately from God as a peculiar and immediate whip, and therefore attribute
nothing unto the help of man, I can do no more but counsel these, to suffer
themselves to be better instructed. Such as can abide no order setting
themselves openly against our Preservers, and will urge or be earnest for
their old custom liberty, these I would altogether have admonished, to
consider, that they alone are not here provided for, but also their wives,
children kinsfolk, yea the whole society and fellowship. What barbarousnes
then should it be, to be unwilling for a small time to bear that which thou
may safely do, to the end thou may be delivered from it, which if it
hap unto thee, thou can not bear but with the hazard of thy life? Go to,
who would not willingly in the time of war, or in the besieging of a city,
suffer to have some new laws, Le. Lem. 2. de occul. not. mir. cap. vlt.
but yet necessary for that state, by the Senate, or Lieutenant of the
soldiers, to be prescribed unto him, by the which he understands that both
his goods and life, and also his country men's may be defended and preserved?
Nay who would not labour with all his might mayne to keep away the enemy from
his borders, if he be absent: or to thrust him out if he be entered the city?
Who in a common overflowing of water, will not take pains to keep and
maintain the baize, to strengthen houses, to deliver cattle, to help men
swimming, to give if it be but a board to them that are like to be drowned,
if he can do no more? Who would not run and help the sheep, if the Wolf
somewhere breaking into the fold, should tear the flock? Who (I say) is
endued with so cruel an heart, which in these miseries wold not both with
hand and foot, so far as he were able, bring aid in things going thus to
wrack and ruin? Who of tenderness could with a quiet mind behold these
miseries of his neighbours? O heart altogether devoid of all humanity, and as
hard as the Adamant, or rather brutish, that in this case thinks that there
is any place for sloth and sluggishenesse? Bruit beasts help one an other,
and that readily, if any trouble befall them from others: and shall manne
that hath his name of manhood (which word conteyneth in it all kind of
duty) for the retaining of an unprofitable liberty in the grievous
affliction of a whole City, not be content to have commendable, commodious,
necessary laws, yet not perpetual, but temporal, prescribed unto him? And
according to the equity of these laws to have the common wealth, and the
safety and life of his fellows maintained? Objection.
But (say they) the examples which you bring are unlike: because GOD is the
Author of the Plague, but men, or other creatures are the Causers of these. As
though any thing came to pass without the providence of God, yea or without
his divine decree. Answer.
As if there were any evil in the City, which God hath not done. Amos 7.


But these things in times paste have been handled by us. Go too, if we see
any manne to be pressed with hunger, doest thou not think that by the
commandment of GOD we are bound to give him meat? Albeeyt he be a Turk,
albeeit he be an Heathen, albeeit he be our enemy? Howe much more then
do we owe this duty unto our brethren, our neighbours, our citizens, whose
help we canne never be without? Now if we withdraw our help from those
which are in such sort in need, be we not murderers before God? Saint
Iohn says, he that loves not his neighbour, commits murder, and that
love doth not remain in him. And such was one of the sins which GOD laid
against Sodome, as Ezechiel says, Behold these are the sins of thy sister
Sodome, idleness, riot, not regarding of her neighbour. After the self same sort
shall Christ say at the last judgment: I was an hungered and ye gave me no
meat, I was sick, and ye did not visit me, and if then it be so great a
fault, to deny meat, or not to visit the sick, how much more great a fault
shall it be, not to take away according to our power as it were present death
and destruction? I wold to God that with these prattlers and contemners of the
public safety, the counsel of the most excellent and noble M. Luther might
find place, who so wisely, so godly, Luther.
and finally, so carefully persuades al kind of helps to be used, which by
any means may profit: and will by no means have any thing omitted, which any
way may quench such a fire. So behave thy self (saith he) as one that is
desirous to quench a common fire in a city. The Plague is a fire.
For what else is the plague, then a certain fire, which doth not consume and
devour wood or chaff, but the life and body? Therefore every one of us ought
thus for to think: if Satan by the will of God, either by him self or his
ministers hath wrought us this deadly infection, I on the other side before
all things will pray unto God, that of his mercy he will take away the same
from us: Then I will put to my simple helping hand, both by perfuming and
cleansing of the air, both by using of medicines, also in shunning the
infection, where my presence is not necessary, least I might seem my self to
have neglected some thing, or be cause of death unto others, who through my
negligence may take harm. But if God nevertheless will have me visited with
this sickness, or cal me out of this world unto him, at leastwise I have done
that which was my duty, neither have offended any thing, either against my
self, or my neighbour. But where my service is needful, there I will let
pass nothing of all things which either can or ought to be done of me.
Behold this is that godly faith indeed, which doth nothing rashly, neither
tempts God in any thing. Thus much in a manner after this sort hath Luther,
but in Dutche. Therefore if such wisdom and fidelity were seen first in the
Magistrate, then in the Citizens, truly the Plague would be much more
tolerable. But whereas the one are too rash and careless, the other
contrariwise too fearful, there Satan easily at his pleasure tosses all
things up side down, and the misery doth so far daily increase, that at
the length there is a pitiful plight of ye whole city. Miseries that happen in
the time of a common Plague.
For traffic waxes cold, there grows a dearth of al things, the Church
assemblies cease, charity is in jeopardy, al things are suspected, as the Poet
saith, The wandering guest doth stand in dagger of his host, the host in danger
of his guest, fathers of their son in laws, yea seldom time doth rest
between borne brothers such accorde and love as ought to be. Due honour is
given neither unto the magistrate, nor unto parents, al discipline is
neglected. Nothing but trembling, despair, crying of young children, a noise of
women, weeping, mourning, sorrow, fear, dying of families, falsifiing or
staying of testaments and wills, confusion of inheritances, wasting of the
City, decay of the common wealth, to conclude, nothing is heard or seen but
al kind of misery. All which things they ought worthily to set before their
eyes, which do so little esteem of this cause, yt they will bear nothing, no
not for a small time only, for the sake thereof, the which is both easy to
be done, unhurtful, nay profitable for them: but either under colour of
religion, whose force they know not, or through rebellion they despice
commendable profitable laws to the common wealth: and unthankfully reject
those, which give the healthful counsel with great travail, and faithful
carefulnes, which they may use cost them no money: unto whose ignorance
notwithstanding in respect of the public profit, our Preservers ought in no
case to yield: but rather ought to follow that excellent counsel of
Hippocrates, that they constantly follow and continue in the same, which at
the beginning they have by grave advice thought most expedient.

Let every man think these things to be said unto him either in my name, or
in the name of the Preservers, and earnestly endeavour faithfully to help his
distressed Country. Which if he do not, let him fear punishment both at
the hands of God and men.

Of the punishment of such as rashly offend. Chap. 9.
WHerefore, because that hitherto we have set down what is needful to be
done, neither have let pass any thing yt by reason might be said, or is
appertaining profitably unto the matter: and also have exhorted all men
diligently and earnestly unto the observation or keeping of these constitutions
or orders, it now follows, that if any man be found slack or unfaithful in
his office, that he, the cause being known, suffer punishment according unto
the greatness of the fault. For what shall it profit to have made many good
laws, if they be not kept? And they will not be kept, unless there be due
punishment upon the offenders. For such as are good, will of their own accorde
do all those things which are best. For the law is not made for the just, but
for transgressors or offenders. The Magistrate also carries not the sword in
vain, but is a fear unto those that do evil. There is one hath said very
well, yt no common wealth can stand without laws, that laws are worth
nothing, if there be no action: and that al action is in vain, if there be no
execution. Let us therefore begin at the beginning, and let us see, what
penalty is to be set down to every one that shall rashelye break the laws of
these ordinances, the which I protest that I fear not to make, if I should
be in danger to loose my life for the same.

First of all concerning the Preservers themselves, The Preservers.
albeit they shall be the rulers and overseers of these laws, yet they ought not
to claim unto themselves more liberty, then the highest Emperor his majesty it
self wold have unto himself: who although he confess himself to be above the
laws: yet he saith yt he will obey be subject unto the laws. L. O worthy
voice. cod. de begib. Item L. princeps ff. de legib.
And truly equity doth require, that look what every man ordeineth unto others
the same also he bear himself. It is ye saying of Isocrates, that the common
people willingly follow the same which they see their rulers to be delighted
withal. Therefore let the Preservers by al means endeavour to maintain their
authority, let them labour not only in name, but also in deed to be Preservers
of health, and from their hearts to procure the common safety. But if either
they themselves shall do any thing negligetly, or of favour (which in ye iudgmet
of the very heath becomes not a magistrat) bear with others: by the decree
of ye Senate or whole bench, which thing will procure them infamy, let them
be put from their office, and be brought into the order of common Citizens.

Physicians, Surgeons, Apothecaries.
Physicians, Surgeons, Apothecaries, if they commit any thing through
oversight, which men never know of (for oftentimes such things may happen
(let them know that they shall have God a revenger. But if they shall be found
guilty of some light fault, let the recompense it with greater diligence. They
which cannot do all things so handsomely and skilfully as only ye most
excellent Physicians ca do, they are cleared by the law it self. For it is
always a hard thing to attain unto that which is rightest, L. lat. L. mag.
ff. de ver. re. sig.
neither can we all be Hippocrateses or Galenes. As for such as have made an
open fault, that is of gross purposed ignorance, have offended in that the
which for the most part all men of their calling would have done otherwise,
and better, let them sustain some arbitrary penalty according to the pleasure
of the magistrate, which may consist either in putting the out of office, or
abridging of their stiped, or finallye in impayring their estimation and good
name. Other faults are left to be punished according unto ye imperial laws or
constitutions statutes of princes. In the mean season both these and the
ministers of the Church that follow, must abstain from the company of others,
or else sustain an arbitrary punishment.

The ministers of the Church, who are the Physicians of the souls, Ministers.
cannot easily offend in their office, if they be desirous from their heart to
be that which they are called, show not themselves slow unto any, nor have
respect of persons, which doth at no hand beseem them. Wherefore public
crimes excepted, if they shall do any thing negligently, Pro. 15.
or not behave themselves godly, we will leave them to be punished unto God the
incorrupt judge, searcher of things, and of the heart, or at the most suspend
them from their office, and in the mean season take from them a months
wages.

Among the Citizens, Citizens.
whosoever shall be found a breaker or transgressor of ye order appointed, let
him have punishment according unto the nature of his fault. If any man be
found drunken, Drunkards.
he is to be punished either by some public shame, or forfeiture of money,
observing the circustance of person, occasio, oftennes, greatness. They that
shall dance, Dancers.
trim up or go unto public bathes, or be married, shall have some small
punishment: but if they get a special privilege, no punishment at al. For
there may such causes fall out, why some thing may be granted unto some, the
which ought not commonly to be done unto all.

They that shall adventure to bring into the city, Sellers and buyers of things
unlawful.
to sell things forbid, are worthily to be punished with the loss of ye
things themselves. The same punishment is to be laid upon ye buiers, if they yet
now have with the the things hole untouched: otherwise let the punishment be
equal unto the price of the things.

Inst. de re. diuis. cum in alieno solo.
He that is found selling of profitable things, as meats, or drinks, in any
other place then in the place appointed, let him bear the loss of all that he
sets to sale.

Whosoever of his own private authority shall covetously increase the price of
things saleable above that is reasonable, Sellers above the stinted rate.
or above the appointed rate, let him be under the punishment of unlawful
usuries, and for a time forbidden to occupy any more.

Whosoever shall not put away beasts forbidden, Penalty for not removing of
cattle and their filth.
nor carry away the filth which they make, let him be punished with a certain
sum of money: but if he throw it into the public street, let him be
punished double, and nevertheless compelled to carry it out of the City on
his own charges. If he shall forslow it, let the punishment be increased
according to the number of every day: or else let it be caused by the officers
to be carried away upon his double charges.

Dogs, cats, goats, c. Dogs, cats, c.
which severally belong to every man, unless he keep them at home, let him
pay an arbitrary sum of money: and let it be lawful for every one yt takes
them, to kill or keep them, unless it may be proved to be done without the
negligence of the owner. Horses, if they break out of the stable, and run
away, must be restored unto ye owner. For such are not wont to run up and
down.

If any either stranger or citizen coming from infected, or suspected places,
Comers fro places infected.
have not a testimonial of health, of the soundnes of the things that he
brings with him, let him be shut out: and if he shall privily come into ye
city, let him suffer ye loss of his things, and concerning himself being
punished let him be put back for a time, or else shut out for altogether.

Keepers of gates.
The keeper of the gates which shall receive any coming from a strange place
without a testimonial of health, if he do it wittingly, let him for certain
days be imprisoned: but if he do it unwittingly, as it may come to pass in a
multitude passing by, yet he is to be punished with some money penalty. The
same is to be ordained concerning Inkeepers, and such as lodge strangers.

Comers out of infected houses.
Whosoever after the prohibition of the Preservers shall dare to go out of any
house infected with the plague without an appointed mark, shall be punished with
a money punishment: but if noted with some mark, he shall rashly go into
other folks houses, or thrust himself into the company of me, let him want
liberty to go out afterwards, or let him be carried into the Plague houses.
The same is to be ordained against the, which go out of one plage house into
another.

Contemners of Physic.
He yt being in health or sick shall contemn Physic, let him be codened of
stubbornes, counted as an heretike: unto who also afterwards, less benefit
duty is due fro others, nay he shall be counted unworthy the fellowship of
Citizens. For he hath tempted God, with the rebellious Iewes required miracles,
when as without miracles he might have had experience of the grace of God.

Whosoever shall affirm, Forsakers of their city, c.
yt it is lawful for christias in the time of ye plague without a lawful cause,
consent of the rulers, to leave his city church, he is worthy the name of a
schismatike: and if so be he so run away, he is to be depriued of the
freedom of the city. And he yt shall hold every plague to be as an immediate
punishment from God, is to be condemned of ignorance, to be despised as an evil
speaker: as one yt lays upon God his own rashness, blame of his own
rechlesse negligence.

They yt have charge about burials, Officers about burials, c.
grave makers, cleansers, such as are put in office about carrying forth of
the dead, if they refrain not themselves from the company of others, as those
that in houses infected have bin of ye household (if they offend after ye same
sort) are to be punished. If they have at any time buried any that were not
dead, as we have said yt it doth at some time hap, if they have don it
willingly, let the be held for murderers: but if they have done it ignorantly,
let the ask god forgiveness for their fault.

Inst. de pub. Iud.. Item lex Cornel.
If they shall steal away any thing out of houses that they had to cleanse, let
them be guilty of theft: but if they have given the same unto any other, let
the be guilty of giving of poison, and be punished with a bodily punishment.

Goers abroad before the time prescribed, c.
If any man before the time prescribed, shall go out of his house without
license, thrust himself into the company of others, he shall be bound to begin
afresh the time of shutting in, be punished beside with an arbitrary
punishment. But if the same party being infected before, and yet scarce well
recovered, or but meetly recovered, shall adventure to do the like, he is to
be accused of great vnthankefulnes, and to be depriued of all benefits usual
to be done unto him, and besides to be restrained with longer keeping in. But if
being now in very deed infected with the plague, he shall be found to have
committed this heinous offence, upon notorious wicked boldness, as a murderer,
after the loss of his goods (if he be without children) let him be delivered
over unto the hangman.

Let these then be the punishments of such as offend rashly: the which
according unto the circumstance of time, place, person, age, sex, greatness of
the fault, often committing of the same, the preservers may either increase or
alter. Whatsoever penalties or forfaitures shall be gathered the same must be
bestowed partly upon the relief of ye poor, partly employed upon the plague
houses.

A register or brief rehearsal, containing the orders set down in these two
books, Chap. 10.
AFter that hitherto we have set forth such things as we thought to
appertain unto the office of a faithful and wise Magistrate, in preserving
and delivering the common wealth from the infection in the time of the plague,
and have hadled many things somewhat at large: it seems not amiss, to
repeat briefly, after ye manner of a register, the more profitable and chief
orders: if happily any man have not either leisure, or else like not to read
the whole discourse: for so he may both the more easily remember the, and be
less weary.

Therefore when as we shall be persuaded that it appertains unto the office of
the governors of the common wealth, not only to furnish the city with things
necessary, but also to keep away things hurtful discommodious (amongst which
hurtful things are especially contained common general diseases, which hurt
men by infection, such as chiefly the plague is) the magistrates must beware
of this, that here they give no place to slougth or negligence, but rather with
all endeavour, study, faithfulness, wisdom, perform ye, which they shall
understand to cocerne the profit and health of the whole fellowship and all their
subjects.

And first of al, yt they command unto their subjects

shall be great barbarousnes, in other things to have good rules, in ye breaking
in of diseases as it were of cruel beasts to use no wisdom, to make no laws
agreeable unto reason. Wherefore as the natural Philosophers do appoint unto
every sphere of the heaven, his mover, as it were governor: as como wealths
do set over every office a several ruler: so also in ye care of ye public
health, some certain magistrates must be ordained, who both indeed name must
be preservers, by their authority procure all matters of this treatise, yt in
such order as follows.

First, they shall provide ye common wealth of being wicked persons they
persuade themselves to spread and increase the same.





In things concerning meat and drink, Theo. Tabe. de pest. ca. 8.
according unto the natures of the things and countries, and ability of the
buyars. Concerning which notwithstanding it is not easy by certain laws to
make proviso, or exactly enough to prescribe, but only charity must needs
appoint the measure rule of this equity.

Kine, Hogs, Geese, and other filthy doth greatly defile the air, and
yields norishment unto the infection.



And here the custom of the Sarmations shall nothing move us, who in the time
of the plague use to cast dead Dogs every where in the streets, to quench
infection with infection. For this is barbarous, and peradventure commodious
only for that place. But we must rather amend our air with sweet things:
and chiefly by making every where great and bright fierce and flames. For in
a general sickness the purenes of the air is a chief remedy, as
Hippocrates and Galen, and all ancient wise men do witness. And the fire
doth cleanse, dry up and purify all things, and is unto the air, as it
were the Sun, soul, and life: Pli. hist. not. 56. cap. vlt.
Insomuch as look what that notable preservative Triacle doth unto compound
bodies, that doth fire unto the air, of all simple bodies, as in place, so
also in virtue the highest element: De var. rer. lib. 1.
the which let it be lawefull for me to speak with the leave of Cardanus, who
denies the fire to be an element. And it is very prettily said, Le. Lem. de
ocul. not. mir. 3.
By howe much the air is better, by so much the mind is better. For men for
the most part are disposed according unto the quality of the air.

Dogs also, Cattes, Goats, and other

Wherefore such as cannot easily be kept at home, as Cattes, it is better
that they be killed, then suffered, and in the room of them, to use gins
and mouse trappes.

scattered the present sickness far and wide.

Into whose houses the Plague is lighted, gives health: albeit when he will,
he can do it without them, which can do al things. But it is not lawful to
tempt him, neither ought we to ask miracles, when as without miracles, we
may obtain the thing which we require.

Hereunto also appertains, that regard be had of women in travel, which are
not to be forsaken for fear of infection, but if they be suspected, they are
faithfully to be helped, especially of the midwives other women, which by a
public stipend must be hired for this purpose.

Two houses, called Plague houses must infected is smaller. For in a great
company of sick persons, and in an universal visitation of the city, these
things will scarce be sufficient, albeit al things be well observed.

The Magistrate, when as the necessary persons and matters of the common
wealth

But if it be plain by evident tokens, that this punishment is sent
immediately by god, without the negligence of men, and natural causes, so
far of is it that we should fly away, that we ought rather patiently to
abide his fatherly correction, and humbly to pray for mitigation and slacking
of the same. But every plague cannot properlye be called the plague of God, but
comes sometimes by nature, sometimes by our negligence and rashness. In such a
case there is no doubt but that we may desire and follow al wholesome
counsels and remedies.



a stone wall, with grates at the entry, and doors falling too of their own
accord after they be opened, to keep out cattle.

After that the Corse is carried forth,

All those which are left alive, must be by certain laws kept in, such in
manner, as hath been said of them household servants, which have been with
the sick. Those therefore which shall be in health among the, if they will go
abroad, must, as well as they, carry a white rod in their hand.

Those which have been infected, and so so recovered, but yet not fully, may
not rashly go abroad, until they be thoroughly cleansed, unto the which the
space of two months is requisite at the least. But such as indeed are now
presently sick of this disease, may in no case be found amongst the
assemblies of men, as in the old testament it was not lawful for the leprous
to be in the company of the clean.



the last punyshmente of putting to death.

And thus far hath hitherto been spoken of the duty of a faithful and
wise Magistrate to be used in the time of the plague. Which if it shall seem
peradventure new unto any man, albeit that in many places it is not
altogether unusual: let him understand that we go about a new work:
New, I say, in some place perchance, or at least wise in some part new, but
yet notwithstanding not unprofitable, or not necessary. And wholesome counsayles
are not therefore to be despised, Al new things are not to be despised.
because they are new: For all things, which now are old, and with reason
long ago ordained, were once new. Neither doth it follow: this is new,
therefore it is to be refused. For is the hand of GOD shortened, so that in our
times he canne reveal nothing, which was not known of our forefathers? Do
there not daily come abroad new medicines, the use whereof being unknown unto
our Elders, hath been with great fruit and profit known unto us?

Wherefore they which judge thus, that which is unto any man strange and
unusual, the same by no means is to be received and allowed: do tie the
Magistrate unto too straight bands, to cut away from him all liberty, to
take advice upon most weighty matters, and such as he never before heard of:
Far disagreeing from the counsel of that Prince in Homer, who (necessity
enforcing) says He that can better counsel give, who so he be, now let
him come, for be he young, or be he old, most willingly the same I take.

When as therefore there are some Rulars over al offyces of the common wealth,
who especially take charge of those things, the dooinge whereof is committed
unto them, least any thing should be done amiss, or disorderlye: I hope
that wise Magistrates will herein easily also agree, to receive this newenesse
into their common wealth. The which albeit it shall peradventure seem
somewhat harde unto such as are not acquainted with it: yet by use it will wax
mild, and by the profit thereof make it self by little and little more
commendable. But if quarrellars shall cry out, that I have taken some things
out of other Authors into this Treatise, I have examples, by which examples I
think it lawefull for me to do that, which they have done. Howe many
things, nay almost al things hath Terence taken into his Commedies out of
Menander? Terence.
And Virgil into his poesy out of Homer, Cicero although of singular wit
eloquence, Virgill.
nay the father of eloquence, was not ashamed every where out of the Greekes,
to convey so many things into his writings, that he may seem rather the
Translator then Author of some things. In the law, Physic, Divinity, the
new writers have almost nothing, or very little, the which they have not taken
from the old: out of whose books also they are not afraid to write out many
things word for word, and to stuff them in their works for the maintenance
of their cause, albeit sometimes not without suspicion of falsehood. And these
things they often do in the same matter which hath sometimes been handled
before by others: with how much more right I then who do handle a matter not
perhaps so very new, yet thoroughly as it were from point by point, set forth
hitherto by no man, that I know, if out of the works of good Authors I have
fitted to my purpose such things as seem to serve the turn. It is no
hanging matter, to take from others that which a man may profitably use
without wronging any body. Aesops crow.
It is the part of Aesop his Crow vnbesittingly to garnish her self with the
feathers of other birds not agreeing unto her, and vainly to boast of the
same: and it is the point of a wise man, from every where to take, rightly to
apply to his matter, such things as are fit and profitable for the thing in
hand. For it is a great praise diligently to search the writings of our Elders:
but a greater, faithfully to keep the things found out: for they have by their
virtues opened the way of labour, and by their wisdom left unto us the path
of understanding.

Now if many of the things which I here require shall seem hard to be
compassed, because that some lack wealth, some opportunity, some wisdom: yet
is it not to be disalowed, yt the best rule be set down, according unto the
which, every man so far as he may, may order his matters. For ye example and
pattern, according unto ye which a thing ought to be done, ought in every
point to be most perfect, The most perfect way is in every thing to be set
down, though it cannot be by others attained unto.
that the following of the same may be most commodious. For whereas in a manner
nothing by following may be so set out as that it be made like to the first
pattern, nay that it will not many ways be thereunto inferior, this shall be a
great praise unto the follower, yt in the next degree he come near unto that
which he hath purposed to follow. The Poet saith: Look what we can attain
unto, some praise it is, though that we can perform no more: And of the wise
men in the gospel it is said in a common verse: They went so far as they
could go, where that they could no further pass, there stood they still. I
know it to be more easy to give counsel then to follow ye same: yet
notwithstanding the best counsel is to be given. For if some thing be wanting
in the setting down how a thing should be done, no doubt some thing will be
wanting in the action it self, that must according to that rule be performed.
There was never such an Orator as Cicero and Quintilian do describe unto us:
Nor such a Physician, as Galen requires: nor such a common wealth as Plato
shapeth, nor such a Preacher, as Erasmus paints out: Nor finally such a
Church as Christ desires. These, I say, albeit at no time they have been
found so perfect, as of the they are perfectly portraitured, yet they thought
good to set a most perfect pattern of them all before our eyes, by the view
whereof all our thoughts and actions should be governed. Which things since they
are so, who can justly find fault with me, for that I require some things
more exactly peradventure then some common wealths by following can be able
to perform? Wherefore those which can plead no other let but want of
ability, will at leastwise take in good part that good and wholesome counsel,
which comes from a good heart: And concerning the rest, must pray earnestly
with me unto God the father, and Iesus Christ his son, the true turner away,
and driver back of all evil, yt he will maintain sound in us the gift of
life, wc he hath bestowed upon us, preserve or deliver us fro this infectio of
the plague, unto the glory of his name, the amendment of our lives, and health
of our souls: calling upon him after this manner.

A Prayer.
O God in all adversity
the only hope and stay,
Th'assured help and certain aid
of life of mine always:
Unmindful of deserved ire,
O Father help at need,
Spare and behold of people thine
the tears which they do sheede.
Regard us for thy Christ's sake,
with humble voice we crave:
And deal not with us guilty souls,
as we deserve to have.
Howe some time Dauid for his sin
committed, grievous pain
Did suffer, holy scripture doth
report unto us plain.
When seven thousand ten times told
(a miserable sight)
With rage of plague in three days space
did loose this joyful light.
But when with tears he did again
his sin confess and whale,
Of frindly pardon at thy hands
forthwith he did not fail.
His wickedness, and also guilt
of wickedness committed,
Which uses to provoke thy wrath,
was by and by remitted.
We also now have made the like,
or greater far offence,
To which of pain is likewise due
as just a recompense.
But yet O God father dear
with humble suite we pray,
That us most wretched wights,
in wrath so great thou wilt not pay.
Have pity Lord on us,
on us that humbly sue to thee:
And suffer not our prayers made,
in vain or void to be.
Unmindful of deserved ire,
O father help at need,
Spare, and behold of people thine
the tears which they do sheede.
Behold I pray for Chirste his sake,
in name of whom who use
All prayers unto thee to make,
thou cannest not refuse.
To whom, as coeternall God
with thee, like laud and praise,
Like honour, equal glory,
renown is due always.
Amen.
Imprinted at London at the three Cranes in the Vintree, by Thomas Dawson.
1583.


