Essays.

Religious Meditations.

Places of persuasion and dissuasion.

Seen and allowed.

AT LONDON, Printed for Humfrey Hooper, and are to be sold at the black Bear
in Chauncery Lane. 1597.

To M. Anthony Bacon his dear Brother.
Loving and beloved Brother, I do now like some that have an Orchard ill
neighbored, that gather their fruit before it is ripe, to prevent stealing.
These fragments of my conceits were going to print^ To labour the stay of
them had bin troublesome, and subject to interpretation; to let them pass had
been to adventure the wrong they mought receive by untrue Copies, or by some
garnishment, which it mought please any that should set them forth to bestow
upon them. Therefore I held it best discreation to publish them my self as
they passed long ago from my pen, without any further disgrace, then the
weakness of the Author. And as I did ever hold, there mought be as great a
vanity in retiring and withdrawing men's conceits (except they be of some
nature) from the world, as in obtruding them: So in these particulars I have
played my self the Inquisitor, and find nothing to my understanding in them
contrary or infectious to the state of Religion, or manners, but rather (as I
suppose) medicinable. Only I disliked now to put them out because they will be
like the late new halfe-pence, which though the Silver were good, yet the
pieces were small. But since they would not stay with their Master, but would
needs travail abroad, I have preferred them to you that are next my self,
Dedicating them, such as they are, to our love, in the depth whereof (I ^ssure
you) I sometimes wish your infirmities translated upon my self, that her
Majesty mought have the service of so active and able a mind, I mought be with
excuse confined to these contemplations Studies for which I am fittest, so
commend I you to the preservation of the divine Majesty. From my Chamber at
Graies Inn this 30. of January. 1597.

Your entire Loving brother. Fran. Bacon.

Essaies.
1. Of study. 2. Of discourse. 3. Of Ceremonies and respects. 4. Of followers
and friends. 5. Suitors. 6. Of expense. 7. Of Regiment of healt^. 8. Of Honour
and reputation. 9. Of Faction. 10. Of Negotiating.
ESSAIES.
Of Studies.
STudies serve for pa^times, for ornaments for abilities. Their chief use for
pastime is in priuatenes and retiring; for ornament is in discourse, and for
ability is in judgment. For expert men can execute, but learned men are
^ittest to judge or censure.

To spend too much time in them is sloth, to v^e them too much for ornament is
affectation: to make judgment wholly by their rules, is the humour of a
Scholar. They perfect Nature, and are perfected by experience. Crafty men
continue them, simple men admire them, wise men use them: For they teach not
their own use, but that is a wisdom without them: and above them won by
observation. Read not to contradict, nor to believe, but to weigh and
consider. Some books are to be tasted, others to be swallowed, and some few
to be chewed and digested: That is, some books are to be read only in
parts; others to be read, but cursorily, and some few to be read wholly and
with diligence and attention. Reading makes a full man, conference a ready
man, and writing an exact man. And therefore if a man write little, he had
need have a great memory, if he confer little, he had need have a present
wit, and if he read little, he had need have much cunning, to seem to know
that he doth not. Histories make men wise, Poets witty: the Mathematickes
subtle, natural Philosophy deep: Moral grave, Logic and Rhetoric able
to contend.

Of discourse.
SOme in their discourse desire rather commendation of wit in being able to
hold all arguments, then of judgment in discerning what is true, as if it
were a praise to know what might be said, and not what should be thought.
Some have certain Common places and Theames wherein they are good; and want
variety, which kind of poverty is for the most part tedious, and now and
then ridiculous. The honourablest part of talk, is to guide the occasion, and
again to moderate pass to somewhat else. It is good to vary and mix speech
of the present occasion with argument, tales with reasons, asking of questions,
with telling of opinions, and jest with earnest. But some things are
privileged from jest, namely Religion, matters of state, great persons, any
mans present business of importance, and any case that deserves pity. He
that questions much shall learn much, and content much, specially if he
apply his questions to the skill of the person of whom he asks, for he shall
give them occasion to please themselves in speaking, and himself shall
continually gather knowledge. If you dissemble sometimes your knowledge of that
you are thought to know, you shall be thought another time to know that you
know not. Speech of a mans self is not good often, and there is but one case,
wherein a man may commend himself with good grace, and that is in commending
virtue in another, especially if it be such a virtue, as whereunto himself
pretends. Discretion of speech is more then eloquence, and to speak agreeably
to him, with whom we deal is more the to speak in good words or in good
order. A good continued speech without a good speech of interlocution shows
slowness: and a good reply or second speech, without a good set speech shows
shallowness and weakness, as we see in beasts that those that are weakest in
the course are yet nimblest in the turn. To use too many circumstances ere one
come to the matter is wearisome, to use none at all is blunt.

Of Ceremonies and Respects.
HE that is only real had need have exceeding great parts of virtue, as the
stone had need be rich that is set without foil. But commonly it is in
praise as it is in gain. For as the proverb is true, That light gains make
heavy Purses: Because they come thick, whereas great come but now and then,
so it is as true that small matters win great commendation: because they are
continually in use and in note, whereas the occasion of any great virtue
comes but on holy-daies. To attain good forms, it suffices not to despise
them, for so shall a man observe them in others and let him trust himself with
the rest: for if he care to express them he shall leese their grace, which is
to be natural and vnaffected. Some men's behaviour is like a verse wherein
every syllable is measured. How can a man comprehend great matters that
breaks his mind too much to small observations; Not to use Ceremonies ^t
all, is to teach others not to use them again, and so diminish his respect;
especially they be not to be omitted to strangers and strange natures:
Amongst a mans Peires a man shall be sure of familiarity, and therefore it is
a good title to keep state; amongst a mans inferiors one shall be sure of
reverence, and therefore it is good a little to be familiar. He that is too
much in any thing, so that he give an other occasion of sati^ti^, makes
himself cheap. To appli^ ones self to others is good, so it be with
demonstration that a man doth it upon regard, and not upon facility. It is a
good precept generally in seconding another: yet to add somewhat of ones own;
as if you will grant his opinion, let it be with some distinction, if you will
follow his motion, let it be with condition; if you allow his counsel, let it
be with alleging further reason.

Of followers and friends.
COstly followers are not to be liked, least while a man makes his train
longer, he make his wings shorter, I reckon to be costly not them alone which
charge the purse, but which are wearysome and importune in suits. Ordinary
following ought to challenge no higher conditions then countenance,
recommendation and protection from wrong.

Factious followers are worse to be liked, which follow not upon affection to
him with whom they range themselves, but upon discontentment conceived
against some other, whereupon commonly ensues that ill intelligence that we
many times see between great personages. The following by certain States
answereable to that which a great person ^imselfe professes, as of Soldiers
to him that hath been employed in the wars, and the like hath ever been a
thing civil, and well taken even in Monarchies, so it be without too much
pomp or popularity. But the most honourable kind of following is to be
followed, as one that apprehends to advance virtue desert in all sorts of
persons, and yet where there is no eminent odds in sufficiency, it is better
to take with the more passable, then with the more able. In government it is
good to use men of one rank equally, for, to countenance some
extraordinarily, is to make them insolent, and the rest discontent, because
they may claim a due. But in favours to use men with much difference and
election is good, for it makes the persons preferred more thankful, and the
rest more officious, because all is of favour. It is good not to make too much
of any man at first, because one cannot hold out that proportion.

To be governed by one is not good, and to be distracted with many is worse;
but to take advise of friends is ever honourable: For lookers on many times see
more then gamesters, And the vale best discovers the hill. There is little
friendship in the world, and least of all between equals, which was wont to
be magnified. That that is, is between superior and inferior, whose
fortunes may comprehend the one the other.

Of Suits.
Many ill matters are undertaken, and many good matters with ill minds. Some
embrace Suits which never mean to deal effectually in them. But if they see
there may be life in the matter by some other mean, they will be content to
win a thank or take a second reward. Some take hold of Suits only for an
occasion to cross some other, or to make an information whereof they could not
otherwise have an apt precept, without care what become of the Suit, when that
turn is served. Nay some undertake Suits with a full purpose to let them fall,
to the end to gratify the adverse party or competitor. Surely there is in
sort a right in every Suit, either a right of equity, if it be a Suit of
controversy; or a right of desert, if it be a Suit of petition. If affection
lead a man to favour the wrong side in justice, let him rather use his
countenance to compound the matter then to carry it. If affection lead a man
to favour the less worthy in desert, let him do it, without deprauing or
disabling the better deserver. In Suits a man doth not well understand, it is
good to refer them to some friend of trust and judgment, that may report
whether he may deal in them with honour. Suitors are so distasted with delays
and abuses, that plain dealing in denying to deal in Suits at first, and
reporting the success barely, and in challendging no more thanks then one
hath deserved, is grown not only honourable but also gracious. In Suits of
favour the first coming ought to take little place, so far forth consideration
may be had of his trust, that if intelligence of the matter could not
otherwise have been had but by him, advantage be not taken of the note. To be
ignorant of the value of a Suit is simplicity, as well as to be ignorant of
the right thereof is want of conscience. Secrecy in Suits is a great mean of
obtaining, for voicing them to be in forwardness may discourage some kind of
suitors, but doth quicken and awake others. But tyming of the Suits is the
principal, tyming I say not only in respect of the person that should
grant it, but in respect of those which are like to cross it. Nothing is
thought so easy a request to a great person as his letter, and yet if it be
not in a good cause, it is so much out of his reputation.

Of Expense.
RIches are for spending, and spending for honour good actions. Therefore
extraordinary Expense must be limited by the worth of the occasion; for
voluntary undoing may be as well for a mans country, as for the kingdom of
heaven. But ordinary expense ought to be limited by a mans estate, and
governed with such regard, as it be within his compass, and not subject to
deceit and abuse of servants, and ordered to the best show, that the Bills may
be less then the estimation abroad. It is no baseness for the greatest to
descend and look into their own estate. Some forbear it not upon negligence
alone, but doubting to bring themselves into Melancholy in respect they shall
find it broken. But Wounds cannot be^ cured without searching. He that
cannot look into his own estate, had need both choose well those whom he
employs, yea and change them after. For new ar^ more timorous and less
subtle. In clearing of a mans estate, he may as well hurt himself in being
too sudden, as in letting it run on too long, for hasty selling is
commonly as disaduantageable as interest. He that hath a state to repair may
not despise small things; and commonly it is less dishonourable to abridge
petty charges then to stoup to petty gettings. A man ought warily to begin
charges, which once begun must continue. But in matters that return not, he
may be more magnificent.

Of Regiment of health.
THere is a wisdom in this beyond the rules of Physic. A mans own
observation what he finds good of, and what he finds hurt of, is the best
Physic to preserve health. But it is a safer conclusion to say, This agrees
well with me, therefore I will continue it, then this I find no offence, of
this therefore I may use it. For strength of nature in youth pas^eth over many
excesses, which are owing a man till his age. Discern of the coming on of
years, and think not to do the same things still. Beware of any sudden
change in any great point of diet, and if necessity enforce it, fit the rest
to it. To be free minded, and cheerfully disposed at hours of meat, and of
sleep, and of exercise, is the best precept of long lasting. If you fly
Physic in health altogether, it will be too strange to your body, when you
shall need it, if you make it too familiar, it will work no extraordinary
effect when sickness comes, Despise no new accident in the body, but ask
opinion of it. In sickness respect health principally, and in health action.
For those that put their bodies to endure in health, may in most sickenesses
which are not very sharpe, be cured only with diet and tendring^

Physicians are some of them so pleasing and conformable to the humours of the
patient, as they press not the true cure of the disease; and some other are so
regular in proceeding according to Art for the disease, as they respect not
sufficiently the condition of the patient. Take one of a middle temper, or if it
may not be found in one man, ^

Of Honour and reputation.
THe winning of Honour is but the revealing of a mans virtue and worth without
disadvantage, for some in their actions do affect Honour and reputation, which
sort of men are commonly much talked of, but inwardly little admired: and some
darken their virtue in the show of i^, so as they be vnder-valewed in opinion.
If a man perform that which hath not been attempted before, or attempted and
given over, or hath been achieved, but not with so good circumstance, he
shall purchase more Honour then by effecting a matter of greater difficulty or
virtue, wherein he is but a follower. If a man so temper his actions as in some
one of them he do content every faction or combination of people, the
Music will be the fuller. A man is an ill husband of his Honour that enters
into any action, the failing wherein may disgrace him more then the carrying of
it through can Honour him. Discreet follo^ers help much to reputation. Envy
which is the canker of Honour, is best extinguished by declaring a mans self
in his ends, rather to seek merit then fame, and by attributing a mans
s^ccesses rather to divine providence felicity then to his virtue or policy.
The true Marshalling of the degrees of Sovereign honour are these. In the
first place are Conditores, founders of states. In the second place are
Legislatores Lawgiuers, which are also called second founders, or Perpetui
principes, because they govern by their ordinances af^er they are go^e. In the
third place are Liberatores, such as compound the long miseries of civil
wars, or deliver their Countries from servitude of strangers or tyrants. In
the fourth place are Propagatores or Propugnatores imperii, such as in
honourable wars enlarge their territories, or make noble defence against
Inuaders. And in the last place are Patres patriae, which reign justly and
make the times good wherein they live. Degrees of honour in subjects are first
Participes curarum, those upon whom Princes do discharge the greatest weight
of their affairs, their Right hands (as we call them.) The next are Du^es
belli, great leaders, such as are Princes, Lieutenants, do them notable
services in the wars. The third are Gratiosi, favourites, such as exceed not
this scantling to be solace to the Sovereign, and harmless to the people.
And the fourth Negotiis pares, such as have great place under Princes, and
execute their places with sufficiency.

Of Faction.
Many have a new wisdom, indeed, a fond opinion; That for a Prince to
govern his estate, or for a great person to govern his proceedings according
to the respects of Factions, is the principal part of policy. Whereas
contrariwise, the chiefest wisdom is either in ordering those things which
are general, and wherein men of several Factions do nevertheless agree, or
in dealing with correspondence to particular persons one by one, But I say not
that the consideration of Factions is to be neglected.

Mean men must adheare, but great men that have strength in themselves were
better to maintain themselves indifferent and neutral; yet even in beginners
to adheare so moderately, as he be a man of the one Faction, which is passablest
with the other, commonly gives best way. The lower and weaker Faction is the
firmer in conjunction. When one of the Factions is extinguished, the remaining
subdiuideth which is good for a second Faction. It is commonly seen that men
once placed, take in with the contrary faction to that by which they enter.
The Traitor in Factions lightly goes away with it, for when matters have
stuck long in balancing, the winning of some one man casts them, and he
gets all the thanks,

Of Negotiating.
IT is generally better to deal by speech then by letter, and by the mediation
of a third then by a mans self. Letters are good when a man would draw an
answer by letter back again, or when it may serve for a mans justification
afterwards to produce his own letter. To deal in person is good when a mans
face breeds regard, as commonly with inferiors. In choice of instruments it is
better to choose men of a plainer sort that are like to do that that is
committed to them; and to report back again faithfully the success, then
those that are cunning to contrive out of other men's business somewhat to
grace themselves, and will help the matter in report for satisfactions sake.

It is better to sound a person with whom one deals a far off, then to fall
upon the point at first, except you mean to surprise him by some short
question. It is better dealing with men in appetite then with those which are
where they would be. If a man deal with an other upon conditions, the start
or first performance is all, which a man can not reasonably demand, except
either the nature of the thing be such which must go before, or else a man can
persuade the other party that he shall still need him in some other thing, or
else that he be counted the honester man. All practise is to discover or to
work: men discover themselves in trust, in passion, at unawares of necessity,
when they would hau^ somewhat donne, and cannot find an apt precept. If you
would work any man, you must either know his nature, and fashions and so lead
him, or his ends, and so win him, or his weaknesses or disaduantages, and so
awe him, or those that have interest in him and so govern him. In dealing with
cunning persons, we must ever consider their ends to interpret their speeches,
and it is good to say little to them, and that which they least look for.

FINIS.
MEDITATIONES SACRAE.

LONDINI. Excudebat Iohannes Winder. 1597.

1 De operibus Dei, hominis 2 De miraculis Seruatoris 3 De columbina
innocentia, serpentina prudentia 4 De exaltatione Charitatis 5 De mensura
curarum 6 De Spe terrestri 7 De Hypocritis^ 8 De impostoribus. 9 De generibus
Imposturae. 10 De Atheismo. 11 De Haeresibus. 12 De Ecclesia, Scripturis
MEDITATIONES SACRAE.
De operibus Dei hominis.
VIdit Deus omnia quae fecerant manus eius, erant bona nimis: homo autem
conuersus, vt videret opera quae fecerunt manus eius, inuenit quod omnia ^rant
vanitas, vexation spiritus.

Quare si opera Dei operaberis, sudor tuus vt vnguentum aromatum, feriatio tua
vt Sabathum Dei. Laborabis in sudore bonae conscientiae, feriabere in otio
suauissimae contemplationis. Si autem post magnalia hominum persequeris, erit
tibi in operando stimulus angustia, in recordando fastidium, exprobratio. Et
merito tibi euenit (o homo) vt cum tu qui es opus Dei, non retribuas ei
beneplace^tiam; etiam opera tua reddant tibi fructum similem amaritudinis.

De miraculis Seruatoris. Been omnia fecit.
VErus plausus; Deus cum vniuersa crearet, vidit quod singula, omnia erant bona
nimis. Deus verbum in miraculis quae edidit (omne autem miraculum est nova
creatio, non ex leg primae creationis) nil facere voluit, quod non gratiam,
beneficentiam omnino spiraret. Moses edidit miracula, profligauit AEgiptios
pestibus multis; Elias edidit, occlusit caelum no plureret super terram; rursus
eduxit decaelo ignem dei super duces, c^hortes; Elizeus edidit, euocauit vrsas
e deserto quae laniarent impuberes; Petrus Ananiam sacrilegum hypocritam morte;
Paulus Elimam magum coecitate percussit: Sed nihil huiusmodi fecit Iesus.
Descendit super eum spiritus in forma columbae, de quo dixit, Nescitis cuius
spiritus sitis, spiritus Iesu, spiritus columbinus, fuerunt illi serui dei,
tanquam boues dei triturantes granum, conculcantes paleam: sed Iesus Agnus dei
sine ira, iudicijs. Omnia eius miracula circa corpus humanum, doctrina eius
circa animam humanam. Indiget corpus hominis alimento, de^ensione ab externis,
cura. Ille multitudinem piscium in retibus congregauit, vt vberiorem victum
hominibus preberet, ille alimentum aquae in dignius alimentum vini ad exhilar
andum cor hominis conuertit. Ille ficum, quod officio suo ad quod destinatum
fuit, ad cibum hominis videlicet non fungeretur, arefieri i^ssit. Ille penuriam
piscium, panum ad alendum exercitum populi dilatauit: Ille ventos quod
nauigantibus minarentur corripuit: Ille claudis motum coecis lumen, mutis
sermonem, languidis sanitatem, leprosis carnem mundam, demoniacis animum
integrum, mortuis vitam restituit. Nullum miraculum i^dicij, omnia
beneficentiae, circa corpus humanum, nam circa diuitias non est dignatus edere
miracula; nisi hoc vnicum, vt tributum daretur Caesari.

De Columbina innocentia, Serpentina prudentia. Non accipit stultus verba
prudentiae, nisi ea dixeris quae versantur in corde eius.
IVdicio hominis deprauato corrupto, omnis quae adhibetur eruditio persuasio
irrita est, despectui quae non ducit exordium a detectione, representatione
malae complexionis animi sanandi, quemadmodum inutiliter adhibetur medicina non
pertentato vulnere. Nam homines malitiosi, qui nihil sa^i cogitant,
praeoccupant hoc sibi, vt putent bonitatem ex simplicitate morum, ac inscitia
quadam, imperitia rerum humanarum gigni. Quare nisi perspexerint ea quae
versantur in corde suo, id est, penitissi^as latebras malitiae suae
perlustratas esse, ei qui suasum molitur, de ridiculo habent verba prudentiae;
Ita{que} ei qui ad bonitatem aspirat, non solitariam, particularem, sed
seminalem, genitiuam quae alios trahat, d^bent esse omnino nota, quae ille
la Profunda Satanae; vt loquatur cum auctoritate insinu^tione vera: Hinc est
illud, Omnia probate, quod bonum est tenete. Inducens electionem iudiciosam ex
generali examinatione: Ex ^odem font est illud; Esto^e prudentes sicut
serpetes, innocetes sicut columbae. Non est deus serpentis, nec venenum nec
aculeus, quae non probata debeant esse, nec pollutione quis timeat, nam sol
ingreditur latrinas, nec inquinatur, nec quis se deum tentare credat, nam ex
praecepto est, Et sufficiens est Deus vt vos immaculatos custodiat.

De exaltatione Charitatis. Si gauisus sum ad ruinam eius qui oderat me,
exaltaui quod inuenisset eum malum.
DEtestatio Iob; amicos redamare, est charitas publicanorum ex faedere
vtilitatis, versus inimicos autem been animatos esse, est ex apicibus iuris
Christiani, imitatio diuinitatis. Rursus tamen huius charitatis complures sunt
gradus, quorum primus est inimicis resipiscentibus ignoscere, ac huius quidem
charitatis etiam apud generosas feras vmbra quaedam, imago reperitur; nam
leones in se submittentes, prosternentes non vlterius saeuire perhibentur.
Secundus gradus est inimicis ignoscere, licet sint duriores, abs{que}
reconciliationum piaculis. Tertius gradus est non tantum veniam, gratiam
inimicis largiri, sed etiam merita, beneficia in eos confer. Sed habent hi
gradus, aut habere possunt, nescio quid potius ex ostentatione, aut saltem
animi magnitudine quam ex charita^e pura. Nam cum quis virtutem ex se emanare,
effluere sentit, fieri potest vt is efferatur, potius virtutis suae fructu quam
salute, bono proximi delectetur. Sed si aliunde malu aliquod inimicum tuum
deprehendat, tu in interioribus cellulis cordis graueris, angus^ieris, nec,
quasi dies vltionis, vindictae tuae aduenisset, laeteris; hoc ego fastigium,
exaltationem charitatis esse pono.

De mensura curarum. Sufficit diei malitia sua.
MOdus esse in curis humanis debet, alioqui inutiles sunt, vt quae animum
opprimant, iudicium confundant, profanae, vt quae sapiant animum, qui
perpetuitatem quandam in rebus mundanis sibi spo^deat. Hodierni enim debemus
esse ob breuitatem aeui, non crastini, sed vt ille ait, Carpentes diem, Erunt
enim futura praesentia vice sua; Quare sufficit sollicitudo praesentium.
No{que} tamen curae moderatae, sieve sint oeconomicae, sieve publicae, sieve rerum
mandatarum notantur. Sed hic duplex est excessus. Primus cum curarum series in
Longitudinem nimiam, tempora remotiora extendimus, ac si prouidentiam diuinam
apparatu nostro ligare possemus, quod semper etiam apud Ethnicos infaus^um
insolens fuit. Fere enim qui Fortunae multum tribuerunt, ad occasiones
praesentes alacres, praesto fuerunt, ^aelicitate magna vsi sunt. Qui autem
a^tum sapientes, omnia curata meditata habere confisi sunt, infortunia
sub^erunt. Secundus excessus est, cum in curis immoramur diutius quam opus est
ad iustam deliberationem, ad decretum faciendum. Quis enim nostrum est, qui
tantum curet, quantum sufficit, vt se explicet, vel sese explicare non posse
iudicet, non eadem saepe retractet, in eodem cogitationum circuitu inutiliter
haereat, deni{que} euanes^at? Quod genus curarum, diuinis humanis rationibus
aduersissimum est.

De Spe terrestri. Melior est oculorum visio, quam animi progressio.
SEnsus purus in singula meliorem reddit conditionem, politiam mentis, quam
istae imaginationes progressiones animi. Natura enim animi humani etiam in
ingenijs grauissimis est, vt a sensu singulorum statim progrediatur, saliat,
omnia auguretur fore talia, qual illud est quod praesentem sensum incutit, si
boni est sensus facilis est ad spem indefinitam, si mali est sensus, ad metum:
vnde illud, Fallitur augurio spes bona saepe suo, contra illud, Pessimus in
dubijs augur. S^d tamen timoris est aliquis fructus, praeparat enim
tolerantiam, acuit industriam; Non vlla laborum o virgo nova mi facies inopaue
surgit. Omnia praecepi, at{que} animo mecum ante peregi. Spes vero inutile
quidda videtur. Quorsum enim ista anticipatio boni? Attend, si minus cucniat
bonum quam spears, bonum licet sit, tamen quia minus sit, videtur damnum potius
quam lucrum ob excessum spei. Si par tantum sit, euentus sit spei aequalis,
tamen flos boni per spem decerpi^ur, videtur fere obsoletum, fastidio magis
finitimum. Si mayor sit successus spe, videtur aliquid lucri factum, verum est;
sed annon melius fuisset sortem lucrifecisse nihil sperando quam vsuram minus
sperando? At{que} in rebus secundis ita operatur spes; in malis autem robur
verum animi soluit. Nam no{que} semper spei materia suppetit, destitutione
aliqua vel minima spei, vniuersa fere firmitudo animi corruit, minorem efficit
dignitatem mentis, cum mala tolleramus alienatione quadam, errore mentis, non
fortitudine iudicio. Quare satis leuiter finxere Poetae spem antidotum
humanorum morborum esse, quod dolores eorum mitiget, cum sit re^era incensio
potius, exasperatio, quae eos multiplicari, recrudescere faciat. Nihilominus
fit, vt plaeri{que} hominum imaginationibus spei progressionibus istis mentis
omnino se dedant, ingrati{que} in praeterita obliti fere praesentium semper
iuuenes, tantum futuris immineant. Vidi vniuersos ambulantes sub sole cum
adolescente secundo, qui co^urget post eum; quod pessimus morbus est, status
mentis insanissimus. Quaeras fortasse annon melius sit, cum res in dubia
expectation positae sint, been diuinare, potius la quam diffidere, cum
spes maiorem tranquillitatem animi conciliet. Ego sane in omni mora,
expectation tranquillum, non fluctuantem animi statum ex bona mentis politia,
compositione, summum humanae vitae firmamentum iudico. Sedeam tranquillitatem,
quae ex spe pendeat, vt leuem infirmam recuso. Non quia non conueniat tam bona
quam mala ex sana sobria coniectura praeuidere, praesupponere, vt actiones ad
probabilitatem euentuum magis accommodemus; modo sit hoc officium intellectus
ac iudicij cum iusta inclinatione affectus. Sed quem ita spes coercuit; vt cum
ex vigilanti firmo mentis discursu meliora, vt magis probabilia sibi
praedixerit, non in ipsa boni anticipatione immoratus sit, huiusmodi
cogitationi, vt somnio placido indulserit? At{que} hoc est quod reddit animum
leuem, tumidum, inaequalem, peregrinantem. Quare omnis spes in futuram vitam
coelestem consumenda est. Hic autem quanto purior sit praesentium sensus
abs{que} infectione, tinctura imaginationis, tanto prudent^or melior anima
vitae summae breuis spem nos vetat meliorare longam.

De Hypocritis. Misericordiam volo, non Sacrificium.
OMnis iactatio Hypocritarum est in operibus primae tabulae legis, quae est de
venerationi^us Deo debitis. Ratio duplex est, tum quod huiusmodi opera maiorem
habent pompam Sanctitatis, tum quod cupiditatibus eorum minus aduersentur.
Ita{que} redargutio hypocritarum est, vt ab operibus sacrificij remittantur ad
opera misericordiae, vnde illud, Religio munda immaculata apud Deum patrem haec
est, visitare pupillos viduas intribulatione eorum, illud, Qui non diligit
fratrem suum quem vidit, Deum quem non vidit quomodo potest diligere? Quidam
autem altioris inflatioris Hypocrisiae seipsos decipientes, existimantes se
arctiore cum Deo con^ers^tione dignos, officia charitatis in proximum vt minora
negligunt. Qui error monasticae vitae non principium quidem dedit, (nam initia
bonafuerunt,) sed excessum addidit. Recte enim dictum est, Orandi munus magnum
esse munus in ecclesia, ex vsu ecclesiae est, vt sint caetus hominum a mundanis
curis soluti, qui assiduis deuotis precibus Deum pro ecclesiae statu
sollicitent. Sed huic ordinationi illa hypocrisia sinitima est, nec vniuersa
institutio reprobatur, sed spiritus illi se efferentes cohibentur: nam Enoch
qui ambulauit cum Deo, prophetizauit, vt est apud Iudam, at{que} ^ructum suae
prophetiae ecclesiam do^auit. Et Iohannes Bapt. quem Principem quidam vitae
monas^icae volunt, multo ministerio sunctus est tum prophetizationis, tum
Baptizationis. Nam ad alios istos in deum officiosos refertur illa
interrogatio, Si just egeris, quid donabis Deo, a^t quid de manu tua accipiet.
Qu^re opera miserecordiae sunt opera discr^tionis hypocritarum. Contr^ autem
^it cum haereticis, nam vt hypocritae simulata su^ sanctitate versus Deum,
iniurias suaes versus homines obducunt; ita haeretici moralitate quadam versus
homines, blasphemias suas contra Deum insinuant^

De Impostoribus. Sieve m^nte excedimus Deo, sieve sobrii sumus vobis.
VEra est ista effigies, verum temperamentum viri, cui Religio p^nitus in
praecordijs insedit, very operarij Dei. Conversation ei quae cum Deo est, plena
excessus, zeli, extasis. Hinc gemitus ineffabiles, exultationes, raptus
spiritus, agones. At quae cum hominibus est, ple^a mansuetudinis, sobrietatis,
morigerationis; Hinc Omnia omnibus factus sum, huiusmodi. Contra fit in
hypocritis impos^oribus: Ii enim in populo ecclesia incendunt se excedunt,
veluti sacris furoribus afflati omnia miscent. Si quis ^utem eorum solitudines,
separatas meditationes, cum Deo conuersationes introspiciat, deprehendet eas
non tantum frigidas, sine motu, sed plenas malitiae fermenti, sobrij Deo, mente
excedentes populo.

De generibus imposturae. Deuita prophanas vocum nouitates, oppositiones falsi
nominis scientiae.
In^ptas aniles fabulas deuita.
Nemo vos decipiat in sublimitate sermonum.

TRes sunt sermones, veluti stili imposturae. Primum genus est eorum qui statim
vt aliqua materiam nacti sunt, artem conficiunt, vocabula artis imponut, omnia
in distinctiones redigun^, inde posita vel themata educunt, ex quaestionibus,
responsionibus oppositiones consiciunt; Hinc Scholasticorum quisquiliae turbae.
Secundum genus est eorum, qui vanitate inge^ij, vt sacri quidem Poetae, omnem
exemplorum varietatem ad mentes hominum tractandas confingunt, vnde vitae
patrum, antiquorum haereticorum figmenta innumera. Tertium genus eorum, qui
mysterijs, grandiloquijs, allegorijs, allusionibus omnia implet: quod genus
mysticum gnosticum complures haeretici sibi delegerunt. Primum genus sensum
captum hominis illaqueat, secundum allicit, tertium stupefacit, seducunt vero
omnia.

De Atheismo. Dixit insipiens in corde suo, non est Deus.
PRimum dixit in corde, non ait, cogitauit in corde; hoc est, non tam ita
sentit penitus, sed vult hoc credere, la expedire sibi videt, vt non sit
Deus omni ratione sibi hoc suadere, in animum inducere conatur; tanquam thema
aliquod, vel positum, vel placitum asserere, astruere, firmare studet. Manet
tamen ille igniculus luminis primi, quo Diuinitatem agnoscimus, quem prorsus
extinguere, stimulum illum ex corde euellere frustra nititur. Quare ex malitia
voluntatis suae, non ex natiuo sensu, iudicio hoc supponit, vt ait comicus
Poeta. Tunc animus meus accessit ad meam sententiam, quasi ipse alter esset ab
animo suo. Ita{que} Atheista magis dixit in corde, quam sentit in corde, quod
non sit Deus. Secundo, dixit in corde, non ore locutus est, sed notandum est
hoc metu legis famaefieri, Nam vt ait ille, Negare Deos difficile est in
concione populi, sed in concessu familiari expeditum. Nam si hoc vinculum
tollatur e medio, non est haeresis quae maiore studio se pandere, spargere,
multiplicare nitatur quam Atheismus. Nec videas eos qui in hanc mentis insaniam
imm^rsi sunt aliud fere spirare, importune inculcare, quam verba atheismi, vt
in Lucretio Epicurco, qui fere sua^ in Religionem inuectiuam s^ngulis alijs
subiectis interc^larem sacit. Ratio videtur esse, quod A^he^sta cum sibi non
satis ^cqui^scat aestuans, nec sibi satiscredens, crebra suae opinionis
deliquia in interioribus pati^ns ab aliorum assensu refocillari cupit. Nam
recte dictum est. Qui alteri opinionem approbare sedulo cupit, ipse diffidit.
Tertio insipiens est, qui hoc in corde dixit, quod verissimum est, non tantum
quod diuina non sapiat, sed etiam secundum hominem. Primo ^nim ingenia, quae
sunt in Atheismum proniora, videas fere leuia, dicacia, audacula, insolentia:
eius deni{que} compositionis, quae prudentiae, grauitati morum aduersissima
est. Secundo inter viros politicos, qui altioris ingenij latioris cordis
fuerunt, Religionem non art quadam ad populum adhibuerunt, sed interiore
dogmate coluere, vt qui prouidentiae fortunae plurimu tribu erint. C^tra qui
artibus suis, industrijs, causis proximis, apparentibus omnia ascripserunt, vt
ait Propheta, Retibus suis immolarunt, pusillifuerunt politici, circumforanei,
magnitudinis actionum incapaces. Tertio, in physicis illud affirmo parum
Philosophiae naturalis, in ea progressum liminarem ad Atheismum opiniones
inclinare. Contra mul^um Philosophiae naturalis, progressum in ea penetrantem
ad Religionem animos circumferre. Quare atheismus stultitiae inscitiae vbi{que}
conuictus esse videtur, vt merito sit dictum, Insipientium non est Deus.

De Haeresibus. Erratis nescientes scripturas, neque potestatem Dei.
CAnon iste matter omnium canonum aduersus haereses. Duplex erroris causa,
ignoratio voluntatis Dei, ignoratio, vel leuior contemplatio potestatis dei.
Voluntas dei reuelatur magis per scripturas scrutamini, potestas magis per
creaturas contemplamini. Ita asserenda plenitudo potestatis Dei, no maculemus
voluntatem. Ita ass^renda bonitas voluntatis, no minuamus potestatem. Ita{que}
Religio vera sita est in mediocritate inter superstitionem cum haeresibus
superstisiosis ex una part, Atheismum cum haeresibus prophanis ex altera.
Superstition repudiata luce scripturarum, se{que} dedens traditionibus prauis
vel apocryphis, nouis reuelationibus, vel falsis interpretationibus
scripturarum multa de voluntate Dei fingit, somniat, a scripturis deuia aliena.
Atheismus autem Theomachia contra potestatem Dei insurgit, tumultuatur, verbo
dei non credens, quod voluntatem eius reuelat ob incredulitatem potestatis
eius, cui omnia sunt possibilia. Haereses autem quae ex isto font emanant,
grauiores videntur caeteris. Nam in politijs atrocius est potestatem maiestatem
minuere, quam ^amam principis notare. Haeresium autem quae potestatem Dei
minunt, praeter Atheismum purum tres sunt gradus, habent{que} vnum idem
mysterium: (Nam omnis antichristianismus operatur in mysterio, id est sub
imagine boni) hoc ipsum, vt voluntatem dei ab omni aspersione malitiae liberet.
Primus gradus est eorum, qui duo principia constituunt paria, ac inter se
pugnantia, contraria, vnum boni, alterum mali^ Secundus gradus est eorum,
quibus nimium l^sa videtur maiestas Dei in constituendo aduersus eum la
affirmatiuo actiuo. Quare extu^bata tali ^udacia, nihilo minus inducunt contra
deum principium negatiuum priuatiuum. N^m vol^nt esse opus ipsius materiae
creaturae internum, natiuum, substantiuum, vt ex se vergat relabatur ad
confusionem, ad nihilum, nescien^es eiusdem esse omnipotentiae ex aliquo nihil
facere, cuius ex nihilo aliquid. Tertius gradus est eorum, qui arctant
restringunt opinionem, priorem tantum ad actiones humanas, quae participant ex
peccato, quas volunt substantiue, abs{que} nexu aliquo causarum, ex interna
voluntate arbitrio humano pendere, statuunt{que} latiores terminos scientiae
Dei, quam potestatis, vel potius eius partis potestatis Dei, (nam ipsa scientia
potestas est) qua scit quam eius, qua mouet, agit, vt praesciat quaedam otiose,
quae non praedestinet praeordinet. Et non absimile est figmento, quod Epicurus
introduxit in Democritismum, v^ fatum ^olleret, fortunae locum dar^t,
declinationem videlice^ atomi, quod semper a prudentioribus ina^issimum
commentum habitum est. Sed quiequid a deo non pendet, vt autore, la, per
nexus gradus subordinatos id loco Dei erit, nouum principium, Deaster quidem.
Quare merito illa opinio respuitur, vt laesio diminutio maiestatis potestatis
Dei. Et tamen admodum recte la, quod Deus non sit author mali, non quia
non author, sed quia non mali.

De ecclesia Scripturis. Proteges eos in tabernaculo tuo a contradictione
linguarum.
COntradictiones linguarum vbi{que} occurrunt extra tabernaculum Dei. Quare
quocun{que} te verteris, exitum controuersiarum non reperies nisi huc te
receperis. Dices, verum est, nempe in vnitatem ecclesiae. Sed aduerte. Erat in
tabernaculo Arca, in Arca Testimonium vel tabulae legis. Quid mihi narras
corticem Tabernaculi, sine nucleo testimonij? Tabernaculum ad custodiendum
tradendum ^estimonium erat ordinatum. Eodem modo ecclesiae custodia, traditio
per manus scripturarum demandata est, sed anima Tabernaculi est testimonium.

FINIS.
OF The Colours of good and evil a fragment.

1597.

1 CVi c^tera parts vel secta secundas vnanimiter deferunt, cum singul^
principatum sibi vindicent melior reliquis videtur. Nam prim^ quaeque ex zelo
videtur sumere; secundas au^em ex vero tribuere. 2 Cuius excellentia vel
exuperantia melior id toto genere melius. 3 Quod ad veritatem refertur maius
est quam quod ad opinionem. Modus autem, probatio ^iu^ quod ad opinionem
pertinet h^c est. Quod quis si ^lam putaret fore facturus non esset. 4 Quod rem
integram servant bonum quod sine receptu est malum. Nam se recipere non posse
impotentia genus est, potentia autem bonum. 5 Quod ex pluribus consta^,
diuisibilius est maius quam quod ex paucioribus magis vnum: nam omnia per
parts considerata maiora videntur; quare pluralita^ partium magnitudinem
praese fert, fortius autem operatur pluralitas partium si ordo absit, nam
inducit similitudinem infiniti, impedit comprehensionem. 6 Cuius priuatio bona,
malum, cuius priuatio mala bonum. 7 Quod bono, vicinum bonum, quod a bono
remotum malum. 8 Quod quis culpa sua contraxit, maius malum, quod ab externis
imponitu^ minus malum. 9 Quod opera, virtute nostra partum est, maius bonum,
quod ab alieno beneficio, vel ab indulgentia fortunae delatum est, minus bonum.
10 Gradus priuationis mayor videtur quam gradus diminutionis, rursus gradus
inceptionis mayor videtur quam gradus incrementi.
IN deliberatiues the point is what is good and what is evil, and of good what
is greater, and of evil what is the less.

So that the perswaders labour is to make things appear good or evil, and that
in higher or lower degree, which as it may be performed by t^ue and solide
reasons, so it may be represented also by colours, popularities and
circumstances, which are of such force, as they sway the ordinary judgment
either of a weak man, or of a wise man, not fully and considerately attending
and pondering the matter. Besides their power to alter the nature of the
subject in appearance, and so to lead to error, they are of no less use to
quicken and strengthen the opinions and persuasions which are true: for reasons
plainly delivered, and always after one manner especially with fine and
fastidious minds, enter but heavily and dully; whereas if they be varied and
have more life and vigour put into them by these forms and insinuations, they
cause a stronger apprehension, and many times suddenly win the mind to a
resolution. Lastly, to make a true and safe judgment, nothing can be of
greater use and defence to the mind, then the discovering and reprehension of
these colours, showing in what cases they hold, and in what they deceive: which
as it cannot be done, but out of a very vniue^sall knowledge of the nature of
things, so being performed, it so clears mans judgment and election, as it
is the less apt to slide into any error.

A Table of Colours, or apparances of good and evil, and their degrees as
places of persuasion and dissuasion; and their several fallaxes, and the
elenches of them.
Cui ceterae parts vel sectae secundas vnanimiter deferunt, cum singulae
principatum sibi vendicent melior reliquis videtur, nam primas quaeque ex zelo
videtur sumere, secundas autem ex vero merito tribuere.
SO Cicero went about to prove the Sect of Academiques which suspended all
as^eueration, for ^o be the best, for saith he, ask a Stoicke which
Philosophie is true, he will prefer his own: Then ask him which approaches
next the truth, he will confess the Academiques. So deal with the Epicure
that will scant endure the Stoicke to be in sight of him, as soon as he hath
placed himself, he will place the Academiques next him.

So if a Prince took diverse competitors to a place, and examined them
severally whom next themselves they would rathest commend, it were like the
ablest man should have the most second votes.

The fallax of this colour happens oft in respect of envy, for men are
accustomed after themselves and their own faction to incline to them which are
softest, and are least in their way in despite and derogation of them that hold
them hardest to it. So that this colour of melioritie and pre-eminence is oft a
sign of eneruation and weakness.

2 Cuius excellen^ia vel exuperantia melior, id toto genere melius.
APpertaining to this are the forms; Let us not wander in generalities: Let
us compare particular with particular, c. This appearance though it seem of
strength and rather Logical then Rhetorical, yet is very oft a fallax.

Sometimes because some things are in kind very casual, which if they escape,
prove excellent, so that the kind is inferior, because it is so subject to
peril, but that which is excellent being proved is superior, as the blossom
of March and the blossom of May, whereof the French verse goes. Burgeon de
Mars enfant de Paris,
Si un eschape, il en vaut dix.
So that the blos^ome of May is generally better then the blossom of March;
and yet the best blossom of March is better then the best blossom of May.

Sometimes, because the nature of some kinds is to be more equal and more
indifferent, and not to have very distant degrees, as hath been noted in the
warmer clymates, the people are generally more wise, but in the Northern
climate the wits of chief are greater. So in many Armies, if the matter should
be tried by duel between two Champions, th^ victory should go on one side,
and yet if it be tried by the gross, it would go of the other side; for
excellecies go as it were by chance, but kinds go by a more certain nature,
as by discipline in war.

Lastly, many kinds have much refuse which counteruale that which they have
excellent; and therefore generally mettle is more precious then stone, and yet
a diamond is more precious then gould.

3 Quod ad veritatem refertur maius est quam quod ad opinionem. Modus autem
probatio eius quod ad opinionem pertinet, haec est, quod quis si clam putaret
fore, facturus non esset.
SO the Epicures say of the Stoics felicity placed in virtue, That it is like
the felicity of a Player, who if he were left of his Auditory and their
applause, he would straight be out of hart and countenance, and therefore they
call virtue Bonum theatrale. But of Riches the Poet saith: Populus me sibilat,
At mihi plaudo.


And of pleasure. Grata sub ^mo
Gaudia corde premens, vultu simulate pudorem.
The fallax of this colour is somewhat subtle, though the answer to the
example be ready, for virtue is not chosen propter auram popularem. But
contrariwise, Maxim omnium teipsum reuerere, So as a virtuous man will be
virtuous in solitudine, and not only in theatro, though percase it will be
more strong by glory and fame, as an heate which is doubled by reflection; But
that denies the supposition, it doth not reprehend the fallax whereof the
reprehension is a low, that virtue (such as is joined with labour and conflict)
would not be chosen but for fame and opinion, yet it follows not that the
chief motive of the election should not be real and for it self, for fame
may be only causa impulsiua, and not causa constituens, or efficiens. As if
there were two horses, and the one would do better without the spur then the
other: but again, the other with the spur would far exceed the doing of
the former, giving him the spur also; yet the latter will be judged to be the
better horse, and the form as to say, Tush, the life of this horse is but in
the spur, will not serve as to a wise judgement: For since the ordinary
ins^rument of horsemanship is the spur, and that it is no manner of
impediment nor burden, the horse is not to be accounted the less of, which
will not do well without the spur, but rather the other is to be reckoned a
delicacy then a virtue, so glory and honour are as spurs to virtue: and
although virtue would languish without them, yet since they be always at hand
to attend virtue, virtue is not to be said the les^e, chosen for it self,
because it needs the spur of fame and reputation: and therefore that
position, Nota eius rei quod propter opinionem non propter veritatem eligitur,
haec est quod quis si clam putaret fore facturus non ess^t is reprehended.

4 Quod rem integram servant bonum, quod sine r^ceptu est malum. Nam se recipere
non posse impotentiae genus est, potentia autem bonum.
HEreof Aesope framed the Fable of the two Frogs that consulted together in
time of drought (when many plashes that they had repaired to were dry) what was
to be done, and the one propounded to go down into a deep Well, because it
was like the water would not fail there, but the other answered, yea but if
it do fail how shall we get up again? And the reason is, that humane actions
are so uncertain and subject to perils, as that seems the best course
which hath most passages out of it.

Appertaining to this persuasion the forms are, you shall engage your selfe^
On the other ^ide, Tantum quantum voles sumes ex fortuna, you shall keep the
matter in your own hands. The reprehension of it is, That proceeding and
resolving in all actions is necessary: for as he saith well, Not to resolve,
is to resolve, and many times it breeds as many necessities, and engages as
far in some other sort as to resolve.

So it is but the covetous mans disease translated into power, for the covetous
man will enjoy nothing because he will have his full store and possibility to
enjoy the more, so by this reason a man should execute nothing because he
should be still indifferent and at liberty to execute any thing. Besides
necessity and this same iacta est alea hath many times an advantage, because
it awakes the powers of the mind, and strengthens endeavour. Caeteris pares
necessi^at^ c^rte superiores estis.

5 Quod ex pluribus constat et diuisibilius est maius quam quod ex paucioribus
et magis vnum: nam omnia per parts considerata maiora videntur; quare et
pluralitas partium magnitudinem prae se fert; fortius autem operatur pluralitas
partium si ordo absit, nam inducit similitudinem infiniti et impedit
comprehensionem.
THis colour seems palpable, for it is not plurality of parts without
maioritie of parts that makes the total greater, yet nevertheless it often
carries the mind away, yea, it deceyueth the sense, as it seems to the eye a
shorter distance of way if it be all dead and continued, then if it have trees
or buildings or any other marks whereby the eye may divide it. So when a great
moneyed man hath divided his chests and coins and bags, he seems to
himself richer then he was, and therefore a way to amplify any thing, is to
break it, and to make an anatomy of it in several parts, and to examine it
according to several circumstances, And this makes the greater show if it be
done without order, for confusion makes things muster more, and besides what
is set down by order and division, doth demonstrate that nothing is left out
or omitted, but all is there; whereas if it be without order, both the mind
comprehends less that which is set down, and besides it leaves a
suspicion, as if more might be said then is expressed.

This colour deceyueth, if the mind of him that is to be persuaded, do of it
self ouer-conceiue or preiudge of the greatness of any thing, for then the
breaking of it will make it seem less, because it makes it appear more
according to the truth, and therefore if a man be in sickness or payne, the time
will seem longer without a clock or howre-glasse then with it, for the mind
doth value every moment, and then the howre doth rather sum up the moments
then divide the day. So in a dead plain, the way seems the longer, because
the eye hath preconceyued it shorter then the truth: and the frustrating of
that makes it seem longer then the truth. Therefore if any man have an
over-great opinion of any thing, then if an other think by breaking it into
several considerations, he ^hall make it seem greater to him, he will be
deceived, and therefore in such cases it is not safe to divide, but to extol
the entire still in general.

An other case wherein this colour deceyueth, is, when the matter broken or
divided is not comprehended by the sense or mind at once in respect of the
distracting or scattering of it, and being entire and not divided, is
comprehended, as a hundred pounds in heaps of five pounds will show more,
then in one gros^e heap, so as the heaps be all upon one table to be seen
at once, otherwise not, or flowers growing scattered in diverse beds will show,
more then if they did grow in one bed, so as all those beds be within a plot
that they be object to view at once, otherwise not; and therefore men whose
living lies together in one Shire, are commonly counted greater landed then
those whose livings are dispersed though it be more, because of the notice and
comprehension.

A third case wherein this colour deceives, and it is not so properly a case
or reprehension as it is a counter colour being in e^fect as large as the
colour it self, and that is, Omnis compositio indigentiae cuiusdam videtur
esse particeps, because if one thing would serve the turn it were ever best,
but the defect and imperfections of things hath brought in that help to piece
them up as it is said, Martha Martha attendis ad plurima, vnum sufficit. So
likewise hereupon A^sope framed the Fable of the Fox and the Cat, whereas the
Fox bragged what a number of shifts and devises he had to get from the hounds,
and the Cat said she had but one, which was to clime a tree, which in proof
was better worth then all the rest, whereof the proverb grew, Multa nouit
Vulpes sed Felis vnum magnum. And in the moral of this fable it comes likewise
to pass: That a good sure friend is a better help at a pinch, then all the
stratagems and policies of a mans own wit. So it falls out to be a common
error in negotiating, whereas men have many reasons to induce or persuade,
they strive commonly to utter and use them all at once, which weakens them.
For it argues as was said, a needines in every of the reasons by it self, as
if one did not trust to any of them, but fled from one to another, helping
himself only with that. Et quae non prosunt singula multa iuuant. Indeed in a
set speech in an assembly it is expected a man should use all his reasons in
the case he handles, but in private persuasions it is always a great error.

A fourth case wherein this colour may be reprehended is in respect of that
same vis vnita fortior, according to the tale of the French King, that when the
Emperors Amb. had reci^ed his masters stile at large which consists of many
countries and dominions: the French King willed his Chancellor or other
minister to repeat and say over France as many times as the other had recited
the several dominions, intending it was equiualent with them all, beside more
compacted and united.

There is also appertaining to this colour an other point, why breaking of a
thing doth help it, not by way of adding a show of magnitude unto it, but a
note of excellency and rarity; whereof the forms are, Where shall you find
such a concurrence? Great but not complete, for it seems a less work of
nature or fortune to make any thing in his kind greater then ordinary, then
to make a strange composition.

Yet if it be narrowly considered, this colour will be reprehended or
encountered by imputing to all excellencies in compositions a kind of poverty
or at least a casualty or jeopardy, for fro that which is excellent in greatness
somewhat may be taken, or there may be decay; and yet sufficiency left, but
from that which hath his price in composition if you take away any thing, or
any part do fail all is disgraced.

6. Cuius priuatio bona, malum, cuius priuatio mala, bonum.
THe forms to make it conceived that that was evil which is changed for the
better are, He that is in hell thinks there is no other heaven. Satis quercus,
A corns were good till bread was found c. And of the other side the forms to
make it conceived that that was good which was changed for the worse are, Bona
magis carendo quam fru^ndo sentimus, Bona a tergo formosissima, Good things
never appear in their full beauty, till they turn their back and be going
away, c. The reprehension of this colour is, that the good or evil which is
removed may be esteemed good or evil coparatiuely and not positively or simply.
So that if the privation be good, it follows not the former condition was
evil, but less good, for the flower or blossom is a positive good, although
the remove of it to give place to the fruit be a comparative good. So in the
tale of AEsope; when the old fainting man in the heat of the day cast down
his burden called for death, when death came to know his will with him, said
it was for nothing but to help him up with his burden again: it doth not
follow that because death which was the privation of the burden was ill,
therefore the burden was good. And in this part the ordinary form of Malum
necessarium aptly reprehendeth this colour, for Priuatio mali necessarij est
mala, and yet that doth not convert the nature of the necessary evil, but it
is evil.

Again it comes sometimes to pass, that there is an equality in the
change or privation, and as it were a Dil^mma boni or a Dilemma mali, so that
the corruption of the one good is a generation of the other, Sorti pater aequus
vtrique est: And contrary the remedy of the one evil is the occasion and
comencement of an other, as in Scilla and Charibdis.

7. Quod bono vicinum, bonum: quod a bono remotum malum.
Such is the nature of things, that things contrary and distant in nature
and quality are also severed and disjoined in place, and things like and
consenting in quality are placed, and as it were quartered together, for
partly in regard of the nature to spread, multiply and infect in similitude,
and partly in regard of the nature to break, expel and alter that which is
disagreeable and contrary, most things do ^yther associate and draw near to
themselves the like, or at least assimulate to themselves that which approaches
near them, and do also d^iue away, chase and exterminate their contraries, And
that is the reason commonly yielded why the middle region of the air should be
coldest, because the Sun and stars are either hot by direct beams or by
reflection. The direct beams heate the upper region, the re^lected beams from
the earth and seas heate the lower Region. That which is in the midst being
furthest distant in place from these two Regions of heate are most distant in
nature that is coldest, which is that they term cold or hot, per
antiperistasin, that is inuironing by contraries, which was pleasantly taken
hold of by him that said that an honest man in these days must needs be more
honest then in ages heretofore, propter antiperistasin because the shutting of
him in the midst of contraries must needs make the honesty stronger and more
compact in it self.

The reprehension of this colour is, first many things of amplitude in their
kind do as it were engross to themselves all, and leave that which is next
them most destitute, as the shoots or vnderwood that grow near a great and
spread tree, is the most pined shrubbie wood of the field, because the great
tree doth deprive and deceive them of sap and nourishment. So he saith well,
Diuitis serui maxim serui: And the comparison was pleasant of him that
comp^red courtiers attendant in the courts of princes, without great place or
office, to fasting days, which were next the holy days, but otherwise were
the leanest days in all the week.

An other reprehension is, that things of greatness and predominance, though
they do not extenuate the things adjoining in substance; yet they drown them
and obscure them in show and appearance. And therefore the Astronomers say,
that whereas in all other planets conjunction is the pe^fecte^t amity: the
Sun contrariwise is good by aspect, but evil by conjunction.

A third reprehension is because evil approaches to good sometimes for
concealment, sometimes for protection, and good to evil for conversion and
reformation. So hypocrisy draws near to religion for covert hiding it self:
Saepe latet vitium procinitate boni, Sanctuary men which were commonly
inordinate men malefactors, were wont to be nearest to pries^es and Prelates
and holy men, for the majesty of good things is such, as the confines of them
are reuered. On the other side our Saviour charged with neerenes of Publicanes
and rioters said, The Physician approaches the sick, rather then the whole.

8. Quod quis culpa sua contraxit, maius malum; quod ab externis imponitur,
minus malum.
THe reason is because the sting and remorse of the mind accusing it self
doubles all adversity, contrariwise the considering and recording inwardly
that a man is clear and free from fault, and just imputation, doth temper
outward calamities: For if the evil be in the sense and in the conscience
both, there is a gemination of it, but if evil be in the one and comfort in
the other, it is a kind of compensation. So the Poets in tragedies do make the
mo^ passionate lamentations, and those that forerunne final despair, to be
accusing, questioning and torturing of a mans ^elfe. Se{que} vnum clamat
causaq, caput{que} malum.
contrariwise the extremities of worthy persons have been annihilated in the
consideration of their own good deserving. Besides when the evil comes from
without, there is left a kind of evaporation of grief, if it come by humane
injury, either by indignation and meditating of revenge from our selves, or by
expecting or foreconceyuing that Nemesis and retribution will take hold of the
authors of our hart, or if it be by fortune or accident, yet there is left a
kind of expostulation against the divine powers. Atque Deos atque astra la
^rudelia matter.
But where the evil is derived from a mans own fault there all strikes deadly
inwards and suffocates.

The reprehension of this colour is first in respect of hope, for reformation
of our faults is in nostra potestate, but amendment of our fortune simply is
not. Therefore Demosthenes in many of his orations saith thus to the people of
Athens. That which having regard to the time past is the worst point and
circumstance of all the rest, that as to the time to come is the best: What is
that? Even this, that by your sloth, irresolution, and misgouernement, your
affairs are grown to this declination and decay. For had you used and ordered
your means and forces to the best, and done your parts every way to the full,
and notwithstanding your matters should have gone backwards in this manner as
they do, there had been no hope left of recovery or reparation, but since it
hath been only by your own errors c. So Epictetus in his degrees saith, The
worst state of man is to accuse extern things, better then that to accuse a
mans self, and best of all to accuse neither.

An other reprehension of this colour is in respect of the well bearing of
evils, wherewith a man can charge no body but himself, which makes them the
less.

Leave fit quod been fertur onus. And therefore many natures, that are either
ex^reamely proud and will take no fault to themselves, or else very true, and
cleaving to themselves (when they see the blame of any thing that falls out
ill must light upon themselves) have no other shift but to bear it out well,
and to make the least of it, for as we see when sometimes a fault is
committed, before it be known who is to blame, much ado is made of it, but
after if it appear to be done by a son, or by a wife, or by a near friend,
then it is light made of. So much more when a man must take it upon himself.
And therefore it is commonly seen that women that marry husbands of their
own choosing against their friends consents, if they be never so ill used, yet
you shall seldom see them complain but to set a good face on it.

9. Quod opera virtute nostra partum est maius bonum; quod ab alieno beneficio,
vel ab indulgentia fortunae delatum est minus bonum.
THe reasons are first the future hope, because in the favours of others or the
good winds of fortune we have no state or certainty, in our endeavours or
abilities we have. So as when they have purchased us one good fortune, we have
them as ready and better edged and inured to procure another.

The forms be, you have won this by play, you have not only the water, but
you have the receipt, you can make it again if it be lost c.

Next because these properties which we enjoy by the benefit of others carry
with them an obligation, which seems a kind of burden, whereas the other
which derive f^o ou^ selves, are like the freest patents abs{que} aliquo inde
reddendo, and if they proceed from fortune or providence, yet they seem to
touch us secretly with the reverence of the divine powers whose favours we
taste, and therefore work a kind of religious fear^ and restraint, whereas in
the other kind, that come to pass which the Prophet speaks, Laetantur
exultant, immolant plagis suis, sacrificant reti suo.

Thirdely because that which comes unto us without our own virtue, yields
not that commendation and reputation, for actions of great felicity may draw
wonder, but prayselesse, as Cicero said to Caesar: Quae miremur habemus, quae
laudemus expectamus.

Fourthly because the purchases of our own industry are joined commonly with
labour and strife which gives an edge and appetite, and makes the fruition of
our desire more pleasant, Suauis cibus a venatu.

On the other side the^e be four counter colours to this colour rather then
reprehensions, because they be as large as the colour it self, first because
felicity seems to be a character of the favour and love of the divine
powers, and accordingly works both confidence in our selves and respect and
authority from others. And this felicity extends to many casual things,
whereunto the care or virtue of man cannot extend, and therefore seems to be
a larger go^d, as when Caesar said to the sailor, Caesarem portas fortunam
^ius, if he had ^aide, virtutem eius, it had been small comfort against a
tempest otherwise then if it might seem upon merit to induce fortune.

Next, whatsoever is done by virtue and industry, seems to be done by a kind
of habit and art, and therefore open to be imitated and followed, whereas
felicity is imitable: So we generally see, that things of nature seem more
excellent then things of art, because they be imitable, for quod imitabile est
potentia quada^ vulgatum est.

Thirdly, felicity commends those things which comes without our own
labour, for they seem gifts, and the other seems pennyworth: whereupon
Plutarch saith elegantly of the acts of Timoleon, who was so fortunate,
compared with the acts of Agesilaus and Epamin^ndas, That they were like
Homers verses they ^anne so ea^ily and so well, and therefore it is the word we
give unto poesi^, terming it a happi^ vain, because facility seems ever to
come from happiness.

Fourthly, this same praeter spem, vel praeter expectatum, doth increase the
price and pleasure of many things, and this cannot be incident to those things
that proceed from our own care, and compass.

10 Gradus priuationi^ mayor vide^ur quam gradus diminutionis; rursus gradus
inceptionis mayor videtur quam gradus incrementi.
IT is a position in the Mathematiques that there is no proportion between
somewhat and nothing, therefore the degree of nullitie and quiddity or act,
seems larger then the degrees of increase and decrease, as to a monoculos it
is more to loose one eye, then to a man that hath two eyes. So if one have lost
diverse children, it is more grief to him to loose the last then all the rest,
because he is spes gregis. And therefore Sybilla when she brought her three
books, and had burned two, did double the whole price of both the other,
because the burning of that had bin gradus priuationis, and not diminutionis.
This colour is reprehended first in those things, the use and service whereof
rests in sufficiency, competencie, or determinate quantity, as if a man be
to pay one hundredth pounds upon a penalty, it is more for him to want xii
pence, then after that xii pence supposed to be wanting, to want ten shillings
more: So the decay of a mans estate seems to be most touched in the degree
when he first grows behind, more then afterwards when he proves nothing
worth. And hereof the common forms are, S^ra in fundo parsimonia, and as good
never awhit, as never the better, c. It is reprehended also in respect of that
notion, Corruption vnius, generatio vlterius, so that graedus priuationis, is
many times less matter, because it gives the cause, and motive to some new
course, As when Demosthenes reprehended the people for harkening to the
conditions offered by King Phillip, being not honourable nor equal, he ^aith
they were but elements of their sloth and weakness, which if they were taken
away, neces^itie would teach them stronger resolutions, So Doctor Hector was
wont to Dames of London, when they complained they were they could not tell
how, but yet they could not endure to take any medicine, he would tell them,
Their way was only to be sick, for then they would be glad to take any
medicine.

Thirdly, this colour may be reprehended, in respect that the degree of
decrease is more sensitive, then the degree of privation; for in the mind of
man, gradus diminutionis may work a wavering between hope and fear, and so
keep the mind in suspense from settling and accommodating in patiece, and
resolution; hereof the common forms are, Better eye out, then always ache,
make or mar, c.

For the second branch of this colour, it depends upon the same general
reason: hence grew the common place of extolling the beginning of every thing,
Dimidiu qui been coepit habet. This made the A^trologers so idle as to judge of
a mans nature and destiny by the constellation of the moment of his nativity,
or conception. This colour is reprehended, because many inceptions are but as
Epicurus te^meth them, tentamentae, that is, imperfect offers, and essays,
which vanish and come to no substance without an iteration, so as in such cases
the second degree seems the worthiest, as the body-horse in the Cart, that
draws more then the fore-horse, hereof the common forms are, The second
blow makes the fray, The second word makes the bargain, Alter principium
dedit, alter abstulit, c. Another reprehension of this colour is in respect of
def^tigation, which makes perseue^ace of greater dignity then inception, but
settled affection or judgment makes the continuance.

Thirdly, this colour is reprehended in such things which have a natural
course, and inclination contrary to an inception. So that the inception is
continually evacuated and gets no start, but there behooves perpetua inceptio,
as in the common form. Non progredi, est regredi^ Qui non proficit, deficit:
Running against the hill: Rowing against the stream, c. For if it be with the
stream or with the hill, then the degree of inception is more then al the
rest.

Fourthly, this colour is to be understood of gradus inceptionis a potentia,
ad actum comparatus; cum gradu ab act^ ad incrementum: For other, mayor videtur
gradus ab impotentia ad potentiam quam a potentia ad actum.

FINIS.
Printed at London by Iohn Winde^ for Humfrey Hooper. 1597.


