A GOODLY GALLERYE WITH A MOST pleasant Prospect, into the garden of natural
contemplation, to behold the natural causes of all kind of Meteors, as well
fyery and aerie, as watery and earthly, of which sort be blazing sterres,
shooting stars, flames in the air c. thoder, lightning, earthquakes, c.
rain dew, snow, clouds, springes c. stones, metalles, earths c. to the
glory of God, and the profit of his creaturs.

PSALM. 148. Praise the Lord upon earth Dragons and all deeps, Fire, Hail,
Snow, Ise, Wyndes, and storms, that do his will. LONDINI. Anno. 1563.

TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE LORD Robert Dudley, Master of the Quenes
majesties horse, Knight of the most Noble order of the garter, and one of the
Quenes majesties privy Counsel. William Fulce, wishes increase of grace and
heavenly gifts, in perfect health and true honour, long to continue.
THe most mighty Monaychie of the Romain Empire Octauius Augustus, (right
honourable Lord) did show so great liberality, or rather magnificence
towards all them that bare him good will, that he also most largely rewarded
sondry persons yt had tought Popingayes and other birds, to pronounce some
salutation (as he passed by them) in his praise commendation. At the length a
poor yonge man, allured (as it seemed) by his bountiful remuneration of
other: had tought a Crow (an untowardly bird) after the same manner to salute
the emperor. Who perceiving his purpose, that it was rather for hope of gain,
then testimony of good will: answered that he had store enough already, of
such saluters at home, meaning those Popingayes other birds, which at the
first for their strangeness, he had dearly payed for. In like manner (right
honourable Lord) when I present the salutation of this mine untowardly bird, a
Crow in comparison of such pleasant popingayes, as have been hetofofore
offered unto your honourable Lordship: you may have just cause of suspicion,
that being moved with your former liberality magnificence towards other, I do
as the Poet says: Occulium cautus decurrere piscis ad hamum.

And so if your gentle nature and noble disposition could suffer, as a craver of
undeserved benefits, to reject both me my present. But since my state is such,
that I can not testify the good will of mine heart towards your honour,
otherwise then by such means as this: I was bold to refer that suspicion to
the judgment of your wisdom and humanity (knowing my self clear from such
intent) and to commit this vnbewtifull bird, under the wings of your
honourable protection, trusting that the same (which I take as a come defence
of all good learning) shall not only at this time be my stay refuge, but also
hereafter to more worthy attempts a continual encouragement. But specially at
this time, I was bold to enterprise the matter, for that one Iames Rowbothum,
a man of notable impudens (that I say no worse of him abusinge your singular
humanity and gentleness expressing thexample of one Bathillus, or rather (that
I may continue in the allegory of birds) of Esopes crow, hath not ben
ashamed to dedicate unto your Lordship of late a treatise of mine, which I
gathered out of diverse writers, concerning the Philosophers game:
notwithstanding he was straightly commanded to the contrary by the right
honourable and reverent father, my Lord of London, of whom also I was exhorted
and encouraged to dedicate the same unto your honour, my self. Which though
now through his importunity disobediece, it be intercepted, and the book
defaced with his rude rythmes peevish verses: yet I thought best to give your
Lordeship understanding that your honourable protection which is and should be
the defence of learning learned men, might no more be a boldening to such
ignorant and dishonest persons. And like wise most humbly to desire your honour
that though mine Epistle dedicatory, be not annexed to that book, yet
considring by what pertinacitie I was hindered, you would accept that book
also together with this, as an homely present of mine, of which I may conclude as
one did in like case. Illum ego coposui libru, tulit alter honore
Sic vos non vobis lacte tumetis oues.
Sic vos non vobis praeda agit ampla canes
Sic vos non vobis conditis antra ferae,
Sic vos non vobis pondera a fertis equi.
Thus sparing to trouble your honour any lodger, either wc complaint or excuse, I
desire almighty God to multiply his blessings toward you, that abounding in
all good gifts both bodily and ghostly, you may have long life in health and
honour, to his glory, the profit of other, and your endless comfort. Amen.

A GOODLY GALLERY The first Book.
FOr as much as we entend in this treatise, to declare ye causes of all those
bodies, that are generatede in the earth, called Fossilia, as well as those
other Impressiones, named of there height, Meteora (which no writer hitherto
hath done, yt we have scene) the come definicion given by most wryters, in no
wise will serve us, whether we may borrow ye name of metcoron to comprehend
the whole subject of our work we are not all together out of doubt, all
though ye philosopher, deryuinge it from doutfullnes, gives us some collore so
to take it, and paduenture we might be as wele excused to aplye it to
minerals, as other auters are to use it for earthequakes: yet to avoid all
occasions of cauellynge at words, we shall both defyne and also describe the
subject of our matter on this manner: yt is a body compound with out life
naturalle: and yet to stop one hole, because hear wants ye name of ye
thing to be destinede, yt is no new thing, to them that have red
Aristoteles works to find a diffinition, Aristotles.
of that whereof there is no name. But what need you be so precise (will some man
say) mean you so to proceade in all your discourse? no verily, but because many
of quick judgment not considering the stile to be attempered, to the capacity
of the Readers, will impute the plains to the ignorance of the authors, we
thought good in ye beginning to pluck that opinion out of their minds (that as
the common saying is) they may know we have skill of good manners though we little
use them.

These meteors are divided after three manner of ways, first into bodies
{per}fectly im{per}fectly mixed. Secondly into moist impressios dry. Thirdly
into fiery, aerie, watery and earthly. According to this last diuisio, we shall
speak of them in four books following. But first, we must be occupied a
little in the general descriptio of the same, yt afterward shall be particularly
entreated of.

Why they be called unperfectly mixed.
THey are called unperfectly mixed, because they are very soon changed into
another thing, and resolved into their proper elements of which they do most
consist, as do all impressious, fury, airy, watery, as snow into water,
clouds into waters. c.

Why they be called perfectly mixed.
The last sort namely earthly, Meteores are called perfectly mixed, because
they will not easily be changed and resolved from that form which they are in,
as be stones, metalles and other mineralles.

According to the quality of the matter, they are divided into moist dry
impressions, consisting either of vapores or exhalations. vapores are called
moist, and exhalations dry, which terms must be well noted, because they
must be much used.

Of the general cause of al Meteores and first of the material cause.
The matter whereof the most part of Meteores doth consiste, The material
cause.
is either water or earth, for out of ye water, proceade vapors, and out of the
earth come exhalations.

Vapor as the Philosopher says, What be vapors what exhalations.
is a certain watery thing, and yet is not water, so exhalation hath a certain
earthly nature in it, but yet it is not earth.

For the better understanding of vapors, understand that they be as it were
fumes or smokes, warm moist, which will easily be resolved into water, much
like to the breath that proceadeth out of a mans mouth, or out of a pot of
water standing on ye fiere. These vapors are drawn up from the waters and
warry places, by the heate of the Sun, even unto the middle region of the
air, What the middle region is shall be told afterward.
and there after diverse manner of meeting with coldness, many kind of moist
Meteors are generated, as sometime clouds and rain, sometime snow and hayle,
and that such vapors are so drawn up by the Sun, it is plain by experience:
for if there be a plash of water on a smothe and hard stoone, standing in the
heate of the sun, it will soon be dry, which is none otherwise, but yt the
son draws up the water in thin vapores, for no man is so fond to say,
that it can sink into stoone or metal, and it is as greatfoly to think, it
is consumed to nothing: for it is a general rule, A general rule.
that that which is once a thing, can not by changing become nothing,
wherefore it follows that the water on the stoone, as also on the earth, is
for the most part drawn up, when the stoone or earth is dried

Exhalations, What exhalations be.
are as smokes that be hot and dry, which because they be thin, lygther
then vapors, pass the lowest and middle region of the air, and are carried up
even to the highest region, where for the excessive heat, by nearenes of the
fire, they are kindled, and cause many kind of impressions. They are also
sometimes viscose* that is to say clamy, by reason whereof, they cleuing
together not being dispersed, are after diverse soortes set on fire, and
appear somtims like Dragos, somtim like Goats sometime like cadels sometime like
spears.

By yt which is spoke of vapors exhalations, it is euidet yt out of ye fire the
air no matter whereof meteores should consist can be draw, because of their
subtlety thinnes. For al exhalatio is by making a grosser body more thin,
but ye fire (we mean ye elemetal fire, not the fire of the kitche chimney) is
so subtle thin, yt it cannot be made thinner: likewise the air is so thin, yt
if it be made thinner, it is changed into fire, as the fire if it were made
thicker, wold become air, so the air, being made grosser, wold be turned into
water. Wherefore to conclude this part, ye great quantity of matter, that causes
these meteores, is take out of ye earth and the water. As for ye air the fire,
they are mixed with this matter as with al other things, but not so abundantly,
that they may be said the material cause of any Meteore, though without them
none can be generated. The efficient cause of all Meteores is that cause, The
efficiet cause
which makes them, even (...) they are not to nyghe to the direct beams, nor
to far of from them: there is a moderate heate, drawing out great abundance
of matter, so that in those contries, many Meteores of many sorts as
generated, as in the far North parts are few, but watery impressions. Also
in Autumn Spring, are oftener Meteores seen, then in Summer and Winter,
except it be in such places, where the Summer and Winter are of the temper of
Spring and Autune. Let this be sufficient, for the efficient causes of
impressions, as well first and principal, as second and particular. Concerning
the formal and final cause, we have little to say because the one is so
secret, that it is known of no ma, ye other so euidet yt it is plain to all
men The essential form of all substances, Gods wisdom comprehends, the
universal chief and last end of all things, is the glory of God. Mydle ends
(if they may be so called) of these impressions are manifold profits, to Gods
creatures, to make the earth fruitful, to purge the air, to set forth his
power, to threathen his vengeance, to punyshe the world, to move to
repentance: all the which are referde to one end of Gods eternal glory, ever
to be praised. Amen.

Of the places, in which they are generated.
THe places in which Meteors are caused, be either the air or the earth, in
ye air be generated rain, hayle, snow, dew, blazing stars, thonder,
lightning c. In the earth be wells, springs, earthquakes, metalls minerals, c.
made, and as it were in their mothers belly begotten fashioned. But for the
better understanding hereof, such as have not tasted ye principles of
Philosophie, must consider ye there be iiij. elemets, Earth, water, Air, Fire,
one copassing another round about, saving yt the waters by Gods commandment are
gathered into one place, yt the land might appear. The highest is ye sphere of
the fire, which touches the hollowness of the Moons heaven, the next is the
air, which is in the hallownes of the fire, the air within his hollowness,
comprehends the water and the earth, which both make but one Sphere or
Globe, or as the come sort may understand it one Bal. So each elemet is wcin
another as ye skales of a perle, are on above another, or (to use a gross
similitude) as ye pieles of an onio, are one wc in aother, after ye same sort
fro ye highest heue to ye earth, yt is lowest, one part yt is greater
compasses roud about another that is lesser. But for this present purpose it
is to be known, yt the air is divided into three regions, What the regions of
the air be
ye highest, the middle, and the lowest. The highest, because it is next to the
region of ye fire, is exceading hoate, the lowest being next the earth and the
waters, is temperate, and by repercussion or striking back of the sun beams
waxes hoate, and by absence of them is made cold, being subject to Winter and
Summer. The middle region of ye air, is always exceading cold, partly because
ye son beams, can not be cast back so high, and partly because the cold
that is there, between ye heate above and the heate beneath it, is so kept in
that it can not get out, so that it must needs be excessively cold. For the
water and the earth being both cold elements, after the sunnesetting in the
night season do cool ye air, even to the middle regio. But in the morning
the sun rising warms ye air, so far as his beams which are beaten back
from the earth the water, can extend and reach, which is not so high as the
middle region, and by heate on both sides, is enclosed and kept, saving that a
little thereof falls down in the night, which the next day with much more is
driven back again. Wherefore this region being so cold, is dark and
cloudye, in so much that some doting Divines have imagined, purgatory to be
there in the mydle region of the air.

In the highest region, be generated Cometes or blazing stars, and such like
of diverse sorts.

In the middle region clouds, rain, storms, wyndes. c. In the lowest region,
dew, frost, horefrost, mists, bright rods, candels burning about graves,
gallowses, where there is store of clamy fatty or oily substance, also lights
and flammyng fierce, seen in fields, c.

And thus much for the general causes of all Meteores.

The second Book of fyery Meteores.
A Fiery impression, is an exhalation set on fire, in the highest or lowest
region of the air, or else apearing as though it were set on fire and burning.

They are therefore divided into flames and aparitions. Flames are they, which
burn in dead and are kindled with fire. These are discerned by iiij. ways,
by the fashion of them, by their place, by the abundance of their matter, by
the want of their matter. Their placing is after the abundance scarsetie of
the matter where of they consist, for if it be great, heavy and gross, it
cannot be carried so far as the middle region of the air, and therefore is set
on fire in the lowest region, if it be not so great, light, and full of heat,
it passes the middle region ascends to the highest, where it is easily
kindled set on fire.

According to their diverse fashios, they have diverse names, for they are
called, burning stoble, torches, dancing or leapinge Goats, shooting or
falling stars, or candels, burning beams, roud pillars, spears shields,
globes or bowles, fierbrandes, lapes, flying dragos or firedrakes, pointed
pillors or broached steples, or blazing stars, called Cometes. The time when
these impressios doth most apere, is ye night season, for if they were caused
in ye day time, they cold not be seen, no more then ye stars be seen, because
the light of ye sun which is much greater, dims ye brightness of the being
lesser.

Of the generation of the impression, called burned stoble or sparkles of fire.
THe generation of this Meteore is this, Sparks of fire.
when the matter of the Exhalation is in all parts a like thynne, but not
compacted or knit together, then some part of it being carried up into the
highest region, by the fiery heate is set on fire before another part, that
comes up after it, and so being kindled by little and little, it flies
abrooode like sparkles out of a chymney, in so much that the common people
suppose, that an infinite number of stars fall down where as it is nothing else,
but the Exhalation that is thin kindled in many parts, sparkling as when
saw dust or cool dust is cast into the fire.

Of Torches.
TOrches or fire brands, Torches.
are thus gen^rated: when the matter of the exhalation is long and not broad,
being kindled at one end thereof, in the highest region of the air, it burns
like a Torch or fire brand, and so continues, till all the matter be burned
up, and then goes out, none otherwise then a Torch when all the stuff is
spent must needs burn no lodger.

Of dansyng or leaping Goats.
DAnsyng Goats, Dancing Goats.
are caused when the exalation is divided into two parts, as when two
torches be seen together, the flame appears to leap or dance fro one part
to the other, much like as balls of wild fire dance up and down in the
water.

Of shotyng and falling Stars.
A Flying, shooting, or falling Sarre, Shootinge stars.
is when the exhalation being gathered as it were on a round heap, and yet not
thoroughly compacted in the highest part of the lowest region of the air,
being kindled, by the soden cold of the mydle region is beaten back, and so
appears as though a Star should fall, or slyde from place to place.
Sometime it is generated after another sort, for there is an exhalatio long and
narrow, which being kindled at one end burns swiftly, the fire ronning
from end to end, as when a silk thread is set on fire at the one end. Some
say it is not so much set on fire, as that it is direct under some Star in
the firmament, and so receiving light of that star, seems to our eyes to be
a star. In dead some times it may be so, but that is not so always, nor yet
most comenly, as it may be easily demonstrated. The Epicurians as they are
very gross in determining the chief goodness, The Epicurians opinion.
so they are very fond in assigning the cause of this Meteor. For they say, yt
the stars fall out of the firmamet, and that by the fall of them, both
thonder and lightning are caused: for the lightening (say they) is nothing else
but the shining of that star that falls, which falling into a watery
cloud, and being queched in it, causes that great thonder, even as whoat iron
makes a noyce if it be cast into cold water. Psal. 148
But it is evident that ye stars of the firmament can not fall, for God hath
set them fast for ever, he hath given them a commandment which they shall not
pass. And though they should fall into the cloud, yet could they not rest
there, but with their weight being driven down, would cover the whole earth.

For the least star that is seen in the firmamet, The greatness of Stars.
is greater then all the earth. Here will steppe forth some merry fellow, which
of his conscience thinks them not to be above three yards about, and say
it is a loud lye, for he can see within the compass of a bushel more the xx.
stars. But if his bushel were on fire xx. mile of, I demand how big it
would seem unto him? He that hath any wit, A proof of the stars greatness.
will easily perceive, that stars being by al men confessio, so many
thousand miles distant from the earth, must neades be very great, that so far
of should be seen in any quantity.

Thus much for the shootyng or falling Stars.

Of burning Candels.
Burning candels.
WHen the Exhalation carried up into the highest part of the air is in al parts
thereof of equal and like thynnes, also long, but not broad, it is set on
fire and blazed like a candle, until the Exhalation be quite consumed.

Of burning Beams and round Pillars.
Burning beams round pillars.
THese are caused, when the Exhalation being long and not very broad, is set
on fire, all at once and so burns like a great beam or log. The difference
of beams and pyllers is this, for beams are when they seem to lie in
length, in the air, but they are called pillars, when they stand right up,
the one end nearer to the earth, then the other.

Of burning Spears.
BUrning spears are generated, Burning Spears.
when a great quantity of Exhalatios, which may be called a dry cloud, is
set on fire in the myddest, and because the cloud is not so compact, that it
should suddenly rend, as when thonder is caused, the fire breaks out, at the
edges of the cloud, kendlyng the thynne Exhalations, which shoot out in great
nober like fyry spears, or darts, lunge and very small, wherefore they continue
not long, but when they fail, within a short while after, more fire breaking
out, they shoot out as many more in their place, and likewise, when they are
gone, other succeade, if the quantity of the matter will suffice, more then a
doosen courses. This impressio was seen in Lodon, Anno doom. 1560. the thirty
day of January, at eight of the clock at night the air in all other places
being very dark, but in the North east where this cloud burned, it was as
light as when the day breaks, toward the Sun rising, in so much, that
plain shadow of things opposite, was seen. The edge of this cloud was in
fashion like the Raynbowe, but in colour very bright, and often times casting
forth almost innumerable darts, of woderfull length like squybbes, that are
cast up into the air, saving yt they moved more swiftly then any squybbes.

Of shields* Globes or Bowles.
Shields Globes or Bowels.
THese Meteores also have their name of their fashion, because they are broad,
and appear to be round, otherwise their generation differs not fro the
cause of the like impressions before mentioned.

Of Lamps.
THe lamp consists of an Exhalation, Lamps.
yt is broad thick, but not equally extended, namely smaller at one end then
at another, which being kindled about ye midst thereof, burns like a lap.
The cause why, as well this impressio, as many other, appears round, is not for
yt always they are roud in deed, but because the great distance causes the to
seem so. For even square forms, far of seem to be roud. It is written, yt a
lap fell down at Rome when Germanicus Caesar, set forth the sight of sword
players.

Of flying Dragons or fire Drakes.
FLying Dragons, or as Englyshmen call the fire drakes, Flying Dragons or fire
Drakes.
be caused on this manner. When a certain quatitie of vapors are gathered on a
heap, being very near compact, as it were hard tepered together this lope of
vapors assending to ye region of cold, is forcibly beaten back, which violence
of moving, is sufficient to kindle it, (although some men will have it to be
caused between ij. clouds a whote a cold) the ye highest part, which was
climming upward, being by reason more subtle thin, appears as ye Dragons neck,
smokig, for yt it was lately in the repuls bowed or made crooked, to represent
the dragos belly. The last part by ye same repulse, turned upward, makes ye
tail, both apearig smaller, for yt it is farther of, also, for yt the cold
binds it. This drago thus being caused, flies alog in ye air, sotime
turns to fro, if it meat with a cold cloud to beat it back, to ye great terror,
of them that behold it, of whom some called it a fire Drake, some say it is
the Devil him self, and so make report to other. More then sixtene years
ago, on May day, when many young folk went abroad early in the morning, I
remember, by six of the clock in the forenoon, there was news come to
London, that the Devil the same morning, was seen flying over the Temmes:
afterward came word, that he lighted at Stratforde, and there was taken and
set in the stocks, and that though he would fain have dissembled the matter,
by turning him self into the likeness of a ma, yet was he know welinough by
his cloven feet. I know some yet alive, that went to see him, returning
affirmed, that he was in deed seen flying in the air, but was not taken
prisoner. I remember also that some wished he had been shoot at with gons, or
shaftes as he flew over the Temes. Thus do ignorant men judge of these things
that they know not, as for this Devil, I suppose it was a flying Dragon,
whereof we speak, very fearful to loke upon, as though he had life, because
he moves, where as he is nothing else but clouds smoke, so mighty is God,
that he ca fear his enemies, with these and such like operations, whereof
some examples may be found in holy scripture.

Of the Pyramidall pillar like a spire or broached steeple.
THis sharpe pointed pillar, Of spires.
is generated in the highest region of the air, and after this sort. When the
Exhalatio hath much earthly matter in it, the lighter parts and thinner (as
their nature is) ascending upward, the grosser, heavier, and thycker, abide
together in the bottom, and so is it of fashion great beneath, and small
pointed above, and being set on fire it is so seen, and thereof hath his name.

Of Fire scattered in the air.
Fire scattered in the air, Fire scatered.
or illuminations, are generated in the lowest region of the air, when very
dry and whote Exhalations, are drawn up and meeting with cold clouds, are
sent back again, which motions sets the a fire, whose parts, being not
equally thycke or joined together, seem as though fire were scattered in the
air. Yea sometimes, the whole air seems to burn, as though it would rain
fire from heaven, so it hath come to pass, burning both cities and towns.
Then judge, how easy it was for God to rain fire upon Sodome and Gomor, for
their sins and wickedness.

Of lights that goes before men, and follows the abroad in the fields by the
night season.
THere is also a kind of light, yt is seen in the night season, seems to go
before men, or to follow them, Light that goes before men and follows the in
the night.
leading them out of their way unto waters, other dangerous places It is also
very often seen in the night, of the that sail in the Sea, sometime will
cleave to ye mast of the ship, or other high parts, sometime slyde round about
the ship, and either rest in one part till it go out, or else be quenched in
the water. This impression seen on the land, is called in latin, Ignis fatuus,
foolish fire, that hurts not, but only fears fowls. That which is seen on
ye Sea, if it be but one, is named Helena, if it be two, it is called Castor
and Pollux.

The foulishe fire is an Exhalation kendled by means of violent moving, when
by cold of the night, in the lowest region of the air, it is beaten down,
then commonly, if it be light, seeks to ascend upward, is sent down again,
so it dances up down. Else if it move not up and down, it is a great lompe of
glueysh or oily matter, that by moving of the heate in it self, is inflamed of
it self, as moist hay will be kindled of it self. In whote and fenny
countries, these lights are often seen, and where as is abondaunce of such
vnctuus and fat matter, as about churchyards where through the corruption of the
bodies there buried, ye earth is full of such substance, wherefore in
churchyards, or places of common burial, oftentimes are such lights seen,
which ignorant superstitious fools, have thought to be souls tormented in the
fire of purgatory. In dede ye devil hath used these lights (although they be
naturally caused) as strong delusions to captive the minds of men, wc fear of
the Popes purgatory, whereby he did open injury to the blood of Christ, which
only purges us fro al our sins and delivers us from al torments, both
temporal and eternal, according to the saying of the wise ma, the souls of
the ryghteous are in the hands of God, and no torment touches them. But to
return to the lights in which, there are yet two things to be considered.
First, why they lead men out of their way. And secondly, why they seem to
follow men and go before the. The cause why they lead men out of the way, is,
that me while they take heed to such lights, and are also sore afraid, they
forget their way, and then being ones but a little out of their way, they
wader they woot not whether, to waters, pyttes, other very dangerous places.
Which, when at length they hap the way home, will tell a great tale, how
they have been lead about by a spirit in the likeness of fire. Now the cause
why they seem to go before men, or to follow them, some men have said to be
the moving of the air by the going of the man, which air moved, should drive
them forward if they were before, and draw them after, if they were behind.
But this is no reason at all, that the fire which is oftetimes, three or four
miles distant from the man that walk, should be moved to and froo by that
air which is moved through his walking, but rather the moving of the air the
mans eyes, causes the fire to seem as though it moved, as the Moon to
children seems, if they are before it, to run after them: if she be before
them, to run before them, that they can not overtake her, though she seem to
be very near them. Wherefore these lights rather seem to move, then that they
be moved in dead.

Of Helena, Castor and Pollux.
WHen the like substance in the lowest region of the air, over the Sea by the
like occasion is set on fire, if it be one only, it is called Helena, if there
be two, they are called Castor and Pollux. Helena, Castor, Pollux.
These impressios will oftentimes cleue to the mast other parts of the ships,
by reason of the clammynes and fatness of the matter. Helena was of the Heath
men, taken as a Goddess the daughter of Iupiter and Leda* Castor Pollux, were
her brethren. Helena was the occasion yt Troy was destroyed, therefore the
Mariners by experience tryinge that one flame of fire apearyng alone, signified
tempest at had, supposed the same flame to be the goddess Helena, of whom they
looked for nothing but destruction. But when two lights are seen together, they
are a token of fair whether, good luck, the Mariners therefore believed, that they
were Castor and Pollux, which saylyng to seek their sister Helena, being
carried to Troye by Paris, were never seen after, and thought to be translated
into ye number of the Gods that give good success to them that sail, as we
read in the last chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, that the ship wherein
S. Paule sailed, had a badge of Castor and Pollux. A natural cause why they may
thus fore show either tempest or calmnes, is this. One flame alone may give
warning of a tempest, because that as the matter thereof is compact, and not
dissolved, so it is like, that the matter of tempest (which never wants) as
wind and clouds, is styll together, and not dissipated, then is it like not
long after to arise. By two flames together, may be gathered, that as this
Exhalation which is very thycke is divided, so the thycke matter of tempest is
dissolved scactered abroad by the same cause that this is divided. Therefore
not without a reason, the Mariner to his mates may promise a prosperous course.

Of flames that appear upon the hears of men or beasts.
THere is yet another kind of fyry impression, which is flames of fire upon
the hears of men and beasts, Flames upon hears of men beasts.
especially horses. These are sometime clamy Exhalations, scatered abroad in
the air in small parts, which in the night by resistance of the cold, are
kendled, cleauyng on horses ears, on men's heads shoulders that ride or walk.
In that they cleave upon hears, it is by the same reason, that the dew will be
seen also upon hears or garments, whose woll is high, as fryese mantels and
such like. Another sort of these flames, are caused, when men's or beasts
bodies being chaffed, sed forth a fat clamy sweat, which is in like manner kidled
as ye sparks of fire yt are seen when a black horse is curred. Liuius reports
of Seruius Tullius, Liuius. Seruius Tullius.
ye as he lay asleep, being a child, his hear seemed to be all on a flame,
which for all that did not burn his hear, or hurt him. The like history he
recites of one Marius, Marius.
a Knight of Rome, that as he made an oration to his Soldiers in Spain, they
saw his head burning on a light fire, he him self not ware of it. Thus much
concerning these flames..

Of Comets or blazing Stars.
A Comet is an Exhalation, Comets or blaesinge stars.
whote dry, of great quantity, fat and clammye, harde compact like a great
lompe of pitch, which by the heate of the sun, is drawn out of the earth,
into the highest region of the air, and there by ye excessive heat of the
place, is set on fire, apearing like a star with a blasinge tail, and
sometime is moved after the motion of the air, which is circuler, but it
never goes down out of the compass of sight, thought it be not seen in the
day time for the bryghtnes of the sun, but styll burns until all the
matter be consumed. An argument of ye greatness is this, that there was never
any Comet yet perceived, but at the lest it endured seven days, but much lodger
they have been seen, namely fowrtye days long, yea, lxxx. days, and some six
months together. Wherefore, it must neades be a wonderful deal of matter,
that can give so much noryshement, for so great and fervent fire, and for so
long a time. There are considered in a Comet, specially the collor fashion,
which both arise of the disposition of the matter. Their colours, be either
white, ruddy, or blew. If the matter be thynne, the colour is white. If it
be meanly thycke, then is the Comet ruddy, after the colour of our fire, but
when the matter is very thycke, it is blew, like the burning of Brymstone. And
as the matter is more and less, after this disposition: so is the Comet of
colour, more or less lyk to these three principal colours, some yelowyshe,
some duskish, some grenishe, some watchet c.

In fashion are noted three differeces, for either they seem round, wc beams
round about, or with a beard hanging downward, or else with a tail stretched
out sydelong, in length. The first fashion, is when the matter is thickest in
the myddest, and thin round about ye edges. The second is, when the
Exhation is upward thick, and in length downward also, meanly thycke. The
third form is like the second, saving that the tail hangs not down, but
lies aside, is commonly longer then ye beard. The time of their generation is
oftenest in Autumn or harvest. The temper of the 4. quarters.
For in the spring, there is to much moisture, and to little heate, to gather a
Comet. In summer, is to much heate, which will disperse and consume the
matter, that it can not be joined together. As for winter, it is clean
contrary to the nature if a Comet, which is whoat dry, winter being cold and
moist, therefore no time so meet as Autumn.

Now for so much as many learned men, have gone about to declare the
signification of blazing stars, The signification of Comets.
we will omit nothing yt hath any shadow of reason, but declare what is
written of the.

Such things as are set forth of yt betokening of Comets, are of two sorts: the
first is of natural, the second of civil or politic effects. They are said to
betoke drought, barynes of ye earth pestilence.

Drought, because a Comet can not be generated without great heat, much
moisture is consumed in ye burning of it.

Barrines, because ye fatness of ye earth, is draw up, whereof the Comet
consists.

Pestilence, for so much as this kind of Exhalations, corrupts the air, which
infects the bodies of men beasts.

The second sort, might well be omitted, saving yt Aristotle him self, Arist.
disdains not to seek out causes for some of them. Generally it is noted of
all Historiographers, that after the apearing of Comets, most comenly
followed, great notable calamities. Beside this, they be token (saith some)
wars seditions, chages of comme wealths and the death of Princes and noble
men.

For what times Comets do shyne, there be many whote dry Exhalations in the
air, which in dry me kindle heat, whereby they are {pro}uoked to anger, of
anger comes brawling, of brawling fighting war, of war victory, of victory
change of common welths. Then also Princes, living more delicately the other men,
are more subject to infection, therefore dye sooner the other me. If it were lawful
to reason of this sort, we might induce the to betoke, not only these few
things, but al other things ye chanse in the world.

Yet these predictions have a show of reason though it be nothing necessary:
but it is a world to see how the Astrologians, dote in such devises. They are
not ashamed, to an earthly substance, to ascribe an heavenly influence, and in
order of judgment to use them as very stars, suerly by as good reason as to
the celestial stars, they atribute divine influences and effects. But this
their fooly, hath been sufficiently detected by diverse godly and learned men,
and this place requires no lunge discourse thereof. Wherefore this shall
suffice, both for the natural causes of blasyng stars, and also, for all
flames in general. It follows therefore that with like brevity we declare
the causes of fyery aperitions.

Of Aparitions.
AN Aparition, Aparitions.
is an Exhalation in the lowest or highest region of the air, not verily
burning, but by refraction of light, either of the sun or the Moon, seems
as though it burned. Which appearance of colour, rises not of the mixtio of
the four qualities, as it doth in bodies perfectly mixed, as herbs, stones c.
But only of ye falling of light upon shadow. The light is in stead of white,
and the shadow or darkness in stead of black. These diversely mixed according
to ye diverse disposition of ye exhaelation, which ministers variety by
thickness or thynnes, cause diverse colours.

There be commonly recited three kinds of fyery apparitions.

Colours, wide gapinges, and deep hooles, which appear in the clouds.

Of colours.
Colours are hear meant, Colours in the air
when there is nothing else to be noted, but the colours of the clouds, and
they are caused (as it is said) by casting the light into the shadowye cloud,
according as it exceadeth more or less in thickness. whereof some be very bright
white, and that is when the Exhalation is very thynne: some yellowish, when the
Exhalations is thicker, sum ruddy, when it is meanly thick, and very black
when it is very thick. The red and ruddy colours are seen, only in the
morning and evening, when the light of the sun is not in his full force, for
at other times of the day, his light is to vehement, clear, strong, and
pearsing. This much of colours.

Of wide gaping.
Wide gaping is caused, Wide gaping of clouds in the air.
when an Exhalation is thick in the midst, thin on the edges, the the light
beig received into it, causes it to appear as though the sky did rend, fire
break out of it.

Of round opening Hiatus.
THese holes called Hiatus, differ from wide gapinges, Roud opening in the
air.
in nothing, but that they be less, therefore seem as though they were deep
pits, or holes, and not rending or gaping, and these be those apparitions,
that appear fyery and yet be not so in dead. Therefore let this be sufficient
to have showed the natural causes of all fiery Meteores.

The third Book of aerie impressions.
Under ye name of aerie impressios, be comprehended, such Meteores, whose matter
is most of the air. Of this sort be winds, earthquakes, thoder, lightnigs
stormewyndes, whirlewyndes, circles, raynbowes, ye white circle, called of some
watlig street, many suns many moans

Of Wyndes.
THe wynd is an Exhalation whote and dry, Wind.
drawn up into ye air by ye power of ye sun, by reason of ye wayght thereof
being driven down, is laterally or sidelongs carried about the earth, this
diffinition is to be vnderstaded, of general wyndes, ye blow over al ye
earth, or else some great regions, but beside these, there be particular wyndes,
which are known but only in some countries, the not very large, The second kind
of wyndes.
these wyndes oftetimes have another manner of generatio. And that is on this
manner. It must needs be confessed, ye within the globe of the earth, be woderful
great holes, caves, or dogeos, in which when air abondeth (as it may by diverse
causes) this air, yt cannot abide to be pined in, finds a little hole in or
about those countries, as it wear a mouth to break out of: by this means,
blows vehemently, yet ye force vehemens extends not far, but as ye wind
that comes forth of bellows, near the coming forth, is strong, but far
of, is not perceived: So this particular wynd, in ye country, where it
breaks forth, is very violet strong, in so much, yt, it overthrows both
trees, houses, yet in other countries, not very far distant, no part of that
boisteous blast is felt. Wherefore this wind differs fro the general wyndes,
both in qualities substance or matter, for the matter of them is an
Exhalation, and the qualities such as the nature of the Exhalation is, very
aerie, but not ayere in dead: but of this particular wind, the matter and
substance is most commonly air.

There is yet a third kind of wind, the third kind of wind.
which is but a soft gentle and cool moving of the air, and comes from no
certain place (as the general wynd doth) yea it is felt in the shadow under
trees, when in the whote light and shining of the sun, it is not perceived.
It comes whisking suddenly, very pleasant in the heate of the summer, and
cease by and by. This properly is no wind* but a moving of the air by some
occasion. As for the general wyndes, they blow out of diverse quarters of the
air, now East, now West, now South, now North, or else inclininge to one of
the same quarters. Among which the East wind following the nature of the
fire, is whote and dry, the South wind expressing the quality of the air,
the qualities of the wyndes and the fow^ quarters of the world.
is whote and moyste, the Western blast, agreing with ye waters property is
cold and moist. The North that never was warmed with the heat of the sun,
being cold and dry, partakes the conditions of the earth. The middle wyndes
have middle mixed qualities after ye nature, of those four principal wyndes
more or less, the quality of middle wyndes
as they incline toward them more or less.

Generally the profit of all wyndes, the profit of wind.
by the wonderful wisdom of the eternal God, is wonderful great, unto his
creatures. For besides yt these wyndes, alter the weather, some of them
bringing rain, some drynes, some frost and snow, which all are necessary,
there is yet an universal commodity, that rises by the only moving of the
air. Which were it not continually styred, as it is, would soon putrefy, and
being putryfied, would be a deadly infection to all yt hath breath upon the
earth. Wherefore this wind whose sound we hear, Ioan. 3.
and know not from whence it comes nor whether it goes (for who can affirm
from whence it was raised, or where it is laid down) as al other creaturs
beside doth teach us, the wonderful and wise providence of God, that we may
worthily cry out, with the Psalmist, say: O Lord, howe manyfolde are thy
words, Psal. 104.
in wisdom hast thou made them all, c. Let this be sufficient, to have showed
the generation of the wyndes.

Of earthquakes.
AN earthquake, Earthquakes.
is a shaking of ye earth which is caused by means of wind and Exhalations,
that be enclosed, with in the caves of the earth, and can find no passage, to
break forth, or else so narrow a way that it can not be soon enough
delivered. Wherefore, with great force, and violence it breaks out, and one
while shakes the earth, another while rends and cleaves the same, sometime
it casts up the earth, a great height into the air, and some time it causes
ye same, to synke a great depth down, swallowyng both cities, and towns, yea
and also mighty great moutaignes, leaving in the place where they stood,
nothing but great holes of an unknown depth, or else great lakes of waters.

Of diverse kinds of earthquakes.
Diverse authors write dyuerselye, of the kinds of earthquakes, Diverse kinds
of earthquakes.
some making more and some less, but we shall be content at this time to
comprehend them in four sorts.

The first kind is when the earth is shaken laterally, to one side, which is
when the whole force of the wind drives to one place, and there is no other
contrary motion, to let it. This wind if it be not great shakes the earth,
that it trembles as a man that hath a fit of an agewe, and doth no more
harm, but if it be great and violent, it louseth the foundations of all
bydinges, be they never so strong, and overthrows whole cities, but
specially yt great buildings, and not only buildings, but some time also
casts down great hills, ihat cover and overwhelm, all the valley under
them. Many noble and great cities, have been overthrown by this kind of
earthquake. Twelve cities overthrown with one earthquake.
It is written that twelve of the most beautiful cities, and most sumptuous
buildyngs in all Asia, were overthrown and utterly destroyed with any
earthquake. Howe often, Antiochia, yea within short time, was destroyed, they
which have red the histories, can testify. Howe terrible was the
earthquake, that shook Constantinople a whole year together, Constantinople
the chiefest city of Greece now the Turks palace.
that the Emperor, all the people, were fain to dwell abroad in the fields,
under tents pavilions for fear their houses would fall on their head, it is
recorded in Chronicles, worthy to be remembered.

The second kind is, The second kind.
when ye earth with great violence is lifted up, so that the buildings are
like to fall, and by and by synketh down again: this is when all the force
of the wyndes stryueth to get upward, after the nature of gonpouder, and
finding some way to be delivered out of bondage, the earth that was hoised up,
returns to his old place.

The third kind is a gaping, The third kind.
rendyng, or cleaving of the earth, when the earth synketh down, and
swallows up cities, and towns, with castles, and towers, Earthquake on the
sea.
hills and rocks, ryuers, and floods, so that they be never seen again. Yea
the Sea in some places hath been drunk up, so that me might have gone over on
foot, until the time of tide or flood returning, covered the place with
waters again. But in the land, where this earthquake swallows up any city,
or country, there appears nothing in the place thereof, but a marvelous wide
and deape goulf, or hole. Aristotle makes mention of diverse places, Aristot.
and regions that were ouerthrouwen with this kind of earthquake.

The fourth kind, The fourth kind.
is when great mountains are cast up out of the earth, er else when some part
of the land synketh down, and in stead thereof arise ryuers, lakes, or
fyers, breaking out wc smoke and ashes. It causes also ouerflowyngs of the
sea, when the sea bottom, is lifted up, and by this means, arise many Ilandes
in the sea, New Ilandes in the sea.
that never were seen before. These and other such miracles, are often to be
found in the wryters of histories, also in the Philosophers, as Aristotle,
Arist.
Seneca, Seneca.
and Plinius. Plinius.


Nevertheless, the effects of some, as most notable it shall not be
unprofitable to recite. Plato in his Dialogue, Plato.
entitled Timens, makes mention by the way of a wonderful earthquake, A
woderfull earthquake.
wherebye not only Africa was rent asonder from Europa and Asia (as it is
indead at this day, Africa. Europa. Asia the three parts of the earth
except a little neck by the red Sea,) the Sea entering between them that now
is called Mare mediterraneum: Mare mediterraneum because it goes through the
midst of the earth.
But also a wonderful great Land, which he affirms, was greater then
Aphrica and Asia both, called Atlantis, Atlatis. an Island.
was swallowed up, and covered by the waters, in so much, that on the Sea
called Atlanticum, for a great while after, no ship could sail, by reason
that the same huge sea, by resolution of the earth of that mighty Island, was al
turned into mud. The famous I'll of Scicilia was also some time a part of
Italy, and by earthquake rent asonder from it. Seneca makes mentio of two
Ilandes. Seneca.
Thereon and Therea, Thereon Therea.
that in his time, first apeared. It should seem both by Aristotle, Arist.
and also by Herodotus, Herodotus.
that Egypt, in aunciet time, was a goulphe of the sea, Egipsom time a golphe
of the sea.
and by earthquake made a dry land. During the raygne of Tyberius the
Emperor, twelve notable cities of Asia, were overthrown in one night, c.

How so great wyndes come to be under the earth.
THe great caves and dens of the earth, must neades be full of ayere
continually, but when by the heate of the son, the moisture of the earth is
resolved, many Exhalations are generate as well within the earth, as without,
where as the places were full before, so that they could receive no more
exepte part of that which was in them nor let out, in such countries, where
the earth hath few pores, or else where they be stopped, with moisture, it
must neades follow, that these exhalations striving to get out, must neades
rend the earth in some place, or lift it up, so that either they may have
free passage, or else rowm enough to abide in.

Of the signs and tokens that go before an earthquake most commonly.
THe first is the raging of the sea, when there are no tempestuous wyndes, The
signs of an earthquake.
to styre it, yea when the air is most calm without wyndes. The cause why
the Sea then rages, is that the wind begins to labour for passage, that
way, and finding none, is sent back, and soon after shakes the land.

The second sign is calmenes of the air, and cold, which comes to pass
by reason that the Exhalation, that should be abroad, is within the earth.

The third sign, is said to be, a lunge thine struck of a cloud seen, when
the sky is clear, after the setting of the son. This (say they) is caused,
by reason that the Exhalation or vapor, which is the matter of clouds, is
gone into ye earth Other affirm that it is the Exhalation that breaks out of
some narrow hole of the earth, out of which the rest of the wind cannot
issue, neither will it weighty the time, wherefore within a while after, it
seeks and makes it self by soden eruption a broader way to be delivered
out of prison.

Also the sun certain days before it, appears dim, because the wynd,
that should have purged and dissolved ye gross ayere, that causes this
dymnes, to our eyes, is enclosed within the bowels of the earth.

The water in the botome of deape wells, is troubled, and the savor thereof
infected, because the pestilet Exhalations yt have ben long enclosed, within ye
earth do the begin a little to be sent abroad. For thereof comes it, that in
many places where earthquakes have been, great abundance of smoke, flame,
ashes, is cast out, when the abundance of brymstone that is under the
ground, through violent motion is set on fire, breaks forth Finally, who
knows not, what stynking mynerals and other poisonous stuff doth grow under
the earth? wherefore it is no water if well water, before an earthquake, be
infected, but rather it is to be marveled, if after an earthquake, there
follow not a grievous pestilence, when the whole mass of infection is blown
abroad.

Last of all, there is harde before it, in the time of it, after it, a great
noise and sound under the earth, Thodring under the earth.
a terrible groanyng, and a very thondryng, yea sometimes when there follows
no earthquake at all, when as the wind without shaking of the earth, finds a
way to pass out at. And these for the most part, or at lest some of them,
are forewarninges that the most fearful earthquake will follow, then the
which there is no natural thing, that brings men into a greater fear. Cato
was very curius to confess him self, Cato.
that he repented, that ever he went by water, where as he might have gone by
land. But what land, can be sure? if it be the Lords will, by this work of
his to shake it? what building so strong yt can defend us? when the more
strong the more danger, the higher ye greater fall.

Of thonder.
THoder is a sound, Thonder.
caused in ye clouds by the breaking out of a whote dry Exhalation, beating
against the edges, of the cloud. It is often herd in spring summer, by reason
yt the heat of ye son, the draws up many Exhalations, which meeting in the
middle regio of the air, wc cold moist vapors, are together with them, enclosed
in an hollow cloud, but when the what Exhalatio cannot agree wc the coldness of
ye place, by this strife being driven together, made stronger and kedled, it
will neades break out which soden violent eruptio, causes ye noise which we
cal thoder. A similitude is put by great authors of moist wood, a similitude.
ye cracks in ye fire, we may add here unto ye breaking of an egg in the
fire, of an apple, or any like thing, for whatsoever holds withholds,
enclosed any what wind, so yt it can have no vent, it will seek itself a way,
by breaking ye skinn, shell or case. It were no ill copariso to like thoder to
the sound of a gone, which be both caused of the same or very like causes.

The soud of thoders is diverse, after which, men have divided ye thoders into
diverse kinds. Diverse kinds of thonder.
Making first ij. sorts, yt is, small thoder great. But as for the diversity
of soudes, generally it comes of ye diverse disposition of ye clouds, one
while having more holes then at another, sometime thicker in one place then in
another. The small or little thoder is, Small thonder and the kinds thereof
when ye exhalatio is drive fro side to side, of ye cloud, making a noise,
ether for ye small quatitie, less forcibles, or else for the thickness of ye
clouds walls, is not able to break the, but robleth up down within ye cloud,
whose sides are stroger the ye force of ye exhalation is able to break, it
roneth up down within, striking against the cloud moist sides, makes a noise not
unlike to the queching of whote yro in cold water.

And if ye Exhalation be meanly strong, and the cloud not in all places of like
thickenes, it breaks out at those thin places which such a bussing, as
wynd makes blowing out of narrow holes.

But if the cloud, be so thynne, that it cannot keep in ye Exhalation,
although it be not kindled, then it blows out with like puffinge as wind
comes out of a pair of bellows.

A great thonder, is when the Exhalation is much in quantity, Great thoder
and the kinds thereof.
and very whote and dry in quality, the cloud also very thycke and strong,
that easily will not give place to the wind, to escape out.

Wherefore if the Exhalation do vehemently shake the cloud, though it do not
at the first disperse it, it makes a lunge and fearful romblyng against the
sides of the cloud, until at the last being made stronger by swyfter motion,
it dissolveth the cloud, and hath liberty to pass out into the open air.
The cloud resolved, drops down, and then follows a shower of rain.

Otherwhyles it shakes the cloud, not long, but streyghtwaye rends it a
long space time, whose sound is like the rendyng of a broad clothe, which
noyce continues a pretty while.

And sometime it discusseth the cloud at once, making a vehement and terryble
crack like a gone, sometime with great force, casting out stones, but most
commenly fire, which sets many high places on fire. As in the year of
our Lord, 1561. the fourth day of June, the steple of saint Paules church in
Lodon was set on fire, as it hath been once or twyse before, and burned. The
noyce of thonder though it be great in such places over which it is made, How
far thuder is harde.
yet is it not harde far of, especially against the wind. Whereof we had
experience also in the year of our Lord, 1561. on saint Mathyes day in
February, at the evening, when there was a great flash of lyghtnynges, and a
very terryble crack of thonder followynge, they that were but xv. miles from
London Westward, heard no noise, nor sound thereof: the wind that time was
Western.

The effect of thonder is profitable to men, The profit of thonder.
both for that the sweet shower doth follow it, and also for that it purges,
and purifieth the air by the swyft mouynge of the Exhalation, that breaks
forth, as also by the sound which deuidynge and pearcyng the air, causes
it to be much thynner, which may be verified by an history that Plutarchus in
the life of T. Quincius Flaminius, Plutarch{us} T. Quincius Flaminius.
reports, that there was such a noyce made by the Grecians after their
liberty was restored, that the birds of the air that flew over them were
seen to fall down, by reason that the air divided by their cry, was made so
thin, that there was no firmitie, or strength in it to bear them up. And let
this suffice for thonder, whom lyghtnyng succeadeth in treaty, that seildome
is from it in nature.

Of Lyghtninge.
Among the diverse kinds of lightning, Lightnig
which wryters in this knowledge do number, we shall entreat only of four
kinds, yet so, that under these four, all the rest may be comprehended. The
names we must borrow of the latin tongue. The first is Fulgetrum, The second
Coruscatio, the third Fulgur the fourth, Fulmen. Fulgetiu, Coruscatio, Fulgur,
Ful^


Of Fulgetrum.
FVlgetrum we cal that kind of lightening which is seen on summer nights and
eueninges, Fulgetru
after a whote day. The generation hereof is such, when many thynn, light,
and whote Exhalations, by the immoderate heate, have ben drawn up from the
earth, and by the absence of the sun, be destitute of ye force, whereby they
should have been drawn further upward, yet something ascending by their own
nature, in that they be light and whote they meat with the cold, either of the
night in the lowest region, or else of the air in the middle region, so by
resistance of cotraries (as it hath been oft before rehearsed) they are beaten
back, and with the vehement moving set on fire. This lightning commonly goes
out in the air, terrible to behold, not hurtful to any thig. Except somtim
when the matter of it is, earthy gross, being stricken down to the earth, it
blasts corn, and grass, with other small hurt. Sometime it sets a barn
or thanked house on fyere. The colour of this lightninge, The collor of this
lightning.
as of all other, is diverse, partly according to the matter, partly according
to the light. If the matter be thynne, it is white, if the substance be
gross, it is ruddy, like flames of fire, in great light as in the day it
appears white, in the night, ruddy, yet sometime in the day time, we may see
it yellow, which is a token that the matter is woderfull thick and gross.
Old wives are, wont to say that no night in the year, except one passes
without lyghtnynge, but that is as true as the rest of their tales, whereof
they have great store.

Of Coruscation.
COruscation is a glistering of fire, Coruscation.
rather then fire in dead, and a glymmerynge of lightning, rather then
lightning it self. which is ij. manner of ways, one way, when clouds yt be
lower then the upper part of the earth, without the compass of our sight, are
inflamed, the reflection of that flame, is cast up into our sight appearing in
all points like lightning, saving that the air where it appears is so
clear, that we are persuaded no lightning can be there caused. Another way, is
when there be thycke clouds over us, and commonly a double order of clouds,
one above an other, if lightninge or any other inflammatio be in ye upper part
of these clouds, the light of them pierces through the lower parts, as through
a glass, and so appears as though it lyghtned, when perhaps it did lighten
in dead, yet that which we saw, was but the shadow thereof. And this is
often without thonder.

Of Fulgur.
FVlgur is that kind of lightning which follows thonder, Fulgur.
whereof we have spoken before. For when that violent Exhalation breaks
forth, making a noyce as it beats against the sides of the cloud, with
the same violence, it is set on fire, and casts a great lyghte, which is
seen, far and near. And although the lyghtnyng appear unto us, a good
preaty while before the thonder clap be harde, The lightening is not before
the thond. though it seem so.
yet is it not caused before the noyce if any thonder at all do follow, but
either is after it or with it. Wherefore that we see it, before we hear the
thoder, may be ascribed, either to the quickness of our sight, that prevents
ye hearing, or else to the swyft mouinge of the fire and the light thereof, to
our eyes, Sight prevents hearing.
and the slow mouynge of the soud unto our ears and hearing. These three
kinds of lyghtnynges, are more fearful then hurteful, but the fourth seldom
passes without some damage doing.

Of the fourth kind called Fulmen
THe most dangerus, violent, hurtful, kind of lightning is called Fulmen,
whose generation is such, as follows. What time, a whote Exhalation, is
enclosed in a cloud, and breaking the same, bursts forth, it is set on
fire, and with wonderful great force stricken down toward the earth: The
crack of thonder, that is made when this lightening breaks out, is sudden,
short, and great, like the sound of a gone. And often times a great stoone
is blown out, with it, which they call the thonder bolt, The thonderbolt caste
out of the clouds.
which is made on this manner. In the Exhalation, which is gathered out of the
earth, is much earthy matter, with clotterynge together by moisture, being
clammy by nature, consistynge of brymstone and other metallycke substance, by
the excessive heate, is hardened as a brycke is in the fyere, and with the
mighty force of the Exhalation, strongly cast toward the earth, and
stryketh down steples, and high buildings of stoone, and of would, passes
through them and sets them on fire, it cleueth trees and sets them on
fire, and the stronger the thing be that resists it, the more harm it doth
to it. Strongest things are most hurt of lightening.
It is sharpe pointed at one end, and thycke at the other end, which is
caused by reason, that the moyster part, as heauyer, goes to the bottom of
it. So is the top small, and the bottom thick.

Men write that the thonderbolt goes never above five foot deep, when it
falls upon the earth, How deep thoder bolt goes into the earth.
which stands with reason, both because the strength of it is weakened,
before it com so near the ground, and also, because the continual thickness of
the earth, breaks the force, were it never so great.

Both Aristotle, Seneca and Plinius, Aristot. Plinius. Seneca.
divide this lightning into three kinds.

Of the first.
THe first is dry, which burns not, Dry lightening.
to be felt but divides, and pierces with wonderful swyftnes. For being
subtyle and pure, it passes through the pores of any thing, be they never so
small, and such things, as give place unto it, it hurts not, but such
things as resists, it divides and perseth. For it will melt money in men's
purses, the purses being whole, vnharmed. Yea, it will melt a sword in the
scabbard, Money molten in mes purses swerds in scabberds
and not hurt the scabberd at al. A wine vessel it will cleave, and yet the
wine shall be so dull, that by the space of three days it will not run out. It
will hurt a mans hand and not his glove. It will burn a mans bones within him
to ashes, and yet his skin and flesh shall appear fair, as though nothing
had come to him. Yea otherwhyle the whole man in the momet of an howre,
shall be burned to ashes, where as his clothes, shall not seem to have been
touched. It will also kill the child in the mothers belly, not hurt the
mother. And all because the matter is very subtyle, and thin, burning, and
passing through whatsoever it be, that will not give it free passage.

Of the second kind.
THe second kind is moyste, and because it is very thin, Moist lightninge.
it burns not to ashes, but only blasts, or scorches trees, corn, and
grass: and by reason of the moistnes, Why it makes black.
it makes all things black, that it comes near, as moyste wood burning, is
smokye and makes things near it to be black smoky.

Of the third kind.
THe third kind is most like our come fire, Gross lightning.
that we have here on the earth of gross and earthly substance, wherefore it
leaves a prynte where it hath been, or else consumes it into ashes, if it be
such a body as wylbe burned with fire.

Of the maruayls of Lightening and their causes.
BEside the wonderful effects of lightning, The marvels of lightning
that have been already remembered, there be many other which hereafter ensue,
with the reason and causes unto them belonging, as thus.

The nature of lightning is, Light poisons.
to poison beasts that are stricken therewith, as though they had been bytten
by a serpent. The cause of this is, that the matter of lightning, is much
infected with brymstone, and other poisonous metallike substances, which will
poison the rather in lightening, because it is thin gives the passage into
every part of the body. It is notable, that Seneca writes, howe wine vessels
of wood being burned with lightning, Senecae. Wine not ronning the vessels
being broken.
the wine wold stand styll, and not run out, the reason hereof, is the
swyfte alteration and change, whereby also, all the clammynes of the wine, is
drawn to the outward most part, and so keeps in the wine, as in a skin,
that by the space of three days, it will not run. It will also poison wine,
in so much that they which drink thereof, shall either be mad or dye of
it. The cause hereof was set forth before.

Lightning that strikes a poysenous beast purges it from the poison,
Lightnig purges a poisonous beast.
in so much that it causes a serpent or snake which it kills, to bread
worms, which otherwise it would not do, but being purged from the natural
poison by the swyfte percyng of the lightning: nothing lets, but that it may
bread worms, A snake breads no worms.
as all other corrupt flesh will do.

If lightning strike one that sleeps, it opens his eyes, and of one that
wakes, it shytteth the eyes. Lightnig opens his eyes that sleeps closes
his that wakes.
The cause is this, that it wakes him that sleeps, and kills him before he
can close his eyes again. And him that wakes, it so amaseth, that he wynketh,
as he will do at any sudden chaunse, so he dies before he can open his eyes
again.

All living things, turn their face toward the stroke of the lyghtenyng,
Living things turn their face toward lightning.
because it is their nature, to turn their head if any thig com sodely behind
them. The rest that have their face toward it, when it comes, never turn
before they be killed.

The reason why it kills the child in the mothers womb, not hurtynge the
mother, is the tenderness of the one, and the strength of the other, when the
lightening is not vehement, otherwise both should dye together.

Sometime lightening burns only the garments, Garments burnt the body
unhurt.
shoes, or hear of me, not hurtynge their bodies, and then the Exhalation is
nothing vehement. Some time it kills a man there apereth no wound without,
neither any hurt within, no not so much as any sign of burning: for then
the Exhalation which being kindled is called lightning is woderfull subtle
and thin, so swiftly passing through that it leaves no mark or token
behind it.

They that behold the lightening, are either made blind, or their face
swells, or else become lepers, Lightning causes blindness swelling or leprosy
for that fyery Exhalation, received into the pores of their face and eyes,
makes their face to swell, and break out into a leprosy, and also dries up
the Christalline humour of their eyes, so that consequetly they must needs be
blind.

Eutropius shows, Eutropius.
that the same day in which Marcus Tullius Cicero, M. Tullius Cicero.
was borne, a certain virgin of Rome riding into Apulia, Apulia.
was stricken with lightening, so that all her garments being taken from her
without any rendinge, she lay stark naked, the lasing of her breast being
undone, her hose garters untied: yea, her bracelettes collers and rings, being
also loosed from her. Likewise her horse lay dead with his bridle and girtes
untied.

The places of them that are burnt with lightning are colder then the rest of
their bodies, The woudes of lightning cold
other because the greater heat draws away the lesser, or else because, that
by the great violence the vital heate is quyghte extinguished in that place.

The sea Calfe is never hurt with lightening, Sea calfe not hurt with
lightening.
wherefore the Emperors tents, were wont to be covered with their skins.

The Bay trees, and box trees, are never or seldom stryke with lightning.
Baize box seldom hurt with lightning.
The cause of these may be, the hardness of their skin, which hath so few
pore holes, that the Exhalation can not enter into them.

The eagle also among fowls is not stricken with lightening, wherefore the
Poets fain, that the Eagle carries Iupiters armur, The Eagle Iupiters harnes
bearer
which is lightning. The reason may be the thickness and drienes of her
feathers, which will not be kindled with so swift a fire.

Of storm wyndes.
A Storm wind, Storm wyndes.
is a thycke Exhalatio violently moved out of a cloud without inflammation or
burning. The matter of this storm, is all one with ye matter of lightening,
that hath been spoken of: namely it is an Exhalation very what and dry, and
also gross and thycke, so that it will easily be set on fire, but the it hath
another name, other effects

The form or manner of the generation is such. When abondance of that kind of
Exhalation is gathered together, within a cloud, which needs will have one
way out or other: it breaks the cloud, causes thonder, as it hath been
tought before, but if the matter be very thick, and the cloud somewhat
thynne, then doth it not rede the cloud, but falling down, bears the
cloud before it, and so is carried as an arrow out of a bow. It doth always
go before a great soden showere, for when the cloud is broken, the water
must needs fall down. Also it is so gross, and so thick, that it darkens
the air, and makes all the lowest region of the air, to be in manner as a
dark smokye cloud. It causes tempest in the Sea, and wonderful great
danger to them that bear sail, whom if it overtake, it brings to utter
destruction. So soden it is, that it can not be resisted with sodeyn help. So
violent it is, that feeble force canne not withstand it. Finally, it is so
troublesome with thonder, lyghtnynge, rain and blast, besides these
darkness and cold, that it would make men, at so near a pynche to be at
their wits ends, if they wear not accustomed to such tumultuous tempest.
Wherefore it wear profitable, to declare the signs that go before it, to the
end, men might beware of it. But they are so come to other tempests, that
either they are known well enough, or else being never so well known, in a
seldom calamytie they would little be feared. The Sea ships subject to
more danger, have more help if it be used in time, but no signs foreknowen,
can profit the dweller of the land, to keep his house from ruin, except it
wear to save his life from the fall of this mansion. The soden violence of
this tempest to him, is more seldom times, but more incurable when it comes
then to the Mariner, who has some aid to look for, by his coming, the
other if he escape with his life, may comfort him self, that he was near a
great danger, cast with him self to build up his house again.

Of whyrle wyndes.
A Whirlewinde, Whirl wyndes.
is a wind breaking out of a cloud, rolling or wynding round about,
ouerthrowying that which stands near it, and that which comes before it,
carrying it with him a loft in the air.

It differs from a storm wind in three points.

First in the matter which is less in quantity, and of thinner substance.

Secondly in the moving, which is circulare wyndyng about, where as the storm
blows a slope and sydelonges. Also a whyrlewynde in the mouinge divides not
it self abroad, and blows dyrectly as the storm doth.

And thirdly in the manner of the generatio, for a storm doth always come out
of one cloud, but a whyrlewynde some time is caused by means of two contrary
wyndes that meet together. In like manner, as we see in the streets of cities,
where the wind is beaten back from two walls, meeting in the myddest of the
streate, there is made a little whyrlewynde, which whiskynge round about takes
up the dust, or straws and blows it about after the very similitude of the
great fearful whirl wind. The reason of the going about, is this, that when
the walls beat back the wind from them, which abounds in that place, and
those wyndes, when they meet by reason of equal force on both sides, can
neither drive one ye other back again, nor yet pass through one ye other: it
must needs be, that they must both seek a way on the side at once, and
consequently, be carried round about, the one as it were pursuing the other,
until there be space enough in the air, ye they may be parted asonder.

The matter of a whyrlewynde, is not much differing from the matter of storm
and lightening, that is an Exhalation whote and dry, breaking out of a cloud,
in diverse parts of it, which causes the blowing about* also it is caused as
it hath been said, by two or more wyndes, blowing from diverse places, which
may be of particular causes yt hath been shows before in the chapter of
wyndes. The troubles of whirlewyndes.
This tempest is noisome to man and beast, Sea and land, things living, and
life lacking. For it will take up both men and beasts, stones and cloddes of
earth, which when it hath borne a great way will not be so curtues as to
set them down again, but neglygently lets them fall from a great height,
or else violently throws them down to the earth.

It breaks trees wyndyng them about and pulling them up by the roots. It
turns about a ship and brooseth it in peaces wc other mischiefs beside.

Of the fired whirl wind.
Sometime a whirlewynde, is set on fire within the cloud, Fyered whyrlewynde.
and then breaking forth, flies round like a great cartewhyle, terrible to
behold, burning and ouerthrowynge all dry things, that it comes near, as
houses, woods, corn, grass, and whatsoever else stands in the way.

It differs not from a whirlwind, saving that it is kindled set on fire, so
apearing, else the generation of both is called one.

Of Circles.
THe Circle called Halon, is a garland of diverse colours that is seen about
the sun, the Moon, or any other sterre specially about Iupiter or Venus,
Circles about the sun, the moon other sters Iupiter Venus Planetes.
for their great bryghtnes. It is called of the Greeks a compassed plate, of
the Latines a crown or garland.

The matter wherein it is made, is a cloud of equal thickness, or thinnes,
coming directly under ye body of the sun, the Moon, or other sterres, into
which the light of the heavenly body is received, and so appears round,
because the sterre is round, or as a stoone caste into the water, Circles in
the water
makes many round circles, dilatyng in breadth, until the violence of the
moving is ended: so is it in the air the light beams percynge it, causes
broad Circles to be delated, The colours of circles.
which appear whyght, purple, black, red, green, blew, and other collors,
according to the disposition of ye clouds matter. The cause of such colours,
is showed before in the peculiar treaty of colours.

This circle is oftener seen about the Moon, then about the Sun, because the
heate of the Sun draws the vapors to high, where it can not be made. Also,
because the night is a more quiet time then the day from wind, it is more
often in the night, the in the day. Syldome about other sterres, because their
light beams are to weak often to perse a cloud, yet oftner about small sters
then the Sun, because the light of ye Sun, pierces the cloud more
forcively, then that this Halon can many times be cause.

Otherwhyles it is seen about a candle, Circles about a cadle.
which must be in a very thick and gross air, of such proportionate
thickness, that it may receive the light as the cloud doth fro the sterres, as
in smoky places, or whotehouses.

This kind of Circle, is sometimes like a raynbowe, saving that it is a whole
circle, unless the sterre under which it is caused, be not all risen, or else
the cloud in which it is seen be not al come under the sterre, or after it
hath come under some part thereof be dissolved from the rest.

These Circles be signs of tempest, the signs of these circles.
and wyndes, as wytnesse both Virgil, and Aratus. Virgilius Aratus. Poets.


The wind shall blow from that quarter, where the circle first begins to
break. The cause whereof is this, that the circle is broken, by the wind that
is above, which is not yet come down towards us, but by this effect above,
we may gather both that it will come, and also from what quarter.

A great Circle about the Moon, betokens great cold and frost to follow
after. Sign of frost.


But if it vanyshe away and be dissolved altogether, it is a sign of fair
weather. Sign of fair weather.


If it be brooken in many parts, it signifies tempest. Sign of tempest.


If it wax altogether thicker, darker it is a fore warning of rain. Sign of
rain.


One alone after Ptolomee, Ptolome{us}.
pure and white, vanyshing away by little little, is a token of fair weather.
Sign of fair weather.


Two or three at once, portendeth tempest, if they be ruddy, they show wind
to come, and toward snow, they seem as it were kroken and rockye.

Being dark or dymme, Sign of snow.
they signify all these forsayde events, with more force and abundance, it
is oftener caused in Autumn, and spring then in winter or summer, the cause is
the temperatnes of the time.

The cause why it appears sometime greater, and sometime lesser, is in the
qualititie of the matter, which as it is gross, or thynne, will more or less
be dilated, and stretched abroad, and also as some will have it, of the
weakness of men's sight. Of which Aristotle brings an example in one Antipho,
Arist. Antipho.
which did always see his own image before him in the air, as in a glass,
which he affirms to have been for the weakness of his sight beams, that
could not pearce the air, so that they wear reflected again to him self.

And thus much for Halone and the causes, signs, or tokens of it.

Of the Raynbowe.
THe Raynbowe, Rainbow
is the aparition of certain colours in a cloud opposite against the sun,
in fashion of half a Circle. Possidonius said, Possidonius.
it was the suns looking glass, wherein his image was represented, and that
the blew colloured, was the proper colour of the cloud, the red of the
sun, all the other colours of commixtion.

It differs manifoldly from Halone, for the raynbowe is always opposite
against the sun, but Halone is directly under it.

They differ not only in place, but also in fashion, the raynbowe, is but
half a Circle, the Halon is a whole Circle.

Likewise they vary in colloure, for the raynebowe is more dymme and of purple
colour, the Halone whyter and brighter.

Also in continuance, for the raynebowe may continue, longer, then Halone.

The image of the raynbowe may be seen on a wall, ye sun striking through a
six pointed stoone, called Iris, a precious stone called iris.
or any other Crystal of the same fashion, also through some glass window.

Halone is seen about candelles, in smoky places, as are bathes kychenes.

The manner of the generation of the raynbowe is such, there is opposite
against the sun, a thycke watery cloud, which is already resolved into
dewy drops of rain, as (for a gross similitude) is seen on the potlidde
when the water in the vessel hath sodden, A similitude.
or is very whote, the lydde wylbe al full of small drops of water, which
come fro the water in the vessel, first by heat resolved into smoke, after
when it cannot go at large, it is resolved again. Wherefore upon such a
cloud, the sun beams strykynge, as upon a smooth glass, do express the
image of ye sun unperfectly, for the great distace. Or else the sun beams,
strike into an hollow cloud, where they are refracted or broken, and so comes
to the eyes of him ye beholds the raynbowe.

The similitude thereof is seen, Similitude of the raynbowe.
when men sail or row in boats, the sun shines upon the water, which
casts on the vessels side, the colours image of the raynbowe.

Likewise water in an urinal hold against the sun, receives the light
shows colours on the wall.

There be two kinds of rainbowes, one of the sun, Rainbow of the sun
another of the Moon, Rainbow of the Moon.
the one by day, the other by night, the raynbowe of the sun often, but of
the Moon very seldom, in so much that it can be but twyse at the most, in
fifty years, and that when the Moon, is in the East or West, full in perfect
opposition. It hath not been many times seen sense the writing of histories,
yet some times and for the rareness, is take for a great wonder. Yet is it in
colour nothing so beutiful, as the suns, but for the most part, whight, as
milk, other diversities of colours are scant perceived. When it appears, it
is said to signify tempest.

The time of the raynbowe, is often after the point of Autumn, both for the
placing of the sun in competent lownes, and also for abundance of matters,
seldom or never is the raynbowe seen about the midst of summer.

There may be many raynbowes at one time, yet commenly but one principal, of
which the rest are but shadows, and images, the second shadow of the first,
the third of the second, as appear by placing of their colours.

It remains to show why it is but half a circle, or less, neuermore, and
why the whole cloud receives not the same colours, that the raynbowe hath.
The cause of the first is, because the center, or mydle point of the raynbowe,
that is Diametrally apposite to the center of the same, is always either in
the Horrizon (that is the circle cutting of our sight of heaven by the earth)
or under it. The cause why the whole cloud is not colloured, is because that
in the myddest the beams as strong, perse through, but on the edges where
they are weaker, they are reflected or refracted.

Now for so much, as God made the raynbowe a sign and Sacrament of his
promise, some think it was never seen before the floude. Their reason may be
this, that the earth after the first creation was then so fruitful, that it
neaded none, or very little rain, so that such dark clouds, wear not often
gathered, the fruitful ground not so easily remitting his moisture, that then
was fat and clammye, harde to be drawn up: so it might be that there was no
raynbowe before, as we cannot find that ever it rayned before. But whether it
were or not, it is certain, that then it became a Sacrament, where as it was
none before, which when we behold, it behooves us to remember, ye truth of
God in all his promyses, to his glory and our comfort.

The milk way called of some the way to saint Iames and Watlyng streate.
THe milk way, is a white circle seen in a clear night, the white circle scene
in the night.
as it were in the firmament, passing by the signs of Sagittarius and Gemini.

The cause thereof, is not agreed upon among Philosophers, whose opinions I
thought best to report, before I come to the most probable causes.

First of all Pithagoras, Pithagoras.
is charged we a Poetical fable, as though it had been caused by reason that
the sun did once run out of his pathway, and burned this part whereof it
looks white.

Other as Anaxagoras and Democritus, Anaxagoras, Democritus.
said, that it was the light of certain sterres, shining by them selves, of
their own light, which in the absence of the sun, might be seen. But this
opinion is also false, for the sterres have no light of them selves, but of the
sun, also if it were so, it should apear about other sterrs,

Democritus is also reported to have said, that it was nothing else but
innumerable little stars, which with their confuse light, caused that
whytnes, to this opinio, Cordanus
Cardane seems to subscribe.

The Poets have four fables of it, one that Phaeton, Phaeton.
which on a time guided the Chariot of the sun, wandering out of the way, did
burn ye place, wherefore of Iupiter he was stricken down with lyghtnyng.

The second, that it is the high street in heaven, that goes straight to
Iupiters palace, Ouid. Meta. Pr.
and both sides of it, the come sort of Gods do dwell.

The third, that Hebe, Hebe.
one which was Iupiters Cupbearer, on a time, stobled at a star, and shed
the wine or milk, that was in the cup, which colloured that part of heaven
to this day, wherefore she was pout out of her office.

The fourth, that Apollo stood there to fight against the Giantes, Apollo.
which Iupiter made to appear, for a perpetual memory.

Theophrastus a Philosopher affirmed, that it was ye joining together,
Theophrastus.
or seem of the two half globes, which made it appear more light in that
place then in other.

Other said, it was the reflection of the shining light of fire, or sterre
light, as it is seen in a glass, but then it should be moveable.

Diodorus, Diodorus
affirmed, that it was heavenly fire, condensede or made thick, into a circle,
so became visible, whereas the rest for the purenes, clearness, and thinnes,
could not be seen.

Possidonius whose mind to many seems very reasonable, Possidonius.
said: it is the infusion of the heate of sterres, which therefore is in a
circle, contrary to the Zodiake, Zodiake.
(out of which the sun never wanders) because it might temper the whole
compass with vital and lively heate. Although in my mind he hath rather
expressed the final cause, then the efficient.

Aristotles opinio is, Arist.
that it should be ye beams of a great circle, which is caused by a cloud or
Exhalation drawn up by those sterres, which be called Sporades Sporades.
This opinion of Aristotles is myslyked of most men, that have travailed in
this science and worthily. For if it were of the nature of elements, as
Exhalations are, it would be at length consumed. But this circle never
corrupts, therefore it is not of Exhalatios. Also it nether increases or
diminishes, which is a plain proof, that it consists not of elemental
matter. Although Aristotle seem to make a double circle, one celestial,
another elemental.

The last opinio is of them that say, it is of the nature of heaven, thycker in
substance then other parts of heaven be, having some likeness to the substance
of the Moon, which being lightened by ye same, as al ye stars be, apereth
whight. And this opinio I take to be ye most probable, because that sentence of
sterrelight seems not so reasonable to be only in that place, and not else
where.

The final cause of this milkewhyte circle, hath been already touched in the
opinion of Possidonius, Possidoni{us}
whereunto also in Plinius in the xviij. book xxix. chapter of his natural
history agrees, Plinius.
affirming yt it is very profitable, for the generation frutefull increase of
things that grow on the earth. The breadth of this circle
The Mathematicians that have measured ye breadth thereof, affirm that toward
the north it passes over the eclipticall lyne of the ninth sphere, fro the
xviij. degree of Gemini unto the second degree of Cancer which is xiij.
degrees, toward the South, fro the viij. degree of Sagittarius to the xiij.
degree of the same sign, because it is there divided into ij. branches (as may
easly be seen in a clear might) it reaches fro the xxiiij. of Sagittarius to
the second degree of Capricorne.

This circle if it be of the nature of heaven, is unproperly placed among
Meteores or impressions, but because of Aristotles mind, who will have it to
be an impression kendled, their opinion which think it proceadeth of ye light
of sterres it is not without good cause in this place entreated of.

Of beams or streams of light appearing through a cloud.
There is yet another kind of impressio caused by the beams of the sun,
Beams or streams.
stricken through a watery cloud, being of unequal thines, ye is thinner in one
part the in another, so ye it cannot receive the beams in any other form, the
ye they appear direct or slope downward, of diverse collors, ye same ye are ye
collors of ye raynbow, though not so euidet, because ye reflection is not so
strong. They vary in colours, some are more purple, or ruddy, when the cloud
is thicker some yellow whitish when the cloud is thinner, so other collors are
caused likewise, whereof you may read the proper causes in the colours of
clouds and other like parts of this treatise. The common people cal it the
desceding of the holy ghost, or our Ladies Assumption, because these thing are
painted after such a sort. Other say that it is rain, stryking down in
another place, as though they could see the drops falling. And they are not
altogether deceived, but in the time, for soon after it will rain, because
this impression appears out of a watery cloud. They are called by diverse
names, as rods, wands, coardes of tents, unto which they are not much
unlike, staves and little pyllers, when they seem greater and thicker, many
being joined together. The rain bow, the circles and these lyghtbeames, are
all of one manner of generation, in so much that if you divide the circle, it
shall be a raynbowe, if you draw it straight, in length, it makes streams or
beams. Herein they agree, namely in form and matter, but they differ in
outward form, which we may call fashion, as the one is round, the other half
round, the third direct, straight or falling a slope. Also they differ in
place, about which they stand, for streams are only about the sun,
raynbowes about the son often, and seldom about the Moon, but circles both
about the sun and the Moon, and also about any other of all the sterres, yet
rather and oftener about bright sterres. To make an end of these streams,
they appear diversely, after the fashion and place wherein the cloud hangs in
respect of the sun.

For some time they are seen only in the edge of a cloud, all the breadth of
that cloud. Sometime through the midst of a cloud, being thynner there, then
in other parts, and then they are spread round about like a tent or pauilon
used in war. They are most commenly seen in such times, as there is great
abundance of rain, which they, by their apparition do signify not yet to
be ended. And thus much concerning direct light beams called rods c.

Of many Sons.
Many Suns at once.
IT is strange and marvelous to behold, the lykelyhode of that, which
Alexander the great, Alexander the great.
sending word to Darius, Darius.
said to be impossible, that two sons should rule the world. But
oftentimes, me have seen, as they thought in the firmament, not only two
sons, but oftener three suns, and many more in number, though not so often
appearing. These how wonderful soever they appear, proceade of a natural
cause, which we will endeavour to express. They are nothing else but Idols, or
Images of the sun, represented in an equal smooth and watery cloud, placed
on the side of the sun, sometime on both sides, into which the sun beams
being received as in a glass, express ye likeness of fashion light, that is in
the sun, appearing as though there were many suns, where as in dede there
is but one, all the rest are images. This thick watery cloud, is not said to
be under the sun, for then it would make the circles called crowns or
garlonds, it is not opposite to the sun, for the wold it make the rainbow, but
it is said to be on the side, where the ima{per}t may be best represented. Also
it may not be to far of* for then the beams will be to feeble to be reflected
neither yet to near, for if it so be the sun will disperse it. but in a
copetent middle distance, for so representation of many suns is caused.

They are most often seen, in the morning evening, about the rising or going
down of the sun, seldom at noonee time, or about the midst of the day,
because the heat will soon dissolve the. Yet hath there been some seen, which
began in the morning, continued all the day long, unto the evening. Many small
suns like stars Similitude.
Sometimes there appear many little suns, like unto little stars, which are
caused after the same sort, as we do see a mans face, to be expressed in all
the pieces of a broke glass. So when the cloud hath many separations, there
appear many suns, on one side of the true sun, sometimes great, and
sometimes little, as the parts of the cloud separated are in quantity.

They do naturally betoken tempest, and rain, The significatio of many
suns.
to follow because they can not appear, but in a watery disposition of the
air.

Also if they appear on the Southside of the sun they signify a greater
tempest then if they appear on the Northsyde. The reason is alleged, because
ye Southern vapor is sooner resolved into water, then is the Northern.

For a supernatural signification, they have often times been noted to have
portended, the contention of Princes for kingdoms. As not lunge before the
contention of Galba, Otho, and Vitellius, Galba, Otho, and Vitellius
for the Empire of Rome, there appeared three suns. Also of late toward the
slaughter of Lewes king of Hongary, were seen three sons, betokening three
princes that contended for the kyngdo, namely Ferdinando now Emperor, Iohn
Vayuode, and the great Turk.

Of many Moons.
AFter the treaty of many suns, if wear not harde for any man, without
farther instruction to know the natural cause of many Moons. Many Moons.
For they are likewise Images of the Moon, represented in an equal cloud,
which is watery, smothe, and polyshed, even like a glass. Some call the (as
Plinius says) night suns, Plinius.
because they joined with the light of the true Moon, give a great shynning
light, to drive away the shadow and darkness of the night.

It were superfluous to write, more of their causes, or effects, which are al
one with those, that have been declared of the suns.

It may be doubted why the other stars do not likewise express their image,
Why other sterrs are not so represented.
in watery clouds, and so the nober of them to our sight should be multiplied:
it may be answered, that their light or beams, are to feeble, weak to
express any such similitude or likeness in the watery clouds. For although
they have garlands, or circles, about them, that are caused in a vapor, that
is under them: yet it is manifest, that this apparition hath not need of so
strong a light, as is required to prynt ye images of them in the clouds.
Again the garlands are direct under, and therefore apter to receive such
apparition.

It may be again objected that the stars have their image perfectly and
sufficiently expressed in glasses, Obiectio.
here on the earth, yea, and at the day time, when their light is either none or
most feeble, weak, as we see it is used at mid-sommer to behold that great
star called Sirius, Syrius a great star seen at noone in Summer.
in a glass even at noone days.

Also we see every night, the image of the stars in calm and quiet standing
waters, then what should let, but that their images might also be expressed in
watery clouds.

Hereto may be answered, An answer.
that the let is in the cloud, which is neither so harde as is the glass, nor
yet so continual as the water, but consists of innumerable small drops, so
that except the light of the stars were stronger, it can in the express no
uniform images of them, as it doth in glasses, and in the water.
Notwithstanding, in wryters of wonders, we read some such like thing sometime
to have chaunsed.

There has been often seen many suns, in the day time, and after the
sun setting, at the rising of the full Moon, there have appeared many
Moons, which was by this means that the same cloud, that received the sun
beams, in the morning, tarried in the same place, at ye Moons rising, was
ready also to receive her image.

Of wonderful apparitions.
WE will close this book, Wonderful aparitions.
with a brief declaration of the natural causes, of many things, that are seen
in yt air, very wonderful strange to behold, which in these later years,
have been often seen and beheld, to the great admiration of all men, not
without the singular providence of God, to forewarn us of many dangers, that
hang over us, in these most perilous times.

The aparition of which, as it is most wonderful, so the searching of the
cause, to us is most harde difficult. A great deal the rather, because no ma
hath hitherto enterprised (to my knowledge) to seek out any cause of them, but
all men have taken them as immediate miracles, without any natural mean or
cause to procure them.

And I truly, do acknowledge yt they are sent of God as wonderful signs, to
declare his power, move us to amedement of life, in dede miraculus, but not yet
so, yt they want a natural cause. For if they be well weighed considered, it is
not harde to find, yt they differ much fro such miracles, as are recorded in ye
scripture, and admitted of divines. So that, as I ahhorre the opinio of
Epicures, to think that such things come by chance, but rather by ye
determined purpose of gods providence: so I consent not with them, that suppose
when any thing is derived from any natural cause, God the chief and best
cause of al things is excluded.

Some of these wonderful apparitions consist of circles and rainbowes, of
diverse fashions placings, as one with in another, the edge of one touching
another, on dividing or going through another, with like placing of small
circles, about great circles, or parts of small circles, some with the ends
upward, some downward, some aside, some across, but all for the most part in
uniform order constituted or placed, for the order of them pleasant to
behold, but for the strangeness somewhat fearful. Such a like apparition, is
made with the sunns or Moons images, joined unto these circles, set also in
good uniform order.

The cause of these is the meting together, of all those several causes, that
make the circles, rain bowees, streams and images of the sun or moon, which
joined altogether, make the wonderful sight of strange raynbowes, positions of
circles, crosses, diverse lights, which perteyne to the knowledge of Optice
and Catroptice, Optice Catroptice.
that teach howe by diverse refractios and reflectios of beams, such visions
are caused. So that he, which will know howe they are generated, must return
unto the several treatyses of raynbowes, circles, streams, images, of the
sun or Moon, and if in the he find not knowledge sufficient, to instruct
him, I must send him to the demonstrations of perspective, where he shall want
nothing.

Another sort of them, no less often beheld within these few years, then ye
former, but a great deal more strange and wonderful to look upon, are the
sights of armies fighting, in the air, of Castles, Cities, and Towns, with
whole countries, having in them hills, valies, ryuers, woods, also beasts,
me, and fowls, monsters, of which there are no such kinds on the earth, and
fynally all manner of things and actions, that are on the earth, as burialles,
processions, judgements, combats, men, women, children, horses, crowns, arm
of certain noble men, contries, weapons of all sorts, sometimes stars,
angels, as they are painted with the image of Christ crucified, besieging of
castles and towns, many things and gesturs done by men or beasts, the very
similitude of persons known to the beholders, as of late, was seen the very
image of the Emperor Charles, insomuch that they which beheld it, put of
their caps, thinking verily it had been he, of Iho Frederick prince Elector
of Saxon, who ye time was prisoner with theperour. Also the image of small
crosses, which hath ben not only in the air, but also on the earth, on men's
apparel, on dishes, platters, pots, al other things so that the Iewes have
been full angry, that they could neither wash, nor rub them out of their
aparell. In Germany, also fyers and many such things, as it were long
stories, seen in the air.

All these woderfull aparitions, may be caused two manner of ways, the one
artificially, the other naturally. Artificially by certain glasses, and
instruments made according to a secret part of that knowledge which is called
Catoptrice, Catoptrice
and so peradventure some of them have been caused, but the most part
doubtless naturally, when the disposition of the air, hath been such, that
it hath received the image of many things placed and done on the earth. And
because it is apt to receive diverse images, as well in one place as in
another, these monstrous forms and strange actions, or stories proceade of
the ioyninge of diverse forms and actions, as if two histories, were
confusely painted in one, the whole picture would be strange or (as the Poet
says,) if a painter to a mans head, should set a horses neck, Horatius
after diverse feathers. Sometimes also, one image is multiplied in the air,
into many or infinite, as are letters crosses, which fill all the air, even
beneathe. And the light of the sun, received into little parts, makes to
appear, as it were many small stars. Let this suffice, concerning these
wonderful apparitions: once again admonishing the Reader, though I have
enterprised to declare these by natural reason, yet believing yt not so much as
on sparrow falls to ye ground, without Gods providence, I do also
acknowledge Gods providence brings these to pass, to such end as before I
have showed, using these causes, as means and instruments to do them.

The fourth book of watery impressions.
THose be watery impressions, that consist most of water. In ye treaty of the,
are wont to be handled, these impressios, namely clouds, rain, dew, whore
frost, hayle, snow, springes, ryuers and the great sea it self.

Of clouds.
A Cloud is a vapor cold and moyste, Clouds.
drawn out of the earth, or waters by the heate of the sun, into the mydle
region of the air, where by cold it is so knit together, that it hangs
until either ye weight or some resolution cause it to fall down.

The place wherein the clouds do hang is said to be in the middle region of
the air, because men see it is necessary that there should be a cold which
should make those vapors so gross, and thycke, which for the most part are
drawn so thin, from the earth, that they are invisible, as the aier is. And
although they are known oftentime as Aristotle wytnesseth, Arist.
to be in the lowest region of the air, near to the earth, in so much that
sometimes, they fall down to the earth, with great noise, to ye great fear of
men and no less loss and danger. Yet may it be reasonably thought, that
these clouds were generated in ye middle region of the air, far distant from
the earth, which by their heuines do by little and little sink down, lower
into ye lowest region, and sometimes also fall down to the earth.

The come opinion is, the height of the clouds.
that they go not higher then nyne mile, which because it leans to no
reason is uncertain.

Albertus Magnus, Albert Magnus.
whose reason also is to be doubted of, affirms, that the clouds do scarce
exceade three mile in height, when they are highest.

And some let not to say, that oftentimes they ascend not past the half of
one mile, in height.

Again other pretending to find out the truth by Geometical demonstrations,
make it above fifty mile to the place where the generation of clouds is

Howe these men take the distance from the earth, it is uncertain. whether
that they assign ye least distance, mean it from the highest part of the
earth, as are hill tops, or from the come plain. Again, whether they yt
assign the highest distance to be from the lowest valleys, of the earth, or
from the hylle tops.

The reason before showed, moves me to think that the most usual come
generation, I mean the condensation or making thick of these thin vapors,
into clouds is in the middle region of the air. But for the distance of the
clouds, when they be generated I think they be sometime nine mile, sometime in.
mile, sometime half a mile, sometime less then a quarter of a mile from the
earth.

Of Mists.
THere be two kinds of mists, Mists.
ye one ascending, the other descending.

That which ascends, goes up out of the water, or ye earth as smoke, but
doth not comenly spread over all other parts, it is seen in ryuers and moist
places.

The other mist, that goes down toward the earth, is when any vapor is lifted
up into the air, by the heate of the sun, which not being strong enough to
draw it so high, that the cold may knit it: suffers it after it is a
little made thick, to fall down again, so it fills al the air with the
gross vapors, is called mists, being usually a sign of fair weather.

Of empty clouds.
THere be certain clouds, yt are empty, Empty clouds.
send no rain, they come of ij. sorts.

For one sort are the remnantes of a cloud, that hath rayned, which can not
be couerted into water, for there dryenes. Another sort is of them, that are
drawn up, of wet and dry places, and be rather Exhalations then vapors, that
is they be day, what, light, so that it were harde for them to be turned into
rain. They look white like flocks of woile, when ye light strikes into the.
There be also empty clouds, when ye wyndes haus dispersed abroad, any cloud,
they are scatered over al the sky, but these clouds, though for a time they be
empty, yet because they consist of such a substance as is watery, they may be
and are often times, gathered together and give pletifull rain.

Of the colours of clouds, The colour of clouds.
we have spoken in the second book of fyry Meteors, where those colours and
the causes of them, are described, which seem to be fyerye, or may be thought
to be inflammations or burninges, as be red fyry and yealowysh.

But beside those, there be white, black, blew, and greane.

White clouds be thynne, and not very watery, so that the light received in
them, makes the to appear white.

Black clouds be full of thick, gross, and earthely matter, that makes them
look so dark.

Blew clouds be full of thick, gross, and earthly as the black, so the light
received in them, makes them to seem blew.

Grene clouds are altogether watery, resolved into water, which receiving into
them the light, appear grene as water doth in a great vessel, or in the sea
and ryuers.

Of Rain.
AFter the generatio of clouds is well known, it shall not be hard to learn,
Rain.
from whence the rain comes.

For after the matter of the cloud being drawn up, and by cold made thick, (as
is said before) heate followynge, which is most commenlye of the Southern
wind, or any other wind of hot temper, doth resolve it again into water,
so it falls in drops, to give increase of fruit to the earth, and move men
to give thanks to God.

There be small showers, of small drops, and there be great storms of great
drops.

The showers with small drops, proceade either of the small heat, that
resolves the clouds, or else of the great distance of the clouds from the
earth.

The streams with great drops, contrariwyse, do come of great heate,
resolving or melting the cloud, or else of small distance from the earth.
Whereof we see an experiment when water is powered forth, from an high place,
the drops are small, but if it be not from height, it will either have no
drops or very great.

The cause why rain falls in roudroppes, is both, for that ye parts desire
the same form that the whole has, which is round* also that so it is best
preserved against all contrary qualities, like as we see water, powered upon dry
or greasy things to gather it self into roundels, to avoid the contrariety
of heate and dryenes.

It is not to be omitted, that rain water although a great part of it be
drawn out of the sea, yet most commenly it is sweet and not salt. why rain
water is not salt.


The cause is, because it is drawn up in such small vapors, and that salt
part is consumed by the heat of the sun.

The rain water doubtless, doth more increase and cherish things growing on
the earth, the any other water where with they may be watered, because the rain
water, retains much of the sunns heate in it, that is no small comfort to all
growing plants. The water that comes from heaven, in rain will sooner come
to putrefaction, or stinking, then any other, because it hath been made very
subtle by heate, and also for that it is mixed with so many earthly
corruptible substances.

Rain water that falls in the summer, by Auicens judgement, Auicen.
is more wholesome then other water, because it is not so cold and moist as
other waters be, but whotter and lighter.

Sometime there is salt rain, Salt rain
when some Exhalatio which is what dry, is comixd we the vapor whereof the rain
consists.

Sometime it is bitter, Bitter rain.
when sum burnt earthly moisture is mixed with it. This rain is both
vnholsom also vnfruictful. In these countries, there is great store plenty of
rain, because the sun is of such teperat heat, yt it gathers many vapors,
by immoderat heat doth not consume them. But in ye East parts, in some what
cotries, it never or seldom is seen to rain, as in Egipt Siria, but instead of
rain Egipt hath ye river Nilus, The river Nilus.
whose ouerflowings, doth marvelously fatten ye earth. In Syria other like
countries, they have more plentiful dew, then we have, which doth likewyse
make their earth exceading fruitful.

Seneca testifies, Seneca.
that ye rain soketh no deper into the earth the tenn foot deep.

Of the signs of Rain.
FIrst if the sky be red in the morning, it is a token of rain, Signs of
rain.
because these vapors which cause the rednes, wylbe shortly resolved into
rain.

If a dark cloud be at the sun rising, in which the sun soon after is
hid, it will desolve it, and rain will follow. If then appear a cloud and
after vapors are seen to ascend up to it, that betokens rain.

If the sun or Moon loke pale, loke for rain.

If the sun in the East, seem greater then commonly he appears, it is a
sign of many vapors which will bring rain.

If the sun be seen very early, or few stars appear in the night, it be
tokeneth rain.

The often changing of the wynds, also shows tempest.

The most suer and certain sign of rain, is the southern wind, which
with his warmenes, always resolves the clouds, into rain.

When there is no dew at such times as by nature of the time, there should be,
rain follows, for the matter of the dew, is turned into the matter of watery
clouds.

If in the West about the sun setting, there appear a black cloud, it will
rain that night, because that cloud shall want heate, to disperse it.

When much dust is raised up, and when the woods make a great noise, some
tempest is towards.

Hard stones wylbe moist and sweat against rain, lamps, and candles, by
sparcling, frogs crying, trees breaking, leaves falling, and dust clottering
forewarn us of a tempest.

Flees, flies and gnats, byght sore toward a tempest, kine feed greadely, birds
seek their vitels more besilie, for in the gross air disposed to rain,
their stomach is whoter and they more hongry. But these kind of signs
perteine not so properly to Meteorologie, as to mariners and husbadrie, which
have a great many more then these. And Virgil in his first book of Georgikes,
hath a great number for them, that list to learn. Wherefore let these hitherto
suffice.

Of monstrous or prodigious rain.
Hitherto we have made mentio only of natural rain, Of monstrous rain.
that which is common which no man doth marvel at. But there is sometime such
rain, that worthily may be wondered at, as when it rains, worms, frogs,
fishes, blood, milk flesh, stones, wheat, iron, wol, brick and quicksiluer.
For histories make mentio, that at diverse times, it hath rained such things,
whose natural cause for the most part, we will go about to express,
notwithstanding accomptinge them among such wonders, as God sends to be
considered, for such ends, as we have before declared. Worms frogs may thus
be generated, Worms frogs
when fat Exhalations are drawn up into ye air by a temperature of whott
moist, such vermyn may be generated in the air, as they are on the earth,
without copulatio of male female. Or else that with the Exhalations vapors,
their seed eggs are drawn up, which being in ye clouds brought to form, fall
down among ye rain.

Likewyse the spawn of fishes, Fishes.
being drawn up makes fishes to rain out of the clouds. Milk.
The vehement heate of the sun, in summer and specially in what contries,
draws milk out of the paps of beasts cattle, which being carried up in
vapors and resolved again into milk, falls down like rain.

After the same manner the sun also from places where blood hath ben spilt,
draws up great quantity of blood, Blood.
so it raynes blood.

It rains flesh, Flesh.
when great quantity of blood being drawn up, it is clottered together and
seems to be flesh. Auicen says that a whole calfe fell out of the air,
Auicen.
and some wold make it seem credible, that of vapors and Exhalations with the
power of the heavenly bodies, concurring, a calfe, might be made in the
clouds. But I had rather think, that this calfe was take up in some storm of
whrlewynd, and so let fall again, the agree to so monstrous a generation.

It is a great deal more reasonable, that stones of earthly matter gathered in
clouds, Stones.
should be generated as we have said before of ye thoderbolt. Yet some men
think, ye wynd in caves of ye earth, breakig upward violetly, carries before
it, earth stones into ye air, which can long abide, but fall down and are
counted among prodigius rain. Exhalations that be earthy and drawn out of
clay, have much gross substance in them, Brycke.
which gathered together, by great heat burned in the clouds, make brick, which
is no great marvel.

He that hath seen an eggs shell full of dew, drawn up by the sun into the
air, Wheat.
in a May morning, will not think it incredible, that wheat other grain,
should be drawn up in much whotter countries then ours is, much rather the
meal or flower which is lighter.

A certain mossynes, like woll, as is upon quinses, Wolle.
wyllowes, and other yonge fruits and trees, is drawn up of the sun, among
the vapors and Exhalations, which being clottered together, falls down like
locks of wolle.

Quicksiluer all men know, Quicksyluer.
with small heate wylbe resolved into most thin vapors. Whereof when
quantity is drawent up, it falls down again. As it is red, that once at
Rome, it rayned quicksyluer, wherewith the brazen money being rubbed, it looked
like silver.

Titus Liuius, makes mention, that it rayned chalk, Chalk. T. Liuius
whereof the cause can not be hid to them, that read howe stoone and brick
come into the air.

Iron hath also rayned out of ye clouds, and sundry times, as histories
wytnesse. Iron.
Whereof this hath ben the cause. The general matter of all metalles, with is
quicksiluer, and brymstone, which the special matter of mixtion, that makes
iron, wear all drawn up together, there concocted into the metal, so came
the strange rain of iron.

Auicen says, Auicen.
he saw a piece of iro that fell out of the clouds, that weighed about an
hundred pound weight, where of very good swerdes were afterwards made.

Of Dew.
Dew is that vapore, Dew.
which in spring and Autumn, is drawn up by the sun in the day time,
which because it is not carried into the middle region of the air, abiding in
the lower region, by cold of the night, is condensede into water, and falls
down in very small drops.

There is come dew sweet dew. One kind of the sweet dews, is called Manna,
Manna.
being whyghte like sugar, which is made of thick and clammye vapors, which
makes it so to fall thick and white. It falls only in the East parts. As
for that Manna which God rained to the Israelites was altogether miraculous. In
Arabia (as Plinius writes) is a very precious kind of dew, Plinius. Arabia
yt is called Ladanum, Ladanu.
which falling upon the herb Cusus, Cusus.
mixed with the iuyse of that herb which goats do eat, is gathered of
goats hears and kept for a great treasure. There is another kind of sweet
dews, that falls in England called the meldewes, which is as sweet as honey
being of such substance as honey is, draw out of sweet herbs flowers.

There is also a bitter kind of dew that falls upon herbs, bitterdew
and lies on them like brann or meal, namelye because it is of an earthly
Exhalation, so remains, when the moyster is draw away: this dew kills
herbs.

The comme dew, drunk of cattle, toth, rot them because the matter is full
of viscositie, bringing the to a fluxio.

There be three things, ye hinder dew from falling, that is great heate, great
cold, and wind. For dew falls in the most temperate calm time.

Of whore frost.
Hoar frost or whight frost, is nothig else but dew congeled by overmuch
cold. Hoar frost
The South and East wynd, doth cause dew, but the North and Northern wyndes,
do fryese the vapors, and so it becomes hoar frost, which if that
excessive cold had not been, should have turned into dew.

The dew and the hoar frost, agree in three things, namely in matter, in
quality of time, and place of their generation. In matter they agree, for they
are both generated of a subtle thin vapor, also small in quantity.

In quality of time they consent, for both are made in a quiet calm time, for
if there were great wind, it would drive away the matter, and so cold there be
no generation.

Thyrdly they are both generated in the lowest region of the air, for (as
Aristotle affirms) upon high hills, Arist.
there is neither dew nor hoar frost.

They differ also in three things. For the hoar frost is congeled before it be
turned into water, so is not the dew.

Secondly, the dew is generated in temperate weather, the whight froast in
cold weather.

Last of all, whote wyndes, as the South and East do cause dew, but cold
wyndes as the North and Weast do cause hoar froast.

Hoar froast doth often stink, because of the stinking matter whereof it
consists, which is drawn out of lakes and other muddy and stinking places.

Of Hayle.
HAyle is a hot vapor in the mydle region of the air, Hayle.
by the cold of that region, made thick into a cloud which falling down to
the soden cold of the lowest region is congeled into Ise.

There be so many kinds of hayle, as there be of rain. The fashion of hayl, is
sometime round, which is a token yt it was generated in the mydle region of
the air, or very near it, for falling fro high, the corners are worn away.

When the hayle stones are square, or three cornered, the hayle was generated
near the earth.

Often times, there is harde a great sound in the clouds, as it were of
thoder, before hayle, or as it were of an army fighting c. the cause is, that
vapors of contrary qualities, being enclosed in the cloud, do strive to
break out, make a noise even as cold water doth put into a seathing pot.

In spring and harvest time, is often hayle, seldom in summer and winter. In
winter there wants what vapors, in summer, the lowest regio is to what, to
congele the rain falling down. In spring and Autumn, there wants neither
what vapors, to resist the cold, nor sufficient cold to harden the drops of
that what shower of rain.

The haylestones are sometimes greater, and sometimes lesser: greater with
greater cold, and lesser with lesser cold.

There is seldom hail in the night, for want of what vapors to be draw up.

Sometime hayle rain, falls together, when the latter end of the cloud for
want of cold in the lowest region, is not congeled.

Hayle stones are not so clear, as Ise, because they are made of gross earthy
vapors, ise is congeled of clear water.

Hayle is sooner resolved into water, then snow, because it is of a more sode
and swyft generation.

Of Snow.
Snow is a cloud congeled by great cold, Snow.
before it be perfectly resolved from vapors into water.

Snow is whyght, not of the proper colour, but by receiving the lyghte into
it, in so many small parts as in some, or the whyghte of an egg beaten.

Snow is often upon high hills, lies long there, because their tops are
cold as they be near to the mydle region of the air. For oftentimes it
raynes in the vallye when it snoweth on the hills.

Snow melting on the high hills, and after frozen again, becomes so hard
that it is a stone, is called Crystal. Original of Crystal
Other matters of snow because they are come with rain, are nedeles to be
spoken of. To be short, sleet is generated even as snow, but of less cold,
or else begins to melt in the falling.

Snow causes things growing to be fruitful, and increase, because the cold
drives heate unto the roots, and so cherysheth the plants.

Of Springes and Rivers.
THe generation of springes is in the bowels of the earth, Springes.
therefore something must be said of the body of the earth. The earth though
it be solide and massy, yet hath it many hollow gutturs and veins, in which
is always air to avoid emptines. For the ignorant in Philosophie must be
admonished, yt all things are full, nothing is empty, Nothing is empty.
for nature abhors emptines, so that where nothing else is, there is air and
vapors, which by cold as it hath often ben said, wylbe resolved into
drops, as we see experience in marble pillars such like harde stones,
towards rain. This aier and vapors therefore being turned into drops of
water, these drops sweet out of the earth, and find some issue at the length,
where many being gathered together make great abundance of water, which is
called a fountain or spring. The cause why such sprynges do run
continually, is because that air can never want in those veins, which by
cold will always be turned into water, so that as fast as the water runs
forth, so fast is air again received into the place, whereby it comes to
pass, yt so many springes are perpetual, and never dried. But if any be dried
up, it is in a what summer, and such springs also they be, whose generation is
not deep in the earth, therefore the vapors may be made dry the earth warm, so
the spring may fail.

There be four kinds of spryngs, fountains, brookes, ryuers, lakes.

Of Fountains.
Fountains be small springes, Foutains.
which serve for wells and conductes, when there is but one place, where the
water is generated, and that is not very abundant, ether because it is of
small compass, or small veins and not many.

Of Brookes.
BRookes, Brookes.
boornes, or fords, be small streams of water, that run in a channel, like
a river. They are caused when either the spring occupies a great compass, or
else two or three small sprynges meat together in one channel.

Of Ryuers.
Ryuers.
Ryuers are caused by the meatynge together, not only of many springs, but also
of many broocks fords, which being received in diverse places, as they pass
are at the length, carried into ye broad sea, for the most part. Howbeit some
rivers are swallowed up into the earth, which perchance run into the sea by
some secret and unknown channels, some ryuers there be, that hide their heads
under the earth, and in another place, far of break out again. They write
also, that some ryuers being swallowed up of the earth, in one Land do run
under the bottom of the earth sea, and break forth in another Ilonde. There
be also many great ryuers yt run under the earth in great caves which never
break forth. Aristotle shows of ponds lakes, Arist.
that be under the earth. And Seneca speaks of a pond that was found by
such as dug in the earth, Seneca.
with fishes in it, they that did eat of them died. As eels ye be found in
dark places, as wells that have been dammed up c. are poison.

Of Lakes.
LAkes are made by the meting together of many ryuers, Lakes.
brookes springs into one deep valley. Whereof some are so great, that they
have the name of seas, as ye great lake called Hircane, or Caspia sea. These
lakes sometimes unlade themselves into the sea, by small rivers, sometimes by
passages under the earth.

The cause of the swiftness of ryuers, is double, for they are swyfte either for
the great abundance of waters, or else because they run down from an hylly
place, as the river Rhene falls down from the top of wonderful high
hills.

Of whote bathes.
SOme waters that are generated and flow out of veins of brymstone, Whote
bathes.
are sensybly warm, and some very whott, because they run out of what
places. These waters being also drying by nature, are wholesome for many
infyrmities, specially breaking forth of scabbs. c. Such are the bathes in the
West country, and S. Ann. of Buckstones well in the North part of England and
many other else where.

Of the diverse tastes that are perceived in wells.
FOr a general reason, the waters receive their taste of that kind of earth,
Tastes of waters.
through which they run as through a strainer. Some salt, that run through
salt veins of the earth, some sweet, that be well strained, or run through
such myneralls as be of sweet taste.

Some bitter, yt flow out of such earth, as is bitter by addustion or
otherwise.

Some sower or sharpe like vinegar, which run through veins of alum,
coporous, or such minerals. Aristotle writes of a well in Scicilia,
aristotle.
whose water the inhabitants used for vyneger. Well waeter used for vinegar.
In Bohemia near to the city called Bilen, Bohemia.
is a well that the people use to drink of in the morning, in stead of burnt
wine. And in diverse places of Germany, be sprynges, ye taste of such sharpnes.

Some have the taste of wine, as in Paphlagonia, Paphlagonia.
is a well that makes men drunk which drink thereof: which is because that
water receives the fumosite of brymstone, other minerals through which it
runs, and so fills the brain as wine doth.

A recital of such ryuers and springes, as have marvelous effects whereof no
natural cause can be assigned by most me, although some reason in a few may
be found.
CLitumnus which makes ox, ye drink of it whyght, maruelus water. Clitunus.
it is a river or spring in Italie. Propert. lib. 3. Properti{us}.
This may be ye quality of the water very flegmatike. In Boetia is a river
called Melas, Boetia.
Melas.
yt makes sheep black if they drink thereof.

Seneca speaks of a river yt makes red hears. Seneca.
These two with the first, may have some reason, that the quality of the water
may alter complexion, and so the collor of hears may be changed, as we see in
certain diseases.

In Libia is a spring, Libia.
that at the sun rising and setting, is warm, at midday cold, and at
midnight very whott: this may be, by the same reason that well water is colder
in summer the it is in winter. Seneca writes, Seneca.
that there be ryuers, whose waters are poison, this may be naturally, the
water running through poisonous minerals, taking much fume of them. Other wells
that make wodde and all thing else that be cast into them stones, such wells be
in Englande the cause is great cold.

Another well, makes men mad yt drink thereof. This also may have as good
reason as that which makes me drunk. As also that well which makes men
forgetful by obstruction of ye brain.

The same Seneca speaks of a water that being drunk, provokes unto lust and
lechery. And why may not that quality be in a water, which is mixed with
diverse minerals, and kinds of earth, which is in herbs, roots, fruit.
liquors. S. Augustin speaks of a well in Egipt, S. Augustine.
in which burning torches are quenched, and being before quenched, are lighted.
Among the Garamantes is a well so cold in the day, Garamates.
that no man can abide to drink of it, in the night so whott, that none can
abide to feel it.

It is incredible, that is written of a well in Scicilia, Scicilia.
whereof if thieves did drink they were made blind.

In Idumea was a well, Idumea.
that one quarter of a year was troubled and moddy, the next quarter bloody,
the third green, and the fourth, clear.

Seneca writes of another well that was six hours full and running over,
Seneca.
and six hours decresing and empty, per chaunse, because it ebbed and flowed,
with the sea, or some great river that was near it.

In the hill Anthracius, Anthracius.
is said to be a well, which when it is full, signifies a fruictefull year,
when it is scarce and empty, a barren and dear year. The sufficiens of
moisture, makes fertility, as the want causes the contrary.

Men say there is a River in Hungarye, Hugaria
in which Iron is turned into coper. Which may well be, saying ink in which
is but small coperus, and artificially myxed, of Iron, doth conterfeyte coper
in colour. In this stream may be much coperus, and that is naturally myxed.

Both Seneca and Theophrastus, Seneca Theophrasius.
wytnesse, ye waters there be, which within a certain space being drunk of
sheep, as ( Seneca says) of birds (as Theophrastus will have it) changes
their colours fro black to white, fro white to black.

Vitruuius writes, Vitruui{us}
that in Arcadia, Arcadia
is a water called Nonacrinis which no vessel of silver, Nonacrinus.
brass, or Iro, can hold, but it breaks in pieces, and nothing but a mules
hoof, will hold it and conteyne it.

In Illyria, Illyria.
garmetes yt are hold over amost cold well, are kindled set on fire.

In the I'll of Andros, where the temple of Bacchus stood, andros Bacchus.
is a well that the fifth day of January flowed wine.

Isidore says, Isidorus.
there is a well in Italy, that heals the wounds of yt eyes.

In the I'll of Chios, Chios.
is a well that makes men dulwitted, that drink thereof.

There is another that causes men to abhor lust.

Lechnus a spring of Arcadia, Lechnus.
is good against abortions.

In Scicilia are two spryngs of which one makes a woman fruitful, Scicilia.
and the other barren.

In Sardania, Sardinia.
be whote wells that heal sore eyes.

In an I'll of Pontus, Pontus.
the river Astares, astares.
overflows the fields in which the sheep that be fed, doth give black
milk.

In Aethiopia, aetiopia.
is a lake, whose water is like oil.

Also many sprynges of oil have brooken forth of the earth, which comes of
the viscositie or fatness of ye same earth.

The lake Clitorie, Clitorius.
in Italye, makes men that drink of it to abhor wine.

The lake Pentasium (as Solinus saith) is deadly to serpents wholesome to me.
Pentasiu. Solinus.


Seneca writes of certain lakes that will bear men which can not swymm. And
that in Siria, Syria.
is a lake in which brickes do swim, and no heavy thing will sink.

It is said, that the river Rhene in Germany will drown basterd children that
be cast in it, Rhenus.
but drive alonde them that be lawfully begotten.

The river Hypanis in Schithia, Hypanis Schithia.
everyday brings forth little bladders, out of which flies do come that die
the same night.

Matrona the river of Germany, Matrona.
as ye common people saith, never passes day but he takes some pray.

Of the Sea.
THe sea in this treatise, The sea.
hath place as a mixed substance, for else the elemet of waters being simple,
were not here to be spoken of.

The sea is the natural place of the waters, The natural place of the water.
into which all ryuers and other waters, are received, at the length.

And here it is to be understanded, yt the very proper natural place of the
water, were to cover al the earth, for so be the elements placed. The earth
lowest, roud about the earth, the water, about the water the air, and about
the air the fire. But God the most mighty and wise creator of all things,
Gen. 1.
that the earth might in some parts be inhabited of men and beasts, commanded
the waters to be gathered into one place, that the dry land might appear,
and called the dry land earth, and the gathering of waters he called seas.

In the sea are these two things to be considered, the saltnes, the ebbinge
and flowing.

Of the saltnes.
THe saltnes of the sea, according to Aristotles mind is caused by ye sun,
Arist.
that draws from it all thin sweet vapors, to make rain leaving the rest
as the settling or bottom, which is salt. But men of our time, peradventure
more truly, do not take this for the only and sufficient cause, to make so
great a quantity of water salt, but say, that the sea by Gods wisdom is
gathered into such valleys of the earth, as were other wise barren vnfruictful,
such carthes are salt, the sea water then mixed with that earth, must needs
be salt, else ryuers by Aristotles mind, should be salt as well as the sea. The
Reader may choose which opinion is most probable.

Of the ebbing and flowing.
THe ebbing and flowing of the sea, as Aristole seems to teach, Ebbinge and
flowing. aristotl^s.
is by reason of Exhalations, that be under the water, which drive it to and
fro, according to contrary bounds, and limits, as upward and downward, of
wide and narrow, deep and shallow. This opinion of Aristotle also, as more
subtle the true, experience teaches men to mislike to ascribe the cause of
ebbing flowing to the course of the moon, which rules over moisture, as the
sun doth ouerheate, for fro the new Moon to the full, all humours do
increase, and from the full to the new moon, decrease again. Also the very
true time of the ebbing and flowing may be known, by the course of the Moon.
with whom as the lady of moisture, we will close up the fourth book of
moist and watery impressios.

The fifth book of earthly Meteores or bodies perfectly mixed.
THis last treatise conteyneth such bodies whose chief matter is the earth,
Earthly bodies.
are called {per}fectly mixed because they are not easly resolved in to the
chief matter, whereof they are generated. These are divided into four kinds.
The first be diverse sorts of earth, the second be liquors concreat, the third
be metalls and metalliques, the fourth be stones. This division is not
altogether perfect both for that there be many of these minerals which partake
of two kinds, also for that the names of some of these kinds may be said of
other. Yet minding as plainly as can be, to declare the things them selves,
the controversy and cauillation of names, shall not greatly trouble us.
Especially saying we pretend not to teach Philosophers, but such as need a
ruder plainer instruction. They may therefore be cotet wc this diuisio, which
shall not serve them to dispute of these matters, but to understand ye truth of
these things that they desire. Of these fowr, therefore we will speak orderly
and generally, not minding to entreat of every particular kind (for that were
infinite) but to open such universal causes, as they which have wit, may
learn, (if they list) to apply unto al particulers.

Of earths.
THe earth is an element, Of earths
one of the four, cold and dry, most gross and solyde, most heavy and
weighty, the lowest of all other in place. When I say an element, I mean a
simple body vncompounded. This earth is no Meteore, but as it was showed in the
water, to ye end there should be generatio of things, there is no element that
we can have, which is pure and simple, but all are mixed and copounde. Our
fire is gross and compound, so is our air our water, and our earth. But the
earth notably and above the rest is mixed. For the puer and natural earth is
dry and cold, but we see much to be moist, and much to be hot The natural
earth is black of collor, but we see many earths white many yelowe, and many
red. So that first the greatest part of ye earth is mixed with water, that
makes it to clean together, with air and some fire, which make an oily fat
or claymy earth, as is clay made. c. Another great part is dried not into the
natural drienes of the first quality, but as a thing ones mixed and after
dried, ether by to cold, as sand gravel, c. or else by heate, as chalk, oker
c. And yet somewhat more plainly and particularly to discourse vpen these
causes, admitting the natural colour of the earth to be black, of ye water to
be blew, of the air to be white, of the fire to be ruddy, it follows that
upon the mixtion of these colours, or chief domination of them, al things
hath their colour. The gross substance of the earth therefore being
diversely myxed with other elements, and those myxtures again being eftsoon
altered, by diverse and sometime contrary qualities, hath brought forth so many
kinds of earth, as clay, marle, chalk, sand, gravel c. Clay is mixed with
fat moisture taking his colloure of the mixture with red from white, but
being cold, it is not so fructfull as marle, which is not always so moist
as it. Chalk is an earth by heat cococted, after diverse mixtions and dried
up. Oker both yelow red with such like are of the same nature with mixtio of
red more or less.

Sand and gravel are dried erthes, as it were froasen by cold, gravel is
gross and apparent, sand though it be finer, is of the same generation
cosisting of many small bodies, which are cogeled into stones. Sad seems to be
clay dried by cold and coacted together into small stones, whereof some are
through shining which were the moist parts, the thick were of the gross
part. The same is gravel, but of greater stones consisting. The like
judgment is to be given of all other kinds of earth, whose generation by the
similitude of these, will not be very harde to find out. They that list to
know the diverse kinds of earths, must have recourse to Plinius, Cardane,
Plinius. Cardanus
and other wryters, that recite a great number of them, but these are the chief
and most come kinds.

Of liquors concreat.
WE take not lyquors cocreat so largely, as the word doth signify, for than
should we comprehend, both the other kinds following. But only those
liquors, called in latin Succi, which are as it were middle between metals
stones, of which some being fat only, do burn, as brimstone, seecoles, geate,
bitumen, c. and the kinds of all these. other some doth not burn, as salt,
alu, coperus, saltpetre, c. and the kinds of these. Of the first sort, which
are generated of earthy airy vapors, fumes Exhalations, the chief most notable,
is brimstone, which seems to be the matter of all dry what qualities, yt are
in earthly Meteores. The rest are generated of such like vapors as brymstone
is, but the they be diversely mixed. As ye coals, have much earth mixed with
brimstone. Get, seems to be all one, but better concocted then coals. Of
amber is great contentio whether it be a mineral, or ye sperm of an whale, for
it is found in the sea, cast up on the shore. Now ye whales seed, being of the
very same qualities, is take more less cocreate of diverse hardness, some al most
as hard as amber, some softer, some liquid. Yet Cardan plainly defines, Cardanus
that amber is a mineral. Whether he have reason or experience, contrary to ye
vulgar opinion, let them consider that list to cotende. These minerals that
will resolve with fire, it is apparent, that they were concreat with cold. In
that they burn it is manifest, they have a fat and clamy substance, mixed
with them. As the other kind hath not, which will not resolve so well with
fire, as wc water, which be salt, coperus, saltpeters, c. these burn not
being watery, earthy, not fat, vnctuus, nor clammy.

These be of diverse colours, black as coals and geat, because there is much
earthy substance mixed with their sulphureus matter. Some be shere as saltt
and alume, having a substance watery, dried, and concreat. Coperus is greane,
because it hath much cold matter that is blwe, mixed with it. Salt the most
come and necessary of all these liquors concreat, that be moist not fatty,
hath two manner of generations, one natural, and the other artificial. The
natural generation, is when it is first generated, in the earth, after comes
the water of the sea, and is infected with it, out of which the salt is again
artificially gathered. Of these liquors concreat be those strange wells and
sprynges infected, of which was spoken, in the latter end of the fourth
book. Most notably brimstone causes the what bathes, and burns in aetna, of
Scicilia, and Vesuuius of Italye, Aetna Vesuuius
casting up the pumise stones, of which is no place here to entreat.

Of Metalles.
MEtalles be substances perfectly myxed, Metalls.
that will melt, with heate, and be brought into all manner of fashions that a
man will. Of these the Alcumistes say, there be seven kinds, to answer to
the seven Planetes. Gold, silver, copper, tynne, lead, Iron quicksyluer, that
they cal Mercury. Mercury.
But saving their authorities, quicksyluer is no more a metal, then brymstone,
which is as necessary to the generation of metal, as quicsyluer is. For they
all agree, that all metalles are generated of sulphur, Sulphur.
that is brymstone, which because it is what, they call the father, and
Mercury that is quicksiluer, which because it is moist, they call the mother.
So by as good reason, may they call brymstone a metalle, as Mercury. Then there
remains but six perfect metalls, Gold, Silver, Copper, Tin, Lead, and Iron.

Of Gold.
THat most unprofitable and hurtful of al metalls gold, Gold.
which most men dispraise, and yet all men would have, is of all other metalles
the rarest, it is only {per}fact, all other be corruptible. Gold never
corrupts by rust, why gold rusteth not.
because it is pure from poysonus infection most solide, that it receives not
the air into it, which causes all things to corrupt. It is perfectly
concocted with sufficient heate, and mixture of Sulphur, all other metalls,
either are not so well concocted, or else they have not the due quatitie of
brimstone. This opinio hath also place among the Alcumistes, The opinion of the
Alcumistes.
yt because nature in al her works, seeks the best end, she entedeth, of al
metals to make gold* but being let either for want of good mixture, or good
cocoction, she brings forth other metals, in deed not so precius, but much
more profitable, the less pretius, the more {pro}fitable, for there is more use
to the necessity of man life, in Iron and lead, then is in gold, silver.
But either the beauty, or the perfection, or at lestwyse the rareness of gold
silver, have obteineth the estimation of al men, so yt for them is sold al manner
of things, holy, profane, bodily spiritual. What pains doth not men take to
wynn gold? every man hath one way or other, to hunt after it, but ye Alcumist
despising all other ways as slow, unnatural, unprofitable, laboreth ether to
help nature in her work, as of imperfect metals to make {per}fact, or else to
force natur to his purpose, by his quintessence elixors, so that what by
purging, what by cococting, what by mixing of sulphur quicksiluer, much other
like stuff, at length he turns the wrong side of his gown outward, all the
teeth out of his head, his body fro health to a palsy, and then he is a
Philosopher, and so he will be called.

Of Silver.
Silver the most pure metalle, Silver.
next unto gold, hath indifferent good concoction in the earth, but it wants
sufficient heat in the mixtur, that makes it pale. It is found as they say,
running into diverse veins as all other metalles be, but this most specially,
after ye shape fashion of a tree, lying along with a body or stock of
proportion like to the body of a tree, also with arms, branches, leaves and
fruits. This metal silver, lacks sufficient heate, and therefore comes
neither to the colour, solidity, nor perfection of gold, and is generated in
cold countries, near unto the North, and South poles. In so great quantity,
that hasbandmen, when they plow the ground turn up silver, among the clottes
in their daily labours. Which they do hyde, and conceal, least the gready
Princes, for covetousness of the metal, should overturn and destroy their
land. The gold mines, are contrarywyse, most found in the whote countries
of India and Aethiopia, because in them is sufficient of heate for that unhappy
generation.

This silver also, the Alcumistes would fain make by art, but Mercury the
chief master of the work, is so subtle, and so sly, that nothing can hold
him, nothing can kill him. For if the glass be not very thyck, he will soon
break out of prison, and so there is nothing left.

Of Copper.
COpper in colour, Copper*
coming nearest to gold, being not solyde, nor massy, (for of all metal
gold is the heaviest) gives way to corruption, being infected with that
greane mineral copperus. Hereof be diverse kinds, brass, latin and such
like, which differ in in digestion, the copper being purest, is of best
digestion and nearest unto gold, and so the rest in like degrees. Copper is
most like to silver in the weighty, and in the hammeryng, wherefore the
Alcumistes have learned to make it white, that it deceyueth men's syghte
handling, but the Goldsmythes do easily try it by the teast of couterfect
silver, makes copper again. Copper or brass, doth always grow near unto
the mine of copperus, which running with it in the digestion or natural
contoction, hyndreth it of perfection, makes it to stink, and to be eaten of a
greane ^se. Much a do the Alcumistes have to turn it into gold, if it might
be, they dispute very reasonably, and conclude almost necessarily in their
talk, that it may be converted into gold as, a body, that wateth little of
perfection which may be easily added unto it. But in conclusio of the work, it
is an harder matter, to bring it to pass, then it was to purpose before they
had done it, to build an abbay at every miles end, upon Salisbury plain, as
one was minded.

Of Tin.
TYnne, whereof great plenty grows in the West parts of Englande, Tin.
in beauty and colour comes nearest to silver, of silver wateth nothing, but
solidity hardness. For tinn is a raw vndigested metal, also very porose
vncopact, which causes it to crashe, when it is broken or bitten. So it
fails of heat, in the comixtio also sufficient digestio in the earth.
Otherwise it is a fair proffitable metal, to serve ye use of the, unto whom
silver gold are not so plentiful.

Of Lead.
LEad also found in great abundance within this realm, Lead.
is a raw vndigested metal, as tin is, but yet of better digestio the
comixtio. For it is mixed, wc a gross earthy substance, which makes it to be
in collor so black, so fowl to corrupt. So that of ye same fumes exhalatios,
which if they had ben pure well digested, if ye place matter wold have
suffered, should have ben concreat into silver, for lack of the same, lead is
generated, which coming plentifully, doth better service the silver.

Of Iron.
IRon the most necessary and profitable of all other metalls, Iron.
yet as ill used of many as any other, is generated of such substance as
silver is, but myxed with a red mineral, which eats it with red rust,
and also being of two extreme degestion, passing all other metalls in hardenes.
And as other metals to the perfection of silver, want sufficient cocoction,
whereby they comme not to the same hardenes: so Iron passes and exceadeth silver
in immoderate digestion. But though it come not to the perfection of silver, God
forbid that al Iron had been turned into silver, for then we should more
have missed it, then silver or gold, the want of which would hurder us
nothing at al.

Of Quick silver.
THough quicksyluer, be no metal, Quicksyluer.
yet because it is the mother of al metals, some thing is here to be spoken of
it.

There be diverse and sundry opinions, both of the generation, and also the
qualities of it, which make the generation to be harde to find out. For if
the quality were certainly agreed upon, there were an easier way found, to
try out the generation. Some affirm, that it is exceading whott, and that
they would prove, by the swyfte piercing there of into other things, that be
porose.

Other say, it is exceadyng cold, that they prove, by the exceadyng weight of
it. As for the percyng, they say: is caused of the exceading moystnes, of
which quality both parts do grant that it is. Concerning the generation,
some have said that it is pure and elemental water, some again hath thought,
that it drops out of heaven, and is a part of the heavenly substance. And
other said, that it is generated in the clouds, and falls down in the
field, in a circle, on those round circles, which are seen in many fields,
that ignorant people affirm to be the rings of the fairies danses. It is
certain, that quick silver hath diverse times fallen out of the clouds, as we
have declared in the treatise of wonderful and marvelous rain, but whether
it so fall in circles, it is doubtful. The most probable opinion is, that it
is generated of moyste vapors of the earth, coacted by cold, much like to
water, as brymstone is of hot fumes coacted by cold, much like to fire. And
thus much of metalles.

Of Stones.
STones the fourth kind of earthly myxed bodies, Stones.
have two manner of generations, by most contrary qualities. For heate doth
harden moist bodies in to stones, as we see that of clay it makes exceadyng
harde brycke.

Also the thoderboltes in the clouds, are generated by heate, as before has
ben showed. But cold doth by congelyng, generate, many more stones then heate
doth: for the most part of all the stones that are dug out of the earth,
are generated by cold, which is able to convert any other kind of myxed
substance into stone, as hath been partly showed in the nature of wells, and
sprynges, of which there be some in Englande, which by their cold turn
wodde or any like thing into stones. I (...) sufficiently shall be said, of the
virtue of stones.

That virtue that is ascribed unto them, is either natural or magical. The
virtue of stones either natural or magical.
Natural virtue is either that which is known to have a natural cause, or a
natural effect, as the Magnes, or loadestone to draw iron, which is by a
similitude of nature, and such an appetite, as is between the male and the
female. Also the said Magnes, Magnes.
moves toward the North, and as some say, there is an other kind found in
the Southe, that draws toward the south. They say, that there is great
hills of this stone, in the North and South, which makes it look that way.

Other bring a Mathematical reason, which because it is more curius then can
be understood of the come sort, not exercised in Geometry, I omit.

The get and amber draw hears, chafe, and like light matter, but being
before chaffed, Geat and amber draws chaf
for heate is attractive.

Also the precious stone called Astroites, moves of it self in vinegar,
Astroites a stone moves in viner.
the sharpness of the vinegar, piercing it, and the air excluded, driving it
forward. These virtues because I have seen, I have set for an example,
generally all other like natural virtues, proceade of like natural causes,
which by their effect the ingenious must seek to find out. As for Magical
virtues be they, which are grounded of no reason, or natural cause which if
they take effect, it is rather of the superstition credulity of him that uses
them, then of the virtue of the stones. As that an Emerald increases love, a
Sapphire favour, a Diamond strength, such like virtues of which Albertus in
his age surnamed the great, Albertus Magnus.
took pains to write a book, which I suppose be englished. To conclude with
the cause why stones melt not as mettalles do, may be gathered by yt which
hath been said before, because they are congeled past that degree, also
because there is left in them no vnctuus, or clammy matter. Let this suffice
for stones, so the whole purpose is at an end.

W. F.

FINIS.
THINK AND THANK, LIVE IN FERE, KNOW THY SELF, FAR AND NE'ER.


Impryted at London in Fletestreate, at the sign of the Faucone, by William
Griffith: And they are to be sold at his shop in S. Dunstan churchyard in
the West. 1563.


