This Book doth treat all of the best waters Artyfycialles / and the virtues
and properties of the same / much profytable for the poor sick, set forth,
by sir Roger Becon Freer.



THe which treatise I have willed to write or a good a loving zele pity and
compassion of godly dysposicion would that every person being diseased / by
the grace of god and of such medicines as herafter in this little treatise
more plainly shall be declared, may the sooner find remedy to be cured and healed
of all bodily infyrmityes and syckenesses trusting than that al those i this
wise recoueryng their health shall purchase such force and strength spiritual
that they shall daily augment their meryte and virtue to the laud praise of
God, where thorough at their departing their souls may be except to be of the
nombre of those yt shall be saved / now pray I unto almighty God, that he give
me grace well to write and to compile this little treatise, that it may be
executed after a good purpose, and so may appear. And for asmoche that Gold is
the most noble metal that is, I shall begin first to advise unto ye water of
Gold, the which is made after the manner that hereafter follows.

In nomine dei Amen.
TAke wedges of fine gold, well warmed in the Fire, and quench it.xlii. times
within the water of a good well or Fountain. And the water strained and kept
clenly in a viol of glass, let the diseased person drink it with wine or
good ale after as the patient it requires, the virtue property of that water
of gold is such that it is good unto ye people that be whole, and also for
the that be sick of the syckenes, that me called, cardia pastio, for it
exalts comfort the heart marvelously it illumines the spirits, and
consumes ye superfluyte, and comfort the virtue contained in all the
members within forth, much it avails unto the flux of the wobe, more than
the water wherein iron is put, it avails much unto the leprous, unto them the
which ben ill disposed. Men make this water of gold, by science of Arquimie.
But I put it not here for that, but that manner of making is much harder, but I
will speak nomore of it at this time.

The water of the Flowers of Rosemarye.
This water is of great, marvelous virtue and hath many great properties in
bodies humaines and sycknesses cold? it ratifieth the appetite and
recomforteth the spirit and the hete natural, because of her good odour,
wherein the soul takes pleasure and gathers the virtue of the members
together, it comfort specially the brain, and all the members synewed, and
if a man wasshe his face with it, it makes it fair, if a ma wash his here's
it reteyneth them and kepeth them from falling and multiplyeth them, and the
continuance and use of this water preserves a man from the botch, and from
all ill syckenesse it comfort the substance of the heart, and also
consumes the fleume, melancholy, makes youth to pourge, who so shall continue
this water wtinforth wtoutforth he shall be preserved long without corrupcyon,
and to wasshe his mouth oft with water ratifyeth the teeth and the gumes? it
heleth the Caker, and of the fystures and ratifyeth the ill wounds and dries
the, it vaileth unto the Cardiacle passion that is to say, trembling of the
heart and prohibiteth the vomytynge, it is good unto the flux of the womb unto
those yt be benomed, as unto people the which tremble in their body, unto
relexacion of worms, drives away all venom, as tryacle and also aydeth unto
the mother of the belly of women and them preserves of their Flowers, and the
bayne aydeth much to consceyue, and who so baineth him right often in the
decocktion of this flower, he renews his youth as an aygler yt is a thing
right secrete right marvelous, who so shall make it in the manner and fasshyon
the which follows. Fill ye a great viol or glass of the Flowers of
Rosemarye and stop it above afterward bery it deep with in the bank of the
see, and let it lye thereby half a year in the season time the whether is most
hotest, and abide there the space of a month, and afterward it shall be
turned in to water the which water must be strogly strained, put in to another
viol in the son, by the time or space of xl. days, this water shall
sprinkle have the sense as balm, it auaylleth much to comfort the heart,
and the brain and all the body, vayleth again the dibilyte and wekenes of the
synewes takes away the spots of the visage and kepeth the ma in good state
of youth and avails against the syckenes tears of the eyes to put within
them.ii. drops at a time, it ratyfyeth the membre slepy benommed, and also it
heleth of the Fystula, also of the Canker where the other remedies profyteth
nothing, and who so should make of the water brennynge of wine of the
decocktion with these flowers yt should be a right excellent thing for the
syckenesses abouesayde.

The water of red Roses.
This water comfort the heart and all the members to dyssolue, and they well
dyssolued, it restores them and because of her good odor aromatyque,
specially it coforteth the spirits, the hete natural it prohybyteth the
putrefaction in dyssentery and lyentery the which ben fluxes of the womb
bledyng, it comfort ye virtue retentyue and it is good unto the feblenesse
of the heart and vometynge and again the sweet dyaforti{que}, it makes sweet
and comfort the gomes and makes to have good odour in the mouth and makes
to have ferme Flesh who so washes him often with it, and puts it with in
his eyes with a little wine for ye mondyfyeth and dries, it comfort the
humodyte, and moystnes superflue of the eyes, and in especial when a man
puts therein a little of thuthie ppared or a little of aloes and fine sugar,
yet the said water with Sugar Candye put within the eyes cleanses and
mondifieth the substance without payne.

The water of Betayne.
This hath many great properties for it breketh the stone in the bledder and in
the raynes, it mondifyeth the breast and the lights, and heleth of the
Epylence, and drives away the venom, avails unto the bytynge of a beast
venomous, it avails unto the strangulyon, and purges the fleume of the
stomach downward or by vometynge, and it avails to the eructacyon ayger,
it provokes ye vryne and loses the womb, it helps much the payne of the
mylte, it comfort the stomach and aydeth unto ye dysgestion, vayleth
against the encreasynge of the blode, and against the payne of the Chynke, and
of the rains, and also of the bledder against the cold dropsye, it is good to
cleanse the wounds of the heed, to draw the bones broken out of the wounds,
it is good for the payne of the teeth, and for the darkness of the eyes
corcosyue, and unto the difficult of children, it kepeth fro dronkenes and
takes away the fatasyes of the people the which sourdeth of syckenes, it is
good for the payne of the womb, and for the payne podagre, takes away the
venom of Dogs enraged, it is good for the payne of the ears, for people that
be deaf in what manner so ever it be, and for ronning eyes, for the flux of
blode of veins, and unto people the which since for the sycknes of the
stomach for vometynge, for the payne of the stomach and bytyng{is}, and
avails to drink unto people weary of the fever quarteine, it is good for the
paralysye sownynge, and trembling of the members, and avails much unto the
pain of the womb, and for the swellynge.

The water of plantayne
This water is much abster, dry and incarnatyue, and it is very good for
wounds corrosyues, it is good for the stoppynge, it is good for the ronnynge
out of the belly and fleing of the guts in drinking, it works the
opylacions of the liver of the mylt making clean and kills the inflamacion
of the blode and incarneth the Fistules the other woudes, and preserves from
emoroides and it is good unto the vlceracion of the mouth and unto the payne of
the teeth unto the bytynge of a dog unto the brennynge of the Fire, and of
hot water for the vlceratio of the lights and unto the spyttynge and unto the
fever tarcian.

The water of lettys and of Endyue.
This water is aparatiue of veins, and comfort the liver, and makes warm,
and in especial it is good for the hot Apostumes, and unto flumes makes a
man to sleep it is good for ye pollution i the night it is good for the
Iaundes, and unto the opelacion of the lunges, and the milk of Endyue makes
clean the woudes that ben in the rains of the back it avails much against
the colere ye which is within ye stomach

The water of Fumetory.
This water fortifies the stomach and it mondifieth and provokes the urine
and avails against the scab and infection, it pourgeth the colere and
mondyfyeth the blode of the humours adustes.

The water of balm.
This water is very good for the s^omake cold and moist and aydeth unto the
digestion and digests the mete, it comfort the heart and the brain
takes away the ill thoughts and pouxes the which proceeds of melancholy and
humours adustes and avails against the bytynge of a dog and Scorpion, and
is good for the ache of the teeth, and suffocacion in dreams and unto
extortion of the belly, resolves the lunges.

The water of Elder.
The water of the leues, flowers and rotes of elder altogether comfort the
heart of the man, and merueylouslye it mondifieth makes clean the blode and
takes away the melancholy, and it heleth the brain the which is infect of
humours melancolyes, it endures and heleth the foals enraged in the
contynuaunce it is good to heal the scab and of the lepre.

The water of Elder and of Buglose.
The water of Elder and of buglose made by eagle parties is much marvelous
unto people melancolyous and unto people the which hath treblynge of the heart
and the brennyng of the gender, it takes away the heuynes and gives gladness
and makes the man to be of good reason of good understanding, but in this
cause he shulde put the flowers of buglose and of elder, and red roses, mingled
together, asmoch of the one as of the other.

The water of Garlyke.
This water opens the opelacyons of the liver, and of the mylt, and of the
rains, and preserves the ma from the passion colleryke and ventouse it takes
away the blakynge of the stomach and ratifyeth the digestion, it encreseth
the dede unto norysshes, and takes away the payne of the raynes, caused of
Uentosytie, and purges the gravel, and makes the payne suddenly to cease, and
it makes good colour unto those that doth use it.

The water of red soddes called Archangell mountain.
This water hath many great properties to provoke the man, and to mondifie and
make clean the raynes and the bledder of the gravel, and it avails unto the
vlceracions of the raynes, unto people the which pysse blode.

The water of hertes tongue cycore endyue, all together by eagle porcions with
the root of peccylle.
This water is much marvelous unto the opelacion of the liver, and of the
mylt, and heleth the iaunders when a man will dryncke of it, him behooves to
put thereto of fine sugar and it may be droncke with wine at his repastes, and
it is proved.

The water of Fenell.
The water of Fenell is given unto the obscurite and darkness of the eyes unto
the dropsye, and unto the lytarge, and it avails against venom, purges the
raynes and the bledder of gravel, it provokes the man and makes the
flour{is} come unto the woman, it subtilieth the fat humours, provokes the dede
unto women, and unto man the sperm, and also it takes away the will to
vomete, and helps the stomach.

The water of Cuffrurie montayne.
This water is meruaylouse good, to comfort the sight and to recover it if it
be possible and in especial unto people flumatyques, unto aged people, the
which it shall compose together with Ueruene, Few, Roses, and Celydoyne. This
shall be a right merueilouse good water, to conserve to comfort, and to repair
the sight.

The water of Ysop dry.
The water of Ysop dry makes clean the raynes, and the breast, and the
lunges of the matter gross Fleumatyque, and vystose is much good unto the
cough the which proceeds of the coldenes, and of moystnes, it clarifies the
voice, and avails much unto those the which falls of the falling evil, and
it is called in latin aperylentia.

The water of horuid.
This water heleth of the strangurye, and profyteth much for to gendre, and
multyplye the people.

The water of sauge.
This water is good unto all syckenesses cold, of the synewes, as ben the
Palsy, the trembling of the mebres swolunynge, epilensye and such like
sycknesses, it is good unto the Revolution of the gommes, and of the pain of
the teeth, and when they chellen, and it is good unto the sycknes of the
stomach cold, and unto the mother of ye womb, as is suffocacion of the
mother, and also this water may be used within forth in drinking, without
forth i washing by other manners the which ben after the dyscrecion of him, or
of her, the which doth use it.

The water of the roots and leues of Bresyll and of fire.
This water lowseth the womb and opens the opylacions of the mylte and
heleth the dropsye, yposarque and takes away the swellynge of the feet.

The water strong is in laten inchium.
This water strong is of right great and marvelous virtue, excellently
above all the other. For it kills the worms dyssolueth the work, cosumeth
the rotten humours within the body, in the places and coduites secretes, and
because of some virtue written, it comfort where ben the rotonesses, and it
is opening and comfortynge the stomach, and it cleanses the ordures, and
opens the opylacions of the mylte and of the liver, and it avails to
recover the speech, and against the venom, it comfort the syghte, warms
the stomach, and refreshes the liver it provokes the vryne, and the flowers
unto women, and resysteth unto the venym of oputhe bayci, and of iusquiauim,
and of all other of this nature, and it is good unto people death wou^ed when the
surgiens washes their wounds they keep it for enfestrynge and engendering of
ill flesh it avails against the epydymye, against eyres pestilencial it
takes away the will to vomet, and avails unto swellynges, and pains of the
members, and unto the palsye, takes away the fleellynge from the tongue, and
delyuereth in making gargarisme.

The water of Quyns Appels and of red Roses.
This water drunk with good red wine comfort the stomach affirms the
womb.

The water of Malous.
This water of cold and moyste, makes soft the womb and is alteratyue of
these opostumes hot, and it makes soft the durter, it provokes the flux
unto women.

The water of Scabiouse.
This water is cosumptyue and dissolutyue, is good unto the scab, or brekynge
out, or lepre, and serpigine impectigne, and unto the dredefull unto the
amoureus.

The water of Saxifrage.
This water breketh the stone in the raynes and in the bledder, and provokes
the urine, and is good unto pensyfenes and thought.

The water of myntes.
This water is much consumptyue dyssolutyue, and comfortatyue, avails much
against the opylacions of the liver, and of the mylt, and of the conduytes of
the vryne, and unto the stynkynge of the mouth, and of the gommes and prycketh
the appetite to eat to vomet and is good unto the faylyng of the heart, it
mondyfyeth the mother of the womb, it dissolveth the milk quayled in the
breasts, it avails against the veno and sleyth the worms, and is good
against the cough, the muries cold and tenme cold, it provokes the vryne,
and prohybyteth the cold of ^entes drouke one hour before with good tryacle.

The water of Radesshe.
This water is subtylatyue, appertyue, abstersyue mondyfycatyue, and
prouocatyue of the vryne, and avails against the storgyne, ympectygiue, and
takes away the humour from the members, modyfyed of the breast, and makes
clear the voice and subtyleth ye gross humours the which ben in the breast,
and in the lunges, it is good unto the biting of the Scorpion, and sleeth the
Scorpions and avails unto Fever quartayne and unto the Dropsye, and unto the
Iaundes, it breketh the stone, and avails against the bytynge venomous,
resolves the humours, the which ben in the corner of the eye, and takes
away the pympylles fro the bysage, it resolves les quantytie and the
syuellynge of the mylt, it provokes the flowers unto women, and is good unto
them the which has eaten fruits venymous.

The water of purslane.
This water is vyscose and contractyue of the flux of the belly, it takes away
the styngynge of the teeth and avails unto the stynkinge blode, apostumes
hoot, and unto the burning of the stomach, and upon the calefacion of the
liver, and of the alteration of the guts, and unto the flux of the mother, it
weketh ye sight and lettynges above the head, and prohibyteth the frenasye.

The water of howsleke.
This water is much cold and repercustiue of apostumes hot of abulatyues, it
swageth the payne of the podagre hot, avails much unto the brennynge of
fire with oil rosat, and unto the payne of the heed and sleyeth the nyttes,
and is much good unto the flux of the womb and unto the vlceracions of the
guts, prohybyteth the frenasye.

The water of Bursa pastoris.
This water is stytyque, and repercusyue, and avails much unto apostumes
hot at the beginning, it consolydeth, and incarneth the woudes fresshe and
bledynge, and it avails much unto the payne of the ears, and dries the
filth of the ears, and avails much unto the vlceracions of the guts, and
unto the flux of the neze, to the flux of blode of what place soever it
springs out it prohybyteth the frenasye.

The water of the flourdelyce and of the leaves.
This water is much aftersi^e, and much mondificatyue, and avails much unto
serpygne, and ympertygyne melled with honey, and it makes the visage fair and
clear, and hands in washing them, it makes also the visage much roddy, and
takes away the spots from the visage, it provokes ye fleures unto the
women, and takes away the hardness of the mother from the belly, it incarneth
the woudes that ben rot and avails unto the brennynge of the fire, and
bytynge venymous.

The water of Lylyes.
This water ereuoketh the sleep and consumes the shakynges, and dybylytie of
the members, and wastes, and takes away the polucions noctournes, and is good
for the cough, and weepynge eyes, it makes soft the womb and avails unto
the Flux of the womb ancyan, and unto the vlceracions of the guts, it
resolves the Apostumes of the mylte and avails much unto nosu^ whyghte.

This is all one.
This water is dyssolutyue, and subtylatyue, and avails much unto ye scalle
and scab of the head, and kepeth the here's from falling, it makes clean the
breast, and the lights, from great humours, and breketh the stone, and is good
for the Iaundyse, and it dyssolueth the estrophules and makes clean the
stomach, and guts of the superfluytes, colerykes.

The water for the Gout.
Take the flesh of a fox, and cut it right small, dystylle it in a
stylletory, and rub ye the sick body there with, for it is a sovereign
remedy.

The water of the grain of Geneper.
This water is much subtylatyue apertiue, and mondyfycatiue, and avails
much to make clean the ulcers sordibus, it provokes the vryne, and the
fleures unto women, makes the enfante dede within the womb of the mother, to
avoid out and chase away the venom, and the beast venomous, bayneth them
in the decockcion of ye seed of brom it avails much unto the payne of the
mother of the womb and atricion of worms.

For to please, and for to make these women to seem more fairer, younger unto
their husbands, and for to keep them from going in to fornycacion, and
aduoutre, it is suffered to use of some waters the which makes the visage fair
and white, and of these waters, I shall put here the which ben called symples
and of other composed and made.
These simple waters ben of the ^oures of be^es, waters of the seed of melos,
waters of the flower of elder, water of the flower delyce, water of the rote of
Yris, of Dragontyne and of the rote of sygilon salmonis.

Thus ends these waters.
The Table of this present Book.
The Prologue. primo. In nomme dei. Amen. ii. The water of the flowers of
Roosemarye. iii. The water of red rooses. iiii. The water of Betayne. v. The
water of Plantayne. vi. The water of lettis endiue. vii. The water of Fumetory.
viii. The water of Balm. ix. The water of Elder. x. The water of elder
buglose. xi. The water of Garlyke. xii. The water of red soddes called
archangell mountain. xiii. The water of hearts tongue cycore Endyue all
together by eagle porcions with the rote of percylle. xiiii. The water of Fenell.
xv. The wa. of cuffrurie moutayne. xvi. The water of Ysop dry. xvii. The water
of Horuid. xviii. The water of Sauge. xix. The water of the rotes and leues of
Bresyll and offyrre. xx. The water strong is in latin inchium. xxi. The water
of Quyns Apples and of red Rooses. xxij. The water of Malous. xxiii. The water
of scabyoule. xxiiii. The water of Saxifrage. xxv. The water of Myntes. xxvi.
The water of Radesshe. xxvii. The water of purslane. xxviii. The water of
howselyke. xxix. The water of bursa pastor{is}. xxx. The water of ye
flourdelyce. xxxi. The water of Lylyes. xxxii. The water for the gout. xxxiii.
The water of the grain of Geneper. xxxiiii.
Thus ends the xxxiiii. waters Artificials.
Imprinted by me Robert ^r


