A BRIEF TREATISE TOVching the preservation of the eie-sight, consisting
partly in good order of diet, and partly in use of medicines. The sixte
Edition.

AT OXFORD, By IOSEPH BARNES, Printer to the University. 1602.

Occasioned thorough certain speeches had with some of mine Honourable good
friends, to write mine opinion of means to preserve the sight in good
integrity, I have performed the same in this little pamphlet, wherein I have
directed my pen rather to leave rules for those, which have not in themselves
sufficient knowledge, the to satisfy the learned: who I know can devise much
better means remedies. And my intent being only to set down some order, as
may be fittest for all sorts of men to continue in perfection their sight, I
thought not good to insert any discourse of the diseases of the eyes, which
will require a long treatise, and cannot well be executed, but by men which
have skill in the art of physic. Therefore it seemed meet unto me at this
time to omit that part, and to leave the reader for the knowledge cure of such
diseases to the professors thereof, by whose helps they may receive remedy of
all infirmities and affects, which shall happen to the eyes: purposing in
this little treatise only to declare, how the sight might be long continued
in his integrity, by such common order as may of all men in their trade of life
be reasonably followed, leaving all other harder matters to a farther
direction of the learned And now following the laudable custom begun in
ancient time, and continued in these our days of presenting friends with
new-yeares gifts, for lack of other things of greater price, I offer unto you
this little pamphlet, as a signification of my good will, wishing that the same
may be a toke of many good prosperous years, which God the giver of all
goodness, send unto you.

A brief Treatise concerning the preservation of the eye sight.
THe preservation of the sight doth consist, partly in good order of diet,
partly in use of medicines.

Concerning diet: Diet
some things hurtful are to be eschued, some things comfortable to the sight
are to be used: wherefore they, which may chose their habitations, in this
respect, may make election of air clear, declining to Air
moderate heate dryness: cold moist air, thick, misty, and rainy weather is
hurtful: it is best therefore to abide in dry places, fro moory, marish,
waterish grouds specially to provide, that the site of the dwelling be not
between the wet places and the sun: southern winds do hurt the Winds. Dust
Smoke. Meates.
sight: so do low rooms: places full of dust and smokey are noisome.

Meates are best which are easy to be digested, which do not stay long in
the stomach: amongst such a young hen is greatly commended: so is Partridge
and Pheasant, Rasis praises the young starve, the quail: so do all writers
the Dove both tame and wyld, but chiefly the wyld Dove, which (as Zoar writes)
hath especial virtue against the weakness of the sight, which comes by
defect of spirits, and the rather, if the same be sod with rape roots, and
turnip roots: for it is accorded by all writers, that the turnip hath great
faculty to do good to the eyes, and to preserve the sight. Gross and slimy
meates, and all water-foule are dispraised. Of small birds, the martin, the
swallow, the iay and pie, the witwall, the specht are noted very hurtful to
the sight: and albeit these birds are seldom, or not at all used of the better
sort, yet common people happily may be compelled to eat them. No fish is
accounted good: yet some fishes, which do Fish.
skoure in gravely places, being sauery sodden with white wine, fenel,
eiebright, sage, persl^e, c. may at some times be eaten: so a little fault-fish
moderately taken doth no great harm. Flesh sodden with senell, Preparation of
meates.
eiebright, mintes, sage, c. is reputed best; next are roasted meates, flesh
fried with Entrails.
butter or oil is to be rejected, thentrals, and feet of beasts are not so
good, nor the brains for the most part, yet the brain Brains.
of an hare, of a cony, and of pigeons are said to quicken the sight.

Milk and all things made thereof are Milk.
found by experience to induce dimness of sight: rear roasted, rear sodden,
or poched eggs are wholesome, especially eaten Eggs.
with the powder of eiebright, fried eggs and hard are blamed.

Of sauces, veriuice, vinegar of wine, and Sauces.
the juice of limonds, are accounted best; Pomgranats, not so good.

Of spices, cinnamon is commended by Spices.
Avicenna, as special good for the web of the eye, and for dimness of the
sight: so is saffron; ginger, both inwardly taken, and outwardly applied, doth
singularly clear the sight: cloves, mace, and nutmegs, and all three kinds of
peppers, may be used. Sugar is convenient to condite things, but Sugar. Honey.
Oil Butter.
honey is better: no oil is good, save pile olive called sallet oil, and that
is better the butter.

Albeit few raw herbs in common use Raw herbs.
for sallets are commended, except fenell, eie-bright, young sage, terragone,
which are very good: yet these are to be avoided as most hurtful, namely
lettis, coleworts, cabbages, beets, spinach, purslane, buds of dill, garlic,
chibbols, onions, skallions, c. Capers may be eaten: Olives not so good: radish
roots, persnep roots, are Capers. Olives Roots.
greatly dispraised: carrot roots, the buds of asperage may be eaten, but the
turnup or rape root, and the navew root are above The Rape Turnip.
all other noted for excellency to preserve the sight, and to that purpose
many do preserve with sugar these roots, eat them as sucket.

The most kinds of fruits are hurtful to the sight: yet pears and the better
kinds Fruits. Pears. Apples.
of apples, may be eaten with the powder of eiebright, or with fenell seeds
thinly encrusted with fine sugar: figs are very good, not only for the sight,
but also to open, Figs.
scour, and to cleanse the breast, liver, stomach and kidneies: so are raisons,
which Raisons.
have a special property to strengthen the liver: nuts are very evil, for
that they do fill Nuts.
the head: the walnut more tolerable then the hasell nut, chestnuts are very
windy, better friends for Venus, then for the eyes: dates are not commended,
nor mulberies. Dates Confects.


Cofectes made with fine sugar thinly encrusted about with turnip seeds, navew
seeds, fenil seeds, anise seeds almonds, pine apple kernels, ginger, cinnamon,
the powder of eiebright, c. are reputed as very good means to continue the
sight: likewise in the preservation of the sight, amongst other things, such
drinks, as are in common use and accustomed, are to be allowed: Drinks.
therefore he that hath used to drink beer, may not forsake the same so of ale.
Beer.


And in this respect it is not amiss at meat to drink wine, for them which have
been Wine.
accustomed to the same: although wine in some affects of the eyes is
forbidden, yet to preserve the sight, wine is not inconvenient, for the
vapours of wine are drying, clear abstersiue, so do consume and extenuate
gross and thick humours, so it be moderately take. In this place I do greatly
commend their counsels, which do prepare medicinable drinks with eiebright,
Medicinal drinks.
other things comfortable for the sight, to be used in the morning, and at
meates, if the patient can well endure so to drink the same: our authors
herein are very ingenious, some addressing drinks with one thing, and some
with another.

The simplest and most written of, is Drink made with ciebright.
with the herb called of the Arabians Adhill, in Latin Euphragia, in English
Eiebright, of whose miraculous virtues in preservation of the sight: Arnoldus
de villa Arnoldus de villa nova.
nova hath written in these words: Eie-bright is good any way taken, either
with meat, drink or medicine, green and dry, The praise of eie-bright for the
sight.
against all impediments of the sight, whereby the clearness of the same may be
obscured. And he writes thus of wine made with eiebright, which he
calls Uinum Eiebright Wine.
euphragiatum This wine (saith he) is made by putting the herb in the must
or new wine, until the same wine become clear to be drunk. By the use of
this wine, old men's sights are made young, it takes away the impediments of
the sight in all men, of all ages, especially in fat men, and such, which do
abound with phlegm.

One (saith he) which was blind, and did see nothing in long time, by using
this wine one year, was restored to his fight. The herb is hot and dry, and
hath by property of substance, to remove affects of the sight. And so the
powder of the herb taken Eiebright taken in an egg.
in an egg, or drunken in wine, doth vvonderfully perform the same. And there
are yet alive (saith he) witnesses of good credit, which have made proof
hereof in themselves, which could not read without spectacles, by use
hereof have recovered their sight to read small letters. And so Arnoldus
concludes, that nothing to do good to the sight, is to be compared with wine
made with eiebrright. If the wine be too strong, he counsels to allay the
same with fenell water, and to that intention, you may also add sugar.

In countries which for their common drinks do use wine and water, they always
do mingle things for the sight in wine, and not in water: for wine in truth is
a fitter liquor to receive the qualities and to carry the same to the eyes,
then water: which things they do put in the must, and so let it stand,
until the wine be ripe, and ready Eiebrigh may be used in beer, in ale, or
mead.
to be drunken, and so do use it.

Notwithstanding in other countries which have other usual drinks, the same
things may be put in their common drinks. So some have put them in ale, some in
beer, and some in mead, and no doubt but all these means are very good
according to the usage and disposition of the party. So even in this our
country, they which either by use or by constitution of body, may well bear
the drinking of wine, may well compound the same with things good for the
sight: others of hot complexions and dry, not greatly accustomed to wine, may
of ale, beer, and mead make such drinks, because in the North countries, ale
and beer are the usual and common drinks, and in some places, mead also is
much used: therefore in mine opinion it is convenient for most men, to make
these drinks with ale, beer, and mead, rather then with wine: and mead
assuredly is a very convenient thing for them which can well away with honey.

Touching the direction of those which How eie-bright wine may be used
have bin accustomed to drink wine, I do nothing doubt, but that they may
without offence bear such drinks for the sight, compounded with wine, to take
a draught in the morning, especially if they allay the same with the distilled
water of fenell, according to Arnoldus counsel. And for this purpose, choice
may be made of very good white wine, and the things may be mingled in the
countries where the wine doth grow, notwithstanding in that our The use of
eiebright ale, and of eiebright beer.
most used drink with meat is ale, or beer, these are very convenient to
receive these things for the sight, and absolutely better then wine, if ye
like to drink the same with meat: as our authors do counsel. Which ale I
think better to be made with Ale made with grout.
grout according to the old order of brewing. And so the things for the sight
may be sodden in the grout, or other way put How to make eie-bright ale and
beer.
in the drink, when it is newly cleansed, put into the vessel in which sit is
tunned to be kept, that in the working of the drink in the vessel, the virtues
and qualities of the things may be drawn and received into the same. When
these things are Eiebright mead.
compounded in mead, then the same are sodden with the honey, in such order as
other herbs are sodden, when they make methegline.

I think it best to begin with the simplest order to compound ale or beer to
each mans best liking with eiebright only, taking to every gallon of the drink
a great handful of the herb, and bind it together, The quantity of
eie-bright to the drink
or put it in raw and thin tinsel of silk, and so tie the same by a string
to the tap of the vessel, that the herb may hang in the midst of the
drink, not too low in the ground, neither to high in the barm, being put into
the drink when it is nevvlie cleansed: let all work together until the
drink be clear and ripe, to be drunken according to the common use, and then
ye may drink of it at pleasure in the morning fasting, and at meat also if
you will, and can well like thereof; and most men may like to drink it,
because this herb doth yield no ungrateful taste, but rather with a
pleasant sapour doth commend the drink. It were not amiss to avoid
windines, to every handful of the herb, to add two drammes of fenell seeds,
well Fenell seeds.
dusted, and a little bruised. As I do put this for more proportion to begin
vvith-all, that the stomach be not at the first offended with the strangeness:
So after a time, ye may increase the quantity, and put to every gallon of the
drink, two handfuls of the herb, wherein ye may best be directed by the
taste, that the herb shall yield into the drink. In the winter season Spices
may be added.
ye may also add some spices, as ginger, whole mace, a few cloves, nutmegs,
cinnamon, and make as it were bragget ale: which drink besides that it doth
preserve and clear the sight, will also help digestion, cleanse and cut
phlegm, and break wind.

I can witness, that many by this simple The effect confirmed by examples.
composition of eiebright and fenell seeds, have found great good for their
sight, not only to continue in good estate, but also that some have found
remedy against the dimnes other impediments, growing in their sight. In truth
once I met an old man in Shropshire called M. Hoorde, above the age of 84.
years, who had at that time perfect sight, and did read small letters very well
without spectacles: he told me that about the age of 40. years, finding his
sight to decay, he did use eiebright in ale for his drink and did also ear
the powder thereof in an egg three days in a week, being so taught of his
father, who by the like order continued his sight in good integrity to a very
long age. I have heard the same confirmed by many old me. Rowland Sherlooke an
Irish man, Physician to Queen Marie, did affirm for truth, that a Bishop in
Ireland perceiving his sight to wax dim, about his age of fifty years, by
the use of eiebright take in powder in an egg, did live to the age of 80
years, with good integrity of sight.

We do read of many prinkes to preserve Drinks more compounded for the
sight.
the sight, compounded not of eie-bright only, but many more things added: so
some put to it sage, some veruaine some celendine, and fenell seeds, anise
feeds, the forenamed spices: others elecampane roots, iris, galengale cubebs,
and in truth all these are greatly commended to preserve the sight, and may
very aptly be put in drinks for the sight: notwithstanding, for that we are
now to deliver a drink for the sight, which may be pleasing, and allowed with
meates, mine opinion is, that the same ought to be made as simple as may be.
For if Gallen in his 6. book de sanitate tuenda, doth prefer the composition
of the medicine termed diatrio^ The most compound not always best.
p^perio, which hath fewest simples because (as he writes) that is soonest
with less trouble to nature digested: surely the drinks for the sight, which
are compounded of fewest things, are most to be commended, especially when we
mean to use the same with meat, as all our authors do counsel us. Wherefore,
for my part at this time, I will only advise to have for use, either wine, or
ale, or beer, according to each mans best liking, made as is before prescribed
with eiebright and fenell seeds, to drink of the same in the morning, or if it
so like with meat, as other drink.

It is holden better to drink oft small Drink often small draughts.
draughts at meat, then seldom great draughts; for so meat and drink will
better mingle, and the meat will less swim Not best to begin the meal with
drink.
in the stomach, which gives cause of many vapors to the head. It is affirmed
not good to begin the meal with drink, but to eat somewhat before you
drink.

When you drink wine, if you mean to When to mingle water with wine
allay the same with water, it is best to mingle to the wine fenell water, or
eiebright water, Montagnana doth council to do the same some reasonable time
before you do drink, and not presently when you drink, as commonly men do.

Bread in our intention is to be made of fine flower of chosen wheat, always
leuened Bread.
and salted somewhat more, then common bread, well wrought, thoroughly baked,
not new nor old, of about a day or two days old. Vnlevened bread is not
accounted good: and the bread is better, if fenell Past with fenil seeds.
seeds be wrought with the past; to which purpose some do cause cakes to be
made of some portion of the dow, in which they knead the powder of fenell
seeds, and the powder of eiebright, and do eat them in the morning, and
after drink the eiebright drink, and make that a breakfast.

As generally in the preservation of Evacuatio.
health: so especially to continue the sight, it is convenient that the body
be obedient, and do his office for evacuation accordingly: and if nature
herein be slack, it may be procured with brothes made of loose herbs, as
mallowes, violet leaves, mercury, groudsell, great raisons the stones taken
out, damask prunes and currantes; and if need be of more medicinal things,
surely the same must be gentle: for as strong medicines, which make agitation
of humours are not good to be used for this intention: so gentle medicines
taken in due time, do great good to the sight: which I do leave to the
appointment and direction of a learned Physician. Of all manner of evacuation,
these which are done by vomiting are most hurtful: so are fluxes of blood by
the nose. And as belkes do ease the stomach, so much belking gives occasion
that fumes do arise to the fore-part of the head, whereby the sight may be
harmed.

Nothing is more hurtful to health then Fullness hurtful.
fulness. And he that will continue his sight good, must be careful of over
plentiful feeding, and therefore must end his meals with appetite: and never
lay gorge upon gorge, but so feed, that the former meat may be concocted,
before he do eat again. It is best to make light suppers, Use of Venus*
somewhat timely. As modest use of Uenus performed in the fear of God in due
time, when the meat in the stomach is digested, and nature is desirous to be
disburdened, is to be allowed: so immoderate and unseasonable use thereof, doth
of all things most hurt the sight and soonest induce sleep and watching.
blindness: over much watching is not good: very long sleeps are more hurtful
the mean sleeps of about vij. hours, are best: ye, better to abridge the
sleep to enlarge watching, then contrariwise; sleep taken in the night is
best, as most natural, when external air doth not distract natures motion,
and all external things concur to help sleep, therefore the more hours a
man doth borrow of the day for sleep, the worser. It is not good especially to
this our purpose, to sleep immediately after meat: for two hours at the
least ought to be put between meat sleep. Best to begin sleep upon the right
side, then to turn on the left side: to sleep upright upon the back is
nought generally: to turn upon the face vvorser for the The moon shi^e
hur^fu^ ^o the sight.
sight. Care must be had that you sleep not in a chamber, or any place in
which the moon doth shine.

Exercises are needful: the same best, after Exercises.
the belly hath done his office, that the excrements are avoided: otherwise by
exercise vapours are stirred, and do ascend Writing after meat
more plentifully to the head. All exercises must be done fasting, and none
after meat. And I wish you might after meat forbear writing by the space of
three hours: but if your course of life and calling will not so permit you,
you may herein follow Montagnaua his counsel, to write either standing
upright, or a little leaning and resting your head upon your right or left
cheek: in no case to write bovving your self forward, holding down the head.
When opportunity and time will serve, frictions Frictions.
with a rough linen cloth are very good, which are to be performed thus:
first to rub the feet, the legs, then the thighs, the hips, the buttocks,
ascending to the shoulders and neck with sof^e and long rubbings, even until
the parts begin to wax red. Amongst orders to remove the weakness of the
sight, Auicenna writes that the combing of the head is not of Combing hte
head.
least force, which ought to be done every morning fasting backwardes against
the hair, for it draws the vapours out of the head, remooveth them from the
sight.

Mirth, joy, pleasantnes of the mind is good: a little anger doth not hu^:
i^moderat Affictios of the mind.
sorrow, fearfulnes, al vehement affections are forbiddein al affects, but in
this our case chiefly as most hurtful to the sight.

To preserve the sight by medicines.
THE order to preserve the sight by medicines, doth consist of things
outwardly Outward medicines,
applied, inwardly taken. Amongst outward medicines to preserve the sight, it
is accounted a great secret, to smell much to marierum. So these things
following, are The smell of marierum.
found very much to comfort the sight in staying the visible spirits from
wasting: vidilicet, coral, pearl, the stone called Lapis Things comfortable
to the sight.
Armenius, spectacles of Christalline or clear pure glass, green sky colours,
to dip the eyes in cold water, to which purpose, many have cups made in the
form of an eye, called eye cups: to wash the eyes with Eye cups.
the waters or decoctions of eiebright, roses, veruaine. Some other things are
put Things put into the eyes.
into the eyes to clear the sight, to remove impediments which do often grow
there: to which purpose as approved very good without hurt, the iuices waters
of eie-bright, of fenell, of veruaine, of marigolds, of pearl wort are greatly
commended. And Montagnana doth mention a certain A preparation of the juice
of fenell.
kind of preparation of the juice of fenell, singular good to preserve the
sight from dimness, to take the juice of fenill in the month of April, and
to put it in a vessel of glass, with a long and narrow neck, and let it
stand fifteen days in the sun, that it may be well dried, then remove the
glass softly, that you do not trouble the residue, or grounds, and so power
it into another vessel: and to every half pound of the juice, put an ounce of
chosen lignum alaes, beaten into fine powder, and Lignu aloes good for the
sight.
let it stand other fifteen days in the sun. Then strain it twice through a
thick cloth and keep the clearest in a vessel of glass to your use: you may
drop a little hereof into your eyes to clear the sight. And some do distill,
this wood in a stillatory of glass and put the water thereof into the eyes
and hold this for a great secrete as miraculous to preserve the sight. And
the sam^ Montagnana doth compound an oth^ medicine more abstersiue to remedy
th^ dimnes of the sight, dissolving in an oun^ of the water of Rosemarie
flowers, tw^ Salgemma doth clear the sight.
scruples of Salgemma very finely powd^red, and filtered, and counsels to
drop the same often into the eyes; affirming by his experience, that it doth
so mightily clear the sight that suffusions are thereby wonderfully removed,
and especially moistures of the eyes.

I am here also in this place for the clensing and strenghtning of the eyes
especially to commend unto you the frequent use of old and clear white
wine, in which the Calaminar stone hath been ofrentimes extinguished: and
likewise the pure liquor of good sugar-candy dissolved in the white of an egg,
being hard roasted and the yolke taken out.

Also our authors do comed the washing The urine of a child.
of the eyes with the vrin of a child, and sometimes to drop the same into the
eyes. A lie of fenel stalks.
And for this purpose also they do commend ^ie made, of the ashes of fenell
stalks. We ^oe read in all our writers great commen^ations, A preparation of
the liver of a goat for the sight.
of a liquor of the liver of a goat, ^repared in manner following. Take the
liver of a male goat, not diseased, nor newly ^lled: and after it is well
washed, prick ^ in many places, and fill the same with ^raines of pepper, and
infarce the liver with the leaves of fenell and of eiebright then roast it with
a soft fire clear, not smoa^kie, until it be reasonably roasted: and i^ the
time of rosting, receive the liquo^ which doth distil, in a convenient vessel,
apply the same to your use.

Av^cenna in his third sen. third book^ and fourth treatise, cap. de
debilitate visu^ abou^ all other things doth commend th^ medicine called
collyrium de fellybus, for tha^ it cleanses the pores of the eyes, clearet^
Collyrium de fellibus.
and conserveth the spirits, mu^ difieth th^ moystures or vvaters of the
sight* as yo^ may read in Avicenna in the foresaid place.

Inward Medicines.
Medicines to be take inwardly are in number many: bu^ I think best at this
time t^ metion a few, which are e^sie to be had, as of gre^ efficacy most
comed: a^ of such the powder following is most si^ple: yet by expe^iece
aproved of such for^ A powder for the fight
that many, after their sight hath bin dec^ed, have by the use of it, received
again^ ^he same perfectly: the powder is thus made.

Take of the powder of eiebright. iiij. of mace. j. mingle them together, and
take thereof the weight of three pence before meat.

Montanu^ in his 92* counsel gives great A sirup for the sight.
praise to a sirupe, against the decay of the sight through the weakness and
dimnes of the same, which he compounds thus. Take of the iuices of fenel, of
vervaine, of roses, of each. ij. ^he leaves of the herb eiebright of endiue,
of celendine, of each M. S.
^oyle the herbs in two pints of water vn^ll the half be spent: then strain
it hard, ^nd mingle the iuices with the decoction, ^nd with sugar according to
art make a si^p, which is to be kept in a glass vessel. ^ou may take two
ounces of this sirup in ^ree ounces of the water of eiebright in ^e morning
fasting. In windy bodies he ^aketh the sirup thus, ^ake of fenell seeds, of
anise seeds, of each. iij. of the herbs of eiebright of vervaine, of
rose-leaues, of each M. iij. of celending* M. j. of rhue. M. j. S.
boil these in water until half be consumed: strain it harde, and with
sugar sirup pize the decoction: both these sirups ar^ excellent good to defend
the sight fro^ dimness.

Mes^e in his book called Grabadin, wr^ting of the diseases of the eyes, above
all other An excellent electuary to preserve the sight
medicines extols an electuary under the name of Hamaine, as having nob^
virtues to preserve the eyes, and to con^nue the visible spirits in their
cleareness^ which he compounds thus. Take the herb called Adhil, that is
eiebright,. ij. fenill seeds, Drams. v. mace, cubebs, cinamom, long-peper,
cloves,
of ea^ Dra. j^
beat all into powder, s^arse it, then (...) of good honey clarified, lib. j. of
the juice of fenill boiled and clarified, j. of the juice of rhue of celendine
both boiled clarified, of each. S.
boyle all to the height of an electuary, and then put to it the powders
according to art, and so reserve it in glass vessels. You may take hereos the
quantity of Dra. iij, in wine as Mesue writes: If wine seem too hot, you may
allay it with fenill water, or with eiebright water: it must be taken in the
morning fasting: and you ought to forbear the taking of other things, by the
^pace of three hou^es, and so at night, but then you must mak^ a light supper,
sup the more timely.

Where in this little Treatise mention is Distilled waters.
made of distilled waters, I wish the same to be artificially done in
stillatories of glass, ^hat the qualities of the herbs may re^aine in the
distilled waters. And therefore do not allow of the common manner of ^istiling
in stillatories of lead, by the which ^he watery parts only are drawn.

FINIS.

