Here begins a little treatise called the gouernall of helthe with ye
medicine of ye stomach.



IN this treatise that is clypped gouernall of health. What is to be said with
crystes help of some things yt lunge to bodily health had to be kept or to
bodyly health lost to bear covered is departed in.viii. chapytres yt is to say.
In the first chapytre of the profit of good gouernall of health. In the
second chapytre what is first on morrow to be done. In the.iii. chapytre of
bodyly exercise yt is to say besynes his profit. In the fourth chapytre of
spices of exercise. In the fyfthe chapytre how a man should behave him in mete
etynge. In the syxth chapytre how a man should be have him in drinking of his
drynkes. In the seventh chapytre what should be done after mete. In the.viii.
chapytre of the noise of evil governance.

IT needs him that will have lunge life to know the craft of holsom
governance. And so for to keep contynuelly the helthe of his body / for else
he may not come to his natural end / but he shall dye or his kyndly time come
/ and therefore thus saith Galye the conning. He saith of wholesome governance
is marvelous / for it makes a ma to live till he be old and without sykenes
in the last of his old aege. Therefore the same Galyen after that he knew the
craft of wholesome governance / came never in to no sykenesse but selde / that
was into a fymera that is to say a sharpe fever that was for trauayll in
vysytynge of his friends / about the comyn profit / for thus he saith / I
take god to record his augelles assigned to keep me that who that wylfully and
besyly will study in ye treatise of holsom gouernauce will keep all hole ye
doctrine thereof he shall never dye but on upon kyndly death which death is sweet
soft without great payne as the same Galyen wytnesse the in the difference of
feuerys. But vnderstonde yt holsom gouernauce may not duly keep that most
needs be occupied will him or nyll him and may not when him needs leave of for
thy it needs him that he have that needs him to his life without trauayll and
pencyfull and in all things that he be of free condition. And ferthermore it
is to wet that.viii. things at the leest ben need full in wholesome gouernaylle
of the which the first is a discrete chose of thoo things that shall be
eeten or drunken. The second is welfull bodyly exercise to foore meet and
that till the swetynge begin / of namely till his wind change fro sloughe
to sweetness. The third is well profytable and well needful that all that
shall be eten be wele and small chewed. The fourth is that thou ete while thou
hast talent to ete. The.v. is yt thou speak on morrow till you wake by thine own
will / for as Arystotle saith not only in metes drynkes be we nourished and
fostered but also in sleep. The.vi. is yt thou take no mete drink in sorrow no
in care but in Joy as much as you may The.vii. is that thou have no hold no
cold in winter no in somer after blode letynge. The.viii. is that thou use
saffron in thy mete / for it quyckeneth kyndly hete and comfort thy
dysgestyon and tarries thine old aege and brings in gladness lets thine
humours fro rotynge and dryenge.

IT is in stories of our elders yt on a time a mighty king brought together
three of the best leches that might be / of Inde / of Mede / and of Greece. and
he commanded them that each of them should study to assygne ye best medicine
which if a man would use should profit him to help of body him should need
none other medicine. Truly the leche of Greece assigned and said that every day
a man to take.ii. his mouth full of hot water / should make a man so hole
that him should need none other medicine. And the leche of Mede assigned and
said that it should profit much every day fasting to take gromel sede / I
say said Arystotle yt he that sleeps so much that he hath no heuynesse in his
womb of mete yt he toke to fore hy dare not dread of any great sykenes no of
ye gout Also who that eteth every day early seven dragmes yt is to say.xxi.
penny weight of sweet reysyns he dare not dread of flewmy sykenes his mind
shall be amended and his vnderstondynge shall be slere / and who yt uses in the
time according to his complexyon may be sure dread not of the fever quarteyne.
Also who that etethe nottes figs with a few leues of few yt day shall no
venym him noye. It was axed of Galye what medicine were most profytable he
answered abstynence. And costantyne saith in his book yt hight vyaryk yt who so
will keep his cotynuell health keep his stomach so yt when him needs mete leave
it not no take nomore thereof than him needs / the same understood of drink /
also in holsom gouernauce sleeth / wrath great thought / heuynes / anger such
other. For al ghostly accydentes yt is to say sudden falling in to a manes
mind outaken Joy alonly dry that moysteth netheles some heteth as wrath /
for thy wrath profyteth to flewmatyk men and it harms cleryk men. Moreover it
is to wet yt in lent season / yt is to say in veer in the beginning of somer
children be well at ease after the likeness of tempered qualytes but other aeges
ben well at ease in contrary times as old men in somer yonge men in winter
/ also in wholesome gouernauce keep this rule if thou will be hole soud / flee
heavy charges be not wroth / soup not to late / fl under meal sleep wake after
mete and eschew spare strong drynkes namely of wine: hyde not thy pysse / nor
constrain the not to syege / keep well these three things / gladness in mind /
travail in mesure / rule of mete / and drink as thou would / ete boldly in
wyter / and in veer scarcely / and in somer mesure well thy metes / and flee
namely fruits of auguste. Arystotle writing to great Alexandre and said sith
to man is a bretyll body me semethe I should write unto the some profytable
thing of lechecrafte if thou will he said besyly behold the ensample of
holsom gouernauce and live after this precious ordre of diet ye shall need no
leche out take accydentes of battle / such other / what is first on morrow to
be done

AFter that a man hath well and peasybly fulfilled his sleep loke he rise
clothe himself with good cloth and sweet if he have them / then he owethe to
walk a little evenly to stretch out his lymmes kembe his heed for why
kembynge draws out ye vapours yt come fro the stomach to ye heed in time of
sleep / therewith loke that ye be besye to put out ye superfluytes of ye body
insyegynge pyssynge coughyng and spyttynge / then loke he wasshe his hands his
face in somer with cold water / in winter with hot water. Then loke he pray
praise his lord after his doctrine of his law / vysyte the poor in god /
then if he like him he should study or rede dyspute or talk and wise men
couceyll saying besyly here in mesure be merry flee utterly wrath sorrow in
asmoche as he may / use himself mesurably to travail as walking or riding
in clean high places fro mire marros / for this profyteth much for it breketh
wind in a man body strength lengeth his lymmes comfort the hete of the
stomach and strength his Joints / and melts evil humours.

Of the body exercise and of his profit.
WE owen unto know by actors of lechecrafte that tho that shall live fair and
well in holsom governance / ought to have euyn and tepered exercise to fore
mete / for that gives to all the body tempered hete euyn and not passing /
which should a man exercise be / a phecysyen dyscryueth thus. Exercise is a
wilful meuynge by which a man wind is made great oft it needs yt this
trauayl be wilful / not stressed by need but that he be all fre and werke
after his own will. And therefore labour of carpenters ploughmen masones
mariners such other is none exercise of lechecrafte / for it hath not properly
wilful meuynge / merchants truly burgeys cloysterers such other walking
well lunge / but it is not properly exercise of lechecrafte. But when a man
walk frely of his own will / so swyftly till he begin to faint his wind
change / then anon he should rest / for if he meuyd any ferther / it should
be payne faintness / such exercise is cleped tempered for thereby grow many
gods to manes body first for thereby is ye kyndly hete stregthed each so ben
other four virtues yt is to say / virtue drawing / virtue defyenge / virtue
witholdynge / and virtue out putting and so ben there.v. bodily wits / yt is
to say / hearing / saying / smelling / tastynge / feeling / so be there three
myndly virtues / yt is to say / maginityf dyscretyf memoratyf. And though
error happed in all these werkynges of lechecrafte so it were not to notable
exercise were as should be should never man body need other medicine / for
exercise fulfylleth ye defautes of al other / for they be not merry ye dread
blodelettyge such other / but by exercise may be healed netheles.ij. thyges ben
needful to every well exercysed yt is to say yt he be not to full no to empy
to full then would the humours louse and so were great dread of the liver or
some fever or sudden death for thy in such a case loke that there be lunge
discrete abstynence so that he be not to empty for than should his body he
feeble out of mesure and at the last for feblenes it must needs lose / therefore
who that is to empty it needs yt he labour not till he be more better releued.
Truly auctours sayen yt exercise is one of the highest noblest thyge yt may be
done of to man body full needful it is in gouernall of health lengthynge of
life for why exercise fulfylleth the medecynes of blodes bathynges and such
other things / therein is no dread nor bytternes no exspenses / but therein is
pure recreation of body of soul so it be done in clean places / and than
should men show themself to the clean air delyte in saying far ne'er. water
land / heaven earth / grene falowe And in all these he should praise and worship
our lord god Fulgens dyscryuyth exercise in a full manner thus saying
exercise is true keeping of man life and prycke of kind slepynge the filth
of foul colour tendynge of slothes hete wasting of superfluytes saddynge of
lymmes sleynge of sykenesses dryuynge away of vices medicine of langores
wynynge of time debt of youth Joy of old or age help of health enemy of
ydelnes and dystroyenge of all evil. But among all other things it is to
wit that exercise mesureth mesurably heteth a man blode dries it. And
therefore mesurable flumatyke men should use it rest coleth a man moysteth him
that is good for coleryke men for thy he alone draws hyselfe from exercise yt
would fain fail Joy and felycyte in this lyf. Galyen saith yt great
purgacyons vomytes should not be taken but selden for great need for why Who so
will each month ones or twyes greatly purge himself he shall bring his body to
many evil uses for he shall engedre theri many noyous humours for why each day
exercise is fulled full to keep a man health for who yt eteth or drynketh
much / may not be hole but if he will sowhat sleep swynke. Then these things
yt be said it shows yt mesured exercise hath many profytes for it / styreth
ye kyndly hete opens the poores / louseth cold and thycke tough humours And
when they ben loused bears them out at the poores makes a manes joints
slipper light it coforteth all the members of a man body. Wherefore noyous
humours ben more holsomly pourged mesured by exercise than by laxatyues or
vomytees / for another of them may be without empeyrement of kind / and right
as due keeping of kyndly exercise is needful / so other while is rest. For
why rest in asmoch as it is contrary to exercise / some is bodyly / some is
ghostly / of which each either if it be mesured after that kind would it is
heleful both to the body and soul / and if it be not so it is contrary. For
why if rest be to much it engedreth nouryssheth and multypleth evil humours
and increases much corrupcyon. For why when water restethe to much it
styketh / so Iron and each metal rusteth when it rests.

The spices of exercise.
Spices of exercise ben there well many as there ben diverse states of persons
/ some ben strong and some be feeble / some rich and some poor / and some
prelates at the large and some subgectes and enclosed sotyme weder is fair
clear sotyme not so but derke rain / therefore it needs to have spices of
exercise for why ye best spyce ye first is to walk tofore mete in high places
and clean. Another spyce is to ride that is for rich men / but great prelates
must have other manner of exercise for why in chambre shall be a great corde
knytted in the end hanged up / and take that corde with both hondes and stoned
upright so that thou touche not the earth and stoned a good while then rynne
as much as thou may heder and theder with that corde and other while skyppe
/ and if this please the not / have a stone of.xxx.li. weight or there about
and if thou will have health therein oft bear that stone fro that one side of
the house to that other side / or a lunge while hold up that stone or thou let
it down or bear it about thy neck / or bythene thyn hodes / and so of other
manners till thou faint or thus hold a staff in thy honde let another take
it from the if he may with even draught / or thus close a penny in thine honde
and let an other take it if he may or thus hold thy breath as lunge as thou
may and then puff it out as herd as thou may do. And this manner of
exercise is full prouffytable to put out noyous superfluytees / for why many
superfluytees in sleep ben witholde therefore if thou have none other manner of
exercise holding of brethe helps it much. Yet there ben other manners of
exercise for yonge men that ben lusty as to run / to wrestle / to leap / too
caste the stone / and so of other plays / also tempered fresshely companynge
with a yonge brown woman is good in winter / and with a yonge white woman is
god in somer is also good and helping in governing of health to boby but not
to soul / except to them than that mowen have it by gods laws so netheles
that there be so much time between yt he feel hyself eased lyghtned in his
body and that he ete the better and sleep the better. But therewith vnderstonde
that asmoche as helps tempered compaynyenge so much noyeth dystempred
companyenge and namely to much for it coleth him wastes him febleth him. For
why man kind is made of ye best blode and best defied that hastily may
torn in to man lymmes. And for why when a man casts out that noble
humours to much he is hugely dyosclored and his body much febled more then he
let four sythes so much blode out of his body / also who that much deleth
or companyeth flesshly with a woman lightly catches the palsy with more
evil.

How a man should behave him in etynge.
When a man has well exercysed him as it is said tofore / rest a while after
and when a little fresshe whet breed well baked and somdele soured then drink
a draught of good clear wine or other good sauery drink then rest a while
after study in some wise means the have some solace mirth with thy friends with
other honest copany. Then ayest euyn take thy mete and supper most sauourly
but if thy custom be there against. But general rule of all fysyke and leches
/ is that thyn hour of etynge be when you art kydly hugry / tofore ye hugre ete
not / but if it be a little mess of good werme mete to provoke thy appetite
with when thou hast appetite let not / for as a fecysyon saith the stomach out
of use to suffer hunger fulfylleth ye body of roten humours. And then will a
manes body wex noughty humours / because yt the colere is draw to ye mouh of
stomach / so yt aftward when he would ete he may not. Ferthermore it is to wit
yt no man should ete but he knew certainly his stomach void of that thing
that he ete to fore / that shall a man know by desire that he hath to ete / by
plente of spyttynge coming up to his mouth. For who yt eteth without desire
of his mete shall find the kyndely hete of his stomach cold / he that eteth
with desire he shall find kyndely his stomach give up a smell and savour like
ensence / by these such other should be vnderstonde of them that have mete
ordained at their own will / and who that will not ete when some ever that he
might have mete for they ben not bounden to the laws of this craft dyatory
as to the qualytees of the metes / vnderstonde that thylke mete which that
most governs thyn helthe should not be passing in any qualyte / for why /
metes that ben to hot brenne the blode as pepper / garlic / onyons / crosses /
sauge / myntes percely / and such other / and tho metes that ben to cold
fresen the blode / as letuse / pursylam / gourdes such other. And if thy metes
ben to watery then they rote the blode / as ben melons / cocumbres / if thy
metes ben to dry it throws out thine vital virtues if thy metes ben to
fat they let thy dysgestyon and if thy metes ben to sweet they stope yt and
make the constypute costyffe thy metes ben bitter they nourysshe the not. And
if thy metes be to salt they brenne noye break thy stomach and if thy metes ben
to sour they make ye soon old. For thy none of these metes much contynuelly
use is good to health of man body but only that mete is good yt is tepored
lacks to mykelnesse as be these good metes for health of manes body holso labe
or yonge kyddes soukyg calves henes capos chekys {per}tryches plouers fesautes
small birds of ye field and of the wode but not of the water. And when the
season comes young rabottes pygges feet ben good other extremytees as groye and
eres scaled fysshe of clean rennynge water Rear eyren or eggs. Also borage ox
tongues whet breed well bake wellauyned somdele salted of yt that is one day
old or tweyne of other that ben not to much passing in any qualyte if we
dread excess of any qualyte amend it by the contrary thereof an insample if you
be seek of evil and tough metes use therefore sharpe metes short as a little
of harde chese scraped small and of little quantyte / also a pere or two or
three of the most best fruit to thy complexion nature. Sothly salt metes
sour and bitter may be amended with sweet apples sweet metes ben amended with
sweet honey and good old wine so of all other and if thou will ete fruit ete
them fast cheryse / grapes and almondes and after mete a few peers quynces and
nottes a few while they ben grene and walnottes ben best but let ye skin be
clean pycked away fro the mete. Also the complexyon of a man should be looked to
as if he tempered keep him so with like metes and drynkes and if it be
dystempred by his contrary bring it little and little ayen to tempre and for
why to sangweyn men dystempred give malyncolyous metes and to malyncolyous men
sangweyn metes to flewmatyk men / colered metes / for every evil complexion may
be brought to tempre. But if necessaries of lyuelode let it. And know when you
will note it for a sovereign notabylyte / who yt eteth oft mylk fysshe oft
katche thereof a lepre or a white scabbe. Also oft to use hye coloured wine
milk togyd brigeth a man to both lepre and scabbe / here none suffices of
qualyte of metes as to the quantyte / vnderstond that thy mete no thy drink
should be no more / but as thy kyndly helthe might overcome it else / thy body
shall wast thy virtues vex feeble. And for the quantyte of metes drynkes may
not certenly be spewed loke how thou felyst it hath done the most good and
such quatyte use. Ferdermore vnderstonde that no man should ete anon after
his exercise no anon after he were bathed / but first rest him a while so
that he hungre thenne when he will ete if he be a rich man set tofore him many
meets of which yt one is better than that other For a fecysyon saith it shall
better save him better nourysshe him skill why for mete yt is taken with delyte
the stomach hugely coueyteth hastily katcheth lunge holds well defyeth that
mete that is best defyeth is most nourysshynge for man body. Truly other
mete yt is not defied is taken with fulsones defyeth not well / for why a man
desire more moton the a capon ye moton shall rather be eten so of all other
metes. But there yt is much dystaunce in qualyte of metes we may not do thus
also beware yt it be none erraunt appetite as in women yt ben with child
though it otherwhyle be ye shall it not always be denied. Ferthermore as Galyen
saith yt at one meal me should not ete divers metes therefore at morrow ete but
breed alone at even flesh alone for when two divers metes ben take at one
male of the come two evils one in either by it self a another in them both
together in themself for then one trauayleth to torn in to great and heavy
humours and that other in to subtle and light in them both for if subtle mete
go before it is first defied and goes forth and draws with hy the great
metes vndefyed and if the great metes goo first to fore than the subtle mete
is not medefyed may not for the great go forth so it wexeth corrupt And which
of these manners ever it be always it is evil but more evil it is that the
subtle follow the great for the chaufynge / and chaungynge in to kind of
raunes may be helped / but the chaungynge in to corrupcyon never or selden and
of wonder harde is helped. And thereto accords Galyen a fycysyon other
doctors but nevertheless peradventure a contrary custom lunge used may do
away the corrupcyon. Also wet well that virtue of defyenge is oft broken
when raw mete is put on half soden for the one rawnes sheueth out the other so
the half soden is corrupt. Moreover that no man ete so much yt the stomach be
euyed therewith no that his appetite cease. But who yt uses great exercise and
to much selde and therewith eteth unruly and contyneth it he shall dye by
sodeyn death or shall feel wicked syknes ye though his mete were right good
for by cause his degestyon is corrupt therefore keep well thy stomach from to
much mete drink. And it so mishap any time anon with water and oil of such
other spue it out anon / and than sleep and if thou may not sleep walk
softly up and down and.xxiiii. hours ete not after / no drink not than ete
a little with a draught of good clean wine so the wine be not to great no of
high colour on the third day have some exercise be bathed than ete a little
after after sleep thou may than use this electuare dyatryon as saith a
fycysyon. Two cause be of sykenesses yt is diverse metes lunge syttyge much
etyge of diverse metes for of them ben gendred divers humours some good some
evil lunge sitting for then the mete yt is first take is defied or the last
begin to defy and so that is defied draws with him to ye liver yt is
vndefyed and so these two ben cause of great sykenesses. Also as old wise men
saying / mashold never ete his fill at one meal in taking divers metes for as
a wyseman saith no thing is worse than to multeply metes so to sit lunge
thereat for thy he saith yt men in old time were satisfied at morrow with breed
alone therwt they said reasonably the more mete should be toward euyn / but the
custom were contrary for a uycenne saith yt hole men should better ete at
ayenst night then on morrow for the kyndly hete is closed within the gadereth
about ye bowels / netheles flewmatyk me ete not to cold for they need but
little exercise to meue her kydly hete which mo weet by the morrow But now the
most usage is here again among many men it is food more holso to ete by day
then by night parauenture yt is skill of custom And therefore thus saith a wise
man short supper light supper is selde grievous great soupers noyen as leches
tech we rede it oft openly also as a uycenne saith between two etynges.xi.
hours to be is {pro}fytable so ete thryes in two days as to day twyes and to
morrow but ones and so to continue forth so yt if error fall in twyes etynge /
and so again ward for that one must be amended by that other since it is harde
to live without error in moreover vnderstonde that men that have good
vnderstondynge / etynge for they would live but they that gone by flesshelynes
would live for to ete ontrary to nature. And wit thou well that too a coleryk
man stomach when the virtue is strong and great hete great metes ben
good. As be of pork great venyson great bestly fish rough great breed salt
mete flesh half soden great mighty coloured wine / if ye hete of the
stomach be feeble if he have but little exercise ye metes aforsayd would much
noye hym-but to such a stomach give subtle metes as chekens small fish of
stony rennyge water. rear eggs breed well baken well soured small wine of
clean oryent colour not deep such other. But these metes should be corrupt of
an hot stomach / if the virtue dygestyffe be in ye mene time of dyetyng as
capons hens partryches such other. Also and gouernauce of health fl all
cessyuous metes namely these but if it be for a medicine / fl also al fruit
and all herbs yt ben not good as these namely / cole wortes letuse for they
make malycolyous blode Galye saith yt my fader ever forbad me yt I should ete
no new fruit grene if I would be without sykenesse / while he lived so did I
was also without sykenesse / when he was deed I ete fruit caught ye fevers /
after yt I caught conning to keep myself I kept me from fruit. And I had
nomore ye fevers / but if it were a little sharp. fever called offymera / all my
friends yt kept my doctrine / kept the fro fruit had their health / Arnolde a
great clerk saith thus. In lent loge usage of stoppyge metes / as fysshe pese
potage therefore it is profytable first to ete porrey of pesen / for this is a
war that wise men hath commended / thus it is made / do pesen in fair water all
night in the same water boyle them on the morrow a good while then cleanse the
and keep the clensyng and when mete time comes do thereto a little wine
powder of spyknard a little saffron clean small salt then boyle it on a walme
/ so ete it for it opens cleanses well the capytall veins of ye liver ye
ways oft of ye vryne / kepeth fro the stone grauelles namely if ye foresaid
pesyn be soden in the foresaid water with persely.

How a man should behave him in his drink.
THe less ye drink at mete ye better it is ever so it be mesurably taken /
for a man should not at mete drink much lest it make mete to swyme in his
stomach / wherefore me should dryke a little / so yt the mete be well meddled
tepred together. And then let it be a lunge while or you drink ayen / tha
drink a great draught at ones no drink not to much after ye first morcell
in no manner of wise / but drink oft a little a little of small clean wine best
according to health gouernyge of thy coplexyon nature / for health of body is
clean small claret wine not to new no to mighty so it be well proporsyonly
tempered with ye quantyte of clean water. More over no man be so hardy to
drink fasting cold water / nor after yt he hath accompanied with a woman nor
after great travail nor after exercise till he have first rested him / nor by
night namely if he have glove tofore / for why lunge sleep and fast slepynge is
cure thereto.

What shall be done after mete.
AFter when thou haste ete thou should stoned or walk a little softly up
and down till thy mete goo down to the botom of the stomach and thenne sleep
a little if that thou be used thereto both ye day and the night namely sleep
first on thy right side for that is kyndly for thy dygestyon shall be better
for then lies thy liver under thy stomach / as fire under a caudron. And after
thy first sleep torn on thy left side yt thy right side may be rested of thy
lunge lying thereon. And when thou hast lain thereon a good while slept turn
ayen on thy right side there sleep all night forth / loke yt thou lye not to
straight no to crooked with thy legs but in a mean between straight crooked.
And in no wise lye not upright / for the will the superfluytes abide within the
turn to wicked grievous evils contrary to health. Also to lie grouelynge on the
womb is good / so yt thy brethe be not grieved therwt ye heuyer the gretter thy
mete be the more thou haste taken thereof / ever the longer thy night sleep be
ever the subtyler yt thy mete be and ye less thou have ever the less should
thy sleep be. For sleep is full helpy to old men for it makes them moist and
therefore saith Galyen when he was old he ete letuses with spices for he would
sleep the better. More over sleep is full helpy to the dygestyon of thy metes
but not anon after that thou hast eten for thou myghtest be strangled. Also
wit thou that if a man byfore auauntyssyed of his body / much sleep then is
not god for him for it will waste his moystenes / and of one thing beware
that to lunge sleep or to short febleth a man body and breketh it. And
after thou hast ete take no latuaryes nor other hot things for they turn thy
mete to corrupcyon nor anon after thou haste ete run not nor ride not to
fast for then every strege meuynge thing turns thy mete to corrupcyon /
also ye virtue dygestyffe is nourished thrugh rest also after mete tofore
asmoch as you may sle wrath sorrow pecyfulnesse right as tofore me exercises be
good so after mete they noye rest is best. Moreover Aueroys saith right as
cold water caste in a pot boylynge lets ye boylynge for a time / so to
drink after mete namely soon lets ye dygestyon makes it to cease for a
time / therefore it is not good after mete to drink much till the mete be
defied / but after mete to suffer thrust somewhat is good. And if you will
easily void thy stomach stand after thy supper till you be weary or walk a
thousand paces wit thou yt glotery when thy mete defyeth not well what ever
ye case be bathing no blode lettynge no exercise ben not good but rest sleep
abstynence dyatryon pypyon. Exercise is not good for thereby should thycke raw
humours be lole then thereof the lymmes should be nourished yt were evil / for
why in such exercise ye kyndly hete is not comforted but more febled strauglyd
for ye raw humours are dyssolued for right as water quenches fire so raw
humours quenches kyndly health.

Of noyes of evil governance.
THere be many yt only not use evil gouernauce i metes drykes but also maytene
it / as they seyen be well at ease well defyen they scorn leches otherwise men
that use good governance for they believe yt they should be excused of their
error by there loge custom for why custom is a full strength in kepyg of manes
body. And ye said Galye thus custom is better defied / wherefore thus saith
Auycee evil mete used is better the good mete not used ye contrary of all these
saith Costantyne as it seems thus glad they not yt use evil mete though they
be not now hurt aft they shall not so escape / heart me may say ye custom
accords with kyde or if it accorde it shall be hold if it accorde not be not
roted it shall be caste away but not suddenly but little little. For thy though
it seem the yt good gouernaylle of custom that they ben well by reason of
custom / virtue / strength or aege. Nethelesse her virtues wasting pryuely so
every day they ordeyn the to lepre or to sodeyn death. As they yt lunge time
use befe old salted or bestly fish or raw flesh or they that sleep to
little / or exercise to much after mete or out of mesure cold or hot and so
of many other truly of such it may be said. But if they leave of / they shall
not a start the broke of death.

FOr health of body cover for cold thy heed
Ete no raw mete take good heed thereto
Drink holsom wine fed the on light breed
With an appetite rise from thy mete also
With women flesshely have not a do
Upon thy sleep drink not of the cup
Glad toward bed at morrow both two
And use never late for to sup
And if it so be that leches done the fail
Then take good heed to use things three
Temporat diet temporate trauayll
Not malyncolyous for none aduersyte
Meke in trouble glad in pouerte
Rich with little content with suffysaunce
Never grutchynge merry like thy degre
If fysyk lack make this thy governance
To every tale give thou no credence
Be not to hasty no suddenly vengeable
To poor folk do no violence
Curtoyse of langage of fedynge mesurable
On sondry mete not greedy at the table
In fedynge gentle prudent in dalyaunce
Close of tongue in word not deceyuable
To say the best set always thy plesaunce
Have in hate mouths that ben double
Suffer at thy table no detraccyon
Have despite of folk that ben troubelous
Of false raueners and adulacyon
Within thy court suffer no dyuysyon
Within thy household it shall cause increase
Of all welfare prosperyte and foison
With thy neighbours live in lest and peas
Be clean clad after thine estate
Pass not thy bonds keep thy promise blyue
With three folk be not at debate
First with thy better beware for to strive
Ayenst thy felawe no quarrel for to contryue
With thy subget to strive it were shame
Wherefore I couceyll pursue all thy live
To live in peas / and get the a good name
Fire at morrow and toward bed at eve
Again mists blake / and air of the pestylence
Be time at mass you shalt the better cheue
First at thy rysynge to do god reverence
Vysyte the poor with entyere dylygence
On all nedy have compassion
And god shall send grace Influence
The to increase and thy possession
Suffer no surfettes in thy house at night
Ware of rear soupers and of great excess
Of noddynge hedes and of candle lyghte
Of sloth at morrow no eslombre Idylnesse
Which of all vices chief porteresse
Void and dronklew / liars and lechours
Of all vnthryfty exile the mistress
That is to say dyse players hasardours
After mete beware make not to lunge sleep
Heed foot stomach preserve aye from cold
Be not to pensyfe of thought take thou no keep
After thy rent mayntene thy household
Suffer in time in thy right be bold
Swear none oaths no man to beguile
In thought be lusty sad when thou art old
No worldly Joy lasts but a while
Drink not at morrow byfore thine appetite
Fro thing contrary to their complexyon
Of great hondes the stomach hath great payne
Thus in two thyges stondeth all thy wealth
Of soul and of body who so list them show
Moderate fode gives to man his health
And all surfettes doth from him remewe
And charity to the soul is dew
This receyte bought is of no potycary
Of master Antony no of master Hughe
To all indyferent it is rychest dyetarye
Here ends the gouernall of health. Enprented in flete street in London in the
sign of the son by Wynkyn de word.

wynkyn de word




