A BOOK OF THE Invention of the Art of Navigation, and of the great travels
which they pass that sail in Galleys: Compiled by the famous Sir Anthonie of
Gueuara, bishop of Mondonnedo, Preacher, Chronicler, and Counseller unto the
Emperor Charles the fifth.

Dedicated by the said Author, unto the famous Sir Frances de la Cobos, great
Comptroller of Lo^, and Counseller unto the said Emperor Charles the fifth.
Wherein are touched most excellent antiquities, and notable aduertisements for
such as sail in Galleys.

Imprinted at London for Ralph Newberrie dwelling in Fleetestreate.

ANNO. 1578.

TO THE RIGHT HOnourable the Lord Charles Haward Baron of Effingham, and Knight
of the most noble order of the Garter: Edward Hellowes wishes long life, with
the fullness of all perfect felicity.
RIght Noble, I not only directed by the glorious Gueuara in this example and
treatise which he dedicated unto a noble man of Spain, in singular favour with
the Emperor Charles the fifte, but also constrained with the oppression and
burden of your bounty, wanting all other mean either of ability or faculty,
to discover my dutiful affection, with the more boldness, not without regard of
the mildness of your humanity, with an humble fear to be noted of mine own
part, of some presumption, or want of due consideration of any imperfection of
the matter, do present, respecting your age honour annexed unto the rare
virtues of fortitude and temperance, with the experience of the sea and sea
matters, with ships and shipping, wherein approved trial, no less worthy
credit, hath made known unto all persons not insensible: your readiness aptnes
in all weathers, to manure not only the meanest matters, as all manner of
cordage and tackle within board, namely sheat, halliard, bowline, tack and
helm, with such other, as also the use and practise of the Astrolobe,
Balistilio, Card and Compass: but also the diligent search in knowledge, of
all capes, forelands, shores, ports, creeks, havens, races, tides, banks,
and rocks. All which things although not usual to Noble men, yet most
necessary unto all manner persons that haunteth the seas: expresses kind to
be an assured guide, to yield unto your honour more expertnes then is common or
easily obtained, to be heir and successor of Neptunes charge and government.
This small treatise, (as a subject in nature) were it of worthiness sufficient,
most due unto your honour: but barren provision impayring my good meaning,
forces me to present unto your honour, the handful of water, (as it were)
which was presented unto the mighty Artaxerxes, who with such mildness did
accept the same, that he said no less nobleness did consist in receiving
small things, then to give great and mighty gifts. Right humbly beseeching,
that it may please your honour, not only to receive this simple present in
good part, but my sincere meaning into your good favour: and I shall not cease
with fortified mind to crave the omnipotent GOD to give your Honour large and
virtuous increase to the nobleness of your mind, as also the concluding and
most absolute felicity, which yields happiness in all worlds.

Your Honours most humble to command: Edward Hellowes.

To the Reader.
RIGHT Christian Reader, dedicating my self unto thy good disposition, by this
small treatise, I give thee to understand, of the first and old invention, as
also the inuenters, chiefly of Galleys, as also of ships: by which device
we generally conceive all countries to obtain participation of each others
commodities: Sea fishing with the profits and nourishment thereof obtained: as
also the territories of diverse countries defended: with diverse many such
others. Wherein of the other part, if I should allege the opinion of certain,
which affirm, that so vnremoueable bounds declares Gods omnipotent ordinace,
that every country so divided ought to content themselves to live, by the gifts
of the same God country: and that Gods justice consents not unto so great
mischiefs, which both first and last ships and galleys not only by murders
and slaughters have been committed, but also by transporting excessive
vanities, advancing this worlds insolency, would not grow overlong tedious,
but also somewhat besides the matter. But to the purpose, thou hast also
(gentle Reader) herein to understand, the opinions of diverse Philosophers, which
in their own persons would never consent unto Navigation, wherein as me
seems they have discovered their own weakness, of al men to be noted, but not
of all persons to be embraced. Also the mighty famous Pirates of old time, to
be marveled how they might attain unto so great power continuance: in the
end, unto so miserable destruction. Also privileges somewhat strange which
they use in Galleys, of all persons which mean to haunt the same to be noted.
Also the subtle disposition of the Sea, and perilous properties thereof aptly
declared. As also the necessary provision for passengers, therein to be used.
Farewell.

A Letter Missive, or Dedicatorie of the Author, unto the renowned sir
France de la Cobos. ()
AMongst the Philosophers, namely Mimus, Polystorus, Azuarchus, and Pericles,
there passed no small contention, and no less variety of argument, in the
definition, what estate or condition of men were most subject unto the
inconstancy of Fortune? unto whom she discovered her self most suspicious,
and least worthy credit. The Philosopher Polystorus said that Fortune was not
in any thing more vncerteine, wherein she did less keep promise, then in the
act of matrimony: for so much as there had been no marriage wherein there was
not found some want, weakness, or deceit: which is to say, that the wife
proved either foolish, subtle, absolute, of tedious parents, of dowry
vncerteine, full of strife, or such other infirmity. The Philosopher Azuarchus
held opinio, that Fortune was not more vncerteine or suspicious, then in the
feat of arms, or martial affairs: affirming, that it was in the hands of
men to enter battle, but in God only to give victory. The Philosopher
Pericles affirmed, that Fortune was not in any thing more inconstant, or
unsound, then with the private and favoured servants of Princes, with whom
she staid long in advancing of them, and after with a blast she overthrows
them. The Philosopher Mimus avouched, that Fortune in any thing did not more
use her will, and less observe promise, then in sea matters Nauigatio of
mariners: for there neither profits substance, or is wisdom sufficient:
either doth she respect persons: but if Fortune fancy, she leads a Lighter
amongst the mounteines of the high seas, and after drowns a Carrecke in the
haven. Applying that which is said, unto that which I would say, me seems
(right noble) that of these four manner of Fortunes, two of them are knocking
at your gates, which is to say, the possession of great favour with our Caesar,
and the oft sailing which you use at sea. He whose honour depends on the
will of others, many times commends his life unto the sea, the one is very
dangerous, the other proceeds of great rashness. Your honour performs no
small attempt, to beard make head against the stubling blocks that Fortune
bestows upon such, as she advances to great honour, but that you also hurl
abandon your person so oft into the waives of so fierce seas? Publianus the
Philosopher said, Improbe Neptunu accusat, qui iterum nanfragiu facit. As if he
would have said, He unjustly coplayneth of the sea, that two times passes the
same: since he that only twice passes the sea, hath not licence to complain
thereof: then, by what justice may he complain, that four times twice hath
provoked her fickle condition? Always give not credit yield not faith unto
signs, likelihoods, or coiectures, either for that always you are served with
a good galley, or make your choice of a good capteine, or special Pilot, or
served with most chief provision, and observe or watch most aptest time. All
which things give good cause the more doubtfully with less surety to return
unto ye sea: for that flattering Fortune never shoots her so cruel shot, as
against such persons only as she hath led many years in great security.
Lucius Seneca writing unto his mother, said: O my mother Albinia, if thou know
not, I give thee to understand, that I never gave credit unto whatsoever
Fortune did advertise me, although at times there was truce betwixt us: all
things which she sent unto my house, she said they were her absolute gifts,
but I never conceived or received them but as lent: by which mean it comes to
pass, that when she returns to demand them, without any altercation
willingly I do yield the: in such wise, that if she remove them out of my
confers, at the lest, she shall not tear them out of mine entrails. He that
said these and such like words, was native of Cordoua, which is not far
distant from your city of Vbeda: and further, he was as private with the
Emperor of Rome, as your honour is now in Spain: And after forty two years
that he had manured the common wealth of Rome, in ambush Fortune had placed so
great mischief, procured by her great despite, and no less deceipte, that in
one day he lost both life and goods. Sir believe me and be out of doubt, that
in this life there is nothing more certain, then that, what soever it
conteyneth is most vncerteine.

The Emperor Titus on a day eating with great joy, soudeinely at the table
clapped his hands and gave a great sigh, and being demanded, why he sighed so
deeply, made answer: I may not satisfy my self, with sighing, either
cease from weeping, so oft as I call to remembrance howe at the will and
pleasure of Fortune, my honour is committed, my goods sequestered, my life
deposed. Oh high, and very high words, right worthy to be written in the
hearts of the mighty! Opulent riches, high estates, and sovereign favours, if
I durst say, I would say, that it is more honourable and also more safe to
despise and hold them in small estimation, then to possess them: because to
obtain them it is but fortune, but to contemn proceeds of valor. To give
you counsel to cease to follow Caesar, were of too great want of reverence: and
to persuade you, not to return into Italie, were rash ouerthwartnes: but that
which I dare say, is, that you should as much presume to be a Christian, as to
be in favour: and that first you accomplish with reason, and then with
opinion. Not without consideration, I did say adventure my self to give you
this counsel: because all the mischief of Princes Courts doth arise, that
nation follows nation, people follows people, opinion follows opinion:
but reason never follows reason. And for that unto Princes we must give our
words by weight, unto the favoured by measure: my letter cocludeth with this
advertisement, that you commit trust unto ye Galley but sildom, but unto
Fortune never: because they be matters much better to behold far off then
wherewith at hand to be conversant. I have composed unto your honour a book,
entitled, An advise for the favoured, at times when you shall be on land to
peruse: now have composed this other treatise of the life of the Galley: for
when you shall pass the Seas, my intent hath been, that the one may serve to
pass the time, the other the profit of time. And if for that I am of small
power and less valor, you hold my watchings in small estimation, yet my
intent is not to be rejected: for that none doth so much desire, that you be
in favour, as I desire that you be saved.

A TREATISE OF THE inuenters and invention of the Art of Navigation, and of
the travels of the Galleys. Compiled by the renowned sir Anthonie of Gueuara
Bishop of Mondonnedo, Preacher, Chronicler, and Counseller unto the Emperor
Charles the fifte.
The Theme and Introduction follows.
To live in the Galley at the Seas,
God dispose it to whom it shall please.
WHich words being taken for the foundation of this present treatise, are the
terms of an ancient proverb, which amongst the common people is greatly
used, and of such as escape the Galleys much lamented. That which we term in
Spanish, Retrans: is said in Latin, Proverbs: in Greek, is understood,
Sentences: and in the Chaldean, is named Experiences: in such manner, that
Refrans, or Proverbs is no other thing, but certain Sentences of
Philosophers, and advertisements of men of experience.

In this manner and kind of proverbs, many ancient and learned persons have
written, That is to say: Xenophon the Thebane, Pittacus the Greek, Anacharsis
the Numidian, Solomon the Hebrue, Mythas the Egyptian, Seneca the Spaniard.
Plutarche Cheronensis saith, that he gave more credit unto poor women's
Proverbs, then to the sayings of the lofty Philosophers: for the one never
say but that which they have experimented, and the other do write very oft,
that which they do but dream.

If Trogus Pompeius deceive us not, in the common wealth of the Sicyonians,
Philosophie was never read, neither did they ad^t Philosophers, but commend
their warlike affairs unto valiant Capteines, and the government of their
Common wealth unto men of experience. The Sicyonians being demanded by King
Cyrus, who they did not admit Philosophers, or give themselves in Philosophie,
made answer: O King Cyrus, we give thee to understand, that this our country
is pair, and full of mounteines, hath more necessity of labourers and
ploughmen, then of Philosophers. And further, we find by experience, that from
studies they proceed more vicious then Philosophers: for which cause, we
determine to govern our Common wealth by the experience which old men
possess, not by the science which Philosophers do learn. That the Sicyonians
should utterly reject the learned, I condemn them for brutish: but jointly
therewith, for their government, by men of experience, I commend them as
discreet: because for mine own part, and also for thine that shalt either
hear or read this same, we shall be much better governed, by him that is of
two years experience, then by him that hath ten of science. The Theme of
this our treatise which saith:

To live in the Galley at the Seas,
God dispose it to whom it shall please.
We may safely and without prejudice swear, that it was not invented by the
Philosophers of Athens, but by mariners at Sea: for which consideration, it is
great reason that we believe and give them credit, hold it in estimation:
since the invention proceeds of matter well proved, and not dreamed or
divined.

But the matter is, that in this treatise we shall speak of the original, and
first beginning, of the manner making of Galleys, and what provision is to be
provided and used in them: all which things being said and declared, I am
assured that many will wonder, and some will laugh. All that we shall blazon
and say in this matter, our audience hath to understand, not hear-say, but
experience doth give us direction: for that scarcely there is not any port,
channel, or gulffe in all the Sea Mediterrane, but therein we have been,
having also passed no small danger. That which is said suffices for the
introduction, and there rests not, but that ye he attentive: for that he
goes to the Galley in an evil hour, that takes not hold of this my
doctrine.

Of the strange report of Historiographers, concerning Galleys. The first
Chapter.
BEfore King Ninus, before the destruction of Troie, before the flood of
Can^ion, and before the great battle at Peloponnesus, although many and very
notable things were found and invented by curious men, of delicate judgment:
yet we know not who were the inuenters, although their inventions remain with
us at these days: for that in those so ancient worlds, men understood not
to read, much less to write.

After that mans industry at leisure had found out letters, and the manner
order of writing, we know every notable thing, from whence it was invented,
howe it was invented, who was the inuenter, and wherefore it was invented.

Amongst all old things, one of the most ancient is the art of Navigation:
in which many have said many and variable things in their writings, wherein,
for so much as they have been so diverse and contrary in opinions: it is
very credible, that they were rather feigned, then either seen or read. But
that which we mean in this matter, is, that for such as are curious, we will
write curiously, that which in this art of Navigation, the most ancients have
written, as well Greekes as Latines: and it shall rest in the discretion of the
wise Reader, that he believe what he thinks to be true: and as touching the
rest, to hold it as fabulous.

And for that in this treatise our principal intent is, to speak of Galleys,
of the inuenters and travels thereof, we shall here recite, howe many fashions
of them were used in old time, amongst the ancients, as well Greekes,
Egyptians, Carthaginians, as also Romanes.

Writers of histories do report, that Demosthenes the Thebane was the first
which invented to row with two oars on a bank: which was some what before
the siege of Troie.

Also they report, and the Greek Thucidides says no less, that a tyrant of
Corinth named Amonicles, was the first that invented Galleys, with three oars
on a bank.

The Gaditanes, and the Penes, have great contention betwixt themselves, for
the first invention of four oars on a bank. But Aristotle doth rather yield
his opinion in the favour of ye Penes, who used that new invention, when they
came to succour the Lydians their friends and confederates.

The Galley of five oars on a bank, is said to be the invention of the
Rhodians, when Demetrius did besiege them: and others give the glory of this
act unto Nasicus a renowned capteine of King Cyrus.

The Galley of six oars on a bank, Plutarche saith was the invention of
Amonides the Lycaonian: but Thesiphont denies that it was the invention of
any, but of Xenagoras the Syracusan, in the days ye Nicias came from Greece to
subvert Syracusa.

The Galley of seven oars on a bank, Plinie in a certain Epistle would give
us to understand, to be the invention of Nessegatus.

Pretonius a most ancient writer doth afirme, the invention to apperteine
only unto Promotheus the Argiue: and yet others do say, that the singular
Alchimides in invention did find out the same: and which of these is true, he
knows that is only true.

Plutarche in the book of the Fortune of Alexander, would give us to
understand, that when Alexander the great did make an army at the Sea against
Diomedes the tyrant, he had a Galley rigged and furnished with twelve oars on
a bank: although of truth he writes it so obscurely, that therein he
discovers his want, both in knowledge and exercise of Navigation.

If any will give credit unto Barbo^us Theneus, must hold it as verified,
that the great Ptolomeus which was named Philadelphus, attained to have four
thousand galleys of twenty oars on a bank, the shaftes all trimmed with lead,
to yield them pliant and handsome for rowing.

Th^s^phont, Alercius, also Hermogenes make mention of a certain Galley, made
by the ancient Herisson of Syracusa: which had two forecastels, and two p^pes,
and under hatches, xxx. chambers, and a pond of fish that contained twenty
thousand Canthars of water: adding thereunto so many other strange things,
that they rather seem Poetical, then otherwise.

Also it is said of Ptolomeus Philopater, that was king of Egypt, against
whom the good Machabeans did fight: that he made a Galley of forty oars on
a bank, which was so stately to behold, so harde to be governed, that it
contained more then four thousand oars, besides six hundredth mariners.

The son of this said Philopater, which also was named as his father, made
another Galley, not so stately, either so costly, but more beautiful, also of
greater devise engine: wherewith in Summer he did solace upon the river Nilus,
and did winter the same in the Isle of Meroe.

After the terrible battle Pharsalian, where Pompeie was overcome of Caesar,
they say that Caius Caesar pursued and also did take a Galley, that fled from
that conflict of five oars on a bank, wherein there were so many trees with
fruit, as it had been an orchard of Campania.

Lucius Seneca, in a certain Epistle, reprehendeth Lucullus the Roman of a
certain curiosity, or to say better, a vanity: which is to say, that he made
a Galley near unto his house of the Castle de Lobo, which was so large, that
therein they did not only chase the mad Bull, but also the Mariners gatt
infinite money, to give place unto multitudes of people to behold the same.

Dionysius the Syracusan, and Phocion being mortal enemies: Phocion caused a
Galley to be made, wherein he, with his wife, children, servants, friends,
alies, and confederates, amounting to the number of six thousand and odd,
which in the day time came up the river, and at night did retire unto the Sea.

Of Aurelianus the Emperor his Chroniclers do recount, that after he
triumphed of the Queen Zenobia, he caused on the river Tiber such and so
great a Galley to be made, that the largest parts of Tiber hardly might
contain the same: in the waste whereof there was room sufficient, with horses
to run the Carrera, as also to torney and just.

To say all the frivolous vanities that in this matter of Galleys is said and
written, would grow very large to be written, and tedious to be read: only
we will recite these few, to the end the readers may understand, that also
we have read, and thereof very little believed. In this Chapter following, we
will report the opinion of other history writers, as concerning the invention
of Galleys, the which in my opinion are more credible, that which they have
written more to be credited.

Of the inuenters and vsers of Galleys, serving for Navigation, and of diverse
their deeds. The second Chapter.
THeseus the renowned Grecian, was the first that did change and alter the
great city of Athens, naming creating therein Senators, commanding Palms to
be given unto ye Conquerours: which custom endured until the time of the
Romanes, who afterwards devised to give their Conquerours triumphs.

This Theseus was he that entered the Labyrinth, and slew the Minotaure, gave
an order to the people to live, as also unto their soldiers howe to fight:
because he was a Prince of a clear delicate judgment, and of a valiant and
noble mind.

This Theseus in a conquest, which he determined upon Rothana, which is a
country in Asia, of his own proper devise invented the first Galley of this
world: which first devise atteined but unto thirty oars, and the mast of
xl. shaftments.

The Atheniens held this new devise in so great veneration, that their King
Theseus being dead, they placed the same within a temple, where long time
afterwards it was kept and conserved.

Alcibiades was among the Greekes of noble blood, and of devise very
ingenious, although of him not very well employed: for that he naturally was
an enemy to quietness, and of great affection to innovations.

This Alcibiades did use much to say, that only for one thing, men ought to
travel in this life, which is to weet, to be famous amongst strangers, and
a Lord in honour amongst his vassals.

He being condemned to dye by the Atheniens, hearing the sentence, said: Not I
of them, but they of me are condemned to die: since I go to the Gods, with
whom none may die: and they remain amongst men, with whom none may live.

This unquiet Prince Alcibiades came unto the city of Syracusa of Trinacria,
with an hundred thirty Galleys, thoroughly well rigged and furnished with men
and munition to destroy and subvert the same: for that he was advertised they
had armed a navy to chastise his insolent deeds done at Sea.

This Alcibiades was ye first that added other twenty oars unto the Galleys,
and unto the mast fifteen shaftments, also of the Galley he called the forep^t
Prora, and the hinder part Puppis.

Themistocles the Greek was a mortal enemy unto Aristides the Thebane, for
the death of the beautiful Aestigilia, whose death and injury, was of all the
people of Greece bewailed: and by the hands of right glorious Princes
revenged.

Being demanded of a Greek, whether he had rather resemble the great
Achilles, that achieved so great and many things, or the Poet Homere that did
write them with so high a style: thereunto Themistocles answered: I would
always rather triumph with Achilles, then proclaim with Homere.

Being demanded of his enemy Aristides, why he was so ambitious of wars,
since the attempters thereof (for the most part) did all perish therein,
answered: I confess, o Aristides, that many that are affectionate unto the
wars, do perish therein, but thou may not deny me, that very few
which are not dedicate thereunto, be crowned.

When he was requested, and also counselled to marry his daughter unto one
that was very rich, no less covetous, he answered: I would rather have a
man that hath need of money, then money that hath need of a man.

The Atheniens being in great fear of the Cretensians, with whom they
traversed cruel wars, but the more, for that they had Atheutides of Corinth
for their Capteine: thereunto Themistocles answered: fear not Theutides, for I
know him, that if he have a sword to kill, he wants an heart to draw it
out of the scabbard.

This Themistocles did arm and rigge forth an hundred Galleys, against the
Agisinetes, who were pirates, all whom he did take and hang: which deed made
him in Greece to be served, and in the Seas to be feared.

This noble gentleman was the first that invented to place the forecastell,
where mariners might shroud themselves from the weather, and with more safety
fight with their enemies.

Symon, a famous Capteine of all the Lycaonians, when his friends and parents
did sharply reprehend him, for leaving his study, and negligence in letters,
he answered: Brias my brother is meet for study, because he is flegmatike:
and I for the wars, since I am choleric: for that Philosophie agrees very
well with men that be dull and negligent, and war is to he commended unto men
of lively and entermedling Spirits.

When in the Senate of Athens they argued in his presence, whether were more
safe to have a good Capteine and a weak army: or a strong army governed with
a weak Capteine, he answered: For my purpose, I had rather have an army of
Hearts, a Lion being their Capteine: then an army of Lions, being governed by
an Heart.

Being bound unto the conquest of a certain people of the greater Asia, and
also persuaded of a Capteine to send for the Agisinetes, who did know very
well to die, he answered: The Gods never command, either my destinies permit,
that any such people should marche in mine army: for in the wars we have no
need of men that know to dye, but have courage to kill.

This Symon was the first that gave order in the Galley to row with three
oars on every bank: and first invented also the misen sail.

He obtained an hundred Galleys to his own proper use, of whom Plutarche
says, that he so vowed him self unto the Sea, that he passed three years, in
all which time he never set his foot on land.

King Demetrius, who was son unto King Antigonus, as he had success with
Fortune, so did he order his life: which is to weet, in time of peace he
would suffer nothing that might be tedious: and in time of war, he admitted
nothing that might be pleasant.

If King Demetrius had been answerable in his old age, to the beginnings of
his youth, he had been another Achilles amongst the Greekes: and another
Caesar amongst the Romanes.

His father King Antigonus being dead, although he always followed the wars
that he had enterprised, and the parcialities which he had taken in hand, on
the other part he was so inconstant of his word and promise, and so
effeminate in his facts, that to follow his love Lamia, he suffered detriment
in his fame, was abhorred of all Greece.

King Demetrius being demanded, why in his youth he had been so prosperous,
in his old years so unfortunate, answered: Because I was an enemy to reason,
and gave overmuch trust unto Fortune.

In great conflicts and perils, many times sighing he did use to say: O
deceitful Fortune? howe easy art thou to be found, but howe difficil to be
kept?

Being blamed by his familiar friend, for his often murmuring at Fortune, by
whom he had obtained so many victories, and was endued with so many gifts:
he answered: Oh, howe great reason have I to complain of Fortune? which with
victories hath made me a fool, and with adversities hath not rendered my
wit.

This King Demetrius always delighted to have a great fleet at Sea: was the
first that invented Galleys with xxv. banks: amongst the rest, he made a
bastard Galley, which was furnished with four hundred oars, and contained
two thousand armed men.

Philopater the Thebane, although nature had made him lame on one foot, and
squint in one of his eyes, yet his great and doughty acts were such, and so
renowned, that he was entitled throughout all Greece, Philopater the just, for
his good government: and, Philopater the fortunate, for the victories which
he obtained.

A certain Capteine named Aristo, thwarting Philopater with words of
reproach, that his lame foot in the wars did rather serve him to stumble,
then to fight: Philopater answered: O Aristo, I confess unto thee, that to go
to ye wars, is a matter much more safe for thee then for me for unto thee
there wants an heart to fight, yet hast thou feet to fly: but unto me
there wants feet to escape by flight, but no heart or courage to endure all
conflicts and hazards.

This Philopater was much and long time at Sea: and being demanded, if he were
not at some times afraid, he answered: We that go to Sea, are but only once
afeared: and that is on land, before we enter the Sea: for after we be entered
and determined, then we hold it for most certain, that at the mercy of a
proud and lofty wave of the Sea, a sandy bank, or a ragged rock, we lead
our lives to be sold.

This philopater came from Asia to conquer Rhodes with an hundred Galleys, all
rowing with seven oars on a bank: certainly, a thing very monstrous to
behold, and no less difficult to sustain.

Many Princes both Greekes and Latines did imitate philopater in making
galleys with seven oars on a bank: all which did perish, and had an end:
and in the end of many experiences practised in Galleys, they resumed in
general, that the good Galley is not to be more then of five oars on a bank,
either less then three.

The renowned Cleopatra sometimes Queen of Egypt, and only love unto Mark
Antonie, (which love cost him his life, and her both life and honour:) when
she passed from Egypt unto Gracia, to encounter with Caius Casar, the oars
of her Galley were of silver, her anchors of gold, her sails of silk, the
ppooe of Marfile entailed.

Behold here the inuenters of Galleys, also their inventions, wherein, to this
day, Seamen have always somewhat to be amended, and no less to be added.

Of the first invention of Navigation, and the great dangers thereof, and of
many philosophers that would never sail or pass the Seas. The third
Chapter.
IF we should believe Isidorus in his Etymologies, the Lydians were the first
that invented the art of Navigation, who attained not, but to the joining of
certain beams or logs, which being fastened and calfated, they entered into
the Sea, fishing therein: not with courage sufficient to wander far from
land.

After the Lydians, the Sidonians were the first that added their invention of
certain baskettes made with Willow rods, skins, canes, and cement,
wherein they did not only venture to fish, but also to sail somewhat further
into the Sea.

Long time after this, the Islanders of Choronta brought forth the invention
of mean Barks: and also of little ships made only without all other matter
but of timber.

All writers of histories do agree, that somewhat before the battle at
Maratho, Epaminondas the Greek, did finish to place in perfection the manner
of sailing, and the form to make ships: for in the Peloponnesian wars,
the renowned Capteine Brias was present, with ships, Carreckes, and Galleys:
but be it as be may, and the invention to whom it appertains: for many times
I staye to consider, howe loathsome it was unto the first man, that being safe
on land, would committ him self unto that watery Element, and unto the waives
and pillars of the Sea, since there is no sailing so sure, wherein betwixt life
death is contained more then a board.

As me seems, exceeding covetousness, and want of wisdom, did join hands
in the devise and art of Navigation: since we see by experience, that for men
not infected with covetousness, endued with peaceable disposition, there is no
land in this world so miserable, which stretches not to serve the necessity
of mans life.

Herein it is seen, howe man is much more brutish then all other beasts,
since all beasts do fly, for no other cause, but for fear of death, pressed
by nature to conserve that life which is given, and may not be had, but only
by divine gift: only man, being captive unto covetousness, saileth, and
goes to the Sea.

But thou, O Mariner, give me to understand, if for the salvation of thy
soul, or conversation of life, any safe matter may be found at the Sea?

What thing is contrary unto us on land, which is not much more on Sea? On
land we are vexed with hunger, cold, thirst, heate, agues, sorrows,
enemies, misfortunes and angers, all which things do yield double and
treble vexation unto men at Sea.

And besides all this, the sorrowful sailor stands at the mercy of the
wind, to be overthrown, and of the terrible waives to be drowned.

I neither lye, or repent my self to say, that if covetousness did not
tyrannize mans heart, there would no fleets remain on Sea: for that is the
only cause that doth alter their hearts, draws them from their houses,
yields them vain hopes, places in them new strengths, banishes them from
their countries, makes them towers of wind, deprives them of their
quietness, leads them wandering out of their wits, carries them sold
unto the Sea, and also tears them in a thousand pieces on the rocks.

The Philosopher Aristo said, that he died twice, that died on Sea: that is to
say, first his heart was drowned in covetousness, and after his body in the
water.

Certeinely, a sentence right worthy to be noted, and to memory to be
commended: since God hath not created man to dwell in the Seas, but to inhabit
the heavens.

The Consul Fabatus, in three score years, which he lived, he never passed
out of his city Rhegio, to see the city of Mesana: which was distant by water
but nine miles, and being demanded in this case, why? he answered: The
ship is foolish, and vncerteine: for she never stands still. The Mariner
is foolish, and vncerteine: which is never of one judgment. The water is
foolish, and vncerteine: for she never ceases her unquietness. The wind
is foolish, and vncerteine: which in her flight is so variable. And since
this is so true, that shunning but one fool on land, howe would thou that I
should commend my life unto four fools on Sea?

From a clear judgment, of a man of experience, of a wise Philosopher, and of
a man of great sapience, was this answer of the Consul Fabatus: for if we
profoundly consider the furious importunity of the Air, the rage and swelling
of the Sea, the inconstancy of the ship, the tedious travel of the Mariner,
and the discomfortable voyage of the passenger, as God shall save me, and so
never more, let me return to Sea, if all that willingly go to Sea in
ships, deserve not most justly to be bound as distraught fools.

What portion of wisdom may he contain, which lives in the Galley? What
thing may thou more justly sing in the Galley, then that response or answer
of the dead, which says: Memento mei, Deus, quia ventus est vita mea.

Is not wind perchance thy life? since thy chiefest business in the Galley,
is to talk of the wind, to behold the wind, to wish for wind, to tarry
for wind, to fly the wind, or sail with the wind?

Is wind perchance not thy life, that if it be contrary, thou may not go
thy voyage: if it blow extreme, although large, yet must thou amain: if it
be calm, then must thou row: if it be a tempest, then must thou hale, or try
for thy life: and if it blow from land, then must thou not believe it: in such
wise, that it shall be no false witness to say, The wind be thy guide, since
thy fortunate or unfortunate life consists in the wind.

There is no man on land, be he never so poor, that in a great necessity
obteineth not money to yield him self relief: or children, to serve him: or
friends, to succour unto: or parents, to restore him: or assistants, by
whom to be supported: or neighbours, in whom to put his trust: Except the
miserable person that goes in the Galley, who hath placed his life at the
judgment of a foolish Pilot, and of a contrary wind.

Plutarche reports of the Philosopher Att^lus, who dwelling in the city of
Sparta, through the midds whereof ran a great river, would never pass the
same, to view the rest of the city all the days of his life: affirming, that
the air was made for birds, the land for men, and the water for fish. It is
said, that this Philosopher ieasting used to say: When I shall see fishes
walk on land, then will I go sailing at Sea.

Alcimenus lived ninety years amongst the Epyrotes, unto whom was left a
certain inheritance, which he would never accept, or as much as view the
same, for that it lay on the other side of the river Marathon: affirming it to
be a miserable inheritance, the profit whereof must be conueyed by water.

Marcus Portius Censorine, at the point of death, said, that in his life he had
offended the Gods but three manner of ways, which is to say: for that there
had passed one day, wherein he had committed no virtuous act in the Common
wealth: for that he had discovered a secret of importance, unto a woman: and
for that, when he might have travelled on land, he sailed as a passenger on
Sea.

Cropilus Philosopher and disciple of Plato, commanded the windows of his
house that were towards the Sea, to be dammed up. The question being
demanded, why? he answered: To escape all delight to enter therein: for my
master Plato did oft use to say: That sailing at Sea was rather the exercise
of fools, then of Philosophers.

Titus Liuius saith, that his Roman people were not more happy on land, then
unfortunate on Sea^ for which cause the ancient Romanes never consented to
make or send forth Galleys or Navies, from the time of the good Camillus,
unto the birth of the great Scipio.

When the Senate of Rome determined to make conquest of Asia, and to the same
effect commanded the Consul Cneius Fabricius to provide a great navy: with a
load voice the Consul Fabius Torquatus exclamed: all men that hear me, and
the Gods that see me, I call to witness, that I am not, or do consent, unto
this counsel, which is to we to: that the fame glory that our mother Rome
hath obtained by land, ye should committ unto fierce waives of the Sea: because,
to fight with men, is but Fortune: but to deal with winds, is great
foolishness.

Wherefore, the word of my Theme, seem to be well said, which is:

To live in the Galley at the Seas,
God dispose it to whom it shall please.
Of many and very famous Pirates which have lived on Sea. The fourth Chapter.
SPeaking with truth, and also with liberty, sailing in the Galley along
the coasts, is somewhat more safe, but in no less danger, being ingulffed.
Whereof it may very well be gathered: that Galleys were rather invented to
rob, then for navigation.

Before the Greek Theseus invented the making of Galleys, it is not found in
any history that ye Sea was haunted with any Pirate or robber: but since the
making of Galleys, there hath never wanted that hath descended to sack towns,
and also to rob at the maine Sea.

If I be not deceived, the end wherefore any man makes a Galley, is either to
defend his own country, or else to offend strangers.

And as the Galley is both tedious, and also costly, so I think not that any
man employs therein his own proper goods, but that he supposes to sustain
the same by other means substance.

And as there: have been many excellent persons, which have been renowned by
the conquest of countries, and subduing of people, by land: So have there been
many much feared, and famous, for their robberies, which they have committed on
Sea.

The famous Pirates of old time, have been many: but amongst the rest, the
most r^ wined was Dionides in the reign of Alexander: Aeste^, in the days of
Demetrius: Cleonidas, in the time Ptolomeus: Chipandus, in the government of
Cyrus: Miltas, in the rule of Dionysius: Alcamenus, in the alteration if the
estate committed by Caius Caesar: and Agathocles, in the happy years of the
good Augustus.

To make an ^ire report of the beginning^ which these Pirates had, the
robberies they did, the perils they passed, the men murdered, the towns they
subverted, the cruelties they committed, the wealth they obtained, the ends
they made, the Fortunes wherein they finished, would grow very large to
report, tedious to read.

For the present, it shall be sufficient to say, that none of these Pirates dyed
in their beds, either made a will of their goods: but the hour being come of
their sorrowful destinies, they quited the mischiefs they had committed, and
did not enjoy the riches which by robbery they atteined.

And because it shall not seem, that we speak at large, or of favour,
somewhat we will say of them.

Dionides was Pirate in the Leuant Seas, in the reign of Alexander and Darius,
which would neither serve she one, or make peace with the other: but without
respect of any person, made good price hauoke of all things.

Against this Dionides, Alexander commanded a great fleet or navy of
ships to be rigged: who being taken, and brought before his presence,
Alexander said: Tell me Dionides, why hast thou escandalized the whole Sea?
Who answering, said: Wherefore hast thou sackte the whole earth, robbed all
the Sea? Alexander answered, because I am a King, but thou a Pirate. Whereunto
Dionides replied: O Alexander, we are both of one condition and office, but
that they term me a Pirate, because I affaile with a small army: and thou
art entitled a Prince, because thou rob with a great Navy. O that the
Gods would grow mild with me, and Fortune cruel against thee, in such
wise, that Dionides might be Alexander, and Alexander turn to be Dionides: it
might happen me to be a better Prince then thou, thou a worse Pirate then I.

Aestelio was a Pirate sixteen years on the Adriatike Seas, in which he
committed great robberies upon the Bactries, and did great hurts unto them of
Rhodes. Against this Pirate King Demetrius caused a certain fleet of ships
to be rigged and launched: who being taken, and brought before his presence,
was demanded: Aestelio, what offence have the inhabitants of Rhodes done
against thee, that thou hast so robbed them? the Bactries, that thou hast so
subverted them? Who answered: Tell me Demetrius, what had my father done
against thee, that thou shouldest command him to be slain? And, what offence
had I committed against thee, that thou shouldest command me to be banished? I
counsel thee, O Demetrius, in this last and extreme hour, that thou persecute
no man to the uttermost: because it is not a little perilous, to deal
extremely with any man that hath lost his honour, and is of desperate life.

Cleonidas was a Pirate in the days of King Ptolomeus, who continued in that
estate, traversing the Seas xxii. years, of which he was never seen in seven
years, to set his foot out of the Galley.

This Cleonidas was lame and crooked, whom Nature had not marked in vain: for
he was most cruel with such as he had taken, and with any observed no truth.

The enemies whom this wretched Pirate recovered into his hands, amongst
other torments which he gave them, their hands feet being bound, he did fear
them with ladels of hot oil.

Against this Pirate King Ptolomeus commanded a fleet of ships to be set
forth, who being taken, and brought before his presence, the King said unto
him: What barbarous inhumanity, or rather, what infernal fury hath taught
thee torments never heard of, to be practised upon men like thy self?

Whereunto Cleonidas answered: I will not only torment mine enemies in their
bodies, wherewith they did persecute me, but also burn their entraile^
wherewith they did hate me. King Ptolomeus commanded this Pirate Cleonidas
daily to be scalded with hot oil, to increase his pain, by enlarging of his
life.

The Pirate Chipandas was native of Thebes, which did concur with the days
of King Cyrus, and was a person valiant, liberal, and of great power: for he
obtained to possess an hundred Galleys, and thirty ships, where with he
forced service of all the Kingdoms of the East, and terrified all the Princes
of the West.

Against this Chipandas King Cyrus commanded a great navy of ships to be
rigged forth: who being taken and brought into the kings presence, said unto
him: Thou Chipandas, receiving my wages, why went thou to serve the king of
Parthians? Who answering said: The laws which are made on land, bind not
such as go to sail and live at Sea: and such as we use on Sea, are not
observed on land: which I say, for that it is a custom amongst us Pirates,
that weee as oft change our Master, as the wind changes on Sea.

Miltas, the Pirate, was in the days of the first Dionysius of Syracus^, who
were great enemies, and strived, not for the sovereignty in virtue, but who
should obtain the highest degree in vice and wickedness: for that Dionysius
subverted all Sicilia, and Miltas sacked all Asia. This Pirate Miltas traversed
the Seas of Asia more then thirty years, in the end the inhabitants of
Rhodes armed certain ships against him, who being taken and brought unto
the place of execution, life up his eyes to heaven, and said: O Neptune, the
God of Seas, why doest thou not help me at this instant? since I have
sacrificed within thy Seas, five hundred men, whose throats I did cut with mine
own hands: forty thousand I cast over board, and thirty thousand that
have died of diseases, and also twenty thousand which have perished fighting
in my Galleys. Is it now possible, that I which have slain so many, should
now be slain of one only man?

Alcamenus was Pirate in the time of Silla Marius, who followed the parcialitie
of Silla: And as Caius Caesar fled from Silla, he was taken by Alcamenus, unto
whom ieasting he did use to say, That he would get loose, and hang them all.
And after, when Caius Caesar saw him self Lord of the Common wealth,
presently he commanded a great fleet to be armed and rigged against
Alcamenus, who being taken and brought to the place of execution, said: It
grieves me not of all that which I have lost, or of the death^ which I shall
dye: but to fall into his hands, whom I had in my possession: and that he
should command me to be hanged, whom I might, and should have hanged.

As we have said of these few Pirates: we might say also of others of great
antiquity, and also of later time. But it suffices, that,

To live in the Galley at the Seas,
God dispose it to whom it shall please.
Of many and great privileges which they have in Galleys. The fifte Chapter.
SInce we have spoken of the foundation and beginning of Galleys, and of the
notable persons that were enemies of Navigation, and also of the most famous
Pirates that vowed themselves to theft: we will now say somewhat of the
notable conditions of Galleys, and of the great privileges wherewith they are
privileged.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that all manner persons which shall enter
therein, must always sail very suspicious of Pirates that shall take them,
and no less timorous of the cruel Seas that shall drown them: for there is
no Sea so safe, wherein wanders not some notable Pirate: or absome time
rises not some cruel storm.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that for all men which shall enter and sail
therein, before all things, must lose all liberty of commandment, and
jointly therewith, both Capteine, Patron, and all the whole ^roope of Mariners
he must obey: and if he will there any thing presume of that which he hath, and
of his value and worthiness, the most poor Rower shall say unto him, that
presently he be packing out of the Galley, and go to command at home in his
house, in an evil hour.

It is a privilege of the Galley, whether she be of her own condition, either
straight or large, of oars much pestered, and no less cumbred with other
carriage: the passenger that shall enter therein may hold it for an advise,
only to lean where he may, and not to sit down at his pleasure.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that the passenger which shall enter therein,
be he never so worshipful, rich, or stately, must call the Capteine,
Seignior: the Patron, Cousin: the Boteswane, friend: and the pages of the
Squiffe, brethren: and the rowers, companions. The cause proceeds, that the
passenger in the Galley wanting all liberty, hath there of all persons
necessity.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that all manner of persons, which there will
enter or pass, must be humble of conversation, patient in their speech,
dissembling in their necessities, and of much suffering in injuries: for that
in Galleys, it is a thing more natural to suffer injuries, then either to do
or revenge them.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that all persons which there do enter, shall
want the conversation of women, of deintie diet, of fragrant wines, of
comfortable and sweet smells, of cold waters, and such other delicacies: all
which things they shall have licenes to desire, but no faculty to obtain.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that all manner persons which there do enter,
shall eat ordinary biske^ with a condition, that it shall be covered with
Tapestry of Cobwebs, black, worm eaten, ratt eaten, also wet either more or
less. And also I advise the squint eyed passenger, that if he be not handsome,
readily to take it out of the water: I bid him to an evil feast.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that if at any time, by descending on land,
the passenger shall obtain any small parcel of bread, that is new, white,
and well seasoned, that he adventure not to feed of it him self alone, but to
make division thereof amongst his companions: and it shall happen, that he
alone being the only buyer, shall obtain so much unto his share, as may serve
for a piece of holy bread.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that no man at dinner time, shall there
demand water that is either clear, cold, whoalsome, or sweet: but of force
must content him self to drink troubled, gross, warm, unsavoury water: yet
is it no less true, that unto such as be very nice, the Capteine gives
licence, that all the while they shall be a drinking, with the one hand they may
stop their nose, and with the other hand lift the pot unto their head.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that if any passenger betwixt meals would
drink a little, refresh his face, or wash his mouth or hands: the water
which he therefore needs, he must either crave it of the Capteine, or bribe
the Steward, bring it from land, or buy it of some Rower: for in the Galley
there is nothing more desired, and whereof is less abundance, then water.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that no passenger shall presume to shed water
in the poop, or much less adventure to spit therein. And he that shall
herein be negligent or careless, the Capteine shall chide him, and the
sweepers for a penalty shall receive six pence: in such wise we control no
Mariners for spitting in our Church, and they make us pay a tribute for
spitting in their poop.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that the flesh which they ordinarily shall
eat, is joints of Goats, quarters of Sheep, salt Beef, rusty Bacon, not
boiled, but parboilde: not roasted, but burnt: in such wise, that being set on
table, it is loathsome to behold, harde as the devil to gnaw on, salt as
broyne to feed on, and indigestible as a stone.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that if the passenger will eat any Mutton,
Beef, or Kidd that is fresh, he must either buy it of the soldiers which
have stolen it, or adventure on land for it. And when he hath all done, is it
true that he shall enjoy it? No, truly: but he that shall flay off the skin,
of right must have the skin, the entrails, and a quarter: and after, with
the flesh which remains, he shall be charged with rosting and boiling, and
commonly at large, with all persons to eat it.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that any person that would eat boiled meat,
he must steal, bribe, or buy, and in time provide a pot: which after he hath
gotten, he him self must wash it, dress it, scum it, and also watch it:
and to remove from thence for no cause: for if otherwise, but with the turning
of his head, another shall eat his boiled meat, and he shall be left to make
report of the jest.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that he never staye to dress his meat until
he have an appetite, but when he may: for, as the pots, pipkins, morters,
caldrons, kettels, spittes, and grateyrons do compass the hearth, the passenger
shall go and come, as one poar-blinde: if first he have not recovered
friendship with the Cooke or Steward.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that the passenger yt will there feed in
platters, with spoons, upon trenchers, and with sawcers, that first thereof he
make provision for him self, or bribe the steward, or hire them of some rower:
and if he happen to be careless to provide them, or negligent to procure them,
the Capteine will friendly give him licence, to cut his meat upon a board,
and sup his potage out of the pot.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that if any passenger would eat with
gravity, that is to say, with clean napkins, large towels, table clothes, he
must bring them not only all ready bought, but as well kept: for a merchandise
so cleanly, is seeldome found in Galley: if in this, as in the rest, he be
forgetful, he may with a safe conscience, as also with shame enough, wipe on
his shirt, and now and then on his beard.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that therein is no bench to lye on, no stool
to repose on, no window to lean on, neither board to feed on: but jointly
therewith, that licence which they give unto the passenger which is dim
sighted, that harde by the hearth, he may eat on the floor as a More: or upon
his knees, as a woman.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that every passenger, rower, mariner,
seruaunt, ecclesiastical, gentleman, or knight, may with a safe conscience,
break his fast without grieve Figs, without Cherries: a beaver without
Apricockes: a supper without Cream: and make collation after supper without
green Almonds. If of these such other refreshings, he shall happen to have
some appetite, or taken with an extreme lust: he shall have time sufficient to
sigh: but all place opportunity wanting that should obtain the same.

Of other twenty travels that are in the Galleys. The sixte Chapter.
IT is a privilege of the Galley, that on the day in which sailing ye shall
pass a gulffe, or that soudenly any tempest do arrise, they kindle no fire,
they dress no meat, that all passengers go under hatches: because to raise
the mast, it is necessary that the Galley be free, clear, not pestered: and
it is most true, at that instant and conflict, the confusion, noise, cries of
the mariners gives more terror, then the rage and fury of the Sea.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that all passengers which be Christians, and
have the fear of God, at the passage of any gulffe, or any other danger,
commend them selves unto God, repent them of their sins, reconcile them
selves with God man, and make some vows: all which things, and much more, is
done at Sea: and after on land, silde or never, is accomplished.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that when the Sea doth go aloft, the wind
contrary, or any furious tempest assail, the Mariners are accustomed
presently to bring home their anchore, they take in their Squiffe, take down
their hale, and uncover the poop: then, wo be unto thee, thou poor passenger,
because thou shalt remain at the mercy of the Sun which shines, to
receive all water that shall rain.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that as often as the wind changes, so oft
the sail is altered, and if it blow much wind, they strike sail: and if it
be more calm, they hoysse sail. And that wherein the passenger hath most to
employ him self, is to lift up his eyes unto the foresaile, lay his hands
unto the rope, and occupy his heart in the torment: for in the Galley at Sea,
there is no greater sign of danger of life, then when the Mariners do often
hoysse and strike the foresaile.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that no man presume to crave either field
bed, sheets of Holland, pillows of down, or Moriscoquilts: but jointly
herewith, if the passenger be delicate, or be acrazed, the patron will give
him licence, to sleep upon a board: and for a pillow, to lay his head upon
a Target.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that no man, be he never so woorshipfull, may
obtain a place assigned to walk in, or else to retire, neither at all times
when he would to sit down: if any man desire, in the day time, to be
sometimes in the poop, and to sleep on nights in some room of Crossebowe
shot, he must first buy it of the Capteine by force of praying, and obtain
it of the Boteswane for good money.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that if any man need to warm water, to make
lee, or drive a buck, to wash his shirt, that he care not to attempt or to
remember the same: but if he will be occasion for some to laugh, and others to
scoff and deride: But if his shirt be somewhat foul or sweaty, and hath no
change, forcibly he must have patience, until he go on land, or by
rottenness to finish the same.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that if any nice or curious passenger will
needs wash any handkerchife, headkerchife, towel, or any shirt for his own
person, that it be in no fresh or sweet, but salt water. And as the salt
water doth breed ytch and scurffe, so the Capteine will give him licence, and
the Boteswane will allow him place to rub his back against the Mast, or
seek a Rower to scratch the same.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that no passenger shall be bound, or as much
as to adventure to pull off either hose or shoes, doublet, coat, or cloak,
when he goes to sleep: because the poor passenger hath allowance of no
better bed in all the Galley, then the garments which he shall wear.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that the beds which there are made for
passengers and Rowers, have no appointed head or feet, but that they lye down,
where they may, and as it shall chance, not as they would: which is to weet,
that the one night, where they shall lay their heads, the next night to place
their feet. And if by chance his companion have eaten Chestnuttes, or supped
with Radish, and so shall let fly, you understand me what: Good friend, thou
must make thy reckoning, that thou did dream it, and never report that
ever thou heardest it.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that all fleas that leap upon the hatches,
and all lice that breed in seames, and all cheslockes that walk in chinkers,
be common unto all men, and be divided and parted amongst all men: and if any
person which is fine and nice, shall appeal from this privilege: from
thenceforth I prophecy, that if he make but a secrete inquiry, in his neck
and bosom, and a privy search in his breeches, he shall find more lice,
then money in his purse.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that all the Rats, and Wezels therein, both
dare and have liberty, when they may, without any penalty, to steal from
passengers, napkins, and fine Sendall, silk girdles, old shirts, fine
Coyffes, and also perfumed gloves: And all the same to hide to sleep in, to
breed in, to bring up their young ones, and also to gnaw on when they want
meat. And brother passenger, marvel not when thou feel, that sometime they
do bite thee: for that when I passed betwixt Tunes and Sicil, they did at one
time bite me by the leg, and another time by the ear: and as I had sworn
to the privileges of the Galley, I made no boast thereof.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that the bread, the cheese, the wine the
bacon, the flesh and fish which thou shalt prepare for thy provision, thou
must give thereof unto the Capteine, Boteswane, Pylott, Mariners, and to him
that is at helm. And as concerning that which remains, hold it for
certain, the dogs will have a catch, the Cattes will have a snatch, the
Rats will gnaw, the Stewards will tithe, and the Rowers will steal: in such
wise, that if thou be a little dim sighted, and not very well advised, the
provision which thou made for a Month, will hardly last thee ten days.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that if the Billow do somewhat roll, or the
tempest rise, or the Galley passing some race, thy heart will be dismayed, thy
head grow idle, thy stomach wamble, thine eyes wax dim, thou beginnest to
belch, and discharge thy stomach of all which thou hast eaten, also lie down
upon the hatches: and think not that any of the beholders will hold thy
head, or cherrishe thee with a caudle: but they all at deaths door with
laughing will say, it is nothing, but that the Sea will make a proof of thee:
thou being at point of thy last gasp, and also in utter desperation.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that if any passenger will at some time
refresh him self on land, recover a Canne of water, or seek or buy fresh
victuals, or with others strike an hand, as a Friar, he must ask leave of
the Capteine, and entreat the Boateswane to arm the Squiffe: he must flatter
the pages to set him on land, and promise them somewhat to tarry for him:
and give money unto him that upon his shoulders shall carry him out of the
water: And if for the wickedness of his sins, he be not ready to embark
at the first sound of the retreat, the Galley shall make sail, and he shall
remain on land to be hanged by the Justice.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that every passenger yt will purge his
belly, is forced to ye common places of the forecastell: or else to climb and
stay by some loop hole for the Crossebowes: and that which may not be said,
much less done without shame, all men may so openly behold him, sitting at
his necessities, as if he sate banqueting at the table.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that no man presume to crave to drink in
plate, in glass of Venice, or pitcher of Barcelona, or nutt of the Indies: in
such a case, if the passenger have not provided a cup or pitcher, wherein to
drink, the Capteine will dispense with him, that in a spoon of wood,
(wherewith the Rower eats his potage,) they will give him to drink a little
water.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that neither Capteine, Pursser, Patron,
Pilot, Rower, or passenger may hold, keep, or hide any wife of his own, or
others, married or at large, but that of all persons in the Galley she shall be
seen, known, and also served of more then twain: and if any there do
adventure to pass, they are rather lovers of charity then of chastity: and
sometimes it chances that some wretch hath brought her to his great cost. And
she of her own courteous condition yields pleasure unto many.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that freely a Friar of Saint Benet, Saint
Basil, Saint Austine, Saint Frauncis, Saint Dominicke, Saint Hierome,
Carmelite, Trinitarie, and Mercenary, may go therein: and to the end, that
such religious men, may go there with safe conscience, the Capteines and
Purssers do bear them in hand, that they have obtained a Bull, to be
divested of their habit, coules, crowns, girdles, and scapularies, in the
place of Breuiaries or Portasses, they place in their hands oars to learn to
row, and to forget to pray.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that the ordinary neighbours, and
fraternity thereof, are false witnesses, pirates, thieves, traitors, men whipped
and mangled, adulterers, homicides, and blasphemers: in such manner, that unto
him that demands what is a Galley? we may answer, It is a certain prison
of the wicked, and a scourge to all passengers.

Of other greater travels and perils, which they pass that go in Galleys.
The vij. Chapter.
IT is a privilege of the Galley, that all the Purssers, Patrones, Pilots,
Mariners, Counsellers, Pages, Helm men, Sweepers, and Rowers, may ask, take,
bribe and also steal from the poor passengers, bread, wine, flesh, bacon,
cheese, fruit, shirts, shoes, caps, cotes, dublets, girdles, and cloaks: also
if the passenger be somewhat poare blind, and hath not his purse tied fast unto
his arm: let him make a reckoning that he forgot it in Civil.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that that which is once lost, forgotten,
lent, or stolen, the right owner may safely yield up his account, that for
evermore he hath lost the fight thereof: and if by the force of entreating, and
not without money, the Boteswane do proceed for search thereof, and in terms
to find the same: let the looser be assured, that ye thief with his
vnshamefastnes will much rather cast it over board, then with safe conscience
make restitution.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that when they go on land for water, or
fetch wood, if by chance they find any lamb, or stumble on a cow, meet
with any sheep, encounter with a goat, or light upon any hog, goose, hen,
pig, or pullet, without all rambling of stomach, or scruple of conscience,
they take and kill them in the Galley, as if in the market place they had
bought them.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that when the soldiers, the Rowers, the
Barbarous, also passengers, go on land near unto some rich or wealthy
place, there are no woods which they hew not, no hives which they do not
vnemptie, no dove house which they view not, no game which they hunt not, no
garden or orchard which they do not ransack, no maid or woman whom they do
not violate, boy which they steal not, slave whom they remove not, vineyard
which they gather not, bacon that they vnhange not, either garment which they
bear not away: in such wise, that in an hard year the frost, hail, and
grasshopper, do not execute so great harms, or commit so great cruelties, as
they of the Galley do perform in one half day.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that if any bankrupt, quareller, periuror,
ruffin, robber, thief, or murderer, be once there placed, no Justice may
there enter to make search, or any person which is offended, to accuse: and
if any such, through the wickedness of his own sins, do once enter, either
they set him to the oar, or apply him to some miserable use: in such wise,
that in the Galleys it is, where good men be cast away, and evil defended.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that therein they have liberty to live in
the law wherein they were borne, which is to say, married, unmarried, Nonnes,
Monks, Friars, Priests, Heremites, Greekes, Indians, Heretics, Moors, and
Iewes: in such wise, that without any scruple on Fridayes, ye shall behold the
Moors make feasting, and the Iewes on the Saturday keep holiday.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that if any poor passenger would carry to
sea, any chest with victuals or apparel, or any trusset with bedding, or
barrellet with wine, or pitcher of water, he must hold it for most certain,
that for the Capteines consent, the Rowers for carriage, ye Purssers for
registering, the Stewards for keeping, some will have money, and others be
served: in this case they are not satisfied with that, which you would give:
but that they must bear away, all that, which they demand. For my self, I
may safely swear, that in our last voyage with our great Caesar, in the
ports of Barcellona, Mallorca, Menorca, Sardinia, Lagoleta, Callar, Pallermo,
Micina, Riioles, Naples, Saicta, Ciuita Vicia, Genoua, Nissa, Freuil, Tholou,
and the dead waters: I had more trouble, and spent more money, with imbarkage
and disimbarkage of horses, mules, servants and provision, then ever I
passed, or would have thought in all my life.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that at the time of lading or disimbarkage,
of the poor passenger they take account of his money, they open his chests,
they take view of his stuff, they rip his packets, and take custom for all
the same: and if the passenger be poare-blind, or somewhat squinteyed, they will
not only take the right eye, but also the left.

And for that it shall not seem, that we speak at large, I swear by the law
of an honest man, that for the custom of a catt, which I brought from Rome,
at Barcellona, they did take half a Riall.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that upon the waters there is no Galley so
perfect, sufficient, or so furnished, that in her is not some want, or
defection. which is to say, that either she is weak of timber, old, heavy, a
slug of sail, not armed, open, leaketh much water, or is unfortunate: in such
wise, that notwithstanding she be furnished with the best Patron, or chiefest
Capteine, there is always in her, more to be wished, then to be praised.

It is a privilege of ye Galley, that neither on Christmas or Sabboth day, the
Rowers and passengers cease not to play, steal, blaspheme, travel, or sail:
for that Feasts and Sabbothes in the Galleys be not only vnobserued: neither
do they know when they fall.

It is a privilege of the Galley, to be oblivious of all days and times of
abstinence, for that their godly devotion to fast is never moved, but by some
extreme necessity and want of victuals.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that neither mariners, rowers, adventurers,
or any other officers, have any care, or make any conscience of Religion, or
any part thereof: but only that good part of a Christian which remains in
them, is: that in a dangerous torment, they begin to pray, to sigh, and weep:
which being once past, they sit down at great leisure to eat, talk, play,
fish, and also to curse: recompting unto each other, the dangers that were past,
and the vows which they had made.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that all neighbours, inhabitants, and
passengers therein, stand discharged, of all customs, portage, loanes,
tributes, subsidies, pensions, tenthes, and first fruits, either to the king
or Church: as also discharged of all excommunication, for any offence
whatsoever. And when in jest I demanded a testimonial of their confessions,
presently they would show me a pair of cards: affirming that in that holy
fraternity, their chiefest religion was to play, curse, and swear.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that none which shall there happen to die,
shall be bound to be innoyled, or pay for ringing of bells, either to the priest
for his burial, either building of his sepulchre, either to the friars for
their diriges, either to the poor for carrying of torches, either sowing of
his winding sheet: because the miserable, which there once dies, shall
scarcely yield his spirit to God, when they shall hurl the body unto the
fishes.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that there all manner persons do eat flesh
in Lent, in Vigils, and all other days forbidden: and question being
demanded of their want of shame or of conscience, they answer, That since
all manner persons on land, do adventure to eat fish which proceeds from
the Sea, upon any day: by the same reason it is convenient for them, to eat
flesh at any time, that comes from the land.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that all bread, wine, bacon, powdered flesh,
cheese, butter, raisons, biscuit, dishes, and pots, which shall remain unto any
passenger of his provision, to leave all unto the Galley at his departing unto
land: in such wise, that they never cease to take the surplusage: and in time
of necessity, to relieve always, not so much as with a raison.

It is a privilege of the Galley, that every passenger that presumes of
Gentry, courtesy, or shamefastness, to gratify the Capteine, to embrace the
steward, to speak unto the Pilot, to take his leave of the whole company, to
reward the sweepers, to give somewhat to the helm man, and also to have
remembrance of the pages of the squiffe: all which if he do not perform,
they will yield him a cruel departure, and will not afterwards accept him into
that Galley.

But the conclusion is, that notwithstanding their privileges are many,
notable, and extreme, we always affirm, and confirm with the words of our
Theme, which is to say:

To live in the Galley at the Seas,
God dispose it to whom it shall please.
Of a certain subtle discretion of the sea, and of her perilous properties.
The viii. Chapter.
SOmewhat being said of the privileges and conditions of the Galley, now let
us say somewhat of the nature of the sea: for that it is no small error to
commend our life unto him, whose virtuous conditions, or cruel inclination is
to us unknown.

To the end we may understand the deeds of the sea, consider the name
wherewith she is endued: since this her name, Mare, imports none other thing
but bitterness: because her water is very bitter, but her condition most bitter.

The sea is not so well conditioned, that any man should adventure to enter the
same, of will, but of necessity: because that man which saileth, except it be
to the discharge of his conscience, or defence of his honour, or to support his
living: I say and affirm, that such a one is either unadvised, or detests
his life, or else they hold him as a fool, or as one distraught of his wits.

The sea is delectable to behold, and perilous to pass.

The sea deceives no man, but once: for whom she once deceives, shall never
more complain of her.

The sea is a Mine, where many be enriched: and a Cemetorie where infinite
people are buried.

The sea, if she like, doth suffer to be sailed with a plank: and if she be
enraged, she consents not a Carrecke to endure her.

The sea resembles a fool, for that she alters every quarter of the Moon:
and makes no difference betwixt a king and a plough man.

The sea suffers neither fools nor sluggards: because it chiefly agrees
with all such as wander therein, to be of great life in their business, and most
diligent in their Navigation.

The sea is a cloak for sinners, and a refuge for malefactors: for in her,
there is none waged for their virtue, or rejected for their wickedness.

The sea dissembles with the vicious, but likes not to be inhabited with
cowards: for he enters her limits to small very evil purpose, that is a coward
to fight, and timorous in sailing.

The sea is very malicious, and always to be considered by her contraries: for
that in calm, she prepares a tempest: and in time of tempest, she prepares a
calm.

The sea is affectionate to some, and appassionate with others: for if she
like, to one she susteyneth life xx. years, and another she deprives the
first day.

The sea is a great enemy to al things that sustain humane life: because her
fish is flegmatike, her air importune, her water salt, her humour hurtful,
her sailing perilous.

The sea of as many as saileth in her, holds none contented: for she yields
their bodies tyred with the grossenes of their life: and their hearts always
in great carefulnes of some perilous tempest.

The sea of her own condition makes all stomaches hungry, but we may well
pardon her the appetite which she gives to eat, through the force which she
uses to make us cast our gorge.

The sea entices or deceives any man, to the end to enter or to commit trust
unto her: for unto all men she discovers the monstruousnes of her fish, the
profundity of her depths, the swelling of her seas, the contrariety of her
winds, the cruelty of her rocks, and fierceness of her torments: in such
wise, that such as be there lost, be not cast away for want of advisement: but
for certain great dizards.

The sea suffers her self of all men to be seen, to be fished, and to be
sailed, but jointly therewith, she removes all jurisdiction from all men, and
from all sufficient power to change her condition. We say no more in this
case, but that:

To live in the Galley at the Seas,
God dispose it to whom it shall please.
Of the things which the passenger hath to provide, when he enters the
Galley. The ix. Chapter.
SOmewhat being said of the privileges of the Galley, and of the conditions of
the sea: there remains not, but to speak of the necessary provision for
Navigation: for it suffices not that the passenger be advertised of all
things, from which he hath to save himself: but that also he enter provided
of all things necessary.

It is a convenient counsel for every man that goes to sea, either in ship or
Galley, not as an Infidel, but as a Christian to commend himself unto God: for
that the sailor leads his life in as great hazard, as if he should enter
into a set battle.

Also it is a convenient counsel, that all manner persons, before they enter
the Sea, do make their will, declare their debts, accomplish with their
creditors, repart their goods, and reconcile them selves with their enemies,
because they may afterwards happen to find them selves in so terrible a
storm, that for all the treasure of this world, they would not be burdened
with any scruple of conscience.

It is a convenient counsel, for the curious passenger, either sailor, ten
or fifteen days before he go aboard, to cleanse and evacuate his body,
either with Rossid, Honey, Rosa Alexandrina, good Canafistula, or else with
some perfect Pill: for that naturally the Sea uses more pity with empty
stomaches, then with such as are replete oppressed with ill humours.

It is a convenient counsel, and no vnsounde advise, to sail in a Galley of
new timber, and that the Thoughts thereof be worn smooth: for at the
doubling of a point, passing any race or gulffe, or inuesting with another
Galley, or at the chase of an army, or in some furious storm, the new Galley
is more light and nimble to be governed both with sail and oars, and best
doth save her self at Sea, the smoothness of the Thoughts helps much in
rowing.

Also it is sound counsel, that before the passenger do embark, he go to
visit and talk with the Capteine, and to use him with fair terms, and no
less courtesy: which is to weet, if he be aboard, to send him some
refreshing: and if on land, to banquet him, or to accompany him: for as the
Capteines of Galleys desire wind, go with the wind, live with the wind,
sail with the wind, always there cleaves unto them some tache of the wind:
wherewith they will of their friends be honoured, of their enemies feared, and
of their passengers served.

It is sound counsel, that at the instant he shall enter the Galley, he
frame friendship with the Steward and Boteswane, to have licence to walk on
hatches, with some rower to attend him, to make him neat: with the Pilot, to
accept him: with the Justice, for his favour: with the Cooke, for his fire:
with the sweepers, for attendance in the poop: with the pages, to row him to
land: for if he hold them not all well pleased, he is entered into the Galley
very evil appointed.

It is also convenient counsel, before he be embarked, that he make him some
garment, that is strong and well furred, more profitable then comely: wherewith
he may without loss, upon hatches, lye down in the Crossebowe room, climb
into the poop, go on land, defend him self from heate, succour him self
from rain, and also at night to use it for his bed: for that, garments in
the Galley, ought rather to serve for profit, then honour.

It is convenient counsel, that the curious and delicate passenger, do make
his provision of some half bed, of a doubled sheet, of a little mantle, and
no more but one pillow: for, any man to carry an whole and a great bed into
the Galley, is to give occasion unto some to deride, and unto others to laugh:
for on the day time, there is no place to lay it, and at night much less to
spread and make it.

It is sound counsel, that for his provision he have white biskett, old
Bacon, good cheese, powdered beef, and also some fat hens: for these, and
such other things, he may not be excused to buy, that goes to Sea.

It is sound counsel, that the worshipful passenger make his provision of
some Barrel, Butt, or Skin of good white wine of a year old, clear, and
fragrant: whereof, after he hath discharged his gorge, he shall more esteem
one drop, then at another time an whole Barrel: and further, the savour
thereof shall reform his stomach, and the smell comfort his head.

It is convenient counsel, for him that would eat cleanly, to be provided of
some towel, napkin, pot, pitcher, and cup: because these trifles are
seldom sold in Galleys, and much less borrowed.

It is sound counsel, especially for that person, which is poareblinde, that
if he carry any chest with provision, any Male with armour, any Barrel with
wine, any pack with garments, or any Caskett with writings, presently that
he cause the Capteine to see it, the Pursser to register it, and the Steward to
save it: for that in the Galley, for scruple of conscience they leave not from
a needle upwards.

It is sound counsel, that he do very well consider with whom he is
conversant, with whom he enters, in whom he trusts, with whom he
speaks, and also with whom he plays: for, in the Galley they are so
handsome, and advised, that if they find the passenger but a little wittlesse,
there shall not want three, which by playing booty, shall provide him a
release of all his money.

It is a convenient counsel, that at the instant in which he is embarked, he
importune the Capteine, request the Steward, entreat the Justice, and recover
friendship with some rower: to the end, that if he may not obtain place in
the poop, or be admitted to some cabinet, at the least to assign him to some
crossebowe room: for, if he be dull or negligent in these cases, let him hold
it for certain, and also condemned, that in the day he shall not find where
to sit, much less at night where to lodge.

It is convenient counsel, for the passenger, that presumes either of
wisdom, or honesty, to procure books, both good and pleasant, and some of
prayers as matter of devotion: for of three exercises which are used at Sea,
which is to weet, play, talk, and read, the most profitable and least
hurtful is reading.

It is convenient counsel, that the passenger before he be embarked, do
provide hooks, lines, bait, and canes: that when they are becalmed, or lying
in any road, or placed behind some rock, or the forecastell being thrust
alande: to draw forth his trinkets, and settle him self to take fish: since
in fishing he shall take recreation, and great savour in the eating: for his
mind peace and quietness, and for his purse much more profit it is, to be
fishing in the forecastell, then at dice in the poop.

Also it is sound counsel, that the nice passenger make his provision, of
raisons, figs, almondes, diacitron, dates, comfites, and other delicate
conserves: for, when the Sea rolls aloft, and the torment increases, belches
be practising, to cast the gorge, and discharge the stomach, the eyes grow
dim, and the appetite is lost: if in that conflict the poor passenger be
unprovided of some comfortable conserve, I command him some harde adventure.

Also it is convenient counsel, not to be unprovided of a bunch of garlic,
of a rope of onyons, a bottle of vinegar, a barrelet of oil, and also of a
box of salt: for, notwithstanding they be rustical meates, and not delicate
for sailors, or licorishe to be stolen. And further and besides all this, it
may happen that of soppes, water, salt, and oil, there may be made a slampamp
or an hotchepotch, that at some other time, shall exceed a Capon in taste.

Also it is convenient counsel, that every discreet passenger provide him
self of corked pantophels, double soled shoes, of Mariners sloppes, of close
hunting caps, and of four or five clean shirts: because Sea water is of
such a quality, and the Galley of such indisposition, that first thou shalt
foul them all, before thou shalt wash one.

Also it is sound counsel, chiefly for nice delicate stomaches, to provide
them selves of perfumes, as of Beniamine, Storax, Amber, Aloes, or of Pomander
of some special good confection: for it many times happens, that the Pump
yields so cruel a stench, that only it dismaith not, but also constrains
to discharge the stomach.

It is also a profitable and necessary counsel, that every passenger do
carefully consider, to have his stomach always in temper, and not overcharged
with meates or drinks: that is to say, to eat little, and drink less: for
if on land it be dishonest, at Sea much more, and dangerous in tempest, to
eat until he belch, and drink until he cast.

And because it shall not seem, that we speak at large, passing the gulffe
of Narbona in a great tempest, there was in my Galley, a gluttonous dronkard,
which at two belches cast up his meat, and with the third he did yield up his
soul.

Also it is sound counsel, and of experience, that to defend the stomach
from the sickness of the Sea: a paper of Saffron be placed upon the breast,
near unto the heart, and in the fury of the tempest to keep him self both
warm and quiet: whereupon he may be assured, that his stomach shall neither
wamble, nor his head grow giddy.

In all the navigation which we had with my Lord and master Caesar, when he
attempted the conquest of the great Tunes in Africa, these rules I used,
which did yield me my life: I say, the life of the body: because the life
of the soul, is given us in that glory, Ad quam nos perducat Iesus Christus
filius Dei, qui cum patre spiritu sancto viuit regnat in secula seculorum.
Amen.

FINIS.
Jmprinted at London, for Ralfe Newberrie, dwelling in Fleet street, a little
above the Conduit.

1578.


