A WORTHY TREAtise of the eyes; containing the knowledge and cure of one
hundredth and thirtene diseases, incident unto them:

First gathered written in French, by Iacques Guillemeau, Chyrurgion to the
French King, and now translated into English, together with a profitable
treatise of the SCORBIE; another of the CANCER by A. H.

Also next to the treatise of the eyes is adjoined a work touching the
preservation of the sight, set forth by W. BAILEY. D. of Physic

Printed by Robert Walde grave for Thomas Man and VVilliam Brom.

A Treatise of the diseases of the eyes, which are in number, an hundred and
thirteen: whereunto they are subject.
The first section containing the description of the eye.
The Praeface.
FOrasmuch as amongst all the sense, that of the eyes is most dear and
precious unto us, The annatomy of the eye is necessary.
it is needful that the Surgeon which takes in hand the preservation of
them, should have perfect and sound knowledge, both of their temperature, and
of their composition, that is to say, of their whole nature. For we are
careful, and consider of every part, to the end we may restore it to the
own proper nature. But this knowledge of every member can not be generally
comprised, but only by a full knowledge of every part in the same. Therefore
whosoever will know the nature of the eyes, must first of all know and
understand by little pieces all the parts whereof they are made, and by the
same manner all their offices and functions, to what end they serve, and of
what substance or matter they are made. Gal 3. book of method. med.
For the curing of diseases doth not only consiste in the knowledge of them,
but also in the skill rightly to appoint and duelye to apply the remedies
which are proper to the diseased parts, all which in respect of their diverse
nature require diverse medicines. For this cause I have thought it very
expedient to declare the nature of the eye, before I lay open the particular
diseases of the same.

CHAP. 1. Of the profit, use, and situation of the eyes.
The excellency of the eye
GOD hath created and framed the eyes with so great cunning, and set in them
such marvelous excellency and beauty, that justly they may be judged the
most perfect work which is in our body, whether we consider the commodity of
them, their use in moving, their place, their rampires and defences, the matter
whereof they are made, the beauty which is in their form and shape, or the
diversity of their colours Concerning their commodi^ye and use, The use and
commodity of the eyes.
they are given unto man principally to see therewith and to guide and direct
him to the knowledge of God, by the beholding of his fair and goodly works,
whereof we can neither have knowledge nor institution by any other sense,
but by the eyes: as also to serve in the place of guiders, and leaders to the
whole body. And by good right they have such rule and sovereignty amongst
al the senses, and all other parts of the body, that those which are
depriued of sight either by nature, or by any other mishap do think them
selves in great misery. They could not have been placed more fitlye then in
the highest part of all the body, The place of the eye.
as it were in a most high tower, seeing they must serve as spies and
vvatch-men to defend and guide all the other parts: vvherevnto nature hath
made most cunningly two hollovve places or troughs in the head named of
their roundness orbitas.

CHAP. 2. Of the rampires defenses of the eyes.
THE eyes are compassed and armed above and beneath, on the right hand, and on
the left, and on every part, not only for their protection and defence, but
also to make them appear more beautiful fairer. And indeed the nose serves
as a rampire and bulwark unto them, purging them and the brain of superfluous
humours. The bones named Ethmoides Iugale are no less commodiouslie placed for
their preservation and maintenance. And concerning the eye lyddes wherewith
they are defended and covered: The use of the eye lids.
they are not only an ornament, but also as gates and drawing bridges,
having their muscles as chains to lift them up, and let them down when it
shall be expedient, either in seeing, sleeping, or waking, and to stay whatsoever
might fall into them, and on their edges they have the hairs called Cilia,
which are as little pales straight sure placed in a convenient distance one
from another, The hairs of the eye lids
that they might mutuallie embrace each other, whereby the eye should be more
surly shut. Moreover, they serve to direct the beams in seeing, that they
may look more straightly, and in like manner to defend them against little
flies, against the dust, against little chips or shivers, and such like
things, which entering into them might hurt them: and they do also beautify
them being set round about them as a little border. The brows and hairs on
them.
Not unlike to these are the brows with their hair, which besides the
ornament that the eyes receive from them, do serve principally to defend them
against rain and sweat of the head and forehead, which descending down,
might fall upon them: therefore were they fashioned like unto half a circle or
cross, or a little vault, or appenthouse jointly or equally agreeing at the
top of the nose, to the end that the sweat and the rain might have his course
easy descent on both sides without flowing or dropping into them. And least
themselves should be any hinderance unto the eyes or enter into them, The
hairs on the eielids grow little or nothing.
God hath created the the hairs on the eye lids of such a nature, that either
they grow not at all, or else very little, but abide almost always in the same
estate which the hairs of the head and beard do not.

CHAP. 3. Of the coats and membranes or Partchmemtlike skins of the eyes.
The matter of the eyes most excellent.
COncerning the matter whereof the eyes are made, it far excells all other
parts, whether we have respect to the membranes or partchement-like skinnnes,
or to the humours, sinews, veins, arteries, muscles, or to the glandulous
substance, and kernels whereof they are made. Now because the humours are
thin and moist, The use of the membranes.
nature hath give unto them membranes or partchment skins which might fitly
keep them in their appointed place to the performing of their office, which by
the searching of the Anatomistes have been noted to be five in number. The
first coat of the eye.
The first is noted in Latin adnata, alba, adhaerem, coniunctiua, in English
the white of the eye. This mebrane or partchment skin is very thin and
slender, serving to contain the eye in his circle or collet: whose beginning
is from Pericranium, that is from the skin which compasses the the skull,
and his end is in the circle named Iris or the rainbow: this which is called
Iris, what Iris is.
is a circle in the eye representing many diverse colours, the variety and
number whereof are not to be judged to proceed fro the humours but from the
membrane called vuea. For the humours in all persons are always of like colour,
Humours are like in al men.
but the circle named Iris is not so, because in some me it appears more
black, in others more white or blew, according to the diversity of the
colours which are in the membrane called vuea. It was named Iris, which in
English signifies a Rainbow, because in it do appear such change of colours
as are seen in the Rainbow. The second coat of the eye
The second membrane or partchment skin is named Cornea, that is, hornie,
which is more strong and hard, resembling horn that is made thin bright, even
such whereof Lanternes are made, from the likeness whereof it seems to have
been named Cornea, that is horny. Now god hath so created it, that it should
be a surer defence to all the humours of the eyes, to help the light which the
eyes receive into them, through whose midst it shines sends out the light
even as the candle which is in the Lantern, casts his light toward the horn
whereof the same is made. The horny membrane is not in every place of the same
nature
This hornie membrane is not in every part like unto it self: for the former
part of it, which we may and do behold: wherein the apple of the eye is
placed and enuironned with Iris, or the Rainbow, that part I say, is bright,
hath a through light, that so colours might have the better passage and
entertainment, but the hinder part of it is dark and very thick gross, The
error of Arabians.
which thing caused the Arabians to make it two membranes. We must mark and
observe that it is made of many little skins, and as it were thin barks,
which take their beginning from dura matter, which is divided into sundry
small skins. The use and office of this membrane, is to make the eye round by
compassing in all the humours of the same. The third coat.
The third membrane or partchment skin is vuea, which is in English like to
a grape, being so called, because it hath in the outward part the
resemblance of a black grape when it is pressed, whose beginning is from the
second skin, compassing the brain, called pia matter, which after it hath
enclosed the sinew of sight, named neruur opticus, spreads abroad under the
hornie membrane, ascending unto the circle Iris, and yet inwrappeth not the
whole eye. For when it is comed thus far, then leaving the hornie membrane it
makes the hole for the apple of the eye, and bends backward to the circle
large circumference of the cristaline humour, unto which it cleaves fast,
staying the waterishe humour that it should not cover bury al the whole
crystaline humour. The use.
The outward part of it is black, to the end it might gather and heap up in
it self, the glittering beams, and that the diverse kinds of colours might be
thereby better united, received, and conjoined. For as it is the property of
white to scatter abroad, so is it the nature of black to gather together.
Diverse colours in the eyes.
And touching the innermost part of it, it is endued with many colours, that by
seeing many colours we might the better judge of them, and be able to
distinguish one from another when they are offered to our sight. Otherwise, if
it had been died but with one colour only, then all things which our eyes
do behold, would have seemed to have been of this only colour: even as we
see a green or red glass makes all things appear green or red.
Furthermore, this change and diversity of colours refreshes the wearied eyes
in such sort, that before we have viewed and looked on a thing diligently, we
stay our eyes for this purpose, that the spirits of sight may as it were,
retire themselves to this diversity of colours as to a place of recreation and
comfort. This membrane named vuea is soft, least it might hurt the crystaline
humour, wherefore v^ea is soft.
and found directly set to the said humour, that the light might have more free
entrance, and that by his darkness the passage of the colours might not be
stopped: it is nourished with the veins arteries of the hornie membrane. The
apple of the eye.
Now that which is seen on the hole or centre of the eye like unto a black
prick, is named the apple of the eye, by the which we see: and albeit it doth
appear black, yet is neither it nor any thing under it black, but thorowlie
clear and bright. The 4 coat.
The fourth membrane is named in Greek amphyblestroides, which in English
signifies a casting net, which takes his beginning fro the sinew of sight
called ner^us opticus, whose coat is stretched forth, and vvouen like to a
net of many veins and arteries, which it receives from the membrane vuea,
both for his nourishment and life, and for the glassy humour wherewith it is
clothed on the hinder part. The 5. coa^
The fifth is called Arachnoides, because it resembles the Spiders web, which
is in greek arachne, whose beginning as some think is from Pia matter, but as
others affirm, fro the crystalin humour to wit, from the superfluous matter
excrement of the same. His use is to enwrap the said humour in all the former
part. Ambrose Pare.
Ambrose Pare reports one most excellent commodity of the same: that it
serves to the cristaline humour, as a glass to behold, so that it is unto it
as Lead, whereby it falls out that the diverse sorts and kinds of visible
things which are sent from any part of the object, that is fro the thing which
is offered to our sight, may be retained in the said humour by such a
conjunction, and linking of each to other, as we see in a looking glass that
is made of glass and Lead, which hath force and power to stay the outward
face and image from passing through, but holds them as it were gathered on a
heap in the uppermost part of it.

CHAP. 4. OF the humours which are in the eyes
COncerning the humours whereof the eye is made, the first called aqueus, 1. The
waterish humour.
that is, the waterish humour, because it is not unlike water settled in the
foremost part of it, between the hornie membrane and that which is called Vuea,
and some part of the crystaline humour. It hath the fi^st place that it may
bridle and stay the raging colours which come upon it, The use of the humour
and that the hornie mebrane should not press down that humour which fills
almost that part of the eye. Celsus.
Celsus hath observed that between the waterish and crystal humour, there is a
place as it were empty, being only filled with bright shining spirit,
wherein the Cataracts are engendered, as we will show in the proper place.
There is a further commodity of this humour to keep by his moisture the
crystal humour, 2. The christalin humour.
from too much dryness. The second humour is the Crystal, so termed, for the
resemblance it hath unto Crystal in vvhitenesse and shining, to the end it
might more easily receive the diversity of colours, The place and use.
as we see only white doth. His seat is in the midst between the
vvaterish and glassy humour, not only ministering nourishmet and moisture, and
so preserving from dryness, but also to help and preserve the same, and to
moderate appease the rage of spirits and colours, The form of it.
which might hurt it. The fashion of it is round, which more easily
resists outward injuries: for this figure is hardly hurt, because it hath
no corners. It is true that the roundness of it is somewhat pressed and
pinched before and behind, but so that thereby it remains more sure and
steadfast in the place, which was harde to be done in a round figure. Again
by this copression, the colours of such things as we see are retained without
any dispearsing on either side, which they must of necessity have done, if
the figure shape had been perfectly roud. It receives norishment fro the
glassy humour, Howe it is nourished.
by the help of the little veins arteries which it imparts unto it. And it
is necessarily required that the glassy humour should make white the blood
before it pass to the Crystal humour: for if it vver nourished with pure
blood which were not white as it is necessarily required. It is give to the
eye as the first instrument of sight, and therefore it is in it as a little
clear Crystal glass. And albeit the other humours do so shine, that the light
may pass through the as it doth thorough water or glass: notwithstanding
they have no light of themselves as hath the Christallin humour, This humour hath
light of itself.
which could not receive the light which it receives outvvardly, if it
were not partaker of the same within, so partaker that it agreed naturally
with the same. And to prove that it is the first instrument of sight thus it
is plain, that after it shall be taken out of the eye, It is the first
instrument of sight.
laid upon any thing written or imprinted, it shevveth the letter twofold
greater then it is in it self: and from this observation it is supposed that
men learned the use of spectacles. Invention of spectacles.
The third is the glassy humour, 3. The glassy humour.
so called because in his substance and colour it is like clear shining glass
when it is melted: it is hollow in the midst to the end it might keep the
Cristallin humour vvhereunto it is in place of a covvshin, as the vvaterie humour
is placed in the former part of the eye: The place of it.
so is this in the hinder part for this purpose, that it may repress and keep
in subiectio sometimes the furious spirits which come upon the Cristallin
humour. How it is nourished.
It is nourished by means of the veins arteries which spring from the
membrane called of the form of a casting net, Amphiblestroides, The greatness
of it.
the greatness hereof is threefold, exceeding both the other membranes.

CHAP. V. OF the sinevves, veins, and arteries, of the eyes.
THE eyes are indevved vvyth two sorts) of nerues or sinevves whereof the
first are called optici in Greek, The number of the sinews and use.
and visuales in Latin, which is in English sinevves pertaining to sight,
whereof either eye hath one proper unto it, which differ from other sinews,
because they are neither of so sound and firm substance but soft, They differ
from other senewes.
and within full of little holes (albeit this hollovvnesse is not so evident in
them that are dead) which are as small Conduit pypes and little gutters, to
carry unto the eyes the spirits of sight, which in manner of a little flame
do issue from the light, by whose help they receive from the brain both life
and power to see. But before they come to the eyes, after they are gone out
from the brains, they are gathered together like as the iron in a Mill, The
form of them.
and make but one only body and conduit, whereby the spirit of sight is
carried out vvholie and conioyntlie, which appears in this, that one eye
being closed, the apple of the other doth so enlarge it self, that by the
passage thereout of the whole spirit, Wherefore we see as well with one eye as
w^th both.
we may see as fully and certainly with one only as with both the eyes.
This union was necessary, least when one thing is offered to our sight, we
should have beheld two, to wit, with either eye one, so that in looking
upon one man, vvee might suppose to have seen two. After this conjunction
linking together they are divided, and each of them passes thorough the holes in
the head, and is planted into either eye severally, ending their course in the
coat or membrane called amphiblestroides. Sinews which move the eye.
The second sort of sinews are those which serve to move the eye, whereof
each eye hath one, which beginning near unto the aforesaid sinevves, passing
thorough the holes in the head, are engrafted into the muscles of the eye to
cause them to move. And if we respect the veins, there are two in either
eye, Veins in the eye.
one within which is derived from the vessels of the brain with the
membranes, and the other without, which is plainly stretched unto the
outward parts thereof, specialy to the white of the eye, by means whereof are
stirred up oftentimes inflammations and redness in the eyes. These help to the
nourishment of the eye, as the artery serves to bestow life on the same.

CHAP. 6. Of the muscles of the eyes.
ANd seeing the eyes are given to me to guide the body, and to discover such
things as might outwardly hurt them, they could not conveniently have been
fastened in one place, and so look only and continually straight forward:
therefore God hath given to either of them six muscles, The number and use of
the muscles.
partly to hold them sure and straight in their places, and partly to change
their motions, upward, downward, to the right hand, to the left, inward, and
round about. There are four of these muscles straight, taking their beginning
fro the bottom of the circle, in which the eye is placed, The use of the four
muscles
called orbita, which compassing the sinew of sight do end in the midst of
the eye, that is to say one in the uppermost part drawing it towards the nose,
an other in the left side drawing it upward, the third in the lowest part
drawing it downevvarde, the fourth in the right side drawing it towards the
ear, and when they have accomplished their action, they pluck it invvarde.
The other two turn the eye, yet not fully, but only on the side, that it
might look backward. For there is not any thing to be seen within, but
only without the head. The first is very long slender, beginning at the
bottom of the circle named orbita, toward the great corner ending with a thin
tendon, which pierces thorough a little membrane or skin like unto a ring,
which is made fast near unto the moist kernel, from which in weeping tears
proceed, called commonly glandula lachrymalis, by the which when it hath
passed as it were by a poly, it makes a straight corner going forvvarde,
until it be imparted in the uppermost part of the eye. His office is to turn
it toward the nose. The use of the two muscles.
The sixth begins in the lovvest part of the circle orbita, being very
slender, it ascends toward the little corner, and embracing the whole eye
with a small Tendon, ends near unto the insertion, or implanting of the
fifte. His office is to turn the eye towards the ear.

CHAP. 7. Of the kernels commonly called the glandules of the eyes.
THere are besides the fat in the eyes, three kernels called in Latin
Glandulae, one within the circle, The number and use of the kernels.
an other underneath it, and the third above, which all serve to keep the eye
moist and vvet, as shall be expedient, because of their continual moving and
hot nature, vvithholding also the humours, least in two great abundance they
flovve upon them and hurt them. From these kernels issue out tears, either by
straightness and compression when we are sorovvful, or by rubbing the eyes,
as those gallant Dames use to make themselves weep, when they vvold obtain
their desire at the hands of their lovers, Many causes of tears.
either by enlarging as, those which shed tears for joy, either through
vveaknes, as they which vveepe at their death, because their strength is quite
decayed, either from the abundance of any humour as it falls out in the
which are drunk: either by sharpness in the humour, which we may perceive
by smoke, or the pilling of an Onion. Concerning the third kernel, it is
placed in the great corner of the eye near to the nose upon the little bone in
the circle orbita, in which place there is an hole which enters into the eyes
on each side, to stay the course of the excremets coming from the brain, fro
running into the eyes, as vvee may see it come to pass in such as having the
said kernel changed or consumed do weep continually, as shall be declared
in the proper place when we speak of the disease called Fistula lacrymalis,
that is a continual vvatering of the eyes.

CHAP. 8. Of the form and figure of the eyes.
AL the forenamed parts jointly together, do make and frame the eyes in the
fashion of a Pyramid, that is, Pyramid.
of a sharpe steeple, whose point turns invvarde to the bottom of the
circle called orbita. But if we consider every part thereof separated from
the muscles, we shall find them to be in form and shape round, which is
commonly called sphaericall, Sphaere.
which is the most excellent and perfectest shape of all others, both in
regard of the easy and svvifte motion of it to the right hand, or to the
left, upward or dovvnvvard, and in respect it most easily resists all
outward and foreign injuries.

The second section containing such diseases as befall the whole eye.
CHAP. I. Of the eye that falls out of the place, which disease is called in
greek ecpiesmos or proptosis, and in latin pro^ipsus, exitus, expres^io,
exertio. Also of the Ox eye, or great eye, which is in Greek named
exopthalmia, in latin o^uli prominentia, of the common sort goglo eye.
Definition.
EXopthalmia, is a standing out, a lifting up, and as it were a casting forth
of the eye from the hollowness and circle wherein it is set and placed as a
precious stone within his collet. This affection or disposition is sometimes
meerelie natural, as vvee may see in such as have great eyes, to them it is
not needful to apply any thing. But if the eye do thrust out more and more,
until it depart vvholy out of the naturalll place then comes ecpiesmos.
Ecplesmos.
In some it stands so far forth that it cannot be covered with the
eielids, and is in such sort removed out of the circle, that it hangs
without the bone ethmoides.

This disease comes either of outward causes, Outward causes of it.
as from falling from an high place, by a great stroke on the head, or about
the eye with a ball or stone: it may grovv also from strangling or choking as
appears in them which use wrasteling, vvhereunto we refer the great
violent straininges which women suffer in hard travels, and the stretching
which they abide that have the disease called ^enesmus. It is incident to them
which are troubled with grievous vomiting, straightness of breath, and use
blovving in great horns. The invvarde causes amongst others are great
inflammation, Inward causes.
and flovvinges commonly called fluxes, which fall upon the eye, and then
this standing out of the eye, because of the inflammation, is called by Celsus
proprosis. It may be called also by an Aposteme, being in the substance of
the brain, Pr^ptosis.
or in the skins and coats which cover the same, and from too much fullness
and vvindines, which is heaped together and engendered in the eye, as it
comes to pass in the child which dies and putrifieth in the mothers
vvombe: and to these may be added the loosing, and overmuch mollifiyng of the
muscles and membranes, which move turn the eye. Signs.
According to these causes there are diverse signs whereby the disease is
knovven. For when the eye falls out through the abundance of humours, it is
greater and grosser then if it fell out by strangling and choking, by straining
or blovving (if there be none other fullness of humours) albeit there is in
both great stretching out of it: but if it arise from the soft^esse tenderness
of the muscles, and membranes, it is not so puffed up svvelled, yea scarceslie
can any stretching be perceived.

Cure in general.
Touching the general cure, blood letting is most necessary, and in that place
specially where the pain and inflammation appears, and in like manner apply
the cupping glasses, with scarrifiyng upon the shoulders neck and if it seem
needful because of the great abundance of humours, you may use purging, and cut
of somewhat in the diet of the patient. Cure in particular.
But concerning particular remedies, as the causes are diverse, so must the
medicines be diverse. For if the stroke be round, or the eye in the thrusting
out do hang, then first of all, let him with his hand put it into the place
again, pressing it down gently with his hand, and when it is either
vvholie or in part thus put again into the place, he must lay on it little
stupes made of fine linen clothes, or such like, vvetting the in Rose water,
Plant in water, and the white of an egg, or rather make your medicine of an
egg, oil of Roses wine, as Aetius appoints, Aetius.
or some such like.

All these medicines must be applied warm, and changed oftentimes, least they
heat too much, and so cause suppuration, that is, bring it to ripe matter.
After these remedies, let the eye be easily kept into the place, with a soft
Roller, named of Hippocrates, Hippocrates roller.
opthalmos. After this order you shall do if the like accident proceed from
strangling, choking, straining or vomiting, for the child which is dead or
putrified in the mothers womb when it is drawn forth: and if it seem
convenient, use things to mollify soft the muscles membranes which may keep
it in his place, then apply a fomentation with a binding decoction made of the
pil of the Pomegranate, Shepherds purse, Aui^en. 3. book. fen. 3. tract. 3.
c. 36.
Endiue, Poppy, thereby to make the part strong, upon it lay a Cataplasm of
Bean flower, Roses, Frankesence, and the white of an Egg. And where the eye
seems full of vapours, slimy humours without any inflammation, there must you use
a fomentation and fume to make the thin before you do undertake the restoring
of it into the place, to the end you may waste dispearse such humours as hinder
the restoring of it. But if the eye fall out thorough the greatness of the
inflammatio, you must take that away and delay the pain. And for this purpose
Celsus commends this Collyrium, that is the eye salve of Nilens. Celsus his
collyrium. 6. ca. 6
R. Nardi Indici, juice of Poppy, ana.i. Gum, i. Saphro, ij. leaus of fresh
roses, 4. sees them in rain water, or tart wine. Now following this pattern
you may appoint this prescription. R. of Spicknard j. leaves of roses fresh P,
i, the Pomegranate pill ij. sees them in rain water, iiij. then dissolve therein
of the juice of black Poppy j. Saffron s make your Collyrium. In it you shall
wet linen clothes, folded together, comonlie called stupes to be laid upon the
eye. They may use also this Cataplasm. R. of the leaves of Poppy Hebane, ana,
m, i. Sorrel leaves Plantin, A cataplasme.
ana, m, i. s red Roses, m i. sees the in water with dried Rasins, put thereto
ii. of Mirh and the yoke of one egg, make it a cataplasme, apply it to the
eye. In this case those medicines will be necessary, which we shall set down
in the disease called opthalmia, which is the inflammation of the eyes. But if
neither by al these remedies, nor rolling, the eye can be restored into the
place, but it styll remains ready to fall out and seems to hang, then it
is to be supposed that the sight is lost, that the eye is in danger to become
dry and vvithered (because nourishment is wating, which should keep the parts
in their natural moisture) or else to com to suppuratio. And it is expedient
there to open the part towards the temples of the head where suppuration
appears to the end that the filthy slimy matter being avoided, the
inflammation and grief may cease: notwithstanding let the coats thereof remain
safe, and put them again into the place to eschew hereby the deformity which
might be in the face, using aftervvarde such medicines as may assuage pain:
such is the white of an egg beaten with Rose water plantaine. Celsus h^s
counsel.
And in what place through dryness and vvithering the eye shall be dead,
least it cause further infection by putrefactio, that which stands forth is
to be cut away. He which shall do this, shall bind thereof as much as is
corrupt, filthy, and hanging out, as near unto it as it is possible, then
must he cut away so much as hangs over the ligature or binding, applying in
the mean time such medicines as may appease pain and stay inflammation.
Aetius.
Notwithstanding Aetius would have it stayed till it come unto suppuration.
Now which is the best way to cut it after it is bound, vvee will declare in
chapter where we shall speak of staphyloma.

CHAP. 2. Of the lean, vvithered, or diminished eye, which is called in Greek
atrophia opthalmou, in Latin imm^tio profunditas macies oculi: Also of the
little eyes, co^monlie called pinking eyes, and in Greek Micropthalmos, in
latin paruus oculus.
Atrophia opthalmou is an affection of the eye when al the parts of it are
leaner and slenderer than they ought, Definition.
and the whole eye smaller and lesser then naturally it should be, vvherupon
there appears an hollow deepenesse, it being sunk down within the circle,
and the sight being darkened dimmed in such sort, that the things which
they look upon do see me much greater then they are. This affection
differs from Pthisis, Difference of Atropbia and Pth^sis.
that is the consumption of the eye, because therein is only a diminishing of
the apple of the eye, and not of the whole eye. The inward causes are the
flowing unto it of sharp and thin humours, continual tears, sharp fevers,
sadness, Causes.
old ache, great ache in the head: the outward, a greatstroke, troublesome
cares watching. Micropthalmos.
Micropthalmos, that is the pincking eye is, when any one hath fro his birth so
little eyes, that they seem scarcely opened, albeit they are not sunk down
within the circle more than they should be, vvhereunto it is not expedient to
apply any medicine, since nature cannot be amended. But to speak of curing the
lean eye in regard of general remedies, Cur^.
exercise is here first of all necessary, then rubbing of the head and face,
and washing of it, and closing the eye-lids to rub the eye gently with the
fingers. The Patient must use to eat good nowrishing meat, and drink wine if
it be pleasant. He must not meddle with his household affairs, but command
them to be kept from his ears. Concerning particular remedies, such are most
commended which be gentle, assuage payne, as fomentations of warm water with
a spounge, to use common milk warm, or woman's milk, Contrariety of opinions
P. Aeginet^.
dropping it into the eye, to avoid all sharp biting medicines which may
provoke weeping. Notwithstanding P. Aeginet^ used this R (...) i crocomag.
iiij. croci ij. erug. i. staping them in water, so framing them fitly for his
purpose. But it hath been well observed, that he did not this to procure
tears, neither to dry as such remedies would do, but rather as it were by
tinkling and pricking of it a little, to bring and draw thither the humours and
spirits and more plentiful nowrishment: which thing is also usually done in
other lean parts when they rub, and apply sharp medicines unto them, pricking
also beating them, to the end they may draw to them more store of spirits
blood. Nevertheless Celsus rejects the aforesaid medicines which cause
tears.

CHAP. 3. Of the burst and broken eye, called in greek rexis, in latin
ruptio.
RExis is taken generally for the separation or dissolution of any fleshly
part without a wound: Diverse uses of this word rexis.
notwithstanding Galen places it amongst the particular affections of the
eyes, Definition by Galen.
affirming it to be a cut or wound made by a stroke or any other cause in
the bottom of the eye, which suddenly dividing asunder the mebranes or partch
mentlike skin, Definition by G^l^a.
the humours which govern the sense of sight are poured out, and scattered
abroad The causes are round strokes upon the eye, a fall from an high place, a
violent motion, Causes.
stretchynge, and enlarging of the membranes, which being broken are not able
to contain the humours in their natural place, whereupon it comes to pass
that all the eye bursts, Cure.
and the humours flow out. It cannot be cured considering the humours are
issued forth, and the membranes remain d^ye, albeit that some will constantly
aduouch the aforesaid humours may be engendered again. For proose of their
speech they bring the trial which hath been made on a pigeons eyes, The
humours lost may be restored in a Pigeon.
whereof they crushed forth the humours, which nevertheless in fifteen days
they have found recovered and restored, and the eyes as plain and sound as
before, which I am able to testify that I have seen, but it is not not hath
not been proved true in any man. A strange history in Galen.
In deed Galen reports a history not ordinary, but rather incredible of a
young boy which being pricked directly upon the apple of the eye, the waterish
humour issued forth suddenly, by means whereof the apple of the eye remained
much less, and the horny membrane stood forth with vvrincles notwithstanding
all this he was healed having perfect sight afterwards the humour being again
engendered which had before flowed out and perished. VVaterish humour is an
excrement.
Which thing might befall to the waterish humour because it is nothing else but
an excrement of the nourishment which is in the Christalline and not any part
of seed as the glassye and aforenamed Crystalline are, whose decay in this
respect is desperate and unrecoverable. For my part I have scene much of the
waterish humour issue forth when the needle hath been plucked forth, which was
thrust in to take away the cataracts, VVaterish humour may be restored.
and afterward in short time the eye hath been as full great and fair as at
the beginning: which yet could not be if all the humours were lost. Therefore
the Surgeon shall be contented with assuaging the pain, Cure.
which he may accomplish partly by general remedies as bloudletting, cuppings
on the shoulders to prevent inflammation and flovving of humours, partly by
particular remedies, and before all othe^s with this eye salve of most
singular virtue easy to be provided, An excellent easy medic^n.
which is the blood of a pigeon hot, wherein dipping a linen cloth lay it on
the eye, and the rest of the cure is so to be ordered as the accidents shall
require.

CHAP. 4. Of the eye which is troubled or confusedly mixed, and set out of
order, called in greek Synchysis, and in Latin Inflatio ^culi.
Definition.
Synchisis is a breaking or cutting of the eye coming by a stroke or of it
self, in the innermost membranes with a dispearsing or overturning of the
humours, and alteration of the apple of the eye, which in the beginning
stands forth largely, but in the end is made less then nature affords
it: the humours of the eye in like manner possess not their natural place,
neither keep their appointed order, but are carried hither and thither, and
mingled together (as we say) had over head. This malady arises after a great
stroke or inflammation of the membrane named Vuea, Causes.
because some part in it is broken. Those are more easily cured, who are most
easily cured.
which have the apple of the eye only made brother retaining still his colour
and figure, then such as have it rent, and as it were cut asunder. The cure
must be in this order. Cure.
If the intermedling and confusion of humours came by a stroke, first let the
corrupt blood be quickly taken away, then fill up the eye with blood of a
Turtle or Pigion very hot, and upon it lay a Stupe (as it is commonly named)
of linen cloth, or vvooll vvetted in the white of an egg and oil of Roses
beaten together, continuing the use of it by the space of two days or more
if need require it. Or the third day yo^ must use a fomentation dropping into
the eye warm milk, or woman's milk, and aftervvarde apply this medicine
made of the yokes of eggs hard roasted, mingled with honey and a little saffron
to cleanse the part. In the rest of your cure, you shall have in readiness
proper medicines for such accidents as may happen.

CHAP. 5. Of the eye which is svvolne, and puffed up, called in greek oedema
^pthalmou, in latin inflatio oculi.
The diverse significations of Oedema.
OEdema is taken in ancient writers for all kinds of tumors or svvelling,
but here we use it particularly according to Galen for a blovving or puffing
up of the eye, Definition by Galen.
when it is lifted up on high, loses his natural colour, and is hardly
moved, the white part being higher lifted up then the black: Aetius.
or as Aetius would have it, when the eye (without any manifest cause)
becomes puffed up, svvolne, and discoloured, through the flovving unto it
of sharpe thin humours which stir up itching. Old age subject most to oedema^.
Others say, that svvelling of the eye which is termed oedema is taken only
for the tumour which outvvardlie arises in eye lid. This affect happens
many times to men, the itching begins at the corner of the eye, not unlike
to that when one is stinged with a Be or Gnat. Causes.
This disease is more incident common in Summer then other times of the years.
The causes are the flowing to it of sharpe waterish humours, or vapours rising
from the entrails and ascending on high, which afterward fall down upon the
eye, and chiefelie upon the white of it called coniuncti^a, which being not
so solid and harde as the hornie membrane doth sooner suck in, and as it were
drink up the aforesaid vapours and humours, which causes it to be raised
above the hornie membrane. In curing of this malady, we must look to that
cause which went before, Cure.
that it may be turned away by frications or rubbinges on the neck back, and
arms, by cupping upon the shoulders by good diet, by avoiding all meates which
send up vapours, and principally strong wines. In particular you must use
fomentations, which do partly resolve, partly comfort, applying them with a
Sponge as Aetius ordains. Atius medicine.
Take of flowers of Camomill and Melilot an. p. i. red Roses, p. ij Sage and
Betonie ana p. i. of Fene-greeke, Anise, Fenell, Line seeds ana iij. seethe
them in equal portions of tart wine and Spring water, apply it with a sponge.
In like sort you may lay to the eye this eye salve. Take of the mucilage of
Linseede and Fene-greeke drawn with water of Eye-bright.. ii. Fenell water,
rose water an. i. wherein disolue of mirh Aloes an s. tutia prepared i. with
this make your salve. The coniunctiua or white of the eye is sometimes so so
svvolne, A necessary caution.
that it goes forth of the eielidds, and is red shining, which some being
ignorant of, would have cut it. Therefore you must take heed thereunto, since
by little little the aforenamed remedies will bring it to the own proper
nature, as I have seen it accomplished contrary to some men's opinions. But if
this thing be not speedily achieved, then the Surgeon must put it gently
easily into the place with the point of a round prop, which some have been
constrained to do, the white of the eye standing and stretching beyond the
eie-lids.

CHAP. 6. Of the hot burning eye, or Carbuncle in the eye. called in greek
anthracosis opthalmou, in latin, carbunculatio
Definition.
ANthracosis in a general sense, is a hard, crusty, fretting ulcer with
flowing of humours, swelling arising in any part of the body, but specially in
the eyes about the beginning of pestilent Fevers hurting not only the eye,
Causes.
but also the eie-lids. It happens sometimes through great inflamatio, or
rather by melancholic blood boiling remaining in that place. Signs set down
by Aetius.
Aetius gives these signs to know it, that there arises a little tumor like
unto a Barley corn, red in the beginning in such manner that the sick party
thinks his eye doth burn, albeit the tumor is not much swollen: for because
of the great heat it opens it self bursts out, that which runs out of
it, albeit it be sharp biting, causes the top of the carbuncle to be dry
crusty. Infection of parts adjoining.
It infects the parts adjoining, whereupon ensues great inflammation in the
eye, in the next parts in the kernels commonly called glandules, which are
under the ear. Sometime it makes great rents vlcerations in the eye, yea the
hairs fall away, the eye lids are bare. In the general cure both of that which
is in the eye, Cure.
and the other on the eye lids, it is expedient that the patient eat little
meat, be let blood, use glisters: For applying medicines to the place affected,
if the Carbuncle be on the eye lids, Aetins.
Ae^i^ commends a medicine made of Coriander, and Nightshade beaten together
with dried Rasins, and laid to the Carbuncle. If the Carbuncle grow brother,
apply a fomentation to the eye of Rose Vine leaves. Oleum vitrioli.
It shall not be amiss if you stay the said Carbuncle with laying on it oleum
vitrioli in little quantity and softly touching it. But if the Carbuncle begin
in the eye, the most excellent course is to wash and cleanse the eye with
milk, and to sees together in water, honey and Bean Flower, or white
flower, which you apply like a Cataplasme, Aegineta.
and sometime bruise to powder the root of the Flower-deluce and lay one it.
Against the great inflammation the mucilage of fleaseed quinceseede made with
Rose water, is wunderfullie commended, in place of Rose water, you may take
Plantain water or milk. If the disease creep farther, Lentilles sodden with
honey are singular, where it shall continue Olive leaves or the pill of the
Pomegranate sodden in wine then dried, afterward mingled together with honey
are most excellent. Now when you see that the malady goes not forward, and
that his crusts are ready to fall away they shall use this medicine made of
the yoke of an egg hard roasted and beaten with a little honey and Saffron
using it till it be fully healed, or rather oil of eggs mingled with a
little Venise Turpentine, and a little oil of Saint Iohns VVort, or else some
common cleansing medicine.

CHAP. 7. Of the moist, running, or vveeping eye, called in greek Reuma
opthalmou, in latin Fluxus oculi, delachrymatio.
RHeusma opthalmou is a flovving of thin humours, Definition.
which in such sort against the will, fall down into the eyes, that there
cannot be any means found to stay them. It comes to some by nature, as vvee
have seen some from their childhood never having dry, but always moist eyes,
with a thin pearsing humour, which always was painful to them. Causes.
And it will soon stir up an inflammation, and blearednes, in many
tormenting them all their life without admitting any cure. Those also which
have great gross heads are subject to it, and scarcely doth any medicine at
any time profit them. It may also arise fro some outward causes, as from a
Fever, from some medicine, or sharpe thing which hath been put into the eye,
or fa^ne into it, from great weakness either in the faculty which retains,
or that which digests the nourishment in the eye, by the unskilfulness of
the Surgeon, which in curing the disease of the eye called vngn^a did cut
away more of the flesh in the corner of the eye then he ought, whereof we
will speak in the proper place for a full discharge of all the head touching
this part. Concerning the cure, the Surgeon must have recourse to former
medicines set down in the beginning, which are most easy gentle, which are
either general or special. The general are, Cure
his manner of diet, which must be of such things as have thick juice, since
the humour is thin sharpe, his purgations, as blood letting, frictions downward,
applying the ruptories o^ seton, and this to be done with the advise of a
learned Physician. For the particular cure, Caution in curing.
if this affect was caused through the use of any sharp medicine or by any
other thing falling fastened in the eye, let him abstain from the aforesaid
remedies until he hath take out that which so vexes molests the eye,
otherwise the patient shall never be at rest and quietness, which being done,
he may use the medicines there set down. If it proceed fro a continual course
of humours, there shall be particularly applied a stringent binding plasters
upon the head, having shaved off the hair, upon the forehead and temples, as
R. emplast. contra r^pt. huguenot. de bol. ana. i. s melt them together make a
plaster for your use, or R. huguenot. desiccat. ^ub. comitiss^an ii. Mastich. s
mingle them for your use. And upon the eye you shall lay plasters which are
comfortable and somewhat binding, that thereby the eye may be strengthened and
armed against the flowing of humours. Aetius
Aetius doth much commend this eye salve, which procures no great pain nor
heat. R. aeris vst. iii. cadmi^e iii. opii, mirth an^..iiii. acaci^e, gum arab.
ana. vii. s. put them into water: of these or the like you may make a salve,
when you will use it, put it into the eye, and let him shut his eye a little
while and so keep it in, whereby it cannot bring much pain as the Author
himself affirms. And when all the former remedies will not preuaile the most
singular mean to cure is the cutting of the veins and arteries of the head
and temples which dtavveth out the humour if it flovve invvard, Incisio in
the veins and arteries.
and cutteth off the course of it, if it be outward. For the better perfecting
of this work, let the diseased party be set on a bed, or in a chair, or
bind his neck with a Tovvel put about it, vvrithing both ends together that
being strait it may press his neck: let him hold in his breath a short time
that thereby the veins and arteries may svvell and appear more plainly: For
by this means the blood and spirits will rise up, The compression of the
neck causes the blood to rise up.
and fill the veins and arteries. Then with your Launcet open whether you
will, making no greater an issue then you do in common blood-letting letting
run forth s;o much blood as shall be expedient, which, that it may come forth
more speedily, make straighter sometimes your Tovvell. when he hath bled
sufficiently, the Rovvler or Tovvell shall be taken from his neck, and put on
the orifice or mouth of the vein or artery a little burnt linen cloth, How
the blood may be stayed.
or scraped lint, lay upon that a plaster agglutinatiue that is, which hath
virtue to knit and join together, upon that lay a thick enfolded linen
cloth to the end that the band or rovvler may with greater ease keep fast
the vein or artery. Some use only a little dry linen cloth wrapped
together, as they do in the blood-letting of the arm. The opinion of the old
Physicians.
The old Physicians have left in their writings that we must sear the
artery least the blood will not be stayed, but I have always stayed it by
this binding without causing more pa^ne to the sick party. Oftentimes the
only opening of a vein or artery, and the avoiding of blood in them
suffices not to heal and help this malady, because they are filled again
with new matter which flovveth as before; therefore the counsel of the
ancient writers is to cut the vessel asunder, that by this means you may
break the course and stop the way to the humours, Arteries cut asunder.
and then it shall not be unfit or unprofitable to sear it, or rather to
bind it above, and belovv as it is used to be done in the veins called
varices, which shall be a debarring of the whole passage of the humours. But
when this is done, I counsel you to apply your searing iron to the arm of
the sick party thereby to make an issue to this matter, D^uerting of the humour.
which might Perhaps fall upon some other part, namely the Lunges.

CHA.P. 8. Of certain diseases which the old writers have assigned to the
whole eye: and first of such as see best downward, or things that be near
them, commonly called po^e-blinde, in greek m^opiasis, miopia, citossis, in
latin, lus^ositas, nus^iositas, propiaqua visio.
Definition.
M^opiasis, myopia, catopsis is when one cannot see one thing, but such as be
very near and even offered unto his eyes with great difficulty piercing
those which are far of. They which have this default are constrained when
they read to look very nigh, imagining oftentimes that they behold little
bodies like to flies, or motes which fly in the air, as we see it happens
to those which have looked very long on their books, or have viewed any
thing diligently. Causes.
This affection although it be in some from their birth, yet it proceeds also
from the small quantity of the spirits of sight, and weakness of the same.
Notwithstanding Aristotle imputeth the cause to the great quantity, In his
book de generat, animalium.
by marking little children to be most subject unto it, by reason of the
moisture of their brains: in like manner those which have black eyes are more
moist, as on the contrary the like is seen in old men, because of their
dryness: they which have blew or gray, or ^kie coloured eyes are subject to
the disease glaucoma, which hath the same cause from dryness that the
membrane v^uea hath from moisture, if we may so compare one with an other.
Wherefore some see nearer, some farther.
The reason wherefore some see better near then far off, as saith the same
Philosopher, proceeds from the situation of the eye. For such as have them
standing forth cannot see far, and contrarivvise they which have them sunk
into their circles do more easily discern things present before them,
because the spirit cannot be so easily scattered, when the eye is settled
deeply as when it stands out. Concerning the cure, albeit the old
Physicians appoint none, accounting it incurable si^h it arises from the want
of spirits, Care.
or is naturally incident unto men, yet since it proceeds from the fullness
of moisture, mine advise is, to use cuppings upon the shoulders and neck, to
purge him with such medicines as draw from the brain, to dry the head with
bags and coyfs made to this purpose, to apply a seton, or rather a ruptorie,
either upon the hinder part of the head, or upon the arms. And touching other
medicines which are to be applied to the place affected you shall have recourse
to the chapter following, entreating of the dimness or diminishing of the
sight, and appointing such remedies as will strengthen and repair the decayed
and dispearsed spirits, which are in very small quantity.

CHAP. 9. Of the continual dimnes, diminishing, or hinderance of the sight,
called in greek amblyopia, in latin, hebetudo, or caligatio.
AMbliopia is a continual dimness hinderance of the sight, Definition
without any appearance of any thing in the eye: notwithstanding the sight is
darkened, and yet no hurt to be perceived in the membranes, neither appears
the apple of the eye made lesser or greater, Causes.
or having any other disorder. This disease happens either when the spirits
are gross, or the membranes are thick and straight or the humours of the eye
are not only gross, but also slimy. It proceeds from some long tedious
disease, and trouble, because the spirits are vvasted: it may come also by age.
For old folk besides the thickness of the mebranes, and humours, have the
spirits of sight much vveakened, and in fine diminished and lost. Cure.
In the general cure of dimness which is caused through the grossenesse of
membranes, spirits humours, you must deal as it is used in the beginning of
the cataracts: touching particular medicines to be applied in any kind of the
perishing of the sight this colliriu is exceedingly comed to have restored (as
one writes) sight to him that had been blind by the space of nine years.
R. succi api^, foenic. verbase. chamedr. pimpinell. gariophil, Holerius.
saeluiae, chelidon. rutae. centinod. m^rsus gall. farinae, volat. ana. i.
piperis crasso modo triti, nucis moschaiae, ligni aloes ana. iii. let them all
steep in the urine of a sound child, and a pint of malmsey one hour, then
sees them a little while aftervvard strain them forth, and put the water
into a glass stopping it very close: put some of this water into his eyes
when he goes to sleep. Strawy wine.
In like manner put Strauberies into wine which is sweet, and boil them
together a short time, of this take every morning, of the same make a drink
which you may use with your meat. Others esteem this water as miraculous.
They bury vipers in doung, An excellent water.
whereof are engendered vvormes which they distill, and put this water into
the eyes. The distilling of white honey and rose flowers is most singlar.
Leonellus Fauen^.
Leonellus Fauentinus saith he healed such a disease by dropping into the eye
the juice of the Selandine and that he tried this remedy, to take of water
which runs through a vein of white earth, after you cut the earth, a
pint, put into it the quatity of a nut of amber beat to gross povvder, let it
stand eight days in the Sun, aftervvard put thereof into the eye. Beside the
ascrenamed causes. Auicen saith, 3. book fen. 3. tract, 4. chap. 24.
the decaying of sight may be procured many times by great light or whiteness,
as when one doth a long time look upon the Sun, or upon snow, and specially
if one come forth of a dark place: so that he cannot see but such things as
are near, and those hardly: even as they which look upon any colour suppose
they behold some white thing above them: Cornarius.
Galen.
he names this affection altum^r that is in latin albedo vincens in english
too much whiteness Galen makes mention hereof in his tenth book of the use
of the parts. This thing befalls them which are shut up in a dark place,
as in dungeons of prisons, and come out suddenly into the light. And some are
of this opinion that the christalline humour is so weak, and so hurt that it
is turned upside down, as if it were out of the place by the meeting
encoutring with this great light naming this disease in greek acatastatia
christalloidous. Sauanarola.
In curing of it the patient must usually behold green and blew colours, and
be kept in a place neither ouerlight, nor ouerdarke Auicen praises fumes made
with wine poured upon a brick, Cure.
or rather a decoction made with herbs having virtue to dissolve, as
Hissope, Melilot, Camomill, Sage, Rosemary, and such like: whereof may be made
also little fomentations: as R. of the leaves of Sage Maiora, Hislope, ana. m.
s Betony, eiebright an m.i. of leaves of Camomill, Melilot, Roses, ana. p. s of
Any seeds and fenill ana. s sees them in wine and water equally to be used
with a sponge, and make this your collirium, R. of water of Selandine and
eiebright ana. i. water of Hissope s in which dissolve Myrrh s Beniamin,
Stirac. Calamitae, ana. ij. when you have used your fomentation apply this
eiesalue to the part.

CHAP. 10. Of those which see not in the night which disease may be called
night bl^ndnesse, in greek it is called Nictalspi^sis, in latin Nocturna or
Vespertina Caecitudo.
NIctalopiasis is when one sees nothing in the night albeit he see most
clearly in the day, Definition.
and in such sort, that as the day passes, so his sight fails. This affect
grows from the weakness of the head, and grossenes of the spirits of sight,
Causes.
as also from the humours and coats of the eyes and principally of that cornea
or horny coat, which are broken and stuffed with a thick slimy juice: or as
Actuarius affirms, 3 book chap. 7. method.
it comes from the impurity and plenty of humours which being enlightened by
the brightness of the clear air is able to minister sight but being obscured
and made gross by the shadow and darkness of the night, it troubles and
overthrows the whole action of sight. To this place may be referred that
disorderly affection which is called by some acies solaris, or solana visi^,
Acies solaris, or solana visi^
that is, when one cannot discern any thing but by the Sun beams. In curing
hereof these general things are to be observed, Cure.
bloudletting in the arm, and corner of the eyes and purging according to the
Physicians advise: this done move neesing by putting things fit for that
purpose into the nose. Some commend the use of selandine and eyebright water
in drink. Concerning local medicines Auicen avouches this experiment,
Auicen.
to take the thin moisture coming of a goats liver laid on burning coals,
putting thereto a little salt and lunge pepper. Aetius.
Aetius extols the liver of a Buck goat roasted with salt and eat and to
put the thin humour issuing from it into the eyes, or rather whilst it is in
rosting to receive into the eyes the sum arising from it. The gall of a
Vulture or any other ravenous bird mingled with a little juice of a pig, and
honey is much praised, as also the juice of Chickweede, or Fenell dropped into
the eye. Also to receive the vapour of Rue, Fenell, Eyebright, Selandine, Ligni
Aloes, Saffron, sodden together in wine or water, or else to still them with
honny, and put the water into the eyes.

CHAP. 11. Of day-blindnesse, or cats eyes, called in greek hemeralopia, in
latin nocturna visio.
HEmeralopia is, Definition
when one sees better in the night, then in the day but if the moon shine he
cannot see: Causes.
which thing proceeds either from the thinness and small quantity of the
spirits of sight, which are dispersed by the light of the Son, as on the
contrary, they are made strong, thick and gathered on an heap by darkness:
or rather because the membranes of the eye are over slender whereby the
spirits can not be retained, but breath forth, and pierce thorough them. VVee
may bring to this place the disease named of the latins tenebrosa affection,
which is, Tenebrosa affection.
when one with great pain beholds the light though it be but very little.
Concerning the cure, there must be regard had that the sick party use good
diet, Cure.
which may procure store of blood, and thick gross spirits, if want and
thinness did first bring this disease: but if it proceeded from the weakness
and sledernesse of the membranes, let the eye be comforted and strengthened
with medicines agreeable thereunto, and which may moreover make thick the
spirits, as R. gallar. balaust, ana i. folioru plantag. betonicae, an. m. s
sees them in.iii. of sharpe wine in which dissolve acatiae gum. trag. aloes,
an s make your collicium an other R. rosar. rub. fruct. oxiacan. tapsi barbati
centinod. ana. p. s sees them in water until it come to iiij. put into it
sarcocol dissolved in a woman's milk which gives suck s iutiae praeparat
aecerussae lotae, antimonij loti, ana. i. or a collirium made of half a dram
of olei vitrioli, dissolved in plantaine and rose water is singular.

The third section containing the diseases of the muscles of the eyes which are
by some referrd to the whole eye.
CHAP. I. Of the squint eye, called in greek Strabismus, in latin Strabositas
or oculi distortio.
Definition.
STrabismu^ is a wresting or writhing, which draws the sight unequally: or a
conuulsion and pulling of the muscles which move the eye: or when some muscles
of the eye are loosed, and the contrary to them shortened, in such sort, that
it is dravven either upward, or downevvard, Observation
to the right side, or to the left. For sometime in the same part are contrary
muscles, equal in number and greatness, and strength, so that if some of them
be subject to a palsy, a conuulsion falls upon the contrary: To whom this
disease incident.
Old folk many times by the drawing back of the muscles being very dry or
moist are subject to this disease, or the like affection, as they also which
have been vexed with any great disease of the head as the falling sickness,
giddiness or any other: Causes.
I have seen it proceed in some of having too much company with women, the
excess whereof doth marvelously scatter the spirits. Children most subject
to it.
But commonly it is a malady most incident unto children presently after their
birth, through the negligence of the Nurse, who sets the cradle in which the
infant lies on the side of the light, not directly contrary unto it which
makes the children looking to the light to turn the eye on the side to it,
and thus by continuance they are accustomed to turn their eye awry when the
muscles have attained to a habit, because one sort of them doth so obeye and
follow the contrary which draw them that these do grovv longer the others
shorter. Cure.
For the cure if the disease come of fulness, softenesse, palseye, in some
muscles, it shall be necessary to purge the brain and to dry it, wherein the
fore-running cause of this disease was contained, to which purpose also let him
chew things in his mouth, put other into his nose, use good diet, and
strengthen the part as much as may be with drying and resolving fomentations.
But if on the contrary it is engendered by too much want, and emptiness of
the blood and spirits, the sick party must b^ nourished very well, and use
to drink asses milk. The particular remedies must be fomentations which are
moist, and the blood of a Turtle or Pigeon dropped into the eye. Paulus A
Eg^neta appointed a mask for such as had this disease, 3. book.
to the end they might look always straight, which is most fit for young
children. The portraiture with the description is in Ambrose Pare his book,
Ambrose Pare his pains commended
which without knowledge of the same set down in the old writers hath very
wittily cunningly invented the said mask instrument as he hath done many
other, thorough the long observation which he had in viewing many diseases.
Moreover the Nurse shall draw her hand over the childes eyes oftentimes to
repair the sight. Auicen. Aeginet. Actua^ Oribas.
And following the counsel of the old writers there shall be some red thing
hanged and fastened upon the temples, or on the contrary ear to the wresting
of the eye, that the child may to that turn the eye, and so amend the
deformed sight. In like manner the cradle shall be set with the contrary side to
the light.

CHAP. 2 Of the shaking eye, or horse eye, called in greek hippos, in latin
equus.
HIppos is an affection of the eye coming at the first framing, Definition.
and from the birth of the party wherein the eyes cannot abide in one place,
but are always shaking, and continually trembling in such manner, that you may
behold the eye going hither and thither without any rest. This affection (as
Galen saith) comes by the default of the muscle which makes fast the eye,
Definition. med.
compassing the lowest part of the sinew of sight yet the latter anatomistes
have not found this muscle in men, Later anatomists dissent from Galen.
neither have I observed it, albeit in Oxen it is most evident. Therefore I
judge the cause of this trembling to come not from the weakness of one, but
rather of all the muscles. The same Author compares it to the natural
grinding or gnashing of the teeth, In prognost. Hip. com 2. sect 21.
which is in us from our Nativity, whereupon Gor^eus accounts it not a
disease since no Physician hath set down any cure for it. Gorraeus.


Nevertheless in labouring to redress this fault I would use the instrument
called a Mask as we have spoken in the former Chapiter, to the end, that he
which were infected therewith might not see but by that little hole, whereby
the eye should be compelled to stay in that place in looking which might
cause it to remain afterward steadfast in the same place Some think it best
to bind or roll the eyes for a short time, and again to vnroll them, which
may be profitable in this affection as also in the squint eye.

CHAP. 3. Of the Senseless eye, or Palsy in the eye, called in greek
paeralysis op^halmou, in latin resolution oculi.
PAralysis is taken for want of sense and motion in the whole body,
Definition.
or in any part, as vvee see in the eye, when it canne neither be moved to
the right side not to the left, up, nor down because the muscles are
benumbed, and if any sharpe remedy be laid to, it cannot feel the same.
Causes.
The causes are the flovving of the humours, and especially of fleume, which
fall upon the second pair of sinews coming from the brain, which spread
forth their branches into the muscles of the eye. Prediction.
If the whole eye be loosed it is hardly cured especially in old folk: if it
be natural it is utterly incurable. And where there is hope, you must do as
follows. The sick must eschew strong wines, vaporous gross meates, using
such only, which are easily digested, and make the humours thin: if the
party be of a good complexion he shall be let blood in the arm, the being
prepared with clisters, he shall be purged, afterward let him use to chew
certain proper remedies in his mouth, and have others put into his nose to
draw down the matter, and use vomit fasting, yet without great constraint,
also having bound the eye before least it might start forth thorough the
vehement vomiting. There shall be applied unto it cupping glasses on the
shoulders, with scarification, and set bloodsuckers on the temples. His head
being shaven make an embrocation of oxirodinum, wherein a little castoreum is
melted. In the particular cure the eye shall be bathed with such herbs as are
good for the sinews, having virtue partly to comfort, A tried remedy.
partly to make thin, and let a plaster or cataplasme be laid upon it made
of the same herbs putting to it a little castoreum carefully providing that
it go not into the eye. Then the water of Fenell, Anyfeedes, Cynamon,
Eyebright, mingled together and dropped into the eye in small quantitye are
singular: so is the blood of a Turtle or Pigeon.

The fourth section containing the diseases which are incident to the
ey^liddes.
CHAP. 1. Of the blovving or puffing up of the eyelidde called in greek
emphisema opthalmou, in latin inflatio.
EMphisema is taken generally for an heap of windy spirits which are gathered
in the empty places of any part, Diverse acceptions of this word.
as appears in Galen, But it is here particularly used for a puffing up of
the uppermost eyelidde when it is lifted up, losing his natural colour with
heaviness and harde moving, Def.
and in the end becomes pale and wan: and sometimes the white doth in part
stand higher then the black. There is also a loose svvelling without it
round about which being pressed down with the fingers, is suddenly stayed,
but presently is filled up again. And herein it differs from the tumor
called Oedema because it being pressed with the finger, How it differreth from
oedema.
the mark and sign thereof remains afterward, and it proceeds also from a
stroke which compassed the eielidde, which thing is not so to be seen in
this windy swelling of it. Causes.
This disease grovveth from some thin humour or vapour which arises in it by
weakness of heat, which is not able to alter the blood to the likeness of
the part, whereupon either wind or thick spirits are engendered, which
cannot be dispersed, nor digested, as vvee may see it happen to such as are
sick of fevers, or which watch much and sleep little, or which have an ill
constitution of body, or which are entering into a dropsy. Cure.
In curing of it, you shall use medicines necessary for the whole body, and
particularly shall be applied fomentations partly strengthening, 3 Book chap.
22.
partly resolving. Paulus doth much commend a fomentation of wine and water,
lentils and roses soden together or this R. ros. rub. P j. Flor. ath^s. P s.
Camomil. melilot. hyssop. absinthii, puleg^i, origani ana. m. s. Sees them in
equal portions of wine and water, and apply it with a spounge. Aftervvarde
you may lay upon it vigoes plaster sieve merc. or de baccis lauri, de meliloto.
Vigoes plaster
Experiment.
I have tried vnguentum desiccatiuum rub. ad comitiss. mingled together to
dissolve such tumors. Aetius.
AEtius praises a Cataplasme made of Lentils sodden with a little honey. Now of
this ill affect follows oftentimes heaviness of the eieliddes called by
Auicen, grauitas palpebrae, Grauitas palpebrae. 3. Book fen. 3. tract. 3. chap
9. Cure.
when the thinner part is dissolved, or rather when there is vveaknes in the
part, or when it dries or consumes: In curing of this there must be used
contrary medicines to the former, whose virtue shall be to make moist and soft:
as fomentations of mallowes, Holihock, Pellitory of the wall, Branck vrsine,
muscelage of Fenegreek and lineseed: of these also may be framed Cataplasms.
Emplastrum de mucaginibus, and that of Vigo aforenamed have singular virtue and
force to mollify and dissolve.

CHAP. 2. Of the Tettar, Ringworme, or Scabbs on the eielidds, or sharpe fleumy
blearednes, called in greek Psoropthaimia in latin L^ppitud^pruriginosa.
Definition.
PSoropthalmia is when the eyeliddes are red, and salt biting tears issue
from them, the corners of the eyes having vlceration and reddnesse with much
itching. Causes.
This proceeds from salt sharpe fleume flovving down to the eye stirring up
this itching and fretting. Cure.
To cure it you must change the course of the humour by bloodletting, cupping,
rubbing on the shoulders, abstaining from all salt slimy meates. In particular
you must use fomentations ex posca lenticulae decocto, Collyrium Philoxeni.
rosarum, aftervvardes apply collirium philoxeni which is named of AEtius
achariston, because the Patient is not able sufficiently to requite it: it is
this R. cadmiae. ii. chalcitidis crudae. i. aloes, obol. ii. aerug. obol. ii.
piperis gran. x. florum rosarum. iii. beat them together and use them. My
counsel is to put to them vng. pomat. to bring the to such a fit commodious
form for your use as is vnguentum de tutia, and then to put some of it into
the corners of the eyes. Medicines against itching
For the itching after you have applied your fomentations use this collyrium
Take Rose water and plantine water. ana. ii. in which boil with a soft fire
aloes hepaticae s of white coporas. ii. of sugar Candy. i. this eiesalue
consumes dries the sharpe fleume and gives strength to the eye.

CHAP. 3. Of the itchinge or dry ringvvorme, or blearednesse of the eyes
called in greek xeropthalmia in latin arida l^ppitudo.
XEropthalmia is a dry blearednesse wherein the eyes are neither puffed up,
Definition.
nor send forth tears but are only red and heavy with pain, Celsus in his
6. book. 6. chap.
and in the night the eyeliddes stick fast, and are as it were glued together
with thick fleume: which disease is of the longer continuance since the matter
is tough and heavy. In curing hereof bathes are most meet, Cure.
and good diet, and particularly such medicines as provoke tears to the end
to draw the moisture to the eyes whereunto serves the plaster of AEtius
named acharistor. This remedy is greatly praised of Celsus to take bread
dipped in wine and apply it to the eye. Celsus.
For if therebee any humour it dravveth it forth and beats back the flowing
of other humours unto it. Now whereas they which have this infirmity are
greeuouslie vexed in the mornings, not being able to open their eyes, because
their eie-liddes are so fast gievved, they must at night when they go to
bed annoynt them with vnguentum de tutia, which will hinder the eye-liddes
from sticking together.

CHAP. 4. Of the hardness of the eye, or harde blearednesse called in greek
Scleropthalmia, in latin lippitudo dura, or siccitas oculi.
Def.
SCleropthalmia is when the eye-lyddes are more harde then accustomablye they
use to be, and also the eye, more slow in moving, more red, more
painful, especyallie when one awakes, the eye-liddes can hardly be opened,
yet no moisture issues from them and in the corners of the eyes sticks some
fleume dried and and folded together: and when we would turn the
eye-lidde, we cannot do it easily, because of the great hardenesse, neither
canne vvee shut it without pain, Causes.
except we take the aduauntage. This affect happens by the flovvyng of a
gross humour, or after a great inflammation of the eye, when the slimy humour
is dried, either of it self or by the heate, or it befalls thorough the
default of the Surgeon, who hath applied over drying medicines. Cure.
In curing hereof, the same remedies are very convenient which are before
appointed for the dry blearednesse, since they only differ in greatness the
one and the other being dry, 3. book fen^ tract. 3 ch. 5.
Auicen extols greatly these remedies to apply a Fomentation unto the eye
with sponges wet in warm water, and after to put upon the eye the white of
an Egg with oil of Roses. And where the humour is thick and very salt he
uses the mucylage of Fenegreeke dravven in milk, and such remedies as are of
power and virtue to scatter mollifye such an humour. For my part I have
oftentimes tried vnguentum rosatum Mesuae anointing the eyes with it, both
within and without, especially at night when he would take his rest.

CHAP. 5. Of the fallng of hair from the eieliddes or bauldnesse of them
called in Greek Maedarosis and Milphosis, in latin Def^uium pilorum or
Glabaties palp^bra^um also of thickness joined with baldness in the
eyeliddes, called in greek Ptilosis (...) latin, Cra^sittes callo
sapa^polrarum.
Definition.
MAdarosis is only taken for the falling of hair from the eyelids by a
flovving of sharpe humours, and where the hairs do simply fall away, and the
utmost part and banks as it were of the eyelids are red like unto lead the
affection is called milphosis or miltosis. The cause according to Auicen is
gross salt matter, Milphosis.
which makes the eyeliddes red, bringing vlceration to the parts where the
hairs take root, Causes.
the eye thereby being sometime impaired and corrupted. ^ut if the edges and
banks thereof grow thick and hard in such manner that the hair cannot there
be fastened and pierce thorough the disease is named ptilosis jointly mixed and
compounded of madarosis and xeropthalmia. The cause as Auicen records, is not
only in regard of the matter (as when vermin and worms are engendered, or
rather when the humour is salt) but also in respect of the place, as when it
is harde and thick, which hinders the passage of the vapours whereof hair is
engendered, so that they cannot come to the edges of the eie-lidds. Cure.
In the cure you shall have regard to make sweet this humour so sharpe, and so
biting, and if any vermin be there, they shall be either taken away, or
distroied by medicines applied for that purpose. This being done, lay to it
such remedies as have force and virtue to make hair grow. Auicen advances
misedounge beaten to powder, Auicen.
as also alcoole cum mell. Where the eie-liddes are thick he uses this
Cataplasme of Endiue, oil of Roses and white of an egg, commending moreover
the use of bathes in the morning.

CHAP. 6. Of the hardness of the eie-liddes, called in greek Scleriasis, in
latin Durities palp^brarum, and of the harde aposteme in them called Se^rrosis.
Definition
SCleriasis is an harde tumour on the eie-lidde with reddnesse, and pain
which cannot without much difficulty be vvholy taken away, being of longer
continuance then an inflammation, and when it grows harder, and the
reddnesse of it changes into blewenesse it is named scirropthalmia. Causes.
These fall out upon some great inflammation which hath gone before. Cure.
In the Cure especially the hardenesse being ontvvard you must shut the eye and
rub it a long time with your finger, and then use a mollifiyng Fomentation, as
R. of Mallowes, Holihocke Pellitory of the vvall, Violets an. M.i. Lineseede s
make thereof two bags which sees in water. After this shall be applied a
mollifiyng plaster, as de mucaginibus, and diachylum ireatum, amongst other
Vigoes plaster sine Mercurio is singular. You may put also into the eye
Colliria of mucilage of Linseede and Quinces, and a little woman's milk.

CHAP. 7. Of the roughness of the eie-liddes called in greek Trachoma, in
latin Aspritudo: Also of the Fig in the eie-lidds in greek Sicosis, in latin
Ficositas, or Ficosa Palpebra, and of the brawny eie-liddes called in greek
Tilosis, in latin Callosa Palpebra.
TRachoma, Definition.
is an inequality and roughness of both the eie-liddes in their inward part
with an harde ruggedness as if the seeds of millet were in them. If the
malady grow farther and there appear cleftes and rentes and little parts
standing forth not unlike figs it is called sicosis. Sicosis.
And when the disease is vvaxed old and hardened, the eie-lidde becomes as
harde as bravvne, which is called tilosis. Tilosis.
This ill affection comes many times by the long use of eie-salues or by a
sharpe humour flovving unto them, Causes.
and sometimes without any evident cause. Cure.
In curing of it after general things accomplished the use of this collirium
is vvonderfully commended by AEtius R. testae sepiae, Aetius.
viij. punicis viij. rubricae sinopiae, ammoniaci thimiamatis an x. gummi viij.
put them into water, wherewith make an ointement for the eyes, and presently
upon the anointing with a sponge, dipped in cold water, vvashe the
eie-liddes: or R. cadmiae xvj. aeris vsti iiij. seminis hiosciami i. opii ij.
mirrh. fructus ericae, acaciae ana. iiij. gummi. viij, bruise them all dry,
and put to them woman's milk, and then beat them again, into woman's milk,
lay them to the eye, but first look you have used a Fomentation or R.
chalcitidis vstae iij. croci viij. meli^e ix. bruise them with water, and then
dry them, put aftervvard honey unto them and use them.

CHAP. 8. Of the Hares eye, or open eye, called in greek Lagopthalmos, in
latin Leporina palpebra.
Definition
LAgopthalmos is when the higher eielidde is so dravven back, that in shutting
the eye, the whole is not nor cannot be covered vvholy, and in sleep it is
open, as vvee see Hares do sleep. Three kinds thereof.
There are three kinds thereof according to Auicen: the first is, when the
eie-lidde being dravven back, covers not the white of the eye, which
comes either from the first frame of it, or by incision made in the aforesaid
eie-lidde, and this is called leporinus, that is the hares-eie. The second
kind is when one part of the white is not covered, and thereupon arises
abbreuiatio that is shortness, which hath the same causes with the former. The
third is, when the higher eie-lidde touches not, nor covers the lower, which
proceeds either of some kernel, or outgrovving of flesh, or by a conuulsion
of the same eye-lid. Beside the afore-named causes, Causes.
this disease may come sometime by the closing up or as it is commonly called,
cicatrizing of a wound or ulcer, and that, either where the ulcer doth it of
it self, as in a carbuncle, or after the eye-lid is very much cut, and so
over much loosed, or because it hath been lifted up by cutting, or hath been
cauterized or feared unadvisedly. Cocerning the cure, Cure.
if the eye-lid be too short, it is unpossible to recover it by any kind of
cure or operation: If it want but a little, it may be amended and restored in
this manner, when you have felt the sick party fittely, The manual
operation.
you must cut the skin a little under the brows in manner of a cross,
whose points and corners are turned down, with this consideration, that if
this default have arisen from the rash incision sewing of the eye-lid, you then
make your incision upon the scarre, or where it is drawn back. The deepenesse
of the incision must enter to the gristle, yet not touch it: For if it be cut,
the ey-lid falls down, and afterward cannot be lifted up. You shall make
separation of the edges in the incision with scraped lynt, to the end that
the eye-lid may fall down, and return equally to his former shape and
greatness, as also to stay the divided skin from reioyning, causing a little
flesh to grow and fill up that place, that afterward the eye may be easily
and conveniently opened. Concerning local medicines, Local medicines.
there may not be any used which a^e drying, but only loosing, made of gross
vnctuous things, as a fomentation of mollifiyng and loosing herbs. Vnguentum
basilicum made of wax, rosine, black pitch, the sewet of an Ox is much
commended, as the mucilages of quince, senegreeke, and lineseede.

CHAP. 9. Of the inuersion, or turning inside out of the eye, called in Greek
Ectropium, in Latin Inuersio.
ECtropium is, Definition.
when the lower eye-lid turns the inside out, draws so much back, that it
covers not the white of the eye, nor is joined to the other eye-lid which is
above. This affection is not natural, but hath grown from too much loosing
medicines, Causes.
or from superfluous flesh which hath grown in the inner part of it: or
rather, as Aetius saith, Aetius.
when the flesh in the corner of the eye is increased and overgrown: or by
cutting away too much of the skin in a palsy, labouring by that means to
make it shorter: in like manner, burning, cicatrizing, or cutting in the
outward part of the eye-lid, may bring this fault* and old-age also may
procure it. The cure must be diverse, Cure.
as the causes are diverse requiring rather the hand of the Surgeon then
medicines: If then it proceed from the ouergrovving of flesh, and the same be
little and tender, it may be abated and consumed with medicines properly
affected to take away flesh, if it be old and dry it shall be cut away. The
operation shall be in this order. Take a needle with thread in it, and put it
thorough the lovvest part of the flesh which grovveth out, then with the same
thread lift it up, and the eie-lidde with it, and with the point of a penknife
cut it by little and little, or with a crooked vause, you may cut it all at
once if you canne, but take heed least you rake any part of the eie-lidde
away. If the eie-lidde recover his natural fashion, and returning invvard do
cover the eye, we will be content therewith using only medicines, somewhat a
stringent to close up that which is cut away, and to prevent pain and
inflammation: but if it fall back, and return to the former disorder, An
other way of incision.
the must two ouertvvhart incisions be made gently in the innermost part of
the eie-lidde, which shall begin in the midst and lower part of it, being
drawn both ouerthwartly, one to the great corner, the other to the sesse, nigh
unto the eie-lidde, and hauuing gathered both together there will be taken
away a little piece like unto the great letter of the Graecians named L, being
notwithstanding careful to avoid cutting of the skin in such manner: Let
the point of it be to the lower part and bottom of the eye, the larger open
part arise and ascend towards the eye-lid. Now if this default have
proceeded from incision, burning, searing, cicatrizing in the eye lid, which
hath not been well and cunningly performed, then must incision be made of the
skin in the outward part, not far from the eye-lidde, which beginning at
one corner of the eye shall end at the other, in form of a cross, making
seperatios of the edges with lint put between them least they should join
again. But if it proceed from olde-age, or of too much loosing, all that
which is loose must be outvvardly seared, either with a fine instrument, which
kind is called Cauterium actuale, or with a medicine which is called Cauterium
potentiale, with great care that you touch not the eye.

CHAP. 10. Of the eyelids which are tied joined together, called in Greek
Agcylosis, and Agchyloblepharon, in Latin Inuiscatio, or detentio
palprebrarum: of the diverse kinds thereof, named Symphisis and Prophisis
blepharon.
Definition.
AGchiloblepharon is, when the eyelids take hold each of other, and join
together, so that the eye cannot be opened: And it so falls out sometime in
this malady, that the eye-lidde is knitted to the white of the eye, commonly
called coniunctiua, Causes.
and sometime with cornea, or the hornie membrane, this disease is called
Simphisis, or prophisis blepharon. It is so that from the birth and
conformation of the part, the eye-lids are joined together, as it is also
sometime seen in the hole of the ear, yard, matrice, fundament, mouth, or
when an ulcer hath been negligently and ignorantly cured, either in the
eye-liddes or membranes, coniunctiua or cornea, because in healing of the
ulcer, the parts which ought to have been separated, have been glued
together. ^re.
Concerning this cure if the eye-liddes are equally joined, they must be
separated, which I would have cunningly done with the point of a little
slender launcet, and after the incision, to put between both parts little
clothes dipped in some eye-salue which may keep open the vvounde,
Observation.
until both parts be healed* but when the eye-lidde is linked and fastened to
to the white of the eye or horny membrane, the eye-lidde must be with great
dexterity and discretion parted from the eye, cutting rather (if so it must
be) the eye-lidde than the eye: which being done, use such medicines as will
a^svvage pain, to eschevve inflammation, flowing of humours, and pain issuing
from them, and by little and little afterwards to apply medicines, which may
heal and take away the roughnes which the incision hath left, stirring it
daily, not only to put the medicine upon it, but also to keep it from joining
together again, giving in charge to the patient to lift it up many times with
his fingers. Celsus.
Celsus saith he never saw any cured, Mesua.
and to his opinion agrees Mesua, albeit he had assayed many things, because
the eye-lidde is inseparable from the eye.

CHAP 11. Of the short or maimed eye-liddes, called in Greek Coloboma, in
Latin mutilatio, and after Celsus, curtum.
COloboma is here used for any defect want, Definition.
either in the lips, ears, nostrils, or eye-liddes, when by nature (as it
oftentimes falls out) these parts are cloven, in such manner as if there had
been some whole piece taken away, and they left maimed. The cause of this
default, Causes.
is either natural through the feebleness of that faculty and virtue which
fashioned the body in the womb, or fro want and insufficiency of matter,
whereof those parts were framed, or from some other accident, as
rottenness, a carbuncle, or gangrene, which have eaten wasted the part, or by
a stroke which hath cut away or made a division in the part. C^e.
As touching the cure, it is unpossible to restore that vvante which is in the
substance: that must be natures vvoorke, not the Chirurgions hand. But the
deformity of the part so maimed, may be repaired and recovered if it be but
little: if it be great it receives no cure, but he which deals with it,
Prediction.
shall make it more ugly and ill favoured then it was before the cure. The
way to amend this fault, when the eye-lid is some-vvhat lame and maimed is,
that which is used in the disease called hare-lips, you must cunningly with
a launcet or crooked Vause, take of the skin from the outward and invvarde
parts, which are to be joined* and then make fast together the edges of both
parts: but if they cannot conveniently touch each other, beside this pulling
away of the skin, there must be made two cross incisions on both sides, as
vvee have before said in the hares eye, Celsus in his 7. book.
which shall be turned from the wound, cutting only the uppermost part of
the skin. When this is done, there shall be a needle thrust through both the
lips and edges without touching the gristle, and the thread shall be made
fast on each side as in the Hares-lippes, which Ambrose Pare hath largely set
forth, Ambrose Pare.
plainly laying open the portraiture and fashion of that whole work.

CHAP. 12. Of a fat substance lying under the eye-lidde, called in Greek
Hidaus, in Latin aquula, or palprebarum aquositas, or vesica.
Definition.
HYdatis, is a grovving out of fat in the higher eye-lid betvvene the skin
and the gristle. In some, specially in little children which are very moyste,
this fat grovveth more and more, and causes many grievous accidents
ouerlading the eye: and for this cause drawing down the revvme, the
eye-liddes seem svvollen under under the brovves, neither are they able to
lift up themselves when need so requires. Signs.
If any one press them down with his fingers divided in sunder, that is
between the fingers arises up, when the other which is under them is
pressed down. Those children (saith Albucrasis) which have this malady,
Albucrasis.
lie sleeping always upon their face, and at the davvning of the day are
greatly tormented vvyth that abundance of humours which hath been gathered in
the night: they are not able to behold the sun, but their eye trembles, and
sheddeth tears. Cure.
If this disease be but nevvly begun, it may be easily healed with
resolving medicines without Chirurgerie: but if it be of long continuance, it
must be taken away by manual operation, that is by the hand of the
Surgeon. When you have set the sick party in a convenient place, you must
press down the eye-lidde at both corners with your fingers, that by this
means the skin stretching forth, may be cut ouerthvvart, your hand
remaining hanging down, least the skin or bladder wherein the fat is be
touched and hurt: and moreover, that it being opened, the same may be taken
away jointly with the bladder. This done, you must pressed it out with the
fingers, or rather with a pair of pincers pluck it out by the roots, since
it may be easily separated, dealing afterward with it, as you would in the
disease called a VVolf. But if the bladder be cut it procures great pain,
because it sends forth his moisture, which being thin and small, or as it
were minced, cannot be gathered again. If this do so fall out, you must
apply such medicines as will bring it to suppuration, and so consume it, and
if it be needful to use such as will take away the abundance of flesh called
cathairetica: least if there remain any skin of the bladder it may engender
again the like disease, as we see it fall out in vvolfes.

CHAP. 13. Of the corruption or rottenness in the eye-lids, called in Greek
Midesis, or midosis, in Latin putredo.
The diverse use of this word^.
MIdesis taken generally, is common to all parts, yet it is specially used for
the corruption of the eye lids, when they seem much svvollen, and slimy
matter doth distil from them usually, and they are ouer-laden with fatness.
Causes.
The cause of this disease proceeds from a stream of superfluous and
corrupt humours which fall down vppn the eye-lidde, specially in the
invvarde part of it, wherein nature hath placed a fat substance to make
the eye moist because of the continual moving thereof. Cure. Dioscorides.
To cure it Dioscorides saith, Nardus is a singular remedy, since it binds
and dries the superfluous humours, whose corruption brings forth this
disease. Such eye-salues as dry without great sharpness are most fit fot
it, as this: R. aquae plantag. rosar. ana. j. iutiae prepar. aloes lotae an s.
trochischor alb. ras. j. fiat collyrium. If there be great corruption, a
little vnguentum Aegiptiaecum dissolved in wine will be most excellent: but
you must be circumspect least you hurt the eye.

CHAP. 14. Of the wart or barley corn on the eylidde, commonly called (as I
suppose) a Stian, in Greek crithe, or posthia, in Latin hordeum, or hordeolum.
CRithe is a small, harde, firm, Definition.
and somewat long tumor, like unto a barley corn whereof it hath the name,
growing in the outmost part of the eie-lidde, where the hairs be, which hath
his humour contained in a little skin, and it hardly comes to suppuration
or ripeness. Galen.
Galen names it in Greek Posthia, which signifies desire, as Philippus
Imgrassias writes, because that women when they have conceived are naturally
subject to longing, and desiring of many things, which if perhaps they be in
the power and possession of any who will not give it them at their request, It
is reported of the Romaines. Cure.
they curse him with this malady, and threaten him with crithe, which commonly
befalls them. In curing of it Auicen uses the blood of a pigeon, Antonius
Musa.
or turtle, and this liniment. R. oliban. mirrh. an ii. ladani. s boracis i.
cum oleo liliorum fiat linimentum. Antonius Musa appointed a plaster of
galbanum mixed with nitrum Paulus made a fomentation of sodden barlye, Aegniet.
Galen.
Galen of the blood of ravenous birds which issues from them after the head
is pulled off, or else a plaster of white wax. If the matter in it may be
evidently seen, Celsus.
Celsus commands to open it, that the humour may run forth which by the
resting therein might corrupt the gristle. But if this accident be in the
outward part, Aetius.
to purge and cleanse it Aetius uses the yolke of an egg and honey mingled
together, and to engender and restore flesh, puluis capitalis. If the gristle
be corrupted within, then he turns the eye-lidde, scrapeth away so much of
the gristle as is decayed and defiled, puts upon it orichalcum burned and
made in fine powder, and upon that the yolke of an egg mingled with honey and
oil of roses: on the second day he uses a fomentation, and continues the
former medicine: on the third day he fills up the eye-lid with honey, and
upon it applies a collyrium having force and virtue to repell, o^ beat back,

CHAP. 15. Of the hailestone of the eieliddes, called in Greek chalaxion, in
Latin grando.
Definition.
CHalaxion is an heap of superfluous humours gathered both in the higher and
lower eie-lid, in fashiolyke to an hailstone: when this tumor is pressed, it
remains not fast fixed vnmouable but chageth the place, wherein (as also in
the form* it is distinguished fro aforenamed disease hordeum, How it differs
from hordeum. Aetius.
or a stian, Aetius makes two kinds of them, whereof the one is plainly to be
seen in the outward part, in which it grows like unto little round knobs,
clear as hayle, out of the which when it is opened issues forth an humour
like to the white of an egg. The other kind is a tumor in some part harde
like to a bean, marvelous painful, if it be roughly touched, This kind is
painful.
yea sometime the extremity of the pain causes the patient to faint and
sown. Concerning the cure, Cure.
if the tumor be without the eie-lid, let the incision be outward upon the
same, and with a little hooke or other instrument pluck forth the corn,
applying to it incontinently a plaster having virtue to knit and join. But
if the hailestone be within the eye-lidde, and shine overthwart the gristle,
when you have turned the inside out of the eye lid, make incision overthwart,
and when the corn is taken away, use joining and knitting medicines: Paulus
in his 6. book.
Some put thereto a little chewed salt to consume the humour that may there
remain.

CHAP. 16. Of harde knots upon the eye-liddes, named in Greek Poriasis, in
Latin Tophus: also of gravel or the stone in the eye-lids, in Greek
Lithiasis, in Latin Lapidescentia, or lapis palpebrae.
POriasis is an harde brawnye tumor arising in the outward part of the
eye-lidde. Definition.
Galen affirms it to come also in the inside. Lithiasis is an harde, Galen.
white, rugged tumor, in colour resembling the Sapphire stone. Causes.
They are both caused principally by an hardness of humours, which are
assembled and gathered in the eie-lidde, as if the second kind of Grando
afore-named should become dry and thick, where-uppon should ensue poriasis,
and by growing more dry and harde like unto a stone, should ensue lithiasis.
In curing the harde knotnamed poriasis, Cvre.
the skin must be cut in the outside, and all the the matter taken forth
from the bottom, laying afterward unto it a joining plaster. In curing the
gravel or stone called lithiasis, the eyelidde must be turned, and the
incision made in the inside, drawing the matter of the tumor forth with an
instrument, and then apply unto it a little salt with spittle. Aetius.
Aetius uses the powder of orichalcum burned, and upon it lays a defensive
made of an egg, wine, and oil of roses mingled together, and rolls ir.

CHAP. 17. Of lice which breed in the eye-liddes, called in Greek pthiriasis,
in Latin pediculatio.
Definition.
PThiriasis is, when many little broad lice trouble the hairs on the eye-lids.
Causes.
They are engendered by excessive eating and drinking, of uncleanness, ill diet.
Cure.
In the cure, the patient must eat good wholesome meat, fifth they come only
of ill humours, his hair must be shorn, he must use frictions or rubbings
fasting every morning, such remedies must be applied as may dry, strengthen,
and comfort the head. After this the lice which are engendered must cunningly
be taken away, such medicines used as may not only destroy those which remain,
but also prevent the generation of other. Aetius.
To this purpose Aetius commends this medicine, to have a fomentation of Sea
water, and then to aplie this collyrium. R. alum. sciss, i, staphidis siluest.
obol. i. piperis obol. ij. aeris vsti i beat them to fine powder, and use them
dry. Celsus used this. Celsus.
R. sandarac. spumae nitri, vuae taminae, beat the together, put unto them as
much oil, and also vinegar until they be as thick as honey. Auicen comendeth
brimstone to this purpose. Auicen.
This is a tried ointement. R. huguenot. rosar. mesue j. sulphur. viui.
staphisag. an s. hydrarg. cum saliua extinct. i. fiat vngnentum.

CHAP. 18. Of hairs growing in the eielids which hurt the eye, called in
greek trichiasis, in latin oculorum a pilis offensio. also of the diverse
kinds thereof.
TRichiasis is, Definition.
when the hairs which grow either naturally or unnaturally on the eye-liddes,
do hurt and prick the eye, and cause vveeping. The old writers have left
unto us three kinds of them, whereof the first is named ptilosis, which is,
Ptilosis.
when the eyelid is loose, the natural hair falls round about into the eye,
and pricks it. The second is called districhiasis, Districhiasis.
or duplex ordo pilorum, that is, a double order or set of hair, when one
hurts the other as contrary adversaries. The third is called phalangosis,
Phalangosis.
or acies pilorum, that is, ranks of hair, when the edge of the eie-lidde
with the hair which is upon it without any relaxation of the eie-lidde is
turned and wrested into the eye, in such manner that the hair is hid,
neither can it be seen without the eielidde be lifted on high. Causes.
The cause of this unnatural generation of hair, proceeds of the abundance
of superfluous moisture, which nevertheless is not sharpe nor biting, even as
the earth being over moist brings forth plenty of herbs. For if the
humour were sharpe or in any manner fretting, by remaining in the eie-lidde it
would de file and corrupt the hair, which nature had there planted. It migt
also cause by increasing and long continuance a looseness in the eye-lids.
Concerning the cure, if the hairs be unnatural which grow there, Cvre.
let them be pulled away with pincers, and afterward apply such medicines as
may stay them from grovving again: of this sort, are antes eggs, the gall of
a calfe, the blood of al sorts of frogs: amongst other, rhis of Archigenes is
praised vvonderfully, Archigenes medicine.
which is made of the blood and gall of an hedge-hog, with castoreum in
equal proportion. I confess I have not seen any trial of these remedies, and
therefore, after the eye is turned where they stick, the best course is, to
sear them to the roots with an iron made for that purpose, for this will
utterly destroy them. This done, apply such remedies as may prevent
inflammation, the escarre being once removed, the ulcer will heal easily. In
this order shall you deal with those hairs which grow naturally, if their
turning invvarde offend the eyes. But before you come to sear the place, you
must labour to gather and tie up the hairs, which you shall do more
conveniently, if you knit them with other hair which is near to them, by
a plaster framed after the manner of dry stitching. When al are thus
gathered and made fast to the outward part, let them so abide a good space,
that they may not return into the eye, but receive another shape: But if the
edge of the eye-lidde be also turned inward, yet the eye-lidde not loosed,
there must be incision made on the inside in a straight form or line, that by
this means the skin may be separated and let loose, The cure of the old
Physicians.
which did draw the eye-lidde inward, and the hair ioyntlie with the same may
look upward. Concerning the curing of ptilosis, which is, when the
eye-lidde is relaxed, as we say, or too much loosed, you shall have recourse
to the operation, which shall be set down in the chapter following,
touching atonia, or weakness of the eie-lids.

CHAP. 19. Of the looseness or weakness of the eye-liddes, called in greek
atonia ton blepharon, in latin imbecillitas palpebrarum.
Definition.
AToniaton blepharon, is a simple weakness of the eye-liddes, without
appearance of any other outward cause yet the party thus affected is not able
to lift them up, but is enforced to keep them shut, unless he lift them up
with his hand, which is the cause that they which are in this miserable
estate, cannot avvake, nor see plainly. Causes.
This malady comes by the abundance of moisture which softens and loses
the eye-lidde, which is stretched further then the bounds of nature, so that
when one would by the benefit of the muscles lift up his eye-lidde, and open
his eye, he cannot do it fully, because of the weakness and looseness.
Cure.
The cure must be in this order. When the Surgeon hath placed the patient
to his liking, he shall take between his fingers the skin of the eye lid
(leaving the gristle, which, since it is not loosed, The gristle must not be
cut.
needs not incision) lifting up so much of it as he shall think expedient
in the restoring of the natural form to be taken away. For there are tvvoo
dangers: one, least too much be cut avvaye, for then the eye-lidde will not
cover the whole eye: the other least too little be cut, for then your
labour is lost, and the incision utterly unprofitable.

Therefore in this consideration, it shall be necessary to mark the place
with ink, drawing tvvoo straight lines where the incision shall be made In
this order, that betvvene the edge where the hairs do grow, and the
nearest of your lines, there be space remaining to thrust in a needle. Celsus.


This done, you shall cut gently, piercing the skin which is betvvene the two
lines, One kind of incision.
which may be done all at once, holding with the fingers, and lifting up so
much of the eye-lidde as you will cut avvaye: aftervvard with a penknife,
launcet, or cisers cut directly upon the two lines, taking avvaye the piece
which is in the midst: or rather make your incision upon each line so long
as is requisite, An other kind of incision.
and cut away that which is in the midst, beginning at one end, and
gently removing the skin until you come to the other, and all be clean
taken avvaye. Having proceeded thus far, you shall then join both sides of
the vvounde with a needle put into the midst, which shall not be vvholy and
suddenly stayed, but command the patient to close his eyes, and if the eyelid
come not down to cover all the eye, let the point of the needle slip, if it
do cover all, make it fast: in what part the skin of the eye-lid shall be
yet too large, there take away your thread which is in the higher lip of
the wound, and cut away so much of it as you see needful, How to stitch
then thrust thorovve the thread again, and draw together both the lips or
edgcs of the vvounde: and aftervvard at both the ends put thorough the needle.
This part of your work thus finished, you shall then apply a defensive, and
also a medicine, which may join the continuitie dissolved. You must be
prudent in pulling away your needle, least it may procure too great deformity
by the scarre uvhich remains. Aeginet.
Paulus Aegineta saith, he knew Surgeons which used no stitching, but
such medicines only as had virtue to close it up, notwithstanding the
aforesaid manner of stitching is the surest way.

CHAP. 29. Of little pieces of flesh in the eye-lid, or mulberry, called in
greek pladorot^ (...) i^la^ m^rum.
Definition.
PLadarotes are little soft discoloured bodies growing within the eyeliddes:
as sarcosis is an outgrovving of thick flesh, resembling small pieces of pitch
coming forth within the eie-lidde. Causes.
These proceed from corrupt blood, which engenders soft, slimy, discoloured
flesh, not unlike the blood of flesh when it is washed. An exulceration in the
innermost skin of the eye-lidde which cannot close up, may also cause this
affect for in continuance these do grow out, and close up the ulcer in some
part. Concerning the cure, Cure.
if they be thick and gross, they shall be cut away finely with the point
of a launcet, and and aftervvard let the place be touched with a little fine
salt, allam, or copperas water, applying also medicines which may dry the
eye without great pain.

CHAP. 21. Of the svvollen or stretched out veins called varix or varices, in
Greek cirsos, also of meliceris, steatoma, atheroma.
CIrsos is a stretching forth of the vein most usually proceeding of
melancholic blood. Definition.
Atheroma is filled with matter like unto a pulteise of wheat meal. Steatoma
contains matter not much differing from sewit: the humour in meliceris
resembles honey. All these humours are enfolded in a little bladder or skin,
and with the same oftentimes may be found many other strange bodies, as
stones, hair, nailes, glass, yea little beasts, like to flies or gnats. In
the cure, Cure.
the skin of the eye-lidde must be cut even to the bladder which keeps the
humour, and if it be possible it must be wholly together taken out: for if any
part remain, the disease returns. Therefore, if by occasion you be
constrained to leave any part behind (as sometime it falls out that must
be consumed by medicines which have virtue to mollify procure suppuration, but
in fine such as do cleanse increase flesh in the wound. But concerning varices
or swollen veins, Aetius forbids meddling with varix.
Aetius would not have them handled, because they are rebellious and malignant
for the most part, as also certain other red painful tumors are in like
sort pestilent and incurable.

The 5. section, containing the diseases which are incident to the membranes
or parchment like skins of the eye.
CHAP. 1. Of the black mortified or bloudshedding eye, called in greek
hipospagma, or aimalops, in latin sanguinis effusio, or sugillatio.
Definition.
HYposphagma are red spots in the end appearing black or blew, coming
from blood which flovveth in the eye by the veins scattered amongst the skins
and coats of the same. This happens of some stroke, Causes.
cry, fall, or great gushing out of blood when the mouth of the veins are
opened, or by bursting of them when they are over full. They which are
troubled with this malady, imagine vvhatsoener they see to be red, because
the blood is not only dispersed, Wherefore all things seem red.
as it were spilt amidst the conjunctive membrane, or white of the eye, but
also in the hornie membrane which makes them red, vvherevppon it
follows, that whatsoever is offered to the sight seems red. The plain
proof whereof we may and do daily behold in glasses, which being green,
red, or yellovv, represent to us all things of their colour. Cure.
In curing it, bloud-letting is most necessary, and of local medicines, the
blood of a Turtle or Pigeon is excellent at the beginning, as is also a
fomentation of camomill, melilot, hyssoppe, and other herbs which have
virtue to dissolve. The cataplasme of hyssop sodden with covves milk, Old
medicines.
is praised of A^icen. In old blevvnesse or blackness Aetius commends this
remedy. Put the urine of a sound boy into a vessel of red brass, beat it
with a brazen pestill many days in the sun, that by this means the moisture
may decay: when it is dried, put honey into it, and use it.

CHAP. 2. Of the puffing up, or svvelling of the membranes of the eyes, called
in Greek epanastoma octhodes, in Latin ficus, or othewise hymenon epanastasis,
rebelliones, or membranarum eminentiae, extuberantiae.
EPanastema octhodes, is a tumor or swelling of all the membranes and skins
in the eye: Definition.
and when the affect is greatly increased, it is named hymenon epanastasis, as
if the said skins should swell until they were thrust out of their proper
place. This disease arises from abundance of humours suddenly and ioyntlie
falling down upon the eye, Causes.
or from a windye spirit enclosed amongst the skins, or rather from an
inflammation which stretches forth the membranes. It may also be caused in
like manner, as is set down in that disease when the eye falls out. The
cure shall be the same which is used in great inflammations, and falling out of
the eye.

CHAP. 3. Of wrinkles in the membranes, called in Greek rutidosis, or
russosis, in latin corrugatio.
Definition.
RVtidosis or russosis, is a wrinckling or playting of the coats skins whereof
the eye is made. Some make two kinds of it, whereof the one is inward, to wit,
when the membrane called vuea is wrinkled, which causes the disease named
pthisis, of which we will speak hereafter. The other is outward when the
membranes cornea adnata are loosed. Causes.
This disease grows of weakness cold, which sufficiently appears in this,
that it is most common to old folk, as we may see by their wrinkled eyes. For
the humours being diminished in old folk, the spirits become thick, yea the
humours so dry, that the eye is utterly empty, it falls down, the membranes
are so wrinkled plaited together, that some see not any thing, others with
great pain difficulty. For the plaits wrinkles being doubled upon the
membranes, they make the hornie membrane so thick and dark, which should be
naturally plain and bright, that the things which are offred to the eyes
cannot be discerned. Cure hereof hard.
There is small hope of the curing hereof, since it is principally procured by
old-age: nevertheless that we leave not the sick party destitute of all
succour, let him use such meates as are fit to beget and increase good
juice. Let him use particularly these eye-salues, whose virtue is to make
moist and comfort the membranes. R. euphras. betonicae, verb. gariophyll.
ana. m ij. chelidoniae, saluiae an m.iiij. vini albi lib. s. seminis anisi,
feniculi an j. nucis mosch. s. cinamom. ij. aloes hepat. iiij. distill them
together. Thus shall you use this water: you shall take a little of it, and as
much of the mucilage of quinc-eseede mingled together, and thereof put some
into the eye. The medicines set down before for dimness of the sight and
aftervvard in the chapiter of the cataractes are very profitable in this case.

CHAP. 4. Of the inflammation of the eye, called in greek opthalmia, in latin
inflammatio adnatae, ot lippitudo: also of the diverse kinds thereof, which are
chemosis in greek, in latin hiatus or hiatulatio, phimosis, or praeclusio,
taraxis, or perturbatio, epiphora or delachrimatio, opthalmia sphacelisousa, or
inflammatio ocularis in sphacelum degenerans.
OPthalmia is an inflammation of the membrane in the eye named coniunctiua,
joined with swelling, Definition.
extension, pain, redness, heate, puffing up of the eye-liddes, which do
hardly either open or shut, and cannot suffer touching with the hands.
Taraxis.
Taraxis is taken for a swift inflammation of the eye, being red and moist,
but less grievous then opthalmia, Causes.
growing from outward causes, as smoke, dust, the sun, the moon, oil,
rubbing of the eye. Some affirm it comes by the use of strong wines,
garlic, onions or mustard Chemosis is, Chemosis.
when the membrane called coniunctiua, is higher lifted the cornea, as if this
were in a hole, which beside the redness and heate, causes the eye-liddes to
be turned, so that they cannot cover the eye: Phimosis.
contrary unto this is phimosis, when by means of a great inflammation, the
eye-liddes do stick fast each to other and cannot be opened. Some impute this
default to the eye-liddes, but the hurt which they receive is but an accident
in this disease. Epiphora.
Epiphora. is taken generally for a sudden stream of humours in any part, as
Plinye calls epiphoram vteri, ventris. Notwiihstanding it is properly used
for the affection in the eyes, when with great inflammation, Galen.
great quantity of humours flow unto them Al these aforenamed affections do
accompany each other. The causes are the recourse of blood, Causes.
choler, fleum, melancholy, most commonly blood choler These are signs that it
is engendered of blood, Signs of blood.
redness, heate, great swelling with extension, thick tears soon dry, soft
slimy matter congealed in the corners of the eyes, the party of a sanguine
complexion. If choler be the cause, the tumor is not so apparent, the colour
of it somewhat pale, Signs of choler.
the pain sharpe and biting, either no tears issue out, or if any do, they
are salt and bitter, the slimy matter is dry and gross, the party of a
choleric complexion, whereby he is sometime subject to a tertian ague,
avoids choleric excrements. When the swelling is greater, Signs of flewme.
more lose, white in colour, the tears without taste, and cold, little or no
slimy matter troubles the eyes, it may be supposed to come of fleume, which
is called by Aetius a cold distemperature of the eye. The general cure
consists in bloud-letting, diet, Cure.
purging by the advise of a learned physician, not omitting in this case the
applying of cupping glasses upon the shoulders, with scarifiyng if it be
thought expedient: if the inflammation be very great, the malady violent, it
shall be necessary to open the veins in the temples forehead, yea to open an
artery, as also to apply a felon behind in the neck, or a ruptorie, either on
the crown of the head, or behind, or rather upon the arm, all which
remedies bend only their force to alter turn away the course of the humours.
Observation.
And forasmuch as such a course of humours for the most part passes by the
vessels which are within, so that it might seem lost labour to open such as be
without, since they being emptied of the humour which was in them, yet are filled
again fro the humours that are within, because of the fellowship which each
hath with other, it must be confessed that this cure is not speedy* as touching
medicines which are to be applied on the temples forehead, they must be of force
nature to beat back as emplastrucotaruptura, d^siccatiuum vnguentum comitiss.
vng. oxirhodinum, or oxicrat. and such like. Upon the eye if the inflammation
be little, it shall be sufficient to use this collyrium of the white of an
egg, To assuage great pain.
rose-water and plantaine beaten together. Where the pain shall be vehement
apply this: Take of the mucilage of quince-seede, and flea-seede, drawn in
rose-water one ounce, in which dissolve trochis. alb. Rhasis sine opio one
dram: make your salve, and apply it warm. If the inflammation do continue,
the aforesaid mucilages shall be drawn in water of poppye, or in a decoction
of it, adding thereunto a little camphor or poppy, and lay upon the eye this
cataplasme. R, of sodden apples 4. ounces, and with the white of an egg,
woman's milk make a cataplasme. A cataplasme assuaging pain.
Also a cataplasme of pure cassia, new and presently drawn is most excellent.
Above all you must have especial care to change and renew these medicines,
least they dry, and so cause heat. Not long after you may use this collirium.
R. gum arab. trag, ana. j. cerus. lotae s opii grana. iij. let them be all
dissolved with the white of an egg, two ounces of a woman's milk giving suck.
In the declining of this disease, In the declining of the disease.
this may be used. R. of the mucilage of fenegreeke and quince-seede drawn in
rose-water, and water of eye-bright ana. sj. s wherein dissolve sarcocol. in a
woman's milk that gives suck. ij aloes lotae i. mirrh.. s make an eiesalue.
And where there is any great itching, or rather where the inflammation comes
of fleam, Against itching or inflammation.
this is a most singular collirium. R. tutiae preparat. aloes lotae ana. s
sarcocol. mirh. an s. saccar. cand. i. vitriol. alb. s. aquae rosar. foenicul.
an ij. boyle them al together a little while in a viol glass, then drop
thereof into the eye. Some commend this collirium in all inflammations of the
eyes, to take snails with the shells, and to beat them with a little salt,
and thorough an hypucras bag to let the water hereof distil, which being
clear, Observation.
put it into the eres. It many times falls out by long and unadvised applying
of medicines, which do cool and beat back, or else by some great
inflammation, that the natural heate is extinguished and choked, and
there-uppon ensues a worse inflammation then any of the aforenamed, Opthalmia
sphacelisousa.
which is called opthalmiae sphacelisousa, which depriving the ey of the
natural temperature, doth make it corrupt utterly perish, which disease is
named by Galen in his introduction gangraena opthalmon, Galen.
the gangrene, or mortificatio of the ey. When this happens, you shall have
recourse to the remedies proper for gangrenes, changing them as the state of
the disease party shall require.

CHAP. 5. Of the nail of the eye, commonly called the web, in greek
pterugion, in latin vngula, or angulus.
Definition.
PTerugium is, when the white of the eye called coniunctiua, is increased above
measure, or when in it is engedred a superfluous growing of flesh, after a
continual recourse of humours or scabs, The beginning of it.
or an inflamed itching. This malady most commonly begins to increase at the
great corner of the eye, nigh unto the nose, seldom at the less, and most
rarely it is seen to begin at the higher or lower eye-lid. It is stretched
unto the hornie membrane, growing greater and greater until it cover the apple
of the eye, Three kinds hereof. 1. membraneus
and darken the sight. The ancient writers have made three kinds of it. The
first is named membraneus, that is skinny, which is a sinewish skin beginning
at the great corner by little little stretching and growing outward. 2.
adipeus.
The second is called of Guido adipeus, that is fatty, which is as a congealed
humour that becomes round when it is touched to be pulled out: it grows in
the same place with the former. 3. sebel, or pan^niculus.
The third is called of the Arabians Sebel, in Latin panniculus, which is
worse then the others, being interlaced with gross red veins, and arteries,
resembling a thin cloth or web: upon this appears oftentimes
inflammation, redness, and itching. Some of them stick not to the eye in
every place, but hold only by their edges, so that between the nail and
the eye an instrument may be put thorough. Causes.
The cause is a fullness in the head, specially of thin blood mingled with
salt fleume, and weakness in the eye, which makes it fit to receive these
humours.

It follows oftentimes, the ill curing of an inflammation, whose heate hath
been disorderly assuaged, or else old harde slimy matter which hath taken
root in the eye. To what persons it is incident.
In some bodies it is engendered thorough the coldenes of the time and place, as
in old men which abound with salt fleume, or in an intemperate person. which
drinks so much that he quenches natural heat: the coldenesse of the time and
place do increase it, when they which are overladen with such humours, by cold
do multiply and stir up the coutse thereof. If the stream of humours be
outward, Signs to know the course of the humours.
the veins seem red and great, there is an obscure darkness like to smoke
upon the horny membrane, the checks are red, and the disease very much
lifted up above the white of the eye, there is great payne and heate on the
brows, and the skin named Sebel, grows in some part of the eye-lidde. If
the course of humours be inward, the veins are not so thick and red, the
party neeseth oft, specially if he be in the sun, he feels great
itching, the eye sends forth tears. This disease, and principally Sebel, is
joined with itching, boiling, reddenesse, ulcers, tears, swelling of the
eye-liddes, slow motion of the eye: it so hinders the sight, that the party
cannot abide the light any long time. The cure is both long and hard.
Praedictions.
For some are never healed, other have it by inheritance, Auicen.
and in certain it is contagious, yea ( Auicen saith) it goes from one eye to
the other. That kind which is white, Which be curable or incurable.
and narrow at the bottom, is easily cured, especially if it stick not fast
in every place, but that which hath none of these qualities can hardly be
healed. There is no dealing with a nail or vvebbe which is thick, standing
forth, hard, and by consent causing pains in the temples: for this is
malicious, and of a cancrous nature. The red nail being cured, causes pain
in the head, and procuseth the megrym. Moreover if the vvebbe be spread over
the apple of the eye, and be made fast unto it, Observation.
the cicatrice which remains after it is taken away stops the sight. If
at the same time there be a cataract and a vvebbe in the eye, and the cataract
be but beginning, by labouring to take avvaye the vvebbe, the cataract will be
greatly increased. Cure.
After the general cure ended, which consists in bloud-letting, purging,
cupping, good order of diet, and other necessary means, which may staye the
increasing of the vvebbe, and turn away the humours, you may cure it either by
medicines, or by the hand of the surgeon. If it be but nevvly begun, it
may be consumed by such medicines as are used to make thin and eat away
the cicatrices in the eyes. Aetius affirms that they may be consumed by
medicines, whereof this is most singular. Aetius his corrosive.
R chaleitidis vstae sxx cadmiae sx. squamae aeris rubri sj, piperis si. But if
it be old and thick then must it be healed and taken away by incision in this
manner. The manner of he manual operation.
The patient must be placed either over against the Surgeon, or rather in
such sort that he may lay his head in the Surgeons lap (as we use to
speak) Let one turn up one of the eye-liddes, and the Surgeon the other:
if he sit over against the patient, let him turn up the lower, if he have
his head on his knees, then the higher eye-lidde. At this same time let the
Surgeon with a pair of pincers, Celsus.
or some fit instrument lift up the web, and with the other hand thrust
thorovve a needle with thread under the vvebbe, close by the membrane,
whereunto it is fast joined: and leaving the needle there, he shall take both
the ends of the thread which is passed thorough and by them lift up the web:
Howe to seperate the web.
if it stick fast in any part he shall seperate it with the point of a
vause, or cisers, or some such sharpe, fine, and delicate instrument, wiping
avvaye the blood issuing from it at the same instant, until he see the
veins of the vvebbe decayed and consumed by the avoiding of this blood:
continuing his work until he come to the corner: and mark how oft he
dravveth the thread, so oft shall he loose it, until he attain to the
beginning of the vvebbe, and the end of the natural flesh resting in the
corner. Two inconveniences.
For there is danger of two incoveniences, one, least some piece of the web
remain behind, whereby it may grow again unless it be removed by medicines: the
other least he cut the flesh which is in the corner, since it follows the
vvebbe being violently pulled out, and so may deceive the surgeon. If this
flesh be cut, the hole which it did stop is opened, whereby issues out
water continually, which affect the Graecians name Rhyada, of which vvee
will speak in the proper place. Therefore he must be able to discern how
much suffices to be cut away, which being done, he shall lay a fine
linen cloth or lint dipped in honey upon the eye, and above that a defensive
against inflammation, and three or four times in a day the patient shall be
dressed, and open his eye, least perhaps the eye-liddes glue and join
together or else stick to the eye, which is a third inconvenience. A third
inconvenience.
You must continue the applying of lint in this order, and in fine use a
collirium which may close up the ulcer. As R. aquae plantag. rosar. ana. si.
sii, tutiae praepar. aloes an s s trochise. alb. Rasis s s. saccaricand. si. If
any other hurtful accidents fall out, you shall help and heal those,
omitting the proper cure for so long time.

CHAP. 6. Of certain white spots in the membranes named cornea, coniunctiua,
called in greek aglia, or aiglia, in latin albicans cicatrix: also of a knot
there arising, in greek poros, porosis, in latin tophus, or durities adnatae
or corneae.
AIglia, Definition*
is a white spot resembling a cicatrice gathered upon the membranes
coniunctiua and cornea. Causes.
This comes by a fleume which by little and little is heaped in the part.
It may also proceed of some piece of a vvebbe being left behind, about the
which some humour may he congealed, and in time come to a scarre. And where
these humours become very harde, there may be seen as it were a knot upon
the membranes coniunctiua and cornea, it is called porosis. Porosis. Cure.
Concerning the cure, if this white spot be very high lift up, it shall be
consumed away with the collyrium set down before in the cure of the vveb, or
rather if it may be conveniently done, there shall be only used a drying
medicine. In curing the knot called poros, you shall first pull off the skin,
then apply such means as may consume it, aftervvard use a drying collirium,
which may also close it up. But if neither of these afore-named maladies be
much deformed, neither a great hinderance to the sight, mine advise is, The
council of the author.
to use such means only as may staye the increasing thereof any further.
For it falls out many times, that whilst some have endeavoured to heal
them, they have made them worse. Put therefore into the eye a little of tutia
prepared, and sugar candy, with a little of the dried fishbone called sepia,
in english a cuttle, mingled all together in fine powder.

CHAP. 7. Of the blisters in the hornie membrane, called in Greek phlictaenae,
in Latin pustulae: also of their diverse kinds.
PHlyctaenae, are little hot blisters arising in the skins of the eye,
Definition.
but especially in the hornie membrane, to vvitt, between the skins of it.
For it is most certain that this hornie membrane consists of four little
coats or skins, Aetius.
in regard whereof these blisters are accounted diverse. Diverse kinds
For when they grow under the first skin, the humour flovving between the
first and the second, then is the matter of the blister more black: it is at
other times between the second and third, or third and fourth, and the
blister seems more white, The blister is black.
albeit it is hidden in the bottom of the hornie membrane. Now the natural
colour of the blister is black, but the membrane is white, resembling horne:
therefore by how much deeper the blister is hidden in the membrane, by so much
more it represents the colour of it being most grievous and tormenting, and
in danger to make an vlceration, by breaking thorough the membrane, whereupon
might ensue an utter loss and decay of al the humours. Those therefore which
are in the ouermost part of it are less dangerous. Causes.
For the most part they are engendered of choleric sharp biting humours, or of
a thin malicious humour running between the aforesaid skins. In the general cure
the patient must be careful to be quiet, to beware of much light, to use little
speech, to keep his belly loose. Concerning local medicines, he must use
soft cataplasmes, as is accustomed in great inflammations, which will cover
not only the eye, but also the temples, forehead, Aetius.
and cheeks, renevving them often least they be too dry. Aetius appoints
this remedy: take the white and yolke of an egg, beaten with saffron, and a
little juice of poppye, small quantity of wine and bread: in like manner you
may use sodden quinces. According to these medicines you may appoint such a
cataplasme. R. micae panis albi in passo vel lacte tepido macerat. siiii.
pulpae cydonior. coctor. sub cineribus sii. croci si. opii s s. make your
cataplasme, adding to it the white yolke of an egg. The salves which are to
be put into the eye, shall be made of the mucilages of quince-seed, flea-seede
drawn in milk, or rose-water and plantaine. After the heate is delayed and
the payne mitigated, you may put thereto a little myrrh, frankincense,
Celsus salve.
and saffron. Celsus praises this collyriu. R. mirrh. papaueris lachrim. an
si. plumbi elot, terrae samiae, tragac. an siiij. stibii cocti, amyli an svj
spod elot. cerusae elot. an sviij. put them into raine-vvater, use your
collirium vvyth an egg, or milk.

CHAP. 8. Of the ulcers in the horny membrane called generally in greek elcos,
in latin vlcus: also of the diverse kinds of them, as mistines, in greek aclis,
in latin caligo, cloudines, in greek nephelion, in latin nubecula, the round
ulcer, in greek argemon, in latin vlcus rotundum, the fiery ulcer, in greek
epicauma, in latin vlcus inustum, the pit, in latin fossula or annulus, in
greek bothryon, holownes, in greek coiloma, in latin cauitas, the filthy
ulcer, in greek egcauma, in latin vlcu^ sordidum
ELcos is taken generally for any ulcer in any pert: The diverse acception
of this word.
but Galen applies it to the eye. The old physicians have made seven kinds
of the, 7 kinds.
whereof four are in the ouermost part of the horny membrane, which may be
named outward, and three are inward in the bottom of the same membrane.
Achlis.
The first of the outward ulcers is called achlis, which resebleth smoke, or a
misty air, of a sky colour, relying upon the black of the eye, possessing
a great part of it, and when it hath gained the apple of the eye, Gorren^.
the party sees very little. Some suppose it to be a black scarre, which
begins to obscure and make dim the sight. Nephelion.
The second is called nephelion, like to the former, but more deep and
white, occupying less room, because it is not so stretched, not lifted up*
yet it hinders the sight. The third is called argemon, Argemon.
which is a round ulcer in the white of the eye near unto the circle named
Iris, or the rain bow: it is white near to the apple of the eye, and red
in the membrane coniunctiua. Galen.
Galen affirms it to be an vlceration appearing white in the black of the
eye, red in the white of it. The fourth is called epicauma, Epicauma.
which is a fiery boiling ulcer, rough, in colour like unto ashes, lying upon
the apple of the eye, as if it were a flock of woll. Third book 22. chap.
Notwithstanding Aegineta takes it for a deep, filthy, and crusty ulcer.
Beside these, there are three other invvarde and deeply settled. The first is
named bothryon, Bothrion.
which is a little strait deep ulcer, like to a prick without filthy matter.
The second is coiloma, like to the former, Coiloma.
but greater, yet not so deep. The third is encauma, Encauma.
which is a filthy and crusty ulcer, out of which comes most vile, stinking
slimy matter, which can hardly be kept clean. Concerning the cure, although
some ulcers be little, Cure.
yet if they be not well handled, or utterly neglected, they prove malicious.
And in what place the humour is sharp and biting, there happens elcosis, that
is a bursting of the hornie membrane, by means whereof, either all the
humours, or part of them issues out. Elcosis.
This may also chance by inflammation. After the general cure consisting in
bloud-letting, purging, cupping, rubbing of the shoulders, the surgeon shall
carefully consider whether there be any inflammation as sometimes it
happens, that he may ease it with the medicines set down before in optholnia,
or the inflammation of the eye. If the ulcer be in the left eye, the patient
shall lye upon his left side, and on the contrary. And according to the
filthiness of the ulcer, A cleansing medicine.
it shall be cleansed with medicines fit thereunto. As with this: take of
water, of eye-bright and plantaine an i. of syruppe of violets i. s, of sugar
candy s make a collirium. If greater cleansing be required, you shall use this*
take of betony and buglosse water ana i. s, of honey of roses, and syrup of
worm wood, ana. s, of myrrh and aloes, ana.. i make a salve. The mucilage of
fenegreeke is most profitable, if you add unto it a little syrup of dried
roses. When the ulcers are cleansed, you must use dry medicines made of
olibanum, cerufae lotae amili, gum. tragac. plumb vst. litharg. Celsus.
Celsus used this medicine to cleanse and dry. R. aeris combust eloti, thuris,
stibii combust. eloti, mirrh. gum. ana. ij make a salve. This salve may be
dissolved in rose-water, and the mucilages of flea-seed, quince-seed,
fenegreeke drawn in eie^bright or plantaine water.

CHAP. 9. Of the malicious eating or consuming ulcers, called in greek nomae,
in latin vlcera depascentia.
NOmae are malicious ulcers, Definition.
which partly begin at both the corners, partly at the white of the eye,
sometime at the hornie membrane. They gnavve the eye suddenly, especially in
corrupt bodies: Signs.
there comes out of them a great quantity of most stinking slimy matter,
with exceeding pain* the party hath a fever, and oftentimes a bloudye flixe.
They go forward in such sort, that oftentimes they consume the parts next
adjoining to the eyes, Cure.
as the muscles and eye-liddes. In the cure the patient shall use good diet,
and have his belly loose: if the veins or arteries in the temple seem very
full, it shall be most expedient to let them bleed, and for the eye, the salves
set down in the former chapiter are to be used. But if these ulcers creep
further to other parts beside the eye, Aetius.
then take scoria ferri, cerusae, olumbi, wash them all together, with
woman's milk make them fit for your use, applying them with pomaton or oil
of roses, in form of an ointment. Now if these gentle and easy medicines stay
not the ulcer from going further, then oleum vitrioli is to be used, which I
have seen stay the course hereof with good success. And where necessity
doth so require, this cataplasme is much commended of the old writers:
videlicet, take two quinces, four handful of nightshade, as much housleeke,
sees them in woman's milk.

CHAP. 10. Of the crabbed, or as it is commonly called, canctous ulcer, in
Greek elcos carcinodes, in Latin vlcus canceratum.
Definition.
ELcos carcinodes are little ulcers, happening in the black of the eye, which
cannot be closed, Aetius.
very painful, full of swollen vessels, as in the disease called varix: and
sometime when they seem to be closed up upon no manifest occasion, they open
again, and become ulcers. Signs.
They may be known by wandering running pointed lines which go to the temples
by a sharpe and thin course of humours; the white and black of the eye are
always red, the patient refuses his meat and drink, the grief and payne
is greatly increased by using sharpe medicines. Old folk and women most
subject to this disease.
This malady is incident many times to old folks, by reason of some great
inflammation, and to women whose months are stayed. In curing of it the
ancient Physicians do counsel the Surgeon, to foretell, that the sick
party cannot be fully and perfectly cured: Prediction.
the especial cure must be therefore to assuage the pain by good diet,
purging, cupping, the seton and seating applied either behind on the head, or
upon the arm, Cure.
to the end that the recourse of the humour which might increase the disease
may be stayed and diverted.

Amongst local medicines, the vvhyte of an egg beaten with woman's milk is
praised by many: also lintels sodden and steeped in plantayne water, or juice,
the mucilages of quinces and line-seede often renevved. But where great payne
and inflammation is, there you shall use the cataplasmes set down in the
chapyter which entreats of opthalmia, or the inflammation of the eye, that by
this means the grief may be mitigated.

CHAP. 11. Of a scarre in the cornea, or hornie membrane, called in greek
oule, in latin cicatri^: also of the diverse kinds thereof, as the spot in the
eye, commonly called argis, and leucoma, in latin albugo: of the white
shining scarre, in greek paralampsis, in latin cicatrix splendens.
Although oule be used generally for a cicatrice or scarre in any part:
Diverse acceptions of oule.
yet Galen takes it for a white high scarre upon the hornie membrane,
because of a deep vlcer^t may also happen in the white of the eye, but not so
evidently to be seen. The kinds thereof are aigis and leucoma, Hip. in prophet.
Galen in d^f. ^d.
when the scarre in the hornie membrane is thicker higher then the former,
arising of a greater ulcer then the former, possessing sometimes the circle
Iris, or rainbovve. Some assign this default to the crystalline humour, which
is vvholy made white. Paralampsis.
Paralampsis is a scarre on the black of the eye, more harde, gross, and
shining then aigis. In the cure you must consider whether they be hollow, or
standing up. Cure.
If they be hollow, Celsus.
Celsus uses this collirium to fill them up and make them plain.

R. lachrym. papais. sagap. op^pon. an sij. aeruginis siiij. cumini s iiij.
pipe^ s. xij. cadiniae elotae, cerus. ena. s vj. make them into a salve. Aetius
forbids dealing with old scars
Aetius gives counsel not to attempt the curing of very harde, gross, old
scars, since they cannot be removed but with sharpe medicines, which will
cause vlceration in the parts adjoining* but on the contrary, others may be
dimished with gentle clensing medicines, as aes vstu, squama aeris, flos aeris,
calchitis vsta, which shall be washed prepared, that their great sharpness may
be delayed: mares milk with a little honey is commended. Celsus.
Celsus appoints this collirium. R. gummi sii aerug, si. crocomag. siiij.
make of these a salve. It is a most singular remedy to cause a little child,
or some other person who hath a clean tongue, to like the scars which are
not over harde and gross. This salve was given to me for an undoubted
experiment: An experiment.
take a pynte of white wine* wherein you must put an ounce of tutia well
prepared to steep, half an ounce of myrrh, as much aloes, two ounces of
sugar candy, let it all stand soaking or infusing in a glass bottle in the
sun by the whole space off the Dog days. Others distill this water, and put
some drops of it into the eyes. How to change the colour of scars.
Now to alter and change the black scars to white, such medicines must
be used which have virtue to bring blackenesse unto it, as galls, the pill of
the pomegranate, nux cyprus, vitriolum, litharge, plumbum vstum, calx lota,
sage: of these or such like you may appoint this remedy. R. calcis lotae s.
litharg. vtriusque i. cum decocto gallarum, nucu cypress. saluiae, make your
medicine. Although the ancient physicians do use these remedies yet I have
not seen any great profit of them, and indeed I have found more hurt then
help reaped thereof, in so much that the white of the eye hath been changed
black: for it cannot be but that the medicine which is applied to the horny
membrane, should flow upon that. Therefore they which will use these, must be
very careful to wash their lime, for avoiding of imminent danger.

CAAP. 12. Of the eye full of matter or corruption, called in greek pyosis
opthalmou, in latin oculus purulentus: of the kinds thereof, which are a
nail or web, in greek onix, in latin vnguis a putrefied eye, in greek
hipopyon, in latin sanies in oculo.
PYosis opthalmou is an heap or lump of slimy matter, Definition.
with inflammation in the black of the eye. The old physicians make two kinds
thereof, 2 kinds.
whereof the first is named onix, which is when the corruption or slimy matter
is gathered by a deep ulcer, Onix.
between the skins of the horny membrane, and shows it self in the apple
of the eye, about the circle iris or raine-bow, like to the pairinges of
nailes. The second is called hipopion, when the corrupt matter is in greater
abundance, Hip^pion.
so that it possesses half the blackc of the eye, or shines thorough the
horny coat which covers the whole apple of the eye. Causes.
This affection may arise not only of an ulcer, but also of great pain in the
head, or inflammation in the corrupted eye. And beside this inflammation, it
may grow from great abundance of humours which break open the mouths of the
veins, also by a stroke or fall, which may make the blood disperse scatter
abroad, which turns to suppuration or slimy matter, when it is out of the
proper vessels. When this comes, the party feels great throbbing pain,
the eye is red round about, Cure
and about the temples he hath much pain. To meet with these inconveniences,
the party must with all speed be letten blood in the arm, in the temples, in
the corners of the eyes if it be possible, use cupping upon his shoulders, and
medicines which may stay inflammations by the space of tvvoo or three days,
so long as necessity doth require. After this shall be used such medicines as
will resolve and assvvage pain, such as this is, which for the excellency
is named in greek isotheen, in latin par deo, A divine plaster.
it may be called in english a divine remedy. R. cadmiae viij. aeris vsti
iiij. rosarum siccar. iiii. croci i. folii i. lapidis scissi i. mirrh. i. gum
vi. beat them with sweet wine, and use them with an egg. The last remedy.
If all these medicines heal it not, but still the eye is full of matter fast
remaining there, tha must you come to attempt this course and way: Let the
patient be set conveniently, having one to stay his head: let the Surgeon
hold his eye with one hand, with an instrument called speculum oculi,
Speculum oculi in Ambrose Pares book.
of which you may see the description and picture in Ambrose Pare, and with
the other hand with the point of a launcet he shall finely and cunningly
pick the hornie membrane until he come to the slimy matter, which by little
and little shall he avoided. After this operation ended, he shall use
medicines which have virtue to beat back, and mitigate pain, as the white
of an egg beaten with rose and plantaine water: and then apply the remedies
before set down for ulcers, which may cleanse, increase flesh, and close them
up. The sure experience of th^s operatio.
This practise I have seen performed by Ambrose Pare the kings surgeon,
and even most excellently hath he accomplished it, being at the age of
threescore twelve years: and according to his example I have twice practised
the same without any hurt, yea with great comfort ensuing there-uppon. The
Surgeon must be provident, least flesh grow and increase in the incision of
the membrane, which will bring both hurt and deformity to the party. To
prevent this danger, this collirium is much commended that no inflammation
happen thereby. R. gum. arab. vi. spodii iiij. thuris, mirrhae. acatiae, spic.
nard. squamae aeris, opii an. i. with rain water bring them to a perfect form,
then make them unto little round balls named trochisci: when you will use them,
wet them in the white of an egg with rose and plantaine water.

CHAP. 13. Of the falling out of the membrane vuea called in greek proptosis
ragoides, in latin procidentia: also of the diverse kinds thereof, resembling the
head of a fly, in greek miochephalon, in latin formicalis ruptura, or muscae
caput: 2. resembling a grape, in greek staphiloma, in latin vuatio or vuea: 3.
resembling an apple, in greek melon, in latin malum: 4. resembling the head of
a nail, in greek elos, in latin clauus.
PRoptosis is here taken for a starting or falling out of the membrane named
vuea, Definition.
when the horny membrane is either loosed or broken: as this malady appears
greater or less, so there are numbered diverse kinds thereof, Miocephalon.
having names given unto them from the likeness of things which they do
represent, as miocephalon, when the standing forth of the skin is little,
like unto the head of a fly (...) Staphiloma is of two sorts, whereof the
first is, when the hornie membrane is lifted up, or drawn awry, Staphiloma is
of two sorts.
either because some humours are gathered between the skins of it, or rather
because a vvheale is engendered amongst those skins, which may happen
without any breach in the hornye membrane. This kind of staphiloma causes
only a standing forth like to a grape, not in colour, since it is not black,
but in roundness add whiteness as it were an unripe grape.

The other sort of Stapholima is, when the horny membrane is by vlceration
fretted in sunder, in such sort that the coat or membrane named vuea, slips
forth, and makes a round swelling tumor, resembling a black grape when it is
ripe. Melon.
It is called melon, when the vuea issues forth a greater quantity, so that
it ouer-reacheth the eye lid, representing an apple hanging by the stalk.
Elos.
Elos is, when vuea being so far thrust out of the eie-lids becomes harde
and the horny coat round about being brawny presses it down, as if it were
the head of a nail. Howsoever this malady grows, it brings with it two
dangers and discommodities, Two discommodities of this disease.
whereof one doth empaire and decay the sight, the other doth deform and
disgrace the face. If the sight be lost, there is no recovery: if it be only
a deformity in the countenance it may be helped, Cure.
and chiefly by chirurgerie. When the staphiloma or grape is new, stirred by
inflammation to lift up the hornie skin of the eye, it must be cured by salves
cataplasmes appointed for the assuaging of inflammations, also by good order of
diet. But if the recourse of humours amongst the skins of the horny membrane
hath raised this svvelling, and therewith pain, you shall use the mucilages of
fenegreeke and line-seede with a little honey. When the grief is somewhat
delayed, Aetius.
Aetius comendeth this remedy, to wit, a cataplasme made of bean flower,
and the seeds of roses sodden together in water. You may in like manner make
binding and comforting fomentations, applying them warm, with this proviso,
that too much heat draw not humours to the place affected. Theodotius collirium.
The collirium of Theodotius tempered with liquor of cole-worts, applied very
thick upon the eye with a spoonge, and kept close with a roler, consumes
disperses this tumor, if it be not of long continuance. And seeing Aetius
reports so great fruit and effect of it, I will here set it down. R.
cadmiae lotae, stibii loti, acatiae, gummi ana. xxv. rosar. siccar. depurgat.
xii. aeris vsti, mirrh, ana. viii castorii, licii indici, croci, folii, spicae
nardi, chalcitidis tostae, cerus. glancii seminis ericae, opii, gall, omphac.
ana. ii. make them all in fine povvder, and frame thereof with water little
round balls. When you will use them, you may dissolve them either with the
juice of cole-worts, or with the white of an egg. An other medicine for
miochephalon. R. cadmiae, sqammae aeris, croci an sviij. opii s xii. misios
vsti, mirrhae, acaciae, gummi ana. siiii. put them in water. Now, that kind
of staphiloma which hath a deep and large bottom, Predictions.
and veins full of blood is most hardly healed. Those which stand far out,
change their colour, as that which is in vuea, stir up vehement pain even
to the temples are incurable. When these signs appear in stophiloma, none
other remedies are to be used, but such as may ease the payne. But where the
bottom of them is not narrow, neither the ulcer of a malicious nature, the
cure may be performed by binding and rolling not vnfittely in this order. The
manual operation.
The patient shall be so placed, that he may lay his head upon the
Surgeons knees sitting in a chair. Then thrust thorough a needle with a
double thread in the midst of the root of the tumor, beginning this work at
the great corner of the eye, and so piercing it unto the less: when the
thread is passed thorovve, he shall cut off the needle, that there may be
tvvoo ends of the thread in the same place, and take two ends thereof in
one hand, and two in an other. This done, he shall knit one of the threads
on a fast common knot, after-ward with a running knot to the end it may be
more easily loosed at your pleasure: according to this manner you shall tie the
other thread. In continuance of time these threades by little and little will
seperate and cut out the tumor. And where the tumor is gross, you may cut
off the top of it, leaving only the root of it, in which the threades may be
retained. For if they fall out, the humours issue forth wlth the fame, and the
eye sinks down. Some are not contented with two threads, but will have
four. This part of your vvoorke thus accomplished, such medicines must be
applied as will mitigate pain, which are the white of an egg, beaten in
rose water, or milk, or specially in the blood of a pigeon, laying upon it a
defensive to prevent inflammation and other inconveniences. When you will
dress the party, you must be careful least in removing the cataplasme you
pluck away the threeades which oftentimes are dried, and stick fast to the
same. Therefore make a little fomentation with milk which may moisten it,
using the same medicines until the threades of their own accord fall away,
tiyng them straiter if need do so require. When they are fallen away, you
shall use gentle medicines which may cleanse and increase flesh: after them
apply such as may close it up, whereof you have had before prescripts set
down, Chap. 7. 8.
which as occasion is offered, may be altered.

The sixth section, containing the diseases which are incident to the apple of
the eye.
CHAP. 1. Of the enlarged or broad apple of the eye, called in greek
mydriasis, or platycoriasis, in latin pupillae dilatatio: also of the displaced
apple of the eye, in latin pupillae e loco remotio.
MYdriasis or platicoriasis is, Definition.
when the apple of the eye doth not alter nor change his colour, but is greater
then naturally it should be, stretching sometimes unto the circle iris, or
raine-bowe, whereby the sight is either much empaired, or utterly lost. They
which are troubled with this disease, Signs.
think every thing which they see to be greater then it is, which error
comes by the scattering of the spirits at the largeness of the hole in the
apple of the eye. Sometime it is not only enlarged and stretched abroad, but
it seems to be removed from the midst of the eye, and to have changed his
place, which in Arnoldus is called, pupillae e loco remotio. Pupillae e loco
remotio.
Now both these diseases happen either naturally, or of some other cause. If
they be natural and from the birth, Causes.
yet they hurt hinder the sight. If any other cause have procured them, it is
either outward, as by a fall, or stroke: or invvarde by a recourse of humours,
which falling down by little and little, do cause the membrane vuea to be
stretched out, where-vpon ensues the enlarging of the apple of the eye. This
disease is hardly cured, Praedictions.
because the coat vuea being much stretched forth by his skinny nature in
continuance of time becomes so harde, Black eyes have the apple of the eye
great.
that it cannot be afterward easily drawn strayter. They, whose eyes are
naturally black, have also the apple of their eye great, and for this cause
do easily incur this inconvenience. Some see very well, although they have
this default from their birth. Cure.
Concerning the cure, it is general in good diet, purging, cupping, rubbing,
blood letting, both in the arm and corners of the eye, or particular in the
use of binding, and strengthening medicines, as fomentations and salves made ex
rosis, croco, nardo, thuris cortice, pompholyge, spodio, acatia, being
provident to avoid sharpe medicines, because they draw down great abundance
of humours, Observations.
which still make the apple of the eye broader. And you must be no less
circumspect that your medicines bind not ouer-much, least on the contrary the
apple of the eye be over strayte and little. Auicen.
Auicen commends this collirium. Take of the gall of a kid and craine, of
each three drammes, of saffton one dram, of pepper 170. grains, of juice of
lyquorice five drammes and an half, of armoniake two drammes, as much honey as
will be sufficient, make them all into fine povvder, and then put to them
fenel water, and with honey make them into little round balls.

CHAP. 2 Of the consumption of the apple of the eye, called in Greek Ptisis
opthalmou, in Latin tabes oculi.
PThysis is used generally for all kind of decaying and leanness: Pthisis
diversely used.
notwithstanding it is used in the old wryters for that affect of the eye,
Aetius.
when the apple of it is made narrower and weaker. This default (saith Auicen)
may be in it from the first beginning, Little eyes have quick, sight.
but they which have the apple of the eye so little have their sight most
sharpe and quick. When this affection is not natural, Causes.
it may grow by the dryness of the membrane vuea, which is withered and
drawn together, or by abundance of moisture descending upon the same, which
makes the edges and borders of the hole so large, that they touch each other,
and so it is made narrovve: even as we see in a sieue made of parchment, the
which being wet, the holes thereof are closed up. Moreover the dryness of
the waterish humour may procure this disease, which being dried becomes
less, and thereby is the coat that covers it made narrower. VVeakenes of
fight causes all things to seem greater then they are.
It may also be engendered thorough great weakness and extreme ach of the head.
To them which are thus affected, all things appear greater then they are of
their own nature: and in truth in alweakenesse of the sight, the objects are
more great in show, but not so plainly discerned: which error happens by
the littleness of the apple of the eye. Cure.
This order must be observed in the cure: If moisture have brought forth this
malady, it shall be cured by contrary medicines. It is profitable to rub the
parts above it, and also the eyes with the fingers, to wash the face and
head, to rub it, and anointe it with oil of flower-deluce. In like manner to
use some sharpe biting salve which may draw moisture unto the eyes, as this.
R. ammon. thimiamat. i. crocomag. iiij. croci ij. aerug siiij. put them into
water and beat them, aftervvarde make them fit for your use. If drynes
procured it, Auicen gives counsel to use moist and suming meates, Auicen.
and upon the place this salve must be applied. R piperis, ammoniac. ana.
parts i^. olei balsami nonu^partis vnius, croci part. i. dissolve the
armoniake with fenel water, put upon it oleum balsami, then with honey make
up your medicine. The author accounts this a most singular remedy: but in
my judgment, I would in place of oleum balsami, take good venice turpentine.

CHAP. 3. Of the web or cataract, called in greek hypochyma, in latin
suffusio, gutta, aqua, imaginatio.
HYpochyma is an heap of superfluous humours made thick, Definition.
like to a little skin between the horny membrane and the crystalline
humour, directly upon the apple of the eye, swimming above the waterish humour
in that place which Celsus affirms to be void and empty. ^ernelius.
It hinders the sight, or at least the discerning and judging of such things
as are before our eyes. Fernelius appoints the place of it between the
membrane Vuea, and the Christalline humour. Differences herein.
The differences of it is borrowed from the quantity or quality. From the
quantity, when it is whole, covering all the compass of the apple of the eye,
in such sort, that the party cannot see any thing. Sometimes it covers
only half of the apple of the eye, How it comes to pass that only some
part of the obiectis seen
or some part of it either above or beneath, or in the midst in such manner
that that only part of the thing before our face can be discerned which is
placed against the part of the eye which is free from this disease, whereby it
falls out oftentimes, that either the party sees nothing, or only some
part of things. For if that which is offered to the sight be set before the
part affected fully, he sees nothing, but if he pry at it with that part of
the eye which is sound he may see clearly. Now if the spot or web be in
the midst of the eye not touching the edges or borders thereof, even as a
prick in the midst of a circle, The cataract* in the midst of the eye.
then the party sees only the extremity and edges of things, in the
midst thereof supposing there is a window, or covering, Differences from the
quality.
or some dark place. The differences which are drawn from the qualities, are
either from their essence and substance, since some are thin, slender, and
clear, thorough the which the light of the Sun may be discerned, others are
thick and gross: or from their colour, since some are like brass, others
white like Plaster or Pearls, others pale coloured, mixed of green and white,
or green and yeallowe, others like gold, others black, others resembling
ashes. Amongst the Arabians, Arabians.
cataracta, suffusio, aqua, gutta, imaginatio are used for the same things,
herein only is the difference, that imaginatio is called by Auicen,
Imaginatio.
gutta zala, as it were the beginning of a web or cataract, because we
imagine we see that which in deed we see not, when the cataract is as thin
and slender as a spiders web. It is then named, Aqua Gutta.
aquae and gutta when the cataract begins to receive some form enlarging
and running abroad like water: but when it is thick and ripe, Gutta obscura.
and harder, it is called a cataract, and of Auicen gutta obscura. The causes
hereof may be a fall, stroke, heate, cold, pain, by whose means the humour
is drawn and gathered thither, or rather vapours and humours ascending to the
brain, Causes.
and from thence descending to the eyes, which in process of time, and by
reason of cold are changed into water, and in fine become thick and
congeled. In like sort this malady may proceed of ill digested nourishment in
the eye, or if the nourishment have been good, yet the superfluttie of it hath
not been avoided, which is an excrement of the third digestion. Fernelius.
Fernelius thinks the cause thereof to be a course of humours descending by
little and little upon the sinew of the sight, which in the beginning cannot
be perceived: A cataract engendered in one day.
notwithstanding he boldly affirms to have seen a cataract made framed in
one day. For (saith he) if at one moment a gross slimy humour may fall upon
the sinevve of sight, wheruppon ensues the loss of the whole sight, why may
it not suddenly engender a perfect cataract, having before time had recourse
upon the apple of the eye? Signs of the cataract beginning.
Now when the vvebbe or cataract begins, these signs and tokens are
incident to the diseased. They imagine there are before their eyes little dark
things resembling flies: others suppose they see hairs, others threades of
vvooll, others spiders webs, others think they behold a circle about the
candles when they are light, and sometime two candles for one. When these
things do thus fall out, if you look upon the apple of the eye, it appears
clear and pure, but if you behold and view it more nearly, it will seem
somewhat troubled, and if you compare it with the other eye which is sound, it
will appear somewhat appalled. Predictions ^ couching cataracts.
It hath sometime the colour of the sea as the disease increases. Concerning
praedictions, and foretelling of the event which will ensue, those which are
like to rusty iron or pearls, or have a green or ash colour or resemble a
turquoise, or sea water, are fit to be couched: on the contrary, those which
are like to chalk, lead, citrons, black or yelowe, cannot be couched with a
needle. Beside their colour the substance is to be examined whether it be
fit and prepared: for that which is enlarged and spread abroad without
separating into pieces, Consideration of the substance.
returning to his former figure greatness is known to be curable by this his
ripeness. But if it be scattered into pieces when it is spreadde abroad, it
is not yet ready nor fit to be couched. Neither may you deal with that
which is not stretched forth in breadth and largeness, since it is an evident
sign that the sinevve of sight is stopped, whereby the spirit which causes
sight should be conveyed forth as with a blast made larger: for it is but
lost labour since he could not see any thing albeit that were removed. How
to know if the sinew of sight be stopped.
Thus you may make proof hereof, if the eye being shut he rub gently
upon the eie-lidde with his fingers turning it sometime to this side, sometime
ot that, and then lifting up the eie-lidde suddenly, consider, if the
cataract do spreadde abroad and return again presently or not. The same
observation you may take by closing the other eye wherein is no cataract: for
in thus doing you shall perceive the spirits enlarged in that which ought to
have been carried to both the eyes.

That cataract is the worst, which comes either by great sickness, The
worst cataract.
or extreme ache in the head, or by a grievous stroke or wound. It is
incurable in old men and children which without this imperfection have their
sight decayed. Only age is a sufficient mean to receive cure in a cataract if
it be full ripe and the eye be neither too little, nor sunk down deep into
the head. Concerning the cure, if it be in the beginning of this disease, you
shall labour to prevent the further increase thereof by good order of Diet, and
by bloudletting in the Fore^heade, Cure in the beginning.
Temples, and Arm, by Purging, Cupping, Cauterizing, applying of a Seton, and
other remidies to be kept in the mouth, or put into the nose^ And touching
particular remedies, these salves following are highly praised. R. terebintl^.
lib. s. sulph. viu^ ij. ^ellis ros iiij. plantag. arn^gloss, euphras. chelidon.
ana. m.ii. let them be altogether distilled in an alembicke of glass, or this.
R. zinzib, cinnamon, garioph nucis mosch. gran. parad. ana. ii s foli^r.
saluiae, m.ii. cardam. masti^. cubeb. galang* rorism, maioran, lauand, m^liss.
beton. an. i. let them soak in four pound of excellent wine, by the space
of ten days, then distill them. Put two or three drops of this water into
the eye, continuing this order a sufficient time. But if all the afore-saide
means both general and special be not able to heal the cataract, it shall
grow until it be ripe, without applying any other medicine unto it. When it
is ripe, which may be known by the signs before set down, then enterprise
the work, but with this caveat, that you have diligent regard to the time of
the year, What time is fitest to couch the cataract.
wherein this may be most fitly achieved, which is especially the spring
time, then summer, and also if necessity so require, and the patient be
willing, winter, or the fall of the leaf. But above all other things do not
adventure to couch a cataract, either on a rainy, windy, very hot, or very
cold day. For we have learned by experience, that the couching of them at such
a time stirs up gteate, yea almost intolerable pains in the head.
Therefore when you have chosen a convenient time, the party must eat little,
and drink water, or some other thin drink, The patients diet sober.
abstaining from wine by the space of tvvoo or three days before you attempt
the couching of it* and especially on the day before, his eating and drinking
must be with marvelous sobriety. This being done, let him be set in a light
place, having his face turned toward the Surgeon, and the light coming
directly upon him, let one hold his head steadfastly without moving: for
any little motion of it may bring blindness without recovery. The Surgeon
must have a higher seat then the patitient. The affected eye must be kept
open, and the sound eye covered with a little linen cloth. Let the Surgeon
rub the right eye with the left hand, and the left eye with the right
hand, before he begin his work, or rather let some child having a very
clean mouth chevv fenell or a^-seeds, which when he hath spit forth, let
him breath upon the diseased part, that by this means the cataract may be
made more thin, and smaller. When you have proceeded thus far, bid him turn
the eye which hath the cataract toward his nose, as if he would look upon him
and presently put your needle unto it, which must be sharp pointed, not
slender, flat, nor round, to the end it may enter pierce more easily, that
the roundness thereof cause it not to slip upon the cataract, then thrust it
straight inward, or overthwart the membranes named coniuctiua cornea, in the
midst of the black of the eye, Observation
at the corner which is nearer to the temples guiding directing it upon the
midst of the cataract, so that no vein be hurt: nevertheless you must
thrust boldly without fear, since the place is there void, least after it be
entered in, the Surgeon though he be cunning, be deceived, if he lift it up
with the needle, perceives nothing to resist it. Now when the needle is
thrust through, it must be stayed on the the top of the cataract, by little and
little turned gently to bring the cataract toward the lowest part of the apple
of the eye: when it is couched there, you shall press it down very hard, that
it may abide in that place. If it do remain there, the cure is perfect, if it
ascend up again, the with the same needle break and cut it into many pieces,
which will cause less hindrance, and require less room. After this draw out
the needle, lay with in the eye the white of an egg, with a linen cloth
folded together, and with out apply something to prevent inflammation, with a
roller binding it up. These things ended, The patient must be quiet, and use
abstinence.
the sick party must remain quiet without stirring, lying in his bed, without
moving his head any way, or very little, not seeing any great light for a
certain time, abstayning from meat, supping only thin broth by the space of
six or seven days, without chewing any meat with his teeth, because it
might dtavve down humours to the eye, and make the cataract ascend again.
When the inflammation is ceased, you shall order the patient as if he were
grieuouslie wounded. He may not be dressed, nor the eye vnrolled, until the
second or third day after the couching of the cataract, unless there happen
any inflammation, or great pain.

When you will dress it, shut the windovves, and set a candle lighted
behind him, and not before his eyes, or rather far of from him on the side,
Great light is ^urtfull.
least the great light suddenly offerred to his sight, may trouble the eye,
stir up the cataract. Now, sometime in couching of cataracts, Flux of
blood.
there happens a flux of blood within the eye, in such sort, that the
humours seem all red. This arises of blood issuing out of some little vein
or artery which is cut or pricked: this blood mingling with the vvaterish
humour, gives it this red colour, and as it were dries it so, that the
Surgeon if he have not seen the like event, and all that stand by would
judge the eye burst and utterly lost: notwithstanding about two or three
days after, when the patient shall be dressed, this blood will be so vvasted,
that no token thereof will appear. There are some cataracts which vanish and
scatter as soon as the needle is applied to couch them, because they are not
harde and solide to bear the needle, which goes thorough them as it were a
green cheese, Cataractae lact^a.
whereof they are commonly called cataractae lacteae, because their colour and
substance resembles milk. That the Surgeon may meet with this
inconvenience, he must labour to loose it, pressing it with his needle on
every side: for by this means I have seen and proved sometime the grossest
part of the cataract to fall away, and come lower, the thinner part to be
loosed and consumed, and in the end the party hath recovered his sight.
Albucrasis.
Albucrasis doth write, that it was reported in his time, one had devised to
pick the eye with an hollovve needle, and by the hollowness of it he could
raise up and draw forth the humour of the cataract. Notwithstanding I
think he might sooner raise and draw forth the vvaterish humour, then the
cataract, when it is ripe and ready to be couched, because it is an harde
skin.

The seventh section, entreating of those diseases, which are incident to the
humours of the eyes.
CHAP. 1. Of green, pale, or gray eyes, called in greek glaucoma, or
glaucosis, in latin glaucoma, or coesii oculi, and by the interpretour of
Auicen, viriditas oculi: also of the wolues-eie, or cursed eye in greek
aethemoma, in latin raui oculi.
Two significations of glaucoma.
GLaucoma is used in two senses: for it is taken unproperly for a web
cataract or spot which is gathered and dried round about the apple of the eye:
which signification some of the old physicians have used this word as
Aegineta writes saying, the ancient writers have supposed Glaucoma and
hypochyma to be one and the same disease, Aegineta.
which have been only distinguished by the new writers. Galen.
Neither doth Galen much descent from this opinion, affirming glaucoma to be
like to the web or cataract, and that both of them may be comprehended under
the same name. Gorraus.
Nevertheless (as Gorraeus saith) it follows not that they are like. For the
cataract is a collection and an heap of other humours, then of those which
are naturally in the eye, flovving unto it from some other place: but glaucoma
is properlye used when the Cristaline humour is dry and thick, The difference
between glaucoma and hipo^himc.
and the colour of it is green whereupon the eyes seem green or pale.
Moreover, the cataractes are always so great that they ouerspreade and cover
the whole apple of the eye, and hinder the vvholesight: but glaucoma
possesses all the Crystalline humour, and it is dry in every part, and by
reason of the dryness it grovveth so thick. Besides these, cataractes may be
cured, but Glaucoma is uncurable, when it hath once attained to perfection as
Aegineta writes concerning the opinion of Rusus. Aegineta.
When this affection is only found in one eye, Heteroglaucosis
it is called in greek Heteroglaucosis, as if that party had unlike eyes, of
two parrishes. There is incident to the Crystalline humour, an other malady,
named in greek Argyrias, in latin, Argirias.
albedo in Christilloide, which is a white spot grovving upon the
Crystalline humour, which is easily perceived if you look upon the ey: it
hinders the sight more or less, as it is greater or smaller, and may be
accounted the beginner and messenger of glaucoma. In old time, and even in
these days also, green or gray eyes, called in greek glauci, in latin
coesii, were much commended in women, whereupon in Homer Minerua is always
surnamed glaucopis, that is, having green or gray eyes. The diversity of
opinions.
Although Aegineta assign the cause of this disease unto moisture, yet Galen
and Hippocrates impute it to dryness, for which cause old folk are subject
unto it. Arist. 5. lib de generat animal.
Some have imagined that a green colour intermedled with the Crystalline
humour causes this disease, and makes this gray or azure color called
glaucoma. The cure is to be taken in hand in this order. When you perceive
this malady beginning, which is evident in the Crystalline humour appearing
some-vvhat gray, first use your general cure, then such medicines as may
comfort and staye the Crystalline humour, least it wax dry and be frozen: as
moist and comfortable fomentations. R. of the tops of mallovves, holyhocke,
violets, ana. m. i. ey-bright, selandine, an. m. s of camomill flowers, and
melilot, an p. s line-seeds, ii. faenel and ani-seeds an i. sees them for a
fomentation. This collirium shall be put into the eye. Take of the mucilage of
quince, and line-seed dravvn in water of pellitorie on the vvall, ana. i. of
faenell and eye-bright water ana s dissolve herein of myrrh and aloes, ana.
s, of beniamin and storax calamit, ana. ii. make a salve of all these. This
afore-named ingredience may be distilled, and the water of it will be very
profitable. Those medicines which have virtue to dissolve cataractes and vvebbes
in their beginning may be in this case discreetely used, as also hoate bread
taken out of the oven, wherein is baked the povvder of ani-seedes and faenell,
may be well applied in this order. Divide the bread in the midst, and lay
it upon the eye so hot as the party can abide it and let it so remain upon
the eye a good space. The breath of a sound and clean person which hath
chewed faenell or ani-seede is not unprofitable in this case. The distilled
water of faenell and any seeds is most singular, if it be wisely used and so
are the mucilages of quince, Fenegreeke, and Linseedes dravven in the aforesaid
vvaters. There happens to the eye an other affection called in greek,
Ae^hemoma, ^themoma.
in latin, raui oculi, in French the vvolues eye, or evil boy, and I think
vvee call it in English, the cursed eye, or evil eye, or sometimes greedy
eye, which is, when the humours are all black, and thereupon the whole eye
is black. In curing of this seeing it differs little from glaucoma, you
shall have recourse both to general and special medicines set down for
that disease. Fernellius writes of an other affect incident to the eye,
called in Latin, Occulusleoninus.
Leoninus oculus the Lyons eye in french, the brazen eye, when the eye is
red, cruel, proud, resembling sparks of fire, as we behold in a Lyon,
and in them which have the leprosy. Seeing this affection is joined with the
leprosy, before you adventure the helping thereof, you must cure the leprosy
it self.

The eight section, containing the diseases incident to the corners of the eye.
CHAP. I. Of an Aposteme in the great corner of the eye, called in greek,
anchilops, in Latin, abscessus ocularis.
ANchilops and aegilops are sometimes used for one self same disease, The
difference of anchilops aegilops.
but they are most commonly distinguished in this manner. Anchilops is a
svvelling or aposteme between the great corner of the eye and the nose
which is not opened, but aegilops, is a fistula procured by means of this
aposteme. Causes.
The cause is an heap of thick gross humours like to honey or pulse, which is
sometimes wrapped in a little skin increasing by little and little,
Predictions.
but without any payne. This disease is hardly cured, because the
delicateness, and tenderness of the bone, whereupon the svvelling grovveth,
and because it is so near unto the eye that the medycines may endanger the
same. Concerning the cure, as soon as the aposteme begins, with all speed
apply medicines which have great force to beat back, and may bring little
astonishment: of this kind and nature is emplastrum contra rupturam, vnguentum
de bolo, comitiss. desiccatiuum rubrum, where unto you may add a little opium.
For these medicines will quickly dissolve disperse that, which is gathered to
that place. But if you see the course of humours inflammation remaining, then
such medicines shall be applied, whose property is to resolve without sharpnes
least by molesting the eye the inflammation be increased. Aetius.
Aetius appoints this remedy. R. thuris sviij, mirh. sviij. ladani si. cerae
sviij. alumin. sciss. siiij. spumae nitri, siiii. ^oaguli leporis, siiij beat
these together, and with the grossest part of oleum Ir^num make them soft and
fit to be used. If in despite of all these medicines the tumor comes to
suppuration, when this aposteme must be opened.
open it speedely, that the humour may run out, which if it be in a bag or
skin, take the same away cunningly: and if it cannot be taken away without
danger or hurt, consume it with pure powder of Mercurie, or rather mingle
with it some cleansing medicine, or such ike. To make the cure perfect, and
to prevent the returning of this malady some use to sear the edges of it. The
remainder of the cure shall be accomplished with this medicine: R. olei
hipericonis i. gum. Elemi s. thuris, mirrh. an ij sarcocoll j. melt them
together and make a salve. If you perceive the ulcer doth not heal, you must
have care to observe, least it turn to a fistula, if the bone be corrupted and
rotten: for this cause, the cure shall be changed as the condition of the
disease doth require.

CHAP. II. Of the weeping fistula, called in greek, aegilops in Latin,
fistula lachrimalis.
AEgilops is a little fistula, in the corner of the eye near to the nose,
Definition.
out of which issues continually fleume or a thin humour, arising of some
former disease, as of anchilops suppurated, but either not speedily opened,
Causes.
or negligently dressed: or rather it is procured of slymie matter, or moist
medicines, or the air which hath altered, and rotted the bone in that part.
Signs.
This malady vexes the eye without ceasing, being sometimes red, piercing
thorough cue to the nose. It hath in some, the nature properties of a cacer, in
those the veins at stretched forth, crooked, the color pale bluish, the skin
hard. If it be touched as gently as is possible, it stirs up inflaation in
the parts adjoining. Praedictions.
It is dangerous attempting the cure thereof, when it is of a cankrous or
crabbed nature: for it hastes the death of the patient. And it is lost labour
to take in had the cure of it when the aposteme touches the nose, since it will
never be perfectly healed: those which are in the corner of the eye are curable,
but yet the nearer their hole or mouth is to it, the greater difficulty is in
the cure: that which is of short cotinuance may be most easily healed* these
things thus considered, the bon corrupted thorough long continuance of the
disease, the cu^e set down in the former chapter be not available, it behooves
the chyrurgio to enter into an other course. Let him make wider the mouth of
the fistula either with the point of his laucet, Cure.
or some other instrument, or with a sponge prepared fitly to open and enlarge
the same. This don, let him place the patient conveniently, defend the eye
either with a plate made for that purpose whereof you have a discriptio in
Ambros Pares book, the kings chief Chyrurgia, Ambros Pare^.
or with any other thing comodiouslye serving thereunto. Afterward with an
actual cautery (as it is called) sear the bon the parts which go cross
within the fistula, and especially the over most parts of the, because in that
place there is a straight hollowness whereat issues a thin humour like tears into
the ulcer fro the higher and overthwart part: If this place should not be dried
by searing, it would make the ulcer to short, thereby hinder the perfect closing
up of the same. I have seen Ambrose Pare heal many with good success,
Experience.
in short time by whose example I have most happily practised the like. When
this part of your work is ended, you shall use a disgestiue made of turpentine,
and oil of eggs: apply within the eye the white of an eg beaten with rose water
plantine, whereupon lay a defensive, and continue the use of your digestiue
until the eschar be removed. Not long after nature will cast of a little
scaile from the bone where it was touched with the fearing iron, which,
whether it be with matter or without matter, let not the Surgeon suddenly
and rashly pull any part of it away, Nature must be followed.
but vvaite the leisure of nature in disburdening it self of the same. For
vvhosoeuer will hastily and by force draw it away, especially before nature
have brought forth flesh between the sound bone, and that which shall be cast
off, he shall cause a new rottenness in the bone. In the mean time, let the
ulcer be kept clean, then use means to increase flesh, lastly, close it up
when it shall seem expedient.

CHAP. III. Of the outgrowing of flesh in the great corner of the eye, called
in greek encanthis, and according to Auicen additio carnis lachrimalium.
Definition.
ENcanthis is a tumor, or addition of flesh to that which naturally grows in
the great corner of the eye near to the nose, or rather when the natural
flesh grows beyond his compass. Of this there are two sorts. The one is
most commonly tender, loose, Two kinds
without pain, red in color, yielding easily to medicines. The other is
malicious, hard, rugged bluish, having pricking pain, not relenting by
medicines but is only curable by the hand of the Chirurgyan. There are three
principal causes of this malady, The first is a flowing, Three causes
and an heap of melancholic humours, which make the flesh in the corner of
the eye gross, as we see it in warts. The second is, when the flesh grovveth
out through ill handling of an ulcer which hath been in that place. The
third is the remainder of a nail or vvebbe, which was not fully taken
away, and therefore hath grovven and increased unto a more gross nature.
Concerning the cure, that which is little, Cure.
gentle, not malicious may be healed with only drying medicines, as with
this, Aetius.
commended by Aetius. R. aluminis vsti, mysi Combust. vitriol. an parts
aequales: make your medicin in this case that Colliriu is most singular which
we have set down before, for the disease called miocephalon. I have seen the
trial of oleum vitrioli, wherewith the part affected hathbene touched, but
first of all the eye hath been sufficiently defended. Now if this flesh which
grows out, The manual operation.
be great, and malicious, but not of the nature of a cancer, it shall be taken
away by Chyrurgerie in this manner. The Surgeon must put thorough the midst
of it a thread, wherewith it shall be lifted up, then with his rasour or cisers
he shall cut it, being provident least he cut any part of the natural
flesh adjoining unto it. Otherwise he shall bring into the place of it a
vvorse disease named rhaeas, which causes the eye to vveepe continually. When
you have finished this work, you shall lay upon it dry medicines to prevent
the grovving of the flesh again, proceeding in perfecting the rest of your
cure according to that, which is written before in dealing with the web in the
eye.

CHAP. 4 Of the vveeping eye, called in greek, rhaeas or rhaeades ^pthalmou,
in latin fluxus oculi.
Definition.
RHaeas is a diminishing or consuptio of the flesh which naturally grows in
the corner of the eye with continual grievous vveeping. It arises either by
ill curing of the vveb, fistula, or encanthis, Causes.
when too much of the glandulous flesh or kernels which grovvin that place is
cut away or consumed by medicines. For hereuppon the tears cannot be stayed,
but the eye seems to weep always, yea the cheeks are continually vvet
with the tears. A double use of the glandulous flesh.
For seeing there is a double use of this glandulous flesh or kernels, whereof
the first is to stop the hole in the corner of the eye which hath passage
into the nose* least the excrements which disced from the fore-part of the
brain upon the bon called as cribrosum because it resembles a sieue should run
into the eye, and it prevents the violent carriage of air into the eye
thereby, when we blow or snuff, or any way cleanse the nose of that filth which
is in it The second use is to cover the little corner conduit in the corner of
the eye, by the which the excrements and natural superfluities are conveyed
into the nose. This excrement is a thin liquid humour which flows out in
weeping, or laughing, and whenever the brain doth disburden it self of these
superfluities. If this humour be not much in quantity, and commendable in
quality, then the kernels do receive, retain and keep it, The eye must be
kept moist.
to sprincle it upon the eye (as is the office of other glandulous flesh or
kernels placed at thee root of the tongue) to keep it moist, and make it move
more easily, which it could not do if it were very dry, and it could not but
be very dry, since it is moved continually, whereby it is made hoate. But if
this humour contained in the kernels offend either in quantity, or quality, it
brings forth ulcers, tears, and other diseases before set down. Now when
too much of the flesh is taken away, either by cutting, searing, or corrosive
medicines, there is made not only a scarre in the place, but also the hole
entering into the nose remains open, thorough the which the excrementes of the
brain fall without any hinderance upon the eye, which procures continual
weeping. Cure.
In curing hereof some use binding medicines to the end they may stop the
hole, and cut of the passage: others scarrifie the skin, round about, with
incarnatiue medicines (as they call them) labouring to restore, and engender
new flesh in place of the former which was decayed: and when it is grown
sufficiently they close it up and make it dry. But because this kind of
cure is both harde and dangerous, An hard and dangerous cure.
many content themselves with closing up of the hole, not regarding the
restoring of new flesh. These men force not the manifold discomodities which
spring by stopping of the eye. For first the passage of ordinary excrementes
unto the eye is debarred. Secondly, Aninconuenient cure.
since the cicatrice is none other thing but hard dried flesh, by reason of the
thickenesse thereof it is not able to receive drink up these superfluities:
hereupon ensues continual tears dropping from the eyes. Therefore in regard of
this inconvenience it is more expedient to adventure the generation of new
flesh, then only to close up the ulcer.

CHAP. V. Of fretting and itching Ulcers in the corners of the eyes called in
greek Peribrosis, and Epinyctis, in latin Angulorum Erosio, or Pruritus
Lachrymalium
PEribrosis is taken for a little itching Ulcer in the corners of the eyes,
Definition.
and there is itching sometime without appearance of any ulcer. Causes.
This disease comes of a salt humour flowing unto that part, and there staying:
whereupon they which are troubled therewith, put their hands often to their
eyes, take delight in rubbing them, suppose often times that there is sand or
some other such like thing in their eyes. Epinictis.
Epinictis is used generally for little ulcers growing of their own nature,
resembling in the beginning red wheales, wherein is found bloody matter: On
the day time they are not much painful, but in the night season, their
torments are more vehement then could be imagined to come from so small a
thing. At what time this pain begins.
This pain begins usually about three or four hours before night, and
continues until midnight, at which time it cease, in such sort, that on
the morrow the party feels either very little or no grief, neither doth
their remain any thing, but dry tough matter wherewith the eie-lids are tied
and joined together, which you must help by anointing the edges borders with
vnguet de tutia. Plinie.
Nevertheless we according to Plinie: do take epinictis in this place for an
ulcer in the corner of the eyes wherout islueth vncessauntly slimy matter.
This ulcer it more grievous then the former, because it is more filthy,
malicious, painful especially in the night, whereof it is named. Cure of
Peribrosis.
After the general cure, these local medicines may be used in peribrosis.
Take of the mucilages of quince seeds linseeds drawn in the water of Plantine
and Pellitory of the wall ana. i. of white coporas dissolved in rose-water i. s
mingle them for your use. Water of coporas.
This water of white coporas only I have proved with very good success
being provident least it were too strong. It is a conterpoison against great
itching, An history reported by Ambrose Pare.
which doth so much vex the party, that Ambrose Pare the kings counsailour
and chief Chyrurgian reports he saw a woman constrained to vvashe her
eyes with strong vynegar, finding in it more ease and comfort then in any
thing which she could use. Concerning Epinyctis, Cure of Epinictis.
because it is a more filthy ulcer, it must be dyligentlye cleansed, to the
which purpose you must dissolve into the aforenamed salve a little sirrup of
wormwood, and honey of roses, or else touch the ulcer with this collyrium which
will not offend the eye. Take of rose water eiebright water ana i. Myrrh and
Aloes ana.i. vnguenium egiptiac.i. s. dissolve the all together and make a
salve, dip a linen cloth in this salve and touche the eye therewith, and
put upon the eye immediately a medicine which may delay pain and cool, as
the white of an egg beaten with plantine water, or rather in place of it, wash
it with strawbery water When these ulcers are thus cleansed the Surgeon must
have wise consideration in closing them. For otherwise, there is great danger
least the eie-lids stick together, in that manner which is spoke of in the
disease named prosphysis, since both of them are vlcerat. To prevent this, How
to prevent prosphisis
you must use vnguentum de tutia spread upon a fine linen cloth and laid
between the eie-lidds to withhold one from an other. In this doing that which
is ulcerated and kept clean shall heal a part, and the other in like manner.
But if this inconvenience do grow, then you must have recourse to the chapiter
entreating of anchiloblepharon, or the joining together of the eie-lidds.

The ninth section comprehending the diseases incident to the sinew of sight,
which is called ^n latin Nervus opticus or visualis.
CHAP. I. Of the stopping of the sinew of sight, in greek amaurosis, in latin
obfuscatio, guita saerena: also of the deceiving or dim eye, called in greek
parorasis, in latin halluctnatio, or calltgatio.
AMaurosis most commonly is a hinderance of the whole sight, Definition.
without any appearance thereof in the eye: for the apple of the eye remains
sound, and unchanged the sinew of sight only is stopped. Sauonarola seems
to name the beginning of this disease in greek parorasis, in latin
hallucinatio, Causes.
or caligatio, which we may name in english the dim or deceitful sight, when
we take one thing for an other, which thing is a forerunner and messenger of
blindness. These defaults befall to some suddenly, to others by little and
little, but so, that either they see nothing, or very little. The difference
between ambliopia and lamaurosis.
The causes of this which comes by little and little are like to that malady
which is called in greek ambliopia, in latin, b^be^udo. And some have thought
the difference of these two to consist only in this, that the causes of
ambliopia are less, but the causes of amaurosis are greater and stronger. Now
the cause of that which comes altogether suddenly, and (as we say) at one
push which is rightly called amaurosis is when the sinew of sight is filled
stuffed with thick slimy humours falling into the hollowness of it, which will
not suffer the spirit of sight to be conveyed thereby into the eye. How to know
if the sinew of sight be stopped.
The way to know the stopping of the sinevv of sight, and that no spirit can
pass thorough it is this Shut the other eye, the apple of that eye which is
stopped will not appear to be enlarged, which it would be if the spirit of
sight were conveyed thereto by the sinew: for this spirit doth as it were
with a blast make the apple of the eye broader. Therefore where this is not
apparent, you must judge either the sinevve to be stopped, or rather that the
brain is not able to send spirits to this sinevve which may happen by
weakness thereof, grovving of long sickness trouble, or old age, whereby
the spirits are vvasted scattered. Praecedent causes.
The forerunners and as it were outward causes of this disease are much
ravvnes or ill digestion, drinking of pure wine, great heat of the son, or
cold on the head, continual reading, bathes after meat, vomiting, immoderate
company with women, holding in of the breath as vvee see in trumpeters: for
all these things fill the head with vapours. Before this effect do plainly
appear the party perceives great heaviness in his head, Cure.
specially in the root botom of the eyes. In curing those to whom this disease
hath befalen thorough fulness it is necessary to let the blood on the arm, then
on the forehead, to use cupping upon the shulders with scarrifiing, to purge to
observe good order of diet, to eschew strong wines, to abstain from fuming
meats, to rub the lower parts, Aetius most excellent salus
is much commended we have this salve (saith Aetius in great admiration and honour
Take of Safron i. mirh i. pepper gra. xv. spicknard ob. ij juice of Fenell.xvi.
ammoniac. thimiamat. i. honny v. When they are all beaten finely, power into
them the juice of Fenell, then beat them again until they be dry, aftervvard
put the honey unto them, and keep this salve in a brazen box for your use.
Before you do use this Collirium you must have a fomentation of Sea water hot,
wherein dip a sponge and often bathe the eye. This Author approves the
applying of a causticke behind on the head, as also to dry the head. There
hath been seen great fruit and profit by the use of bags and coyfes put
upon the head, when the hair is shaven. Take of the flowers of staechadis
or both sorts of Lavender, Hysope, Betony, Camomill, Ana P. i. red roses P ii.
calam. aromat lign. aloes ciperi an.. i bay leaves, maioram ana. P i. nutmeg,
the root of the flower deluce, A coyfe to were on the head.
excellent cinnamon an. ii. s cloves i. s stiracis Calamit i. ambargrise gra
vi. musk gra. iiii. beat all these to powder and sow them in a linen cloth
with, bombast made to the fashion of a coyfe. But before he use it he must rub
and stroke down his head with a little bra, putting unto it a little salt,
which must be made moist with a little wine. This electuarie is commended to
comfort the stomach, A comfortable electuarie.
to prevent the engendering of gross fleum in the brain. Take of fine
cinnamon. i. and i. cloves ligni aloes, mace ana.. s. ginger s. aniseedes in
powder i. take the equal vvaight of sugar to the all, with vvormewood water
make losinges in weight iij. let him use these in the morning three hours
before dinner. Or rather let the patient use this singular electuarie. R.
electuarii human. descript, Mesuae i. s. aromat ros. ana. s. mingle them
together, and let him take thereof evening and morning before meat the
quantity of a chestnut. I have not set down here any eye-salues, which have
none use in this case, since the default is not in the eye.

CHAP. 2 Of the depression or weakness in the sinew of sight, called in greek
simptosis in latin, concidentia.
SYmptosis is when the sinevv of sight, Definition.
is so flat, weak, and pressed down, that there is not any hollowness
remaining in it, because the inside of the skins do touch each other. Causes.
This thing proceeds of abundance of humours which fall not into the
hollovvnes, but upon the mere substance of this sinevv which is so much loosed
and softened that it falls down, and one part lies flagging upon an other.
It may also come of drines, whereby it is vvithered and gathered together,
and becomes vvrinckled, as may be euidentlye s^ene in old men, whereby the
holes and poorie passages thereof are stopped This default may grovv in like
manner from weakness, Celsus. 7 book chap. 26.
albeit the sinevv be neither too moist, nor too dry. This vvee may behold in
old folk, which have the conduit of their urine so depressed thorough
weakness and feeblenes of the part, that no water can pass that way. So
we may judge of this sinevv of sight, which being feeble decayed cannot give
entrance and a free course to the conveying of the spirit of sight into the
eye, whereupon the party must of necessity be depriued of sight. Now, Cure.
although there be small hope of cure* yet let not the Surgeon leave the
sick party destitute of all help. For if he perceive the disease doth grow
from abundance and fulness, In old folk uncurable.
the general and particular remedies set down in ambliopia will be fit and
agreeable in this case. But if old age bring this infirmity, then it is to be
accounted incurable.

CHAP. 3. Of the breaking asuder of the sinevv of sight, called in greek,
aporrexis in Latin abruptio also of paremptostis or coincidentia.
APorrexis is when the sinevve of sight is broken asunder. Definition.
by a stroke, or fall in such sort, that presently upon it doth ensue
most desperate blyndenesse because the spyryte of sight cannot be carried
unto the eye. Paremptos^.
Paremptosis is when the sinevve of sight is stopped by means of sum
humour which flovveth into the same, because the sinevve gapes and seems
as it were cloven or chincked. The vvaye to discern and distinguish one of
them fro the other is this. If it be utterly broke as in aporexis, and
separated from the brain, now to discern aporrexis from paremptosis.
by a stroke or fall on the head, first the eye is thrust forth, aftervvard it
sinks in deep, then it receives no nourishment as it should, the sight is
vvholy lost without any recovery: and if one of the second pair of sinevvs be
broken, the eye hath neither sense, not moving, but abides fixed in the
circle. But when this sinevve of sight doth only gape seeming to be cloven,
and as it were rent, the eye remains in the place, and the sick party
sees (as we say) by fits, especially in short time after, when some part of
the humour which was entered into the eye is resolved and dispersed, the sinevv
is strengthened, in some part joined again. Concerning the cure, Cure.
the Surgeon shall have more care to maintain and preserve the beauty of
the eye, then to endeavour the restoring of the sight which is utterly lost.
And it is to be feared least some great course of humours, pain, or
inflammation, do come unto the eyes, whereby they may be constrained either
to fall out of the head or to burst asunder, as we have written before.
Therefore to avoid and eschevve the returning again thereof, you shall have
recourse both to general and particular medicines which are able to stay and
heal the aforesaid inconveniences vvhensoeuer they shall happen.

WHen I had finished this my treatise to be printed, I received a letter from
Mounsieur le Ieune Surgeon to the king, and to my Lord the Duke of Guise, a
manne much travailed and experienced in Surgery: the Copy whereof I have
thought good to add in the end of this my book because the disease of the
eye whereof he hath written unto me is very strange and rare.

The Copy of the Letter.
FOR as much as I understand that you have written a little treatise touching
the diseases of the eye, wherein you have comprised not only whatsoever the
autient writers cold affoord, but also what by your own observation your self
hath learned: I thought it expedient to advertise you, that in this place not
many days past, one of our house came unto me troubled with a disease in the
eye in this order. There are upon the membrane coniunctiua or white of the eye
little beasts, like unto little lice, or great worms in the hands, which
cause so vehement itching, that when the party is troubled therewith, he
become vnpatient, rubbing his eye without ceasing. I laboured to cure it by
those means which the old writers have set down in Ptheriasis, but I
prevailed either nothing or little. Therefore the aforesaid patient addressed
him self to go to a woman dwelling about Ioynuille, who in my presence with a
silver needle took away very cunningly and with small pain the worms or the
nits from the membrane: And unless I had seen them go, I should scarcely have
been persuaded that such vermin could be engendered on the white of the eye.
The woman avouched to me that she had taken the like from many others at
diverse times without any hurt ensuing, and that many in this part the country
were subject to the like malady, which thing by diligent inquisition I have
proved true.

Fare you well.

FINIS.
To the courteous and careful Chyrurgian.
THis Treatise of the Scorby, hath been a long time prepared for thee, but it
wanted a prosperous gale of wind. Perhaps delay may b^ some disgrace to it:
for erst other Treatises of the same matter have here arrived. Surely, others
gain, is not my grief, but I am sorry that I cannot also present them to thee.
I hope a better furnished leisure and skill will shortly impart to thee this
benefit. In the mean time, have Wires pains, in high price, which are not
inferior to others. Ronsleus and Langius wade into deep difficulties, fitter
for a learned censurer, then a plain practiser. Ecthius paynteth out the
signs, and poynteth to the cure* but affords not the pith and marow of
special medicines: The other Treatise which is of the canker, was painfully
weaved by Textor: who (in mine opinion) discovers the deceit of Penelopes
web. For the crabbed ulcer craves help, hut accepts none, as the matron
ever laboured, never ended her work. Nevertheless as her web deluded her
suitors, and supported the hope of Vlysses return: So this crooked Caecilius
may receive often ease of payne, though none end of grief. The authors deserve
commendation, the interpreter, desires friendly acceptance, the Printers
discourage, both.

Farewell.

A discourse of the Scorby translated out of Wires observations.
I He Scorby is a stopping of the spleen hindering thereby the course of
Melancholy, which mingling with the rest of the blood infects all the body
with vile wasting corruption, the gross part whereof falling down,
stains the legs with spots like unto pomgranats, and the thinner part being
carried up defiles the tender gummes with sharpe fretting and loathsome
growing out of the flesh. It is lawful for Physicians to define and lay open so
largely the nature of things for the better understanding of them, although I
know that amongst Logicians, these things will be more narrowly sifted. The
name was invented by the Duchmen which dwell nigh to the Germaine Sea. For
Scorbuc in their language signifies burst belly, as if the sides and belly
(as it comes to pass) were affected. In high dutch when the gummes are
infected, it is called Scormunt, that is burst cheeks or mouth, but when the
signs and tokens thereof appear in the legs they name it Scorbem, which is
broken legs, the Holanders of the spots resembling pomegranates call it
blanschuit. It seems to be stomacace and sceletyrbe whereof Plinie makes
mention in the 25. book of his natural history and third chapiter in these
words: Neither do beasts only hurt but sometimes water and the soil where
men live. When the Emperor Germanicus pitched his tents beyond the River
Rhene in Germanye there was upon the sea coast one only spring of sweet
water, whereof whosoever had drunk within two years space his teeth would
fall out, and the joints of his knees would be loosed. The Physicians did
call it stomacacen and sceletyrben, to the curing of the which they have found
out, an herb named britannica, which is not only wholesome for the sinews,
but also for diseases in the mouth, against squincyes and serpents, the leaves
of it are long and black, the root black, the juice of it is pressed forth
both of the leaves and of the root.

The people of friesland amongst whom they camped, showed it. This disease hath
hitherto grown worse worse amongst them, and the near inhabitants of the
sea, specially amongst such as dwell towards the North. But in these latter
years it hath begun to creep into the countries adjoining (wherein it was
never heard of before) either through ill diet, or contagious infection, so
that it is now known almost in all lowe Germanye: notwithstanding it is
unknown in the dominions of high Germany, as in Italy, France, and Spain. If
this infection may perhaps be in any place of Asia, or Africa, either that
borders on the sea, or there is want of sweet water, or their diet and the
Air nourishes it. Therefore this disease is proper to that Region, as to the
inhabitants of the North parts, and not familiar to all places in the world,
as is the crevve of other maladies. The Nabathaeans which dwell in that part
of Arabia, which for the fruitfulnes is called Arabia Faelix, that is happy
Arabia, and the Romanes also coming thither in the days of Augustus Caesar
seem to have been troubled with this disease. For when at his commandment
Aelius Gallus had leaded the Romaine Army into Arabia, he was constrained
in the voyage to leave it in Albo vico which is the greatest market Town of
the Nabathaeans, where they remained all Summer, and winter, that they which
were weak, might recover their strength.

For the Hoaste was aflicted with diseases in their mouths and Legs, and
other sickenesses incident to that place, in both which disseases there was a
dissolution and looseness of the Legs, and iavves, which proceeded from
the water, and fruits as Strabo writes near to the end of his sixteenth
Book, who lived in that same time. I find not any proper name, for this
disease amongst the Arabians: but either the Greek Physicians which then
practysed amongst the Romaines, or such as understanding Latin and being
also cunning in the Greek tongue folloed and vvayted in the Romaine Army
invented Greek Names, from the signs and accidents which appeared in the
mouth and Legs, calling it Stomacaece, of hurting the mouth, and Sceletirbe
of hurting and infecting the legs. For the Physicians which then attended on
the Emperor Germanicus received not these names from the Hollanders, which
seem at that time to have been destitute of learned Physicians, and such as
were cunning in strange languages, so that they were not able to give fit
names in Greek unto diseases: but if they had any Physicians they were of
their own Country, and very meanly learned. Neither received the Physicians
which followed Aelius Gallus these names from the Arabians or Nabathaeans.
Moreover that disease which is named Scelotirbe by the Author of the
definitions which bear Galens name, is not our Scorbie, seeing he writes
that it is a kind of Palsy, which suffers not them which have it to
vvalke straight, but sometime they bovve to the right hand, sometime to the
left, sometime they draw their legs after them, not unlike those which
go up steep places: his his words are these: Scelotirbe is a kind of
Palsy wherein the Patient cannot go straight, but now vvritheth to the
right hand, now to the left, and dravveth his leg after him, as they do
which ascend into high places. I suppose that Marcellus called this disease
Oscedo because it eats into the mouth gums, it is called of others
Gingipedium, as it were hurting the feet and gummes. Here now arises a
question, whether this pestilence were knovven and written of by the old
ancient Greek and Arabian writers of Physic. Albeit some do affirm it to
be true, yet I incline to the contrary, for Auicen Chapt. 3. Fen. 15. tract.
2. Chapt. 2. of the tokens of Apostemes in the Spleane rehearses a number of
such signs and accidents as may be seen in the scorbie: Nevertheless he
describes not our scorbie though he come near unto it. Hippocrates writes
of great Spleanes in such sort, that in the second book of his Praedictions
he points out certain marks of the scorbie, but our scorbie is not laid
open with a few signs and tokens which appear in the diseases of the
Spleane. For he saith, they which have great Spleanes are subject to soar
gummes, and a stinking breath, again vvhosoeuer have great Spleanes without
bleeding, or a stinking breath, they have ulcers and black scars in their
legs. Let us now vvaigh and examine Hippocrates words. He affirms that
such as have great Spleanes have infected and stinking gummes, that is one
token: then he adds. If in such as have great Spleanes there is neither
rotten gummes, nor bleeding, then there arise in their legs malignant
ulcers, and black scars. By this it is plain that Hippocrates judged both
these tokens could not jointly happen in a great Spleane, but that ulcers
would be then in the legs when the melancholy sharpe humour was either
not carried up to the gummes, or was diminished by bleeding, and when it
settles into the Legs it breeds filthy Ulcers, and leaves behind it
black Scars. But in the Scorbie, jointly the Gummes do rot and stincke,
and great blew spots appear in the Legs, which very seldom come to be
an Ulcer.

The spots go before the Ulcers, which are very malignant, and also very
rare, neither is there any mention of these spots which are always evident
in this disease, but Hippocrates only speaks of such scartes which remain
after all melancholyke Ulcers. It is true they are most hardly cured:
Wherefore P. Aegineta, 3. Book. c^ap. 49.
affirms they cannot be closed together when the spleane is hard.

Mine answer is the same to Celsus, who hath translated into Latyne these
words of Hippocrates, in his second book and seventeenth Chapiter. And in
this manner I answer to Celsius, and all the auncyent aucthorityes which are
alleged to this purpose.

Furthermore I have found out by lunge experience that the Scorbie differs
from the black Iaundes, and from the third kind of Volvulus, called by
Hippocrates Haematites: and Balduinus Ronsseus, an excellent Physician, and my
familiar acquaintance shows the same verrye learnedly, in his excellent
Book entitled De magnis Hippocratis lienibus. Amongst the new writers Olaus
Magnus, borne in Svvizerland, somewhat sets out the Scorbie, in his history
of those Nations which dwell under the North Pole, in his siixteenth book and
fifty one Chapiter, albeit in many places he is full of forgeries. There is a
disease amongst Soldiers vexing such as be besieged and shut up, in such
sort, that the fleshye parts wax gross and senseless, consuming under the skin
as wax melts, and when they are pressed down with the finger they yield.
The teeth are set on edge, and ready to fall out, the white skin hath blew
spots, there is a heavy sluggishness with loathsomnes of medicines, this disease
is commonly called in their tongue Scorb^k, in greek cachexia, peradventure of
the soft matter which rots under the skin. It seems to grow by eating
of salt meates being not well digested, and to be fostered and increased by
the cold exhalations and vapores arising from vvalles. For it is not so full
of force and strength, where their walls are bourded with any kind of
wood, whatsoever it be. If this malady wax more fierce and continue long,
they drive it away by the continual drinking of vvormevvoode, as they use to
take away the roots and relics of the stone by drincking old Ale sodden
together with Butter.

In his 9. Book and 38. Chapiter he saith: At the first they steal avvaye by
force, but when their Soldiers are lost by continual skirmishes, by craft
and subteltye the victuals of such as do besiege them, especially their
Cattle, which they put to feed on the tops of their houses which are
full of grass, least wanting new and fresh flesh they should fall into
this sickness of all other the most grievous, called in their natural tongue
Scorbuck, that is to say, a wounded or vvearye stomach which pines away
with horrible torments and daily sorrow For cold meates not digested being
greedyly devoured do cause a disease not unlike that which the Physicians
call Vniuersalem Cachexiam, that is an ill disposition or state of the whole
body. Also Alberrus Coraniz, in his Saxonia, and Euricius Cordus in his
Bonaetologiens do by occasion speak of this pestilent disease.

The causes.
THe first and nearest cause is a gross, ravve, cold humour contained in the
veins, whether it come only from melancholy, or be mixed with fleam.
Causes far of are those which are commonly called in Physic, the six
things which are not natural, as corrupt Air, evil and vnholesom diet,
which is usual in the North parts, chieflye amongst Marryners, as swines
flesh even smelling as soon as it is sodden, Bacon stuffed and dried with
smoke, being sometimes restye, and at the killing of it unclean, and showing
manifest tokens of infection, which oftentimes they eat raw: also other
flesh, and fish salted, then hardened in the smoke, or powdered to keep
longer, also such as are of a groasse substance neither have any juice,
stinking flesh taken in hunting, fowls living in the water, all things
which have been sowsed a lunge time in Vinegar, Coolewortes, Cabbage,
Garlic, breadde twice sodden and somewhat hoary, Pulse, drink thick and
full of dregs, use of stinking waters when sweet fail, from whence grievous
diseases do spring as Hippocrates, and Plinie do witness.

Moreover, fasting with a little meat, in which is ill nourishement whereunto
may be added watchings, untimely labours, immoderate affections of the mind,
great and daily cares, and studies: Causes going before, Fevers, hinderance,
or staying of the usual due purging, as of the emroodes, or flowers, and such
like.

The Signs.
THe signs in the beginning of the disease are heaviness of the whole body,
sudden grosnesse, straitness about the sides, and belly, weakness in the
legs, and some coldness with little payne, soreness in the iavves, with an
itching reddenesse altered from the natural colour, the face from paleness
changing into blevvnesse: In the increasing appear a loose svvellyng, and
flovving of blood from the gummes, rottenness with a styncking breath,
sometimes the flesh is consumed to the roots of the teeth, and they shake
ready to fall out, there are spots in the legs, not unlike the
spryncklinges of blood, and almost resembling flea-bitinges, yet some-what
greater, which may some-time be seen in the thighs, and dispersed over all
the body, proceeding of the less grosser blood: commonly the spots are great,
coloured like to lead, blew, purple, darker then black violets, begotten of the
grossest corrupt blood, which falls down that way, wherefore they seldom
spring in any other places, except the legs And whenever these appear,
they fore-tell most certainly, that the Scorby is there, albeit other marks
are hidden and secrete. Sometime this blewnesse shows it self in the jaws,
but that is in such, whose whole body is drowned in this corruption, that
death is nigh at hand. When the disease grows worse and worse, then there is
coldness in the sinews of the legs, vnabilitie to walk, the cramp,
straightness of breath, especially when the sick party sits, moves or is
lifted up: for then he either sowneth, or is near unto it, but when he lies,
he doth breath more easily, and is much refreshed. Some do often desire meat,
others have their appetite decayed. The grieuousnes of it is observed in many
on the fourth and fifth day, in the most on the third day, in very few every
day, yet without any evident fever. Notwithstanding there is no doubt, but at
the same time some have a fever. For in this disease, some are troubled with a
lingting and changing fever. It so falls out, that there go before it
burning pestilent fevers, double tertians and I have seen when the Scorby not
being perfectly cured, a most pestilent quartaine hath ensued, and in the
decay of the quartaine, the Scorbie hath again appeared, which by sound advise
and council hath been ouercomed. So those fevers seem not so much to be
ended in their separation, as to cause new diseases worse then the former, by
the weakness of the bovvels, want of nourishment, and the great filthy
corruption of the blood. Some have their bellies bound, some loose. The
blewnesse doth so compass all the legs with svvelling unto the feet, that
it might be accounted a token of leprosy. Again, some have their legs so
small, that there seems to be nothing but the simple skin covering the bones,
with great heate most commonly, yet sometime without heate. Some men have
their spots, turning and consuming into scales, as for the most part it falls
out in Erisipelas, others have them remaining light, smooth, and shining,
leaving a little print when they are pressed with the finger. And sometime
(albeit but seldom) there appears a fullness and svvelling of the veins,
such as is to be seen in the disease varix, and under the tongue are little
veins not unlike to that, and they are also evident in the nether lip.

The pulse, as in the quartaine fever, is inconstant, slender, hard, swift,
weak, altering with the time of the disease. The urine or water is red,
troubled, thick, and like the lees of new red wine, as also it is usually
seen in a hot quartaine, having also a strong smell savour.

The Prognostications.
THe Scorbie is sometime perceived to be common in the same house, because they
all have used the same diet: th^refore it is accounted infections, which
contagion partly proceeds by drinking of the same cup, when the mouth and
gummes are infected, partly corrupt spirits are drawn in by continual
handling of the sick. Sometimes it is received as it were by inheritance from
the parents. Fevers many times do cease change into this disease. A consumption
is a most common companion of it. Sometimes the dropsy, or flixe, but always
Atrophia, that is, a languishing of the body, for vvante of nourishment
waits on it.

If ulcers arise in the legs (which are very rare) they are hardly joined
together, because they are stinking, pestilent, and sometimes change to a
gangrene, so corrupt, that they feel not a launcet thrust into them. Some
have sound gummes, albeit fifthy and spotted legs, and such do bleed
either at the nose or mouth. The spots are hidden in many that dye, in others
they bud out abundantly after they are dead.

Their Diet.
Let his diet be of such things as may be easily digested, having good
juice some-vvhat hoate, thin, piercing, clensing, whereunto ad such as have
some force to bind and strengthen. Fried barley, or oats, or barley husked, and
sodden in pottage, or water, then strained with wine, small corains sodden
in some broth agreeable thereunto, or in water, or wine, and so strained,
where-vnto you may put sometime the yolke of an egg. If the sick party be
thirsty, he may eat of those raysens: also sweet almonds, a few bitter,
prepared in a decoction made with vvheat, is very profitable. Sometimes
spices, in regard of the feblenes of the body, and state of the disease, are
to be mingled with his meat, as cynamon, mace, nutmegs, ginger. It is not
unprofitable to eat sovver grapes. Let his sauce be capers, with great rasyns
steeped in oxisaccharu, or oximel, which are not to be swallovved before they
be chevved very small. Let his drink be good ale well clarified, specially
with vvormevvood, and vvormvvood wine, which is marucilous profitable, if he
be declining to a dropsy. Let him use with discretion the vvhey of milk:
also goats milk, or the milk of kine when it is new, in which let
there be sodden vvater-cresses, or garden-cresses, which some cal
winter-cresses, whose leaves are broader. Many use with good success
Scorby-grasse, such especially as have been accustomed to eat milk. Let him
be kept in a dry, warm, clean, light chamber, let him avoid sorrow. You
shall begin your cure with bloud-letting, if the body be full of blood, and
the age and strength of the patient can bear it, but let him not bleed much It
is best and fittest to procure the emroodes, to be purged that way. If the
spleen be specially affected, open the spleen or middle vein in the left arm,
but if the liver be more or as much grieved, then open a vein in the right
arm. Now seeing the Physician is seldom called, except the malady have taken
deep root, and prevailed much, and spots do appear in the legs, my
counsel is, to abstain from bloud-letting. Purge the body gently with the
leaves of sena Alexandrina, s, or iii or less if you put thereto a little
epithimum, with a few great rasyns, fenell seed, ginger, of each half a
dram, which when you have put into a sufficient quantity of whey, and made
hot, let them stand soaking a whole night in the same: In the morning after
you have again made it hoate, strain out the clearest part, and give it to
him to drink. Half an ounce of this povvder following, may be in the same
manner steeped and strained, and then drunk.

R. foliorum senae Alexandrinae ex purg i. epithymi, tartari albi, ana. s.
cinamoni, gariophil. galangae, seminis a^isi, ana. i. diagredii i. s. fiat
puluis. The pylles of fumitorie, and diasene, are much available. Although
some give pills de lapide lazuli, armeno, yet I allovve them not. If any will
give confectionem Hamech, they must have singular regard to the quantitye,
since this disease cannot receive vehement purging vvythout danger, because the
heart is so quickly hurt The body being thus gently purged, on the days
following in the morning when many svveate, and at four of the clock in the
afternoon, he shall take iiii. of juice of the herbs following, putting
there to some sugar, and a little cinnamon. Take Scorbye grass, vvater-cresses,
vvinter-cresses, of each equally being green, and half as much as of one
of them, of brooke lyme, stamp them with a wooden pestill in a stone mortar,
and then strain out the juice. For these have a singular privilege, and
prerogative in reason, to pull up this disease by the roots, since the three
first do cut, make thynne, and purge by vryne, the fourth brings the other
to a just temperature which therefore in respect of the body, and heate of the
disease, may be increased or diminished. They may be stamped and sodden in
goats milk, or covves milk, and so strained out and drunk.

It is most forcible, being nevvlye made every day. I have had good success
when I did sees the herbs in vvhey, yet the drinking of the juice is to be
preferred. But these may be changed at the discretion of a learned and
expert Physician. I remember they have been sodden not vnfitly with red
vvyne. And forasmuch as the herbs are full of juice, you must not put into
them much liquor, but so much as may cover them, when they are sodden.

Otherwise you may stamp strain the juice with other liquor, vvringing them
strongly. Common wormwood put unto it is exceeding profitable, and I have
with no small fruit and benefit added fumitorie, and germander. When the
bovvels are vveakened, the joints loosed, then put to it tvvopenny-grasse.
Other men delight to have a mixture, or a hodge-podge of many other things, as
of Indyan myrobolanes, mother-vvoort, mayden-haire, selandine, betony, hyssope,
agrimony, scabious, roots of valerian, enula campana, sortell, parsely,
pimpernel, cychory, borrage, bugloss, ash, fool-foote, fenell, elder,
broome-flovvers, aniseedes, fenell-seeds, lichoras, dodder, time, rasyns,
bistortae, corticum radicum capparum, phillitidis, ceterach, tamarices, senae
Alexandrinae, seminum frigidorum, many others, but I have had happy cures by
using a few herbs in good order I understand many have been cured with this
medicine. Take of the tops of common vvormevvood dried, juniper berries beaten
to povvder, an. m.i. of goats milk lib.iiii.let them be sodden until the
third part be consumed, then strain it, and put thereto a dram of saffron in
powder, boyle them again a walme or tvvoo, and after strain it, give him a
draught of this warm thrice in a day, in the morning, at three of clock in
the afternoon, and when he goes to bed. I knew a woman famous for curing
the Scorby, which after the body was purged, gave to the patient this drink.
Take of brooke-lime, water-cresses, of either three or four hand-full, when
the herbs are bruised, put thereto of rockat-seed, of the root of the garden
flower-deluce, of each half an ounce, ginger two drammes, long pepper one
dram, with two pound of red wine, strain them. She gave them of this drink
stirred together, every day in the morning warm, and covering the patient with
clothes procured sweat, so bestowing 9. days in this cure. In the country of
Marchia, the noble matrons drink brooke-lime, water-cresses, and aloes beaten
together, strained with milk. A certain Countess did give this potion to a
tender infant often with great success. R. rhabarbari, centaurii minoris,
rhapontici vulgo dicti ana s anisi liquiris ana. ii. made in powder, let them
be strained with a hand full of damask flowers sodden in water, vvhere-with
putting to it sufficient sugar, make a syroppe thereof let the patient drink
evening and morning a spoone-full. I will here set down an unpleasant and
abominable drink used in the East parts of Friezeland, as a most certain
cure of the Scorbye, that every man may behold what force is naturally in
excrements, which nevertheless we approve not to be used, because other
which are more pleasant and less loathsome, may be more safely used, and
there is found out a more delightful way of curing.

Take six quarts of Rhenish wine, (every quart must weigh four pound) four
ounces of the radish root new, and beaten to povvder in a stone mortar, let
them steep in a little earthen pot vvyth some of the wine, by the space of
an hovver, then put this being strained again to the rest of the vvyne: after
into an other portion of this vvyne, put the quantitye of three filberdes of
Ox doonge, and goose doonge, and let it remain an hour, then vvryng it
forth, and put it to the other vvyne: This being done, take nutmegs,
cloves, of each ii. beaten severally, and bynding them in a lynnen cloth,
hang them in the fore-saide wine, and let this drink stand xxiiii hours.
Let the patient drink hereof so often as he is thirsty, neither let him
use any other drink until he be fully sound. If need so require, this
drink may be prepared the second time for him. But he may not eat salt
meates, nor rye bread, during the time of his cure.

Because Friezeland is full of Bulls and Oxen, and plentiful in geese,
therefore they prepare their medicines of such things as may be most easily
gotten It is not to be doubted, that there is so great heate in goosedoonge,
for it burns the grass where it lies, and therefore infused in a fit
liquour, it helps to procure vtyne, the flowers in women, and second birth.
The afore-named purgations may be repeated often in the cure.

After-ward on other days, let him take in the morning the conserve of
Scorby grass, or germander mingled together, or severally, to the which ad a
borrage, buglosse, or enula campana root preserved. Here must be noted, that
al sharpe plants which have force to cut and make thin corrupt matter, do
help to drive away this malady, least any man should imagine that either of
their hoate substance, or by secrete property only these herbs were so
effectual, (whereof vvee have spoken before, and which are so familiarly
known, I mean Scorby grass, vvater-cresses, brooke lyme) to expel this
disease. Of this sort (beside the aforenamed) are taragon, scordiu,
stone-croppe, all herbs appropriate to the spleen, opening roots, hot
seeds, bay berries, juniper berries, and other of this sort. Annoynt the sides,
the left with this, or the like. Take oil of capars one ounce, the ointment
of bryonie against the spleen half an ounce, mingle them. Anoint the right
side with the oil of wormwood, wherein, if need so require, you may sees
the juice of the former herbs.

In the mean time let the loose stinking gummes be washed with a
decoction made of the leaves and bark of barberies, Scorby grass, water and
vvinter-cresses, red roses unripe, prepared in water, in which iron or
steel hath been quenched, to which being strained, you may put a little
allome. In regard of the taste and cleansing, mingle with it either
vnclarified honey, or honey of roses, or for the surer preservation and
strengthening of the gums, delaying of heate conserve of mulberies. To this
purpose are profitable the leaves of the wild olive strained with plantaine
water, and the bark of the sloe tree.

Another water to wash the mouth, may be thus made. Take a pound of water,
salt, and allom, of each two drammes, boyle them together. Also take the
citron pylle, sumach, the citron flowers, of each half an ounce, an ounce of
raisyns, sees them in four pound of rayne-vvater till half be consumed, and
when the liquor is strained, put to it two ounces of honey of Roses, two
drammes of allome.

Let the loose and bloody gummes be rubbed with salt burned, vvherewith the
povvder of pomegranate flowers is mingled, or the ashes of Vyne-braunches,
burned with oyster-shelles or muskle-shelles. In the mean while suck and
spit forth the bloody matter. After wash the gummes vvyth a decoction of
radicum bistortae, which is in strength not inferior to britannica, press out
the juice of it, as you were taught to do in your crosses, and mingling with
it the double quantitye of conserve of Mul-berryes, annoynt the teeth. Or take
the juice of bistort, and honey of roses, of each three ounces, sees them
until the juice be spent, put thereto a dram of allome, make of it a
liniment. Use this confection.

Take of bistortae s salt i. vvyth conserve of mul-berries, make a conserve of
them together. You may make the like of allome, pellitorye of Spain, and not
clarified honey mingled together, adding to them a little sage and olibanum
made in powder.

The Woman of whom I spake before used this vvashing water, of byssope,
betonye, Ambrosia, roots of enula campana sodden in water, putting to it when
it was strained in quantity two pound, half an ounce of allome, seething it
with honey, and taking off the scum. The Fryzians make an other water of two
pound of ale vyneger, half an ounce of bole armoniake, ii. drams of allom,
iii. ounces of honey, boiling all together. The Saxones for the most part put
to it sauin. If the rotten svvelling of the gummes grow too rank, cut some
part away with your scissors, and consume the rest with vnguentum Aegyptiacum,
or burnt allome mixed with honey of roses, or staye it with oleum vitrieli.
This water excells against their rottenness, as also against all pestilent
ulcers, if vvetting a sponge in it you rub your gums. Take of Arsenicum
prepared a scruples, burnt allom, ii. s, beat them to powder, boyle them in a
pound of plantayne water, by the space of an hour in a double vessel. The
spots in the legs must be washed, or as vvee use to speak, fomented
with a decoction of Iunyper berries lightly bruised, water-cresses,
winter-cresses, Scorby grass, vvhere-vnto you may add if you will, camomill
flowers, motherwort, balm, wormwood, rosemary, maioram, time, hyssope, and like
herbs to be sodden in the water. If you wring out of it warm sponges, and
apply them to the lower parts of the legs round about, you shall draw out
such spots as lye hidden under the skin, that the manifest signs of the
Scorbye may seem to flourish. Also annoynt them with this.

Take two pound and an half of May butter, six drammes of iunyper-berryes
bruised, two ounces of pure vvyne, sees them in an earthen pot, until the
vvyne be consumed, strain it, and annoynte the legs evening and morning.

Or make an ointment with cream gathered from the milk, wherein have been
sodden water and garden-cresses, brooke-lyme, vvorme vvoode, iunyper-berryes
bruised. Dyppe clothes therein, and lay them to the legs. There is
consideration to be had of heate, that such herbs as are over hoate may be
diminished, and brooke-lyme increased, and that the decoction be prepared in
milk without butter. The curdes of milk, wherein is no butter, may be alone
applied, or the cheese nevvly made.

In harde tumours and svvellinges, lay to it a Cataplasme of milk, wherein
hath been sodden great comphrey, vvorme-woode, both sorts of selandine,
bryonie roots, bread crumbs, bean or barley flower, or lupines, as the
quality and state of the diseased part doth require. If the sinevves,
ligamentes, and tendons have sucked into them great plenty of this gross
heavy matter, and are thereby stiff, and unfit to move, either before the
fomentation, or when there is none, let them be anointed with goose or
ducks grease.

If there be ulcers in the legs, things that are to be applied, must be
altered as the condition of the ulcer requires: to cleanse it, prepare an
ointment or liniment of Scorby grass, parsely, wormwood, stamped and
strained, and with sufficient honey brought by seething to an huguenot, to which
(if the filthines do so require) you may ad a very little powder of
aristologiarotunda, or burnt allome, or praecipitat. In this case the plaster
named diacalcite^s, or diapalma, which may be melted with oil of roses is
of great virtue, and the sooner to bring it to close up, the plaster de
minio, or vngu^ntum de rutia, or some of such nature is to be applied.

An Addition.
FOrasmuch as amongst the causes of this disease, unwholesome water is not the
least. I have of purpose adjoined the discommodities that grow hereby for the
fuller declaration of this matter out of Hippocrates his book, entitled De
Aere, aquis, l^cis, that is, of the air, vvaters, and region wherein men do
live, in which he writes in this manner. The vvaters which are frozen
cold, and troubled, thorough snow and ye, are full of slime and filthines.
They which drink of them, have great splenes and swelled, and their bellies
are harde, slender, and hoate, their shoulders, neck, and face, are thynne and
small. For their flesh wastes into the spleen, vvhere-vppon they become lean.
Such cannot but eat and drink much: and since they have both their higher and
lower belly exceedingly hoate, it is requisite they should have stronger
medicines. Therefore this disease is familiar unto them in vvynter and summer.
They are also subject to many and incurable dropsies. For summer brings
forth many flixes laskes and quartaine fevers. And by lunge continuance
these diseases lead them into dropsies, and kill them.

These are the diseases of Summer: but winter causes in young men inflammation
of the lunges, and maddenesse, in old men hot fevers, because they are bound
in their bellies: but women are svvollen, and stuffed vvyth fleume, they
conceive hardly, bring forth painfully: their children are great and
svvollen, and thorovve their ill nourishment, they become deformed, and pine
away. They are not sufficiently purged after their travail.

Ruptures are incident to children, and svvollen veins called varices, and
ulcers in the legs unto men.

Wherefore it cannot be that such should live long, but before their time
they seem old. Moreover women think they have conceived, but when the time
of their deliverance is now present, that burden and fullness vanishes
avvaye. This proceeds from water vvhere-vvith the vvombe is troubled. And
truly I suppose these vvaters to be utterly hurtful.

He means marrise and fennye water, which stands in pooles and ditches,
whereof he had spoken a little before. And whereas they sees their herbs
in milk, and the patients drink the juice of them, when they are strained
with good success, I think it falls out rather in regard of the vvhey,
then in respect of the whole substance of the milk, vvhylest the butter and
curdes of it doth stick and remain in the linen cloth, or strainer thorovve
which the juice is pressed, and if any of it run thorovve, that delay
the sharpness of the juice by his hoate and fat quality. This vvheye is in
virtue like unto the thynnest part of the blood which is the urine, and
therefore it is sharpe, hot, thin, clensing, opening, moving urine, and most
profitable to the abandoning of this disease by the testimony of old writers.
For Aetius Amidenus writes thus out of Galen in his second Book and 94
chapter. Every one uses stronger wheye to those bodies and diseases which have
need of stronger remedies specially in old blisters and wheales, and blew
swellings in the veins, and in all corrupt humours which pierce thorough the
skin, as leprosy, and such like, also in old untamed ulcers, in running
soars of the head: Moreover in continually watering eyes, in scabs on the
eye-liddes, in spots on the face, yea in the continual course of fevers, and
in them which from a former sickness fall into a dropsy. Mesues gave the first
place to that whey, which is separated from goats milk, then next to wheye of
sheep milk, saying thus: the watery part of milk is fit matter wherein any
thing may be steeped and soaked, and it is of it self a safe medicine without
danger. That is esteemed best which is gathered from the milk of black goats
feeding in good pastures which have lately brought forth their young. It is
hot and dry perfitely in the first degree and unto the second. Moreover it
hath virtue to make thin, to vvashe away, to cleanse, and to purge the belly
gently thorough the saltnes which is in it. It expels both black and
yeallovv choler begotten of dried and burnt humours, whereby it is marvelous
profitable to mad and melancholic persons. It is available in the stopping
of the intrels, and helps the diseases that grow from thence, as dropsies,
yeallovv and black Iaundies. It may be conveniently given in Agues
proceeding from choler, and in the stoppings of the vessels and bovvells. It
serves also in diseases proceeding from burnt choleric humours which arise
out of the skin, wherefore it is fitly and agreeably used in tettars,
messels, scuruines, morphevve, leprosy.

CHAP. I. Of the nature and diverse kinds of Cancers or Cankers.
A Cancer or Cancker is an hard, unequal, round tumor, with svvelling edges,
loathsome to beeholde, blakcker then an inflammation, but less heate, somewhat
blew resisting greatly when it is pressed, having Veins svvollen round
about with melancholic blood, standing forth like the feet of the
Crabfishe, yet rather reached forth, then stretched by inflammation, Gal in his
book of tumors. Aegineta 6. book. chap. 45
because the humour which is as it were the the mother of this tumor, is
over groasse to fall out of the vessels into the flesh adjoining.

Tagault. I. book.
Neither appear the veins red as they are seen in an inflammation, but
black, resembling the colour of the noisome humour. In the beginning this
tumor is obscure and hardly known, not unlike chich peas or a bean growing
suddenly* at the first with small pain, but in process of time intolerably
tormenting the Patient continually, afterward having an outward pricking heate
which sometime brings astonishment: sometimes it is painful and grievous
if it be handled sometime not.

Aetius 16. book. chap. 44.

Aegineta 4. book chap 26 Tagault 1. book.


THis disease borrowed the name of the crabfish which it represents many
ways: First of all, the veins which compass this malady are stretched forth
like the feet of a crabfishe: Secondly as the crabfishe is hardly pulled away
from the place where it hath catched hold with the cleys, so is it in this
disease: Moreover it resembles the crab in blackenes, roughnes, and hardness:
and to be short, it stands forth like it, it yealdeth not when it is
touched, it will scarce endure handling. There are two differences of cancers,
one is not vlcerate, commonly named an Aposteme, and called almost of all
antiquitye an hidden cancer, the other is ulcerated. Again, one possesses the
superficial or uppermost parts, Aetius book 16 chap 44. Aegin book. 6.45.

Gal. in his book of unnatural tumors.


the other lies hid within more secrete, as in the bowels, matrice,
fundament, roof of the mouth. This kind is specially called the secrete cancer
by Philoxenus whom I follow. Also, some cancers are new, some old, some little
some great, some gentle, some stubborn: all which kinds we will in order
prosecute hereafter.

THe cause of this disease is black choler remaining in the place, Gal. in his
book of unnatural tumors:

In his 2 book to Glauc^ Aeginet. 4. book. ch. 26. Guido. 2. book. Tagault.
1.1. book.


which if it be not boiling heate, but only somewhat sharpe then it
ingenpreth a cancer without vlceration: but if it be sharpe and malignant it
brings forth an ulcerated cancer, even as when it is exceeding sharpe it
procures a carbuncle. It happens in many parts of the body, as in the
face, eyes, ears, but especially in such, which are more loose, spungye, full
of kernels, Gal 2 book to Glauc.
receiving naturally the grossest matter of black choler, as ate the
nostrells, lips, and breasts. Aegineta. 6.45. ^ Tagault. 1.
But it is most usually incident to the matrice and breasts in women.

They are undoubtedly subject to this disease whose constitution is
melancholic, Aetius 16.44.
or which use a melancholic diet, or inhabit a melancholic place, Guido.
but women more often then men especially such as have large fleshy breasts,
or too hoate a liver, or a weak spleane which is not able to draw those
melancholic dreggs, or which want the usual course of their flowers or
Emroodes: they (I say) are subject hereunto, which have either all or some of
these things.

CHAP. 2. The Cure of the Cancer in general.
EVery Cancer almost is uncurable, Guido. 2. Tagault 1.
or hardly cured, since it is indeed a particular and worst kind of Leprosy.
It is therefore very expedient speedely, even in the beginning to meet with
this disease, before it have taken root. For that which is very great (as you
shall hear hereafter) is not removed with that incision, most commonly it
remains uncurable, because this juice being exceeding thick, obstinately
resists all medicines, whether they beat back or disperse, or purge the
humour. The part must be gently handled, Aetius 16.46.
not receiving any trouble from the things which are applied. Plasters and
seareclothes which are much wrought must be eschevved, because their hardness
presses and grieves the part. There must be gende, and sweet ointments,
whereof I will set down many hereafter. Aetius. 16.4^
The belly must be kept soluble with fit nourishment, and either aloes or
hier a picra, or rhubarb, or cassia, Preseruatiues against poison must be daily
used, as treacle, or mithridate, or these things which are more simple, to
vvit^ to drink the blood of a goose or duck nevvly killed, or to drink one or
two spoonefulls of claper which is called trifolium bituminosum in three or
four spoonefuls of water: or an ounce, or a dram of wild rue, or a dram
of peniroyall sodden with Mallovves: or the broth of Creuisses given with
Asses milk by the space of five days, and the crabs in like sort eaten:
this is marvelous profitable. If this order be continued 7. days the cancers
in the breasts become gentle, and then with easier medicines health may be
recovered.

CHAP. 3. Of the new Cancer, not secret, but superficial, that is to say:
consisting in the outward parts, and not ulcerated, which Galen sometime
calls the hidden Cancer.
Galen. 2. to Glauco and Alakia.
GAlen did often cure the new, or green cancer, especially if the
melancholic blood were not very thick, but gave place to often used
purgations, until the part returned to the natural temperature.

vnfined, red wines, Vinegar: brannye bread, lentills, colovvorts, old and
corrupt cheese, the flesh of old beasts, or flesh log powdered. bief, goat,
hart, hare, vvalnuttes, too much abstinence, watching, immoderate labour
especially in the heate, sorrows, cares. He must use barley cream,
mallovves, spinach, Gal. 2. to Glauco. Aegineta. 4.26.
lettuce, sorrel, porcelaine, endiue, hopps, violettes, buglosse, gourdes,
cucumers, vvhey mutton, kidd, veale, all kinds of birds, except those that
live in marshes fishes living on rocks, rear eggs, white or claret wine not
strong.

Secondly let the party be let blood

Then let the flowers be provoked

Aftervvard let him be purged with

Consequently use the preseruatiues

Lastly local medicines must be applied to the affected part which may
strengthen it. The humour abiding in the diseased part is to be dealt with all,
either with repelling or digestiue medicines, yet so that neither of them do
much provoke nature: In the beginning both before in the time of purging,
repelling medicines are to be used: after, reasonable purging repelling and
digestiues jointly together: but after full perfect purging only digestiues,
observing in all these great moderation, and avoiding biting medicines. In this
cause the juice of nightshade which is cold and repelling is most profitable
wherein a folded linen cloth is to be dipped, lay upon it soft vvooll, which
at sundry times is to be sprinkled with that juice. Or use a medicin of
pompholygos which is of force to beat back, is also profitable in ulcerated
canckers, or that which is made of bras oate commonly called chalciteos which
hath property to discuss, or else a medicin made of litharge, white lead beat
together in the sun in a leaden mortar, with a leaden pestill with oil of
Roses, until the ointmet be in colour like the lead. This also repells and
digests. Take of burnt lead washed, pompholygos, frankincense, of each ij s
of sea wormwood. s. oil of Roses iij. wax. vj. and so much of the juice of
nightshade as will bring them to the form of an ointment, you must beware of
a cataplasme made of bread, comfrey, Aetius 16 49.
least the greatness of it may hurt and grieve the part. This plaster in the
beginning delay pain, digests, and strengthens. Take roses, melilot,
poppy-seedes, first bruise them, then sees the in wine, putting to the the
yolks of eggs, bring them to a perfect form or a plaster made of holihocke
alone, or mingled with bread is fit to digest, an other which repells
digests and assvvageth pain is this. Take plantine the heads and seeds of
poppy, fleaseed, of each equally beat altogether without the fleaseed, and
then scarce them finely: with the fleaseede, and wine make a mucilage which
work with fat dates, then mingle them with other things which are dry
putting to the a little goose grease: this plaster may be safely applied
warm. Or if the nature of the disease do rather require it cold, then make
it thus.

Take the aforenamed plantaine, poppy, fleaseede beaten fine, and searced,
bring them to a form with the flesh of dates and a little bread, apply this
cold. A plaster made ex sen^ne crisimi cum aesipo mulsu being applied warm
dissolveth the Cancer.

This medicine following asswageth the pain of a malicious ulcer, which
being daily continued for a long time hath marvelous force to dissolve. First a
cataplasme made of ash leaves sodden in water until they be very soft,
aftervvard bruised and applied warm. Also of the same water wherein the
leaves were sodden is made a most excellent Fomentation. Afterward apply a
plaster of Planteine, or that which is called hicefion, or panaceon, which
is most gentle and easy to the sense.

Theodoricus diapompholygos preserves a cancer from vlceration, repells,
dries. Take oil of Roses, and vvaxe of each. ij. s the juice of the red
berries of nightshade. ij. white leaded washed. i. leaded burnt and washed,
tutia or pomtholygos of each s. franchinsence ij. Apollonius ointment for
cancers, or a scald head is this. Take oil of Roses.ix. or else half as much
put it into a leaden mortar, with a piece of leaded, stir it in the same
until it become thick, and black like unto the leaded, then beat severally
lytharge and white leaded of each one pound or an half, mingle them with
the oil and frame an ointmet. Paulus and Auicen make a plaster, Archigines a
povvder ex cancris fluuiatilibus cadmia.

But if every Cancer is naturally so rebellious, that it cannot be cured in the
beginning as it is plain by Galens confession, what shall be thought of that
which is old? It is therefore sufficient (if an old not vlcerate Cancer be
in the outward parts) to stay it from grovving greater, since there is no
hope of perfect Cure. Auicen would have it taken away by incision, if so be
it be not dangerous to the part where it is.

CHAP. 4. Of the great, old, rebellious, and ulcerated Cancker which is only
cured by manual operation.
FOr as much as the new cancer being a disease of his own proper nature so
evil, is not for the most part amongst the best practised Chyrurgions
found always to be curable, it seems not then a thing very much to be
marveled at, if the old and great canker be so rebellious, that it is not
tamed with the most strongest medicynes, no not with cutting and searing,
but rather is sometimes made far vvorse thereby.

Notwithstanding, since this only remedy remains to the perfect Cure
thereof, then if the Patient be so tormented that he crave the Surgeons
helping hand, and the cancer be in those parts which may be cut and
seared safely, to the bottom and roots of it, then (though happily it be
found exceeding great) yet is it to be cut away from the sound parts, and so
plucked up by the roots. I call the roots the Veins abounding with
melancholic blood stretched forth round about the place.

But although we grant this manner of Cure to be greatly commended of
Auicenne and Galen, yet because it is dangerous in a great and old Cancer,
vvee allovve not so rash proceeding. For that in such kind of incision, it is
many times much to be feared, that an excessive flux of blood may follovve
because there are large veins and Arteryes in the place: and in scaring of
them some noble part of the body thereunto adjoining is hazarded, and so both
ways the life of the party is in peril. Mine advise is rather to stay the
malady from growing both by the diet before set down, and also by gentle
medycines vvherewith many have continued until old age, vvythout further
violence offered to the disease. At the leastvvise if no other remedy at all
be thereby attained, this one good property thereby yet ensues, that by such
means it is kept clean from filthy matter.

To be short their gentle dealing vvyth this disease is more safe, and free
from slander: on the contrary, rough and sharpe medycines exasperate the
malady and hasten death.

For experience teaches, that after a cancer hath been thus healed, it hath
shortly after become more fierce not without danger, yea with loss of life.
Nevertheless some are not afraid to adventure this manner of Cure, but with
what success they see. But if cutting be requisite, there must purging go
before it, by which means whatsoever is hurtful and noisome may be removed
utterly. After the incision if there be flux of groasse blood a cauterye is to
be used to disperse and consume the rest of the matter, to strengthen the
member, to staye the flux of blood. This done, the Cure is to be finished
according to the order in other Ulcers.

CHAP, 5. Of the secrete Cancer in the Matrice, or such like place which
cannot receive incision.
Tagault 3.
A Secrete Cancer which is in a place where canne be neither incision made
nor cauerye applied, or being near to a principal part, or in a weak
body or fearful, and discouraged, or where after there Cure by cutting and
searing greater danger is suspected, and yet there is none other means of
Cure but by incysion, which yet is not safe must be thus handled.

You must staye it from further increase by good diet before set down, which
ought to be cold and moist because the hoate and dry liver engenders groasse
and melancholic blood also the party must beware of sharpe things, or
earing much. Then must follovve purging, and bloudletting at sundry times,
except the age of the party will not bear bloudletting. The flowers are to
be provoked in vvome, and the emroodes in such as have usually had them.

Aftervvard gentle medicines must be used, and not sharpe and vehement least
you stir up an hornet. Apply therefore those whereof mention is made before
to assvvage the pain, and strengthen the place, that no more humours flovve to
it Let them be cold and dry as the juice of nightshade, or in default of the
juice the stilled water leaded burnt and washed, vngnentum album vnguentum ex
lithargyro etplumbo vsto, medicamentum ex pompholyge chalcite. Camphyre water.
Plates of leaded, which hath great and incredible virtue against an vlcerate
Canker. Now these medycines assvvage the pains of Cancers: Mallovves, or
Holyhocke, stamped with Muscadell and oil of Roses: or a Cataplasme made of
dry figs, Melilot, Rue, Frankincense, Nape, beaten together dilligently
with oil of Roses: or Dates, sodden in wine with the yolks of Eggs and
husked barley, or Poppy, Coriander, and knotte-grasse sodden together.

Guido saith a piece of Scarlette, or the flesh of Chickens, or hens do
staye and mitigate the greediness of Cancers: or mans ordure with Anifeedes
burned in the fire, and finely made into povvder: or these following severally
applied, to wit: Scabious, or common Clauer, or mullein, or herb Robert.

CHAP. 6. Of the secrete and hidden Cancer.
IF you cure not this the Patient will live longer, if you do Cure it,
Aegineta. 6.45.
it, becomes vvorse, and the party will soon dye according to the saying
of Hippocrates in his sixth book Athoris. thyrtye eight. It is best not to Cure
secrete Cancers. For when they are cured, the parties die sooner, but being
uncured they live longer For as Galen in his Comentarye affirms. It hath bin
found by experience, that by cutting and fearing these Cancers have been made
vvorse, and have shortly procured death. Here therefore we must be content
with most gentle medycines.

CHAP. 7. Of the vlcerate Cancer,
I Will let pass, pain, hardness, svvelling, and other notes which this
kind hath in common with the not vlcerate Cancer.

It is an Ulcer, fretting unequal, filthy, with svvollen, harde knottye,
turned, high, hollovve, edges loathsome to behold, abounding with black
putrified matter, blew, sometime red and bloody from whence flovveth
continually a thin, vvaterish, black, yeallovve, stinking humour. It is named
malignant, and fierce of wild and fierce beasts. For it is a stubborn
disease made vvorse by healing and handling. It must be thus Cured. Tagault. 3.
First the black cholor must be purged, and other things observed whereof
mention is made in the Cure of the rebellious old Cancer. Then if the place
will suffer, Aetius 16 44. Aegmeta. 3.67
the whole body of it is to be cut away from the roots and the blood must
be suffered to issue out, yea the parts adjoining must be pressed, because
the blood is gross. Aftervvard the cure is like as in other ulcers. Otherwise
when the cancer is cut away, and the blood pressed out, the place must be
feared with an hot iron as some use to do. Or if the place will abide it,
first cut it, then fear it to the quick, and aftervvarde put upon it
cantharides beaten to povvder with allome, and oil of cypress, as some do
use. Moreover of vlcered cancers those only are cut seared, which are in the
uppermost part of the body, do so torment the party that he necessarily
requires the Surgeons hand, also may be cut away with their roots. Some
omitting cutting searing with hot iron, eat away the soar with consuming
medicines (which way I mislike) as with arsenicum siblimated, which medicin
Guido Theodoricus do marvelously commend as most safe excellent, defending the
parts adjoining when the causticke is applied with medicines resisting
inflammation flux of humours, with bole armoniack. In three days space the
effect of arsenicum will appear. After the removing of the arsenicum the pain
is to be assuaged, the falling away of the crust or eschar to be hastened,
when the cancer is taken away the ulcer which remains is to be cured after
the order of other ulcers. The signs that the cancer is quite gone are these,
good sound flesh, no filthy stink of matter in the place, no loathsome smell.
Archigines appoints this medicin for vlcered cancers. Aetius. 16.48.
Take litharge, new swines grease, white wax of each one pound, of good oil
eight pounds, xij yolks of eggs, it must be thus made. The lytharge must be
beaten with a little water, then power in a little oil and also mingle the
eggs, the swines grease having the skins taken away must be beaten in a
mortar, then mingle it with the wax, and when they are melted strain them.
After they are cold pour the rest of the oil by little little, beat the
thoroughly in a mortar, this ^one, and the rest being well prepared. This
medicin is to be applied like a linament in soft wool. If the ulcer be not
paineful put to ^ryreos, mirth Anstolochy of each. iii. this is also very
good for Cancers not vlcerate, this medicin following is good for vlcerate, and
not vlcerate cancers: take good wax, turpentine, Bulls foot, marrow of Hart, or
Calfe, oil of gourdes, oil of Roses, new goose-grease, pure honey,
frankincense diphrigis of each equally, aesipi thrice as much, this is more
gentle without frankincense, but with it, it doth more discuss and ripen and
is more agreeable to not vlcerate Cancers.

An other gentle medicin to delay pain in malignant ulcers is mentioned by
Theodorus, take the ashes of cypress washed, and dried, white lead burnt and
washed, juice of roses of each s. frame it and use it with oil of roses: this
medicine following is of wonderful force, to root out a malicious gnawing and
fretting cancer. Take of coriars sumach 3. pintes. pillul cupressi. iij. vripe
galls, cassia of each a j s. beat them together, then steep them in 5.
pintes of old red wine, and after boyle them continually stirring them with a
cypress slice, till the third part be consumed: this done strain them forth,
cast away the dross, but sees the juice till it be of consistence like to
honey, so keep it in a glass. This is to be applied alone to the cancer, but if
it wax thick, you may put to it a little wine. If it be applied to the cancer
in the nature, it must be often washed in wine. If it be dissolved in asses
milk it asswageth pain, and is profitable for all eating ulcers without
inflammation. It hath property to dry filthy running ears, and loose
consumed gummes, and all ulcers will hardly be cycatryzed. For howe should
gentle ulcers resist it, since fierce and untamed yield to it. I Textor did thus
prepare it. R. rhu. lib. ij. pillul. cupress. lib. s. gallar. immaturar.
cassiae ana ij. vini astringetis lib. viij. In the declining of it, treacle
washed in milk oil of Roses in soft woll is to be applied to the ulcer. And
it may be drunk with wine very profitable against this disease, as other
counterpoisons and preseruatiues used against the stinging of beasts. I think
it is not meet to close up a cancer until all the hardness be consumed by
ointmentes and cearceclothes. But to say the truth touching an vlcerate cancer,
whether it be so by nature, or otherwise, seeing it refuses gentle medicines,
yea scarcely at any time abides them, and is not to be cured, but with strong
medicines: which nevertheless make it worse more fretting, is not to be deemed
incurable? Certes if any such be cured, it lies not deep but only is in
the uppermost parts, from whence it may be removed by incision, or searing,
if the part will suffer it, and the roots of it may be pulled vppes and the
grief of the patient causes this extremity to be adventured. Aetius in his
sixteenth Book and forty four Chapiter saith thus: An vlcerate Cancer
gnaws continually, and digs deep vvythout staye, it sends forth a thyn
corrupt matter, more vile then the poison of any wild beast, most abominable
both for abundance and smell, and the payne is continually pricking. Tagaultius
with many others saith thus: An vlcerate cancer, whether of it own nature, or
by medicines applied, is worst of all others, and utterly refuses all sound
cure. For whereas it needs sharpe biting medicines to cure it perfectly, by
these it becomes vvorse. I have said heretofore, that I did utterly mislike
burning medicines, commonly called caustickes and ruptories, as hurtful to be
used to any kind of cancer, which is near to the heart, of which sort is
that which is in the breast, because they procure extreme pains, vvatching,
abstinence, agues: and this stinking sink being once raked, there follow
more cruel torments, and the strength decaying by little and little, at the
last the whole body languishes and consumes.

CHAP. 7. Of the cancer in the head, neck, shoulders, breast, arme-holes,
flank.
ALl these are desperate and incurable. For besides that they cannot be cut
away, it is to be feared least the party dye in the Surgeons hands by too
much effusion of blood. That cancer which is in the top of the teat, may be
cured by putting away that part. A cancer not vlcerate in the breast is an
exceeding great swelling, not yielding when it is touched, unequal, cruel,
like a savage beast, piercing and sticking fast within. stretching his roots
very broad, bound as it were vvyth veins swelling like varix round about:
the colour is ashye, some-what declining to purple, of a dark blew, soft to the
sight, but in feeling most harde, having pricking pain every where so largely
stretched, that by consent thereof it hath procured pestilent buboes in the
arme-holes, which have reached unto the shoulders.

Aetius in his 16. book, and 46. chap. sets down out of Leomidas, how a
Surgeon is to deal in curing a cancer in a woman's breast Let the patient lye on
her back, and first cut the sound part of the breast, presently after the
incision sear it, to procure a crust upon it, which will stay the flux of
blood: Not long after make incision again to the bottom of the breast, with
often scarifiyng, then also scare it Both cutting searing must be often used.
After all is cut away, sear the parts until they be dried. For the first
searing is to staye blood, the latter to abolish the relics of the disease.
In the apostemous swelling of the breast, which threatens a cacer to ensue,
cutting without searing to the soud part will suffice, when there is no danger
of great issue of blood. After the incisio, linamets must be applied to bring
it to suppuration, then must a dry cure be continued as the manner of ulcers
requires. When there is searing with incision, these things are to be
applied immediately: a cataplasm of plantain, or knot grass, or sesamine finely
beaten, putting sometimes to them crumbs of bread. Lay upon the cataplasme a
linen cloth wet in water, which only remedy for the most part is
sufficient. Also milk mingled with honey, applied like a liniment, removes
the crust. Her diet must be such, which may be safe from cold when the ulcer
is cleansed, least any convulsion ensue: Therefore the patient must be kept in
a warm house.

On the second or third day unloose the medicine, and wash the place with
warm water, then make an ointment of lentils with a little honey, and upon it
lay a vine leaf or lettyce, which you must continue until the crust fall away.
After-vvard your linimentes must be made of women or asses milk, wherewith
oil of roses is mingled. Let your lynnen cloth be single, and very fine,
which must be vvette in the milk. Beware of sharpe and fattye medicines, both
which recall this disease. Many cloths are grievous to the sore. When you
would bring it to suppuration, let your oil be most, when to cleansing, let
your milk more abound.

If extremity of pain do so require, apply melilot with oil of roses and
water, or woman's milk above the cataplasme. If there be need of dry medicines
to close up the ulcer, the ashes of pompholygos washed and dried, or cadmia
thrice burned and quenched in oil of roses, afterward finely beaten, must be
applied dry. Her diet mus^ ^ee this: In the time of the cure, she must
refrain from wine, meates which are hardly digested, and drink cold water.
While the ulcer is in closing, the whole body must be strengthened, and
nourished with good juice, to which purpose serve commendable meates, and
exercise, and other meet means.

CHAP. 8. Of the Cancer in the matrice.
A Not vlcerate Cancer in the matrice, Aegineta 3. book.
is a tumor in the entrance of the same, as appears in the vlcerate cancer
before mentioned. For it is needless to repeat the same thing often. The
signs are great pain in the flank, in the bottom of the belly and loins:
if it be handled, or many medicines applied, it rages more. The other signs
both of the vlcerate and not vlcerate cancer in the matrice, must be learned
from the former treatise. Since this affect of the matrice by the judgment of
Hippocrates cannot be removed, it remains to ease it on^ly by all means of
fumes, suppositors cataplasmes, such like. A cataplasm^ much assuaging it, may
be made o^ mallows, or holyhocke sodden in water honey, made smooth with oil
of roses, fenygreeke or linseed, or dates sodden in wine: or else a seare-cloth
of roses or mirtilles, or baulm, or woman's milk, or only oil of roses dropped
into the place. In like manner may be used oil of violets, or sweet almondes,
or lineseed, either by themselves, or with goose grease or capons grease. Also
a mucilage of lineseed, holyhocke, or rasyns, or a decoction of lillies. An
excellent assuaging suppositorie is made of saffron, woman's milk, juice of
poppy, capons greale, or the oil in the wool of sheep called aesypum. If the
ulcer be very hoate, or bloody, drop into it the juice of plantaine, or knot
grasle, or nightshade warm, putting to it sometime milk, sometime a grain of
frankincense: which iuices, the like (as Galen saith in his 9. book of
simples) are to be beaten in the sun along time together in a leaden mortar,
with a leaden pestill, putting unto them, if you will, oil of roses, or
milk, or both. And this kind of medicine is marvelous profitable against al
kinds of cancers. This plaster folovving is most effectual against the
cancer or other maladies in the fundament. Take Litharge vj. Frankincense,
aesip. new swines grease, fresh butter, vvaxe, of each ij. oil of roses
iiij. beat the Lytharge with the juice of garden cichotye, and mingle it
with the rest melted together, or you may make it more easy gentle,
especially for cancers in the breast. Take saffron, juice of white poppy,
frankincense, of each j Lytharge lead burnt and washed, of each ij of white
lead prepared s. of white vvaxe ij. goose grease, fresh butter of each iij.
of good oil of roses iiij beat the dry things with juice of night shade, and
mingle them with the other when they are melted.

Sic textor telam contexuit.

FINIS.

