THE French Chirurgerye, or all the manualle operations of Chirurgerye, with
divers, sundry Figures, and amongst the rest, certain nuefovvnde
Instruments, very necessary to all the operationes of Chirurgerye.

Through Iaqves Gvillemeau, of Orleans ordinary Chirurgiane to the King, and
sworn in the City of Paris.

And now truly translated out of Dutch into English by A.M.

IMPRINTED At Dort by Isaac Canin. M.D.xcvij.





TO THE MOST HIGH, MIGHTY, ROYalle, and Victoriouse Princess, the most
Christiane, and Virtuose defendresse, of the sincere, true Christiane Religione
LADY ELISABETH By the grace of God, Queen of Englande, France, and Irelande.
c.
MOst graciouse Queen, your Royalle Mtye. is not ignorant (I trust) of the
great services, which through, the hands, of expert Chyrurgians,
operatinge on Mans body, are offerede as sweet smelling sacrifices, up into
the nostrells, of the omnipotet, Longevalle Emperioure of the Caelestialle
influences. Whereof also all renoumnede, providente Caesaristes, have
dilligently providede, and furnishede themselves, when as they are wounded,
by their means, and aid (next unto God) to be curede, and have of there
health restauratione. I could not therefore (being also incitatede, and
councelede thereunto by divers and sundry of my friends, vvellvvillers) omit
this boocke, composede by the most expert, and very learnede Chyrurgiane Mr.
Iaques Guillemeau, addictede Chyrurgian to the King of France, of the which
(without doubt) the French natione, do reap great service, and commodity
thereof, and therefore I have for the service and utility of your Renoumnede
Majesties subjects, poeple, and also to the commodity of our contrye (being
vnitede in the bond of amity together) with all expeditione possible for me
causede it to be translatede both into English, and Lovvdutch because that all
younger, and junior Chyrurgians, might heerin behold, and view, (as in a
resplendente Lookinge-glasse) the most part, and principalle Instruments of
Chyrurgerye also with a very excellent methode, and doctrine, for all the
especialle operations, which a Chyrurgiane (or any other man being in
necessity) other by land, or by water, might have any use for. And seeing
that there is no King, nor Prince on earth, which with such fervent desire,
and fidelity endeavours by all means possible, to maytayne, and protecte,
the health and wealth, both of body and soul of their subjects, and
poeple, as your (most Illustriouse Mtye.) doth for your peculiar inhabitants,
being of God thereunto constitutede, and ordaynede. The excellence of this
boocke, hath therefore, incitatede, as it vveare copellede me to use this
audacitye (in sign of gratitude, for so many, innumerable benefits, which
next after God, of your Royal Mtye. through your continualle aid,
opitulatione we reap) humblelye to present, and dedicate this very
necessary boocke, unto your most Magnificent Mtye. firmelye trusting,
assuredly hoping, that your renoumnede Mtyes. subjects, not only within,
but also far without your Mtyes. Realms, dominiones, shall heerebye be
greatly aydede, and thereof also reap great commodity. I have effected this
vvorcke, partly to demonstrate the sincere love, affection wherewith
(through the good acqvayntance of your Mtyes. Gentlemen, Capitaynes, and
valiant Sovldiours, which your most Royal Mtye. hath vouchsafede so many
years to send us) I affect your Mtye. as also to cause all men together with
me gratefully to acknowledge, the ineffable mercy of God, which hath
imbuede, and adorned your renoumnede Mtye. with so many noble, vvorthye, and
excellent virtues, and very miraculously hath defendede, and protected, your
Grace, against all the sly, and vvylye practises of your Majesties enemies, by
this means to continue, and by your hands to protecte, not only your
dominion, and other nations, your neightvours and vnitede subjects (amongst
the which we account our selves, most bounden to your Mtye.). But also heerby
to cause the florishinge of all spiritual, corporalle arts in the midst of
your Realm, and Kingdom. Amongst which, the Art, and Science of Surgery
is esteemede, accoumptede (as the first, and most vvorthieste, and necessary
part of Physic) whereof I here present your Mtye. one of the most
exquisite, and perpolite boockes touching, and concerning the same. Most
humbly in treating your Mtye. that it would vouchsafe your Highness not to
miscontrue this my temeritye, but take, and construe my audacitye, which I
have in this my dedicatione used, to no other end, then that with all my
heart, and mind I endevoure to gratify your most renoumnede Mtye. be at the
command according to my bounden duty) of your most Royal Mtyes. subjects,
as much as is possible for me. Thus fearing least I might be some
interruptione, hinderance unto your Highness, I heervvith, commit your Royal
Mtye. into the divine protectione, and hands of the omnipotent King, and
Father of Heaven, whom incessantly I pray, to give ominouse, fortunate event
to your divine attempts, to the furtherance of his holy vvorde, and reformede
church, being congregatede together under the shaddovve of your Highness
vvinges.

Your Mtyes most humble, vvellvvillinge subject, who in sign of gratitude
addicteth himself vvholye to the service of your Highness and your subjects.
Maximiliane Bouman Surgeon at Dort.

TO THE KING
MAn being allianced, both with Heaven, and earth, is through his corporal
necessities constrained, to conterate, and spend the best time of his Life, in
Sleep, repose: notwithstanding being resuscitated, erected out of a
profound, deep somniation, through the best part of himself, which is his
Soul, he pursues, only and favours very soberly, the most vile and
abiecte things, the concupiscence, and appetite whereof, he communicates, and
participate the, with brute, and irrationalle beasts. For man is not only
this mask or vizard, and this figurated and articulated Massa in certain
members, which with our eyes we discover and behoulde, with our fingers we
may touche and sensibly feel: but is rather, the virtue, and internalle for
me, which effectuateth life in him, vigour, agilitye, and temperature, the same
being as it vveare, a radiant beam a little sparckle, and parcel, of the
Divinitye, transmitted, and descended out of the most gloriouse Empire of
Heaven, to effectuate, and bring to pass in this wretched world, in our
body, a short, and brief ligatione: For who is there which doubts, that
the Soul, remembringe, and calling to mind her first originalle, would not
address, and endevoure her self to learn, yea and if it vveare possible to
relerne, all those things, which be honourable unto her Creator, might also be
profitable to all other creatures? for this cause it is, vvhye we have not our
countenances declined towards the earth as the brute beasts, but have them
elevated towards Heaven, because through such contemplacione, and by reading
of the true book of life, we might draw therout, and practice on the ordre,
and imitate, the constance which the celestial corps, do observe, and one
their perpetualle, and profitable agitatione thereof. Let us therefore consider
on the Sun, which is as it vveare a Prince, and moderatoure of all other
celestial constellations: what doth she othervvyse effect through her
environing round of the earth, then light us, calefye, and warm us, vivisye,
administre life unto us? but what commodity, and profit is it unto us to
search the sun on high have we not the earth it self which with our
feet we inculcate, and tread one, and accuse the same to be brute,
insensible, doth she refuse, to receave, and conceave, and again
continually, and without cessation superfluouslye procreate, and liberally
impart unto us, all that which is necessary, unto our vesture aliment, and
nurture? It vveare also indeed great shame, perfidiousnes, and execrable
disloyaltye, and treason for us, whom God hath adorned with so livelye,
vigorouse, and fruitful a spirit, that as all things which are inanimate,
doc travayle, and labour for our proffite, we should show our selves
stupidouse, and involuntary to help the one the other in all things possible
and advaunce them: for as the wise, and sage men heretofore have said, that
even as all the mundayne, and terrestrialle things, are created for man, and
his use, in like sort also are men created for God, and the one man for the
other. This consideratio most illustriouse, mighty King, hath urged, and
impelled me, after that I next unto your majesty, have discharged my duty, and
function, which I was ovvinge unto your Highness, and that especially in
curing of my Lord, the Earl, of Montpensier and my Lords of Buhy, of
Montigny, to peruse, revolve certain rescriptiones, and memorialles, which I
had compiled, and collected together, when I served the deceased King, as
well touching the manual operations, as also the comparisone, and conference
of the ancient instruments of Chyrurgerye, with the nue inventede, because
through the discourse rehearsal of the same, and by the discriptione and
defiguratione of the foresayed instruments, to demonstrate, what commodity
we might hope, and reap out of the one more then out of the other: All
which, having according to my possibillirye, as much as this pitiful time
would permit allovve of finished, I have embouldened myself, to consecrate,
and dedicate the same unto your most renoumned Majesty: whom supliantlye
with all humillity I desire, request, and entreat, benignly to receave it,
as a gift, or present, which is not disagreeing unto the present time, nether
will be discommodiouse to your highness. For because this Kingdom of France,
is blinded with rage, error, through the fatalle censure of the most fearful
God, doth ruinate it self, into his own spoil, of what art I pray (saying
that all other arts do decrease, under this fear of wars) might it rather
implore comfort secourse, the of Physic or Chyrurgerye? And what is more
Royalle, more magnificall heer on earth, yea and more divine, then to recreate
the afflicted, to relevate, consort the depressed, humbled, and to restore
health to all men, without which all dulcor, pleasantnes of our life is
nothing else then amaritude, and Gaul? Wherefore most magnificent, and
renoumned King, permit^ pray and humbly entreat your highness, that under
your Heroical name, this Pamphlet may be published, because through the same,
as alsoe through your most illustriouse acts, of the which the posterity,
perpetually shall not be silent, may be revealed, and known, how fain your
Highness saw this poor Kingedome of France flourish again: which now
seems to respire, and in short time exsperateth to have an ominouse and
happy end of her miseries, and calamityes, through the prudence wherewith
your Majestic valour, and vigilant valiance is accompaniede, and
associated. From Paris, the 15. of September, 1594.

Your most humble, and most obedient subject, and servitoure GVILLEMEAV.

The Epistle to the benevolent Reader.
THere is a common saying, is now taken for a common proverb: that all
things have their time, their place, and their sayson: by which occasion
divers, sundry interprises, which indeed of themselves are good, do leese
their grace, and decorum, only because in their condecent time they vveare
not practised, put in ur. But it is not so with the vtilitye, which the
common wealth expects, through our industry, principally, especially,
through the studies of good arts: such fruits are never importune, nether at
any time out of season, nether abortive: but are at all times very vvellcome,
profitable, on what time soever, on what manner, or of whom they might be
brought: In which fact, the maxim, or proverb may very truly be spoken of
Maximo Fabio, vvhoe said, that all intentions, which to the publiqve profit
of the commonevvealthe vveare assayede, intended is allvvayes well hopede of,
to have a good evente, is esteemede to be a happy intent, or praemeditatione:
And contrarily those are esteemede infeliciouse, unfortunate, are of a
funestalle, and sorrowful event, which are intendede, and attendede, unto
the damage of the commone vvealthe.

Wherefore I need not doubt, of that which I praetende to maintain, and
publish into light, shall of any one vvhatsoever, be taken in bad part,
because I have conceavede, and publishede the same in time of jars, and
wars: For what time might I have elected more convenient, propre, more
profitable to meditate one this Chyrurgerye, which compraehendeth her
operatione, propre Instruments, then at this time, France being in all
qvarters, in al parts, armed, in vveapons? animated against her own
entralles, we having our own minds exvlcerated as it vveare, and hardened
the one against the other, by which occasion we to our great grief, and
sorrow, must behoulde, at all hours, so many poor wounded, mutilatede
persons, their corps being vvouded through the rage, and malevolence of their
foes, on the which we are constrained to employ our hands, instruments to
reduce again the same to their former, and accustomed health again? Or what
might they othervvyse hope, and expect of me, then that which is according,
and agreinge unto my vocatione, calling* For as the Poet says* The
Neptunist of winds, of storms, and of tempest
Discoursinnge on the shore, to his mates can talk best;
The Cerialist, of Oxen, Horse, and Plowes
The cruel Martialist, of wounds, and of his blows.


Therefore having seen, and also with my own hands practised the space of
tvventye years the operation of Chyrurgerye, in most of the famous, renoumned
Cities, of France, the Lovve Countries, as well one great, as small
persons, and that with such diligence, and methode, that I couplinge, and
comparinge, the use of the ancient Chyrurgians, with the practice of the
modern, and latter Chyrurgians, I then endeavoured my self, as much as the
disease, the Patient also would permit me, to temperate, the rigoure, and
severitye of the first Operatours, or Chyrurgians, through the supple, and
gentle or sweet dexteritye of those which followed, to assimilate the the
one with the other, supplyinge in the counterchang, of that which was
vvantinge in the one, through the dexteritye, and industriouse curiosity of
the other, reducinge the same unto the best form of being, alsoe the
vvritinges, or scriptions, of the most expertest Chyrurgias, of this preset
time, with the vvritinges judgement of the whole, through the controulinge of
the vvritinges of the one of the other: So that I have intended to make a
collection: in form of a Manual for my self, to opitulate, address my
memory, in time of need, and promptly to effectuate, any manualle, and not
vulgar operatione: but the liberalitye through the which I am so voluntary,
to communicate the same unto certain of my good friends, vvhoe are studiouse,
desiruose of Chyrurgerye, hath precipitated me into this present prodigality,
of the which I suddaynlye retired drevve my self backvvarde, blushing as it
vveare ashamed, considering the means thereof, as being vnvvorthy to come into
light (although notvvithstandinge everye one hath a vain imaginatione,
affection, unto the same which is proceeded from him) so that I omit the
hardiness which I might have had, to publish the same unto the print, I
could very difficultly contain my desirous, covetuouse hands, of that
which I with great labour, diligence, and through lunge experience had
collected together, to have in one momet abolished the same, if I had not
purposed to reserve the same for my own particular, and peculiar commodity.
But my foresayed friends debellating against my timorous fearful defensions,
through certain experience of time passed: to vvitt, that my book of the
diseases of the eyes, after certain days he was comited to the press, was
unto all Ch^rurgians very necessary, profitable: and that my first, second
Tables of Anatomye, had administered unto all men such great service, and
promptitude of the Anatomy, and cognisance of the parts of mans body: They
have in the end resolved me of my doubtful fear of prodigality, adding also
therbye that this fear of prodigality, could be dammageable unto no man
then unto me, and that it could make no breach into my credit at all.

Through these foresayed remonstrations being convicted, persvaded, under the
pretext of great furtherance, which younger Chyrurgians might heerby reap,
and not being possible for me any longer to resist, the importunitye of
certain sproutes, beginners of Chyrurgerye, who vveare of opinione, that this
present piece of vvorcke, with all the deformityes thereof, might be profitable
for them, and being certifiede, that if by any means they could attain them
into their hands, they would commit the same to the print even such as it
vveare. So that I am constrained to employ my self certain hovvres of the
day, in correcting of the same and a little more imbellishe, and adorn, the
same, with 4 portrayctures of mans body because the same entringe into the
world, might be effected with more favour, credit, whereof the two first,
do demonstrate all external parts, as well anteriorlye, as posteriorlye, in
the other two, all the superficial Veins, are evidently laid open unto us,
which as little rivers do run through the face through all other
external parts of the body extend themselves as well behind as before,
because the same being of the young Chyrurgians noted, they with less danger
might open any of them.

Farther I have enriched this vvorcke, with divers defigurations of
Instruments, not of all Instruments, but of those only, which I esteemed to
be most necessary: For even as the sage, prudent, and vvyse Nature, hath
instituted such an ordre, to mans body, that she with few parts, can
accomplish, many great and excellent actions, In like sort must the
Chyrurgiane, an imitatoure, and administre of Nature, endevoure, and
constraygne himself, with few Instruments to execute, and effect, many,
great Operations. And to speak the plain truth all this great company and
treasure house of Engines, Molitiones, and of other Chyrurgicall Instruments,
are more for curiousity, oftentatione, then for any necessity, and use. I am
also very certain of that which our Hippocrates says, to wit, that we
ought not to constraygne, or restraygne, the liberty of our corps, and the
Operations, unto the penury, and deficiency of Instruments: but much more
amplify, and enrich the same, unto the commodity of the body, and ease of
the Operations: but I would rather exoptate, and desire, that this vanity,
superstitiouse bravadinge of Instruments, vveare ruled with more religiouse
mediocritye.

Also I have made, a great ample Table, or Index, in the end of the Boock,
wherein through Alphabetical ordre I have illustrated, the most notablest,
difficultest things, which in the inqvisitione might be an impediment, unto
the vnexperte in the art of Chyrurgerye, in seeking of their farther
commodity. And if so be any man object unto me, that this my discourse, is
only compilede together of certain rapsodyes of the antiqve Chyrurgians: I
vvillingely here confess, acknowledge, that in this Treatise, there is very
little, or nothing at all of mine own Invention: For I am not the man which
lives by an other mans mutuated supellectilles and I rather publiqvely confess,
that I have collected all this out of ancient Chyrurgians, being great shame
for me to be repraehended, and surprised, of a secrete theft. For what
noveltyes are under the Sun? as the vvyse man says: And as the Comicus
says, what should we now adays say, which hath not before bin spoken?
But I may at all times with veritye say, that I am not entered into this matter
to sow, and feminate the same in an infertille grovvnde: For I have added
thereunto great amendmente, and have eradicated, vveeded out all spinosities,
thistles, whereof they vveare replenished with great difficulties,
seqvestringe on the one side malevolet herbs, which choacked the good
fruits of the truth, composinge all things in good ordre, to add thereunto
clearness, and facility: through the which excellent, modern, ancient
Authors may be understood of those, which can attain to the klovvledge of
no strange langvages. Nether have such Personages, out of which I have taken
any of their operationes, observed in all their treatises one ordre,
perfectly, and one manner of operatione, but one divers places, and in divers
Books they have described them: wherefore they are not to be reprehended, who
with a conseqvence, have redacted them together, because they might the easier
be compraehended, and understood. And although those which heretofore have
written of Instrumetes have cotentede themselves only vvithe the
representation, of the simple Figures: In have heer endeavoured to present
dimensions, and proportiones, their longitude, and crassitude, and so
naturally, that nether the Chyrurgiane, nor the Smithe which we cause to
compose the same might have any occasion of hesitatione, or doubt, nether
fall into any error, of their commensuratione appropriatinge unto everye
one of them his name in Greecke, Latin, French, report also his own
opportunity, and usage thereof.

name in Greecke, Latin, and French, and report also his own opportunity,
usage thereof*

I know right well, that in this vvorcke there vvilbe some operations of
Chyrurgerye vvantinge, and that it is not vvholye perfect: But I assure my
self, that everye man of a good spirit, judgment, will acknowledge, that I
of purpose have omitted the same, and that especially because certain
operations, thereof are not now a days in use, practise: as is the manner of
inscisione of the skin of the Head, which the Greeckes call Pericuphismos:
Also the extirpatione of vvoemens breasts which hang toe long: of the
Cauterizinge of the Liver, and of the Mil^e: of the extractio of a stone out of
the blather, because I my self am not therein instructed: Al which operations,
I permit to practise the right vvorshipfull Monsr. Collo Chyrurgiane at Paris,
a personage so rare therein that all France hath not his like, with all
dexterity to effectuate such an operatione: In like sort also Mr. Pineau, also
Chyrurgiane at Paris, which is the resplendente star of Light unto all the
Anatomistes of these times. Nether do I doubt, that he which dilligently
searches this vvorcke, that he shall find any diffaulte therein: for I doubt
whether that any curious poeple should accomplish, the same, saying the
Author himself could not sufficiently accomplish the same: But I hope, to
receave of the benevolent Reader, some excuse, he noting, and considering,
that such operatios which are very titillouse can not at one time be begun,
and also at the same time finished, and that it is sufficient, with great
difficulty rightly to imprint the same. Wherefore if this enterprise seem
alienate, and strange unto any body, and they mocked thervvith, I certify
unto them, that I envye no man, which can meliorize the same: And as
touching those which seem not to be in the world for any other use, then
to censure, repraehende others without vvillinge yea and being able to
effectuate ought themselves, let them iovise, joy themselves, of their
privileadge, as long as pleases them, wherewith I do not much molest my
self. Othervvyse, I have written only for the junior, younger Chyrurgians, and
not for those, which are vvholye and completlye edoctrinized, and search for
nothing else then for a perfection of all things: I have not exalted my heart
so hight, as those severe censurers would require, and I suffice my self
with my accustomed manner, with the behouldinge of the commodity of the
French iunioritye, of that which my small wit, could set forth: I only
desire this one thing of them, that they would vouchsafe to meliorize the
same, as I certaynlye know they well can, and do not retain their own
commodity thereof. And it vvilbe a great joy, and pleasure unto me that therein
they surpass me: I shall very well know to apply the same to my profit,
and commodity, which they through their great labour, and industry, have
brought forth, nether will I conceal that which of them I shall have
learned.

And although it be the opinion of the Sages that we ought not to lightly,
thereveale secretes, of Physic, unto the common, vulgar poeple treating of
such matters, in their maternal, motherlye langvage, because it might be
esteemed of little worth, be of all men little accounted of: And although I
could easily, have uttered, and expressed my intent, in latin, yet I rather
published the same in our French language: And that first of all, because all
annciente Learned men, whether they be Greeckes, Arabers, or Latinistes, have
written al their doctrine, and experience in the maternal language. The
primates, and princes of Physic, Hippopocrates, and his faithful, and fidele
interpreter, commitatoure Galen, Paulus Aegineta Oribasius do vvitnes of the
same. Avicenna, and Averroes, have also done the same, vvritinge in the
Arabiane Langvage. Celsus and Plinius, the first and they which have only
written in Latin, have alsoe done their endevoure, and have also disired to
imbellishe, and eternize, their Latin langvage, contrye, through the terms,
and theoremes of Physic. Farthermore also, by how much the more a thing is
more commone so much the more is it better, and by so much the more may this
science of all men be known, lauded, and extolde. The Physic of
Hippocrates, and of Galen, the Phylosophye, of Plato, and of Aristotle, are
they therefore obscured or less esteemed of, because they vveare vvrittene of
the Auncientes in Latin, and Arabic langvage? And those which of our time,
have written, in French Dutch Italiane, as many renoumnede me have done,
vvhoe in all sorts have indevoured, to do some service to the common
vvealthe, hade they here in committede any thing vvorthye of repraehension?
they which write in unknown langvages, besides that they are profitable
unto strangers, and to their onre native soil discommodiouse, are
assimilated and resembled unto farmers, which would rather till, an other
mans field, then their own propre grovvnd, to the great dishonour, shame,
detrimente, of their country, and inhabitants.

VVherfor I most humblely entreat, and obsecrate all men, to receave
gratefully, thanck fully this my labour, and divine desire, which I have to
see the junior Chyrurgians, with all their minds industriously labourig to
follow imitate me: if so be it pleased that any more learned ma the I am
vouchsafede to perlegate with pleasure, employ a small of their time in the
reading, of my scriptsons, and vvritinges, I most courtiouslye desire the,
that they would more with good will, then with a spirit, which to
narrovvlye espies, to repraehende the faults, vue circumsplectlye note the
defaults which might be therein: Least that through to great curiosity, and
to seriouse subtilty, that same happen to me, as in times passed, happened to
the Philosopher Theodosio, who turning over the precepts of Philosophy with
his right hand fro his Anditors, they who with their left hand could
also reach him, through malice, and impuritye of spirit, turned, misconstrued
the same in bad sort. Which if so by any means I can attain unto, and
know that this my vvorcke, (published through the importunitye of the
iunioure Chyrurgians) shall be aggreeable, and acceptable, unto many, it will
then administre courage, unto me, to pursue, and address the remanent of my
studies, wherein I am entered: that is, to medidate, and to publish for the
younger Chyrurgians, all those things, whereby Gods honour might be increased,
and be profitable, for the common wealth.

Candidus imperti meliora, vel utter nostris:
Carper vel noli nostra, vel ede tua.
Some men do read, to reap some good thereof,
Others to mock, and hovvlde thereof a soffe,
It is more ease heerin to reprehend,
Then any thing therein, for to amend.
To the gentle, curtiouse Reader.
SOmetimes with my self cosideringe, in the balance of my cogitations
vveighinge, how perrillous, dangerous an attempt it is (most benevolence,
benign, curtiouse Reader) in these times, and ages, I omit ether to write, or
divulgate any vvorcke, but to translate it out of one language into an other.
Yet I would not, nor indeed could not partly to satisfy the great
importunitye of certain vvellvvillers of the English natione, and poeple, but
especially of my reverente master, vvhoe although no English man, yet I
assure thee one who through certain acqvayntance of English Captains in
these Lovvcountryes, doth affect all English men, would heerby show
himself grateful not only unto them, but to the whole society of our
Majesties subjects, by incitatinge, as it vveare compellinge me his poor
servant here unto, obiectinge unto me my inconstant levitye, vvhoe having
receavede so many, so great benefits of the poeple, students in Englande
would not impart this excellent, exquisite, and perpolite piece of vvorcke
unto them, saying that also the Printer, was so vvillinge to incitate me here
unto, here by alsoe expressinge his affectionated good will both to our most
renoumnede Majesty (whom God lunge praeserve) and her subjects. I standing
in a dump, being with these objections mute, Nesciens quid agerem, aut quo
me verterem, not knowing where to hide my self, at the last as one being
erectede, and suscitatede out of a svvound, I feeblely made this ansvver, that
it fitted not nether was agreinge to my harsh, rude, and illiterate stile to
begin such a piece, of vvorcke, and I being no English man borne might
chance (as without doubt I have) to take Sissiphus his labour on me, in not
vvritinge good English. And which is more, least I should attribute any
occasion of offence to my most reverent brother who being a Doctor of
Physic, I but an illiterate, ignorant youth applying my mind unto
Chyrurgerye, might suppose me to be so pratchante, highminded that I sought to
aequall my self with him who through his affection he bears to Englande
hath also translatede an excellent book of Physic. But at the last I being
fully resolved of my doubts, of the persuaded, that it would of all men be
taken, construede to a good end, I could not any longer resist their
importunate assaults on the imbicille vvalles of my ansvvers, but they having
therein made a breach I was constrained to yield my self a captive,
acknowledge them victors in consenting to their requests, by taking this
labour of Atlas on my shoulders. Therefore I would not vvillingelye, have
that this light inconstancy should be objected against me, for not
impartinge unto thee (most gentle Reader) these my obliterate lines of this
expert, excellent, and perpolite Chyrurgiane Iaqves Gvillaemeau, whom for
his excellentie of his manuale operations I assure thee such a one hath never
in English bin traslated: Behold now therefore to show my self
greatefulle for those benefits which vvhilome I have receavede in this
florishinge, blessed country of Englande, both in the Vniversitye, and in the
other Cities thereof, I here humblelye praesent unto thee this my first
attempt, who although indeed no Englisheman borne, yet bearing a true
English mans heart unto our Majesty endevouringe continually to show my
self grateful unto her, her subjects. And although it be more gross,
impolite, then decent, convenient, to ansvver the fine, scoffing heads,
wits of these times vvhoe almost can do nothing else then scoff, mock,
flout, at other men's industryes, and labours, yet I pray the (gentle Reader)
not to eesteeme them all vain, indecent, and invtile, for Non cuivis la
contingit adire Corinthum, everye man can not have a nose like a shooing horne,
that is everye one hath not such a fertile wit as they have for I
acknowledge my self to have but a barrane, vnfrictefulle grovvnde that there
doth nothing then Filix innascere agris meis, and how is it possible then to
reap good Fruits thereof? And know (curtiouse Reader that I take it to be
a godly thing to publish such a piece of vvorcke for the aid, succour of
all yonge Chyrurgians to operate, vvorcke on mas body, for what more
praeciouse thing is there on earth then man: and if then we endeavour to
praeserve, the health of our bodies it is then necessary to have such boockes
out of which we may learn the means whereby we might do it, I have the
more vvillinglye translatede the same into the vulgar English tunge because
everye one hath not the gift of langvages, although it be not so exqvisitelye
done as it vveare convenient it should, tamen est laudanda voluntas, I have
done my best indevoure thereunto, for there where ability lacks, my goodvvill
notvvithstandinge is to be receavede, and not to be repugnede, rejected. Nether
shalt thou here (gentle Reader) have any exquisite methode, nor the flovving
stile of Demostlenes, and eloquence of Cicero, but a plain common, and vulgar
stile for it was not of the Author composed in the first for such me as are
expert in these operations, but for the commonaltye, and younger Chyrurgians,
that they heerbye might learn the true operations of Chyrurgerye. If my bold
audacitye, or audaciouse bouldnes shall administer occasion of offence to any
man, I recurre to that common refuge, which promises remission to him which
gives his first assault. Wherefore if the learned will vouchsafe to read
this my first beginning without envye, or malice against me, I shall think
my industry very vvellimployede not to have bestowed all my labour in vain:
but if through the harshnes of my illeterate rude stile they are caused to lay
it out of their hands, sight, yet I humblely request them to take him up
again not for my sake, but for his own, vvhoe although defilede, polluted
with my impolitede stile, yet they may gather in the garden of his exqvisite
vvorckes, as fragrant gillovvfers of Chyrugicall operations (I dare avouch) as
any ever vveare in English. And if there be any of Momus his partakers, which
do revile, scoff, flout me, who are so scrupulouse, praeiudicialle, that
with no Physic they can be cured of their critical dissease, tell them I
pray thee (gentle Reader) from me, that it is far easier for them to
repraehende, then to correct or meliorize, and that they dare not for the best
cap they have take such a thing in hand, least they peradventure should
fall into the pitt which for other they had made, for there is an old, and
inveterate proverb as I remember in Latin Quod tibi fieri non vis, alterine
feceris, let them (I say) read this proverb I trust it vvilbe a purgatio for
them. What shall I say more? for indeed I can say nothing as the Comicus
says quod non fit dictum prius, If therbe any which with their Argus eyes,
will vue, so narrovvlye princke, and look, for faults in this my labour
without doubt they shall find faults sufficient, but I would request them
to leave their eyes at home with Lamia, when they loock for any faults heer
in, spit in a box, the spittle of quips, quiddityes, cast them behind some
chest of oblivione that they never may any more be spoken of, and let them not
despise this my poor farthing, for it may be heerafter shall find my self
doing with some other piece of vvorcke more excellent. If therefore (benevolent
Reader) we find this vvorcke to be acceptable unto thee, my master shall
think his motion to have bin blessede and happy, the Printer his irritatione
commodiouse, and I my labours, and industryes well bestovvede, and it shall be
as it vveare a Calcar unto me thereafter to employ my self with the
translatione of some other excellent piece of vvorcke. If not I would friendly
desire such as scoff heerat, to read, dilligently consider these two verses
which the Author recites, and are these.

Candidus imperti meliora, vel utter nostris:
Carper vel noli nostra, vel ede tua.
Thus being loath to interrupt thee any longer with vain, illiterate
speeches I commit thee to the tuition of God thy Creator, his son Ihesu
Christ who with his effused blooredeemed thee, and of the holy ghost, who
inspires thee with his spirit, continually vvishinge increace of all
virtues, and lunge life unto thee.

Thyn as his own, or else not worthy of vital breath. A. M.

THE THESAVRARYE, OR STOREHOVSE of Chyrurgerye: wherbye are also added Four
figures, or portrayctures of mans body: Two of the which do demonstrate unto
us, all the external parts of the same: and the other two, the most
visiblest veins fit for phlebotomye, which lye dispearced under the skin
Through Iaqves Gvillemean of Orleans, Ordinatede Chyrurgiane to the King, and
svvorne in his Chastelet at Paris.
The Praeface.
WE say in France for an ancient, verified proverb: That it is not
sufficiete enough that we do any thing, but that we do the same
exquisitlye, profitablelye. Which can not with any convenience be excuted or
accomplished, without knowledge of the causes, which do lead, and conduct
us, to the perfectione of the effect: So that according to the sayings of the
Philosophers, Science is nothing else, then the knowledge of that, What Sciece
i^
which we have in hands, through his proper causes. Unto the which all
Artificers must endevoure to attain: through the which Chyrurgerye, although
notwithstanding, we can not attain to the knowledge, cognisance of the
present subject, the accidents thereof, through such occasions as we have
discribede, the same being as it vveare an inferior science, and dependinge,
on the Naturalle, and Physical sciences: we ought notvvithstandinge to know
at the least this poyncte, and to observe, and follovve the same, and that
through the most sensible, and apparent causes, which are Materialle, and
Instrumentalle.

Which hath movede me to represent, Wherefore the Author hath collocated the
Instrumetes in the forefrontutes of his book.
and as it vveare evidentlye unto all men's eyes demonstrate, not only the
materialle, and formalle principles, whereof our subject, of mans body, is
created, and compilede together, but the Instrumentalles, through the which
we as by such means maintain the same in his natural health, as lunge as
there is any health before hands, and also again restore the same, being
imbecillede, debilitated, through the combat which we have against the
dissease, or sickness.

Nether to speak truth is it a thing conveniente, and seemlye, that any
great, or vvorthye Captain, should assail his enemy, before he
apparantlye know him, and have for his own commodity, and advantage made
electione, and choice of the place, field of combat, hath ordrede and alsoe
armed his soldiers: no less also, must he besiege any strong, The office,
duty of a good Captain.
and fortified City, without first having advertisemente, knowledge, of the
most feebleste place of the same, where in storminge his soldiers may least
of all be endamagede, he having sufficient admunitione, to make a breach.

In like sort also vveare it great temeritye, and rashenes, for any
Chyrurgiane, to take in hand any operatione, of Chyrurgerye, without first
of all considering one the subject, The office of a good Chirurgiane.
one the which he intends, and purposes to operate, or vvorcke,
convenientlye to situate, and collocate the same, and being fournishede of all
his Instruments conveniente for such an operatione, therbye to attain unto
his pretended intent. I humbly reqveste, the most benevolent, and gentle
Reader, to have me excusede, although I have not collocatede, them in such
number, as I vvillingelye could wish and desire I had, having
notwithstanding causede the same to be representede: but through the injuries
of this most disturbede, molestede time, there are some of the Plates (unto my
great molestatione, and sorrow,) lost, and could not by any means
possible so suddaynlye be again pourtrayctede, engraved: the which
notvvithstandinge in the next editione I hope to collocate them.

Explication of the Characters which are contained in the first figure of mans
body: wherein G. signifyeth a Greecke word, and L. a Latin word.


















































^The yard, or virile membre, G, Caulos, L, Coals, Penis, Mentula, Virga: The
Head, G, Lalanos, L, Glans, the concavitye of the yard, G, Ourita, L,
Vrinarum iter: the top thereof, G, Posthi, L, Praeputium, the end of the top,
G, Acoposthion, L Summum praeputij.



(...)

Declaratione of all the parts of mans body



This conseqventlye ensues on the second leaf.











































The Declaration of the Characters which are compraeheded one the posterior,
part of the body.




















































Declaratione of the Characters contaynede in the first, and second figure,
of the externalle Veins, which we use to Phlebotomize.






































(...)

Demonstration of all the externalle veins



Declaratione of the Characters contaynede in the Table of Instruments, where
with we extract, and draw out the Bulletes, and all other vnnaturalle, and
alienate things, forth of the body.


















































There is no Chyrurgiane, which hath any bullet dravver of his fashone, or
manner wherewith he contents himself: but I have here placed,
collocatede, those which are fitteste for use, omittinge, and lettinge pass
many other fashons, to prevent, and evite all confusions vvhatsoever.

(...)

Sundry Instruments to draw out Bulletes



Declaration of the Characters contaynede in the Table, of the Instruments of
the Head.


















































I have here endevourede, to present, the most convenienteste sorts of
Elevatoryes, which now a days are most in use, in such magnitude, greatness
of form, as might be most conveniente for the Chyrurgiane, considering all
other small instruments or ferramentes of the Head, as are the Raspers,
which of set purpose I omittede, least I should cloy the Chyrurgiane with
to many Instruments, because by those in place of others he might content and
suffice himself, because that such an infinite, number of instrumetes do
serve more for ostentatione, and pride then for any necessary use.

(...)

Diverse Instruments for the Head



Declaratione of the Characters contaynede in the portrayctures of sundry, and
divers sorts of Trepanes, and nipinge tongues.






















































The Declaration of the Characters contaynede in the capitalle Instruments, or
Pinsers.


















Declaration of the Characters, which are contaynede in the Trepanes with vises.
















Declaration of the Characters, which in the Cranio are contaynede, being in two
places Trepanede.
















(...)

The portrayctures of diverse sorts of Trepanes, and Tongues



Explicatione of the Characters contaynede in the figure of the Hare mouth.
















Explanatione of the Characters notede on the side of the throat, in the
portraycture of the Haremouth: which demostrate unto us, a wound receavede in
the Ingulare Vain: and the means also howe to circumligate the same.












Declaration of the Characters, which are contaynede in the dry Suture, or
stitchinges.












The Declaration of the Characters which are contaynde in the Instruments of a
little portable case.












Explanatio of the Characters contaynede in the Description of the Needle
pipes, cases or Canons.
























(...)

Declaration of the Dry suture

Portraycture of the Haremouthe

Canons and Needles

Instruments for a little case



Explicatione of the Characters contaynede in the table of these Instrumetes
which are propre and necessary to the extirpatione of members.
























































The Finger which is spoylede, and corruptede.

How we ought restraygne the blood after the extirpatione of a Ioyncte,
without using any hot Iron, only through ligature, which is of two sorts,
ether with the Crowesbille, or with the Needle.






















(...)

Instruments fit for the extirpatione of any Ioynete



Declaratione of the Characters contaynede in the Instruments, which are apt
to opene any Apostemations.


The use of those said plates, is only to hallucionate, deceave, those,
which will not permit an apertione to be made in their Apostemationes, and
are to timorouse, fearfulle of the hand, or lancet of the Chyrurgiane, as
commonly are vvoemen, little children: to open the Apostemation beside their
expectation, and intelligence: you must have in preparation your Caraplasma,
and before the application thereof you must have in a readiness a plaster of
Diapalma, or some such like, which must be somewhat larger then your plate, on
the which plaster you must apply the plate, which in like sort also, with
the acuity thereof must be coverede with the salve Basilicon, which being
finish de, you must apply this plaster being in this sort preparede, on the
place, where you conjecture the foresayede Apostematione must be openede,
therone the Cataplasma, on the which you must the stiffly crushe, and by that
means make and apertione at one crushinge in the Apostematione, through the
poyncte of the Lancette, which is one the plate fastenede, into the concavitye
whereof the matter as then will issue out: I my self have oftentimes vsede
this same manner of apertione, which although it seem to be but a simple
shift, it is notvvithstandinge an hallucionatione which oftentimes is very
necessary.



























































The use of this foresayed Instrument is this: to wit, that in those fistles
in the which are two apertios, as in those in the which is made a counter
apertione: and where it is necessary, requisite, to make of these, two, holes
or orifices one apertion it is first of all reqvitede, that we sound the
depth of the fistle, with this sounding iron which is here defigurede unto
you: which at the one end hath a little buttone, at the other end is pearcede,
eyede like a Needle, where with we make our Seton: which being thrust
from the one apertione to the

(...)

Diverse Instruments to open Apostemationes



Declaration of the Charcters, which are contaynede in the La oris,
Matricis, other more Instruments for the Mouth.














































There are some which can not very well suffice themselves with this plate,
by reason that the gould smithe can not so conveniently make the same, that it
aequallye of all sides do touche the Palate of the Mouth, so that in stead
thereof they use, a tent made of linte, or of Sponge, to the which intent
there are divers which are providede of them, because that if the one fell
out, they incontinently have an other in a readiness, preparatione to put
therein, because othervvyse they shoude speak through the Nose.















These artificialle teethe are sometimes made of Ivorye but because Ivorye by
reason of the spittle vvaxeth immediately yellovve, and fulvide, they are more
fitter to make of any other bone, the same being very harde, and thick and
dence, or solyde, as is the bone of a fish which in French we call Rovart.
Farthermore any body by att may make teeth of white vvaxe which being
meltede, liquefactede with as much gum Elemni, or a little Masticke, white
Coralle, and preparede pearls there of a paste being made, of the which we
may form as many teethe as we please. This paste is also very commodiouse
to replenish thervvith a hollovve tooth, because there might no viands
remain therein, through which the teethe do more corrupt, and more
intolerable payne is heer bye suscitatede.

(...)

The Speculum of the Mouthte, and Womb



Declaration of the Characters which are contaynede in the figures of the
Hoockes, and Knives which are necessary, and conveniente, to draw forth a
dead Child out of the Mothers belly: also of the Pessaryes, Plates and of
other things necessary to the Ligatione of the fistles of the fundament.








I have divers and sundry times bin sent for, to divers Woeme, which
vveare in difficult labour Childebearth, notvvithstandinge I never vsede any
hoockes, or other ferrealle Instruments thereto, for which occasion I also
council all Chyrurgianes, to use none of them, then in extreme necessity,
for if so be there happen any other accident there unto, as excoriatione, or
any effluxione of blood, we must then attribute the same unto the
Instrument, which the Chyrurgiane vsede thereunto: Nevertheless I have here
causede them to be set down unto you, to use them in the extreameste
necessity: and here is to be notede, that the Insculptor, or Ingravere to
adorn, imbellishe his labours, hath participatede some propre, and perpolite
fashone to the handle, which indeed is thereon invtile, and needeles, because
it is better, that they be plain, smooth because they fast themselves on
nothing.

The first which I have seen use such manner of Pessaryes, was the right
vvorshipfulle Mr. Rousset, on of the Kings Chyrurgians, and of the Lady of
Nemours, which hath learnedlye, and excellently written, of divers sorts of
the Woomens parturio, where this form of Pissaryes are defigurede, and the
manner also of his use.







This plate, or this invention hath oftentimes bin vsede, of Mr. Girart Raber
Chyrurgia at Paris, which was a very inventive, perquiringe man, in
searchinge out of Chyrurgicalle Instruments, and also the most experteste
practitionere of his time.







Explanation of the Characters contaynede in the figures of the Instrumetes to
draw, break, and cut of teeth.


























(...)

Diverse Instruments to draw and cut of Teeth

Haeckes to drane forth a Child



The Declaration of the Characters which are contaynede in the table of the
actualle Cauteryes.
















































































It is impossible for the Chyrurgiane to present in this place all the
figures, portraytures of the Cauteryes, wherewith he must cotente himself:
for he must sometimes cause them to be forgede according to the reqviringe of
the Operatione, the part, where on he intends to use the same, wherefore I
in this place have done my endeavour to place collocate together such Cauteryes
as are most necessary, novvadayes in use, wherein I only have cosiderede,
observede their magnitude, crassitud: And as cocerninge their branches, the
handles of the same, have only bin observed in two, which are notede with
A, h, the Exsculptor having ingravene the same, somewhat shorter, smaller then
he ought: I most comonlye use such Cauteryes which be reasonable short,
because those which are of to great a longitude, bigness, do affrighte the
Patient, as allso those which are too lunge can not so easily be conductede,
rulede, because they do most commonly vacillate, turn this way, that way in
the hand.

(...)

The figures of Diverse Actualle Cauteryes.



The Declaratione of the Characters which are contaynede in the Table of those
Instruments which are propre, and conveniente, to the executione of all
manualle operations which in the Eyes may be by any means vsede.
Although that I in this Chyrurgerye have not discribede the manualle
operatio, which may be vsede in the infirmities of the Eyes: Yet
notvvithstandinge I would not, nether indeed could omit in this
storehouse and treasurye of all Chyrurgicalle Instruments, the portrayctures,
and figures of those Instruments, which are necessary, commodiouse unto such
an effect of deliberate, set purpose omittinge the operations of the Eyes,
because at large I have discribede, amplely set forth, everye severalle
operation, in my Treatize of the Infirmities, and diseases of the Eyes, which
I committede to the Press in the year M.D. Lxxxv. to the which I commit
the gentle Reader, there to behold the practice, severalle use of all
operations of the Eyes.

































































We must here note, that this pipe, or canulle, must have a little ringle,
where by we might hold fast the same, for if so be with a buttone we
houlde it, we might then chance to burn our fingers, because the cauterye
internallye passing through the same, it should not so completlye be
effectede, as it ought to be.









(...)

Sundry Instruments necessary for the Eyes



The Declaration of the Characters, contaynede in the Figure, which
demonstratethe unto us the means how we ought, and should make a
restauratione of a humeralle dislocation, by the means of an Instrument
callede Glossocomium, which Hippocrates calls Ambi.












Declaratione of the Characters contaynede in the Glossocome, or Ambi, the same
being taken a sunder.




















Declaratione of the Characters contaynede in the Cassolle, or Case necessary
to lay a brockene leg therein.










































Declaration of the Characters, which are contaynede, in the brokene leg, with
the bandages there of.














All these foresayede double Ligatures, are revolutede, first the one, then the
other, smoothlye and evenlye situainge of the same: and then they are each
apart, with the poyncte of a needle fastened, according to the situatione, or
collocatione of the Leg.

The end of the four portrayctures of mans body, and of the Veins, which
are most commonly phlebotomizede: and allsoe of the the saurarye, or storehouse
of the Instruments of Chyrurgerie.

(...)

Canalle which is open and shut



The summary of the principalleste, and most especialle poynctes, which are
cotaynede, and spoken of in the operationes of Chyrurgerye.
The Preface of the Chyrurgerye. Containing four Chapters. Definitione, and
originalle of Chyrurgerye, with the operatione of the same. Chapter. 1. The
prognosticatio, judgement of vvoundes. Ch. 2 Signs to know vvhate parts of
the body are hurt. Chap 3 Adverticemente to give assurede report before the
Iusticiaryes. Chap 4
The first Treatise, of the Operatios of Chirurgerye, wherein is discoursede,
the means to draw out all strange, and alienate things out of the body.
Containing five Chapters. The vitilitye, necessity of drawing out all
strange, and alienate things. Chap 1 How that the Chyrurgian with all
dexteritye to draw forth a bullet, must considere on the differeces thereof,
and on the nature of the part, wherein the bullete is contaynede. Chap 2 The
bullets, all other alienate things, must in the first dressinge be dravven
out of the body, if it be possible, and the means which we must therein
use. Chap 3 How we ought to draw out the bulletes if they stick fast in
the bone. Chap 4 The Chyrurgiane ought not to be to curious in extractinge the
bulletes. Chap 5
The second Treatise of the operatione of Chyrurgerye, wherein is discoursede
the means, to Trepane the pan, or Craniu of the Head. Contaynige six
Chapiters. The signs by which we may discern the fractures of the sculle.
Chap 1 The Coutrefissure of the bones of the Head. Chap 2 What fractures we
ought to trepane. Chap 3 How loge we ought to defer the trepaninge. Ch. 4
What quatity of bones we ought to take away. Ch. 5 The methode, and manner of
trepaninge. Chap 6
The third Treatise, of the Operations of Chyrurgerye, of the sutures, and
sovvinge of vvoudes. Containing six Chapiters. What suture, or stitching is,
the vtilitye there of. Ch. 1 What we ought in stitchinge of a vvounde, to
considere. Chap 2 What is necessary unto suture, the manner of doing of the
same. Chap 3 The Species, differences of suture, how long we must suffer them
to continue without resectione thereof. Chap 4 The means to thrust in again
the guts, the Epiploon hanging out of the belly. Chap 5 The Gastroraphia,
or suture of the inferior part of the Belly. Chap 6
The fourth Treatise of the Operations of Chyrurgerye, wherein is discoursede
of the apertione of Apostemations. Containing five Chapters. Of the generalle
apertio of all Apostemations. Chap 1 Of the vlcerations, Ateromata, Steatomata,
and Melicerides. Chap 2 The means howe to cauterize, inscide the Empiemata.
Chap 3 The manner of doing the Paracentese, to draw out the water of the
Dropsye. Chap 4 The means to cure the Hernia aquosa. Chap 5
The fifte Treatise of the Operations of Chyrurgerye, of the disseases of the
Nose, and Mouth containing seven Chapters. Of the Polypus, Chap 1 The
Haremouthe, or clovene Lips. Chap 2 The tumefaction, superfluous flesh of
the gumes, called Paroulis, or Epoulis. Chap 3 The retractio of the tongue,
called of the Greec Kes Anchyloglosson, of the tumefactio Batrachos. Ch. 4.
Means to tie the palate of the mouth, and to cut of the same. Chap 5 The
tumor of the Almondes, and the Apostemations thereof. Chap 6 How to draw,
break, cut of teethe. Chap 7
The sixte Treatise of the operations of Chyrurgerye, containing nine
Chapters. What we ought to considere, before phlebotomye. Chap 1 How we
shall convenientlye open a vain. Chap 2 What we ought to considere the vain
being opened: and the blood issuinge out. Chap 3 The number of the veins, and
Arteryes, which are commonly phlebotomizede. Chap 4 Of the apertio of the
Arteryes, or Arteryonomye. Ch. 5 The Aneurisma, the manner how to ligate, and
inscide the same. Chap 6 The Cirsotomye, which is the manner how to inscide
the Varices. Chap 7 Horseleeches, their use, and manner of applicatione. Chap
8 Of boxes, and applicatione thereof. Chap 9
The seventh Treatise of the Operations of Chyrurgerye, containing six
Chapiters. Of Caries, and corruption of the bones. Chap 1 The fistle of the
fundamente. Chap 2 How we should draw out the Childrene out of their
mothers body, which can not of themselves be borne. Chap 3 Why we ought to
extirpate Arms, Legs vvhate and place we ought te to make choice of. Chap 4
The executing of the extirpation, and means to restraygne the fluxione of
blood, the patient being situatede. Chap 5 The extirpatione of the
corruptede, and superfluouse fingers, the separation of those which are
ioynede, and combinede together. Chap 6
The eight treatise of the operations of Chyrurgerye, touching the Cauteryes:
containing five Chapters. What a Cauterye is, the species, differences thereof.
Chap 1 The invention, use of the Cauteryes, and on vvhate parts, diseases
they must be applyede. Chap 2 The potentialle Cauteryes, and means to make
them. Chap 3 The applicatione of the Cauteryes. Chap 4 Of the Seton, and
applicatione thereof. Chap 5
The ninth Treatise of the Operatios of Chirurgerye, of the badages, or
Ligatures, containing six Chapters. What a Ligamente is, matter, quallitye,
form, quantitye thereof. Chap 1 Difference, and kinds of Ligamentes. Chap 2
Generalle rules to be considerede, in all bandages, or Ligatures. Chap 3 How
we should solve, dissolve a Ligamete. Ch. 4 The manner to involve, a broke
Arm, Leg, or thigh. Chap 5 The situation, and collocatione of those parts,
vvheron these operationes must be effectede. Chap 6 Apologye for the
Chyrurgians, wherein is evidentlye demonstrated, which be the occasions of
death, to certain vvouded Persos, although their vvoudes are small: where
the Chyrurgias are defended from all calumnies, which oftentimes iniuriouslye
they are sclaundrede with. The treatise of the Dysenteria, or Bloodyeflixe.

Deo sit Laus.
THE FRENCH CHIRVRGERYE OVT OF ALL the ancient professors of Physic, and
Chirurgerye collected, and compacted together, with sundry, and diverse
figures of instruments, very necessary to the operatione or vvorcke of
Chyrurgerye.
Through Iaques Guillemeau of Orleans, public Chyrurgiane to the king, and
sworene in his Chastelet at Paris.
The praeface. To the Chyrurgerye, containing four Chapters.
The discriptione, and originalle of Chyrurgerie, and what the operatione of
Chirurgerye is. Cap. 1. Of the prognosticatione, or foreknovvledge, and of the
judgement of the vvoundes. Cap. 2. Of the tokens and signs, how to know,
what parts of the body are hurt or wounded. Cap. 3. Of the instructione
how to give assured demonstratione, of all manner of vvoundes vvhatsoever,
before the iusticiaryes. Cap. 4.
The discriptione, and originalle of Chyrurgerye, and what the operatione of
Chyrurgerye is. Cap. 1.
Having with my self resolved, The invetion of sciences.
and purposed to describe the operation of Chyrurgerye, first of all it seemed
expediet unto me to observe these three necessary things. Namelye and
especially, what Chyrurgerye is. Secondly, how, and from whence, she hath
participatede and taken her originalle, and beginning. Thirdly what the
operatione of Chyrurgerye is. Concerning therefore her beginning originalle,
unto all me is it apparent and we rightvvell know, that the invention, and
finding out of all arts, and scieces vvhatsoever, hath bin by all men in such
great estee, and admiratione (which Hippocrates in his boocke of aunciete
Physic vvitnesseth) that the inventors or authors of the same, have bin
extolled even unto the clouds, by the which is vvitnessed, and testified,
this invention te have bin so perpolite, that it was adiudgede to be a thing
impossible to be discovered and brought into light, by any other, the through
some God, or at the least, by such a person which hath bin infused, with
divine inspiratione: In so much therefore, Chyrurgerye is auncieter then
Physic.
if this may be testyfyede of any arts with aeqvitye and right, it may
truly and boldly be said of this art of Chyrurgerye, the inventors, and
authors of the which, have bin canonisede, esteemede and extellod as Gods, as
for example there hath bin Apollo, Aesculapius, and Hippocrates, vvhoe have had
divine honour and reverence of all me. The two first of these authors, have
allonelye leerned, that part of Physic, which through externalle
medicametes, and by inscisions cured the infirmities, and diseasses of men's
bodies. By the which playnlye is to be understood and judged, that Physic
at those times was not as then inveted created, or fovvnde out, when that
Chyrurgerye, was sufficietlye practised and known in all places: the which
Homer testifies and vvitnesseth unto us in the second book of his Iliades,
where he affirms that the sons of Aesculapius, Podalyrus, and Machaon, in
the besieginge of Troye have with there hands handelede and cured many and
diverse vvouded persos without molestinge or troubling of themselves with
any internalle diseasses or sicknesses, as with agues, or with the plague,
the which notvvithstandinge praedominatede and vexede sore the whole host or
camp of the Greeckes: and consequetlye Physic and the use thereof being
known, and in practise, Chirurgerye was very confusedlye hadeled amongst
Physic. But for as much that it is very difficult a harde thing to excel
in divers, and sundry arts, and because it is impossible, the vvorcke of
Physic, Chyrurgerye, and Apothecary for one man to do, therefore the art of
Chyrurgerye is secluded and separatede fro the other two, having alsoe her
own professors and practitioners. The which because that it may berightlye
understood, it is to be noted and observed, that in the old and ancient
times, by Chyrurgerye, the third part Therapeuticae was not understood,
even as vvee in these times take it, as consequently shall be showed: Divers
misconstrvinges of this vvorde Chyrurgerie.
But they understood by this vvorde Chyrurgerye nothing else, then that only,
which through the operatione of the hades is finishede and brought to pass
wherefore it is yet manifestly written by the aunciet professors, that by
Chyrurgians was nothing else understood then certain servantes, which in
those times vveare callede Chyrurgians, not because they had the perfect
science, or knowledge of Chyrurgerye, but because they earned there sustenance
and livinge through the vvorckinge of there hands. Now to conceave aright
what Chyrurgerye is, it is expediet and necessary, that we ascede somewhat
higher, and industriouslye seerch try what Physic is saying manifestly
that Chyrurgerye is thereof separated and secluded.

Descriptione of Physic.
Physic therefore is nothing else (as Hippocrates in his book De art
vvitnessethe) then a knowledge, or science, which teaches, how to cure any
sicknesses to frustraete, and annihilaete there impregnable forces, because of
themselves they are incurable.

Parts of Physic.
This Physic again hath sundry parts, of the which the first is
Physiologia, which handelethe and treatethe, of the structure and situatione
of mans body, wherein is to be regarded and noted on the seven vnnaturalle
things. The second is Hygiena, that is a Nource, and fosterer, or praeserver,
of our health, which instructs, how we shovvlde continually preserve our
present health, keep the sovvnde body liber, and free from all diseasses,
sicknesses: and this consistethe in six vnnaturalle things. The third is
Pathologia, which treatethe of the cause, and occasion of the sicknesses of
the accidents unto the same, the which three things are against nature. The
fourth is called, Simiotica, and treats of the demostratinge signs or tokes,
not only of that which is all ready passed, but alsoe of that which is as
yet to come, in respect as well of sickness, as of health. The fifth is
Therapeutica, that is the curing or sanable part of Physic, which
instructs, learns, howe to repelle and cure sicknesses, and diseases, The
parts of Therapeutica
restore again to former health: This praenominated Therapeutica is redivided
and again dealed in three parts, the first whereof is called, Dietetica,
which teaches, how to observe a sober good diet: The second part,
Pharmacia, which instructed us, how to compovvnde our medicaments. And the
third part is callede Chirurgia, which cures or helpethe the affected
patients through manualle or handlye operation for Chirurgia hath his
derivatione of a Greecke vvorde, and is compovvnded of Cheir which signifyeth
a hade, and Ergo which betokens operatione: nether may we by this vvorde
Chirurgia not on lye understand, all operations which are only effected by
the hands, but most of all and especially, all that is done, or may be done
one mans body toward the curing of all external diseases.

And as cocerninge this vvorde operatione, What this vvorde operatione
signifiethe.
it is nothing else, then an artificialle and normaticke applicatione, which
is brought to pass, and wrought by the hands, one mans body, wherewith the
decayed health is reiterated, and again restored. And if we vveare desirous
to know what the office, duty of a true chyrurgiane is, or what his
operations are, how and in what manner he must work, effect them, and
what conditions are expected, at a chyrurgians hades, I have described them
fully, at large in my general table, and discriptione of Chirurgerye,
wherefore I will make in this place no more metione of them.

Of the prognostication or judgment of wounds Chap. 2.
IT is certain that the praedictione, or judgement of vvoudes, The use of
judgment.
yea alsoe the generalle knowledge of all disseases, is a thing most
necessary and expedient for a good Chyrurgiane: therefore Hippocrates alsoe
esteemed it very conveniente, profitable, that a Chyrurgiane must excelle in
the fore knowledge of things, and be apt ready to give judgment and his
opinione of all disseases, because by that he may attain, and at chiue unto
great credit, and fidelity by all men, and having on this manner set forth,
and published his knowledge shall be irrepraehendable, and of all men admired,
so much the safer,, with more providence finish his vvorcke, the boulder
illustraete the operatione of his art, and give judgment there of without
any scoff, or check, and be able to give a true report, when that by the
aucthoritye of some learnede chyrurgiane, or by the aucthorytye of some
Potentate, he shall be therein imployede, ordained to report his opinione, ether
of the wounded persons life, ordeath, haultnes or criplenes. Even as alsoe the
foresayed Hippocrates says in his Porrhet that the Chirurgiane must end
voure him self to have a wise grave gesture, Hippocratesin his Porrhet.
because that if it so chance as he adjudged it should, he might reap
honour, goodvvil, not only of the patient, but alsoo of all the circumstants,
and behoulders: Contrarilye if that othervvyse it happened or chanced then he
said, and judged it should, and that his judgement fail him, he shall not
only of all me be hated but alsoe be esteemed as an ignorant, sottish
fellovve. Beyond all this Galenus says, and testifies unto us, that by our
upright, and sincere judgment, by the friends Kindrede of the patiete,
although he come to dye, we shall be liberated, freed from all bad reports
sclaunders, because that through the death which consequently followed,
nothing shall be alleagede against us.

What a Chyrurgiane ought to know in giving judgement
And for the givinge of such a perfect, and complete judgment, it is necessary
for the chyrurgiane not to be ignorant, which parts of the body being
wounded, easily, or difficultlye may be cured, which of the are praesent
death, and in fine, the tokens how to know what parts are wounded or
hurt, because that out of there natures, quallityes, dispositios, we may
certaynlye hope, or mistrust of their health, and safety.

Such judgement therefore ought to be taken, out of the very being, and
substance, or essence of the vvouded part, alsoe of the use, the action, and
situatione of the same, there must alsoe be noted, the proportione, and figure
of the same vvounde, and the accidents or other chances, which are incident
unto her, considering alsoe the complexione and temperature of the body, the
sex, the age, on his handelinge, and trafiqve, manner of livinge, the contrye,
the constitutione of the time then praesent, and one the time and season of the
year.

All great vyoundes are dangerous,
To conclude, all men that have received a great vvoude, are ether in danger
of death or in danger of being mutilate. We eesteme and account the vvounde
to be large, for three occasions: A great vvounde is taken three manner of
ways.
The first whereof is, because that through her latitude, or vvidnesse,
circumiacente places, she hath a threefoulde survayinge and measuringe to
wit, in length, bredthe, and debthe, as some there are which be deep
broadlye carvede: or right overthvvarte or cross vvyse vvholye percige
through the principalle muscles of any part, by the which alsoe sometimes
the bones are hevved cut quite through, broken, wherefore some times they
must be stitchte, bound and ligated together: or because that the veins, the
arteryes, or the sinneus themselves, come to be squised and plettered. The
second, cocerninge the vvorthynes of the wounded part, for although the
vvounde be but little, in her meatinge yet notvvithstandinge we esteem her to
be great, because that the strength and action, of the wounded part or
member, is very necessary for the whole body 'and for the whole life of
man, which part having left his natural use and action, it consequently
follows that the personne, must immediately decease dye, as we may by
experience see that daily chances in the vvoundes of the Brains, of the
Heart, and in the vvoundes of the Liver.

Thirdelye, because that some vvoundes are of a vvorser nature, dispositione,
as being venoumede, rebellious, and entermingled with some bad and dolorous
accidents, which sometimes far surpass excel the vvounde it self, as it
is evidentlye planlye to be seen in the vvoundes of the Ioynctes, which
immediately, may fall into a very exceeding bad estate, because that those
parts and places are circumligatede or clothed with very small store of
flesh, being only decked co verede with the Tendones, with sinnues, with
Ligaments, that very tender, and sensible pellicle Perioflium, by the which
these parts or members are in more danger of falling into a convulsione of
sinnues, into Phrensye, payne, and inquietude, as much as a far more greater
vvounde in any other part of the body.

Those vvoundes are accounted incurable which do happen in the Brains,
Wounds which are esteemed incurable.
or in the ventricle of the same, in the Heart, entrace of the stomach, in the
Vena Cava, the entrace of the Liver, the back bone, quite through the Lunges,
in the small guts, or entralles, the stomach, the Kidneys, or in any great
veins, or arteryes about the throat. Wounds that be difficult to cure,
But these vvoudes which will difficultlye be curede are they by the which
the Lunges, the Liver, the mebrane of the Brains the Milte, the Matrix, or
vvombe, the blather, any of the great guts, or the Middelriefe, are vvouded
with very small vvounde. Alsoe are those vvoudes dangerous, whereas the
great veins, Wounds that are dangerous.
Arteryes, under the Emunctoria or arm pits, in the Hockes or bedinge of the
knees are wounded: and indeed all vvoundes are suspicious, in all places
vvheraboute any great Veins, or Arteryes are situated placed, because that
through their effusione of bloede, the wounded person is bereft af all his
ability forces: the vvoundes of the Secrete parts or privityes, and the
vvoundes of the Testicles are alsoe by this reason very perilous dangerous,
as alsoe are these which happen and chance to light between the fingers.

The figure or form of the vvoundes
There is alsoe great heed to be taken one the manner form of the vvoude: for
those vvoudes which chance, or come by crushinge, or pletteringe, are far
vvorse, then those, which are only hevvede, so that it is much better to be
vvouded with a sharpe edgede or cuttinge sword, the with any other blunt
vveapone which is not sharpe.

The round or circle vvoundes are vvorste difficultest to be curede, but the
certayneste easyeste to be cured, are those which pass by the length of the
fibres right like a linye or line.

The vvoundes of the Hipp, which are received in the membranous muscle, What
the vvoundes of the hipp are,
are very exceeding dangerous, especially if it be a thrust or stab,or
else when the apertione of the same is very small, hath no issue, but it is
so much the vvorse if it so chance there be any fracture or separatione of
bones, it be where it will in any place of the hipp: so far forth as if
the vvounde be in any internalle part of the Hipp, about the great veins,
then the vvounde is passing exceeding dangerous, for there ensuethe out of
hade some great inflammatione there unto, consequetlye thereafter a Gangraena,
or mortificatione: he that happens to receave a vvounde in the foremoste
part of his arm, is alsoe subject unto the same danger of inflammatione,
and mortificatione, and causes great payne trouble, because that those
vvoundes most commonly are present death.

What we ought to judge out of the accidents of vvoudes.
Now as much as belongs unto the judgement opinione, which is to be
considered noted out of the accidents of all vvoudes, Hippocrates teaceth us:
in so much as in the great bad vvoundes, as are the vvoundes of the Sinues,
of the Tedones, of the Ioynctes, of the bones, little or no svvellinge or
inflammatione at all apperareth, illustratethe it self it is a very evell and
bad sign, for vvhye, it signifyethe unto us that those humours which
considering the payne should have assembled, packed themselves that vvaye have
circumcinglede themselves rovvnde about the vvouded part, have retracted
themselves into some principalle especial part of the body.

Accidetes of a de parted svvellinge.
Those vvoundes in the which there appearethe any svvellinge, or tumefactione
very selden or never fall into any Phrensye, or into covulsione of Sinnues,
because that the venomous humours, which might, ascend draw toward the
Brains or into the sinuishe parts of the body, have congregate and
gatherede themselves together about the vvounde: but if that one the sudden
the svvellinge without any evidente reason, as in example, in the applying
of any remedies, through purgations, or through phlebotomisinge or blood
lettinge, came to depart with draw it self into some other place and that
in such, as are wounded behind in there back bone, that person is troubled
with convulsione of synnues, through the with dravvinge of the matter, into
the sinnuishe parts of the backebone:and the vvounde being in the foremost
parts of the body, and the matter of the svvellinge, ascedinge vpvvardes,
through the great veins, toward the Brains, the patient strayghtvvay
fallethe into a madness Phrenesye: or if so be that the matter draw
toward the breast, then there ensue great intolerable stitches, or
Apostemations, because that those bad humours can not by any means possible
be consumed or vvastede, but descend sink down into the cocavitye of the
breast. And if that the svvellinge now departing be of a very high red
colloured, that thervvas store of blood therein, which is descended sunk
down toward the guts, then it necessarylye cosequentlye fellovveth that
the patient falls into the Blodye flyxe, or Dysenterye.

As far forth therefore as there procedethe any convulsione of synnues out
of a vvounde, The convulsione in vvoundes is very dangerous.
especially from any great inflammatione, that is a sign of death, for
therbye we may playnlye, note, mark that the synnuishe parts of the body,
must needs be hurt, and that the Brains are in some, or other passione.

If that into any vvoudes, which have fiercelye bled any Spasmus happen,
that is a bad sign.

All thrusts of the sinnues, and Tendones, Thrusts in the synnues are very
daugerous.
are very dangerous, and especially, when as the skin and the flesh
chance to shut together, for therein engenderethe a sharpe corrodinge matter,
which resuscitatethe and causes great intolerable payne, because she can
not by any meannes get issue, out of the which procedethe follovvethe
convulsione of synnues, inflammatione, and a Gangraene, or mortificatione. The
Organicke parts, which are vvholye cut of can no more be restored again.
In so much as any especial and principalle, or Organicke part, or any
instrumentalle part, totallye vvholye is hevved of, and sequestered and
separatede from the body, it can not by any means be restored and cured,
because that the blode, and the vitalle Spirits are vvholye exhalated,
through the great veins, which are clean a sunder, and that by the which
the cure must be done, and the foregoinge health again restorede.

The temperature of the body, the time of the year, the age the handling
and traffic, and the manner of the patients livinge, the knowledge of the
cotrye are a great help aid for the prognosticatione of vvoundes: a child,
or a yongema, which as yet is in-his grovvth will better and with more ease
be healed or curede, then an aged personne: and a strong ma, a great deal
sooner then a feeble, and debile person. A lean and sclender person, vvilbe
curedevvith more facility, then a thick, and gross lived man. And a sound
body far sooner, then a sick and corrupt body. That man which labours,
easier, then a stillsittinge and idle person. A soberman, far sooner, then a
bancketter, and one that haunt the hoores. The most conveniente time of the
year, to cure heal a vvoude, is in the fore summere or Vernal time of the
year, or at the least in such a time, in the which it is nether to hot nor
to could, because that extreme heate, or extreme could,are the enymyes of
all vvoundes, and especially the changinge of heate, of could, wherefore
alsoe the fore winter or Autunus, is very unprofitable for the same. In some
regions and countries, Other cosideratios to be his in prognosticatinge.
the vvoundes are ether easier, or difficulter to becurede: for at Rome, the
vvoundes of the head are difficulter to be curede, then the vvoundes of the
Legs, the which notvvithstandinge at Avignon we find clean contarye.

As far as the wounded person keep and continue his perfect Sense, and
memory nether gettethe any agues, we may then assure our selves, that the
vvounde will quickly and easily be curede. We ought not thetfore to
discourage the patient, although, he have an ague by the great vvoude, as
lunge as the inflammatione is yet before hand, and as lunge as there
engenderethe any matter. But an ague is very dangerous, Signs to the
contrary.
when she issuethe from a small vvounde and especially, when she hath lunge
continuance, after the inflammatione, and supuratione, or when she incitateth
the patient unto Phrenesye. When the patient parbrakethe against his will,
green gall, or immediately when he hath received the blovve, or at the time
while the inflammatione is as yet during, that is alsoe a bad sign,
especially in these which are wounded in a synnue, or in annye sinnuishe
place: But the parbrakinge, or vomitinge, which comes by the frevvil of the
patient. is nothing suspicious, especially in those, which are used to
vomitinge, if that a man praesentlye after meals, or after that the
inflammatione is come, or the vvounde being in the head, Consideration for the
vvonds of the head.
do not come to vomit. The Chyrurgiane must use great foresight, in givinge
judgement of the vvoundes of the Head, for the ancient Chyrurgians, have
always esteemed the doubtfulle suspect, because of other bad accidents
until the Fifteenth day, and the modern and, ionge professors, until the
hundred the day.

The Iurists, or lavvyers, have constituted and ordained fifteen days, for
the judgment of the vvoundes of the Head, to know of a certayntye, whether
the patient by occasion of that vvoude came to dye or not or by reason of his
own fault, or by any other occasion. Because therefore, that the younger
Chyrurgiane, shall not be over rash, in givinge of his judgment, least he
come te glyde and fall into any bad reports, or in any repraehensione. As
much as appartayneth unto me, I have known some, which have continued in a
very good estate unto the thirteenth, fourteenth, or until the fifteenth day,
and then have fallen into agues, and many other accidents, by the which they
in the end chased to dye. VVee must alsoe note, that all naughty and bad,
accidents most of all publish themselves, at the full Moon, more then at
other times, because as then all manner of moisture grovveth and increases
more, then in the decreasinge of the Moon, alsoe more in the summer, then in
the Winter.

The signs and tokens of the deadly fractures of the sculle, are agues in the
Winter, The signs of the deadly fractures of the sculle.
before the fourteenthe day, and in the summer before the seaventhe day: Item,
a naughty and bad colloure of the vvounde: little matter of the same:
mortificatione of that which is inflamed: slimy or viscouse consistence of
that which is corrupted: dries ariditye in the skin of the head, as it is
in a piece of pouldrede flesh, with a brouvvne, leadishe, and black
colloure, which signifyeth the beginning of the corruptinge and putrifyinge
of the sculle, which the vvaxeth ravve, as we may see, when it is rotten,
and grovvne black: whereas before it was even and smooth. Finallye we see
therein, a pale, and yellovvishe colloure, to vvitt when the foresayede bone is
vvholye corrupted rotten, through the purulent matter, which was sunk to
the grovvnde of the vvounde, and was there gathered together.

The patient begins to rage, he hath little pimples one his tongue, he
gets alsoe convulsione of synnues, one the contrary side of the vvounde:
some fall inte an Apoplexia vvheron follevvethe death. The Practitioners of our
times, have observed in all vvoundes, whether allreadye therein vveare a
Paralisis, or else thereafter happened thereunto: and onethe contrary side a
Convulsione, or sometimes also in the wounded part a Convulsione, and in the
other side a Paralisis, sometimes also in both the parts, ether a Covulsione,
or Paralisis, and sometimes one each side ether a Convulsione, or a Paralisis,
without the contrary side being in any sort thervvith infected. The good
signs of healinge, in the fractures of the Head, after that it is trepanede,
or else after that the broke parcels of bones, are taken out of the Head, are
these namelye when that the Membrane of the Brains hath her naturalle
colloure, and her naturalle motione stirring: when the engendringe and
grovvinge Flesh is red. When that the patient may easily turn about his
Neck, and alsoe easily vvagge his lower chavve bone. But in so much as the
Membrana hath no stirring, Bad signs.
and is black, leadishcolourede, lividouse or with any other bad colour
tainted defylede: Then the patient ragethe, vomits exceedinglye, falls into
a Paralysis, or in Spasmo, if that the Flesh of the vvounde be leadishe
colourede the neck the chavvebone both of the stad stiff all these are very
bad signs. And when the vvoode, is at a good estate, the begins the flesh
of the Membrane, or of the sculle to grow, and to vvax double, and fills
all the void places with flesh, that have bin open between the bones,
yea sometimes covers even as it vveare with pomegranate Kernells the scull it
self.

The tokens howe to know which parts of the body are wounded Cap, 3.
TTe vvoundes most commonly are knovven by there first aspect, alsoe sometimes
the place of the vvoude certifyeth unto us, what parts are internallye
wounded: But saying that it often times chauncethe, that these vvoundes',
which to our estimatione be not profound or deep, penetrate unto the
internal parts, we will here therefore recite the signs, by the which we
may know, what internal parts, within the body are vvouded, because there
by we may know, whether the patiete may be cured of them or not.

Signs vven the brains are hurt.
If so be that the Brains or else there Membrane is vvouded, the there issues
blood out of there Noses, with some alsoe out at there Ears commonly there
follows a vomitinge of choler: some lye almost out of the memory beside
themselves that although you call cry unto them, they give no answer:
others see in there faces as if they vveare affrighted feared: some turn and
wind there eyes, this way and that vvaye, as if they vveare touched stricken
by Gods hade, the third or the fifth day most commolye they fall into madness
Phrenesie: other get the Spasmu, before they dye: some there are which
pluck the medicametes from there Heads, so that the vvounde comes to lye
bare, vvaxeth could.

When as the back bone is hurt, Signs when the back bone is hurt.
or vvouded, the beginnethe the patient to be feeble lame in his sins, or else
he gets covulsione of synues, which is called Spasmus: leases the sense of
feeling, sometimes the patient can nether retain his urine, Sperma, or Stole,
but of it self departs from him.

If the Heart be vvouded, Signs when the heart is vvouded.
there issues out of the vvounde, great store of black, dence, or thick
blood, especially when the right side of the Heart is hurt: But when the
left side of the Heart is hurt, then issuethe out of the vvounde fine subtle
red blood the pulse of the patient is very debile feeble, variable, is very
pale coloured in his face: The could svveate in all his body bursts out,
and hath a very vnsaverye smelle, eve as we may note in other sicknesses of
lunge cotinuance. His hands and feet begin to be could, out of the which
present death ensues.

When the Lunges are hurt, the breaths the patient with great difficvltye,
The wounds of the Lungs.
divers times reiterateth, dravveth anevve his breath as if he there by sought
indevoured to do him self some solace coforte: he voydeth of ten times through
his mouth frothy blood, through the vvoude fair, red, vitalle blood,
with peepinge hissinge breathe: he endeavours for the most part to lye one
his vvouded side: others often times erecte them in there bed with out any
occasion: Some lying one the wounded side, can speeke, but turning
themselves one there sovvnde side are quite deprived of there speech: sometimis
they are bloesinge in there faces, sometime clean pale, and at the last issues
out of the mouth of the vvounde great quantitye of filthy matter,

The signs of a wounded Liver are these; The Liver being hurt.
nalye that out of there right side they avoid a great quatitye of blood:
Both sides of the body, are as it vveare plucked toward the back bone: The
patient is very pale in his face as if he vveare half dead: His eyes are
fallen invvardes, and hath intolerable payne, being ignorant through his
impatientie what he shall do: he is't best at ease when he lye the one his
belly: he hath a very pricking stinging payne, which dravveth toward his
breast, and also toevvarde the sides of the same. Heavinge and contractinge his
shoulders together must he breathe, and sometimes through, parbrakinge he
avoydethe choler. Hath a very violent, fervent pulse, he is easily incesed
to ire, sorrow: sometimes he hath an ash coloured face, his urine alsoe
sotymes very bloody: his stoels like matter, and dye most comonlye, with the
Hickcoughe.

When the kidnyes are hurt, then descedeth as it vveare by degrees comethe the
payne into the flanckes, Of the wounds of the kidneys.
and so forvvarde unto the testicles: the patient can very difficultlye be
released of his urine, he pisseth blood, or at the least his water is
bloody. Sometimes his urine is quite retaynede, by the which occasion, the
patiete being extreamlye svvollene dies.

The milte being hurt.
If the Milte be hurt or wounded, then the blood issues out of the left side
of the paciete, is blak of colour. The same side, alsoe the stomach begin
to be indurated, harde: the patient vvaxeth thirsty the payne retracteth it
self towards the breast, as in the vvoundes of the Liver.

The vvobe being hurt.
Now the VVombe being hurt the vvoma has great payne in her flanckes, in
her Haunches, in her hippes: she avoydeth blood partly through the vvounde,
and partly through her privityes, after the which sometimes follows a
parbrakinge of Cholera Others ca not speak: some lye out of memory others
which do not rage, say that they are troubled with great payne in there
sinnues, in there Eyes: when they draw toward death, they are troubled
with the same accidetes, which we have recited of the Heart.

The Middle reefe,
When the middle reefe or Diaphragma is vvouded, the are the sides of the
patient drawn, shruncke vpvvardes: they have exceeding great violent payne,
internallye in the back bone: they have very retardate breathe, and there
issues out of the vvounde frothy blood.

The entrance of the stomach,
The entrance of the stomach being hurt the patient beginnethe to have the
hick up, avoydeth choler: when as he eats or drinks, he casts it
strayghte way fro him again: he hath a small, feeble, obscure pulse: he
gets a little could svveate, with a cooling of all externalle parts.

The stomach the guts,
The stomach, that gut Ieiunum, have hoth of them one manner of token,
because that there meat drink issues out of the mouth of the vvounde
sometimes being half digested, and altered in Chylum: they feel a payne, as
if a man would rent tear there Heart out of there bodies: they get
hardness in there sides, sotimes alsoe parbraketh the patient Cholera, vpvvards
through the mouth, his spittle is bloody: betveen these two is no other
difference, then that the gut Ieiunu hath his place situatione somewhat lower
then the stomach.

The bladder beige hurt, we feel payne, Hurts of the bladder,
in the flanckes: that part of his belly a little above his privityes
extendethe stretchete it self: in stead of urine the patient pisseth blood,
or else the urine issues forth of the vvoude: the entrance of the stomach is
perturbed out of ordre, wherefore the wounded vomit Cholera, or at the least
are afflicted with the hick cough: they begin to vvax could in hands
feet, and consequently ensues death.

Instructione, how to give a certain report of all wounds whatsoever before
the magistrates. Cap. 4.
ALl such which before any magistrates, Codsideratione to be had before the
giving of report,
of any vvouded or sick personne, will are disposed to give report
instructione, shallby no means intrude themselfves, before that of the
magistraete they shall be requested thereto, sent for, saying that most commonly
proferede witness is repraehedable: he that takes such a thing in hand
ought first of all to visit and see the patient, because he might ripelye and
dilligetlye consider of al things, namelye especially one the greatness of the
dissease, one the situatione, place of the same, not only, as the may give
good instru^one, but alsoe, one all occasios, on the praedictione fore saying
of the vvoundes, without having vnadvisedlye therein hasted him self: for it
is a harde and difficult matter, to give a perfect coplet judgment of the
end of all vvoudes, or other sick persons, because of the accidents which
might chance thereunto, for those vvoudes, which we do not esteem of
sotimes are occasion of death, cotrarylye those of the which we expected
nothing but death, are yet notvvithstandinge cured. We know, that some there
are cured healed, notvvithstandinge although they vveare wounded in the
Membrane or pellicle of the Brains yea some which vveare hevvede in the
substance of there Brains: as I alsoe remember some to have bin cured, which
vveare hurt in the luges, in the Middlereefe, in the Liver, in the small
guts or etralles, the Bladder, the Kidnyes, or in the Matrix or vvombe.
Although we according to the judgement reason of the ancient professors,
esteem such vvoundes to be deadly incurable. Contrarylye we se some me men
dye of small and vndiepe vvoundes: we must therefore in such things make a
distinction among the wounded for some there are which are of so good a
temperature, and state of body, that of a great and large vvounde which in
any other mans body wear praesent dea the, they are cured: contralye there
are others which being wounded in any externalle parts, which are
nothing nocete or daugerous to the life of the patient, without any
penetratione, of the which, notvvithstandinge they chance to dye, ether of
the bad costellatione, or constitutione of the time, or by the refluxione of
any bad humours unto the wounded part.

Some me dye of a small wound.
Although therefore, that some vvoundes are curable, and alsoe of a good
constitutio dispositione, without any bad or cotrarye sign therein to be
marked, but for all that we may not give any absolute judgment or report of
the same, but must only say that the vvounde is curable, so far forth as
there be nothing praetermittede, which consists and belongs as well in
the patient as unto the Chyrurgiane which has him inhandes, it belongs
alsoe unto the circustantes, and unto other external things.

The judgment must be provident lye given.
We must thefore suspede our judgement, and keep it in secrete for a season,
without givinge any absolute report the first day, because that the good or
bad signs ca not so soon reveal and disclose themselves: we must alsoe
consider that all vvoundes must have there originalle, there increasinge, and
there estate, and during this time, seek by all means possible to repress
the vntemperatenes, which is fallen into the wounded part, through the
blovve, through the external air, which striveth with nature, against the
which nature strengthenethe and fortyfyeth her self, to expel and drive
away the foresayed vntemperatenesse, during the which time, we can not
certaynlye know, which of the shall obtain the victory, the only some
time thereafter, vvhenas the foresayed vntemperatenesse makes her self
known, through any signs which she reveals in the concurringhe humours
because nature, through certain signs, doth demonstrate that she hath
obtained victory, and is become the mistress of that vnteperatenesse. These
signs and tokes are especially known, by the matter before had: and because
that the purulence or matter, is not engendered the first day, it necessarilye
follows that on the first day, we give not any absolute report of a
vvounde, but must first consider, whether it is bent, because that nature one
the days of Crisis demonstrates her self, by the which we may judge of the
end of the sickness. The first, and certanest day of the Crisis is, the
seventhe, for the fourth, is not indeed the day of the Crisis, but well the
demonstratinge day of the seventh, which is the upright and trevve day of the
Crisis. After the seventh, follovvethe the eleventh, of the which the seventh
is the demonstratinge day, then the fourteenth day follows, after that the
tvventithe, and then the last is the fortithe: For if that before the fortith
day, we perceave no bad signs, it is then evidet and plain enough, that
the vvounde vvilbe easily cured.

It is best therefore that we do not report or give any judgment before the
seventh day be passed by, in which time, When that the report must be done.
the accidetes begin to reveal these (...) ^her on as the we must have a
specia^ (...) ^de and care, whether there be more good, then bad accidetes
before hades, or the contrary, we must consider one these signs, three manner
of ways: For they reveal themselves ether in the quality of the body, of
the wounded part, or in the livinge, and vitalle in the animaele, or
naturalle actions: Or in the excremetes, which are common, or in the whole
body, alsoe in the particular excrementes, which the vvoundes reject and
repelle from them. The signs which reveal themselves in the qvalitye of the
body, are considered, when we regard on the figure, and one her colour:
the animaele, and spirituale actions, consiste in the stirring, in feeling,
and in reason. The vital, or the livinge actions, consist in the pulse: and
the naturalle actions, cosiste, in the appetite, in the digestinge, and in the
expellinge and drivinge forth of the excrementes. The common excrements of the
whole body are the filthynes of the Nose, the tears out of the Eyes, spittle
out of the mouth, or the substance and filthy matter of the guts, the urine,
or that which we opvvards parbrake: The particular excrementes, are filth,
matter, ad the blood: in which excrementes, we must mark and note the
quantitye, the consistence, colour, smelle, and sometimes alsoe one the taste:
saying that if there be more good, that is so much the better: we must alsoe
note, that through the actions we may best judge of the forces. Having thus
therefore togethere considerede and noted all these things, the Chyrurgiane
shall be able to geve his sentence and report certaynlye, ether of life, or of
death, of lamnes or criplenes.

THE FIRST TREATISE OF THE OPERATIon of Chyrurgerye, wherein is discoursede and
handelede of the means and way how te extract and draw forth any
alienate thing out of the body containing five Chapters;
Of the profit, and necessity that comes to draw all alienate things out
of the body. Chap. 1. How the Chyrurgiane, convenientlye and fitlye
extractinge and dravvinge forth the bullet, ought to consider marcke their
diversityes, and in what parts or places they lodgeor are collocated. Chap.
2. We ought to extract and draw forth the pellet, or any other things,
if it by any means, be possible, at the first dressinge. And praemeditate,
one the means, how we should best and convenientest effect the same. Chap.
3. After what manner we shall draw forth those bulletes, which stick
fast in the bones. Chap. 4, That the Chyrurgiane ought not to be too curious,
in extractinge or dravvinge forth of the bullet. Chap. 4.
Of the necessity, and vtilitye, of the extraction or drawing forth of all
strange things. Cap. 1.
The excellentie of Chyrurgerye.
Amongst all operatios of Chirurgerye, the ancient Chyrurgians of old
times, have especially considered, one the hadlinge, where with all we most
convenientlye, and aptly, drevve forth out of mas body all manner of strange
alienate things, as are Bullets, Arrovves, and all other sorts of vveapons,
or all pieces of brokene bones, and many other such like things as being most
necessary, for this foresayed operatione.

It is a Chyrurgiane full of craft,
That out of the body can pluck shaft.
An excellent similitude.
And even as in the vvarrelike affairs, those Capitaynes are esteemed to be
most courageous and valiant, which one the sudden can best discern and
know there enemies. and allure and as it vveare draw them, forth to their
own furtherance, to battle: oras in chasinge, those hunters are esteemed
fittest and expertest, which suddaynelye can discover, or disclose, the
harbour of the persecuted dear, and knows how he may with al foresight
chase the same: Even so have the Physicians alsoe, had those Chyrurgians in
great estimation, which first of all, have found out that part of mans
body, in the which the bulletes, or Arrovves, or any other alienate things
have bin hidden and lodged, and which have had knowledge science fitlye
convenientlye to draw them therout: considering that through there
continuance in the same, above al things they are clean contrary unto us
unsufferable, as that which is dead, livinge: so it is a hinderance unto us,
and especialye to that part, wherein the foresayede weapon, stickethe, and
that as well of it self because that it vvholye, hinderethe the curing of the
vvounde, or else because it bringethe to gether many heavye accidents, the
which is cause of lamnesse or criplenesse in the wounded part: or else
causes the health which we suppose to have gotten not to be perfect, and
sure, but is subject unto a far vvorse return renueinge of the same. Yet
for all that I know some which are cured, Some me are curede containing the
bullet in the body.
in the which the bullets as yet tarryae in some parts of there body wit
hout being necessary to have searched for the same to curiously, or to pluck
it out although that we might easily have attained there unto, touched it,
because of the danger that thereof might ensue: as for example, a violent
bleedinge through laceratione of some vain, or arterye: any great violet
payne, through the stretchinge or dravvinge for the of some synnue, or
Membranes: An especially it is not necessary, curiously to search after such
things, or to draw them forth, which ca not rot, or corrupt, as that
which easily, or in time can come to rot. But yet it is allvvayes better,
that all which is strange and alienate unto mans body, and is contained in
the same, be dravvene therout, then to let it tarry therein, because that the
health (as we have al ready said) is far surer, concerning the danger,
that is then present, to cause the cured vvounde again to burst open, when as
the bullet, or any such like thing, comes to repraeset himself: or that we
should not be constrained to make an apertione any where, whether the fore
said bullet through his ponderousnes might chance to be descended.

Which are the strange things,
The Strange things of the which in this place we have spoken, are of two
manner of sorts, for they are, ether external, as Iro, vvoode, bullet, stone,
or vvolle: or they are any substance of our bodies, as any splinters or
parcels of bones, the cogealed blood, which we notvvithstandinge esteem it
strange, because they are separated from our bodies, and are no more
partakers of our life, or vital spirits, as they vveare before when they as
yet vveare all one with them, wherefore they are now become strange.

The intete of the Author,
My intent purpose is nothing else, then to describe unto the yonge
Chyrurgiane, the practice, of all bullets, and of al other strange things,
which might thervvith enter mingle themselves, or thervvith might be crushed
to pieces, how to draw the out of the body: Because in th^se our days
here in France there is no other shot used: saying that the knowledge of
the extractinge of the same, may easily lead us unto the knowledge, howe to
draw forth shaftes, Arrovves out of mans body, of the which the ancient
professors have very copiouslie written.

Howe that a Chyrurgiane aptly fitlye to draw a bullet out of the body, ought
to consider their difference, the nature of the part, in the which it is shot.
Chap. 2.
THe Chyrurgiane being requested and desired to draw forth the bullet,
Wherein consists the danger of dravvinge forth of bullets.
having pierced penetrated some part of the body with least trouble,
hinderance to the patient fitlye, finelye to accomplish the same, because that
sometimes they are drawn forth with insufferable payne, shall first of all
consider mark, that the danger consists, ether in that part, in the which
such bullets are shot, or in the species forms, and difference, of the bullets:
it is therefore first of all necessary, that he observe, and know, the
nature and qvallityes of those parts, for some parts will more gently and
softly be handled, then others: wherefore he must consider, on the substance,
qvantitye, figure and form, compositione, vnitinge, originalle, temperature,
and one the necessity use of the same part. To the which end purpose, he
must note what vvoudes, in the which the bullets have bin shot, are
incurable, or difficult, or easy to be cured, because that we may admonish,
the friends, and kindrede of the patient, of those accidents which might
happen unto the vvoude, the bullet being drawn therout, alsoe of the
certayntye or fear, which through the danger, we are to expect, of the
healinge of the same. Advise of Celsus.
For first of all Celsus says, that a prudent, and vvyse Chyrurgiane, shall
not at any time take in hade, such a patient, for whom it is impossible to
be curede, escape death, because he administer no occasion unto others to
suspect, think, that he hath bereft the patient of life, which othervvyse
through the bad fortune of his wounds is deceased. And saying that the
danger is great, but yet notvvithstadinge entermingled with some good hope,
the he shall admonish the friends of the patient, that the matter is heavye,
and suspect, because if so be the art science, be suppressed, and overvvonne
of the dissease, that they should not as then think, ether that he hath not
known thereof, or else that he hath sought to abuse the friends. But that such
is the office, and the duty, of a vvyse and prudent Chyrurgiane, also is it
the fact of a Runagate Qvacksalver and deceaver, to make any thing, seem
to be very dangerous, which of it self is easy, and light, because we
should think, more art to be in him, then indeed theris. It is alsoe
seemlye, that the Chyrurgiane cofessinge, the cure to be easy light, do pane
his credit, reputation, because as the he might the more vvillinge, think one
that, which might be most commodious and profitable, to the curing and
healinge of the patient, and that the dissease which of it self is small,
through the negligence of those, of the which the patient is kept, be made
no greater.

To this end Paulus Aegeneta counceleth us, Opinione of Paulus Aegineta.
that if so be, the bullet continue, or tarry, in any of the vvorthyest
parts of the body, as in the Brains, Heart, Liver, or throat, in the
kidneys, bladder, or Matrice, and the signs, tokens of death revealinge
themselves we cannot by any means possible convenientlye without great
pains, dilaniatione of the wounded part draw forth the foresayed bullet,
that as the we may not offer to touche it, because that without doing any
good or furtherance, we do not administer unto the ignorant common poeple,
any occasion, of evell speaking or blaminge us.

But allthoughe the issue of the vvounde, be as yet uncertain, having
admonished and fortoulde the danger, Many men preserve there lives above the
opiin of the Chyrurgian.
we may with Gods help take the cure in hand: because that some having an
Apostematione, in any of the vvorthyest parts, against the opinione
certayntye of the Chyrurgiane, have as yet beheld praeserved there life: yea
we have alsoe seen beheld some, in the which a parcel of there Liver, one
part of the Epiploon, the whole VVombe hath fro them bin separated, or
hevved cut of, the patient for all this hath bin cured, and praeserved to
life. We have alsoe at some times in a vehemete great squinantie, pierced made
an apertione in the throat. But if so be that we suffer the bullet to
continue in the body, or in any part of the same, without extractinge of
the same, when that easily he may be drawn forth, it necessarylye
follows, that the patient must dye therofe, it might also bring the
Physician, or Chyrurgiane into the name of beige cruel, mercylesse, where
other vvyse the bullet beige drawn forth, it might be that the patient might
as yet be curede, wherefore the Chyrurgiane must always endevoure do the
best he can, when he hath forttoulde, admonished the friends of the patient,
of the danger, because some times great fearful vvoudes beyode the
expectatios of all me are cured, wherefore we ought not at any, time to
permit or suffer the patiete without help or succour, where there is any
small hope of being cured. We must not at any time leave the patient.
And all though that all things of this our operatione fall not out
according unto our mind, yet notvvithstandinge, must not we leave to
effect that which this art science reqvireth, that which our conscience
vvitnesseth unto us.

Consideration of bulletes,
Above all that the Chyrurgiane must considere, on the wounded part, he must
alsoe farther consider one the difference, varietye of bulletes, which
consists, in the matter, form, qvantitye, number, and facultye of the same.
As concerning touching the matter, although that the foresayed bulletes,
most commonly are of lead yet for all that sometimes the besieged, they that
skermishe in the feelds are constrained to use tin bullets, Copper, pieces of
iron, steel, peasen, yea alsoe little stones or pebbles. As concerning the
figure or form thereof they are most commonly rovvnde, although there are some
shot with three corners, some four corners, some of other fashons.
Touching the qvantitye, there is great difference concerning the greatenes of
the pieces, by the which the bullets are shot. As for the number,
constitutione of the foresayed bullets, there are some which shoot, with
more. the with one bullet, with some which are fastened the one, with the
other, with little chained Bullets, with hayle shot, which spread
themselves, in the body of a man. Speaking of the forces or faculties, of
bullets I have not as yet geven any credit unto them that said the bullets
might be poysened, because as yet there hath bin never a famous Chyrurgiane
which ever had a venomous shot vvounde in hand in these our times which
hath made any metione therofe, as is playnlye showed, in the discourse of the
deceased the right vvorshipfull M Ambrosius Pare, chief Chyrurgiane to the
king his majesty which hath very learnedlye discussed as it vveare
grovvnded this questione in his boockes of Chyrurgerye.

The bullets, all other strange things ought in the first dressinge to be
drawn forth, so far as it is possible to be done: of the means how to
effect the same. Chap. 3.
WHen that the Chyrurgiane shall have considered, one the part, also a little
observed, one the varietye, difference of bullets, he shall choose, a certain
number of instruments which cotinuallye he ought to have by him, especially
those, vvich he supposes to be most fittest to draw forth the fore said
bullet with most facility ease. We must endevoure to draw forth the bullete
at the first dressinge.
The which he shall at the first dressinge, without any longer delay, unto
the next day, put in ur and practise: for the bullet being drawn out,
shall the patient, Chyrurgiane alsoe be freed from great danger, the which
both of them with all right ought to desire and lunge for. The bullet may
alsoe praesentlye, while the vvounde is fresh green, be felt with the
finger, or most fitlye with the privet or searchinge iro without tarrying
until the next day, because that the wounded part, through any
concurringe humours, svvelleth out of hade, through the payne of the vvounde,
by the which the entrance of the vvounde comes to svvelle, as alsoe through
the force of the bullet, any of the Mebranes or Tedones, being bruised the
foresayed entrace of the vvounde, stops: because most comonlye shotten
vvoundes do not enter right, or liniallye into the body, but turning, alsoe
with any Membranes, or tendones rovvnde about vvounde, even ^ngled, as alsoe
the bullet through his ponderousnes, running this way or that way, chances
to fall into some hollovve place, which sometimes frustrateth, annihilateth
the knowledge of the Chyrurgiane, so that by any means possible, he can
nether touch nor find him: above all this, the foresayed vvounde, is the
second day more sensible, tender, then when she is fresh, as the patient
allsoe while that the vvounde is fresh warm, is better able to abide the
sovvnding or searchinge iro, or privett: that which is more, the wounded
having obtained no time to think, The vvouded feels not his vvoude at the
first.
consider of his vvoude, his heart being as yet puffed up with vayn glory,
is not as yet at the first dressinge, posessed with any timorousnes or fear,
as he is in the second or third dressinge: wherefore in his frist dressige,
with more courage, patience, is able to bear the payne, and dravvinge forth
of the bullet.

First of all therefore, if so be that by any means we ca nether find nor
feel the bullet, to acomplisshe effect this work, fitlye convenientlye,
with the least trouble payne of the patient, we are constrained to cause the
patient to sit or stand, in such a form, posture, or, collocatione as he sate
or stood, when as the bullet was shot into his body, yea alsoe with the
same gesture, behavioure, One what manner we must set the patient
which he used: for the chainginge of the form as when we fight, or when
we are laid aloge, or when we stade upright, or being set down, causes
a great alteratione, in the being, and situatione, of these parts of the
patient, because the veins, arteryes, synnues, bones, muscles, may one so
many ways fashons be turnede vvoude, as they have divers uses, actions unto
the which they at fit, it be ether in the erectige, or in the stoupinge, or
in the turnige: which often times is the occasion, that altough we search,
feel for the bullet, any muscle lye any other way turned, then it did, when
the foresayed muscle was pearcede with the bullet, the vvoude in that place
most commolye being stopped, so that for the most part the searchinge iron can
not enter that place where the bullet lies: But when we shall have set the
patient on such a manner, as he stood, or sat, when he was shot, the come all
the parts into the same situatione, as they vveare when he was shot,
wherefore, as the the proof or searchge iron, may pass very easily,
without any let, eve into that place whereas the bullet lies. And so far
forth as the patient, cosideringe his great imbicillitye vveakenes, hath not
the strength to stade in that ordre, we must as the at the least, ether
sitting or lying, turn, wind him on such a manner, whether he sittige or
lying, in as much as is possible, as he was when he received the shot. Why
the wound must bedilated.
Now being in such a situatione, we are first of all counceled, if so be
the vvoude be narrovve, as alsoe all aunciete Chyrurgias teach 'vve must as
the dilate the vvoude, because the bullet, or that which is therein, may have a
free passage: for there is nothing, that causes more in flammatione, then
dilaceratione, or tearing of the flesh, when as with violence we seek to
draw out any thing out of the vvoude, wherefore it is better to make the,
dilatatione with a little rasore then with violence to tear op the vvoude:
further we must note, that in the dilatige of the vvoude, we chance not to
hurt any synnues, veins, or arteryes: the which if you perceave, you shall
eschevve avoid the, or with a little blunt hoocke pluk them one the one
side, proceed betrvvixt them, as Celsus in his 5 cap. of his seaveth book
teaches us.

After that we sufficietlye dilate the vvoude we must them search for the
bullet or that which is shot in the vvounde, The second instructione.
feel first of all with your finger, if it be possible, as with out doubt it
is, the best searchinge iron in feeling we must consider what way the
bullet hath taken, if it be deeper the the length of your finger, as then we
must use there unto the common searchinge iron, which must be reasonable thick,
and at the lower end very rovvnde, for if so be, it be to sharpe pierces,
and goes between two muscles, with out follovvinge that way which the
bullet vvet.

When as therefore we have certaynlye fovvnde out the bullet, The third
instruction.
the third instructione is that we draw him forth to the effectinge of the
which, there is nothige surer, the to draw him through the same place, by
which he entered, especially when he hath not penetrated to deep, or passed
through any great vain, arterye, or synnue because the way is allreadye
made, wherefore we need not make any other inscisione.

Amongst all instruments which ever I have used, I have contented my self best,
In scisione one the contrary side.
with that instrumete, which we call, the spoonevvyse, or spoonefashoned
bullet dravver, because this instrument, may both be used fore a searge iron, a
bullet extractor alsoe, so that as soon as we heervvith feel the bullet we
may alsoe at that time, pluck him out: but pearcinge very deep, one the
cotrarye side is little substance, without great veins, we with our fingers
may feel the bullet, it is the better, rather couceled, there to make an
apertione, namelye, on the contrary side, of the entrace of the bullet, then to
draw the same by the way which he entered, considering the great distace,
and space, through which he being drawn backvvardes, must of necessity
pass bye, as alsoe the payne is far greaater, when with the bullet, with
the instrument, the vvoude internallye comes to tear, bruise the Flesh, the
when by inscisione we dilate the vvoude, by which she is alsoe sooner cured,
because that which is cut, more re easier sooner is healed, then that which
through dilaniatione is wounded: and if it be possible, the foresayed
inscisione must be made right under the bullet, but sovvhat greater then the
bullet, because the we need not draw him forth with any violence, do not
chance to lacerate the vvoude: This being in this sort finished, we shall
find the bullet a great deal nearer unto us, more easier to be drawn
therout, without passing by to great tedious a vvaye, in the dravvinge forth,
of that way by the which he entered, Vtilitye of inscisione.
yea which is more, the vvounde will a great deal sooner be cured, and with
less danger, the vvounde having two issues, to wit the one under, the
other above, partly because she may receave the remedies the better, as alsoe
cosideringe the matter, which one both sides hath her issue, which othervvyse
might be retained, collect or gather it self together in the bottom of the
vvounde.

As soon as the bullet is draw forth, we must show it the patient,
because he may be joy full glad, to be released of that which was such a
molestatione trouble unto him, and was cause of so great payne, and by the
which he might have gone so lange a time with payne, without being thereof
cured: we must endevoure by all means, ether by dravvinge him forth, through
his entrace, or else through the cotrarye side of the vvounde, well knovvinge
howe to effect this dravvinge, with all fitnes, conveniece, because we
should not forsake the vvouded, nether discourage him, through our lunge
operatione, or vvorkinge: effect that alsoe with the least payne possible,
because that the payne of the wounded patient therbye, which is great might
not be increased, Instructione howe to work vvyselye.
for it is to great a shame, to bring a wounded person which bath enough
to suffer, into greater sufferace payne: we must alsoe dilligently note, that
we do not bye any means hurt any particular part, and especially the
great veins, arteryes, or synnues, or any other vital parts, one the
which we must have an especial eye, and care: for it would be to great a
disgrace, shame, thinckinge to draw forth the bullet to do more harm, the
if the bullet had stayed therein.

What sotimes deceaveth the Chyrurgyane.
We are oft times deceaved, nether ca we alsoe find the bullet, because he
is clothed, with cotton, with vvolle, or with any other parcels of
apparel, which the f^re said bullet, carries into the body with him: or
else because the flesh, or the Membranes which are bruised, or with violence
of the bullet have bin rete, cover the foresayed bullet. It is alsoe sometimes
evident, that the foresayed bullet, erreth fro his right way, chances to
come somvvhether a side, into some other part, yet notvvithstadinge, having
in the passage met with any bone, is for all that removed into some other
place, as between any muscles, between any Mebranes, or betvvee any
ligametes, wherefore the Chirurgiane not finding of the same, searchinge for
him accordige to the rectitude of the vvoude, must turn, wind the instrument
one all sides, feel with his hades one the out side not only the vvouded
part, but alsoe the circumiacent places, because therbye he might know
whether that the bullet might be suck: which he shall discern, and mark,
ether cosideringe any payne, spaninge of the skin, hardness, or through any
blevvnes or cerulitye, which comonlye, is noted seen about that vvouded
part, where, the bullet is covayed, sunk. We must also dilligetlye note,
that when as we think to have found the bullet, we do not rashelye make
an inscision, before vvea are certified of the place of the bullet, and so
draw him forth of the same: for that Chyrurgiane vveare vvorthye to be
laughed to scorn, which ca not accoplishe his praetended purpose after that
he hath so intolleratlye tormented the patient.

Albove all this, we must note, and mark, The bullet sometimes carries
sothinge with him in to the body.
whether the bullet have trailed nothing with him into the vvounde, as
paper, vvoole, cotte, linne, or any thing else of the patients clothinge, or
apparel, or alsoe any parcel of the patietes armour, or harnas, or any
pieces of vvoode, stones, or iron, which the bullet mightby any means have
carried with him into the wound: as such a thing might well chance, when the
bullet any where against a vval, or against ons harnas, on the which the
fore said bullet chances to rebound, breaking, receavinge some small
parcel of that on the which he plettered, carries it with him into the
body: If so be there be any such like thing, carried, into the vvoude with
the bullet, we ought to have no less care of that, yea rather more, the one
the dravvinge forth of the bullet, for such things are vvholye cotrarye unto
nature, because they corrupt and rot in the vvounde, out of the which
needs, must follow some great Inflamatios, or Apostematios, so conseqvetlye,
the vvounde in a loge time ca not be cured, which othervvyse might easily be
cured, much sooner, although that the bullet as yet tarried therine,
especially if that the bullet be of lead, because that lead, vnitethe makes
it self all one with our nature. Means how to know whether the bullet have
take any thing with him.
And perfectly to know, whether the bullet have carried any such thiges
with him, we must consider, one the harnas, if that be any vvheare torn, or
broke, if it be a mayled doublete, how many mayles there are vvantinge, the
which one that makes mayle doublets easily ca tell you: we must alsoe note,
the patietes apparel, his shirt, whether there be any great or small pieces
thereof torn rete: or whether there be one, olye hole fovvnde there.

How we ought to draw forth those bullets which stick fast in the bones, or
in the iunctures or ioynetes of the same: alsoe what we ought to note whenas
the foresayed bones are crushed, beaten to pieces. Chap. 4.
Those bullets which stick fast in any bones, are very difficult to be
drawn out.
THe greatest davnger that consists in dravvinge forth of a bullet is, when
the fore said bullet sticks fast, in any bone, or in any ioyncte
between the bones. If so be the bullet, stick fast in any bone, it is
most convenient that as the we draw him forth, with that instrument which
we call Extractor, or Grovvnde dravver whereof we must set the point one the
bullet, wide it very fast in the same, when it is therein fast, we must
softly easily try, if he will not follovve, turnige the hands, this way
and that way, the better to make him loose, and stir. But if so be that we
can not so soon get out the bullet we must then suffer him, to continue
therein some certain days, with in the which time, the external flesh
will begin to rot, through the which the vvoude vvilbe somewhat dilated,
vvyder, and the bone will somewhat disclose open, during the time, we must
everye day stir the bullet, with the instrument lift him up because that thus
doing, the foresayed bullet might by little little be removed Loosed: and if
that we perceave that the bullet sticks to fast, can not by any of the
fofsayed means bedravvne out: then is this the last remedy, that we quite,
clean pearce and boar through the bone, with the Extractor or elsi with
the point orpiramide of a Trepane, pearce boar, against, rovvnde about the
bullet in divers places, Elevatorium or vpheaver.
because there may be made some place for an Elevatorium, on that sort to lift
up the bullet drevve him therout, if that with all gentleness it may by any
means possible be brought to pass for we are in no vvyse counceled, with
violence or vehemence to effect it. And if it be a little and small bullet,
that he stick in any place fast, as in the middle of the greatest focile of
the shin bone, or in the middle of any rib, or in the sternon, or in any
bones of the head, we are as then counceled, to trepane that bone, setting
the Trepane on the bullet, so that the fore said bullet, be rovvnde about
compassed vvithinthe circkle of the Trepane, and that then the trepane might
abolish and take away all that, which retained and held fast the bullet.

On what sort we must draw forth a bullet out of a ioyncte.
But when the bullet is any where, in any ioyncte pierced penetratede
betvvene two bones, as for example, in the knees, we must then as easyely as
it is possible, endevoure with the instrument to stir the bullet hither,
thither, hut allvvayes straight forevvarde, now toward the hipp, and then
toward the leg because that therbye we might the better, vnshutt make
loose, with the least payne that may be, the ligametes, tedones, which
cotayne houlde the ioyncte so close together: by the which apertione, and
dravvinge forth the space, distance between the bones, vvilbe a little
dilated, so that at length, with less payne trouble, with the little
spoonevvyse bullet dravver, we shall be able to draw forth the bullets. But if
we feared, least we should put the patient to some intolerable payne,
through the distendinge of the ligamentes, tedones, my council is as the,
that the yonge Chyrurgiane, endevoure, to follovve and use the same, which I
did or have used on my lord of Floyon: which in the skirmish of Maestricht,
A notable History.
got a shot in his knee, the bullet lying fast, occulte in the iovncte
betvvee the bones, the which nether I, nor any chyrurgianes, of Do Ihon of
the Eeaste, could find, at the last it seemed good unto me, against the
opinios of all the rest, we should shut fouled together the knees of the
patient: which he doing with some payne, the bullet, through the fouldige of
the Knees, the bones which placed pressed themselves together, was drive
therout, revealed it self externallye, under the skin, and one the sides of
the foresayed ioyncte, where I having made a little inscisione, my self have
take the same forth of that place.

In like sort, if so be the bullet, We must dilate the vvounde if the bone be
dilacerated
have rebovvnded against any bone, and the bone through the violence thereof be
broke, crushed to divers pieces, the bullet as yet remaining therein, or else
having pierced quite through, it is as then the surest way to dilate the
vvounde, as far forth as the wounded part is able to suffer, it, that ether
in the entrance, or issue of the vvounde, at the least if it have an issue: the
which being finished, we strayghtvvayes with the finger, or with any
other instrumete, must search for the spliter, and finelye draw forth, those
parcels which vvholye are separated fro the bone, alsoe in like sort, the
bullet, if so be as yet he sticks therine: if that there vveare any great
pieces, or parcels of the bone, which as yet are not vvholye separated fro
the bone, but are yet fastened vvithe the Periostium, or the ligamentes, we
must not with any violence draw the forth, because through such violence
we might urge great payne convulsione of synnues, wherefore it is far better
to place situate them by the bone, on the which as yet they are half
fastened: For nature, expellethe them most comonlye vvithe the matter forth of
the vvounde, without any payne, they separate alsoe fro the bone, through
the increasinghe of the new flesh, the which repells the same from him,
or else in time they conjoin themselves together, and are so again cured, as
I have of te times known the same to chance, and as yet in fresh memory,
Monsr. de la Tour, ordinated and chosen gentleman of the kings chamber of
presence, which in the Baricades, or Treches of Parris, got a shot in his left
leg, the entrance whereof was in the oppermoste part of his shin bone,
breaking the least focile, in divers pieces, of the which also one piece of
the same focile came forth, through the apertione, which the foresayed piece,
through the violence, blovve of the bullet, had made himself, which cleanlye
pierced througe the Muscles called Gemini Solores, wherefore m'Habricot, Barber
Chyrurgia at Parris, made an inscisione in the foresayede muscles partly to
extract draw forth those splinters forth of the same, partly, to restore
again those broke pieces of bones, into the vvounde, which as yet vveare not
separated fro the Periostium: and is in the space of two months again cured,
the foresayed pieces of bones being therein very sovvndelye healed, and I
alsoe have treated him until such time as he was vvholye fully cured.

The bullet sometimes pierces through the grissles.
Sotimes the bullet pierces clean through, some cartilage or grisselye part,
or through some Tendones, which being softer the the bone, doth not break,
but only splitteth asunder or bends it self, as soon as the bullet is
passed bye, erects it self again, occludeth, the passage, where under the
bullet hide the himself, the which, al though we endevoure to search for
with our fingers or searchinge iron, it for al that is impossible we should
find him, which comonlye chances in the vvoudes of the breast, when as the
breast bone is pierced. As I remember such to have chanced, in my lord of
Malicorne being wounded, hurt before Maillezes in Poittou.

How that the Chyrurgiane ought not be to curious in searchinge out the bullet.
Cap. 5.
Good doctrine for a Chyrurgiane.
ALlthoughe, the bullet be of any strange, alienate, substance, yea alsoe as
intolerable for nature, as is the livinge with the dead, the principalle
intention, to cure all vvoundes is, that we must first separate that, from
the vvounde which oppugneth nature, yet notvvithstandinge ought not the
Chyrurgiane be too curious, in seeking all contrary things in the wound or
to too bold audacious, in dravvinge the out, except he lightly or easily,
can find them, vvithe small payne grief to the patient ca draw them out.
Because that often times, in the first, we can find nothing, but the vvoude
being come to good suppuratione, and matter, the bruised flesh rovvnde about
the bullet corruptinge rottinge, at the last makes him an apertione, through
the which nature in the end, expellethe the bullet without any pane, as is
the nature qvallytye of the vital livinge parts, to expel fro them the
mortified and dead parts: the which we ought to understand of all other
contrary things, which are retained in a vvounde: as sometimes being the
surest best way, that we recommend such things unto Nature, The Chyrurgiane
is the servant of nature.
follovve her instructions, then that we in vain torment, and molest the
same, saying that it is she only, which curethe the disseased, when as she
through the Chyrurgiane, as through her servat is opitulated helped: For I
have known many, and divers, which being shot, the bullet hath continued in
the body, are yet for all that perfectly cured, and that in short time alsoe,
without at any time thereafter to perceave any impediment thereof: which
especially chances the bullet being of lead, the which in time by little
little comes to unite it self and with our nature agrees: wherefore for a
renoumned example I will allege, the vvounde of Mosieur of Chardon, the
first gentleman, of my lord the Cardinalle of Bourbo, who being the
Chapelayne, of my lord of Angvie, hath gotten a shot in the skirmish of St.
Laurent, in the midst of his leg, of the which shot the bullet, remained
fast sticking therein, the vvounde being vvholye, compleatlye cured, without
perceaving in 28 year any hiderance or molestatione of the same, wherefore he
reqvested mr Pare, me, Example.
that we should remove take a way the fore said bullet from his leg,
fearing least that the same, in time, might be any hinderance or molestatione
unto him, the which we alsoe effected, finding the bullet united and
coalited together, as well with the bone, as with any Mebranes, and so fast
grovvne, and joined together, as if the bone, the membrane, the bullet, had all
of them bin but one substance. It happens alsoe sometimes that the bullet
through his ponderousenes, heavyenes by degrees, dessendethand sinks
dovvnvvardes, towards the exterior skin, The bullet through his
ponderousnes sinks dovvnvvardes.
that part notvvithstadinge being cured, through the vyhich he descedeth or
sinks, without the perceavige of the patient, where, without any great
trouble or molestatione of the patient, he may be cut out, which one this
manner is far surer, the if in the first we had tormented him heervvith,
brought him into danger of his life, considering the great dilaniatione or
tearing of veins, arteryes, and synnues, which the hardnecked and obstinate
Chyrstrgiane, in searchinge and in dravvinge forth of the bullet, might be the
cause of: wherefore I, in all sorts do council, that when the bullet, can not
by any means possible fitlye or convenientlye, without any great torment of
the patient be drawn forth, we as then quietly suffer him to tarry therein:
In thus doing we shall follovve the practise of the ancient professors, yea
alsoe of Hippocrates, An example of Hippocrates.
which recites to have cured a certain personage, which had received a shot
with an arrovve, in his flanckes, where of the head, or iron, tarried therein,
and yet against the opinione of all men, is thereof cured helped: which
foresayed arrovve head or piece of iron, six years thereafter he took from
him. Paulus Aegineta alleges, Paulus Aegineta.
that he hath of ten times seen, that the arrovves have bin lost in men's
bodies, that the same, in a lunge time thereafter, the vvounde being cured, are
through apostematione of that part come again to light revealed themselves.
Albucasis says, that he alsoe hath seen one, An example of Albucasis
which was shot with an arrovve into his shoulder, of the which shot, the
foresayed arrovve, therein stuck fast, yet for all that is cured, but that the
arrovve, seven year thereafter at the length through the bone Coccix is come
forth and taken out. Wherefore we must not be to curious, in dravvige forth
the bullet, with great danger, torment to the patient, to our utter shame
disgrace.

THE SECOND TREATISE OF THE OPEratione of Chyrurgerye, wherein is discoursed,
of the means, howe to Trepane the Cranium, of the Head, Containing six
Chapiters.
Of the signs tokens by the which we may know when there is a Fracture in
the Head. Chap. 1. Of the counterfracture, of the sculle. Chap, 2. Which
Fractures we ought to trepane. Chap. 3. How lunge, we ought to tarry,
before vvee proceed with the trepane. Chap. 4. How great a quantitye of
bone, we ought to take therout. Chap. 5. The manner, and methode of
trepaninge. Chap. 6.
Of the tokens, through the which, we shall know the fractures, of the sculle.
Cap. 1.
Chyrurgerye must not rashelye be effected.
THe operations of Chyrurgerye, which with great prudence, consideratione,
vvilbe effected, we must not all to rashly or overbouldlye begin them
saying, therefore that it is dangerous, to open the Cranium of the head,
before we may attain unto the operatione, we must dilligently and truly
consider, whether it be very necessary, or not, which is revealed unto us,
by those signs and tokens which the ancient Chyrurgianes have beqveathed
unto us: For the sign or token, is the demonstratione unto us, which
discovers, that which before lay occulte, hidden: The which fore said
tokens, of the wounded part, must be taken, and observed, ether of the
accidents which chance unto the vvounde, after the blovve, or fall, or allsoe
of the instrument, wherewith the vvounde was made.

We must therefore first of all note, Discriptione of the signs
which part of the head, hath received the struck namelye, whether the
Cranium, one this place be thin, or tender, thick or strong, because the
bones of the head, are not in all places of aequalle crassitude, or of aequall
tenuitye: (...) there we must mark, whether the vveapos, wherewith the
blovve was given, have allsoe cut of the hair, that it shevveth it self
right in the vvounde for if it be so, it is to befeared, that the bone is
bared or vncovered, out of the which we may easily judge, the Cranium to be
hurt, because that it is all most impossible, the hair to be cut through,
the which for the most part slips aside, with out hurtinge of the Cranium
or breaking there of. Having thus considered and noted all this we must
interrogate the patient, whether he have parbraked vomited any Cholera,
whether he lost not his sight, and his eyes darckened, whether he lost not
his speech, or hath voided any blood through his nose, through his ears,
or through his mouth, whether after the blovve he fell not down to the
earth, and there lay still, without any reason, as if he had bine one sleep:
For it is impossible that all these fore said signs chance unless the scull
were dilaniate, or broke. In like sort if the patient, lye without his
memory or reason, if he rage, if he be vexed with Paralisis, Divers accidetes
of the vvoundes of the head.
or with Spasmo, or with them both together, it is then credulous, that the
Membrana called Dura Matter, is hurt, and suffers great payne. And although
that none of these accidents have happened unto the patient, yet
notvvithstandinge all ways theris something doubtful, whether the Cranium
be hurt broken, or not: and to be thereof certified we are to note, with
what instrument the wound was made, as ether with a stone, with a stick,
with an iron, or with any other vveapons: also whether it wear great, or
reasonable great, light or heavye, smooth or rugged, whether the blovve was
smitten violently, or easily, with greath ire, fury, vpvvardes or
dovvnevvardes: of all the which we may be certified of by the patiete, when
as we ask him on what manner he was stricken, or from whence he is fallen,
vvherone, to wit on the earth, or on the pavement, whether he have great
payne, and in what place, for how easier the blovve hath bin stricken the
less fear there is of a broken scull: yet notvvithstandinge, there is nothing
surer, Celsus.
as Celsus says, the that we search the vvounde, give judgment through a
more surer sign, wherefore, if so be, the vvounde be great enough, we must
as then search it with the finger, scrapige the bone with your nail, one
that manner to perceave the rete, and dilaceratione, and if so be we can not
effect that with the finger, we must as the try it with the searchinge
iron, which must not be to gross and thick, nether to sharpe and thin,
because, if that per adventure we perceaved any natural hollovvnes of the
sculle, What form the searchinge iron must be of.
we should not think esteem it to be a dilaceratione, or fracture: nether
must the privet or searchinge iron be to thick, or gross, because it should
not praetermit overrune a little or small dilaceratione, without perceavinge
it, and staying there at. When as therefore we lead and perfricate the privet
or searchinge iron over the sculle, perceave no vnsmothnes, then all even, and
smothe, then we say esteem the sculle to be with out danger, not
dilacerated or torn. But if so be we perceave any thing, which is rugged
and uneven, and that the searchinge iron stadeth thereat fast, if so be, it be
not on the sutures or commissures, and ioyninge of the sculle, or any natural
cocavitye hollovvnes of the Cranium, it is then a sign, that the head is
broken, or lacerated, and rent wherefore the Chyrurgiane must dilligently
mark, that he do not in steed of the fracture, take the suture, because that
those comissures, The Chyrurgiane may easily be deceaved.
often times do deceave the sight of the Chyrurgiane in his judgement, and
that as touching the similitude, which the commissures, are participatige
with the fractures: And we are to note, that in some persons, the futures
have no natural situatione, or place, A suture, or commissure, is the ioyninge
together of the bones of the head.
but to the contrary we must also note, whether that there be any
dilaceratione one the fracture, or not: for it might chance, that the natural
similitude of a suture, might well be a rent or dilaceratione, which is not
so easily to be perceaved, known, because that a suture considering her
nature is vnsmothe and rugged, even as a dilaceratione is vvonte to be.
Wherefore Hippocrates, Hippocrates hath bin deceaved.
acknovvledgeth to have bin deceaved, in the person of Antonomus, of Omilos,
vvhoe being thrown with a stone in the midst of his forehead, and a
bout the sutures, died within the space of fifteen days thereafter, because
that he was not trepayned, and because alsoe the foresayed Hippocrates,
thought and judged the skull not to be dilaniated or torn. Wherefore, it is
the surest, and certaynest way, principally, when by, or in the vvounde there
are these foresayed accidents, with agues, that as then we denudate, and
uncover the sculle, because the sutures sometimes have no certain place, for
sometimes we espy the, in the midst of any bone, which a man would
think to be a fracture or dilaceratione: it might alsoe chance that the
foresayed sutures, or the next parts, unto the same, The futures of the head
are variable.
might be dilacerated and torn, the which we can not certaynlye espy,
without making denudatione of the Cranium, and to our sight uncover it: when
as therefore we doubt, whether there be a fracture or fissure, and can not
certaynlye espy it, because of the smallenes of the vvoude, as then there is
less danger, and the cure thereof happens so much the sooner, the surer,
when as therein we make a reasonable vvyde apertione, rather then being thereof
uncertain, we as yet proceed with such a small apertione, in curing of the
same vvoude, because that it is vvholye impossible, othervvyse to know any
certayntye, of that which thervnder lies hidden, as we easily see in the
great apertions, which thereafter, may very easily be cured. It sometimes
alsoe chances, that the Cranium being sufficietlye denudated rovvnde about
the fissure, yet for all that with the tacture, or with the searchinge iron,
or with the eyes, we can not by any means possible espy the fissure or
rent, because it is as subtle and fine, How we shall espy the hayrye
fissure.
as a hair, wherefore it is allsoe called the hayrye fissure, or ret: to the
which purpose we must above on the sculle or bone, vvype a little ink, or
any other black medicamente, because that the nigreditye or blacknes, may
imprint in the fissure some sign of his blackenes, if so be that there be
any, which bare bone, we must there after scrape with an exfoliative
trepane: For that which is burst or rent, notvvithstandinge retains his
blackenes, by the which means, we shallbe certified of the largeness there of
and profunditye of the same.

Of the counter fissure, in the bones of the head. Chap. 2.
THe ancient Doctors, and all so certain professors of our time, make
mentione, that we sometimes find a counter tear or fissure in the sculle, as
if we had received a blovve in the occipitialle part of the head and had the
tear or fissure in the antereore part of the same and there revealed it self,
or in any other part of the head also, whereas the blovve did not alight.
Signs of a counter fissure.
The conjecture which we ought to have of a counter fissure, is, that we
surely know whether the patient vveare roughly stricken, and whether after
the blovve, any bad accidetes have followed, as if through the blovve he fell
to the grovvnde, hath there lien impotente, hath vomited Cholera, is full of
agues, although it so be that we can find no fissure in the Cranium in the
place of the vvounde, and there where the scull is denudated. We must alsoe
farther note, and observe, vvether the patient often times lay his hand, on
any other place of his head, then where the vvounde is, complayninge of any
payne or heavines of his head: we must one that place which we suspect
apply some Cephalicke plaster, which when we remove, the same, we must
then note, whether any one certain place of the applicatiane, be moyster
then in another place, or else any where under the payster, the skin be
softened and a little more svvollene, then the other, which finding it to be
so, it is the a sign, that in the sculle there must needs be a fissure, that
it is necessary, there and in that place to denudate the Cranium: for sometimes
we find the bone there to be broke: The ancient Surgeons have beyond all
this written, Opinione of the aunciete professors touching inscisione.
that although we have inscided the skin, without any reason or occasion,
it easily and lightly vvilbe again curedand if so be that the sculle be
dilaniated torn, and we having forgot to detect denudate the same there
immediately follows a great imflammatione, which very difficuttlye can be
cured. But I as yet could never attain to the knowledge of such a fracture,
nether can I perfectly adhibite any credit thereunto that there can by any
means chance to be such fissures shut up, and closed or joined on with the
other and so grovvne together, or being missing of the broken bone unto
that, which finds it self in the fracture of the other side, right over
against it. I have seen, that with the shot of a gun, that the first table
was vnhurte, and yet not vvithstandinge the second was crushed and broken,
when I perceaved that the patient, had gotten many bad accidents, namelye,
that through the blovve he fell to the grovvnde, had vomited, forth at his
nose voided blood, was vvholye abashed feeling payne about the vvounde,
having alsoe an ague: and fearing least the patient might have dyed, I
trepanned him, whereas when I had pierced the first table I found, that the
second was burst, yea and that reasonable vvyde: wherefore thereafter I was
urged to believe that the counter tear or fissure, in the other side of the
sculle, which by the ancient professors was described, must be understood
in the same bone, for the first table, is right against the second situated.
It might alsoe chance that nether the first table nor the second should be
hurt, or broken, yet notwithstanding the Diploe, that is the porositye which
is between them both, An observatione of the auctor.
was so plettered crushed, that the little veins, wherewith it was,
replenished, vveare broke burst and avoided blood from them which in time
corrupts and rots and alsoe corrupts the bone internallye, the which in
some time thereafter we perceave, for the bone vvaxeth leadishe coloured, on
the which the Chirurgiane must well note.

It may allsoe chance, that the sculle, be safe and sound, yet through the
violence of the blovve, any veins which contain that membrane which is
called Dura matter, Veins which burst within the brains.
as well of those which pass through the sutures as througe any of the
other small holes internallye are situated with in the brains, might come to
break, out of the which there will issue blood, which thereafter cogealeth
and with great payne changes in to matter, with many other fearful
accidents. In this dissease theris all ways payne about that vain which is
burst, and if so be we chance to open in this place the skin, the bone
there under hath a pale and dead Colour: but it is a difficult matter to
judge, and know it, wherefore considering often times of the impossibility,
to do any remedy or cure therine by want of knowledge, death suddaynlye
ensues thereon. The which Hippocrates recites of the daughter of Nerius, A
history must of the daughter of Nerius, described through Hippocrates.
which was but 20. years old who in playing being smitten on the bone
Bregma, with an outstreched arm, of one of her playfellovves, strayghtvvayes
without any respiringe is, fallen into a Vertiginem who as soon as she was
brought into the house is fallen into a violent ague, with payne in the head,
and rednes of face: one the seventh day she voided a goblet fulle of reddishe
matter filthylye stinckinge out of her right ear, by the which she seemed to
be somewhat lighted and easyed but when the ague again returned unto her,
she was then vvholye abashed, and almost lay without any reason or
understanding, with Spasmo, in her right cheek, or side of the face,
without being able to speak vvherone the foresayed Spasmus hath possessed
the whole body, with shaking, qviveringe, with the tongue tied, and with
irremoveable eyes, and dyed on the ninth day.

What Fractures of the head we ought to trepane and wherefore we must trepane
them. Chap. 3.
We ought not at all times to trepane.
Although that in all fractures and fissures of the sculle, the yoghe
Chyrurgians take there light or refuge straight unto trepaninge: it is
notvvithstadinge better, that in the first we try, with players, and
with many other remedies, and inventions thereto constituted, and ordained:
considering one the consequence and importace, of the foresayed Fracture,
whether, it be needful or necessary, to take away any parcel or piece of
bone, considering the excellentie, and vvorthines of the brains, which are
such vvorthye parts: wherefore we must vviselye and dilligently consider and
mark, whether the vvounde give a good digestione forth of her, and purifieth
her self, and whether there begin in the vvounde to grow, any red
pomgronate Kernel wise flesh, or whether the ague which considering the
suppuratione in the vvounde, be abated or asvvaged, or hath left him which so
in tollerablye vexed and tormented him, whether his appetite be again
restorede, and whether the patient reasonably takes rest or sleep, without
having any troublesome accident chance unto him, vvherbye we might
suspect, that the membrane called Dura matter, or the brains, are molested,
affected, or suffer any payne, ether through a splinter, or through any
blood, or through any matter, which might be come and situated it self
therone: And the matter luckylye ominouslye procedinge, The fissures recollect
then selves sotimes.
we may continue the fore said remedies, and the use therofe, because that
sometimes by this means the fissures, are replenished filled up with some
obdurate substance and callositye, which agrees and may be likened unto the
callositye or cicatrice of other bones.

Sometimes only the first table of the sculle breaks and rents without
pearcinge or penetratige the Diploe: Diploe is the porositye between the
botables.
Some times allsoe is the fore said diploe crushed plettered, and broken yet
the second table safe and illaese or vnburte, wherefore as then it is not
necessary to detect and make bare or to trepane the membrane Dura Matter, yea
and as then we may perceave the manner as it vveare of a splinter, of the
sculle therein lying erected. The fracture at sometimes alsoe is so great,
with such a huge quantitye of massacred, and crushed bones, which lye half,
and half separated, or else for the most part clean beaten theroute, that we
may playnlye with our eyes behoulde the membrane Dura matter, so that the
blood which drives therone, may very easily flovve out of the vvounde, in
like forte allsoe may the remedies therein easily be applied: To the which
fractures, the trepane is nothige behoovinge or needful: And if so be in any
sort you perceave any skilfers or splinters, by the which that membrane
might be pricked, or crushed, you must take them very easily therout.

It happens alsoe some times, not only in the little children but in aged
poeple, The bones of the yonge Childrene are bet invvardlye.
alsoe in who me the bones are so thin and tender, that with any rude
blovve they are invvardlye bent, (as we see a tin or a copper pot to be
bruised) without the external skin being any where externally hurt: To
the which disease of the bones, we must only take our refuge flight unto our
extractive, dravvinge plasters, vvherbye that the depressede bone, might by
any means be elevated, and heaved again into his right place.

Hippocrates, comprehendethe in very Short words in his blooke De Locis in
homene, The opinione of Hippocrates tou-
the whole cure of the fractures of the sculle demonstratinge those unto us
which we ought to trepane, The opinione of Hippocrates touching the curing
of fractures.
or not. As far forth therefore (says he) as if the bone be broken, or
massacred, there is as the no perrille, or danger at all, with moysteninge
medicamentes must it be cured and helped, which quiet, and take a way the
inflammatione, soften and mollyfye the bone, because that without payne we
might take the broke pieces of bone therout: but insomuch as the bone only
chaucede to be burst, it is then very dangerous, must of necessity be
trepanned, because that the matter which distills through the rent, or
fissure one the membrane, do not in any sort corrupt and rot, the
foresayed subiacent, or subiectede membrane: for as without having any issue
again, she come to sink through this angustnes, and narrovvnes, as then
she causes an ague, and sometimes allsoe distemperatenes of mind: wherefore
we must needs trepane, and make a large apertione because that the sanious
matter may not only have an entrance, but an issue alsoe: when as we do not
in any sort suspect that the membrane Dura matter, sufferethe any thinghe, or
is in any sort crushed, or pricked with any pieces of the broke bones, that
there is no matter run therone, by the which she might be troubled, it is
not the necessary that we trepane, or open the sculle. For what occasion
we ought to trepane.
The Chyrurgiane is constrained to use the trepane for divers occasions, and
take therout the broken bones: First of all to give an issue and passage to the
congealed or not congealed blood, which was sunk on the membrane Dura
matter, through the effluxione of those veins, which are as well situated in
the flesh of the head as betvvixt both the tables, under the sculle, which
as there do restrain that membrane fast unto the sculle. Secundaryly, because
the matter, which continually soacketh through the fissure on the membrane
do not chance to spoil, or inflame the same, because that through such an
anguste passage she can have no issue, the which in the end might be the
cause of the patient his death. Thirdly, to draw forth the broke bones
splinters, through the which the foresayed membrane might in any sort be
pricked or lye crushed:

Fourthlye, according as the work reqvireth, to apply convenient and
necessary remedies into the vvounde: Fifthlye, because it might serve in
steed of a repercussive, defensive ligature of inflammations, which
othervvyse may be used in all other broke parts and ioynctes, The head may
not to strictlye be bovvnde, the reason why.
exceptinge only the head, because that this, considering the rotunditye
rovvndnes there of can not by any means possible therone be effected: for a
ligature, which must be stifflye fast vvoude, rovvnde about the fracture, to
praeserve and keep the broken bones one by the other, might in the head be
the cause of paye, and inflammatione, it would alsoe hinder the agilitye of
the arteryes, and the ascendinghe of the fuliginous excrementes, which
through the futures of the sculle, do evaporate: it would alsoe repelle the
external blood of the vvoude, send it toward the brains, membranes
thereof, out of the which might ensue very bad accidents.

How lunge we ought to tarry, before we begin to trepane, and of the places
which in trepaninge we must choose, or eschew. Chap. 4.
HIppocrates charge the Chyrurgiane, Opinione of Hippocrates.
in his book concerning the vvoundes of the head, when as in the first he
hath bin theruto fetched or sent-for, having together noted, the fracture of
the bone, with the molestinge and troublesome accidents thereof, that without
any longer delay, he shall within the space of three days begin to
trepane, and especially the vvether being hot, thereby to prevent the
inflammatione: but not to the membrane, least she lye bare, and so the
external air chance to distemper her, and cause therine some corruption and
rottinge, least also that in so doing we might chance to tear the membrane,
in boaringe through the sculle which cleaves unto the same, or any of the
other fasteninges of the membrane: or in placinge of the instrument thereon, she
might thereby be hurt or vvouded. Wherefore, (as he says) it is far better,
when as there is but a little more bone to pearce or boar through, the barede
bone begins to stir it self, that as then we desist, until such time
as it of him self falls out. The Chyrurgiane is sometimes to late sent for.
But if so be that the Chyrurgian hath not in the first bin thereat present,
the patient hath of some idiot or ignorant fellow bin dressed, which hath
not know the fracture, and because there was no apertione made in the bone,
to give air or light, unto the matter, there are chanced thereunto (as is a
fore recited) great inflammations, and many other fearful accidents: we
must then (if it be in the summer, and the putrifactione one the sudden
reveal it self) within the seventh day treparte the patient, before the
brains are vvholye infected, and chance to mortify: But in the winter when
as the corruption proceeds and goes somewhat tarder ofsloer forvvarde, we
must then effect it with in 14 days: because these days being passed, as
well considering the imbicillitye of his forces, as the greatness of the
dissease is incurable, although as then we trepane the scull, it is then to
late, wherefore in no vvyse must we effect or do it.

Opinione of Avicenna.
Avicenna will have that we straight ways begin to trepane, and if so be
we must needs defer it, that we should defer it no longer then two or
three days at the most, and that especially when as the Dura matter is
pricked or lies crushed, of any broken bones.

Celsus says, that he which tarrieth any longer from trepaninge then three
days, are not to be excused, because that such delay causes a concursione of
humours, on the Dura matter which finding no apertione, or issue, disorders
the foresayed membrane, and spoils it, out of the which necessarylye must
follow great inflammationes.

But our use and practise in these days, is that as soon as we are sent for,
whether it be in time or out of time, early or late, and we espy, ether
through searching with our, fingers, through the searchinge iron, or by our
sight, that the scull is broken, rent, or torn, and that the Dura matter
suffers any thing, we out of hand proceed with the operatione, and that
so much the sooner, when as we note, that there accidents demonstrate
themselves, without any longer delay and especially, in debile
aegritudinous, or corpulent bodies, because in them there are revealed far
vvorse accidents then in others, wherefore to tarry or defer the trepaninge
any longer it would be small commodity unto us, but better that altogether
we deferred it.

And although the Chyrurgiane vveare not in the first sent for, and that the
seventh day of the summer, and the 14 of the winter vveare praetermitted, and
let pass, he shall not therefore refuse to do his utter most endevoure, with
trepaninge, for it is yet better somewhat to late them never, considering the
good hope which we must have of doing the patient any good, help, and
comfort, which othervvyse without trepaninge of the broken bone, or the
elevatione of the same, can by no means be done, which we only understand
of those, which are not clean without hope.

What places may bear the trepaninge.
Saying therefore that we have the time day limited unto us, in the which we
ougt to trepane, we must consider what places, or parts of the sculle are
able to abide the trepaninge, and which not. We must first of all there fore
consider, that the bones which vvholye are in pieces, or being crushed, or at
the least a great part of the same being separated, can not easily be
trepanned, because he might chance to crushe the trepane one the membranes,
howe easily soever he lean thereon. We must alsoe note, that we do not
chance to set the trepane one any suture, because in so doing, we should
with great payne, and with great blood shedding, cut of the veins,
arteryes, and synnuish filamentes, which have a vnitye and fasteninge, with
the Pericranium, and the membrane Dura matter, We may right well trepane one
the sides of the future.
which have the free passage through the foresayed sutures, to retain the
Dura Matter, and administer life, and nurture unto her. But if it so chanced
that the fracture chanced to be one the suture, we must then apply the
trepane, on both the sides of the suture, with out in the least touching of
her: for if so be we trepane but on the one side only and not at the other
side of the suture it vveare then impossible that the blood or matter, should
have at that hole any issue or passage, the membrane being betvvixt them
both: nether may we trepane on the fontanelle, or opening of the head in
yonge Children, because that there tender imbicillitye as yet is notable to
suffer and abide the trepane. The inferior, or descending parts of the sculle,
are not convenient or fit to be trepanned, because the brains through there
ponderousnes, might chance to sink therout, or the membranes through the
apertione might chance to be extruded: But if so be we vveare urged there
unto, we must make but a very small apertione.

We ought in no vvyse to trepane the temples of the head, We may not trepane
the temples of the head.
because we should not hurt the temporalle muscle, considering divers
synnues, arteryes and veins, which are therein divided and entermingled
through the which there might be caused to great payne, fluxione of blood,
agues, Spasmus, and the patient might chance to dye: Because that there under
the bone called Os petrosum is situated, and that considering, the movinge and
stirring in the temporal muscle, which happens in speaking or eating,
the vvoude might be far more dangerous, and Hippocrates alsoe says, that
the inscisione of the same muscle, might be cause of a great, and villanouse
distortione out of the which one the same side, a Paralisis on the other a
covulsione of synnues might chance to ensue. Nether ought we to trepane that
part of the sculle, a little above the eye brouvves, because in this place
there is a great concavitye, fylle of air, and white slimy, my, humiditye,
of nature, in that place constituted ordained, to paepare the air, which
ascedeth up to the brains, the which indeed is vvorthye to be known
observed, because that the Chyrurgiane, might not in any sort be deceaved,
taking the foresayed concavitye to be, a depressione of the bone, which
needs must be trepanned: if it so chanced, that any of these foresayed parts
vveare broke, as are the temples of the head, we ought then to apply the
trepane, a little above the teporall muscle: We may not trepane that bone
above the eyebrovves.
if so be that the part or portione of the sculle, be broke a little above the
eyebrovves, we must as then make choice of that part of bone, which bounds
on the fracture, as above in the fooreheade: it is right true, that if so be
the foresayed bones, vveare depressed, and crushed, that as the we ought to
elevate them, and if they be clean separated we as then must pluck them out
in like sort as we must do in the sutures.

The sutures and temples of the head may sometimes be trepanned.
Yet considering all this, we are oftetimes compelled constrained, to trepane
in all places of the scull: The which a renoumned, expert Chyrurgiane called
Andreas a cruce, confesses often times to have done, without any danger.
And I dare my self boldly affirm, that I in the years, of 1591 1592 have
my self trepanned, and have seen others trepane, in the foresayed prohibited
places, as one the sutures, and one the temples of the head. Notvvitstandinge
I would council the yonge Chyrurgiane, that in as much as is possible he
avoid eschevve, the trepaninge of these places, but rather make choice of any
other part, which part, may be a little descendinge, because having made
the apertione, the blood, the matter, all impuritye might therout have there
free passage. Considering in the days which go before and which
conseqventlye follovve after the trepaninge, on the singularitye, and
vvorthines of tvose parts, we must command the afflicted and wounded
person, that in all things he vvilbe sober, and observe a good diet, both in
etinge and drinckinge, abstayninge especially from wine, and phlebotomye, as
much as is needful, because that the humours, should not concur unto the
vvouded part, and that alsoe we keep his head warm, with light
coveringes of the head, because could is a great enymye unto the brains all
synuis he parts.

What qvantitye, or what bigness of the bone in trepaninge we must take out
Chap. 5.
WE must in the first, according unto the quantitye, How great the
apertione must be for to trepane.
and bigness of the bone we purpose to take out make an apertioin the skin
denudate the foresayed sculle: Therefore if so be there be no vvounde nor any
apertione, and the skin externallye as yet vnhurte, this shall as the be the
convenientest apertione, which with hands may be made, which we shall make
with two crossevvyse overthvvarte inscisiones, in such a form as this in the
margin, demonstrates unto you, or else in form of a borghondiane cross,
which in his middle praesenteth four corners. In so much therefore, as if the
hurt, have made a vvounde, and inscisione, in the skin, we must suffice our
selves thervvith, with such as it is, if so be she be thereunto fit and apt,
making an other transversall inscisione, namelye overthvvarte the vvounde,
because these two as then may present one. But if so be, the vvounde be very
ample, large, we must as then only cut the skin one the one side,
begininge the same in the middle of the vvounde, because so the vvounde may
present this letter T, in the which vvilbe but two corners.

These foresayed inscisions, are cenvenientest done for the inflammations. The
inscisione must be done before the inflammatione.
But if so be we perceave the vvounde to be large enough to give place unto
the trepane, or any other instrument, vvhatsoever, wherewith we might
endevoure and seek to elevate, and restore again the broken, or depressed
bones, in so much as if there be any, we must thervvith content our selves,
exstendinge the foresayed vvounde at the first with linte, with little
plumaceoles, thereof being made and therein crushed, on allsydes, corners of the
vvounde.

But in what sort or fashone soever, we make our inscisione in the skin,
we must allvvayes note that we do not suffer any portione of the
Pericranium to remain one the sculle: which under the skin, decks and
covers the whole sculle: because if so be the foresayed membrane
Pericranium, vveare per haps, torn with the teeth of the trepane, might be
the cause of great inflammatione, payne, and agues, where fore it is better
that we clean, and vvholye separate it from the sculle, which being done,
we must then damme stop up the vvounde with white linte, by the which the
next day ensuing we shall find the vvounde wide open, if as yet there vveare
any parcel of the skin, or lip of the wound, which might be a
hinderance unto the trepane, the which in the turning about might chance to
touche, we shall with the scissors clip it of, without deferringe it
until the next day.

When as we having considered, one the place where to set the trepane, we
must then note, how much, howe broad, we ought to boar the sculle. What
qvatitye of bone we ought to trepane.
First of all therefore, we must vvholye take avvaye all the broken and crushed
bones, which vvholye are separated from the sovvnde part, and alsoe from the
Pericranium, considering that they can never thervvith be united joined again.
But when as the broken bone is depressed, any part thereof as yet thereon
vveare fastened, with the sovvnde parts thereof, which crushed the membranes
of the brains, or any acuitye of the same, as yet stick theri, we must not
therefore for all that cut it of, and vvholye take it avvaye. But must by all
means endevoure, easily to lift elevate the same, situate it next unto the
borderinge bones, exemptinge only out of the same the small pieces, which
might hurt the membrane, prick it, because by this curing remedy, the bones
again renevve, unite, and join themselves together with the circumiacent
bones. In so much as if there be any more rentes or fissures before hades,
which fro the one side, disperse themselves this way or that way, we shall
not need to pursue the unto their end, but we shall only take some part
thereof away, because most commonly they join, saulder as it vveare together
again, the which is a far more better opercle for the brains, the that
new incarnated flesh, which after the trepaninge grovveth therein, where
we have taken the whole broken bone therout, wherefore we must take no
bones therout, then with great discretione, then as few as is possible, The
scull is the natural opercle, or cover to the brains.
so that they do not prick, trouble the membrane, with there acuitye edge,
that there remain distance enough, to give passage unto the blood, and the
matter which is therone gatherede, to depart, for as well the membrane as the
brains, shall be better defended, through the bone which as yet they Keep,
which is there natural defece, as if we qvite clean toke it away, through
which discoveringe, the foresayed brains might be hurt or hindered.

The Diploe is the distance betvvene the two tables.
It chances often times that the first table comes to be broken, rent unto
the Diploe, yet for all that the second table remaining untouched, wherefore
it is not the needful to apply the vvhol trepane therone, to boar the bone
qvite out, but in this case we must olye use the exfoliative trepane, When we
ought only to use the exfoliative trepane.
thereby to administer any passage or apertione unto the blood, which, being
sunk betvve the foresayed Diploe, through continuance of time beginning to
corrupt, might in the same time change alter the second table alsoe, and
cause any accidents thereof to ensue. If so be in the vvounde we perceave any
splinter, which exalts it self with some high eminence, we must not be
so curious, to take the same immediately a vvaye, or cut it out seige that it
is any where fastened, but rather commit it unto the work of nature, which
will deminishe separate no more therofe, then shall be necessary need full,
because she is wise and prudent in all her works. It might alsoe chance
that the bone, not being broken or rent hath only bin above contunded,
hurt, or externallye denudatede, which beige so, we must only above scrape
it even, and grate it.

Of the manner methode howe to trepane well, and artificiallye. Chap. 6.
So many and divers species forms of fractures, as there are even so are
there divers means where by we may succour the wounded patient. When as
therefore the fracture, is nothing else, then a right running fissure, we must
then consider whether it pearce or penetrate through both the tables: the
which me may know through the Raspatoriu, or through the exfoliative
trepane, where with we must grate the first table, unto the Diploe, if that
the foresayed fissure, Diploe is the space between the two tables.
as there doth not depart or vanish out of sight, nether the accidents
desist, finding allsoe the fore said Diploe plettered crushed, or broke, any
matter which through the second table comes to distille into this place,
it is as then a sign that the foresayed fracture pierces, unto the second
table, stretches it self one the Dura matter alsoe: Methode howe to trepane.
we are as then counceled to apply the whole trepane therone: ordinarylye to
effect this, as it is needful to be done, we must cause the patient to sit,
one such a manner as the part which is broken reqvireth: we must stop his
ears with cotton, decline and lay his head one a company of pillovvebeares,
which must be indifferent harde, cause his head of one or two men to be held
fast, because he stir it nether this way nor that way: then we must cover
the lips of the vvounde, with any plasters spread vppen fine linen cloth,
least that of the air, of the turning round of the trepane they might be
hurt or vvouded, Al-this being in such sort fineshed, we must situate and
settle, the perforative trepane very fast or steadfastly, on the broke bone, on
such a place where as we desire to have the acuitye or point of the trepane
situated, there to make a perforatione, which being effected, we must therone
situate the whole trepane whereof the poyncte, must be set in the hole or
perforatione, the which before was made with the perforative trepane, and
so easily turning it, the bone first of all shall raceave the poyncte, by
and by the crovvne, or the teeth of the trepane, without ether glidinge this
way or that way, or remove out of there circkle, because of the acuitye or
poyncte of the trepane which must restraygne the trepane, with out slippinge
out of his place. There is a certain industry in the depressione of the
trepane, so that it both turns round, pierces or cutteth alsoe: for if so
be we lean to lightly therone, it then pierces and cutteth little, or
nothige at all: if it so chased that as then we depressed is somewhat to
harde, it will not then turn round, wherefore heerine we must use a medium
betvven them both, or mediocritye, lift it some times out, to purifye, brush
it, and then annoynte it with oil of roses, because that it might the betre
pearce and enter in. The trepane having now made a reasonablve deeped circle,
as then we must take away the point out of the middle thereof, for if it
pierced deeper the the crovvne or teeth of the trepane, he should be sooner
passed by or through the bone then the trepane with his teeth, by the which
the membrane called Dura Matter might chance to be hurt, the foresayed poyncte
therefore being taken therout, we must again set the trepane in his hole, or
circkle, and markinge that the trepane hath pierced the Diploe, Signs to
know when the trepane is entered into the Diploe.
and passed therbye, the which me may perceave by the blood which will issue
therout, through those little veins which there are openede, we must then
finnishe the trepaninge with more discretione and heed taking there unto,
unto the concavitye of the sculle, turning the foresayed trepane very easily
vvyselye, laying the left hand very lightly therone, that therbye we may
the better espy, when that the sculle shall be pierced qvite through, that we
do not in any sort hurt the membrane: because thereof might ensue,
inflammatione, and the danger of death. Note the form or figure of your
trepane in the sculle.
Now to mark this, we must often times lift up the trepane, to try the
thickness of the bone, through the which the trepane hath passed, which we
must with a little privette or searcher try, or with a propre instrument
which here to fore is only for this intent described. By which means, we
must alsoe note, whether it be in no place clean pierced, for although we
rightly aeqvallye turn the trepane, it may never the less happen, that the
foresayed bone be one the one side clean througe, unto the Dura Matter, and one
other side not so deep: when we therefore perceave this, we must proceed
with turning, depress the trepane one the other side where the bone as yet
is not through somewhat more, because the bone may aeqvallye be pierced, or
if it will not so be, we may then with the same turn of the trepane, pearce
the bone one the one side, denudate the Dura Matter one the other side, which
sometimes I have known to be done. Such an in aeqvallitye, comes partly as
well considering the head, which is round, as concerning any concavityes
or furrovves which are situated in the second table, which touches the Dura
matter, wherefore the bone is in one place thicker then in an other.

In like sort we must alsoe plant the little groundedravver in the
perforatione, the which in the first was made with the poyncte of the
trepane: Or we must, stick that Elevatorium which is at the poyncte of the
little foresayed grovvndedravver in that circkle, which by the trepane is
made, thervvith to lift out the little piece of bone, or make it loose, by the
which we shall easily espy, whether it yet hold very fast, whether it
need any more to be board, if we see that it hath pierced unto the Dura
matter, we shall then with the foresayed Elevatorium, After what sort we
ought to lift out the perforated bone.
or with the groundedravvere, vvholye lift it out, with out breaking of it
or doing any violence therone, because there through we do not chance to
hurt the membranes but give it rather one turn or two, because that so much
the easier we might lift it out, at one ti-time. This being done and the
round bone being taken therout, we must then smooth and make plain, the
edges of the perforatione, and grate them, and take away all his acuitye and
ruggednes, from him, for if so be there remain any small splinter therone or
any other vnevennes, the which not being clenlye taken thereof, it might be
agreat hinderance unto the membrane: and if so be that through trepaninge there
chanced any of the poulder of the bone to fall one the membrane, we must
endeavour by all means to get it out: If so be it is sufficient to remove the
first table, without touching of the second, we shall not then plain and
scrape the edges only of the pierced hole, but allsoe the whole bone, because
that thereafter without any trouble to the patient the skin may grow
therover: for if so be that it come to grow over the rugged and vnsmooth
bone it will be a great hinderance to the patient, and cause a nue payne,
because that the flesh will not be so good, vvhervvhithe the rugged bone
shall be covered.

And this is our practise, Manner we to trepane unto the membrane.
and manner of trepaninge unto the membrane Dura matter, and the manner allsoe
how immediately to lift the bone out of the perforatione, although that
Hippocrates, in his book of the vvoundes of the head, strictlye prohibiteth
to boar the hole unto the membrane, and presently to take it therout, because
the external air, suddaynlye alightinge one the same, might chance to hurt
the same, by the which occasion she might thereafter chance to rot: and more
alsoe if that we take the bone out of the same the which as yet might be
fastened with the foresayed membrane, we might chance to tear the same, or
any small veins therone fastened: or if that we stuck the trepane unto the
membrane, we might hurt the same: it is therefore the surest vvaye, says he,
that when as the bone is all most clean through, and begins to stir,
that we then desist, and tarry until such time as it of it self falls
out: But our trepane with the crovvne, or teeth is such, that unless the
Chyrurgiane be very ignorant, might in any sort thervvith, hurt or crushe
down the membrane.

Nue inveted trepanes.
We have inveted other forms of trepanes, which we have in this book also
set down there form which we cal Terrebellum alatu, the vvinged trepane,
which takes no pieces of bone with it but diminishes, and consumes them,
wherewith by no means we may hurt the membrane: there are some which
having used them, find them far surer, and expediter in there operationes,
then those with the hood. But if so be there be any great massacringe of
bones, or depressinge of the same, the the membrane is there through depressed
and crushed, and is alsoe sometimes pricked with the splinters, of the broken
bone. In these two dangerous matters, we must help, and succour the
patient or wounded person one some other sort, that as soon as it may be
possible, in the extractinge of the same, if so be they be vvholye separated:
What we ought to do when as the Dura matter is crushed through the broke
bones or splinters.
To which purpose, it is oftentimes necessary to trepane, cut away some
part of the sovvnde bone, which borders and is situated next unto the
plettered bones, because that our Elevatorium, might in the elevating of that
which is depressed dovvnvvardes have sufficient place, rest it self one the
sovvnde bone, with out in the elevatione to depress the brokene bones any
more dovvnevvardes: for as Hippocrates says, the bones which are broken, and
depressede, can not without great danger be board or perfotated, because
that the depressinge of the trepane, or Elevatorij, by any means of them can
not be suffered. It often times happens that the second table is more
depressed the the first, wherefore to that intent we must let the Elevatorium
pass through the perforatione of the trepane, between the second table,
Elevatorium is an instrument wherewith we use to lift up any thing out of a
wound.
and the membrane Dura matter, because in that sort we might lift up the broken
bones and splinters again, and take them out if they lay loose or separated.
And if so be there vveare no hole, above all this, the place of the fracture,
could by no means suffer, to have therein made a hole, it is as then my manner
to take my grovvndedravvere with three feet or poynctes and set therone,
Practise invention of the author.
then make choice, of the greatest, which is most fittest for me, considering
the fracture which is in the bone, to intrude the same therein, and easily
wind the same therein, houldinge your hand always hanging, and not
depress the same to harde, because he will easily enough enter therein, when
he hath a little pierced we must as then with a certayntye, the easyest way
possible endevoure, to lift up the broken and crushed pieces of bones. But if
so be, there be any piece of bone so far shoved under the sculle, that it
lay above the membrane, and the same considering his greatness, and the
angustnes of the apertione, could not by any means be taken therout, ether
by Elevatories, or Pincets, we must the take our refuge, (if so be we will
not through the trepane make the apertione any bigger) to the cuttinge
pincers, to the Parrates bill, with the which we may cut of as much bone
as we please, with out any pains, or danger, making one this sort the
apertione somewhat vvijder, to take out of the same the foresayed piece of
bone, which drives one the Dura matter. Touching the inflectione or bending
invvardes, without fracture, which commonly chances in yonge children, or
in these which have a weak tender sculle, when this is crushed, or bendt
invvardes, as is a copper or time pot, those are better to be cured with
extractige plasters, then with the trepane or with the grovvndedravvere.

The French Chirurgerye THE THIRD TREATISE OF THE OPERATIon of Chyrurgerye,
wherein is discoursede and handelede of the sovvinge or suture of vvoundes.
Containing six Chapters.
What the suture, or sovvinge together of avvounde is and the use thereof.
Chap. 1. VVherone we must note in the sovvinge of a vvounde. Chap. 2. What is
needfulle, to the sovvinge, and of the means, how to do the same. Chap. 3.
Of the species, or differences of sovvinge, and of the time to remove the same.
Chap. 4. How we ought to repose again the guts, with the net, vvhenas
they hang out of the body. Chap. 5. Of the Gastroraphia, or sovvinge of the
bellye- Chap. 6.
What sowing is, and the use thereof, and in what impediments she is
necessary, and in what parts. Chap. 1.
Six things which in sovvinge must be considered
THe Chyrurgiane ought to consider six especialle things, which concern the
sovvinge of vvoundes: First the use thereof, that is, in what impedimets it is
necessary, in what parts: what we must therein consider: what there is
vvantinge to effect the foresayed sovvinge: after what manner we ought to
do it, howe many fashions, differences there are of the same. Descriptione of
sovvinge.
Therefore sovvinge of a vvounde is nothing else, but a vnitinge, and couplinge
together of the dissevered parts: which vveare contrary to nature, separated
and parted one fro the other, which fore said vnitinge must be effected
vvithe a threded needle.

Invention use of sovvinge.
The occasion, why we in any vvounde, or separated part, use this sovvinge,
is to unite again, join them together, whereof the convenientest means is,
this sovvinge, the use of this combinatione, and that especially in all such
parts, which we can not conveniently oraptlye bind together, even as we
may playnlye see, in the great vvoundes of the arms, legs, which are
overthvvartlye wounded, in like manner alsoe in the body vvvich happen in the
length thereof, for the lips or edges of the same, are so much separated one
from the other and causes the vvoude so to gape, that she could not
without great danger be cured, unless that in any place we sovved it, to
bring them together and vnition: because that all incarnate, or fleshye parts
of the body, are drawn through with certain sinnuishe fibers or
filametes, the which being overthvvartlye, or contradictorylye separated the
one, from the other, the one lip of the vvoude is dravven opvvarde, the other
dovvnevvard or the one on the right side, the other one the left, all
according as the vvoude or the separatione is more or less, overthvvarte,
cotradictorye, loge, deep, or vndeepe. In like sort is the sovvinge, very
necessary in a vvoude, wherein a piece or parcel of flesh hangs one the
one side, and one the other end as yet connexed, even as it commonly chances
most commonly, in a great hevve or slash, through the which the ear,
hangs by the head, or in any other part, as in the nose, the which held
fast but at one end only.

It happens alsoe some times, Sovvinge in a separated place, is unprofitable
and needeles.
that the whole part is clean cut of, wherein the sovvinge is nothing
profitable, wherefore therein we must not use any sovvinge at all, to cure the
again, for then in the separated part is no more life, therefore can no more
be nourished of the body, by the which the curing ought to come.

And although that all those parts, which against the course of nature are
separated fro the other, might behove to be healed again, ca not bear or
suffer to be united or coalited, even as are the synnues, Tendones, Cartilages
or grissells, because after the opinione of ancient professors, and as alsoe
the use and practise teaches us, there must consequently follovve of one
prick, or thrust with a nedle, in the synnues, or tendones, great payne of
all sorts, inflamatione, convulsione of synnues, and some times alsoe death it
self, through the sympathy, or compassione, which they have with there
first originalle, the which Galenus, hath showed unto us, in a vvoude,
belovve the Hockes in the which, The tedones are dangerous to sow and why.
considering the greatness thereof, it was very needful that there should
be a profound suture, that not only to bring the supersituated places,
together, but alsoe the profoude lying parts of the vvounde: the which he
endevourige to effect, hath separated the tedones fro the muscles: for because
there is great danger consists in the hurtinge of the synnues, even in like
sort is there danger in hurtinge of the tendones, that considering the
synnuishe fibers wherewith the muscles of the belly are connectede, which in
time change themselves into a tendone, which we commonly call the great
synnue.

What we ought to consider in the suture, and so winge of a wound. Chap. 2.
Why we may not in the resovvinge of a vvoude draw the lips or edges close
together.
WE must not at any time sow up a vvounde, least in the first she be well
purifyed, cleansed, as well externallye, as internallye, if at the least with
out any great danger or peril it may be effected: extractinge and taking
therout all that is contrary unto the said vvounde, as is congealed blood,
which coming to corruption, might cause great inflamatione, oft times
alsoe a convulsione in that part, through which the sovvinge breaks,
tears, so conseqventlye hinderethe the vnitinge healinge of the vvoude:
wherefore in the resovvinge of a vvoude, we must deligentlye note, that we
do not contract draw together on all sides) the lips or edges of the
forsayed vvounde (except it vveare in the haremouth, in the cleaved or severed
lips of the mouth) but must leave some distance between the one the other
lip or in any place some or other apertione, because the matter which
gathers it self together, in the bottom of the vvounde, may issue therout,
and by that means the medicamentes may be therone applied. In like sort the
Chirurgiane must in sovvinge consider, use medicoritye, and not take to great a
qvantitye, ether in the length, or in the depth of the flesh, and of the
skine, through the which there might ensue and follovve great payne, which
we ought not to esteem for small, thereof allsoe would remain an
illfavored vnseemlye cicatrice or scarre: As to the contrary the not deep
sovvinge of the vvounde, might easily break and burst again, then in vain
it vveare sovvede. For if so be, that the needle, be to near thrust through
the edges of the vvoude, the the thread because of his tenuitye tears
through the skin or flesh, when as we thrust the needle to deep and
far, from the lips or edges of the vvounde, then there rests and
remains a great part of the skin, Flesh with Flesh comes far
sonner to unite, the skin with skin.
which will not be united: wherefore indifferentlye we ought to pearce
together as much of the skin as of the flesh, because the flesh far sooner
and easier comes to heal and cure, with the flesh then the skin with
the skin, and that is considering the natural temperatenes of the foresayed
flesh, which is warm, and moyste. And as touching the distance of the
stitches, and soovvinge, we ought not to lay them to close one by the other,
nether to far separate sequestered one fro the other, as the they can not
retain the vvounde: And when all to ny the other they are laid, cause
payne, through all the stitches, and dravvinge together of the same, through
the which payne is caused a concursione of Humours unto that place: we must
therefore use a mean therine well considering, the largeness, and length of
the vvounde: but above all we must mark, that we thrust not, through or in
any synnues or tendones, considering the payne, the Spasmus and many other
fearful accidents, which thereof might ensue, as allreadye we have said.
Sovving of a vvounde may not be effected with any violence, in those parts
which we endevoure to unite and bring together, but the is sovvinge
laudable, when as the skin stretches it almost together, of it own
accorde, whereas in this sort it will not be effected or brought to pass
easily, that the lips of the wound with violence must be joined, it is as
then most convenient, that we relay the stitches some distace one fro the
other, lettinge them be somewhat looslye sovved: for if it chanced we drevve
them somewhat stiffly together, the skin might then easily rent or tear,
so burst a sunder through the tumefactione which thereof ensues: If that
therefore, Sovvinge may not by any violence be done in the lips of the
vvounde.
we disire perfectly to cure a vvounde, we ought as the so to dispose of
the sovvinge, because that in thus doing, the humours, blood, matter, and the
external air might be repelled, from the lips, or edges of the vvoude,
because such things, may hinder, or at the least defer, the curing of the
same: and in so much, as the lips of the vvounde are not well united the
one with the other, and kept in that stature, vnitinge, the wound can verve
badlye hardly be cured.

And alsoe if the lips of the vvounde, We may in no wise sow the lips
of an inflamed vvounde.
do greatly chance to svvell, inflame, they shrinck in themselves, or else
if they be to much bruised or plettered, we must not the in any sort resovve
it again: for the suture would straight vvaye break, and so consequently
the inflammatione increased, but must delay it so lunge until the foresayed
inflammatione be seaced the vvounde be come to good suppuratione and matter,
and is prepared and ready, to be united brought together.

What is necessary unto the sowing of a wound, and howe we ought
convenientlye to do it Chap. 3.
WHen as the Chyrurgiane desires aptly convenientlye to sow a vvounde, he
must first of all have in his hand a needle, thereto a thread, and a canulle:
Cocerninge the needle, she must be of a reasonable length, sometimes right,
sometimes croocked, according as the parts reqvire, nether must she be made
of to harde a steel or mettle, where of they easily might chance to break,
but of gentle steel, because they might rather bend then break: although
she ought to be stiff, smooth, infrangible, havige a sharpe triangled
poyncte, because that in her entringe she might both cut prick, so the easier
pierce or go there through, because that in her govvinge through, she might
make a lunge little wound or hole, not round, because those little rovvndes,
are more difficult to be cured, What form the needle must have.
then the lunge holes. In the head she must be one both sides hollovve, in
form of a gutture, because the thread might therinne be hidden buried, not
hinder the percinge or entrance of the needle, in the dravvige through thereof,
because she then touches the body in that sort more easier and softer: It
will not alsoe hinder according to the sayige of Avicenna, that we somewhat
anoint the needle with oil, vvherbye the payne of the prick night be
somewhat easyed, the foresayed needle enter the easier.

What form the thread must have.
The thread must be smooth, soft rovvnde, and without any knott, all
eqvivalent with the thickness, greatness of the needle, but not in any sort to
thin, least he chase to break or cut through the lips of the vvoude. We
may rather take a thread, the silk, because the knott of the silk easily
vnlooseth, through his vveaknes: it is right true that the foresayed thread,
must not be to harde, because there through he might hurt, the vvoude, not to
soft least he break nor chance to corrupt, before the time the vvounde be
fully healed, vvherthrough the lips of the vvoud, might again dissolve
vvaxe loose yet notvvithstadinge now a days we had rather use a thread of
carmosyne silk, the a hempen thread, or of flax, which Galenus disprayseth
mislikes, in his third book of methode, where he best likes of a thread of
vvollen which may be likened unto, a brovvne thread, or a vvhyte silk thread
ravve, without being dyed, or coloured: Why the thread may not be dyed or
coloured.
because that in the dying sometimes is entermingled poysen, as in the scarlet
dye there comethe Arsenicu. The fore said Galenus uses strings made of small
guts, as are lutestringes, but cosideringe there moisture, they quickly
begin to svvell, rot, wherefore we had rather use a strong brovvne
thread, which we must draw through vvaxe vvaxe it because so much the
less he might corrupt rot, houlde the faster. And to effect this surely to
sovvea vvoude we must have a Canulle which one the one end must be roude,
split, with a hole, partly because the edge or lipp of the vvoude, which
with the needle we would pearce, because that the fore said lip may
stay, rest it self, on the pipe, without stirring this way or that way,
through the whole to espy, when the needle is half pierced through as then
to draw her through with her thread, without ether the nedle, or the thread
to draw the lips of the vvounde toward, them, because through the split
of the pipe, it might the the easier fro thence be removed, to rest thero the
other edge thereafter, when she allsoe must be thrust through. And
convenientlye to effect this sovvinge of a vvounde, How to sow a vvounde
convenietlye.
we must first thrust through the upper lip of the same, situatinge at the
first the holed end of the pipe with the left hand, internallye within the
lip of the foresayed vvounde, because she may rest therone, and not stir
this way or that way, then with the right hand we must thrust the needle
through the externalle part of the lip, invvardes, then set the Canulle on
the external part, of the nether lip of the vvounde, thrust the needle
internallye outvvardes, of the foresayed lip, gently draw through, the
thread, because as then we may couple join again the lip together: if it
be needful to lay more stitches, we must lay them as is a fore said: some me
hold the lips with there fingers in steed of a Canulle.

The kinds and differences of sowing, or sutures, the the time, and the
methode, or rule to take the away. Chap. 4.
THe aunciet Chyrurgianes have invented fovvnde out divers sundry ways of
sovvinge of a vvounde, Divers forms of sovvinge, accordige unto the diversitye
of the vvounde.
cosideringe, markinge one the vvouded part, nature or qvallytye of the
disseases: for the vvoundes of the arms, or legs, as in those places we may
better with more convenience use the dry suture: the vvoudes of the belly, are
alsoe on an other fashone sevved, then the vvoundes of the guts. The
profound deep vvoundes are sovved, on an other fashion, the the not deep
vvoudes: Alsoe are the debile imbicille persos sovved one an other fasho, as
are vvoeme, the those which are robuste strong, by great pains taking and
labour have a harde skine, there in to eschevve fly the deformitye which after
the sovvinge vvilbe seen.

All ancient professors have used, Three sorts of sovvinge by the ancient
professors.
have had in estee, three sorts of sovvinge of vvoundes, as naemelye, the
incarnative, the blood stoppinge, the conservative sovvinge. The incarnative
suture is so called because that through her vnitinge, she joins together
the separated parts, Incarnative suture, her use five manner of ways.
if so be without violence covenietlye they may be brought together: we use
this manner of suture in all fresh vvoudes, or in these, which are renewed. And
this sovvige is effected after five manner of ways. Where of the first is
called, Incarnative or knotted sovvinge.
the knotted suture or sovvinge, because that in evetye stitch, which pierces
through both the lips of the vvoud, is every time cut of, with both the
ends of the thread above the vvounde is knit together: betvvixt the which
stitching, we lay as yet other. This suture is done with a vvaxed thread, as
is all ready said, noting that both the lips must aeqvallye be joined the
one with the other, with out that ether the one or the other, yield it self
more this way the that way, placinge the first stich in the middle of the
vvoude, with a perforation of both the lips of the vvoud, by the which the
thread being passed, shall one the one side of the lip be dravven together,
above dobblelye knit to gether, cuttinge both ends of the thread short of,
because they should be no hinderace, unto the remydyes which we shall
apply: The which in the renuinge of the dressinge might be the occasion of
payne, or brekinge of the stitches, when as with the plasters we chanced to
pluck them. If the vvoude he great, we must as yet lay more stitches, in the
middle of the Spaciu, one both ends of the vvounde, so proceeding forvvardes
until the whole vvounde be laid with stitches or sutures, everye stich a
fingers breadth the one fro the other, because at the least the lips of the
vvoude might be brought close together, considering, duelye perpendinge the
general observatione above metioned, especially that the stitches be not
laid the one to near to the other, or the one to vvyde fro the other because
as heer tofore we have said, through the great multitude, and through so
many pricks, they bring are cavse of vehement payne: cotraryly they lying to
fare the one fro the other, the vvoude as the being not sufficiently
occluded, or shut up, do little profit, comoditye, therefore they may not be
laid to close by on another, nether to far separate the on fro the other,
they alsoe which are laid to looselye, suffer the vvoude to gape to vvyde,
they which to fast, strictlye draw together the vvounde, cause
inflammations, copell the vvoude burst open, wherefore heerine we ought te
observe a mediocritye. The second incarnative suture.


The second incarnative, or flesh making suture, is done with one, or with
more needles, as if so be the vvounde be great, deep, as the we begin to
stick thrust the needle in the lip or edge of the vvoude, without
dravvinge of the foresayed needle qvite through, although she be threded, but
must suffer her to continue therine, and wind the thread about her, in form
of an S as the Tailors do, when as they are minded safely to keep there
threeded needle, any where one there apparel, as you may see in the figure or
form of the haremouth: so put as many needles therein as shall be needful,
according to the greatness of the vvounde, wind the thread there about, and
let them continue therein until such time as the vvoude shall be healed joined
again. This sovvinge or suture is used, in such vvoundes as stand vvyde open,
in those in the which the lips are separated the one sovvhat vvydlye fro the
other, they which with the common stitchinge might not be contained, or Kept
together.

The third incarnative sovvinge, is called, The third incarnative suture.
the penned stitchinge, because most commolye it is done with little quills,
or shaftes of a pen, not that the foresaved qvilles, do effect the
sovvinge, but because they contain it, alsoe are a let hinderace that the
thread doth not cut the lips of the vvoude clean through, which if with
al expeditione with the least payne we desire to make the we must do as
heerafter follovvethe. We shall first of all take a strong double thread
which is separated in two, at the end having a knot, which with the
needle we must thrust through both the lips or edges of the vvounde,
redoinge the same so often, in divers places, as the greatness of the vvoude
shall reqvire, allvvayes remebringe that everye stitch must be a fingers
bredthe the one fro the other situated laid, or therabout.

This being in this sort finished we must as then one that side of the wound
where the knott lies of the thread, between everye dubblethrede stick a
little shaft or qville, or else a little stick of vvoode, which is vvounde in
linen clothe, must be as lunge in the vvounde it self: which aftervvardes
with the thread, we must draw close unto the lip of the vvounde: and one
the other lip of the vvoude, we must through that same dubblethrede, in like
sort alsoe put a qville, or a little stick, wound about with linne which
in the first must be dravvn with one of the foresayed thredes, and with a
double knott be knitted together, bringing by this means the lips of the
vvounde as close together as is possible, in this vvyse proceeding with
dravvinge together and knittinge, all the thredes which there are, in such
sort as the first was dravven together knit. Such sovvinge, is used, in
great, deep vvoudes in the which we fear least the common sovvinge or
stitchinge might chance to break, cut through the edges of the vvounde.

The fourth is called the dry stich, or sovvinge, The fourth incarnative
suture.
because this may be done without pearcinge of the skin or flesh: which
we are vvonte to do with two strong pieces of linen cloth, which are cut
of the side or edge of the clothe, and which in the ends are cut sharpe or
picked, as here before in the figure we may see, on the which other end we
must spread a very dravvige fast houldinge plaster, which qvicklye may be
dried, which must thus be praepared, we shall apply this same one both sides
of the wound, a little higher then the foresayed vvounde, in such sort that
both the sharpe ends of the pieces of cloth, may be situated close unto the
edges of the vvounde. This being cleaved very fast to the skin, we must as
then sow both there ends close together, without touching of the skin,
and draw them together with the thread, through the which means, we may
compact the lips of the vvounde as close together, os we please. Such a
manner of stitchinge is very vvillingelye used in the vvoundes of the face
vvheas we desire to have no great cicatrice left therein.

The fifth kind of sovvinge is no more in use.
The fifth incarnative sovvinge or stitchinge, is effected with iron hoockes,
which one both there ends vveare crooked, with the which we must hold
both the lips of the vvounde, bringing the foresayed lips close together:
but because they cotinuallye prick are never without causing of payne,
moreover might chance to stick in any membrane, which might suscitate cause
payne, concurringe of humours, inflammatione, in the vvouded part, it is now
a days no more in use. The second general suture
The second suture is, the bloode-stoppinge suture, so called, because she
stencheth stops blood, and hinders that the air can not enter into the
vvoude, when as in manner of revolutione we turn the needle, (as the
furriers are vvote to do, when as they sow together the skins, lay the
stiches, reasonable close, harde, on by the other. Some use this suture, or
stitchinge, when as the great veins or arteryes, are hurt or cut of,
cosideringe the great shedding of blood, through the which they are
compelled to do so, so the more easier to join bring together and shut
the lips of the vvounde.

But this stitchinge, is nothing to certain, because the one stitchbrekinghe,
all the other break go loose, moreover the blood which is therein contained
causes that part to svvell, and leases as it vveare himself between the
muscles, which alsoe thereafter by cotinuance of time corrupt are mortified.
VVherfor I would council the yonge Chirurgiane, that he should rather tie or
bind the mouth of the vain or arterye, or with a Cauterium cauterize it
together, the to use such a stitchinge, which is far covenienter, in the
vvoundes of the small guts, or entralles, of the blather, or in the vvoudes
of the stomach to be effected, if at the least in the two last it may any
way possible be brought to pass.

The third sovvinge, The third Stitchinge.
or stitchinge we call the conservative, or the praeservinge suture, because
she praeserveth, Keeps, the lips op the vvounde which are very vvyde
separated the one frome the other, or else because they are plettered, crushede,
or else because there is any part of them lost, through the which they ca not
by any means be brought joined again, the one with the other, reqviringe
only to be defended, maintained in that estate, till such time as the vvounde
be come to a good suppuratione incarnatione: where through the vvoude, is so
much the the sooner cured cicatrised, without any great, or deformed
cicatrice, remaining in the place. This stitchinge is alsoe used when we
suspect, that there is any thing cotrarye to nature in the vvoude, which we
vvillinglye would have therout, wherefore we do not bring the lips of the
vvounde so close together, as in other sutures, contentinge our selves, that in
such sort we may continue it.

Touching the time, when we ought to cut a sunder the stitchinges, there is
no certayntye thereof, because in some bodies, the vvoudes are sooner cured,
then in others, alsoe the one part heals sooner then the other, wherefore
we ought not to cut loose the stitches, before the vvounde be so far come,
that she hath no more need of the stitches, which cuttinge, must alsoe be
done one divers manners, as the stitchinges are divers: for the knotted
stitchinge, must be done, by cuttinge everye stitch apart, right at the
knott, liftinge up the thread with the privette or searchinge iron, having in
this sort cut of the knott of everye stitch, we shall as then with the
pincet or pinsinge iron draw them out by there knot laying the one finger
one the stitch, to hold that fast that the one lip of the vvoude, be not
draw out vvardes. Sovving of haremouthe.
That stitchinge which happens to be done with one or more needles, as in
the haremouthes, in these we cut a sunder the whole thread, which is vvoude
roude about the needle, the gentlelye takige the same avvaye, thereafter the
needle alsoe. The pened suture, The penned suture.
is take away through the discidinge or cuttinge avvaye, as is above said,
that we ought to cut everye stitch above the knot, and there gently draw
forth the thredes therout. The dry stitch is taken away, when as ether with
water or with any oil we moysten the same. The furriers fashoned suture.
And the suture of the furriers fashone, is very difficult to be taken
avvaye: in this stitchinge, we must first of all begin to cut, the first
stiche, and so proceeding forevvardes, with the scissors, or shears, unto
the end, if at the least it be to be done, and then easily and gentlelye take
every stitch out apart, allvvayes houldinge fast the lips of the vvoundes
with pour finger, least that they in any sort lift up them selves because if
it so chased we could not easily resovve them again.

How we ought to thrust in again the guts, and the net, which is sunk out
of the belly. Chap. 5.
Gastroraphia or belly suture.
IN the great vvoundes of the belly, which enter into the concavitye of the
same, therein is used an other manner of sovvinge, which the ancient professors
call Gastroraphia, that is as much to say, as the belly suture or sovvinge.
But because in such vvoudes, most commonly the guts the net come to sink
out, it is therefore first of all necessary, that we hadle of the means,
through the which we might again restore in to there former place the
guts, or the net, for othervvyse can not the sovvinge be effected, or
brought to pass.

The small guts being hurt, clean cut a sunder, can not by any means
becured.
When as therefore it chances, that the guts are sunk out of the belly,
we must then first of all dillygentlye consider, whether in no place they
are wounded, or hurt, secondly, whether as yet they retain the natural
colour, for if so be the small guts are clean cut of, especially that
empty one, which we call Ieiunum, it is then impossible that he may be
healed again, because of a great company, and divers great veins, which
are therein, allsoe considering his subtyle and synuishe tunicle or koate, and
because he continually receaveth the Cholera, and is situated more nearer the
liver, then any other. But the great guts being hurt, we may rightvvell
sow them, yet not without a steadfast hope that we are able to cure them,
although in respect of the small guts, by the great ones, which are
hurt, it is allvvayes better to have a doubtful confidence then a certain
despair, as much as belongs unto there curing. If so be any of the be
black, or pale, (which is a certain sign they have lost there feeling)
there is nothing to be done unto them, or at the least very little. But if
so be as yet they retain the vitalle colour, we must by all means
endevoure to bring them in again, and that with all possible expeditione,
because the external air, in the which they are not vvote to be, doth
straight ways change and spoil the. And first of all if they be wounded,
we must stitch the with the furriers suture, which above we have described,
when they are sovved, bring them into there natural place or situatio,
dilligently noting that we do not let the end of the thread hang in the
vvoude, because when as they are cured, we may draw the thread there out,
not let it sink into the belly, for the which occasion he ought be
reasonable lunge, without cuttige of him from the sovvige.

But when as we will begin or take such a thing in hand, After what
manner we must set the patient
we must as then convenietlye set, or lay the patient: even as if the vvounde
vveare in the bottom of his belly, we then lay the patient one his back,
with his thighs his buttocks aloft: if so be the vvounde vveare in the
upper part of his belly, the patient must lye one his back highly situated
all most sittinghe, because that the vvouded parts may suspend hang in the
belly: if so be the vvoude be in the right side, we must the situat the
patient one his left side, and if in the left side he be wounded, he must then
lye one his right side: when as the vvoude is so narrovve, so small, that
the svvolle gut, which hageth out, cannot again be put therein, it is then
necessary, ether that by art we drive away, consume the vvyndes which
cause the tumefactione and svvellinge, or that we dilate the vvounde: but it
is allvvayes best that we try first of all to repell the svvellinghe of the
guts, which must be effected with some resolvinge and strengtheninge
medicamentes, What we ought te do when the descended and svvollen gut can not
be put in again or restored into his place.
amongst the which must be entermingled some mollifyinge and softeninge
medicamentes: as when the guts are to dry, we must then bath the, in
warm water, in the which must be done a little quantitye of oil of roses,
or else with some gross black vvyne, because it strengthens and vvarmeth
the guts more then water: if so be the guts with these remedies, will
not as yet relaye there svvellinge, tumefactione, it was then the use of Mr
Pare, chief Chyrurgiane to the king, in divers places to prick them
through, with a needle, through the which the vvyndes as then depart.
Having thus finished all this, if so be there be such a quantitye of guts
sunk out of the belly, that they can not in any sort be put in again at
the same entrace, or vvoude, because she is to little, we must as then dilate
it with a crooked Lacet, which cutteth but one the on side, dilligetlye
notige that in any sort we do not hurt the entralls, which being finished,
a coveniet person thereunto shall with his fingers, hold a sunder the edges
of the vvoude, the Chirurgiane impose foresayed guts again into there places,
first of all intrudinge of those which vveare last, in the coming or
sinckinge out, exactlye noting, The entralls must everye one be brought into
his natural statione.
that everye circumvolutione of the guts, or everye revolutione of the same,
may obtain there own place, intrudinge the same therein with the fingers, and
one such a manner that the one may follovve the other: othervvyse that which
is allreadye thrust in, the finger being taken avvaye, might chance retire
and come forth again, unless that with any other finger we retained the
same, vvhylest that the other finger is finishing his operatione or work,
with bringing an other portione or part, into his place, and using this
manner,they may easily be reduced into there former places. Which being done,
(imposing or laying the hand one the vvounde) we must as then a little
stir and jog the body of the patient, where through the entralles, will
situate, settle, or place them selves everye one in his natural propre place,
even as they vveare, before they vveare removed out of the same. After what
sort we ought to put in the net.
If the net, issues out of the vvounde, and the same be not hurt, or without
any vvounde, and as yet sovvnde, we must genttlelye cause it to sink one
the guts, but if so be any part there of or portione is become black or
leadishe coloured, we must as the a little above the blackenes bind it, to
praevent the bleedinge, and cut it of under the foresayed succincture, and
immediately reduce that into the belly again which is not as yet black, is
yet soud, laying the end of the thread hanging out of the vvounde, because
thereafter we might easily extract and draw it forth, when as it shall be
thereof loosened, and the vvounde be come te good suppuratione and voydinge of
matter.

Of the stitchinge of the belly which we call, Gastroraphia Chapter. 6.
The sovvinge of the belly must not be done as the other sutures.
THe guts or entralles, and the net, being brought into there several
places, we must as the sow, stitch up the vvounde: but because such suture,
according unto the opinions sayings of divers, may not be done in that sort,
as other stitchinges, or sovvinges, to wit the ioyninge together of that,
which is of one nature and dispositione, the one with the other, as the
Peritoneum, with the Peritoneo, ( so forth of the skin and the muscles) but
we are vvilled and councelled that we join and stitch the Peritoneum, which
is a membrane, with the muscles, and with the skin Epigastri, because the
same being very synuishe, will very difficultlye be cured or healed, with
the other part Peritonei, which oppositelye is situated against it which is
allsoe of the same synnuishe substance. In fine we are councelled, to sow up
the edges of the vvoude which is in the right side Peritonei, with the
muscles, which are in the left lip of the vvounde, so that one this manner
the musculous flesh, of the right lip Peritonei, which heals with the
left lip of the foresayed Peritoneum, with the musculous flesh one the one
side, and the muscvlous flesh with the Peritoneo on the other side. Because
that Peritoneum, with the Peritoneo, can not be healed, vvherthroughe the
vvounde only above in the fleshye part might chance to heal, out of the
which might ensue a tumefactione, as if it vveare a roushing, or issuinge
forth of the navel, considering the foresayed Peritoneum, which through
erectione heavinge up of the guts, could not in any sort conjoin together:
and such a meaning must be done one this manner. The vvounde being great,
we must have a convenient minister or servat, which must with his hand one
the exterior part of the vvoude depress it down, because as then she may
be shut closed, nether the guts, nor the net, roush therout suffering only
a small portione of the vvoude vncovered for the Chyrurgian, who with his
threded needle, must begine his first stitch in the end of the one lip of the
vvounde, thrustinge through the external skin, and the musculous flesh of
the vvounde, without touching the Peritoneum, which is there under situated,
dravvinge the needle fro outvvardes, invvardes with her thread, thrust the
second stitch, clean through the whole lip of the vvounde, which
oppositelye is situated against the first stiche, to wit, the Peritoneum,
the muscles and the skin, first bringing the stitch clean through the
Peritoneum, and dravvinge the foresayed needle, from invvarded, outvvardes: And
the same being draw out, with her thread, he must then lay his third
stitch, as he did the first, beginning the stitch in the skin, in the
musculous flesh, of the first lip, without touching the musculous flesh,
of the first lip, without touching the Peritoneum, dravvinge the needle
from out vvardes, invvardes, the he must bring his fourth stitch, as he hath
done the second, thrustinge clean through the Peritoneum, all the musculous
flesh, the skin, dravvinge out the needle from invvardes, outvvardes, in
this sort he must proceed, and go forvvardes, until the whole vvounde from
end to end be clean sovved up, thrustinge through on the one side, only the
skin the musculous flesh, and one the other side the Peritoneum, the
musculous flesh, the skin: because the sovvinge of the Peritoneum only,
with the other part Peritonei, is not sufficient, nether the suture of the
flesh only, but this suture must as well be done in the one as in the other,
endevouringe allvvayes to unite the Peritoneum with the musculous flesh.

An other fashion of sovvinge of the belly, according to some mes sayings.
Some there are which effect this suture on this manner, follovvige, being of
opinione, that those parts, which are of one nature property, very easily
unite them selves the one, with the other, as the skin with the skin, the
flesh with the flesh, and the membranes with the membranes, wherefore they
bring there first stitch, quite, and clean through the skin and the
musculous flesh, from the first lipp, without touching the Peritoneum,
which is thervnder situated, dravvinge there needle from outvvardes,
invvardes, with her thread, laying there second stitch, in the lipp right
opposite against that, thrustinge then only through the Peritoneum, through
a little flesh, dravvinge the needle, from invvardes, outvvardes, the they
bring there third stitch, in the first lip of the vvounde, thrustinge
through the Peritoneum, a little flesh, without ether thrustinge through the
muscles, or the skin, dravvinge there needle from invvardes, outvvardes, then
they bring there fourth stitch in the opposite lying lip, thrust through
the skin, and through the musculous flesh, without touching the
Peritoneum, and in that sort proceed forevvardes, until the whole vvounde be
sovved, so that through one edge of the lip, but yet at divers times they
thrust through the skin and the musous flesh, and allsoe the Peritoneum.

The manner of sovvinge of the belly out of Celsus-
Among all other sorts of sovvinge the vvoundes of the belly, or stitchinge
of them this which we have taken out of Celsus is the least dangerous and
the best alsoe, easyest to be done. That we must have two threded needles, By
the left lip we must not onderstade the left side of the patient for it is
the right side of the vvounde, but rather the left side of the Chyrurgiane.
with one thread, the one needle at the one end, and the other needle at the
other end of the thread, where of we must take the one needle in the right,
the other in the left hand, we must begin in the end, of the superior part
of the vvounde one the left side, first of all pearcinge through the
Peritoneum, then the musculouse flesh, and the skin, dravvinge the needle
with the thread out, unto the one half, from invvardes, outvvardes, then we
must with the other needle of the left hand, make the second stitch, right
opposite against the first, in the right side of the vvounde, beginning with
Peritoneo, as we have said of the first stitch, on this sort the acuitye or
poyncte of the needle is far enough fro the entralles or guts, yet
notvvithstandinge the head close unto the forasayed guts: When as therefore
the needles have pierced passed through from the one side to the other, we
must as the change hands, in receavinge again of the needles aforesayed, take
the needle, of the right hand, in the left hand, the needle of the left hand in
the right this permutatione or changinge being in this sort effected, we
must then again thrust through the lips of the vvoude, as al ready hath
bin done, to vvitt, from the internal part, towards the external, so
proceeding forevvardes, as much as is sufficient, and allvvayes considering
that the one stiche be allvvayes laid right opposyte against the other, in
this sort proceeding, until the vvoud be vvholye sevved up, allvvayes
remembringe to leave a little apertione, in the bottom of the vvoude, through
the which the congealed blood, and the thread may be avoided, which
apertione, we must always keep aperte or open with a little leaden
hollovve pipe, which in the end must be tyede bovvnde with a thread, because
that by chance it do not come to slip into the belly of the patient. And
we must well and dilligently note, that this suture or sovving allvvayes
bedone with a good strong thread, What manner of thread needle we must have.
with a needle, somewhat crooked at the poynct, laying the stitches,
somewhat closer the one by other, then in other vvoundes of the body, because
the stirrige of the belly, far sooner causes the stitches to burst and
break a sunder, then in any other parts of the body, because alsoe the
vvoundes of the belly, are not so subject unto inflammation or incensions, as
other although that often times the belly is thrust through.

Chirurgerye THE FOVRTH TREATISE OF THE OPERATIon of Chyrurgerye, wherein is
discoursede and handelede of the openinges, and apertions of Apostemations,
Containing five Chapters.
Of the general way to open any Apostemations vvhatsoever. Chap. 1. Of the
tumefactions, which we call, Ateromata, Steatomata, Melicerides. Chap. 2.
Howe we ought to cauterize, make any inscisione in the Apostemations of the
breast. Ch. 3. Howe we ought to make the Paracentese, and take away the
water from them which have the Dropsye. Chap. 4. Howe we ought to cure the
Hernias aquosas, or water burstinges. Chap. 5.
Of the general way te open Apostemations. Chap. 1.
What we ought to consider before we make the appertione.
WHen as we endevoure to open any apostematios, to let the matter rune
therout, we must first of all before we com to the inscisione, or apertione,
consider, whether the matter might not in any ways be resolved or consumed,
through the forces of the natural caliditye, or heate, or else whether needs
and of necessity be changed into matter. When as an Apostematione, must
needs be brought to suppuratione of matter can by no means possible be
consumed or resolved, the signs thereof are these, namelye a burning heate,
erectige of the tumefactione, or svvellinge, more rednes, Signs of
suppuratione.
which is also harder the before, pricking, knocking, or beating payne,
ponderousnes, as if there did hang any heavye thing at that joint: And if
so be this apostematione be situated in any principal part, then there is a
chillnes and shiveringe thervvith associated, the ague allsoe is more violent
by day, then by night: sometimes alsoe the next kernells which are in the
body situated thereunto come or chance to svvel, be distempered. Signs when
the matter is fully ripened*
But the suppuratione, or resolutione to matter beige finished, or
accomplished, the tumefactione as the diminished, we the sensibly feel
pricking, with a little itching therbye, alsoe a little deafnes or numnes,
vvherbye alsoe some times is felt a great pricking, especially the matter
lying very deep: For the matter lying close under the skin, there the
demostrateth it self a little head which in feeling is soft, and when as
we depress with the finger it glides a side, where of the skin, in the
superior part of the same head opens it self, separeteth it self from the
inferior parts of the same.

When with the lancet we ought to open an Apostematione.
When as therefore all these signs reveal themselves, we may the boldly
freely, open the Apostematione, with the lacet, with out tatryinge any
longer, that it might of it self break through, because the matter may the
issve forth thereat, because that through to loge tarrying, with the opening
thereof, she do not come to diminish into the circumiacent parts, make other
concavityes. Although Celsus says, Opinione of Celsus.
that very seldom we ought to make any inscisione, under the armepittes, or
in the flanckes when the matter is ripened, come to a full and good
suppuratione, in like sort alsoe, when the Apostematione is not to great is
placed under the skin, but that as the we make the apertione with
Cataplasmes, let them of themselves break through, unless through the
intollerablenes, and great dolor or payne of the patient, the Chyrurgiane
vveare compelled, to open the same, because says he, that if with out
inscisione or cauterisatione we make the apertione, no deformed cicatrice, or
sign, thereof, may remain. When the matter lies deep we must the consider,
When the Apostomatione must be opened with a hot Iron.
whether the part be synnuishe, if so be that it is so we must as then open
the foresayed Apostematione with a hot Iron, which is thereunto very
convenient, because that apertione, although we make it somewhat small, it
tarries a lunge time open to make issue unto the matter, through the which
alsoe the cicatrice continues very little. We use now in these days
potentialle corrosives. If so be about the place of the apertione any synnues
be situated, we ought then to fear when we must make the apertione with a
hot iro that then the patient might fall into Spasmo, or else the ioyncte might
be cripple, and tarry lame, therefore we ought rather to use the lancet.

It happens alsoe sometimes, that although the apostematione be not yet ripe,
What apostematios vvilbe opened before there coplete ripens.
without great store of matter, yet notwithstanding reqvireth to be opened,
especially, when as it is situated by, or next unto some worthy part, the
foresayed matter being venomous or pestiletialle, which if we suffered them
to continue until there complete ripens maturitye, might draw invvardes,
through there venomous dampes, might infect some of the vvorthyest parts,
out of the which, as then follovve most fearful accidents. And although
Celsus counceleth us, that we must stay until such time as all apostemations,
are come unto an accomplished maturitye, which are situated in the synuuishe
parts, because the skin being grovven thinner, and the matter nearer
approchig thereunto, we might then the easier nearer attain thereto,
notvvithstadinge our best practisioners council us, that we should open such
apostemations: as they alsoe council us, to open all apostemations, which are
situated close to the ioynctes, bones, synnues, tendones, and to the
ligamentes, yea and before the time of the accomplished maturitye, because
therein, they might not cause any great rottennes, or corruption of other
parts.

In like sort must the apostemations of the privityes be opened, before they
be come to there full maturitye, because there chance no corruption in that
part, as all such parts through there great, moystnes, are very much
inclined unto corruption rottenes, as allso beyond this, the matter through
to lunge being therine continued, causes the Intestinum rectu, or the gut
of excremetes, to corrupt, rot, which is far softer, the the external
skin, vvherthrough the foresayed matter oftetimes internallye bursts out,
by the vvich commonly follows a Fistle, which is all most incurable.

When (...) therefore we see that there is any matter in the Apostemation,
which hath no issue, by her self can make or effect any ether considering
her crasitude, her crudetye viscositye, as thereby not being possible for her
to attain unto complete maturitye, or else because the skin is harde, or that
the foresayed matter lies to deep, through the which there remains a great
thickness betvvee the skin the matter, or else considering certain
inconveniences, we may not delay so lunge, until it be fully mature, and
ripe, as are the Apostemations, which are situated next unto some vvorthye
part, as by any great veins, or synuishe parts, which are inclined to
great corruption. The Chyrurgiane must without any lodger delay, make the
apertione with his lacet, rather the to expect any of these dangers above
rehearsed. The fittest time therefore first of all to do an operatione, is in
the morning by time, considering that in such a time, the person is far
better qvieted better animated and encouraged, except the great danger
reqvired othervvyse the cotrarye Secondly we must note, that the apertion be
made in a conveniet place, which coveniet place, is knovven by the
tumefactione, Secondly
of the part, in the which there reveals it self a little head, there is
great vveakenes softenes found therein, which glides under the feeling of
the finger, where the skin is thinneste: it is right true that such an
apertio might bedone in the inferior parts of the tumefactione a foresayed,
because the matter might the easier issue out, Four principalle conditions,
which the Chyrurgiane must consider before he open any svvellinge.
with out drawing of the medicametes, or through the harde depressione of the
same because all evacuations which chance in the hanging sores, ca far
better avoid the matter, the any medicametes, especially in such parts, of
the which we ca not change the situatione, as in the whole Chaos of the
body: For although, in the arms, or legs, any apertione is made in the
superiore parts of the tumefactione, through the situatione, such a fault
may be remediede.

The third condition is, that we must consider, one the rimpelinge of the
skin, The third coditione
one the fibres of the muscles, and because the muscles almost run through
the length of the body, the apertione must the be made in the length of the
body, and according unto the right concurringe of the muscles.
Notvvithstandinge although, the rimples, or forefrote of the head lye
thvvarte over, yet the inscisio must therein be made according unto the legthe,
follovvige the fleshye fibers, of the broad muscle: othervvyse the skin
being cut according to the runinge of the rimples, might chance to fall on
the eyes, In the head we must observe the grovvinge of the hair. Under the
armepittes, in the flanckes, we must consider the shutting, or one the
rimples of the same places, because the deformitye of the cicatrice, under the
fouldinge of that part may be hid, to praevet the imbicillytye, which is an
occasion, of the receavinge of the cocurringe humours: The to praevet, that we
do not chase to touche, any synnues, Tedone, Vain, Arterye, or any other
parts of esteem, that the apertion, may be done without an danger, we
make now the inscision in the length as the overthvvarte, according as every
part reqvireth: which ca not rightly be done then of those which have a
complete knowledge of the Anatomye: othervvyse they ignoratlye might chance
to touch a synnue, or a vain, or might chance to cut an arterye,
vvherthroughe the Spasmus, the Paralisis, or any great shedding of blood, yea
alsoe at sometimes might because of his death.

The fourth condition is, The fourth coditione.
that we must remember dilligently to make as small an apertione as we may,
survayinge the apertione, with the magnitude of the Apostematione: For if so
be it be little, we may as then make therine a mean and reasonable
inscisione, which alsoe must not be deep, but the apostematione being great,
we are the sometimes urged, to make two inscisions, or more then two, being
therein made, that one of them all ways, be in the inferior cocavitye of the
fore said Apostematione, because the humour do not chance here or there to
make any more cocavityes, eve as the humours, allvvayes internallye, corrupt
eat through the circumiacent parts, and there in diminish.

An admonitione considering all great Apostematios
And if so be that any apostematione, with great concavityes cam into our
hands, the skin there over might as yet becured again with the flesh, we
must as then make but one apertio or inscisione, through the which the matter
may issve: but if so be the flesh internally is eaten, corrupted away, we
must as then cut through with a right cut, the whole concavitye,
according unto the length thereof, which being done, the edge of the vvounde
in all places being very skin, bereft of all there flesh we must clip or
cut them clean away: because such skin restrayneth and keeps back the
matter, which causes the circumiacent parts to corrupt, hinders the
applicatione of the medicamentes: but when as we cut the skin, we must
do it triagle vvyse, or in form of a myrtle lease, because the apertione so
much the sooner, might chance to heal, because all rotuditye in vlceratios is
difficult to be cured.

Fro vvhece we must take our indication, of the greatness of the vvounde.
And touching all great apertions, which may be made in the apostemations,
must be made, according to the abundance, or the qvatitye of the matter,
accordige as the subject parts thereof require. As alsoe we must consider, on
the depth, mark that we thrust not the lancet to deep therein, but
reasonable deep: for when as we thrust to deep, it is the great dolor,
payne to the patient, causes alsoe much bleedinge: thrustinge not deep
enough, we effect brige nothige to pass.

The fifth coditione, must be observede, according to the apertio of all
great apostematios, that at one time we suffer not all the matter to rune
out, but rather by little, little, especially, the patient being debile,
old, yonge, or any vvoma with child, because all suddayn evacuatios, do
cause great imbicillity fayntnes because there through the vital spirits,
evaporate fly away, which in the cocavitye of the Apostemation with the
matter vveare shut therein, although they are against nature.

An other condition vvherone we must consider after the apertione of the
svvelling.
The apertione being done, we must hadle the wound, according unto the
diversitye of those parts, wherein the Apostematione was situated, alsoe
according unto the time season of the year. The Chyrurgiane ought especially
to eschevve the great tetes, which Celsus prohibiteth to use in the
vlcerations of the arm pits, flanckes, that because of the great veins,
arteryes, synnues, which in those places are situated, laying only there one
a sponge which is madefied, vvetted in vvyne. We comonlye lay thereon a flat
plumaciolle or tent made of linte, and therone a plaster, levinge so the
solutione apert, because that the remaining matter might issue come forth
thereat which othervvyse through a great loge thick tent, might therein be
retained, kept back. This being done, we must then dress that part, wind
it beginning to wind from the sovvnde part, unto the bottom of the
cocavitye if there be any, ending at the apertione because the matter may be
pressed crushed therout, without being therein retained, any longer, because
by to lunge tarrying therine, it do not cause a great hollovve fistulous
concavitye to come therein: then we must lay that part in such a sort that the
apertione may depend or hang, because so the matter may the better issue out
thereat.

Of the tumefactions, or swellinges called, Ateromata, Steatomata, and
Melicerides. Chap. 2.
THe ancient professors, The difference of these three Vlcerationes.
have allvvayes noted, only the species forms of vlcerations, that they only
differed the one from the other, in the matter, which is found therine. For
in the vlceration Ateroma, Signs to know them.
is a kind of matter like unto thin pap: the vlceration Steatoma, a kind
of fat matter, like suet. In Melicerides, is a matter like unto honey: So
that by the form of conjecture we may say, what matter therein lies
enclosed, but for a certayntye we can not say it, before such time as we have
fetched some of the matter therout: and one this manner they are allvvayes
known the one fro the other. when as we chance to touch the vlceratio
Ateroma, it spreads abroad, in that place vvhero we chance to depress it,
doth not so suddaynly, join it self together. The vlceration Meliceres,
differs fro the Ateroma, in his form, substance of his humours for his figure
is much rouder, and the substance of the humour which is therein, far
subtiler. so that it spreads more abroad, then the Ateroma, when with the
finger we depress it, it separateth it self far soener, alsoe joins much
sooner, when we take the fingers thereof. The vlceratione Steatoma, is much
harder, then both the other, in the touching of it, it stirs not, but
resists the depressinge of the fingers, commolye in the bottom is it
somewhat broad, and very seldom or never may we se any which are under
narrovve broad above.

We oftentimes find harde matter in these vlcerations.
These foresayed vlcerations, are in there beginning allvvay little, but in
continuance of time, they grovv to be greater, some are very harde, we find
sometimes therein wondrous matter, as if it vveare little stones, bones,
rovvled hair, mixed with any matter which is thick.

The matter lies enclosed in a little blather.
Philexomus says, he sometimes hath fovvnde, in the matter which therein lay
enclosed, little creatures, as if it had bine gnats, we must note that al
those foresayed humours, al these wonderful things, are enclosed as it vveare
in little blathers.

But as much as concernethe the apertione of the same, it hinders nothing
whether the matter be like pap, or like honey, or like suet, or what
matter soever it might be: for we have but one only intention, to vvitt that
we extract draw out the blather, or little bag, wherein the matter is
enclosed, for the manner howe to open it is this.

The operatione to cure the vlceratios is nothing different.
We must first of all lift up the skin fro the bottom, then cut it of,
making inscisione according to the greatenes of the vlceratione, dilligetlye
markinge least we cut the blather or purse wherein the the humour is enclosed,
because the matter do not chance to issue out: For the matter being issued,
the whole remanet operatio is perturbed, annihilated, because alsoe there by
the operatio falls flat down: so that as then we may or can very
difficultlye flea, peel or separate the foresayed membrane of the matter, from
the flesh, vvherthroughe the whole curatione, consists without reciduitye.

When as in this sort, we shall have cut the skin, the the little bag
demonstrates it self vvhyte, and outstretched, which with great
diligence, we must endevoure to separate thereof, with a Spatula, to vvitt,
from the skin, out of the flesh, or with any other instrument, which is
thereto serviceable, where with we must take it out, with all that which is
therein, without suffering any iott thereof to remain in the bottom, because
it chance not to increase again: And is it so happened that there chanced
to tarry any thing thereof in the vvounde, we must not as the heal together
the apertione very soon, but with puryfyinge medicamentes, purifye that
therout which as yet remains therein.

We must in the operatione dilligently consider, that we do not chance to
break any Veins, synnues, arteryes, or tendones.
We must alsoe heer note, that some of these vlcerations, are rotede between
any veins, arteryes, synnues, tedones, which eradication, reqvireth a great
lunge continued convenient manual, operation, because, thinckinge qvite and
clean to take away the little bag or purse from thence, we might chance
to burst any vain, arterye, synnue or Tedone, therefore if so be therebe any
part therone fastened it is then better to desist from our operation. When
this operatione is thus finished, in any small svvellinges, there is as the
no more danger, wherefore there rests no thing for us to do, then with
any curing medicamentes, to heal op the inscisione, laying therone a
Compresse, madefied in some defensive or other, because that in the dressinge,
all inflammations may be praevented, the separated parts the on again
conjoined with the other. But if so be the vvounde vveare great, could not
be cured, one this manner, it will not then seem discommodious, that we
stitch it up, laying the stitches somewhat vvyde the one from the other, to
let any medicamemt or other drop between them, to give passage to the
matter which engenders therein: then we must vvholye cure these vlceratios as
all other vlcerations.

Touching the curing of Quees evil which is alsoe done through manual
operatione, is alsoe one this manner effected, taking the foresayed Queens
evil vvholye therout, if so be it be possible dilligently markinge, that we
chance not to hurt any veins situated there about, especially of those
which are divided amongst the muscles, which are serviceable to the speech,
or voice, as are the recurrentes, or retrogradinge muscles, those which are
situated, abute the Laringa as well the principalls as common: For it hath oft
times happened that some have had this dissease of the Qveenes evil cut out
about there throt, which all there life time thereafter have remained hoarce
without speech.

The manner how to cauterize, make an inscisione in the vleerations of the
breast, called Empiema. Chap. 3.
Between the ribs, Hippocrates in prognosticis and in his third book of
diseases.
and between the intercostalle muscles between the mebrane Pleura,
concurrethe gathers sometimes certain blood together, which chaugeth it
self into matter, although the Physician, as well through Phlebotomye,
through purgations, through fometations, or through any other appliclations,
hath done his best, This tume factione externallye sometimes demostrateth it
self.
to resolve consume that. This foresayed matter, sometimes externallye
demostrateth her self causinge a tumefactione under the skin of the breast.
Then the foresayed membrane Pleura, The vice-ratione of the breast, which we
call Empiema often times demonstrates it self.
allvvayes most commolye breaks, and bursts a sunder, to give passage unto
the matter, which thereafter sinks into the cocavitye of the breast, is
sometimes voided through the urine, or through the mouth, the lunges
dravvinge the same unto them, and then through the throat is coughed up.

The signs, if any matter be retained in the breast, are these, to wit,
difficultnes in breathing, stinckinge breath, heavines in the side, Signs of
the matter which is retained in the breast.
a dry cough, with great pricking in the breast, a cotinualle ague, which
against night redoubles her forces, svvetinge in the end of the digestione,
little sleep, no appetite at all. Sometimes in the place of matter, there is
water gathered in the breast, which we espy when as the patient through
great thirst, hath drunk great store of water: when he continually
cougheth, without spittinge, with Shortness of breath, with svvellinge in the
feet, when we stir the breast one the one side, wherein the water
contains it self, we hear a shogging, as we are vvote to hear in a pot
half full of water: this dissease may be called, the Dropsye of the loges of
the breast.

Dropsy of the breast and her tokes
When any of these disseases have continued any time, no remedies have
helped, no hope left, that the water, or the matter might by any means be
expelled out by the mouth, or else be purged through the urine, 40. days
being passed, we must as then come to the manualle operatione, endevoure to
open the breast, make a passage for the matter to issue forth, because the lunges
do not in any sort chance to corrupt, or rot. Which may bedone through
the inscisione, or through a potential, or actual Cauterium. We must first
of all consider, whether in any parts of the breast, Howe we ought to make
the apertio in the Empiema with a lancet or with a corrosive
we espy no svvellinge or tumefactione: which havige espied, we must then
make the apertione, with the lancet, or with the Cauterio, that in the
fittest convenientest place we can find. But our common use is, to apply the
potential Cauterium, because the apertio, which we made therine, through the
Cauteriu, may the longer be kept open and apert, without troubling of the
patient, with the impositione or putting in of great tents, to keep open
the inscisione. And if so be we perceave no tumefactione, or svvellinge,
externally in the breast, we must then between the third and the fourth true
rib, beginning to account from under, about the midest of the one side, The
place of the apertione.
six, or seven fingers bredthe from backebone, make an apertione with the
crooked lancet, into the concavitye of the breast, not all at once, but by
little and little, or by degrees, beginning from vpvvardes, dovvnevvardes,
thrustinge, the poyncte of the foresayed lancet, fro under the fourth rib,
the cuttige side of the same, reachige, to the upper end of the third rib,
least that we should cut in any vain, arterye, or synnue, which lies
occult and buriede under the inferior concavitye of the rib. We may in the
same place set a Ruptorium, whereof the Escara being made, we must cut it
through, into the concavitye of the breast, setting again the foresayed
Ruptoriu, or corrosive thero, if so be at the first tim it had not made his
operatione sufficient deep enough. This apertione may alsoe be made vvithe
the actual Cauterium, heer before described, which we may crus he as deep
therine, as is necessary, to pearce the matter.

When as therefore the apertione is in this sort effected, Admonitione of
lettinge the matter or water go from the breast.
we must not as then suffer the matter all at once to decurre out, because
that to many of the vital spirits, do not chance to fly away, which
therein lye included, or enclosed: so that when as one part of the foresayed
matter is run therout, we must then put therein a tent, and lay therone a
plaster of Gratia Dei, or of Betonica, Hippocrates couceleth, that we should
make the apertione, Opinione of Hippocrates.
one the third rib, when as we have discovered, bared the rib, of her
skin, membrane, wherewith externallye she is clothed, setting there one, a
Forret, or Trepane, wherewith we must bore her clean through the water
which is enclosed in the breast: the which easy lye may be done, in those,
which have an vlceratione under the ribs, the foresayed ribs, being
broad enough, to set a trepane therone, between the Mediastinu, under the
brestbone, may also gather water, The trepninge of the breast bone through the
advice of Columbus.
which Columbus vvitnesseth, that we trepaning through the self same bone,
let forth the water thereat. But we must note, that there are some ancient
professors, which houlde this apertione to be very suspicious, because they
pearcinge into the cocavitye of the breast, might chance to cut alsoe the
membrane there under situated: fearing least the patient, immediately after the
sudden apertione, through the evacuatione of the animale and vital
spirits, might chance to dye, which with the matter fly away, or alsoe
considering the in curable fistles, which might thereof ensue: but now a
days we find the cotrarye because there through are cured, vvhithout
having retained any fistle thereof. In stead of such an apertione, they place
in the breast certain actual Cauteries, or potentialle, The manner now a
days to make an apertione
to the number of 7. or 8. yea alsoe sometimes cauterizinge only the skin
14. times without pearcinge any deeper, making the Escara reasonable brood
but not deep, whereof they kept the vlceratione so long open until al the
cough and all other impediments are, clean gone.

Howe that we must make the Paracentese, to draw away the water out of the
bellies of those which are troubled with the dropsye. Chap. 4.
Descriptione of the Dropsye.
THe Dropsye, is a tumefactione, or inflatione, against nature, or Phlegma is
engendered, or also of some certain winds and ventosityes. This svellinge
sometimes alsoe, spreads herself through out the whole body: sometimes
allsoe only in the inferior part of the belly. The first kind is engedred,
of a phlegmaticke humour, the second kind of Dropsye, Three sorts of Dropsye.
is engedred of water wind tohether: wherefore the auciet professors have
thought that there have bin three sorts of Dropsye. Whereof the first is
called, The first kind.
Anasarca, Hiposarcidios, Leucophlegmatias, when as the universal body is
through soaked with water, through the which, everye part of the body
seems to be tender, or weak soft, pale, vnseemlye to the sight, so that
crushinge therone, the printes of your fingers for a little continuance tarry
therein: The second.
The second, is called Tympanitas, and of Hippocrates the dry Dropsye. when
as the inferior part of the belly is full of inflation, or winds, and
stiffly stretched out and spanned, so that smiting therone, it gives from
him a sovvnde like unto a Drum, it is right true that sometimes there are
alsoe a few humours mixed theramongst, because by continuance of time the
winds come to condence them selves, and change into some vvaterye substance.
The third kind.
The third kind of Dropsye is called, Asites, which is an inflation, and
strectchinge out of the belly, because of the aquositye wherewith it is
replete, having vnparted her name of Ascos, which is to say, a leather
vessel, wherein in former and ancient times, they used to keep any moisture
in, as we do in the hydes, in the bucks skins: when this dissease
increases, grovveth, Accidetes of the Dropsye.
sometimes the hippes, and the Scrotum begin to sveelle, which is a sign of
Leucophlegmatica, as differinge, from the self same being or essence of
Ascites: as in the contrary it is not so, when as any aqvosytye ascends up
to the breast. Ascites is subject to Paracetese.


Amongst all these three species, and kinds, there is but one of them subject
unto our manual operatione, to draw forth thereof all that water which
lies enclosed in the concavitye of the belly: In what persons the dravvinge
of of water must be used and in what persons it must be left.
but before we come to the apertione hereof, we must first know, which of
the are curable or incurable, because in vain, to the hinderance of the patient
we take it not in hand, in those which through age are grow debile, and
feeble, or in those, which are corrupt not sovvnde of body, the intestines or
entralls, being very ill disposed and ill at ease, without any hope of
amendment, in those, which vvholye are grovven impotent, or in those which
are there vvithe borne, we must not in any vvyse through this operatione lay
hades one them. But in those which as yet are yonge, strong, are of a good
constitutione, nether have any agues, having all there entralles sovvnde, and
tempered, in these, in the which the water as yet hath made no cocavityes,
whereby the liver, the milte, and the guts, might chance to be altered, in
those remains as yet some hope, ominouslye to effect and bring to pass this
operatione: in this manner we must with the same proceed. Namelye, How we
ought to effect this opening
and especially, if the Dropsye, resume his original from the liver, the
patient lying one his bed, we must gentelye lay him one his right side
because we may make the inscisione one his le^ side: is so be this fore said
Dropsye proceed, through any dissease of the milte, we must then turn him,
one his left side, to make the inscisione, in his right side, so that the
inscisione, must allvvayes, be done one the contrary side, of that part, from
whence the Dropsye takes her original, that because the patient must lye
one that side, fro whence the original of the dissease comes, for if so be
he lay othervvyse then so then the obdurated part, through the ponderousnes
thereof, might chance to sink and descend dovvnevvardes, making internallye
any solutione, migt there through be the occasion of great payne and dolor.

And the patient lying one the obdurate liver or milte, might through the
vvarmeth of the bed, be eased and stengthened. And if so be, the patient
chance to lye one the open side, the vvoude would then be a great trouble
hinderance unto him, the which he mervaylouslye might be debilitated, The
place where the apertione must be made.
in feebled. Morover it vveare inconveniet that the debilest side of the
obdurated liver, or milte, through inscisione, as yet should be more vexed.

The patient being in this manner situated, we must note, in what place the
inscisione might easyest with most conveniece be do no, to vvitt three fingers
breadth under the navel, dravvinge ether towards the left side, or toward
the right, but not lineallye right forth, between the navel, the privityes,
be cause we must eschevv, and avoid, the vvhyt lyne which in this place is
situated, the ends, of the muscle Epigastri, alsoe the synnuis he tedonousnes,
of the right muscle: Excellent consideration.
because these vvouded or hurt, might suscitate, cause great payne, with many
other daugerous accidetes, vvherfor they difficultlye vvilbe cured, when as
fain we would heal up the vvounde. Having noted all this, the Chirurgiane
must with his left hand, his servant, which assisteth him, nype in the
length, the one, on the one side, and the other, one the other side, first of
all the skin, the incarnate or fleshye panickle, of this side, to lift it up,
cut it clean through overthvvarte, unto the muscles, which being effected,
they must let the foresayed elevated skine, pannickle fall again: And to
finnish the rest of our operatione convenientlye fitlye, after this first in
scisione, (because the fore said skin may fall again, one the inscisione,
which inscisione must alsoe bedone, in the muscles, and in the Peritoneo, to
stop them, to prevent the running forth of the water, then we shall lift
up the foresayed skin) we must again lift up with the hand the skin,
the fleshye pannickle, and then as high as is possible follovve the fibers of
the muscles, we must easily thrust in the crooked lancet, cut through the
muscles, and Peritoneum, as broad as we are vvonte to make the apertione in
blood lettinge, or phlebotomye, dilligently noting, that we nether touch
any veins, no guts, or any other part which is situated in the cocavitye
of the belly. Now therefore to effect this, we may with great coveniece,
dexteritye, in stead of the crooked lancet, use our punctual instrument, here
before described defigured, the inscision now being done, we must thrust
clean through the inscidede skin, the fleshye pannickle, the muscles, and
through the through cut Peritoneum, in to the concavitye of the belly a
golden, The use of the pipe.
or silver, pipe, as thick as a qville or shaft, which must have a broad
end, that nothing chance to slip between into the concavitye of the
belly, and therone a little string, or thread tied, by the which foresayed
pipe, the water must be tapped as it vveare, dravvn out, but not all at once,
but by degrees not to superfluos at one time, but on divers days, to vvitt, so
lunge till nature, being released, lighted of her pack or butthe, which
mitigatinge this evacuatione, governinge of the forces accordige to the
fortitude of the patient: which we may know, by feeling of the Pulls.
Because there are some, which having made to great an evacuatione at one
time, have alsoe evacuated the vital and livinge spirits, which vveare
therein enclosed, and finally have caused the patient his death. When as therefore
we shall have dravven water enough of at one time, we must then stop the
pipe, with a tent of linne, or with a tent of sponge, to retain the rest of
the water, lay thereon a great plaster of Diacalcitheos: some there are which
draw out the pipe, and let the vvounde which is in the muscles and in the
Peritoneo, the skin, and the lip of the vvoude, which before the
inscisione was nipped, and lifted up, because that the foresayed vvounde, might
thervv^ be stopped, and covered.

Now certaynlye to retain and keep back, the water Mr. Floris Phillippes,
Practise of Mr. Floris Philippes, a renoumned Chyrurgian at Orleans.
a very renoumned Chyrurgiane, at Orleans, sticks his needle qvite through
both the lips of the vvoude, comprehendinge sufficient qvatitye of skin,
wherein he lets his needle stick, as we are vvonte to do in the har^
mouths, and vvindeth his thread rovvnde about the needle, wherewith he
contains houldeth the lips close together, so that there may not one
drop of water pass forth, and when he desires to draw, or tap more
water therout, he then vnvvyndeth his needle, opens the lips of the
vvounde, without drawing the threded needle there out. Whilst that these
things are this doing, we must strengthen the patient, with good cibaries
and food, which easily may be changed in to blood, let him so rest
until the next day: on which day, if so be he be strong enough, we must
yet draw of some more qvantitye of water, ether through the dravvinge out of
the tent, wherewith the pipe is stopped, when as we put the pipe therein, or
with the elevatione of the skin, wherewith the apertione is covered, with
out putting the pipe any more therein, if so be there can issue any water
out, allvvayes egallinge or proportioninge the qvantitye of water, with the
forces and strength of the patient, and in this manner must we proceed in
the drawing, or tappinge of, the water.

Others there are which in the opening of the belly lay there one a carrosive,
Corrosive with inscisione in the Escara.
where by the skin is bitten corroded through, the they make an inscisione
through the Escara, unto the concavitye of the belly, making a very, small
apertione, through the which the water shall droppingly distill forth,
having dravven therout sufficient water enough, the they stop it, with
scraped linte, which when they are desirous to draw more water therout,
they the remove, take it of. Yet there are others, which after the inscisione
of the foresayed Escara, thrust therein a little pipe thereby to draw the
water out, as we have above said. Others set there on divers, and sundry,
corrosives, on the place of the liver, Applications of divers corrosives.
and of the milt, penetratinge nothing deeper then the skin in^tatinge therein
the doctrine of the aunciet professors, which vveare wot sometime, to apply
nine at once. Others make small inscisions, like unto little scarifications,
one the sides of the belly, or else they lift up the skin, thrust there
through a needle with a silk thread, which thread they suffer to continue
therein.

The navel which heaves up it self may be pricked thorough
And considering that oftentimes, in those which are troubled with the
dropsy, there navel heaves up it self, yea and sometimes as big as an egg,
which stands as clear, as if it vveare a blather with water, there
through I have seen to be drawn, a silk or vvotle thread, by the which
the patient perceaved great ease, considering the great qvantitye of water,
which through this apertione, is dropping vvyse run out.

Allsoe beyond all this are the legs, the hippes, and the Scrotum often
times, svvollen: for the which there is no better remedy, the that we
scarifye them through the skin, once as broad, as the apertione is in
phlebotomye: Some there be which do this by the innermost ankle or four
fingers above it. In what places the scarifications may be made.
I have sometimes my self very luckylye ominouslye done the same, above the
knees, and in the insyde of the hippes, in the bag of the testicles, out of
the which first of all issues a little vvaterye blood, but immediately
thereafter the water superfluovslye issues therout without any inflammatione,
so that the foresayed scarifications, can not shut, or heal, before all the
water thereof be issued, run out, the patient all most grovven smaller, the
belly evidentlye vvaxed thinner, which in short time vvilbe effected, with
out any troublesome accidents, happeninge thereunto, without any
inflammatione in the foresayed parts. More over we are not to expect any
danger hereof as we might well do, when as we open the belly of the
Dropsy Ascites, because one this manner, the water with great qvatitye, at
one time is not dravven of: and if so be the patient, after that there is a
great qvantitye of water dravven of, began to be weak, we may as then
restrain the dropping of the water, when as we cover the scarifications,
with scraped linte, or with a few burned pieces of linen, and so stop
it, bind it. Out of the which scarificatios, if so be we are disposed to
draw more water therout, we as then untie the foresayed place, take away
the linte from the same cause the patient somewhat to vvalke, or ride in a
vvaggen or koache, if it be possible, with the leg hanging out, To cause
the water, Council of Hippocrates, to draw of the water.
very superfluouslye to run or issue out of the legs, Hippocrates
comma^eth us, to rub the foresayed scarificatios with saulte, thereafter stue
them, with any fervete or hot medicametes we must allvvayes continually keep
open the same, to vvitt, with medicamentes which are sharpe biting: because
in such scarifications, the ancient professors, as Aetius, Asclepiades,
Leonides, Hippocrates, and Archigenes, have allvvayes had great confidence
therein.

But before we must come to these scarifications, we must consider one the
strength, one the age. of the patient: for these apertions, are to no use, or
comodytye, to those, which are vvholye overcome of the sickness, nether those
which are very old, macilete, because that as well the one as the other, of
these scarified parts, might easily out of hand be mortified, without
being able in any sort to retain keep back the same, vvhero immediately
follows death, by the which oft times, the Physicians, or the Chyrurgias,
are iniuriouslye without right blamed, and of all me hated had in little
vvorthe, as I my self have known it happen unto some, for the which I was
not a little greeved.

How that we shall cure the water burst, called Hernia aquosa. Chap. 5.
IN the Scrotum, which we call the bag where in the testicles are contained,
is cogregate gathered together a certain, vvaterishe moisture, through the
which the fore said bag comes to svvel, which tume factione, or
inflatione, of the Greeckes is called Hydrocele, Hydrocele.
which seems to be a particularre kide of Dropsye: must here note that this
svvellinge, sometimes comes but in one side only: if so be that this
dissease proceeds out of any antecedent or foregoinge occasions, it
necessarilye follows, that the blood, which into all parts of the body
is sent as nurriture, is permutated changed. into some vvaterye substance: if
so be of any blovve, or fall, it produces his originalle, then is contained in
the svvellinge a blooddye kind of moisture. This aqvositye, remains not, The
signs of a water burst.
in one certain place only because sometimes she is congreated situated
between the first second membrane of the testicles: we may know this, when
as we depress the svvellinge, because as then the foresayed moisture again by
little little runs therein: the bag as then is more safter, nether can we
perceave any hardenes, or tumefaction therein as the vvaterye moisture, which
is situated, within the concavitye of the Scrotum, because the foresayed
aqvositye, is not drive therein: yea also in the same side, where the moystnes
demonstrates her self, there lies the svvellinge in form of an egg, or in
an ovale figure, nether as then can we ether through the sight perceave, or
through the touching thereof feel, any part of the testicle, because the
foresayed testicle lies therein hidden, and when we assemble liken them both
together, he appears somewhat greater, more svvollen, and when as this
svvellinge or inflation of the testicles is great, the is the bag of the
testicles, vpvvardes somewhat lunge stretched out, and elevated, so that the
upper end of the yard, partly alsoe under the tumefaction lies hidden,
occulte. Sometimes alsoe is this vvaterishe humidty secluded in a several
membrane, as in a little blather, the which only for that purpose is
constituted ordained, as comonlye chances in the tumefactione Ateroma, and
when it is so, then is the svvellinge rovvnde, closely compacted together,
so that it seems to be a third testicle.

There is alsoe oftentimes, a ventosytye gathered together, in the bag, or
Scrotum, as if it vveare a vvaterye humiditye or moisture, which rightly to
discern know the one fro the other we must consider that the vvindye
Hernia, Whereby we may know the vvindye Hernia.
or burst, is partly harde and light, and is at one time engendered, on the
suddayn, subitlye ca it leese it self, depart: where to the contrary, the
vvaterye Hernia, doth not vvholye depart, but vvaxeth sometimes a little
smaller, considering any small ague, or else considering the great
abstinence, that especially in yonge childrene. If so be therefore that there
be no great qvantitye of moisture, or humiditye, then is the tumefaction soft,
but if that there be great qvantitye, it causes then such a renitatione, or
stretchinge out, as a bottle which is full, and closely stopped, is heavye in
elevatinge, or liftinge up: such a svvellinge by little little increases: the
veins of the bag of the testicles svvell, when as with the fingers, we
thrust thereon: the humeditye flies before the finger, spreadethe her self
rovvnde about the finger, that vvheron we do not crushe, bears up it self:
and this vvaterishe humiditye, reveals her self over thvvarte, as in a
glass, or in a blather: as easily we may espy, when as we houlde a cadle
close thereunto, one the side of the svvellinge, and look then one the other
side: And so farreforth as the humiditye, therein contained, and occluded, be
vvaterishe, then the inflatione or svvellinge glistenneth, is of such a colour,
as the circumiacent parts therabout lyige are: if so be it be blodye, or like
the wine mother or dregs, and faeces of wine, then is the svvellinge
reddishe of colour, or purple coloured: To know vvheter the Hernia be one
both sides.
if so be we find all these signs, and tokens, in both sides of the
Scrotum, or bag of the testicles, it is then a sign of two kinds of
Hernia, to vvitt, in everye side one. All these svvelinges, of themselves,
cause no payne, unless it vveare great spanninge, of that part might chance,
through the great tumefactions, and that especially, whereas the vvatery
moisture lies enclosed, between the membranes of the testicles. Now to
abolish such aqvositye, there is nothing more profitable, and commodious,
then to make an apertion therinne, on this manner as follows and succedeth.

Having shaved away the hair, Howe we ought to make the apertione.
rovnde about the privityes (if so by the patient be no child) we must then
cause him to lye one his back, ether one a bed, or bench, being well
stored of linne, then we must cause a servant, or helper, to stand one the
one side of the patient, on the other side of the wherein we will make the
apertione, which foresayed servant, must draw the yard toward him: then
must the Chyrurgian with his left hand crushe, on the inferior part of the
bag, because that part which he will thrust through might show it self
the more stretched, and fuller of substance, and prick with his right hand,
wherein he must have a strong crooked lancett, from vpvvardes, Inscisione of
the Scrotum.
dovvnevvardes, unto the concavitye of the bag of the testicles, because that
the aqvosity may rune out. And if so be the foresayed humiditye, lye enclosed
in the mebranes of the testicles, we must as then most gently, artificiallye,
once again thrust therein, dilligently noting, that we chance not to touch,
the foresayed testicles, nether any of the spermaticke vessels: and if the
humiditye vveare enclosed in a blather, the Chyrurgiane must then with his
left hand, crushe one the inferior part of the bag, on this manner to drive
vpvvardes the svvellinge, and the svvellinge being there retained kept, we
must continue it in this place, least that she sink dovvnevvardes again, and
with the crooked lancet, cut in the nethermost part of the foresayed Scrotum
unto the blather, or bag, wherein the humiditye lies enclosed, let it run
therout, as much as is possible: And if so be, it be able to be done, we
must take therout, some part of the bag, or blather, because it should not
heal again, other water therein be engendered: then we must put therein a
great tent made of linte, which must not be to harde vvounde, thervvith to
keep open the vvoude, and not so quickly heal it: for if so it come to be
too soon healed, shut there might then chance to be an other collectione, and
gatheringe together of water, so that it might be right needful, to be sure
of the curing of the same, that as much as we ca, we cause the membranes, to
be purified, and cleansed, of all the humiditye, and moisture wherewith they
are thoroughly soaked.

Some there are which apply alsoe in the superior part of the Scrotum, a
potential cauterye, the operatione whereof being done, they the make an
inscisione in the Escara, unto the concavitye of the Scrotum, wherein the
foresayed water lies enclosed, then suffer the foresayed Escara of her self
to fall out and separate. Such an apertione, which is made with corrosive,
can not so easily be cured, so that in the mean season the water hath time
enough to issue out thereat. Apertion by the thrusting through of a silk
thread.
Others, draw through the svvellinge, with a strong needle, a silk thread,
in stead of making an inscisione, or applying of the corrosive, in place of a
Seto, or transforatio where through the foresayed water by little little
leaketh out.

But the apertione which is least daugerous of these three foresayed, is, the
inscisio, whereof no, or at the least, very small accidents, can ensue, if
so be she be done expertlye, and one a conveniet place. It appears according
as we have above tought, in the opening of Apostemations, that the apertion
of the Scrotum, or bag, reqvireth to be done in the inferior parts of the
same: The apetione is better to be done above (...) under.
notvvithstandinge experience teaches us, that there happens far more payne,
inflammation, unto it, when the inscisione is made belovve, the when she is
done made above, towards the flackes: for there is less danger of hurtinge of
the testicles above, or there membrane, because it is situated more inferior,
where all the fibers, of the foresayed Scrotu, do finish end, wherefore, they
are very sensible painful. So that Celsus, Paulus, coucell us, that we
should make the inscisio close by the flanckes. A dubb^ inscisione in a ^ble
Hernia.
When as therefore this species, and kind of Hernia, is double, we must then
make do such an operation one both sides, especially when we se, that they
do not in any sort assvvage.

THE FIFTH TREATISE OF THE OPERATIon of Chyrurgerye, wherein is discoursede and
handelede of the disseases of the nose, of the mouth, containing seven
Chapiters.
Of the Polipus. Chap. 1. Of the Haremouth. Chap. 2. Of the vlcerationes, of
the excrescece of the flesh of the gummes, called Paroulis, end Epoulis,
Chap. 3. Of the tunge tyinge, or of the shortness, or brevitye of the tunge,
which the Greeckes call Anciloglossum, of the vlceration Ranula, which is
allsoe called Batrachos. Chap. 4. Howe we ought, to cauterise, and cut of,
the Vvula, or pallaet of the mouth. Chap. 5. Of the svvellinge of the
almondes, of the vlcerations of the same. Chap. 6. Howe that we ought to
draw, break, or cut of teethe, Chap. 7.
Of the Polipus. Chap. 1.
Root, original of the Polipus.
SOme men there are, which have a certain excrescece, of flesh in the
nostrells, which resumeth her originalle, out of the bone, Etmoidis, or
Chribleus, out of the bones of the nose. This excrescence happens or comes
to a man, by little little at once, and at the last, she vvaxeth so big,
huge in qvatitye, that she stops the whole nostrells, sometimes alsoe
hangs down to the lips, by the which the patient, is mervelouslye
molested, as well in speaking, as breathing. Sometimes also she grovveth in
the entrace, or conductione, through the which the air, the breath, are
drawn into the throat, the which we may easily see, when as the patient
opens his mouth, behind the pallaet of the mouth, in such a greatness
sometimes, that she stops the throat, vvherthroughe the patient comes in
the end to be choked, if that in time we do not prevent it, And because such
an excrescece of flesh, most commonly is soft, and pale, having divers
small sproutes, not mislike unto the feet, of the fish Purpura, it is therefore
of the Greeckes called Polipus, allso in our langvage Polipus.

There are no sorts of Polipus which being venomous, No sorts of Polipus,
can through Surgery be cured.
have need of the operatione of Chyrurgerye, because we may not touch the, in
like sort we may not touch those which are infected with the Cancer,
because there nature is thervvith polluted, they there through spoiled. The young
Chyrurgiane, may know them by there sensiblenes, Signs of a venomous
Polipus.
because they are very dolorous, full, of payne, extreme hard, being almost
purple coloured, with a very stinckig odor, or smelle, on the which the
Chyrurgiane shall do nothing, but must be handled as if it vveare the
Cancker, to vvitt, through koolinge, dryinge, through mollifyinge
medicamentes, through the which her excrescence may be praevented.

Signs of a tractable Polipus.
That Polipus, which is insensible, or where there is little, or no payne,
which is weak, loose, tractable, without beige irritated, pale, or which
is of a reddishe colour, those we may through the operation of Chyrurgerye
take in hands.

Howe we ought to cure the Polipum.
To the effectuatinge of which, the aunciete Chyrurgias, those which have
followed there doctrine, have effected this operatione cruelly enough: for
some there are which with an instrument cut rovvnde, or circkle vvyse this
Polipum, which to that end purpose, thereto they have caused to be made, and is
called in greek Polyticon Pathion, without touching of the cartilage, or
grisle, which being effected, they draw forth the foresayed descided
Polipus, with an instrument much like unto an ear picker, or else with some
kind of hoocke, then they cure heal the vlceratio, as it reqvireth to be don.
And as commonly there remains some little piece of root, in the bones
Etmoides, of the nose, the which they scrape of, alsoe from the foresayed
bones turning, thrustige therein, with an instrument, to fetch all therout,
that by any means possible might tarry, and remain therein.

An other manner.
Others endeavour to consume, annihilate the foresayed Polypum, with certain
causticke, or vstive medicametes, as with Aqva fortis, with oil of vitrioll,
or with the liqvefacted, moulten corrosive, in the which they dip, madefye
little small tents, which they lay therone, with or through a little pipe,
because they should not hurt the nose one the internalle or inner side.
Others there are, which with an actual cauterye, cauterize it, which
through a pipe they thrust therein. Others, after the example the four famous
Chyrurgians, An other manner to cure the Polipum.
which not being of opinion, that in no vvyse, or in any sort we vveare
able to cauterize the Polipus, unto his root, because he is so deep
ingraffed, they the make an inscisione, one the one side, of the cartilage of
the nose, unto the bone of the same, having in this sort discovered,
denudatede the Polipu unto his root or first ofspringe, originalle, then they
there cut, cauterise him, stitch together again the said inscisione, as we
are commonly used to do in the hare mouths. The wise, Learned man Guido de
Cauliaco, likes commends this, or such like operatione, but in no wise,
counceleth, to stitch up the inscision, before the foresayed Polipus, be vvholy
eradicated, rooted out, because if so be, that any parcel thereof remain, it
again increases, which happening he, to be so, all the trouble, pains of
the patient, hath bin done for nothing, to no purpose. All which
operations, being as sufficiently and completlye effected as they possible may
be, yet for the patient they are tedious trouble some, as often times, we have
with our eyes beheld, which to speak the very truth indeed, they have
never attained unto there perfect, and former health again, but rather far
vvorse, then better: whereby we vveare moved, to try. make experiment of a
far more ominous, and more convenient operatio, to the curing of this
dissease, which consistethe in the whole eradicatione of the same. The manner
howe to drovve out the Polipus, more certayner, convenienter, through
extirpatione.
To the which end and purpose it seems unto us convenient, that we situate,
dispose the patient, on the most convenient manner we may, in a seat,
towards the light, the Chyrurgian, with his left hand opening the
nostrell, wherein the Polipus is situated, shall with his right hand, thrust
therein the flat toges, as deep as possibly he may, (which tongues must be
sovvhat broad, like a Ducks) bil wherewith he must nipe the foresayed
Polipu, gentlelye with both his hands turn wind the same, thervvith alsoe
draw towards him a little, not at one pluck, because the root which is
fast settled in the foresayed bones, might alsoe follovve, the foresayed Polipus
at one time be dravven forth, and extirpated: which I my self may with the
truth allege to have done, with very little payne. Mr. Sourlin, a very
expert Chyrurgian, hath assured me, that he alsoe divers times hath done it
one the same manner, without any inconvenience. Admonitione for the
Chyrurgiane.
But the Chyrurgyane must consider, that he do not adveture on such an
operatione, then in that Polipus which is tractable, and not canckerouse,
which is great enough, to be griped, with out breaking to be extirpated,
wherefore, if it be not great enough, we as then let him grow, increase.
And so far forth as the foresayed Polipus, drevve himself vpvvardes,
avoydinge the nipinge, of the little toges, we must the draw it
dovvnevvardes, with a little hooke, because as then we may the better, take
houlde therone: the operatio being finished, there ensues an effluxio of
blood presetlye, thereafter, which we shall permit, suffer to bleed,
because that part may be thereof released, vnburthened: we must then cause the
patient, through his nose to snufle up red vvyne, that as oftentimes a day,
until such time as it be internally cured, without applying any pingveditye,
or oils thereunto.

Of the haremouthe, or splitted and cloven lips. Chap. 2.
Coloboma, Curtum.
THe cleavinge, or splittinge, which daily we see, in the lips, in the
ears, and in the nose, is of Galen called Coloboma, in Latin Curtum, when as
these parts through any natural dissease, are splitted, or clovene, as if
there vveare a piece cut out. To regenerate any substance is a work of
nature and not of the Chyrurgiane.
It is impossible, that we should ingendre, any other matter, restore, the
substance, which therein is vvantinge, because it is the work of nature not of
the Chyrurgiane: but he may bring the separated parts the one, by the other,
and cause such a substance, which in that part is deficiet, vvantinge shall
seem as it vveare there in engendered, so that very hardly we shall espy,
mark such an vnseemlines, deformitye, especially if the slit have bin but
small: for these disseases might per adventure be so great, that they should
be incurable, and vveare not conveniente for us to lay hands one them, if so
be we endeavoured to cure them, we might chance to make them far vvorse,
more vnseemlye, then before they vveare. Wherefore the Chyrurgiane ought
dilligently to consider, that one such kinds of fissures or splittinges, he
impose not his hands, and especially in those which are to vvyde separated
the one from the other, where there is to much substance deficient or
vvantinge, between them both, for when a Chyrurgian endeavours to cure
such a dissease, then must necessarylye the seiunged and separated parts,
ether join, heal together again, or else not: if so be they grow, join
together, the lip the is merveylouslye stretched, lies close to the teethe,
one the gumes: And if so be they ca not souder, join the on with the other,
the fissure, or splitting, vvilbe much greater, then before it was, because
cosideringe that, which one both sides was taken cut avvaye, through which
occasion, the patient, as then can far and much more difficulter eat, and
also speaks vvorse, because that a coplete, whole lip, is very coveniete,
necessary, as well to the commestione, as to the loquution, speech.

In what persons this operatione is dangerous.
This manuale operatione, is very dangerous in aged persons, in those which
are vnhealthesame, of body, or in those, which (as we commonly say) have
noughtye healinge flesh, because, that in mas body there is no part or
place, where in the Cacker ca sooner come, and being therein, wherein he may
be vvorse cured, with more difficulty healed. The means to cure such a
dissease, is on this manner: When must first of all situate the patient
towards the light, with our left hade, lift up the right side of the cloven
or splitted lip, as then cut with the crooked lancett, in the middle or
upper end of the foresayed side of the lip, through the skin, alsoe
between them both beginning as high, as near the nose, as possible might
be done, dravvige the foresayed lacett, unto or towards beneath or end of the
lip, How we ought to cure the cloven lips, or haremouthes.
because that the whole interiacet skin, might be clean thereof separated
and severed: then we must change hands, taking in our right hade, the other
side of the clove lip, which is situated in the left side, then we must cut
with the left hand, even as before we have done with the right, because the
clove lip, may on all sides be cut, on the edges be brought to ravv flesh,
without leavinge the least part thereof untouched, which is not cut, or made
ravv, ether in the infierior, or superior parts thereof, that nothing
differinge from a green, fresh, bloody vvoude, before we assay to stitch
them the one with the other. We must let that part somewhat bleed.
This being one such a manner effected, and that part havige somewhat
bled, we must as then contract join together both the cut parts, as
close, and as smooth as by any means possible we may, and thrust a needle
through both the foresayed revnited parts, thrustinge deep enough through
the flesh, suffer the needle to remain therein, one the which we must
rovvnde about wide the thread, as the Tailors are vvonte to do, when any
where one there apparel they stick there needle there to keep it: As far
as the fissure or splittinge be great, we may as then stick two needles
there in, the one under, the other above. If so be the separated parts, of
the foresayed lip, can not with any facility, or ease be brought together,
we must the make two inscisions, in each side of the lipp one, inform
likeness of a halfemoone, both the korners thereof towards the vvoud, View
the figure before.
as heer before in the figure we may see, which inscisiones must only
penetrate the upper skin, because that the edges of the vvounde being
drawn together, might the better join the one with the other, for with
any violence they may not be compelled, but rather, with gentleness, and
without any force, because that, they being brought and joined the one with
the other, be not again vvithdravvne backvvardes.

It chances alsoe sometimes, that the skin one the on side of the fissure,
can not completlye unite her self with the other, where through, that place
of the vvounde, is deformed mishap, because it is not vvholye cooperte,
coverede, saying therefore that this so chances, we must as then cut this
said part halfemoone vvyse, without in any sort touchig the other side. We
must nipe of the poyncte of the needle.
If so be the acuitye or poyncte of the needle which sticks in the vvounde,
or lip, sticks somewhat loge through the other side, we must nipe, or
break it of with certain pinsers or tongues because it should not prick or
hoocke in any other place, we must apply thereon, a plaster of Betonica, in
those inscisions which are made in the form of a halfemoone, we must apply
therone only dry linte, because the lips, or edges thereof, might not heal,
because that the flesh which therein increases, do not replenishe the
vvounde, the lip there through be made broader.

The foresayed suture, is commonly healed together the seventh day, and
soudered the one with the other, when as therefore we espy mark that it is
so, that they are joined the one with the other, we must cut of the thread
which is vvounde rovvnde about the needle, pluck the needle therout, cure the
remanet of the vvoude, alsoe the stitches of the needle, as necesitye reqvireth
the same to be done, and effected.

Lips which are cleft in two places.
The lips are some times split, or cleft in two sundry, divers places, but
thero is not so much consistinge, if they be not so far separated the one
fro the other, as if there vveare a noteable pieces cut therout, because
othervvyse it is as well easily to be cured as the single fissure. If so be
there be any excressece of flesh, or any cartilage, fovvnde about the lips,
or in any place, which necessarilye is to descided we must alsoe cut that
out, because, in all places it might be of an aequalle smoothenes. Cleaving of
the ears, and nostrils
As cocerninge, touching the fissures, of the ears, or nostrils, we must
therewith proceed, on such a manner, as heretofore we have said of the
splittinges and fissures of the lips.

Of the vlceratione, and excrescence of the gummes, called Paroulis, and
Epoulis. Chap. 3.
AFter the inflammation, or inscensione of the gummes, commolye succeed the
follovve the an excrescence of flesh, which of the aunciete professors was
called Epoulis, that especially about the check, or hindmost teethe. Such a
humour, excrescece encreseth by little, little, till at last it increases as
big as a hens egg, so that sometimes the teeth there through fall out,
and the patient not able to open his mouth. We may not provoacke the
Canckerouse.
If so be these excrescences be black, and Canckerouse, we must not apply
there one any sharpe, or corrodent medicamentes, nether with byndinge
separate, root them out: but must entreat, handle them, in such sort, as
before we have spoken of the Cancker, and like all palliative cures.

If so be this excrescence be tender, soft, The manner to cure Epoulis
tractable, we must whilst it is small, descyde cut it away, if so be it
be great, we must the bind it of, with a strong thread, which we must
alligate, and tie under at the root thereof, and by degrees knitt it closer,
till that in thus doing, the root by the thread be cut through, and the
excrescence fall out of the mouth. Such a ligature is more certain the
inscisione
Such a ligature or byndinge is far surer, the the discidinge or cuttinge of,
the same, because that therthroughe, we need fear no superfluous bleedinge,
the root better one this manner be taken out, allsoe the patient have less
payne, and fear to expect, then of the inscisione, or cuttinge, and
cauterisatione, which after the inscisione coseqvetlye follovvethe.

When as therefore througe byndinge, Howe we ought to handle the Epoulis that
returns
we have discided this carnositye, or excrescens, that she reverteth comes
again, as often times chances, we must as then religate bind again the
same, or cut it, and cauterize the root thereof, it be ether with a little
actual Cauterium, or with a little oil of Vitroll, with Aqvafortis, or
with any other liqvefacted corrosive, which we find thereunto most
convenient. A part of the ancient professors, vveare vvote to apply
therone, some or other corrosive poulder, on the same, where of the
excrescence might clean be corroded avvaye, which in my opinione is very
incoveniente, especially in these parts.

There is as yet an other kind of vlceration, Paroulis, and the means how to
cure it.
or tumefactione incident unto the gummes, which of our praedicessors was
called Paroulis: which perseavige it to be come to his full maturation,
ripnes, we must immediately make therein an apertione, inscisione, with the
crooked lancett, which must be of an indiffeferent latitude, because it might
not again chance, to cause a revlceratio or svvellinge, so chance to
change it self into a fistle: being aperte, and open the patient must vvashe
his mouth with some gross red vvyne, which must be sovvhat warm, to
exsiccate, dry, to confort, to repelle, drive back if need so reqvire to
stop, and restayne blood: the next day follovvige he must vvashe his mouth
vvithhonye water, to the purging, and purifyinge of the dissease.

This vlceration, must immediately be openede, because the matter, chance to
make no more concavitye, and the cheecke bone therthroughe chance to be
polluted. If so be there chance any corruptinge, and rottenes in the gummes,
we must then annoynte them with a littie Aqvafortis, A remedy against the
corruptinge of the gumes.
but with due consideratione, and discretione. And because that oftentimes
immediately after the disseases Paroulis, or Epoulis, there commonly
engenders, and comes a fistle in the gummes, which penetrates, pierces
unto the cheeckebon, we must note, if the root of the tooth be not rotten,
corrupt or altered, for if so be it vveare so, (as oftetimes it happens) we
must draw forth the tooth, and correct the place, wherein the tooth hath
stood ether with a cauterye, or with oil of Vitriolle, and if so be there
be any part of the cheecke bone corrupt, by this means, nature will expel
and drive from her the corrupted piece of bone, without with violence to
draw forth the same.

Of the retentione of the tuge, which of the Greeckes was called,
Anciloglossum, and we now call it tungetyed: And of the vlceration under the
tunge, which of the Greeckes is called Batrachos, of our modern Physicians
Ranula. Chap. 4.
The dissease of a hortened tunge.
THe tunge in some persons, or children, is shorter then she ought to be,
wherewith they are borne, and by the which occasio, they must with
difficulty utter the words which they would speak, the tunge being
intercepted, and hindered, by a certain ligament, which we call the spaned
vayn, vvherthroughe the toge, is restrained, as it vveare, seems to be
brydeled, or through any membrane thervnder situated, vvheron the tunge
rests, because she can not so move her self, and turn, as it vveare
convenient, she should. The children are very lunge time before they begin
to speak, when as they begin, they as the speak very festivouslye
hastily, without any hinderance, except in uttering of those words,
which are difficult to pronounce, as are those, in the which many R. R, R.
and L. L. L. come.

This dissease, is alsoe sometimes accidetalle unto a man, The dissease of the
tunge after a callouse vlceratione.
when as after any vlceratione under the tunge, there remains a harde
callousnes, anguste cicatrice, whereof the tuge sometimes, inspeaking must
double redubble her self, they which are troubled with this imperfection,
do speak with great pains difficulty, wherefore the ancient professors of
foretimes, have called the Mogilaous. The fore said dissease must be cured
only through the manualle operatio. To which end purpose, we must situate
place the patient as the matter is reqviringe, How we ought to cure the
tunge tyinge.
the servat of the Chyrurgiane having both his fingers vvounde with fine
linne (to vvitt, the thumb, the first finger) wherewith he must take the
foresaid tuge by the end, lift her up, towards the roof of the mouth:
which being done, if so be the membranes vvherone the tunge is fastenede, be
cause, of the difficulty of speech, the must the Chyrurgian vvitth a small
hooke, as is before describede, houlde the same thervvith fast, with his left
hand, when indiffierentlye he shall have stretched out the same, he must as
then ether with the poyncte of his scissors, or else with his crooked lancet,
cut, and discide it of. If so be the shortness be caused because the ligament
of the tunge, is to short, stretches it self more then is needful
toward, the middle of the tunge, or else because of any cicatrice: we must
then alsoe in like sort take houlde on all that with the hooke, pluck or
draw it, cut it of, which is obdurated harde, alsoe all that which with
the natural flesh of the tunge is not moved, or stirred. This operatione then
being effected, the patient must was he his mouth, with a little water
vinegar, dilligently stir the tunge, often times thrust her forth of his
mouth, rub or vvipe his finger thervnder, oft times with his teethe crushe
her up towards the roof of the mouth, because that the foresayed ligament,
or mebrane, do not chance to join grow fast again thero: Howe we may
hinder the healinge.
for as the stirring, removinge up down, are a hinderace, unto the healinge
of the same, so is all so qvietnes, stillnes, an occassion of the vnitinge,
cobinatione of the same: yea he must alsoe in the night seaso lay a compresse
under his tunge, there by to hinder, delay the curing of the vvounde, which
easily sleeping might chance come to pass, that because the tunge, nether by
eating, nor by speaking is in any sort stirred or moved.

Some of our aunciet professors, Membranous ligament or tunge tyinge.
to prevent the danger, of bleedinge in such an operation, thrust through the
membranous ligamet, or through the cicatrice, whereby the tuge is kept boude
tied, a needle with a thread, which by degrees they draw pluck together
until such time the membrane heervvith be cut a sunder.

When as we would cut the tunge tyednes in yonge children, which are nuely
borne, How we ought to cut the tunge tyinge of yonge children.
we must first of al with the finger lift up the tuge, with the poyncte of
the scissors, descide, and cut of the membrane which is situated under the
tunge, the with the finger vvipe a little fault therein rub it, without
doing any thing else there to, commaundinge the nurse, to do the same once,
or tvvice more.

The vlceratione Ranula, and the original thereof.
It may alsoe chance that the speech is impedited hindered, by reason of some
vlceratione, which comes under the tuge, called Batrachos, or Ranula, in
which vlceratione, there lies a vvaterishe humiditye therein enclosed, which
often times is not disliking unto the vvhyte of an egg, as well considering
the consistence thereof, as concerning the colour, allvvayes commonly being
included in a little membrane, like unto the vlceratione Ateroma, many other
could vlcerations or svvellinges. In have seen such manner of svvellinge,
tumefactions so great and so often times (after they have bin thrust
through to let out the matter) return again, that the patient, by reason of the
greatness could not speak, yea allsoe in davvnger there through of styfelinge,
or smotheringe, so that I have known them to have bin opened four times
in one day, and at everye season a hadefull of matter to issue therout, like
unto slime, and the vvhyte of an egg. The which hath binn so difficult to be
cured, that in the end we have bin compelled, to apply there one an actualle
Cauterium, in which large and vvyde apertione, we have imposed laid in
linte, being madefyed and made vvett in oil of vitriolle, by the which at the
last the patient is sovvndlye, and completlye cured.

Now to cure this dissease, we must first of all make an apertione, with the
crooked lancet, according to the length of that part and not thvvart or
crosseover, to give issue passage to the humiditye matter to run out, which
is the occasion of this tumefactione, or vlceratione: and if so be this
svvelling return, the surest remedy, as the is the actual cauterye.

Howe we ought to cure this vlceratione his return again.
To which intent, we must well, and convenietly situate the patiete, cause his
head to be stayed, held by his servant, with the one hand one his head,
and the other under his chin, there about where the foresayed vlceration is
situated, because partly there through it may be elevated and lifted up, for
the Chyrurgiane with more ease facility to attain to his purpose, when as
with the lacet or with the cauterie we will make there in an apertione: For
those parts being tender, soft, how little soever they be crushed yet
notvvitstadinge yield themselves invvardes where through the apertion might be
hindered failed, and all our labour be lost, bestowed in vain. The patient
therefore in this sort being settled and disposed, and being by some servat
held fast, must open his mouth, then shall the Chyrurgiane with his left
hand lay a piece of lattinne or a silver plate under the tunge of the patient,
which hath a hole in the midst thereof right on the place, where we desire
to make the apertione, then must the Chyrurgiane take in his right hand a
glovvinge or red hot Cauterium, which he must sittuate right one the hole
of the foresayed piece of Lattinne thrust the same into the concavitye of the
foresayed vlceration: in so doing are the circumiacent parts defended from
all combustione or burning, the vlceratione very convenientlye opened. This
apertion being on such a manner effected, brought to pass, we must cause the
patient to wash his mouth, with a mouth-vvater, or gargrise, which must be
made of barley-vvater, of Plantine, and of honie-vvater.

Howe we ought to cauterize, cut of, or bind, and tie, the palate, or Vvula
of the mouth. Chap. 5.
NAture hath in the posterior parts of the mouth created, a spongiouse,
carnal or fleshye dug, as thick, rovvnd. as is the end of a shaft, or qvill
as easily we may see, when as we open the mouth. This reservinge his
natural proportione, the Greeckes as the call it Gargareon, the Latinistes,
Gurgulio, Gurgulio
we the palate of the mouth: but the same being amplified, and grovven
greater, then naturally it is, through the discendinge of any superfluous
humours, being of one crassitude above, beneath, it is as then of the Greeckes
called Chiou, in Latin Columella, Columella.
as if we would say, a little pillaer: but if so be it be belovve rovvnder
it is as then of the ancient professors called Staphila, of the Lattines,
Vva, Vva.
and of us, the sinking or falling of the palate. It hath sometimes such a
longitude, depending one the tunge, that the patient allvvayes supposes, to
have somewhat in the throt, which very vvillingly he would svvallovve.

That which is black, Wen we ought not to cut away the palate.
we must not in any vvyse meddle with, or take in hands, in like sort
alsoe the same being vvholye inflamed, because as then with out danger we
can by no means possible, descide and cut it of, because of the superfluous
bleedinge which conseqventlye follows, wherefore as then we ought rather
to use all such medicamentes as still, and assvvage payne, which moysten and
madefye, and gently fortify strenghthen the patient. But if so be that there
be no inflammatione, the palate be thoroughe soaked with humours, is vvaxed
very lunge, vvhyte, pale, and sharpe, Three means or ways to cure this
dissease.
we must as then cut it of: as we must alsoe do when it is above thin,
and belovve thick.

This dissease may be cured, by taking away that, which in the palate is
oppugnant unto nature, ether through dissectione, or through cauterizinge, or
else through bindinge of the same. If so be we fear any superfluous
bleedinge, it is then the surest, shortest, easiest vvaye, to discide it,
because the patient there through might be freed from many more miseries,
calamityes, mischauces, vvherine othervvyse he might in time chance to fall as
is the cough, through the cotinuallirritatio of the forefayed lunge hangige
palate, omissione, loss, of sleep, sometimes alsoe the choackinge, so that
we noting observinge all these things, are of te times compelled, for the
succour of the patient, to effect our extreme, The first way to cure the
sinckinge of the palate.
and last remedy, to preserve and keep him from greater danger ensvinge.

And aptly to bring this to pass, we must cause the patient to sit in a
very lucent and lightsome place, and alsoe to set apert wide open his mouth,
and depress his tunge with the Speculum oris, then take houlde one the
foresayed palate, with a little instrument, or toges made only for that
purpose, leavinge as much hanging of the palate under the foresayed tongues,
or instrument, as is to lunge, nought, as must be cut of, plucking of the
same a little towards him, because that with the poynct of the scissors, he
may convenientlye cut of, that which hangs under the foresayed instrument
or tongues but not that which is above the foresayed instrument as easily it
may be done, for vven as this palate, is tender, spongious, and covered with
a mebrane, Accidetes which may ensue through cuttinge to high of the palate.
we as the easily take houlde thereon when as we would pluck him,
wherefore some Chyrurgians have oftentimes bin deceaved, supposing him to be
much longer, wherefore they have cut him to short, almost clean away,
where through allsoe very troublesome, and difficult accidents have
followed: because this beige happened, al the pectorall parts, are haynouslye
merveylouslye therthrough offended, with great difficulty of well speaking,
yea sometimes allsoe with want of speech, or dumnes: wherefore we ought not
only to leave the root, vvheron that this dug, or this palate is fastened,
but somewhat more, and only cut of that, which above his natural
constitutione seems to be toe lunge. Others there are which take houlde on
this palate, An instrument or tongue, called Staphilagres.
with an instrument called Staphilagres, wherewith they vvringe it rovvnde
about, having vvrunge it rovvnde, it vvaxeth crooked, purple coloured, and in
the sectione thereof issveth little blood therout. Being now descided cut
of, if so be there followed a great effluxione of blood, we must as the
cause the patient to gargrise his mouth with water and vinegar, and then
with some constringent decoctione which hath bi boiled with gross red
vvyne, or else touch the place, Remedy agayst the bleeding of the descided
palate.
orvvype it with some strong cauterisinge water, wherewith the opened
veins might be seared together.

The second manner, of effectinge this same, is done with an actual, The
second manner to cure the sinekinge of the palate throug cauterisatione.
or a poteciall cauterye: as concerning the actual cauterye, we must
thereunto have in a readiness and praepared, a sylver, or copper pipe, which in
the one end thereof must have a little apertione in sorme of a little vvindovve,
to receave there in that part of the palate, which you resolve to cauterize,
then you shall put into the pipe your glovvinge actual cauterye, which with
his end will abolish and take away that, which shall hage there in as if it
vveare with a little cheesell stroke of, and one this manner we must
cauterize, and cut of the palate eve, and smothe. Touching the potential
cauterye, or corrosive, we must first receave, into the apertio or vvindovve
of the foresayed pipe, that part of the palate, which we desire to
corrosive, and then with a privett or searchige iro thrust into the foresayed
pipe, a piece of corrosive, against the foresayed piece of palate of the mouth,
and continue the same therone a certain time, dilligently considering, that
not any part of the corrosive, fall one the tunge, or the throat, when as
through the humiditye of the palate it begins to liqvefye. This corrosive
is described before among the instruments.
And when we desire to take away the foresayed pipe, we must the first of
all lay the Speculum oris, one the tunge, because as the no part of the
foresayed corrosive, chance to light or fall one any of the subteriacet
parts, nether touch any part, but the palate only because thereby they might
be indammaged, and hurt. Thus having brought this to pass, we must annoynt
the palate with a little oil of roses, with a little cotton or linen there
in being madefied, and made fat, then shall the patient vvashe his mouth
with a little roosevvater.

A sort there are which do not use the foresayed pipe, but they dip,
moysten, a little cotton, or linen, which is tied to the privet, or
searchinge iron, in oil of vitriol, or Aquafortis, with the which they
touche the palate, and cauterize it, the tunge before being laid down
with the La oris, the a little season follovvinge they vvashe it with
Platinevvater. Others take a little kind of spoon, Staplulocauston, a
certain kind of spoon so called
(which of our praedecessors was called Staphilocausto) full implete with
poulder, of corrosive, full Aquafortis, or oil of Vitriolle, wherein they
cause the end of the palate to depede, allvvay before having laid down the
tunge vvithe the La oris, and by this means they cauterize, consume, the
palate which before was to lunge: it is right true, that some of this
corrosive in the spoon might chance to fall one the tunge, wherefore I would
rather council to use that corrosive which is thick and of some crassitude,
as that is which may be pulverisated beaken to poulder, because without
being pulverizated it can not show his forces one the palate. When as
therefore, through the applicatione of any of the fore said corrosives, or
cauteryes, the place of the palate begins to be black, it is then a sign
that it is sufficietlye cauterised, and if so be the colour thereof be not, as
yet changed, we must then yet once again apply the corrosive thereunto, then
cause the patient to gargrise his mouth with Oxicrate or with warm red
vvyne.

A tried remedy.
I have known the suncken palate to be lifted up again, with a little
povvnded pepper saulte, by a spoon, being therone fastened: others use there
to some astringet poulders. The third means, to cure this dissease, is
effected by ligature, because of the timorousnes which the patient conceaveth
of the cuttinge of, or cauterizinge the same, or effluxion of blood. The
tyinge, with the third means howe to cure the palate being sunk.
Which is effected and completlye brought to pass, when as with a strong
thread we tie the fore said palate vnderneathe, in that place where it
surpasses his natural length: through which ligature, the inferior part
can obtain no nurture, because the veins by the thread are suffulced
stopped up, so that in a short time the thread cuttethe of, and causes to
separate that which hath bin bovvnde, the superior part being almost
cicatrized, with out any fear of any superfluous bleedige. The means howe
very neatlye, and convenientlye to effect this operatione, and allsoe the
instrument thereunto servinge, is described unto you before amoge the figures of
the instruments.

The use of the foresayed palate of the mouth, Use of the palate.
shevveth unto us, that we ought to observe a mean, in cuttinge of the same,
when as it surmountethe the naturalle longitude, or else the use thereof is
brought to nought, and lost, because therthroughe, the voice of ma is formed,
and retained, as the mouth or apertione of a Citerne, when as we touch the
strings thereof, she as then geveth a sovvnde, even so the breath of man,
which is the substance of the voice, issuinge forth of the lunges being
divided, and spread over, and throughout the whole roof of the mouth, there
and in that place to receave the articulatione, and by the tunge, teethe,
lips, and nostrils, in the utterance thereof to be formed. Wherefore those
which have the same surpassinge the naturalle length, or in any other sort,
troubles them, have such a feeble, imbicille voice, that very difficultlye
we may hear them, or at the least speak through there noses: if so be it
be clean cut of, they leese there speech, and vvaxe mute and dumme. Above all
this it hath as yet a tvvofoulde use, viz the one to prohibit, the dust, and
any other substance, to enter into the throat, by our breathe, which
constinuallye we must draw invvardes, and hangs as it vveare dilated and
spread abroad like unto a tapistrye, over the throat. The other, and second
use of this pallatis, that it vvarmeth, and temperethe, the could air which
we draw in through the nose and through the mouth to the lunges, because
through the extreme could thereof, it might not chance to indammage the
foresayed tunge, wherefore they which have no palate, find themselves
allvvayes very much altered, changed, and a great could allvvayes one the
breast.

Of the swelling of the Almondes, and of the vlcerations of the same. Chap. 6.
ONe both sides of the palate, and in the hider parts thereof, in the
angustnes of the throat, which of the Greeckes is called Isthmos, hath nature
created and formed, two Almondes, the one right opposite against the other,
which are therefore called Paristmia: which be cause of the form, figure, and
qvantitye thereof, are vvholye likened to an Almonde, are for that occasion
called Almodes: there functione, and office is, that they retain in them, a
certain sputaminous humiditye, which sinks descends out of the head,
therbye not only to refresh moyste the mouth, the circumiacent parts of the
same but alsoe the throat, and the entrance of the stomach, because the tunge
in speaking might not vvholye be exsiccated and dried, and that the continual
speech might not thereby be hindered, and interrupted.

These foresayed Almondes, are situated, The use, situatione compositione, of
the Almondes.
in a moyste, and warm place, and considering there spongious, nature, are
subjected to all cocursions of humours, and all inflammations, vvherthroughe
oftetimes they vvaxe harder, and greater, the naturally theyought to be out of
the which, procedethe an vlceratio or tumefactione, called of us Antiades, A
tumefactione called Antiades.
vvherthroughe the passage of eating, drinckinge, breathing is stopped,
interrupted, so that those afflicted patients, can not without great
difficultlye, svvollovve, or respire breathe, even as the patietes, here
through are come into great peril, danger, so they must immediately be
succoured with excellent good remedies.

Remedies against the tumefaction Antiades.
The assuredest and most convenient remedy is, that we cause the praesentlye
to be phlebotomised, after that they shall at the first have used a glister:
and the in like sort cause him to be let blood under the tuge: that we box
the behind in the neck, that they use gargrises, which are indifferentlye
frigifyinge, and astringent.

Signs howe to know when the tumefacted Almodes, exvlcerates and there
remedies
This tumefactione oftentimes is of such a magnitude, that it exvlcerateth:
which easily we may espy, when as we perceave it to be rumpeled, and
vvhytishe, and when as before there hath bin any prickige therein. Which
having espied to be so, we must with an instrument, which only to that
intent, purpose was made, open the foresayed vlceratio, or else with a
lancett, which round about unto the poyncte is vvounde with linen. The
apertion must be reasonably dilated, because theris no especial great vain
situated in that place, which we might hurt, except it vveare in the bottom
or root of the foresayed Almondes. We are sometimes constrained to open this
vlceratione, before it be fully mature, and ripe, to unburden, and release
that part thereof, because the blood which issues out of the foresayed
vlceratione, diminishes intercepts the payne, and inflammatione thereof,
adminestreth better passage unto the meat, and drink, and finallye,
prologeth the breathe. It is right true, that we allvvayes in the first, ought
by all means endevoure to mitigate the payne, and cool the caliditye of the
vlceratione as much as is possible.

If so be these said Almodes, are groovve so lunge harde, with out any
hope to reduce them again to there former natural estate, being, we must as
then use the manual of Chyrurgerye thereunto, ether by cuttinge of the same, or
else through inscisione: if so be there be nothing to hinder or be a let
here unto, then the ligature vveare most convenient thereunto, and especially,
when as we fear any superfluous bleedige. Which very convenietlye may be
done, Ligature, or inscision in the almodes, when they are grovven to lunge
harde.
with an instrument, one the same form and fashion, as before we have
rehearsed, in the tyinge of the palate, ever observinge, that we cut thereof
no more, then is needful, contentinge our selves thervvith, not to cut thereof
any more, then that which surpasses his natural magnitude, greatness:
because that through the largeness and romthe of the throat which by this
dissectione might chance, there be not irritated and occasioned to follovve,
all such accidents and inconvenieces, as before we have described, of the
palate which is to short cut of, or any dangerous bleedinge, if so we
descide and cut it of unto the natural, sovvnde flesh, of the forerehearsed
almondes, because of the great veins which there under lye dispearsed.

But before we proceed unto this operatione, we must consider, The
canckerouse almondes may not be tied, not cut of.
whether they be not of some canckerouse nature, because those which are
canckerouse may not by the manualle, operation of Chyrurgerye be cured: they
are most easyest known, when as they are harde, of a purple colour, rugged,
full of payne, and have a great root. But if they be pale rovvnde, tender,
smooth, and belovve thin, we may as then without danger tie, and cut them
of. And in as much as concerns this operatione, History of Albucasis.
the history of Albucasis shall at this time suffice, to instruct the younger
Chyrurgian, to imitate the same, which affirmethe to have had a woman in
hands, with such an vlceratione vvherbye her throat was almost occluded
and stopped, that with great difficultlye she respired, breathed, nether
could she any more eat, or drink, being in great peril, danger of
death, if so be that in that estate she had continued but one day longer, in
whom this vlceratione was so extreamlye svvollen, that it had yet spread
it self abroad into two branches more, into the nostrils. In which great
necessity, and perplexitye, with al expeditione he took, a little hooke,
wherewith he laid houlde one the one branch thereof, which was come into
the nostrils, wherewith he drevve forth thereof a reasonable qvatitye, and
then as deep as he could, he cut it of, having done the same, in the other
nostrell allsoe he hath aperted and opened her mouth depressinge the tunge
dovvnevvardes, hath taken houlde on the svvellinge and tumefactione, with a
hooke, allsoe cut a great qvantitye therofe, without any great store of
blood issuinge out of it: This being finished, the miserable poor vvoma hath
immediately opened her mouth began to eat, drink water. At other seasons
alsoe thereafter he hath cut away there fro other pieces, but yet
notvvithstadinge, as oft as much as he descided cut thereof, is increased
again grovvne thereunto: which when he had marked, he cauterised the same, by
this means in the end hath praevented the excrescence of this tumefactione:
but being constrained to take his journey to some other place, could never
hear, or by any man understand, how it happened thereafter with her: it may
right well be thought, that the cauterisinge of this dissease unto his root,
could not in any sort increase again, as before it had done.

It happens allsoe sometimes, that the Almondes so chance to svvelle, that
there is no hope left, that we should perforate, or thrust them through, or
to bind tie the, because sometimes it is impossible for the patient to open his
mouth, not beige able in any sort to respire, must of necessity dye: which
perceavinge to be in such an estate, we are then constrained in our extreme
necessity, to take our last refuge, unto the makige of an inscisione in the
throat, or Trachea arteria, rather the with our eyes behoulde the patient to
smother choke. When as therefore we would effect this, we must cause the
patient to lye, lean on his back, and hang his head backvvardes, because
the throat, or Trachea arteria, may evidentlye show it self, then we must
with our fingers, take hold on the skinn, of the third, or fourth ringle of
the throat, where with the foresayed, circles, or rovvndes of the throat are
covered, lifted up, now this being, so heaved up, we must according unto
the logitude thereof make the inscisio, which being cut through, again let
fall, we shall as then perceave the throat bared, if so be therone we espied
any vayn, we must detrude it one the one side eschevve, or avoid the same.
Which being effected, we must with the poyncte of a croocked lancet, make
our inscisione thvvarte over, betvvee the third or fourth rotuditye or circle,
qvite through the mebrane, wherewith both the foresayed cartilages, or circles
are the one with in other united, holden together, of which between the both
is situated, without touching ether of both these cartilages, or rovvndes,
into the concavitye of the foresayed Trachea arteria, or throat, which easily
we may perceave when as the breath issues forth of the vvounde: in the which
wound, immediately therone, we must impose a silvern, or goulde pipe, because
there through during some short space the patient may breathe. This said
pipe must in the one end be somewhat broad, with a thread thereon fastened,
because that through the dravvinge of breath, it do not chance to be drawn
into the throat. Now the danger of choakinge being passed, we must as
then take it therout again, because that the vvoude, with convenient remedies
may be cured.

Howe we ought to draw, thrust out, and cut, of the teeth. Chap. 7.
Divers Chyrurgicall operations.
THere are divers disseases inscidente unto the teeth, which through the
manual operation of Chyrurgerye must be cured: as by cauterisinge, of the
same, by dissipation of the gumes fro the toeth, by filinge, by cuttinge of, by
dravvinge by setting, by cuttinge in therofe, by allegation bindinge together
of the teeth. Those teeth which are slimy, thero, a black, yellovve or
vvhyte tough matter, sotimes like vnslissed lime, or as it vveare some
putaminous substance, chanced to be thero obdurated, hardened, we must with a
little scraper, or instrument, for that purpose make the clean purifye the,
without hurtinge of the gumes, looseninge of the same, because that such teeth
which are heervvith polluted, are not most comonlye very fast: the aged
poeple, the rheumaticke, they which are trovbled in the luges, or which have
any dissease in the stomach, which in times passed have bin infected vvithe
the pox, are commoly subject unto disseases of there teeth: when as this
incresces is not as yet obdurate or hard we may then with more facility
remove the same, in the first we must vvashe the gumes as well of the one as
the other with a little alume water whereby the increasinge of this matter is
sovvhat praevented, retarded, Practise invention of the aucthore.
it fastens allsoe the gummes unto the teethe, when as they hage looselye
thero. Some there are which esteem this a great secrete which heretofore I
my self have used, to vvitt, that we take a little Aquafortis, and a little
stick, as thick as a quille, the one end thereof being dipped in this water,
with which end of the foresayed stick, we must well rubb the tooth
thervvith, dilligetly observige, that no drop thereof chance to fall one the
lips or gumes, immediately the tooth being heervvith rubbed, we must as then
with a linne clout vvipe the tooth, the linne clothe being madefied in
could water therbye to dissipate fro the tooth the tartenes thereof, which the
Aquafortis hath left behind it, causinge the patient immediately to spit,
thereby the tooth will be exceeding white as snovve. For rot hollovve
stinckinge teeth.
If there be any tooth corrupted, foraminous, concavous stinking, that cavseth
sometimes great dolor, payne, yet notvvithstadinge we always endevoure to
praeserve him, ether because he is comodious for chavving, or serviceable for
the speech, or else is for a decoru or grace unto the mouth: to the repellig of
which payne, we must use a little oil of Sage, of rosemary, of cloves, or
any other oil, of aromaticalle spices. And if so be thervvith the payne, the
corruption be not seized, we must as then with Aquafortis cauterise the
teeth, or with oil of vitroll wherein we must dip and moyste a little
cotton, which neatlye we must thrust into the cocavity of the tooth: if so
be all these remedies be not sufficient, there is as the no surer, or better
remedy, the is the use of the actual Cauteriu, which must be proportioned
very little, according unto the concavitye of the tooth.

Other Chyrurgians there are which hovvld in great esteem the filige of the
teethe, Why we file the teeth.
where they be corrupted, which I alsoe esteem to be commodious, when as
convenientlye it may be effected, when the tooth is corrupted but on the one
side thereof: for by this means we shall intercept, hinder the corruption of
the next tooth ioyninge thereunto, that he be not thervvithe polluted above
other commodities, which therthrough we shall effect.

Teeth which grovv forth with an acuitye.
There grovveth oftentimes a tooth higher, then the other of the teeth, ether
vpvvardes, outvvardes, or invvardes, the poyncte whereof is so acute, that in
speaking it ether hurts the tunge or the lips. Alsoe sometimes the teethe
are rugged vnsmoth above, wherefore they, one the tops summityes thereof be
filed, by this means to make them smooth, as the other. And convenientlye to
use the file thereon, to cause that the tooth do not chance to stir in the
filinge, we must hold fast with our fingers the foresayed too the, laying
certain pieces of linen on the gummes, Teeth which stand out of there ordre,
which are broke wherein as yet remains some little piece.
unto the roots of the tooth. We must file of all such teeth which extrud
them selves externally, will not be contained in the semicircle of the other
teeth, or they which are broke, a little piece thereof as yet remaining in the
place, least they might chance to hurt the tongue, or the mouth. Conserninge
the supernatural teeth, because it vveare to great pains labour to file the,
it is alsoe sometimes daugerous to draw the because comolye they are grovven,
stick very fast in the cheekebone, we cut the of with our cutting
pellicane, Supernatural teeth.
or instruments which only for that purpose are composed made, are before
figured set down in there forms: we all so breack the sometimes i^ place of
cuttinge of the, with such instrumetes as here before are praefigured unto
us: but the best way is to cut the of, if by any means possible we ca
effect it. For great payne dolor in the teethe.
The payne of the teethe is at sometimes so vehement in tolerable, because
that the tooth, is corrupted unto his synnue, pierced, is hollovved, that the
person, is almost phresye, cosideringe that there is sometimes no remedy to be
had, for the quallifyinge of this payne, he is as then constrained to cause
the said tooth to be drawn, which as then is the certaynst way.

How we ought to draw a tooth.
When as therefore we would draw forth a tooth we must cause the patient to
sit in such a sort as is most coveniet, the make choice of the corrupted
rotten tooth, because we do not mistake the one for the other, which we
must make loose fro the gumes, fill up the cocavity or hollovvnes of the tooth
with a little piece of lead, or with a little lint, or cotte stick it full,
because in the Pellicane he chance not to break, through the harde shutting
of the same: having houlde thereon, we must gently easily crushe the tooth
dravver together, least the tooth chance to break, and the dravvinge the
foresayed tooth a little a side pluck him out, because that if to rigorously
we vvaggle the tooth up or down that part of the cheek bone wherein the
root stood so fast, might easily be broke, wherefore he will not with to
great violence be drawn out, as alsoe by to violent dravvinge, we might
disioyne, and pluck out of ioyncte the nethermost cheekebon, cause great
perturbation in the uppermost chavve eve to the eyes. The tooth being dravven,
The bleedinge of the gummes when as the tooth is drawn out, is not to be
little esteemed of.
we must with both our fingers shut, join together again the gummes cause
the patient to vvashe his mouth with a little Oxycrate, wherein we must also
put in a little fault. If so be there vveare any effluxio of blood, we ought
not to esteem it to be a small matter because I have known some to bleed
themselves to death.

The assuredest remedy which I ever have known to be used, is this, that
divers times, we must thrust therein some cotte, which hath bin madefyed in
juice of lemones, which allvvayes we must put in that place, out of the
which the tooth was dravven.

And touching the conveniece of the ligatione, or tyinge of the teeth, After
what sort we ought to tie the teeth, shut, set them fast which are loose,
alsoe inserte those which through art are made.
to join the together, to inserte set fast those teeth, which are loose,
grow to be moveable may be vvaggled up down, alsoe to inserte any therein
which by art are made, all this may very convenietlye fitlye one this manner
be effected, with a fine goulde vvyer of fine oriental goulde, which we may
easily bend bovve, between the foresayed teeth without any violence. First
double the vvyer, laying the same with his duplication, between two sovvnde
teeth then bring both the ends, to that tooth which is loose, whether it be
one or more, until such time as we shall have drawn unto the second sound
tooth one the other side, then we must reduce the vvyer unto that tooth
whence we took our originalle, gently dravvinge the foresayed vvyer
together, close to the root of the tooth least that he go loose: This being
done we must with a pare of shears cut of both the ends of the foresayed
vvyer which are to loge, wind the rest thereof rovvnd about the sovvnd tooth,
as close to the root that the foresayed goulde vvyer, may very difficultlye be
espied, nether in any sort may perturb, or hinder the tunge. The teethe not
only being loose but alsoe vvholye fallen out, we may for all that inserte
them in there place, tie them, with a goulde vvyer, as is before rehearsed, or
else we may set other teeth in there places, which are by art made of Ivory,
Look before in the figure or forms
or of any other matters, as here before we have set down the figures and
discriptions thereof.

The French Chirurgerye THE SIXTE TREATISE OF THE OPERATIone of Chyrurgerye
Containing nine Chapiters.
Of that, vvherone we must consider, before we make an apertion in avayne.
Chap. 1. How we ought to phlebotomive, or open avayne. Chap, 2. VVhero we
ought to consider, after we have opened the vain, when she bleeds. Chap: 3.
Of the number of veins, arteries, which are used most comonlye to be opened.
Chap. 4. Of the apertione, of the Arteries. Chap. 5. Of Anevrisma, or broken
arterye, howe we ought to make an inscisione therein, after what manner we
ought to bind them. Chap. 6. Of the Cirsotomia, which is, how we ought to
make our inscision in the Varices, or burst veins. Chap. 7. Of horseleeches,
and of there use, and how we ought to apply them. Chap. 8. Of boxes, and
howe we must apply, and use them. Chap. 9.
Whereon we must consider, when as we desire to open a vain, or phlebotomize.
Chap. 1.
Intention, porpose of the author.
My purpose, and intent, is not in this place to discrib unto you, what
sicknesses reqvire phlebotomye, in what age, in what time or season of the
year, in what country, in what costitutio of the body, it must be done, of
what occasion, namelye especially, whether it be for any simple
evacuation, or for any deprivatione, or derivatione, or for any revulsione. In
like sort alsoe in what vayn we ought to make the apertione, what qvantitye
of blood we ought to detract out of the same, in what sort, and how much
at one time, howe often after the other or in what time of the sickness we
must make the apertione in the vain.

But my purpose, and meaning is, only to show, how we ought to open a
vain: vvheron we must think, dilligently consider, before we make the
apertione therein, after we have opened her: vvherone we ought to not, when
the blood issveth out of the same. This doing, shall the Chyrurgiane, be no
less vvorthye of praises, because he ca very excellently phlebotomize, then
the physitione is praise vvorthye, by his perfect knowledge, whether the
patient have need of phlebotomy, or not: Why phlebotomye is difficult,
daugerous.
For although, that it seems to be a small sciece, to phlebotomize aright,
very well, yet notvvithstandinge is it oftentimes, a difficult matter very
daugerouse, because the veins, are situated sometimes close to the Arteryes, yea
alsoe thervppen, as alsoe are the synnues, Accidents which are caused, take
there original of there hurtinge of any vain, synnue, arterye, or tendone.
the tedones. If so be therefore we chance, with the lancet to hurt a
Tendone, thereafter most commonly issues a Spasmus, or a Gangrene and
mortificatione, vvherthroughe the patient pitifullye ruefullye, and with great
torment ends his life. If there be then any arterye touched, opened, she
very difficultlye will be cured, whereby the patient bleeds to death: when as
we descide a vain qvite asunder, both the ends thereof are immediately
retracted, and drawn invvardes, the one end this way, the other end that
vvaye, so that under the flesh both of the ends are lost, no blood ca
possibly issve therout: if she be then with to great timorousnes fear
pricked, the skin only wherewith she is covered is as the inscided, the
vayn not opened: or else if she be only pricked with the poyncte of the
lancet, the blood as the issveth therout droppingevvyse and the subtilest
blood only comes out, where coseqvently thereafter she exvlcerateth.

Sometimes alsoe lies the vain occulted so deep in the flesh, that we can
not with the lacet find the, without great pains, yea also although we
espy them, yet through there perpusillitye, rotuditye, they avoid, eschevve
the poyncte of the lacet, how acute subtle soever the same be. So that there
are oftetimes divers occasions, wherefore phlebotomye is difficult, which to
an other which never hath done it seems to be very easy.

Before the Chyrurgian makes his apertio in the vain, if so be the patient be
restringed bovvnde in his belly, hath in a loge time not bine at stool, we
must the first of all cause him to use a Clistere, because through the
phlebotomye, the veins beige evacuated, emptied, do not attracte, draw unto
the out of the guts or entralles, any corrupted, rot humours, vvherbye any
of the vvorthyest parts might be offend, hindered.

Nether is phlebotomye expediet, Whereon we ought to consider before
phlebotomye.
when as the stomach, is burdened, ether with any cruditye, of vndigested
meat, or drink, or with any other viscositye vvhatsoever, as also it is
vvholye dissvvaded to do after any great evacuatione, or any other
occasion, whereby the patient might be debilitated, as is superfluous
parbrakinge, a great laske, great abstinence, continualle vigilatione, and
great conversation with vvoemen. When as therefore the Chyrurgiane in the
absence of the Physician, hath on all these foresayed things dilligently
considered, he must as then defer the phlebotomye. And if it so chanced,
that any person to praevent any dissease desired to be phlebotomized, he must
then cause it to be done, when as he is best of courage, as being freed from
all care, of sorrow, of ire, and beside all this, we must not phlebotomize
any person, which is to timorouse, fearful of phlebotomye, because the
afrightednes, the fear, causes the blood to vvithdravve it self towards
the internal parts of the body.

Howe we should convenientlye phlebotomize.
And the patient as yet being lusty, strong, we must then cause him to sit in a
stool, but if so he be feeble debile, is subjected unto fayntnes sovvndige,
as those are, which are of a hot nature, we must in the first let him sup
in a soft dressed egg, or a morsel of bread sopped in vvyne, then cause him
to lye one the bed, half sitting upright, stuff him under with cushes as
if he sate. And above all we must dilligently note, that the light of the
air, or shining of the candle, do rightly shine one the vain, because that
through the shaddovv therofe, the knovvledg of the vain, of the place where
she must be pierced, be not vanished out of your sight: then must the
Chyrurgiane, with his right hand, take the right hand of the patient, or
with his left hand, the left hade of the patient, out of the which he means
to draw the blood out depressinge the arm sovvat down vvardes, and then
with his left hand, or with a vvarmed table naptkinne, rub the insyde of
the arm where he intends to make the apertione: Double band in Phlebotomye.
And then bind the arm double a little above the elbovve, with a little
narrovve list of vvollen clothe, not to stiff nor to loose, because to
looselye bovvnde, or to stifflye tied do both of them hinder the bleedinge:
the must the patient, shut his hand close, whereby as well through the
binding, as through the closinge of the hade, the veins lye fast steadfastly
in the flesh, and not move this way or that way when we should pearce them,
vvherthroughe also they raise themselves, and svvell the more, through the
blood, that by this means is draw thither vvardes, by the which alsoe we
may the easier see, and feel them.

How we ought convenientlye, to make an apertione in the vain. Chap. 2.
Having dilligetlye considered all these things if the Chyrurgiane,
Continvance of the manner rightly to phlebotove.
determine to phlebotomise in the right arm, he must then take houlde one the
foresayed arm with his left hand, by the bending of the arm, or about that
place, wherein we purpose tO make the apertione, lay his thumb one the vain,
a little belovve the place, where we will prick, because that so he may
hovvlde the vayn stedefaste, without glidinge this way or that way because
sometimes the vain being, spanned like a little cord, might chance to
rovvle, glide under the lancet. And because the foresayed vain is oftentimes
implete with wind, vetosityes, she therefore yields, slideth away under
the lancet, vvherthroughe we can not fully pearce her, by this means the
apertione falls to small: all this being in this sort noted, we must with
the first finger of the right hand feel where with most convenience we
might make the apertione, setting an impression on the skin above the vain
where we purpose to prick, with the nail of your finger, then immediately,
take the lancet in the right hand, which between our lips we must have
in a readiness, with the which we finelye must make our apertione, in the
vain, causinge the poyncte, and acuitye of the same, gently to enter into the
concavitye of the vain, not abruptly, and rudely, with a hasty thrust. And
to make this apertione with more certayntye, without tremblinge of the
hands, the Chyrurgiane must take the lancet in the middle, with his thumb
his first finger, suffering his hand with three of his fingers to rest on
the arm, so lay his thumb and his first finger which hold the lacet one the
thumb which houldeth fast the vain, on this sort to hold fast his hand,
with out any tremefactione to use the same. Some there are which annoynt the
place wherein they intende to phlebotomise, with a little oil, or with
fresh butter, thervvith somewhat to mollifye, soften the skin, so with
more ease and with less payne, to pearce there through. To mollifye the
skin.
Others annoynte the acuitye of there lancet with oil because she might the
easier perforate the same, cause less payne, the perforatione, or vvounde
might better contain it self apert the blood if so be it wear gross, might
the subtiler, with more ease have his passage.

If so be then that the apertio be made with one thrust, it is the good, but
if not, we must immediately give an other prick, ether a little belovve the
same, or else a little above the sam, if the vain sufficiently demostrateth her
self. If therefore the apertio be to small, the blood issue out of the same to
subtilelye, so that we fear that we shall not draw sufficient blood enough
therout, then immediately we must thrust into the same hole, or apertione
again, a little dilate the same: because that oftentimes through to small an
apertion, the gross blood congeals before the apertione, and there
conseqventlye exvlceratethe.

Why we must give a staff to them in there hade which we Phlebotomize
Having convenientlye brought to pass this apertione, we must then give the
patient, in the hand of that arm wherein he is phlebotomized, a roud staff,
partly thero to rest his arm, as alsoe to turn rovvnde the foresayed staff
in his hand, because by this means the blood might the better shoot out:
the which if it do not rightly issue out, we must the mark, if the
ligature be not the cause thereof, as if it vveare to harde tyede, which as
then we must a little districte and make it loose, without vvholye looseninge
of the same.

Broad, narrow lancets.
The Chyrurgiane must alsoe have divers lancets, whereof the one must be a
little broader then the other: The broad lancets are very necessary when as
the veins lye high exalted, when we desire to make an ample apertion. The
small narrovve lancets are very necessary, when as the veins lye profoudlye
occulted in the flesh, and also when as in the high exalted vain, we
desire to make a small apertion: because sometimes the sick personne,
reqvireth a great, festivous phlebotomy, to the which end, we must make an
ample apertione, as we must alsoe do, if we conjecture the blood to be
gross, dece, when the patient is lusty, and strong.

Contrarilye, if so be we retract, draw back the blood, which
supernaturallye hath issued out of any part of our body, as in those which,
spit blood, or those which bleed much out of the nose, as then we must
make our apertion small, because that great evacuation of blood is not
necessary for them, because through there noses they have avoided sufficient,
then only in such accidetes, where in is only reqvired a regressione of
blood. Besides, it is necessary expediet, that in the foresayed evacuatione,
and sickness, we suffer the blood to issve lunge enough out of the apertione
of the vain, which the patient should not be able to suffer, if the
foresayed apertione vveare ample, because there would issue to much blood
otherwise therout.

In the Phrenesy we ought to make but a small apertione.
We are also in phlebotomye urged to make a small inscisio, in those, which
are troubled with Phrenesye, in those which are grovvne mad, because that
little vvounde might with all expedition be cured again, because that such
raging* frantic persons will all ways make loose the ligature or dressing
before wear thereof avvare, whereof they might com in danger of bleedinge to
death, but the apertione being small, although they loosen the arm, yet
notvvithstandinge they can not violently bleed because in such a small
apertione, the blood congeals, occludeth, stops the vvounde. We ought to
make in small veins, a small apertione, in great veins an ample apertione:
for if so be we make in a great vavne a small apertion, the should
necessarily follovve, that the blood, which coagulateth in the small veins,
be a hinderace unto the issuinge or running out of the blood.

Touching the form, figure of the inscisione, it is effected in three sundry
sorts, and fashons: whereof the first is made overthvvarte, the second
according unto the length of the vain, vvherthroughe the vain is cleft or
splitted, not pricked: the third is the mean between them both, which we
may well call the contradictorye apertione, because cotradictorilye she is
made. Three forms of inscisions in phlebotomye.
We make the apertione overthvvarte, when as we are not minded to reiterate
the phlebotomy: for when we bend the ellbovve, the both the ends of the
vain join together again, This figure or form is necessary, when as we
desire to make a large apertione. We must make the apertione sydelonge or
contradictorye, when we purpose to iterate the phlebotomye: and we making
the apertione in this manner, very seldom or never miss the vain: and
which is more, it is better for the circumstantes, and standers by, when the
blood in this manner issues therout. That inscisione, which is made
according to the length of the vain, is very expedient, when we intende to
renew the blood lettinge, that not only the same day, but one the next day
alsoe, because that when we bend the elbovve, both the labia, or lips of
the vayn, do separate divide themselves.

But in what form soever we make the inscisione, The vain must be inscided
in her middle.
yet notvvithstadinge the vain must be pierced in the middle, without vvholye
cuttinge a sunder of the same. Because her lips, might chance to be inverted
invvardes, and the blood could not resulte out of the apertione, but run
down a lunge by the arm, or both the ends of the vain, are draw
invvardes, without deliverace of any blood from her, or at the least, in the
first very little.

Whereon we ought to mark, after the thrust, apertione of the vain, and when
the blood issues therout. Chap. 3.
Although the vain be well opened, yet she drops through the afrightednes
of the patient
WE may know, that the vain most commolye is well opened, as easily we may
perceave by the blood, when as in the first, it rousheth and as it vveare
leaps out in great haste, but immediately alters unto dropping, which
through the afrightinge of the patient is caused, for which reason the blood
is dravven invvardes. Which when it chances unto us, we must with patiece
abide, and unbind it somewhat, and encourage the patient, causinge him to move
his fingers, turn, Gross blood doth nothing but drop.
and crush the same in his hand. The apertione in the vain is sometimes ample
enough, but because the blood is gross, it can not issue out thereat, to the
which end we must put a little oil therine, which to that purpose is very
profitable.

If so be therefore the Chyrurgyane, in absence of the physitione, finds the
patient very feeble, and yet notvvithstandinge, follovvinge the rule, ordinance
of the physitione, is very necessary to be well phlebotomized, we must them
do it providentlye, that although, at the first we have not drawn so much
blood as the sickness or dissease reqvireth, we must then, some certain
hovvres thereafter again renew the phlebotomye for the second time, and if it
be needful yet once again, for the third time, without over charging of
the patient with to great phlebotomye at one time.

It might alsoe chance, that before we could detract such a qvantitye of the
patient as was ordained, and reqvired, the patient might chance to be
debilitated, and in danger to fall in great fayntnes, sovvndinge, vvheron the
Chyrurgiane must dilligently consider: as he may easily perceave it, when the
patient vvaxeth pale, and oppressed at his heart, his pulls diminishinge, when
the blood runs down by his arm. What we ought to do when we perceave
the fayntinge to approach the patient.
Which when it chances, the Chyrurgian must then immediately seas the
bleedinge, laying his thumb, one the apertione of the vain, lay the patient
on his back, with his head one a cushen, sprincklinge could water in his
face, and give him a little vvyne in his mouth, and cause him to smell at some
vinegar, and then have a little patience, until that again he revives, comme
to himself: for as soon as he shall be come to his former strength again, we
may as the finish the phlebotomye.

The patient lying fiat on his back ca very well suffer phlebotomye.
Some there are which in any sort can not endure phlebotomye, how lovve
soever they sit, although it vveare on the bed, or although we continually
held vinegar before there nose, or gave them vvyne to drink, yet
notvvithstandinge they lying prostrate on the bed, with there head
reasonable high, they can as the very well suffer and abide the foresayed
phlebotomye, although we draw a good qvantitye of blood from them: As of
late I my self have known to happen, in an honourable, and coragious
gentleman.

After that we have detractede a reasonable qvantitye of blood out, we must
then dissolve and make loose the ligature, and crush out the blood of the
vain, least that the blood chance to congeal therine, and coagulate, and
so exulcerate: and if so be there appeerede any little parcel of pingvedity,
or fat, we must the gently thrust it in again with the head of a pin,
and not cut it of, and then vvipe of the blood which cleaves is dried or
exciccated to the arm, lay a little compress, one the apertion, which is
madefyed in could water, and wind the ligature, tvvice or thrice about the
elbovve, like a borgondian cross, without tyinge both the ends fast, before
you have caused the patient to bend his arm, to lay the ligature thereafter.
The Ligatione of the elbovve after phlebotomye.
This ligatione may not be to stiffly bovvnde, because the cicatrice by this
means, may qvicklye be sitvatede on the apertione of the vain. The arm
being thus fouldede together if so be the patient be able to vvalke he must
vveare his arm before on his breast in a scarf if so be he lye on his bed,
he must gently lay the same beside him, with out much movinge of the foresayed
arm, nether must he lye therone: for there have bin some, which in there
sleep have had there arms violently to bleed, with great danger of there
lives. How we may stop restraygne blood
The blood issues sometimes with such violence out of some parts of our
body, that with no copresses or ligatures we can restraygne the same:
which happeninge, we are the constrained to lay above one the top of the
apertione, the one half of a great bean, and the compresse therone, and in
this sort bind it together,

There remains sometimes a nigreditye or blacknes, Danger that happens to
phlebotomye.
viriditye or greenes about the apertione, but thereof ensues no evell, unless
any other accident chanced thereunto.

When as therefore we desire to renew the phlebotomy, To renew the
phlebotomye.
we must then lay one the inscisione saulted oil, because that hinders the
curing of the vvounde, and the fault keeps the blood from coagulation,
vvherthroughe the apertione of the vvounde is stopped, And if so be the
vvounde vveare so stopped, that the blood would difficultlye issue therout,
we must not then rigerously stretch out the arm, which the patient hath
carried on his breast dubbed, nether depress the vayn with to great violence,
to get the blood therout: Because such violence might cause great pain, and
inflammatione, To renew the phlebotomye.
but we must rather with a small privett or searching iron, remove that blood
which therein is exciccated dried, or rather once again make an inscisione,
after that we have bovvnde the arm somewhat higher, then the elbovve, as
before we have said.

How we ought to open the veins or arteryes of the teples of the head.
When as we desire to make an apertione in the veins or arteryes of the
temples of the head, of the forehead or under the tunge, we must then cause
the patient gently to vvring about his neck a table naptkine, or a tovvell,
thereby to cause the blood to ascede, on high, the veins to svvel, which we
intend to open. How we ought to open the veins of the hands feet.
And when as we desire to open the veins of the hands or feet we must
bath them in warm water, because through caliditye vvarmethe of the water,
the foresayed veins might erect themselves, the blood, the vain being
opened, might the better issue out thereof.

Of the number of veins, arteryes, which commonly, use to be opened in mans
body. Chap. 4.
THe aunciete professors of Chyrurgerye, have observed, certain veins, which
in mans body must be opened, according as everye divers dissease shall
reqvir: whereof the Chyrurgiane must not only know there situatione, there
divisione or separatione, but alsoe the names of the sam, because that he do
not mistake the one from the other. Vain of the forehead.
They which most commonly are opened, are 41. whereof there are in the head
17 even: the first whereof is called the vain of the forehead, which is
situated in the midst of the forehead, and is opened when as we have any
inveterated pain in the occipitialle parts of the head to trouble, molest us.
The second is called Vena Pupis, Vena Pupis.
which is situated right in the midst of the occipitialle, or hinder parts
of the head: this vain is opened, against the soporiferousnes, payne of the
head, which is situated in the forehead. The temporal vain.
The third is called the temporalle, or vain of the teples, whereof in each
side there is on, which in divers branches ascedeth in the temples of the head:
we open those veins against the superfluous lachrimation of the eyes, against
vehement payne in the ears, against the Hemicrania, which only comes in on
side of the head. Eeare vain.
The fourth is called the ear vain, one each side one, have there place,
situatione behind the ears: this vain is opened against surditye, Eye vayn.
payne, vlceration of the ears. The fifth is the eye vain, the which in the
great corner of the eye, close by the nose, we may perfectly see: she is
opened, against all disseases of the eyes, eyeliddes. The sixth is, Nosevayn
the nosevayne which hath her place in the midst of the end of the nose,
between the two gristles or cartilages: she is opened, against the heavines
of the head, against all reumes, of the eyes, eyeliddes. The seventh,
Lippevayne.
is the lip vain, whereof one each side are, two, in the internal parts
of the opermost, and nethermost lip: we open them against all tumors,
excrescenses of flesh, against all vlceratios of the mouth, against the
vehement rednes of the face. The eight is called Ranularis vena, Ranularis.
which is situated under the tunge, one each side on, we make therein an
apertion, against the Sqvinantie, against the incensione of the Almondes, of
the palate, more other disseases of the throat. The ninth is very public,
lying in the neck, and is called the Iugularis, Iugularis.
vain, of the Arabians Gvides, on each side of the neck one. She may very
convenietlye be opened, against that Sqvinantye, against all rheumes of the
throat, which bring us into great angustnes, and trouble.

In the arms are six, in every arm three which in the fouldinge of the
arms are phlebotomized. The first is the head vayn, Headvayne. Cephalica.
which is situated highest most outvvardlye, in the arm, which we open
against the pain of the head, eyes, ears, payne svvellinge of the throat. The
second is the nethermost in the insyde of the arm, is called Basilica,
Basilica,
being the foundatione of both the other veins, and is also called Hepatica,
or liver vain: Hepatica or Liver vain.
We open this vayn, against the stoppinge of the Liver, against all
inflammations of the whole body, all disseases, which are situated under the
head. The third, is the Mediane, The Mediane or Mediana.
as well concerning her situatione, as original, because she takes her
beginning out of the Head Liver veins, as also considering her conditions,
because we open her as well for all disseases, which are situated in the
upper, as undermost parts of our whole body, and there trouble, and molest us.

In the hands, we have six, in each hand three. Eye vayn in the hand,
The first descends a longest the Metacarpion of the hand, and passethe
betvvixt the thumb, the first finger, we call her allsoe the head vain, or
the eye vain. Wherefore she is only opened against payne in the head,
eyes. The second is called Salvatella, Salvatella,
or Liver vayn, betvvixt the little, third finger, she is phlebotomized,
against the yellovve gaundise, in all disseases of the liver, on the right
hand, and one the left against all disseases of the milte, wherefore of some in
the left hand she is called the miltvayne. Black vain,
The third, is alsoe called the Mediane, Black, and Common vain, descends
by the finger called Medicus, Black vain
or third finger, which vain we may open, when we can find nether of the
other two.

In the belly are two in each side of the belly one, Vena Illiaca.
which we call Venam Illiacam, or Titillarem, demonstratethe her self
between the hippes, the flanckes. She which is opened in the right side,
against the Dropsye, and other disseases of the Liver: she which lies in the
left side, against the disseases of the Milt.

In the fundament, or privityes of a ma, are one each side two, the one
whereof we call the Hemorrhoidalle vain, Hemorrhoidall vain.
is only opened in melanckolye disseases.

In the legs are eight, in each leg four: whereof the first is called Vena
poplitis, Vena Poplitis.
situated in the hockes, or fovldinge of the knees, is opened against all
disseases of the nethermost part of the belly. The second Saphena, or mother
vain, Saphena or Mother vain.
which we open one the insyde of the leg under the ankle, in all disseases
of the kidneys, of the vvombe, to provoacke in the vvoemen there monthlye
sickness, or mestruousnes, in all running of the raygnes, and in Venus botches,
or as we call them in latin Bubones. The third is the Schiaticke vayn, which
externallye demonstrates her self, above the ackle, which is only opened
agynst the dissease called Sciatica, The vayn Sci^tica. The kidnye vain
against all payne, and dolor of the hippes, and flanckes. The fourth is the
mediane, or kidnyevayne, situated belovve the foot, and is phlebotomized
against all disseases of the kidnyes.

Amongst all the other which are most comonlye opened, are those three which
in the folding of the arm are phlebotomized: to wit the head vayn Basilica
the media. Basilica, or liver vain is dangerous to be phlebotomised.
We must dilligetlye consider that when we make an inscisio theri that under
the Basilica or Liver vain lies an artery or great heart vain: under the
Median a synnue or tendone of the muscle Biceps or both of these together, but
under the Cephalica is nether synnue artery or tendone sitvated, Cephalica or
head vain is opened without danger.
wherefore amongst all other veins, there is none which with less perril
danger may be opened.

If so be that through mischance in opening of the vain Basilica we chased
to hurt the artery which there under is sitvated as I have knoovvne to have
chased, we must praesetlye for the stoppinge and restrayninge of the blood,
and to the curing of the arterye, without leavinge any Aneurisma, Remedy for
a vvouded arterye.
cleave a bean in two pieces, lay the one half of the bean, one the
apertione of the vain, with a compress therone, gently tied, without
visiting of the same in three or four days, or once offer to touch it. If so
be in the apertion of the mediane, we chanced to prick the subter situated
synnue, or tendone, we must then immediately phlebotomize the patient in the
other arm: and we must drop in the vvounde of the pricked synnue, a little
hot oil of Terpentin, and a little vvoolle, being dipped therein upon the
same, thereby to keep the apertione aperte, then lay a plaster of
Diacalcitheos, rovvnde about the wounded part of the whole arm, which
hath bine liquefacted, with oil of roses, and vinegar.

Of the Arteriotomia, or apertion of the Arterys, or hartvaynes. Chap, 5.
COncerning the Arteriotomia, or apertione of the Arteryes, the praedicessors
ancient professors vveare vvont to effect it especialle behind the ears, in
the temples of the head, against all continual, rebellious fluxions, Rheumes
of the eyes, in like sort alsoe, against all diseases of the head, which have
take there original, fro hot, dampishe, or subtle rheumes: as yet now a
days we do, but not who lye as they vveare vvonte to do, in opening of
the same: for so far forth as if the Arterye be small they then cut her
clean a sunder, they also cut a piece thereof away, both the ends are dravven
invvardes, where by she as then bleeds no more.

And if the Arterye, be great, violently beats, it is the surest way, that
we tie her under above and then between both those ligations cut her of, but
the thredes wherewith we bind her, must be strong closly tied because that
through the continvall beating of the arterye, the thredes loose, the arterye
opens, if so be it be not stiffly bovvnde: because that she should not
chance to corrupt, before the inscision be replete grow full of flesh: where
through the mouth of the foresayed artery is stopped. How we use now adays
to to open an artery
But now a days we only make a simple inscision in the artery in such a
manner as we make an apertion in the veins, without cutting of the same
clean of having dravven as much blood therout as we desire, we the lay a
little plaster of masticke on the apertion, a little compresse tied thereon
rovvnd abovt the whole head as close as is possible. I know right well that
there are some which houlde this apertione of the arteryes very suspect,
because it ca hardly be stopped again, and in doing this, there remains a
cicatrice, in those parts which are situated rovvnde about the foresayed
arterye, before the same is fully cured, and there through often times an
Aneurisma caused, which is very troublesome, Aneurisma is a dangerous
dissese.
and dangerous for the patient. But I may with verity affirm it to be true,
that oftentimes I have seen opened the arteryes of the temples of the head,
without any of the foresayed accidents being happened thereunto, the which I
coucel the yonge Chyrurgiane to do it only in this place, because such an
inscisione, is more fitter, less dangerous, the the whole cuttings of, and
ligature of the same.

Of the swelling Aneurisma, and of the means howe to bind, and cut of the
same. Chap. 6.
Description of the tumefaction Aneurisma.
THis tumefactione Aneurisma, is caused most commonly, through the dilatation
of an arterye, which only we must understand of the small Aneurismata,
being impossible, that the arterye, should so dilate, as it vveare vnshutt in
the great Aneurismata which oftentimes we see: vvherfor we will rather
say, and houlde with the opinione, of the aunciet professors, that Aneurisma
is then caused, when as the blood, and the vital spirits, are repulsed out
of the arteryes, through the apertion, or orificia of the same, which we
call Anastomosin, or else when as the tunicle of the arterye is burst, it be
ether through a vvounde, or by any other occasion: as we may se, when as
the Chyrurgiane, purposinge to opene the vain in the elbovve by chance
prickethe the arterye which is theruder sitvated the skine which is thero
lying, cicatrizeth it self and the perforatio of the artery, through her
cotinvalle reverberatioe, tarrieth uncured, open is not stopped, or with any
carnal substance replete, as being unprofitable for any use in no sort can
be bound so close as the arterye of the temples of the head, but through the
blood vitalle spirits, which by degrees issue therout, are congregatede under
the skin, so conseqventlye cause the svvellig supposing they very well
did know, therein to be matter, or any other slimy substance, or viscositye,
for which reason, they have made an apertione therein, vvhervppon a little time
thereafter death hath followed, because of the blood, and of the vital
spirits, which in great hast have rushed therout, without any remedy howe
to restraygne them. Now perfectly to know such a svvellinge, and to
discern it from other tumefactios, Signs of this tumefactio.
we must observe, that in this tumefactione there is, a continual
reverberatio, the foresayed tumor, being of one colour with the skin,
howe great or small, the inflatione be, it is alsoe tether, and soft in the
touching of the same, glidinge away under the finger when as we depress
it, yea and almost through the foresayed depressione vvholye vanishes out of
our sight, considering the blood of the vital spirits, which through the
foresayed depressio, are crushed in the arterye, wherefore they alsoe, as
passing through a little apertio which violence, do make a noise, or
sovvnde, which having taken away, and removed the finger immediately shoot
again in there foresayed concavitye, as alsoe again in there forth coming, of
the foresayed angust apertione, we may hear a certain sovvnde: which
comonlye chances when as this Aneurisma, is caused through an Anastomosis,
and not of any vvounde, because, the Orificium being apert, the vital
spirits, as being most subtle, are before the blood driven out, so that the
whole tumefaction, is almost replete with vital spirits. But if so be the
Arterye be burst, there as then issues much blood therout, which brings
in the tumefaction more blood, the vital spirits, wherefore alsoe it is more
obdurate, and harder, and the said blood coagulateth, and therein rots, and
corrupts.

As much as concerns the curatione of this tumefactione, it consists only,
Curation of Aneurisma.
in the bindinge of the foresayed arterye, and especially the same beige
somewhat thick, for they which are great, and especially the arteryes of
the neck, the arm pits, or of the flanckes, may or can in no sort be
tied, because it is impossible to find them, make them bare, and if we allsoe
make an inscisione therein there then follows such a quantitye of blood, and
of the vital spirits, that most commolye the patient, dies under the hands
of the Chyrurgiane.

That artery, which is situated in the bending of the arm may easily be
cured, Of an arterye which of the Author was tied above the Aneurisma
as out af this subsequent history we may note. My lord of Maintenon,
desired me to visit the son, of my lord, of Belleville, which through
phlebotomy in the bending of his arm, had gotten a little Aneurisma, which
through continuance of time, is grovven as great as a fist, wherein, in the
end the blood which therein was included, coagulated: so that in the
foresayed tumefaction Aneurisma, there came a corrupting and rottennes, which
he one the out side of the foresayed skin, of the svvellinge he espyede,
which from the vital and livinge colour was changed into a black, and
purple colour, vvherebye alsoe there was an apertione caused in the skin: To
the remedyinge, and curing of the which, especially the superfluous
effluxione of bloede, which might thereof ensue, the loss alsoe of the vital
spirits, if so be the apertio as yet vveare dilated: I as then councelled,
the Physicians, and Chyrurgians, to praevent farther evells, that we ought to
tie, bind the Arterye, (which was situated, and his place in the bending of
the arm) somewhat higher then the Aneurisma, to the which opinion,
propositione, in the end they all consented, agreed: The which alsoe with
happy successione of all causes was brought to pass, in the praesence of the
vvorpshipfull master Drovet, Doctor of Physic, at Beauvais, and of the
Chyrurgiane dvvellinge at Avet, which vveare come thither to cure him.

On what sort the Author tied this Arterye.
First of all, I considered, on the arterye, in the uppermost, and inner part of
the fore arm, as she from above descedeth under the armpittes, unto the
bedinge of the arm, three fingers breadth therabove, on the which place when
I had seen, and fixede mine eyes therone, I made an inscisione, in the skin
according to the length therofe, which lay opened right above the Arterye
where by tacture we might feel her, which when I had found, and discovered
her, I thrust a crooked needle thervnder, wherein was a strong thread, where
with I tied the foresaeyde Arterye, with a double knott: this being done, I
took away, and purifyed, all the congealed, or coagulated blood, all other
impuritye out of the vvounde or svvellinge, and have washed the same with
Aqvavitae, Remedy against the putrefactione.
in the which I mixed a little Aegyptiacum, by this means to cleanse it the
better from all putrefactions: and the patient, is within a month thereafter
ensuing, vvholye cured, and grovvne sovvnde, with out retayninge any lamnes
in his arm: wherein I my self have vvondered. If so be that in any other
external part, there chanced to come any Aneurisma into the Chyrurgians
hands, he must then know, that allvvayes for certayntye, he shall find the
arterye in her uppermost part, or discover, and bare her, so bind, and tie
her with out any more ceremonies.

Of the Cirsotomia, that is, of the manner, howe we ought to cut of the
varices. Chap. 7.
Discriptione of a Varice.
VArices, or burstene veins, are troublesome, because of there greatness, their
extracting, thickness, and their gibbositye above there nature, property.
VVherfor, ether because they cause payne, and hinder the action of that part,
or else because they soacke in some certain vlceratione, with some humiditye,
(whereby she can not be cured) we are urged to open them, and cut themof,
Curation of a Varice.
or else with some actual cauterye, to cauterize them, so consume, and bring
them to nought. To which purpose, the ancient professors, Council of the
ancient professors for the curing of the Varices.
have ordained, that we should cut out, and clean take away, those which
lye croockedlye and dubbelye folded, in divers rovvnde revolutions, or else lye
entangled the one with the other. But before we proceed to such an
operatione, it is necessary, that first of all, we bath that part with hot
water, to cause the gross blood somewhat to separate, and vvexe or grow
subtle, and the veins to svvel and exalt themselves.

But the most gentlelest remedy, is that which daily we use which is the
simple apertione, and inscisione of the foresayed Varices, at one, two, or
three places, as if we intended to phlebotomize, making the apertion somewhat
greater and larger therein because of the gross, melancholic blood, which
we desire to let therout: Through which foresayed apertione, we extract as
much blood, as we suppose to be good, and sufficient, or else as much as the
patient ca abide, one which foresayed apertione, we must lay compresses,
which therone we must bind, as we are commonly used to do one the veins,
when as we have phlebotomised, prohibitinge the patient, not to stir, or
go, which said Varices, if so be they chanced to svvell again we must as
before a little distance there after make therein an other apertione.

But if so be we intende vvholy to discide, and cut them out, we must first
of all, How we ought to cut away a burst vain.
denotate the same with ink, one the skin, which is placed one the Varice
or burst vain, the skin beige annotated, we must with two fingers of
both the hands, lift up the same, the one this way and the other that way,
when we have fast houlde therone, then we must make an inscision, in the
midst of the elevated skinn, on the self same place, which before we had
denotated with ink, of such a magnitude, and greatness, as is reqvired
necessary: the inscisio being effected, we must suffer the skin again to
descend, through which inscisione, the Varice, or burst vain which is
theruder situated, shall be discovered, an denudatede of the skin: VVhervnder,
as then we must thrust, a crooked needle: because thereafter we may with both
the ends of the foresayed thread, The place where we may cut the varice, or
burst ^n vain.
draw the one vpvvardes, and the other dovvnvvardes. This being effected,
we must make an apertione in the varice, according the length, of the same
betvvixt both the thredes, which must be separate apart the one from the
other a thubcs bredthe, through which apertione, we may draw as much
blood, as we please: and the draw bind together very fast the foresayed
thredes, the alsoe cut, the foresayed varice, or burst vain, clean away,
which is situated between both the thredes, if so be it seem expedient unto
you, suffering the thredes, by continuance of time, putrifye and rot out of
themselves, without with violence to draw them out, because that nature, may
have some respite, time, to close, and replenishe the cut, and ligated veins.

The aunciete Chyrurgians have cauterized the Varices,
That burst vain, which runs right, although she lye overthvvarte, if
she be simple, small, we vveare better tie her then to cauterize her: But
first of all we must purge the patient, phlebotomize him ether in the arm, or
in the varice, or else in both places at once. Our praediscesors ancient
Chyrurgians, make metione of the actual Cauterye, but before they applied the
same, they first in scyded the skin, wherewith the varice is cooperted,
covered, in such manner, form, as we do when we bind the same: the varice
therefore being bared, they then imposed thereon, a small stamped Cauterye,
which was well glovvinge, red hot, which reasonable stifflye they
impressed thereon, but yet not so violently that the advstione penetrated any
deeper, the through the vain, with out touching the lips, or edges, in
cauterizinge, of the foresayed inscisione, wherefore they with vvett, madefyed
clouts or with some certain players, recincted, defended them. Use and
practise in these times,
This operatione being after this sort finished they applied therone, some
certain remedies, to the qvallifyinge of the payne dolor, and profitable for
the combustione. And because it is incident unto all me, to fear the hot
iron, and alsoe the inscisione of the skin, which first of all must be done.
Our use therefore now a days is, that we (without making any inscisione in
the skin) apply on the self same place of the varice, a great, strong
potetiall Cauterye, because it should not only combure qvite through the
skinn, but alsoe through the whole varice, or burst vain: but we may not
in any sort touche the Escara, but gentlelye of her self suffer het to
separate, using at this season those remedies, which for that use expresslye
amongst the cauteryes, we have described. The which I have seen to be used,
of Mr. le Ieune the kings Chyrurgiane, and of the Duke of Gvyse, which was a
very expert man, in all operations of Chyrurgerye.

Of the Horseleeches of there use, howe we may apply them. Chap. 8.
THe Horseleeches are little, Descriptione of Horseleeches,
and perpucill creatures, like vvormes, of the longitude of a finger, or
theraboute, nether are they of any great crassitude, or thickness, unless, it be
when they with sucking of blood are grouvven thick. The end of there head
hath a rovvnde hole, much like unto a little lamprell, wherein are to be
beheld, and seen three stings, or acuityes, proceeding out of three corners,
which so violently, strongly prick, that thervvith they can pearce the
hides skins of all creatures vvhatsoever, vvherone they depede fast
hanging, until such time as they have sucked themselves rovvnde, and fall of
with there one accorde. They live, are ingedred in the water, especially in
all stagnes, standing vvaters, because they delight, and are solaced, in
filthy, and muddye places. I esteem, suppose, that there is no Chyrurgiane,
but very well knows them because of all men they are knovven, but everye
one doth not know which are the venomous, or not venomous, which
notwithstanding, is very necessarve to be known, considering the accidents,
mischances, which might thereof ensue, and follovve, as in example, great
tumors, Inflammations, Messalinus dyed of the bytinge of a venomous
Herseleech,
venomous vlcerations, through there venomous momorsiones bitinges, yea also
death it self, as the history of him, which of a venomous one, was bitten
in his knee, dyed thereof, is vvitnessinge unto us.

The vonoumous, are as well known, discerned by there greatness, as there
colour, Signs of a venomous Horseleech,
and alsoe by the place where they are caught. For those which are thick, and
have a thicker head then the rest of there whole body, shining, like unto
glistninge vvormes, and are greenish, and which have on there back, blew, or
black strokes, or lines, and vveare caught in standing pooles, where all
manner of foetide, stinckinge Carrions, with more other filthines is thrown
in, they are all venomous, wherefore in any sort we must not use them.

But those, which are small, rovvnd, Signs of good Horseleeches.
have a little head, are of colour much like unto a liver a rovvnde belly,
the back stripped, stroked with gouldeyellovv strokes, which live in clean
running vvaters, they are not venomous, we may safely, and with all
securitye use them. And yet notvvithstading, those which are so as is before
said, may we as soon, as we have caught them, apply them to the body, but
must first of all, keep them two, or three vveekes in a glass of fair
water, because therein they may avoid the viscositye, impurenes, refreshige the
foresayed water everye three days once, vvashinge the said horseleeches,
What we ought to do before we use the Horseleeches.
with your hands from all there viscositye slimishnes. Galen councelleth us,
that the first day we should give them a little blood, then, put the in
fresh water. We may praeserve, keep the a whole year, or longer if we
please, to use the, when the necessity so reqvireth.

The use of Horseleeches, was invented in place, Use of the Horseleeches.
of scarifyinge: we apply the most commonly one such places of the body,
where we can not set any boxes at all: as in example in the privityes, one
the gummes, one the lips sometimes alsoe one ravve flesh of any vvounde, on
the nose, above on the hand, fingers, when the patient too much fears the
boxinge, or else when as we desire to draw extract any venom, out of a
thrust, or bit of any venomous creature.

Before therefore we apply them, because they might be hungry, nether retain
any thing in there bodies, because they should the sooner take houlde, we
must take the out of the water, suffer the three or four days before we use
them to lye in a nue little vvodden box. Horseleeches are enemies unto all
fatness.
Which being in this sort praepared, to apply one the body, we must first
vvashe that place where we purpose to apply the very clean, if so be the
place, by reason of of any salve or plaster, wear fattye, we must alsoe
vvashe that place vvype it very clean, because they are enemies unto all
pingveditye fatness: this being effected, we must the take them the one after
the other, in there middles with a vvhyte clean clothe, (for if so be we
touch them with bare fingers, they as the will not bite) praeset, or place
there heads to that place where we desire to have them suck. If so be the
Horseleech will not at the first byte, take houlde, we must then annoynt the
said place with pigeons blood, or hens blood, or cause the place ether
with the poyncte of a lancet, or with a pinn, to bleed, vvherthrough
immediately she will begin to suck. To make a Horseleeah violently to
suck.
And so far forth as she sucks not strong enough, or if so be we desire
to have her to suck violently, before she leave, is not vvholye full,
satisfied, we must vyith a pair of scissors clip her a sunder, about the
third part of her body: where by, she begins to suck far stronger with
more violence, and the blood as fast as she sucks de parts fro her through
the hindmost parts which are cut avvaye. How we we shall cause the to
fall of.
As soon as the one Horseleeche is fall of, if we please, we may apply an
other thereon: for they being replete satisfied, praesently of themselves, fall
of: if so be we desire to have them fall of, before they be satisfied, we as
then stravve a little saulte, or ashes of vvoode on there heads immediately
they fall of. There as yet drops blood out of the bit when as they are
fallen of, which is a sign token, that they have dravven suckede the blood
from far, which blood, we must not one the sudden restraygne, stop,
because that part may the better purge, purifye it self, from all venomous
humours, if so be there be any at hand: wherefore some there be which to that
end, apply some small boxes, on the biting of the Horseleech, or else they
vvashe that part with hot water, beige saulted, cause it to bleed somewhat
longer, if so be that part require the same, the patient be able to suffer the
same: If so be the blood run therout somewhat to lunge, will difficultlye be
restraygned, through any compresses, we must then apply thereon a little
adusted, or burned linne, or a splitted or cloven bean, retayninge the same
with his finger so lunge therone, How we shall restrain the blood
until such time as she cleaves fast thereon, vvheron thereafter we must lay a
small compresse, bind the same therone, if so by any means possible it may
be done.

Of Boxes, and howe we may apply them. Chap. 9.
A Box, is an instrumete, of Surgery, the magnitude where of, must
aeqvallye be proportioned, according to the greatness of that part, vvheron
we purpose, and intende to apply them, alsoe divers forms, figures: Difference
of Boxes*
for some there are which are short, thick, others which have a lunge neck,
belovve vvyde, which commonly draw better the any other. Others are of divers
substance, for there are some of Copper, others of Horne, of Tin, and of
glass, which we most commonly use, because through the glass we might
see, whether they draw much blood or not. There are alsoe some which are
made of vvoode, and some baked of earth: yea for want of Boxes, we may use
little vvoodde dishes, or little earthen pots. Touching there form, they
must have a vvyde mouth, and a reasonable broad belly, thick rovvnde edges,
because in the applying thereof they should not chance to hurt.

And if so be they are very great, they must the have a little hoale on the
one side, which with vvaxe must be occluded, before we apply the that we may
give the air, when we will take of the same, some there are, which lay a
little stick, cross over in the mouth thereof, on the which they impose a
little piece, or inch of a candle, which in the application thereof they
incende, and light.

How we shall apply the boxes.
The manner of applicatione is this. That we first of all, perfricate, and
rub the place Vvherone we intend to apply the situatinge that part of
applicatione, in the right form thereof, because the muscles, may lye in there
right situatione, and places, and not be recurved this way, or that vvaye,
because the boxes being thereon fastened, might not vvithe the reflection of
the part, or ioyncte, fall thereof, when as the foresayed recurved muscles,
should reverte again to there accustomed locationes, and places. This being
done, we must impose therone a counter or any other piece of coin, with a
little, flock of flexe, or tovve incended in the midst of that place,
vvherone we desire to apply the Boxes, least that the fire chance to touche
the skin, vvheron immediately, we must vvhelve the Boxes, turning the same
a little rovvnde, because he should the better fasten thereon: the which as
then we must cover, with a double vvarmed clout. Some there are which in
the bottom of the Boxes apply and lay a plaster, and therone a little tovve,
in place of an inch of candle, which in the applicatio, theyt set one fire,
with a candle.

Discriptione of the horne Boxes.
As touchinghe the horns, they are vvyde above, and narrovve belovve, having a
little perforatione in there midst, and internally, a little leathern tuge,
which is very thin, which stops the foresayed hoales. They are applied
without fire, sucked with the mouth. To vvitt with a little pipe, or with
a quille, which we impose in the foresayed perforation, wherewith the
foresaid tunge is thrust backevvardes, which stops the horne, when it
hath dravven and sucked sufficient, dravvinge the pipe therout, the foresayed
tunge, internally shutteth, cleaves it self so close to the hole, as we may
see in a kind of ballon, when he is blovven up.

Those which are ignorant of this secrete, stop, occlude the hole with a
little vvaxe, which in deed is not so necessary, and needfulle. Those little
Boxes which are laid in warm water, are applied, after that we have putt
the flame of the candle, therein and must then with all expeditione be thereon
imposed.

The use of small boxes.
The use of these small Boxes, is three fouled: Namely thervvith to vvithdravve,
and repell, the blood, and humours, which are concursed to any place: to
draw forth any particular thing which nature ca not expel from her: to
draw, out or cause to consume, any occluded ventosityes, in any parts of our
body: wherefore we apply them one divers, sundry places: they are very good
and commodious to be placed behid in the neck, against all rheumes vvich are
incident unto the eyes: behind in the midst of the neck are they necessary
to be applied, for those which are short of respiratione, and troubled with
the cough: one both the shoulder blades, against payne, and dolor in the
head against Hemicraniam, against ophthalmye, and payne in the teeth: we
apply the alsoe in place of phlebotomye one the right hipp, against bleedige
at the nose: in like sort alsoe close to vvoemens breasts, when as there
menstruositye, too superfluouslye flovveth from them, and when there lye
included any ventosityes in the Liver: on the left side, when as there is any
vvynde retained in the Milte: on the Navelle against the vvynde colicke: on the
Vreteres, to cause the gravel to descede, which is contained, in the kidnyes:
on the rump, against the vlcerations, and the Hemorrhodes of the fundament: on
the hippes, against all vesicall disseases, and of the vvombe, and provocation
the monethlye sickness, or menstruositye.

To conclude, we may apply them, The Boxes may be applied one all parts of
mans body.
on all parts of mans body, yea allsoe one the self same place where the
pain is, which we endevoure to cure, to retract and draw therout all
humours, which are theri secluded, as when we desire to draw any humours
outvvardes, which lye profoundlye deeply occulted, and hid, or else alsoe,
any ventositye, which in the foresayed part lies enclosed, as on any bit,
or prick, of any venomous creature, least that the venom might chance to
penetrate and pearce, into some of the vvorthyest parts: one the Venus
botches, or Bubones, one the venoumouse, Pestilentialle Parotides. But
desiring to apply them against any superfluous efluxione of blood, we must
then situate them on the contrary side considering the alliance, communitye
of the veins which is between them, through the which the blood is
retracted, dravven back. It chances also sometimes, that we nether apply
the Boxes, on the disseased, or dolorous place, nether one the contrary side
thereof, but one that part which next, and proximately thereunto is situated:
as when we desire to suscitate and provoacke, the retained and kept back
mestruosityes, we as then place the Boxes, one the bone Pubis in the flanckes,
and allsoe one the flatnes of the hippes.

The Boxes, or horns, are sotimes applied with scarificationes, and sometimes
without: If so be we apply them without scarificationes, they then only
draw certain dampes unto them: but if there be any bad humours, in those
parts, we as then scarifye it: And the dissease proceeding out of winds,
and ventosityes, we then apply them without scarifications, but when we
are minded to scarifye any part, we first set the Boxes therone, and
having again removed, and taken the same of, we the prick, or scarify
therein, ether with a lancet, or with the poyncte of a razor, whether it be
deep, or not deep, according as we suppose, and judge the blood, to be
gross, or subtle, but allvvayes we must note not to scarifye deeper then the
skin: touching the number of the foresayed scarificatios, if so be we are
not intended to draw much blood there out, we may not as then make many
scarificatios: but if we intend to draw much blood therout we must then
make many scarifications: vvhero we must again apply the boxes, so that when
we desire to draw much blood therout, we must apply the foresayed boxes
two, or three times thereon, everye time scarifye the place, especially when
there is contained in that part any venoumouse ventositye, or gross, and
corrupt blood. In delicate, and dayntye persons, which are tender of flesh,
and have an aperte or open skin, in such persons we must scarifye but once,
notvvithstandinge must apply the boxes two, or three times after other thereon:
which being finished, and having vviped, and dried the part, we must then
apply one the scarlficatione, the Cerotum Galeni, or else the Vnguentum Rosarum.

THE SEVENTH TREATISE OF THE OPEratione of Chyrurgerye, Containing six
Chapters.
Of the Caries, or of the corruption rottinge of bones. Chap. 1. Of the
fistles of the Privityes or fundamente. Chap. 2. How we ought to draw forth
Childrene out of their mothers body, which of themselves can not be borne.
Chap. 3. Wherefore the externalle parts or ioynctes of the body, must be
extirpatede, as Arms and Legs vvheraboutes the same must in the fore said
ioynct be done. Chap. 4. How we ought to effect, the extirpation, or
dissection of any ioynct, restraynge the blood after we shall have laid
down the patient. Chap. 5. How we ought to extirpate the spoylede,
superflvous fingers, how we shall separat those fingers which are combinede,
grovven together. Chap. 6.
Of the Caries, and corruption of the bones. Chap. 1.
Disctiption of the natural bones The bones are as well subjected unto all
manner of disseases, as is the flesh.
THe bones, not being spoylede corrupt, are of natur vvhyt smooth, solide. They
are according to the sayings of ancient Chyrurgianes and our daily
experience, subjected unto all evell dispositions, which the flesh is
subjected unto, yea allso unto apostematios. Celsus avouchethe, that all bones
which have any impedimet, are ether hurt, corrodede, corrupted, burst,
broken, crushed, plettered, or out of ioyncte. We may praeiudice the bones to
be altered, To know the corrupted bones through sight.
or polluted, through our sight feeling, matter, and impuritye, which
therout issues: when we perceave it to be yellovv or purple, and at the last
black, as very learned lye, discretlye the said Author, writes, first the
corrupted bone vvaxeth fattye then black, Through feeling.
or putilaginous, that is corroded: when as in touching with the privet or
searchinge iro, we feel the bone to be rugged, and not plain, and the privet,
enters therein, as if it vveare a piece of corrupted, vvorme eaten vvoode,
especially we knovvinge the same not to have binn bared of his flesh, nether
hath binn of the air illuminated: because that sometimes the altered bone, for
that it hath a lunge while lain bare, is grow to be so harde, thick, there
without great pains, we can not fasten thero with the grating iron,
through the matter, which is thin, Through the matter.
subtle, clear, faetide, stinckinge, blackishe: when as rovvnd about the
vlceration especially, is regenerated a tender viscouse flesh where through
the vlceration can not, be cicatrized, although she be cicatrized, thereafter
redubleth herforces, breacketh open again. Occasion of the corruption of the
bones
Such alteration proceeds of some cocurret humours, that descede on the bared
bones, as appears when they are through soackede with any pestiferouse
humours, or else because they are of their flesh pellicle, or mebrane Periostio,
denudatede and barede vvherthrough they corrupt vvaxe dry for want of blood
wherewith they should be nourished, or else because they are to full of
humiditye, moisture, through the purulet matter, which cotinuallye thereon
distills, corrodeth: ether because they are to much anoyncted with oil, to
much fatty salves thero applied, whereby the vlceration is corrupted,
putrified: Or because she is polluted, with the matter of the vlceratione,
which supernaturallye, from above is descended thereon distilled.

VVheas therefore for certaynty we know that there is putrefactio, rottenes in
the bone we must then do our devoyr to know how lardge, profovvnd the same
is, because thereby we may the surer know, how with most conveniece we
should remove abolish the same cause therein a separatione, because it is
necessary that the vivificet part, expelle drive from it the mortified, or
else the mortifiede allso cause mortificatione in the vivificent parts.

Magnitude of the putrefactio.
Concerning the magnitude thereof, we may discern it through the sight,
unless it be operted with any viscoufe or slimy flesh, we supposing
doubting to be more putrefactione of bones, that is patefiede evidente unto
us, through the circumiacent parts of the vlceraration, which as then are
purple coloured through the spongiouse flesh, through the elevatione of the
edges of the vlceratione through the diuturnalle continuace of the same in one
estate: Hippocrates.
For as Hippocrates affirms: In the venomouse vlcerations, which for the
space of a year have continuede, or longer, it can not otherwise be, but
necessarilye in the bone under the flesh of the vlceratione, must needs be a
corruption, putrefaction a corrosione, some pieces thereof come out, the
Cicatrises also will continually be cocavouse, hollovve. To cure the
putrefacted bones.
We therefore certaynlye knovvinge this, we must as then dilate the vlceratio
denudate the bone, dilligently marck how large the foresayede putfactio is:
which must be effectede with causticke medicamentes, by the which the
spongiouse flesh, must be cosumede, according as the foresayede vlceratio
reqvireth. Celsus councelleth us that first we make an inscisione in the
skine, to denudate the bone, if so be the putrefaction of the bone, be greater
then the vlceratione, discidinge cuttinge of all the flesh rovvnde about, unto
the sovvnde bone: touching the depth of the putrefactione of the bone, we may
know it through the privet or searchinge iron, when as we feel thereon,
the which pearcinge deep or not deep in the same, shevveth unto us that the
foresayede corruption of bone is great or small. But if w see the bone to be
black dry as it happens bereft of blood the privet the will not enter
therein, wherefore the depth of such a corruption, can so certainly be knovven,
as through the perforative Trepane, or else through the little ground dravver,
wherewith we must perforate the foresayede bone through which perforatione
of bone, we easily shall perceave, whether the bone be black, vvhyte, or
red, whether there issuethe blood out or not if it be so, it is then a sign
that the putrefaction, of the bone is not deep. And if so be we perceave, the
perforated bone to be black, it is then a token, that the putrefactione is
deep, because the corruption of the bone, pierces so deep, when we
perceave that the bone is vvhyte, red, so far is it then incorruptede.

To the which Caries, or corrupting of boes we must use the actualle
Cauterye, or else allso the potentialle or the Raspatorium: If so be the
corruption of the bone penetrates not very deep, How log we ought to
raspe.
we must then grate the foresayed bone with a peculiar Raspatorye, in
raspinge of the same, stiffly crush thero, that we may qvicklye penetrate
through the corruption, the operatione, vvih all festinatione be effectede
done. All danger being now passed, we perceavinge the bone to be vvhyte,
smooth pure, solide, it is then sufficient: For it is impossible, that the
foresayede corruption of bones may have an end, as long as we do not
liberat, free the same, by one meas or other, from all danger, corruption. When
we perceave, in raspinge the bone to give blood from it, it is then a sign
that all corruption is therout, and that the bone is well disposed, because
that no corrupt or alterede bones will give from the any blood. This being
done, we as then use the poulder of Aristolochiae of Mirrha of Ireas of Aloe
to liberate the foresayed bone fro al corruption praevente the same to be any
more putrefacted and corrupted. If we suppose, that the Raspatorium, be not
sufficient enough, to remove the foresayed corruption, as when she is deeply
corroded invvardes, The fire is the surest remedy to repel all corruptions out
of the boes.
when as there is a peculiar corruption imprinted in the bone, the same alsoe
being fat, oylye, if so be the patient vveare not timorouse of the fire, the
afsuredest remedy as then is, that we cauterize the foresayed corruption,
with an actual Cauterye, which conforteth that part, and consumes all
venoumouse humours, with all festinatione causes the corrupted bones to
separate, causes little, or no pain at all, because the foresayed bone is
insensible, and doth not communicate his vnhemence unto the other circumiacent
parts.

When as therefore, Manner how to apply the Cauterye.
we desire to use it according to the depth, greatness of the corruption, or
Caries, we must therein use a mean, of applying the foresayed Cauteriu on the
bone, to vvitt until through the porositye of the bone there comes out, a
frothy matter, no lodger: for if we held it lodger thereon, it should through
his great callidity, through the exsiccatinge virtues thereof, not only
consume, the humeditye of the putrefaction of the bone but alsoe the natural
humiditye, moisture through which occasio, the flesh engenders increases
between the sovvnde the corrupt bones: This doing, nature in a certain
time thereafter, will separate the corrupted bone, fro the sovvndebone,
engendringe betvvee them both, a tenerouse flesh, which by little little
hardens, as if it vveare Pomgranate-kernelles, which foresayed flesh, we
oftentimes may see, grow clean through the corrupted bone, that in such
sort, as the small tender grass, grovveth through the grovvnde, as the is
the suppuration, matter good laudable, vvhyte, or reddishe coloured, and
without stincke. And we must here alsoe farther note, that the Chyrurgian,
may sometimes gently move, the corrupted bone being cauterized, stir it,
because nature there through may be opitulated, unto the separatione of the
cauterised bone, and the foresayed bone lying sovvhat raised, may be lifted on
high, because as the it houldeth fast noevvhere, but we may not with any
violence take the same thereof, for in so doing, the sovvnde, bone, before
copletlye it be covered with flesh might chance of the air, to be again
infected, and corrupted.

The Cauterization must be reiterated
Nether is it sufficient, that once we apply the Cauterye thereon, but must
divers sundry times do the same, nether must it be glovvinge or red hot, but
reasonable hot, removinge of the forsayed cautery fro one place of the bone to
the other, or houldig of the same in one place, until the place be thoroughly
vvarmed.

What we ought to do in a deep Caries.
The corruption, therefore or Caries being very deep, we must them trepane or
boar it with a perforative Trepane, unto the sovvnd bone, or with the small
ground dravver, make divers hoales therein, the one close to the other, of an
aeqvall depth also, as the corruption of the bone is, in which trepanned
hoales, we must as the apply some little hot actual cauteryes because the
foresayed bone, there by may be thoroughly dried: By this operation, the
corrupted bone will separate it self fro the sovvnde bone, as heretofore we
have said. If so be that the whole substance of the bone be corrupted,
corroded, we must then vvholye remove, take the same a way. A history of
Albucasis.
As Albucasis, to this purpose, recites a memorable history of on whom at
three sundry times he took away almost the whole shin bone, dividing also
the operation, in three sundry aeqvall times, because the patient was not
able, to tolerate so great payne, because of his great imbicillitye, alsoe
because Albucasis feared least that under his hades he should have died,
because through certain evacuations, he allvvayes fell into great fayntnes,
but in the end was perfectly cured: and in place of bone, there engendered in
the place, a harde carnositye, which so miraculously fortified from day to
day, that he during some continuance of time thereafter, could again
courageously go one that leg.

When as therefore it is reqvisite, to apply the foresayed actual Cauterye one
any certain place, we must dilligently consider, how we might liberate,
defend, The circumiacet parts of the vlceration must be freed.
the circumiacet parts of the Vlceratione, least they be touched of the
cautery, which we may with most conveniece do, with some certain
plasters, because nether the fat nor any other ebullient humiditye, which
through the calliditye or heate of the cauterye might chance to run therout,
one the self same circumiacet parts, of the vlceratio, that thereby they
chanced not to be burned, seared, which would be the cause of great payne
and dolor.

Now therefore to correct cure the Caries, or corruption of bones, there are
divers Chyrurgianes of our times age, in place of the actual Cauterye use the
potentialle: Divers remedies against the Caries.
amongst the which the oil of vitrioll is in the most chiefest, in like sort
alsoe the oil of franckinsece, which of divers Chyrurgians is highly
commended, and esteemed.

Of the Fistel of the Fundament. Chap. 2.
ANd because we have not heer intended generally to write of al fistles, to
discourse of their matter, conditions, what parts be thereof polluted, of
their occasiones, signs, prognosticationes, of the remedies, of their cures,
it seemed expedient unto me, briefly to show, the means, to cure those
which reveal, demostrate themselves in the Fundament, that especially through
a convenient handling, Intention of the Author.
or operatione of Chyrurgerye when as shortly and breeflye I shall have
taught, in what sort we may best and easyest know them.

Those Fistles which are ingedred in the fundament, are of divers sundry
sorts: for some of the are occulte, others patefyede, the occulted are so
called, because we no where externally espy them, and internally in the
foresayed fundament, The fistles of the fudament, are ether-hidden or aperte.
or excrementall gut have their apertio, issue in the muscle Sphincter,
whether they be situated vpvvardes or dovvnvvardes, or any where one the side,
adioninge unto any of the two buttocks. Which allthoughe we can not
evidentlye perceave them, yet may judge, that the foresayed parts, are hurt
or hidered, through the payne and through the stinckinge matter, and
humiditye, which issues out of the foresayed fundament, through the which
commonly, the shirts of the patient are polluted, through certain
vlcerations also, which before times in that part they have had, or through
certain internal hemorrhodes, or through any inveterate vvoud, which was
badly cured. We may also sometimes see them vvithe our eyes, through the
Speculum Any.

The patefyed Fistles of the sudamet.
The patefyed Fistles, are therefore so called, because immediately without any
danger we may evidentlye see them: Of the which there are some which lye
croocked, and curved, although they have but one apertion, which visiblye we
may see, yet they have divers ways, branches, or cubicles, like
Conyeburrovves, which of their patent Orificium, in the body, run this
way and that way, which with the searchinge iron sometimes we may find,
when as we thrust it this way or that way, where we feel it of his own
accorde to enter, together also, out of the great qvantity of matter, which
daily issues therout, we may easily judge, that the foresayed Fistle, must
needs have more concavityes, then by the external fistulouse apertione we
can judge, which at sometimes is not great.

There are alsoe some Fistles, which externallye have but one issue, and do
not pass through the concavitye of the external, or arsegutt, or through the
muscle Sphincter, as easily through the privet or searchinge we may perceave
when we thrusting the same therein, we ca not any where perceave it against
our fingers, to the which intent we must thrust the same middle finger of the
left hand in the fundamet, for if it so be that we between our finger, and
the privet feel any thing it is then a sign that it doth not pearce
through but if we feel it against our finger, it the pierces through.

And now as concerning the curation of the same, A three fouled means to cure
the Fistles of the fundament.
we will not here treat of any things belonging unto the medicamentes,
but only speak of the Chyrurgerye to the curing of this dissease: the which
on a threefoulde manner is taught unto us, as well in the curatione of the
internalle, as externalle Fistles: to vvitt, ether through ligature,
inscisione, or through Cauterye.

Although Avicenna, with more others are of opinione, that with any of these
foresayed remedies we ought in no sort to meddle there with unless, they
vveare too intolerable, and molestiouse unto the patient, but that with clean
linen, with Cotton, and with decent and convenient lavamentes, we ought to
sustain them. But for all this not withstanding, I will here describe unto
you, our use and customs of the ancient Chyrugians.

Now therefore as well to cure the publiqve, and patent Fistles, as the occult
and hidden, we must cause the patient conveniently to lye, namelye that the
patient must lye one his back, with his legs on high, retaining and
houldinge the foresayed legs, close unto his belly, and this is the manner,
and customs of ayncient Chyrurgians. But we now a days, cause the patient
to stand on both his legs, with his head, lying on a bed, disioyninge
separatige the foresayed legs vvyde the one fro the other, which alsoe of
two servantes or staders by must so be held, least that he again might
chance to shut them. The patient being thus situated, towards the light, we
shall then thrust the middlemost finger of the left hand into the fundamente,
having with some certain oil anoyncted your finger, and pared close your
nails: and in our right hand we must have a privet or searchinge iro, in
form of a needle, in the which at the on end there of must be a thread, which
foresayed needle, or Privet we must thrust into the Orificium of the Fistle
until we sensibly feel the same on our finger, and then with our finger
recurvate, the end of the foresayed needle, neatlye, conveniently reduce the
same unto the fundamet, and then draw the same therout, dilligently
observinge, that internally we hurt or vvoude nothing, How we must bind a
public, or patent Fistle.
and the thread alsoe being passed through the fundament we must then cut of
the foresayed needle from the thread, tie the ends of the foresayed thread
both together, dravvinge the same reasonable fast, and close together, and
with a slidinge knott bind the same together, because daily we might knitt
the same closer, and continuing this same so lunge in this sort, until such
time as we shall have cut away all the thread which was remayninghe
between, both the Orificia, and both the apertions become to one, and the
thread conseqventlye, without any more dissectione of the same, shall be taken
thereout.

But we perceavinge the Fistle to have no issue in the concavitye the
arsegutt, and the needle doth not come out against our finger being in the
foresayed arsegutt, and that there as yet is some pellicle, or membrane
between them both, the needle having a reasonable sharpe acuitye or poyncte,
we must thrust the foresayed threded needle, or Privett, boldly, and
audaciouselye therthroughe, into the foresayed concavitye of the Arsegutt,
because we might also draw the foresayed thread therout, as already above we
have metioned.

We must alsoe here farther note, that this privet, or needle, must ether be
of goulde or silver, because she may the easier internallye in the foresayed
gut be recurved. We use heervnto a silver plate, which thereunto expressly,
we caused to be made, as this same plate, the foresayed Privett, or needle,
before amongst the figures of the instruments, are also defigured, and set
down unto us.

The thread must be of course thread, the same being tvvisted three or four
times double. And because that unto some, the dissectione of this simple
thread, falls somewhat tedious, they annoyncte the same with some Causticke
medicametes. Gvido, Opinion of Gvido.
effects this dissection, with a rescindent actual Cauterye, to praevent
the same that it pearce no deeper, then it ought, he thrusts in the fiistle
a hollow Privett, on the which concavitye, he with the foresayed Cauterye
pierces the skin, and in like sort alsoe cutteth through the fistle,
brings, dirimateth away with it the callositye, praeventeth also the
fluxione of blood.

It is surer to make an inscision in the fistle, the to tie it.
Others will not in any sort, have the fistle cauterized, nor bovvnde, tied,
but will only have that same to be inscided with a croocked lancett, which
is between both the Orisicia, to vvitt of the fistle, and the excrementall,
or arsegutt, that alsoe which internallye is grovven callouse, they will have
it to be crudifyed and made ravv, or excoriated, as we are used to do in the
haremouthes: yet daily experience teaches us, that the ligature is more
certain, the the inscisione, wherein we need not to take avvaye the
callosity, because it oftetimes chances, that we endevoringe to remove, and
take away this callositye, we discide, and cut of any of the Fibres, of the
muscle Spincter, which being wounded, or hurt, the patient there after can
in no sort restraygne his stools, or excrementes.

It may seem admiraculouse, strange unto some, that I write that, the fistle
may be cured through the ligature only, without removinge the callositye,
because it seems oppugnant unto reason, because all combinatione, healinge
together, is caused through the ioyninge or touching of weak things
together: yet I dare affirm, that all those, which I have seen tied, have bin
perfectly and sovvndlye cured without in any sort to have touched, or removed
the callositye.

Now to come to the operation of the hidden fistles, having situated the
patient as before is said, we must then apply therein, the Speculum Any,
opening the fundamet thervvith, with the least pain we ca, as vvyde as is
possible, allvvayes annoynctinge the foresayed Speculum with oil, through
the which said apertione, the Orisicium, of the vlceratione may appear be
apparet unto us, be-tvvixt which concavityes or branches, we must thrust in
a privet, which must be of a reasonable thickenes, or crasitude, like unto a
small little needle wherewith we are vvonted to make our stitches, which
must be blunt, in the one end must with a thread be threded, which
foresayed needle, or privet, we must thrust unto the bottom, or grovvnde of
the fistle, which penetrates unto the skin, as we easily may feel with
our finger, on the which, with the croocked lancet we must make an
inscision, the needle being in this sort passed through, the Speculu Any
being taken away, we must then draw out the needle, and cut her from the
thread, and tie both the ends thereof together.

Other say we ought besides the privett, internallye to make an inscisione
through the vvhol Fistle, unto the other hole, which is made on the other
side: but there is most certayntye in the ligatione, to avoid the effluxion of
blood, vvhenas there is sufficient flosh enough between.

There have bin certain ancient Chyrurgianes, which could not agree unto
the Speculum Any, but have only thrust there finger into the fundament, to
dilate the same, and besides the same a thin and pusille privett, wherewith
they have so lunge felt thervvith this way and that way up, and down, till
such time as they have fovvnde the Orificium, of the fistle, which is felt as
if it vveare a thing rent, or torn, and now having fovvnde the foresayed
Orificium, An other practice or invention.
they then close to there finger thrust in the privett, conducinge the same
along the finger supernallye, or vpvvardes, or thither where they suppose the
bottom, or ground of the fistle to desist, and end: which through feeling
of the finger of the other hand we may easily discern: and having fovvnde
the end thereof, and perceavinge the skin or the flesh not to be very
thick, in stead of ligatione, we violently thrust the privett there through,
vpvvardes, the privett being passed therthroughe, they then cut open all that
which is situated between the two Orificia of the Vlceration, or else they
thrust a thread there through, and so bind it through.

Amongst those which are of opinione, that we ought to cure the fistle
through an actual Cauterye Albucasis discribeth unto us the means, Albucasis
vvillinge us to use a Cauterye of iron thereunto, which must be very subtle,
and glovvinge, or redhott, and that it be proportioned according to the
greatness of the fistle, thrustinge the same tvvice, or thrice therein, until
such time as all the callositye is taken away there from, laudinge the fervent,
glovvinge Cauterye, above the cuttinge or rescindent Cauterye, because the
glovvinge Cautery, as he says corrects and amends the vnteperatnes of
that part there follows no effluxione of blood the callosity thereof is
burned away, the superfluouse humidity is exsiccated, which was concursed,
and assembled together unto that patte.

How we ought to extract, draw forth little infantes out of their mothers
body, which of themselves can not be borne. Chap. 3.
Admonition for the Chyrurgiane.
BEfore we offer to employ our hades, on such on operatione: it seemed expediet
unto me to admonish the Chyrurgiane what vvoeme may escape this danger,
because we should obtain great blame and discredit, unto our selves, if so
be the woman being in childebearth, should chance under our hands to dye,
she supposing, by our help, council to be released out of this danger, The
signs where through the Chyrurgian is hindered, to draw forth the child out
of his mothers body, vvhic of it self ca not be borne.
Wherefore those which we suppose to be in danger of death, we must not in
any sort lay hades on them* because the countenance and cheer of those
vvoemen which are in labour, or childebearthe and also there face,
administers sufficient knowledge unto us, what event, or success the matter
shall have: for those which are in any great danger, of their lives, have a
strange wonderful behaviour over them, to vvitt that she troubles, or
molests her self with nothing, hath a fearful sight, which is clean
contrary to her naturalle being, is debilitated, hath hollovve eyes, a sharpe
nose, a feeble Pulls, which beats obscurely, and without time: She is
vvholy covicted, as if she had the soporiferouse dissease, with out all
strength, clean laid along, although we speak unto her, yet we can not
avvake her, if we do log trouble, pluck her, she speaks very feeblelye,
with no strength, and then again lies, as it vveare in a great sleep: the
air alsoe flies out of her throat. Those in the which is any strength left,
they fall into Spasmo, or convulsion of synnues. Others after they hay
continued a long time in their labours, as are those which have bin troubled
molested thervvith the space of five, or six months, they are vvholye
decayed, grow lean, vvholy consumed, for want of food, because alsoe that
which she hath eaten, is not changed into any nurture, the vvhol boodye
being thorough soacked with humidity, especially the face, whereof her
svveat most commonly, is fattye, axungiouse, and smearye.

But those which can suffer the manual operatione, are fit, to have the
child dravven out of their body, have none of these fore rehearsed accidents,
wherefore withal festinatio alsoe they must be opitulated, helped, on this
manner as heerafter follows notvvitstanding without rashly, or temorously
to begin the same, without being certifyede, of the Midvvyfe, what the
reason or occasion might be, vvhye the woman can not be delivered, or bring
forth her child, There are three things which make Child birth difficult.
being certified hereof, as well of the parturinge vvoma, as of the
Midvvyfe, in as much as is possible, dilliggetly considering the same, having
well perpeded it, therout to know the just occasion of this heavines
sorrow, considering, whether it takes his occasion of the parturiet women,
or else out of the child, because thereby we might know how to rule, govern
our selves

If so be this danger consists in the mother, The mother.
it happens then, ether because of her mistrust or small hope, or because
she is fearfulle, and fayntharted, having the vvombe, and the neck or
entrance of the sam, small anguste, because she is yonge small of body,
tender, and delicate: Or else because the entrance of the foresayed VVombe,
lies recurved, or is occluded with some tumor, or else there is some
Apostematione vlceration, or any Carnositye there in, which oppugn themselves
against the bearth of the infant: Ether because that the mother, hath a stone
in her Bladder, which therein alsoe being oppressed, seeks by all means
possible to come therout, and being come into the mouth, or entrance of the
Bladder, crushes there the entrance of the VVombe, where through she is
angust, or else because therein is some cicatrice, where through she is narrovver,
then she ought to be, where through she ca not in any sort stretch forth her
self.

Child bearth alsoe in some vvoeme is hindered above all these foresayed
accidents, because they are to fearful, are to much affrighted, of the
parture, or Childbirth, as yet not being used unto the labouring of child,
do not yet know thereafter to govern themselves, as vveare condecent, and
needfulle. Others are grovvne impotent, through any praecedente sicknesses,
and having no strength at all to deliver the conceptione or fruit from them.

The child alsoe may be occasion hereof, The child.
because it is to feeble, and ca not help it self, in the deliverance of his
mothers labours, and that especially when it is dead, and svvolle: in like
sort also the same being to gross, and great, ether in any part of his
body, as having two heads, four arms, being double, or else if there be more,
then one, to vvitt, two, three, or four, whereof the one might praesent his
arm, an other his leg, or any other part, all at one time.

Afther the infat praesenteth himself, the childebirth falls easy, or
difficult: because, that follovvinge the natural Childebirth, the child
allvvayes praesenteth first his head, having his arms stretched out alogest
both his sides: or when it praeseteth it self with both the legs forvvarde,
whereby it may easily be plucked dravven out: when it praesenteth him one
any other manner, it is as then not natural, but very dangerous, wherein
we must use our remedies as herafter shall be showed.

The external occasions.
Touching the external occasiones, they are violet heate, vvherthrough the
strength forces of our bodies are convicted: contrarilye, there is great could,
vvherthrough, all the conduictes are stopped as allsoe are those persons which
we fear, or hate.

The child alsoe as lunge as it lies dry, the water as yet is not broke
out, vvherthroughe it can have no passage, because the ways passages are
dry, not slippery, not smooth, as in the water streams we may see, that
the stones, through the slipperishenesse of the water, The operatione.
are carried away. In like sort alsoe all sorrow, tribulatio, stops
occludeth the entrance of the vvombe: as cotrarilye the mean, reasonable
iucunditye, opens the same.

All these foresayed occasions, must be compared, unto there cotraryes, as if so
be that through the imbicilitye of the mother it be occasioned, she must the
be conforted, givinge her a little vvyne, or Hipocras, conforting, ioyinge her
in her necessity, as much as is possible: if so far forth as the passage, be
to narrovve, or anguste, to exsiccate, or dry, or else to much shrucke, we must
then, endevore with decoctiones, with warm infusions, with pingvefactios,
to soften, moyste, make supple the same: If then there be any carnositye,
which in terrupteth the passage therofe, we must depose, detrude the same one
the one side: or if there be a stone in the entrace of the bladder, we must
thrust the same on high: if so be the Child otherwise praesent it self the
it should, as first with the head, we must then turn it in the best sort
we may: or if it thrust one arm, or leg out, we must not thervvith draw
it out, but must gentlelye retrude it back again, again bring it into his
place: or if there, be more the one child, we must dilligently consider howe
we ought to take hold therone, noting that we do not take the one by the
foot and the other by the foot, so both at once pluck the, wherefore we
must thrust one foot on high, draw towards him the foot of that which
is next, How we ought to situate the woman.
most rediest unto the passage.

But before we come to the manual operatio, we must first of al situate the
vvoma convenientlye: although there be divers manners of situationes, (for some
set the in a stool, others set the leanige, on a table, or one the edge of a
bed, with the legs separated the one from the other: others set them one
their knees) yet the best fittest way is one a bed, causinge the vvoma to
lye one her back, thvvarte over the bed, close to the edge there of, with
cushes or pillows under her back, to rest her head thero, laying her
heals close to her buttocks, which must lye alsoe somewhat exalted, and the
hippes spanned the one fro the other, which of two vvoeme must so in that
sort be held, least that she do not chance to draw, shut them together:
the vvoma lying in this sort, the Surgeon as then may the easier obtain
his will, and com close unto her, to drive, detrud the child toward the
entrance of the vvombe.

The vvoma being thus settled, or laid, the Chyrurgia must lay one the knees,
one the belly of the vvoma a clean linne clothe, partly to be an opercle, or
coveringe to the woman, partly there through to be freed from the external
air: the he must gently thrust his hand being annoyncted with fresh
butter with Sallatoyle, or with hogs suct, in to the entrance of the
vvombe, first of all cosideringe whether the child be alive, or dead, how
it is therei disposed, or turned, whether also there be more the one, two, or
three children a fore hades: howe soever it be situated, The child must with
his head be drawn out or with the feet if it be possible.
or disposed, ether alive, or dead, curved, or croocked, if it be possible we
must draw the head first out, but if not, with both the legs, dravvinge
the same aeqvally dovvnevvardes, cause, one of the arms, to be stretched out,
alogest the side of the head, because there through may be hindered, that the
body being therout the vvombe do not chance to shut, the neck of the
Child be not therein enclosed, which through the arm which lies stretched
out by his head shall be praevented hindered. If so be the one foot praesenteth
it self, the other tarry theri, we must tie the foresayed foot with a
ribbon gently thrust in again the foresayed foot, suffering the end of the
ribbon to hang out, and inqvire, seek after the other foot, thrustinge the
hand, along by the foresayed foot, leg until such time, as we feel the
buttock of the other foot, then reducinge your hand close to the buttok
shall immediately find the other foot, which getlely you must bring
forevvardes, dravvinge by the ribbo, the other foot, will come forth again,
which having the both aeqvally together must gently draw the out with, the
rest of the whole body of the child: by this means we may know whether
they be both the legs of one child, on this manner drawing out the same,
first the one then the other.

Signs of a dead Child in his mothers body.
But if so be the Child be dead, it will not as then stir it self, in the
feeling also thereof it will be could, vvhenas we thrust the figer in the
mouth thereof, it stirs nether lips, nor tunge to suck: The mother as then
hath a stinckinge breath, hollovve eyes, and a svvollen belly: we therefore
out of all these foresayed tokens, perceavinge the Child to be dead, we must
then draw it out as already we have said with the feet forvvardes: As
far forth therefore as if the Child had one arm or one Leg hanging forth
of the vvobe it vveare impossibleto reduce the same again into his former
sitvation, because that through the body of the Child, the entrance of the
vvombe is stopped, we must then pluck the foresayed arm or leg draw it
to the ioyncte of the shoulder, or of the hipp: How we ought to draw forth
a dead Child.
then discide, cut of the same in the foresayed ioncte. And if so be the head
did first repraesent it self, we must then thrust both our fingers into the
mouth thereof in place of a hoocke, towards the roof, and so as gently as is
possible draw the same towards you. If so be the belly thereof be
svvollene, or hath to great a head, and the same fulle of water, we must
then with our finger, a little crush thereon, because the aquosity might soacke
therout, and the svvollen parts by this means be diminished and vnsvvollen:
if so be that our hands vveare not sufficient to draw out the Child, or to
find the belly, to let out the said Aquosity, which ether is retained, in
the head, in the Breast, or in the belly, we must then gently with our right
hand bring therein, a little curved and croocked knife, which within the
curvednes thereof is sharpe, and cutttinge, the acuitye or povncte thereof being
closely enclosed betvvixt his fingers, After what fort we may draw forth
the aquositye out of a dead Childes body.
which he must houlde very close together, wherewith we must make an
inscisione ether in the Head, in the Breast, or else in the Belly, by this
means to draw forth the water which is therein contained: And then we must
take, a hook, which on the same fashion as is before said we must bring
therein, whereof we must fasten the poyncte, ether in the eyes, or in the
mouth, or in the Clavicles, vvheron we must then draw as violently as the
cause reqvireth to be done, dilligently cosideringe that the hooke breack not
through let his houlde go, through the violent plucking of the same do not
chance to hage take houlde in the VVombe, to the which intent we must with as
much judgement, consideration, draw the same as is possible, only with one
hand which must be within the VVombe. Now if the Child, be so thick, so
gross, A monstruouse Child.
that vvholy to draw it out is impossible for us or else if it be a Monster, or
two Childrene fast together, we must as then by parcels draw them out,
cuttinge the Head thereof in pieces, then pluck out first the the one piece,
then the other, then the Breast the Arms, and the legs, allvvayes making
that it be cut in the ioynctes, without breaking any bones: for although they
be tender, yet the splinters thereof might chance to hurt the vvombe, so that
it is allvvayes the surest way we cut of the Arms, and legs in their
ioynctes.

It chances also sotimes, that we dravvinge forth the Child by the legs,
that only the head tarrieth therein which thereafter without great difficulty
we ca not get it out, the with extreme danger, because the same rovvleth up
and down in the concavitye of the vvobe: this therefore being happened, there
must as then a servant, or one of the standers bye which is experimented in
such affayers, sittig one the left side of the woman, crushe with both his
hands one the belly of the vvoma, being covered with a warm cloth on this
manner to depress dovvnevvardes the head of the child, and there in that
place to contain, and keep the same. How we may draw forth the head of
the dead child as yet remaining in the vvobe
And the Chyrurgiane which sits on the right side of the woman must with
his light hand bring the hoocke therein, as is already said, which he must
fafte in the head, ether in the eyes, in the mouth or in the apertione of the
head, draw the same by little, little therout, as if, as yet the whole
body remayend therein: If so be the foresayed head vveare to great, we must
then in like sort alsoe cut the same in pieces, and draw therout the pieces
first the one, then the other.

The Child being dravven therout, we must dilligently consider, that we
do not break a sunder the navel, because it may serve for a conductor,
leader, which we must allvvayes feeling the same, and suffering it to glide
through our right hand must follovve until we be come to the matrice
wherewith the Child was covered in the foresayed vvobe: having found the
same, we must gently rovvnde about separate her where we find her to
befastened, then draw her forth with al the cogregrated blood theri, if
therbe any, least that there it might chance to putrifye: having thus
finished all this, the woman as then shall join, and shut her hippes
together again, and must then circumligate the belly, as is required, and
necessary.

In this forerehearsed danger, is oftentimes incident unto the woman a far
more lamentable and pitiful accident, to vvitt, a discendinge, and sinckinge do
vvnvvardes of the vvombe, which between the hippes sinks out, through the
which the woman, can not go. The manner to elevate again the sunk disceded
Matrice.
If so be therefore this chanced, we must gently, and easily by degrees
thrust in again the same, as we have said of the guts, or entralles being
sunk out, whereof we must cause the disseased and sick woman to keep her
bed some certain cotinuance of time, with her buttocks a little exalted,
and if so be the Matrice in her rising chanced again to sink out, we must
then again, thrust in the same.

And to praevent her that she do not again sink out of the body, we must
the thrust in the Matrice a Pessarium, like a rovvnde Apple, which must have a
hole in the middle therofe, as heer before amongst the instruments we may
see it defigured unto us where we shall alsoe find, the form, the figure,
the manner of using the same.

Upon what occasion, the external parts as Arms, and legs are, and must
be extirpated, or cut of and in what place it must be done. Chap. 4.
When, vvhye the external part, must be saved of.
THe externalle members of mas body, as are Arms, legs, are cut, or savved
of, when as they are sqvised, plettered, and broke, the Veins, Arteryes,
Synues, vvholy be lacerated, cut of: Or else when they concerning any
externalle occasion are hurt, or indammaged, whereby they sotimes vvholy come
to be mortified, that suddaynlye, or else sometimes alsoe by degrees, so that
sometimes there ensues such a Gangraena, or mortification, that not only the
flesh, all the other mollified parts, of the foresayed ioyncte, do mortify
corrupt, but alsoe the Bones themselves, so that there is no hope at all, of
any health, then only through the extirpatione of the same, fearing least
that the foresayed Gangraena, should farther infect pollute all the
circumiacent parts, vvherethroughe the patient might suddaynlye chance to dye.
Notvvithstandinge the Chyrurgiane may not in any forte aproch unto his
exstreame, last remedy, before he have tried all other remedies, to ease
appease this forsayed mortificatione, to save the ioyncte: because that such an
operatione, Extirpatione of any ioyncte, is effected with great danger.
can not be done, then through extreme danger, as oftentimes the patients
themselves, do dye under our hades, because of the great effluxione of blood,
or else some great fayntnes. Others immediately after the extirpatione fall into
a Phrensye, in extreme, intolerable payne, in Spasmo, in a could svveat,
vvheron praesentlye, follows death. Wherefore first of all we ought to
admonish the friends, kinsfolk of the patient, certify unto them that this
operatio is full of danger, and is as well lamentable for the Chyrurgiane as
for to patient: and that we ought not thereof the make any great matter of
worth, or estimation, saying there is no other hope, nor any other success to
be expected, that it seems more convenient, and necessary, to extirpate the
mortified ioyncte, and so to avoid fly death, which is more terrible, and
fearful, then the loss only of one ioyncte.

And before we begin this operatione, that we must extirpate, the foresayed
ioyncte, it is necessary that first of al we know, the place where it must be
done, Reason, how to make choice of the place, where we should extirpate the
ioyncte.
because of divers opinions which are had thereof: for some are of opinione,
that in the ioyncte we ought to do it, because in this place it would fall
easier for the Chyrurgiane to execute the same, is alsoe more tolerable and
easier for the patient, bebecause there it may be done with more festinatione,
with a simple inscision of a well rescindent and cuttinge knife, if only the
Chyrurgiane be agile, and expert, in finding of the ioyncte.

Now as touching those which suppose all vvoudes of the ioynctes, to be more
subjected, Reason for those which extirpate any mebre in the ioyncte.
unto deadly, and dolorous accidents, the those which hap to be three
fingers above, or under the same, yet for all that they are no less
davngerouse, because of the Tendones, and al other sunnuish parts, which as
then are alsoe cut of, which are round more thicker there then in the
ioynctes themselves: VVherfor we need not to fear, that there will follovve
more payne, or convulsione, although the extirpatione which is done, three,
or four fingers belovve, or above the same, because the Tedones, and the
synnues are as well in the on place as in the other aequallye cut of. And
which is more, if we extirpate a membre in the ioyncte, the marrovve, of the
pipe as the is not denudated, because of the Epiphysis, wherewith it is
covered, and contained: But contrarilye if we saw through the focille, or
pipe, the marrovve as the is denudated, for the praeservatione of which Nature
with great difficulty, must have a lunge time, to engedre a Callum thereunto,
and to cover it, because nature must separate that end of the savved bone: And
besides all this, there follows no superfluous effluxion of blood, as
Hippocrates in his boocke of Hemorrhoidibus, vvitnesseth unto us.

Although that all these foresayed reasons, Reason, for those which extirpate
the membre above or belovv the ioyncte.
are sufficient enough, to persuade the yonge Chyrurgian, to extirpate the
members in their ioynctes and Hippocrates, allsoe commands councelleth the
same, yet al PractisionerS of Chyrurgerye, do here in agree, unite their
opinions together, that we ought to extirpate the membre, Reason, for those,
which extirpate the membre above or belovv the ioyncte.
three, or four fingers under, or above the ioyncte, according to the
dispositioe reqviringe of the mo^tified ioynct: For first of all the opratione
is done with such festination so certain, because of the facility thereof, for
we may right well know that the whole infectede, spoylede part, most
commonly svvelleth, the finitimate parts also thereunto lying, that without
great danger difficulty, we can not know the ioyncte or the place thereof
in the which we ought very vvarily to enscide: Farther allso the ioynctes are
most comonlye very difficult, clean to cut them of, or extirpate them,
because of the bones, which are placed the one in the orher.

Touching therefore the certayntye thereof experience teaches us, that an
inconvenience may as well come of the one, as of the other: And such vvoundes,
are no less mortalle, then the vvoundes of the ioynctcs. Secondly, there much
sooner follows a cicatrice, because of the great qvantitye of flesh,
wherewith the bone on all sides is circumcinglede, covered which in that
place is not of such a crassitude, spongiousnes, as in the ioyncte. And
although the Cicatrice can not so soon be effectede, the patient
nevertheless needs not abstain from going, that without payne allso,
laying his knee in a stilte, wherewith he shall as then abide the time of his
complete sanatione: The which he in that sort should not be able to do,
before that the cicatrice we are vvholye curede, obduratede, if so be his
leg had bin extirpatede in the ioyncte, because the whole body resting
thereon, through the confricatione, or rubbinge together of the same might
chance to breacke open again. Experience of the Author.
As touching my self, I have allvvayes food that the cicatrice hath ever
bin very difficult, yea almost impossible to be curede effectede in the
ioynct, but imediatlye thereafter is openede again, how little soever the body
restede therone. Conclusione.
Wherefore I also am of the same mind, opinione, with all other common
Chyrurgianes that as well considering the festinatione, facility of the
operatione, as allso the brevitye of the generatione of the cicatrice, that we
ought to do our extirpation or savvinge of, of any membre, three, or four
fingers breadth above, or under the ioynct, to vvitt, of the Leg, if it be
under the knee: For allthoughe the Gangraena, or mortificatione of the Leg,
vveare only belovv in the foresayed Leg, the middle of the Leg as yet
illaef unhurt, sound, vvherfor it is all ways better to make the stump
short, then lunge, because vvithe his length, it is associated with a certain
deformitye, might cause great impediment unto the patient, with thrustinge
of the same, heer against this thing, there against somewhat else. Which in
the Arm is contrary because there it is better, that we suffer him ^o keep as
lunge a part thereof, as is possible to be by any means done,

It is right true, if so be the Gangraena, Exceptio.
or mortificatione of the Leg, do end in the ioynct or, close thereunto, no
higher then to the beginning of the hipp we must then allvvayes rather do
the extirpatione in the ioyncte, then above the same, especially in the hipp:
Because the accidents might allvvayes be vvorse, considering the great
Veins, Arteryes, Synnues, which by how much the more we pluck, draw them
vpvvardes, so much the greater we find them: Nota.
And then the cicatrized part, should be constraynede to rest on the
artificial, feigned leg, as if we extirpatede the same in the ioyncte: Be it
therefore what place you will choose, we must note, that allvvayes we rather
take away some of the sovvnde part allso, then leave any of the corruptede,
or mortifiede part behind. Because that such a part of mortificatione, might
allso corrupt, mortify, the finitimate sovvnde part, so that the patient,
should have suffered all the davvnger, payne in vain, for nought, to continue
his life, we should be constrained to make an other extirpatione.

How we ought to do the extirpatione, or sawinge of, of a ioyncte and how we
may stop the blood, after we shall have laid down the Patient. Chap. 5.
Having noted the place, where we intende to do the extirpatione, we must
situat the patient as it is reqvirede, not only considering the nature,
disposition qvallitye of the part, which we intende to extirpate, Situation
of the patient in the extirpation of a Ioyncte
but allso one the Chyrurgiane his commodity, that the patient sit not against
the day, ligt of the Chyrurgian, not to high, nor to lovve, nor on a place
where he might slip as it oftentimes hath chanced, the patient sitting to
far in the bed. Some are of mind that we ought to set the patient on a
stool because he may sit the faster, convenienter: Others effect this
operation, the patient sitting on the edge of a bed, fearing least he should
grovv faint, or syncopize, might the with more ease be got into his bed
restig place the extirpatione beingedone.. But my use is, to cause the patient
to ^itt in a reasonable lovve chair, because all beds are not of one hight,
nether are so ready, and fit for our purposes nether so well towards the
day, whereas we may set the chair vvheare we our selves list: farther the
patient is more surer in such a place, may alsoe better, with more convenience
be held, and better towards the Chyrurgians hand, as well to cut through
the flesh, as to saw of the bone and restraygne the blood: the servantes
allsoe shall have more better oportvnity to houlde the patient fast in more
safety.

How we may well convenientlye extirparte a Ioynct.
Therefore to effect and finish this operatione, the Chyrurgyne must stand
between the legs of the patient, and must cause a servant, or stader bye as
much as is possible with both his hands to strip up the skin the muscles
which are situated above the extirpatione, after he shall have caused the
patient to bend the ioyncte, that as well for the longatione of the skin,
as lengtheninge of the Veins, and Arteryes, which after the extirpation of
the Ioyncte, the ligature being taken away, will more easier as then
demonstrate them selves, be more easier taken houlde of vvithe the Crovvesblil,
and they tyen or cauterized: Then we must immediately one the place, where we
intend to make our extirpation, lay a strong ligatvre of strong linen, the
same being reasonable closely drawn together and that because of divers
occasions: First of all because the Ioynct may be praeseted the stedyer and
faster to the Operator, and because the flesh should the better bear, and
receave the inscione of the croocked, or curved knife: Secondly, because the
sensibilitye of the foresayed Ioynct, in the scissure, might partly be
therthrough benumbed, and somewhat mitigated: Thirdly, because after the
inscision, in sovvinge of the bone, the blood might be so lunge through the
foresayed ligature restraygned, kept back.

Farther more, by this means we keep the skinn muscles on high, which
after the operatio, the ligature being dissolved, made loose, sink again
dovvnvvardes, and cover the savved bone, by which means the Cicatrice the
sooner grovveth therover, and serves the foresayed bone thereafter, in steed
of a Cushone.

There may not be any flesh one the bone when we intede to saw it of.
All which being finished, we must then with a croocked knife, which is
very sharp, cut through the flesh close unto the ligature roude abovvte, unto
the bare bone, without leavig any thing betvvee the bones vncutt, if there be
two, scrapinge of with the back of the knife the membrane Periostium,
wherewith the bone is covered, because we do not chance to tear the same,
with the teeth of the saw, which would cause an intolerable payne unto
the patient, also in serratinge, or savvinge might be some hinderance: In like
sort also we must remove the flesh as much out of the way as is possible,
then with a well cuttinge saw, saw of the whole leg as close to the
flesh as may be, dilligently noting, that with the teeth of the saw we
do not in any sort touch the foresayed flesh.

The leg now being extirpated, The Ioynct being extirpated, we must the
make loose the ligature.
we must the dissolve make loose the ligamets, which vveare tied above the
wound, strip dovvnevvardes the skin, and the muscles, because the bone of
al sides may be well covred: which being done, if so be there be but little
blood issued therout, we must not then (especially where there is a
Gangraena,) so soon restraygne the same, but as yet let it a little more
bleed, that as lunge, as you suppose it may without any davnger to the
Patient be done, because that part there through might the better ease her
self, and be disburdened, and so much the less be subject unto any
inflamationes.

The blood having indifferentlye and reasonably issued therout according to
the strength of the Patient, we must as then stop, Instruction how we shall
koovv whether it must be stenched, or let bleed.
and restraygne it, which we must do through the imposition of the fingers
one the mouths, or apertios of the Veins, which we must ether bind or else
cauterise the one or the other according as the same shall be needful, and
requisite, it be ether through binding, or cauterizinge, as the ancient
Chyrurgians of former times have done, we have committed it to the memory, of
those of our times.

For as in example, Virtves of the actual Cauteryes.
if there be any member corrupted, and mortified, which must be extirpated,
after which extirpatione, the fluxion of blood, must be far more stopped,
through the applicatione of glovvinge cauteryes, on the appertio, or mouths
of the veins, the through the ligation, or binding of the same, because the
glovvinge cauteryes, make one the foresayed Orificia of the veins an Escara,
vvherthrough the foresayed Orificia of the veins are occluded and the blood
stenched, because it ca no more issue out, by which means it dravveth unto
it self, also consumes al the venoumouse evaporations, dampes, and brings
the to nought, which as yet through the foresayed veins, have bine retained
in the supersituated parts, although, it seems not that the foresayed part
is in any sort corrupted, or putrified, then only soacked through with some
certain venoumousenes, vvhertroughe sometimes that part hath bin prepared
as it vveare to some mortificatione, or Gangraenatione: that we supposing to
take houlde one the veins with the Crovvesbill, and so to bind them, do
most commonly chance to break between the Crovvesbill, or else how
gentlelye soever we knit the thread together, one that sort to tie them, are
through the tyinge of the thread notvvithastndinge cut a sunder:
vvherthroughe we are in the end constrained to use the actual Cauterye.

Galenus.
And not without occasion, Galenus testifies unto us, to be a thing very
expediente, necessary, to stench, and restraygne the blood through actualle
Cauteryes, which through any corruption, hath corroded through the veins,
because they, nether are able to suffer the Crovvesbill, thereby to be drawn
out, nether the tyinge, bindinge. It is also the most surest way, to cauterize
all that, which through the Gangraena is corrupted, or else, that we apply
thereon any Causticke medicamentes, as we are used to do one the originalle of
al corruptions.

Wherefore if so so be the Chyrurgian have any suspicione, of any
venoumousenes, which after the extirpation, might be dravven invvardes
towards the finitimate parts theraboute, it is as then the surest remedy,
that to the restraygninge, and stenchinge of the blood, he have in
praeparatione, and readiness, three, or fovr fervent, glovvinge cauteryes,
vyhich he must apply on the Orificia of the descided veins, How through
cauterisatione we should restraygne, steche blood.
without houlding, or depressing the same to harde thereon, because thus doing
there may be left behind a good Escara: And if it chanced that the blood
through the applicatione of one cautery vveare stenched, it is then
sufficiently cauterized, nether must we any more cauterize the same Vain,
prosecutinge of the same, on the other veins.

Instructio how to restraygne blood through ligature.
Contrarilye, we being constrained to extirpate any membre, being very much
plettered, and broken, which through no Gangraena,, or corruption is
putrified, it is as then most conveniet, to restraygne the blood, through
taking hold of the Veins, or Arteryes, with the Crovvesbill,
compraehendinge allsoe some part of flesh thervvith, which with a good
strong thread we must bind together, as allsoe the flesh, which with the
thread is tied, is an occasion, that the ligature must be the more certayner,
and surer.

And as Galen finds it good, to stench the blood, through actual
cauteryes, whereby is any corruption, or putrefactione, in like sort alsoe
he commends the ligature in the effluxione of blood, whereby is no
corruption, Accorde to agree, the right vvorshipfull Mr. Gourmelen, Mr. Pare.
or any venoumousnes. Which right well may be an agreemet betvvixt to great
personages of our time, where of the on is a Physicione, and the other a
Chyrurgiane, because of a certain dispute, which they had, concerning this
matter, of the means, which we ought to use, in the restraygninge of blood,
as they have agitated most inmicisiously this disputatione the one against the
other without the one, understanding the other.

The blood therefore through the foresayed means being stenched,
restraygned, we must as then strovve some restringet poulder one that part,
and apply therone divers dry plumaciolles, or flatt tents, and therone an
ordinary restringent, or defensive plaster, laying rovvnde about the stump,
a plaster of Refrigerans Galeni, because that the foresayed defensive, should
not chance to cleave too fast therone, and so bind the part, as it
requires, and then curing the same as a simple vvounde, allvvayes
dilligently considering that we do not take away the Escara, which
through the foresayed Cauteryes is made, nether the threedes allsoe where
with the Veins have bin tied, if so be at least there be any.

It happens allsoe sometimes, Of the dressinge after the blood is stopped.
that the Veins after that they have bin cut of do draw themselves
invvardes, so that with the Crovvesbill in no sort we can take houlde
therone: It might allsoe chance, that the tied Vain, might chance to untie,
vvherthrough the patient is charged with a new effluxion, of blood.

If so be any of these accidents chanced, and come unto your hands, and it
seemed best unto you, to Cauterize the Vain, then to bind her, or else rather
to bind, then to Cauterize her, and such a mischance, or accident happened
into your hands unexpected, and not being therone provided, without having
any Cauteryes in are adines, the right vvorshipfull Mr. Pare councelleth us
very fitlye to stench the blood. The which if in two or three or four Veins
it chanced, or Arteryes, at one time then must the servant, of one of the
circumstantes, lay the ends of his fingers, one each vain one, gentlelye
crushinge the same, one the Orificia of the Veins, because as Galen says the
Chyrurgiane may have time, to restraygne the blood: And then take a needle of
a fingers length, or longer, and of a reasonable crassitude, which is very
sharpe, and rescindent, as here before is defigured unto us, being threded
with a strong thread, wherewith the vain after this sort follovvinge must
be tied.

Having first of al considered, where the bleeding Vain is situated, How
we should do this ligature to stench the blood
you must the thrust your needle therthroughe, beginning on the skin a good
fingers breadth higher then the vvounde, one the side of the Vain, making the
same to come contradictorilye out of the vvoude, to vvitt one the side, alsoe
somewhat lower then the Orificium of the Vain, because the thread may be
thervnder, there to circumcingle the same, suffering the end of the thread to
hang one the skin, without extractinge, or vvholye dravvinge out of the
same: Then you must again, thrust the same needle inter nallye in the vvounde,
one the other side of the vain, because in so doing, the thread, which
with both his ends is come forth externallye on the skin may take houlde on
the foresayed vain, with some certain portione of flesh, so through both
the stitches of the needle, passages of the thread, may stifflye be bovvnde
together, through both the ends of the foresayede thread, laying between
the thredes a little compresse of leather, tvvice, or thrice dubbled, as thick
as a little finger, because there through the payne might be praeventede, which
through the foresayed stiff bindinge, might be caused, because the knott,
through the continuance of time should not cut through the skin.

A certain ligature.
When as this ligature is convenietlye done, she as then is very certain,
which allso may be done in all parts of the body, where there is any
fluxione of blood, as in great vvoundes of the Arms, of the Hippes, or of
the Throat. Here before amongst my Instruments of Chyrurgerie, you shall
find them defigurede unto you.

How we should extirpate, the superfluous, corruptede fingers, separate those
which are grown, conioynede together Chap. 6.
The hand is an instrument, of instruments.
THe hand, which is an instrument, of instruments, is dividede in five
fingers: And it sometimes allso chances, that besides the thumb, or the
little finger, there grovveth a sixte finger, which is all carnal, or fleshye,
or else composede of some small bones: Yet is nether the one nor the other
complete, whether ye consider ether their figure, or their magnitud, greatness,
as being against the course of nature, vvherthroughe they are an impediment to
the actiones of the hand. It may allso well chance, the one finger of the
hand to be pletterede, without being able to keep the same from
Gangraenatione. Besides this there commethe in the ends of the fingers,
sometimes a certain vlceratione, Curation of the Panaris, or Paronichia.
which is callede Panaris, or Paronichia: The which cause such vehement
payne, through the venoumouse matter, that therthroughe the bone corrupts,
rots, yea the inflammatione allso begins most commonly in the bone: The
which to remedy, before that the bone be corruptede, we must make an
inscision in the end of the finger according to the length thereof, beginning at
the extreameste end of the ioyncte, unto the bare bone, because the venoumouse
matter, which lies inclosede betvvene the bone, and the pellicle, which
covers the same, might have some or other issve. The inscisione beig done,
we must suffer it to bleed as lunge, till it of it self restraygneth
stops, the thrust the finger in good Aqvavitae, wherein we must before
dissolve a little Treackle: And if so be notvvithstandige all these remedies
the finger as yet corrupted farther, and must be extirpated, we may the very
aptly effect the same with our rescindent, or cutting pinsers, wherewith,
without great payne, we may with, How we may remove the superfluous
fingers.
one nipe clip it of. There are other, which lay the finger on a little
block of vvoode, as the with a razor hevv it of. On this manner also we may
extirpate the superfluouse finger wherein there is any bone.

And so far forth as if the fingers, vveare from the nativitye, and birth,
or through combustione, or else through any vlceratione, healed and joined
together, we must then with a razor, separate them the one from the other,
and according to the length there of cut them asunder, and then with an
exsiccating plaster, being separated cure the, and so skin them, by which
means every finger will separatlye heal. If so be that there came any
vlceration in the finger, after the which there follows a deformed
Cicatrice, vvherthroughe the finger, grovveth croocked: We must then try
thereon some mollifying remedies, to cause the finger thervvith to rectifye,
grow straight:

And if so be by no means it vvilbe so, as it sometimes chances, when
the foresayed Cicatrice is great, and inveterated, ether the sinnues, tendones
or skin have bin hurt, we must not therefore proceed with the same as a
thing which is incurable, for if so be we cut, ether the one or the other,
the finger thereafter should nether be able to bend, nor stretch out, yet is it
necessary that the bending, proceed before the stretchinge out, and the
stretching out, or rectifying of the same, before the recurvatione, so that he
should allvvayes be right, and very inconvenient, as being better that he be
reasonable croocked, then right, because of the inconvenience, which there
through we receave: For we supposing to shut, close the hand, and to
fasten on any thing, this finger as then should stand right out: But when it is
only the skin which makes the Cicatrice, through the which the finger is
recurved, we must then clean cut of the same for as it being harde,
callouse, can not be through the finger erected, and stretched forth. Curation
of a croocked finger.
Having therefore now rectified this finger, by this means, we as the make a
nve Cicatrice therone, must note that in the generation of the foresayed
Cicatrice, the finger do not chance to be again recurved, or shrincke up
again: A finger-case of lattinne, or of silver.
to the praevetig of the which, I know no better means, after he be cured,
that there one we vveare a finger case, of lattinne, or of silver, one the
plaster, one the combustion. This fingercase must be covered with Taffatye, or
with any other decent substance, conveniently, with a band, fastened above
on the hand, which fingercase shall do more commodity, help, the all the
splintes which we might apply thereon.

The thube or the finger being vvholely lamed.
There happens alsoe a dissease, clean contrary, unto all other disseases of
the fingers, especially in the thumb, having received therone a blovve on the
Tendones, whereby the same is erected, again the foresayed Tendones being
cut of, can in no sort be again elevated, nether stretched forth,
vvherthroughe he lies in the hand immovable, and can not be stirred. The
same chances alsoe in the hand, having received any vvounde in the hand
one the Tendones, or alsoe above the hand, where through the hand hangethe
falls dovvnevvardes, as is she vveare paraliticke, and of her self is not
able to be lifted up. As touchig therefore the thumb, the fingers: we must
ether have a thumbcase, or a finger case vvherthroughe they must be heaved up:
And for the hand, a glove, vvherthroughe the hand may be held up. Which in
the boocke of Mr. Pare, are described.

THE EIGHT TREATISE OF THE OPERATIone of Chyrurgerye, wherein is discoursede and
handelede of the Cauteryes, and of the Setonne Containing five Chapiters.
What a Cauterye is, the Species, and differences thereof. Chap. 1. Of the
invention use of the Cauteryes, in what disseases, and one what places we
may apply them. Chap. 2. Of the Potentialle Cauteryes, and how we should
make them. Chap. 3. On what manner we ought to apply the Potentialle
Cauteryes. Chap. 4. Of the Seton, how we ought to apply it. Chap. 5.
What a Cauterye is, of the Kinds, differences thereof. Chap. 1.
Having with my self resolved purposed, to write sovvhat, of the Cauteryes,
it is first expedient and necessary that we know, what a Cauterye is,
howe many kinds, and Species therbe thereof: what their use is, on what
bodies, on what disseases we ought to apply them, and the manner howe we
shall apply the same. The name of a Cauterye may be under stood in two
sorts.
Therefore to understand their nature, we must first know, what we by the
name Cauterium understand: For it may be understood one two sorts or
ways, Simplely, and not Simplelye: Symplely, considering the instrument, the
Causticke matter, which adureth in any part, as Galen, in his sixth of the
simples in his 27 Chap. describes: Not because of the sign which remains
in the Cauterized part, that is because of the little Vlceratione, which
remains, therein, when as the Escara is fallen therout: So that this vvorde
Cauterium, in properlye being understood, can no otherwise be understood,
then a little Vlceratione, in any external part of the body, which
through the art of the Chyrurgiane, is made therein, through some comburent,
adustive medicamentes, to give issve, passage to some certain matter, of some
dissease.

VVherfor the differeces, of these Cauteryes, The differences of the Cauteryes
not properlye taken.
or Vlcerationes, are as it vveare drawn, from their place, being, vvheron
they are applied, also from their efficient cause. The essence, being of
these Cauteryes, consists in their form, figure, vvherfor some there are
which be rovvnde, some contradictorye, others right, great, small, deep, or
not deed: All the which have but one only apertio, or sometimes also two, is
the called a transforatione, or Seton: And also of all other places, vvheron
they may be possiblelye applied, as on the Head, in the Neck, Arms, Legs,
finally in all parts of the body, vvherone they might be applied, when only
the agilitye, or action of the part can not there through be hindered, or
hurt: Of their efficiet cause, which is take out of the diversitye of the
matter, which is applied one any part of the body, or engendered in the
same. The matter which continually is applied on the body, actuallye
combureth, Actual Cauterye
or potentiallye, wherefore they are called actual, or potentialle Cauteryes:
That which in our body is engendered, can come through any sharpe, corrodent,
or biting humours, vvherthroughe the skin is corroded, bitten through,
exulcerated, of which vlceratione, may be effected made a Cautery, or
fontanelle, which may be called actual Cauterye.

Differences of the cauteryes simply taken.
Here of we may conjecture and suppose, that the Cauteryes, fontanelles,
vveare invented, following nature therein, there through to give passage, to
that which is contrary, opposite unto her, whereof she is perturbated,
molested, it be ether in quality, or in qvantitye, as heerafter we will
farther speak of. And as touchig the Cauteryes, which we call instruments,
their principalle, especial difference, is taken, of their substance, form,
figure, of their tarditye slovvnes, or festinatione, of adustion, of their
depth, shallovvnes, of the manner of their applicatione: touching their
matter, or substance, because they actually, in deed do combure, burn, or
potenciallye, they are therefore called actual, or potencialle Cauteryes.

The substance of the actual cauteryes
The form of those which actuallye burn is almost innumerable, which are
made hot, glovvinge. The antique ancient Chyrurgians, have commonly made
their Cauteryes of mettles, as of gould, of siver, of Iron, of copper.
Archigenes.
Archigenes hath cauterised the lachrimall fistles with liquefacted lead,
which through a little pipe he dropped therein. They vveare of opinion, that
the cauteryes of gould caused less payne, Substance of the cauteryes which the
ancient Chyrurgians used.
vveare far more easier to be suffered, that alsoe the Cauterized place,
should not avoid so much matter, and the adustio is not so dangerous,
because gould amongst all other mettles is the most temperate, wherefore it
burns not so violently, as Iron, because it is not so codensated of
substance: wherefore in like sort alsoe the Cauteryes which are made of
Copper, do not so closely burn, or cauterize, as those which are made of
Iron, because the copper, is not so solide of matter, wherefore we desiring
strogelye, violently to cauterize we must take such cauteryes, which are
made of the condesest, A kind of spongiouse matter full of dust grovvinge on
the moutaynes wherewith we use to stench blood.
most firmest matter, substance. Sometimes have also the aunciete professors as
Hippocrates,, recited, to have cauterized, with tents, which they dipped in
ebullient, seethige oil, or with dry incended puffs as we call them or
with the root Aristolochiae, being madefyed in seething oil, or with the
roots of Strutium, as Caelius Aurelianus, Dioscorides, and Attilus, which
have cauterized with incended Goats dung. Aetius hath cauterised the
corrupted gummes, Aurelianus, Dioscorides. Attilus. Aetius. Albucasis Guido.
with ebullient oil, which he applied thereon with vvolle being therein
madefyed. Albucasis in like sort, hath cauterized the hollovve, and concavouse
teeth with seethinge butter. Guido hath cauterised the bones, with
liquefacted Brimstone, to vvitt of the Caries. So that out of all these we
may sufficiently understand, that we may make as many sorts of cauteryes,
as there are substances, which may be incended.

The foresayed cauteryes, Differences of the cauteryes cocerninge their
figures.
especially those, which are made, composed of any mettle, are also
differinge in their figures the one from the other: For everye cauterye must be
proportioned, according to the dissease, and that vvheron we will apply the
same: so that some are like heads of great nails, triangled, others rovvnde,
like unto a butto, others cutting, some not dislike unto a half moon, and
others circlevvyse: As we may behoulde, and see, the circles of Albucasis,
other in form of a rapersblade, as Celsus discribeth, there with to cauterize
the fissures in the lips.

They are alsoe differinge the one from the other in their depth, or
shallovvnes: for we need sometimes to cauterize the skinn only, as Hippocrates
vvilleth us to do, in the pains of the shoulders: We must alsoe sometimes
cauterize the flesh, as in the Sciatica: Cauteryes to cauterize deeply.
Some times also to the bone, and crushe the same reasonable close thereunto as
we must do, when as we must cauterise above on the head, we must
sometimes cauterize, into the concavity of the body, as when we must
cauterise into the breast, to let there out any matter, sometimes we do but only
scorche or singe above one the place.

And because that amongst the cauteryes, Differences of the cauteryes taken
out of their action.
(considering the matter whereof they are composed) there be some which are
quicly heated) and some which continue longer hot, then others even so there
are some, which considering their poderousnes, or levitye, tarditye, or
festinatio, ether in violence, or pain of their operation, are differinge the
one from the other.

The Cauteryes are alsoe differing, Difference in number.
in their number, for at sometimes we apply but one, sometimes two, three,
four, yea alsoe fifteen at one time, as Aetius comandeth us, to the curing of
the vlcerations of the Breast.

They differ alsoe in their manner of applicatione, for some are applied
alone, Difference taken out of the manner of the application
others in little pipes, which at one end are aperte, and open, or have any
appertios, or vvindovves in the sides thereof.

Of the Invention, and of the use of the Cauteryes, and to what disseases, and
one what places, they must be applied. Chap. 2.
IT may rightvvell be said that nature hath showed unto us, The invetio of
the cauteryes is dimonstrated unto us through nature.
the invention, of the Cauteryes, fotanelles: For as sotimes the parts being
overlade with to many humours ether their tartnes, or venoumousnes are
troubled, they in the end, discharge, unburden themselves, in some part of
the body, of that which molests the, as in one of the Arms, or legs,
causinge there to there solace, and ease, some excoriatione, or apertione. So
that the Physitiones, Chyrurgianes, to help heerin the nature, have there
through fovvnde out the use of the Cauteryes, Fontanelles, effectinge by their
art, that which nature oftentimes, through her own commotione thereunto
endevoreth to do, wherefore we alsoe use the Cauteryes, as oftentimes as we
desire to make any derivatione, revulsione, interceptione, or evacuatione, of
any matter, the which ether considering her qvantitye, or qvallitye, or
with both of them together, might in any sort be occasion of any harm. We
alsoe use them, not only when as we desire, to transpire, and cause to
evaporate any venoumouse vapours, but also, when we would cause any
concurrent matter to exsiccate, consume, endevoringe to draw the same from
vvithine externally, as well through the extraction, which it heer makes,
as through the vlceratio, which thereafter remains, as through certain
little open fistles, or small runinge issues wherewith we draw the matter
from invvardes, outvvardes, there to evacuate the same, and cause to digress
from the one place to the other.

Cauteryes are profitable says Galen, Hippocrates, in all corrosive,
ambulative vlcerationes, against fluxions of the eyes, in the tumor Aegylops,
Vtilitye of the cauteryes
when as the fore arm, is sunk and descend under the Armepittes: In the
Sciatica, payne of the hippes, for they retracte draw back the humours,
which trouble in that place hinder those parts: In the Gangraena: in the
extirpatione of the mebres, to stench, stop the blood, so forth in all
fluxions of blood, in all other internal disseases what soever, as in the
Consumptione, in vlcerations of the Breast, Albucasis
and in the Dropsye. Abucasis avoucheth the Cauteryes generally, to be
profitable, in all disseases, and sicknesses, which take their original, of
any matter, or without matter. They are also profitable, and commodiouse, for
all bitinges, stinginges of any venoumouse creature, in the Carbuncles and
Venus botches, because through their heat, they consume the venoumousnes of the
humours, annihilate them and out of the depth draw the vpvvardes. They are
alsoe very profitable, in al critic Apostemations, which are could,
vvaterye, and which are very slow in maturatione because that through
their caliditye, they opitulate, and help to ripen, the could, tough humours,
which are in that part. They are alsoe good, against all corruption of
bones, because they exsiccate the venoumousnes of the same, and consume it, and
cause the corrupted bones to separate from the sovvnde.

We may apply the on all parts of our body, and especially, being
needfulle, to make any apertione, to give issue and passage, to any matter, or
vapoure, which therine is assembled.

There are some which have applied the cauteryes one the upper part of the
head, In what parts the Cauterye must be applied.
about the sagittal suture, where she joins her self with the Coronalle
suture: Which with great and good success I have see to be done of Mr. Pare,
Mr. Pare.
against the Hemicraniam, or pain of the one side of the head, and against
many other sorts of inveterated pains of the head, because that through
such an apeatione, many and divers humours, vapours, which are congregated in
the head, by this means are exhalated: allso against the falling sickness, to
give transpiratione to some venoumouse humour, vapoure, which are often times
the occasion of this dissease: Against shortness of breath, and difficulty of
breathing, which have take their original, of the superfluitye of humours,
and descend out of the head dovvnevvardes to the breast there hinder molest the
parts of the breast, and bring with them the shortness of breath, and
oftentimes allsoe are cause of vlceratios in the breast through corruption, and
putrifyinge of some pituitous humours: also in the Ophthalmia, or inflammation
of the eyes, which is there through caused, through any fluxio, which is set
through the veins, which lye scattered in the Pericranio, so run to the
external tunickle of the Eye: Against reddnes of the face: Against payne in
the teeth, of the Eyes, in the Sqvinancie, in many other disseases, which
come in the mouth, and in the throat.

We Cauterize alsoe the Eyeliddes, which are relaxated, in like sort also
the Cilia which stick in the Eyes, and allso in those which in number are to
many: Alsoe in the Arteryes of the temples of the Head: The tumefactio
Aegylops, the Polipus, and Ozena, the cleaved lips, the Ranula, the Teeth,
and the palate of the mouth when it hangs to loge, also the Almodes: The
Thorax, or Breast, on divers places, sometimes shallovvly, sotimes to the
cocavity of the fores. yed Breast: the inferior part of the Belly: the Scrotum,
or genitalles, especially the hipp against the Sciatica: the bone, under the
knees, on the insyde of the leg.

Some there are which set five cauteryes one the head of those which we
suppose to be infected with the lazarye. Cauteryes for such as are troubled
with the lazary
Whereof we must set the first cautery, one the Coniunctio, of the sagitalle
suture with the Coronalle: The second above the forheade, vvheare the hair
cease: The third in the Neck: The other two the Ossa Petrosa above the
ears, somvvhate aftervvarde, toward the end of the Lamdoidalle Suture, to
avoid the end of the temporalle muscle: to vvitt one, one the right side; an
other, on the left side: All which Cauteryes are applied, to separate those
humours, which cause the nose to exulcerate, and the internalle part of the
mouth, in those which have the lazarye, and which externallye have their
face corroded, deformed, fearful to behoulde. These Cauteryes are applied one
some, because we should not see that they have bin cauteriyed, only
behind in the neck, and one both the Arms.

Of the Potentialle Cauteryes, how we ought to make them. Chap. 3.
The potetiall Cauterye, and the matter thereof
THe potetiall Cauteryes are those, which through their intolerable, extreme
heate, being with their forces set to work together with the benefits of
our natural caliditye, burn as it vveare a fire in that part, vvherone they
are applied, leavinge behind them an Escara, or crust: Of the which the
matter of the Corrosive is in great number, and hot, unto the fourth degree:
Amongst the which there are some, which are extreme hot, a little gentler,
according as their operatione is tardive. Amongst them are numbered, the
Cantharides, the Tartre, the common Vitrioll, or the calcined, the vnslissed
limbs, the Auripigment, the Arsenicvm, the sublimate, the Aqvafortis, the Oil
of Vitriolle with more others) the which we novvadayes, do seldom use, in
such sort as they are, with out praeparinge, or mixinge of them, to make any
Fontanelles, because that experience, hath taught us some, which are far
more convenient, less dangerous.

The use of the actual Cauterye.
The actual Cauterye, is much convenieter* then the Potential, whether it be
we consider on the nature substance, on the healthfullnes festinatione, and
certayntye, in operatione: for the fire, is a simple element, having no other
forces then by the heate thereof, exsiccation, without havige associated unto
it any venoumousnes, wherefore the operatione thereof is festivous, certain,
healthful, piercing deeper therine when we please, without causing any
accidents in the circumiacent parts, although, that thervvith we chance to
touch them, that because of the subtilenes thereof, and considering the virtues
of his substance. It is an enemy unto all corruption, vvherfor, it freethe
alsoe from all covruptione, putrefactione, yea it consumes all venoumouse
matter, qvallityes, which in that part might lye occulted, and hidden,
consumes also all superfluouse humidityes, and corrects alsoe all
intemperate could, and moisture.

Where on the contrary, the matter, The use of the potential Cauterye the
matter, virtues thereof, and vvherone we ought to consider.
whereof the Potential cauteryes are made, are oftentimes venoumouse: And how
soever they be praepared, yet there operatione, action, is uncertain,
retardate, and slow, and sometimes alsoe daugerouse, without simply
knovvinge the vittues therofe, howe to limit his operatione: Because sometimes
it spreads it self broader, then our meaning is it should, and causes
more detriment, and harm in corrosione, then vvillinglye we would, it
should, because it doth not only combure burn the place vvhereone it is
applied: But being united, with our naturalle caliditye, it extends, and
pierces alsoe deeper in the flesh then is necessary it shovlde,
vvherthroughe that part being by little, and little calefyed, and vvarmed, it
imprints not only one that place his venoumouse nature, but extends it
self farther, through the circumiacent veins, Arteryes, Synnues, in the
vvorthye parts, spoiling, oftentimes burning, the good, well disposed
complexion of that part, out of the which commonly follovve very bad
accidents, and vlcerations, which thereafter very difficultlye vvilbe cured,
yea also some times a Gangraena.

Notvvithstandinge although the Chyrurgians novveadayes, are bold enough in
the application of actual Cauteryes, novvithstandinge most commolye they use
the potentialle considering the fear, affrightednes, which the Patients
conceave therofe, so that the actual Cauteryes are almost therthroughe
relapsede into oblivione: It is right true, Velvet Cauteryes.
that the Potential Cauteryes which now adays we use are indeed of
velvet, very excellent, where of I never as yet knew any bad accident to
follovve, through the lunge use whereof, we have learned the certayntye howe
to make them.

We must note, that in the Potential Cauteryes, or Ruptoryes, we add
nothing, which hath any venoumouse nature or qvallitye: Because they,
considering their virtues, are through our natural calliditye compelled to do
their operation, which by little, little suscitateth, the redormitinge,
soporiferouse forces thereof, so that it is not possible, but that of
necessity, this venoumouse nature, must imprint some parcel of her
venoumousnes in that part, if so be at the least there be any venoumousnes
mixed thervvith: wherefore most commonly one this sort we praepare it, that
immediately it might show forth his operatione.

We make now adays Cauteryes in form of Trociskes, of divers kides of
Ashes, Saultes, The matter of the potential Cauteries which now adays are
in use.
limes. The ashes are made of Oacke wood, of Figgetreevvoode, of VineBranches,
of Beanestravve, of Cabbage stalks, and of Titimallo: The saultes are Alcali,
Salpeter, Ammoniac, Fault of glass, Vitrioll, Tartare, or Pottashes, whereof
we, ether of any parts of the same make lye, out of the which we extract
a Corrosive fault, which may be made strong, debile, or extreme strong, and
acute, according with all that which comes in the foresayed lye.

Mr. Pare.
Amongst all Cauteryes which are made that is one of the best, which Mr. Pare,
calls the Cauterye of Velvet, when it is only sodden, made, as it reqvireth
to be done: notvvithstandinge it seemed convenient unto me, here to describe
certain other Cauteryes, whereof I my self have seen divers good operations.
Receipt, of the Velvet Cauterye
Take fault of glass, Potashes, vnflist lime, of each a povvnde, ashes which
are burned of the inveterate sides of a vvynepipe, two povvnde: Put all these
together in a great earthen pot, infuse thereon 18, or 20, povvnd of clear
water, and let it so stand soackinge 8. or 10 days, or as lunge, till one
your tunge you feel, the lye to be very sharpe, and tart, or until that
there may drive an egg thereon, with a stick daily stirring of the same, and
then we must let it to clarify, sink, whereof you must defuse the
uppermost thereof, and ether straygne it through a thick close clout, or else
through a Felt, without stirring of the bottom or foeces thereof, of which
aeqvall part, you must make Trociskes, as heer after we will demonstrate.

An other Cauterye, of the deceased Monsr. Cheval, Chyrurgiane.
Of Monsr Cheval.
Take fault of glass half a povvnd, Sal gemmae six ovvnces, Sublimate which
is smally perfricated, half an ovvnce, Ashes of Vinebranches half a povvnde,
10 povvnde of common water, let all this stand and soacke, as is above said,
and thereof make trociskes, adding in the end thereunto two dragmes of Opiu,
which is liqvefacted in Aqvavitae.

An other of Monsr. Rasse Desneux.
An other of Rasse desneux.
Take two povvnde of potashes, Saul^ ^f glass and Sal alcali, of each half a
povvnd^ (...) povvnde of common water, hereof make a Lixivye, as is above
rehearsed, and alsoe make thereof Trociskes,

An other of Mr. Iaqves de Vile neufve, a great practisioner at Mompeliers, as
I have in the same cittye seen him make.
An other of Iaqves de Villeneufve.
Take Sopemakers lye two pound, Vitriol three ovvnces, Sublimate one ovvnce,
make hereof Trociskes adding in the end thereunto two dragmes of Opium.

An other of Monsr. de Iovine.
We may also make good Lixivye, only of Oacke ashes, or of Ashes of
Vinebranches, when as the same is well sod, with potashes, and of
Beanestravve, adding thereunto a little vnslissed lime, whereof we may make
very excellent good Cauteryes.

An other which qvicklye can be made.
We may in one day make very good Cauteries taking thereto a povvnde of
vnslissed lime, half a povvnde of Potashes, An other which with all
expedition can be made.
Sal alcali pulverizated very small, four ovvnces, commone ashes of vvoode
two povvnde, infuse heer in 15 povvnde of common water, let it stand soacke
three or four hovvres, then sees it a little, if you take it to be
convenient, and then let it stand purifye, or sink, and then let is straygne
through a Felt, hereof you may make good Cauteryes.

Allthoughe that we have all these foresayed things in a readiness, An
observatione in seethinge of the saulte to the Cauterye.
thereof to make a lye or lixivye, unless that you ebulliate your fault, very
short, dry, it will as then have no great forces, will qvicklye be
liqvefacted, again dissolved. Therefore to sees a right your lye you shall
infuse it in a Basin, let her there seethe, and ebulliat, or evaporate, till
such time as she be very thick, like unto honey, mix, stir it well
together, with an iron Spatula, and then the foresayed fault, will sometimes
present divers colours, as blew, by little little, will grovv thicker, yet
not vvithstandinge, we must yet make greater fire thervnder, Liqvefactinge
fire
with violent flames, as if it wear a liqvefactige fire, because the
foresayed fault might be melted and liqvefacted, as Butter, changed into
water, of the which you must take a little on your Spatula, lay it on a
stone, if so be it immediately vvex harde, it is the a sign that it is
sufficiently sodden: For if so be as then you keep it longer one the fire it
will as then burn, again be changed into ashes, as being needful that
there be some humiditye thereby to keep it in his vvonted thickness: which
being done, you must then remove your Basin from the fire, with the Spatula,
take out the fault, or your Cauterye therout, whilst as yet it be hot, least
that it cleave therone to harde, whereof yon must then make great or little
Trociskes, which immediately you must put, into divers little glasses violles,
least that through the air they chance to be altered, and changed, and
stop the same very close, How we must praeserve the cauteryes
use the vvhensoever it shall please you.

And to praevent, that the Escara, of the cauteryes, or ruptoryes, be not to
harde, a certain friend of mine for certayntye imparted unto me, that in the
end of the ebullitione of your lixivye, when she is about the thickness of
honey, we infuse thereunto a little Aquavitae, or spanish vvyne, or else any
other strong vvyne, as Malmasye. And to make them so, that they should not
cause any great payne, we must as the add unto it a little Opium, which is
liqvefacted in Aquavitae, but I never tried it.

The manner howe we ought to apply these Cauteryes. Chap. 4.
Now therefore condecentlye to apply all cauteryes as well actual, VVheron
we ought to consider in the application of the Cauteryes.
as Potential, without expectinge therein any reproach, we must first of all
consider, one those, which are able to tolerate them: In what places they may
be best set, and applied: one what manner we may apply them: for commonly,
the vvithered, lean personnes, can not tolerate them, unless it vveare one the
head, because their bodies, are nothing else then Membranes, Veins, Synnues,
vvherthrough sotimes great pain might be caused, or any vayn, or Artery might
chance to be through corroded, one al which things we must note, when as
we must apply any Cauteryes: we must also consider, one the nature of the
Patient: Divers considerations.
for a strong gross body as a Labourers, or country clown, may far more
easier tolerate, suffer a Cauterye, then a tender delicate body, or of a
woman: nether can any obdurate part, as is the skin of the head, so
easily be corroded through, as any other soft or tender part, wherefore we
must houlde the Cauterye longer one the one place, then one the other. A little
actual Cautery, or a little parcel of a potetiall Cautery, will work as
forciblye, one a tender, soft body, as a great cauterye would do, one a
strong gross, and obdurate body.

If so be, it be a replete, corpulet body, or an vnhealthsame body, we must
then first of al Phlebotomize, or purge the same, because in the cauterized
parts there chance not to come, any concursione of humours. When we desire to
apply any Cauteryes, or make any Fontanelles, we must consider that we
apply them not one any synnuishe part, nether on the ends, or beginninges, of
any muscles, nether any great Vain, Arterye, or Synnue.

Places vvheron we apply the Cauteryes.
We apply them most commonly on the Head, one the Arms, and one the legs,
betvvixte all corners of the head, for the curing of divers disseases, which
here before we have recited, the ancient Chyrurgias have made their choice
of that place, where the Sagittalle suture, joins and unites her self
with the Coronalle, which place is like unto a threfould way of the head:
the which place because we should not miss of the same, is showed unto us,
of Albucasis: To vvitt, that we cause the Patient, to put forth the one of his
hands, How we shall find in the head the place vvheron we must apply the
Cauterye.
and lay the end thereof, (which is the vvriste, or bedinge of the hand) one
the original, beginning of his Nose, between both his Eyes, and the stretch
forth his middlemost, or longest finger, towards the crovvne, or superior
part of his head, one that place where as the foresayed finger shall have
his endig, there we must apply the Cautery, because that there is the place
where the sagitall suture unites her self with the Coronall suture: if so
be through the applicatio of this cauterye, we desire to do any vtilitye,
profit, we must the suffer the same to penetrate unto the bone: for by this
means the bone being denudated, it will exfoliate, peel, through the which,
the apertione continues the longer open.

Wherefore, divers, after they have applied the poteciall cautery, the next day
follovvinge have cut of the Escara, do apply thereon an actual cautery,
without any danger, as oftentimes I have seen to be done of Mr. Pare.

We may apply alsoe cauteryes, of corrosives, in the posterior parts of the
Head, in the end of the suture lambdoide, behind under the Ear, therthroughe
to avoid the muscle Crotaphite: To the surer finding of the which place
therefore, we must cause the patient to open, shut his mouth, and so to feel
the motion of the said muscle. Monsr. Martel chosen, ordinary Chyrurgian to
the king, which was an expert man, he applied cauteryes behind the Ears,
in the cocavity which is situated behind the little flap of the Ear,
called Fibra, Cauterye in the Fibra.
and that against all inveterate disseases of the Eyes, whereof he certified
me, to have allvvayes had ominouse and happy success, we allsoe sometimes
apply the Cauteryes in the Neck, in the hollovvnes, or concavousnes thereof,
but we must consider that they do not penetrate to deep least that we
chance to adust, or corrode, the eight small musckles, of the Head, which
are in this place situated, which might cause dangerous accidents, as I
oftentimes have known to chance.

The most commonest now in use, Means how fittlye to apply the Cauterye on
the Arm.
is to apply the Cauteryes, one the arms, where most curiously, with great
care we must make electione of the place: the most fittest place is in the
midst of the arm, towards the inner side thereof, right betvvee the
brachialle musckle, the musckle Biceps close to the side of the head vain.
And convenientlye to make choice of this place, we must lay the first finger
one that place, stiffelye crushinge the same, with the other hand, fouled
shut the elbovve, again strech him out, allso lift up the Arm, because
through this motione of the Arm we might perceave, whether there be no
synnue or Tendone situated thervnder, to vvitt under your finger, whether you
find in that place no concavity, or interstitiu of muscles, which is very
fit, for a Peas or little pellet to be therine, to keep open, apert the
foresayed Cauterye: having now with your finger fovvnde out the most fittest
place we must there apply the Cauterye. Means how to apply the cauteryes
convenientlye on the leg.
And touching the same which we desire to apply one the legs, the most
covenietest place there unto is two, or three fingers breadth belovve the knees,
where we are used to tie our garters, whether it be internallye, or
externallye one the leg: But those that are much used to ride on horseback,
also to cause better abscessione of humours, vvherthrough the Sciatica is
caused, for the it is better to apply them in the external parts of the
legs, in like sort alsoe for vvoemen.

Admonitione in the application of the actual Cauteryes.
Having therefore well, dilligently considered on the fittest places, and
those which are also the surest, you must the first race away the hair, if
at the least there be any. Which being finished, we must then situate the
Patient on a convenient place, being held of some other person, if so be it
be needful, the you shall take your Cautery, which must be proportioned,
fashoned according alsoe unto that part which you intende to cauterise, and
must be glovvinge, red hot, or at the least as hot as is required, because
your operatione may at one time be finished, if it by any means be possible,
which according as shall be required, you must imprint the same deep, or
shallovve in that part, considering, taking heed, that in no sort you
chance to hurt the circumiacent, or finitimate part thereunto, to the
praeventing whereof, there are invented, found out divers defensions for the
foresayed Cautery, as certain pipes, little cases being composed, and made of
Iron, least that we should chance to combure, the finitimate, approximate
parts, whether it vveare through the fault of the patient, or else through
temerousnes, timorousnes of the Chyrurgian, as in other places we more at
large have spoke of, alsoe thereby have placed the discriptione of the foresayed
Cauteryes.

For the reiterated Cauteryes.
Being therefore necessary, oftentimes to reiterate the Cauterye, as in any
great Gangraena, or in any Carry of legs, we must then cover, the
approximate places thereunto where we intend to Cauterize, with Compresses,
being madefyed in Plantine-vvater, or any other humiditye, yea also vestite
the edges of the vlcerationes, with plasters of Infrigidans Galeni, or else
with some linen clouts, being madefyed, and dipped in any distilled
Aquosityes, or vvaters.

Now being sufficiently Cauterized, we must then by all means indevoure to
qualify ease the payne, and dolor thereof, to cause the Escara to separate:
To ease the pain, and Separate the Escara.
which must be effected through any warm, and moist remedies, which is
aequallye proportioned with our humiditye, calidity, because through the
humiditye, or moyster thereof it may soacke through the Escara, and also the
finitimate parts thereof, which are obdurated, dry, because through the
caliditye thereof, it might suscitate, and draw unto him, the naturalle
caliditye, out of the internal parts of the body into the external parts of
the same, by this means expel that fro him which is mortified combured.
Amongst all remedies there is none better, the that which is made of Oil of
Eggs, of insulsed, and fresh Butter, of Venetiane Terebebentine, addig in the
end thereunto a little poulder of Ireas, Aristolochiae, and a little Beanemeale,
vvherthroughe alsoe all the purulente matter, which hangs therone as lime,
and an Escara is purifyed. Some use a Digestive made of yolckes of Eggs, of
oil of Roses, of Terebitine: But that is not so necessary, as the formest,
because it doth not so califye, coagulating as the yolcke of an Egg is
vvonted to do, and alsoe immediately vvaxeth dry, and exsiccated.

The potential Cauterye, How we must apply the potential Cauterye
which makes an Escara, or scabbe, being as it vveare a Vicarius, of the
actvall, is in this manner follovvinge applied. We must first of all make a
plaster, of Diacalcitheos, or some such like, as great as a large piece of
tvvelve pence, in the midst where of we must cut a little hole, as great as
the nail of ones little finger, or a little greater, according to the bigness
as we desire to have the apertione: and if you desire to have the apertion
somewhat lunge you must then alsoe make the hole in the plaster somewhat lunge,
then lay the same on that place which we desire to open: And in the hole of
the foresayed plaster, vvherthroughe we perceave the skinn denudated, lay your
potenciall Cauterye, or Corrosive, whether it be great, or small according
as you desire to make the apertion great, or little deep, or shallovv: Which
being done, we must lay thero, a small dubbled clovte, which must be sovvhat
greater the the Cautery, The cauterye makes a far greater Escara then the
hole of the Plaster.
thervvith to cover the same, and thereon as yet an other plaster, which must
be a little broader then the first, and one this plaster an other compress,
which must be of two fingers breadthe and again thereon an other which must
be yet greather, and then tyinge the same with a ligature, acordig as the
part shall the be requiring.

The Cauterye therefore having done his operatio, which most commonly in the
space of two hovvres is finished, if so be the said cauterye be strong,
violent enough, we must as then take it of: and presently to cause the Escara
to separate, we must make a crossevvise in scisione therein: Other suffer her,
of her self to separate, without inscisioue: Some inscide her rovvnde, and
then lift her up, so cut her loose from under. But we desiring through the
application of a Cauterye, to make an apertio, for the evacuating of any
matter, we must not only the inscide the foresayed Escara, but also pearce
somewhat deeper therein, until such time as we have sovvnded the matter, to
give her passage.

Divers means to keep, open a Fontanel, which through a potential cauterye
is made.
If so be the Cauterye be applied to make a fotanelle, we must then cause the
Escara through the said remedves to separate, and keep open the hole, or the
foresayed vlceratio, as great as the rotunditye of a bullet: to the
effectuatinge of which, some use a great Peas, which through the great
humiditye wherewith she is soacked svvelleth as thick as big again, as she
was before, by the which means we may keep open the apertione, as lunge as
pleases us: others make little pellets of elder pith, of Rhabarber, of
Agarico, of the black neesinge root, of a Gallenut, of Getian, some of
goulde, or of sylver being hollovve, concavoyse, but the most convenient,
fittest which I have experimeted, are made of vvhyte vvaxe, amongst the which
is mixed, verdegriece, Cantharides, hermodactilles, a little auripigment,
adding thereunto a little pirosin. This kind of little Balls, vveare invented
of Monsr. Hubert, Chyrurgiane to the king, one of the most expert Chyrurgians
of our times.

What cotinuance we may keep open the vlceration.
Touching the time, of keeping open these Fotanelles: Celsus teaches us, in
his fourth boocke and 22. Chap. that it is oftentimes necessary for the
Chyrurgiane, to exvlcerate the parts of the body, with a glovvinge Cautery
being, as it vveare, an aeternall prohibitione, that we should not suffer
such vlceratios so quickly to close again, as of themselves they would, but
that we must sustain and keep them apert open, till such time as the dissease,
which through this apertione we intend to cure, be vvholye finished, and
cured.

Of the transforation, or seton, and of the manner how we ought to apply it.
Chap. 5.
Seto Properlye taken.
THe transforation, or the Seton, may in two sorts be understood, properlye,
and improperly, we simplely understand it, considering the thread which we
draw clean through the skin, with the needle, which thread in aunciet
time, was made of, course hair, as of horsehayre, or any other such like,
which of the latinistes is called Seta: But we now a days make our thread
of silcke, of Cotton, Seto improperlee understood.
or of Course yarn. Improperly, we understand by the Seto, a logestretchinge
vlceration, in any external part of the body, which is clean thrust
through the double skin, and that through agilitye, and dexteritye with a
glovvinge Cauterye.

We apply especially the transforatio, In what parts we ought to apply the
Seton.
or the Seton, in three parts of the body: to vvitt behind clean through the
Neck, although some to follow, the direct concurrence of the fibers, apply
the same in the length therofe: In the Navle, and in the Scrotum, when as it
is full of matter, ventosity, as it oftentimes is vvonte to happen in the
Dropsye.

This transforatione, is used, ether for any regressione of humours, or for an
evacuation, The use of the Seton.
or expulsione of the same: For we applying the foresayed transforatione
behind in the neck, it then revelleth, and draw the back again those
humours which concur towards the Eyes with those allsoe which run
toward the Mouth, and the Breast, and retains allsoe those humours, which
descend, and sink, behind in the Backebone, and in the Hippes: He being
dravven through the Navle, or Scrotum, he then dravveth there through all the
Aquositye, and ventositye which is therein contained.

It is now adays also applied on two manner of ways, namelye with
Pinsers, Two sorts of application of the transforation.
and with an actual Cauterye, or through the Needle only. The transforation
which only is laid in the Neck, must be applied betvvixt the second the
third Vertebram. Which conveniently to effect, we must cause the patient to
sit on a little stool, and least that the transforatione should copraehend
more one the one side then one the other we must denotate a line with Inck in
the middle of his neck, or else on the same part where we will apply the
tranforatio, How we ought to apply the transforation behind through the
neck.
causing the patient to hold his head on high, and leene backevvardes over,
because thereby, the skin might be the looser, and stretch the farther
commanding then one of the servantes, or standers by, that with one of his
hands he take hold one the skinn, close by the hair, as deep as he ca, ether
according the length, or thvvarte over the skinn, following the line which
theri is made, liftig the same in the middle on high, which the the
Chyrurgian, with his left hand shall take hold one in the midst of the
same, and elevate it, because that he with his right hand, with a round,
well cuttinge threded needle which must be threded with a thick thread, may
thrust clean through the same, the foresayed thread being in this sort
thrust therthroughe we must cut him of close to the Needle. The transforation
with an actual Cautery.
But if rather you desired, to effect the foresayed transforatione with a
hot Iron, the skin being lift up on both sides, through some servant, or
through the Chyrurgiane with his Pinsers, which he must houlde fast in his
left hand, dilligently considering least he take houlde thervvith of any
Muscles of the Neck, which are situated under the foresayed skin, as to
that purpose, intent he must cause the Patient to bend his neck, hold his
head up, or on high, right by this means to know, whether any of the
foresayed, Muscles are compraehended of the Pinsers or not. Which being done
the Chyrurgyane must nipe, shut close together the foresayed pinsers thereon
applied, thereby to benumme dissipate the senses feelig which through the hot
iron might be caused, as the with a triagled glovving cautery thrust through
the hole of the pinsers so through the elevated skin alsoe: The which
foresayed skin being in this sort perforated, immediately again being
dravven therout, without suffering the skinn to fall, we must thrust through
the perforatione, a needle with a thick double thread which thread must be
soacked in the remedies above rehearsed for the Cauteryes, or else at the least
being made fat in some Digestive, then the said thread being dissected, and
cut of, we must suffer him to remain therein, as is above rehearsed, apply
therone a Plaster of Refrigerans Galeni, for the first or second day, and
then a Plaster of Betonica.

This foresayed thread, or Seton, we must suffer it to continue therein, as
lunge as it shall be needful, as we have said of the Fontanelles.

As concerning the transforation, A transforation applied in the Scrotum.
which in the navle, or in the Scrotu may be applied it will be sufficient
when we take the Scrotum, the extremest end of the navle, so perforate the
skinn being doubled, with a reasonable great or gross needle, which must be
threded with a woollen, cotton, or silcke thread, and applying therone, the
self same remedies, of the which we have in the transforatione of the neck
rehearsed.

THE NINTH TREATISE OF THE OPERATIone of Chyrurgerye, wherein is discoursede
and handelede of the Ligatures, or vvindinges, circumvolutions, of the
convenience or the situation of the parts, Containing six Chapiters.
What the Ligamentes, or Circumvolutiones are, their matter, quality, form,
and quantitye. Chapit. 1. The Kinds, and differences of the Ligamentes. Chap.
2. Rules, and general instructions, vvherone we must consider, in all
circumvolutiones, and Ligamentes. Chap. 3. Howe we ought to tie the Ligament,
and again make loose the same. Chap. 4. Howe we must ligate, and tie, the
broken Arms, Legs, and Hippes. Chap. 5. Of the placinge, and situatione of
those parts, one the which the operatione, is set one work. and employed.
Chap. 6.
What the Ligamentes or Circumvolutiones are their matter, quallitye, form,
and quantitye. Chap. 1.
Having therefore spoken, treaated of the combinationes, and sutures,
vvherthrough al vvoudes, divisione, or separatio of the whole is inserted
combined together again, and the lips or edges of the foresayed vvoundes are
kept close together shut, we will now treacte, and handle of the
Ligamentes, or bindinges, of the wounded parts wherein we ought to consider,
what their matter, their quality, form, quantitye, differences are, What
Ligamentes are.
howe we ought to wind, and again vnvvinde the same.

The vvindinge therefore, or dressinge of a vvounde is nothing else, then a
vvindinge about, or circumvolution, of the Ligatures, which is as much to
say, with a broad and lunge ligamet, wherewith not only, the wounded
part, butt allsoe the fin itimate, and circumiacent parts, are involved, and
circumvestede by this means to restore them to their Former estate, and
natural being.

Matter of the Ligamentes.
Those Ligametes according to the affirmations of aunciet Chyrurgias, are of
divers matter, as of Linen, vvoolle, or Leather: the linen Ligamentes are the
most commonest of all the other, which at that time they used, when as they
would stifflye compresse, bring close together any part: they used
woollen rovvlers, in the fractures with vvoundes, gently in that sort to
retain together the broken bones, to cause no payne, or inflammatione at all.
Hippocrates used the Ligamentes of leather, Hippocrates.
in the fractures of the Nose, the nethermost chavv bone: But of what matter
soever we make the they must not be too much vvorne out, because that they may
be strong enough, to be dravvn close together, stretch stifflye out: Farther
more they must be even and smooth, nether must they have any silvages, nether
must it have any harde seames, must be cut aright the thread, according the
length of the linen, not cotradictorily: because they may tie smooth and
evenlye, without the one side being hardre tied then the other, as oftentimes
it chances, when the rovvler is cut contradictorryelye: It is right trevve,
that the ligature vvhervvithe after Phlebotomye we tie the arm, yields it
self better being so cut, but it chances heerin, because in that place it
yields it self better for the bending of the arm.

Touching their qvallity, they must be clean vvhyte, least that through
their impuritye they be a hinderance, or interruption unto the part, because
by that means they may the better receave the humidityes, as Oxicrate, vvyne,
or any such like, wherein we chance to madifye, vvett them. They must allso
be fine light because through their ponderousnes, they do not overburden the
part, suscitate, provoke payne, cause inflammation. Thirdly they must be soft,
flexible because through the obduratnes thereof, they might chance to hurt
that part. Fourthlye, of linen, which must be very vvhyte, not to closely
vveaved because so they are more better to be placede, the matter, the
evaporationes might the easier therthroughe transpire, which being therein
occluded, cause inflamatione, itchinge.

Form figure of the Ligamentes.
Concerning their form, figure, we must know, that these foresaede
Ligamentes, or rovvlers, are ether rovvled up, or involved, siplelye, or
dubblelye, unto the midst of the foresayed ligature of an aeqvalle latitude
in all places, as are those which we use in the fractures of the Arms,
Hippes, Legs: In like sort allso in the vvoundes, vlcerations of the same
parts. The double ligament or rovvler is ether of on piece of linen, on the
ends being diverselye cut, or on an other place, in other ends, as are the
ligamets of the Head, which are cut into four, or six ends: And in four
ends for the Scrotum: Or in the ligament, which is sovved together, made of
divers pieces, as are those which are used for the flancks, for the Breasts,
for the Testicles, for the Fundament, that especially we desirige to spare,
be chairye of the linen. And as much as concerns their longitude, latitud
that consists on the consideratione, judgment of the Chyrurgiane, which
before hand must see the figure, know it, must thereby allso be able to
know, the conformatione, sitvatione of the part, the diversitye of the
dissease: for when as we are vrgede to make a great circumvolutione, we
must then consider on the length, make it as long as is reqvired: cosideringe
the breadth, we must make the according to the longitude, latitude of the
dissease, The Ligamet must be broader then the dissease.
so that the foresaid ligament must be greater the the dissease, because with
on circuvolutione do not only involve the vvounde but allso both the ends
thereof as well on the one side as the other: for if so be the ligamente vveare
small, he must the crushe the dissease, vvherthrough great payne, and
inflammatione might becausede.

And to speak of the qvantitye of the foresayed ligamentes, Quantitye of the
Ligametes.
that is nothing else then the mean, and measure which we must use and
observe ether in stiffly or loosely bynding, as in respect, of the person. For
as the one man is grosser more corpulent then the other, so there are also
disseases, whereof the one is more painful then the other, wherefore we must
consider, that the ligament be nether too stiffly nor loosely tied, for all
ligatures which are too stiffly bovvnde, cause payne, concursione of humours,
with inflammations, yea sometimes allso a Gangraena: And those ligamentes which
are too loose, they are profitable for nothing, cause that the restauratede
parts, which are sitvatede, move therout, as the broken Legs the
dislocatede members, yea allso the lips of the vvoundes which are insertede,
and brought together through the loose ligature do again separate the one
from the other. And finallye in one vvorde to conclude, the mediocritye of
ligatione, is a great solace, and comfort to the Patient, as he will then
with his own mouth testify.

We must note that all ligatures must not in a vvoud so fast be ligatede,
Wherone in Ligatione we ought to consider.
as in a Fracture less in a Fracture which is without a vvounde, then in a
simple vvounde: We must allso harder, more violenter bind ligate on the
vulneratede part, one the fracture, the on any of the approximate, next
adioynig parts, thereby to repell, drive back again the humours, which do
thereon sink and allso crushe out, those which are sunk into the finitimate
parts, which is least shut: for in so doing, we keep those parts
occludede, liberate, free from all inflammations. Farther more in the end of
the ligatione we espy a tether tumefactione, out of which we may judge that
the part is reasonably shut: if so be the tumor be harde, obduratede,
blackishe, it is then a sign that the part is too stiffly tied. And whereas
at all we perceave any tumefaction, it is a sign that the ligament is too
looselye tyede.

Of the kinds, differences of the ligamentes. Chap. 2.
Two sorts of ligaments in general.
HIppocrates gennerally hath made two sorts of Ligamets: where of the first
is, that which of it self, by his virtues did prosper, First kind of
ligature.
opitulate the curing of the disseases, and without the which they can not
be cured because that with out the same, the part can not be contaynede in his
statione, or form, wherein she must be contained, to be cured, to be
praevented that there happen no fluxione unto the part, nether the matter
being therein congregatede, without the said ligature could not be driven,
expellede therout. As we may note on the ligamentes, which in the vvoundes of
the Head we use, which allso in all concavouse vlcerations we use, in
Fractures, in dislocatios, recurvatione of Ioynctes, in the separatinge of
those parts, which against nature lye the one above the other, in the
reductione of the separatede parts, in the apertione of the parts, which are
to closely occludede, shut against the mind of the Chyrurgiane, will
combine themselves together.

The second sort of Ligament.
The second ligament, is that which is ordaynede, not only because of it
self it is commodiouse, profitable, but Per accidens, bye chance, it is but
only used, to contain, keep the remedies, compresses, on the disseasede
part, as on a great, dolorous inflammatione, on a great Apostematione, or on
any other dolorous part.

Redivisio of the first kind of Ligature.
And touching the ligature which of it self is profitable, commodiouse, there
of there are two kinds, which of the use, where unto they are ordaynede, are
taken: which is ether to cotayne the parts as close in their natural being
because therthroughe they may be combinede vnitede, wherefore this ligatione is
called, the agglutinative, or incarnative ligatione: Or else to praevente, the
fluxione which might chance to come to that part, expel the same therout,
which is molestiouse, troublesome unto him, wherefore he is called the
expulsive, or repellinge ligature.

The incarnative or conglutinating ligation, Icarnative Ligament.
is commoly used in this form on the wounds. To vvitt, that we roll up the
rovvler, or ligature on both his ends, unto the midst thereof, whereof in
each hade we must take the one end being rovvled up: laying that part of the
ligamet which is not rovvled up, on the other side of the vvounde, reducinge
both the ends of the ligatione, which we have in our hands above on the
vvounde, that there through, we might adioyne, bring together, the separated
parts, lips of the vvounde, crossinge the foresayed ligature, in form of a
Burgundiane cross, or in form as in the margin is set down unto you: Then
we must reduce both the ends to the part, bringing one end, towards the
superior part of the membre, because thereby the fluxione may be praevented,
the other end, on the inferior part, that the blood therthrough, which is
sunk, and descend into that part, might be depressed, and crushed out: and
the fore said Ligature must be of such a breadthe, that when as he is rovvled
up, applied on the wounded part, may not only compraehende the vvounde but
alsoe both the ends, of the same.

If so be the vvoude vveare ample, great, and the ligature, considering his
latitude, Nota.
could not be accommodated, we must as then compraehende but the one half of
the vvounde, the other half thereafter.

Such a Ligament therefore must be reasonable closely vvounde, but allvvayes a
little stiffer one the wounded part, Hippocrates.
as Hippocrates vvilleth us to do, yea also, in the vvoundes with Fracture,
because there through might be expressed, and crushed out, the blood, which
in that part is sunk, least that there should happen any inflammatione
thereunto, then an Apostematione.

The expulsive, or repellinge ligamente, Expulsive Ligamet.
is very much used in Fistles, in concavouse vlcerations, thervvith to expel
the matter, which is descending to the grovvnde or bottom of the same, which
through the lunge retentione, internallye corrodeth that part. Admonitione.
This ligature is allso very commoeiouse in the Varices or burst veins, in
tumefacted Legs, but we may not use it in Fistles, nor in any concavouse
vlcerationes, unless first of all they be putrifyede, their callositye taken
therout, nether in inflammationes:

This ligamente is imposed, How we may make the expulsive ligament.
with the one end being revolvede, rovvled up, beginning with the sovvnde
part, which is sitvated close to the bottom of the Sinus, where he must be
somewhat more dravven together, shut, then is reduced again toward the
wounded part, toward the mouth, or apertion of the concavitye, with out
bindinge the same to stiff, consideratione, of the inferior part.

As if the Sinus be in the leg, the bottom of the same under the Knees, is
alsoe higher, hath his issu in the crassitude of the calfe, we must them
begin to bind, one the Knees, finish in the inferiore parts thereof.
Contrarilye if so be the inferior part of the Leg, the issue thereof be by
the Knees, we must the beginn the ligatio by the foot, end the same close to
the Knees. But if we desire to use this Ligature in great Arms, and great
Legs, which are Varicouse, we must then begin from belovv the leg, or
Arm, vpvvardes, which is the most farthest, from the original of the Veins
and supernallye end the same, to vvitt, about the Heart, the Liver, which are
the originals of all Veins, Arteryes, heerby to repell the humours which are
in that part, to praevent that there concur no more unto that place.

As far forth therefore, as if that part be rugged, and vnsmoothe, as is that
Leg, which is far more thicker in the Calfe thereof, then in the lovvermost
parts thereof, we must the fro palm, to Palmebreadthe, a little more the half
through cut the same, and fovvlde both sides cotradictorilye the one to the
other, so looslye sow the same, by which means the said Ligament, is made
to be recurvated, and croockedlye vvounde, like a Bovve. Having therefore
stifflye rovvled op this foresayed ligature, or rovvler, An attractive
Ligature.
we may thervvith as smoothlye wind involve a Leg, without making, therein
any inaeqvalitye, or furrovves causing that side which was cut of, the again
sovved, aeqvallye to agree with the thinnest part: the vvhol part which is
the longest, to agree with the greatest part. Above these two foresayed
Kinds, differeces of Ligamentes, we may as yet add thereunto a third Kind:
The which we call an attractive Ligamet, which we may use when we desire
to retracte, any blood, nourishment, or any other vital Spirits into that
part, the which, the part of it self can not draw, attracte unto it,
because her attractive forces are debilitated, very much feebled.

The second kind of Ligament above rehearsed.
We will somewhat alsoe speak of that ligament, which of it self is for no
use profitable but accidentallye cures, through his continuace of the
remedies, which are applied unto the dissease, wherefore we may call it the
retentive Ligament: wherein we must consider three especial things. First in
what disseases it is commodious: Secondly on howe many fashones, it may be
composed, made: Thirdly, Ligamet for the dissease.
lastelye, howe we ought to use the same.

Touching the first, we ether use the same, considering the part, or the
Dissease, which can tolerate no other: Considering the Dissease, as any
vvounde, or vlceratione, accompanied associated, with any great payne, or
inflammatione, or when we disire an Apostematione to be matured: Considering
the part, as when a vvounde is in the Head, in the Neck, in the Belly, or
in the Testicles, which parts ca not indur to be stiffly tied, or bovvnd,
therefore need no ligatione, but only to retain the remedies therone, because
that the other stiff ligatures, bring with them great discommodity.

Concerning the second poyncte: Ligamet for the part.
The retentive Ligamet, must have two, three, or four ends, according to the
form, situatione of the part which we would dress. Touching the third
poyncte, that must be begun in the dissease, ended on the other side of the
same.

Of the Rules, general Instructions, whereon we must consider, in all Rowles,
Ligatures Chap. 3.
Therefore convenientlye, Two things to be considered, when as decentlye we
desire to wind any part.
decentlye to wind, or involve any part, or mebre, we must note, consider
on two especial things, whereof the first is, the wounded part, which we
will wind: the second is the aegritude, or dissease. Touching therefore the
disseased part, we take this for a general Rule, that she must be tied,
that in such a form, figure, as we will have her to continue, lye: For if so
be we wind a folded, curvated part, which thereafter must be situated
right, and extented, there will as then conseqventlye ensue such or the like
Accidents: to vvitt, that the Ligature will dissolve, loosen, that there
vvilbe caused great pain, dolor in the part, because the Muscles, Veins,
Arteryes Synnues, the very bones alsoe have an other situatione, being
erected, extended, then when as they are recurved, and croocked.

As in example: If so be a broken Leg, Example.
being recurved, so on that manner be circumligated, vvounde which ought
othervvyse to be tied, being stretched extended right forth, without doubt
all the Ligature will go loose, when as we desire to extend the same, out
of the which will follovve great pain, because the broke Bones, Veins,
Arteryes, Synnues, Muscles, do not as the keep the same place, as they have
done, the part being bovvnde, tied.

Contrarilye, we desiring to dress a fracture in an Arm, he must then be
shut, folded together, for if so be we dress him being extended, when as
thereafter he shall be recurved bended, then the Bones in therre lying, with the
other parts, be turned into some other fashone, vvherthroughe the Ligature,
will in one place be loosened, in another spaned, which also suscitateth payne
in that part: For it must necessarilye follovve, that when as a tied part be
changed, and then ether shut bended, or extended, the there are some of the
Muscles extended, crushed, as in the rotunditye, in the abbreviatione, others
vveackened, united: And when they are exrected, they must needs then be
crushed through the Ligature, out of the which must necessarily follovve
intolerable payne, because of the Compresse, which in ferreth with it in
that part great fluxiones, other accidents, mischances.

The dissease.
Now for as much as cocerneth the dissease, we must circumligate, involve an
Arm or a broken Leg with a vvounde, on an other manner, and fashion, then a
Fracture with out vvoude: on an other fashion a Leg, which hath but a simple
Vlceratione, then a Leg, which hath a concavouse, or Fistulouse vlceratione:
And a Ioyncte which is full of payne, must one an other manner be tied, then
that wherein is no payne.

Decetlye to wind.
Therefore covenientlye, decentlye to ligate or wind, the Ligature must be
right, closely rovvled up, because we may houlde him the faster, stedyer in
the hade, without stirring, or glidinge this way or that vvaye, as he might
chance to do the same not being stiffly rovvled up, because that through his
hardenes he may the better be handled, conduced, so that all ligationes, far
covenienter, more decet to more contentment of the Patient, and the
circumstantes, or standers by may be effected, then other vvyse, when as the
Ligature is laid double, croocked, curved, uneven.

Howe we ought to tie the Ligament again make loose the same. Chap. 4.
Wherone we ought to, consider in the fasteninge of the ligature.
THe Chyrurgiane must consider, note, that there be no seames knots, or any
vnevennes, in the Ligament, which might chance to crushe the wound: and the
Ligatione alsoe being finished, considering that the end of the Ligature, be
not fastened, one the vvounde, nether one any place where there is any payne,
for unless with a pin, we fasten it, or else with a Needle sow it, it
allvvayes infers payne with it: wherefore we must fast the said
Ligature, ether higher, or lower, or one the side of the same, one the end of
the rovvler, one such a place of the Ligature, vvherone the Patient doth not
lye, as behind one the Head, in the Temples of the Head, one the Back, on
the Buttocks, nether one the Flanckes, or Armepittes,

And concerning the dissolutione, or vntyinge, therine we must consider two
things: Two things vvherone we must consider in the dressinge of a vvounde
Namelye one the time, when the Patient must be dressed, one the convenience of
doing the same: and heerin disagreethe the practise of the ancient
Chyrurgianes, from us: For touching the dressinge of vvoundes ( Celsus
vvilleth) that we ought not to dress the vvoude, but in three days once,
suffering it two days* Celsus.
to continue without dressing: And then vvilleth he us, that we dress it but
once in five days. And as touching the simple fractures, Hippocrates.
Hippocrates councelleth us, that in three days once we dress the But now
adays, we do not observe this manes, for we dress the Patient after the
first dressinge 24, hovvres, unless we feared any great fluxione of blood,
wherefore we suffered the Patient to lye lodger with out dressing, to vvitt,
two, three, four, or five days lunge: It is right true, that we sometimes
make loose the ligamet in two, or three days once, without touching of the
plaster, only to give air to the part, to note, whether there be nether
Inflamatione, nor any other Accident come there unto: But when as the vvounde
is come to very great suppuratio, that there is much matter, payne, or
Inflammatione at hand, we as then dress the vvounde two, or three times in
the space of 24 hours, to vvitt, all eight hovveres once, if it be possible.

And touching the simple Fractures, For simple fractures.
we keep the sometimes, six, or seven days undressed, unless that there
vveare any Accidents, at had, but allvvayes we tarry as lunge as is
possible: for how little soever we touch a broke leg, the ends of the
bones, of the fracture are nevertheless, stirred, dislocated, the on rubbed
against the other, vvherthroughe is caused payne, and the combinatione, or
together healinge is hindered, because that all conglutinatione, can not be
with out continual coniunctione of the one part with the other.

The redressinge, or dressinge, How we may getlelye take of the Ligament.
must be done one this manner: to vvitt, that we easily make loose the band,
or rovvler, now with the one hand and then with the other looseninge of the
same, always houldinge the whole Ligament in the hand. But because most
commolye the first dressinge of the vvounde, cleaves so fast, as if with
glevve it vveare thereon fastened, because of the blood matter, which is
therone dried, and baked, we must first of all therefore, madefye, moysten the
same with a little vvarmed vvyne, and thervvith soacke the same because the
ligament may be taken, revolved thereof without payne, yea or else also in the
vvindinge of, of the same coming on the vvounde, we might there everye time
cut it of, because in so doing, we might by peecemeale take away the same,
without in any sort hurtinge of the Patient.

How we shall dress the broken Arms, hippes, and legs. Chap. 5.
Our manner of dressinge of al broke legs may be assimilated, and compated,
with the manner of the ancient Chyrurgianes.
AL though that our common practise, of the dressinge of all broken Legs,
seems to be alienate, and to differ, from the manner of doing, of the
antique, ancient professors, Chyrurgias, it is notwithstanding in such sort,
that we easily can compare them together. All the ancient physicians,
Chyrurgianes, have bin of opinio that in the Fractures we ought to use a
double kind of Ligament: Namelye inferiore ligamentes, which they called
Hypodesmidas, superior ligatures, which they called Hypodesmous: they have
these names because of their situatione, because some of them are tied, and
bovvnd under some again above. And as touching the inferior ligametes,
Hippocrates makes mention of two sorts.

Two sorts of inferior, or vnderligametes.
Whereof the first, the shortest, begins one the fracture, laying always
the one end contradictorilye therone because it should not vvholy lye, on the
place of the pain, which ligament must be tied round about the fracture, then
be reduced vpvvardes, where he as the ends: This ligament must closely be
vvounde together, because so the fluxio, which might chance to sink into the
disseased part, might the better be kept therout. The second ligament, which
almost, must be as lunge again as the first, is allso begun one the same
manner, to vvitt, on the fracture, laying only therone, a turn, or two,
winding dovvnevvardes, to crushe therout the blood which might chance to
sink into the fracture, with circumvolutios, which must be laid a little
more a part the one fro the other, then in the first ligament they vveare: for
we must take heed of making to great expressiones of blood, in the ends
of the Arms, or legs, that without imflammatio they can not receave much
thereof, and the ligament being come down, must wind the same vpvvardes
again, to come again to that place where we did beginn, because both these
ligamentes might hold fast, and the muscles be brought into their natural
situation, which through the two foremost ligationes might be brought therout.

Subdivisio of the second inferior ligature.
Other ancient Chyrurgianes make of this nethermost ligature, two ligationes,
whereof the one is the surest the second for the fractures, which begins
one the broke part: having thereafter, made one, or two circumvolutiones, then
is the foresaved ligature reduced dovvnevvardes. The other which may be the
third for the fractures, must be begun, on the beginning of the part,
ending supernally where the first ligatio is ended passing over the Fracture:
So that they impose therone three ligationes all which three we may call
inferior ligametes. The first which ascends from the fracture one high, as
from the middle of the leg toward the knee. The second which descedeth
from the fracture dovvnevvardes, as from the middle of the leg towards the
foot. The third, which from the extreameste part of the Ioyncte, ascends
superiorlye as fro the the soul of the foot towards the knees.

But novveadayes folovving our common practise, An astringent plaster on the
fracture.
which we use before these three ligamentes, we apply first of all, one the
place of the fracture an astringent Plaster, which is made of Bolus, of
flower, or volatill meal, of vvhytes of Eggs, of Oil of Roses of a little
Terebentine, (in stead of Cerotu Galeni, which the aunciet Chyrurgians used:)
After the first dressing we use the Plaster of Diacalcitheos, or of Diapalma,
liquefacted in oil of Roses, with vinegar. The ligature now being decetly
vvoud, because the legs, the hippes the Arms, are thinner belovve then above
they are, we must therefore one such slenderness apply some certain copresses
because the foresayed ioyncte may be in all places of an aequall crassitude,
thickenes, the splinter, which must be made of stiff paper, of lattinn, or of
any other substance, be very evenlye, smoothlye applied therone, tied under
the inferior ligatures, or rovvlers.

These splinters must be three in number, which must be excavated like a
gutter, whereof the first must be a little broader, then the other to by
applied under the fracture, to compraehende all that, which is belovve the
fracture, be as it vveare a fundament, or foundatio thereunto. The other two
one both the sides of the fracture, being somewhat separated the one fro the
other, least that in the ligatio they chased to glide the one over the other.
They must also be of such a longitude, as the broken part requires.

These three foresayed splintes being thus imposed, one the inferior rovvlers,
Applycatione of the inferior Ligatures.
we must then tie the fracture that it may lye fast and steady the part be
contained in a good quallitye disposione. With the first of these two
ligatures, we must beginn, at the extremest part of the membre, fro under
vpvvardes. The second must beginn fro above end belovv: we must allsoe note
that the one of those rovvlers, must take his beginning internally in the
membre, must proceed from the left to the right side, because they may cross
the one over the other, in such a form as in the margin you may see, or in
form of a St. Andrevves Cross, because it may be involved very closely
thereon.

It seems that Hippocrates hath used no other ligature, in the Fractures
with vvounde, but that he rovvled the same somewhat loose.

Ligametes for shot vvoudes, with crushing of bones.
But in those fractures which vveare shot, or with any other such like
instrument, or engine, be done, wherein is great crushinge of bones, because
we should little need to handle this part, which is thus broken, and
crushed, least the acute, and sharpe ossicles, or bones, frustles, the which
in the pertractatione of the same, might chance to prick the Flo^he, Tedones,
Synnues the Peritoneum, we must there fore use heervnto great Copresses, being
folded three, or four on the other, and so sovved together in the middle,
being in two places cut through, the compresse being of the breadth of a
palm, of ones hade, or theraboute, which we revolve the one towards the
other part, as if we desired to circumligate the part. These, or such like
Compresses, we must by little little shove under the crushed part, or mebre:
the same being immudifyed, impure, and we desire to lay an other thervnder,
we as then sow a clean white Compresse, one the impured Compresse, as then
we draw away the impure compresse from under the Fracture then subseqvetly
follows the mundifyed, clean compresse thervnder, in the stead of the
immundifyed. I have constituted the defiguratione, of these Compresses, here
before amongst the figures of the Instruments, in the table of the
Glossocomium, which of Hippocratis is called Ambi, on which place, in the
forsayed leaf, is defigured unto you, a broken leg, with the Ligamentes of
the same.

Of the situation, and of the constitutione or collocatione of those parts,
one the which the forsayed Operatione must be effected. Chap. 5.
No man is ignorant, how necessary, requisite these operationes are, to the
resanatio, of the disseases, wherewith mas body is daily, continually
oppugned opressed: and indeed, this operation should in vayn be used, if so be
that not only the whole body, but also the forsayed disseased parts, vvhero
we effect our Operation, vveare not thereafter, constituted situated, and
with most convenience collocated.

Therefore decentlye, with most couvenience to collocate the same, Vitilitye in
constitution of the part.
the Patient must first of all lye on his bed, (if so be at the least the
magnitude, and largeness of the dissease require the same,) that in such a form,
that the vvouded, or vulnerated part; may be with most ease, coveniece
collocated, as it is reqvisite, for they are not al together situated in one
fasho, manner: It is right true, that there are some certain rules, as are in
the ligatures, which must only be used one disseases.

First of al therefore, generally, Three things to be considered in the
collocatio of a part, or membre.
to collocate rightly situate al wounded parts, we must consider three
especial things: to vvitt, that the situation, be Soft, Smooth High: Soft,
because a hard situatio, sometimes might chance to disturb, and irrequiate,
not only the vulnerated part, but also the approximate parts there unto, by the
which means great pain, inflammation, consequently also an attractione, a
fluxion must necessarily follovve in that part: which is more, the Patient is
constrained not being able to tolerate the obdurate collocatio, to ease and
yield solace to that part, by oftentimes turning, and revertinge of
himself, which is very unprofitable for him, because that part, requires
nothing else then quietude, without being much disturbed, and molested.

Even, and smooth, becavse that the vneve, Plain, smooth situation.
implanitude collocation, infers pain recurvatio in the Ioyncte, to vvitt,
the one part resting on somewhat, the other part, dependinge without
resting one any thing.

On High, because that therbye, High situatione.
al concursione of humours is praevented, which otherwise through the low
situatio of the Iovncte, might be therthervvardes drawn.

Considering this occasion, have the Chyrurgians always caused the broken or
wounded Arm to be dependently vvorne one the breast the leg to be collocated
on high, to wit sovvhat higher then the body, the Patient lying on bed,
because he may nether be erected, nor sit.

Nether is it only necessary that the membre, or part be collocated softly,
smoothly, The aperon of a wound must all ways be recurvated dovvnevvardes if
it be possible.
highly, but it is also requisite, (if so be there be any vvounde, or
vlceration, which especially is fistulouse) that the apertio thereof, if so be
it is possible, recurvate it self dovvnevvardes, because that the matter,
might have the liberater a passage, to enter forth at, without making any
greater cocavityes, do not chance to incece, or inflame the approximate
parts, nether to corrode them, which would bring with it divers, sundry
accidents: praeposterate the resanatione of the same.

Secondarilye, The situatione of the Ioyncte must be natural, accustomed.
the Ioyncte must be situated in such a form, and fashone, which is agreinge
with the naturalle disposione of the Ioyncte, and alienated from all payne:
which two observationes, are well agreinge the one with the other: For all
fashons which cause no payne, that is the naturalle, and accustomed figure,
and collocatione thereof: Even as the painful, and vnnaccustomed figure is
against nature, so that the natural, and accustomed figure, or fasho, is
vvholy without pain: which happeninge, the Patient must a lunge continuance
keep his Ioyncte in that being, because so he shall feel no, or at the
least very small payne at all which is very comodiouse, to the resanation of
all vvoundes, vlceratios, Fractures also for all dislocatios, as it is in like
sort profitable for all other disseases vvhatsoever,

The ancient Chyrurgians, have called, this form of situatione, the right
and true collocatione, because all the Veins, Arteryes, Synnues, muscles, as
then are right, nether are they extended, nether lye they recurved.

The natural situatio which of the aucient professors, is called the right
situation.
And although that the Arm have binn anglevvyse collocated, notvvithstading
we esteem it as then to lye right, because that all the foresayed parts, are
accounted to lye right, not extended, nether recurved, that this collocation of
the Arm is naturalle, as here after we will more largelye speak of.

An example of the situatio of any disseased part.
And by degrees to specifye, the situatione of each, sundry part, we will
here describe some of them for an example: when as there is any vvounde,
Apostemation, or dislocation in any Ioyncte, we must then with all diligence
note the situation there of: for through a bad situatione, not only
immediately are caused many accidents, but after the sanatione thereof, the
Ioynct sometimes tarries right out extended, which ought to have bin
croocked, or else abides croocked where it ought to be exteded or else
combines it self, joins with some other thing, which ought to have binn
separated, seioyncte. An excellent observation
Wherefore if the vvounde be in the uppermost part of the shoulder, we must
then impose under the Armepites of the Patient, a great linne balle, hang the
arm one the Breast, somewhat bear, out his elbovve, because that the head of
the arm, may be somewhat elevated, the separated parts, may again be
inserted the one with the other and so much the better be cured together
again: The contrary whereof must be observed, if so be that in the inferior
part be any vvounde, as under the Armepittes: for the wound being cured,
we do not lift up sometimes, the Arm let him fall down again, stir him
othervvayes, without causinge any payne, and that the Arm is not held from
the Breast, the Patient thereafter, because of the Cicatrice shall not be able
to lift up his Arm because through the same the Arm is grovven stiff. As
thereof we have an example, exemplifyed unto us of the throat, in the Neck
also of many and divers, which being wounded, or burned, the cicatrice hath
remained so obdurated, that they there through have ether held their Heads, to
much on high or to much stoupinge, or haging backvvarde, or to much dependinge
ether on the right, or one the Leftsyde.

If so be that there be an Apostemation, The anglevvyse figure, is the natural
form of the Arm.
in the Elbovve, or else that the same be dislocated, or wounded, we must the
situat the Elbovve angle, or cornervvyse: for such aforme is very necessary
for the same, natural, accustomed unto hi: although, the cornervvyse figure is
that which makes an acute corner, notvvithstading we mean thereby through
the anguled figure* with the ancient Chyrurgians, that which hath his corner
right but yet not so clean, and vvholy erected, but that which attaygneth
somewhat toward the rectitude, so that it comes somewhat bluntly, and such
a figure is not as yet truly the mean, between the inflexione, and the
extensione, but is the same which yields her self, toward the extensione:
If so be the Arm be inserted and combined, with being able to be recurved,
or exteded we may yet as then better, and with more facility help him
self, then if he vveare vvholye recurved, or vvholye extended.

We may alsoe observe the same in the hand, The hand must be shut.
for we must keep the fingers shut, half bended, and if so be the dissease
vveare in one finger only, it vveare then better that the same continued ether
inflected, or incurved, the that he vveare straight, for the property of the
hand is to gripe and take houlde, the which she can not effect, and bring
to pass, then through the recurvatione of the same.

If so be above in the Hipp there chance to come, an Apostemation, or
vvovnde, The hipp must be stirred.
we must then in the consolidatinge of the same, observe that which in the
shoulder we have seen, as being necessary to stir the foresayed part, on
divers fashons, because the head of the bone, do not insert it self, and
grow fast in the pan.

We observe in the Ioyncture of the knees the contrary, for if so be, The
leg must be kept right.
that there be a vvounde, or an Apostemation, or else in the finitimate part,
the Patient must the hold his leg right, without having the heals dravven
in towards his buttocks, as it in divers persons happens, and that to the
hinderance of the Patients, when they are cured.

And we must dilligently note, that the leg be collocated as right, as is
possible, and if so be by chance it lay recurved, we must then as gentlelye,
as is possible stretch and extend the same again, othervvyse the patient
being cured, might chance to be mutilate, and without great indecoru, or
deformity should not be able to go, as we have knovvene the same to hap
unto two great personages, of our times.

Now as concerning the foot, the Toes, they must allsoe be extended, and not
recurved, or inflected, as we have spoken of the had, fingers: Discommodity
of having the Leg croocked
For if so be they continued so croocked, the body as then should not be
able to rest, or stayede thereon: So that the situation of the Arm, is
cotrarye to the Hand, to the Leg, and to the Foot: because the one must be
recurvede, or croocked, and the other extended right out.

The end of the French Chyrurgerye, containing the manual Operations.
Methodicalle discourse, or rehearsal, of the Originalles, occasiones, Signs,
Tokens, Accidents, chances, Prognosticationes, and Remedies, against the
Bloodyeflixe, or Dysenterye.
BY all other miserable and pitifulle disseases which do commonly vex, and
trouble the Entralles, and run through the same, as is the Cholicke, the
restrictione, or constipatione, Ileus, Lyenteria, Diarrhea, Tenasmus, the
vvormes, many other such like yet me thincketh the Dysenteria, or the Bloody
flixe, of all these to be most intolerable, Bloodyeflixe.
and most mortal: And also amongst the Commonaltye, amongst our French
Martiallistes or vvorriours, amongst the Svvitsers, Countryemen, Englishemen,
farther amongst all sorts, and Kinds of vvarriours, it is so common, that it
seems this dissease, as soon as they are gone out of their houses, that there
nothing else follows them, the the shaddovv of their body, vvherthrough in
all leagers through this dessease at sometimes there are more poeple deprived
of their lives, then through all the inqvietude, through all povertye,
through the Plague, yea more alsoe then of the enemy are Killede: And
touching my opinione herein, I take this sickness to be a pestilentialle
spirit, and a certain essence of the Plague: So that necessarilye there under
must be occulted, hidden, a secret, ineffable venom, or poison, which
through defilinge, and infectione, spreads it self from the one body into
the other, Because the intestines or entralles, of a sovvnde, and vvelfaring
man, through some inclinatione, or Sympathy, are made partakers of such
venoumouse vapours, of him whose guts are polluted with this dissease, and
by that means also are imparted with the bloodyeflixe: As in the cosumptione
we may see, which proceeds out of some vlceratione of the Lunges, and also
in the Ophthalmye of the Eyes, the same to be as infectiouse, that the on body,
may obtain the same of an other: Which comes to pass, Reason of Aristotle.
as Aristotle says, because that the Lunges, the Eyes, are continually
contained in a perpetualle motion, vvherthrough the venoumousnes is the easier
imparted to an other body: Health being, as it vveare a continual rest, and
an assured estate.

And as the entralles, have also their perpetualle motione, the which in
Greek we call Peristaltica, in like sort alsoe may they impart their
dissease unto other entralles, as the eyes unto the eyes and the Lunges do
unto the lunges.

Of the Causes, Signs, Accidents, prognosticationes, and remedies, I will
somewhat discourse, considering more the necessity thereof, thereby to
instruct the yonge Chyrvrgian, the because of any pleasure, which I take
therein, or any ostentatione.

The Dysenteria, or bloodyeflixe, Description of the Bloodyeflixe.
is a sangvinolent excrement of the Belly, with great dolor, and as it
vveare scissure which the Latinistes, call Tormina: And this dissease may be
taken properlye, or improperlye.

The improper Dysenteria, or Bloodyeflixe, Dysenteria Improperlye taken.
is a fluxione of blood, with out any great pains, or travayle, whereof
there are two sorts, or Kinds, ether when we avoid pure, clean blood,
which we call Sangvinolenta, Cruenta or else when we avoid unclean blood,
and impure.

The pure clear blood issveth forth of the Mesenterium, vvheare a lunge time
it hath lain occulted, cogregated, as it oftentimes chanced, in those which
are gross of Belly. And sometimes alsoe it proceeds out of the Liver, of the
Milte, of the Hemorrhodes, and sometimes also out of some great veins, and out
of other parts, yea and also out of the whole habitude of the body: All
which differeces, must through their own signs be known, because the
resanatione of the same may be the surer.

As for example it happens commonly, Those which are deprived of any
Ioyncte, are very subject unto the Bloodyflixe.
through any great superfluitye of bleeding, in those which have lost an
Arm, or a leg, that on certain times they have the bloodyeflixe* In which
kind of Mysenteria, we need not much to fear, nether need we to use those
remedies heervnder described: But must restraygne such Patients, from great
comestiones, and superfluouse drinckinge of VVyne, and cause him to be well
phlebotomised: whereof we in this place endevoure to advertise, and instruct
the yonge Chyrurgiane, because that without making any great delay, he might
be adiuvable helpefull to the patient with these remedies which consequently
follovve: the which in passing by, it seemed convenient unto me to rehearse:
Because it is not my intent, in this place, only to speak, of the improper
Dysenteria, curatione thereof, but of the true, proper bloodyeflixe, or
Dysenteria, which in all Leagers is common, familiar, and infectiouse.

The impure Bloodyeflixe, is the truest, assured, and is assimilated unto
water, wherein nue slaughtered flesh, hath binn washed: the vvaterye
Bloodyeflixe, Fluxus Hepaticus.
is called Fluxus Hepaticus, the Liver laske, which is caused, through the
imbicillitye, of the retentive forces of the liver, through the which the
vital spirits the naturalle calliditye do exhalate, the personne, is vvholye
bereft of all his forces therthroughe also the stomach is feebled, that it can
not any more compraehend, any meat, or drink, to feed one, nether digest
the same, so that by this means the whole body consumes and vvithereth.

The black, heavye, thick bloodyeflixe, proceeds especially out of the Milte,
which is, as it vveare a Poole, or receptacte, of al melancholic, thick,
and blackebloode.

Dysenteria properlye taken.
But that which properly, or uprightly is called Dysenteria, or Bloodyeflixe,
that is a common vlceration of the entralles, out of which first of all the
viscositye of the same is driven, expelled out, then the Axvngiousenes therofe,
with a little red blood intermingled: Thirdly, the internalle membrane of
the intestines, of the which the pellicles, and the little fibres are in the
stools seen, thervnder to be mixed: finallye the vlcerrtio as yet proceeding,
more, more grovving vvorse, as the consequently follows the carnositye, the
very substance, of the corroded, corrupted guts: all which kides, are
accompanied, associated with those common accidents, to vvitt, with biting,
or mordicante pain, with continual punctios, with continualle concupiscence
of going to stool, with intollerabilitye, with a continual comotio. Which
foresayed Dysenteria, or Bloodyeflixe, ether happens to the small entralles
or to the great intestines, the which we first espy out of the situatione of
the payne, out of the diversitye, and mixture of the matter,

When as therefore the upright Bloodyeflixe is in the small guts, Signs
when the small guts ate hurt.
as then we see blood, certain membranouse pellicles, intermixed with the
excrementes, there is also great pain above on the Navle the time betvvixte the
pain the deiection is slow, and there associateth it most commonly a
vomitinge, and a great oppressione of the heart, and the Hick cough, in the
entrance of the stomach, through community which the forsayed entralles have
thervvith: For as Galen says, the Harmony, coniunctione, which the parts of
the body have the one with the other, is wonderful, to be admired, because
as soon as the action of one part is hindered, or suffers any thing, al
the other parts of the body do thervvithe conspire, and sympathise.

If so be the said vlceratio be in the great guts, or entralles, Signs of
the great* intestines
there as the drives one the deiectiones, or excrementes certain drops of
blood, and some little parcels of flesh, and the dolor of the wounded, or
hurt entralies, not so pungent and sharp, but somewhat more surde, and
benumde.

The occasion of the bloodyeflixe is the venoumouse puissance and force,
Occasion cause of the Dysenteria.
Dynamis of the acute, saulte, and mordicant humours, which being as it
vveare on the journey, to descend right to the guts, but they come
recurvared, in form of this lettre S. as in the situatione, they must pass by
many recurvationes, cocavityes* where they cleaving fast, first of al
crudifye, and excoriate the foresayed guts, in the end through their
acuitye corrode the same: as is the choleric humiditye, the melancholycke
humours, and the saulte Petuita, the which is ether ingedred internally in the
guts, or else congregate together in other place are so driven that way, as
it happens commonly in the Pestilentialle agues, in Causo colliqvanti,
Phthisi, Athrophia, in the Cacochimia, in the inflammatione, and in the
colliquation, of the vvorthyest parts. The humours are also irritated, and
provoacked, through causticke and venoumouse medicamentes, as through the
Coloquintida Scammonia, or through the Sublimated poulder of a Diamante. Ravve
fruit causes the Bloodyflixe.
Also through any vicious, acute gross cibaryes and those which are apt
unto corruption, or else is not sufficiently dressed: Alsoe through any
fruit, as by cherryes, Blackecherryes, Plumbs, Peatches, Coucoumbres,
Millions, such like, which we call Hotatij Fructus, which more, through the
constitutione of the air, which ether is to moyste, and pluviouse, or raynye,
to could, or to hot, in others through intemperature, and other inordinate
victitatione, or debacchatione, by the which it inseparablelye happens as
well in the Winter, as in the Summer, that this dissease of the bloodyeflixe,
afflicts man kind.

It is right true, that this dissease, Indicati^ how we may easily, or
difficultlye attain to the Bloodyeflixe.
oftentimes reagneth in the Prime, or vernal time of the year, and especially
in the Harvest, or Autumn, in the which time the humours, do most impeach,
hurt us with the qvallityes. Having observed all these things, we must
consider one the quantitye and quallitye of the dissease, as on the greatness of
the vlceratio, and the superfluitye of blood, and one the great corrosione,
and one the violence of the dissease, therbye to judge, whether the dissease
with any facility, difficulty, or impossibility may be repelled, and cured.

We esteem the cure of the Dysenterya to be of more facility, the same
being in the great guts, or intestines Caecum, Colon, Rectum, the it being
in the small entralles, Duodenum, Ieiunum and Ileum.

We take also the same to be less dangerous, in yonge persons, and in the
men, then in yonge children, and vvoemen.

In a longevalle, or lunge continuing Dysenterye, it is a bad sign when the
appetite is departed, yet a far more vvorse sign, when as there are
associated unto the same Agues, or Imflammationes.

They which are of most experience may judge of this poyncte.
As is that which is caused, out of any Apostemation, being burst out of the
Liver, or of the Milte, which very rarelye happens, and yet more rare out
of the pulmonicalle Apostemationes, whereof the matter disgorges it self in
the left ventricle of the Heart, and so into the Artery called Aorta, the
trunk, or body of all other Arteryes, fro thence into the Veins of the
Mesentery, which are exteded to the entralles, the which passage or way we
can not then through imagination compraehend, and which is very obscure. And
if so be there followed any peculiar thing therout, besides the causticke,
and venoumouse matter it might the infer fearful, dangerous accidents,
to the hart of the Patient, (which is the vvelspring of life) the only
original, of vital spirits, which are diffused over the whole body, are
occasion of the action, motione, also all other agilityes of the body.

The evomitio of the choleric humours, in the beginning of the dissease, do
bear vvitnes alsoe of the danger follovvinge.

The bloody flixe, which is caused out of any melacholicke humours, is esteemed
to be without any hope.

The convulsio of synnues, the Hickough, the parbraking, are forerunners, as it
vveare, embassadoures of death.

In like sort allsoe when we espy, a black spott behind the left ear, as
big as a Vetche, vvherbye is great alteratione, that allso is a sign of
Death, as Hippocrates vvithnesseth unto us. If so be this dissease, through
negligece, or through malice, or aulteration, or by any other means, came to
be inveterated, the Patient as then will vvholye consume, vvexe so feeble,
that without great difficulty he shall not be victor thereof.

This therefore is the cause, or occasio, the species, kinds of this dissease,
the afflicted, opressed part being aperte, and known, we must now
proceed to the resanatione of the same.

The final end of the curatione, is ether generalle, or specialle.

The general end is to be noted, ether on the dissease, or on the Physitione,
as on both the especiallist, most principal personages, which act and set
forth the History of this dissease. In all the kinds of Dysenteria, Cure of
the Dysenteria.
the patient must keep himself reposed, and quiet, because all vlcerationes,
desire to be quietly kept, and in ease: Notvvithstandinge, Hippocrates in his
third boocke de Diaeta councelleth, that we should cause the Patient which
hath the bloody flixe to vvalke, alsoe cause him to stir his body, whereby
he means, that we ought to do the same, before the foresayed Dysenteria
become, because of the Prophylactica, therthroughe to prevent, the procreatio
of all bad humours, to defend the same out of the intestines, cause them to
vvithdravve themselves into other external parts of the body.

Farthermore the patient must allvvayes retain his stools as lunge as he
possibly may or can, without constraygninge himself thereunto,

The Chyrurgian must first of al consider on the use of the astringent
medicamentes, What astringent medicametes the Patient must use.
which before repast, or comestion are used: for he cotayninge the viands, or
cibaryes, they help also to the digestio of the same: but by the astringent
things I understand, mean, which are reasonablelye fortifyinge, and
confortative, and those which are helpefulle to the concoctione: For it vveare
the greatest, absurdest error of the world, if so be in the first,
especially in an vnhealthfulle body, to use violent stopping astringent
medicametes, for it vveare nothing else, the to shut keep our enemy or
thief within doors.

Wherefore his viands, or meat drink, What his meates, drinckes must be.
must only be Diureticke, astringent causinge to void urine, because through
the urine especially, all aquositye of the blood is evacuated: but if so be you
perceave, that the great toughenes of the acute sharp adusted Pituita, or
aquosity, which is very retardatelye expelled conglutinateth with the
guts, or entralles, is a cause of the bloody flixe, with pain with
corrosio, you must the with discretion use the urine expulsors, or urine
provokig remedies because through the use thereof, it expels the aaquosity
through the which othervvyse the forsayed viscouse tough Pituita, might by
chance have bin driven out, so that thervvith it is made more viscouse and
tougher, then before for by how much the less any thick viscouse matter, hath
adjoined unto it any thin humiditye, by so much it is the vvorse. We
permit some considering the imbicillitye of their stomachs, to use drink a
little astringent vvyne.

Medicamentes which we must eschevve.
Farthermore we must beware, and take heed, of all sharpe, mordicant
medicamentes, as Arsenicum, Auripigmentum, Antimonium Sal Gemmae, many other
such like things, that because of their, to great, sudden evacuationes,
because they irritate provoacke the dissease.

Thirdly we must consider on the Liver, especially on the stomach, because
all those which are afflicted with the bloody flixe, can digest no viands.
The specialle end must be the fluxione, or the dissease it self.

The Scopus of the fluxione is, to stop, to diverte the concurrent humours,
but we must in the first gently, easily reserate the same, with such,
consideration, as before we have said, least that in reseratinge of the same
you increase the ague, the which with reason, and experience may chance.

Remedies which may be taken out of the reason.
The remedies which may be taken out of the reason, are ether external, or
internalle.

The internal are, ether simple, or copovvnde. Simple, as Covvemilcke, nue
Eggs, with Masticke, or with Ambergreece, Poulder of sovver Mulberryes,
flowers of Peatches, fine Bolus, Terra sigillata, confited Nuts, Nuttmegges,
being thervvith intermixed: Rhabarbarum so acked in Platine-vvater is alsoe
had in great estimatione, or in the decoctione of Mirobalanes, Syrope of
dried Roses, Iulep, of Roses.

Amongst the compound Remedies are the Trociskes of Diacorallum, Dialectrum,
De Spodio, with the juice of Endive, of Cicorye, more other.

We must alsoe content our selves, in this dissease with sudoriferouse
medicaments, and with easy vomits: because through diversityes, we may
reserate, retain the fluxione.

This subseqvent poulder, is oftentimes with great success administered, used,
the vvayght of a Crovvne, with the yolcke of an Egg.

{rum} Boli Armeni, terrae sigillatae, lapidis Haematites, ana drachmas duas,
picis navalis vnciam semis, Coralli rub. Margaritarum elect. cornu Cervi vsti
loti in aqva Plantaginis, ana scrup. duas, Sacchari rosati vncias duas, fiat
omniu pulvis subtilis: capiat drachmam semis, vel scrupulos duos mane.

Admonitione.
But to commit no error at all, we must before the reseratione, or before the
use of this poulder, administer an ounce of Cassie, by it self, or with half
a dragme of Rabarber: or with an ovvnce of the double Catholicon, with a
decoctione of Plantine, of Agrimonye, Flowers of Nenufarre, Infusio of
Rubarbe.
with Tamariscus, to the refrenatione, or bridlinge, of this furiouse humour.
Or else we must take, a gentle infusione, or expressione of Rubarbe, made with
Rosevvater, adding thereunto six dragmes, or an ounce, of Catholicon. But
besides all this, we may not reserate, restraygne this laske at the first, as
the common poeple suppose.

But amongst the external remedies, Phlebotomye is very commodiouse for the
same, but must always be effected with Knowledge of the cause, for that
sometimes is more necessary then all the other remedies, especilye, when as
the intemperature being caused out of the Liver, urges us thereunto but not
heerby to debilitate the forces strength of the Patient, which in this dissease
reqvire to be firmed, comforted, Phlebotomye must be done with discretione.
the said phlebotomye must with all discretione be done, because the Patient,
through the deprivatione of to great a qvantitye of Blood at one time, might
chance to be vvholye superated, overcome, and fall down dead under his
pack, or burden: For it is known unto all men, that the blood is the
treasure of life or the domicille, habitatione of the soul: Secondly we may
not in Phlebotomizatione be to timorouse fearful, for in place of Phlebotomye,
yeeldinge air to the Veins, the ague chances sometimes to continue, increase
alsoe, the blood also getting no air, is the polluted with some sharpness,
or venoumousnes, which thereafter corrodeth, consumes the entralles.

The Patient is praeserved by his strength, through good nurture,
feeding, which is easy of digestione, through the Cordialle corroboratinge
medicamentes.

Amongst the astringent Medicametes, Astringetia.
there are the oils of Quinces, of Roses, of Masticke, oil of Myrtles, being
intermingled with a little astringent poulder, in like sort there are also
confortative Players, amongst the rest, is the cofortative Plaster of Vigo,
which with cosideratione, must be used, as before we have said.

We may in this dissease alsoe use some certain fumigationes, exsiccating
Lavametes.

Those things which are most belonging, to the dissease, are the
mundificationes, and the cosolidationes of the vlcerationes: For the mudifyinge
of all vlcerationes is nothing else, the to cure, to exsic^te, to cosolidate
the. Where fore first of all we must elavate the vlceratione with a
clisterye, and if the same be profovvnde, deep, a little absterge the same,
mixinge thervnder some confortative things, to fortify, strengthen the
intestines.

VVhervnto as the we may use, mellifyed, or Honyed-vvater, Barlye-vvater,
with the yolks of Eggs, Sugar, Honey of Roses, with many other such like
things being mixed thervnder: and if so be we as yet desire more to
mundifye the same, we must then use the decoctione of vvheaten bran, of
Vetches: and if so be there be calidity adjoined theruto, we must the add
thereunto Sap of Roses, of Plantine, or juice of Night shade, or Solatri.

Remedies to consolidate the vlceratios.
Touching the cosolidatione, that is effected through the providence of
nature, or with any incarnatinge medicametes, which we call Sarcotica. Unto
cosolidatione are four things necessary, to vvitt, the clisteryes of
Plantine, of Hogs grass, and of VVillovvleaves, unto the which we add
Goats suet, Butter, oil of Roses, or oil of sweet Almondes, wherewith the
vlceratios be internally annoyneted, the punctione, acuitye of the vlceration
is somewhat diminished, which continually soacketh theri.

We may also very fitlye mix theramogst, the sealed earth, Franckinsence,
Sangvis Draconis, amongst many other this one incarnateth very much, to vvitt
the Lachrima Thuris, but we must note that all these Poulders, be very
diminutlye pulverisated, least that in the vlcerationes of the entralles, they
chance to corrode, bite.

Clisteryes made on divers fashones.
As touching the Clisteryes, we must at the first use, payne assvvaginge
clisteryes, as there are those, which are made of fresh milcke, where in we
must contunde some yolckes of Eggs, oftentimes reiteratinge of the same: and
the using the absterginge clisteryes, which gentlelye will purifye the
intestines. We make also divers other of divers fashons, forms: where unto
this shall serve, for an example of one.

{rum} Rosar. rub. Tapsibarbati, Furfuris Hordei, ana P.j. fiat decoctio in
Lacte, in colatura, ad lib. j. vel, ad quartastres, dissolve oleiras. colati,
Sacchari albi ana ij. Syrupirosar. siccaru ij. fiat Clyster, additis duobus
ovorum vitellis.

We may use this clister, reiterate the same as often as we perceave it to be
necessary: but when we must use some astringent Clisterye, which we may
not do, unless that the repeccating humours, be cleanlye purged out, and then
we may use this subseqvent clisterye, or any other such like.

{rum} Furfuris macri, paleae Hordei, tapsi Barbati, Centinodiae, Chamemillae,
summitatu Anethi, ana M j. fiat decoctio in aqva Chalibeata, velin Lacte
vstulato, in colatura, ad lb j. vel ad quarts tres, dissolve sir: rosar.
siccarum, vel mirtillorum ij. Vitellorum ovoru iij. pulveris Mastiches, sang.
draconis, ana iij. fiat Clyster.

We may also costitute, exordinate, to this end divers Sundry potiones,
Electuaryes, also the Kinds of Diacorallum, nature of a Heart fine Bolus,
sealed earth, juice of Berberis, Ribs, conserve of Roses.

The Empiricke medicametes, which the Methodical Physiciones, do so
disdain, esteem of little worth, are those which we through experience,
through the divturnall use have fovvnde to be most excellent, which being used
with judgement, are not vvholye to be disdained, saying that Galen testifies,
that the Physician, must be established one two fundametes or foundations, to
vvitt, on the reason, on the experience, whereof the Reason is, as it vveare the
Soul of the same, which measures, ponderateth all things: and the
Experience the body, as a providet, tutor Schoolmaster.

Experience teaches us, that the Rubarbe, on what manner soever we administre
the same, (but especially the infusione thereof) is very commodious profitable
in this dissease, as in like sort also is the Spiritus Vitrioli, with
Rosevvater, vvithe Plantinevvater, also being administered with
Cynamomevvater. There is a sugerye dulcor, or svveetnes, extracted out of Lead,
which never deceaved the hope of the right vvorshipfull Mr. Duion, Monsr.
Duion an expert Physician
which is a very expert, learned Physician, whereof I have attained the
best, of this discourse. The Tincture of Coralle, and of yellovve Ambre,
extractede with Aquavitae is in his operation admirable, also Crocus Martis,
Flos sulfuris being administered with coserves of the betryes of the Cornus,
Coserve of Roses, Marmalade, Citronpeelinges, with many other such like
things, are all together very commodiouse. Because amongst natural things,
I know nothing that exsiccateth more, oppugneth it self more against all
corruptiones: And to conclude there are an innumerable sorts of remedies,
which we must so compound, that they may have one similitude, or one
Analogye with the dissease.

Finallye, we must in an extreme Dysenteria, for the last remedy, endevoure
to mitigate the payne, with Narcoticall things, as is the Oleum Iusqviami,
Mandragora, the could seeds, the Philounium. Reqvies Nicolai, many oaths such
like compositiones, which are unto this dissease used, which may not be
administered the with great judgment and advice had therone.

The end of this Treatise of the Dysenteria, or Bloodyeflixe.
An Apologye, for the Surgeons, where through is apparantlye, evidentlye
demonstrated, showed, which be the occasions, or causes of death, in divers
sundry, wounded Persons, although notwithstanding, their wounds wear small:
where by the Chyrurgians may be liberated, excused, from all calumnes,
sclaunders where with falsely they are accused, reproached.
THe common discourses of Surgery, are now adays far more mean, idle,
more fabulouse, uncertain, the the Nativityes of the Gods, the Histories of
the Giantes or the doctrines of the Philosophical stone yea a thousand other
fantastical sommationes, There is but one expert Chyrurgiancinal Fraunce-
dreams.

There is novvadayes in all France, but one expert Chyrurgiane, whom everye
potentate and great Lord, endeavours to retain by them, vvherthrough they are
vvont to say I have the best expertest Chyrurgian which is living, wherefore
they also laud, extol him, to have a million of knackes which vveare never
before herd, or known. The one boasts that his Chyrurgia, in a very
short time, hath cured one which hath binn shot clean through his head
although the very substance of the Brains, Divers fictions, Lies.
issued therout: the other steadfastly affirms, that his Chyrurgiane, hath
again imposed the Eye of a man, which fro the earth he took up, without
being deprived of his sight in that Eye, or else that he cut of a piece of ones
Liver, or Milte, yet hath praeserved the life of the man. Farthermore an other
will boldly periure himself, say, that they are but nugationes, Childrens
play for his Chyrurgian to cure, a harqueboushed, or shotten vvounde of the
Heart, the Liver, the Milte, the Blather, and the stomach, and the Intestins
and of the great veins, yea is no more molested thervvith, the vveare the
Sold lours of Iulius Caesar, which never interrogated how forcible, strong
their enemies vveare, but vvheare they vveare: nether one what place of the
City the breach was bartered but whether ideed it we are shot or not.
Comparasion.
So that novvadayes, the Chyrurgianes also do not any more ask, nether do
any more endevoure, to know the nature, the condition, the necessity, the use,
or the vvorthines, or excellency of the wounded parts, but ask only
whether the man be vvouded, although all the ossicles of his Leg, vveare
crushed, yet vvithi the space of 14. days, at the farthest, with their
water of shot vvoundes they are able to cure them, although I my self do
not disdain the same, the same being administered, used with discretton. And
briefly to conclude each lord supposes that he hath by him an Hippocrates, an
Aesculapius, a Podalirus, a Machaon.

Out of which ignorace, persuasion, as not to know, what vvoundes are
mortalle or curable, what vvoudes are little, or great, which are of an
easy, or difficult resanation, there must then necessarilye heerout follovve,
that vvheas any body seems to be little hurt dies under the hades of a most
expert Chyrurgia ether because of the greatness of the wound, through any
vnhealthfullnes of the body, through any concursione of humours, or else
because of any unexpected accidents, he is then without all compassione,
blamed, disdained and diffamed, notvvithstandinge all his great pains or
diligence, according to the art he in curing of the foresayed Patient hath
done that, because they are ignorant of the causes of his death, allvvayes
persuade themselves, A foolish persuasio
that if the Patient had bin in hands of their Chyrurgiane, he without al
doubt had not dyed, although that their Chyrurgian, have experimented tried
little or nothing at all and is vvholy inexperte so that by continuance of
time we find the to do, or vvorck no more miracles the a common or lay man,
and also with no more certayntye, doctrine, nor experience and oftentimes in
their practise, being at their wits, or councels end, are constrained to
sue for succour, aid of their companions, or partakers. Because therefore that
in conseqvente times heerafter, these fellovves, should not vndeservedlye reap
such honour, the ancient Chyrurgianes might liberate, free themselves from
all calumnes, of being ignorant which is laid to their charge, and to
reqvite, and resolve the opinions of those mighty, and potetat Lords with
reason, because thereafter they do no more blame, and sclaunder the
Chyrurgianes, I will here breeflye recite, Some vvoundes are esteemed to be
small, which indeed are great and dangerous.
the occasions of Death, causinge them playnlye, and evidently, to vnderstade
that there are some which of a vvoud, which we esteem to be but small, and
of little regard, do notwithstanding dye, yet of expert, learnede men the
same was esteemed, and accounted for a perillouse vvounde. And contrarilye,
some are cured of great vvoundes, which indeed we esteem to be but small,
and of little regard, and which with all facility may be cured. They can
not cure all men.
Notvvithstandinge being impossible for the Chyrurgiane, how erudite,
expert, soever he be, to cure all men, although at sometimes they be
vvoundede with very small vvoundes.

Now therefore to return to our discourse, What is required to the resanatione
of vvoundes.
we must first of all know, that to cure a vvoundede part, to restore
again that person- into his former, accustomed estate of health thereunto are
many things reqvired, which I here normallye, rightly will prosecute.
First of all there is the integrity, force, vigore of the vulneratede, hurt
part, or membre: As evidentlye do demonstrat unto us, the aucthoritye,
reason, and experience: For accordig to the opinione, and sentence, of divine
Hippocrates, It is nature which cures all sicknesses, and disseases sect. 5.
Epid. 6.

The wounded parts are enfeebled, ether considering the nature of their first
conformation or through any accidents, chauncinge to the dissease, or else
because of any hurts, or shottes which happen unto the same: we may through
their nature know the when as the head is to little, for as then it is
whole inconveniet: Or else to gross and so vast, and ponderouse, that because
of the dissease, the patient is not able to bear up the same right on his
shoulders: If so be it be perfectly, and completly round for in such a Head
is ether wanting, the anterioure, A Head noughtily formed
or the posterioure future, or both of the together which are the suspiracles,
through the which nature disburseth her self, of all superfluityes, which
being therein contaynede, they retardate the curatione of the vvounde. And if
it so chanced, that the Head of your wounded, vveare indecently formed, the
wound seeming to be small, (allthough indeed no Capitalle vvoundes are to
be esteemed small) and the curation thereof be tardife, and the Patient
chance to dye thereof, we ought not as then in any sort to attribute the
fault unto the Chyrurgiane but to the bad formatione of that part which is
hurt, or wounded.

We must alsoe understand the same of the Breast, which being anguste,
strict, sufficiently demonstrates unto us, that the heart and the natural
calor of the same are very feeble be cause the domicille of the heart, the
Luges is to angustlye formed: which might be the cause that if any body, being
wounded in such an angust strict breast, shall with great difficulty
receave again his health, because the natural caliditye, being in these parts
feeble, laguide shall not be able to surmount the Accidents which ordinarily
happen unto such parts, as difficulty of respiratio, through the oppression of
the effuded blood in that part, which ca not be digested, nor expelled, ether
by the Mouth, or through the vvoud, that for vvante of natural caloure,
which commonly in such a strict anguste Breast is very small. Abadde formed
Back, or Backebone.
The like may also be said of the Back, of the Spina Dorsi or Backebone,
which being sovvhat to log as those which cotumeliouslye, diridingly we call
Elevenribbes, because they have such huge and vast long sides whereof we
need not doubt, but that such a Back or Backcbone, is far more debile then
others, therefore more apt, and prone to receave any unnatural humiditye,
vvherfor also in such vvoudes there hap great fluxios between the Muscles,
the skinn betvvixte the distaces of the same, because of the great quatity of
excremetes, which have their accourse out of the Brains, other parts of the
body, whereby, betvvee the Muscles the distaces of the same, there sink many
superfluous humours, which by consequece of time are changed into some
venoumouse humiditye, matter, through the which we are sotimes constrained, to
make some great apertione, which require a long continuance of time to the
mudifyinge thereof, vvholy to be cured, yea sotimes also alter chaug into
fistles, because of the tenderness softenes of the part, which ca not be shut,
nether through ligamentes reserated, or copressede, as an arm or leg.
Hippocrates hath observed, noted that betvvixte feeble, A notable sentence.
diseased flesh there always descedeth sicketh a vvaterishe humudity, which
easily can corrupt. The small, thin, Hippes which are baddly formede
Hern fashoned hippes legs, whereof we commonly say they go one VVayghtes,
are under, and above all most of aequall crassititude and thickness, contrary to
those which we say, to be hipped, legged, or have a payere of good,
steadfast stilts under the, which are well proportioned, where of daily
experience teaches us, that to our great grief, and sorrow, that such
persons, ether being vvouded in hippes, in the legs or in the feet, are
subject unto many, and divers accidents, the vvoundes alsoe difficult to be
cured mudifyed, Legs which are of a difficult resanatio.
in the which oftetimes above the ordinary fluxios therein engedreth proud
flesh: now being as it vveare almost ready to be Cicatrizede, can very
difficultely be brought thereunto, being cicatrized, through any small occasion
bursts open again. And if so be the bones be offended, or broke, as then the
Ioyncte most commonly consumes, and vvithereth the health very retardately
can be again restored.

Now all this which hath binn said, The most truest, assured sign of the
imbicilitye of any part
is sufficiently known, with all the diseases of all other parts. But we
must generally note, that the most assured sign, of the imbicilitye of any
part, chances through, the vntemperatnes, and bad formatio of the same:
for if so be that the Temperamente, had bin good, and by consequence, the
formative virtue had binn strong, she should as then exactlye have formed that
part: for by the operation is the operator thereof known. VVherfofe Aristotle
is of opinion, that the incomplete creation, hath her deformity, through the
vvante of the frigide, could nature, and the imbicillity of the Sperma:
Similitude.
for even as we see, that the Mechanical operatours, or handyecraftes men,
can not make any piece of work so perfect, so neat, of a bad piece of
stuff as, they might well easily do, of a good, and apt and tractable piece
of stuff, which is not spoiled, nor corrupted.

All which is before approvede by the third rule, sect. 1. of the sixte
Epidemioru Hippocratis, founded, on an excellent Axioma in the commetaries of
Gale, where be says, Imbicilla membra multum pravumque excrementum colligere
consueverunt.

Such a congregatio, excrescence of venouous excrementes which chance to
congregate themselves together in such deformed parts do drounde, choacke,
Suffocatio of the natural calidity.
oftentimes corrupt the naturalle caloure, first of all of the diseased part,
and then of the whole body, after the which must necessarilye follovve
death, without the Chyrurgiane being able to remedy the same or with any
aequitye might thereof be blamed although notwithstanding oftetimes the Princes
great Lords, which of these matters have small knowledge, without occasio
do blame, reproach their Chyrurgians: yea some times also accuse them,
require of the magistrate to have punished, themselves also vndeservedlye
punish their Chyrurgians. Accidental imbicillity.


Touching the accidetalle imbicillity, which hath bin from the beginning of
the first creation, it is certain, that as we have said of the momorsions, or
Bittes, even so in like sort we may say of the diseases, that the first are
very nocent, unto the last: For Quae non possunt singula, multa nocent: a
little thereafter, Gutta cavat lapidem, non vi, sed saepe cadendo. We do not
through sickness a mend, the pitcher goes so often to the well, till that in
the end he return broken home again. For all diseases are of so venomous a
nature that although they are clean cured, yet they relinquish some bad
relics in the part, vvherthrough they may the easier return again,
wherefore of our Divine Hippocrates it is called Philostrophes, The one disease
follovvinge the other is very troublesome.
which signifyeth, no return again or at the least, such parts are as then
most subjected to receave some nue disease: also the said Hippocrates says
farther, in his Book of internal diseases, that all aegritudes, which
follow any other disease, are allvvayes most comonlye mortal: because she
finds the natural forces debilitated: which we allsoe must understand of
the vvoundes, which are received in any parts of the body, which before
have once binn wounded. An ague being cured commonly leaves an Empirema
after her.
These dispositiones are of our Physiciones called Diatheses and are esteemed
to have great forces, for the generatione of diseases or for an incurable
confirmation of the same: In like sort allso relinquesheth an Empirema after
her, where by that Personne is made more subicte to receave more agues, that in
such a sort as a hot ove, which hath once bin heated, is more apt again
to receave the heat: as in example, there be any on which hath once binn
wounded, again being wounded, especially in the same place, where before he
was vvouded it is impossible that the said part should have, the same
force, virtue, or vigour, to repugme and to resist for the curatio which
before she hath had, before ever she was wounded: and that in such sort
as in a Corselet or harnas, vvherone hath bin a shot, and having gotten a
crushe, or bending in, allthoughe the same be beaten, and malleated smothe
again, yet it will never be beat so smooth, nether so plain strong as it
was before it had the shot. Nether can can I heer praetermit, to recite
those which have itenerated, and travelled through the Sudatorye regione, and
passede, through the drivelling, or sputaminouse climate, being again ready to
travel the same way, being grevouslye wounded, where there is one which is
safely returned from the journey with good fortune, there are three, yea
four which by the way do faint and so dye: vvherfor as the we admire,
why they are not cured, or vvhye their resanation is so tardife, not
considering that the wounded was half before corrupted, The vvouded which
have binn in the drivelinge climate can very difficultly be cured.
that his humours have vvholy bin aultered through the venoumousnes of the
foresayed disease: or having bin cured thereof, have as yet retained any
aulteratione in the Liver, or in any other internalle parts, which gathers
continually many venomous excrementes, which the foresayed part without
any cessation, discharges into the wounded part.

And so most commonly the occasion of death comes through the inordinate
state of life, in eating, Gluttony is the occasion of much evel.
and drinckinge without observinge any rule of victitation, hauntinge also of
vvoemen, and not suffering themselves to be handled, of the hands of the
Chyrurgian, as the cause requires, it be ether in tenting of the vvounde, by
inscisione, by cauterisatian, by keeping himself quiet which all ancient
Chyrurgians so highly and exactlye commaude, Ease is good for al vvoundes.
to the furtherace of the curatio of the vvoude, follovvinge the sayings of
Celsus, that Optimum Medicamentum, quies, abstinentia, is: So that I am
intended, as of a thing that is of all men known, not much in this place to
speak thereof although notwithstanding, it is oftentimes the occasion of
death, how lightly soever they be wounded: yea allsoe and of great vvoundes,
being clean out of danger through their inordinate manner of life,
especially in eating, and drinckinge, do again fall therein, and come to a
far more vvorse estate then ever before they vveare, yea and sometimes allsoe
dye thereof: for it is most certain that.

More there are which of Gluttonye dye here,
Then of blows, or shottes to death come near.
So that we will now, handle, or treacte, Consideration on the time of the
year.
of the times of the year. There is nothig more manifest, then that many
wounded personnes might of their vvoundes be cured, if so be the time of the
year, vveare such, as it vveare requisite it should, that is, if so be the
four seasons of the year, reserved their natural temperature quality: It is
also apparent that the intemperature of the air, the disordre of the time, the
astrolicalle venom, other funestall influences, do make the vvoundes
incurable, or else very difficult to be cured, and changes the habitude, and
complexione of men, through the chaunginge of the time, through the
Astronomical constellation, which over us is praedominating. As if so be the
winter, which ought indeed to be could, The irregulatede season of the
year aultereth our bodies.
vveare warm, the summer which ought to be warm, is could: Also when it
is now hot, the could, now dry, the moyste, without the time of the year
requiring the same to be othervvyse then he ought to be: vvhoe ca doubt
thereof but the same must be prejudicial, to the vvouded patient? because our
bodies, here bye receave mervaylouse, sudden alterations chaunginges,
vvherthrough out vital spirits, humours, are vvondrouslye, with great danger
aultered, observinge the saying of Hippocrates, which avoucheth that all
repentine subite permutatio, how soever the same may be are unto our bodies
very preiudicialle. All repentine, sudden change is dangerous.
The divrnalle experience demostrateth the same unto us, for if so be in the
winter, in stead of a dry could wind, there respire a southwest wind,
with vvarmishe shovvres of rain, there then comonlye follovve great
corruptiones in our humours, vvherthroughe the vvoundes do putrifye, and
gangraenize. The infected air, may also be an occasion, of the death of many
wounded persons, how little soever they sotimes are wounded: because
without air we can not Live, which allvvayes such as it is we must
receave, We can not live without air.
that not oly through the mouth, through all the conductes of our body,
poro^tyes of our skin, through our Arteryes, which are situated under the
porosityes of our skin, fro whence the foresayed air doth draw towards
our Lunges, sovvhat to cool the heart, refresh it be as it vveare a nurture
unto the same, fro whence the said air is farther spread divided through
our whole body, whereby it the chances, that if so be the same be
corrupted, infected, consequently also the foresayed Heart, with some other of
the noble vvorthiest parts are polluted, in stead of being praeserved,
maintained, in their form virtue. The malignante air pollutes the heart.
Galen in the ninth of his Methodes, attributeth so much to the air, that he
says that the especiallist, principalist demonstratio to cure any dissease,
must be observed out of the air: because we ca in no sort, be wanting or
missing the communitye, and use thereof.

Besides al these occasiones, there are yet certain times of the year, which
are irreprehedable, yet clean contrary to certain disseases: for vvhoe is he
that doubts that the star Canicula doth not disturb the vvynes, Virtves of
the doggedayes.
causes the same to boyle, where he lies in the fellers? as by experience
we find in Plinio we may read, that the same also causes our blood to
boyle within our veins, Lib. 14. Chap. 18.
that sotimes there follows such a superfluous sangvinatio, that by no
means it can be restaygned, by the which means the same also flovveth
toward the wounded part, which before was tormented with sufficient payne
enough. In like sort also we perceave the Autumn, The Autumn is enemy to
all pulmonicall vvoundes
or Hurvest to be an enemy to all vvoundes of the Lunges, as is apparet by the
10. rule, the 3. of the Aphorisms, becavse they oftentimes change into
fistles or into pectorall Apostemationes. The penetrable could is allsoe a
sore enemy to all vvoudes in the Head, Aphor. 3. lib. 5. Farthermore
Hippocrates dissuadeth us, Lib. de aere, We must not purge in the dog days.
aquis locis to administer any physic unto the patients in the great
constellation of the stars under the Solsticium, nor under the
Aequinoctialles, because of the great perturbations, alterations, which as
then are in our bodies, by the which means the vvoundes as the are far more
molestious mortalle: which must al so be understood of the great vvyndes
thunderinges, the effects whereof are so admirable, terrible, in inanimate
things, vvherbye we may the less admire at the great alterationes, which
they do cause in the vvoundes, disseases of men's bodies, which body is the
most sensiblest, and the most dilicatest, amongst all the animate bodies.

Besides this we have spoken of the times saysons of the year, An excellent
observation.
we may also add heeruto that the Carpenters, the Architectors, do alsoe
observe a choice of the fellede, cut down vvoode, which at this time, or at
that saysone of the moon hath bin felled: esteeminge the vvoode, to be more
moyste, replete with vvormes, more subject to corruption, which is felled in
the full Moon, that more durable yea all most incorruptible, The inanimate
things do feel the effects of the Moon.
which is felled in the decreace of the Moon, as in Palladio we may read,
in his Treatise of January, Novebre, Caesar also says the same, in his
commentaryes, on Arat: that the Moon hath not only power over that which
hath received sesibilitye, but that alsoe the stones, the bones, and the VVoode
do perceave the effects of the Moon, which being of the Mooinfected,
vvexeth full of vvormes: vvherfor the common phrase of the Lavvyers, or
Iuristes is as yet observed, de Lignis sua Luna caesis:: which being so
wherefore should not we also esteem a vvounde, to be more moyste in a fulle
Moon, more subjected to putrefactione, then in the decreace of the Moon,
saying that man is tender of flesh far more subjected under the domination,
subiectione of the Moon, the influences thereof, then those things, Man is
subject unto all inflvences.
which are inanimate have nether life, nor sensation: Above all these
praecedente, reasons, and experiences it is manifest, a common axiom, that all
terrestrialle corps, are ruled, governed by the celestial, or supernal
influences.

Through all which foresayed occasions, the humours oftentimes being so
corrupted, polluted, after death there are certain apostematios four in divers
places of the body, yea sometimes allso, in some of the vvorthyest parts of the
body, as in the Liver, in the Brains, in the Milte, in the Lunges, or in any
ioynctes, according unto the imbicillitye of any of the parts of the body,
which have bin debile, apt to receave such impurity of the body, which
being thervvith, out of all measure charged, expellethe fro him the forsayed
impure humours, in any of the said feeble parts, which thereafter is changed
into purulet matter, the which there possessing more place, making more
concavitye, the is requisite, do expel fro them certain faetide venomous
vapours, participate the same unto all the other vvorthiest parts, out of the
which ensues, Inquietude, Agues, Convulsios, or Spasmus, Phrenesye in the end
necessarily must follovve death perceaving the vvoudes to vvaxe black dry,
without being able to judge thereof, or to know the occasio, whereof this
might proceed, notvvithstading how erudite, Corrodinge matter causes many
accidents.
expert soever the Chyrurgia be, nether being possible for him howe small
soever the vvounde be to save the Patient, havig no sign vvherbye he may
know, whether that venoumouse matter, hath implanted it self in any of the
said vvorthyest parts, or not. Nether.

Can the physicione cure all those,
Which are incurable, and without repose.
Costitutio of the vvouded.
Let us therefore now consider, search out the pecvliare, costitutios of the
wounded: some there are which have little blood, towards the resanatio of
their vvoundes: others have to much which notvvithstading, is nether to the
curation good enough, nor pure enough.

Hippocrates speaking of those which have to little blood, in the 24. rule
of the fourth section, in the sixth Epid: says that those which have their
entralls hot, as it vveare burning, their flesh could have binn badlye
nourished, Which are vnhealth same poeple.
which commonly we call vnhealthsame poeple, who having received in their
bodies some great vvoud, are most commonly always very difficult to be cured,
for want of materialles: which also we may see to be in aged persons, when
as they are any vvhear wounded, or by chance break their legs. We have
also an excellent rule in Hippocrate which is, the 6. Aphorism, of the sixte
sectione where he says Hydropicorum, A notatable sentence.
lentiginorum on other places he addethe theruto Vlcera non facile sanantur: of
those which are troubled with the Dropsy, because their blood is to clear,
vvaterishe: of the lentiginouse, because their blood is to sharpe, or tart,
for that occasion can make no good combinatione, or healinge: whereby this
might be occasion, to wit, whether it be through nature, or by the inordinate
manner of life, of eating, or drincking, it becaused, as by the drincking of
strong vvynes, or by eating of garlic, of Onions, of Porrhy, of pouldred, or
saulted meat, or of spices, as the suldiours vveare vvonte to do, that is
little belonging to our purpose. Nether can I heer praetermit to speak,
Perturbation of mind.
of the perturbace of the mind vvherthroughe most commonly the Martialistes
are very much afflicted, which through the generosity of their courage, if so
be that in any assault, battle or skirmish, they have not valiate enough
born themselves, or at the least not to the cotentatio of their Captain, have
not as Caesaristes behaved themselves, fought are therefore blamed, of those
which are their, enviours such as hate the, vvheri they do so vehemetlye
vex, greeve themselves, that it ircketh the, do so melancholize themselves
therein, that they do vvholy neglect themselves, desiring vociferatinge for
death rather the to live so miserablelye in dishonour. Wherefore also it may
happen in the same, (being greevouslye vvouded) that which happened to the
Lord of Aussun, which was one of the most valiant, most magnanimouse,
gentlemen of all France, of whom it was commonly for a proverb said,
Hardiness of Assun.
the hardiness, and valour d'Aussun, causes us to adhibite credit thereunto,
who, through I know not what mischance, suddayn astonishmet in the first
charge of the battle at dreux, there arrived as it wear overvvhelmed him such
a disgrace, for the which he so greeved him self, and sorrovved that within
few days thereafter with sorrow he died: having solemnly svvorne, that he
would never any more eat, or drink, with which resolution hedyed.
Contrarily the soldiers sotimes, do so valiantly combat, by the which they
vvexe so courageous, do so joy themselves therein, thereby do so exalt
themselves, that their heart of tetimes is inflamed, puffed up with pride of
their victory, honour which they reap, enjoy. Which causes great
alteratio, change as well in the body of the one as of the other.

And to speak truth, The perturba^ are of g^ate effect forces in our bodies.
such motios turbatio of the mind, are of great forces, in the body of man,
they cause therein ether great aegritudes disseases, or else death: for if to be
the motions, and perturbations of the mind, have pover to increace the
natural caloure, or to diminis he the same, of causing the same to draw in
vvardes, or to expel the same outvvardes to spread it self by the whole
body: such motios of the natural calour, which do reduce with the the
vital spirits, the blood, is an occasio of all disseases, of health: there
must then certaynlye subseqvute, that the said motions, and perturbationes of
the soul, and mind, have all power in their hands of our health.

So that it is even as Aristotle, Lib. de motu animalis Chap. 5. says, that
the motions, and turbations of the mind, do cause such a remotio and
alteration of the natural caloure: as Hippocrates also testifies the same
unto us sect. 5. of the 6. Epidemiorum, Galenus Cap. 5. secundae de Symptomatum
causis and Chap. 5. of the second of Methodes; Through pertubations of the
mind, a man may dye.
where he demostrateth, that there are many which through motione, and
perturbatione of the minds have died: Wherefore Galen also, on the 14. rule,
of the 4. section, of the sixth Epidemiorum, those which internallye, have a
sharpe corrodent caloure, (wherefore by by so much the more we must prohibit
the wounded) to abstayn from ire, and choler, and from all turbations of the
mind, vvherbye the humours might be moved. The said Galen in his book de
sanitate tuenda demonstrates, that all turbations of the soul all motions of
the mind, do ingendre great quantitye of Cholera whereby are caused great
inflamatios fluxions in the wounded part and per conseqvence a Gangraena, and
sometimes in the end a sudden death.

Amongst all other turbations of the spirits, Joy is that which ought to
cause the least accidents unto our bodies, notwithstanding was the same so
immoderate, and violent in Chilonio lacedemonico, Sudden death of Joy.
in Diagero Rhodiano, both the which so joyed themselves, perceavinge their
children victoriouslye to return over their enemies, that of joy they both
immediately, and suddaynlye died: for through such immoderate joy, the blood
and the vital spirits of the Heart, are with such vehemecy reverted from the
Heart, and diffused and disperced, through the universal body that the
Heart, is vvholye destitute of his natural caloure, the person must
necessarilye fall into syncopizatione, or fayntnes, out of which commonly
follows death: Virtues of moderate joy.
But if the joy be moderate, it fortifyeth, and strengthens the animale, the
naturalle virtues, stirs up the vital spirits, suggerateth the digestione,
and is consequently commodious for all the constitutione of mans body,
vvherthrough the Ioynctes, are throughely soacked, moystened, because of the
humiditye which is disperced through the whole massa of the blood, so that
by this means, the vvoundes are better modified, and incarnated and those
parts do increace, and pingvifye.

Effects of Cholera.
In like sort alsoe doth Cholera, or anger, and yet also more, then the
immoderate joy: because heerby, besides all this that in the spirits humours of
the body is caused great corrvptione and they through their great heat,
caloure chance to inflame, and by this means consequently, the whole
habitvde of the body is replete with putrid agues, how little sick soever
the person be, which foresayed agues, if they chance to afflict the patient
unto death as it oftentimes happens, we most commolye then attribute the
same unto his wound, Accidents of sorrow.
as if of the Chyrurgiane he had not bin well handled, and not to the ague.
Is it not evidente enough unto us, what accidents are caused through
sorrow, and grief, how healthful, sovnd soever the personne be which is
thervvith entrapped? for she so reserateth, and as it vveare strictly
occludeth the Heart, that by no means there can engendre any vital
spirits, and how few soever there are, yet they may not be dispercede with
the blood through the whole body, because the same is gross, and tenebrous,
by the which the vital virtues, and al their accoplices, are debilitated: so
that in the end a man is in his mind vexed, hebede, The melacholicke do hate
themselves.
the Heart omitteth all joy, pleasure, he odiously hates himself, falling
into desperatione, and raging, having lost his livelye colour in his face,
consuming the body, whereby oftentimes must follow death.

It will not also be alienate unto our purpose, to the a poroving of my
sayings, that I here recite that which the father of eloquence hath writ
ad Atticum, the words whereof are these: It vveare an excellent matter my
good friend Atticus, that man could live, without meat, or drink: but yet a
far more excellelleter matter if so be without any envy, and hate we
could Live: because those viands which we eat, do corrupt nothig else the
our humours, but the traitorous envy, and sorrow, do consume us eve unto the
bones: Envye, malice consume the bones, corrode the entralls, as we playnlye
may behoulde: for man sickeneth, through some certain envye, malice, of the
which he by continuance of time dies. Doest thou not know by experience,
that two torturors, which will deprive a ma of life, that the torturer of
grief, and sorrow is the most cruellest, yea then of the Gluttonye? Effects
of stupefactione.


Nether may we here omit to recense, and speak of the obstupescece, fear,
wherewith the covvardes, faint hearted are oftentimes touched, and taken: This
stupor causes in us, the same accidetes which the sorrow causes but
somewhat greater for the time: for this fore said stupefactione, and fear,
expulseth from him, retracteth toward the heart (but with more festination,
more raptnes, then the sorrow) the blood the vital spirits, vvherfor we
may perceave, that the face in the time of stupefactione, fear, vvaxeth pale,
and the external parts could, with tremblinge of the whole body: the Belly
relaxateth, the speech fails, with a great reverberation of the heart,
because that through the great quantity of blood, of the spirits, which
suddaynly do retire thethervvardes, being almost suffocated can very
difficultlye move it self, but greatly desires to be refreshed, and
discharged of such a sarcinatione, so that oftentimes there follows death,
because the blood being drawn towards the Heart, suffocates it self
there, by that means the natural calor and the vital spirits beig
extingvished, Error of the vulgar, common poeple.
without the which the life of man can not be preserved.

If so be that any body being wounded, through perturbatios of the mind do
chance to dye, the vulgar common poeple, will not attribute the occasio of
death unto chose praecedent, or praenominated occasions, but far more to the
negligence, and ignorance, of the Chyrurgian, which hath not intreacted him,
as it vveare convenient he had done, Fear and nicenes do impeach health.
although that those which have a more sovvnder judgment of such occasions,
will judge clane contrary thereunto, and others. The like also may be said of
those, which will not allovv of the will, and intent of the Chyrurgian,
nether of any other remedies which vveare commodious, and proffitable for his
health, being ether to timorous, or delicate, to suffer any apertion, which
for his disease had bin necessary, to administre issue, passage to some
corrodent matter, or parcels of bones, that lye there praepared ready to be
taken out, which by their remansione in that place, do also corrupt the
finitimate parts, do alter permutate the remanent part of bone, and corrupt
the Marrovve, whereby the health, can not suddaynlye follovve, as the
Chyrurgiane is exoptatinge, vvishinge for the same, yea also by this means
oftentimes remain incurable, by which occasion the Chyrurgiane, The History
of Duke d'Aumalle aftervvardes Duke of Guise.
with his Patient must hope for that which his Patient will not suffer, and
yet notvvithstandinge is required of his disease. And to this end Du Bellay,
recites in his memories, that the Duke d'Aumall, son to the Duke a Gvyse,
being mortally vvouded, with a spliter of a lauce, which pierced his Eye,
said to the Chyrurgians, entreat, or handle not my son as a Prince, or
mighty Lord, but as a Pioner, or servant: which was alsoe an occasion of
his resanation, because he suffered, Contemplation of instruments.
that the tronchone of the Lance, which stuck clean through his head, to be
with force, and violence drawn therout.

And if therefore we desire to enter into the conteplatio of the diversityes of
instrumemetes wherewith the vvoudes are made, we shall then find sufficient
occasion, to establish the unexpected death considering only the matter
whereof the vvoundes are received, as well of the small, as great vvoundes.
Those which have written of Agriculture, Whervvith the vvounde is made must
be considered
or tillage, Gardening, as Cato Plinius, Columella say, that theris great
difference, whether a tree be with an Iron knife engraffed, or with a knife
of Bone. And we make little or no difference, whether our bodies are wounded
with Lead, Iron or Brass, seeing that brass being mixed vvithe the matter of
our vvoundes resolves it self into viriditye, which corrodeth the flesh,
and causes sometimes such an inflammatio, that death thereafter follows.
Nether is it sufficient, that in short time, we have accommodated this mettle
unto our ruin, but now by little and little we make it four cornerde, which
is far more dangerous, the if it vveare round, because through the
quadrangulatenes thereof, it rescindeth, cutteth breaks in pieces al that
vvhero it glances, without any small hope of resanatione: as also sometimes
the bullets are fastened together with coppervvyer by which means they cut
a sundre all flesh, veins, arteryes and Synnues, which are in that part.

And because that those men, which comonlye we must give account of our cures,
A notable History of the daughter of Nerio.
are far more stirred up through exaples the with any reason, what example
is it of the daughter of Nerio which is described in the fifte book of
Epidem: Hippocratis, which being but of the age of 20. years, and being
smitten jestingly, of one of her playfellovves, and friends, with the palm of
the hand, on her forehead, Note the circustances of the blovve the death will
seem more admirable.
is thereof grovven mute, asthmaticke, or short of respiratio and fallen into a
convulsione, and tremblinge, and so the ninth day thereafter died. True will
the backbiter or sclaunderer say that chanced through the commotio of the
brains: what ansvver? of such a little blow, which with the palm of the
hand was done, and of a maiden, friend and playfellovve, iestinglye strikinge
a maid of tvventye years? VVhye should not then the same commotione of a
varice, or bursted vain, not only in the Brains, but in the Breast also,
which happens to a soldier, who hath ridden the space of ten, or tvvelve
hovvres lunge on a harde trottinge Horse, and who before hath taken great
pains, and travayle, hath led an inordinate manner of victitatione, the veins
of the Lunges, the Heart spanned, extended, or svvollen, with vvyne which is
as it vveare a corselet unto them, Wine is necessary for soldiers, and
combatates.
vvhervvithe they adorn, arm themselves, when as they assault their enemies,
and especially in Battle, where they do straygne themselves with lovvde
clamours and scritchinges, with fightinge, and furiously assaultinge, not
dallying, or playing with their enemies, but boldly incountring them with
Lances, on their bodies, and thvvacking the on the other with courtelasses,
and with Pistols, and Muskettes, shootinge each, at other, by that means to
murder on another, yea and they also which are completelye harnessed, being
lifted out of their saddles lye one the earth for the other Horses,
Discommodityes of wars
to trample one which not only one or two days have binn in great trouble
but the whole before winter have suffered in tolerable could, and marched
through, rain, wind hayle, and Snovve, or else have travayled the whole
summer, through extreme heat of the sun, and have received all the injuries
of time have bin hardly lodged yea and sometimes under the resplendet stars,
living on his pray which he hath gotten, sometimes half dressed, or ravve,
hot or could not tarrying the time, of the meals sometimes being replete
with, filthy, stinckinge and corrupt viands, and for his drink harsh,
noughty tappiges of vvyne, or else foul and impure puddle, yea stinckinge
water, having consumed most of his time with nocturnal vigilations,
labour, fear, stupor, anger, melancholy.

Many there are which for want of succour do dye.
Others dye because in time they are not dressed and succoured, which as yet
not long a go is happened, unto our great sorrow, lamentatione, to Captain
Roux, who was shot in his cheek, rising, to avoid a clistery, which was
administered unto him, had such a fluxione of blood out of his vvounde, during
the space of eight hovvres, without finding any Chyrurgiane which could
restraygne the blood, so that in the end he was constrained to yield his
spirit, my partakers, or compagnions, Ponget, le Gendre, and Hubert, and I,
being charged to tarry with the King that night in the trenches: therefore the
Chyrurgians ought no more to be blamed, then when the disease is so deeplye
rooted, that there is no more remedy or cure for the same, for as we say by
the common proverb, or old adagye.

To serotine doth Doctor then begin,
When the disease to deep is rooted in.
Many things are oftentimes vvatinge unto the vvouded.
There are othervvyse many things wanting by the vvouded, wherewith we might
succour the, solace the as it is requisite we should. We see oftentimes
great Lords lodged in an aperte place where the vvyndes blovve on al sides,
being destitute of old linen to dress them with, have very small store of
victuals, and drink, I here omit the poor soldiers, who being wounded
must lodge on the earth.

Obiectio.
Thereto may now be answered: I confess that sometimes of the year are
intemperate, vnordinate, that the air also is infected, corrupted that the
wounded also have want, are destitute of many things, briefly to conclude,
that many of the above rehearsed things do fail: notvvithstandinge there are
many cured without any accidents chauncinge to their vvoundes, and for
whose sake take little pains, have no great expenses, although they are
very sorelye wounded contrarily, other of little shallovv vvoudes do dye.
Ansvver.
To this object I answer, that all vvoundes which seem to be large ample,
are not therefore mortal or perilous, as are the great carnal or fleshye
dissolutions or vvoundes, wherein none of the vvorthiest parts are touched
which are necessary to the life of man, wherein are nether hurt great
Veins, Arteryes or synnues, but which are only great, cut in the flesh,
as in the Buttock, in the calfe of the Legs or in an Arm and yet
notvvithstandinge be called a great vvounde, not being so dangerous, as the
least punctio of a synnue is, or the hurt of a great Vain or Arterye, or else
a little fissure of the Cranium, or any small thrust in the Breast, or the
inferior part of the Belly, percinge into the concavitye of the same.
Dangerous vvoundes
And if so be there vveare any which of such vvoundes vveare cured, being
great vvoundes, not considering the apertione, but because of the vvouded
part they ought to be well disposed, to buste strong, to resist such an
evell, impeach the accidents which happen thereunto, that they must also be
rightly disposed tempered without any of the vvorthye parts, or those
which are necessary unto life being thervvithe polluted or corrupted, and such
may easily be cured: Necessary things a good curatione.
So that those which are not vvholye sovvnde of body having received such a
vvounde, are in great danger of death, as others considering the difference of
the time and of the difference of the body, and body, and of parts thereof:
there are some, which are of so good a temperature, that they with great
facility are cured of such vvoudes, the which in others bodies wear mortal:
Contrarily there are some persons, which have received a wound in some abiecte
and not necessary part or Ioyncte, without profoundly penetrating the same,
whereof notvvithstading they died, ether through the constitutio of the time or
through the disposition of the body, the humours where of have their
deflueces towards the wounded part or else through any other occasions, here
before alleged: but the vulgar poeple, can not compraehend all these
circumstances, and considirations, as the Chyrurgians do in such persons.

For to speak truth we look on the time, The vulgar, and common poeple, ca
not so deeplye judge consider any thing as the Chyrurgiane.
one the year, day, number of poeple, all which have bin the one as
sorelye hurt, or vvoundede as the other, yet for all that, those which we
esteem most dangerously vvoudede, we judge to be out of all hope, are
sotimes first of all cured: Where of we do not so much admire, after we
have after death anotomizede the dead corpse: for besides there vvounde we
find, an other apparente occasion of death.

As it is as yet in fresh memory happened to the Lord of Bellay Baron of
Tovarce, History of my lord of of Bellay.
King at d'Ivetot, who having received a shot before Rove, or Roane in his
left Arm, where of the focille of the Elbovve was broken the vvounde being
in good suppu^atio, yielding good matter, and the flesh very rubicund,
grayned as we would desire, the Arm remaining in his natural
dispositione, as well above, as beneathe, without any payne, or
inflammatione, very few, or no agues at all adioyninge thereunto,
notwithstanding al which being brought to his house, tvventy days after his
wound received, is he fallen into a hot, venomous, or furious ague, which
accompagniede him unto the thirtith day, in which day he died, how great
pains, and labour soever the expertest Doctors of Physic, Chyrurgians and
amongst other the right vvorshipfull Mr. Amboyse Dr. of Physic, an ordinary
Physicione to the King, have therein taken, whose experience is sufficiently
know, the foresayed Arm with the vvoud allvvayes remaining is his former
estate, The occasions of the death of the King of d'Iveror.
disposition. Now the corps being Anotomized, we perceaved his Lunges to be
clean corrupt, and replete with obdurate schirrouse vlcerations, his right
Kidney also vvholy polluted much matter in his blather: which was the
occasion of his death, not the vvounde it is a thing therefore most certain,
that if so be his entralls had binn soud without doubt he might have bin
cured of his vvounde, because the same nether of it self, nor of any other
accidents was mortal.

An other History of my Lord of Gyuri.
The contrary hereof chanced, to the great contentation of all the Nobility,
to my Lord of Gyuri who having received, a terrible shot, in his sinistre
shoulder, the entrace whereof was right in the ioyncture, the bullet having
touched a great part of the apophysis of the bone of the Arm, pearcinge a
lunge the Omoplate, remaining, in the inferiore angle of the foresayed
Omoplate, which bullet was happily extracted drawn out by Mr. Lavenot,
svvoren Chyrurgiane to the King, which very excellently hath dressed him the
first time: notvvithstandinge, he is of this great wound (I say great
vvounde considering that part of the body) vvholy cured, without perceaving
therein any bad accidents.

Nature cures all diseases.
The which we must attribute, partly to the good Temperature compositione,
and nature, (which must cure all diseases,) when as she is evel entreated of
expert, and learnede Physicians, and Chyrurgians, and thereof aided, as very
excellently hath done amongst others, the right vvorshipfull Mr. Portaile,
Counceller, chief Chyrurgian to the King, which as now is chief amongst us:
of Mr. Gillis des Rus, his Chyrurgiane, which dressed him: and we are heer
farther to note, and observe, that there may be an other which being vvouded in
the same place of his body, shall be treacted of the self same Chyrurgians, and
shall yet for all that dye.

And for the confirmatione, of al that which is before rehearced, I will
conclude this my Apology, through my Lords heerevnder nominated, beginning
with my Lord de Hallot de Montmorency, who being on Horseback by the City
of Rovan, received a shot of a canon, of the which his Horse died, he being
prostrated on the earth, his Leg being in dives pieces broke right under the
Ioyncte of the Knee, notvvithstandinge all which, with his good disposition
nature hath cobated against all the malice of time, magnitude of the vvounde,
being very successivelye cured of the right vvorshipfull Mr. Martel,
Chyrurgiane to the King, A^o the History.
who is very expert in all the operations of Chyrurgerye. Contrarilye, my
Lord the Baron of Salignac, being wounded only with a simple shot of a
handgunn, without any fracture of bones, in the end dyed thereof, al though
notvvithstandinge he was assisted by the right vvorshipfull Mr. Pouget, alsoe
one of the Kings Chyrurgians and chieffe in Montpelliers having seen the
hour, in the which the Gangraena chanced to his vvounde, many fluxions
oppressed him, by which means he very difficultlye could be cured: Which
we must only attribute uto his teperature, which was not so good as in
deed it vveare to be exoptated it had.

The most happy cure which Mr. des Hayes hath effected, A another History.
one also of the Kings Chyrurgians, which is a very vvyse man in the art of
Chyrurgerye on my Lord de Vic, gouvernoure for the King in St. Denis, who
with divers vvoundes was wounded, especially in his head by the crovvne of
the head, and one the sagittalle suture which was rescided clean
overthvvarte, is thereof very ominously cured whereby is demostrated unto us,
what the good dispositione of the body can do, which cobated against the
injuries, and malice of time, and many other more, inquietudes, vveare clean
contrary unto him: wherein the foresayed Mr. des Hayes, hath used great
consideration, to his perfect resanatione.

The same allsoe happened, in my Lord the Duke of esperno, An other History.
who being wounded with a greateshott, which dilaniated a part of his
inferior lip, had deprived him of certain of his teeth, and a part of his
chavvbone, penetratinge, taking his issue close by the vain Iugularis, was
cured of Monst. le Gendre, Surlin, Chyrurgians to the foresayed Duke: out of
the which we may plainly note, that not only the iunioritye, or youth and
good temperature, are not only profitable unto the resanatione of vvoundes,
but alsoe the good constitutione of the time: For a little before (which was
about the besieging of Chartres) the died most of all the vvouded, The
constitutione of the time is comodious to resanatione
how sound notwithstanding soever they vveare, how little soever they vveare
wounded: which partly we must attribute to the bad constitution of the
time, as in deed at that time it was a disordered weather: because in a
short time thereafter, all the wounded vveare of their vvoundes cured: amongst
others my Lord the Earl of Flex, An other History.
vvhoe in the end of the besieginge, received a short of a Canon in the
inferior part of his Belly, whereof it was vvholye plettered even unto the
Peritoneum, the wound being almost the length of a foot, in longitude, of
half a foot, in latitude, as Mr. Portayle Samboyse can vvitnes, which a lunge
time administered help unto them. An other History.
On the same time, my Lord of Favolle was cured, of a shot, which brake
both the focilles of his Leg, a little above the ankle, which allsoe was
cured of the right vvorshipfulle Mr. Portaile, d'Amboyse, of the most ominouse,
dextrous had of Mr. Billarde, ordinary Chyrurgiane to the King, and of Mr.
Biron.

And for an inventio, or practice, which we might say to be vvholy against
reason, amongst many others more which chanced at Chartres: there was the
Chamberlain of my Lord the Earl of Chiverny, An other History.
called the Pietmontois, who was vvouded, on his head with a raper, whereby
his Parietale was clea rescided through, yea clean through the Dura, Pia
matter also, piercing the depth of ones finger into the substance of the Brains:
whereof in the second dressinge, clean through the dissolutione of the
Craniu, there issued out as much of his Brains, as the quatity of the little
finger in logitude, crassitude thereof: notwithstanding al this is he in the
presence of the right vvorshipfull Mr. Le Febure, Duret, svvorne Physicians to
the King, other Doctors of this profession out of Paris, which are very
expert in Chyrurgerye, which vveare alsoe assistants in this disease, was
of me completelye cured, without having retained any accident, or
impediment thereof: Divers Chyrurgians of the city of Chartres stood heerby,
amongst the rest was Mr. Fransoys Cheaureau, Michel Fauveau.

At the same time trepanede M Gabriell du Tertre, An other History.
a very expert Chyrurgiane in all his operationes, a certain vvomane which
was threescore year of age, or more, vvhoe had a fracture in her
occipitalle parts of the head: he had besides her a little page, or lackye
in hands, vvhoe had his Os Petrosum brokene split, and some part of the
Parietale. In like sort also trepanned Mr. Gillis Pillier, a most expert
Chyrurgiane, a Tripeseller, called Mr. Laurence, who had his membrane Dura
matter cleft a sunder: all which foresayed patients have received their
complete resanatione: we must heer also farther note, that within the space
of two months therbefore all those which vveare wounded in the Head died,
notvvithstandinge all the secourse we could do them yet for all that they
dyed suddaynlye.

All which being noted, we must attribute the deaths of so many valiant
Capitaynes, Conclusione of the Apologye.
worthy Lords, and brave soldiers, on such occasions, and disorders, and
not on the fault as if they vveare inconvenientlye treacted, solicited,
whether ether it vveare through yonge, or old Chyrurgians. Or else we will
conclude it rightly, with the Aphorism, common proverb, it is allvvayes good
Luck, as loge as a man falls not and breaks his Neck.

As Hesiodus said, sometimes is the day our mother, and sometims our
stepmother.

End of the Apologye for the Chyrurgians.
THE INDEX OF THE MOST ESPECIAL, and notablest things contained in this
worcke of Chyrurgerye, wherein the F denotateth the lease.
A
A Bullet sometimes, carries somethinges with it into the body. Fol. 7. A
bullet sometimes pierces through the grissles. Fol. 8 A bullet through his
ponderousnes sinks dovvnevvardes. Fol. 8 A Chyrurgian may easily in
searching a broken scull be deceaved. Fol. 9 A certain Ligature. Fol. 39 A
Chyrurgiane is the servant of Nature. Fol. 8 A double inscisione in a double
Hernia. Fol. 22 A dissease being cured, most commonly leaves some relic
behind it. Fol. 51 A fingercase of Lattinne. Fol. 39 A great vvounde is taken
three manner of ways. Fol. 2 A history of the daughter of Nerius. Fol. 20 A
head noughtilye formede. Fol. 50. 53 A monstruose Child. Fol. 36 A notable
history. Fol. 7 A notable sentence. Fol. 50 A remedy against the corruptinge
of the gumes. Fol. 24 A suture, or commissure what they be. Fol. 9 A thumb
being vvholye mutilate. Fol. 39 A tryede remedy, for sinckinge of the palate.
Fol. 25 A true sign of the imbicillitye of any part. Fol. 50 Accidents of a
departed svvellinge. Fol. 2 Accidents of the Dropsye. Fol. 20 Accidents
which may ensue through cutting to high of the palate. Fol. 25 Accidents
proceeding out of bad phlebotomy. Fol. 27 Accidentalle imbicillitye. Fol. 51
Accidents of sorrow. Fol. 52 Actualle Cauterye. Fol. 39 Admonitio
concerning all great Apostematios. Fol. 18 Admonitione for the lettinge of
water or matter go from the Breast. Fol. 29 Admonitione for the Chyrurgiane
concerning the Polipum. Fol. 22 Admonitione for the Chyrurgiane, concerning
the extraction of yonge Children out of their mothers body. Fol. 35
Admonitione in the applicatione of the actual Cauteryes. Fol. 42 Admonitione
concerning the bloody flixe. Fol. 49 Advice of Celsus. Fol. 5 After what
sort we ought to list out the trepanede bone. Fol. 12 After what manner we
must in sovving collocate the patient. Fol. 16 After what sort we must
thrust in again the Net. Fol. 16 After what sort we ought to tie the teeth.
Fol. 27 Against rotten, hollovve, and stinckinge teethe. Fol. 26 Agreement of
Mr. Gourmelin and Mr. Pare. Fol. 38 All great vvoundes are dangerous. Fol. 51
An excellent similitude. Fol. 5 An other fashion of sovving of the belly,
according to some men's sayings. Fol. 17 An other condition, vvheron we must
consider, in the opening of a svvellinge. Fol. 18 An exellent consideration to
be had of the Paracentese. (20 An other means to cure the Polipum. Fol. 22 An
instrument called Staphilagres. Fol. 25 Antiades. Fol. 25 Aneurisma is
dangerous. Fol. 30 An artery which of the Author was tied above the
Aneurisma. Fol. 30 An other practise concerning the Fistles of the Fundament.
Fol. 35 An astringent plaster on a fracture. Fol. 46 An excellent observatione.
Fol. 47 Anglevvyse figure the natural situation of the arm. (47 An ague
being cured, commonly leaves and Empiema after her. Fol. 51 Applicatione of
divers corrosives. Fol. 20 Applicatione of Boxes. Fol. 32 Applicatione of the
superior Ligature, in a broken Leg. Fol. 46 Apertione in the Scrotum, by
the thrusting through of a silk thread. Fol. 22 Apertione in the Veins, and
arteryes, of the temples of the head. Fol. 29 Apostemations found in the
vvorthyeste parts of the body. Fol. 52 Archigenes. Fol. 20 Ascites is
subject to Paracentese. Fol. 20 Astringentia. Fol. 49 Attractive ligature.
Fol. 45 Ancient Chyrurgians cauterized the Varices. Fol. 31 Autumn enemy to
all pulmonicalle vvoundes. Fol. 51
B
Back badlye formede. Fol. 50 Bad signs. Fol. 3 Basilica. Fol. 29 Basilica
is dangerous to be phlebotomized. Fol. 30 Black vain. Fol. 29 Bloodyeflixe.
Fol. 47 Bones of yonge Childrene are bent invvardlye. Fol. 12 Bones subjected
to all manner of disseases. Fol. 33 Boxes may be applyede on all places of the
body. Fol. 32 Breast baddelye formede. Fol. 50 Broad, and narrovve lancets.
Fol. 28
C
Canckerous almodes, may not be tyede, nor cut of. Fol. 26 Cauterizatione of
the Caries must be reiterated. Fol. 34 Cauteryes to cauterize deeply. Fol. 40
Cauteryes for those which are troubled with the lazarye. Fol. 40 Cauteryes
of Mr. Cheval. Fol. 41 Cauterye of Mr. Iaqves de Ville neufue. ibidem Cauterye
of Mr. Rasse d'esneux ibidem. Cauterye which in all haest can be made. Fol. 41
Cauterye in the Fibra. Fol. 42 Celsus. 9 his manner of sovvinge of the Belly.
Fol. 17 Cephalica. 29 openede without danger. Fol. 30 Chirurgerye is
auncienter then Physic. Fol. 1 Chyrurgerye must not rashly be effectede.
Fol. 8 Choice of the place where we should extirpate any ioyncte. Fol. 37
Circumiacent part in all vlcerations in cauterizinge must be freed. Fol. 34
Cleavinge of the Ears, and nostrils. Fol. 23 Clisteryes made in divers
fashons. Fol. 49 Coloboma, curtum. Fol. 23 Columella. Fol. 24 Comparison. Fol.
50 Conclusione of the Apologye. Fol. 54 Consideratione for the vvoundes of the
head. Fol. 3 Consideration to be had before the givinge of report. Fol. 4
Consideration, of Bullets. Fol. 6 Consideratione in fasteninge of the Ligature.
Fol. 45 Consideratione on the time of the year. Fol. 51 Constitutione of the
vvounde. Fol. 52 Constitutione of the time, is commodious to resanatione. Fol.
54 Contemplatione of instruments. Fol. 53 Continuace of the manner rightly to
phlebotomise. Fol. 28 Continuance of raspinge of the Caries of bones. Fol. 33
Continuance of keeping open an vlceration. Fol. 43 Convulsione in vvoundes is
very dangerous. Fol. 2 Corrosive with an inscisione in an Escara. Fol. 20
Council of Hippocrates to draw of the water. Fol. 21 Council of ancient
professors, for the curing of the Varices. Fol. 31 Corrodinge matter causes
many bad accidetes. Fol. 52 Cure of the tunge tyinge. Fol. 24 Cure of
Ranula, and reversione thereof. Fol. 24 Cure of Aneurisma. Fol. 30 Cure of a
Varice. Fol. 31 Cure of the putrefacted bones. Fol. 33 Cure of the Panaris.
Fol. 39 Cure of a croockede finger. ibidem Cure of the Dysenteria. Fol. 48
D
Dangerous vvoundes. Fol. 52 Descriptione of Physic. Fol. 1 Descriptione of
the signs, of a dilaniated Cranium. Fol. 8 Descriptione of sovvinge. Fol. 23
Descriptione of the Dropsye. Fol. 20 Descriptione of Aneurisma. Fol. 30
Descriptione of a Varice. Fol. 31 Descriptione of Horseleches. Fol. 31
Descriptione of horne boxes. Fol. 32 Descriptione of naturalle bones. Fol. 33
Decentlye to wind. Fol. 45 Descriptione of the bloodyeflixe. Fol. 47
Difference between these three vlcerations Ateroma, Steatoma, and Meliceres.
Fol. 18 Difference of Boxes. Fol. 32 Differences of the Cauteryes not properly
taken. Fol. 93 Differences of the Cauteryes simpletye taken. Fol. 40
Differences of Cauteryes concerning their figure. 40 concerning their
action. ibidem Number. ibid. manner of applicatione. ibidem Divers
miscostruinges of this vvorde Chyrurgerye. Fol. 1 Divers accidents of the
vvoundes of the head. Fol. 9 Diploe what it is. Fol. 12 10 Divers forms of
future according to the diversitye of the vvounde. Fol. 14 Discommodity of
having the leg croockede. Fol. 47 Discommodityes of vvars. Fol. 53 Divers
Chyrurgicall operations. Fol. 26 Divers considerations of cauteryes. Fol. 42
Divers fictions. Fol. 50 Dressinge of an extirpated membre the blood being
stenchede. Fol. 38 Dropsye of the breast and her tokens. Fol. 19 Double band in
phlebotomye. Fol. 28 Dysenteria improperlye taken. Fol. 47 Dysenteria properlye
taken. Fol. 48
E
Ear vain. Fol. 29 Ease good for all vvoundes. Fol. 51 Effects of Cholera.
Fol. 52 Effects of stupefactione. Fol. 52 Elevatorium. Fol. 7 Elevatorium
what it is. Fol. 13 Entrance of the stomach being hurt. Fol. 4 Entralls
being out of the Belly, must everye one be again restorede into his former
place, and natural statione, if it be possible. Fol. 16 Error of common poeple
Fol. 53 Example. Fol. 8 Example of Hippocrates. Fol. 8 Example of Albucrasis.
Fol. 8 Example of the situatione of any disseasede part. Fol. 47 Excellentie
of Chyrurgerye. Fol. 5 Experience of the Author in extirpatione. Fol. 37
Expulsive ligament. Fol. 44 Extirpation of a ioyncte is very dangerous. Fol.
37 Eye vain. Fol. 29 Eye vain in the hand. Fol. 29
F
Fear and nicenes do impeach health. Fol. 53 Fifth incarnative suture. Fol.
15 First way to cure the sinckinge of the palate. Fol. 25 First kind of
ligament. Fol. 44 Fissures recollect themselves sometimes. Fol. 10 Fistles of
the fundament are ether occult, or aperte. Fol. 24 Fitlye to apply the
Cauterye on the arm. Fol. 42 Flesh, with flesh unites far sooner the
skin, with skin. Fol. 14 Fluxus Hepaticus. Fol. 48 Foolish persuasione.
Fol. 52 For what occasion we ought to trepane. Fol. 10 For great pain, and
dolor in the teeth. Fol. 27 For simple fractures. Fol. 45 For reiterated
cauteryes. Fol. 42 Fourth incarnative suture. Fol. 15 Four especialle
conditions, which the Chyrurgiane must consider, before he open any tumor.
Fol. 18 Form and figure of ligamentes. Fol. 44 From whence we must take our
indicatione of the greatenes of a vvounde. Fol. 18 Furriers suture. Fol. 16
Fire, the sureste remedy for corruption of bones, (33
G
Gastroraphia. Fol. 16 Gluttonye the occasion of much evell. Fol. 51 Gross
blood in phlebotomy doth nothing else then drop. Fol. 40 Good doctrine for a
Chyrurgiane. Fol. 8 Gurgulio. Fol. 2
H
Hand, an instrument of instruments, Fol. 39 Hardiness of Aussun. Fol. 52
Hepatica. Fol. 29 Hemorrhoidalle vain. Fol. 30 High situatione of a broken
membre. Fol. 46 Hinderance of the sanatione of the tunge tyinge. Fol. 24
Hippocrates in his Porthet. Fol. 2 Hippocrates hath bin deceaved. Fol. 9
Hippocrates in prognosticis, and third book of diseases. Fol. 19 Hippocrates
concerning the caries of bones. Fol. 33 Hippes baddelye formede. Fol. 50
History of Albucasis. Fol. 26 History of Messalinus. Fol. 31 History of
Albucasis concerning the corruption of bones. Fol. 34 History of Duke
d'Aumalle, aftervvardes Duke of Guise. Fol. 53 History of my lord of Bellay.
Fol. 34 History of my lord Gyuri. ibidem. Horseleeches are enemies to all
pingueditye. Fol. 32 How we shall espy the hayrye fissure. Fol. 9 How
great the apertione must be for trepanatio. Fol. 11 How to sow a vvounde
convenientlye. Fol. 14 How we ought to make the apertione in the Empiema,
with a lancet, or with a corrosive, Fol. 19 How we ought to effect the
opening of the Dropsye. Fol. 20 How we ought to make the apertio in the
Hernia. Fol. 21 How we ought to cure the Polypum. Fol. 22 How we ought to
cure the cloven lips. Fol. 23 How we ought to cut the tunge tying in yonge
Childrene. Fol. 24 How we ought to draw a tooth. Fol. 27 How we should
conveniently phlebotomize. Fol. 28 How we should stench blood. Fol. 29 How
we should open the veins of the hands. and feet. Fol. 29 How we should
open an Arterye. Fol. 30 How to cut away a burst vain. Fol. 31 How we
should cause a horseleech to fall of. Fol. 32 How we should restraygne the
blood after the horseleech hath sucked. Fol. 32 How we should bind a patent
fistle of the fundament. Fol. 34 How we should situate the woman in
dravinge a child out of her body. Fol. 36 How we should convenientlye
extirpate a ioyncte. (38 How we should tie the ligature to stop blood. Fol.
28 How we should gentlelye take of a ligament from a fracture. Fol. 45
Hurts of the blather. Fol. 4 Hydrocele. Fol. 22
I
Inanimate things feel effects of the moon. Fol. 51 Incarnative suture and
her fiye manner of ways. Fol. 15 Incarnative ligature. Fol. 44 Indication
how we may easily, or difficultlye attain to the bloody flixe. Fol. 48
Infusione of Rhubarbe. Fol. 49 Inscisione must be done, before inflammatione.
Fol. 11 Instructione how to work vvyselye. Fol. 7 Inscision of the Scrotum.
Fol. 21 Instructione to know whether the extirpatede mebre must be stenchede
or let bleed. Fol. 38 Intent of the Author. Fol. 5 Intention of the Author
concerning the fistles of the fundament. Fol. 24 Intent of the Author of
Phlebotomye. Fol. 27 Invention of sciences. Fol. 1 Invention of the Cauteryes
is through nature shevvede unto us. Fol. 40 In phlebotomising of those which
are phrensye, we ought to make but a small apertione. Fol. 28 In what
persons the drawing of water must be used, and in what it must be left. Fol.
20 In what places the scarifications may be made. Fol. 21 In what persons the
operatione of the haremouthes is dangerous. Fol. 23 In what parts the
Cauteryes must be applyede. Fol. 40 In what parts we ought to apply the
Seton. Fol. 43 Irregulated seaso of the year, aultereth our bodies. Fol. 51 It
is surer to make an inscision, in the fistles of the fundament then to tie
them. Fol. 35 Judgment must be providentlye given. Fol. 4 Iugularis vena. Fol.
29
K
Knowledge by sight of a corrupted bone. Fol. 33 Knowledge through tacture.
ibidem Knowledge by the matter. Fol. 33
L
Legs of a difficult resanatione. Fol. 50 Ligament must be broader then the
dissease. Fol. 44 Ligament for the dissease. Fol. 44 Ligament for the part.
Fol. 45 Ligamentes for shot vvoundes, with crushinge of bones. Fol. 46
Ligatione of Epoulis, is more certain the inscisio. Fol. 23 Ligature, or
inscisione in the Almondes. Fol. 26 Ligatione of the Elbovve, after
Phlebotomye. Fol. 29 Lips which are cleft in two places. Fol. 23 Lip
vain. Fol. 29 Liqvefactinge fire. Fol. 41 Liver being hurt. Fol. 3
M
Magnitude of the putrefactione in bones. Fol. 33 Malignant air pollutes the
heart. Fol. 51 Man is subject to all influences. Fol. 51 Manner to cure
Epoulis. Fol. 23 Manner how to trepane unto the membrane. Fol. 13 Manner of
applicatione of the Cauterye on the corrupted bone. Fol. 35 Manner to draw
forth a dead Child. Fol. 36 Manner to draw out the aqvosity out of a dead
Childes body. ibidem. Manner to elevate again the sunk, and descendede
Matrice. Fol. 37 Manner to praeserve the Cauteryes. Fol. 42 Manner to apply
the transforatione in the neck. Fol. 43 Manner of dressinge of all broken
legs, which may be comparede, with the manner of all ancient Chyrurgians.
Fol. 46 Many men praeserve their lives against the opinione of the
Chyrurgiane. Fol. 6 Many there are which for want of succour do dye. (53
Many things are oftentimes vvantinge unto the vvoundede. ibidem Master Dvione
an expert Physitione. Fol. 49 Matter of the Vlceratione Ateroma lies enclosed
in a little blather. Fol. 19 Matter of the Potentialle Cauteryes which are
now adays in use. Fol. 41 Master Pare of Cauteryes, ibidem Matter of the
Ligamentes. Fol. 44 Means how to know whether the bullet have take any
thing with him. Fol. 7 Means to draw out the head of a dead child, as
yet remaining in the vvombe. Fol. 36 Means to find the place in the head to
cauterize. Fol. 42 Means to keep open a Fontanelle. Fol. 43 Means to make
the expulsive Ligamente. Fol. 44 Mediana. Fol. 29 Medicametes to be eschuede in
the bloodyflixe. Fol. 49 Membranouse Ligament, or tungeryinge. Fol. 24 Methode
how to trepane. Fol. 12 Mideler eefe being hurt. Fol. 4 Milte being hurt.
Ibidem
N
Natural situation, which of the ancient professors is called the right
situatione. Fol. 47 Nature cures all disseases. Fol. 54 Nail which heaves
up it self may be pricked through. Fol. 21 Necessary things to a good
curatione. Fol. 53 No Polypus can through Surgery be curede. Fol. 22 Nose
vain. Fol. 29 Note your form of your trepane in the sculle. Fol. 12 Note the
circumstances of the blovve, and the death will seem more admitable. Fol. 53
Nue inventede trepanes. Fol. 13
O
Observatione of the Author. Fol. 9 Observatione in seethinge of the saulte to
the Cauterye. Fol. 41 Occasion of corruption of Bones. Fol. 33 Occasion of
the death of the king d'Ivetot. Fol. 54 Occasioe of the Dysenteria. Fol. 28 On
what manner in drawing forth a bullet we must collocate the patient. Fol. 6
On what sort we must draw a bullet out of a ioyncte. Fol. 7 On what sort
the Author tied the arterye on the Aneurisma. Fol. 31 One dissease follovvinge
an other is very dangerous. Fol. 51 Opinione of Paulus Aegineta. Fol. 5
Opinione of aunciet professors touching inscision. Fol. 9 Opinione of Hippoc.
touching the curing of fractures. Fol. 10 Opinione of Hippoc. concerning
trepanatione. Fol. 10 Opinione of Avicenna touching trepanatione. Fol. 11
Opinione of Celsus concreninge the apertioue of apostemations. Fol. 17 Opinione
of Hippocrates concerning Empiema. Fol. 29 Opinione of Gvido concerning the
fistles of the fundament. Fol. 35 Organicke parts which are cut of can not be
cured again. Fol. 2 Other considerations to be had in prognosticatione. Fol. 3

P
Paroulis and the means how to cure it. Fol. 23 Parts of Physic. Fol. 1
Parts of Therapeutica. ibidem Patesyede fistles of the fundament. Fol. 34
Patient lying on his back can very well suffer phlebotomve. Fol. 29 Paulus
Aegineta. Fol. 8 Penned suture. Fol. 15 Perturbations of mind. Fol. 52
Perturbationes are of great effect in our bodies ibidem. Phlebotomye vvhye it
is difficult. Fol. 27 Phlebotomye must be done with discretion in the
bloodyeflixe. Fol. 49 Place of the apertione in the vlceration Empiema. Fol. 19
Place where we may cut the Varices. Fol. 31 Places vvheron we apply the
Cauteryes. Fol. 42 Plain, and smooth situation of a broke membre. Fol. 45
Potential Cauteryes and matter thereof. Fol. 41 Practise of the Author. Fol.
13 Practise of the Mr. Floris Philips. Fol. 20 Practise, of the Author
concerning teeth. Fol. 26
Q
Qvantitye of Ligamentes. Fol. 44
R
Ranularis vena. Fol. 29 Ravv fruit causes the bloodyeflixe. Fol. 48 Reason
why a membre must be extirpatede in the ioyncte. Fol. 37 Reason for those
which extirpate a membre, above, or belovve the ioyncte. ibidem. Reason of
Aristot: concerning the bloodyeflixe. Fol. 47 Receipt of the Velvet Cauterye.
Fol. 41 Redivisione of the first kind of Ligament. Fol. 44 Remedies against
the bleedinge of the descidede palate. Fol. 25 Remedies against the
tumefactione Antiades. Fol. 25 Remedies for a wounded arterye. Fol. 30
Remedies against putrefaction in an Aneurisma. Fol. 31 Remedies against the
Caries. Fol. 24 Remedies to consolidate the vlcerations. Fol. 49 Renuinge of
Phlebotomye. Fol. 29 Root, and original of the Polypus. Fol. 22
S
Salvatella. Fol. 29 Saphena. Fol. 30 Sciatica vena. ibidem Second incarnative
suture. Fol. 15 Second genetalle suture. ibidem Second means to cure the
sinckinge of the palate. Fol. 25 Second Kind of Ligamente. Fol. 44 Second
kind of attractive Ligament. Fol. 45 Seton properlye taken. Fol. 43 Seton
improperlye taken. ibidem Seton with the use thereof ibidem. ibidem Signs
contrary to prognosticatione. Fol. 3 Signs of a deadly fracture of the
sculle. Fol. 3 Signs when the brains are hurt. ibidem Signs when the
backbone is hurt. Fol. 3 Signs when the heart is wounded. ibidem Signs to
know when the Trepane is enterede into the Diploe. Fol. 12 Signs when
matter is fully ripened. Fol. 17 Signs to know the vlcerations Ateromata,
Steatomata, and Melicerides. Fol. 18 Signs of the matter which is retained in
the Breast. (19 Signs of a vvaterburste. Fol. 21 Signs of a venoumouse
Polypus. Fol. 22 Signs of a tractable Polypus. ibidem Signs of a
counterfissure. Fol. 9 Signs to know when the svvollen almondes exvlcerate,
with their remedies. Fol. 26 Signs of an Aneurisma. Fol. 30 Signs of a
venoumouse horseleech. Fol. 31 Signs of a good horseleech. ibidem. Signs
vvherbye the Chyrurgian is hindered, to draw forth the Child out of his
mothers body. Fol. 35 Signs of a dead Child in his mothers body. Fol. 36
Signs of suppuratione. Fol. 17 Signs when the small guts are hurt. Fol. 48
Signs when the great intestines are hurt. Fol. 48 Similitude. Fol. 50
Situatione of the patient, in the extirpation of a ioyncte. Fol. 37 Situatione
of a ioyncte must be naturalle, accustomede. Fol. 46 Six things which in
sovvinge must be considered. Fol. 13 Small guts being cut a sunder, are
incurable. Fol. 16 Some men dye of a small vvounde. Fol. 4 Some men are cured
containing the bullet in their body. Fol. 5 Some vvoundes are esteemed
small, which indeed are great, and dangerous. Fol. 51 Sovvinge may not
with any violence be done in the lips of a vvounde. Fol. 14 Sovvinge of the
haremouth. Fol. 15 Sovvinge of the belly must not be done as the other
sutures. Fol. 16 Staphilocauston what it is. Fol. 25 Stomach, and guts
being hurt. Fol. 4 Subdivisione of the second inferior ligature in a broken
leg. Fol. 46 Substance of actual Cauteryes. Fol. 46 Substance of the
Cauteryes which the ancient professors used. ibidem Sudden death
proceeding of joy. Fol. 52 Suffocatione of the natural caliditye. Fol. 50
Superfluouse comestione, bibacitye, are not so oppugnant unto us, as is
Melancholy, or sorrow. Fol. 52 Supernaturalle teeth. Fol. 27 Sutures of the
head variable. Fol. 9 Suture in a separatede place is needless. Fol. 13
T
Teethe which grow forth with an acuitye. Fol. 27 Teeth which stand forth
out of their ordre, are broken, and wherein as yet remains some little piece
ibidem. Temporal vain. Fol. 29 Tendones are dangerous to sow, and vvhye.
Fol. 13 The apertione of a vvounde must allvvayes be recurvatede dovvnvvardes,
if it be possible. Fol. 46 The apertione in the Hernia, is better to be done
above then under. Fol. 22 The Cauterye makes a greater escara, the the hole of
the plaster. Fol. 42 The Child must with the head be draw out of his
mothers body, if it be possible. Fol. 36 The Chyrurgiane can not cure all men.
Fol. 50 The Chyrurgiane is sometimes to late sent for. Fol. 10 The dissease of
a shortened tunge. Fol. 24 The dissease of the tunge after a callouse
vlceratione. ibidem. The figure, or form of vvoundes. Fol. 2 The forms of
inscisione in phlebotomye. Fol. 28 The hand must be shut. Fol. 47 The head
may not to strictlye be bovvnde, and the reason why. Fol. 20 The hipp must be
stirrede. ibidem The ioyncte being extirpatede, we must dissolve the
ligature. Fol. 38 The leg must be kept right. Fol. 47 The manner of making
an apertione. Fol. 29 The means to draw out the Polypus. Fol. 22 The means
to cure the palate. Fol. 24 The Melancholic do hate themselves. Fol. 52 The
operatione to cure these three vlcerations, Ateroma, Steatoma, and Meliceres is
nothing differet. Fol. 19 The place where, in the Paracentese the apertion must
be made. Fol. 20 The scull is the natural opercle to the brains. Fol. 22 The
second instruction in drawing out of bullets. Fol. 6 The second kind of
Dropsye. Fol. 20 The sutures, temples of the head may sometimes be trepanned.
Fol. 11 The third instructione. Fol. 6 The tumor Empiema externally sometimes
demonstrates it self. Fol. 19 The vain in Phlebotomye must be inscided in
her middle. Fol. 28 The vain being well openede, yet through the
affrightednes of the patient she drops. Fol. 29 The wounded feels not his
vvounde at the first dressinge. Fol. 6 The vvouded which have bin in the
drivelinge climate, can very difficultlye be curede. Fol. 51 There may not be
any flesh on the bone when we intende to saw it of. Fol. 38 There is but
one expette Chyrurgian in all France. Fol. 50 They which are of most
experience may judge of the poynctes, concerning the bloodyflixe. Fol. 48
Third incarnative suture. Fol. 15 Third generalle stitchinge. Fol. 15 Those
bullets which stick fast in the bones, are very difficult to be dravven out.
Fol. 7 Those vvhoe are deprived of any ioyncte are very subject unto the
bloodyeflixe. Fol. 47 Three sorts of sovving by the ancient professors. Fol.
15 Three sorts of Dropsye. Fol. 20 Three things to be considerede in the
collocatione of a broken membre. Fol. 46 Threfoulde means to cure the fistles
of the fundament. Fol. 34 Three things which make Childebirthe difficult.
Fol. 35 Through perturbatione of mind a man may dye. Fol. 52 Thrusts in the
synnues are dangerous. Fol. 2 To apply the Cauteryes on the Legs. Fol. 42
To apply the potential Cauteryes. Fol. 42 To make a horseleech violently to
suck. Fol. 32 To know whether the Hernia be on both sides. Fol. 21 To know
an imbicille part. Fol. 52 To mollifye the skin in Phlebotomye. Fol. 28 To
restrain blood through ligature. Fol. 38 To remove superfluouse fingers.
Fol. 39 To regenerate any substance is the vvorcke of Nature and not of the
Chyrurgiane. Fol. 23 To stench blood by Cauteryes. Fol. 38 Tractatione of the
returnede Epoulis. Fol. 23 Transforaiion with an actual Cauterye. Fol. 43
Transforatione in the Scrotum. Fol. 43 Trepaninge of the Breast bone. Fol. 29
Two sorts of applicatione of the Seton. Fol. 43 Two sorts of Ligamentes in
generalie. Fol. 44 Two things to be cosiderede in dressiinge of a vvoude.
Fol. 45 Two sorts of inferior ligamentes. Fol. 46 Tyinge, and third means
to cure the palate. Fol. 25
V
Veins which burst within the brains. Fol. 9 Vain of the forehead. Fol.
29 Vena pupis. Fol. 29 Vena illiaca. Fol. 30 Vena poplitis ibidem Velvet
Cauteryes. Fol. 41 Virtues of the actual Cauterye. Fol. 38 Virtues of the
doggedayes. Fol. 51 Virtues of moderate joy. Fol. 52 Vlceratione Ranula, and
original thereof. Fol. 24 Vnhealthsame poeple. Fol. 52 Use of judgement. Fol.
1 Use, and invention of sovvinge. Fol. 12 Use of the pipe in the Dropsye. Fol.
20 Use of the Palate. Fol. 25 Use, situatione, compositione of the Almondes.
Fol. 25 Use of these times concerning the Varices. Fol. 31 Use of the
horselaeches. Fol. 32 Use of small Boxes. Fol. 32 Use of the actual Cauteryes.
Fol. 41 Use of the potential Cauteryes. Fol. 41 Vtilitye of Inscione. Fol. 7
Vtilitye of the Cauteryes. Fol. 40 Vtilitye in constitutione of a broken part.
Fol. 46 Vva. Fol. 24 Vulgar, common poeple, can not so deeply judge, consider
of any thing, as the Chyrurgiane. Fol. 53
W
We can not live without air. Fol. 51 We may not trepane that bone above
the Eyebrovves: Fol. 11 we may not sow the lips of an inflamed vvoud. Fol.
14 we may not provoacke the cackerouse excrescece of the gummes, Fol. 23 we
may not trepane the sides of the head. Fol. 11 we may right well trepane, on
the sides of the sutures. ibidem we must endevoure to draw forth the bullet
at the first dressinge. Fol. 6 we must not at any time leave our patients.
Fol. 6 we must dilate the vvounde if the bone be dilaceratede. Fol. 7 we must
in operatione dilligently consider, that we do not chance to break any
Veins, Synnues, Arteryes, or Tendones. Fol. 19 2 we must let the cloven
Lip, after the operatione is done somewhat bleed. Fol. 23 we must nipe of
the Needles ends sticking in the cloven Lips. Fol. 23 we must not purge in
the doggedayes. Fol. 51 we oftentimes find harde matter in the Vlcerations
Ateromata, Steatomata, and Melicerides. Fol. 19 we ought not all times to
trepane. Fol. 20 what a Chyrurgiane ought to know, in givinge of his
judgement. Fol. 2 what astringent medicamentes, the patient must use in the
bloody flixe. Fol. 48 what Apostemations vvilbe openede before their complete
ripens. Fol. 17 what form the searchinge iron must be of. Fol. 9 what form
a Needle must have. Fol. 14 what form the thread in sovving of a vvounde must
have. ibidem what his meates, drinckes must be. Fol. 48 what manner of thread
and nedle we must have in sovvinge of the belly. Fol. 17 what Ligamentes
are. Fol. 43 what is reqvired to the resanatione of vvoundes. Fol. 52 what is
to be understood by the left lip of a vvoude. Fol. 17 what places may bear
trepanatione. Fol. 11 what qvantitye of bone we ought to trepane. Fol. 12
what sometimes deceaveth the Chyrurgiane. Fol. 7 what this vvorde operatione
signifies. Fol. 1 what we ought to judge out of the accidetes of vvoudes.
Fol. 2 what we ought to do the Dura matter being crushede. Fol. 13 what we
ought to do when the discendede svvollen gut ca not be again restored into
his place. Fol. 16 what we ought to consider before we make the apertione in
an Apostematione. Fol. 17 what we ought to esteem of the bleedinge of the
gummes. Fol. 27 what we ought to do when we perceave the fayntinge to
approach the phlebotomised patient. Fol. 29 what we ought to do before we
use the horse leeches. Fol. 32 what when ought to do in a deep Carry. Fol.
34 what vvoundes of the hipp are. Fol. 2 when, and vvhye the external parts
must be extirpatede. Fol. 37 when that the report must be done. Fol. 4 when
the Apostemation must be opened with a Cauterye. Fol. 17 when we ought only
to use the exfoli^tive trepane. Fol. 12 when we ought to open an
Apostematione. Fol. 17 when we ought to cut away the palate. Fol. 24
whereby we may know the vvindy-hernia. Fol. 21 wherein consists the danger
of dravvinge forth of bullets, Fol. 5 vvheron we ought to consider before
phlebotomy. Fol. 27 vvheron we ought to consider in the applicatione of the
Cauteryes. Fol. 42 vvheron in ligatione we ought to consider. Fol. 44
wherewith the vvoude is made must be considered. Fol. 53 which are strange
things. Fol. 5 vvhye the vvounde in extractinge of a bullet mus^ be dilated.
Fol. 6 vvhye we may not in the resovving of a vvounde draw the lips close
together. vvhye the thread in sovving of a vvounde may not be dyed. Fol. 14
vvhye we file teeth. Fol. 2^ vvhye we must give a staff to them in their
hands which we Phlebotomize. Fol. 28 wine is necessary for all
combattantes. Fol. 53 vvombe being hurt. Fol. 4^ vvoundes of the Lunges. Fol.
3 vvoundes of the Kidnyes. Fol. ^ vvoundes that are dangerous. Fol. 2
vvoundes that be difficult to cure. ibidem vvoundes which are esteemed
incurable. ibidem
FINIS.
IMPRINTED At Dort by Isaac Canin. M.D.xcviij.


