A DIALOGVE between a knight and a clerk, concerning the power spiritual and
temporal.

The clerk begins to speak on this wise saying. CLERICVS. I Wounder / sir
noble knight / that in few days / times be changed / right is buried / laws
be overturned, and statutes be trodde under foot.


MILES. Those words pass my capacite / I am a lewd man: and though I went
to school in my chyldehode, yet got I not so profound learning / that those
your words can of me be understand. And therefore worshipful clerk, if ye
desire to have communication with me, ye must use a more homely playner fascion
of speaking.


CLE. I have scene in my time / that kings / princis / and all other nobles,
have had the church in right great worship: and now I se the contrary / the
church is made a pray to you all / and many things are challenged of us, and
nothing is given us: If we give not our goods / they be taken frome us by
strong hand. Our good and catalle / is distroyde / our laws and freedom be
not holden, but dispysed and withsayde.


MILES. I can not lightly believe, that the king (of whose counsel they of
the clergic be) will deal unjustly with you / another distroye your law.


CLERI. Yea truly against all law, we suffer innumerable wrongs.


MILES. I would fain know what ye call law.


CLERI. I call law the statutes and ordinances of bishops of Rome, decrees
of holy fathers.


MILES. What ever they ordeyn, or other have ordained in time past of
temporaltie / may well be law to you / but not to us. For no man hath power to
ordeyne statutes of things, over the which he has no lordeshyp. As the king
of France may ordeyne no statutes upon the empire, another the emperor upon
the king of Englande. And likewise as Pryncis of the world may ordeyne no
statutes of your spirituality, over the which they have no power: no more ye
may ordeyne no statutes of their temporalties / over the which ye have another
power nor auctoritie. Wherefore it is a thing in vain / what ever ye ordeyn of
temporal things, over which ye have of god resceiued no power. And therefore
but late I loch well fast, when I harde that Poop Boniface the.viij. had
made a new statute, that he him self shulde be above all seculer lords /
princis, kings, and emperors, and above all kyngedomes, make law upon all
things: and that him needs nought but write / for all things shall be his,
when he hath written: and so all thing shall be yours. For to make a statute,
his statute is nought else, but to will that the decree be holden and kept,
and ordeyne and whote that it be holden. If he woll have my castle, my town /
my field, my money, or any other such things: him needs nought, but will it,
and write it, and make a decree / and whote that it be holden / and when that
is done, he hath right to al such things. Now good clerk / thou wottest well,
howe worthy this iape is to be scorned.


CLE. Sir knight ye speak sharply, slyly, and wisely enough: all your talking
and meaning is (as fer as I perceive) that the pope hath no power to ordeyne
and make statutes of your temporalties: For ye know not, that he hath
lordeshyp, power, and auctoritie upon your temporalties. Though we would prove
it by our law / and by decrees written, ye account them for nought. For ye
wene that Peter had no lordeshyp no power over temporalte / but by such law
written. But if thou wilt be a true christen man / and of right believe, thou
shalt not deny, but that Christ is lord of al things. To him it was said in
the sauter book: Ask of me, Psal. 2.
I shall give nations, to thyn heritage, and all the world about to thy
possession. psal. 2. And also of him it is written, 1. Tim^ 2. Apoc. 17.. 19.
the first pistill to Timothe the.vi. chapiter / that he is king of kings,
and lord of lords. These be not ours, but gods own words: nor we wrote
them not, but god sent them, and the holy gooste spake them. And who doubts /
whether he may ordeyne and make statutes, whom he knows to be lord of all
things?


MILES. I withsay not the majesty / lordeshyp, and might of our lord god: for
he may not be withsayde on no manner wise. But if it may be showed by holy
writ, that the pope is lord of all temporalties: than kings prncis must
needs be subject to the poop, as well in temporaltie as spirituality.


CLE. That may be showed lightly / by the auctoritees that be a little rather
rehearsed. The faith of holy church holds, that Peter the apostell was
ordained Christis full vicare for him self and for his successors. And he that
is fulle vicare, may do the same that his lord may, when he is made vicar with
full power, without any withdrawynge of power. Than if ye can not deny, but
that Christ, that is lord of heaven and of earth / may ordeyne and make
statutes of your temporalties: how can ye / for shame deny Christis vicare to
have the same power?


MILES. I have hard of holy and devout men, that we sh^ld distingue two divers
times of Christ: one of his humilite / and an other of his power and majesty.
The time of his humilytie was from the time that he toke flesh and blode,
unto his passion: the time of his power and majesty, was and is after his
Resurrection, when he said: All power is yeue to me in heaven and in earth /
Mat. vlt. Mat. vlt.
Peter was ordained Christis vicare for the state of his humilite / and not for
the state of his bliss and majesty: but to follow him in doing those
things, which Christ in humilite did here in earth: for those things are
necessary for us. Ergo Christ committed thylke power to his vicare, which he
as a man mortal exercysed / and not that power, which after his glorification
he resceyued. And for to prove this by holy writ, I take wytnes of Christ
and holy writ / as thou dost. Lo Christ said to Pilate: My kyngedome is
not of this world, / Io. 18. Also he saith / he came not to be served, but to
serve other men, Matt. 20. This wytnes is so manifest, that it may confound
a man, resist he never so much / and all to frusshe his neck / be it never
so styffe. And it is written Luc. 12. howe one said to Christ: Master say to
my brother / that he depart heritage with me. To whom Christ answered and
said: Manne / who has ordained me judge or departer between you? Lo thou
hereste openly, that Christ was not judge nor dealer over temporaltees. Ergo in
that state of dispensation taken on him, he neither had nor desired temporalle
kyngedome. But when the people, that he had fed / would have made him king
/ he fled from them Ion. 6. Also in Peters commission he yafe him not the
keys of the kingdom of earth / but the keys of the kyngedome of heaven. Also
it is evident and plain / that the bysshoppes of the Hebrewes were subjects
to kings, and the kings deposed the bysshoppes: but god forbydde, that they
shulde so now. And for to know / that Peter was Christis vicar in godly
kyngedome of souls / and not in temporalle lordeshyppe of castles and of
lands: take heed what Paule the appostelle says writing to the Hebrewes.
Heb. 5.
Every bishop (says he) is take of men / and ordained for men in things
that belong to god, not to govern erthely things, but to offer gifts and
sacrifices for sin. That the bishop is made ruler in those things that
long to god, thou may perceive by the words of saint Paule writynge to
Timothe / the.2. pistel,.2. chap. where he saith: No man that trauayleth in
knyghthode to godward, medleth him in secular busynesses. Than hit is sothe,
that Christ neither exercised worldely kyngedome / nor committed hit to Peter.
And in the acts of the apostels the.6. chaptre, Peter says: It is not
rightful that we leave the word of god, serve meat bourdes, that is to say /
to dispose temporal things.

And all though some temporal things may be disposed bi bishops: yet
nevertheless it is plain and evident / that bysshoppes shulde not be occupied
in governance of might and lordshyppes of this world. Therefore sir clerk,
the auctorities that thou haste laid for thy party, Ask of me / and I shall
give to the, Psal. 2.
nations to thyn heritage, and all the world about, to thy possession. And that
he is king of kings. 1. Tim^ 2.
c. This is not vnderstond for the first estate but for the second. Apoc. 17..
19*
In the which first estate it is plain, that Christ exercised no teporall
power / but put it clean away from him, used only that / that longed to the
gouernace of our salvation: And in that manner of doing he made Peter his vicar
/ whom he another made knight nor crowned king: but ordained him to be a priest
and bishop. And if ye woll yet strive, that Christis vycare shulde have that
power in temporaltie, that Christ had after his resurrection in heaven, and
used not here in earth / your strife shall not turn you to worship at length.
For it is evident to every faithful man, that if god should command him to
give his money / his field, or his vineyard to any other man, without any
provision or reasonable request / and without any express studieng, he ought
forth with to obey. Wherefore if ye will contend / that the pope hath the same
power / than of necessite ye must grant also / that the pope may take from
you / and from us / all the goods that ye and we have / and give them all / to
which of his nephews or cousins, that he will, and tell no cause why: and also
he may take away from princis and kings, principalitees and kyngedomes at his
own will / and give them there as him lykethe. But take heed how wrongfully
that were done, and demeth your own self, howe that would mislike you / if he
did so to you. If that very reason constrain you to forsake your foolish
argument, the poop also shall be constrained to give back. For it is sothe,
that he, Christis vicare / resceyued not so great power in temporaltees / but
he resceyued only that power, that Christ in his humilite daily used and
taught.


CLERICVS. Will ye deny sire knight / that holy church shall not know and
correct men for sins?


MILES. God forbydde, For he that would deny that / shall deny penance and
confession.


CLERI. If ought be done vnryghtfully, it is sin: and he that hath to do in
knowledge of sin, must know and also deem of ryghtefulle and unrightful.
Therefore syns there is rightful and unrightful in businesses of temporal
matters, of very consequens the pope ought to rule and deem in temporal
causes.


MILES. This is a forked argument, whose vanite and sklendernes must be by a
like argumet, overthrown. In hanging up of thieves and other misdoers / that be
dampned to the death* is rightful and vnryghtfull, and also sin. Therefore
because of sin, that such men do, shall the Poop deem and be domes man
in cause of felonye and of mans death? This is a light argument / and therefore
hit is blown away with a light reason. Now sir clerk ye must show, howe ye
shulde know and deem ryghtfulle and vnryghtefulle. For there is no doubt, but
that ryghtful unrightful in temporaltie shall be deemed by laws, that men have
made of temporaltie. But ye mote take heed all about, what longs to the
cause, that shall be deemed. Than it is soth, that he that makes the law / hath
power to know and to deem rightful and vnrightful, and to expowne and
declare, and to tell the meaning of the law / and to keep the law, and to
govern reasonnably by the law. Now if ye will be as great ^aysters as he, in
knowledge and demynge of temporaltie / and strive with him in knowledge and
demyng of rightful and vnrightful / in what that longs to temporaltie,
than care ye with an ox and ass against your holy writ. And when the
prince says, this is rightful / the bishop saith / this is vnryghtfull:
than is fulfilled the prophecy of Abacuc: Abac. 1.
Ryghtful dome is made / and withsayenge is stronger, through the which the
law is torn and rent / the rightful dome comes not to end. For truly that
is not to do rightful dome and justice in earth. Now I shall show you, after
the apostelle Paule where your knowledge and dome shall begin. The prince by
his laws shall deem right and wrong / and every man shall be ready at his
commandment / as he is bound: and shall be obedient to him. Now if any man
wax stubborn, and will not be obedient to the pryncis hestes, nor the prince
(whose office is to deem and judge) is not able to resyste and compel him:
than begins your knowelege and your dome. For your monitions shall refrain
and chastise him / according as saint Paule says to Titus the.3. chap.
Admonyshe and warn them, Tit. 3.
that they be subjects to princis and high powers. And also writing unto the
Romayns the thyrtene chapiter he saith on this wise: To. 13.
Every soul shall be subject to the high powers. When he saith every soul,
it seems than, none is excepted. Also where as misdoynges and sinful deeds
are manifest and open / as robbery, theft, and such like, nor there is none
that can or will redress these offences: I deny not, but that ye shall and may
use your power in such cases, but not of rightful or unrightful: for it
falls not for you to know and deem thereof,, nor to intermeddle therewith. But
when it is openly known by sentence and dome of the law, or else by plain
evidence and knowledge of the trespace* that needs none other wytnesse nor
proves: than may it lunge to you in manner and form, as hit is said before.

And if ye woll needs know and deem in such causes, because that wrong and
sin be linked to gether: than there needs nought else, but shut up the
gates of princis, and speak naught of their laws and statutes, but speak of
the laws of bishops all only. It doth belong to you to know and to deem
in cause of matrimony and of wedlock, I pray you / will ye therefore say, that
it follows / that ye shall know and deem of al that longs thereto for the
knyttyng of the dede? Lo I go into your country for to ask heritage in my
wife's name: for she is heir thereof. Ye see, that by reason of matrimony it
longs to me to require this heritage: shall I therefore plede before you for
my wife's heritage, and tell my tale in this manner: I Roberte at Stile ask for
my wife a duchery / in the name of dowerye, and so forth? Which ought to be
pleded before the king / and not before the bishop. Yea I say unto you all
clerks forbyddynge you, that you entermeddell you not of dome and knowledge of
dowere / against god and ryghtousnes. For the behest of dowery* is very
covenant of temporaltie, and shall be proved or disproved / by proves or
disproues, of the kings laws. And for so much as ye usurp and take upon you
that, that belongs unto other, it is right mete, that ye suffer as ye do.

Now thus it appears / that it is but a iape and a vanite / of such manner of
onynge of things to feyne a knyttynge to gethers in dome and in knowledge of
causes. For to the confoundynge of all those reasons (that ye make) the only
words are sufficient, that I before recyted to you out of the gospelle of
Luke, Luc. 12.
where our lord Iesu saith: O man who hath ordained me domesman or dealer
between you? Here Christ shows us openly, that it longed not to him to deem
and deal heritage, by the power that he used in that that he was man shapen
for to dye.


CLERI. Can ye denay / but that the temporalties ought to obey and be
seruiseable to the spirituality? If ye can not, ye must needs grant / that the
temporaltie must needs be subject to the spirituality: that the spiritual
power ought to rule the temporal.


MILES. Sothely the temporaltie shall serve the spirituality in this case: they
are bound to find them, that worship and serve god, all that is necessary for
them. For so do all nations (as it were by way of kind) honour and ministre
unto the liuelod other necessaries / that worship god / ministre sacramentes,
and such as longs to god. For in the laws that our lord gave to Moyses, the
phariseis and pristes were largely provided fore: but yet that law did not
ordein for them any temporal kyngedome or lordeshyp. And the apostell to the
Corinthees says: 1. Cor. 9.
If we have sown things spiritual among you, it is no great thing if we
repe carnal? But if thou will wit / what manner lordship Christ ordained
for his servants / that sow spiritualle sedes: take of the words of Christ
and of the apostelle Paule / as they follow in order. For Christ to his
disciples / sent forth to preach, said: The work man is worthy his meat:
Mat. 10. Luc. 10. 1. Tim. 5.
and, The work man is worthy his mede. And Paule of him self and other
apostels saith. 1. Cor. 9. Who trauaylleth in knyghtehoode upon his own cost?
As who saith: 1. Cor. 9.
no man. And in Moyses law it is written. Deuteronomy. 25. Thou shalt not bind the
ox mouth that thressheth. Lo to whom doth Christ his apostell Paule lyken
you? To workmen / to hyredmen oxen / and not to kings. I pray you, be work
men and hired men, lords of things? Than it seems / that temporaltyes are
granted you to help of your living / and for charge of spiritual
administration / and not to lordeshyp. And of the spiritual it is written in
Moyses law, Deuteronomy. 15.
there ye be likened to an ox, that thres / shes / to the which it is enough
to take his meat, though he fill al the berne with his travail. And for that
ye say / that spiritual power rules and governs the temporaltie / that is
answered you before by the apostell Paule / where he saith: Every bishop is
taken of men, and ordained for men in that that longs to god / Heb. 5.
and in that the spiritual power shall rule and govern us, and not in that
that longs to the world: for it longs not to holy church to deem in
that that is outward.

And if ye yet strive / that the pope is above all other also in temporaltie,
ye fall into well great skornes. For if the poop (when he is made pope) should
be made lord over all: than by the same skylle a bishop (when he is made
bishop) is made lord of all the country of his bysshoprike / and my priest
shall be lord over my castelle, and be my lord. For as the power of the pope
is in all, so is the power of these in that party, where they rule. Wherefore
leave this folysshenes / the which is laughed and mocked att of every man,
and that is, with so many reasones and auctorityes of scripture confounded.
Also we have learned in the old testament, that kings ordained who shulde be
priests: but priests did not ordeyne / who should be kings. And priests were
not worshypped of kings: but kings and pryncis were worshypped of priests
and prophets, and might call them and command them to do what pleased the
kings. And in the same old testamente the kings did correct the priests,
and vndertoke, and blamed them, when they erred in governance of temporaltie.


CLE. I marvel that ye say / that kings vndertoke and blamed the bishop in
gouernace of temporaltie.


MILES. Ye awake the slepynge dog, and drive me to speak otherwise than I
thought before to do.


CLERI. Let the hound awake and bark.


MILES. For as much as ye can not be content, and pacyently (to your profit)
suffer the princis, I fere me, that after due and just barkynge, ye shall feel
bytynge.


CLERI. What have princis and kings to do with governance of our temporaltie,
let them take theyrs / and suffer us in peace with ores?


MILES. Sir the princis must in any wise have to do therewith. I pray you,
ought not we above all things / to mind the helthe of our souls? ought not
we to see / that the wills of our fore fathers be fulfilled? Falls it not to
you to pray for our fore fathers / that be passed out of this life? And did
not our forefathers give you our temporalties right plentyfullye / to the
entente / that ye shulde pray for them, and spend it all to gether to the
pleasure and honour of god? and ye do nothing lo: but ye spend away your
temporaltie in synfullle deeds and vanite, the which temporaltie ye shulde
dispende in warkes of charite, and in alms deeds to poor men and nedy. Were
it not nedefulle, that they that be deed shulde be help / and they that be
alive saved by deeds of mercy? For the which our fore fathers have given you
great and huge dominions. And when ye apply them to your own use and
superfluously consume them, and contrary to their intent / that were the
gyuers / and also of the resceyuers / lasshe them out to an ill use: do ye not
damnably hurt and hynderaunce, both to them that be alive / and also to them
that be deed? Ye reck not for honesty, no nor for your own law, nor for
deeds of mercy and charite, but in folly and bobance, and in liking of this
world, ye dispende al that was given you for an holy intent. Shall not his
wages be stopped / that will not do deeds of knyghthode. He that holds of an
another, and doth not his due office and service, he shall lose and forgoo his
fee. And for to make an end of this question, and to put you to sylence, I
shall show you that* that shall make you sorry, and glad to find the mene
to set a remedy. Redeth in holy writ. 2. Parali. ca. 14. There it is written
of king Ioas, that he did that that good was and pleasynge to our lord
alle the days of Ioidas the priest. And of the same king we rede.iiij.
Regum. 12. King Ioas called Ioida the bishop / and also the prestes, and to
them he said: why repair ye not the covering of the temple? Loke therefore
that ye take no more money of the people by your own ordynaunce / but apply
it to the instauration of the temple / and of gods house. And thus the
preestes were forbydden to take any more money of the people. Wherefore thou
see / that king Ioas was praised of our lord, for that he toke heed / that
the offrynges shulde be spended to gods worship / that is to say, to the
instauration of the temple / according to the holy entente of them that gave
such things. God preysethe this king Ioas / for to show and leave unto us
ensaumple, that the said king, in his so doing, did not offend / for so
much as he did hit not for any covetousness, but of goddelye zeal, not of
ambition, but of devout relygyon. And the king / to the entente to eschew
yuelle suspeccion, he would have the bishop with him to bear wytnesse / as
follows. And when he saw to much money in the Treasaurye / the kings
writer and the bishop went up in to the Treasaurye, and poured out and
told the money / that was found in gods house / and they gave hit after the
noumbre and weight in to their hands / that were sourueyours of the masonrye
of gods house. Lo the good intention of the king is praised / that took
heed / that the goods of this old church shulde be besylye saved, and spent
to a good and a holy use. I know well it likes not you to here these words,
and yet never the less I speak not but words of holy writ. It is said to
you before / that ye have resceyued all such lordeshyppes and riches to the
help of your life, and as the wages of holy chivalry / and to the intent to
have cloth and food: with which two the apostell says, 1. Tim. 6.
he held him paid: and all the over plus beside clothe and food, ye ought to
spend in deeds of mercy pity, as on poor people that have need, and on
such as be sick and diseased / and opressed with misery. And if ye do not so,
than must we have to do therewith: for than it falls to us to take heed of
your temporaltie / that ye beguile not and deceive the quycke and the deed.


CLE. This king Ioas toke not the goods and cattle to his own use / but he
bestowed them on holy churches use. But now a days ye take our goods,
which ye spend not to the use of holy church, but on your busy and unruly
soldiers, and on ships and ingins of war. And therefore the ensaumple that
ye bring forth, is not against us / nor against our warkes and deeds: but ye
wold thereby colour your violence and wrong.


MI. Always to your own harm ye kycke against the prick of kings. It is not
grievous to you, that your cousins and kynsmen take to them of holy churches
goods and cattelles, and sometime other persons, that be not honest, to the
sklaunder of you, and of all the people that be under you: and ye be full
venomous through your own yuell ensample of living. This ye suffer / the
which may be cause of gods wrath upon the king, and upon all the realm /
the which recklesly suffers you so frowardly to work against almighty god.
But to you it seems a grievous wrong, and in no wise to be suffered, that the
king asks mekely of you, and thanks you for it, as for a thing graciously
granted: and yet he doth not spend hit to his own use / but for your
saufegarde, and in the defence of holy church / and of your goods and
cattle.


CLERICVS. Alas wo is me wretched man, ye tere hale away my flesh and my
skin, and that ye call saufgarde.


MILES. I pray you lettethe be your noise and your grutchynge / and harkeneth
patiently. Consider your neighbours about you, that be many in land, which
wanting, wherewith to live, gape stylle after your goods. If the kings power
failed, what rest shulde ye have? would not the gentle men / such as be
nedy, and such as prodigallye have spend away their substance, when they
have consumed their own, wol not they turn to yours, and waste and distroye
all that ye have? Therefore the kings strength is to you in stead of a strong
wall. And ye wot very well, that the kings peace is your peace: and the
kings saufegarde is your saufegarde. For if the kings power wanted / or else
were withdrawn from you: than (as your sins asks) they that commune with
you now, and they that wait upon you now, wold dystroy / waste, and consume
your goods, and compel you to be their thralls. And if ye wold not, all that
ye have were utterly lost. Howe much than would ye paye for to have the
kings succour his help and defence / as ye had before? Than thus ye se and
perceive manyfestlye / that when ye give a little portion to the king, you
bye therewith your own safeguard / and thereby ye save to your self / your
goods and your cattals, that should be distroyde by your ennemies, and by men
of strange lands, no were the kings help and his succour. But as ye have
always ben vnkynd, for the goodness that he has done to you: even so now ye
plain and grutche, against that that is your own profit. If the king
failed you, would not your enemies war upon you, and put you out of
your place, and out of your land, and take frome you all that ye have, and
leave you poor, naked, and bare? and so stricken with terrible dread / would ye
not put your self to flyghte / and wander ye forced not wither? But and
kings and princis, at their own costs, and to their great peril and danger
of their lyfes, be holden to defend you: and you to rest under their wings,
and to eat drink with great solace and mirth, and to lye in soft and
delicate beds / and sikerly to sleep / than it semethe, that ye would mean,
that only ye be very lords, and kings and princis be of bond condition,
and unto you servants and thralls. If rest be granted to men of the church
/ it is no great thing / if the riches be reserved for us of the lay fee. This
is an harde thing / say ye, but ye will not rest, till ye be (as ye are
wont) convicted and also confouded by holy scripture: against the which ye can
not resist. For of Ioas the king (of whom we spake before) hit is written in
the. 4. book of kings, the.12. chaptre. and in the second book of Parali.
the.24. chapyter thus: Wherefore Ioas the king of Iuda took all that was
halowed / the which things Ioram Ochozias his fathers / kings of Iuda had
halowed, and which things he him self had offered up / and all the
silver that he could find in the treasaurye of the lord, and Palace of the
king / and sent it to Azael / the king of Syrie, and he departed from
Jerusalem. Lo here thou may plainly see, that for to paye the peoples
raunsomme, he toke those things out of the temple / not withstanding he
spared not the kings palayce / when he toke those things out of the temple.

Also in the.4. book of kings, cap. 18. it is thus red of the holy king
Ezechias. The same season Ezechias braake the gates of the temple of the lord
/ and toke the plates of gold / that he him self had there stycked up, and
gave them to the king of Assiriens.

And if thou would say, that Ezechias did amysse, I answer as it is said
secundo Paralipo. cap. 32. Ezechias is not blamed for any of all his works,
that he did, but only for the message of the princis of Babylon. Than who
shall dampne him / the which holy writ preysethe in all his deeds? If he
err, not understanding the sothenesse and the verity of holy writ /
wherefore than strive you against kings and princis? It is red secundo Machab.
quinto. God chose not the people for the place / but the place for the
people.

Therefore the church of lyme and stone should not be spared / when the christen
people be in perylle. The which thing the holy king Ezechiel and Ioseph
understood and truly did fulfil. If your goods be holy churches goods / and
the people is a great part of holy church: shall not than holy churches goods
skylfully be spended for the succour and saufegarde of the people? And so it
follows / that it longethe to the ghostlyche of holy church. And our lord
says, Matthei duodesimo. I tell you / this is more than the temple. For it is
no doubt the ghostly temple, that is mankynde, is more worth than the temple
that is made of lyme and stone.

Therefore a mild and a prudent king mote by these words know the will of
all mighty god: and him needs not to seek auctorite of other. Nor the temple
of lyme and stone / nor the things dedicated therein / shulde not be spared /
to wyn peace and saufegarde to the people, that is in peril. Nor we should not
smile (after a flaterynge facion) at the superfluite of the church / but se
that the great multitude of christen people be help and succoured in their
need. And though the king deals graciously with you / and goodly governs
you always / yet ye be not ashamed to withsay him in that that he may laufully
do by the law of god almighty, and will not with your good will thereto assent.
But take heed and beware by the words of Salomon: The kings wrath is the
messanger of death.


CLE. If those things that are ones given to god, may be withdrawn taken away
again: than all vows may be made void fordone.


MI. That that I have said is not to withdraw and take away gifts, that are
given to allmyghty god: but to turn and apply those gifts to such use, for
the which they were first given. For those gifts that are given to god / the
very same gifts are dedicated to holy and charitable uses. And what thing can
be more holy than the sauation of christen people? And what is more precious
unto our lord / than to defend and sauely keep the christen people from
the inuasio of their ennemies, thieves murderers / to bye peace to the true and
faithful subjects? Therefore when the goods of the church be spent on this
wise / than are they bestowed to such use / for the which they were first
dedicate and given.


CLERI. If ye take you to holy wryt, why do ye withsaye and break our
privileges and fredomes: which lybertyes we have by holy writ? For our lord
Matt. 17. said unto Peter: Howe seems hit unto the Symon, The kings of the
earth, of whom take they tribute / of their own sons, or else of other? of
other said Peter. Iesus said to him: Than are the sons free. But lest we
offend them, goo unto the see / and caste in a fysshe hooke / and the first
fysshe that comes up / open his mouth / and thou shalt find a stater,
take that, and give it for me and for the. Ye se sir knight that the clergy,
bond to the service of god, is free in all points.


MI. If ye well consider, and understand the gospel aright / ye may se / that
the tribute or dragme was demanded only of Christ: And only for Christ
this answer seems to be given: For he is the very son of god, the son of
the great mighty king. And as the kings son is greatter than the bishop:
so is gods son greatter than the emperor. And so that answer was given
for Christ, and not for you. Never the less because they, that chieffely
serve the king in his presence, shulde not be put to common and grievous charges
/ so we grant, that clerks in their own persons be free / but not they, that
lead their lyfes as lewd men, and not as clerks to the worship / but to
the gyle and fraud of our lord / as hit is all day scene. But clerks that
follow Christ, as pristes that serve at the alter, and that are fully given
and occupied in the service of god, we grant, that those be free, I say not
clearly by the gospelle: but by cause in their so doing hit discordethe not
from the gospelle / that freedom is given them by privileges of princis. For
since the beginning of the church Paule ad To. 13. saith: Every soul be
subject to the higher powers / not only (saith he after) for wrath / but also
for conscience. And after following he saith, yield and paye to all men that is
due to them: to whom tribute is due / pay tribute: to whom custom is due,
paye custom. Than ye se / that every soul must be subject, bear tribute,
and pay custom. But as I have said / ye be now free in your own person, by
privileges of princis: but shall your feldes have now the same freedom? If holy
church bye a field, that is able to be tilled: shall he that hath thereof every
year rent and tribute lose his rent and tribute?


CLE. Our communication now is not of rent and tribute, but of exactions.


MI. Like as I have of some field certain rent: so the emperor of his empire
/ and the king of his kingdom, may at his own will reyse skylfull tribute
for the defence of the common welthe. It is granted by clear reason / that the
common welthe shall be defended at the costs of the commontie: and what so
ever part thereof enjoys this defence / it is most agreenge with right / that
he set to his shoulder, and help to bear the burden. Than if possessions be
as ryghtfully subject to the common charge / as to the years rent, he shall be
under charge / who so ever owes them, specially if it needs for the defence
of the common welthe: for they need the common defence, as al other need. If ye
say nay, because of prescription and custom, that ye have of so lunge time
used that liberty: We answer you / In as much longer / and of old
continuance that your freedom and liberty is / by the goodness and liberal
benignite of kings and princis, so much the sooner ye shulde be prompt and
ready with heart and mind to pay your part, and help forward, where need
required. For holy writ fordoth this prescription / that ye allege. For from
Salomon to Ioas / and from Ioas to Ezechiell it is red of no such doing, as
Ezechiell did in time of need. Also many cities, that were by privileges and
custom free from payenge of exactions: have both patiently paid / and also
do pay with good will at this day, at their princis pleasure / for the defence
of the realm / of the commonalty, or of persons. If god for vnkyndenes /
calls again forgyuenes of sin: beware lest for your rebellyon / that ye
deserve no less, but also to be further charged, and at the last to be
strypped from al your goods and power.


CLE. Shall the king beryue and take away from us, the gracis granted us by
kings, that were his predecessors and by other noble princis? And may he
fordo the privileges of blessed fathers granted to holy church?


MI. I deny not it is truth / great and large privileges be to you granted by
kings and princis. Therefore ye ought to understand and know, that what so
ever the governors of the common wealth do / they intended it all to gether for
the profit of the common weal / having regard specially thereunto
according to this rule: They dispose all things in such wise, that they
prefer the common welthe before their own: which in a prince is a thing
most glorious, whereof Dauid is example.ij. Regum. Therefore it is know by
witness clear true, and eke by very reason, that they grant nothing by their
writynge / that shulde afterward be harm and damage to the common weal. But
if any privilege / that is granted, be found and known hurtful / and
grievous to the common weal, it may be repelled and fordone in time of need.
Therefore it is not to be doubted, but that the high princis for the necessary
busynes of the realm, may alter and change (as reason and time requires)
the gracis and privileges to you granted, and by the laws established. As we
rede of the most wise king Salomon, in the peyne of theft, changed some
what of gods law.


CLERI. The emperors and not the kings have establisshed tho things.
Therefore now sir knight / the emperors must gyde the raynes of the laws.


MI. This answer is blasphemous: And either (as it seems) ye are ignorant of
the beginning of a kyngedome, or else (which is most likely) ye envy the
high estate of the realm. If ye well behold the acts of great Charlemain,
or listed to rede the ancient approved histories: ye shall find, that the
realm of France is but a portion of the empire / by a just division separated
from it / and was by the space of.500. years eagle thereto both in dignitee and
auctoritie. Therefore what so ever privilege of dignite the empire holds in
one part / the same holds the realm of France in an other. For when by
brotherne the realm of France was divided from the other part of the empire:
what so ever laws / power, or dignite the empire opteined and exercysed over
and upon the said part thus divided, the very self power fell to the
french king. And therefore like as all things contained within the bounds of
the empire, is well known to be subject to the empire: so likewise all
things within the bounds of the realm / be subject to the realm. And like
as the emperor may make laws over al his empire, and to them add more or
diminish, as he thinks good: so may the king of France, either utterly
repelle the emperors laws, or change which of them him list: or else clean
exilynge and fordoynge these laws / may at his pleasure ordeyne and make
new. For when need should require (as it oft chances) to enact and ordeyne a
statute, if the king that is the chief, could not do it: tha there is none
other that canne: for there is none above him. And therefore sir clerk refrain
your tongue, and acknowledge the king by his royal power to be above your
laws, customs / privileges / and liberties: and that he may by the advise of
his nobuls add or diminysshe / what so ever he think according with equite
and reason: and therefore what so ever he changes in those days for the welthe
of the realm, take it well in worth and patiently suffer it. For so Paule
teachethe you writynge to the Romaynes the xiij. chapter, where he saith: Who
that resists the high power / resysteth the ordynaunce of god. And again in
the end of the pistell to the Hebrewes he says: Obeye ye to your soueraynes
/ and humble your self to them.

Also king Dauid.1. Reg. 21. under Abiathar the prince of the pristis / in time
of need did not lonely eat the bread called panes propositionis, (whereof to
eat it was not lefull for any man / except the priests) but also gave the
same bread to eat / to them that were with him. And it is written Mark
the.ij. chap. The holy day is made for man, and not man for the holy day. And
so the lord is the son of man, and also is lord of the holy day. It is
written in the first book of Parali. the 39. chap. In thy hand is the greatness
and empire of all. It saith farther there: They honoured god, and than the
king. And it saith there. They secondely anointed Salomon the son of king
Dauid / they anointed him in our lord to be their prince, and Sadoch to be
their bishop. And.2. Parali. 23. it says: Nor none other shulde entre in to
the house of our lord but priests, and such of the deacons as ministered,
they all only shulde entre in, because they be halowed: and all the residue of
the common people shulde keep the watch of our lord. The deacons environed
the king about, every man having his armour. And if any other entered in to
the temple of the lord he was slain. They shulde attend upon the king both
when he entered in / and when he went out. Also Ioada the bishop anointed
him / and his children prayed for him and said.

God save the king.


CLE. It draws fast toward night: to morrow morning I will answer you to
every thing.


FINIS.
Imprinted at London in Fletestrete, in the house of Thomas Berthelet / ne'er to
the cundite at the sign of Lucrece.

CUM PRIVILEGIO.


