Work for Chimny-sweepers: OR A warning for Tabacconists. Describing the
pernicious use of Tobacco, no less pleasant then profitable for all sorts to
read.

Fumus patriae, Igne alieno Luculentior.

As much to say, Better be chokt with English hemp, then poisoned with Indian
Tobacco.

Imprinted at London by T. Este, for Thomas Bushel, are to be sold at the
great North door of Powles. 1602.

To the Reader.
I Am to well asured (good Reader) that in undertaking this vain discourse of
the pernicious vulgar use or rather abuse of Tobacco, I shall draw unto my
self no small (...) among our smoky gallants, ^ long time glutted themselves
with the fond fopperies and fashions of our neighbour Countries: yet still
desirous of novelties, have not stuck to travel as far as India to fetch a
Dulce venenum, a grecian Helen, an insatiate Messaline, and hug a stinging
serpent in their bosoms: nor am I ignorant, that to the wiser sort this
treatise will seem at the first a fruitless labour, of an idle brain, and to
other some a vain flourish of a carping mind: And that because in this
treatise is utterly reprehended and in some sort refuted, that which of many
excellent learned men hath been most highly commended, and by sundry persons
of high estate hath been experimented and tried very commodious for the
health of man.

For Monardus in his treatise of the West Indian simples, Carolus Clusius in
his Comment upon Garcaeas de Stirpibus et Aromaticis Indicis, and Baptista
Porta in his 8. book and 11. Chap: of Natural Magic do commend this plant
as a thing most excellent and divine.

And in these our days many excellent Physicians and men of singular learning
and practise, together with many gentlemen and some of great account, do by
their daily use and custom in drinking of Tobacco, give great credit and
authority to the same: yet nevertheless if it shall please them either with
patience to hear, or with judgment to read these few lines, and with
indifferency to way and ponder the reasons herein ^dged, I doubt not but they
shall find, neither the great authority of the one, nor the usual practise
of the other, nor yet them both united and conioined in one, a ground for this
their vulgar practise of a thing so hurtful an^ pernicious to the life and
health of man.

Authorities of expert and learned men in their art (I confess) be motives of
weight and importance to lead and draw the unlearned and unskilful sort, who
for the more part stick and rely more on the authority of the teacher, then
on his demonstrations and proofs, to yield to their assertions.

But of all heresies in Philosophie that Pithagoricall precept (Ipse dixit)
seems most gross, hurtful, and pernicious: Heerevpon we find that
Aristotle in his Morals thought it not a matter of wisdom or worth
commendation, to content himself with the bare authority of his Master Plato
(who no doubt was in learning most excellent: but laying Platoes assertions in
one scale of the balance, and reason with experience in the other, and finding
his Masters authority to light to counterpease re^son, he made it no scruple
to swerve and descent from Ipse dixit, and stuck to sensible reas^n, as a most
evident means to bring a sensible and reasonable creature, to the knowledge
and understanding of the truth.

The like in Pnis^ke did Galen, dissenting sometimes from his Master
H^pocrates, (for so may I term him, for from him he had his light:) of set
purpose in his Comments on Hippocrates Epidemicks, and Aphorisms doth refute
him: And Aristotle had wont to say, Amicus Plato, sed Magis amica veritas.
Plato was his friend, (for from him he had his learning and knowledge) but
Truth and Verity was his greater friend, and therefore in equity right he
ought rather to take her part.

So for truth sake only did Varro write against Lelius, Sulpitius against
Casselius, Saint Ierome against Hilaris, Saint Augustine against Hierome and
Ambrose also. These men made ever more account and estimation of verity and
truth, then of the authority of learning in any whosoever.

Let it not therefore (good Reader) seem a vain thing to you, or an argument
of an Idle brain, for me to descent in judgment of Tobacco, from those
authors before aleaged, having as I suppose, both sollide Reasons and true
Experience on my side to counterpease their authorities founded rather on
opinion then any certain science or demonstration.

Philaretes.

NOt the desire of any private game,
Nor (...) motions of a Carping brain,
Nor for reward from some (...) fil^,
(How ever men may Censure (...) them lif^,)
Nor the desire to see my name in (...),
Like pupil Poets who^e minds look a sq^i^,
To heart the Vulger sorts applauding voice,
Commend their budding Mule, Inventions Choice*
Hath (...) me take in hand this idle task*
And (...)* smoke face unmask,
Who being but a ^
Hath plaid the painted English (...)*
(Pity: that so ^ wits
Should fall into such furious ^)
But Nature, Lo^e, and my welwilling pen,
To Englands soil, and my dee^ Countrymen,
Duty and due alleg^unce binding band,
Hath (...) me take this (...) task in hand,
Which ^ comes to the (...) view,
Of the (...) sighted and (...) Crew,
Of new enstalled Knights (...),
Of the sterne Censours Leering (...)*
I'm sure the one will wish the reeking (...)
That smoketh from his ^
Like fire and brimstone: ^
(Such is the flintinesse of modern (...))
Another ^eares my guiltless ^
Hiding them in his big ^
And at some public show in all ^
With them he kindles his ^
They burn for Heretics, (^)
C^se they blasphemed ^
Let none deny but Iudi^ soil can yield,
The sou'raigne simples, of Ap^ll^ field.
Let England Spain and the French ^
Let Irish Kern and the ^
Confess themselves in ^
To wholesome simples of (...) land.
But hence thou Pagan Idol: tawny weed,
Come not with-in our Fairy Costs to feed.
Our wit-worne gallants, with the sent of thee,
Sent for the Devil and his company,
Go charm the Priest and Indian Canniballs,
That Cerimoniously dead sleeping falls,
Flat on the ground, by virtue of thy sent,
Then waking straight, and tells a wonderment,
Of strange events and fearful visions,
That he had seen in apparitions.
Some swaggering gallants of great Plutoes Court,
I warrant you would he the truth report,
But would I were a Charmer for it sake,
In England it should little rest ytake,
O I would whip the queen with rods of steel,
That ever after she my ierks should feel.
And make her swear upon my Charming hand,
Never t'set foot more on our Farie land.
Pity it is that smoking vanity,
Is Englands most esteemed Courtesy.
Oft have I heard it as an old said saw,
The strong digesting hungry Camells maw,
Brooks stinging nettles and the vilest weeds,
That stinking dunghills in rank plenty feeds.
But it is a toy to mock an Ape in deed,
That English men should love a stranger weed.
Oh cry you mercy now the cause I know,
It is probatum for the Pox I trow.
Peace tel-tale peace, blab not thy countries fault,
O seek to hide it in obliuions valt.
See if thou can with arguments refrain,
The smoky humours of each wit-worne brain.
Then will I never look for greater gain,
Nor ever think my labour lost in vain.
I. H.

FOR the dislike that I have conceived in the use and practise of Tobacco, I
take it to be grounded on eight principal reasons and arguments.

1 First, that in their use or custom, no methode of order is observed.
Diversity and distinction of persons, times and seasons considered, no
variety of accidents and diseases pondered. 2 Secondly, for that it is in
quality and complexion more hot and dry then may be conveniently used daily
of any man: much less of the hot and cholericque constitution. 3 Thirdly, for
that it is experimented and tried to be a most strong and violent purge. 4
Fourthly, for that it withers and dries up natural moisture in our bodies,
thereby causing sterrilitie and barrenness: In which respect it seems an
enemy to the continuance and propagacion of mankind. 5 Fiftly, for that it
decays and dissipateh natural heate, that kindly warms in us, and thereby
is cause of crudities and rewmes, occasions of infinite maladies. 6 Sixtly, for
that this herb or rather weed, seems not void of venom and poison, and
thereby seems an enemy to the life of men. 7 Seauenthly, for that the first
author and finder hereof was the Devil, and the first practisers of the same
were the Devils Priests, and therefore not to be used of us Christians. 8 Last
of all, because it is a great augmentor of all sorts of melancholy in our
bodies, a humour fit to prepare our bodies to receive the prestigations and
hellish illusions and impressions of the Devil himself: in so much that many
Physicians and learned men do hold this humour to be the very seat of the
Devil in bodies possessed.
A Warning for Tabcconists.
The first Reason.
TOuching the first; Where no method or order is used, there rests in all
arts and other actions human, nought else but dissolation and confusion, a
thing, as in the Common weal it is pernicious, so in the preservation of mans
health it hath been always adjudged most dangerous.

But that in these our days, in this land of England, this new come simple of
the West commonly known with us by the name of Tobacco: is without all method
and order of most men received, may be apparent by this, that it is taken early
in the morning, and also very late at night: in the morning fasting, and in the
evening feasting and on a full stomach. In the beginning, middle, and end of
meals. To be short, at all times, at all hours, and of all persons, this
Indian stranger most familiarly is received: for the smoke of Tobacco seems
to the fauorits thereof at no time unseasonable. Neither that it ought to be
tied to reasons and rules (being perhaps a thing in it self more irregular and
unreasonable) seeing that by experience (as they think) they have found great
good profit by the use thereof.

They boast much of this their experience as a sufficient ground for this their
disorder. But their experience not grounded on reason, but rather repugnant
thereto, and contrary to commonsence also, is a motive sufficient for the
simple, but no way an argument for the wiser sort, to dance after their
unsavoury and unpleasant Tobacco pipe.

Galen in his Comment on his first book of Hippocrates Aphorisms: Galen. Com.
ap^o. Hip. 1. Lib. 1.
shows that the art of Physic stands on two legs, Reason and
Experience: Whereof if either be wanting, the whole art is lame and maimed.

For as Reason without Experience is very uncertain: Experiment^ falla^.
Hippo. apho. 1. lib.
so is Experience without Reason very perilous and dangeroes; especially in
matters inwardly to be taken and received into men's bodies, the which as they
are diverse and differing in nature and complexion, so are they also diversely
in diet to be ordered, and by far contrary medicines in their sicknesses
cured.

For Example.



And bodies of temper dry, require things in nature and quality moist. But
moist complexions and maladies growing of superfluities of humours, are more
commonly remedied by things of nature drying and disiccatiue. Contrari^
currantur contr^js.
By which last means we see by experience, that some diseased of the dropsy
(no doubt a cold and moist affect) have received great help by the freque^t
use of this Tobacco. For the siccety, dri'th of this simple, together with his
heat, in a body hidropicall, having fit matter great store of cold humours to
work upon, doth no doubt in that respect further their health, and yet can it
not be justly inferred here of, that Tobacco simply taken without respect of
times, persons, sex, age, temperament and disease, any ways to be either
profitable or else commendable.

Also fasting and abstinence for meat is assigned Hippocrates in his
Aphorisms, for a good remedy against full and replete bodies.

Abstinuisse decet nimium quibus humida membra, Apho 79. li. 5
hu^da desiccat corpora nempe fames. But yet the same Hippocrates denies that
kind of abstinence to be any ways convenient for growing yee^es, or for the
sick of fevers consuming, for such as are not accustomed thereunto.

Humidior victus pueris pariter{que} suetis, Apho. 6. lib. 1

Conuenit, accensis corporibus{que} febri.
Moreover some bodies receive help and ease by Hippocrates speaks of in his
3. Aphorism of his book.

Ad summam veniens habitudo athletica molem noxia, Apho, 3. lib. 1
cum non quo progrediatur habet.
La namque statu cum non consistere possit, est in deterius retro necesse
ruat.
Vnde fit vt corpus confestim soluere possit, quo poterit rursus conuenienter
alt.
And yet the same author in his Aphorisms doth testify, purges no way to be
convenient for sound and healthy bodies: for saith he, Sana corpora
difficulter purgantia medicamenta ferunt, et cito a purgantibus exoluuntur.

And to be short, neither one nor the other remedy can in any respect preuaile,
if it be applied out of his due time and season: for, Temporibus medicina
valet, Ouid*
data tempore prosunt, et data non apto tempore vina nocent.

And truly as no one kind of diet can fit all sorts of bodies: So no one
kind of remedy can aptly be applied to all maladies, no more then one shoe
can well serve all men's feet.

What reason therefore have these Tabacconists (I pray you) to offer this their
Tobacco after one and the self same order to all men, ages, and complexions
indifferently, making no scruple of the fitness of time, quality of the
disease, or temperament of the person to whom they offer it.

What thing can be more absurd and fantastical, then to minister one the
self same remedy to contrary repugnant affects, hot cold, dry and moist,
empty and replete, acute and cronicall, which for the more part have deeper
roots, and are of longer continuance, then can suddenly be blown away with a
puff of a smoky Tobacco pipe, yea some of them can hardly be removed by the
great pains, care cunning of the expert and learned in Physic: for, Nonest
in medico semper releuetur vt aeger Interdum docta plus valet art malum.

And yet these Tobacco Baptista Porta lib. 8. Cap. 11.
sau^rits hold no disease so incurable but that in some measure it receives
either cure or ease by this Tobacco.

But I assure you many diseases being of themselves and their own nature,
light and of easy cure, may by the untimely use of this same, become
altogether incurable, such are, the first step or degree to an Heticke,
distemper of heat in the Liver, oppilations of the Lungs, and such like.

And truly if nothing else should make one out of fancy with the use of
Tobacco, it might be suffi^ient for an equal judge to think with himself how
unnatural a thing it is to pervert the natural use offices of the parts of
the body, for by the force of Tobacco the mouth, throat, and stomach,
(appointed by nature for the receipt of food nourishment for the whole body)
are made emunctuary clensing places and sincks, (supplying herein the office
of the most abject and basest part) for the filth and superfluous excrements of
the whole body.

The second Reason.
THe second reason against the ordinary use of Tobacco, is taken from the
excess of his two manifest qualities of heat and dri'th, which Monardus and
others also have affirmed to come near to the third degree of excess in
either quality.

So that if men of hot and dry constitution should often use the feume of
Tobacco, no doubt they should increase much their distemper, for like added to
his like, increases the resemblance similitude the more according to that
Axiom in Philosophie. Arist. (...).
Omnes unile additum simili reddia ipsum magis simile. Whereupon Aristotle in
his 8. book and 29. Chap. Arist. lib 8. Cap 29. De animal.
De animalibus, infers, that a Snake if he eat of a Scorpion waxes far
more venomous then he was before.

But I need not to stand long upon this point, seeing that daily practise
experience teachth us, that heat increases heat, things cold, do increase in
us a greaer cold, the like may be said of the other qualities of dri'th and
moisture, so that in natural reason and common sense it seems true that the
extreme violent dri'th heat of Tobacco, makes it far unfit unwholesome for
thin choleric bodies. And so is it also for youth and such as grow, for Qui
crescunt plurimum habent innaticaloris, this natural heat in youth, by the
immoderate use of this fiery fume would soon turn unto a heat unnatural,
and thereby be occasion of infinite maladies.

But I hold it a thing very dangerous, not only for the younger sort, but also
for all other ages and constitutions whatsoever, to be over bold with Tobacco.
For it doth not only consume and dissipate natural heat in them (by
increasing of the unnatural) but it wastes also dries up radical moisture
(the principal subject of native heat) so that hereof ensues in the body
great store of crud vndigested humours, the effects of immoderate heat in us.

For it is not fiery nor immoderate heat in us, but rather a mild vnctuous
warmth, consisting in a temtperate moderate moisture that performs as well
concoction as all other natural actions in us.

Which thing is very apparent conspicuous in such as are afflicted with hot
burning Fevers: In whom as the fiery heat appears most, so crude and
vndigested humours do abound more then in such as are clear of such
extremity of heates. Neither do their humours at any time come to perfect
digestion in them, until the rigour and violence of that fiery heate be in
some sort (by cooling diet and medicine) repressed.

Much less therefore are the patrons of Tobacco to be beeleeued in this, that
hot and burning Agues (^ising of corruption and putrefaction of choler blood in
the veins or about the principal parts of mans body) may be cured with an
in^usion of Tobacco lease in white Wine steeped all night.

For as it was ever an aphorism maxim in Physic, that as like is maintained
by his like, So was it also of like certainty in the same art, that Contr^ria
a contrarijs currantur. Contraries are cured by their contraries. I mean
contrary rather to the disease, or to the cause of the disease.

But what contrariety I pray you can be found between Tobacco and a Fever
tercian or burning Ague: When as they mani^estly agree in their principal
qualities of heate and dri'th: both equally falling in excess of either of
them? The like may be said of other effects proceeding of the same of like
causes.

But to let the diseased pass, and to come to those which are of perfect
health, I take it very dangerous and hurtful for them often to use this ^ for
thereby great part of that humour is dissipa^d, wasted, spent cast forth of the
body by often (...), seeges, swets and continnall spittings and coughings,
which in process of time would turn to good blood, and wholesome nurrishment
for the body.

For Crude and waterish humours (which for the most part are all those which by
this medicine are) are oftentimes very necessary for many uses in the body: As
for pliant motion of the loints, and principally for nurrishment of the
flegmaticke and colder parts.

And it is a received opinion amongst the best Physicians that nature (being a
provident careful nurse of mankind) hath purposely left this Crudie humour in
our bodies, to the intent that we might ever have some thing in store to
nourish us, if happily we should at any time want other food.

But that no small part of our nurishment is drawn away by the untimely use of
this Tobacco, Tobacco deprives the b^dy of nourishment.
may manifestly appear by those men, who before the use thereof were gross and
foggy, but after they have acquainted themselves with this kind of practise,
they became very lean and s^lender.

So that no doubt, if they desist not in time from farther use thereof, there is
no small suspicion least that they shall thereby fall into Consumptions, to that
of the most dangerous sorts called of the Physician, Marasmos proceeding of want
of substantial nurrishment, dissipation of natural heat and decay of spirits
in the body.

And herein I cannot but wonder much at the over sight of some, who otherwise
being learned and wise, yet in this seem very Paradoxical, when as they
contend to prove Tobacco to be a great nurrisher. For besides that, it is
manifest that it takes away great part of our nurrishment, by the extreme
evacuation it procures, it is also (by means of his great heat dryness) very
unapt to breed any good nurishment in us*

To this may be added, his unpleasant and ungrateful smell, insomuch that
the tasters thereof bear away with them in their bodies and breath, the
loathsome Tobacco sent, long time after.

So that it is very evident and manifest that as well in respect of his
substance (over hot dry) as also of his unpleasing stinking sent, it is neither
fit to nurish the humerall solide parts, nor yet apt to refresh comfort the
spirits of man, be they natural in the Liver, vital in the hart, or sensible
or animal in the brain and sinews. For as touching the humours in us, they
are aptest nourished by such things as are either humorall and mo^st, or else,
may easily be turned and converted into a liquid and thin substance.

And as for the hard and solede parts of the body* as bones, sinews, veins
artires) they cannot receive any nutriment of any thing before it be first
turned into some moist and liquid substance also, apt to be ^uked drunk into
the former parts, afterward by the force of natures work, assimilated,
hardened, transformed into the very nature substance of the parts by it
nurished. But as for the spirits, it hath ben a question much disputed on
amongst the Philosophers, (as Aristotle, Plato, and others) of old time, their
expositers since; whether smells or odours may any ways nourish the same. And
(if I be not deceived) they all agree in this, that men's spirits do feel
great comfort and refreshing by such sweet and pleasant savours as are founded
subjected in some moist vnctuous matter. But this privilege cannot in any
respect be granted to Tobacco, both for that her savour is very unsavoury
stinking, also because it is placed founded in a very dry and withered
substance. Insomuch as that the t^sters and drinckers thereo^, think it not
fit to be taken, until it be thoroughly parched and dried, that thereby it
might the better receive the force of the fire, the sooner be kindled therewith.

Now that sweet and pleasant savours delightful fumes, Sweet smells (...) the
spirits.
do greatly refresh our spirits and recreate the senses, it is evidently
perceived by our usual practise: When to the feeble and languishing persons,
and to such as faint or ^ound, we presently offer them the sent of Rosewater
mixed with a little vinegar, that it might the more speedely pei^ce; and the
sick person feels great comfort thereby.

But on the contrary, ^
stinking filthy smells, are so far from re^e^hing us, as that they utterly
extinguish quell our spirits in us; and to some procure hasty and untimely
deaths, (or at the least some uncurable maladies and loathsome diseases.

^ French Ch^rurgion not unlearned, ^
in his profession most expert, reports of himself in the 12. Ch^pter of his
treatise of the plague, that visiting a certain patient of his, that had by
means of the plague a botch in his ^ancke or groyne, and other bl^es elsewhere
in his body: Whilst rashly he unfolded the bed clothes, the better to take
view of the sores, he was suddenly stroke into a sound with the st^c^e
loathsome breath that steymed from these ulcers, pierced up to his brain
through his nostrils, in such sort as that he hardly recovered his life.
Afterward being recalled to his ^ence feeling again, he thought the house
wherled round, had fallen suddenly down again, if happily he had not taken
better hold of the bed post, and stayed himself.

How noisome and irksome a thing unpleasant and stinking savours be to the
brains of men may easily be con^ectured by the usual custom of most men,
who never pass by any unsavoury place, but they straight ways stop their noses
mouths with their hands or other means, least that the ill vapor or stench
thereof should any ways offend or loath their brain.

But to come to our Tobacco, Tobacco ungrateful in sent.
if any man doubt of his ill savour bad sent, I refer him to the report of
those, who have had longest trial thereof. No doubt, except they be altogether
shameless, they will truly inform him thereof. I remember that being called
once to the cure of an honourable Earl now departed this life, amongst other
learned and expert Physicians, D. T.
there happened one to be called, who as in times past he was Chemical, so in
the untimely use of this plant he seemed to be over fantastical. It fortuned
the very morning that he came unto his Honours presence, he had (according to
his accustomed wont) taken his mornings draft of Tobacco, with the fume whereof,
he so perfumed his Lordships bedchamber in such sort, as that the Earl being
marvelous annoyed therewith, told me after the departure of the former
Physician, that from thence forth he had rather lose the benefit of that mans
counsel in Physic, then to endure such a horrible a fume again. This good
D. being demanded of other Physicians, (whereof two were her Majesties) the
present, what reason he had for this his custom? answered that he would not
but for 100 pounds he had used this feume at first, for thereby he found great
ease for his cold reumatick stomach. But now said he, I would that I could so
easily leave it, condicionallie I had given 300 pounds more, for I find my
self hart sick that day, till I have tasted thereof.

No doubt the long and daily use of drincking Tobacco, had accustomed his
stomach to draw to it waterish and rewmetick matter in great abundance, the
quantity whereof, urged nature to seek means for the expelling the same
again, which could, by no other thing be more fitly performed then by Tobacco
it self.

For as it hath a power faculty to draw to the stomach, (as other strong
purges have) so likewise hath it a property and virtue to expel forth the
same, no otherwise then all other purges have. But herein it differs from
other purges, that it seems to be of a far more thin subtle nature then
other purges be, by means whereof, nature is so pricked and forced oftentimes
in such violent sort, as that it causes violent evacuation, as well by stool
vomits and swetes, as also by saliuacion, coughing spittings, which thing other
purges usually do not, albeit they be very forceable, violent and strong.

So that hereof is gathered the fourth reason before aleadged, that Tobacco
is not familiarly to be used because it is a vehement and violent purge.

The third Reason.
I Need not stand long on this point, Tobacco a violent purge.
to prove Tobacco to be a strong and violent purge: for that in daily practise
common experience the same is most euidet and manifest to most men. And to
doubt of that which of it self is perspicuous, were gross stupidity, and to
deny that which is to our sense most clear and evident, were a point next to
extreme folly.

The often scowrings, fluxes, vomets, swetes, and other immoderate euacuations
in^ident to this simple, do testify the same to purge most violently.

Furthermore, Tobacco is found to be of that strength force, that the very
maceration or infusion of one leaf thereof in white wine ouernight doth
procure strong and extreme vomits.

It is as yet fresh in memory, that diverse young Gentlemen, by the daily use
of this Tobacco, have brought themselves to flixes and disenteries, and of late
at Bath a Scholar of some good account and worshipful calling, D. B.
was supposed to have perished by this practise, for his humours being
sharpened and made thin by the frequent use of Tobacco, after that they had
once taken a course downward, they ran in such violence, as that by no Art or
Phisicks skill they could be stayed, till the man most miserably ended his
life, being then in the very prime and vigour of his age.

But no purge, (be he familiar or gentle, or else violent and hurtful) ought
by the rules of Physic to be familiarly and daily used of any man that hath
respect either of his life, or regard to his health.

For as concerning such as are in perfect health Hippocrat^ the Prince of
Physicians in the 36. Hip. lib 2. Apho. 36.
Aphorism of his second book affirms: Corpora (...) si per medicamenta
purgantur exoluuntur celeriter; quae prauo cibo vtuntur. Sound and healthy
bodies (saith he) soon wast and consume, by the use of purging medicines. In
like case do they which feed on corrupt and unwholesome meates.

Likewise the same author in the 37. Hip. lib. 2. Apho 37.
Aphorism of the former book, saith, that Qui corpora habent commoderata ijs
purgationes difficiles sunt. To such as are in health purging medicines are
very dangerous. And truly this his assertion seems to be grounded upon good
substantial reason. For whereas the virtue and operation of the purge is to
draw expel forth of the body such corrupt vnholsome humours as have any
affinity or likeness in substance with the purge; in healthy bodies finding
none of that disposition nature, the purge then either loses his operation and
action, thereby is converted into some bad humour in the body, or else it
draws and expels forth humours very profitable necessary for the
nurrishment and sustentation of the body. And therefore all purges must needs
be to sound and healthy bodies very perilous and dangerous.

And as for sick and diseased men, they ought only to use purging remedies at
such times as their bodies and humours shall be made fit and apt for the
operatio of the purge, according to that counsel of Hippocrates in his tenth
Aphorism of his second book, saying: Purganti quoties vacuas medicamine
corpus, quo been res Cedat, fluxile red prius.

So often as thou purgest, Hip. Apho. 1^. lib.
so often also ought you to make your bodies apt thereto, and the humours (to
be purged) fluxible, that the parts and passages of the body being open, and
the humours apt to run, the purgation might work with less torments and
grief to the party purged.

So that it seems very apparent true, that neither in health, nor yet in
sickness, that so untimely and vulgar use of Tobacco (being before proved a
violent purge) can be used without great hurt and danger.

Neither ought this kind of remedy to be given at anytime, but in causes of
extremity, and in desperate diseases only. For that it is an extreme and
desperate medicine. Hip. Apho. 6. lib 1.
Extremis enim morbis extrema remedia adhibedasunt, saith our Hippocrates. And
in his comment upon the same Aphorism, shows all strong purges to be
reckoned amongst extreme remedies.

The fourth Reason.
THe fourth argumet against this newcome simple, was that it dries up and
withers our vnctuous and radical moisture in us, and thereby seems an utter
enemy to the continuance and propagation of mankind. This may be proved in
this sort.

That thing which deprives the body of norishmet and food, doth also wither
dry up our natural and radical moisture; (because this hath his refreshing and
sustentation from the purest part of the blood engendered of our nourishments).
But Tobacco was showed before to deprive us our norishment, in that it spends
and euacuateth out of us by spitting and sweats otherwise much of that matter
that in time would prove in us good blood good food for our bodies. And
therefore Tobacco must needs be said to be a great decaier and witherer of our
radical moisture before specified.

Moreover Tobacco by means of his great heat and immeasurable dryness,
dissipateth natural heate and kind warm'th in our bodies, and thereby is
cause of defect of good concoction perfect digestion in us. The humours
therefore in us by this means made crude and raw, can be no fit aliment or
nutriment for the vnctuous and substantial humidity, wherein with moderate and
kindly heate the Philosopher esteemed the life of man to consist.

And last of all, whereas the sperm seed of man, is supposed (by the Physicians
natural Philosophers also) to be framed of the purest finest part of his blood
by the actio virtue of kindly warm'th working therein; the blood being now
vndigested crude, and the natural heate perverted corrupted by the immoderate
use of this hellish smoke, reeking forth of Plutoes forge, what sperm or
seed shall we expect to come fro them that daily use or rather shamefully abuse
this so apparent an enemy to the propagation thereof, as well if you respect the
material cause of seed consisting in the perfect^st most concocted parts of
the blood) as his efficiet (resting in the moderatio of natural heat) both
greatly altered and decayed by the use of Tobacco.

Hereby it must needs in cosequent follow, that the continuation propagation of
mankind (consisting principally in his perfect incorrupt seed) is in these men
much abridged.

And for certain proof that Tobacco dries up the sperm seed of man, I hear
by faithful relation of such as have much used it; That whereas before the use
thereof, they had been long molested with a flux of seed, commonly called with
us the running of the reins, and of the Physician Gomorrhaea, (proceeding in
them by reason of great quantity abundance of that matterseeking vent forth of
the body) they were in short space eased of this affect by the only use of
this medicine. For no doubt, this fiery fume, dried up the superfluity of
that matter, which by reason of her thin and great quantity, easily dropped
from them. But if they persist over long in the practise thereof, no doubt more
of that spermaticall humidity will be dried up in them, the will be convenient
for their health, or for the increase of their like; whereby the propogatio
cotinuation of mankind in this world must need be abridged.

The fifth Reason.
THe fifth argument against Tobacco was, that it dissipateth natural heate, and
thereby was occasion of raw and vndigested humours in the body.

This thing in part hath been demostrated before in the chap. precedent, to
which may here be added, that where natural and kind heat is by any mean made
more violent and fiery, there the parts of the body are made more hard and
dried, and thereby the more unfit and unapt to drink or receive into them such
liquid and moist matter, as by the daily food should accrue and grow to them.
Whereupon it falls forth, that that humidity that should be converted into
the nature substance of the sollide parts, is made (by means of their not
admission thereof) excrementall and superfluous.

For it is not a thing either strange or absurd in Philosophie, that things of
quality dry, may by an accidental means, be cause of superfluous moisture.
We see this thing confirmed by Galen himself, in his second book and second
Chapter, De tempera mentis, Gale. lib. ^. de Temp. cap. 2.
and also by Auicen.

We see by experience, that old persons being naturally dry in their sollide
parts, and have for that cause, their skin parched, their faces withered, their
sinews f^iffe, their backs stouping, and yet who doubts but such persons
have in their entrails and inward parts, great store of flegmaticke and
excrementall moistures, proceeding of want of good digestian and concoction in
those parts.

And truly those superfluities do the more abound in them, for that their firm
and sollide parts (as Sinews, Bones, Flesh, Veins, Artiers, and Ligamets) are
too dry and hard to receive and suck up so much of that alimentall humour
which Nature doth daily send to them for their sustenance and relief.

And hereof is seen in daily experience, that old folk are troubled most with
rewmes, Catarres, coughs, spatterings, vomits, scourings, and such like.

And that old age is naturally dry and hard, Galen declares in these words:
Senum temperies sicca est, Lib. ^. De tempora. cap. ^.
pro exemplo sunt arbores, N^quoties senescunt magis exiccantur.

We see also that the earth in Harvest time being over dried and parched with
the heate of the Summers Sun, cannot so speedily suck and drink up such
sudden showers of rain, as at that time most usually do happen.

And therefore about that time of the year we see the greatest land floods to
appear, and most harms to happen to men by loss of their Hey carried away
thereby.

All which proceeds by reason of the great siccetie and dri'th of the earth
at that season, causing it to be far unapt to receive that sudden moisture
flowing on the face thereof.

In like case the firm and sollide parts of mans body, being over dry and
hardened by the long and continual use of Tobacco, do with the more difficulty
receive and imbybe into them the alimentall humidity before specified: and
therefore they remain more copious in the body.

The sixth Reason.
THe sixth Reason against Tobacco was, that this Plant seems not void of
suspicion of a venomous and poisoned nature, and therefore ought not so
carelessly or confiden^y to be used.

The venomous and poisoned substance and nature of Tobacco, is manifested and
proved by this, that it is daily experimented, and before was proved by us,
to be a violent and most forceable purge.

Galen in his second book De ratione virtus, and 12. Section, ^
holds for a certainty that all vehement and violent purges, have in them
some deliterious poisoned nature, a faculty or operation clean contrary to
the nature of man.

And in the sixth of his Epidenickes, the same Galen affirms, that in times
past purging medicines were esteemed deliterious, for that they (being taken in
any large quantity) were offensive to nature, destroying and wasting the same.

In good Authors I find three kinds of deliterious Calcanthum, or else
extreme cold (as Mandrake) or Opium.

Napellum, Taxicum, and such like.

Enphorbium, praecipitate, Eleterium, and Tobacco it self.

Which last as it is deliterious by violent evacuation, So it is also very
pernicious and hurtful in his manifest and evident qualities of extreme
dry'th and heate included therein.

But touching his violent evacuation and purging quality, it hath been
sufficiently showed before. This one thing may be added thereunto, that Tobacco
is in this respect more perilous, for that it is taken without due preparation
and correction.

For it is confessed of all Physicians, Io. Mesnes cap. de (...).
that every purging medicine if it be strong (in respect of the deliterious bad
quality it hath) ought to be artificially corrected before it be take, leas^
he communicate his bad and venomous nature, to the stomach inward parts.

Hereupon it is a usual custom in Physic, to mix with purges, Mastich,
Cloves, Cinamome, Ginger, Aniseeds, Nutmegs, and such like sweet and
aramaticall Spices, partly to take away the ungrateful sent of the purge, and
partly to defend the vital spirits, principal parts, from the malice and hurt
which otherwise would happen by the ill quality of the purge.

Out of this rule of preparation of purges, only Aloes Succotrine is by Mesnes
excepted. Which as he affirms) is so far from ill quality and deliterious
nature, as that it is commonly given with other purges to amend correct their
venomous malicious nature.

But what correctiues I pray you in our time and Country are there used in
this Indian Tobacco, which the more simple sincere it is, the more wholesome and
effectual it is adjudged to be? And if it have by any means any aramaticall
spices shuffled amongst it, it is straight rejected and condemned for nought
counterfeit.

I deny not but that since Hippocratus and Mesnes time, there have been found
out sundry purges by the latter Arabians, which for that they work gently and
without offence, are called of them, Benedicta Medicamenta: Blessed and safe
medicines, and therefore have need of no preparation to be used with them for
their correction. Such are thought to be Manna of Calabria, Camarinds, Cassia
of Rhubarbe. But this Tobacco (now in use) is of an other key, and no ways to
be accounted Benedictum in working, but rather diabolical and hellish: for
that it works with extremity, torments and grief.

And that it is also in substance and nature deliterious and venomous, Tobacco
in his nature poison.
may be gathered by the symtornes and accidents which do immediately follow
and ensue the large drinking thereof. That are, violent vomits, many and
infinite stools, great gnawings and torments in the guts and inward parts.
Coldness in the outward and external members, Cramps, Convulsions, cold
sweats, ill colour, and wanness of skin, defect of feeling, sense,
understanding, loss of sight, giddiness of the head and brain, profound and
deep sleep, faintness, sounding, and to some hasty and untimely death. All
which, or the most part of them concurring, do manifest a poisoned quality or
venomous nature in the thing received.

And it is the more dangerous for that it hath in it the effects of contrary
and repuguant poisons: Tobacco a double poison
for albeit it be in quality very hot dry, yet hath it a stupefying and
benumbing effect, not much unlike to Opium or Henbane: which ere held to be
cold in the extremest degree. And albeit, it be apt to suffocate or strangle
like to Gipsum or plaster of Parrise, yet doth it purge scour as violently as
Precipatate or Quick-siluer sublymed.

I cannot resemble the poisoned force of this Tobacco to any thing more aptly,
then to the venom of a Scorpion, Tobacco like the poison of a Scorpion*
D^oscord, lib. ^. cap. 10.
which never receives cure but from the Scorpion it self, bruised or
anointed on the place stung. In like case the venomous impression left in the
stomach by Tobacco, receives no ease by any thing else whatsoever, but by
Tobacco only, eftsoon reiterated and resumed. This only difference seems
to be between these two poisons, That the venom of the Scorpion hath his
perfect and absolute cure from the Scorpion it self, but that of Tobacco hath
only a ce^taine ease and paliation for a time by the fume of Tobacco received;
but after perfect and absolute cure, this Tobacco by it self a thousand times
resumed or reiterated, admits none.

Neither do I take it of great importance which is by some alleged; Custom is
of great force.
That many here in England do take the fume of Tobacco without hurt or
inconvenience, and without any such strange accidents following. For the
custom of taking Tobacco with us, is in that manner, as that, it neither
profits, nor yet hurts much.

For what great inconvenience (I pray you) can happen to the taker thereof,
Every Agent requires time convenient to work his effect.
when as he receiving it at the mouth, doth straightway puff it forth again,
or snuffs it out at his nostrils, before it can have sufficient time and
space, to imprint his malicious and venomous quality in their bodies?

Few or none do take it down their throats, If the Agent lack due quatitie,
he los^th his ^orce.
and such as let it pass down, they mince it in such sort, and swallow it in
so small quantity, as that no great detriment can happen to them thereby.

But if happily any, more audacious then circumspect, shall let down any large
quantity thereof, then shall you evidently perceive in him, most of those
accidents before specified.

I am not ignorant that many perilous and deadly poisons are sometimes taken
into the body without offence and danger, but then they are either in very
small quantity (as I spake before) or else so repressed and corrected with
other Cordials, Poisons sometime may be taken without o^fence.
as that they cannot offend, but sometimes they bring great commodity and
profit with them.

For example, the flesh of Vipers in Treacle is so tempered and corrected, that
it profits much to such as orderly reciue it, against any poison or contagion
whatsoever. And quick-siluer well mortified, is often given, inwardly taken,
against many infirmities, with good success.

So in like manner we deny not but that in small quantity Tobacco may be taken
of any men without peril or imminent danger, especially being corrected
purified by the force of the fire wherewith it is ministered.

For that fire sometimes doth repress the poisoned vapour of venomous things,
Fire corrects poison.
may be proved by the testimony of Seneca, who (in his 2. book of his natural
questions, Seneca. lib. 2. not. quest. cap. 31.
and 31. Chapter, going about to show the reason why that poisoned and
venomous beasts do never engender worms within them, until such time as they
be first stricken with lightning) saith, that worms are engendered of humours
apt to receive life. But such be far differing from such as are of a venomous
or poisoned disposition or nature, for they are altogether adversaries and
enemies to life. This poisoned and venomous nature in Serpents (once stricken
with lightning) is in them wasted, dissipated dispearced, by means of the fire
in the lightning, and the humours remaining after in them, being freed fro
venom and poison, may the more aptly be converted into things bearing life,
and to worms themselves.

It may also be assigned out of Mercurialis for an other reason, Hieronimus
Mercurialis ll. 1. de veneni^.
why worms are not engendered in poisoned serpents, because that worms have
their original from vndigested and crudie humours in the body: But Serpents
have no such in them: for all their humours be well and perfectly digested.
Which may well be gathered by the fragrant and sweet smell, and pleasant
smell and sent, which breathing from their bodies, is left behind in those
places where they usually haunt.

But here may be objected, Objection.
that if Tobacco were of that poisoned nature (as we have affirmed) then no
doubt, the Indians (who usually drink it) should have long since bin poisoned
therewith. But hitherto they ^aue found no such hurt, but rather great
commodity and manifest benefit thereby. As appears by Monardus in his
Treatise of Tobacco.

To this may be answered, Answer.
that the odds and diversity of their bodies and humours from ours, may alter
much the case. Or else, that long custom and familiar use of this Tobacco from
their infancy, hath confirmed their bodies, to suffer endure the same without
hurt or offence: for custom alters nature.

In like case I read in Galen in his 3. Galen lib. 3. de simpl med. cap. 18.
book of simples, and 18. Chap. of a certain old woman that nourished her
self long season with poisoned Hemlockes By little and little (saith he) she
accustomed nature thereto, that at length, this poison became familiar to her,
and no way offensive, but rathe^ nourishing to her body.

Auicen also in his Treatise de Viribus Cordis, alleging Rufus an ancient
Physician for his author, reports that there was a young maid, who being fed
nourished long time with poison, lived her self in perfect health. And yet with
her venomous breath she poisoned and infected all other persons that came near
to the same.

Plynie in his 7. Plyn,
book 2. chap. of his natural history. Aul. Gel.
And Aulue Gellius, noct. attic. 16. cap. 11. And Siluius Italicus in 8.
Saluius.
lib. do all testify that in times past there were certain people in Italy
(Marsitians by name) Italicus.
who usually handled and sold, yea and fed on also the flesh of Vipers. Which
of all Serpents are accounted most malignant and venomous.

And Virgil in his 7. Virgil.
Aeneid. feigns those people to be the offspring of Circes, Aeneid 7.
and that they had a natural gift given them by her, to tame enchant that
kind of Serpent: and also to qualify delay the venomous and poisoned nature
thereof.

Of these men Galen makes mentio in his 11. Galen*
book of simple medicines, where he confesses, that being at Rome, he inquired
diligently of those people (termed Marsi) of the nature quality of vipers,
and how they differed from the other Serpent called Dipsas. Because (saith he)
they were expert and cunning in them.

So that it is manifest apparent by the testimonies before rehearsed, Custom
is an other nature.
that custom may alter change nature and the quality of things, according to
that usual Cosuetud^ alter an natura. Custom changes nature, at length turns
into nature it self; for it is an other nature.

The like is seen in the East Indies, where the Turks familiarly use Opium in
large quantity, which to us but in very small dose is experimented to be
manifest poison: only long use familiar practise hath made this vnconuenient
for their bodies.

And so no doubt if our country men from their infancy had by little and little
used to take this Tobacco fume or other poison whatsoever, they should have had
as little cause to fear the danger thereof, as the Turks have of their Opium,
or the old Marsitians had of Vipers, or the West Indians have of their Tobacco.
But for want of that Custom, it fares with us in that sort, that if we take
any great quantity of the Opium before specified, we shall rather die on the
sudden, or else fall into that kind of dead sleep, as that we shall by no
other means then by the Arch-angels trumpet (sounding at the latter day) be
awakened thereout.

To this may be added a secret virtue and specifical quality given the
Indians by nature, whereby they are not overcome by this kind of poison, as
other Nations be. For Sextus Empericus Sextus Empericus.
reports in the like case, that one Attienagoras Argivus had a gift given by
nature even from his birth, that he could be hurt by no venomous Beast or
Serpent whatsoever. And that certain people of Aethiopia did naturally feed
nourish themselves with the flesh of Scorpions.

But we Englishme may not safely presume that this specifical^ virtue hidden
quality doth abide or lurk in us, seeing that by far weaker poisons then
these, we sustain infinite perils, and often incur death it self.

Wherefore we have the less cause to venture on things in reason suspected to
be of a venomous poisoned quality, because forsooth the Indians do it
without offence.

Neither is it of any great weight or moment which is alleged of the Tobacco
patrons for her commendation, that Mariners and Sea-faring men, never found
any remedy so forceable against the Scurvy and other diseases of like nature,
commonly incident to that kind of people (by means of the foggy air in the
Sea, and their vnholsome diet) then is the fume of Tobacco.

The reason of this profit in Mariners may be, because their bodies after
long lying on the Seas, are filled and stuffed with bad and corrupt humours,
on the which the force and power of Tobacco doth work, drawing and purging
them forth of the body, no otherwise then other strong purges expel and purge
forth such corrupt humours as have any similitude or likeness to themselves.

But as strong purges taken of sound and wholesome bodies (as I showed you
before) be very perilous and dangerous: So truly is Tobacco, being taken of
such as are clear and void of such impure and corrupt matter, which to the
Mariners is most familiar and usual.

The like is seen of other poisons, which when they find any of their own
quality nature in mans body, or that hath any likeness or similitude to them,
they draw forth the same (the like coue^ing his like) and leave the sound and
healthy humours clear and unspotted.

But when no such poisoned matter is found in the body, then doth the poison
or venom received, work on the good humours, utterly corrupting and
destroying them. So that it is apparent that sometime venomes (to venomous and
poisoned persons) may be profitable medicinable. But to sound healthy bodies
they can never happen without danger.

The seventh Reason.
THe seventh reason against Tobacco was, that this herb seemed to be first
found out and invented by the devil, and first used and practised by the
devils priests, and therefore not to be used of us Christians.

That the devil was the first author hereof, Monardus in his Treatise of
Tobacco doth sufficiently witness, saying. The Indian Priests (who no doubt
were instruments of the devil whom they serve) do ever before they answer to
questions propounded to them by their Princes, drink of this Tobacco fume,
with the vigour and strength whereof, they fall suddenly to the ground, as dead
men, remaining so, according to the quantity of the smoke that they had
taken. And when the herb had done his work, they revive and wake, giving
answers according to the visions and illusions which they saw whilst they were
wrapped in that order.

And they interpreted their demands as to them seemed best, or as the devil
had counselled them, giving cotinual doubtful answers, in such sort, that
howsoever they fell out, they might turn it to their purpose, like unto the
Oracle of Apollo. As Aio te Aeacide Romanos vincere posse.

Which might be understood, that either he might overthrow the Romanes, or that
the Romanes might overcome him.

But yet in more plain words, the same Monardus^ little after declares the
Devil to be the author of Tobacco, and of the knowledge thereof, saying: And
as the Devil is a deceiver, and hath the knowledge of the virtue of herbs;
so he did show them the virtue of this herb, by means whereof they might
see the imaginations and Visions that he represents unto them, and by that
means doth deceive them.

Wherefore in mine opinion this practise is the more to be eschued of us
Christians, who follow profess Christ as the only verity and truth, and
detest and abhor the devil, as a liar and deceiver of mankind.

The eight and last Reason.
THe last, and that not the least argument against Tobacco, was that it is a
great encreaser of melancholy in us, and thereby disposes our bodies to all
melancholy impressions and effects proceeding of that humour.

Galen in his second book of temperaments and 3. Chapter, Galen. lib. 2.
de^empera. cap. 3.
defines Melancholy to be the very sediment and dregs of blood; which is so
far thicker colder then blood, as yellow choler is held to be thinner and
hotter then the same.

And this melancholy humour is said to be of two sorts: the one natural, the
other unnatural.

The natural is that thick part of the blood before rehearsed. The unnatural
is not the sediment or grounds of good blood, but rather a certain burnt and
parched matter rising of the adustian and scorching of the other humours, that
is, of phlegm, yellow choler, and of the former sediment of pure blood, which
we termed natural melancholy.

And albeit it seems very unlike that phlegm (being of nature cold and
moist) may be any adustian be turned into swoart and black choler; yet in
quality and disposition that humour doth often represent and resemble
melancholy it self. And therefore Galen holds sometimes melancholy to be
engendered of phlegmy ouer-hardned and dried.

The contrariety and diversity of these unnatural melancholies, doth hang
and depend on the contrariety and difference of the humours whereof they be
engendered.

All these sorts of melancholies are augmented and increased much in such as
often accustom themselves to the fume of Tobacco.

For first, touching the natural melancholy, it is manifest that the thicker
and grosser that the blood is, the more of that thick and earthly sediment it
shall contain. But Tobacco thickeneth and engrosseth the blood, and therefore
Tobacco engenders in us a greater store of that thick and gross sediment
which we defined to be of Galen called natural melancholy.

The Mayor or first Proposition is manifest, for all liquid and moist things
are the more thick, or thin, and clear, according to the quantity of the
grounds and feces mixed in the same. For if the grounds be many, then is the
matter or humour troublesome and thick. But if the dregs or feces be few,
then is the humour clear and thin.

The Minor or second Proposition of the former Sillogisme, may be proved in
this sort. All those things which waste and consume the purest thinnest parts
of the blood, do cause the same blood to remain afterward more gross and
thick, and therefore may justly be said to thicken the blood.

But Tobacco wastes and absumeth the liquid and thin part of our blood, and
therefore Tobacco may justly be said to thicken the same. The Mayor Proposition
being evident, needs no farther proof.

The Minor is proved by daily and usual practise and experience of such as
commonly do drink this Tobacco. For thereby do they purge great store of a
clear and thin humour, which would mix it self with the blood, and cause the
same to be more liquid and fluent, and in time also (by good Concoction) turn
into pure and subtle blood, apt to feed and norish the body.

And albeit melancholy (being of nature cold) seems to have no need of
phlegmetique and thin humours to be mixed therewith (least that his cold
distemper be greatly increased thereby): yet of necessity some store of this
crude and raw matter is required to run with the melancholy Juice, to
moderate and temper his extreme siccetie and drythe, and to defend it from
Induration hardness. The increase whereof in our bodies, breeds dullness,
sottishness, and blockishnesse. All which are the usual effects of
ouer-hardened and dried melancholy.

For melancholy ouer-hardened, if it come once to be cooled, it is extreme
cold as Iron. Which being heat, is extreme hot; and being cooled again, is
extreme cold also.

So this hard and dry melancholy once depriued of natural heate by the
inordinate use of Tobacco fewme (the fiery heate of the one dissipating the
natural and lesser heate of the other) can yield nothing else but the effects
of an excessive and immoderate cold cause lying in the veins, and mixed with
the blood. Such are esteemed to be dullness of conceit, blockishnesse,
mopishnesse, and sottishness, one of the worst kinds of accidents that
commonly ensue ouer-hardened, cooled and dried melancholy in our bodies.

Again, such as the parts of the blood be, such also is thought the blood to
be, and as the blood proves, so likewise are the spirits affected, for they
do issue and proceed from the blood it self. And such as the spirits are,
such also is adjudged to be the temper and dissipation of the heart and brain:
and as the brain is disposed and affected, so likewise are the virtues of
conceit, imagination, understanding, and remembrance, affected and disposed
also. All which in particular, by sundry examples were easy to prove, for
him that is but meanly seen and slenderly read in Philosophie sayings, that
the sanguine man by means of the purity of his blood, hath his brain and
inward parts well tempered, his senses clear, his spirits light and subtle,
his heart bold and merry, his mind affable, courteous and civil. Whereas on
the contrary part, the melancholy person by reason of the superfluous earthly
and dry matter mixed with his blood, hath his complexion more wan and swarte,
his conceit of brain more dull and hard, his mind given to sollitarinesse and
private life. For those two humours of blood and melancholy, are in both their
qualities very repugnant and contrary. The one being hot and moist, the other
cold and dry.

But here me thinks I hear you say, what makes this idle discourse of blood
and melancholy, of the disposition of the brain and spirits to your purpose,
or to the reputation of Tobacco?

Forsooth very much. For hereby it appears that the continual practises of
Tobacco, destroy the purity and clearness of their blood, in that as I
proo^ed before, it hardens and thickeneth the same. And in thickening it
engenders dull melancholy spirits, which make blockish and sottish conceits,
and a timorous and dejected mind not fit or convenient for man that delilghteth
in civility and society of others. For seeing that the fewme of Tobacco
yields no good food or nourishment to the pure blood, but rather troubles
and corrupts the same, it is thereby most plain and evident, that it
engenders in us most dull and troubled spirits, also tasting and sauouring
much of that loathsome fewme and duskish smoke which rise^ steemeth up to the
brain by the roof and palate of the mouth, first sent thither through the
Tobacco pipe full charged with Tobacco dust, and afterward scorched and
incinerated by the extreme heate of the parching fire.

This dark and smokey fume, pearsing the cavities and ventricles of the
brain, no otherwise, then a melancholy wind or adust vapour (rising from an
adust Liver, or obstructed spleen) do breed in us terror, and fear,
discontentment of life, false and perverse imaginations, and fantasies most
strange, no way depending upon just cause or grounds, and always a melancholy
spirit, a fertfull and timorous mind. For truly the inward darkness and
obscurity of the brain, doth appall and terrify our inward senses and mind
also, in no less sort then doth the external darkness or mist of the outward
air, terrify apall the same.

And if any man be far blinded with Tobacco, that he will not admit for true,
that the vapour or fume thereof ascending to the brain, is dark and swart of
colour, and of quality excessive dry; let him but cast his eyes on the smoke
issuing forth of the nostrils of the Tabacconists, or to the smokey tincture
left in the Tobacco Pipe after the receipt thereof, and he shall easily reclaim
his error. This swart sottish tincture cleaves so fast to the inward part of
the Pipe, as hardly by any means but by the extreme heate of the fire it may be
cleared from thence. And no doubt the like impression doth the same leave in
our brains, and in the cavities thereof. So that the animal spirits engendered
in those places, can no less but (participating thereof) savour of the same,
no otherwise then wine put into an unsavoury and musty bottle, doth ever
savour of a musty taste.

Neither am I any ways ignorant that Aristotle in his Problems holds that
melancholy doth help and profit much to the sharpening quickening of the wit and
understanding: and that melancholy persons are deemed of him the most wisest.
But this kind of melancholy (which Aristotle talks of) is altogether
natural, and no way engenders of the Tobacco smoke. For it is the sediment
and grounds of the pure perfect blood, Ficinu^ lib. 1. cap. 6. de s^^it.
^uend.
in colour like gold, or somewhat inclining to purple: little in quantity, and
somewhat shining. The spirits which issue from this kind of melancholy, are
very light, fine and subtle, not much unlike to the spirits of wine well
distilled, and artificially rectified: which is by art and force of the fire
drawn out of the feces or grounds of pure wine. And the spirits rising from
this dry melancholy humour, are the thinner and the more subtle by reason of
the closeness straightness of the pores of the same matter: and they are the
more firm constant in their action, by means that they issue and proceed from
an humour more compacted and close united.

The subtility therefore and stability of these spirits, rising from such a
natural melancholy, doth much further the sharpening of the wit and
understanding of man.

But the like cannot be expected of the spirits rising of that kind of
melancholy which is engendered by the abuse of Tobacco. For this sort of
melancholy humour is neither bright shining like to molten gold, nor yet the
grounds of pure and perfect blood, but rather an earthly and adust matter, not
much unlike stoncole or scorched earth. So that the spirits issuing from it
must needs be of a diverse and far contrary quality and nature.

Last of all, melancholy being of nature cold and dry, had in reason need of
some thin and liquid humour to be mixed therewith, to temper his extreme
siccetie and drythe: which is the quality of most offence and annoyance in it.
For as phlegm offends most in cold, so doth melancholy fault most in
dryness.

Tobacco therefore ought in no respect to be familiarly used of the melancholy
person, because it is excessive dry, both in his manifest quality, and
likewise by accidental means of his immoderate purging and evacuation, by
means whereof, great part of that liquid and moist matter is purged out of the
body that should retain and keep it in perfect state and temper. And for that
Tobacco is confessed to be hot, almost in the third degree of excess,
therefore his drithe and siccetie is thereby made the more vehement, and
untolerable.

So that it is apparent that unnatural melancholy, whether it be made of
adustian of blood, choler, or phlegmy, or else of the sediment of them,
scorched and as it were in cinerated, hath no small increase by the untimely
use of this fantastical device of Tobacco smoke, leaving in our bodies a
fiery impression and dry distemper, not easily remedied.

And therefore in my opinion all melancholy persons, of what state or condition
soever they be of, and especially Students and Schollers, ought to be very
well advised in the use of so pernicious and dangerous a thing, least that in
them, natural melancholy be converted into unnatural, and this also, either
into a corrisiue and adust humour apt to inflame the brain, or else into a
matter so hard and dry, as that it be altogether hurtful and offensive to the
vnctuous and radical moisture of the life of man: and thereby occasion a
hasty and untimely death. For no longer can life continue, then natural heate
be refreshed with an airy and moderate moisture included in the radical
humour, and appointed by nature for the relief and sustentation of the same.

FINIS.

