A DISCOURSE OF THE several kinds and causes of Lightnings.

Written by occasion of a fearful Lightning which on the 17. day of this
instant November, Anno Domini 1606. did in a very short time burn up the spire
steeple of Blechingley in Surrey, and in the same melt into infinite fragments
a goodly Ring of Bells.

BY SIMON HARWARD.

Psal. 145. Verse. 17. The Lord is just in all his ways, and holy in all his
works.

THOV SHALT LABOUR FOR PEACE PLENTY



LONDON Printed by Iohn Windet, and are to be sold by Iefferey Chorlton at his
shop near the North door of Paul's. 1607.

Honoratissimo Domino D. HOVVARDO, Baroni de Effingham, illustrissimi Comitis
Notingamiensis filio et heredi domino suo colendissimo omnia prospera faelicia.
{inverted }

CVi potius munus (praeclare ac nobilis Heroes)
Hoc donare queam (sit licet exiguum)
Quam tibi cuius in auxilio Blechingleienses
I am tristes totam spem posuere suam?
Sperant permultos per te (domine inclite) amicos
Tempore posse quidem se reperire breui,
Per quos campanae amissae sibi restituantur,
Debito vt ad templum tempore conueniant,
Concipiant{que} preces humiles vt Rex Iacobus
La, sit sanus, floreat, vigeat,
Seper Howardos solito amplectatur amore,
Sic villa haec saluam se fore non dubitat,
Sic Christoque (vir ample) placebis, qui tibi donet
Nestoreos, sanos, omni in honore, dies.
Amplitudini tuae deuotissimus, Simon Harward.

The preface to the Christian Reader.
IT is not without great cause pronounced by the wise man, Eccles. 9.1.
that no man knows either love or hatred, which Saint Bernard doth expound to
be meant of natural man, that man by nature doth not know whether he be in the
love or in the hatred of god, but the spiritual ma doth discern all things.
But saint Hierom doth better interpret it to be spoken of things under the
Sun, which words, are used by Solomon five several times in the self same
chapter. By things then under the Sun, that is by the outward accidents of
this life, no man can discern either love or hatred, because sorrows,
sicknesses, losses and calamities, do befall to the godly as well as to the
wicked, but the trial of our selves doth consist in inward graces, to wit,
with what faith in God, and what love toward God we endure the said
afflictions, what good uses we make of them to our selves, and how in the
midst of them all we do possess our souls with patience. Sondry fearful
punishments by lightnings have bin inflicted in many corners of this land, in
this clear light of the preaching of the gospel, partly upon Paules in
London, and partly on other places of this realm. And the like or far
greater have bin showed, heretofore in the time of Popery and blindness. The
french Chronacles do testify that in the year of our Lord 1534. (at which time
France was overwhelmed with idolatry superstition) the city of Claraualla
being stricken with lightning about noone days did so fiercely burn, that in
three hours space their town castles and churches were utterly consumed. We
must needs acknowledge that our sins do deserve a far deeper punishment
then did the offences of our forefathers. They were as servants sent out in the
night time, and therefore if they missed their way, their faults cannot be so
heavy as ours who are as servants sent out of the clear day light: where God
gives one talent, he expects the increase of one, but where he gives ten
talents; he doth justly demand the increase of ten. What uses we are to make
of these judgements of God under the Sun, I have briefly according to the
shortness of time set down in this small treatise, which here now I do commit
to thy view, both thee and it to the good blessing of the Almighty. From
Bansted this twentieth of November An. Doom. 1606.

Thine in the Lord, S.H.

A DISCOURSE OF THE SEVERAL Kinds and Causes of Lightninges.
WHen the Lord Almighty, doth any where show extraordinary tokens of his
judgements, it behooves such as near dwellers to resort to the place, and not
only to take view of the punishment, but also to lay it deeply to their
hearts. For there are some punishments, which in Greek are called (...),
punishments of vengeance, there are some which are termed (...), punishments
of correction, and means to draw us to amendment of life, and some (...),
punishmets of trial, to try our faith and patience. The consideration whereof
moved me this present week to visit the town of Blechingley, being a town
not only near unto me, but also having such inhabitants, as unto whom for
many years, for sundry kindnesses I am much beholden, when I came, I found
their case to be equal (if not worse) then the rumour or report, which was
before published. I found that by the lightning (which came with the terrible
thunder on Monday, being the 17. day of this instant November, about ten of the
clock in the night) the Spire steeple of the said Bleachingley, having been
lately new covered to the great charges of the parish in three hours space,
was utterly consumed with fire. The steeple was but about twelve fadome high
above the battlements of the square stone work: but it was a steeple spreading
downward very large in circumference. The stone work which bare it (being
also about twelve fathom high) is a long square of one twenty feet one side, and
eighteen feet the other side. It is thought by good workmen, that two
hundred loads of timber will not suffice for the erecting of such a steeple,
as that stone-worke did lately bear.

I found also the belles (being before a sweet ring, and so large, that the
Tenor weighed twenty hundred weight) partly melted into such fragmentes, as may
perhaps be melted again, and partly burnt into such cinders, or
intermingled with such huge heaps of cinders, as it will never hereafter serve
to the former uses thereof.

These grievous losses are by diverse sorts of people in sundry ways
interpreted. Some do account of them as a particular judgment of God against
the sins of the inhabitants of that town of Blechingley. But I am not of
their opinion, partly, because, as I cannot excuse the inhabitants of the said
town of sundry gross abuses, so am I fully persvvaded, a number of tovvnes
near adjoining to them, are in the like iniquities, nothing inferior to them,
and partly, because in the extremity of this fire upon the church, the tovvne
and tovvnesmen were miraculouslie preserved. The church stands in the East
end of the tovvne, and the wind (though it sometimes changed) yet it still
kept near the west point, drove the flame frovvard fro the houses: A thatched
barn, and certain poor houses near adjoining to the Church, were so
wonderfully preserved, that we must needs confess and acknowledge, that in
the midst of judgment there shined mercy. Some do descant upon the day,
because the Bells did thus perish in that seventeenth day of November, wherein
for so many former happy years they had joyfully sounded for the reign of
good Queen Elizabeth. But let such know, that there needs no other Bell, but
only a noble fame to sound out the virtues of such a learned and religious
Queen: and that fame (maugre the despite of all adversaries) must and will
ring out her praises, even unto the ends of the world.

If the Bells had been cast in our late Queenes reign, then might the Papists
pick occasion to take some colour of advantage. They might say, that the Bells
were never christened and hallowed, as by their laws they should have been,
and that therefore the lightning prevailed against them.

But the Bells were all ancient Bells, the eldest man in the parish cannot
remember the casting of any of them, the third bell only excepted. All the
rest, as they were framed in time of Poperie, so (no doubt) they had the
blessing and baptizing at that time used, and were hallowed by that prayer in
the Mass book.

Omnipotens sempiterne Deus tu hoc tintinnabulum coelesti benedictione
perfunde, Benedictio Campana.
vt ante sonitum eius longius effugentur ignita iacula inimici, percussio
fulminum, impetus lapidum, laesio tempestatum.

Almighty everlasting God, besprinckle this bell with thy heavenly blessing,
that at the sound thereof, the fiery darts of the enemy, the striking of
lightnings, the stroke of thunderbolts, and hurts of tempests may far be put
to flight.

The cause indeed why the lightning at this time did preuaile both against
bells and steeple, was because it was the good pleasure of God, thus to show his
omnipotent power to stir up as well the inhabitants of the said town, as us
all, to fear him, to give us some taste of his judgments, to summon us all to
true repentance.

The Philosophers Aristole, Plinie, Seneca, and others, do point out many
natural causes of lightnings, but when they consider the wonderful effects
thereof, they are compelled to acknowledge a divine power, far above the reach
of all humane reason. Seneca lib. 2. Natur. quaest.
As Seneca saith, Mira sunt fulminis si intueri velis opera, nec quicquam dubii
relinquentia, quin diuina insit illis occulta potentia. The operations of
lightnings (if you behold them) are wonderful, and do leave no doubt, but that
there is in them a divine and secret power.

Pontanus in meteorolog.
Pontanus makes three especial kinds of lightnings.

Scinditque vritque longo serat era hiatu. One is a renting lightning, another
a burning, and the third doth cut through the air with a long dispersing.

The lightning which is scattered more generally thorough the air, is of less
and weaker force, but that which is gathered into a lesser compass, is of
greater strength, and according to the several effects hath sundry diverse
names given unto it. One is called fulme scindes a cutting or renting
lightening, because by the abundance of spirits and drines it is so swift in
operation, that it rents before it can inflame: of that the phophet Dauid
speaks when, he saith The voice of the Lord breaks the Cedar trees, Psal.
29.3.
yea the Lord breaks the Cedars of Libanus.

An other lightening is called penetrans, a piercing lightening, because by the
purity of the flame, it pierces thorough such outward parts as have powers of
passage, works his forces inwardly* of that Pontanus speaks Pontanus. lib.
meteor. cap* 16
hominemque bouemque,
exanimat nulla vt maneant vestigia mortis.
Of man and beast it kills hoth kind,
And leaves no print of death behind.


It pierces thorough the outward pores of the body and slays the vital
parts within. So it kills the child in the mothers womb, leaving the mother
safe: and it melts the silver in the purse, the purse sustaining no damage.
This penetrant lightening is of such force, that it pierces oftentimes bodies
which can hardly be accounted transpirable, as when it corrupts wine and
bear, be the vessels never so strongly made, or be the orifices thereof never
so strongly stopped Pontan. ibid.


There is also a lightening infuscans, which makes black, but by reason of
the subtillitie and thinness it flies away before it can burn, of that
Pontanus speaks.

Non faciem non ora hominum non corpora noris.
The body from the foot to face,
With blackness it doth quite disgrace.
An other lightning is termed vrens, a burning lightning, It hath much earthly
matter, it breaking thorough the clouds doth fall down, and doth burn, melt
or spoil, those bodies upon which it descends.

Some lightnings are prodigious, so surpassing the reason of man, that no
natural cause can be rendered thereof: as Eutropius shows a history of a maid
of Rome, who travailing to Apulis, was killed with lightening (no haim
outwardly appearing in her body) and at the same instant her garments were also
shaken off without any rent, and her horse also killed, and his bridle and
girths shaken off without any breach. Of such lightnings Pontanus writes.

Pontanus lib. meteorolog.
Nunc ipsis etiam in stabulis (mirabile dictu,
Quadripedem exoluit, pedibus quoque ferrea demit
Vincula intacto terram quatit vngula cornu,
Illaesus sonipes alta ad praecepia mandit.
Oft from the horse (O wonder great)
it shakes of the iron locke,
The stead still at the cratch doth eat,
and nothing harmed by the knock.
That lightening should shake iron fetters from the the feet of horses, and
nothing hurt the hoof, this doth Pontan. call a miraculous lightning.

The causes of the grievous harms which are often caused by lightnings, are of
three sorts, the first judicial, the second instructtiue: and the third
fatidicall.

The judicial cause is, when the Lord doth by it execute vengeance upon some
notable offenders, as upon blasphemers, upon sorcerers, upon ambitious men,
bloudsuckers, Sabellinus Paulus Diaconus.
drunkards, adulterers, and such like, Olympius an Arriau Bishop when being at
Carthage, he blasphemed the blessed Trinity, he had by the judgment of God his
body suddenly burnt with lightning. So Sabellinus shows a history of one
Prester the son of Hippomanes, who blaspheming God was stricken with a
thunderbolt and perished.

The thunderbolt comes of the viscous sulphurous matter of the lightning: for
as the Gunners wildfires do flame in the water, so lightnings (being much of
the same nature) have been often seen to burn Fishers nets even under the
water. And as meal and water kneaded together and baked, do grow into a
hardness, so the dry and viscous exhalation is by force of the heate in
thunder hardened into a stone.

Zonarus tom. 2 Annalium.
Another sin, which God doth punish with lightnings is Magycke and Sorcery.
As Zonaras writes, that Anastasius the Emperor in the year of Christ 499.
being addicted to Magycke and the Manichean heresy, did persecute such
Christians as reproved his sins and wickedness. But at the last, lightning
came fearfully about his house called Tholotum, he crept from chamber to
chamber to seek where he might be safest: but nothing would preuaile. The
flashes in the end overtook him, and he perished miserably.

2. Reg. cap. 1. verse. 10.
So in the second Book of the Kings, fire came down from heaven upon the two
captains of Ahazia king of Israel, and upon both their bands of man, and
destroyed them, because their Lord the King had highly displeased God, when in
the time of his sickness he sent his servants to consult with Beelzebub the
god of Ackron.

Another sin plagued usually by lightnings, Dionys. Halyc. lib. 1. Antiq.
is Pride and Ambition. Dionysius Halicarnassaeus shows, that Alladius an
ancient king of the Latins (who reigned before Romulus) was so proud and
ambitious, that he couterfeited thundrings and lightnings about his palace,
because he would be esteemed as a god amongst his people. But at the last,
his Palace was set on fire with lightning from heaven, and in the same he
fearfully perished.

So Diodorus Siculus writes of a king of Clide, Diodor. Sic. li. 4*
who caused himself to be drawn up and down in a Chariot, wherein were
devises of Torches and squibs counterfeiting thunders and lightnings, that so
he might be deemed a god amongst his subjects: but in the height of his
ambition he was stricken with a thunderbolt from heaven, and came to a most
wretched end. This then is one cause why lightnings do commonly strike the
highest places, according to that of Horace, Feriuntque summos
fulmina montes.
Lightnings strike commonly
the hills that are most hie.


Not only because the highest places are most subject to the injuries of the
clouds, seeing every agent doth work most strongly upon his nearest matter
(as the Philosophers give the reason) and because evil spirits dwelling in the
air, Eph. 6.12.
do most seek to annoy Temples and Churches, which commonly are the highest
edifices, Garcaeus lib. de Meteorolog.
(as some Divines do give the cause) but also because by that example, God
doth warn mankind, not to seek to extol it self by haughtines of mind. And
this was seen by the Poet Ouid: Viue tibi, quantumque potes praelustria vita,
Saeuum praelustri fulmen ab arce venit.
Live to thy self, and too much height avoid,
High towers are by lightninges most annoide.


An other sin plagued with lightning is cruelty, and blood-shed, that so
judgment may be without mercy to them that show no mercy. Hatto the Bishop of
Mentz when in the year of Christ 918, Jam. 2.
by the instigation of Conrad the Emperor: he endeavoured to murder Henry Duke
of Saxony, was suddenly slain with a stroke of lightning. For this cause is the
Lord in the Scripture, so often called the Lord of hoastes, that is the Lord
of Armies: Malac. 1. Ierem. 5.
because all things in heaven and earth, are a part of his Army to plague the
wicked, and to fight for the godly. In the heavens he hath fire, to power down
upon Sodom and Gomorrah: he hath in the air, thunderinges, lightninges and
blazing stars to terrify the hearts of the wicked: he hath the earth to
swallow up Core, Dathan and Abiram: the sea to drown Pharao and his Army:
Dogs to like up Iezabels blood, bears to devour them that mocked Elizeus:
the canker-worm and Caterpillar to destroy the fruits of the ungodly, yea
there is no Creature so vile and base, but it is a part of the host of God to
punish and destroy, even the mightiest in the world. Herod and Antiochus were
two monstrous tyrants, yet was one of them destroyed with lice, and the other
with worms. Lightning hath but a poor and base beginning of exhalations,
drawn up from the earth, yet by the power of God, being inflamed gathering
force in the air, it is enabled to confound whatsoever doth exalt it self
against God his divine Majesty.

An other sin which God doth punish with fire from Heaven, is drunkenness
and whoredom, as Ezechiel cap. 16. doth show of the destruction of Sodom, that
it was for their fullness of bread, that is excess of meats and drinks,
according to the Hebrew Phrase, and for their committing abomination, that is,
for their filthy and damnable lusts. Concerning these things, I take not upon
me to judge of the inhabitants of the town lately punished: But I pray God,
that every one may now so judge himself, that he be no hereafter further
judged of the Lord.

The second cause of the harms done by lightnings, is for instructions sake,
that others may learn to take heed and to fear God, and in this respect God
doth sometimes punish his dearest servants. In the year of our Saviour,
1551. an honest Citizen of Creutzburge, Garcaeus lib. de meteorolog.
standing by his table, and a dog laying by his feet, were both of them
suddenly slain by a lightning: yet a young child which stood hard by his
Father, was preserved safe. Iob his flock of seven thousand sheep his
servants, Iob. 1.16.
were suddenly destroyed with fire from heaven, not so much for the sins of
Iob and his family, as to try the faith of Iob, and to make him a
schoolmaster of Patience to all posterity. So it falls out in all other
kinds of punishments: Luck. 13.1.
Do you think (saith our Saviour Christ) that those Galileans whose blood
Pilate mingled with their sacrifices, were greater sinners then all other
Galileans? I tell yon nay, but except ye amend your lives ye shall likewise
perish: or think ye that those eighteen upon whom the Tower of Siloam fell;
were sinners above all them which dwell in Jerusalem? I tell you nay, but
except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Ioh. 9.3.
The blind man in the ninth of Saint Iohn was borne blind? neither for his own
sins, nor for his parents sins, but that the power of God might be showed
forth upon him.

There is none so desperate, but will he, nill he, shall by thunderinges and
lightnigns receive admonition, if not to instruct him to amendment of life, yet
at the least wise to condemn him in his own guilty conscience: we read of
Caligula the Emperor, that in fearful thundering^s he would creep under
beds and into the-strongest corners of his hows, Whereof came this, but-that
he understood there, by that there was a God in heaven, whose voice he did then
hear, and who in the end would assuredly be revenged of his ambitious, cruel,
and filthy life.

The third chief cause of fearful lightnings is called fatidicall, or
prognosticall, Garcaeus in Meteorol
when God doth by them forewarn us of greater calamities to fall afterward upon
us, unless we amend our wicked and sinful life.

In the year of our Lord God. 653. at Frisazium a town of Saxony a great
number both of houses and people were destroyed with lightning, but there
followed afterward a grievous plague grassant over the whole Country. So in the
year 653. in the time of Constance the Emperor a fearful fire fell from
heaven, but shortly after for the space of three months together their
followed a most grievous pestilence upon all the places adjoining.

So in the year 1062. in the month of February there fell terrible lightnings
upon the City of Constance, but presently upon it an infectious plague did
wonderfully wast that City.

God of his infinite mercy grant us such true repentance for our sins and
such unfeigned conversion from our ungodly behaviour, that these his judgements
thus threatened upon us may favourably be turned aside. And the Lord grant that
in all his judgements powered out upon our neighbours we may rather in godly
wisdom make good uses of them to our selves, and in charity seek to relieve
such as be in distress, then either by pride to insult upon their losses, or
by shutting up our bowels of compassion to augment their griefs and miseries.
Sundry are the remedies which are described by sundry writers against the
dangers of lightnings, some of them are philosophical, Garc. in Mete.
as when they appoint that in thunders and lightnings men should either shoot
up ordinance into to the air, or ring bells that by the stirring of the air
the clouds may be the sooner dispersed ^nd driven away, Fot as a stone cast
into the water doth make first one circle and that circle makes a greater
until the greatest of all do touch the bank or side, even so (say they) the
tossing of the air by Gunnes or belles doth affect the air next to it and
that air again the air next to it until at last it come to the clouds by
which the thuderings and lightnings are made. And this they make also to be the
cause why (although the lightning and thunder are in time both together) yet
the lightning comes sooner to our eyes, then the thunder to our ears. For the
line to our sight is a right line, but the line of sounds beating the air is
circular, or giricall, giricall as I have showed by the aforesaid example of
the stone cast into the water. So when we see a man hewing wood a far off,
the sight of the stroke comes to our sight before sound of the noise (which
beats the air circularely) can come to our hearing. Others appoint mere
Magical, that is wicked and ungodly remedies, to wit to hang about the neck
or body enchanted herbs, stones or jewels. Such devises savouring of sorceries
can in no wise be agreeable to true Christianity.

Some have taught that bay trees the skins of seacalues are remedies against
the dangers of lightnings. Wherevpo Suetonius affirms, that Tiberius Caesar
would crown himself with bay bows, cover his tents with the skins of sea
calves. Vt a fulmine tutus esset, that he might be safe from lightnings.

The only true remedy is first by true faith, Psal. 92. v. 1, et 5.
to put our full trust in God. For (as the prophet Dauid saith) If we abide
under shadow of the Almighty, we shall not be afraid of any fears of the
night, nor of the arrow that flies by day: and secondly, by hearty repentance
to remove the causes of Gods heavy judgements, Isay. 59.1. Psal. 112. v. 1.4.
6. 7.
and to forsake all such sins as do make a division betwixt God and us. The
Prophet Dauid pronounces of him that delights in Gods commandments, and is
merciful and leudeth and will guide his words with discretion that he shall
not be afraid of any evil tidings he shall surely never be removed but the
righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance.

These graces he grant to us that died for us even Iesus Christ the righteous,
to whom with the father and the holy ghost as well for judgements as for mercy,
be all honour, glory, praise, majesty, and thanksgiving now and for ever,
Amen.

An addition of the Author showing the opinions of Philosophers and Astronomers
touching Thundrings and Lightnings.
THe general natural cause which the Phlo-sophers do give of Thunders and
Lightnings is this. First a viscous vapour joined with a hot exhalation is
lifted up to the highest part of the middle region of the air, by virtue of
the Planets: then the watery vapour by the coldness both of place and of
matter, is thickened into a cloud, and the exhalation (which was drawn up with
it) is shut within the cloud, and driven into straights.

This hot exhalation flying the touching of the cold cloud, doth fly into
the depth of the cloud that doth compass it about, and courseth up and down
in the cloud, seeking some passage out, which when it cannot find, it makes a
way by force, and being kindled, by the violent motion it breaks through the
cloud. If the sides of the hollow cloud be thick, and the exhalation dry
and copious, then there is made both thunder and lightning: but if the cloud be
thin, and the exhalation also rare and thin, then there is lightening without
thunder.

The thunder then comes, when the fiery spirits and exhalations being (as
it were) shut up in prison, do by (...) wrestle with the congealed vapours
which have imprisoned the. The like we see in al moist bodies which have a hot
spirit so included, that it cannot get out, the Chestnut in rosting amongst
cinders gives a crack, a bladder filled with air, being violently broken
makes a noise. When green wood is burned, the spirits burst out with some
little crack: but gun-powder issuing out of ordinance makes afar greater
sound. The clouds then which do far exceed the greatness of mountains must
needs give out a more forcible roaring. Especially seeing that in them there
is added a more principal operation of the handy work of God, whereupon
thunder in the Scriptures is called the thunder of God, Psal. 77.17. The voice
of thy thunder was heard round about. And Psal. 104.7. at the voice of thy
thunder they are afraid. So Psal. 18.13. The Lord thundered out of heaven, and
the most highest gave out his voice, hailestones and coals of fire. So Iob.
38.25. Who doth divide the spowts for the rain, or the way for the lightnings
of the thunder? as if he should say: none can do it but God alone.

The Poet saw somewhat by natural reason, when he said, Siquoties peccant
homines sua fulmina mittat
Iupiter exiguo tempore inermis erit.
If God should with his lightning fight
As oft as men offend,
In little space of time he might
His weapons wholly spend.
The Astrologers as in other points they vary, so in their predictions, by
thunderings and lightnings they do greatly disagree. Beda.
Beda saith Tonitrua in Nouembri sterilitatem im minere ex alto quasi tuba
praecinunt. Thunders in Noueber do as with a trumpet sound out from heaven to
us a dearth and scarcity, and if they happen on monday, then turmas coniugum
morituras fruges passuras that companies of married folks shall die, corn
fruit suffer harm

Hermes.
But Hermes is of a contrary mind: He saith tonnitrua Nouembris frumenti largvm
prouentum hominum hilaritatem promittunt. The thunders af November do promise
great store of corn, and joy and gladness amongst men.

This lightning on mondy the 17. of November did not only this harm in Surry,
but also it afflicted Sussex and diverse other places. It was very strange that
at the same time when it fired Bleachingley steeple it entered also so into
the house of one Stephen Lugsford of Buckstead in Sussex almost twenty miles
from Bleachingley and melting the lead of his glass windows did with great
violence break through and rent in sunder a strong brick chimney: the man is
of honest report and zealous in religion, we must not therefore judge of men by
those outward accidents, but commit all judgment to God to whom it doth
belong. If lightnings have any predictions, they have as well good as bad. The
mother of Hierom Fracastorius (who afterward became a famous scholer) carrying
the said Hierom (when he was a young infant) in her arms was stricken with
lighning and slain, whereas notwithstanding the young child was unhurt and
untouched, and preserved (as the sequel showed) for the greater good of the
common wealth.

Psal. 77. verse. 13. Who is so great a God as our God? thou art the God that
doest wonders, thou hast declared thy power among the people.


FINIS.
ERRATA.
Fol. 3. Apulia. Sabellicus.

Fol. 4 for ^lid. Ibid. Salmoneus.


