A book of the propreties of Herbs called an herbal, whereunto is added the
time yt herbs, Flowers and Sedes should be gathered to be kept the whole year,
with the virtue of ye Herbs when they are stilled. Also a general rule of all
manner of Herbs drawn out of an auncyent book of Phisyck by W.C.



De virtutibus herbarum e^ primo de littera.A.
Agnus castus.
This herb Agnus castus that men do cal Tutsayne, and other wise Park leues,
this hath leues somdel red like unto the leues of Orage, and this herb hath
senowes on his leues as hath Plan^ayne, and it hath yelowe flowers bears
black beris it grows in dry wodes, yt virtue of this herb is, it will keep
men women chaste For as Discolidion Placens do say, this herb is called Agnus
castus for ye knowledge the use of this herb makes men chaste, and this herb
will open the pores of man and let out wicked humou^s and sprytes of his body,
this herb destroys the moisture of manes fed. Also ye same auctor saith
that if this be sode with Fenel, in Asel it is good to destroy ye dropsi. Also
if this herb be sode with smalage, and Sage, in salt water, and afterward the
hinder part of a man head be well washed ^herwyth it heleth it and
vnbyndeth an evil that is called Lytargy. Also this herb destroys the foul
lust of Lechery and it be dronk^n, or if it be borne a bout him, therefore
sometime they do eat it roasted, because it shall keep them chaste, for if this
herb be eaten raw, it will engeder head ache. This he^be is good to defy the
hardness and stoppyng of the Mylte. Also a plaster of this herb is good to do
away ache of a man heed, that is engendered of wicked humours. This herb is
hot dry in the second degre.

Apium.
This herb Apium, is a herb that me do cal Smalage, or stamarche, the virtue
of this herb is this. It will make a man to pysse, opyn the stoppinge of the
liver, also the sede of the herb hardneth a man wombs, and it draws
wicked humours of a man body unto the head to ye stomach and the womb, and
therefore it noyeth them that have the falling evil, to women that be with
child, for when it draws such humours to the womb and engenders that be
the cause of pestilence, and therefore it is commanded of leches that women that
be with child they that keep suckynge chyldre shulde not eat nor drink of
this herb for dred of yt falling evil, for it is hot and dry, there be
speces thereof, y^ joy is good for cold players tempered with flower, and
for scalding, this herb is hot in ye.i. degre

Anetum.
This herb Anetum that men do call Anete otherwise Dyl, this herb hath leues
like to Fenel but the sede is somdel broad as Orage sede is, the virtue of this
herb is thus. It will make a man pysse, also it swageth rumblinge in a man
womb, and wicked wyndes in the womb, also it distroyeth the vexinge, the sede
of this herb bret and laid upon a woude it heleth soon namely if a ma be
scalded in his members or on his yard, strowe the powder thereof it shall heal,
or what manner of evil that rises in a man yard it shall be hole in the same
manner, a plaster made with the same powder, shepes talow and black soap, is
good for ye Emaraude this herb is hot and dry in the second degre.

Apiume risus.
This herb Apiume risus is called Cerfoy or Che^uile, the virtue of this herb
is and it be drunken with wine it shall make a man to pysse well and it
delyuereth a man of ache in the rain in the bladder, and it be drunken with
wine it lets out and vnbyndeth the wicked wyndes and vnsloppethe the womb
and the liver of all manner wodnes. This herb with holds casting. Also a
plaster made with this herb tempered with Aisel destroys wild fire and
heleth the Canker and al other woudes, this herb is one of the Smalaches, it
is hot and dry.

Absynthium.
This herb is called Wormewode. The virtue of this herb is. It is good to
comfort the her^e cleseth the stomach. Balien says that the herb hath.ii.
virtues one is laxatyue, and the other is costypulatyue. Therefore Galien says
that if this Herb be given to an evil, of the which the matter is not fully
defied, it shall harde the stomach, and let the d^gestion, and if the matter be
ryped, it shall make a man laxayue, and esily put away the matter, if this herb
be drunk with Spyconarde, it swageth the stomach and of the womb that is
engedred of wicked wyndes. Also if this herb be tepered with honey it will ease
the swelling in a man mouth. Also it doth away the black myste in a
mann^s eyes and clereth the syghte, and if this herb be powned with the gal of
a Bull and afterward put into a man eyes, it puts away all manner
impedymetes of the syghte.

Arthamesia.
This herb is called Mugworte, the virtue of this herb is this. If a ma bear
this herb about him he shall not be weary of trauelynge in his way, also if this
herb be powned with talowe, it heals the sornes of a manes fete and a king
also. And if it be within a house, there shall no wicked spyryte abide. Also if
this herb be stamped and tempered with runnynge water it heals the akynge of
a man guts many other evils, this herb is hot and dry in the second
degre.

Affodylius.
This herb is called Affodyl, The virtue of this herb is that ye leues ben
good to heal the dropsy, and the leues of ye flowers begood to be drunken to
heal venom of wicked bestes, also the joyce of this herb and Myrre, and
Saffron tempered together in white wine a little boiled over the fire cleansed
thoroughe a clothe is good to heal rinnynge eyes, also the rote of this herb
bret to powder, is good to heal sore ears and restore the again, also take
an harde cloth yt is rough and wet it in the joyce of the herb, and rub
the morphewe therewith syttinge against the soon and it shall do away the
morphewe, this herb is hot and dry in the second degre.

Aristologia longa.
This herb men do cal it Red mader, the virtue of this herb is thus. It will
vnbynde the stoppyng of the liver let pass wicked wyndes that be stopped with
in man body, also if it be drunken with wine it cleanses and purges al men
of al manner of venym that is in a man body. Also it cleanses and purges all
manner of dyseases that be roted within and without in the veins, and in the
teeth, that ben rotten. This herb is hot and dry, and it must be gathered
in herueste, there be two speces thereof.

Aristologia rotunda.
This herb aristologia rotunda men do call it Galingale meke, the virtue of
this herb is thus as Apocras doth say, if the said herb be drunken with
hot water then it is medicinable and curable for those men that bestoppped in
the breast, and for the swellynge evil, and for the Podagar, and for the
Cramp^, this herb is hot dry and it must be gathered in harvest and it is a
spece of the reed Madder.

Abrotanum.
This herb abrotanum me cal it Sothernewode. The virtue of this herb is thus,
yt if they break the sede and drink it with water it heals me that have ben
bytten with any venomous beast. Also this herb destroys worms in a man
wobe, also powder of this herb meddled with barley meal vnbyndeth and breketh
harde postumes, also this herb brent and the ashes medlyd with oil, it
restores there as man lacks here, this herb is hot and dry.

Ameos.
This herb Ameos hath leues like unto Eldren, but they be less and the sede
is like persly sede, the virtue of this herb is thus, if it be tempered with
honey it sle^th worms that be in a manes body, and it vnbindeth the great
stoppynge of winds, and it breketh the stone, and it chafeth a man stomach
that is cold, it chafeth the liver the raynes, and it heleth wounds and the
bytynge of venomous bestes, this herb is hot and dry.

Alleluya.
This herb Alleluya men cal it wodsore or s^ub wort, this herb hath three
leues of the which two be round a little departed above, and it has a white
flower, but it hath no lunge stalks, it is wynsore, and it is like.iii. leued
grass the virtue of this herb is thus. If it be roasted in the ashes in, Reed
dock leues, or in reed wort leues, it freteth away dead flesh of A
wound, this herb grows much in woods.

Asterion.
This herb Asterion grows among stones and in high places, this herb
shows by night, this herb has yelowe flowers hole and round as a
Kockebel, or else like to Foxegloues, the leues of this herb be round, and
blew, they have the mark of the moan in the myddest, as it were.iii. leued
grass, but ye leues thereof be more and they be round as a penny, and the
stalk of this herb is reed and this herb seems as it were musk and the
joyce thereof is yelow. And this herb growethe in the new moon without lefe
and every day spryngeth a new lefe to the end of xv. days, and after.xv. days
it loses every day a lefe as the moon waneth, and it spryngeth and waneth as
doth the moon, and where y^ it grows there grows great quatyte. The
virtue of this herpe is thus, they that eat of the berys or of the herb in
wanynge of the moon when he is in sygno virgins, if he have the falling evil
he shall be hole thereof, or if he bear this herb bout his neck he shall be
helped without doubt, and it hath many other good virtues.

Agrimonia.
This herb Agrimonia me cal it Egrymonye. The virtue of this herb is thus, it
be eat the herb and the root grene, it heals the akynge of the womb. Also
if the herb be dried and pouned to pouder^ broke with water it is good for the
same evil, also the said herb tepered with Aysell is good to heal a wound
that is hurt with iron, also this herb used in metes is good to heal the
akynge of sores in the mylte it is good for Treytes.

Auencia.
This auencia is called Auen, the virtue of this herb is thus if it be dried
and powder made thereof with wit wine warmed or else luke warm water give it to
the that hath the fevers, it shall help him much and ease him, also it heleth
wounds Cankers if it be drunken.

Altea.
This herb is called holy hocke or the wild malowe, the virtue of this herb
is thus, take and stamp it fry it with shepes talowe and make a plaster and
lay it to a podagar ma, it shall help him within three days by experymente al
auctours do say and affirm that this herb soden with Vinegar and Linsede.
and a plaster made thereof laid to the side of any person, it departed and
helps wicked gatherynges that be engendered in a man body, this herb
grows in gardens moist places.

Amarisca.
This herb is colled Dog fenel, or Maithe, this herb is much like to
Camamyle for it has a white flower as Camamyle, but it stinks, the virtue
of this herb is good to drink the joyce thereof for to heal the Canker and the
pypes of the Emeraudes, and there be.ii. speces thereof, the one has a white
flower, the other hath a yelowe flower, it grows in corn.

Auticula muris.
This herb is called Mousere The virtue of this herb is, if it be drunken it
helps the Quinsy, also the joyce is good to heal al manner of wounds.

Apium Emoroidarum.
This herb is called crowfote this herb hath leues departed as it were Rames
fete, this herb has a lunge stalk in the midst, grows in watery places,
has yelowe flowers.

Apium ranarum.
This herb Apium ranarum that men call water crowfote, this herb hath yelow
flowers as hath crowefote and of the same shape, but the leues are more
departed, it hath a lunge stalk, and out of that one stalk grows many
stalks small by the sides, this herb grows in watery places.

Triplex domestica.
This herb Atriplex domestica, men call it Orage, or medolious.

Anabulla.
This h^rbe Anabulla men call Spourge.

Acus demonis.
This herb Acus demonis is an herb that men call Poukenel.

Argentilla.
This herb Argentilla that me cal Argentyl, this herb hath little leues
somdele round, and within they be ragged, as it were ye leues of Eufra^y, and
it growith much among whet, and there be.ii. speces thereof, the more and the
less.

Acus mustela.
This herb Acus mustela is called Groundeswelye, it is good for players.

Allium.
This herb Allium is called Garleke, the virtue of this herb is this. It will
unbind all wicked wyndes within a man body, and it helps a man to make
water, but it noyeth a man eyes, because of the great byndyng and drinking,
he that hath voluptuosly it drinks and destroys the sight, and it
destroys and heleth venom within aman. Also it heleth all cold sores as it
were tryacle. Also it heleth the scabs and morphewes or bladders in what
manner place they be in a manes body, so that it be well froted therwyth, this
herb is hot and dry.

Amsum.
This herb is called anise, the virtue of this herb is this, it vnbyndeth the
stoppyng of the liver, and of wicked wyndes, of great humours and encloses
the milte, also it stereth a man to make water and to sweet, also this herb
makes a man womb laxatyue if it be to harde and the sede must be parched
or roasted in al manner medecynes, that it will work the rather, this herb is
hot and dry.

Hic incipit litiera.B.
Et primo de Bethonia.
BEtyn men do call this herb, ye virtue of this ^erbe is this, if it be
stamped and tha laid to a wound in ye head that is smitten with a stroke it
shall heal the wound fair, and draw out the broke bones if there be any as
leches do say, also if a man eyes do ache, take the water or the joyce
thereof, it shall amend ^hem greatly. Take Betin and stamp him and temper him
with water or with wine warmed and drink it.x. days and it shall destroy any
web in the eyes of any person. Also if your eyes be waterye, eat every day
a little betayne, and it shall do the much good, also if you have akynge ears,
take the joyce thereof temper it with rose water, and warm it a little and
drop it in thy ears and stop them with wolle, and thou shalt be hole. Also
if thou do blede much at the nose, ^ake and stamp Betine with salt and stop
thy nose there with and it will stanch. And if thou have sore teeth, with
Uyneger or with Aysel let it sethe well ^yl it be more than half wasted, than
as hot as you may suffer it sup thereof, and hold it in thy mouth till it be
cold, than spyte, it out and do thus oft and thou shalt be hole. Also for the
cough take the joyce or powder of Betyne and medyl it with honey, make thereof a
lectuary, and use it. ix. days and thou shalt be hole. And if a man may not
hold his meat within him take the same me decyne and give him.iii. sponeful
thereof with a sponefull of water. Also if a man yard be swolen or that it
be sore, take Beteyne and stamp it with white wine tempered and it shall be
hole. Also if a ma be Podagat, take Betayne, sethe it well in water and give to
him to drink and wasshe his fete there with and lay the herb about his fete
on a clothe, and it will amend him much. Also take and eat Betayne or powder
thereof. you shall not be drunken that day, all these medicines have ben proved
of this herb. It is hot and dry.

Balsaminta.
This herb Balsaminta called horse mynte or water wine or brokemynte, and also
this herb doth grow in waterye places, the virtue of this herb is to coforte
a manes stomach and makes a ma well to defy his meat. Also y^ ^oyce and
clarifyed honey, Reed wine boiled together, it shall do away the cold fro a
manes stomach and wicked wyndes within him, also the joyce or else the powder of
the herb drunken with Red wine hot, makes women that be with child soon
and esely to be delivered of their children, This herb is hot and dry.

Bl^ta.
This herb Bleta is called Be^es, a^d there be.ii. speces thereof as
Diascorides says, the one is white and the other black, ye virtue of this
herb is this if ye joyce thereof be put in the nosestrylles of a man it
cleanses a man head. Also it swageth the akynge of the eyes of every
person, it cleanses the head from nyttes fro other vermin. Also it repairs
and amends a man hear of his head also this herb destroieth botches
^ils, also Diascorides says, if a man use over much of this herb y^ it
norysheth wicked humours in a man for it is hot.

Borago.
Borago is a common herb, the ver^ue of it is thus. It will cleanse the reed
colour of a man. Also this herb is good to destroy the Cardyacle, and the
postumes that be gathered of the black colour. Also the water drunk with wine
makes a man glad and merry, this herb is hot and moyste.

Bugla.
This herb Bugla is called Brounwort this herb hath leues like a browne
colour with a blew flower, and somewhat boistous, the v^rtue of this herb is
thus. It will heal wounds in a man head, and if this herb be drunken it
heleth streng^hn^th the bones that be broken in ye man head this herb
breketh and destroys the rew^ne and the akynge of the head, this herb grows
in woods much and it is hot and dry.

Burneta.
This herb Burneta is called burnet, the herb hath blew flowers as has
Hayhoue, and small ragged leues like Tan^ye leues, y^ virtue of this herb is
thus. It will destroy the great humours and laxatyue within a man. Also it
opens the stoppynge within a man liver, makes a man to pysse well. Also it
makes one to avoid the yelowe evil. Also a portion of this herb meddled with
honey and white wine helps vnbyndeth sore stytches of the rybbes in the
tetes, there be ii. speces thereof the one grows on hills and ye other in
meadows.

Bursa pastoris.
This herb Bursa pastoris is called sheperdes pu^s, this herb hath a small
stalk and full of brauches and ragged leues a white flower, the coddes thereof
be like a purse, the virtue of this herb is thus, drink it with reed wine, or
with milk and it will stanch ye blody menson, it is hot and dry.

Borago siluestris.
This herb Borago siluestrys is like to come borage, but the leues be somewhat
smaller and it grows in feldes and in ways.

Billire.
This is called byller, The virtue thereof is good to ripe botches and it is
hot and dry.

Camomilla.
This herb is called Camomyl the virtue of this herb is thus if it be drunk
with wine it will break the stone, and it destroys the yelowe evil. It
helps the akynge and the desease of the liver, if it be strained it helps
swageth the sores in amanes mouth, it is good for akynge in a man head and
for the megrym, this herb is hot and dry.

Calamintum.
This herb is called Calamint the virtue of this herb is thus, it destroys
a manes talent, as ypocras says, the be.iii. spices thereof, one that is
stony, another that is of the earth, and the.iii. of the water and all they be
hot and dry, it that is wateri makes a ma moist, it that is stony makes a
man hole if ye drink it, if he have drunk any venomous drink, this herb
made in a plaster lay it to a venemes wound it draws out venym soon. Also
who so drink the this herb.iii. days, it shall help him of the yelowe
euell. The other is erthly it is helping for lepery, the joyce of this herb
and it be put into the ears of a man it will slay worms in a man head and
comfort the stomach, and helps to defy it, and it wythdraweth casting.

Crassula mayor.
This herb is much like unto Orpyn, the virtue of this herb is thus, if it be
laid to a wound by it self it shall heal it without any other help.

Crassula minor.
This herb is called stonchore or Stonecroppe, the leues of this herb be
suwhat like unto Orpin and it grows on houses and walls, the virtue of this
herb is thus it will make a man to cast.

Cicuta.
This herb is called Hemlock or herb Benet, the virtue of this herb is
thus, the joyce of this herb kepeht maids tetes small, also this herb oft
drunk kepeth and destroys the great appetite of lecherye. Also the joyce
tempered with Swynes greece, destroyethe the hot Podagre, and swag the the
great swellynge, for it is cold and dry.

Centaurea mayor.
This is named the more Centory or earth gall, his flowers be yelowe in the
crop, his virtue is if it be sodden in good wine it will heal the syckenes in
the liver, it draws out wicked humours in the mylt, this hath ben proved, and
it be soden in water it is good to h^le a wound, if there be a canker it be
anointed there with it will make it hole, this herb is hot and dry.

Centauria minor.
This he^be is the less Centory, it hath.iii. branches coming out of a
round more with a ^eed ^lower. His virtue is this, the powder or joyce thereof
is good, for biting of an adder or any venemus beast if it be droken with
wine and the joyce is good to anoynte sores therewith if ye have any venym
within you, powne it small temper it with Aysell and drink it and you shall
cast out al the venym within you.

Caruo.
This herb is called Caraway this herb has leues somewhat like to Fenell
with a lunge stalk, and a round sede more than persly sede. The virtue of this
herb is to destroy wicked wyndes and the cough and it is good for the
Fresye, and for bytynge of venomous beasts. Also this herb meddled is good for
scabs, and Tetters. Also it restores hear there as it is fallen away, this
herb grows in moyste places.

Celidonia.
This herb is called Celondy or Tetterwort, his virtue is as poliminus says
if the birds of ye swalowe be blind, the damme of the birds fetches of this
herb heals their eyes therwyth, it is good for ye caker in a mans mouth it
is good for the toth ache to clese a manes head, this herb is hot and dry.

Culamen.
This is called Hertnote, Dylnote, Skycte or holy wort: he hath leues like
Fenell with white flowers a small stalk it growethe in wodes and meadows, his
virtue is to eat away dead flesh this he^b put to a sore that lacks
hear, it will restore the hear and heal the place.

Colewortes.
This herb is good to clese fresshe woudes, the canker, to norysshe synowes,
to heal^ sore eyes that be almost syghteles, it encreseth a woman's mylcke the
joyce tepered with Alume and Asell, it swageth the Leper, and it is good to
keep a man fro dronkenes it is hot dry.

Coliandrum.
This herb is called Colyandrum the virtue of this herb is this, if the joyce
thereof be drunk with honey it will slay worms in a man body, and hardeth a
man womb, the sede is good to do away the Fevers that come three days,
this herb is hot and dry.

Capillus veneris.
This herb is called maiden here or waterwort. This herb hath leues like unto
fern; but ye leues be smaller, it grows on walls stones in ye midst af ye
lefe is as it were black here, ye virtue of this herb is this it will br^ke ye
stone, it be broke with wine it dstroyeeth venym and it is cold and dry.

Crocus.
This herb is called Saffron, the virtue of this herb is thus, it will destroy
all manner of abhomynacyons of man stomach, and will make a ma to sleep, it
is good for many medecynes^ and namely for cokes to colour their meat their
with, it grows in gardens, and it is hot and dry.

Centinodium.
This herb is called Sparrow tongue, the virtue of this herb is to break the
stone, and it is hot and dry.

Caprifolium.
This herb is called wodbynd and it hath a white flower, ye virtue of this
herb is good to heal Cankered wounds, bladers, and akinge teeth and sores in
the toos of a man^ Also it is good for the swellynge in a manes body that is
venimed, this herb is hot dry.

Canabaria.
This herb is called wyld hepe or holy rope, it is like unto hepe his virtue
is if a man have the fever fret well his pounce therwyth and he shall be hole,
and it grows in watery places.

Costus.
This is named Cost or less Detyn, his virtue is to heal the sickness of the
breast of the lunges it will break the postume.

Also it draws out evil humours of a man head, it is good for a man
stomach.

Cepe.
Is named an Onion, his virtue is to comfort a man stomach it purges somewhat
the fleume it nessheth somewhat the womb. Also and it be stamped and tempered
with honey and Aseyll, it is good for the bytyng of a houde, Also the joyce
tepered with woman's milk is good to heal the akynge of eres, Also the joyce
tempered with any lycoure is good to drink for any ma that hath lost his
speech. Also the joyce put in ye nosethrylles breketh out the wicked room and
ye stoypyng of a man head.

Columbina.
This is named Columbyne, his virtue is good for him yt hath the quynsy. This
herb must be gathered in August.

Cominum.
This is called Comyn, the leues thereof be much like unto Colyadre, it hath
many brauches coming out of one stalk, it is strong of savour, his virtue is
to destroy wicked wind and other evils, in a man stomach, it helps to
make water, it is hot and dry.

Cardiaca.
This is named Cardyacle, it hath leues like to blind nettels it hath little
coddes with sede, his virtue is good for the falling evil.

Cisara.
This is called a France peas, it hath leues and coddes like unto other pees
but y^ leues be not so great nor so lunge, and there be.ii. spices thereof.

Camelon.
This is called a woluisshe thistell or a wild thystell. He has white leues
great broad a reed flower, it grows by ways, the virtue of this herb is if
thou take this herb when the soon is in Capricorne, and the moon be new:
while thou berest it about y^ there shall no myschefe the befall.

Cauda pulli.
This is named Coltes tail, this herb hath leues like to wyld comin, but they
be not stalked like

Cabachis.
This is named Freche wortes it is hot and dry.

Caulus gallica.
This is named wild Tansy

Caulus agrestis.
This is an herb that men call Gland, or kouratum, the leues be like unto
plantine but they be not so much, it hath a white flower grows in waters.

Cimbaria.
This herb men do cal it Penny wort, this herb hath round leues, if grows
on walls.

Consolida mayor.
This is named Cofery, it has leues like to Horshelme, but they be not so
white, there be two speces thereof One with a white flower, the other with a
reed, His virtue is if a man be brosen or broken with in take the rotes of this
herb and toste them in the ashes and let the sick eat thereof fasting.iii.
and he shall be hole. Also it helps to gather broken bones, it is hot and
moyste, and it bears black sede.

Consolida minor
This is called daysy or Brousworte, his virtue is if it be stamped and laid
to a botch, it shall heal it and break it, for it is a spyce of the Confery.

Consolida media.
This herb is called Methyn, this herb hath lunge leues and a little endented
and a white flower and the flower is somewhat like to the Daysy.

Hic incipit lettera D.
Et primo de Dragantia.
DRagaunce or Serpentine this herb is called. The virtue of this herb is this
if it be stamped and droncke with wine, it doth away all manner of venym. Also
it doth away the akynge of eres if they be anointed therewith. Also the powder
thereof blown in a man nose, shall clese a man of the Room, and it is good
to destroy the cough, and to destroy the canker and the fretyng of wicked
winds this herb is hot and moyste it must be gathered in June and July.

Diptanum.
This is called Detander or detain. The virtue of this herb is thus, if it be
drunken it will deliver a woman of a dead child Also this herb will draw out a
thorne or an iron out of a mans body, it is hot and dry.

Dancus asinius.
This is called Dank, his virtue is to heal the dropsy, bytyng of venomous
beasts. Also it opens the stoppyng of the liver and of the mylte. Also it
vnbyndeth the womb and makes it laxative it is hot and dry.

Dens leonis.
This herb is called Dandelyon, the virtue of this herb is, the More is good
for the fever quotidian.

Dens canis
This is named houndest other it hath leues like to dandelion but they be less
and the branches be not like and they drop milk.

Daucus creticus.
This herb hath leues like to wild popy, but the leues be more white, it
has a flower of purple colour and it growethe in wheat this herb is hot
and dry.

Dragancia.
This is named Drag^e femell, it hath leaves like to Re^, but it hath white
spectes it hath an even stalk the length of.ii. cabites, and it berethe (...)
as it ^re a cluster of Grapes, and they be yelowe it growethe in moist places,
the virtue is if it be stamped, and meddled with Oil and ^ut into the eyes of a
man it shall do away the akynge thereof. Also the more thereof and the more of
the white Onion stamped therewyth and tempered with honi, it heals all woudes
that the Canker has be risen in. Also who froteth his hades with y^ more, if
it be i May without dout he may take adders they shall not venom him. Also the
joyce destroys y^ darkness about a man eyes, if they be anointed therewith.
Also if the joyce be drunken with wine it destroieth lechery, and it is moist
and cold.

Hi^ ^ncipit littera.E.
Et primo de Enulacampana.
ENulacapana is called ^orshelme, the virtue (...) ^his herb is this if a man
have wagging teeth and he eat of this herb, they shall fasten again, it
helps a man to make water if it be drunken it delivers a woman of a dead
child, it is good for the chough it hardeth a mas wobe it is hot and moist.

Endiuia.
This herb is called endiue or southystle, his virtue is if ye joyce thereof be
meddled with hot water drunken it helps the stoppynge of the mylte and of the
liver. It is good to heal the ^elowe evil and y^ fever tercian. It is good
for hole postumes and for to swag great hetes of the liver of the stomach and
it is cold and moyste.

Eru^a.
This herb is named Skyrwyte, This herb has leues like to Byllerin but they
be not so loge it hath a greatter more, his virtue is the leues be good to
heal a man mouth, if it be holden lunge therein. Also the joyce of this
herb sodden afterward droken it destroys the black colour. Also this herb
oft used styrreth a man to lechery and to make water, Also the more stamped and
meddled with oil and honey cleanses aman^es chynne if it be anointed therewith.
Also the joyce thereof drunk delyuereth men and women of the cough, for it is
hot and dry.

Eufrasia.
This herb is called Eufrasy^ it is good for eyes and hath a little ragged
lefe.

Ehullus.
This herb is called walwort, it hath leaves like to Elder leaves it hath a
lunge stalk, the virtue of this herb is good to destroy the dropsy, scabs
and ^etters and it draws ^waye wicked humours out of a man, this herb is
hot and dry.

Edera.
This herb is called Ivy, this herb is like to brayn, y^ virtue there of is. If
it be sodden in wine, till it be thycke, then lay it al hot to a bot^h and it
shall break it. Also if y^ have any aching in the head take ye joyce thereof oil
of roses white wine meddle it together anoint thyhead therewith and thou shall be
hole thereof.

Edera terrestris.
This is an earth Ivy, it has leues like to Catmynt but they be not so much,
and hath a reddy flower, ye virtue of this is if it be soden in Swynes greece,
it is a good ointment for al manner aches.

Enforbium.
This is called ^lary, this her be hath leues like to Sauge but y^ leues be
brother ^ounder, his virtue is if he be put in potage it will make the flesh
tender.

Elleboras albus.
This Pellyter of spain, or lunge wort. This herb has leues much like to
pedelion, but they be not so much slyt without and it has a flower as it were
a Parsneb, his virtue is if he be put into the nosethrylles of a man, it will
make him to nese. Also it healethe scabbe, the morphewe, and tetters. Also it
purgethe a man of wicked colours of the flewme, and of the Emerodes if he be
laid to ye place that is deseased. Also for the tothe ache it is good if it be
sodden in A sell and keep it as hot as he may suffer in his mouth and it
good to purge a man stomach and womb. Also the powder thereof put in
grewell shall slay worms and the joyce meddled with milk sleeth flies, it is
hot and dry.

Elleborus niger.
This is called Pedelyon his leues be much like to lunge wort but they be not
so white, it has a broad flower a black rote, his virtue is if it be made in
powder it will destroy and slay rats this herb is hot and dry.

Epatica.
This herb is called lyuerwort, his virtue is to destroy cleanse ye hardness of
ye liver. Also if it be meddled with fresh greece it will heal woudes and it is good
to heal the fever quartayne.

Erpina
This herb is named Foxgloues.

Ebulus minor.
This is the less Walwort. It is somewhat like to Walwort and the leues be a
little red.

Hic incipit li^tera.F.
Et primo de Flamula.
FLammula is called Sperewort or Launcell it is much like to a sphere and in
the crop of the stalk comes many fair small branches and it hath a white
flower and it grows in waters, his virtue is if a ma have the fevers and the
pouces of him anointed therwyth he shall be hole, it is good to break botches
and boils and it is hot and dry.

Fumus terre.
This herb is called Fumitory or earth Gall, his virtue is to coforte a manes
stomach. Also it gives a man appetite to meat and it helps a man to make
water, it opens the liver, and it clerethe a manes blode. Also if any drink
thereof with whei, it destroieth scabs, ytches, bladders, and wicked humours,
it is hot and dry,

Fumicretum.
This is called Fumicrete, this herb has is a lunge stalk, and it hath
leues like to three leued gras and it hath ^oddes, his virtue is if it sod in
water it makes a man laxat^ue without any perell and is hot and dry.

Fragra.
This is called Strauberye, the virtue of this herb is good for blered me. Also
it is good to destroy the web in a man eyes. Also the joyce of it meddled
with honey drunken heleth the mylte.

Fabaria mayor.
This herb is called Brock^lepe, this herb hath leues like unto Bestede, it
grows in waters

Fabaria minor.
This is the less Brockelempe it hath leaves in manner lunge and somewhat
round like to myntes This is good to lay to a place that is brosed or to be
wellynge if it be fried with shepes talowe.

Filix.
This herb is named Fern, of his be.iii. speces. The first is Pompody the
second is Osmunde and it grows in dyches and woods, and it has a great
more, as pynapples, it is good to heal broken bones. The third is Euferne, and
it grows in walls, Polpody grows in Oaks, it is good to make a man
laxatyue. This fern grows in woods, it is good to heal the Podager. And it
makes synowes strong.

Filipendula.
This herb is called dropwor^ the virtue of it will destroy the wicked wyndes
about a man liver and his mylte and it is good to destroy the stone, it is
hot and dry.

Feniculum.
This herb is called Fenel or Fenkel, the virtue of this herb is this, if the
sede be dried it is good and comfort the stomach it opens the stoppynge of
the raynes of the blader. Also ye joyce is good to do away the web of the
eyes of a manne, and it be drunken with wine, and water, it is good to do a way
all manner of venym. Also the joyce dropped in the eres of a man, it will slay
worms in a man. And also if it be drunken with wine yt will break the dropsye
and al manner swelling, and kepeth him fro casting, and if it be drunken with
wine and water, it makes a woman's milk to increase. Also if yt be meddled with
oil it is good to heal a man yard that is swollen. And this herb is hot
dry.

Faxinus.
This herb is named Hertwod, his virtue is if he be powned and laid to a
sore, it will heal it.

Feniculus poeticus.
This is called wormesede. It is good to destroy worms in a manes body, this
herb is hot dry.

Febrifuga.
This named Fetherfoye, his virtue is to comfort a man stomach it is good to
aswage ye axes cotidian, the cramp, and to temper it that comes of cold
stomachs Also it is good to lay to a sore that is bitten with venomous bests I^
will heal it shortly and it be laid thereto. Also if it be tempered with Aysell
it will do a way the Morphewe. Also if it be stamped and laid to a wound in
the which be broken bones, it shall bring the broken bones together and heal
the the rote thereof is good to stop the blody mension. And this herb is hot
and dry.

Filago.
This herb is called Feldwort or Whore wort it is a little herb, it grows
in whet.

Flamenula.
This is called the less Sper^worte, this herb hath small leaves like gras,
but it is sharpe like a sphere and it grows in feldes, his virtue is yt a head
be cut it will heal it anon.

Hic incipit littera.G.
et primo de gratia dei mayor.
GRatia dei mayor, this herb is called the more Gratia dei.

Granum.
This is Gromel or Lyche wale the virtue thereof is good for the stone, and for
al evils in the bladder. This herb is hot and dry.

Genestula.
This herb men do call it Genestre or brom it has leues like to
Spyngeruell, and it hath a yelowe flower his virtue is to knyte bones and
synowes to gyther.

Gencianus.
This herb that me do cal Felworte or Balmoyne, his virtue is if it be drunken
with water and and honey it helps the swellynge in a man body, in his
stomach it is god for venomous beasts, it delyuereth a woman of a dead child,
it is hot and dry.

Galanga.
This is named Galingale, the virtue of this herb is thus, it coforteth the
stomach makes him well to degeste his meat, and vnbyndeth and lets out
wicked wyndes of a man body.

Granum solis agrestis.
This is called wyld Gromel, it is somewhat like to other Gromell, but ye sede
thereof is somewhat gray it grows in dyches, it is good for the stone.

Gladiolus.
This herb is called Gladon, the virtue of it is good to make a man to cast.

Hic incipit littera.H.
Et primo de herba cruciata.
HErba Cruciata is a herb y^ men cal Croworte this herb hath little leues and
asmal stalk with white flowers, and it is like to a cross, this is good to
heal wounds.

Herba cristofori masculi.
This is called Cristofer, the male it hath leues like to the Crousope, but
they be more whyt and not fully so lunge, it has yelowe flowers, his virtue
is to heal the Epylence and the frenzy.

Herba Cristofori femini.
This is named Cristofer female it hath leues like to herb Peter, but they be
not in all so white and it growethe much by the waters side it hath a lunge
stalk.

Herba walteri.
This is herb walter, it has leues like to Persly and the leues be suwhat
chycke fat and theder.

Herba Rob^rti.
This is named herb Robert, it has leues like to herb Benet and it hath
small flowers like to purple colour, and it hath a strong savour, his virtue is
to heal woudes, ye powder of it will slay cakers.

Herba Martis.
This is called Mortagon. It has leues like to the capital letter.M. and
some brauches hath, ix leues and some.x. and some more.

Hastucaregia.
This is named Wooderoso if the more thereof be stamped drunken with wine, it
will heal a sore in the mouth. Also ye sede stamped and drunken with strong
Aysell will stanch the Flyx and make the womb harde.

Herb Petri.
This is named the Couslope

Herba Iohannis.
This is called saint Iohanes wort the virtue of it is thus, if it be put in a
manes house, there shall come no wicked spirit therein.

Hic incipit littera.I.
Et primo de Iusqbiamus.
IUquiamus is called Henbane, his virtue is good for ye gout, nam^lye those yt
come of melacoli. Also the sede thereof and the sede of Humlocke meddled to
gyther a candle made thereof, or brent upon a tyle stoone, and let the smoke go
up ito a man mouth in especial among the teeth, and it will slay worms.
Also the rotes be good for the toth ache, Also the joyce thereof is good for al
wounds. Also it swagethe the cough and the hot postume, and the hot
Podager. Also the sede of this herb shulde be gathered in ye month of August.
This herb is cold and dry.

Isopus.
This herb is called Isope, his virtue is if a manne take the joyce thereof,
and put it in his mouth, it will heal all manner of evils in the mouth. Also it
sleeth worms in a man womb makes it nessh Also if it be droken grene or i
powder it makes a man well coloured it is hot and dry.

Ireos.
This herb is called Save, it hath leues much like unto the flowerdelyce, and
it hath a white flower, it growethe in water, the virtue of it is good to heal
the aching of synowes. Also if it be drunken with wine or ale, it will destroy
wicked humours in a manes breast and the cough. Also it destroys the cramp,
it heals the bytynge of venomous beasts. Also if a woman have a dead child
within her it will deliver her without peryl, it is hot and dry.

Iris.
This herb is called Flower-delyce, this is like to an herb that is called
Save, almost in al fetures, but the flower is more inde blew, this herb
grows in water and gardyns. It is of the same virtue that Save is of.

Iarus.
This herb is named Cockopyntell this herb hath leues like Mercury, a flower
like to Dragaunte, and it is bitter and pryckynge upon the tongue, his virtue is
if a ma have any swelling upon the tongue or any swellynge about his eres, take
the herb and sethe it with Tuberosetatibus in wine and oil and with comyn
make a plaster thereof and lay it to his ^ares it will make him hole. Also
take the knobs of the rote, and dry them and cleanse the, and they have
virtue to make a man laxative if it be constypulatyue. Also if thou will make
thy face white clear take the powder of the rotes and lay it in rose water,
and set it against the son, till it be consumed, do so twice or thrice, than
rub thy face with the powder or what other place thou will, to fret away the
super^luite of the flesh This herb is hot and dry.

Iasia nigra.
This is called Madefelon or bulwede or knapwede.

Iasia alba.
This is called Golegras or wyld ^ansy, it is good for clensing of a mans
lymmes.

Ipia mayor.
This is named Pympernel, it hath leues like to Cheken meat i^ is good to
heal wounds and to destroy venym and to heal a man of the postume to heal
sore eyes

Ipia minor.
This herb is called Cheke meat.

Ia^metus rusticus.
This herb is called Blewche time or andode or Ka^bowe.

Hic incipit littera.L.
Et primo de herba Lanisticum.
LOuage this herb is called, his virtue is much in the sede the more thereof is
good to bedroken with wine to heal a manes stomach, for other cuylles within a
man, and for to make good deg^sstyon, it is hate and dry.

Lingua ceruina.
This is called Hertis tongue, ye virtue of it is good to ripe a postume break
it if it be sode with oil of Roses and a plaster made thereof and if it be
drunken with wine or ale, it will harden a man womb and it is hot and
dry.

Lilium.
This is called the Lylie, ye virtue of this is if it be staped with talowe
oil and a plaster made thereof and laid to a place there as the postume is,
it shall ripe it make it to break. Also take a great quantyte of the rotes and
the sede of the Dock, the more of Louache and put al these in wine, and
oil, the space of.ix. days and afterward sethe it and cleanse it, and do
thereto wax and make thereof an ointment, and that is good to heal the sore the
hardness of the mylte. Also ye joyce thereof is good to heal the venym of adders.
Also lay the joyce thereof to a wound that is bytten and it will heal it, also
take the rotes and roast them and temper them with oil of Olyue, and lay it
to a place that is brent, and it will heal it. Also this herb is good for
many other things and deseases if it be drunken with ale, wine or water. Also
it heals and comfort much a man sinews. The virtue of this herb is
in the Mores, and this herb is hot and dry.

Ligustum.
This herb is called Primrose, this herb is good to potage. Also the joyce
put in a man nose it will destroy Megrym.

Lingua bouis.
This is called langdebefe the virtue of this herb is good to do away ye red
colour of a ma. Also if it be drunken it doth away the Cardyacle and other
wicked humours in a man lunges. Also the joyce of this herb droken with
hot water, makes a man to have a good mind and good wit, this must be
gathered in June or July, it is hot and dry.

Lingua serpentis mayor.
This is calley Adders tongue, this herb hath leues like to Affodyl, but they
be more grene, and also more sharpe in the end, this must be gathered in
Apryll.

Lengua serpents minor.
This is called the less Addertong, this herb has leues somewhat like to
Pygyll, and it has a yelowe flower and out of the stalk comes many
branuches and it grows in wodes.

Lingua canis
This is is called hundestonge, it is good to destroy the couge the possume,
it will type a boche

Lingua hiccina.
This is called Buck^shorn of Swyneskerce this herb hath leues faltred as it
were an Hertes horne, and growethe crepynge by the ground, and it has a
little white flower, it grows in watery places.

Lupinus.
This is called Lupyne, this herb hath leues like to five leued gras, the
Lupine has.vi^ leaves and it has a white flower, and a white seed that is
somewhat like and it bears coddes somewhat like unto Been coddes, the virtue of
this herb is thus, if a man have worms in his womb, take the sed^ and make
meal thereof and the joyce of wormewod and honey and make a cake thereof and eat
it and it vnbyndethe the stopynge of the liver of the mylt. Also it is good to
destroy ye dropsye. Also take the same meal the joyce of Arsmerte and make
thereof past and lay it to thy ears and it shall kyl the worms within them, or
if thou make a cake hete it, it will do the same Also if thou will take the
joyce of Lekes and temper it with the meal and put it in thy eres, it shall
cleanse them fro al wicked humours and stynkyng. Also take the same meal and
temper it with oil and it will break and ripe al manner of postumes, this herb
is hot and dry.

Labrum veneris.
This is called Southystel, the virtue of this herb is this, if a man have a
hot fever, take the joyce thereof temper it with hot water and let him drink
it and he shall be hole. Also if a man have venym within him, take this herb and
dry it and make powder thereof and do the powder in good wine and let slym
drink it and it will cast up all the venym, it is hot dry.

Lauendula.
This is called Laueder, if this be soden in water give that water to a man
that hath the palsy and it will heal him, it is hot and dry.

Lactuca.
This herb is called Lettyse or stope wort, the virtue of this herb is thus.
If it be eaten raw, or soden it engenders good blod. Also this herb soden
with a lyttl A^sell and Saffron and than droken, it helps a man that is
stopped in the liver and in the myl^e. Also if a man may not sleep, take the
sede of this herb and stamp it to powder and temper it with woman's milk and
make a plaster thereof on lynte, and lay it to ye temples of thy head, and
thou shalt sleep well, or else drink the powder thereof with milk.

Also take the sede temper it with oil of Roses, and make a plaster and lay it
to the stomach, and it is good to destroy the hot postume Also drink the
joyce of this herb or powder of the sede for it is good to heal the Flixe. But
who yt uses this herb overmuch, it will destroy their sight, this herb is
cold and somewhat moyste.

Lactuca siluatica.
This is call^d wild Lettyse, this herb hath leaves like to the thysbell, and
they be sharpe kene and it hath a flower of purple colour^ and it grows in
Feldes and in whe^e, This herb is hot and dry.

Lactuca leporina.
This herb is called Harchys^ell this herb hath leu^s like to Sowthystell, but
ye leues be not so endered, it drops milk, the virtue of this herb is thus,
if a hare eat of this herb in Somer when he is mad he shall be hole also take
this herb and ley it to a man side when he sleeps or else yt he know not
thereof, and it will heal him of the fevers.

Lollium.
This herb is called Cockle this herb hath virtue if it be drunken with
Raddysshe and a little salt, it is good to hel^ the Canker or other wounds in
peril. Also it is good to comfort the stomach and the liver. Also it will
unbind worms in a man stomach. Also it helps a man to make water, and it
is good for sore eyes. Also subtumigacion thereof will make a woman to bear her
child without any peril or harm. Also it will assuage the great pains of
akynge of the liver it is hot and dry.

Lapacium rubeum.
This is called the reed Dock, if ye a man take the joyce thereof hold it in
his mouth, it will aswage the toth ache. Also if a man have the kings evil,
take this herb seth it in wine and strain it and give him to drink and he
shall be hole if he use it oft. Also if a man rub him with the joyce, it doth
away evil ytchynges. Also this herb is good to deliver wyndes that be
stopped in a man stomach balkyng. Also this herb is good to make scabs
and botches ripe. Also it is good to make a ma to have a harde womb, it is
hot and dry.

Linum.
This is called Flex, it is good if a man take the sede thereof seth it in
water, it makes a man laxative, and it is good to make a plaster thereof for
akynge sores. Also there is another spece thereof that is called Custula, it is
named in Englyshe dodure, and it grows among Flexe, the virtue of this is
good to purge a man of the colour Also if it be take and a great quatyte thereof
sodden in Myrre and oil together, and a plaster made thereof, it is good for
the raynes for the breast, and for other akynge lymmes.

Lauriola.
This is called Laurel, it will make a man laxatyue it is good to purge a man
of flewme and of the colour, it is good for a ma that may not eat, for if the
joyce thereof be put in his eres, or if ye said herb be stamped and a
suppository be made thereof and laid on cotton it will heal, it is hot and
dry.

Liquiritia.
This is named Lycoryse, the ^oote of this herb is sweet and it moysteth y^
kyndely hete of a man and it is good for the cough. Also if it be sodden in
water, it will destroy a man thurste. Also it makes a man breast, his
throat his lunges, moist and in good temper. This is cold and moist.

Lappa.
This is called Clote, or Burs

Lappa ameria.
This is called a clote.

:De littera.M.
et primo de Millefolio minore,
Mylfoyle ye less this herb is called. There is no difference of kind nor
virtue between milfoly the less, and mylfoly the more, save the more grows in
gardens, the less in wild place they be both of one strength his virtue
shall be declared in Milfoyle the more following by letter.

Mercurialis.
This is called Mercurye, his virtue is good if a ma have akige in his womb,
give him to drink the joyce and he shall be hole, it will clese the stomach and
the sede will do the same. Also the joyce tempered with white wine is good to
heal sore eyes, and if a worm or other venym have bytten a man. take the
joyce and warm it, and wasshe it. Also if there be any worms c^open into a
man ea^es, take ye joyce and warm it and put it into his eres and he shall be
hole This herb is hot and dry.

Menta.
This herb is called Mint, his virtue is if it be oft eaten, it will slay
worms in a manes wobe Also if a ma have botches or other rennynges or
swellynge in his head, take this herb and stamp it and lay it to the sore
and it will heal it. Also if a manes tothe or the flesh of ye tothe ache or
stink, take this herb sethe it in white wine and in Aylell, and take ye
lycoure wasshe his mouth therewith, than take the powder of the herb and tube
well his teeth therwyth, he shall have a sweet smelling mouth Also take thou
this herb Aisell and make sauce, and it will make the to have a talet to thy
mete, also when there shall be given any medicine to destroy venym, it will be
good to be given with the joyce of this herb, for it hath many virtues and
namely for veni, there be many spices thereof and it is hot and dry.

Menta romana.
This is named white Mynt, the virtue thereof is the joyce, it will slay worms
in a man womb. Also the joyce will slay worms in the nosethrylles of a
man. Also the powder thereof caste in a man meat, it shall make him well to
defy his meat.

Malua.
This herb is called Malow the virtue of it is good if the leaves be stamped
and laid to a man stomach it will break a hot postume in the beginning,
or else meddle thy herb with fre^she swynes greece and lay it on a hot tyle and
lay it al hot to the postume it shall ripe it and break it. Also it is good to
destroy the hardenes of a man liver and mylte. Also it will make a man
laxatyue, and it is good for players, it is cold and moyste.

Morell or night shadow.
This herb is cold dry in ye ii. degre, the leues, the brauches the fruit
thereof be right good and best when they be grene, they be good for stoppinge
of the Spleen and the liver, best for the Iandesse to drink the joyce of it
with a little Ruberbe. Also for a postume in the stomach, in the bowels or in
the liver seth the joyce thereof with barley water and drink it.

Mastyke.
This gum is hot dry, in the second degre It is a gum of a tree growing in a
part of the country of Greece in the latter end of Uere the men of that
country slit the trees and than make the grouude clean about and lay clothes
round about the trees, or some other conninge to keep the gum from the
ground in closing of it, to know which is best to take, the best is white
and clear, the whyt colour is next the best yt is meddled with earth suwhat
da^ke, y^ best mastyke he hath virtue of costraynig, cofortig clesig losing of
humours descendynde fro the head above to the eyes and to the teeth, and for
the deseses of the temples made of and ascendynge wind fro the stomach to the
head. Take powder of Mastike, with white sweet wine and the white of an egg
meddle them well together and ye will ye may put in frankincense and plaster it
to the themples. Also sethe Mastike in water and drink it it will comfort
well the stomach, and make good dygestyon, and it comfort and relaxeth ye
stomach and put to it Fenel sede, and it puts out wind out of the stomach
Also a plaster made of Mastyke and Bole Armoniake the white of an egg and
vyneger and lay it on the fork of the stomach or breast it will costrayne well
the coloryke vanite. Also seth Mastike in rain water and drink it with warm
water and this medicine is good for the Flux of ye womb that comes of a
sharpe laxe that was taken before to stop him. And boyle Mastyke in rain
water, or Rosewater with two or three cloves and drink it warm and that
comfort the vomyte and ye Flux of the womb that comes of sharpness and
violence of the medecin. Also Mastike must have but little boylynge for hurting
of his virtue it shulde be given warm, for it costrayneth more when that it is
given warm, Than when it is over much hot.

Magerum.
This herb is hot and dry in the second degre, the flowers and leues be
used in medicines, it should be gathered in somer when it flowreth, and dry it
in the shadow, It may be kept a year, it hath virtue of confortyng, of
losing, if consumynge, and of clensynge. If the powder of it be drunk in
wine, or else boyle the powder of it in wine it will hete well a stomach. Also
it comfort the degestyon. Also take ye leues and flowers of margerum and
powne the a little make them hot in a pan, and lay it to the greuauce and it
takes away the desease in the stomach that comes of wind. Also for the rewm
in the head, take this herb bind it warm about thy head. Also it dries the
mother and consumethe the superfluyte of it.

Millefolium mayor, or yarowe.
King Achilles found this her be, with it he healed his men that were wooded
with iron, for woudes stamp this herb with swines greece, and plaster it to
the woude and it shall heal it, and the same is good for an ache in ye breast
or side it is good for them that may not pysse, take the joyce of this herb
and vyneger drink it, and marvelously it helps a wound that hath toke
cold. Stamp this herb in butter and lay it to the would and it will heal it
well. Also to degest the stomach or that lies there in, take the joyce of it
and meddle it with water and honey and drink it warm. Also for deseases in the
body take the powder and meddle it with wine or with good ale and drink it and
it helps much. Also it is good for hart breimyng. Also for the head ache
stamp this herb and plaster it to the head. Also for bytyng of a wood dog,
stamp this herb with the grains of where au^ it heleth it. Also for him that
may not hold his meat, stape this herb with wine and drink it warm.

Motherworte or Mugworte,
This herb in latyne is called Artemesia, and it is hot and dry in the.iii.
degre, this herb helps a woman to coceyue a child, and clen^ethe the mother
and makethe a woman to have her flowers and to destroys the Emeroydes on this
manner, First they must be gathered, the take powder of Motherworte and of
Horehounde to gyther and straw it on ye paps. Also if a child be dead in
the Mothers womb take Motherworte stamp it small make a plaster thereof and
lay it to her womb al cold, and with the grace of god she shall have have
deliverance with out perell, It is good for the stone and the gravel in the
raynes of a man or of a woman, if a mon bear this herb upon him there shall no
venomous best grieve him. It is good for the yelowe yaundes and if it be
drunken with wine, for, it comfort the stomach makethe a man or woman to
have good colour.

Maces.
This spyce is hot dry in the.ii. degre maces be ryndes or husks it grows
about the Nutmegge as ye rind grows about the Hasel mutte, it may be
kept.x. year i his virtue it is confortynge, dissoluynge, and consuminge, the
knowledge of fine maces is thus, it should be in colour like to fine gold or
else like to gold, that silver is gilt with, the which hath a sharpe talage
with a bytternes, it lokethe like to earth, it is to be refused, for it hath
no sharpe savour, for a cold stomach that may not defy nor degeste well,
take maces and boyle them in wine and drink it, Also a good plaster the which
is best for a feeble stomach, make ^ouder of Mastyke and of maces and medele
them with oil of roses and wax and make a plaster thereof lay it on the
stomach of ye seek person. Also to cleanse the brain of superfluous humours,
take a quantyte of Maces and chew the well in thy mouth and hold them there a
while, and that shall lose the fumosite of humours that rise up to the brains
and purge the superfluite of it. Also for feblenes of the stomach ye liver of a
cold cause and for ye colyke, and for the deseases of the spyrytuall members,
or flewme, boil maces in the joyce of Fenell and in the end of the boylynge,
put in a little wine, than strain it and drink it for it is the best remedy
for the fore said deseases. And for the ache of the heart, use powder of maces
in thy metes and drynkes.

Menta.
This is named ye reed Mynte it is hot and dry in the.ii. degre, and there
be, ii. other myntes, but I mean house mintes, the which properly is said
garden myntes, for that most commonly is in medecines both grene dry, for
great holsomnes it shulde be dried in a shadow place, so it will be kept a
year in great virtue, to dyssolue or less to cosum of his proper qualite and to
comfort of his sweat savour, for ye stynkyng of the mouth and filth in the
gumes and of the teeth wash thy mouth and gummes with vyneger that mintes
besodenin, and after rub him with the powder of myntes or with dry myntes to
provoke the appeti^e, when an impediment of the stomach that comes of cold
humours being in the mouth of the stomach make a salve of Myntes and vyneger
with a little Synamun and pepper and use it well against vomytes that comethe
of feblenes of the stomach or of cold causes. Sethe myntes in Sauge water
vyneger and dype it to and lay it on the mouth of the stomach with the myntes
that be sodden therein. Also give to the patient to eat of the same Myntes for
the syncopyne and feblenes in Fevers, and with out fevers, or of medicine, or
of what cause it be, stamped Myntes with vyneger and a little wine if the
pacyent be without Fever, and if he be with Fever, stamp Myntes with ^ynege^
alone, tha make a toste of sower bread and toste it well till it be almost
brent than put it in that lycoure and let it lye there in till it be well
soked, than put it in to his nose and rub his lyppes, gummes, teeth and temples
therwyth and bind it to the pulse veins of his arms. and let the pacyent
eat the moystnes that is left and swalowe it in. For to cleanse the mother,
take the tender croppes of Myntes and seth them in water or wine and plaster
it to the share, and to the raynes against the cogelyng in a woman's breast take
the small stalks of mine eyes and sethe them in wine oil and plaster it
about ye tetes Also be it known that when any medicine should be given a
gaynste venym it should be given with the joyce of myntes for myntes have a
manner of strength of drawing out of venym, or else it shulde be with wine that
myntes hath bensodden in, for stopping of the splen and the liver and of the
ways of the vryne of a cold humour and of a hot without Fever, Take the
joyce of myntes alone, or myntes soden in wine, or the joyce of myntes meddled
with honey, and give it to the pacyent. To slay worms in the belly, take the
joyce of myntes and drink it, thou shalt be hole Also ye joyce of myntes
flees worms in thy ears. For a tetter take the joyce of myntes and put
thereto brimstone and vynegre and meddle them well together, anoynte the tetter
therwyth and thou shalt be hole. For a wound in the head, stamp mintes and
lay the on the wound. c. For payne in the side take myntes and seth them in
old wine or ale with it stamp.xviii. grains of Pepper and drink it in the
night, there be but little difference between this mynte and the romayne
mynte, this is the guard mynte.

N. littera
et primo de nux muscata.
NUtmygge is hot dry in the.ii. degre, ye best grows in inde and in the
time of his ripinge, it is gathered and.vii. year it may be kept, they that
be plain heavy after their kind be best to be chosen. Also when they be
broken they fall not to powder, but they have a sweet and sharpe savour, if
they lack any of these aforesaid, they be not good for medecynes, he has
virtue of comfortynge by his sweet savour, or coldness and feblenes of
degestyon of the stomach, take in the morning half a Nutmige or a hole
Nutmegge and eat it. Also for a cold stomach that is feeble of degestyon and
for the liver give him wine that the Nutmegs is boiled in. Also for the same
boyle Nutmegs, and Mastyke i wine and drink it, this is good for the
deseases in the stomach, and in the bowels to break in wind. Also in the
recoueryng of a syckenes to coforte the spyrytual mebres boil Nutmegs and
mastike in wine and drink it. Also take a Nutmeg and smell to it, and it will
coforte the spyrytuall members.

Napo.
This is named Nauewe, it desires ground that is fattye, and sandy, it
growethe best in such ground. The property of the Nauewes is he changes
and turns into rape, and after that it turns into nauewe. The best do
grow in ground well doged and turned Also it proves weil in places that
stuble of corn hath been in y^ same year. If they grow to thycke pluck some
up here and there, so that the other may prove yt better and those that ye
pluck up set the in void places. They shulde be sown in the end of Iulye
and in Auguste, the best savoured Nauewes be they yt be lunge strayghte and not
over great nor branches in the roots, bu^ a straight root, Also of Nauewes
may be made a passing good meat with a little salt and vyneger, honey and
mustard and with sweet spices and it may be made without spices Nauewes be
hot in the second degre and they noryshe much, but they be hard of degestion,
they make the flesh soft wyndy but less wynd than rapes. Therefore when ye
seth them in water, cast that water away, and seth them in another water and so
his hard substance is tempered by that, and so menely between good and euell
they engeder noryshig, for they that be thus sodden be not harde of degestyon,
they make one wyndye, and they make stoppynge of veins and of poores but yet
they be profytable if they be sodden twyse and both the waters to be caste
away, they to be sodden with the third with fat flesh.

Hic incipit littera.O.
et primo de Olibano.
OLibanum is called Frankesence, This is hot and dry in the.iii. degre, it is
gum of a tree in Inde, the cleneste is the best Also there be trees of that
kind growing in Bama^ke, but not so clear nor good, for it is darker of
colour, therefore it is to be refused in medecin, it hath virtue of
comfortinge by his sweet savour Also of closing and costraynyng for the
tothache that comes of superfluyte of humours of the head and specially by
the veins, make a plaster of powder of frakensence with wine the white of an
egg, meddle them together and plaster them about the templ^s, Also to stop
the ways of the veins above, take Frankincense and chew it well in thy
mouth and that shall stop and let the flux of humours coming down to the
nostrils. Take pills of frakensece swalow them down in the morning, then
boyle frankincense in wine and at eve dryncke that when thou go to bed.
Also these py^les be good to help the degestyon of the stomach, and good
against sore bolkinges. Also to the confortynge and clensynge of the Meryce,
and helping of conception in y^ receyuynge the fume of frakensece bynethe.
Also boyle powder of it in wine and when it is me^ely warm dip a cloth in it
and lay it so warm to the share of the pacyent, and greatly it comfort the
Matrice.

Hic incipit littera.P.
Et primo de Pruna.
AL plumines be cold moyste, some be white some be black some be red. They
that be black and some what harde be the best, they be called Damsons, and
when they be ripe gather the and slet them spring Uyneger upon them, and so
they may be kept^ in a vessel of wood a year, and first when they be cu^
they must be laid in the son.xv days to dry, these Damsons have virtue of
coldness and clensyng of the inward parts wherefore they be good in fevers that
be sharpe for costyfenes of the belie that comes of drynes or of Colorike
humours dryenge, if it be new give it him to eat, if it be dry boyle it in
water give ye pacyente to drink thereof, this is good for the Fever tertian,
for stoppynge of the liver, for the yaundes and sharpe fevers it soteth the
belly, it is good for defaute of appetite, and for many other deseases.

Pepper.
This is called Pepper, it is hot and dry in the.iiii. degre. There be three
manners of Pepper. Black white, and lunge. Diascorydes and Constantyne says
that they be fruit of tres growing in Inde and some say that Pepper is made
black with brennynge in the fire for when it is gathered there be a great
multitude of serpetes about it, therefore they put it in the fire to brenne the
serpents yt be about it, the Sarysyns dry it in an ove because it shall not
encrese in another land. But of al the Pepers, the black is the best and the
most wholesome. Take pepper and put it in to the nosethrylles it will make the to
nese, and sethe pepper and figs in wine and drink it, and it will cleanse the
spyritual members of tough humours, and it is good for the pose that is taken
of cold. Also for the same eat powder of pepper with figs. Also powder of
pepper put in a man meat comfort the degestion of ye stomach also put log
pepper i a roasted apple and eat it, and it shall comfort the degestyon. Also
powder of Pepper will freate away dead flesh or proud flesh, lunge, Pepper
coforteth more tha black. Also black Pepper hath virtue of losing,
comfortynge, and of drawing, i^ cleanses the spyrytual members of cold flewme
vicious humours and best when the powder of it is eat with figs for he hath
great strength of heatinge and comfortynge the stomach provoking appetite,
but to Sanguyne and Colorike persos, it is not good to use pepper, for it dries
breneth blode and it engenders leprye and other evil syckenes. Plato says
that Pepper is foul to se in syghte, with out black, within with a sharpe
savour and a sweet odour, little in quantyte and much in virtue.

Pympernell.
This herb is good to heal woudes and to destroy venym, and to heal a postume
and sore eyes.

Pulegium.
This is named Puleol royal it is hot and dry in the.iii. degre In the time
of flowering it shulde be gathered, and it may be kept in his virtue a year,
when it shall be used in medecynes, take ye leues with the flowers and strype
them fro the stalk, and it has virtue of losing and consumynge, for ye cold
humours in ye head take powder of it and hete it well in a Skellet, and al hot
bind it to the greuance without any lycoure. Also for a great cold taken in
the head, and for a tough humour or a watery humour make a garg^rysme, sethe
^ulyoll royal ^rye figs in a tart vyneger, take a good sponful thereof as
hot as ye may suffer it, and hold it in thy mouth till it be almost cold,
than put it out and take as much more, and do so three or.iiii. times and that
shall purge thy head well of flewme. also sethe it in wine and drink it and it
is good for the desease of the stomach guts, and for cold causes, or for
wind in the stomach. Also it is good for tough flewme in the breast, if thou
take powder of it, and meddle it with claryfied honey and make a lectuarye thereof
and use to eat thereof, or take the herb thereof boyle it with wine, honey or
water and use to drink thereof. Also for the black colour drink y^ joyce of
it, or boyle it with wine thou shalt be hole. Also for a itchynge boil, lay
this herb in water, and use to wasshe the ytchynge therein warm thou shalt be
hole. Also for ache take this herb al grene and stamp it plaster it to the
ache and it will ease it. Also against the cough boyle this herb in wine and
drink it luke warm and this will make one to pysse well. For the desease in
the belly stamp this herb with comyn and water and lay it hot to the navel
and lightly it shall be hole, for the diseases in ye liver stamp this herb
and temper it with water and vinegar and drink the joyce thereof, and thou
shall be hole. For an ache in ye legs or arms take the leues of elders Pulioll
royal of every like much and stamp them together well and plaster it to the
greuannce, and it is good for ye fever tercian, if thou take the branches of
this herb wrap it in a good locke of wolle and give it to the pacyent and
let him smell thereto, before the fever come on him, and that shall do hi great
ease. For the head ache take this herb bind it fast round about thy head and
anon it ceasethe the ache. Also if a woman have a dead child in her womb
stamp this herb and give her to drink with old wine, and she shall be
delivered of it, by the grace of God.

For the cramp drink the joyce with vyneger fasting and it will put it away.

Pencedanum vel Feniculus porcinus.
This herb is call maysh Hogs fenel or maiden wed this herb is hot and
dry in the.iii. degre when this herb is gathered for medecynes the root is
better than the herb when the rotes be gathered they may be kept all a year,
it hath a purging virtue, it is good for the strangulyo or the flyxe and good
for stoppynge of the spleen the liver, boyle this herb in wine or water and
give it to the paciete to drink. Also sethe it in oil and wine and plaster
it to the share it will help the strangulion or the flix. Also the same
plaster is good for hardness of the splen it molyfieth that. Also against the
cold humours of the spyrytuall members give him to drink water with barley and
this herb sodden to gyther and if it be a fervent cold humour than sethe the
Barley and the herb in wine, and give it to the pacyete to drink with
Lycoryce.

Petrocilium.
This is called perslye, this is hot and moist in the third degre It
multyplyeth greatly man blode and doth away the Tysyke, it helps well to
destroy the Fever tertian, it is good for the side and the dropsy, it
comfort the heart and the stomach, and it is good in potage and to stop
chyckens.

Peritorium.
This herb is called peritory it is hot and dry, ye virtue of this herb is
thus. If a man have an evil stomach or else akynge within him, take this herb
and sethe it in thy potage and eat thereof and thou shalt do well. Also this
herb is good to heal one of the stone, if he be bathed with it.

Pastinaca.
This is called a perseneppe, it is hot and moyste in the second degre. There
be two manner of persneppes, the one is the Persneppe of the garden, and the
other is the wild persneppe. They be more used to meat tha to medicine his
virtue is to engedre thycke blod much, wherefore it styrreth the lust of the
body if it be much used therefore it is good for ama that is newly recovered out
of his great sykenes to use to eat of it a while. Also they be good to be
eaten raw or sodden for y^ melacoly humours grene and not dry. To make a
serope to stir the lust of the body and for to comfort the, degestyon take
roots of Parsneppes sethe them well in water, tha take them o^t and caste away
the water, and the rotes that be in gobbets, boyle the again i water tha put
thereto honey well clarifyed and let them boyle unto the thyckenes of honey, and
continually styre it, that it cleue not to the vessel and in the mydle of the
boylynge, put in almondes if ye have them, in the end of the boylynge, put in
gynger, galengale, and a little pepper nutmegs other sweet savoured spices.
Also Parsneppes may be so wen in December, Ianuarye, and March, in fat ground
deep doluen and lose groude and best dug, and they be somewhat wyndye. Boyle
them in two waters but caste away the first water. Also there is Parseneppes
that is somewhat red, the which may be eaten both raw soden, with the and
Nauewes to gyther ye may make a very good meat and fair and rede in colour
the which be sodden as Parsneppes be.

Plantago.
This is called Plantaine, it is cold and dry in the.ii. degre, for head ache
take Plantayne bind it about thy neck, the ache shall go out of thy head. Also
for deseases in the body, sethe this herb in good lycour what ye will and use
to drink it and it shall cleanse the maw the other inwards. Also for him yt
bledeth at the nose give him to drink the joyce of it and it shall cease
lightly. Also if ye body of any man be wexen hard. stamp this herb with greece
and make a plaster of it lay it on the hardness and lightly it shall be soft
and make it hole. Also for biting of a serpet, take this herb and drink it
with wine. Also for the desease in the mouth take the joyce of this herb hold
it long in thy mouth and eat the leaves of this he^b for him that may not well
pysse sethe this herb and drink it. Also for a rotten humour in the breast
and about the heart take the joyce of this herb the wayght of.x. d. and meddle
it with honey and give him to eat a sponfull at one time and that shall purge
the breast, for ache in the r^te take this herb with vyneger and drink it.
Also it heleth wounds and cleseth the filth out of wounds. Also it swadgeth
ran kelynge and staunchethe the mencyons both with drink and with players
made with powder of Armoniake and of sandragoune and Barley meddled with the white
of eggs made in a plaster laid to ye sore for the Canker and the payne in the
gumes, take the joyce thereof and meddle it with honey and vyneger and powder of
Alume and that shall slay the Canker in the mouth. Also for the fevers,
stamp.iii. Rotes of Plantayne, tempre it with water and give it him to drink
that hath the fevers and he shall be hole, for the Iaundes stamp Platayne and
Lettyse together temper them with vyneger and make a plaster there of and lay
it to thy right side use it till thou be hole, and it is good for the bytyng of
an adder, drink ye joyce of it lay the substance of the herb to the sore,
for the same hang the rote of plantayne about the neck of the patient and
marvelously it helps, for the potager, and for the disease in y^ synowes
stape the leues of it with a little salt and plaster it well thereto, and
marvelously it helps.

Portum.
This is called a leke, it is hot and dry in the.ii. degre, it desyrethe lou^e
ground and fat and well duged in that they shall best profit in hot places
and teperate. They may be sown in Decembre in temperate places cold. They
may be sown in January, February Marche, when the ground is well dug and
dyghte, and it may be sown by it self or meddled with other sedes of herbs in
good fat ground well dug and turned above it with good doge, this sede
would be sown somewhat thycke and when they be somewhat sprog take up the
greatest lekes plant them in forowes, but take a way none of their root when
ye set the in ye forowes, but when ye set them with a dyble, than cut a way
the rotes almost up to the leke head away the uppermost of the leues they may
be planted in Iulie, Auguste, September October, they be much profitable in
March, and in Apryll next following, but in your plantynge you shall not seek
after fate soft ground for menely groude that is best that groude that is
almost dry is best, there is two manner at setting of lekes, one is in
forowes, as is the manner in Bonony and the forowe must be fro the other a
span large, and the lekes mast be set in the forowe iiii. fyngers breed each
fro other, when ye mnke next forowe caste the earth on the lekes and tread it
down softly with thy foot. The ii. manner is thus when the ground is well dug
raked than make holes with a great dyble every hole fro other a large spa more
i which the lekes must be set in, but fill not thy holes nor put earth on the
but let the be void, iii. weeks when wedes grow among them pull them up keep
the clean fro wedes. Diverse auctours say that the Lekes that be thus planted
be better tha any other, or they may be well plated among great onyons when
the onyons be taken away, wed the leke and you shall find them fair and
good and when ye pluck up, leave some in a place, leave some for sede, y^ which
sede may be kept iii. year, and it be hanged up in the hulles, Lekes be best
soden, or.iii. times washed before they be eat. For a woude take lekes and
stamp them well with honey, and lay it to the wound, and it will heal it, for
the cough take ye joyce of lekes use to drike it, for y^ same take ye joyce of
lekes meddle it with womans milk and use to drink it, it will cleanse the lunges
of al vices.

Fracturas sotidat duritiasque relaxat.
vulnusque appositum ceto cu sale claudit.

Diretrum.
This is called Pellyter, it is hot dri in ye.iii. degre, the rote is used in
medecynes, five year he may be kept in his virtue, know ye well y^ hs sharpnes is
not know, it should be powned hold in ye mouth, He hath virtue of losig drawig
of cosumig. To make a gargarisme take pelleter figs boyle the i vyneger or
sweet wine it will clese y^ brain of superflute of flume also if it be chewed in
ye mouth it helps ye palsy in ye tongue. Also for ye Palsye podagar stape it
sethe it in wine oil plaster it to the greuace this plaster helps much
therefore if thou may have grene peliter stape it lay it soking i wine xv. days,
after boil it well put thereto wax oil for this is ye best ointment for al ye
foresaid desease

Papauer.
This is called Popy, it is cold and dry, There is two manners of them. The
white Popye is cold and moyste and it is good to cause one to sleep. The sede
thereof well gathered may be kept ten year, it hath virtue of clensyng. It is
put in medecynes with a determynacyon as the sede may be received of white
popy or black. For to provoke a slepe^ make ye a plaster of each of them or
one of them with woman's milk and the white of an egg and lay it to the
temples. The woman of Salerne gave to yonge chyldred the popye but they would
give them no black popye for it made them to much heavy. Also for a hot
postume in the beginning and for chafynge of the liver take the sede of white
popye or else the herb of it and stamp it and meddle it with oil of Roses and
plaster it to ye greuauce. Also for drynes in fever e^yke, and in other fevers
take hete oil of violet meddled with powder of poppye sede, and annoynte the
small of the back therwyth.

Pollipodium.
This is called pollipodye, it is hot in the.iiii. degre and dry in the
second degre. This Pollypodye is fern that grows upon Oaks or on walls, or
stones but the pollypodye that growethe on oaks is the best. Gather the rotes
of it and lay it a day in the son, chose that is grene, and that which
appears dry when it is broken it is to be refused, he hath virtue of
dissolving of drawing of purging flewme specially melancholy, wherefore communely
he is put in boylynge and to sleumatyke and melancolyous hole men, he is given
to preserve their health, and know well that in ye boylynge of pollypody should
be put in some thing to exclude put out ventuosyte as Anyse sede fenell sede,
or Comin or else al these a foresaid sedes for they exclud out much wynd and
vnbynde the humours. Also for the E^tidian and for Ilica passio and to keep a
man health, do thus stamp half an uncle of polypody or an uncle if ye will
have it much laxatyue, than boyle it with Prunes nnd vyolettes in Fenell water
or Anyse, in a great quantyte than strain it and give it the pacyente at
morning and evening. Also stape it sethe it in water with Fenell sede and with
water, make a broth with a chekin therein with sweat savoured spices give ye pacyet
to eat. Also make a drink thereof after this manner stap it boyle it i wine
after put mor wine thereto and so make up your drink with sweet savoured spices

Pionium.
This is called Pyony, it is hot and dry in the second degre, so saith
Ypocras Galyen the good philosophers, they say that ye root thereof grows to
divers medecynes and it will last ten years, and it is cold for the palsy,
dry the rote and drink powder with Caster sodden in wine. Also the same is
good for the Stone. Also if a man be costyue and may not goo to the draught,
take and strowe the powder thereof on Cotton and put it in to his foundement,
and drink ye powder in white wine. Also for a man or woman that hath the
falling evil eat it and drink it in wine. Also hang the rote about his
neck and it will save him without doubt within.xv. days. Also it helps
the sores in the mouth. Also if thou sethe it in wine, it helps the spleen.
Also drink Pyony with water honey and do thereto powder of Colyander and this is
good for the stomach, for the mylte and for gravel in the raynes. Also it is
good for women for diverse deseases, Also sethe it in white wine and give a
woman to drink thereof it will heal her bledder make her to peace the stone,
and it will heal her of the Marris. Also Pyony sede when it is black it makes
delyueraunce of the bed of the child in her wobe and at every time when he
shall use to drink it, she must drink xv. sedes an time.

Q. Littera.
Et primo de Qui^quefolia.
QUynckfolie is cold dry i ye second degre, this herb is good for ache in a
man limbs for ache of ye head, mouth, tongue, and throat, that be sore, take
sethe this herb in wine give the pacyent to drink thereof three days, first
and last and he shall be hole. Also stamp it, and drink the joyce of it in ale
it will cease the akynge and ye gnawynge of a man or woman. Also if a man blede
sore at the nose, give him to drink the joyce of it with wine, and anoynte his
head well with the joyce of this heath, and anon the blood shall stanch. For
to sle a Canker, seth it in wide and the greece of a swine and make a plaster
thereof and lay it on the Canker and it shall sle it, Also take powder of
quyncke foil and meddle it with honey and there with rub thy mouth, tongue, and
throat, and the chekes within and it will purge it well. Also for poison and
bitynge of a serpent take the joyce of ye Quynckefoyle, and drink it with
wine merueloslye it resysteth venym.

Hic incipit littera.R.
and first of Rybeworte.
RYbeworte is good for ye fever quartayne, take the joyce of this herb and
drink it two hours before ye think the disease shall come to you and by ye
grace of God it shall go from you.

Rednetle.
Take Red Netels, and stape the small sethe the in an earthen pot with a
porcyon of white wine till half be wasted, and give the pacyent to drink first
and last warm, and lay the herbs to the foudemet, as hot as the pacyent may
suffer it, and use this medicine till he be hole.

Rosa.
This is the red Rose, it is cold in the first degre and dry in the second
degre. Dry roses and grene roses be used in medecynes, and of grene roses be
made many confeccions. Also dry roses be put in medecynes, when a receyte of
roses is made, for they be soon made in powder of roses is made Mell roset,
Sugar roset, syrop of Roses alectuary of Roses, water of Roses and oil of
roses. Mell roset is made thus, take fair purified honey, new red roses the
white ends of the clipped away than chop them small and put them into the
honey and boil them menely together, to know when it is boiled enough, ye
shall know it by the sweet odor and the colour ruff Five years he may be
kept in his virtue, by the roses he hath virtue of cofortyng, by the honey he
hath virtue of clesynge. In winter in somer, it may be given competently to
feeble sick slumatyke melancholy, and Colorike people^ also Mulsa is made of
water and mell roset, and it may be give after the iii. day yt it comes out of
the bath for to cleanse toe stomach of cold humour give him mel roset with water
that fenell sede is boiled in putting therein.iii. grains of salt, if the
sick may take it this should be the quantyte of roses and honey. In.vii. pound
of honey put a poude of Roses, Sugar roset is made thus. Take new gathered
Roses and stamp them right small with Sugar than put it in a glass and xxx.
days let it stand in the son and stir it well and meddle it well together
so it may be kept three years in his virtue. The quantyte of Sugar Roses
shulde be thus in.iiii. pound of Sugar a pound of Roses, he hath virtue of
costraynynge and comforting of the flux in the women. Take Sugar roset and
powder of Mastyke of every one a drame, and meddle the well together and give it
to the sick oft, than give him rosewater that Mastyke and cloves be sodden in.
Syrope of Roses is made thus, some do take roses dyght, as it is before said
and boyle them i water, and in the water strained they put Sugar and make a
syrope thereof, and some do make it better for they put roses in a vessel having
a straight mouth they put to the roses hot water, and they let it stand a day
and a night and of that water putting to it Sugar they make syrop and some do
put more of roses in the foresaid vessel more of hot water, and let it stand
as is before said and so they make a reed water, and make thereof a syrope. And
some do stamp new Roses and then strain out the joyce of it and Sugar
therwyth they make syrope and this is the best making of syrope know it well
that syrope made of fresshe and new Roses, first somewhat meanli they laxe, in
ye end they bind, but syrope made of dry Roses first and last they bind
Syrope of Roses hath virtue of comfortynge and constraynyng against the flux of
the wobe and the vomyte, give it to him with rain water or with rose water in
a fever. After letting of blod give it him with cold water. Also the same for
the Sincopyne. Oil of roses is made thus, some boyle Roses in oil and keep
it. Some do fill a glass with Roses oil and they boyle it in a caudron full
of water this oil is good, some stamp fresh roses with oil and they put it
in a vessel of glass, and set it in the son x. days and this oil is good
against chafyng of the liver, if it be anointed therewyth. Also it is good for
ye desease in the head that comes of hete, anoint the forehead and the temples
with oil of roses. The water of Roses hath virtue of comforting and
constraynynge against the flux of the wobe and vomyte. Also give him Rosewater
boiled with Mastyke and cloves it is best against the flux and feblenes of
virtue, if it come of a flux by a sharp medicine. Also rose water is good for
the Syncopyne and the Cardiacle give it hi to drink spring the water on his
face and y^ water is good for eyes and in oyntmetes for the face, for it takes
away the wemmes and the superfluyte and strayneth not the skin. Also dry
Roses put to the nose to smell do comfort the brain and the herb and
quenches the spyryte. Also against the flux of the womb of colour give him
Roses boiled in rain water. Also a plaster made of roses and the white of an
egg and vyneger dyp a sponge in it and lay it on the mouth of the stomach
against the syncopyne, give him to drink water that roses have ben boiled in,
and give him powder of roses in a rear egg to make oil of roses, take.ii. li.
of oil a.li. and an half of roses and put all in a glass, and put the glass in
a Caud^ron full of water and hang it therein and boyle it till the third part
be wasted, and after strain it thorough a linen cloth keep it for your use,
for this oil is losing and serves for many things. Some do put rose water in
a glass and they put roses with there dew thereto, they make it to boyle in
water, than they set it in the son till it be reed, and this waier is best,
this has virtue of comfortynge and constraynynge and for the flux of the
womb, and against the vomyt.

Rosemary.
This herb is hot and dry, take the flowers and put them in a linen clothe
and so boyle them in fair clean water to the half and cool it, drink it for
it is mouch worth against all evils in the body. Take the flowers and make
powder thereof and bind it to the right arm in a lynen cloth and it shall make
y^ linght and merry Also eat ye flowers with honey fasting with sower bread
there shall rise in the none evil swellynges. Also take the flouers and put
them in a chest among your clothes, or among books and moughtes shall not
hurt the, boyle ye flowers in gotes milk and tha let the stand al a night
under the air fair covered after y^ give him to drink thereof that hath the
tysyke it shall deliver hi, boyle the leues in white wine and wassh thy face
therewith thy beard and thy brows there shall honorne grow out, and thou shall
have a fair face. Put the leues under thy beds head thou shall be delivered of
al euel dremes, Break the leaves small to powder and lay them on a caker and it
shall sle it. Take the leues and put them into a vessel of wine and it shall
preserve it fro tartnes and euel savour, and if thou sell that wine thou
shalt have good luck in the sale. If thou be feeble with vnkynely sweet, take
and boyle the leaves in clean water and when the water is cold, do thereto as
much of white wine, and tha make therein soppes eat well thereof, and thou
shall recover appetyde. If thou have the flux byole the leaves in strong
Aysell and bind them in a lynen clothe and bind it to the womb and anon ye
flu^e shall withdraw. If thy legs be blown with the gout, boyle the leues in
water, and than take the leaves and bind them in a lynnen clothe about thy
legs and it shall do the good. Take the leues and boyle the ^n strong Aysel
and bind them in a clothe to thy stomach, it shall deliver the of all evils,
If thou have the cough, drink the water of the leaves boiled in white wine,
and it will heal the Take the rynde of Rosemary and make powder thereof and
drink it for the pose and it shall help the, Take the tember thereof and brene
it to coals and make powder thereof and than put it in a lynen clothe, rub thy
teeth therewith, and if her be any worms therein it shall sle the keep thy
teeth fro evils. Also make the a box of the wod smell to it and it shall
preserve thy youth. Also pu^ thereof in thy doors or in thy house and thou
shalt be without danger of adoers and other venomous serpents. Make the a
barrel thereof and drink thou of the drink that stands therein and thou need
not to fear no poison that shall hurt the and if thou set it in thy gardyn keep
it honestli for it is much profytable. Also if a man have lost his smelling of
the air, or else he may not draw his breath make fire of the wood take his
breath therwyth and give it hi to ease and he shall be hole.

Ruta.
This is called Few, this is hot and dry in the.ii. degre, the leues and the
sedes be used in medecynes ye sedes may be kept ten year and the leues a year,
he hath virtue of purging, dissoluynge and consumynge, for the head ache take
ye joyce of few and hete it and put it into his nosethrylle for it purges out
fleum and cleanses the brain, the joyce soden with wine is good for the same.
For feblenes of sight put Few in a pot with ale and let the patient use to
drink of it. For stoppynge of the splen and liver, the stranguri the flux,
seth Few in wine with roots of Fenell, or powder of Few, with the joyce of
Fenell, and drink it warm. Also for and ache or fretyng, stape Few with
powder of Comin and plaster it to the greuaunce. Also against venym, drink
ye joyce of Few. For bytynge of venomous best or worm, plaster Few to ye
bytynge. For feblenes of eye sight styll water of Few, and roses, together and
put thereof in your eyes Also an oyntmet for sore eyes, stape Few and Fenell
together of yche like much by weight and meddle the with honey, and Eufrose and
it is good oymente for eyes. Take Few, Comyn, and Pepper, of yche like much by
weight, and grynde them small to gyther and meddle them with honey and veneger
and it is good for the ache in ye breast and in the raynes.

Hic incepit liriera. S.
Et primo de Sinapio.
SImapum is called mustard, it is hot and dry, in the meddle of the.iii.
degre, and not the herb, but the sede, is put in medecynes. Five year he may
be kept in his virtue. He hath virtue losing, of drawing, of making thine,
and of consumynge. For the palsy of the toge take and chew the sede in your
mouth, and hold it under the toge and it shall do you good. Also for the
Palsye in other members sethe the sede in wine and lay it to the sore place
and is best in the beginning of the disease. Also take the powder of it, and
put it into your nostrils and it will make you to nese and it cleanses the
brain and superfluite flume. Also sethe it in wine and figs hold it warm
in your mouth till it be al most cold tha take as much and do so.v. or.vi.
times a day as much another day this is good for an old pose of chough and
flumy humour in the the head Also for stopping of the splen and the liver sethe
the sede in water with rotes of Fenel, than strain it and put thereto honey and
give it to the sick to drink. For hardness of the sple sethe the herb of it
in wine plaster it to the greuaunce for to ripe and break a postume, stamp
this herb well with hogs greece and lay it to the postume. Also for
Strangury take the herb of this and sethe it in oil and wine and plaster it
to the greuance, and it will louse it. Also for the Ciaticaand for other old
sores take mustard sede and the third part of cromes of white breed, and
figs, honey, and vinegar, after as the ach of the sore requires the more of
ye figs and the honey that is there the more sharper is the strength of the
sede, and the more bread and vinegar that is in it, the more weker is the sede,
but I say not yt ye shall put this confection to al sores but to great and old
sores. His virtue if if he be eaten it sharpeth a man wit, it cleanses the
belly, it breketh the stone it purges the vryne menstrosite, and comfort the
stomach.

Smalage.
Take Smalage sede Few sede, Pepper and salt and grynde them well together and
tempre the with wine and drink it, for it is good for cold and wicked humours
in the stomach and comfort the stomach the liver and the lunges, it is good
for wounds. For rankelynge and to cease the brennynge and akinge, and to
bring them to their kind again. Also it is good to drink for the fever
tercian.

Saluia.
Sage is hot in the first degre and dry in the second degre the leues only
be taken in medecynes both grene and dry, he may be kept a year, there be two
manners of Sages, the garden and ye wild Sage, if thou wilt have Sage in for
medecynes take ye leues of garden Sage, for that cosumeth more and comfort
more tha the other doth. For the palsy, sethe the leues of sage i wine use to
drike it. For the same sethe ye leues i wine plaster it to ye greuauce, also
it is good to put in sauce, for the strangury, ye flux, the matrice it
cleanses, sethe the leues in water let the patient set over it receive ye hot
fume of it and it shall do him much good. Also it is good for venym or poison,
sethe Sage in ale or wine and use to drink it.iii. days and thou shalt be
hole, bi ye grace of god. for the stomach drink ye joyce of sage with water
and honey, it is good to cleanse a man body to use it both ripe and grene,
it will make a manes body clean, therefore who that uses to eat of this
herb, or drink it, it is marvel that any inconuenyence shulde grieve them
that use it, If ye have an ytchinge on you, wasshe it well with ye joyce of this
herb it shall slay ytchyng. Also drink sage with wine a little worm wode and
it shall cease the ache under the sides, the wobe and the stomach, it is good
for the palsy and dropsy.

Sytureia.
This is called Sauery, it is hot and dry in the.iiii. degre, sethe it in wine
or water, and dryncke it and it purges the raynes, ye bladder, the
menstruosyte in the bowels, it purges the lunges, and loses great humours
and compellethe and puts him out by the mouth by spytynge, therefore he is
brennynge and styrrethe him that uses lechery, therefore it is forbyde to use
it much in meates. Soak it in vyneger or wine and drink it and it shall make
the have a meke stomach. Also when it flowereth it should be gathered and dried
powder made thereof. Also take ye powder of sauery boil it with clarified honi
use to eat thereof, or boil it in wine, drink it, and it will lose cough flum
in ye breast. Also for fretynge in thy belly drink powder of it in warm wine
and thou shall be hole. Also if ye take the less sauery it hath the same virtue
strength that the other Sauery hath. Also make grewell with water and fluwer,
and powder of Sauery eat thereof that shall cleanse all ye spiritual members of
a man.

Saxfrage.
This is hot and dry in the.iii degre, for the stone, sethe the rote of it in
wine and drink it. Also it is good for the desease of the colyke the
strangury, and the powder of it be eat with an egg, it is good for the same.
It may be keep in his virtue.iii. year.

Scabiosa.
This is called Scabias, it is hot and dry in the.iii. degre, to dri it there
is no profit in it, for scabs take joyce of it, Uyneger and oil, and boyle
them to gyther till they we^e thycke, and keep it for it is good for scabs.
For the Emerawdes sethe them in water, than set over it and take the flume of
it and use it thou shall be hole, stape it and sethe it wine that drink, is good
to dystroy humours in the stomach, and drink it every day fasting with Eurose
thou shal^ be hole, and thou shall never have the pestilence bredynge within
the while thou do use it. For the lever stamp it and sethe it in wine and
drink it.

Sothernwode.
This herb is good for the cough and for biting in the belly and in the
breast, and for disease in the bones, and good for the that may not well pysse
take the sede of this herb and stamp it and drink it with water, it is good
for all the aforesaid. Also for the desseases i the side, stamp this herb
with Betayne and drink it and it helps well. Also for the bytyng of a serpet
and for venym, stape this herb and drink it with wine, and it is good. Also
for the cold fever stamp this herb with wine and drnycke it and thou shalt
be hole.

Syngrene.
This is cold and moyste in the third degre ye joyce of this herb and also
the same herb is right necessary for many deseases, stamp this herb with
greece and plaster it to the desease marvelously it helps. For desease and
darkness of eyes, stamp this herb and put of the joyce in ye sore eyes For
chafyng of the liver take the joyce of it and vyneger dyppe a cloth therein, and
plaster it to the greuaunce. For bytynge or scalding make an ointment of the
joyce of this herb and oil of Roses, and wax, but lay it not to till after
the three first days, but first anoint it with greece and such other. Also for
a disease of a hot cause this herb is good to be laid thereto.

Stycheworte.
This is called Stycheworte or birollog this is hot moist i ye first degre, ye
virtue of this herb is, it is good to heal woudes sore eis

Scamony.
Scamony is hot and dry in the.iii. degre ye leues only be best in
medecenes it may be kept a year in his virtue or two for need. For the disease
in the stomach boyle leues of it in wine, drink it. Also the aforesaid drink
is good for ye belly, for the strangury, and flux. Also astewe made with boiling
of it i water, or wine is good for y^ for said, if it be boiled in oil
plaster it to ye aforsayd, for it is better.

Scene.
Scene is hot dry in the.iiii. degre, it grows in y^ other side y^ see and
most about Babylon: the best be the flowers and the branches of it, It is
good for many deseases as the falling euell: for ye Sinacop, for ye splen, for
the Emerawdes, and for the quartayne, syrop made of it boiled in water and
sugar, is good for al the aforesaid. Syrop made with the joyce of Borage is
good for the foresaid. Also D^ascorides comaundeth to make Exmel of the
aforesaid with boylyng of vyneger and honey and it will be good for the
aforsayd, And this herb may be kept ten year.

Selondyne.
This is hot and dry in the.iiii. degre, Galen says yt it is good for sore
eyes, take ye joyce of selondyne and boyle them well together in a pan when it
is cold anoint the eyes therewith. Take Selodine and wryng out the joyce meddle
it with white wine and anoynte thy visage therewith it shall do away frekeles of
y^ visage, ye joyce of selondine gotes dog meddled to gyther small in a mortar,
tha if you lay it to a caker in a woman's pap, it shall sle the caker. Also take
ye joyce of selodyne powder of brimstone and meddle them well together it will
help to do away ye Morphew And sethe the rote in wine, when ye pot is take
down let hi hold his mouth open over it yt the breath my go into his body, that
shall slay ye canker in the mouth, it is good for him yt hath drunken venym with
his own stale that will save him

Sauayne.
This is hot and dry in the second degre, it is good to slay worms in the
womb and to brige the out if it be soden in wine given to the pacyet to
drink. It is good with butter or grease to make an ointment for ye scabbe that
reneth to heal it dry it up, and it is good for the head ache, if it be stamped
and tempered with Uyneger and make a plaster thereof and lay it in the temples
and upon the mould of thy hende.

Scabiose.
This is cold and moyste in the ii. degre, stamp it and sethe it in wine and
that drink is good for the liver. And it will destroy wicked humours in the
stomach, and drink it every day fasting with Eurose thou shalt never have
postume bredinge within the as loge as thou dost use this medicine.

Littera.T.
Et primo de Tapsu ba^basto.
This is called Molen, it is cold and dry. It is good for the Emerawdes it be
sodden in wine and scommed clean. Also it is good to wasshe the greuaunce
therewith, it is good Also for the flux in the belly.

Town crosses.
This herb is hot and dry in the.iii. degre, the sede will endure good five
year. It is good to stauche the flux the mention, if thou take the sede and
bruise it in a mortar of brase give the sike to drink thereof three days every
day penny weight at ons with reed wine warmed and i those three days he shall be
stauched, or else he shall dye, of that evil, it is good for the palsi and for
the male flank, take ye sede and sethe it with wine do it in a poket bind it
to the side there as y^ greuaunce is. Also it is good for hi yt may not well
peace, take yt sede seth it i wine oil olyue bind it to thy share. It is good
for a manes fundamet y^ goes out, if it be take of cold, tha it must be put in
again and straw ye powder on the fundament thy rain with Honey and than
strowe the powder above with the powder of Come or powder of Calafyne, for al
these be kidly for it. Also take the stalks of town Crosses, and brenne them
and there shall no venomous beast no worm abide the savour nor smell thereof
but he shall dye or fly awai

Littera.U.
Et primo de herba Uiole.
VIolet is cold in the first degre, and moist in the second. For blast in
the eyes, take ye rotes of Uiolettes and stamp them with Myrre Saffron and at
night lay it to ye sore eyes. Also for wound in the head stamp the leues of
Uiolettes with honey and vyneger, and plaster it to the wound and it shall bele
it. And for them that may not sleep for syckenes sethe this herb in water and
at eve let him soak well his fete in the water to the ankles, when he goes to
bed bind of this herb to his temples he shall sleep well bi ye grace of God.
Take Uiolettes Myrre and Saffron, make a plaster and lay to the sore eyes
that be swollen and it shall cease akynge bate the swellynge.

Uua suauis.
This is called the sweet Raysen, it is hot and moist it hath virtue of
clensynge, scouring or smothynge. Raysens eaten or boiled in wine is good for
ye cold cough Sethe them in wine and they be good to plaster on the cold
postume and good for a cold stomach.

Ueruayne.
Ueruayne it hot and dry in the second degre. It is good against al manner of
evils, of venym if the pacyent drink it tempered with wine and stamp the
herb lay it on every manner of bytyng of venymous best, and it will draw out
the venym and save the sore, who yt uses it, it will make good breath and do a
way stink of the mouth. Also who that hath ye fever tercya take.iii. rotes,
and three croppes of the same herb and stamp them temper the with fair clean
water and give it to the pacyent to drike Also who that hath the fever
quartayne, let him take the same drink Also it is good for the stomach, the
liver, loges. Also take veruayne Betayne, Saxfrage of every of them like much
and stamp the with wine tempered, and this is good for them that hath the
stone. Also they that bear veruayne upon the they shall have love and grace of
great masters and they shall grant him his asking of his asking be good
and rightful.

Hic incipit littera.W.
Et primo de Watercresses.
WAter crosses be hot dri in the second degre seth them in water, by them
self and drink it or sethe it i flesh and sup of the broth, and it will
cleanse well the inward members. Also it is good against the Strangulion and
the flyxe of the same.

Wild neppe or wodbynd.
This herb bears a flower like to the Hop, and after the flower he bears a
grene berye, and it hath a great rote, the virtue of the herb is most in the
root, it is good for sinews that be shronken or cut to make them sople and to
have their owen course in their proper kind Go to ye rotofe wild Neppe, that
is like wodbynde and make a hole in the midst of the rote tha tha cover it
well again that no air go out nor that no rain go in nor water, powder nor
the son come not to much to it, let it stade so a night a day, tha after
that go to it, thou shalt find therein a certain lycour take out that lycoure
with a spoon and put it into a clean glass and do so every day as lunge as thou
find ought in the hole this must be done in the month of Apryll or May,
than anoynte the sore therewith against the fire than wet a lynen cloth in the
same lycour and lap it about ye sore and it shall be hole in short space, on
warantyse by the grace of God. For the gout a soueraygne medicine. Take the
rote of wild Neppe, and the rote of ye wild Dock soden by it self and cut
the in thyn pieces pare away the utter ^inde and cut the in quarters, tha boil
the in clean water.ii. or.iii. hours, than stape the in a mortar as small as
can be, the put thereof a quantite of soot of a chymny, and temper them with y^
milk of a cow, that the herb is of one colour, than take the pysse of a man
that is fasting and make a plaster thereof, and boyle it together and as hot
as ye may suffer lay it to the greuaunce a day, and a night and so do nyne
times, it shall heal the on warantyse, by the grace of God.

Wormewode.
This is hot dry in the second degre, it is good for worms in the womb if it
be stamped, the joyce wrong out mingled with sweet milk, and give to the
pacyente to dryncke, sethe this herb in wine and make a plaster to the womb,
Make powder of wormwode, Centory, Bettayne, of each like, much by weighty and
meddle all well together, and the powder will slay worms in the womb both when
it is eaten in potage and drunken. Also for the mylte that is swollen of a
cold matter, sethe it in wine let the sick dryncke thereof, and yt shall heal
him, make a plaster of the substance of the herb lay it all hot to thy
womb against the greuance. Also temper wormewode temper it with vieger and
with roasted sower bread, ground therwyth, with the joyce of Mintes, and the
joyce of Plantayne, of ever ych like much, and fry them well together, than
make a plaster lay it to the mouth of ye stomach and this shall stanch
breking or casting. For worms in a manes ears be it serpent, or erewyke,
take the joyce of wormewode put it in the ear. Also for the dropsy seth it in
wine and give the sick to drink at morning and evening and it shall help
him.

The virtues of Waters stylled.
WAter of Wormwode, for ye stomach, liver the spleen, for worms in the
body, for the Iaundyce, druckennes, and for the sight.

Water of Sentory, for Appetite for the Liver the Milt, worms, and
Sauceflewme.

Water of Mugwort, for the matryce.

Water of Dyttayne, for poison, Uenome and Pestylence.

Water of Fumitory, for y^ Morphew, Lepry, Scabbe, Dropsy, liver, Spleen,
Costyfnes and the Matrcie.

Water of Ysope, for the Cough Lunges, breast, the stomach, for the Pose and
the guts.

Water of Horehoud, for the Cough, lunges, breast and colica passio.

Water of Bawme, for the Mother, the Matrice liver, and spleen

Water of Calamint, Mugwort, Ysope, Brookmynt, Fumytorye, Bawme of each a like
much, and of Wormwood, a les part. These are good waters for the Matrice, for
the reteynyng the flowers.

Water of Calamynt, is good for the stomach.

Water of Plantayne for ye Flixe and hot Dropsye.

Water of Fenel is good for a sweling, and for sore Even.

Water of Endyue for the dropsi, liver Iaundice and Stomach.

Water of Borage, for the stomach, Colica passio, and other sickness of the
body.

Water of Saugle, is good for ye Palsye.

Water of Bytayne, is good for the hearing and for all manner of syckenes in
the body, for right as musterd is sauce for most kind of meates: so is Bytayne
to all other herbs.

The time of gathering Sedes Flowers Herbs and Roots.
SEdes should be gathered when they be fully ripe, and the moystnes thereof
sothyng dried away.

Flowers should be taken when they begin to faule or fade.

Herbs should be gathered when they be full of moystnes, before they begin to
shrynke.

Roots should be gathered when the leaves faule.

Fruit should be gathered and taken at their full greatness before they faule,
and the heuyer, and the sadder, that the fruit be: the better they are. And
those that be great light: be not so good. And they be better yt be gathered
infaire whether than they be yt be gatherd in foul or Raynye whether.

Herbs that grow in the Fields: be better than those that grow in gardeines^
And those yt grow on y^ hills be best. And comoli field herbs be smaller than
town herbs.

Many herbs there be that have a special time to be gathered in, in which
time, if they be gathered: they have their virtue in full stregthe, more than
they should have, if they were gathered in any other time. Some help,
whesoeuer they be gathered, some be nought, if they be not gathered in their
due time Bytayne, shall principall^ be gathered in August, with the seeds rotes
with ye Juice. And it shall be dried in the shadow, or in the so^e, for need. For
medicen, it may be gathered in any time: but ever yt is better y^ is gathered,
without moisture, before the Son rising.

Swyne grass, may be gathered when so ever you need.

Camomil, shall be gathered in april

Perytory, should be gathered in June, before the Son rise.

Red Dock, may be gathered when need is. Lagdebefe shall be gathered in June and
July.

Peniwort, shall be gathered in the beginning of winter.

Germander, shall be gathered in Lammas Moon.

Dragace, shall be gathered in June and July.

Columbine, shall be gathered in Lammas moon.

Adders tongue, shall be gathered in April.

Pedelion, shall be gathered after ye mid day, when ye list.

Groundsil, shall be gathered after mid day.

Walwort shall be gathered when ye will.

Violet shall be gathered in Marche, and in this month should Sugar Violet be
made and Sirup, also Oil of Roses, of Camomyl, of Lillies, and of Chesboll
heads, yt is called Popy. And Rosemary flo^res, in May.

Centorye when it begins to floryshe.

Organ in the month of June. Calamint in the month of June,

Hearts tongue, in November,

Aristologia rotunda in heruest, the other in the same time.

Garlycke when ye will, wild Garlycke when it flourishes.

Agnus Castus, when it flourishes.

Gourdes in thend of September or in October, when they be ripe, they should be
dried in such aplace yt the Son may come to them all the day.

Wild Neppe beryes should be gatherd when they be yelowe.

Cucumers should gathered when the Fruit is ripe, the fruit should be laid under
Uynes, where as ye son hath not his full strength, upon it, and in a moist
place that it may rot, for than should ye sede be good and full of Kernelles.

Citrull should be gathered when the fruit is ripe and it should be dried, in a
dry place in the son.

Water of Calamynt, should be gathered when it floureth and dried in the shadow,
and it will be good a year no longer.

Saffron, should be gathered before the Son rise.

Dodour grows amoge Flax, should be gathered in summer when it begins to
flower, it may be kept three year.

Drauke should be gathered when it floryshith and should be dried in the shadow
and will last a year.

Elebor, should be gathered in heruest time.

Fenyl, should be gathered in the beginning of Heruest, and a year it may be
kept, and the rotes of fenell, should de gathered in the beginning of the year,
and will endure a year.

Baldemonye, otherwise called Gencyane, should be gathered in the last end of
the year, and may be kept.iiii. years, the Roots of it is used. And for to
know it: one is, it is right bitter, for the less bitter it is, the worse it
is, another is, it is somewhat yelow, and not clean yelow, but sad.

Galyngall yt is called in Phisycke, Syperus, it may be gathered in each time
of ye year. The best time is in the end of Uere, it must be laid.iii. days
in the son, that the moisture thereof rot it not lytely, and then keep it in
the shadow.

Flower Deluce, should gathered in thend of Uere, and dried in the son, and it
will last.ii. year.

Sisalido, is the Root of Philipendula, and that serves to medycen, and
shall be taken out of the earth, in the end of Heruest.

Auence leaves serves more to medicens then the Roots, the virtue of it is
best, whiles it is green, and his virtue is to dissolve, consume and open.

Take Grapes before they be ripe, and wring the youce out of the, and than dry
them in the Soon, and make powder of them. That powder is good to be used in
meates for casttyng y^ comes of Choleric humours and for the Flyxe.

A general rule of all manner of herbs.
IT is a general Rule, that from the eyghte: Kalendes of the month of Aprell:
unto ye month of Iulye, all manner of leaves of herbs be best, and from
the.viii. Kalendes of July unto the.viii. Kalendes of October: the stalks have
most virtue. And from the.viii. Kalendes of October: unto the.viii. kalendes
of Aprell: all manner of Roots of Herbs be in their full strength.

Finis.
Here begins the table of this book.
AGnus castus Apium. Auetum. Apumeresus. Absentium. A^tamasa. Affodillus.
Aristologialou. Aristolegia rot. Abrotinum. Ameos. Alleluya. Asterion.
Agrimonia. Auentia. Altea. Amarisca. Auricula muris Apium emo. Apium canarus
Axtiplex do. Anabula. Acus demonis. Argentila. Acus mustela. Allium. Amusm.
B.
Betonia. Bl^om^te Beat. Borago. Bugla. Burneta Bursa pastoris. Borago sy^ues.
Byllyre.
C.
Camamilla. Calamintum. Crassula mayor Crassula minor Citura. Centauriama.
Centaurinmi Cura Celidonia. Culamen. Colewortes. Coliandrum Capillus ^e^e.
Corcus^ Centonodium Caprifolium Canabaria. Costus. Cepe. Columbina. Cominum.
Cardiaca. Cerasa. Camelon. Cauda pulli. Cabochis, Caluus gallica^ Caluus
agrestis. Cimbaria. Consolida mayor Consolida minor. Consolida m^d.
D
Diaptanum. Dragantia ma Dancus arininus. Dens leonis. Dens canis. Dens
creticus. Dragantia fe.
E
Elena campana. Endua. Eruca. Enfrasia. Ebulos Edera. Ederaterrestris.
Euforbium. Elleborus albus Elleborus niger. Epatica. Erpina. Epulus minor
F
Flaminula. Fumus terre. Fumicretum. Fragra. Fabaria magor. Fabaria minor.
Filix. Filipendula. Finiculum. Faxinus. Finiculus poet Febrifuga. Filago.
Flaminula miu.
G
Gracia die ma. Granum. Genestula. Gencianus Galanga. Granum solis agitu^
Gladiolus.
H
Herba crutiata. Herba Christofory masculi. Herba Christofori femi ni Herba
wal^eri Herba Robarti Herba Marcia. Hastuca regia Herba Petri Herba Iohannes.
I
Iusquiamus Isopus Ireos Iris. Iarus Iasia alba Iasia nigra Ipia mayor Ipia
minor Iacenitus rusti.
L
Lanisticum. Langua cecui Liliium. Ligustum Lingua bouis Lingus serpents
mayor. Lingua serpentis mi. Lingua Canis Lingua Hercina Lupinus Labrum veneris
Lauendula, Lactuca Lactuca Siluat Lactuca Lepo Lollium. Laparium rust Linum.
Lauriola. Licorisa. Lappa.
M
Millefol^um Mercurialis. Menta. Menta romana Malua. Morel or nyght-shadowe.
Mastyke. Magerum. Millefolium maor Yarowe. Motherwort or Mogwort. Maces. Meuta
rubea.
N.
Nux muscata. Napus
O
Olibanum.
P
Pruna. Pepper. Pinpernella. Pul^gium Peucedanum vel^. Feniculus por
Peorocilium. Peritorium. Pastina^a. Plantago. Porrum. Pireteum. Papauer
Polipodium Pienium.
Q
Quinque foliu
R
Rybworte. Reed nettell. Rose rube^. Rosemary. Ruta.
S
Sinapium. Smalage. Salua. Statureia. Saxfrage. Scabioso. Sothernewode. Syn
grene Styche wort Scamony, Scene. Selondine, Sauayne. Scabiosa.
T
Tapsu barba. Town crosses.
U
Violet. Uua suauis. Ueruayne.
W
Water crosses. Wild neppe. Wormewode.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London in the Fletestrete at the sign of the Rose Garland by me
Wyllyam Copland. for Iohn wight


