THE MOST pleasant Art of the Interpretation of Dreams, whereun to is
annexed sundry Problems with apt aunsweares near agreeing to the matter, and
very rare examples, not the like extant in the English tongue.

GATHERED BY THE former Auctour Thomas Hill Londoner: and now newly Imprinted.

Imprinted at London in Fleetestreate near to S. Dun stones Church by Thomas
Marsh.

ANNO 1576.

To the right worshipful Master George Keabel Esquier, Thomas Hill wishes all
health and felicity.
AFter I had increased this treatise of mine (right worshipful) and weighing
how {pro}fitable this Art to be of the interpretatio of dreams, in that the
same shows to us rather comfortable warning then any vain ^nd vnfruitefull
matter. And that none also but the wise and discret parsons, may rightly
discern and Judge of Dreams, seeing it is thought a rash matter to Judge of
unknown matters, (...) those which a ma vnderstadeth not.

Yet how Dreams may be known to ^m, which never had true dream, in ^at
they only happen to such, whose spirits are occupied with no irrational
imaginatios, nor overcharged with the burthe of meat or drinckes, or
superfluous humours, nor give to any other bodelie pleasures. For those which
are contrary to this order, are not properly dreams, but be named vain dreams,
no true signifiers of matters to come but rather showers of the present
affections and desiers of the body. And yet dreams seen by grave sober
persons, do signify matters to come, and a spirit undoubtedly showing to
them, which by her nature is a Prophetess, that sedeth forth such a motion
workmanship, through which the body as in her proper dwelling, may either
be defended fro the instant evils perils, or moved to the attaining of good
things to come that with diligence workinge the same, that as it were into
looking Glasses of the body placed, it might so behold and foreshewe al matters
imminent. Therefore this difference of true dreams from the vayn ought
diligently to be noted. Further who that knows rightly to judge these,
vnderstadeth a great part of wisdom, and they which judge of the same, have a
sure and perfect Art. Besides Hippocrates and Galen do write, howe that the
Phisitionnes by the Dreams of the sick) may the redyar and aptlyar appoint a
perfect diet and due medecines, also for the recovery of the sick: wherefore I
see not now that the rash judgment of the ignorant, can rightly condemn
the knowledge of this Art, seeing the learned, yea holy Scriptures, do both
allow and witness of Dreams. As the same I may here aptly apply out of
the Prophet Ioel. xi. where God says I will breathe down of my spiry^on all
the earth, so that your sons and daughters shall Prophecy and your old
me dream dreams, and your young men see visions. Also in sondry places of the
new testamente we read howe that the Apostles and other holy men, were
taught and warned by dreams. Besides the learned Trogus writes, that Ioseph
the son of Iacob, first found out this laudable Art of the interpretation
of dreams, although Philo attribute the this inuetio unto Abraha his great
gradfather. And after him did the Godly Daniel and wise Salamo leave in
wrytinge of this art, as their Pamphlettes extant at this day do manifestly
show. But to be brief we learn that this art of the interpretatio of
Dreams, doth especially consiste of wisdom, and by coiecture in that he
which coniectureth cunningly, is couted a natural Prophet. So that the
interpreters of Dreams (as vvitnesseth Quintilia) are named coniecturers. Yet
for that there be so few parsons that see true Dreams, and fewer which
understand or observe them, yea and most few which can interpret them,
therefore of this, is the art now come into a contempt with most persos. And
although^ I might here write sondry examples (for confirmation of this art)
both of kings, Princes, and others, which vver^ vvarned by their dreams
what to do o^ avoid or what would succeade after yet for that I mind to be
brief, and no to seem tedious unto your vvorshipp in so small a treatise,
therefore I omitt^ them, craving pardon of this my rud^ attempt unto you. And
to conclude, I s^al perceive this Treatise to be thankfullye accepted at your
hands, it sha^ encourage me shortly to set forth my little Treatise of
Probleames with their apt aunsvveares, under your worships name.

Thus leaving to trouble your worship any longer, I commit you to God who
send you a godly increase, happy success in this life.

Your most bounden Thomas Hill.

The Preface to the Reader.
IF it be superstitious (gentle Reader) and therefore denied of some men, to
have a foresyghte and judgment in things to come, why is not then denied to
learned Phisitios, sklfull warriors, weary husbandemen, and polytycke
Captains, to have knowledge in the Arts of divination? If they be codempned
which be of such antiquitye, so generally received, and so often confirmed by
the sundry works of learned me, who then shall dare presume to open the
secreates of dreams, where in is contained so high, and so many mysteries. But
great pittyie were that so noble a knowledge, so necessary to all men be
trode^ under foot, and so lightly esteemed. At Arts of forknowledge hath been
of long^time had in great price and estimation. I times past the noble
warriors, the grave Senators, the mighty Princes, almost every private man,
did direct al thei^ doings, and wayghty affairs, by coiectures and
divinations.

The worthy Romaynes, seldom toke ^nye great matter in hand, before their
soothsayers or wise men brought them good or bad tidings. The Grecians, ^he
Arabians, the Chaldes the Egipti^ns, did also the like: where upon what
through the great credit it grue unto, what through the commodity and pleasure
^he found thereby: many bent their minds to invent mo such studies, which
^s they increased in nombre, so were their operations diverse, and their
judgements several. Of the which number many may worthily be cut of, some as
most detestable and wicked, some as vain and frivolous and many as mere
foolish, only those are so reserved and excepted, wherein any wit, wisdom,
or reason is contained, among this sort, the divination by dreams doth
occupy as a Mistress (...) of the chiefest roumes, for that in it besides
certain infallible rules, besides quickness of wit, there must be adjoined
dexterity in learning, gravity in debating the matters moderatio in indgemet
without the which neither ca this art nor any other be used in their right
kinds, but al erroneous, no profit shall rise to yt Dreamer, no honesty to
the deuinoure, nor no praise to the art it self. Let not the misvsage of some
me, take away or deminish the commedatio, that is incidet to so good an Art.
Let not the rashness of some in lightly credityng every ignorant and vnlerned
professors of the same, be a discredit to that which in it self is grouded on
certain and sure precepts, but rather when such errors do happen, let us
return them on the parson, and not on the Art. For if through the mysuage of
some men, good things should be condemned: what Art so good should not be
misliked of? what doctrine so wholesome for the people, so profitable for the
common wealth and so necessary for mans use, should not be clean banished
Then should Physic because under some men's hands, their patients prosper
not, be rejected. Law, for that sometimes judgment is give amiss be abolished,
and the use of Surgery because the Chirurgia doth often keep the wounded in
longer pains then he needs, be cast out of a Common wealth. But as these
knowledges are never a whyt ye less esteemed, thought the unskilfulnes and
rashenes of the practisers, put oftetymes the patients and clients in great
hasard, peril and mischief, no more ought this Act of divination to be
eschewed, whereby dangers may be foreseen, and yet it self void of all
danger peril. What haz^rde of life: what loss of substance? or what danger
of limb ca a dream put ye dreamer unto? en so much as when he awakes, he
wonders how such imagination or fancy crept into his mind. Be his dream
never so terrible or fearful, as falling into the hands of thieves, werewouded
by the, fightinge in bloody battles, or on every side beset with enemies, in
such manner as it would make a stout ma to quake, yet when he awakes no skin
is broke, he hath no ache in his bones, he is still in his quiet bed, as whole
and as safe, as when he went to rest nothing so nor so, it was only a dream.
If now he have his knowledge of divination, what a comfort will it be to him?
that examining the circumstances in their due time order, shall prognosticate
what such things portend. And thereby may solace himself with good haps, and
labour to prevent or hinder the imminent misfortune, or at the least arm
himself so strongly with patience as quietly to bear them: for a mischief
known of before, and diligently looked for, is not so grievous as when it comes
on a sudden. It is a wonderful thing and almost incredible that dreams should
have such virtue in them, were it not that God hath revealed it unto us: When he
himself, as a mean, often used them, to open unto his people of Israell, his
secrete will and pleasure. Were it not that we have red of the wonderful chauces
in old time foretold by them: and were it not again that we daily se the
effect of dreams. But alas, our ignorance makes us so blind, that we know
them not, until they be paste. For a man beholding in his sleep the top or
end of an house falling down, hearing a dog to bark or houle, seeing a
hare to chase a hound, or a bird to fly without wings will seek no further,
but esteem it as a vain dream, laughing at his own conceit, having more
regard to the present spectacle, then to the cyrcumstaunces to come making no
more account of them, then of things casual, natural, or impossible. For a
house to fall down is casual, a dog to barcke natural, the hare to
persecute the hound, is against nature, a foul to fly without wings
sounds impossible. Yet al these by circumstances signify such euetes, as may
be for the profit or hinderance of the dreamer. It seems a thing against
nature, a thing most strange for a woman to be delivered of a firebrand: if
Hecuba had left here, and sought no further, then had she not known howe her
son Paris with who she then went, should be the destruction of his own
country Troye. It is monstrous for a Uyne to spring out of a woman's bowels,
and for the Branches to cover or shadow the great country of Asia, yet this
foreshewes Astiages, that of his daughter should be borne such a child, as
should grow to a mighty Prince and unnaturally should drive him out of his
kingdom.

For a Cignet to hane feethers soon grown out and flying into the element
fil-filing there the air with most sweet tunes and sound seems incredible,
and b^yonde mans expectation. But having ^ further eye, it may well signify
some excellent learned ma, for his learning wisdom, and virtue. These few
examples gentle Reader of an infinite number, I have set forth to show thee
what notable destinies, chauges of fortune, notable ^llucke, and notable good
luck, what honour, what shame, what singularitye in learning and wisdom,
have been it ancient times by dreams signified and foreshewed. And in this
my treatice smal^ in comparison to the number I could se^forth, I will manifest
such strange haps as have chased in later years, and also teach the
further how thou may vs^ and behave thy self in expounding suc^ as hereafter
are to come, And hear I^ crave at thy hands gentle Reader to vs^ good
discretion, to believe nothing rashly, nor to pronounce any thing without
good judgment but first to practise i^ with thy self secretly and then if
thy judgements fall out right, thou mais^ the bolder communicate it with
other ^f not, codemn it not, but leave it to their ^udgementes, whose learning
being mo^e profound, or knowledge more parfitte can better and more sincerelye
interpret the same. Thou know well enough, that if one stringe be out of
tune, it causes a^ vnpleasat sound of all the rest, or if the Physician
preparing remedies against poisons making rough things gentle medecines, do
myxe the untoward ^y and out of season, shall rather further the disease, then
cure the sick, even so it is with dreams. If they being sometimes obscure and
harde shall not be applied in their due order, but shall be negligentlye
weighed, over curious in some thing and rash in other, nothing is by them
known, nothing can be by them prevented and helped.

Thus gentle Reader, I take my leave of thee at this time, ceassinge to trouble
thee any lodger, I trust I have spoken sufficiently to utter my meaning, and
to give thee warning, howe to deal. If thou can attain to the knowledge
there of, I will be glad of it if thou cast not, yet blame not me. that wishes it
with al my^ hart. I can do no more but teach, thyn^ it is to learn, farewell
and God prospethy doings.

Qui been coiectat, vates (...) hic optimus extat.
The distinction of Dreams.
THe cause why Auerrois doth rather attribute this passion of Dreaming to the
Imaginative part, is that like as the motion of waking begins from the
outward senses, and ends at the memoratiue, even so doth the motion of
sleep contrary begin from this, and Ends at the outward motions.
Wherefore seeing the same ^s a passion of the inner parts, and not of ^he
memoratiue, nor cogitatiue. For that as he writes, the woorkynge of ^hese, is
not manifested in the sleep, therefore the same shall be of the Imaginative
which only consists in the mouinge ^nd continual doing and may also
recyue forms of the Memoratiue, when ^s the dream is of insensible matters
co^eiued. And of both the like, when as the Dream is mix^ and of the outewarde
^oinge also, like as of the hearing, or of ^e understanding And he further
writes that when they happen true, the same then doth somewhat declare of
that which was in the hour of knowledge, and yet this for the more part not
present being, for if this would happen in the present and instant doing,
that then the same should not forshewe things to come but rather matters
present. In that al^ things to come move and work according to their
causes. But how so ever the same be. yet Aristotle affirms, that dreams may
be caused by the sheadinge of forms, which proceade frome those things
workinge in the act. Yet he perhaps means, that the same signification of
the dream, is not caused in the moving of it. Wherefore howe soever be
doubted, that the understanding abstracted, may minister Imaginatiuelye the^
knowledge of the particular indiuiduate when as the same is of the general
things by the which it doth manifestly appear that certain are indiuiduates
of the simple substances and certain of the mixte. So that either they be
^uinge and as th^ mineralles, or have life working as th^ plants, or
otherwise sensitive as th^ Beasts, or of understanding as men.

And of the accidents also, certain are in the Symples, certain in the Myxte
and certain in Beasts, and of these besides, certain are of nature, and
certain by Art, and of it self also, or of hap. So that these not
otherwise mente, but only by accident. Wherefore al the indiuiduates of the
simple and comp^be by substances, and of all other Acciden^es by theymselues
have terminate causes, which although they may be understanded by our
conceiuinge of them, yet ^n they not be vnderstanden of theyms^lues, in that
these happen not under the se^es, nor as things to come

But to be brief, like as the Physician by twooe propositions of which the
one general, intelligible conceived by art, and that other particular and
sensible invented of some what, may prognostic^e upon sicknesses and health,
even so the knowledge or dreams, may proceade of two causes the one of the
vniuersail, that is by the vnders^dinge, which doth illuminat the Imaginative,
and the other of the particular under that. In that dreams for the more part
are caused of those matters, which be known to the dreamer. And of this he
concludes that y^ knowledge of the imaginative, is rather ended at the
similitude or kind of the indiuiduate, then at the indiuiduate it self.
Because that if the same be illuminated by the understanding, then is that
continually procured to be caused like it, with the kind whithe is more
spiritual then the indiuiduat. And a man also doth more comprehend in his
dream then waking in the day time, because in a dream i^ more resolved the
that in the day which^ is troubled through the doings of the outward
senses. And he concludes also, that a dream is none other, then a
fantastical appearance, which the person sleapynge conceives. For if they
are of those affections which be in us, the^ is the same either of the part of
the spirit^ and in such sort are they rather causes o^ the part of the body,
and are signs, bu^ those which are causes of them being without us seeing
by no manner they ma^ be in our power, therefore are they name ^ accidents. And
a like example may her^ ^e applied of the Eclipse of the Sun, whose cause is
the Moon. which runs ^etwene. But the sign, is a star appea^inge in the
day time, running under the ^ight of the Sun, or as the roughnes of ^he
tongue, which declares the sign of a ^euer. So that a dream is the only
cause ^n that which imagines the venerall act ^n so much as fantasy doth move
the drea^er to that act, which afterward he exer^iseth waking. Also the sign
may only ^e, as when we be moved and led unto the ^nowledge of any matter as
the like exa^le is written of a certain person, which ^reamed that himself was
thrown into a ^ost boat fat of pitch, in the which he ^hought himself to
be scalded, waking ^pon the fear thereof did after vomit up much a dust or
brent choler. So that this ^ream was the a sign of the matter pre^ent, and
not the accident or cause why this ^ente before. And even the like example, ^s
he which dreams these matters, that ^re not in our power, like as those which
^re caused in the East, grauting that they may happen, yet was not the dream
the cause nor the sign like as he which speaks of any matter waking and
in the day time, although that may after happen in the dream, the same ensued
not altogether of the talk, in that not always nor oftentimes happens the
divisions but those, which are caused of the others, And for a further
knowledge to be understanded, that although dreams forshewe rather matters to
com-Yet be many of them paste which help to the remembringe of those wrought
in the day, and to the understanding of the others, and perhaps to give
warning of harms that may happen. And yet these (after the mind of
Aristotle) do not of necessity happen, because if any has dreamed to be
sick, and has in him self the cause of a sickness, yet may the sickness
be stayed by an other stronger motion of nature. For that in the air do
often times appear signs of rain, which after enseweth not, and much like
to this do certain conclude that there are such which before the execution
do cha^nge their determination Also dreams are much varied, which do happen
through the doings wrought before in the day time, in that not al are
solicited nor delighted in those, nor the vapours do move in the same sex,
nor the ways of the common sense to the Imaginative and memory are carried the
like in one as in another nor there is not the self same manner disposed in one
time as in an other. Also to sick personnes do some fearful dreams happen,
when as the spirits cariynge the virtues of life be aflicted by some evil
vapour. And the like when any fearing is moved to cry out, then is sicknesses
prognosticated to ensewe.

But of the interpreter of dreams be ought to be such a one wh^che has
perfict knowledge to distinguish the simitude of al matters and to be skilful
in the manners and conditions of the most people. Besides it isirequisite that
he be a personne which leadethe an honest life. For although he may happelye
touche every kind of cause, yette is the same difficill to make apparaunte
howe so ever the same may be reduced to the Act.

Which is the chief principal purpose. And further headde the of the
interpreter, that he ought to be a most arteficiall iudger, which well
knows similitudes, in that all dreams fall not out right, for in this case
every one may easily indge those dreams as the same happneth of the notes.
For that like as one beholding a far of two sundry things of like
distance, and the one of them he well knows, then through this be comes
the better and easelyer unto the understanding and knowledge of the other.
Also he ought to know how to discuss from like to like. For like as the
poets, which also are named natural prophets, do further pass by a small
similitude of any matter unto another like as in speaking of the nature of
Venus do thereby proceade to discuss the caulmnes of the air, so like in many
others. Yet that personne is apter to interpret dreams, which otherwise is
not occupied about other matters. And that men sumtimes, do dream in the one
they apply with the other, so that ye one for the other, they sometime declare.
And it is also written of Hercules, that he dreamed such dreams at the first,
which no person could expound, but dreaming afterward the like was then
declared to him, as it after succeeded. Also it behouethe the expounder not to
be ignorant, howe that the doings business of me do daily alter through the
one, and through the other by the disposition of the blood and spirits. For
these when they be many and clear, do dispose the person unto mirth. And
the same is named a sign, because men become sad being in the dark, unto
which the humour very subtle and distemperate doth the dispose them. For
otherwise being clear they dispose the personne to behold and see hid
matters. But the subtle bumors over heated, do dispose the person unto Ire,
in that these be engendered of the burning and great heate of the blood, easily
and apt to be in^amed.

But the gross and clear, unto sports and the bodily acts of mirth. And
often those personnes in whom these are mul^iplyed, seem to laugh without
cause, ^nd yett as the common proverb, is that ^othinge under heaven but
rejoices, al^hough the same sometime may be covered (...) us. And the same also
they declare by the motion of them. For when they be moved vehemently from
the hart toward the outward part of the breast, then do they cause Ire, and
toward the part downward shamefastness, but when the motion succedeth
outward, then doth it cause joy and mirth. And through the lack also of
them either in the quantitye or quality are the sensitive powers forced to
work either corruptly or dimynishedlye, even in the dream, especialye when
the ways and passages between the Imaginative and Cogitatiue, by which they
pass, be hiunred or trowbled, for then the powers are often deceived. Also
the disposition of blood through whoose subtler part the spyrites are
engendered, doth alter the workings both waking and a sleep. For when the blood
is clear, not gross nor subtyle then doth it ingendre y^ like spirits,
which dispose unto joy and mirth, eve like as the distempered, blood
works un, to that kind of Ice which lunge lasts, contrary wise the thin
hot doth work unto that which is soon kindled soon qualified, the waterye, in
contrary manner doth work unto fear. But the gross blood distempered in
heat, doth work unto the sturdim^sse of will, sadness, wherefore it behooves the
expounder of dreams to inquite orderly, whether the dream appeared pleasant
or otherwise vnpleasante for the knowledge of those doth give great
understanding to him. And it shall be necessary for the interpretoure to
consider and know what the person tradeth or occupies, of what birth he is
what possessios he hath what state he is in for the health of body of what
age he is also which sees y^ dream. Also a drea^e ought exactly to be told as
either without any adding to of matter or taking fro, For yt these do
cause great error unto the understanding of a truth. Also if any shall doubt or
be deceived in yt telling of his dream, then must the interpreter needs be
deceived, in the declaring of the true meaning thereof. And in all dreams
also which have not a manifest cause, it behooves diligenty to mark, whether
they be scene ether in ye night or day time so yt we may not think to make
differet of the night before, fro the day, or ye night evening from the morning
spring, if so be he hath moderately eaten before sleep. For that immoderate
feeding doth not permit matters to be truly decerned unto the morning.

Of them which interpret dreams by the colours of the Stars, by other
accidents.
ANd now some affirming the art of divining by dreams, do teach yt things
which appear in the proper nature do forshe we good: like as dreaming to
see the earth which of her nature is cold and dry, and of this shows the
dominion of the Melancholy humour in that person. And the like whereas they
write, that to see dry trees or cleft, doth after signify peril of life,
which if that should be true, the many husbandme and fellers of trees should
die, because they often dream of such businesses which they earnestly go
about and busy them selves in. And in the like sort this is not true, that to
see in the sleep deformed things, that the same foresheweth a sickness to
come, neither is this also true, if that a thing deformed of nature doth then
appear far to the dreamer, that the farrenes doth forshewe an evil, for
that some do think to see artificial garments should signify a deceit, in
that under these is the truethe often covered. Nor it disagrees not that to se
filthy things in the sleep, that the same doth declare corrupt humours,
because the stincke may proceeade of the outward means or be represented by
the kinds reserved and then should it rather argue the goodness of smelling.
And although the body grieved, may be said to argue many humours, yet may it
declare that the expulsiue matter is shed forth to the caryringe down of the
grounds, or that the sinews or mouinge powers of the spirit are hindered
stopped through some vapour or humour greuing, whereof it fails not under the
propre working that it may be attributed to one cause, with depends of many.
But well considering that the ^ayre is the outward cause of dreams, because
in the first it receives the impressio of the stars, and after touchethe the
bodies of men and beasts, which are alt^red of it yea in the day time, like
as appearethe in the night Raven and Owl, which (as most men affirm) by
his synginge over the chamber of the sick, is prognosticated shortly after
death, because as men say these, like as many other beasts are more easily
changed in the respec^e of men, for that those are not occupied with earnest
cares, but that the air in this case doth not only touch outwardly, but by
the passages or poores the sense enterethe. And where that others say, that to
see in the sleep clear and bright forms doth signify that the bodies not
to be altered, this also is untrue because this may happen, when the
melancholy humour like to the sand, doth purge cause clear visible
spirits, and then although the clearness of the forms, doth declare the
goodness of these senses, yet is the cause evil in it self, because it
declares the dominion of that humour. Nor it is to be doubted, when
similytudes appear darklye, or shadowed with clouds, but that they may
declare a troubling of the visible spirits, and when those tend unto a
witness, then do they signify mattery humours, and when the shadow appears
small, then doth the harm soon cease, and when it shows to the sight as
water or earth, then the harm shall be the greuousser, and the flower apt to
be resoined. But where some affirm, when the sleeaper dreams to see stars
shadowed with fire or by a thynne cloud, that the same doth argue the dominion
of choler, which rather may declare an indisposition of the eyes either
present or to come. And where they also afirme, that when the stars appear to
the dreamer that they are so busted, that they can not be decerned of him,
that the same is a note of death, especially if the personne then dreamynge the
like should be sick as though the stars could not then help him. But this
truly is rather a matter to be laughed at, that to prognosticate death of the
impediment of fight. Yet certain do allow when the stars seam to the
dreamer to move swiftly, that the they prognosticate great Ire or madness to
ensew and that the inordinate motions also of them, to declare sadness and
heaviness to ensue. For the self same doothe the inordinat motion of any matter
argewe. And grant that the order should declare the goodness of the organ,
yet rather doth it express the disposition of the powers of the sensitive
spirit, or of natural heat. Wherefore in the like matters, are the other
qualities and proporc^ions of things, referred to the dreamer, considered.

Certain demands and their answers both of sleep and of those matters,
through which, some time we dream
ANd first why old men do not so well sleep, and dream the like as yonge
men do seeing they take more rest. Unto which Auerrois thus answearethe, that
for so much as old men are of could complexion, although they may feed
sufficiently, yet have they natural heat over weak in them, so that they can
not well digest the same and of this the fumes of the meat in the stomach are
not sent upward. But the young men have natural heat intensed, through which
they diggest their meat well, and of this send up much fume out of the stomach
unto the brain which cause them so to dream. Why is it, when in the dream
appears some fearful matter. that then the personne sweateth, and wakes
upon the same. Unto which the philospher thus answers, that to the man
appears then that terrible matter to be present, and with enemies And nature
also being careful of y^ health of man, doth both send forth heate and spirits
from the heart unto the outward members. So that nature judges it such a
ferefull matter, disagreeing to the man, that through the concourse of the
spirits about the heart, the heart of this is wrong together, and the ma
thereby weakened of the same.

Why men commonly are not wont to dream in the beginning of the night. To
which the Philosopher thus answers, that the first digestion is then
occupied, in which the sumes of the meat much engrossed are sent up, that
mightily stop, and so cause the person that he cannot the dream. And those also
stop the passages, not only to the outward senses, but unto ^he organ the
keeper of times.

Why affirms Aristole there a wicked person often foreseethe evil dreams, To
which is thus answered, that as the condition of the wickedness doth incline
and dispose the person unto the often cosiderynge of the same, even so is be
moved to dream those things which were a good while together thought upon
in the day time, in that they sooner come to mind. So that the luxuriouse
person is often m^oued to dream of women, the drunkard of sundry wives, and
y^ thief of sundry thefts. Why dreams which are caused in the morning, be
parfiter^ and to more reason, then the others in the night time. To which the
philosopher answeereth that in the morning the middle division between y^
common sece and the Organ reseruatiue is sufficient quiet, through which the
fumes of the meat elevated then, are sufficient weak, and of thi^s cause
trewer, and parfytter dreams

Why it is that at to a manne being a sleep appear he that he flies or
falls from an high place. To which the philosopher thus answer the, that
the same proceadethe of the indisposition of the humours of certain spyrites
and vapours. Whereof in the body sometimes ^che fumes are very light, and of
this ^use the man to think that he flies. But sometimes the fumes are over
gross ^nd cooled by the brain, and do then disend to the heart and through
this it see^eth then to the ma that he falls from high very deep

Why is it that a man sometimes dreams of those things, which in all his
^yfe he never possessed nor saw, To which ^he philosopher thus answers, that
in ^he sleep is a certain compositio of fan^asies, through which composition
such ^ppearance is called. Like as when any ^haunge the kind of gold on a
hill, then ^o him appears in his sleep to have scene ^ golden hill

Why is it that the similitudes of ^hinges sometimes in the sleep do
appear broken, and sometimes defouremed. The reason of this is in that the
^otte vapour is hindered to be shed forth ^hat seeks the Uentricle or Organ
in which the similitudes are, wherefore of y^ troubled, they are then not
perceived ^nder a proper form, for that they may ^omtymes be caused of those
which were never perceived or decerned, and that heauelye sleapyng they dream
nothing, (...) that the powers of the spyrite or the imaginative is hindered to
pass unto the act^

And by the same reason in a manner some dream nothing al their life tym
becaue the plenty or abundance of moi^stures causes the grosser spirits, and
(...) confounds the similitudes. But A^stotle doth attribute this to a drines
an^ coldness of complexion, for these as th^ philosopher affirms do hinder the
asc^ding of vapours, which like happene^ to old persons, by reason of age.

Why is it that some persons neu^ dream, nor dreamed all their life time The
philosopher thus aunsweareth, th^ such personnes are either over moist (...)
quality, and the brain to much running so that the kinds cannot abide, or
such are over dry that the kinds in them ca^ not be imprinted. So that in both
sorts the Organ is over much vnquieted.

Why doth it sometme appear to us that the sight may be changed fro^ the
one sensible and yet altered from th^ other. To which the philosopher
aun^ereth, that the same happens when (...) that alters, that the other
should be ^t to change, like as the mouinge of a ^rge or ship, which then
causes to ^ppeare that the earth moves withal, cause this motion is like to
that which ^e earth should cause, if the earth did ^oue, yet the error may
be corrected, ^rough the upper power.

Why do some persons begin firste^ dream, when they come unto old age. ^o
which the philosopher thus aunswe^th, that they throughout their whole ^me of
youth are over much moving ^nd occupied, so that they can not all (...) at
season dream. And this procea^th through the inward heat, which
continually resolved of the nourishe^ente. For in old age such euapora^ons
begin to cease, through the wea^nes of heate, and hereof beeginne they (...)
dream.

Why is it that it appears often to (...) in sleep, both to see hear
matters. ^o which the philosopher Aristotle thus ^unswereth, that to the motion
ceasing ^y which the forms are troubled, the similitude then of the matter
which was seen doth represent the act of seeing, and heard, the act of
hearing, by which they were caused.

Why is yt that the virtuous men and studiouse, have often plesaunter dreams
then the wicked and vicious persons. T^ which the Philosopher Aristotle thus
aunswerethe, that the virtuous bestow^ them selves in dooynge good works and
of this the kinds of the good works are reserved and such vertuouse persons
do dream of such like matters, which appear to them as very delectable.
But the evil persons which doo^ wicked works, the kyndnesse of thos^ evil
are reserved, through which they often dream, wicked dreams.

Why is it that such wakened out^ of sleep, be myndefull of their dreams,
and not of the works done in their sleep. To which the Philosopher thus
answers, for that whether the form^ of the dream remaining imprinted i^
the Immaginatiue part, or for that the woorkinge of them was caused by the
Organes shut of them selves, an^ dissolved by accident. Therefore the
simylitudes of the matters caused, could not be differred or carried unto the
common sense or ymmagination, in that the particulers wear bound. Yet are they
sometimes stirred up and moved forward, for that unto a strong motion in
the Orgaue, the sense may ensewe the motions of the moving spyrites

And a strong motion I mean, in that this may heate and resolve the moisture
stoppinge the commone sense. Nor it is not necessary, that for that time they
should be depryued by a voluntary motion in that although the senses may
be harmed through the distemperatenes and diminution of the spirits, yet is
not in that season the sense of fantasy taken away, which is only cause of
the same.

Why is it that persons hoate by nature or eating hoate meates and
vaporouse, do dream much. The reason of this is for that very much hoate
vapoure doothe sharpen the spyrites which placed in the Motion do move
forward the kinds resting in the memory, so that the dream is caused of the
representing of them. And Aristotle writes, that through the boathe humours,
dreams are caused of matters a lunge time reserved, for although these may
abide in the Organs* quieter, yet through a strong motion of heate brought
back, may so cause dreams, or to dream after. Why appears it to the ma
dreaming that the dream is sometimes true, and sometime aunsweareth not the
like at al. The cause of this is, in that it some tyms happens that in such a
dream the judgment or knowledge of the virtue intellectiue cocurreth with a
sensitive virtue but sometimes the same doth not concur: therefore when it doth
concur, the man judges the dream to be false the reason is in that the
intellectiue virtue doth correct the sensityue. But when it doth not concur
or accorde then doth it appear to the man that the dream is true. Why is it
that certain sleapynge do exercise the works of persons waking. The reason
is, for that not simply they do sleep, nor properly be waking although the
vapour in the time of sleep doth stop the Organ of the common sense, and
repells the heate and spyrits toward the heart. Yet sometimes with that
vapoure doth some pe^mixte kind of be he mente concupiscence, or fear. or
boldness remain. For this when it moves the only Organ of fealyng in this
beginning, if then from that kind ^f his fantasy also is moved seeing it is
the beginning of the local motion, therefore sleapynge it is moved by it
self, and when the foresaid causes be base and weak, that is to say, not
moving out of the place, and when they be strong, then do they move from
place to place. And because the spirits and Organ are distinct senses from
the Organes, the motions therefore of them are for the more-parte not reasoned
of, but saying they be not much distant, for that cause is not speech
hindered in them, so that the Organes be not occupied or indisposed, for then
do they show foolishenes much like unto the condition of the sick. And
because the lower mebers which be the instruments of motion are less hindered
in respect of the upper which obeye to the sense therefore those are lowsed
unto the motion, and not unto the sense, and because the quality of the eyes
is of the natu^e of water, therefore are they slower opened to see abroad then
the other members to move. But although such walk with the eyes shut, and
that rather by a hap, yet sometimes by Fortune or by Custom they come unto
the place in the day time imagined, not by sight in that the eyes are then
shut but of the inward fantasy by which they walk in the dark, like as in
the light or day time or rather this by a hap. And although they be then
without feelynge, yet the other senses do obey in as much as they may to the
mouinge powers. But sometimes they think to kill a ma, and sometimes that they
them selves are dead, because the fantasy doothe yagine that which either
it conueytethe or fears.

Why is it that such having big heads be lovers of sleep. The reason is
for that they easily receive and retain the vaporous fumes of them, also the
moister brains are apter to sleep, whose near workinge is a vapoure without
doubt. Why is it that wine doth sometimes cause sleep, and sometimes to wake.
The reason is for that when it is drunk moderately, it doth then cause sleep,
in that the vapours of the wine do not trouble but easily moysten and stop
the ways by which the spyrites and hear pass whereas waking, it doethe
otherwise. But when the person drinks much, or y^ the wine is strong, then
doth it dull and vex the powers, and instruments of the spyryt, which at
that time placed in the motion, do force the person to wake. And although

Nature troubled sometimes, these do cause astonishement, yet do they not then
perfitelye sleep.

Why is sleep caused moore and longer, by lying on the right side then on
the left. The reason is, for that as Aristotle wrytethe, we do more wake
lying on the right side, yet sleep is caused of the contrary causes. Or for
that the right side is more wearied in (...) day time, which of these need
the the more rest, nor upon this side also, doth the heart labour.

Why is it that only man while he sleeps, bows down in his sleapyng.
The reason is, for that the powers and spirits giving sense and motion drawn
inward, do not then suffer the body to be stayed upright or for that the
vprightnes of the form in man may cause of the same that the foresaid powers
and heat by their own nature may be carried upward or determined by the
proper kind yet by drawing down those from the members, it behooves that
they fall as to the heads of beasts, of their own nature goo not upright. And
for that the ascending of those in the beasts is not so easily caused, therefore
the members in the seeing they remain not altogether destitute of helps, they
staye up themselves the surer and better.

Why do beasts sleep a lesser time then they do wake. The reason is, for yt
the superfluityes multiplied by perfect digestion can not aptly be sent of
nature without the body by one only expulsion. And, seeing we may often rise
to put away those, therefore is sleep oftentimes broken. Or rather for that the
greater part of the woorkings necessary to life, in which mans perfection
consists, is performed in the day time, and not in sleep, in which man
differethe not from plants or beasts, and whom nature finds unto the end
of waking, for that we sleep quieter, wake with more delight.

Why do me affirm, that sleep much helps to digestion. The reason is, for
that the same happenethe not to every thing, but rather in that which is
caused for the comfort of the whole body, as of the stomach and liver, upon
which the powers and heate more united do convert themselves, and be shorter
lines for they be in a manner in the middle of the creature. But to the other
particular members is the food digested sense, and if that lacks any thing
then the heate engendered suffices them, which may as well be caused in the day
time as in sleep.

Why do some write that the marishe or watery places cause sleep. The reason
is, for that from these are vapours ingrossinge and coelynge the air caused,
which breathed in or drawn in with the breath that spirits refuse, as
contrary to Nature it self which is clear and pure, so that through the
drawing in of these, sleep enseweth. Or rather for that the gross air
brethed or entered in by the pores of the body, doth by his grossenes grieve
at the first the brain, and after carried unto the common sense, doth of the
same compel sometimes to sleep.

Why do the telling or hearing of tales sometimes cause, and sometimes put
away sleep. The reason is as yt is said that in some parsones the gross
moisture abounds, which if it so happens that through labour in the
hearing it is resolved into a vapour, then are they taken with sleep or rather
moved to sleep but the humour subtle in lean or choleric persons, do moore
sharpen, and of this in the pricking compel the person rather to wake: Why
affirms the philosopher, that sleeping he thinks some times or through a
small noise to hear thunder, or through a little fleume sweet stillinge to the
tongue doothe then think to taste or eat milk, and so like in many others.
The reason of these is, that as they say by night, the outward senses bound
in the respect of the motions fro without do perceive the inward far bigger,
whereof the common sense or other virtue dreamynge is deceived, in that he
judges those to be of other sensible matters, then in dede they be. And
Aristotle writes that the small motiones in sleep do appear bigger the in the
day time, because the senses in this occupied about many matters, either
perceive not those, or else discern the far lesser. And for that he thinks
those sometimes to be rather as honey then milk, happens either through
the indisposition of the spyrites or life of the dreamer or of an other cause,
so that of particular matters, no firm rule can be given.

Or when the same should happen that Nature expelled from any principal
member any moisture like as ^ewme in purpose as unto taste, or wyndye Humour
as unto hearing, and if now by reason of the first that which sheddeth forth
unto the Organ of taste is small in respect, yet the senses which perceived
and do retain the cause of the former motion to have been big in his
beginning or parhappes with a big and strong enforcement of nature expelled,
therefore the imaginative coveting to express y^ troublesomnes which it
perceives as big doth so move other customed forms to represent inward
tastes, as of Milk.

And the self same judgment is of the small noise in respect of hearing,
which through the foresaid causes thinkethe ye same big, and so mouethe the
kind of thunder otherwise meant or thought before.

And why do some write, that such devising or unknown matters, do often
falla sleep. The reason is, for that the daily beholding of matters, doth
hinder the digestion of nourishment, but vndygested, the humours then do
easily, evaporate up to the head cause the dream to appear otherwise, Then as
they understand and be delighted, Because the diligent marking, and
considering of the matter, doothe then cause the parson to wake. And of this
when any reads not understanding the matter, he therevppon doth often
times fall a sleep.

Because the spirits power through the endeavour and agitation weakened do
return inward, that they may rest, after which ensewethe sleep, rather
through y^ labour, which also doth often convert the humour into a vapour

Why do the sick and drunken parsons give sometimes in their sleep angry and
froward words and sometyms gentle honest words. The reason of this is for
that the spyrites vexed by an evil or obscure humour do then cause fear
after which then ensuethe hatred, that so forces the person to speak
frowardlye especially being a babbler by nature. But when the spirits be
cleared, then do they dispose that person unto a hope, and so to talk quietly
and gently

Why is it that certain beasts sleep with the eyes oppen, like as the Hare
and fyshes. The reason is, for that the fyshes do lack eye lids, which
very nature hath denied them, in that they lightly waked may soon succour
and defend them selves. And the hare when she is pursued or hunted after doothe
at no time hyde her self* in the wood among bushes, least her eyes always
open and uncovered, might so be harmed with briars and thorns.

Why is it, that the remembrance of the evil past, doth not take away sleep,
like as otherwise of matters to come. The reason is, for if the same should
be true and both laborious, yet of that to come by reason of the fear
annexed, is the same with carefulnes. so that this lets him to sleep,
whereas of the known, it troubles him little or nothing at all. Why do some
sometimes declare to see or to have seen in their sleep Devils, and sometimes
saints or Angels. The reason is, for that although devils of their proper
nature have no colour at all, yet because by this especialye as bye the black,
they are manifested to the people, therefore when it so happens that the
adust humour or fume doth occupy the spirits and and passages, then the
cogitatyue ruled by the, doth cause the dreamers to belene y^ y^ similitudes or
black kinds to be very diuils in that they are then caused corruptlye to
decern. And al though there can not be caused one only dream of all the
kinds which are reserved in the remembrauce, yet are there imagined many
diuills, in that they are comprehended under a certain vnicye of blackenes
imagined. And even like, when the foresaid similitudes and ways are affected
with the red couloure of blood mixed with flewme which for that the same
is white and the other red therefore through, the worthiness of the colours,
they think the those to be ether Angels or saints in yt both these were wot to
be so painted. And that y^ blood also doth dispose the sick to gladness,
appears in the swan, which drawing ne'er to death sings, because her
subtle blood is then dispersed in the ventricles of the heart. Yet sometimes
those be true deuilles, which show themselves sodeinlye, before the soul
departethe out of the mans body unto a greater payne, or rather parhappes that
God will, that such call to remembrance their wicked deeds, and that the sick
in conscience may thereof repent, and amend before death.

Of the opinions of physicians in dreams.
THe phisicions also do observe, that dreams in a manner do declare y^
disposition of our bodies, as either to health or sickness, which parhappes
ought rather to be searched out and learned by Art. Yet say they, that when
sleapynge men see black visiones, like as the dry earth obscure or dead
men, these they and such like, do forshewe customed sickenesses to be caused of
the melancholy humour, and they also warn us then to consider whether that
visione towched the whole body in that the sickness follows universal, like
as of the agewe or leaprye, for if in any part alone the partyculer shall be
that it hath nothing touched that it signifyeth upon the indisposition of the
spyrites, through which some sadness is wont to happen in the spirit and the
self same they declare of the blood For when it doth offend in the like or in
as much, then doth he think to see red and ayeryal matters, and what soever
is pleasant to behold so that a hot and moist quality is prognosticated
upon the motion or indisposition of the same, and then doth it in like sort
either touche the whole body, or but part, And the like is to be said of
choler, when as it seems to him to see cytrene or fyerye matters, or
contentions. And the flewme in like sort, when as it seems to him to see the
white, watery, glass, or clammye, and other like proportioned matters to that
humour, with the foresaid consideration. And allthoughe these may perhaps
yield to the place of the signs yet by them may not the bodily or inward nor
premitiue causes be found, out of these, as by the same appears. in that
they do depend of the gouermente of the six natural things by which they be
known without the dreams, and of the first also, in that seldom when we do
dream, we do then see those touched, except, that when they do foreshew
the harde expressions or properly the nightmare by which are wont to be
prognosticated the sickness named Apoplexiae. And many also of these which as
they say do commonly happen to health full parsons, without sickness following
Neither do the sayings declare the cause for so much as it is manifest that the
subtle vapour of blood, or flewme ever heated by labour or sickness may cause
dreams to show of choler, with in dede bears not sway in the body, or else is
soon resolved or fumes away.

But if you demand why they do foreshewe choler, when as a man in sleep
fears to fall, or thinks to have fall?

The reason is, for that when the same is subtle and of a swift motion, doth
then in dispose the spirits. and lets the motive spirits to proporcionate
the space between the bound, from which, and unto which. But the falling
either is a discotinuation, or not without these, for that waking a man doth
not only fall, but throw himself headlong down, which regards not to
discende by the ordinary steppes.

Also other phisicions do reduce men's dreams, unto the inward or bodily cause
but these rather do happen of the effects or cares of the spirit begone in the
day time, and they are besides diverse in diverse persons, because, not al
personnes occupied about the same, like as y^ occupyer idle person, the smith,
or hus^andman, whereof the self same form doth show one thing to one
person as to the covetous man, an other thing to the liberal person, or
Musician, another thing to the healthful, an other thing to the sick.
Wherefore if it should be so grouted, that the physician by the argument of the
humour ruling may argue the temperatnes or disteperatenes of nature, and unto
the more which either trouble or help, but these contrary of beasts in y^ by
time do diverse desires arise of which ca no firm or certain rule be give but
are wot as it is said to be aplied unto those which either we are by nature, or
custom, or by immoderat desire inclined but if those should have an outewarde
cause, then might they signify many matters upon the issue of the business of
ye hap to come, but the sign of this is, as when dreaming he remains after
wandringe amassed because the significations the do not lack which also may be
applied to the having inward cause of humours. But the cause of the admiration,
is either proceeding through the new access of the outward kind because
they happen not customably, or else when the humour over much rules or
excedeth in the body.

Of the cause of Dreams.
THe causes of all dreams be on this wise, first those which are caused of
meates and drinckes, as in surfeytes are wont to be is the cause of the motion
which properlye is caused of the vapours breathing out of the fo^e. But the
sleep is the rest of the spyrites, and the waking, the vehement motione of
them* and the vain dream is a certain tremblinge and vnperfit motion of
them. Therefore al are vain dreams caused through the spirits lightly
moved. Whereof while we soundly sleep, we then dream nothing at all.

So that all kinds of vain dreams in this point, do agree with the light
motion of ye spirits, all do agree in the matter, for y^ the matter of ach is
the remembrauce of y^ scene or heard, for no vain dreams are caused, but
through them. As y^ like for example, when a man in his sleep thinks to se a
monster with three heads, which he either heard of by the description of some
or saw painted in the like sort, which heads he remembered to be on this
wise, as the one like a Lyon, the other a serpent or Dragon the other a Goat.
That if any other strange matter also a man shall see in his sleep, or some
unknown thing, or deformed Plant then are those none other then vnparfite
things or transposed.

For an unknown man is none other, then when a man is vnparfitlye found.

And the knowledge of this is, that all men, yea the most known being seen
far of, are unknown. Therefore through the vnperfite knowledge and trasposing,
and mixinge of sights, are all dreams caused. So that it appears that al
dreams to agree booth in the efficiente cause and in the matter, for the
efficyente cause, is the moderate motion of the spirits, but the matter is the
memory of things seen, either whole or vnparfit. For as it is manifest that
there be diverse kinds of dreams, even so it behooves y^ the causes be diverse
for that through them, those are always caused.

This moderate motion ought not always to be thought so perfect, that this
moderation is exquisitely an indiuiduat.

But if the motion be vehementer, and troublesomer, although it may be
moderated in the kind, yet are they called vain dreams, troubled, vnperfite,
and confused. And in this manner do two kinds of them, arise, the one which
is of meat, and is the more confused and vnperfyte, yet more fayntly. For that
from the meat and drink the vapours are not so parfytelye carried as from the
humours, which so cause dreams more vnperfite lame, yea and more obscure, in
that the vapour is fatter, if the parson drinks wine, then of humours

Yet are the kinds not so stable, do. move with such a force, as those
which are caused by the humours. Wherefore the dreams caused of meat are less
parfyte less agreeynge, and in order, so that they appear more troubled,
confused and diverse, then those which are caused of the humours, as are
contrary, those which are caused of the humours be more stable in order
agreeing, yet lesser troubled and diverse, with less force, then those which
are caused of meat. And those which are caused with a lesser troubling, and
be clearer, but caused as they were compound through many remembrances
conjoined, do affect more by the sleep through that, which agrees that by
waking in the day time little. Also they agree for the more part to those
things either seen, or harde, or imagined the day before or but a few days
before, or else a lunge time before. And the do they show y^ order as it were of
the whole matter. But those which are in an order, and be with the least
motyon of the spyrites caused gentle, and that without any agitacion of the
upper causes procured, do yet more affect the soul, that waking be may
then be holden with a certain admiration. And seeing a man may through the
effects, proceed unto each causes therefore ought a trauce to be ineche
kinds.

For if dreams by a great motion may appear troubled, divers obscure, and
vnperfite, and that they seem a little to agree then shall we s^ye, that
either meat, or drink, or such like matter, was the causer of these.

Of the division of Dreams and order of interpretyng of the
IT must needs ensue, that some causes of effect, to be true of all dreams
of the others which are caused, therefore those causes, are either bodily, or
not bodily, and hoth also either new, or before wrought. So that it must
uedes ensew, that there be four kinds of dreams. Now the new and bodelye
causes, are meat and drink, like as the heads of Garlic, the Coleworts,
the Onyones, the Beans, and what soever ascend to the head, and especially
those which engender melancholy. Further yealowe choler doothe cause to
appear in sleep, both fyers fighting, and Melancholy causes to appear
in sleep clay, myer, or dirt, Burialles, graves, imprisonment, and fear,
and blood causes to appear spor^es, fair places, blood and purple
colour: and the flewme causes to appear waters, showers of rain and snow,
for that the same is a moyste cold quality. But the vncorporate causes
precedent are cares cogitations, matter as committed to memory, fear, hope,
gladness, heaviness or sadness of mind hatred and love. But the new are those
which frame the superior cause come unto the soul. For of all the other
members al the causes of the divisions do so agree that many endeavour to place
this last under some of the three foresaid. And it behooves first ^o seek out
which may be of every kind, therefore which true and which false, for that
none do show matters to come, but those which are sent frome the superior
cause, and those also which are caused of humours. And hereof why those may
be true it behouethe to show, and what truth also may be found in al the
kinds.

And after that which be forms, that may be interpreted. And to co^clude
the whole tretise as it euidentelye appears doothe either consiste of the
difference of things seen, or of the manner of seeing, or difference of the
dreaminges. For that by nature men see true dreams, which dream but seldom,
and false dreams which dayelye dream. Also such as be occupied in great
actions, and businesses, and greatly abstain from meat and drink nor are
troubled with fear nor sadness, do see and have true dreams, but such
affected in the contrary manner, do see false dreams. And for that cause the
dreams of Princes, are commonly true.

And such of honest manners true faithful, and godly, have for the more
part true dreams. And such which are not so godly, but cruel, yet no
deceivers, see commonly true dreams, and the superstitious parsons, do see
very few true dreams. Also he which is accustomed to see true dreams, to
his dreams is more credyte to be given, then to those which are of a
contrary manner. And men have truer dreams in the Summer and the Winter then
in the Spring, and the Harueste, for that in those times they often alter.
Also quiet seasons, do cause true dreams, but the wind, and boystrouse
weather, do work contrary, and the more boysterouse, the rather falser.
Besides short dreams and in order, are truer and moore evident, and of a
cause more constant are caused. And dreams moved or cansed in the rising of
the Son, and, before or after unto the third hour, be for the more part
true. But those dreams at the noone time of the day and at the setting of
the Son, be not so true. For that the son is the author of the true and
constant things. So that when he shall be ne'er the angels, be doth then cause
the truer dreams. And the terror or fear of things mouynge a man out of
bed do often follow true as the like happened to Caesar, the day before he
was slain. And the condition also which is fullfylled by and by of the sleep,
when it shall be without cogitation doth the reason show true and most certain
dreams. be much before, or after the rising of the Sun, it shall then
signify the cause to deginne, or else shall then be accomplished or discovered.
Therefore that space shall be referred unto the whole dream, as unto the whole
year. And now as to the qualities of things seen, it is manifest that
whatsoever are presently begone, are sp^dylier accomplished, yea and that
very swiftly those which presently through y^ proper course are near the
end, but those contrary, do slowly ensue. So that a man must consider the
nature of the dreamer, the age, and the rest needful, like as the wealthy
persons, and men in aucthority. And whosoever also have a constitute time, as
Magistrates for a year, like as the self samh custom is used in London, by
the yearly chosinge of the Mayre. And to be brief, the times of dreams are
either present or shortly after, or a lunge time after to come or paste, or
else a time appointed for that no man can number the years, months, nor
days, exept that when the words or peculiar signs declaring the nombers
shall come. And besides these, whatsoever dreams shall be caused in the Kalendes
of Januarye, or on Christmas day, come to pass within a year after. And if
in the Kaledes of any month, or in the entrance of y^ Son into any sign
then within a month. And if in the same day of the Suns entrance, either
into the Solstice or Equinoctial, then shall the effect ensue within three
months. And if in the hour of the full Moon or Change, the within xv.
days after. And if at the Sunrysinge on the Sunday, then within seven days
after. And if at the new entrance of an office of government, or entrance of
a new house, or of the new dwelling in an other country, or new enteringe
of a ship, or in any other beginning to speak generally before the end of
that bus^sse, shall the effect be accomplished.

Also dreams happeninge on Christmas day, and on the day of the salutation of
the virgin Mary, show marvelous matters to follow, do also extend their good
haps unto the return of the next year. And the day of yt resurrection, for
that the same is a movable feast doth, signify the like, yet chaunginge the
form of things, as that the parson shall pass out of one condition of life
into an other, or else it declares that mutation to come in the same year. And
that no new hap besides of increase, for the present life, is after promised
of the same. And seeing in all matters, some one may be better worse, and
which profits and harms even so must it happen in the like wherefore
whatsoever do remove impediments do cause dreams the truer, for some
impediments are of the mind, others of the body, and others which hinder and
trouble dreams. For the dreams art troubled of these, which declare dreams
of an other kind, like as meates and wine, and the veneral act excessively
used, and troubles of y^ mind sorrow of which a ma must beware

Of the Authors proper opmio about the manner of interpreting Dreams, which
come by an outward cause.
AND to eschew the lunge, circumstances and prolizites of cerayne, and that
the readers of these may not be wearied about so divers, as vain practices
which be written and declared by many, about the interpretation of Dreams.
Therefore we will follow and use a surer and easier way, into these which
shall bring with it some wonted reason of others happeninge to come by the
which manner many have been invented. For many truly with these, coceyue to
direct of the particular doings in the day time: For how much y^ kinds moved
altered be in the cause of remembrance, and oftentimes also with similitudes
perceived in the sleep or rather with the experience of them which after
followed, we saw to declare much. And many also when they see or perceive, that
it hath otherwise happened or, come to pass, then as it is wont oftentimes to
them, to succeade and follow as to some good. And contrariwyse, when it so
meets, that it hath otherwise hurt, then they be stricken with a feat,
which is the expectation of the evil, And semblably, whethe imaginative in a
dream of himself, or rather with the hel^e of another inward virtue doth
perceive some what from the outward that he thinks to adioyne and apply like,
and the dreamer also has experienced to have otherwise come to pass then it
moves again the similitudes or forms of those matters, which in the like, or
in some have happened, with the which prosperous dreams he caused. And
contrarywyse when he is mindful that it hurt, then he provokes them
again, of which otherwise he received harm. For not by one ha^ or hurt
only, a man may conclude tha^ it may like succeed, like as not one spring
alon, works and multiplyeth the swallow, but by the often coming of him, ^
that also somewhat contrarying the mig^tyer shall not hinder, as the Philosophe
saith, which is, that oftentimes present signs of rayue be at hand which
succeed nor fall not after. So that not al things are to be sought out by the
causes. For it is truly as Aristotle saith, that the learned to earnestly
enquire and search out that which comes to pass or performed in every
kind, and how much the nature of that matter works, and geeueth also a
similitude, which appears by the Mathemathicane persuading to prove by the
orator to demonstrate.

Wherefore those are not to be denied, which by a long time have been observed
and found true, forasmuch as in their kind they be near to the terms of
the first principles. And if therefore divining by this art, a man sometimes
may be deceived, it is no marvel, because that no man hitherto hath affirmed
that assuritye, that of dreams he may have such certayntye which he hath of
the sciences and others, which we work waking in the day time in the which
also error happens. For both the Gramarian, doth sometimes harberouslye
write and the Physician also harms in his cures.

Of the observation of the Autentiks in divining or pronouncing by similitudes
ANd they witness to this opinion, which the auncietne men did observe, in
deuininge or pronouncing by them, for when as they saw and marked a certain
animal like to fly to go out of certain appels, they pronosticated the
battle to ensue taking peradventure their knowledge or perseuerace by this,
forasmuch as flies be in continual motion, and move or stir too and fro,
and be also of a deceitful and importunate nature, like as to me of war.
Also they pronounced rain to ensue, of the eager bytynge of them for that
through the ele^ation of the vapoure one high they lacked the fode, with the
which before they were nourished, whereof they recurre to hard matters which
when they suck, by a greater enforcement and might, they thenne byte. But
those beasts which cannot suck or byte, like as be frogs, and such like,
the which do sing or chirp that they may the better draw the air to them,
for as much as they may not otherwise be nourished and live. And others
besides seeing worms very why^ to come out of the earth, pronosticated
plenty of corn to ensue, for as much as the whiteness of them proceeded not
but of the fatness of the earth. And others also markinge little spyders to go
out of certain fruetes, did pronouce pestilence to ensue, peradventure the
reason was because the spider is an animal of the nature of Saturne, which
oftentimes is y^ cause of the death of beasts, or else because she spinnethe or
weauethe her webs which be in a manner like to that matter in which the dead
bodies to be buried is involved. And further by y^ similitude of a Serpent
they pronounced a secret^ enemy and by that similitude also of a wolf, they
pronounced a tyrant. And albeit now that this place is not the self same with
that before by effect, because that either is of the latter, and for that cause
in proceeding of the better known to us it swarued not much from the matter to
prosecute this way the which although that, in many it may be attained by
knowledge, yet he may have or come to it by the instinct or inward moving of
nature, for according to this truly, the lamb ^yethe the wolf, and the bird
also the hawk, follow their dams. For in the end life and the continuance
be not reserved, without the prosecu^ion of the conferences, and es^hewing
also of them. which may hurt and harm.

Of those Dreamess which were reported to have been proved
Considering there is no other credit to be given to dreams, farther than
their nature requires, yet being requested or rather enforced by my friends. I
will therefore recyte certain of those which we have taken known as true. For
although that many of them for the most part especially those which be caused
by an outward manner, the reason or cause of them cannot be assigned or given:
yet had we rather satis^ye the requests of our friends, then by wrytinge
nothing, to avoid the slanders of malicious persons.

And first to dream that he sees* water altered in colour, and substance,
albeit it may declare the evil disposition of the eyes, either present or to
come, yet if the colour chaugethe to rednes or darkness argues very what
humours. And when the colour is diverse and variable, argues the diversity of
the humours and that spyrites troubled disquieted much, and outward sorrows
also. For these give or imprint sometime into our minds some similitude or
sadness, but yet in a secrete manner when as we be not intent or stable when
we receive the same, for then we be not ve^ed by it, either because we think
not thereon, or be occupied before hand with other matters. But when these
impediments cease although the man thinks not on them, yet the former
similitude commethe again, and represents it self cofusedly, because it
made not an impression before.

Wherefore when it is fearful he sorrows, and the cause knows not, but the
same may happen of some inward humour which before rested, and after vexes
by it self, or by a vapoure or fume. But to come to the matter, when we
dream that we see the water troubled much in quantity and permanent,
declares the abundance of many humours. If it appears that it runs:
sygnifyeth the caterre to come or present. He which dreams that he sees
missing light rain and the firmament clear argeweth a good disposition of the
spirits, with a little humiditye of the eyes: but the firmament to be cloudye
and bent to rain, signifyeth the aboudance of these, and the indisposition of
them. And when to the sick person in a fever appears y^ he swims in the
water, is then anotyce that nature contends against the matter of the
sickness, and that the patient shall escape because the resistance and fight
argues the strength of him. And when one dreams that be feels himself
much grieved as he were pressed or wrong together in the body, is a notyce of
benummynge or the night mare as we name it. For it demonstrates or declares
the quality wherewith the sleaper is vexed, rather then any outward thing.

To dream that he sees himself carried as though he flew, declares the
subtilnes of humours, like as to dream that he sees or touches snow or
hayle declares crude and raw flewme.

And dreams signify evil, when the spirits and heate renewed in the sleep
transpose them upon those evil humours, which before rested, for as much as
then through these the like vapours be elevated and stirred up, and these by
their ill nature, cause men to fear. And vniuersallye all things seen or
appearing in the sleep otherwise t^en their proper nature, do argue an
indisposition or dystemperaunce of the powers or spirits, of the organes, or
humours, or of natural heat. Like as dreaming to walk by narrow places,
declarethe a sickness to come of the lunges or lights, because he is
prohibited and let to breathe or draw necessary or congruente air, and
the reason wherefore is, because their passages and ways be stopped. And
^ccordinge to this sense, it is said that Physicians commonly help by
dreams.

To dream that he sees many Citizenes and Towns men gathered in the
Church, well apparelled, with mearye countenance and smylinge cheer: it is
found by experience, that he (...) happy marriage to be with good suck in
the end, if he minds the taking of a wife. And otherwise when they appear
sad of countenance, ireful or ill fa^oured, then if that he that so (...)
be sick, it declares as hath been experienced the death of the dreamer near
at hand, especially when they that are of his affinitye seem to associate or
company from others: for it disagrees not, y^ one similitude with diverse
cyrcustances and respects may signyfie many things, like as sometime for the
lack of words, and signifies many things, yet the word or name is for y^
more part at pleasure of the namer, but the thing it self is of nature. And in
all dremes the more good cyrcustances there are like as when they seem to be in
a pleasant, fair, good lye, green, and fruit^fu^place, or in a Church, or
before ^ friend, and so of the others, so much the certainer shall be the
interpretation upon, prosperity, and contrary wise upon infortunacye: like
as to dream that he sees himself in a barren place, desert, or rude, or
rough with stone, or troublesome, pronosticateth evil. And when also he who
dreams is fortunate already, although the prosperouse vision may have fewer
testimonies, yet by reason of his own fortune, the signification is enlarged
in prosperytie goodness: and when one being unfortunate already so dreamethe,
then with fewer testimonies may be pronounced upon the evil end. And
generally to say when the vision appears in the proper syte due place, not
defourmed nor troubled, not ^loked, dissembled, nor couterfeyted, argewetth
goodness of the operacions: and teperatnes of humours. But here must be made a
distinc^ion, because with them is associated somewhat appertaining to affairs
or busynesses but with these to the natures of the elemetes or mixtures. For
when one dreamynge thinks that he seethe or heerethe clearly and quickly
declarethe the clerenes of the animal or visible spyrites.

And to dream that he runs swiftly allthoughe it signifyeth that the powers
of our mouinges be tree and well, yet may it also pronounce the expedition
of some business.

To dream that he meets women in black garments, with their head covered
declares privy deceits intended against him as has been found true,
which thing booth the kind of them also the colour of the garments
persuades so to be. To dream that he seeyth a harlot, or commoneth with
he, signifies deception or variances, which among y^ others be two
properties of them.

To dream that he smites or kills an enemy with the sword, is a sign ^
token of victory to ensue, as hath been^ experienced, and if he were in suit
wyt^ him, yt declares that he shall have th^ sentence pronounced on his
behalf, o^ on his side,

To dream that he seethe a fryende, or priest of an honest and godly life
looking cheerful in countenance, declares a good hap to follow, for the
people use not to hurt us, when we are awake, but to dream that he hath,
foul or pitiful face, signifyeth heuines of mind

To dream that he sees a man accustomed to, lye declares that it shall
contrarywyse happen in his business, then he hoped and looked for. But the
contrary is signified in seeing him that uses to speak true. To dream that
he sees himself put or thrust into prison, declares as has been proved,
that the business of which he is vexed about, shall soon be ended by agreement
or by sentence or the cause shall remain and ^reste as boyde and dead, for
imprisonmentes be the extremity and uttermost in civil controversies. To dream
that he seethe the Judge or Justice his face, altered in colour or place,
declares that he will not perform that which he promised, for the
countenance, in latyne is named Vultus, because what a man willethe it
expresses and declares. To dream that he sees a Prince long a gone dead,
with a merry countenance or lokynge merely, signifyeth a vain hope to follow,

To dream that he talks with a dead parson, which he thinks to be a
live, signifyeth that some deception or wily deceit shall be opened or
manifested, unto him. To dream that he sees a field or close of green
wheat, with ears not sprung out, declares joy without profit, or very
small, because the profit of the wheat consists in the ear. To dream that
he sees the air (which for the obscurytye and darkness thereof) he can not
discern, declares that some wicked fact by him committed, shall remain
uncovered and unknown.

If he, which is in love with a woman, dreams to have found abirdes neaste,
and that he reaching or putting his hand into the nest, feels it could, it
is a toke of hasty or sudden sadness, and sorrow, for she shall either marry to
another man, or else shall dye, he shall depart soon fro that city or abiding
place, into another town. For yt nest signified is in ye place of birth, and
coldness expresses death.

And to dream or think that he hath sound yonge ones there it declares joy
of wantonness or luxurye, to take those birds, signifyeth a certain gain.

To dream that he sees a small ship entringe into his house and after going
out of his house, declares the death of the principal or head of the house,
especially when to him appears that in the house is water, for that
betokenethe the tears and the ship signifyeth the bear whereon the dead
bodies be carried.

And many things are spoken of the seeing of sundry beasts, as to dream that
he sees many horses, declares a hope of gain to follow, but if they walk
confusedly, declares the disquietnes and trouble of mind. If he thinks
himself to ride upon a fat horse and beautiful* in a pleasant place,
declares gain, with out controversy. If the horse be red it shall be with
strife and variance, and if cole black, with heaviness of mind, and if white
uncertain. To dream that he seethe lea^e asses, or wild beasts, that live
in woods, declares labours with ^eauines of mind. And lea^e oxen and lack
declares incommoditye damage, ^fat and white, gladness and gain of the proper
industry and if they be under an others care or keeping, it shall come by an
outward manner: And if they feed in a pleasant place it declares abundance
and quietness of mind, and if they be in continual chaunginge of place,
declares the gain not to be certain. To dream that he is bit of a
Serpent, declares that he hath a sharpe humour, or that he shall be laid
inwayte for, and his humour shall be impaired if he leaves a wound he shall
sustepne damage, and if the Serpent appears great the damage shall happen or
come to him by his superior if a small serpent, by a private or wicked person,
if it wear a venomous Serpent by a tyrant. And if it should some a Lion that
bites, he should be endamaged by a prince, if by a wolse, by a secrete enemy.

To dream that he tatchethe fat birds, signifies gain, but to hear birds
chatteringe which cannot be caught, signifyeth contention, and if they lightly
and soon ^ye away that it shall soon be ended and quieted, and if they fly
over his head, declares a heap of honours y^ he thinks he hath them in
his hands, declares assured gain. If he which loves a woman, should dream
that he speaks in a strange tongue, declares that in few days after, he
shall speak and commune with her in secrete, or else by letters. To dream that
he gooeth up to a ch^yre and in it declare doubts, arguethe that it shall soon
be reputed as true which he shall openly speak in the face of the people. To
dream that he sees himself clothed with a garment which extendethe nor
passethe the middle of the leg, declares the expedition of a doubtful
business, which yet shall not be done ended wtoute his shame or check. To
dream that the fruit which he gathreth, savours sweet and pleasantly
declares a good disposition of the humour and if of a stin^kinge, full, ome or
filthy savour, that they be corrupted, or those praises, and these rebukes.

To dream that he sees his debtoure clothed in a black garment, declares
that he shall get nothing of him.

To dream that he wears two caps on his head, the one upon the other,
declares that he shall soon after be infamed or slaunderes of a crime or
reputed y^ he has obtained some grace or favour with filthy gain, because
with the second crime, he shall hyde and cloak the brute or fame of the
first. To dream that he is in the palace of a king or bishop and that his
face appears cherefull, and in the accustomed haby^e, to get favour and
thanks, some say, that a man may prognosticate upon some comoditye to come
and follow specially if he appear to smile on him. To dream that he sees
his adversary or him that sues for that, which he sues for, upon a fat
or fair horse, declares that his adversary is apt to overcome, but if it
appear that he him self also riding, out rides him or out runs him, that
he shall obtain his suit, but with difficulty.

To dream that he which touches in aucthority in a come weal, is highest
his ha^de or any part of his body by which he shall feel him self warmed or
heated, declares that very shortly after he shall be hope by hy him in some
great business or affairs, for y^ touching more certifyeth and verifies the
truth, then words alone spoken by them. To dream that he takes alms from
the alter signifies gain unthought upon.

To dream that he shows some cofer or chest open, declares that shortly
after, he shall utter secretes to come.

To dream that he gathreth two or three green apples from the top of the
tree declares that he shall shortly after, be advanced in the face and sigh
of the worshipful and worthy persons. To dream that he is led or brought to
a gardeyn or pleasant place and after brought to a another barrayne or stony
place, declares that he shall within few days after betaken with a sickness
and if it may appear that there he should be destroyed, it signifyeth that he
shall dye of ye disease.

To dream that he is entered into religion or become religious that he shall
soon after be sick, and if it appearethe that he hath published the
profession the that he shall dye for they that profess are counted dead to the
world.

To dream that he sees those things, which be wont to lye hid under the earth
as bones, or carcasses of the dead, or mostrous forms, declares that thereof
shall succeed strangeness and troubles, because they be contrary to the course
of nature, and they be also as divinations and threatenings of infirmities.

To dream that he sees one coming and casting stones against him, declares
that shortly after he shall be damaged, wrong done to him by words, or that
some man shall go about or endeavour to do him injury. And if any executour of
a will, shall dream that the man buried cries or calls him, declares that
he regards not, or negleceth the charge which he ought to loke upon and
that soon after the inheritance or succession shall be wastfully or ryotously
spent away and consumed. If a woman dreams, that her lover comes to present
her a swynes head as a friendly gift, declares that she shall after hate her
lover, forsake him for that the hog is ungrateful to Venus works.

To dream that he has eaten unaccustomed meat, which he labours and
streineth what he may to vomit up, and cannot: is a token of unlawful gain,
which he would restore, and shall not restore. To dream that he puts or
lays stones in diverse corners of the wyndow for a defence: y^ soon after a
chance or misfortune shall fall to him through which he shall need the
aid of many parsons and if he thinks they be laid upon a common wall,
that then the ^fortune or ill chance shall come by the malignity and
enuoy^s^es of a neyghebour. To dream that a secrete enemy first talks with
him, and after plays or deliuerethe carsts to him to play: declares that
he shall deceive, or shall do what he may to deceive him.

To dream that he hat^ three privy members standin^e together: declares
that he was a pren^ce or hired servant and now a free man, and that he hath
atteyned three names for one as two of the names to come, by his freemanship.

To dream that he hath ears of cornegrowen or spr^ng out of his breast, and
after comes to one to have them plucked away as vnseemelye to him there to
grow: declarethe that he shall have two men children, and through an evil
calamity and myshappe, shall be slain, and thieves also shall beset his
house and break thereinto, and besides spoil his houses or barnes standing
in the fields. For the ears of corn signify the men children that shall
come proceade of his seed, and the plucking away of the ears, declares the
occasion of the children and the robbery of his goods. When a pore man having
a rich father, dreamethe that he seethe his fathers head plucked up by a Lyon
and to be dead, declares as it is very likely that his father shall dye, and
he left to be his beyre and by this mean he shall put away careful^es and
heaviness of mind and grow, rich. For then his father, shall over charge or
lay him no moore nor be pressed by poverty. For the head, signifyeth the
father and the plucking or drawing away the privation or death of the father,
the Lyon, the sickness, by which the father sickninge shall dye of. And the
death the exchange and alteration of life that through the falling coming of
riches to him, he shall never be poor and nedie after. To dream that he hath
no feet, or no soles of feet, declarethe that he shall be burned. And a woman
to dream that her eyes be soredeclareth that her children shall be sick
after. And to dream also that her children be sick, declares that her eyes
shabe sore and greueous.

If the master of a ship dreams that he has lost the fore part of the
ship, declares that shortly after his governor of the fore part or deck
shall dye, And to dream also that he carries forth the governor of the deck
to bury, him declares that the master shall less the face or fore-part of that
ship,

And if one dream that he sees his father sick, declares that he shall have
y^ headache, or be fore pained in the head. And one to dream that he hath no
nose, declares that through a false crime and naughty deed done, ^e shall
fly, and forsake his proper country. For the lack of any member, or part of
the face, makes it loathsome to see to.

And who that dreams that he drinks soft or thynne mustard, shall after
as hath been experienced be accused of murder, for y^ no man is accustomed to
drink mustard, but of force, seeing that it is no customable drink to be
drunk, and it is rather to be said of that which commonly is said, that
is, who ever drank mustard. And therefore it may be said that it is contrary
to the nature of drink, as violent death, is to the nature of ma.

And if one dream that he lightethe a candle at the moon, shall in short
time after fall or become blind, as hath been found true. And the reason is,
for that he seems to take light there, where it is in possible to take. And
besides the Moon, as it is said hath no light of her own light.

A certain woman there was, who dreamed that she saw three proper images or
forms in the Moon and was delivered of three women children, which dyed in
the same month also, that they were borne. For those three images signified
the daughters, which one circle compassed and contained. For that in one
thynne skin named a second, the physicians say the infants and younglings to
be contained in the mothers womb.

And they lived no longer because the Moon performs her course in a
months space. A certain rich woman dreamed that she saw three ravens come
and sit on her, and that dishonestly to behoulde her besides the one of them
to say with a hoarce voice, I will take ^hy life from the and after these
ravens had flown thrice about her, they departed away. The which woman the
nynthe day following dyed, ryghtlye and by good reason. For where he said I
will take thy life from the, was like as if he had said I will deprive the of
thy life, that is I will kill thee. And that they flew thrice about her,
did signify the nyne days following

A certain woman dreamed, that she saw her self to have done Hercules
laborues, who not lunge after being hastily or suddenly taken with fire, so
ended myserablye her life,

And one dreamed that he saw his face in the moon: who not long after
travailed into far countries and there continued a lunge time forth in
wandringe about those regions, for the continual swyft motion of the moan,
declared that he should like wander here and there about.

A certain man there was, who dreamed that be thought himself to have an
iron yard: which not lunge after had a child by whom he was slain for that
iron by rust, which grows on the same is so wasted away.

And one dreamed that he went from home into a strange country, and lost
the key of his house, and when he came home again, he found his daughter to
have lost her maidehead. Which dream declared to him that al things at home
could not be in safety, when the kaye so lost was ready for another to take
up, for either it signified as it is thought the misusage of his family, or
ells that his wife, daughters, or maidens, were enticed to folly in his house,
or else otherwise that his servants bribed and pylfred away from him.

And one dreamed y^ he thought he rose with the Son, and ran also with
the moon: who after was strangled, so booth the Son and the Moon arysinge
saw him hanging on high for he had the Son in y^ morning in his face and
the Moon in his back at night so that he had the one good morrow and the
other good night.

A certain man there was, who dreamed that he thought his seruaunt whom he
loved about all others, was turned and become a Fire brand which
afterterwarde fell blind, and by his seruaunt he was led so that in this
manner in his servant was a light to him, to show him the way.

And one dreamed that he thought he saw a starrefall from heaven: and another
star to ascend from the earth unto heaven. Who then was a servant but
after his master dyed. After whose death, he thought he had been free and
without a master, but in the end he found that he was compelled to serve
his time with his mysters' son. So that the Star falling signified the
death of his master, and the star ascendinge up, signified the son to
be his master, under whom he should serve. And one dreamed that he thought
he crept out of his own flesh like as the serpent being ^u^de, doth caste
his slough, which person the next day following, dyed For the soul myndinge
or rather being forced to leave the body, gave to him such ymaginations, and
to dream the like. And one dreamed being in a strange country, that he was
borne again of his mother, who after returned from thence into his own country
and found his mother greeuouslye sick, he after succeeded as heir to her.

And this was signified to be borne again of his mother that is to say, from
poverty to become rich by his mother for in great need and poverty he was
before. And one dreamed y^ he thought his beard to burn in a light and clear
fire, without smoke: who had a son which after was in great estimation
honoured for his knowledge. And yet they lived not lunge together but that by a
certain incommoditye and mishap were separated, and dwelt or lived a sunder.
So that the beard burning, signified y^ son to become excellent and had in
reputation: for the son was an ornament of the fathers, like as the beard to
y^ face. But because fire is wont to deminish wast every matter therefore it
signified that the soon not to abide or dwell with the father: And the son
also was separated fro him, and not dyed, because the fire burned clear
without smoke.

A certain man dreamed that he heard one say to him, thy staff is broken,
who after fell sick, and was brought to a palseye. For fyrmenes of the body
is declared by the staff that is to say the strength and good health thereof.
And the same man being long vexed and troubled with the palsy, thought in his
dream that his staff was broken, who very shortly after recovered his
health. For it declared that to him being so sick neaded not an outward stay
or staff: a^d that he also should recover his bealt, so y^ he should not after
neade a staff to walk wi^h.

And one dreamed that he thought he would have turned the head to loke on
his shoulder, and could not: who not log after became blind of the one eye, so
that he could never after see that shoulder on the same side that the eye was.

And one dreamed that he thought he was carried on a black Ox, and that y^
Ox bare him whether he would or no^, as to do him some other harm. Who not
lunge after toke a journey by Sea, and was in great peril of life and not
many days after the ship brake the ship so perishing, he could hardly
escape with life. And one dreamed that thought be saw a dart fall from Heaven,
which wounded one of his fee^e who after was bitten of a Serpent, and the
byte so rotted wasted his foot that he died thereof. And one thought in his
sleep, to have a Barbours glass, to stand with the same in the streate near
to the market place and there to occupy himself as much as he might with
the glass, and after possessing the glass after his mind did therein behold
himself, and saw al his Image filled with spots, who the loved a concubyne,
and without good will and agremente of friends, did after mary her, by whom he
had a dishonest child not only for the fact, but for y^ the child had crooked
and ill shapen eyes. So that the Barbers glass signified a common woman, who
lightly was alured to any personne, to use her body wickedly, and for that
let by friends so much as in them lay, to mary her. And where he saw his
Image, signified his soon after borne, like to himself in all parts, yet
irreprehesible, for that the glass had spots.

And one thought in his sleep, that he brought his own wife into the
Bu^^hery to be killed, and there to cut forth her flesh into pe^es to sell,
and to make ^ great gain thereof, in so much that ^e seemed to rejoice
greatly thereat, and ^bat he after carefully laboured, where ^t might saflye
bestow and hyde the m^^ey received of her flesh sold, that he ^ight so
avoid the envy grown ther^boute, who afterward carried forth his ^ife to be
dishonest with many persons, ^d so made her a great gain to him by ^at
means, which of reason moved him ^at he should hyde the fact.

And one dreamed, that he thought he carried a great substance of bright gold
on his shoulders, who after fell blind through the brightness of gold* for
as it is very like a truth, that gold darckned his sight.

And a certain man dreamed, that he thought he hard one say to him, fear not
death, albeit thou can not live. Who after lost his sight, and this ryghtlye
hapeninge to him by reason. And he dyed not insomuch as he lived still, and yet
again he lived not, insomuch as he had lost the comfort of the light, that
is, he saw not

And one dreamed that he thought he eat bread dipped in honey, who after
attained unto such eloquence and wisdom by the study of Philosophy, that
he got thereby much riches: For the honey signified the obtaynynge of
eloquence and wisdom, as very like it is* and the bread the great riches
which he got. A certain woman dreamed, that she thought she had her husbands
priuityes cut from the rest of the body in he^ hands and that she toke great
care, an^ much foresight howe to keep them: wh^ after bare her husband a
son, whych^ she brought up her self. For the husbands priuityes, signified
the son which was got by him: and that it was taken or cut away from the
rest of the body, signified her brynginge up of her son, but her husband
was after bereft of life by death.

A certain ma dreamed, that he thought he saw an Olive tree spri^ge out of his
head: Who after followed earnestly the studies of Philosophy, and used
consequently the doctrine and exercise thereof. For the plant or tree is
thought always green and lusty in it self, thereof dedicated to Minerua:
which is feigned to be the Lady or goddess of wisdom.

And on dreamed that he thought he fleeyd of the skin of his own son, and
to make a bag thereof, to carry wine or suchlike matter therein. Whose son
the next day following fell into a river and was drowned. For they make
bags with the skins drawn of dead flesh or carcases, in the which they are
wont to put wynes, oils, and other like licours.

And one dreamed, that he thought he saw his lover in an earthen pitcher, or
pot or such like vessel burning: whose lover after was dead, and slain of a
como or hired seruaute at will. For it signified with good cause death to the
woman because she was seen in an earthen vessel: and of a common servant
because it was also a common pitcher or pot, serio^ge to every body.

And a certain man dreamed that he thought he dwelt out of his own
country, and there builded an hearth for fire: Who not lunge after dyed out of
his country where he thought he builded or made the hearth. For it signifies
ye place where the fire dissolveth wastes to nought: the building of it out
of his country, signified there the end of his life.

And one dreamed, that he thought dwelling out of his proper country, to
build an hearth and for the stones he mo^^red his own books and then
playstred together: but after changinge his mind* he threw down that he had
built, and s^ceased of buildynge. Who not long after fell sick, and was vexed
with a grievous sickness, which sickness so handled him, that he was brought to
deaths door, bu^ in the end he recovered to health again

And the manifest causes of these, be superfluous to recyte.

And a certain man dreamed, that he thought he was persecuted of a woman,
which he had known of a lunge time which did put on cloaks to knit about
him, and that loose hanged in the middle without pleates or seames: that at
the last against his will, compelled thereto. After which a woman loving this
man did mary him against his will, and he within few years after dyed, for
that y^ cloaks were vnparfit and not sewed together, it so signified. And a
certain woman being sick, dreamed y^ she thought she was with child, that
shortly after to labour of her child, to be near the time of her delivery:
but further she thought that a certain woman vnexperte about these matters to
touche her and to say: that now truly she shall not be delivered but
after.7.months she shall be delivered of a fair child amiable, or worthy to
be loved who after fell into a dagerous sickness y^ no man thought her to escape
and live, and yet the sickness leaving her nothing at all whereby she
should come to health, died within seven months after. For by good reason,
it was the discharge of the burden and cares after the seven months: but the
fair child, was or signifies death, which was worthier to be beloved and
chosen before the rest, because he takes away the sicknesses and sorrows, or
cares of this life.

And a certain man dreamed, that he thought he threw out his ringe, with the
which he sealed all things, and after seking it, found that the stone which
was in it cleft in two small parts or pieces, y^ it co^lde not after serve to
any purpose whereof ensued that al his business availed not, or came to no
purpose, for five siftye days after.

And a certain man dreamed, having a rich sister and being also sick, that
before the sisters door was a fig tree sprog up, and that he plucked of the
tree seven black figs, and eat them: which sister after died, and left him
as heir which so dreamed, within seven days after, and the reason of these
be evident.

And a certain woman dreamed: that she thought she had an eye in her right pap
or breast: who had a son that she dearly loved, which not lunge after lost,
she much wailed for. Which reason may like be applied to that when a person
at any time dreams to have an eye in his shoulder, that lost the shoulder:
for in a certain manner is said by the dream, regard the shoulder, and have
concideration thereof: So that by the same reason the woman lost not her breast
but the like to the breast, her son.

And a certain man dreamed that he thought he eat his own dounge with
bread, and to be delighted therewith: who after was made a ruler, besides the
law amittyng, and that without blame: for yt it seemed to him to be delighted
with that banquet and yet not without suspi^ion, because of the dounge. For ve^y
like it was that this gain to be full of filthines, and dishonestlye.

And a certain man thought, being sent into a strange country on message,
that in his dream he was returned home again: and that his wife after standing
by him to say the little sweetynge is dead Who not long after received letters
fro his wife, that the youngest child he had was dead, which was a sweet
child, to be disyred and loved of every body.

And a certain man dreamed, having a brother dwelling in a strange country
that it was told him y^ his brother was come home that he thought his brother
saw him become blind: who after died which saw the dream. And by good reason
it was, for as much as it was impossible that the brother should see him being
so far of.

And a certain man dreamed that he thought he fed his privy membre with
bread and cheese like as it wear a certain beast, who after died shamefully.
For ye meat which he should have offered to the mouth, he did give to the
privy membre as it were darckly signifying and in a figure, that he should
have neither mou^h nor face. And a certain woman dreamed that she thought, that
out of her breast sprang ears of wheat, and that the ears after burst open
into her nature to be drowned again. Which woman after by a certain hap
vnknowledge to her, did coeate with her own son, and after slew her self,
and so ^yed vnhappelye.

For the ears signified the son, and the drowninge of them into her nature
signified the coeatynge. But the death of her signified the seeds sprung out
of her body: because that out of the earth, and not out of living bodies
they spring up.

And one thought in his dream, to find in his jacket or cote very many and
great stinking worms to abhor them: and that also would shake them of, but
could not. Who the next day following learned or understood, that his wife had
her accustomed fellowship carnaliye with an other man understanding the same
became very pensive and perplexed of mind, in so much that be would have
departed from her, but did not because he was otherwise prohibited, or stayed
by a certain let. For the iackette or coote signified the wife gyrte or
wrapped about him and the stinking woormes her pollution. And where as he
could not pluck and cast them away at his will: signified y^ he could neither
after his desire and purpose, depart from his wife.

And one thought in his dream, that he had a mouth in his foundamente, and
great and fair teeth, and to speak by it, and to eat meat, and whatsoever
also are wont to be done by the mouth, it to have al like: who after through
his light and foolish talk, ^ledde his country, was banished for a lunge
time after. For very like and to reason were the haps but the causes be here
omitted.

And a certain man dwelling in Rome, thought in his dream, that he flew
about the City near the tops of the houses, and to rejoice in the sucesse
of his flying, and to be marveled at with al ye lokers on, but by a certain
payne and bytynge or gnawing of the heart, he was forced to cease from flying,
and for shame sake to hyde himself: Who after was a marvelous man, excelente,
and a noble or famous Prophet, dwelling in Rome got together much riches,
insomuch that he was greatly marveled at of all the people, but in the end,
he received no profit, neither of his coniecturynge, nor riches, for his wife
betraying, and deceiving him, turned al to the contrary part towards him, so
that he could not for shame but depart the City, and dwell in some other
place.

And one thought in his dream, that preparynge himself and ready to fly, he
was stayed of a certain friend of his, and holden by the right foot, the name
also of his friend was Iulius. Which ma after was ready to depart from Rome,
and to dwell in another place, and had prepared also all those necessaries,
which be required for a departure or moving. But it happened that in the
present month of Iulye he was stayed and made to abide through a certain
incommoditye and mishap that fell that time. And that caryinge or abiding
endured not to the end of his life, because he was friend, of who he was stayed
and holden of.

And one thought in his sleep, that he was entered into a school in his own
country, and that he saw his Image there hanging within. And that further
beholdynge, thought ^e saw that all the outward edge or bordour of the Image
was loused, and afer thought he asked one what had happened unto the Image,
and thought also he said thus unto him, my Image remaynethe whole, but the
border is louse. Who after became lame of both feet that by good reason: For
that the school was a note of the good habitude of y^ whole house. But the
Image signified those things, which are about the face: and the outward
bou^der, weer the outward members of the body.

And one thought in his sleep, that his bolster or Bed tic, was stuffed
with wheat in the stead of floxe. Who then had a wife which never before bare
child and the same year conceuinge, brought forth a machild, For the bolster
orbedde signified the conception of the woman, and the wheat a man child,

And on thought in his dream, that he was accused of certain injuries, and
that to have lost the wrytings hooks of his justification, who the next day
having the matter in rehearsal was then cleared of al accions, this was y^
which the dream signifyeth to him. That is to say, the artians being remited,
he needed not afterward his books of iustifycation.

And one thought in is sleeape, having two maidens to his daughters, that the
elder had on her head a golden Garland, and the younger a Garlan^e of the ^yne
branches green sprung. Now the elder of these two was shortly after
married, and the other dyed. For the beutyfull Garland, was a note both of the
coceyuing of children, and of marriage, and the preciousnes also of the matter,
signified the joy in marriage. But the Garland of the vine tree, was a note of
death imminet to the other daughter, because it grew out of the earth for
that bodies put into the earth are after resolved. And for that the vine also
is the longest seaso without fruit. And one dreamed having three sons, y^ two
of them cut him into pieces and eat him and that the younger knowing of the
matter waxed sad and disdained them refusing also y^ sh^meful matter, said,
I will not eat of my father. After which it hppened that his yoger soune dyed:
for it signified by not eating of the father, that he should not possess of
the fathers goods, he also died before the father. But the other two which
seemed to eat him did after death enjoy his goods.

And one thought in his sleep, that a man toke away his sister from his
father by force, and martyed her unto another man. Woo after dyed, that saw
the dream: for the father did rightly signify God, y^ Authoure of life to
the dreamer, And the sister by the like reason signified yt soul, and taken
away by force of the man, signifyeth that separation of the soul, from the
body.

And a certain great wrestler thought in his sleep to ve great with child,
and after to be delivered of two black women children, Who after became blind,
and the balls of his eyes shed forth were after black.

And a certain woman thought in her sleep, that her maid had gotten frome
her both her own Image which she caused to be painted in a table, and her
garments with the which she apparelled her self as one ready to go unto a
triumph which maiden shortly after, caused her husband to be separated fro
her through false accusations uttered by her. And by that means was she both
a cause of damage, and injury to her of the triumph* A certain man dreamed,
that an Eagle drawing fourth his bowels, flew along the city unto the Burse
or such like place where much people were gathered together, and to show them
to the behoulders in that place. After which ensued, that the father having
then no children, should have a son of great report and fame in that City
For the eagle signified the present year in which the child should be borne,
and the bowels signified the son, and the carriage also of the unto the place
of the assembly of the people, signified, the worthiness fame of the son.

And one thought in his sleep, to be thrust into a yooke, and to be yooked
to gether with his brother, which was lunge before dead and that he thought
also his mother so yooked him, and to force him to draw like an Ox, she
rulynge their collores. Who after so dreaming came sick to his mothers house
and there died, and after was buried with his brother, and thus the sorrowful
mother cowpled these two drawing beasts together.

A certain woman thought in her sleep (which wished to have children) that
she saw certain midwyues stoles in which women use to sit, at the
travail of child, swymminge on the Sea who then happened to be with child,
yet not made a mother by this, for that she brought forth seven children, one
after the other and none of them lived but dyed in their swathing clothes.

A certain person thought in his sleep that he saw a large clefte tree, and
that the one half to be a white Popler, and the other half, a Pine tree.

And that on the Poplare tree sate all kinds of birds, but on the Pyneaple
sate gulles, and all kind of Sea fowls. After which ensewed, that he had
two Sons, of which the one led the life of a common Wrestler, and bearer of
heavy burdens, like to a Porter, which the Poplare signified, and trauaylynge
into many countries, was hired of many strangers to labour and travail,
hither and thither. But the other although he were a husbandman's son became
the master of a ship and a skilful Mariner. and he which saw the dream
lived unto a very old age, and ended his life happily.

A certain souldyar sleepynge in his captains chamber, in the night cried
out in his sleep. To whom the captain called, demanding what he ailed to
whom the dreamer answered that he thought one gave him a deadly wound on
the head that he was near dead with all, and for fear of the same so awaked
out of sleep. Which his captain thus bearing, that loved him very well,
willed yea and straightly commanded, that he should not go forth of the
house that day. But his fellows the next day following, prepared to fight
with their enemies, went forth, and he forgettinge his dream went also with
the. At the last they setting on their enemies, were in the end forced
toflye, and in the return and flying away, was he deep cut one the head and
their slain.

Augustus on a time being sick, lying then in Camp amongeste his Souldiars,
was warned by that worthy Philippe his physician in a dream, which he saw
that night in his pavilion, that he should be set upon and murdered of his
enemies, who privily upon the same was conveyed from thence. And the soldiers
of Brutus, the next day following, entered into his pavilion and made many
hooles with their swords through his couch or bed, supposing that he had
been there.

And one thought in his sleep that he kept his mothers funeral and that he
be wailed, and sighed bitterly for her, insomuch that he waked out of sleep
for fear of the same. And the next morrow, when he had told his dream unto
his friend he noted that day, and within afewe days after he received letters
that the day before the same day he had his dream at night the mother whom
he supposed to be alive dyed.

And one thought in his sleep, that he saw himself drowned in the water, and
that he minded to refrain from swymmyng y^ day following. Who on the morrow
forgetting his dream, wet to swimmynge there was drowned ye same day.

A certain person having his wife d^ad alitlle before, and leaving a chyl^e^
behind her, thought in his sleep, that she said to him, I will have my
daughter with me, who thought he often denied her in so much as he
thought she said to him, do what you will, for I will have the maiden with
me.

After which followed, that within ten days after the maiden dyed without
grief or any complayninge.

A certain standerde bearer being of fame, thought in his sleep, that he
was grenouslye pulled and racked with his fellows. Who in the morning after
he had showed the same to his fellows, laughed him to scorn. And the same
morning all were bidden by the governor of the Cittye unto a feast, unto
which all went saving the dreamer, which priuelye conveyed himself from
the. And after dinner they were all thrown into prisone, where they were
examined one by one on the rack, the captain also with them, so that one of
the inferior soldiers at the length, was openly drawn and torn in
pieces, and the rest of the company despoiled, and so let go.

A certain man thought in his sleep, that after a Tyrant of that City, had
slain two of his Children, the one of them said he should give no heed to
the dream. And that it would come to pass, that in the day folowinge, he
should be made prince of the City.

Who awaked (in that hope) a rose, and set upon the Tyrant, and slew him.
For the which good turn done he was after made Governor or Prince of the
City. A certain person being troubled for a certain debt which his father
should owe in his life time, and contynuinge very sad for the same, thought
he saw in his sleep, the shadow of his Father, which then instructed him
of the money paid, and where the obligation was laid. Who when he arose out
of sleep, found the obligation in the same place, where the Fathers shadow
had taught him which by that means cleared that unjust debt demanded of
him.

A certain manne being the Son of a philosopher, after his fathers death
sought a certain book of his, and could not find the same for the which he
became very sad. After which in a certain night his father appeared to
him in a sleep, who showed to him the place where the book lay hid. Who
awakinge in the morning sought the book there and there as he showed him he
found it, that by the same help, the book might come and serve unto all
ages hereafter.

Before the battle against the Philippians, a certain souldiar thought in
his sleep, that Iulius Caesar spake to him, saying show as he thought unto
Octauius that he shall fight the happier and luckyer, if so be he take
some of these things with him, which I, while I was head governor, was
accustomed to wear and cary about me. Which Octauius understanding, got
after the ring to wear, with the which Caesar had accustomed to seal
letters, and the same he woore not only before the battle, but many times
afterward.

The day before that Henry the french king was wounded in the eye, Queen
Margaret his wife as men report, saw sort as the dream foreshewed.

And two familiar friends on a time went a journey unto Megara, where they both
lodged that night, but the one iodged in a Tavern the other man Inn. Who
after they had supped went to bed and sleepynge in their bed, he which lay
in the Inn thought in his dream that he prayed the other that he would
come help him that he were not slain by his host, who awaked with his
fearful dream arose up, and after he had well looked about, and considered
the matter with himself, perceived also the sight no further showed of the
matter, he then laid him down again to sleep. And then to him sleapynge, be
thought again that the selfsame sight to desire him that saying would not
help him when be was alive, yet that he would not suffer his death
unrevenged, and that he also slain, was conueyed into a Carte by the host of
the house, and dounge subtyllye thrown upon him, besides that the sight as
he thought to require him that timely in the morning he would watch at
the Gate, before the dounge-Carte, went forth of the town.

Whoo greatly moved with the fear and care of this dream, arose tymelye
and came unto the Gate of the Town, where he found the dung Carte there
waiting to go forth, by which stood a herd man that drove the Cart, and of
the herd man he demanded what he there carried in the dounge carte but he
being feared with his words ran away. And he in the mean while drew the
dead body out of the carte, after which the host was examined and confessing
the deed had the law.

A certain person having sundry children and none lived with him.

At the last his wife being with child thought then in his sleep, that it
was said unto him, that his Son shortly after borne should be named
Iouinianus.

After which the Father died, and the child living still was made Emperor.

And one John Marya a gentleman of Venice being then a ruler at Dalmatia
thought that he saw in sleep, another of his brothers which he dearlye loved,
named Donatus, to embrace him, to say farewell because he must depart out of
men's company. And that John maria after he had followed him a whiles weeping
as he thought awaked for the fear out of sleep, fyndinge himself all wet
with tears, and thus amassed feared the life of his brother being then at
Venice.

After which about the third day before were letters brought from his house
which signified or declared the same, that that Donatus died that night and in
the same hour that he dreamed the like.

And yt three days also before his death, he had lain sick of the plague.

And a certain woman thought in her sleeape, that her husbands first wife
rebuked the second marriage, and that warning her as she thought that shortly
after she would take her away with her. Who indeed dyed within a short time
after.

And acertayne parson thought in his sleep, that he saw the Son shyninge
on the earth, who endeavoured with his hands to catch the son, but it
seemed to slip from him. And this he proved in y^ order three times together,
after which he demanded of certain wise me what the same might signify, who
told him that he should raygne after.rxx* years. For the Son signified him
to be a King, but if it had determined the king dome'onely for three years,
then had it not been needful why he should see this. For no king of fame
as only one like as the so^ne is, could escape danger, for so short a time.
Yet it ended otherwise by broofe for that he raygned from the.xl. years of
his age, unto threscore and ten.

A certain person thought in his sleep that he was alone in a Cockebote on
a tempestuouse Sea, and that the wind blew boysterouslye, and the air also
seemed so dark, that he was without hope of escapynge to land with lif* And
being in this perplexitye, he catched hold as he thought of a Tree, and hanged
by the hands on the same, through the Boot mounted or carried up to the
same, and fo remained he there alive as he thought without further succour.

After which followed that he ever after lived a careful life and never
could have good success in his businesses and requests, nor obtain his
desire.

Besides it further signified, the alteration of his kind of life, and that
through a sorrow near at hand, he should fall into a desperation; which
person besides lived twenty years after he had this dream, but yet oppressed
with many griues and sorrows.

And a woman named Accia which was the mother of Octauius, being the withe
child with him dreamed that her bowels were carried up to heaven, and that they
were also made manifest and thoroughly known unto al the earth, and heaven
above. After which followed, that the bowels signified the Son, which she
then bare in her body that through his great power on earth his bruit and
report should after reach unto the stars.

And Octauius the father of Augustus dreamed, that he saw the brightness of
the son arising out of the wobe of his mother Accia. After which succeeded,
that the deeds of Augustus did like shyne and appear amongst the me of his
age, as the brightness of the son, in the world.

A certain Lumbard dreamed, that he saw an Angel discendynge from heave
clothed in yellow, and making wide steppes on the ground, but he had no
wings. Which sight so feared the dreamer conjecturing that the same
signified some fear full matter that he hid himself as he thought in a very
darcke hole ne'er by, and covering himself over withe the leaves of trees,
whereby he might so lye hyd out of sight. And the Angel after he was
descend, called the dreamer by his name; but he lying hy^ as he thought
answered not. In so much, that after the Angel had called him thryse,
said he will not come, and so departed. Who after for fear, awaking out of
sleep, thought the same signified some great peril to happen to him that day
following.

Wheruppon he caused the outward door of his house to be fast shut and that
none to go out, but the key he gave to the maiden to keep. Who after
forgettinge her masters comaundemente let in a familyer friend of the dreamers
that came to his presence unawares to him, which infected with the pestillente
air about him, many of his household, but the dreamer upon the sight got out
priuilye by the roof of the house. After which died xii. of the plague, for
that the same happened in such a contagious season.

But he escaped through his skilful practyse, which for that he could hyde
him self in the den or whole the same signified by the dream.

C. Fannius after that he had written three books against the life of Nero,
thought in his sleep, that he lay apparelled on his bed as he was wont to
do like to other studientes, and that Nero came to him and, plucked forth ye
books out of his bosom. And that he also diligently looked on the first,
after on the second then on the third which he turned to fro not uttering or
speaking any word, but shutryng up the books so departed. Whereby Fannius
learned, y^ before he should finish any more books to these, that he should
end his life with ye work, who within a short time after died.

Sylla a head officer in Rome, thought in his sleep, he saw the devil, and
that he called him, who after he awaked, although he were then in health sent
for his friends who after they were come together, caused in their presence his
will to be written with all speed, and after signed the same, fearing death to
be at hand. Who in the night following was taken with an ague, of which he
dyed within few days after. But some write that he was eaten with lice: And
others write that he died of a great anger which he toke against a Burgeys
of that Cittye through which he casting up much blood dyed thereof.

And one Rinaldus Villanoua a Physician writes that a certain parson often
saw in his sleep that a black Cat did bite or gnaw his little finger: Who
shortly after was taken with the eating Cankar in that finger of which he
died.

And one Arianus thought in his sleep that his father ministered a sleapynge
drink to him, who not lunge after dyed For the dead sleep signified death
which afterward ensued.

And when a certain personne despaired, that he should not attain the
Garland for the lack of knowledge, his brother then dreamed, that he had
lost his fathers ringe, and seekynge a long whiles for it, found it at ye
last as he thought, fallen into a deep hole, and that he reached got the
same forth with a long staff. Which the interpreter thus expouded yt his
brother undoubtedly should attain the Garland that through the help of a
taule man, which accordingly did so happen, to the wonder of many.

And a certain woman of the country showed unto the wife of the kings heard
man, that she thought in her sleep, that she brought forth or was delivered of
the Moon, which shined over al Britayne. After which the woman being
delivered of a maiden child, the wife of the kings herdsman nursing then the
kings Son, brought up the child with hers, as her own. Who after grown to
elder years the kingest son fell in love with her, through the familiarity
in youth and of this married her, of whom he begat Echelstane who after
flourished and accounted the worthiest king, for his virtue and fortune.

And one Ecelinus a Romayne, in the first night after marriage, thought in his
sleep that he saw a hill on which Rome was s^ituated, an yt the same rose
heigher and higher to an exceadynge heighte, after which he thought it shronke
away like the melting of snow, that at the last there seemed nothing to
remain.

Which dream of his like succeaded by the fortune of his children. For
Ecelinus the elder son after his name, through a small fortune attained
Verona, Vincetia, padua Feltrius and the Region of Tarnisina and Marchia. And
Albericus the younger brother, obtained Ternisius it self and sundry other
places. But after certain years, this Ecelinus losing his kingdom was wooded
and take and near to Soncinus dyed. And Albericus at the losing of Tarnisius,
fled unto the Castle of Zeno, where of his own me, he was betrayed, after
which he saw. 6 of his sons slain before him, and his wife with two
daughters burned. And him self through diverse kinds of torments butcherly
dealt withal, yielded up a lamentable spyrite. And now on this wise was the
whole stock as the father had foreseen with power utterly extincted.

A certain person came to one Hyburis Aebaneus an Interpreter of Dreams and
said I dreamed this night past that I had corns of Barlye in my hand which I
did cast into my mouth to eat them: to whom the expounder thus answea^ed well
be it unto you. And after he was departed, the expounder asked the staders by,
whether any there were, that knew him: to who one answered, that he knew him
very well and where he dwelled. Well said ye enterpreter, mark and have
regard after him, for that shortly he shall dye, in that he thus eat up his
nourishemente. Who in very dede according to his saiynge died within four
days after.

Alexander the Philosopher thought in his sleep, that he was judged to dye,
and for al means and excuses yt he could show, he could scarcely he
delivered from sufferynge. Who after feared no such matter for that he only
applied himself to the study of Philosophy, yet the next day following when
he came to reasoning with another philosopher very hotly, he was theere
stricken on the head with a staff, and hardly escaped death.

And the wife of Diognosta dreamed, to have half a beard, who after lived
seperate from her husband, so that if she had thought to have a whole beard,
then after to be a widow.

A certain Lumbarde so often as he should wyn, dreamed in the night before,
that he did eat white grapes. For the white grapes do protende a plentiful,
easy increase of labour. But the black grapes do signify a small gain, and
that with tedions travail. Now such a custom of his endured for twelve
years, and after decayed.

A certain learned Physician there was who so often as he dreamed, that he
saw his mother being dead, very sad, the next day following he fell
sick, and that by good reason, for that son is most dear to the mother,
that her sadness also signifyeth the calamityes to the child, and not the like
to the father. For fathers are not like moved to morn for the sicknesses of
their sons, except those sicknesses are deadly, in that me are stouter of
mind and stomach, then women. And he was also sickly by nature, so that he
dreamed the like many years.

A certain gentleman, as Mattheus Ferrarius wrytethe, that howe often he
thought that he did eat in his sleep, and so often in the day following he
was pained with ye stone. And if so be he thought that he didd eat harde
things of digestion, then the payne continued many days after. So that by
good reason we say that we so well taste of sorrows, as meates.

And to Valentinianus Emperor the day before he dyed, being yet not sick,
for that he dyed suddenly, appeared his wife clothed in mourning apparel, and
standing a far of with her hear shed abroad. Which well declared the
former fortune, that then had left him in so lamentable cause.

And one Policrates Samius a tyrant while he was in prosperity, his
daughter on a time thought in her sleep, that she saw her father hanging on
high, whom Iup^ter washed, the Sun anointed. After which followed that he
being oueecome of Orotes, and hanged on a gibbite happened the like so that he
was after washed with the rain falling and anointed of the Sun, by melting
of his fat, which so seemed to anoynte him.

And one thought in his steape, that he saw his house on fire, who after
received letters that his brother lay greuouslye sick, while he prepared
himself to journey, a messenger came declaring him to be dead. Who after
counted the time, from that hour which he saw the dream, conceived that his
brother then dyed. But commonly this dream doth threaten death either to the
dreamer, or some principaller of the house. himself to be with child, if so be
he hath been poor, he shall after possess much substance and shall gather
and keep and heap together abundance of money: but if he be rich, it
signifies that he shall be in torments cares or troubles of the mind: And he
which shall have a wife, that he shall loose her, for it signifyeth, y^ she
shall not after bear him more children but he which shall have no wife, that he
shall after marry such a kind and gentle wife, that he may find in his hart
to wysh to bear and suffer that payne, that his wife susteneth in the travail
of child. And to others this dream doth signify sickness. To be with child
and after to be delivered thereof, is evil, for it declares that the personne
being sick, shall shortly after dye. For every body ^earyng, sends forth
a spyrite: and like as the infant by ioyninge himself with the body is
delivered, and departs fro it even so the soul doth from the body: and to
a poor man, hired seruaunt, or to any which is in calamity or misery: it
signifyethe a delivery of the present evils or mysery, and that cause is
manifest or apparaunte, but to rich men, usurers, and other occuppers and to
such also as be in authority and power it harms. For they which had before,
shall after lack, and loose much. And to merchants, pylottes, masters, and
owners of ships, it signifyeth good luck after, but to many it happeeth that
also should lose by this dream, as kinsfolk, because the infant in his birth,
is rejected and separated from the blood.

If any in the manner of babes dreams that he thinks himself to be swaddled
like a child, and to suck of a woman that he knows, doth portend after a
lunge sickness, except he hath a wife with child. For the shall be borne a son
like to himself, which in the same manner shallbee fed, and brought up.
But if a woman shall see this dream, it doth signyfy that she shall be
delivered of a daughter like to her self: and if any woman thinks in her
dream to have milk in her breasts, to a yonge woman it promises conception,
and perfect fruit, and birth also, but to an old woman being poor, it
signifyeth riches, and to a rich woman, it signifyeth expenses and charges:
And to a maid mariageable, this dream promisethe to her marriage, for
notwythout the venerall act of coactyng, milk in the breasts cannot at any
time be had, but if the maiden be young, that she cannot be married of a lunge
time for her age and making the this dream portendeth to her death. Also to a
poor and needy man, this dreamepromiseth plenty both of money and
possessions, that he may also be able to feed others. And further to him
which is unmarried, this dream promises a wife: and to him having a wife,
which lacks or hath no children: this dream promises also children, as
hath been found true in both.

For the one had after such a kind and gentle wife, that he did wish to suffer
al her travails and pains. And the other had children after, which he fed and
brought up: And to wrestlers, warriars, and such as exercise the strength of
the body it thretneth sickness: For that effeminat bodies have milk: and any
also having a wife, and children in his dream is depryued of his wife, for he
after brings up his children, and ministrynge to them the equal use, both of
the father and mother.

To dream that he thinks himself to have a great or big head signifyeth
good to a rich man, which as yet is no Magistrate or high officer. And to a
pore man, warrior, usurer, and that kepeth a bank of money. to them it
signifyeth both good luck, and the gathering together of much money, but to a
rich man which is in authority. And to a Rhetoritian, Judge or Legate, yt
denounces both slanders of the people, and loss of dignitye and honour. And
to a sick person, this dream signifyeth beuynes and payne of the head: and
to dream that he thinks himself to have long fair hear and to be proud
of it, signifyethe good especially to a woman, for women oftentimes use for
beauties sake, to deck and set forth their heads with others hear: besides,
this dream signifyeth good, to a Philosopher, King, Prince, Priest and
Religious, and to all those also whose profession byndethe them to wear their
hear lunge. But to have much hear on the head, rufled and out of order,
like to those which we name bush naturalles, signifyeth to all such
personnes, heaviness and loss. As the like was experienced in one, who dreamed
that he had his hear snarled and rufled together, much like to a pycked
torch. and he after was depriued of his living, to his great sorrow and
heaviness. And further to have bristled here like a Swine, doth portend
violent perils, by some ill fortune: But to have horse here signifyeth
bondages, painful labours and cares of mind with heaviness: and to
journeymen or such like, imprisonment. And to dream also that he hath wolle
growing on his head, in the stead of hear to him that so dreams it
promises long sickness both ye P^hisick, and consumptio of the body. And
besides if any dreams that his face to be roud about, bare naked of hear,
it portendeth presently a mock or gyle and an unhappy success. But if any
dreams y^ the hinder part of the head to be on such wise to him that so
dreams, it signifyeth in his old age poverty great mise- For the hinder part
of the head, is contrarywyse signifier of the time to come. And again who
that dreams that the right side of his head is bald or bare o^ here,
signifies that he shall loose al his male kynue that be nigh unto him and if
he shall have no kin alive, then it signifyeth damage or harm to him self.

And if ye left side of the head be bare it signifyeth that he shall lose his
nyghe kinswomen, if he shall have any one alive, but if not, the he shall incur
damage to himself. For the head hath the signifycatio of the kindredes, as
the right sides of it the males, and the left sides the females. And who that
dreams that he hath either side of ye head naked or bare of here, shall
after ^ee condemned unto an open work or labour adjudged thereto. To dream
yt he thinks al his whole head to be shaven signifyeth evil: for that this
dream portendeth good to none but such as be accustomed to be shaven, as
fryers, monckes, abbottes, fools, and such like: to sailors and mariners on
the sea* this dream threatens shipwreck, to sick persons to be near
deaths door but yet not death.

And to dream that he clip his own heir, signifyeth sudden bewailing,
or calamity, threatened by great evils.

But to dream that a barber clyppeth his hear doth promise a like to him and
to all personnes good luck and joy for that it hath the signification, both
of joy and the exception of other causes. And truly there is none being in any
evil or woeful case, or else in any calamity, that clip the hear of his
head: but such as be free from these, and hath somewhat to take to. Therefore
this dream promises delivery out of trouble, to such as be in thraldom, and
good luck also to all personnes. To dream that the foorheade is whole without
crasinge or disease, and sleshye is good to all personnes and signifyeth the
liberty of speaking, and fortitude. But to dream that he thinks himself
to have a forehead of brass, Iron, or stone signifyethire, hatred, and
enemies: But to ruffians, and those yt keep^ brothel houses and bawds, and to
such also as I^ade their lives without shame it signifyeth good.

And to dream that he thinks himself to have many ears, signifyeth good
to him which would attain any to be obedient to him, as wife, children, or
servant. But to a rich man this dream signifyeth a great name, good also,
if the ears shall be fair coly: but if the ears shall appear deformed out of
fashion it signifyeth slaughter of the people: this dream is euell to a
seruaunt, and to one also having a cause or matter in judgment or before a
judge, for either he must sue or trouble another by action, or ells be called
by another into judgement, for it signifyeth to him obedience, of a lunge
time. And besides like as he sues this man by action it so shall be done, the
like again by him: But if the cause or matter be called or brought into the
trial of the law, then shall he hear many more faults or crimes to be
objected against him, the which be manifest or apparaut that in a certain
manner he may need many ears, but to a handye crafts ma this dream signifyeth
good for he shall hear many persons, which do require desire his work: but
to lease thy ears also which thou hast signifies cotrarye to those
aforesaid. And to purge or cleanse the ears of filth or matter, signifyeth y^
he shall hear fro some place good news or tidings, but, if any dreams that
he thinks to beat his own ears, it portendeth the hearing of ill news
frome some place.

And to dream that he thinks pysmiers to creep into his ears, signifies
good alonly to dissemblers of wisdom which we name Sophisters. And the like
the pismiers signify to young men, that go to hear such persons, but to
others, this dream denounced death. For that they be the daughters of the
earth, in which they harbour and dwell. And if any dreams that he thinks
to have ears like an ass, signifyeth good to philosophers alone, for that the
ass month not his ears lightly or quickly: But to other personnes, this
dream signifyeth bondage, paynufll labours or cares of the mind with heaviness.
And if any dreamethe, that he thinks to have eyes in his ears, signifyethe
that he shall after be blind, shall come to knowledge o^ those things by his
hearing and ears, which he saw before with his eyes.

And if any dreams that he has a quick sharpe fight of the eyes:
sygnifyeth good by right to all personnes but to dream that he thinks
himself blind, doth indicate neadines of money, to him which hath children,
it signyfyeth that his children shall be sick. And to dream also that he
think the himself blind of both the eyes signifies to his children with sees
the dream, the loss both of brethren father mother. And to ye children because
the eyes be like to them.

But to the brethren, because the eyes also in themselves be like brethren: to
the parents, because the eyes be the cause that we see the light like as the
father and mother also be. Wherefore the loss of the eyes signifyeth the loss
of the like but to him which is in prison, if he thinkethe himself to be
blind, it signifyeth good a notyce y^ his misery is at an end. And this dream
also signifyeth good, to those that be very indigente, and poor: but to a man
of war, this dream signyfieth evil and greuouse, for that ^his ill success,
and to such also as live in the court: but yet to men of arms or champions,
this dream promysethe victory: As the like happened to a certain champion
that should have cobalt or fought in the honour of his country, who dreamed
that he thought he was blind. which after wan the victory. Also this dream
to masters and pylottes of ships, signify heaviness and sorrow: and to such
which be occupied with the contemplation of celestiall^matters, which, hath
oft been observed. And if any seeking any thing lost shall se this dream,
shall after se that thing lost no more: nor following after a fugitive or that
runs away shall take him: but to sick persons, this dream doth always
portend death: for the privation of their light.

And one thought in his dream, that a certain credible man said to him, thy
father is not dead but sleeps, whose father was then become presently blind
and not long after one brought him word of the same matter. And if any shall
dream yt he thinks himself blind of the twone eye* shall have those
things happen to him which be signified of that part: For this is to be
considered and noted that the right eye, both signifies the son, brother,
and father. And the left eye, both the daughter sister and mother

That if any have two sons, or two daughters, or two brethren, or two
sisters: then the right eye signifyeth the elder son, or brother, or father
or else the elder daughter. But the left eye signyfyeth the younger daughter, or
brother, or else younger son. And besides to dream that he thinks to have
three or four even, to him which hath purposed to mary a wife, to him also
which lackethe or hath no children it signifies good* For to the one a wife
shall happen, and to the other children so about one body shall be many eyes.
And one thought in his dream to have three eyes, who after became blind. For
the third, which signified the need lack of the other light because ye proper
light suffyced not. And further to a naughty and wicked man, to beautiful
women: many eyes signify euell. For many eyes shall way on him and about
this woman shall many apparaunte auoutries be wrought, found or taken. And
further if any dreams that he thinks to have even in his fingers ends, or
in his feet: signifyeth that he shall after become blind. And a certain man
dreamed, that he thought to have eyne about each finger of the hands, who
after fell blind.

And if any dreams that he thinkethe to have a great and fair nose, comely
in form, signifyeth good to all persons: for it signifies a great subtillitye
of senses, a foresight in doing matters.

And he that dreams to have no nose, doth portend to him, and to all parsos
the loss and lack of senses, and hatred of his betters, and to a sick person
death. For that the sculls of dead persons, be found without nose: And if
any thinks in his dream to ha^e two noses, it signifyeth to have variance
or dsicorde with his betters in house.

And to dream to have fat or full cheeks, signifyeth good to al persons and
especially to women, but to have thin or lean or else scabbed cheeks
signifyeth heaviness or wailynge for the lean cheakes signifyeth heaviness
sorrow, and the blistered or scabbed cheeks, signifyeth waylinge mourning: For
that in mournings, men are wont to tear scrache their cheeks.

And he that dreams to have a great heard, both thick rough, being a
learned ma it signifyeth good to a philosopher also. And if a woman thinks in
her dream to have a beard, if she shall be a widow she shall then find have a
husband which shall be so gentle a man, that he may seem to be of a mingled
nature: but if she shall be married she shall then less her husband, or shall
depart from him and shall govern her house, like as she were husband and
wife except she be with child, or hath a cause which is to be judged, but if
she be with child she shall then bring forth a son which after earnestly
beholding, shall think her self to have a beard. And to a man child, or very
yonge stripling, this dream portendeth death, because a beard to a child,
doth prevent his age. And if one thinks in his dream yt his heard falls
away, or else shaven of, or violently plucked away of any: doth portend not
only the loss of kinsfolk but also both damage, a soul confusion that shall
happen to him.

And the loss of teeth, or else falling or violently plucking out of them,
doth for the more part signify, the loss or death of kinsfolks, or else
one of the same family or household, or else the loss of substance: For the
like is to be applied between the house, family, and substance therein, as is
between the mouth, and the teeth. And besides the right teeth signify the men,
and the left teethe the wo: men: except it so hap, that in on house be all
women, and in another house all men: for then in those houses, the right teeth
signify the elder, and the left teeth the younger persons. And further the
foor teeth signify very yonge personnes, and the sharpe teeth like to dogs
teeth, signify parsons of middle age: and the cheke teeth, old persons.

And therefore who that dreams co leese any too^e, shall lose such a friend,
as that tooth signifleth: but when not only men, but also the losinge
possessions be signified: then is it thought or supposed, that the cheke teeth
to signify treasures or riches laid up orels hid. And ye sharp teeth to
signify those things which be of no great moment or value.

And the fore-teeth signify simple^ household stuff, or else other moneables
within the house. Therefore very like it is y^ some of them falling out, to
signify the loss of money, riches, faculties: further the teeth also signify
necessary matters to life, and of these the cheek teeth, signify secrete
privy matters. And the sharpe teethe signify those things, which be not
manifest to many, and the fooreteeth, signify most manifest, open maters, and
these things which be compared by the talk word. And therefore the teeth
falling out, be, or signify the hynderaunce or loss of the like matters, to
them belonging, also all the teeth falling out together, signify a desert
house left and forsaken by all the persons departing together from it. And
further teathe falling out to those that be sick do signify a lunge sickness
and the scabs or blistrings: but yet they give them not to dye. For of the
dead bodies, none after leaseth a tooth. Wherefore what so ever happens not
to dead folks, is a notice of health to sick persons yet better it is that
sick persons to lose all their teeth, for so the come yt s^ner to health

And to a servant to lose his teethe, signifyeth after liberty freedom. And
to merchants this dream signifyeth the spedy provision a desposition of
packs and other goods, especially if they shall be in that journey with them.
Allo certain of the teeth waxing above the others so that the on exceadeth
the other in bygnes, or else that be louse and fall not out, signify sedition
or variance in his house which sees the dream. And who that thinks in his
dream to have black, rotten, worm eaten, or broken teeth, and to lease
them, signifyeth the delivery frome al trouble, and misery: yet some, as
often times the elder men, have lost by this dream: besides he that thinkethe
in his dream to have Juorye teeth, signifyeth good to all persons: but be
that thinkethe in his dream, to have golden teeth, signifyeth especially good
to eloquece learned speakers: as it were of the golden teethe pronocinge the
talke^ but to others this dream after threatens fire and burning of the house
which se this dream, and to certain also this dream signifyeth sickness,
coming and being of the multitude of choler. And he yt thinks in his dream
to have teeth of wax, signifyeth that he shall come to a speedy death, for
such cannot chew meat with them: and to have teethe of lead or tynne
sygnifyeth reproach or infamy shame to ensue: And to have teethe of glass or
wood, doothe portend violent death: and he that thinks in his dream to
have silver teethe, signifyeth to him that is learned, to get money by his
talk, and eloquence: but to rich men this dream portedeth, the expense of
money into food, and meates. And if any thinkethe in his dream that his
fore-teeth fall out the other grow in their places doth por^tend the change of
life, into a better state If so be the second teeth shall be better fairer,
then yt other before: but into a worser state, if they shall be worser fouler.

And he that thinks in his dream to have a reasonable tongue and congruent
to the mouth, and to speak freely and clearly with out impediment,
signifyeth good to al personnes: but to dream that he cannot speak, or to
have the tongue, bound or tied in the mouth: doth ported the impediment of
actions or doings, and also poverty. For as much as poverty doth take away,
prohibit the lybertye of talk, and speaking. And he yt thinks in his
dream, that his tongue is swolen doth protende sickness to his wife, which
sees the dream, if he truly hath a wife: if not, then sickness to him self,
But if any thinks in his dream, to have hears sprung out of his tongue
whether they be white or else back, signifyeth sickness and sorrow: but yet the
black hears cause these sooner, the white hears later.

And he that thinks in his dream, to vomit much blood, and of good colour,
not corrupt, signifyeth good to a pore ma for it portendeth the coming to
riches and the abundance of money. And this dream is good to him which
has no children, to him also, which hath a kinsman out of his contrye: For
the twone after shall have a son borne him and the other his kinsman came
home again for booth be of one kind of blood, but if the blood shall run
forth into a vessel, the child notwithstanding shall be brought up: and
the kinsman shall live dwelling in a strange: country or out of his
country, which also after his coming home shall dye. But if it shall run down
on the ground, then both shortly after shall dye: and he which dwelt out of his
country, shall go into his own for the blood that is in his ground which
truly in his country. And he that thinks in his dream, to cary or bear
blod, is both foolish and to no purpose to him which would be hid, for he
shall be manifested and openly known. And he that thinks is his dream, to
vomit black or corrupt blood, doth signify by good reason sickness, to all
persons. A^d he that thinks to vomit a little blood in so much yt not by
vomittyng, but by spitting it may seem to be cast up, doth portend sedition
as hath been observed.

And to vomit choler, or flewme, to him which is in calemity or misere or else
in any perplexitye of mind or sickness, doth signify the flakyng ceasing of
the preset evils: For all the refuses of such like, do not molest or grieve any
more.

And he that thinks in his dream to vomyt up his meat, or whosoever it be
signifyeth loss and trouble of that, that the body feleth not the sustenances
or fode. And who also that thinks to cast up or vomit out by the mouth, the
great guts or bowels, doth portend the death of children, both to the man
and wife: but to them which have no children, this dream signifyeth the
loss of the best and most precions thing which they have in their goods,
or that they set most store by. And to a like person also, this dream
portendeth death.

And to hauet woo or three heads, to a poor man it signifyeth riches, besides
for that he shall possess and have many heads y^ he shall gather together
great abundance of goods and riches: and his wife and children also shall
happen well and prosperous. But to a rich man this dream signifyeth adversity
and loss by kynsfolkes to a warrior this dream signifyeth good luck,

And who that thinks in his dream to have his head strycken of, either by
judgement condemned thereto, or of thieves, or else in a triumph or turnemente,
or in any other manner signifyeth good: But to him having parents, this
dream, signifyeth euell, or the less of them and to him also having children,
this dream signifyeth the like. For the head is compared like to the parents,
because they be authors of life: but the head to the children, for the. face
and Image sake. And a certain man also having a house, dreamed the like: who
after lost the same. And by this dream also it signified, the loss both of
wife, friend.

Besides to the keepers of banks of money and to usurers, masters of ships
and merchant, and to al others also that gather up money: this dream
signifyeth the loss of great sums of money: but he which dwells out of
his country that he shall after return home: and he also which is in
peril of life by the law, that he shall escape the danger. And further, if
any sailing on the Sea sees this dream, it signifyeth the loss of the top
of a mast of the ship, except he be any of the mariners, which sees or saw
the dream.

And in these like truly have been observed, to signify death to princes. And
a certain Greek dreamed yt he thought his head was stricken of, who after
came to Rome, and so lost his former name dignitye. And he that thinks in his
dream, to have a head like to a Lyon, Wolf, Panther or Elephante, shall
obtain after the victory and ouerhande over his enemies, and adversaries, also
which he is in suite with. But he that thinks in his dream, to have a
head like to a dog, horse, ass, or any other four footed beast, doth protende
servitude, bodage, and care of mind with heaviness: and he also yt dreams
to have a head like any kind of bird: is a notice of peregrination, and
iourninge about.

And further he that thinkethe in his dream, to have his head in his hands,
signifyeth good hap to him which has no children nor hath a wife and to him
also lokinge for any dwelling out of his proper country. And if any also
thinks in his dream, to have horns like an Ox or any other violent
beast, doth portend vyolente death: but yet for the more part it signifyeth
headynge to him which sees the dream: For this like is wont to happen to all
horned beasts.

And the breast whole, and sound without any hurt signifyeth good, but the
breast rough although it shall be thick of hear, to men truly this dream
signifyeth good, and lucratyue: but to women this dream signifyeth,
wydoweheade or the loss of her husband, and if the paps appear greater
then they wont to be, keepynge a comeliness or fashion, signify both the
obtaining of children, and possessions or goods, but if the paps appear
sore, and as they wear blystred: do portend sickness to him, which seethe
the dream. And the paps falling fro the breast, signifyeth death to children
and to his children which sees ye dream: and if not children then they
promise nedines Also they oftentimes signify waylinges especially to women.
For these in their weeping and wailing, do pull or rent their papes. And who
that thinks to be wounded on the breast of a certain familiar, and one well
known to him, signifyeth to old men hearing of sad or heavy news from
some place: but to young men, and men of middle age, and women this dream
promises love.

And he that thinks in his dream to have harde and fair hands: signifyeth
felicity or good hap: especially to handy crafts men, which get their
substance and living, by giving out wares, and receyuinge in others too work.
But to a personne fearing or being in fear, this dream portendeth bynding,
and bonds or fetters: for not without fear this dream is. And further the
one hand is prepared to take things, and the other fear to keep them. And
besides the right hand, signifyeth the son, father, friend or kinsman. And
the left hand the wife, mother, sister, daughter maiden servant and
manseruaunt. And therefore which of the hands any shall think to lack, shall
lease one of those, which be signified by that hand. But to mariners,
dancers, or tomblers, i^glers, to have no hands, is not good forasmuch as it
is impossible. to work and do most things without th^m, as it is manifest.

And further to loose the fingers of his hands, signifyeth damage or loss and
to dettours, to pay more then they owe: and to usurers, to be deceived or
begyled of their usury.

And he that thinks in his dream, to have hear grown out of his hands,
out of his joints of the fingers of the hades, signifyeth Imprisonment.

And who that thinks in his dream to be pained or disseased in the great
guts, or about the bottom of the belly, do denounce truly sickness to
the body and nedines or barenes of living.

And if any shall think himself payened about the nauill part: doth either
portend the loss of parents, or the privation of country.

And if any thinks in his dream to see his body cut open and to see his
inward parts after nature, and each decentlye lying, signfyeth good to him
which has no children, and to a poor man. For the one shall after have
natural children, and the other possessions or riches. For the children be
named the bowels, like as also ye intrales or inward parts. And like as the
possessions or goods be in the house, even so within the great guts, be the
bowels: but if any dream that he is cut open, and that he sees nothing
of his inward parts left within him, signifies that his house shall after be
desolate and forsake, and the loss also of children to a sick parson, death:
but this dream signifies good to those, which be in troubles or imprisoned,
for they shall soon after tread them under their feet. And besides the
former spoken, must here be considered and applied like as the heart in the
body, sygnifyeth the wife of the man which sees y^ dream, and the husband of
the wife which sees the like. Also the lunges or lights, the like. But ye
liver signifyeth the son sustenance and cares. And the gaul the choleric
humour, money, women. And the mylte, signifyeth pleasures, laughter household
stuff: An^ the belly and great guts, signify children.

And the kydneis signify brethren, and kynsfolkes: therefore when any of these
shall be diseased, they portend the like to that, that the membre signifyeth:
also if any member seems lacking, it signifyeth loss of the like member.
And if any thinks in his dream to se a plant sprog out of his knees, doth
portend that he shall after be stayed or hindered of the use of his knees, but
if a sick person shall see this dream be shall dye: For out of the earth al
plants do spring.

Also a certain man there was, who dreamed yt he saw a reed or ca^e grow
out of his right knee, which after had a fistula engendered in that knee.

And to have many fete signifyeth good to merchant and masters of ships,
for they shall rule and govern servant with many feet and this dream also
signifyeth good to al those which nourysheth and maintains servants by
byinge and sellinge, and to a pilot or governor of a ship. this dream
signifies ease, rest, and quietness: for that he shall use many feet, in
running and girdinge forward the ship with owers, or else otherwise by
sailing. And to a poor man this dream signifyeth good, for he shall attain
servants but this dream to a rich man doth portend sickness, for y^ not
with his own feet, but by the help use of a stay he may so seem to have
many feet. And further, to see the feet burning, signifyeth evil to all
personnes, both loss, decaying of goods and also of children and servants.

And who that thinks in his dream to become bigger then any man: doth
portend death to him, which seethe the dream, and if any having a litlte
young senne, shall think him to become a man or at a mans stature, doth
portend tha^ his son shall dye: this dream is grievous to an old man, to
think hymself^ changed into a yonge man, a young ma into a child, for both of
them passes i^ changed into the worser simpler state* But good it is a child
to be changed i^ to a yonge man: and to a man to be changed into an old man,
for both of the^ passes, into the better and honowrable estate. But if a
yonge man shall be chau^ged into an old man, he shall not dy^like as the
child, but shall be sick. And if a man shall also be changed into a child
behauinge himself vnwyselye, in doyng matters shall sustain damage. And
further the quality of chaunginge is thus: that if any shall think himself
also changed into a woman, which before was a man: signifyeth both good to a
pore man and servant: for the one shall after have such a person which shall
nourish him up, like as a woman: the other shall serve after, with lesser
labour. For the lesser be women's labours, which they do: but to a rich man
this dream signifyeth evil, and especially, to an officer or one ruling a
Common weal for that women for the most part bekepers of the house and
occupyinge themselves within that house, wherefore to every maiestrate, ruler,
or officer, this dream doth damage and deprive him, which sees it. But if a
woman shall be changed into a man, if she shall then be unmarried, shall after
obtain a husband, and if she be married and shall lack children, that she
shall be delivered of a son, and so she shall pass into a very ill nature:
but if she hath a hand, and son, she shall after be a widow. For that a
man needs not a man but a woman. And besides if any ma or woman, shall think
himself, to become gold or silver, if he shall be a servant, shall after be
sold, by which truly he is made both gold and silver: but if a poor man
shall see this dream he shall after become rich that such a matter thereby
may be about him.

And this dream to every sick parso doth protede death, like as to think
him self to become brass, except it be to a warrior or seruaunt, but to be
changed into Iron doth signify intolerable calamityes and miseries, enduryng
to old age, to him which sees the dream.

And he that thinks himself to become clay or to an earthen matter doth
declare death to all personnes except to those which get their living by the
earth or by clay.

And to become also a stone signifyeth wounds and cuts, to him which sees
the dream: so in the same manner aman must judge of any other matter like.

And he that thinks in his dream, to exerise husbandry, as either to sow,
or plow or else plant, signifyeth good to the which seek a wife and have no
children for the fallow field is none other then the woman, and the seeds
and plants, the children: but the wheat the sons, and the barley the
daughters and abortyues. Also to others this dream signifyeth sickness, and
troubles of mind: if any be sick in his house which sees the dream, shall
after dye.

And he that thinks in his dream, to govern a ship well, and wyselye,
signifyeth good to all personnes For not without fear and labour it is
governed and brought to any port. But if they be vexed with tempests or come
to shyppewracke, it d^th portend a mighty evil or harm to ensue which hath
often been observed.

And to dye leather, signifyeth evil to al personnes, but to see a^y Visions in
thy dream, signifyeth a most great and daugerous evil of all.

And good it is to him, that goes into a brothel house and commothe not again
For a certain man there was, which dreamed that he thought he entered into a
brothelhouse, and could not go out again, and so not many a day after dyed.

And this by good reason happening to him, for that the place is named common,
like as that also is, which receives the dead besides in this place
happens ye corruption of many men's seeds: Wherefore that place is worthi
lickned to death, although those women have or be nothing like of signification
with ye place common. For they signify good for the moore part, but the place is
and signifyethe evil and harm: whereof these harlottes that wader about, be
commodiouser, to be seen in the dream then the others. And if any thinks in
his dream, to have carnally to do with a strange or unknown woman, if she
shall appear to him fair and gentle, to have one soft and sweet apparel, and
Jewels of gold about her, and that she shall also proffer herself to him
signifyeth good to him which sees the dream, nor promises the small hap of
actions: but if she shall be an old or foul, or defourmed woman, and wearing
on vnclenlye and ragged apparel doth denounce that he which sees the dream
shall after lead his life in heauynes and sorrow. And again if the woman
aforesaid, shall not offer herself to him, then it signifies the contraries
to the former.

For a man must suppose that women's unknown Images to be of the actions,
happening to him which sees ye dream. And if a master thinks in his
dream, that he hath to do with his seruaunt, it is not good, for it signifies
despite, and damage by that seruaunt: which signifycation also is of the
brother, whether it be the younger which he companieth carnally with, or the
elder. And the like judgment, it is to be given of an enemy.

And to lye with a woman familiarly known and well acquainted, if he shall
earnestly love her, and shall also desire her carnallye: doth portend
nothing to him which sees the dream, for his intentyue or fixed
concupiscence, but if he shall not in his dream earnestly desire her, it
signifyeth good to him, if the woman shall be rich: for he shall always after get
or obtain of her some profit to him, or at the least by that woman which the
man sees. And if any thinks in his dream to lye with a married wife, is not
good for the law sake. And to be moved of a certain familiar friend to a woman
truly, it is both ioyoufe and profytable, whosoever be, the earnest desire
shall be, But to be moved thereto of a richer or elder man signifyeth good, for
that the manner is to take of such. And to be moved of a younger and needy
person, is evil for to such the manner is to give. And the fame signifycation
also if the elder shallbe the mover or procurer, and a beggar. And a certain
person being a seruaunt dreamed that he thought he handled his masters
priuitye: who after was made school master, and bringer up of his children,
for he had then in his hands the masters priuityes, being signified of the
proper children of his master.

And if any thinks in his dream to wrestle with an unknown person it doth
induce dangers through a sickness: For like as the wrestler covets to
handle his adversary, even so the sickness, the sick person as to bring him
to the earth. And further that a man to wrestle with a child, signifyeth also
evil. For if he shall overthrow or cast the child, he shall then bury some
body. And to a child to wrestle with a man, signifyeth good, for there shall
follow after great matters, besides his expectation. And to wrestle with a
dead personne signifyeth sickness, or contention and variance, with some of the
children or heirs, of that dead parso. And besides in wrestling, it is always
better to overthrow or cast down an ennemye for thereof ensues victory, to
him which sees the dream.

And to eat browne bread to a poor man it signifies good, for that they
most commonly feed there upon But to eat white bread to poor men it
signifyethe sickness: for the contrary cause. And to rich men to eat browne
bread, it signyfyethe desperation: or that those things which be presently
hoped after shall not be performed or accomplished. And if any thinks in
his dream, to eat barlye bread, it signifyeth both good to him, and to al
personnes.

And if any thinks in his dream, that no stranger, but his own household
do see him dance, signifyeth both good to him and to all persons: But both his
wife and children and some of his kinsefolkes to see him daunsinge, doth
portend good: for it signifyeth gladness and joy, the great abundance of
goods of riches: but yet to a person being sick as well to a man, as woman,
this dream signifyeth evil. And for the much motion also of daunting, it
signifyeth deceyuing and dotage. Also this dream signifyeth evil to him
which is vexed or hath any sickness on him. But if any shall dream that he
dauceth in some high place doth portend that he shall after fall suddenly into
a fear or other perils. And if he be an offender, he shall after be
greuouslye punished, for the reason of the highness, stretching out of the
hands.

And he that thinks in his dream, to singe songs or Ballates, and that well
trimly, signifyeth good as well to syngers, as musicians, and to al other
persons, but to singe euillye, and out of order is a notice of yt vnprosperous
or vnluckelye success of matters, and, actions, and po^ertye.

But when those songs any shall remember, then by those songs he must make
his iugemente: and to singe in the way as he goes signifyeth good, to him
which follows a wayne or cart: but to singe in a bayne or hot house,
signifyeth evil to him, which so dreams. And further to dream that he
sings songs in the market place or streats, to rich men truly it doth
portend dishonesty or rebuke and derisions: hut to a poor manne this dream
signifyeth either peuishnes or do ^age.

And he that thinks in his dream to hate a garland of violettes on his
head if it be in the season of the year for them, doth portend good hap:
but being out of their florishinge time and season, it signifyeth evil. And of
those truly which be made with white violettes, do signify manifest add
notable incommodityes, and those which be made of yellow violettes, do
signify less incommodityes and harms and those also which be made of
purple violets do signify death: For that the purple colour hath a certain
agreement to death.

And Garlands made of rooses, after the seasonable time of them: do signify
good to al versonnes, except chose being sick and to those which go about to
hide the.

For those sick, they slay because rooses do lightly wyther and rot, and
these which hyde them they do manifest, for yt savour and smell. And to wear
a garland trimmed with lyllyes, that they differ and put of matters unto a
hope.

And the flower of Mallowes in a Garland, signifyeth good to gardeners, and
husbandeme: but to others, it portendeth labours and wandringe about. And the
same significatio is of Time, Sauerye, and Melilote, except to Physicians, to
whom they portend good, but a Garland made of smalach, or else our common
parceley, doth slay sick personnes, and in a waver those which be vexed with
water runinge between the skin and flesh, for the coldness and moisture.

And a Garland of wax signifyeth evil to all personnes, but especially to
the sick: for as much as it is commonly occupied about burialls, but those
Garlands truly which be made of wolle, for the variety do signify poisons
and imprisonment. And to wear a garland of gold, signifies euell both to a
poor man and servant. And to wear a garland made of the vine Juie leaves,
doth portend to some imprisonment and sickness also, for the windings about of
the Juye, but to offendoures of the Law, it doth portend headinge for that
they be cut of with such a kind of instrument to the bigness.

And he that thinks in his dream to speak to an adversary or enemy and
to kiss either doth* portend the solucio of enmitye between them. But to
kiss dead personnes to a person being sick, it doth portend death.

Also to a sick person to have or wear on white garments, doothe promise
death, for that dead bodies, be carried forth in white clothes. And to wear
on a black garment, it doothe promise for the more part, health to a sick
persan for that not dead personnes, but such as morn for the dead, do use
to be clothed in black. But yet certain personnes there were, as well poor
men servants, and prisoners being sick, that dreamed to be clothed in
black, who notwithstanding after died. For very like it was, that those weere
not carried forth to burying in white, for their great poverty sake. And
therefore it may be said, that to be clothed in black, is in a manner evil to
al persons. And to have on a garment of dyuers^ colours or purple, doth
portend sorrows or trouble, perils, and reveals also hyd secretes: but to
sick persons, it signifies to be vexed by sharp humours, and much choler:
but a purple garment, to rich men, and servants signifyethe good: for to the
one it promises aduauncemente, estate, and honour, and to the other freedom,
and liberty. Also it sleethe the sick per^on, and to a poor man it is a
dangerous dream. Besides to many, this dream portendeth imprisonment: for
none lightly wears on purple but suchas be in regal authority, or in high
offyce. And to wear on a soft costly garment, signifyeth good to rich and
poor men: for to those, the present dely^es wealth shall continue, but to
these, shall be after greater increase of riches: but to servants and very
needy persons this dream threatens sickness.

Also broken and vncomlye apparel, do signify damage and vnprosperous
success of doing matters.

And besides he that thinks in his dream, to wash his own or an other
bodies clothes, do promise the putting away and delyuery of some hurt or
incommodity about life, For that the clothes thereby: leave and cast of their
filth. Also it makes a man to learn and know hyd matters: for to them, which
fear to be known or perceived, and reproved: it is dangerous, to cary and
see clothes washed.

And to stand at a glass. and to see his own image in the glass: signifyeth
good both to the man, and woman which will mary. For the glass to the ma
signifyeth a wife, but the glass to the woman, signifyeth a husband. for
as much as the face shewethe or expresses even like as these again show the
children, the one to the other. But yt takes away sick persons, for that the
glass is of earth, of whatsoever matter it shall be made. And to see an Image or
figure in the Glass, unlike to himself: doth portend yt some person to be
named or called, the father of bastards or of strange children.

But to see an Image, fouler or deformeder in the Glass then himself:
signifyeth evil, for that it portendeth sicknesses and sorrows or heaviness of
mind. And like as also to see: or behold himself in the w^ter, doth
pronounce death to him which sees the dream, or else to some most near or
familiar friend to him.

And to see the air fair and clear, promises good to all persons: and
especially to those which do seek things lost, which will go into strange
countries: for al things, in a clear air be made apparat, but y^ air dark
or darkish or else cloudy, signifyeth besides y^ hindrauce of actions sorrows
and heaviness of mind.

And into what matter soever, the air shall be changed, is good to them which
occupy the fame matter: but ^uto others, it is euel. And the air become quiet,
signifyeth good to Astronomers alone and prophecyers. But to others, it
geeuethe a quiet life.

And rain to fall without tempest and much wind is good to al persons, except
to those which be sent to strange me or strangers, for to these it
sygnyfyethe hindrance. And myslinge rain, drops, and frosts, do siguifye
only good to husbandmen, but to others, this dream portendeth small gain
and profit. But showers of rain and bail, and thick clouds, and tempests,
do pronounce to al personnes, troubles, peryls, harms and hurts, But to
servants alone, and nedy persons, and those which be vexed with some
incommodity danger do promise the alterations, and delyuery from the present
evils. For after great storms and tempests, fair weather doth
incontinently ensue.

And for snow and ise if they be seen in their proper time, they signify
nothing

For that the sha^pe cold day before caused to repeat it in the s^epe. But if
they be seen out of season, the signify good to husbandmen, but to others they
pronounce cold attempts, and p^r^osed accions to be, and prohi^t also to go a
journey. And hayle doothe indicate, troubles, and heaviness or sorrows, and
revels also hid matters, for yt couloure. And thonder without lightninge,
doth portend to servants, troubles, and wiles to entrap them unawares, for
the sudden unloked for, but lightninge with out thunder, signifyeth vain
fear. For after lightning, to loke again for thunder, doth demonstrate the
fear, for it is none other then vain threatenings. And therefore when thunder
ensues not, yt causes a vain fear. And further to se fire in the sky,
clear pure, and, little: doth signify threatenings of some noble estates. But to
many, this dream portedeth the incursion of enemies, poverty, honger. And
besides wheresoever the fire shall be or where it is carried up, as from ye
North, South, West, or East, from thence enemies come, or else near those
regions or countries, dearth shall be. But worst of all shall be, to see fire to
be carried or showed openly: the same also signify fire like to torch light
falling f^om heaven, also to see wood burning trees, which altogether
threaten peril or danger, about his head which sees the dream. And
lightninge without tempest passing near by, and not touching the body,
that person which sees it shall after be driven out of those places in
which he dwelled. For no man can sustain and abide, the lightenynge coming
near him. But if the lyghtninge, shall seem to fall before any, it doth
prohibit him utterly to go forth. And to be stricken with lightninge doth
promise to him which lackethe a wife, to marry one, whether he be poor, or
else rich. But being married, it declares the separation of his wife, from
him, the like also of brethren, friends, kynsfolkes, and acquaintance, to
become enemies to him. For lightning doth not ioin together, but they joined
together in one it seperateth. And further having children, it doth depryue or
take away children in as much as they dye: if he be sick to this yt he is
smitten with lyghtninge, or otherwise they fall, if he be not sick. For trees
where they be stricken with lightning they die lease their branches. And like as the
branches be the children of the trees, even so be the children the branches
of men. And a certain man there was, who thought in his dream, that the
outward post or pillor of the bed, was smitten and consumed with lightening and
not long after dyed his wife.

And he that thinks in his dream, to se usual fire, small clear, soft
burning, signifyeth good, but to see a much and over great fire, doth
portend evil.

Therefore the best fire is that which on the earth is seen to burn pure
clear, for this signifyeth much ric^es: because a ready fire in the hearth, is
chieflye occupied about dressing of meates but the same fire put out doth
threat poverty, and if any be sick in that house, it doth pronounce death
to him. And good it is to think himself to have Torches or like lights
burning, and especially this, to yonge men. For it signifies for the more
part joyous loves to them, and promises also pleasant actions. But to see
himself having one torch, is evil, that covets to hyde him. And the
lantern light, clear burning in the house, is good for it signifyeth to all
persons, the attaining to wealth and riches, and to those unmarried, it
promises marriage, and to sick persons health. But not clear burning but
darkly signifyeth sorrows, heaviness of mind, sick persons not log after it
flees the light put out, it recovers and amends them for that afterward
it shall be lighted again. And any lantern light, seen in a bark or ship,
doth portend after a great quietness and calm of the wind. And further the
gates of the house burning, do signify the death of the wise, his life also to
be in a hasard or in danger which sees the dream.

And he that thinks in his dream, to se greehoundes hunting or taking what,
or already taken, going out to hunt, signifyeth good for they be signifyers of
the actions but those which return unto the cytty or town, do signify the
hyndraunce of actions, for the they cesse of their labour. And masty dogs, or
others yt only keep the house, do signify the wives and servants other
goods gotten together. Wherefore they being lusty, fawning upon do ported a
good keeping of yt house as well of the wife, as of the household the water
dies.

And to see great flying birds, signify more prophet to rich me the to the
pore. But the small, and fat birds, be most profitable to poor men. And
further to se an Egle sitting on a stone, or tree, or else in a most high
place, is good to them going forth to do a dede, but to such fearing this
dream evil, and a strayer away also it brings back again.

And an Egle sitting on his head which sees the dream, doth pronouce death
to him. For what ever it hath seasoned on with the calons, it sleeth.

And to be carried on an Eagle, doothe promise death, boothe to kings nobles of
a realm, and rich men. And the Egle threatninge what, doth signify the
thretninges of a man of power. But gentle of loke, going to or greeting what
and calling in his own voice doothe signify good, as hath been observed. And
to see an Egle dead signifyeth only good to a seruaunt and to him which
fears any, for it threatens both death to the threatener, and to the
master, and to others, it signifyeth the hyndraunces of actions. Also the Egle
doth signify the present year, for after the difference of the Egles, be
also judged the differences, and divers haps to come. And grippes, both to
potters, and curryers of lethers, do portend good, for that they dwell in the
edge of the Town, but to physicians and sick persos evil, for that they joy
and feed on dead bodies.

Also they signify wicked and cursed enemies, not dwelling in the town, and
besides incommodious to al others. And the hawk and kite do sygnyfye vyolente
catchers or takers robbers of couters. For the hawk signify open enemies, and
openly inuadinge or setting upon, and the kite, doth portend enemies
pryuyly setting on. And the raven may be likened to an adnouterer and thief
and both for the colour, and yt he oft alters his voice.

And the crow, signifyeth much or lunge time and the delay of doing matters.

And the company of Jayes, doth signify both nedy men and vain trouble. And
wood coluers, and doves, do signify Women, but the wood Coluers, always
signify harlotes. And the doves also do sometimes signify honest women, and
matrons. And doves also do signyfye delectation in doing matters, for that
they be dedicated to Venus, and they be also good to al frendshippes,
feloweshippes, all consiliations, for that they dwell and live together. And
the companies of cranes and storks, if they be seen, do signify the
invasion and meetynge of robbers and thieves, and the coming of enemies. And
the swan, sygnifyethe a musitio, and music also yt self: and reveals hid
things, for the colour. And to sick personnes being seen, it portendeth
health, but harde singing, doothe promise death, for that the swan sings
not, until he be near dying. And bees to husbandmen, and to those which get
a living by them, signifi good, but to others they prononoce troubles, for the
sound and noise yt they make and wounds, for their sting. Also they threaten
sickness, for the hounye wax.

And sitting on the dreamers head, to a Captain of a band, and to an
Emperor shall be, signified, good but to others, evil, and besides they
portend for the more part that he to be slain of a company, or souldiars,
which sees the dream. For they be like to a company or band. for that they
be ready and obey, to their king and Captain, and to enclose or shut in bees,
signifyeth good, and good it is also to al personnes to kyl them except to
husband men only. But wasps signify evil to al personnes, for they signify
that some shall fall into evil and cruel men's handlinges.

And if any saylyng thinks himself to sail well, is good to al persons,
but to happen or fall sodaynlye into a tempest, doth signify sorrows and
peril, but to come or to make a ship wreke, or the ship overthrown, or
rotten, or dryeuen on stones, is dangerous to all parsons, except to those
which be holden and kept by force of some, and to seruautes, for those it
delivers from the dangers. For the ship is like to them, which so keep them.
And always it is better to think to sail in a great ship and which hath
heavy ladynge, for as much as small ships, although any shall sail well
in them, yet they bring not goods home and to their port without fear.

And that is also better to think to sail by the sea, then by land, for to
sail by land, doth signify goods, the slowelier and hardliar to come, and
that scarcely shall come at all. But worser is that any sailing by sea, doth
suddenly fall or happen into a tempest, then if by the land. And if any
would sail and cannot, or is by force holden or stayed back by some doth
signify hindraunces and stayinges or withholdings of goings to and forth.

And the like so sail by land, trees and stones being laid against and in
the middle set, doth signify witholdinges or stayings back and hindraunces.

But to see barks sailing from the shore and land on the sea or well
performing their course, is good to al personnes, and both a signifier of
wandringe, return home from some strange countries.

And also it pronounces, messages messengers by sea, and Ships or barks
brought out of the haven unto an high place do make goods the ^lower to come,
for then truly they begin saylynge. But of an high place, and the barks into
an Haven returning and arryuinge, do signify goods the sooner to come, for
then they shall come to an end of saylinge.

And the havens, do always signify well doers and friends, and all those
also which be Artificial practisers. And the anchors uses, do signify
necess^tye safety and prohibit to wander forth.

And the mast of the ship, signifyeth the master of the ship or house, and
the fore part of the ship, signifyeth the ruler of the foorshipe or beck.
But a ship performinge his course, and not resting, doth portend very great
peril to be about the self same part, and the ship bruised or thrust
together by a violent tempest.

And from whence soever fyet is carried into the ship, from thence it
foorsheweth the tempest to come.

And the sun from the East rising up clear and fair, setting the like in
the West, is good to all personnes, and to others also it portendeth actions,
and to others the generation of children. But hurts those, which go^ about
to hide themself, for it reveals and brings to light al things. And the
Son out of the West arysinge, reueyleth hid things, and of those which
they thought to hid themself, and the sick person very lowe brought it
recovers and amends, the person being dim of sight not to be blind it
promises, for of much darcknesse he shall se light. And ^bringeth again the
person dwelling in a strange country although he be in hope never to be. Also
good it is to him which hath purposed to go Westward, for it promises return
to him from thence. And to him which looks for any to come fro yt West, it
signifyeth that he is then ready to return and come. And to others it is
contrary, to every attempt and hope, and that which we have purposed it
lets to be done or ended.

And the Sun darcke or somewhat bloody for heate making a noise, is evil and
harm to all personnes, partly indicating hindrances of actions, and partly
to the dreamer, it portendeth sickness or otherwise peril, or else sickness or
disease in his eyes.

And to those which will hide what, and to persons also fearing is observed
profitable, for the twone shall well hid, and the others shall suffer or
sufteyne no evil and harm. For the Sun dark, doth the less b^ne. And it is
always better to se the light brightness of the Sun, entringe into the house,
then to see the Sun it self, for the light, because it makes the house the
lighter, it p^endeth the attaining of goods. And further the sun thought to
be apparelled like a Carter, is good to warriors, and to those which covet to
wader abroad, to Carters, but to sick personnes, it is petillous and
dangerous.

And the Moon signifyeth the wife of the dreamer, the mother also for nurse
she is thought to be: and both daughter and sister. For when any thinks to
see his own Image or shadow in the Moan, to him truly which hath no children,
it portendeth to him the birth of a Sun, but to the woman so dreaming, it
portedeth the birth of a daughter. For every one perceives y^ like Image of
himself ^ daughter.

And this dream is good to keepers of banks of money usurers, for they shall
after attain much gain and profit good it is also to them which would be
seen, but parsonnes hid it reuayleth. But parsonnes being sick, and
sailing ou the sea, it sleeth, and those truly being vexed with a sickness of
water runnig between the skin and the flesh, for as much as the nature is
moist, but these to fall and come unto shypwrake. And what good things the
Sun promisethe, the same also the Moon signifyeth, and the like what
evils, but yet the evils always lesser, for that she is lesser of heate
then the Sun. The stars seen all clear and fair, signifies good unto
such ion^neyinge and unto other accions, and unto secrets. For these show not
the like which the Sun and Moon do, for that these show the brighter and
fairer they being not above the earth, and the dimmer darcker when either is
above the earth: For that every star is known privately, either by his
couloure, bigness, motion, or form of motion. And now each star, doth cause
like hap according to his fortitude, which when they appear troubled, do
then signify sorrows, and both perils troubles to the dreamer. But
appearing bright fair do then promise a happynes, prosperity, and good
increase to the dreamer.

The stars seen to fall from heauer, do threaten to rich men much poverty
sorrow to ensue for that heaven, is applied to the house of the dreamer, and
the stars to the possessions, riches and men in the house. But this dream to
the pore foresheweth destruction. And one thought that he saw all the stars
fall from heaven, after which ensued that he became wholly bald: For like
reason as heaven hath to al the earth, even the same hath the head to the
body. And again, what reason the stars have to heaven, the same have the
hears to the head. So yt the stars neither falling on the earth nor darcke
appearinge do promise good. But rather forshewe danger and hurt to many
persons. And evil it is to see the stars under the roof of an house for
that it signifyeth the house to become destitute, uncovered and burned, or else
yt the Master of the house shall dye, in that the stars appeared within the
house.

The raynbowe seue of the dreamer on the right side, promises good to him,
but seeue on the left side, threatens evil. But this right and left side, is
not hearement as to heaven, but as to the Sun. And howsoever it shall
appear, yet it always signifyeth good to those in great poverty or in any
misfortune. For that such in decay, and oppress^d with any calamity, shall
after amend of their estate.

The white clouds be signifyers of a happier estate, and drawing from the
earth upward toward heaven do signify for the more part a long journey: and
that such lying out of their proper coutreye,, shall after return home, and
that secretes to be reueyled. But the yealowe clouds seen do signify an
vnprosperous ^uccesse of matter. And dark clouds seen, do signify sorrows,
and cares to ensue: but the black clouds seen, do threaten a tempest, or
heaviness to ensue. To think him self to be dead, that carried forth, and
buried, to a servant, to whom the affairs and house of the Master is not
committed, it sygnifieth liberty. For that the dead being a seruaunce, hath
then no master, and finds at that time the rest both of labours service.
But to that seruaunt to who the goods of the master are committed, death
takes away that credit. And to a ma not having a wife, it forshewethe
Marriage to ensue. For that marriages and death, be thought both as the ends to
men, and do always show a like together. So that to sick personnes to marry
a wife, and to keep the Brydale, signifies death to ensue. For that the same
happen to both, in that feasts be kept as well at the Burialles, as at the
Marriages. And to that manne dreaming the like, which hath a wife that he
shall after dye, leaving both brethren, kinsefolke. For that the dead do not
after keep company with the living, nor the living with the dead: But this
dream signifyeth good to the well learned, and fathers. For that to the
fathers, children, and to the learned, the wrytinges, Books of their wisdom.

And this hath been observed, that to the sad, and such in fear, that death
signified good to them. For that the dead be then free both of fear, and
heaviness. And this dream to them, which he in a cotrouersie for land and
would buy land, signifyeth a good success. For that the Lords of such
land are dead. But in other variances to dream to be dead, signifyeth loss
and sorrow For yt in causing and workynge matters, the dead be then vnhable to
do, besides are fallen in the power of the living. But if any being sick
seems to be dead, doth after signify that he shall be delivered from the
sickness or grief, for that the dead do not then feel grief: nor be
sick. And if rny thinks to be buried alive, the same promises good to no
body, for that it signifyeth for the more yarte imprisonment or to be fettered
with chains. And he that thinks to be strangled and to hang himself,
signifyeth after tribulations sorrows for that to them that are strangeld, we
se the like to happen. And if the dead seem meerye and gentle they signify
good, that he shall pass the present time luckily: But if not, then
contrarywyse. And if the dead seems to take away such thing, which he
enjoyed in his life time, promises evil to follow. But most dangerous of all
others are these, which seem to take away garments, money, or meat: For
they either signify death to the dreamer or to some of his kindred or
acquaintance. Besides if the dead seem to give somewhat, do also signify
evil: unless they s^me to give meat, silver, or garments.

And if any thinks to dig up treasure, finding there little stoare of
money, doth signify the lesser harm or evil to ensue: but seeming a
treasure of much money doth signify sorrows and cares, and foresheweth
death, for that Treasure is not found, without the digging up of the earth,
nor the dead laid into it without the opening of the earth.

And this for a truth hath been observed, that when a certain personne was
sometimes in heaviness, thought in flepe that he saw himself to have very
small money in a little basket, and that he entered into a certain shop, where
thought, he lost the same coin conueyed by theft. After which followed, yt
certain lucky tidings came to him the same day following, of matters which
he toke great care for, and through the same was delivered, and became meerye
again. And an other which sent his son sometimes out of his country to
gather up money, and being then not come home, thought in sleep that he was
returned, and said to him: I have brought thee home three Thousand and 80.
Crowns, who awaking, showed this dream unto ^n interpreter, who answered
that his Son should shortly return with loss of his money which the like
happened to him

To mary a maiden signifyeth death to the sick parson, for that like things be
used in marriage, as happily in the Burial: yet the same signifyeth good to him
which purposes to go a new journey message, for that it signifyeth he shall
attain his purpose. And to that person hoping after any thing of commodity,
shall after attain the same. For yt some profit doth always ensue, at the new
marr^ing of a wife. And yet to some parsons, this dream signifies troubles
shame, for that maryages are not performed, without trouble. And if any
thinks to mary a widow, shall after compass no ne^e, but some old
business, without care and trouble. But if any shall think to see his wife
married to another man, doth after signify the alteration of actions, or
separation. And if a woman having a husband seems to be married unto
another man, like as many write, doth after signify that she shall either bury
her husband, or other wise in some manner shall be separated, live fro him. Yet
this not always happens true.

Certain brief Dreams gathered out of the Pamphlettes of the wise Salomon
holy Joseph, and Daniell the Prophet, with others now newly added.
IF a Prince or his wife shall seem to have rings on the fingers, declare
after so many parsons sons as there appeared rings. To talk with the earth,
signifies to Princes victory. If it seem to a Prince to have received poisoned
drink, or meat, that his hears seem to fall of: shall after overcome enemies
by policy.

If it seem to a Prince to pluck up any trees by the root, that he shall
subdue some of his nobles. But if those trees fall of their own accorde, then
those nobles shall dye without trespass or fact of the Prince. If from the
foot of Trees ships seem to arise then the Princes people shall increase.

If a Prince seems to have the Sun in his hand, signifyeth that he shall
have a Prince captyue. If this seems to a noble parson, that he shall be a
rebel: if to a private parson, that he shall be delivered from the heaviness of
cares. To worship the stars, or before them to weep, sygnifyeth a good turn
or grace to be had at the Princes hands. If to a Prince seem Tapestrye clothes
to be banged abroad, signifyeth a glad tidings or message But if they seem
decayed and torn, then a short life: and if but old, then that he shall
retain a good end only of the matter hoped after. To a private sick parso,
good savours Music signify health, but to a Prince death. A rich pomp or
triumph to a Prince sick declares death but to a private man, the delivery
frome that sickness. To a person in dignity to sit in the Clouds, declares a
hasti ruin to follow: to be whipped or scourged of a Maiestrate, not of a
Bedell or other officer without crime, signifyeth that the sentence of law
shall be give against him, to his hinderance. And if the same be a friend, then
this shall be profitable with ^ut damage.

And if any seems to raygne; declares to him a public death, but to a
seruaunt it is good for it signifyeth liberty. To see the Prince ireful, is
evil to al parsos, but especially to subjects.

To worship the king is to worship Religion and God. To take a cloak,
Crown, or sword of a Prince, signifyeth good. to contend with a king or some
parson in Authority, that he shall acoplishe all his businesses, that he
would with either of them. And the like when he overcomes them in cause of
the law. To minister meat to a king, receives a gift according to the manner
of ye meat. To be kissed of an Emperor or king, or to talk with him,
signifyeth gain with joy. to seem to put on golden garments declares envy
or heaviness. If any sees an Eagle or done sitting on him, signifyeth honour.
If any seems to break down altars in sleep signifyeth death to follow. If
any thinks to see or fight with Bees, signifyeth ire. If any thinks to cary
armour, declares safegardes or honour. To loose or break Armour, signifyeth
damage. To seek Tree with fruit in sleep signifyeth gain. To think himself
to be a tree, signifyeth a sickness. To climb trees, signifyeth good tidings or
some promotion. To fall out of a tree, signifyeth to fall fro a great hope. To
see trees grow in thy house, signifyeth strangers to dwell keep fellowship with
thee. The leaves of plants to fall on the sleaper, declares deceits wiles to
be forged against him. And to see plates without root, signifyeth vain
thoughts men of small trust utility. If a woman seems to bring forth a
peach tree, shall after bring forth a son of worthy manners, but of short
life. To bend a bow or shoot arrows, signifyeth sorrow or labour. To loose
or break a bow, signifyeth honour. To gather to gether arrows, signifyeth
wicked deceates to be intended unto some one. To find a howe signifyeth to
take a journey. If any thinks in his sleep, to plow, signifyeth abundance
with labour.

And seeming to plow is good to such desirous to have children, but to the
sick, the same is perilous. And one seemed to plow, and sow wheat, after
which the dreamers wife his children beyngthen out of the country, returned
home. To think he handled silver, signifyeth gain. To see a big Tree,
signifyeth honour. To plant a Tree with Arms or branches, or to hear
boughs, declares gain to ensue. And be that thinks to see a broken Tree,
signifyeth gain out of doubt. To see a Tree bearing fruit, signifyeeh gayue
or joy to ensue: to see a most huge Tree, declares death to ^ollowe. To lead
or handle a Boar, declares a happy expectation.

To find either gold or silver, declares envy or hatred to ensue. To see
gold or any gilden matter, declares happy times to ensue. To see silver, and
not to hadle it, declares great strife to follow. And sometimes to se silver
and handle it signifyeth a grievous sadness. To seem much higher then he is,
declares that he shall after be very sick. To take any thing from a woman
signifyeth damage. To see a field ^ull of thorns, declares pletifulnes to
follow. To se birds boiling, signifyeth the evil talk of enemies. To see
birds and to fight with them signifies damage. To see birds without
feathers, signifyeth trouble. To se the stars in sleep, signifyeth a great
gladness to follow. To see and talk with an Angel, declares a happiness to
follow. To climb to heaven or to pray to God signifyeth a great tradition.
That he goes to church to pray, or executes the office of a minister,
signifiethe great gladness to follow. That he catches hastily at birds,
signifyeth damage. To se birds, hang in sleep, declares gain. That abyrde
fights against him, declares the anger of some man towards him. To see a
bird with her young, declares joy to ensue. Tol loose or let go birds,
signyfieth damage. To have birds with their yonge, declarethe gain to follow.
To see bees upon him, signifies enemies to hurt him.

That bees sting and hurt him, signifies to be hurt by the wiles deceyts of
men. To crepe into a be hyue, declares dissolution. To see a swarm of Bees
signifyeth damage. To dream that he sees bees fight within themselves, sig,
nifyeth the hurt of parsons. That a be smyteth angarlye, signifyeth the
sedition of enemies. To see or have Lambs or kyds, signifyeth consolation or
increase.

To see a goose, declares great honour. To se lambs feadinge or sleapynge,
signifies deterimente. And to see an ass in sleep, signifyeth the tediousness
of a sickness. And to think himself caught or taken hold of the devil,
signifyeth gain. To be taken of a bear, signifyeth gain. To fly to heaven,
signifies peregrination. To give any thing into the hands of an other,
signifies gain. And to think himself taken or houlde of a wolf signifies to
be oppressed of enemies. To take roasted eggs, signifyeth gain, To drink hot
water in sleep, signifyeth a sickness. To drink cold water in sleep,
signifyeth health and lunge life. And to fall from a tree, signifyeth dead
near hand. To be crouned of an Emperor, signifies joy. To be crowned of
a dead parson, signifies securitye. To be carried forth of a River,
signifyeth the discord of enemies To sit at the table of a man of power,
signifies joy and gladness. To see the air clear, signifyeth gain or
expedicio. To see the air troubled or cloudy, signifyeth a deceit or petition.
To see or eat roasted flesh, signifyeth damage To climb to heaven or pray unto
god, signifyeth a great traditio. To think himself drawn of the dead,
declares no good luck. To be vexed of a devil, signifies happy gain. To think
himself bound, signifies a certain hindrauce. To take meat or some other
thing of the dead, or to talk with him, signifyeth honour: that armed to be set
upon or smitten with a weapon, signifyeth to be oppressed of a mighty parson.
To lose a bracellet or ring, signifyethe a greuouse deceit. To take an iron
ring, signifyeth security. To give a ring or vracellet, signifies a gift
honour. To take or receive a ring, ^ignifyeth gladness. To see a ram running
declares the anger, or falling out of thy neighbour. To see asses fighting or
sttiuinge one with another or to run mourning, signifies strife of enemies. To
see himself endamaged by Beasts, shall be overcome of enemies or else subversion,
or disturbation.

To be assaulted of Serpents, signifyeth ^uill. If any thinks himself to
be clothed in white or bright apparel, signify^the joy to ensue. To see a
Carter running, signifies strife and contention with neighbours. To drink
vyneger, or wormwood signifies greuouse sorr^wes or asickenesse. To see the
air tempe^stuo^s, signifies a great sorrow. To see or handle Eels, signifies
labour.

To see white feathers on his cote or other garment, signifyeth gladness. To
see a tree, signifyeth deceit or ^usines.

To walk by dung hills, fignifyeth a sickness to ensue.

To walk by a still water, signifyeth securitye. To se himself aged,
signifyeth labour To walk by a running water, signifyeeth hynderaunce. To
speak to an Emperor, declareeh some aduaucemente by a great man.

To conceive any thing in thy love, signifyeth carefulnes. To burn his
house, declares charity good news.

To walk or talk with a stranger, declares expedition.

To dream that he hath a great long beard, declares gain fortitude. To se
himself bearded, or in a strange manner from that he was, declares contentio
or sorrow, or else decrease or sickness. That he seethe himself to have a
beard burning or on a fire, declares tribulation.

To see thy beard clypped or shaven declares damage. To have a staff to
walk with, declares sorrow and sickness to follow. To be feared and set upon
by beasts, declares to take heed of thy enemy, to see beasts running,
declares some trouble. And tame bestes, declares to win favour withe
enemies, and to have them a while in thy power.

And to dream that he hears beasts speak, declares grievous sorrows.

To have strong arms, declares increase, to have goodly arms, a good
message or an ornamet. And to have foul arms, signifyeth strife and loss.
And to have great arms, declares power.

To have small arms, desolation: to have mighty arms of strength, declarethe
friendship. And to se an Ox climb, signifies much good. To see Oxen play,
feed or stand, signifyeth joy, to see fat Oxen, declares temporal goodness. To
se leave Oxen, declares poverty or needines of emporall goodness after. To see
an Ox black or killed, signifies danger. And to see an Ox without horns,
declares the conspiracy of enemies. To hear an Ox mow, signifyeth strife.
To se Ox fight, signifyeth a business. To se Oxen run, signifyeth joy, To see
Oxen sleep signifyeth an evil time. To tame Oxen, signifyeth a greeuouse
sorrow. That Oxen cun upon him, signifyeth a wretched business. To see a
white Ox, or to sit upon him, signifyeth honour or aduaucement. To se
Olyphauntes, signifyeth sorrow. To eat butter, declares a happy message. To
see beasts make a noise within themselves, signifies the defence from enemies.
And yt he sees the elemet touche the ground, signifyeth expedicio. And to se
the elemet al on fire, declares no goodness, but iniquytyes in the dreamers
hart. And to sit in heaven, declares happinewes. And to fe a hart attaint the,
declares that thou need not to fear no man. And to se dogs play,
signifyeth grace or fa^o^re of thy aduersari And to think dogs barkinge, or
leapyng on the: declares hatred sought on thee or thy enemies to over come
the. Also dogs leaping on the, signifyeth that thou shalt be deceived of thy
enemies. And to make candels or light lamps, signifyeth joy and iocundity.
And to se a wax candel or cadels, great gladness or a good message. To handle
wax, declares good. And to have lunge hear on the head, signifyeth
fortitude: the head to be polled, signifyeth sorrow or loss. To se himself
heary declares a sickness after. To singe psalmes anger. And the bell to toll or
to hear the sound thereof, signifyeth fame, or a glad tidings. And to se
quick coals, signifies to extinct or move thy enemies. And to eat coals,
declares yt the enemies speak evil of the. And to se thy neck bound, beware
how you give credit to any, in any thing after. And to put on new shoes, or
new apparel thy self, declares gain with paynfulnes. And to put on old woorne
shooen, signifies a damage, trouble, deceuing, sorrow. And to read or write a
letter, signifyeth a good message. And to talk with the dead, signifyeth good
and profit to follow, And to se books reading in the, declares the not to be
overcome. To dwell with an Emperor or King, dedclareth joy and aduauncemet.
And to eat a fresh cheese, declarethe gain or favour. But salt cheese, no
good hap.

And to have an helmet on, declares securitye. To take or receive a garland
of what kind it be, declares gladness or gain. And to wear a garland of
diverse flowers, declares an equality of temporallgoods. And to se lightnings
thuder declares gain. And to see doves, declares some heaviness after. To se
or have a borne, declares hynderaunce or peril of life. To dream that he
sees himself yt he cannot run, declares a sickness, hynderaunce or loss.
And that he can run, signifyeth gladness. And to dream yt he talks with a
dead person, signifies gain With other to be crowned, declarethe death to
follow. And to embrace friendly with a wife in bed, declares a grievous strife.
And with thy sister, sorrow or damage. But with they mother, securitye. And with
a virgin also declares sorrow. And with a man, strife deceate of the devil.
And with a beast infirmitye. To lye with harlottes, signifies gain. To have
cucubers gourdes, signifyeth weariness, because ye grain there is both red
black.

To see the white grayn like peas. signifyeth a grievous strife. To give a
s^ese, then beware thy enemy. To take a knife of on, declares that thy
enemies speak evil of thee. To sit in a carte, declares great gain to follow
To seem crouned or to wear a crown, declares gain. To read books or to see
them read, declares joy, to have gyves or fetters on, signifies friendship.
And to drink any spyced matter or sauce, to take heed of an enemy. To se a
prison shut, declares securitye. To talk or walk with strangers, declares
an expectation. And to talk with thy master or lord, signifies great gain To
cut his own flesh with iron, declares a grievous sickness. And to eat mas
flesh, declares good as it wear sent. To see much flesh, then beware thy
enemy. And to se himself grievously punished or tormented, declares grievous
tribulatio To dream that he hath a heary boodye, declares hynderaunce. To
have a white head' signifyeth gain. And to vomit up meat, signifies yt what
thou shall have well settled in the, shall be troubled tossed after. And to swallow
meat down, signifyeth damage. And meat to rise up, signifies the effect of his
will. And to se a whalswim, signifies loss And to dream that his head is
washed, shall be delivered. fro al peril. And yt his head is polled, signifies
damage. To think thy self blind, signifies a sickness or to fall into sin.
And to hear a harp, signyfyeth vain words. And to dream that his teeth fall
out signifies the death of one of his freds after. And to dream that the
nether eye teeth fall out with pain blood, declares that he shall after come
poor, or leese his near kinsman. And to dream yt he sees himself rich,
signifyeth to suffer an injury. And to build thy house, signifies consolation
or great gain. And to destroy thy house or to see thy house fall, signifyeth
damage or the death of.i. of thy parents: to se thy house burning, signifies
the occasion of an offence caused by one, or peril of life. And to be praised
of young children, signifies yt he shall be glorified of his proper children. And
to dream that his head is stricken of, signifyeth gain or to overcome an
enemy, to eat sweet things, signifyeth to be oppressed with many crimes. And
to see dragons signifyeth some advancement. And to have or see a diadem,
signifyeth gain, To se hymsefe comely decked, signifyeth gain, And to sit on a
white horse or to see him, signifyeth iocuditye. To have red or bay horses,
signifies a happy message, to se a gray horse signifyeth gain, and to se a
horse saddled, signifyeth labour. and to se him self watering, signifyeth a
great grief or sorrow to follow. And to se a dead horse, signifyeth gain. And to
have a black horse, or to sit on him signifyeth sorrow. And to geld a horse
signifyeth damage, that secretes to be reveled. To se himself drunk,
signifyeth sickness or scurity, And to see him self gelded, signifyeth damage
or a sickness. To see himself sick, signifies some accusatio. And to dream yt
he is a vanyshed man, signifyeth a great offence to follow. And to se spoils
or to be spoiled himself, signifyeth yt he shall receive loss by some of his
near friends. And to see himself not to exercise his proper relygion,
signifies heaviness to follow. To dream that he is hurt with iron, declaaeth
desolation. And to dream that he sees his face in the water, declares log
life. To think himself to have a comely face, signifyeth aduauncemente or to
be enryched. But to dream that he sees himself to have a foul face,
signifyeth that he shall be oppressed with many crimes. And to see a clear
river, or quietly to pass the river, declares securitye, to see a troublesome
or tempestuous river, declares accusement or offentio. And to pass a reddishe
river, signifyethe a tempest. To see a fountayue or well, to drink out thereof,
declares to grow to riches. To se a den^ or cave to fall into the same
declares a grievous acusmente, falslye or craftily brought in. And to have
sons or daughters borne, declarethe increase. To see brother, mother, or
sisters dead, declares joy long life. To see a well sprung up in his house,
signifyeth consolatio and gladness. And to se a river flow into his house,
declares peril of life.

To have springes of water, signifyeth yt he shall do matters for an other man,
and wyn by him To wash his face, signifyeth eth lunge life. To have a rudy
face, to be oppressed with many crimes. And to see his face in a glass, a
son to him borne.

And to see antes or pismiers, signifyeth great variaunces or cotrouersies. And
to se wheat or wheat meal, or to handle the same, declares weakness or
sickness to follow. And to laugh or smile in thy sleep declares sadness. To se
himself mad or become a sword player, signifyeth condenation. And to see sword
players, that thy enemies shall over come thee. To see himself a master of
fence, and with it to be praised, signifyeth a g^ouse sorrow to follow. And
cary a sword, to receive harm by it, signifyeth sorrow or heuynes to follow.
To see people fighting to beset upon by the, signifyeth variance or
cotrouersye peril. A cock to crow or fight, declares subuersio or
carefulnes. To less a precious stone out of a ring, declares that he shall
less something after. To se or here hail, signifyeth a great damage. To see
got bucks, or r^ms, signifies plentifulnes to follow. To dream yt thou hast
gests or receive gests, signifies envy or great deceits. To dream yt thou
kill men, signifyeth damage. To se a garden or to walk in an orchard,
declares joy. And to make gardens. signifies iocudity. An emperor to dwell
with thee, or a king, signifyeth joy. And to se images, declares mutation: To
walk in a palace, declares sorrow. To walk in a church sygnifyeth joy.
And to walk or sleep in the market place declares a sickness. Advanced to
honours, signyfieth poverty. And to see a man changed or transformed into a
beasts lyknes, signifyeth to be reprehended of his master or Lord. And to
dream that be washes in a clear Well or river, declares gladness with
profit. But to dream that he washes in a foul spring or river troubled,
signifyeth a most bitter or greuouse accusemente and damage. And to dream that
he sees himself walk or goo into battles, declares greueouse sorrows to
grow to him. To wash him self in a privy bane, signifyeth sorrowfulnes. And
to see himself in prison or imprisoned, signifyeth some false or crafty
accusation against him. To dream that he plays with young babes or infantes,
sygnifyeth felicity. And to dream that he walk man orchard, declares joy
mirth. Also to wash himself in a well, or clear river, declares gain to
follow. In the sea, profit or gladness. To swym in a great water, signifyeth a
lunge life. To wash in a foul deep pyt, signifyeth accusemente. To wash in
a pond, signyfieth: iocundity of life: In a river, joy. And to dream yt he
falled into a well signifyeth accusemente, Into the sea, sygnyfyeth joy. And to
see fyers in any place of the house, signifies peril to some part of the
house. To eat coals, signifies slauderouse talk or euel report of enemies.

To paint in tables signifyeth long life.

To se fierce otherwise in sleep, declares the peril of life. And to see ii.
or many moans sygnifieth aucthorities or powers else ill will. To dream that
thou see the moon bloudye, sygnifyeth peril. To dream that he sees the
moon fall from heaven, declares labour or traueil. And to dream that thou
see thy self bound, signifyeth hindrauce. To dream yt he sees his bed
trimly made. signifies yt he shall take or wed a faithful wife. And to se ye ^
good, to the moon of many colours or obscure, signifyeth heaviness or loss.
To see the moan show white, signifyeth gain To se a lyon assaylinge the,
signifyeth sedition To read or to hear a book read, a good message. To eat
lard or fat, that some of his parents shall dye. To se a lyon running,
signifies an expedition of his business. To se himself clothed in white linne
declares heaviness of mind, or a sickness. To se himself throw or gather
stones, signifyeth sorrow to follow or a sickness. To see himself brawl or
strive, signifyeth increase. To see his bed well apparelled or decked,
signifyeth gladness or joy To se himself handle lights, declares sickness or
some infirmity to follow

To make or kindle lights, declares gain and joy. To drink or eat milk
signifyeth joy.

To dream that he washes himself in could water, signifyeth health. To
dream that he hath new books, signify yt he shall either remove into a new
house or have a new house. To dream that he sees thieves, signifyeth gain or
otherwise. To dream that he speak the faynedly in confession or to laugh in
his sleep signifyeth strife or variance to follow. And to dream yt he sees
his hands foul signifyeth damage offences. And to dream that he sees his
mother dead declares joy. And to see the sea calm, signifies joy. But to
se yt sea troubled or tossing, signifies heuines or sorrow. And to se the sea
most clear, signifyeth an expedicio. To dream that he departs the world,
declares removing into some desolate place. To dream that he washes his
hands, signifyeth to be delivered of his offence or offences, and crimes
excused. And to dream y^ he sees a woman with the here sparsid abroad, declares
discord to a rise after. And to dream that he see^h himself removed fro one
place in to another, signifeth deceit. To dream y^ he sees a dead person or
that he talks with him, signifies joy. And to dream that he sees himself
dead, signifies hinderace. And to dream yt he kisses a dead pa^son,
signifyeth a long life, To dream y^ be sees bades bound, signifies greouns
sorrows. And to see the majesty of God, signifyeth death or a most greeuouse
sycksickenesse. To dream that he gathers up corn new mowen, signifies
gladness or joy. To take honny, beware enemies. To marry a wife, a grievous
sorrow. To see souldiars, signifyeth joy. To dream that he sees fishes
playing in the sea, signifyeth security. To dream that he clymeth or goes
up on a mountain high and difficult, signifyeth dyminutio or loss, To
dream that he (...) himself to be a hill or mountain, signifyeth joy. To
dream that thou feasteste marriages, or see singers of songs, declares
sorrowing, weeping, labour. To dream that he walk bare footed, or sees
himself naked, signifyeth sorrows or great labours travails. To dream that
he sees himself swym and cannot, signifyeth grievous hinderance.

To dream that he sees byrds nestes, signifyeth his busynes to come to good,
or happen prosperouslye to him. To find a neaste of birds, signifyeth rather
evil then good. To dream that he washes his feet, signifyeth an
expedition. To dream that he takes apples, signifyth gre^uous anguishes of
mind. To give Apples, signifyeth damage. To see peacocks. signifyeth
expedition. To dream that he fights or ^triueth, let him then beware his
enemy. To dream yt he takes mantels, signifyeth ioyfulnes. To dream y^ he
hears a chicken crowinge, signifies joy. To take a young maiden, signifyeth
gain. To handle pepper, to fight with enemies. To have hearye feet, a
hindrance. To eat Apples, signifyeth labour. To burn a wall, signifyeth
sicknis to follow. A woman to see a wall signifyeth damage or loss. To dream
yt he sees a woman delivered of a child, signifies damage. To think
himself cloaked in purple, signifyeth a sickness. To dream yt he sees the
going out of swyne, signifyeth a true message or tidings. To see his father
alive being dead, signifyeth security. To dream yt he goes down into a pit,
signifyeth loss or damage. To think himself in exile, to be oppressed with
great crimes. To be set upon of four footed beasts. signifyeth no good. To
dream that he hath or goes up to chariottes or horstiturs, signifyeth
honour. But to go dow^ fro the, or fall out of them, sygnifieth to loose ^onours,
or to offend his Elders. And that four footed Beasts speak, that thy
enemies shall fl before thee. And to dream that he thinks himself become
blind, signifyeth sedition to follow. And to dream that he sees himself
fly, signyfyeth that he shall remove or change his hydinge place. And to
dream that he sees himself beset with a bear, signifies y^ sedition of
enemies. To se horslitters, signifyeth heauin^s of mind or some infirmity. And
to dream y^ be gives a four foted beast, signifies heaviness to follow. To
dream that he sees a king or kings, declares departur out of the world or
sorowfulnes. And to dream y^ he sees kings dye, signifies damage. And to se
runinge brokes or ryuers, signifies variances at hand. And to dream y^ he
climbs or goes up a waterbancke, signifies labour traueil. But to dream y^
he goes down or falls fro a waterbank, signifyeth evil. And to dream y^ he
is a queen, signifyeth deceit to follow. To se a rose, declares health. And
to give or take a rose, of other gladness. And to dream y^ be sees himself
shaven, signifyeth gain. And to laugh or to se laughing, signifies gain. And
to se frogs, signifies sorrow or heaviness of mind to follow. To dream y^ be
eats rotes, signifyeth strife or varyauce to follow. To dream y^ he sees
ships or to climb into them, declares happy message or good news. And to
sea white cloud, declares gladness or good news. To se ^le white clouds lying
on y^ earth declares small goodness to hap. And to see snow or ise,
signifyeth sorrow or heuines. To think himself sail in peril, signifyeth
joy: To dream that he hath business to do with an Emperor or judge, signifyeth
dignitye or aduaucement.

To take or eat nuts, signifies joy.

But to dream that he gathers nuts, sygnyfyeth strife or variance: to
dream tha^ he sees a ship saylinge, signifies a happy message or good
tidings. To see a s^ippe charged or frayghted, signyfieth happier times, and
days to follow.

To dream that he prays, signifies happy days after. To se shorn sheep,
sygnifieth damage. To lose the right eye, to lose some next neighbour. To take
or see oil, signifies gladness. To dream that he sees dead mes bones, or
their bodies, declares great travails or labours, damage and i^iury: to take a
kiss, signifiioyfulnes and gain.

Or to give a kiss, signifyeth damage.

And to dream that he hears the sound of an Orgayne pipe, or pypes playing,
declares most great ire and variances to follow. And he that thinks to do
great works, grievous hinderance shall follow. And to dream that he
gathers Olives, signifyeth gayue. Or to dream that he sheareth or clip
swine signifyeth damage. To eat potherbes, signifies sorrow. Or to eat
eggs, signifyeth strife: To hear a pipe sound, signifyeth variances: To
dream that he hath oil poured upon him, signyfyeth gain. And to dream
that he buries ornaments in the belly of the dead, declarethe a happy
message or good tidings: To dream that he feeds sheep, signifyeth
sorowfulnes. And to dream that he sees rain, signifyeth aboudance of riches
and ioyfulnes: To dream that he sees himself become hearye, signififyeth
fortitude or increase: To dream y^ he digs or makes a pyt to fall therein,
signifyeth damage and a false crafty accusation. And to se himself weep,
signifyeth joy after: to make, see, or to have a strong fountain or well,
declares securitye after. And to se wells or fountains broken down,
signifyeth heuines of mind: To dream that he sees hogs, a sickness to
follow: to handle lead, declares a great infirmitye to follow. And to
dream that he eats white bread, declares gain and joy. To dream that he
eats harlye bread, signifyeth sorrowfulnes to follow. And to dream that he
rows on the water, declares labours: to se two or many stars clear,
signifyeth that thou shalt increase in power joy. To dream that he sees the
son clear shyninge, signifyeth joy, or the stabilitye of the king. And to
dream that he sees stars fall from the firmament, declares that he
shall see men fall to the earth in battle or a great battle to ensue: to
dream y^ he sees the Sun running with the Moon, declares a strife or a
most wicked message. And to dream that thou art beset or assailed by
serpents, signifyeth an happy overcome of an enemy: to se the Sun darke^ed,
signifyeth the peril or danger of a king. And to see the Sun and moon
bloudye, signifyeth danger or harm: To dream that he sees blood issue
out of his side, declares peril and danger to follow. And to see two or
many sons. follows honour and joy. To dream that he goes up a ladder,
declares a deceit or begylynge. To dream that he kills a Serpent,
signifyth joy. And to dream that thou sees either the Sun or Moon,
declares ioyfulnes to follow. To dream that he sees Serpents, signifyeth
women's wily intrappinges. And to dream that he sits, signifyeth an
infirmitye of mind or sickness to follow: to dream that he treads down
thorns, signifyeth to overcome enemies. And to dream that he sees Images of
timber or mettell, declares hatred. To walk on the water, signifyeth honour
and joy* To dream that he makes a will signifyeth d^scent^on. And to hear
thunder, signifieeth a happy message or glad tidings. To dream that he sees
a tempest, signifies gain. To dream y^ he sees it darck signifyeth sorrow or
sickness to follow. To dream that he sees weavers weaving, whether it be in
silk or clothe, declares a good message or tidings. And to dream that he
sees and hears an earthquake or the moving of the earth, signifies the
loss of somewhat, wherefore he shall become very sad, or contrariwyse an
infirmity or sickness shall follow.

To dream that he sees the earth move or quaver, declares that ruin, or
some other vnprofitablenes shall happen of the place. And to dream y^ he sees
a loom or frame, after what manner it be* or to weave, signifyeth ioyfulnes. To
dream that he puts on a rosy or scarlet colour cote, signifyeth heuines of
mind or sickness to follow. And to dream that he passes the seas,
signifyeth joy. To dream that he sees playing at tables or dice, signifyeth
a ioyfulnes. To hear or see trumpets in sleep, signifies a good tidings, and
to see a bull, or a bull to run on him, signifyeth a bariaunce to ensue. To
dream that he hath a fair and comely garment, signifyeth strife and varyauc.
To dream that he huteth signyfieth gain. To burn his garments signifyeth
deceit or damage. To have a fair and comely garment, declares favour, and
ioyfulnes, but in the beginning, or before to be sharply chidden or challenged.
And to make an oyntmet, signifyeth perplexitye of mind. To cut or pare his
nails signifyeth grievous perplexities of mind. And to dream that he sees
lost garments, signifyeth damage. To drink wine, signifyeth a sickness. To
dream that he walk on a clay ground, signifyeth a grievous sorrow or peril. To
see sower and vnrype grapes, signifyeth some variaunces. And to see ^ynes ripe
signifyeth gladness. To see the gathering of grapes or making of wine,
signifies ioyfulnes. To dream that he sees birds fly, upon his head, and
pluck away the here of his head, declares an euel death after to that
person. And to think himself to have a fa^re house signifyeth perigrination.
To se a banner or flag, signifyeth to be oppressed with great crime. And to
dream, that he marries a wife signifyeth damage. And to dream that he
handles a glass, signifyeth perplexity of mind. To dream that he sees a
virgin have a great bush of here on the head, signifyeth gain. To think
himself to fly, to wader or to change place. To dream that he sees himself
wooded, signifyeth dolor.

To se his wife in dream to mary to an other or to lye with another man,
signyfieth the death of his wife or a long sickness. To dream that he sees
himself grene in colour, signifyeth heaviness: To dream that he ^eth a bear
running or setting upon him, signifyeth the discord of an enemy. To dream
that he sees white grapes, signifyeth joy. To dream that he sees black
grapes, declares poverty or a sickness to ensue. To dream that he sends
presents, signifies damage. But to dream that he receueth presents,
signifyeth joy and gain. To dream that he sees water pots or pitchers full,
signifyeth comfort in adversity and riches. To see got bucks, signifyeth
happy^es to follow. And to think himself girt with girdels, signifyeth
safeguard, to the parsonne. To dream that he cutteth a girdell divided in
parts, signifyeth envy and discord.

To be girt with golden girdels, signifyeth gain or envy. To lose a girdell
signifyeth sedition of faith. To be girt with an old girdell signifyeth
langoure. To dream that he sows cockle or dar^ell, declares brawling or
contentio and saluder

FINIS,

