DE MORBO GALLICO.

LONDINI IN AEDIBVS THOMAE BERTHELETI. M.D.XXXIII. CUM PRIVILEGIO.

The preface of Thomas Poyne^ chanon of Marten abbey, translator of this book.
NOt lunge agoo, after I had translated into our english tongue the book
called Regimen sanitatis Salerni, I happened being at London to talk with the
printer, and to enquire of him, what he thought, and how he liked the same
book: and he answered, that in his mind: it was a book much necessary, and
very profitable for them that toke good heed to the wholesome teachynges, and
warily followed the same. And this much farther he added thereto, that so
farforthe as ever he could here, it is of every man very well accepted and
allowed. And I said, I pray god it may do good, and that is all that I desire.
And thus in talking of one book and of an other, he came forth and said:
that if I would take so much peyne as to translate into Inglysshe the book
that is entitled De medicina guaiaci, et morbo gallico written by that great
clerk of Almayne Vlrich Hutten knight, I shulde, said he, do a very good
dede. For saying hit is soth, as this great clerk writes of this medicine
Guaiacu, (For he him self hath had the very experience thereof) how needful
and howe beneficial to the common wel^h were it? For almost into every part
of this realm, this most foul and peynfull disease is crept, and many
soore infected therewith. When he had said thus his fantasy, a^d that I had
bethought me and well advised his words, I answered: If I thought it would do
good, I would take the peyne with all my very heart, and hit were much
greatter: and yet (said I) I fear me, it be as much or more than I am able
to accomplish. For I doubt whether I may come to the clear vnderstonding
thereof or not: It is in ernest a matter strange enough to translate, not only
for the names of herbs and other diverse things therein contained, but also for
the phrase and eloquent style. But what so ever answer I made him, I finally
determined to translate the said book, as I have done in dede, not so well I am
sure, so plainly, and so exquisitely as many other could, if they wold
vouchesafe to take the peyn: but yet I trust I have not much erred from the
true meaning of the auctour. And I say not the contrary, but sum words
have I left barely englysshed, and some not at all, but they be such, as are
by those names in latin usually known to physicians, without whose counsaylle
(specially those that be approved and known to be syngularly learned in
physike) I would counsaylle no ma to be to bold either to practise or receive
any medicine.

At Marten Abbey. an. dni. 1533.

The table of this book.
THe beginning of the french pockes, and why it has divers names. cap. j.
fo. 1. The causes of this disease. Cap. ij. fo. 3. Into what diseases the
french pockes are turned. cap. iij. fo. 4. Howe men at the beginning
resisted the french pockes. cap. iiij. fo. 6. What help the author of this
book used in this syckenes. cap. v. fo. 8. The description of the wodde
Guaiacum, and of the finding name thereof. ca. vi. 10. Of the ordering of
Guaiacum in medicine.
The beginning of the french pockes, and why it hath divers names. Ca. i.
IT has pleased god, that in our time sycknesses should arise, which were to
our forefathers (as it may be well conjectured) unknow. In the year of Christ.
1493. or there about, this pestiferus evil creped amongst the people, not
only in France, but first appeared at Naples, in the frenchemennes host,
(whereof it toke his name) which kept war under the french king Charles,
before hit appeared in any other place. By which occasion the french men
putting from them this abh^rred name, call it not the french pockes / but
the evil of Naples / reckenynge it to their rebuke, if this pestilent disease
shulde be named the french pockes. Not withstanding the consent of all nations
hath obtained / and we also in this book will call hit the french pockes, not
for any envy that we bear to so noble and gentle a nation, but because we
fere, that all me should not understand / if we gave it any other name.

At the first rysynge thereof some men supersticiously named it meuyn syckenes
of the name (I know not) of what saint. some accounted it to come of Iob
scabbe, whom this syckenes (I think) hath brought in to the number of seyntes.
Some i^ged it to be the infirmity / wherewith the monk Euager was grieved,
through immoderate cold and eating of raw meates, when he was in desert.
And therefore he also was sought from far countries, with great resort of
men, offering gifts habundantly at his chappelle, which is in Vestrike. And
because the name of saint Euager was not known among^ the common people of
Almayne, they called it Fyacres sickness for Euagers. Not enquerynge what the
^rues of these were, but only believed that these could help them. Such
opinions had the people, and thus they did rise: There was images offered
and hanged before saint Roche, and his old sores were new remembered, which
thing if it were done of a godly mind / I do not repro^e / but if it were
done, that those might get auatage that were the inuenters thereof, I marvel
that disceyte shulde have place in so great discomfort and sorrow, and in so
miserable destruction of mankynde.

But the deuines did interpretate this to be the wrath of god, and to be his
punysshement for our evil living. And so did openly pr^ache, as though they,
admytted into that hye counsaylle of god / had there learned / that men never
lived worse, or as who saith in that golden world of Augustus and Tiberius,
when Christ was here on earth, most myscheuous diseases did not begin: or
as who saith, that nature hath no power to bring in new diseases, which in
all other things makes great changes, or as who says, that within short
time in our days (because men beth now of good fyuyng) the remedy of Guaiacum
is found for this sickness. So well these things do agree, which these men's
minds that declare god (as they think) do preach unto us. Than began the
physicians busynesse, which search not what shulde take away this disese, but
what was the cause thereof, for they might not abide the sight of it, much more
they abstained from touching. For when it first began, it was of such
fylthynes / that a ma wold scarsely think this syckenesse, that now reygneth,
to be of that kind. They were boils, sharpe, and stondynge out, having the
similitude and quantite of acorne^, from which came so foul humours, and so
great stynche, that who so ever ones smelled it, thought him self to be enfect.
The colour of these pusshes was derke grene / and the sight thereof was more
grievous unto the patient than the peyne it self: a^d yet their peynes were as
though they had lain in the fire.

This disease (not lunge after his beginning) entered into Germania, where it
hath wandered more largely than in any other place: which thing I do ascribe
unto our intemperance.

They which than toke counsel of the sterres, prophisied / that evil not to
endure above.vij. years, wherein they were disceyued, if they meant of this
disease and all the ivel that comes thereof: but if they met it of the forsaid
most fylthye kind, which comes of him self / not only of enfection, but
through the corruption of the air, or the ordinance of god: than were they not
disceyued. For it tarried not lunge above the.vii. year. But the infyrmitie,
that came after, which remains yet / is nothing so fylthye. For the sores
at some times beth little, not so hye nor so hard. And sometime there is a
certain broad crepynge scabbe / for his benym enters deper, and brings
forth more diseases.

It is thought this kind now adays to grow in any person, but through
infection by defilynge of him self, which thing especially happens by
copulation. For it appears manifestly, that yonge children / old men, and
other, which are not given to the bodily lust, beth very seldom enfected
therewith. And the more that man is given to wantonness, the sooner he is
infected. And as they live, that beth taken therewith / so other it shortly
leaves them, or lunge holds them, or utterly consumes them. For it is very
easy unto the Italians and Spanyardes, and to su^he as live soberly, but
through our surfetynge and intemperate living, hit doth lunge continue with
us, and greuousely doth vex and chafe us.

The causes of this disease. Capitu. ij.
THe physicians have not yet certenly diffined the secret causes of this
disease, although they have long peynfully with great variete searched therefore,
but in this thing al do agree, which is very evident, that through some vnholsom
blasts of the air, which were at y^ time / the lakes, foutaines / flodes,
also the sees were corrupted, And thereof the earth to receive poison, The
pastures to be enfected, venem{us} vapors to come down fro the air, which
living creatures (in drawing the breath) received. For this disese was found in
other bestes like as i me. The astrologers fetch ye cause of this ifirmite from
the sterres / saying, yt it {pro}cedeth of ye coiuctions of Saturn Mars, which
was not long before, of.ii. eclipsis of the son, they do affirm, yt by th^se
signs they might perceive many colerik, fleumatike infirmities to follow /
which should long continue, slowly depart, as Elyphacia / lepre, tetters, al i'll
kind of scabs boils, and what so ever evils deforms vnfasshioneth the body,
as the gout, palsy / sciatica / joint ache, other like dagers. And that these
things should chase rather in the north part by reason of this sign Aquarius,
wherein fell the first ecclypse: And in the west part by reason of this sign
Piscis / in the which fell the last eclyps. But the physicians affirm this
syckenes to come of ill and habundant humours, as of coler black advst yelowe
and fleume salt or advst, and that of one of these alone, or of certain, or else
of al these mingled, whose sharpnes streking out to the outward parts of the
body / burns and dries the skin, and fylleth it full of scabs, but that
which comes of raw heavy and gross humours / they say is driven into the
joints, and causes great peine in them, and to arise knobs swellinges,
knots to gether, and the skin to ryuell. And moreover the heed to ache,
whereby ye beauty of the body is clean altered gone. Some breuely cocluding say,
that this infirmite comes of corrupt, burnt, enfect blode. And al these
things were in doubtful disputatio, ye nature thereof not yet known, but now
it is know, they be also ap{pro}ued. for in mine opinio this sickness is no
other thing / but a postumatio, rotting of impure blode: the which after it
begins to dry, it turns into swelling hard knobs, the which thing
{pro}cedeth of the liver corrupt. To know more of the nature or qualities of
this infirmity shulde be very tedious hard to jug. For we se in our time,
what diverse concertatios / opinios have be to boldly disputed: and what peyne
the physicians have taken therein, sens the beginning thereof. The physicians of
Germaynie, for the space of ij. years, meddled with such disputation, and yet
when I was but a child, they vndertoke to heal me: but what profit cam
thereof, the end hath showed, not withstondynge they were bold to meddle with
strange dregs and spices, and to myngle and minystre many things / which
they shulde not have ministered. And I remember / they forbode me to eat
peasen. For in some places there grow certain worms in the with wings, of the
which hoggeflesshe was thought to be in^ected, because that best specially was
deceas^ed either with this, or else with an other not much unlike unto this.

Into what disese the french pockes are turned. Ca. iii.
THe peynes of this disease all ready rehearsed are esteemed in manner as no
peines: for this disease turns it self into great inconueniece and peyne
that naturally it hath of him self: In so much that all manner of syckenes,
having or causynge any peyne in man joints, seems to be contained therein.
For first there is sharpe ache in the joints / and yet nothing appears:
afterwards the gathering to gether of humours causes the members to swell,
but after that such vile matter is waxed harde, that a man shall feel the
vehement peynes thereof. This is the first coming thereof. For it seems to
edifye and fortify a castelle, there to rest a lunge season, and thens to
disperse and caste into every part of the body all manner of ache and peynes.
And the longer the said swellynges tarry fro rottynge^ and rypynge / the more
peyne shall the patient suffer. And above all other peynes of this infyrmitie,
this is the violetest, and that troubles man most. I my self had such a
little knobbe, and swelling above my left heal in the inner side, the which
after it was indurate and harde, by the space of.vij. year, could by no power
of oyntementes or any manner lappynges and cherysshynges be made soft / or
caused to putrefy and rot, but continued stylle like a boon, vntylle that
by the help of Guaiacum it vanished away by little and little. This thing as
touching women rests i their secret places, having in those places little pretty
sores full of venom{us} poison, being very dagerous, for those yt vnknowingly
meddle with the. The which sickness got by such infected women, is so much the
more vehement grievous, how much they be inwardly polluted and corrupted. By this
the senowes (at sum times) do slack wax hard again, at sometime they shrink,
some time the sickness turns it self into the gout, or into the pal^ey or ito
apoplexi infects many one with lepre. For it is thought, that these
infirmities be very neighbours one to an other. And yt for many reasons, which
are come to both evils. They that be take with pockes, of^en times become
lepres, and often times through the sharpnes of their peynes they shake and
queuer as men in a fevre.

After all this there buddeth out appear small holes sores, which turn the self
into cakers phistuls, or cotinual sores: the more they putrefy, the more they
diminish ye bone. And when the bones be putrified corrupt, the paciet through
lunge cotinuace of siknes, waxes len, for the flesh consumes away / there
remains but only the skyn to cover the bones withal^ through this many a one
chase to be thisiques, the which inwardly be full of corruption. Beside all
this, out of this infirmity flows an other, which some men do call cacesia
/ the which fylleth a mans flesh also his skyn full of water: Sum have sores
in their bladder, oft times many men's liver stomach is utterly consumed by
this infyrmite. And in this thing their opinion is falls that say that the
gathering to gether of humours swellinges, wrinkels, and knots come not of
the nature of this infirmite, but that it chanced only to those that have been
rubbed and anointed with oyntmetes made with quick silver. I am sure, the most
part of the physicians of Almayne be of this opinion, but yet they have ben
disceyued in this sickness, as they be in many other. For I know it for a
surety, there be some, that have had these infirmities sicknesses, which were
never noynted with quick silver, as I have had experience in my father Vl
rich de hoten.

Howe men at the beginning resysted this infyrmitie the french pockes. Capit.
iiij.
VVhan the physicians were thus amassed, the surgios came forward in the same
error, and put to their hands: and first they began to burn the sores
with hot irons. But for as much as it was an infinite labour / to touche them
all, they went about to aduoyde them by oyntementes, but diverse men used
divers oyntementes, and all in vain, except he added quick silver thereto,
they beat for this use the pouders of mirre, of mastique / of ceruse, of
beyberies, of alam, bolli armenie, cinaber / of veermelon, of coral, of burned
salt / of rusty brass, of leddrosses, of rust of iron, of Rosen, of
Turpentyne, and of al manner of best oils, oil of bay / oil of pure roses
terebinthiu, oil of gyneper, of great effect, oil of spike / swynes grease,
fat of ox feet and butter, made specially in may, talowe of gootes and
hearts, virgins honey, powder of rede worms dried into dust, or consumed with
oil and beaten, camfere, enforbiu castory: with.ij. or.iij. of these foresaid
things mingled to gether / they anointed the sick mans ioyntis, his arms,
his thyes / his back bone, his neckebone, with other places of his body. Some
anointed them ones a day, some twyes, some thryes, some four times. The
patient was shut in a stufe, kept with continual and fervent hete, some.xx.
and some.xxx. hole days: And some were laid in a bed within the stew / and
anointed, and covered with many clothes, and were compelled to sweat. Part
of them at the second anoyntynge began to faint marvelously. But yet the
ointment was of such strength effect, that what so ever disease was in the hyer
part of the body / it drew into the stomach, from these up into the brayn, these
the disese avoided both by the nose and the mouth, and did put the patient
to such peyne, that except they toke good heed, their teeth fell out, all
their throats, their lunges / their roffes of the mouths, were full of sores,
their jaws did swell, their teethe were lensed, and continually there avoided
the most stynking skome and matter, that could be, and what so ever it rein
upon, by and by it was polluted and infected / whereby their lyppes so touched
gathered sores, and within forth their chekes were grievously peyned. Al the
place, where ^hey were, did stink. Which manner of curing was so peinful, that
many had lever die tha so to be esed. How be it scatly the hundredth {per}son was
esed / but shortly after fell down again: so yt his es dured very few days.
whereby me my esteem, what I suffered in this disese, that {pro}ued this manner
of curing a.xi. times, with great ieo{per}die peril, wrestling with this evil.ix.
years. And yet in the mene time taking what so ever thing was thought to
withstode resist it. For we used bathes herbis lapped about the, drikes
coresies, And for this we had arsnicke, ink, calcantu, verdegres, or aqua
fortis, which wrouzt in us so bitter peyn / yt they might be judged very
desirous of life, yt had not lever die tha so to {pro}loge their life, but tho
curingis were most bitter peinful, which were made with oyntmetes, And was also
so much ye more dagerus because the ministers of it, knew not ye operation
thereof. For ye surgeons only did not use it, but every bold fellow wet about
playing the physician, giving to al manner of me one ointmet, either as he had
scene it ministered to other, or as he had suffered it him self. And so they
healed al men with one medicine, as the {pro}uerbe saith, One s^oo for both
fete. If ought happened amiss to the sike, for lack of good counsel, they wit
not what to do or say. And these me tormenters were suffered to practise on all
persons what they wold while the phisitios were done as i an universal error
ignorace. And so without order or rule, with torment of heate and sweat pletie,
al were cured after one facio, without regard of time, habit, or coplection.
Another these ignorant anointers had not so much knowledge, as with laxes to
take away the matter, which caused the evil, or to diet them, or appoint any
diuersite of meat: but at length the matter must com to this point, that they
shulde lose their teeth, for they were losed, their mouth was all in a sore,
through coldness of the stomach filthy stench, they lost appetite. And although
their thirst was itollerable, yet found they no kind of drink to help the
stomach, many were so light i their brain, that they could not stod, some were
brought into a madness not oly their hadis trebled shoke therwt, but also their
fete al ye body: some mubled i their speaking as loge as they lived, cowed have no
remedy. And many I have scene die i the midel of their curing. And one I know
did so his cure, that in one day he killed.iii. husbandme, through immoderat
hete which they suffered patiently, shut within an hot stew, trusting that
they shulde the sooner obteigne their helthe / till through vehement heate
their hertes failed them, and and perceived not them self to dye, and so were
wretchedly strangled. Other I saw dye, when their throats were swollen in the
intrie, that first the filthy matter, where they shulde have avoided in
spyttynge / could find no way out, and at length their breath was like wise
stopped, and an other sort, when they could not peace, Very few they were /
that gatt their health / and they passed through these ^ieopardies, these
bitter peynes, and evils.

What help I used in this sickness. cap. v.
AS often as I was anointed / to keep these evils from my mouth, that
customably came, I used only alam, which I kept in my mouth rollynge it frome
one side to an other, until it melted. And when I went about to wrap up my
sores, and comfort my members, I used these herbs, absinthio, camomilla,
hyssoppe, pulegio, arthemisia, sage, other such boiled in wine and water.

And ones for my sores I made an ointment by the counsel of Eytelvolfe, of
alam vardegrese, purist honey / and vinegre by equal portions.

And afterward I learned of a soldier in Italy an other oyntement, made of
lyme and water / after this manner. I put well water or river water into a new
pot, never seasonned before with any liquor / and sod it therin^ and when it
boiled fervently, I powered it upon vnsleyt lyme (that is it / that no water
hath touched) in a basin or a clean vessel of wodde, before not occupied with
any lycour. And when the lyme was dissolved, and after a little rest lay in
the botom: I toke away the skome that swam above, and mouinge not the lyme /
powered out the clerest water / and kept that for my pourpose / when I would
occupy it: I toke a sponge or a lynnen clothe / and depped hit in the water,
sum time rolled, as I moughte, and often times warmed and moysted my sores
therewith, washing and wypynge away all the fylthynesse. Than I toke a piece
of clothe, so moysted, and lapte it about my sores. And with this water my
peynes were eased. and the swellynge swagged, the sores were clensid, and the
heate and enflamations driven away. which thing is to be marveled at,
seeing the nature of lyme otherwise is to kendle. I found nothing like this:
And me thought I was well helped therewith, and had avoided the destruction /
that was at hand. In so cruel assautes of this disese I used also cassia, if I
would be laxative, and did often times sweat / let go blood drawn out with
gourdes. And when I was in Italy monysshed, that to eat in the morning the
quantite of a walnutte of rasins terebinthia, should be of great efficacite to
amend the fautes of the blood, what manner of thing it is I know not / and to
make the belly lank, and help the stomach, which both things I found true,
I used the same. They said also, that it did help no little thing the
synowes, and strengthed the joints and members. And by this means and
abstinence of meat and drink, and good dyete, I avoided many things / which
moughte have utterly distroyd me in so lunge injurious seson, for the most
part wandrynge abroad in the world, and through pouerte driven to much
aduersite, never at rest and quietness, but always vexed and troubled. And have
so preserved my self, that all though my legs were eaten with so many deep
and grievous soores, yet was there not one synewe hurt / nor one bone
perysshed. And if at any time the disease toke my face, no euylle happened in
my mouth and tongue, so that the inward parts were preserved: For I voided
away those things, that might hurt my stomach, and with a rare help
defended my lights and lounges: and by these helps I moughte suffer and drive
forth this disease, but clearly put hit away I could not: which thing was
the easynge of peyne, and not the cuttynge away of the cause of payne, the
differryng of evil, and not the taking away thereof. A better remedy came of
Guaiacus, ye of that only came helthe, which I do intend now to describe.

The description of Guaiacum and the finding thereof, and name. Cap. vi.
IF we ought to give thanks upward unto god, both for good and euylle: howe
much are we bound for the gyfte of Guaiacum? ye howe much doth the gladness
and joy of his benignite toward us, pass the sorrow and peyn of that
infirmity? The use of this wod was brought to us out of an ylond namyd
Spagnola, this ylonde is in the west nigh to the country of Amerik set in that
place where the length of Amerike, stretchynge into the north / doth end: and
was found af late days among the new lands, which were unknown by the
old time. All the inhabitants of that ylonde sometime be diseased with the
french pockes, likewise as we be with the mesels, small pockes. Nor they have
no other remedy for it but this.

A certain noble man of Spain, being tresaurour in that province, was
grievously troubled with that infyrmitie: And after the people of that land
had taught him that medicine, he brought the manner and use thereof into
Spayn, showing of what power virtue it was in those parts. The phisitios wold
not allow it, {per}ceyuyng that their profyt wold decay thereby / not
withstanding at length they toke in hand to cure with the same wood, but with
such arrogacie, attributing so much to their precepts and order, that except
they were observed, they affirmed / this wood shulde be spend in vain.
Which thing I marvel they could persuade to any man, and make him believe
it. saying it is plainly known / that in that ylande were never physicians.
And yet hath this wood Guaiacum always been there used. But in this cure what
besynes is mete for the physician, I will here after declare. Now I will
speak of the thing intended. They have given it this name Guaiacum. For so the
Spaniardes write it with latyne letters / following their own manner of sound:
which word the people of that ylande pronounce with open mouth Huiacum.

And Paulus Ritius showed me at the city of August / that he harde say of a
Spanyarde / which had ben in that yland, that the first syllable Gua, of this
name / was not pronounced of the Spagnolenses with G, but that his own tongue
did require it so to be written. And they of that Ilonde sound it with, V,
puffed out, as though it were Huiacum, a word of.iii. syllables with them /
and not Guaiacum. We may give unto it some excellent name, calling it lignum
vite / as Philo the physician called his dregs the hands of god: and thi^
day the physicians with great boste call their cofections manus Christi,
apostolicu / gratia dei, Antidotum, Paulium, and many other such superstitious
names. They say it grows like an ash with us in height / is round /
bringing forth a nut much like a chess nut: his tymbre is oil and fat,
in colour like box, but somewhat blackyshe. And they judge that the best, that
hath most black: but that which is like to box, differs from that / which
is black. For this is with in / and tother without: or to speak more
plainly, the black is as hit were the heart and marowe. The wodde is
marvelous heavy / for the leest piece of hit, caste into the water, synkethe
streyghte to the botome. There is no wodde so harde / as it. For hit is so
harde, that hit will not cleue: another hitherto have we scene any, that was
chyned. And they that sell it say, it will in no wise yane or chappe. When hit
bourneth and flames / hit makes a sweet ^dour: and there follows fro hit /
when it burns / a gome, which we yet know not, for what purpose it serves:
This gome is somewhat black / shortly after it is fall away, it is very harde.
The bark is not so thick, but is marvelous hard. which tokens well marked, I
thynk he that shall couterfete this wood / can not deceive the bier. For be it
a man may be deceived in the colour, howe is hit possible all these things to
be in one / a fatness, smelling, somewhat like rosen / such weight as no wodde
hath beside? Than the gome that comes from it / when it flames? such hardness
that may scatly be cut? And the lest piece cast into the water will not swym
above? And the taste ones know will never suffer a ma to err, which as it is to
al men vnplesant, so is it to me ye very pleasant. They say it cotinueth not
after it be sodden / but paulleth / in the summer after.iij. days, in the
winter somewhat later. And therefore we must chose the fattest and weyghtiest
thereof. For that which is old / is light and lean. Upon this description
let the physicians, if hit please them, draw out the causes of such
efficacite by their lunge disputations, as for me I more rejoice, that it is,
than I search what manner of thing it is. Howe be it I grant them worthy of
much thank / that shall first show unto us the nature thereof through out
known: But now there be some, that wey and esteem the strength and virtue of
this tree bi these known ma^kes as though they had suffered it in all poyntes^
which thing is done, as me seems, very hastily and timely, thinking that
the cause and reason of such efficacy and power ought to be searched for in
this tree, after his nature and use is known, likewise as it is done generally
in all other medicines. But now of his use, and how it ought to be prepared
unto medicine.

Of the ordering of G^aiacum in medicine. cap. vii.
IT is orderered after this manner. The wod must first be made as small as may
be / which thing some do, at a torn, and than without any more ado / they
lay the shauynges a water / And some do first broil or stamp them in a mortar
so much that they bring them into powder and dust, ^o the intent they may the
sooner be through soked, and their strength sodden out. But I wot not,
whether that make any matter / I have scene some, that have cut it first with a
saw, and than raped the pieces with a rape / and have taken and put them
into water. Howe so ever it be / whether it be turned / raped, or beaten to
dust / they soak a day and a night one pound weight in eight / of water,
taken either of a well or of a river, or as I did / of a pyt: than they sethe
it in a new glased pot, and clean was^hed, with a soft fire of coals / by the
space of six hours, and more / until it come to the one half, with great
heed taking and diligence, leefte hit run over through much heate. For that
which over runs loses (they say) much of his virtue, and is of less
power. And therefore it may not be sod in the flame, but it requires few
coals / and a pot not filled all most by the.iij. part. The skome that
flows above, they taken away to anoint the sores with: for we know it to
have much power to dry. After it is thus sodden, they streyn it / power it in
to a glass. And than they put to the grondes eight pound water and sethe it
again (as before) as it were a second messhynge. This thynner they give them
to drink with their meat: the first is drunk in the stead of a medicine.
And this is all to gether, that delyuerethe us from so great and grievous
disease, this deco^tion is it. This is the chief point and anchor of our health.
And it hath so little need of any other thing, that it will not abide any manner
mixture, or mynglynge, as I will shortly after declare. Sum would, that light
water and clear shulde be gotten for this purpose. Some admit all manner sweet
water indifferently, because in seething what so ever it be, it is purified. All
wold that good diligence and heed shulde be taken in time of seething, that it
rune not over / or boyle to fast, they bid that the pot be close stopped,
that nothing brethe out: but when the skom is perceived to rise, it must be
softly opened, and the skomme taken out, and so covered again. They put
this decoction (when it is strained) into a glass / only because it shulde be
scene, and because a glass of al vessels is purest and clennest. The colour of
this decoction is somewhat like muddye water, when hit is somewhat troubled.
Wet lynnen in it, and it wexeth grene of a marvelous show. The relesse
thereof at the first tastynge, is some what sour, but to him that uses hit,
by little and little it waxes pleasant. The physicians were so bold, as to
put, to a pound of this.iiij. vnces of honey. Which thing, as I do not
improve, so do I deny it to be necessary. And I would nothing shulde be
added unto such a thing, being of such power, where as it needs not. For
what needs a man there to bestow his labour, where as no need is: And to say
the troth the relesse of Guaiacum is not so grievous that it requires to be
tempered with honey: Yea were it not for my masters the phisytions all men would
be contented therewith. Howe be it what needs me to name phisytions, when I
speak only but of tryflers? For they that be connnynge and expiert, as is O
most noble prince, Stromer thy physician (and through frendeshyppe mine also)
and thy other physician Coppus, such I say, understood and knew, howe hit is
not conuenyente, either to meddle it with unknown things, and myngle them /
or else to add ought unto these things, which as yet are not perceived to
lack ought. The which thing as hit chanced us to have communycacyon of
this wood Guaiacum, at the city of August, when many had advised me to commit
my self to this manner to cure: and I, for newnes of the thing would here none
of them: Stromer speaking after this manner of this wodde with great gravity of
words said, that he feared leest the health some and excellent power of
Guaiacum shulde be diffamed through the superfluous additions of vnlerned
physicians: which thing if hit were not done, nothing could be found better
against this syckenes. And with his word is caused me straight without any
taryeng to caste my self hedlynge into this experience of Guaiacum. And
therefore I wold this, now ones spoke, should be generally vnderstond, that as
often as I shall complain in this small treatise of physicians, al men shulde
think me to mean them, that have no erudition nor experience: and that boste
them self amongst the common people / of the title name of their doctorship,
which they bought, that knew another greek nor latin / and yet no science
requires more erudicion or knowledge of the tongues than phisike: the which
being most ignorant, do lightly abuse the simple people of Germaynie, saying
there is no doubt made of his learning, that is ones garnished with the name
of Master doctoure. But why have I used in this thing so many words? Verily
to make my cause good with the, excellent prince, and to defend my self
against them, that by this occasion mought accuse me, as one that spake words
more snappysshe than besemed me. Which thing when sum of the lawyers and
divines did of late, against whose learning they said I inveighed without good
manner, when I did snybbe but only the vnlerned, and them which were sore
grieved and were bitter ennemies unto such good learning, they caused many a
good manne to think, that I was against them, and yet was that thing far from
my manners, and also the purpose, wherein I than was occupied. which thing
saying, I perceive your excelletnes to know well enough, I will leave these
run agate anoynters, and theuysshe physicians, and also these vntaughte
doctors, and come unto Guaiacum: the which in medicine must thus be used.

The manner of curing. Capitulo.viij.
THe patient must be kept in a close chambre, without air or wind / where
fire must be nourished continually: or else he must be in a stew, after the
manner of Almayn, which sha^l not need always to be kept hot, but must be
close, and defended from air, that no air blow upon him for the time of
this curation: he must also beware of cold. Therefore if he be cured in winter,
or in Autumn, he must soak, that he have fire in his chamber, early in the
morning specially before day: for than is the cold fervent: he must cause
the cleftes of the wyndowes, if any be, to be stopped with plaster, or other
like matter: and upon the chaumbre door must he hang carpettes, or other
like things, within and without, that no cold or air entre into the
chaumbre / or comme out. when he is thus ordered, his meat must be
dymynisshed. First the fourth part of that he was wont to take, and than
the third part, and shortly after the one half, that he may learn to bear
hunger^ and his wine must be well watered. Than must he take a pourgacyon,
other with regard that hit be such a one as shall be thought sufficient to
cut away the cause, or take away the matter, that norissheth the disease,
other such a one without any regard at all, as may empty the whole bealy.
For that thing, as I perceive, only is required, which thing done, than
may ye thereupon begin this work after this manner. The docoction which was
first sodden and is strongest, must be ministered unto him twice a day milk
warm, a gobblet or cyat ones in the morning at.v. of. the clock, or there
about / and again at night, at viii. of the clock, we call a ciates, a cup
that will receive half a pound, whereof we may gather, seeing.viii. pound of
water is required to the seething of one pound of wod, the one half thereof
must be consumed in the seething, that so there must.iiii. pound remain, and
must drink thereof twyse a day, that the decoction of one pound of Guaiacum
is sufficient for four days. For hit is now a come manner with physicians,
to measure their syquores by weight, and they have clean caste up the names
of measures. It must be drunk at one draught without any brethe taking,
After he hath drunk, let him rest more than.iiii. hours, and let him the
first.ii. be covered / that by the help of heate this medicine may be
digested abroad into the members, and the patient may sweet out that that
noyeth. which thing to do howe profytable it is, I will declare when place
comes. And it shall not hurt, if he be close covered one hole hour before he
drink, that he may be hot.

Some will not in any wise he should rise frome his bed in five hours after
he hath taken his ciates of drink.

He must take his meat in the myddaye, and not before, and than as little as
may be, for this medicine above all things requires an empty bealy. And
therefore he must eat, not to fill his emptynes, but to bear up the life,
not to gather strength but to keep him self fro feinting. Another is there any
ieoperdy to be feared. For Guaiacum hath great strength in it self both to
refresshe, and also to comfort, not such as be full / but only those that
are empty. Ye they say, that none faylleth, eat he never so little, so that
he drink faithfully this decoction. In the mean time, he shall not be
anointed in the out side, except he have soores or swellynges. And for this
there is a white ointment made of Cerussa, rose oil of rosis, with camphor,
which is laid on with a lynnen clothe. Some anoint them only with the skom of
Guaiacum, or else dry it into powder, and caste it upon them. And besides this
skomme / there is nothing of this decoction occupied in the out part. Some be
healed in short time / and some in lunge. The most part in.xxx. days. They
command him to be pourged again the.xv. day. For this reason I think,
because as Alexander Aphrodicius thinks / they that hunger and receive not
their meat as they were won^ to do, fall away / and gather a certain sharpe
matter and eager / so that such matter must be avoided, that the body of the
sike may be empty. This decoction shall not be drunken that morning / when he
receives his purgation: but at night let him take it again: and after that
day, he may eat more largely. And again the.xxx. day more liberally: how be
it this more liberally, and that more largely must be very lyttell^ as I shall
show you in the next chapiter. But some, lest any impediment shulde be to
let the operation of this medicine / have kept one order of eating equally
through out the.xxx. days: and truly the stronglyer a man abides to hunger,
the better and more quickly he shall be healed. And although the desire of
eating grow daily more and more, yet must he remember to absteyne, comfortynge
him self with the surety of health, if he so do. For the body being so
wasted and emptied, not only with hunger / but also with sweat, ye being lunge
time as a deed body, through the greuousnes of this evil, shall high fast
to the appetite of meat and drink.

When this cure is comme to an end, ^o that the sick is almos^e ready to go
abroad, he must than take again some medicine to purge him with, but so that
after that purga^ion / he may drink again as he did before.iiij. or six
days space, wherewith they make up the hole cure. Some will not that he shulde
go out of the chambre, where he lies, before he be through whole. Some
think.xxx. days sufficient to keep his chambre: and that he may than go
forth, but yet warily by little and little, and not straight in to the open
air: but first he must walk in the same house, from chambre to chaumbre, and
than to some neighbours house, not far of: until he be used to suffer the
air. For there may be no sudden change / but must use him self to all
things by little and little. And that which remains of the syckenesse
they say will lyghtely be whole / after he ones stere abroad. And that to be
true I have proved in my self. For when the.xxx. days were passed / the
soores of my legs were not yet closed, and therefore I kept.x. days more.
And when these.x. days were gone / yet was not I whole. Wherefore, feryng the
cold, because winter than begone, I intended to keep in other.x. days: but I
was compelled by the physicians counsel to go abroad, and put it in adventure /
which thing happed not amysse. Howe be it the soores that I had than, were not
deep in the flesh, or swollen outward: but only in the hier part of the
skin, and lacked nothing else but skin to cover them with: which they had
scantly the.xl. day after I went out. And I that time, in very sharpe winter,
made my journey frome Vindele into France. The causes of this slow healing I
did coniect this to be. The physician suffered me to eat more mete (as I after
perceived) than I shulde have done, and also he sod my drink thynner than he
ought. For I occupied not fully.v. pound of this wodde, where as other
o^cupye.viii. and some.x. wherein my physician was deceived. For he, saying my
body weke of nature / and moreover extenuated consumed with the lunge
continuance of this grefe, thought that a little thing was sufficient to
drive away the disease / and for that cause fed me the largelyer, fearing
soore leeste my strength shulde fail me: which was double error. For so
much as he ought not to have looked what my body was than, but what manner
body it was wont to be, and again the nature of this medicine is such, that
it will suffer none to faint for lack of strength. Wherefore be they never so
weke, they ought not therefore to ministre the less, but rather somewhat the
more. For it doth nothing suddenly, but werketh health by little little. And
therefore I allow best that decoction, that was longest at the fire / and is
comme to a little of much wode: so that I would counsaylle them, to the
intent hit mought be the stronger, to sethe hit often times to the third
part.

And if any would be lose belied, that is wont to be bound / they will him to
take the powder of Guaiacum sod in the water, and to drink half and uncle
thereof in the morning. And if that help not at the first, to go th^vnto
again. But this framed not with me / no not when I toke it again.

Howe a man must live and diet him self in this cure. Capitulo.ix.
THere is yet much a do for the ordering of a man, as touching his diet.
Some think best to ete nothing but bread, which Galen{us} calls the
cleannest fedynge with a few rasins: which breadde they give to the weight
of.iiii. vnces, without salt or other sauce. And they think best to absteyne
generally from all manner meat, except it be a little broth made with a
chekyn: which they are contented he sup or eat with his bread moysted
therein ones a day. For at night they give nothing but a few rasins / and an
uncle of breadde. Other will that he have half a chekyn, if it be yet yonge and
tender: but if it be any thing grown, they think a quarter enough, which
must be sodden in clean water. Whereunto they put another salt, another other
sauce, but sum put a little sugar thereto. Of breadde they give.iiij. vnces
at night, as before, a few rasins, with an uncle of breadde. But as long as he
is under cure / he must take heed, that he never so much as taste salt. They
allow white bread / made of wheat / well bulted, which made for the nones,
they season with sugar. Which thing is not evil. There be some that add to
this feding (not so much in the place of meat as of medicine) a little borage,
other of the leaves only, or (if there be any) of the flowers, which he shall
eat sodden in water alone, or with his chekyn. And this is the order of
fedynge that some do keep continually / some think.xv. days sufficient for
this dyete / and tha they will his hunger to be eas^d: and the.xx. day they
give him meat twyse. But let them take h^d^ / that follow that. For truly
this medicine requires, that the patient be made as thynne with hunger as may
be possible. Howe be hit sum chance to be through healed within.xv. days,
and yet that not withstanding they put to a few days more thereto. They drink
unto their meat of that second decoction / not warmed but cold. And this is
all the fare, for hyderto none dared pass this measure. Not withstanding I
dispyse not the physicians, that dispute of the dangers, that may chance to
dry and hot bodies, if they be driven to this strayte dyete / bringing for
them Galen and also Hipocras, which seem in many places to be against this
exquisite dyete in fedynge. But of these that used Guaiacum / I saw as yet
none in ieoperdye, and I gather at this time precepts and monitions out of
experience, not doctrine out of books. And also I my self am of dry and hot
complexion, and yet this huger brought me another into a ptisike nor etike:
which thing they seem to fear.

For as much as it is thought wysedom to provide for all things, I will that
if any man fear him self / that he get physicians to keep him, and that this
is sufficiently spoken of this thing. I will now go forward with other
things.

In the time of this cure, the patient must forbear all busynes, and cut
away all sad thoughts, and rest from al care. And therefore they command
rest and quietness from consultations / and also studies: so that the mind may
utterly be ^ree from al motions workings, give him self holly to ydelnes and
rest, losed from al trouble care: which thing must be vnderstonde of al manner
of men, but most specially of them, that be naturally melancholy: They must
also beware of anger: for that, as Galene saith, kendleth chiefly the colerike
matter, And more over we must take heed, that nothing happen in that time /
that may move us to heuynes. Let the sick person here syngers and minstrelles,
and give him self to sports, pastimes, and music, and some time delyte him
self with merry talking. But to company with woman, howe much he must eschew
that, I will show hereafter. I toke great pleasure in redynge making merry
things. And the physicians spake against hit, and not without a cause, saying
they believed it to be labour and busynes vn^o me: but I toke it not as my
study, but as a pastime, and for my recreation. But yet wold I not this to be
to other for an example.

Now ^ome begin to wax very hungry after the syxte day: but I felt no grefe
before the.x. day. And in this case this is the only comfort / not to se
other eat, nor to see meat, nor to smell the savour thereof. Never the less
when any perceives him self to faint, and wax feeble for lack of meat, I
would not that he shulde by and by receive meat or strange confection, to
comfort and bring again his strength, but to refresshe his spirits with
odours and pleasant smells: for even with the savour and smelle of such odors
Galenus thinks the spirit and life to be nourished and comforted. Yet in
thi^ thing as regard must be had, what every man complexion requires,
le^te like things be ministered to them, that be dry and hot, and unto them
that be moyste and cold, or things of one quality be ministered unto them
all, that be of both extremes.

As I do more allow through out the things, that grow among us / as familiar
nygh to our nature: so by the example of Democrit{us}, who with the vapour of
hot bread made his spirit even than departing to tarry hole.iii. days,
think I that we shulde help them that faint other with that breed / or else
with a roasted oynion hold to the mouth? For I plainly know / that in an
oynion was sometime such virtue and power. Which thing is also proved to be
done with the odour of wine. For therewith Philip the physician did recover
Alexander / as we may se in Quintus Curtius. And by the traditions of the old
physicians we ^e his power and virtue in this purpose preferred above all. But
by al means we must norysshe the spirit with the sweet savours and smells:
for so much as that is the life, and above all th^nge the odour of old sweet
wine is praised in this thing: Next is the smelle of honey, specially rose
honey: also of appuls, of the which thing Stromer never ceases to monysshe
me, affermynge that he knows, howe strong / and how helping they be in this
thing. Of these some prefer orenges: other prefer cotonia mala. Vinegar is also
praised / but specially vinegar made with roses: and musterde is well allowed.
For these things, say they, do refresh the wits, and sustain the
strengthes. As for cynamom / nutmegs, styracke / citrous / saffron, a
gisoflower, musk, camphor / and such costly ware, I leave to deinte fellows,
But cumin, anesse, coryander, lavender, amarake, roses, mynt, rue, rosemary,
violettes, sage, castorye, with other growing amongst us, none of the
physicians that have any iudgemeut, improueth: but they affirm these to be
good for this purpose. And I oftentimes do use such helps to the great
comfort of my helthe. The sick man may also use rubbynges, so that they be
softly done, by all the time of his said lying: which as they are for other
things profitable, so I believe they would not hurt in this thing. Let his
heed be rubbed with a warm clothe, and combed with an yuory comb.

That Guaicus will not be mingled. Capit. x.
FVrdermore this medicine will abide nothing to be put to hit. Where at the
physicians be commenly astonished: which would we shulde have none other
medicines in price, but such as receive their power fro the.iii. parts of the
world, which thynk that they should lose al their auctorite, except they joined
to gether for us in their poticarye compositions Indie, Aethiope, Arabie, and
the Garamantes / that dwell in the extreme part of the world. For what will
they allow, that is not dear and costly? And I beseech god, that their
counsel be never harde nor obeyed in the vsynge of this wodde Guaiacum. And
that Stromer may be in this thing as a prophet, and in my judgment a true.
For he fears, and that very wisely, leest they at length will put their
hands thereunto. Th^rfore let all men believe me / that have proved this
medicine, that it is sufficient to heal this disease: and that of it self
without any other thing. But as I said, a purgation in the beginning, and
again a little the.xv. day: and than in the last end, which thing I wold
have done with somone thing, not with any medicine made of many things. For I
verily believe, that the physicians loke than to their own profit and lucre,
and not for the health of men, when they say, they must search, what takes
away the cause of t^is infyrmytie: as though this wodde did it not. And verily
this is evident, there is no other cause to use such purgations, but to cleanse
the belly, and again with abstinence and hunger to draw out and empty the
hole body: But what say ye thereto? In that rude country where this Guaiacum
grows / are no physicians: no strange nor ferfetched ways nor rules of
phisike: But perchance men use there some herb or rote to purge with, and all
do use one thing / not to take away the grefe, but that when the belly is
emptied Guaiacum may the better work. wherefore in this my counsel is, that ye
tourment not your belie with things costly prepared / and specially to
avoid the compositions made of many things.

In this mind I stycke surely, that I would suffer nothing to be poured into
me / but only cassia by it self, and yet they offered me gladly many things,
and I was also wont before to pour in not only Re^barbarum but other things
also more barbarous than Re^barbarum, but my counsel came to a very good end.
which counsel if any will follow, he hath an exaumple, commandment he hath
none. For we teach not these things being our self taught of other, but we
monysshe you / that which we have proved / which thing I would al shulde
remember / that I teach nothing here rasshely, but that which I have learned
by mine own experience and prove, I deliver unto other. And if I had learned
ought else, it shulde not be kept close, but now saying by diligent search and
studious labour I have found out the power and virtue of Guaiacu, which if I
do not well perceive, it is a fault. But if I have learned it, as it is in dede:
I do not greatly covet reward no la^de / I will show you al the hole
faithfully. For that hath this medicine deserved of me, except I would be
unthankful for so great benefits. And therefore saying many well liking men
of nature are corrupted through the diversity of medicines, yea and some of
them utterly destroyed: my sentence is, that nothing shall be added to help
this medicine, for this wodde of hit self is sufficient to pluck up this
disease by the roots. If any thing be put unto hit, specyallye of these
things, that are inwardely received, this medicine takethe no help thereof,
but rather is corrupted and let from his workynge. This thing must be added
hereunto, that they, which drink of this Guaiacum, of whatte so ever state
they be, in this sycknes have so little need of bathes, that they be utterly
forbede by them that be expert, to wasshe so much as their heed, as lunge as
thay shall be in this cure, and are permytted very seldom to wasshe their
hands / but ne^er with cold water.

What place physicians have in this cure. Capitulo.xj.
But now I know, that some suspects me to be of this mind, that I wold no
physician to be used in this cure, which thing is far otherwise. For my mind
is / that sum, that is well learned and wise, shulde be gotten, which is not
bold no liberal in po^rynge in of poticarye ware. his custody and also his
order, if he have learned the use of the admynistracyon of Guaiacum, I would the
sick personne shulde use. And these myscheuous busy fellows, which are so
glad to offer to us this strange waare, and medicines / if any be brought
from the heeds of Nilus, of which / the more they cost, the more they make
of the, auasyng them above the moan, these I say I would have driven away /
and in no wyse^ to se the sick no not through a latis. I have proved this
thing even so to be as Asclepiades judged, which thought all manner drenches
vnfrendely to the stomach. And Celsus also says, that medicines for the most
part hurt the stomach / ye and moreover that hap^ened to me, that the same
author showed before shulde happen, that medicines received into the body, when
they had ben kept in the lower partis, were driven back again into the heed,
and caused great peyne, which thing let all remember that will enter into
this cure, that they comyt not them self rasshly to such tourmenters, not
only because the nature of this wood is not yet well known / but also because
it is their manner never to knowledge ignorance, but always to command
somewhat, to ministre and give some what, unto whom a man shall at no time
show his water, howe well and helthfull so ever he be, but they will make
their bylle to the poticaries, recipe, recipe take, take / saying that other
they suspect^ some sycknes to be begone, other else that the which is now at
hand / must be preue^ted or it come, except thou swallow this (say they) or
drink that, thou haste the axes. O myscheuous men^ if they may be called men,
and worthy to be hated of all the world. But what so ever they be, they have
been bold to take upon them many things of late about the administration of
Guaiacum / thrustynge in them self, unto that work, the sellers thereof
helping them forward through some conuention bargayn made between them I
believe. For when they saw, that by means of this rude, vile, and contemptible
medicine there should be hereafter no need of their disceptations, and yet
dared not / for I know some that would withstonde so favourable good a thing.
And of the other side, when the merchants feared, leest they shulde sell but
little, if the physicians allowed it not, for no man would lightly go unto a
medicine, that came from so strange a place, and was ministered so far from
the come manner of medicines, than they agreed betwyxte them, I believe, that
this shulde be spread amongst the come people, that the physicians labour
was necessary in this cure: So that they selling a remedy approved of the
physicians, moughte get as they were wont, and the physicians in the mean
time shu^de lose nothing of their stipends, saying that they were called unto
this cure.

I know certain physicians of a better sort, that went into Spain in the
emperors name / and in the name of a bishop here, only to enquere and search
for this thing. And these, when they were taught of them that learned knew the
thing in Spagnola, told nothing in manner otherwise than our experience hath:
but that they added of their own brains, what medicines, upon what days, with
what observations ought to be received, by a mathematical dyete, howe they
shulde behave them self in eating and drinking: which thing I believe, they
did of no evil mind, but ^ft^r their manner, and supersticiousnes used of
some good physicians, which are so ^esyrous t^ help the sick, and are so
tender toward them, that sometime they do more than they shulde. Their good
minds I do allow, but yet I think it daunge^ous, to agree unto all men in
all things. But to return again to these if minded phisitios. I think they
be agreed with the merchants, that they may he admitted into part of the
lucre and gains. For I my self did se a certain physician, if we vouchsafe
to call a rude and an vnlerned ass by this name, who with many words
dispreysed this wodde Guaiacum, as a vain thing / nothing worth: but that
the marchates fained it to do these things. But shortly after this lewd
dispreyser was called unto the cure of a certain rich man, and shortly after
to an other^ And when the man began to smelle the gold, and saw great
gains to comme through the multitude of such sick men / he began first to
be more gentylle, and to diminish his cruelnes malice more more, within a
while praised this wode, and greatly auanced it, and said: Now at the last,
I my self have proved the meruay^lous power and virtue of this wodde. Nay
nay ass / but now thou haste found thine advantage therein.

And after this manner this medicine seems to come into their canons / likewise
as all other medicines have done: which thing if it be done by the auctorite
of the wise / expert / and learned physicians, I improve it not: howe be it my
mind gives me, and I verily believe, that they can not do it as yet: And
again I think it not very necessary. For either in Spagnola, where are no
physicians / somewhat is lacking unto this medicine, or else it ought here
likewise to be ministered without such supersticiousnes and formalities. May
there any man be ^o light of believe, as to think that the physicians can handle
this busynesse more counnyngly, than they which knew it by experience in them
self, considering howe that Guaiacum hath not continued so lunge with us,
that they might in that space have searched and learned his nature. And to speak
in few words, men do yet marvel at the thing / is not as yet come unto
perfyte knowledge. Therefore canne hit not be under their canons in this short
time, or any cause of his operation showed.

Let this therefore stycke fast in all men's minds, that they think this
simple dyete sufficient to cure and heal them, which we teach by experience,
in our self. Let them be seen and looked upon, of the sober and learned
physicians: but let them leave the dregs and spices of this other sort.
Let them bed farewell for ever and adaye to these, that go about to restore us
from diseases with their disputations. These are they / which, as I said,
allow nothing that is vile and of small price / and which think that I
tell fables, when I say that I have driven away the axes mo than eight times
by drinking of mine own water / by and by at the beginning: and with no other
medicine. And that I have scene men in Saxonie / which have quenched al manner
diseases with drinking hot buttred beer. And again they will not believe me,
that there is a servant of my faders, which with.iii. certain herbs sodden in
wine, hath healed a man brain pan broken to pieces: and many sore and evil
wounds hath he healed with a few herbis of our own growing, sodden in wine or
water, and that within.x. or.xii. days, without any fear of fever. But this
they think a vile medicine / saying it is not done after their canons. And
the same thing do they judge of Guaiacum, whose nature and power / howe
clearly they vnderstonde, and what manner words they use to have of hit: we may
perceive by the answer of a certain noble physician, not now yonge, that he
shulde begin to practise / but of extreme age, that it is very likely he
fealeth Auicen, Mesuen, and other authors of phisike, as well as his own
nails. This physician when I was wrytinge these things, and taking my journey
from Frankeford, where he was writing his recipe, was asked of a certain
friend of mine, what he thought of Guaiacum: I have not scene it / said he, but
what so ever it be, the weight / the colour, the savour, must be considered in
quatite and qualite. Than said I, his weighte is very heavy, and synketh in the
water, how little so ever the cuttynge be: and has the same colour almost
that is in box, and it smells fayntely / somewhat of rosen: doest thou know
now by this, what the nature and power of Guaiacum is? Than he thinking to
face me down with words, chattered I wot^e not whatte / out of Aristotels
predicamentes. Than said I, It may be, good fader, saying the disease is new,
and this a new medicine, that the hole matter is yet unknown unto you. Thou
art deceived said he, it is no new disease, saying Plini writes thereof.
Than I, being desirous to know, what he knew in Plini, that I knew not,
asked him, what name Plinie gave unto this disease? Mentagram said he, quia
vexat mentem, that is to say, because hit vexith a man mind. Than said I /
why and do not other infirmities and sycknes than tourmet and vex a mans
mind? or doth not frensyes, madness, the falling evil, and other rauysshynges
of the wits this thing more than the french pockes? As he was interpretynge
I can not tell what: good old man, quod I, learn against an other time to
answer more wisely / and specially in such things as apertaigne to mans
health. For if ye had red Plinie / ye would not say Mentagram to come a
mente, but a mento. For in the chynne that disease first began / which thing
declares it to be an other syckenes than the french pockes. And who could
forbere to rebuke this mischievous mad ass heed? But let us pass over these
rascal physicians, of the which we se a great part rich in words / but in
the knowledge of things very poor: and let us return to our purpose,
whereof this is the pythe, that physicians shall be taken in this cure, not as
ministers of medicines or healers, but as keepers. And these to be, as I have
oft said / chosen, wise, and well learned, and most expert, and such as
had lever be wise by them self, than err with the common sort: And such as
if they could heal a ^ycke man with eating beans, would not seek for any
costly, and especially strange medicines.

Whether concerning this cure there ought any regard to be takyn of thage of
the sex / or the quality of bodies. Capitulo.xij.
VVhan they, which I told you went into Spain / to know the use of Guaiacu,
enquered, whether children, great aged persons moughte be helped with this
remedy. For saying they were weak, it was in dout, where they could abide this
diet: answer was made by them that had be in that ylonde, that they never saw
chyldre by this remedy delivered from syckenes: But the men of that ylonde
showed them, that children were wont so to be cured, and women likewise wi^hout
any difference, and old men also very often. Whereupon I remembered the notable
saieng of Hipocras / that old men may well away with fasting, but men in
strong and stedfaste age scantly, yonge men much worse, and children worst of
all, specially they that are of a forward and quick mind. Howe be it
Galenus will not old men there to be vnderstonde men of the last caste.

Furdermore it is well known, that they that are of a sanguine qualite of
body, may abide hunger better and longer than the colerike. For in the sanguine
the humours that nourysshe the body / are more abundant and plenteous, the
hete is temperate and less burning: for it is myngsed with moisture to make
hit slacker, but in these other, all things are thynne and dry, and nedy of
humours. Now who doubts, but they that be fleumatike may best abide hunger,
saying they have more moisture than them needs: Which things marked and
parceyued, none that will take this matter in hand can lack counsel / in
what age or complexion so ever it be, but he shall know howe to diminysshe the
meat, and howe to enlarge it: and again howe to bring in strayte fasting /
and howe to lose it. Another that only, but also howe much or howe little of
Guaiacum ought to be spend. Howe be it in this thing I think little
regard to be taken, because this decoction to apperteyne to the Germayns, I
will open unto all men.

They of Spain think, this medicine ought to be like wise ministered in all
places for this disease, saying it hath nothing, but that that al men may use
every where indifferently, and also hath ben proved among the people of.v.
diverse nations. First it came frome Spagnola in to Spain, and than other
nations about them sought what profit would come there of. And when they
understood, that many had used hit prosperously, the Sicilians received it. Fro
thens it came into Italie: and shortly after we of Germanie have learned the
power thereof by experience. And of late we herd say, that by the help of
this wodde, many be cured in France. Which thing saying it is so, and saying
we live under that air, which is not so much subject unto sickenessis, as
the coutreie of Spain and Italie are, through the subtilnes of the air, and
therefore nedelesse to fear those evils, which may other wise chance, as the
fevers, stytches, and such other: And again saying we have strong bodies,
that may well away with labours, hunger, and thurste. And also the minds of
the Germayns, for the most part, are merrily set: what shulde cause v^ to
think, but that our region and men be very apt unto this medicine? Which
thing Paulus Ricius, a physician of pure iugement and high erudition,
approves, and more over affirms / that he knows by plain experience, that
no nation is more apt unto this dyete. But if we had not scene some restored
unto helthe through the help of Guaiacum, and now should begin to prove hit:
we ought not believe, that god were so much set against us, that he would
either keep this helthfull medicine from us, or defraud us of the virtue
thereof, saying it was brought fro Spagnola into Spayn, and had the same virtue
there, which hit had at home: except a man will say, that Guaiacum
disdains to be carried unto us / his nature first not changed, or when it
comes to the Germaynes / that than it suffers that great and mighty power
and strength of his, to be taken from him, and no where else. And it is
plainly known, that with us his help is very present, and peradventure more
present than else where. And our men, as they be much given to surfetynge, so
can they, if need require, abide very lunge and strongly both hunger and
thurste. And more over as our bodies abunde with heate, so are they very
strong. For after the judgment of Aristotle, they that inhabit cold
countries, have much natural hete in them, and they that have much heate,
for the most part are of great strength. And because the Almayns use much
eating and drinking, Ricius the physician was demanded of late, what he
thought, whether it were best to remyt some what unto them in this cure of this
skleder thin dyete, he said: No by saint mary, not thus much, but rather
handle them the strayter, let these great belyes used in eating and
drinking be driven to a much thynner dyete than these thynne and lean
Italians. And he showed me him self, that he had punysshed with hunger one
of these fat fellows.x. days longer than he ought to have done, because he
wold have nothing remain that might let the operation of Guaiacum.

This thing and such other I do gladly rehearse by Ricius, and do make often
mention of Stromer, that such as shall rede this book may vnderstond, whom I
cal good and right physicians, and how unworthy I think these come tormenters
of me of the dignite of this title name. And that strange countries may
know, that Germaynie hath some good and excellent physicians. And that I
delyte as much in the learning and amity of them, that be good and well
learned, as I hate these vnlerned and fool hardy fellows, which after they be
for their money ones made doctors, straight profess / that they can reuyue
the deed, and restore life to them that are buried. But I will return unto
these.ij. which be of an other sort, of the which two Stromer, when I asked
him the last year a medicine to pourge me with, said / Do not vex thy
stomach with medicines in this age of thyn / in which nature is able of her
self to do all things much better. For as he is very scarce in pourynge in
of medicines / so brings he all sick people unto a very strayte rule of
diet. Wherefore when he had taken in hand to cure one in the city of August
after these ways, and he said, that he feared, lest he could not absteyne him
self from women: Seeing than (said he) thou haste decreed to dye, thou hast no
need of my help, so forsook him, and left him to his intemperancy.

Of this sort there are two physicians moo, of excellent name: whereof the one
is thy physician, most noble prince, named Gregory Coppus / which hath
helped me no little thing in the writing hereof: the other contynueth in the
archbishop of Colyns court, called Iames Ebelly, a man of so great
auctoritie / that four year before / that he was made the come physician, all
physicians were they never so counnynge, gave place unto him. The other was
had in great honour of all the chief learned men of Papia. where this study
floryssheth, as well for his knowledge in phisike as for other good learning:
which he had joined unto phisik. But this is no place to reken up the
excellent learned men / but my purpose is to write mine experience of Guaiacum.
And therefore in this place I repeat this to conclude with, that I verylye
think, that this wodde will help al manner of men, where so ever they be
become, brought up, or continue.

what time is best to take hereunto. Capilo.xiiii.
IT semethe for sum causes that follow, that it is better to prove this cure
in summer than in winter. First because (as Galene saith) the moisture in
summer increasethe and runs in all the body, and doth goo and comme: and
therefore the pestilent humours may lightly be separated from the good, and
they may be expelled and banished: and these that be wholesome good kept.
Secondely because all diseases in winter do fasten their rotes deper and take
surer hold / and in summer contrary wise, the humours be styll mouynge, and
the body is apt unto all changes. But these considerations appertain
generally unto al diseses: But as concerning this our cure of Guaiacum, for as
much as a great part of hit stondethe in dyete and sufferance of great
honger, therefore it is most expedient to begin in summer. In that season a
ma may better away with this dyete than in winter, when men are very hungry.
For if the body, being hot and boylynge of it self / as it is in summer,
shulde moreover be loded with meat / hit would lyghtely be dissolved into
diseases. But in the winter it woll not so^ / for so much, as Hipocrates
says / that in winter a man body inwardly abounds with natural heate,
and outwardly lacks it, for so much as than in avoids and flees from the
sharpness of the cold, wherewith the body outwardly is compassed / into the
inward parts, as unto a strong hold and castle: and there closes it self
up: but contrary wise in summer the same natural heate in man body
follows, as Aristotle thynkethe, the nature of the air, and therefore puttethe
forth it self, and flees out to the extreme parts of the body. But so i^
is, that the very nature and propretie of this medicine is / to reduce into the
body, and bring home again such natural heate as is lost. And therefore this
it seems vnconueniente to go in hand with, or put in experience this cure
in the winter. For tha is it thought dangerous, when the hete of the outward
parts is drawn unto the inward parts, le^te the outward lymmes be forsaken
and left empty of their strength and power / specially in them that be cold
of nature, which otherwise in the winter lose their heate, and have their
bodies slain through the violence of cold, and be like unto deed folk.

But here may we not pass over that, which Coppus admonysshethe, saying,
Guaiacum moves a manne to sweatte, casting out the evil humours, that be
noyfull to the body: Therefore says he, the summer is most apt for this cure
/ when the humours are more subtylle / and the skyn thynner. And in the winter
the ways and poores, by the which the sweat should have his course, and be
expelled: are stopped, and the humours gathered to gether, and clodded. But on
the other side for so much as in this cure done by Guaiacum, the sick are
grieved with nothing more, than with thurste it is thought, that the sick may
worse absteyne from drink in somer than in winter. wherefore in Spain, and
where the heate is vehement, they durst not hitherto prove this experiment in
the summer. Furthermore in winter (after the mind of Alexander Aphrodisius)
there engenders on man through much eating. (For than have men much better
appetite than in other seasons) an humour called pituita, that is fle^me,
which thing mought be avoided, if this cure were than in hand: in which,
great abstinence must be observed and kept. These things we have spoken as
touching the times of fervent heate and fervent cold, and now we will speak
of the other two seasons that be betwyxte both, of the which two, Autumn
seems the worst of both. For than is there great abundance of all manner
syckenes, and the humours wax worse and worse, because this time of the year
is vnegall and without order, always chaungynge and inconstant / bringing in
many kinds of diseses. For as Celsus affirms, Autumn kills many a one.

Furthermore the french pockes are very noyfull to the synowes, and the said
author teaches, that winter and Autumpne be not mete nor apt times unto
medicines / for the resolution of the synowes. But these are the reasons of
them that dispute generally and speak not only of the use of Guaiacu.
Wherefore this I think, that summer (at the left ways in Asmayne) may be
best taken: but that is that part of summer / that begins when vere
ends, as in May, for than there is not here so much heate, but the sick
may well abide and suffer thyrste: And in winter the cold is very fervent,
and likewise in vere and Autumn the cold is sharper, than the sick may abide
in this cure. For it is one of the chief points for him that is restored by
Guaiacum, with all diligence to eschew cold. And as for such incommodities /
as may happen in the summer, to the intent they may the less be feared, I
have spoken of before, and shall repeat them again, when place shall be. And
never the less at this time I do affirm, that this drink of Guaiacum doth
marvelously stere up the naturalle power and strength, and hath power and
might to quycken and to make lusty the body / which for lack of natural
heate is weak and consumed: Which things if they were not as I have said,
and had not Hipocrates in a certain place / if I well remember me, said: that
Vere and Autune are the most aptest times to let blod and minister medicines:
verily the counsel of Celsus should than have seemed best, which says: that
Vere is the holsomest time to go to phisike / next unto that winter, and that
is very dangerous, Autumn most dangerous of all.

That we must utterly forbear wine and wommen in this cure. Capit. xv.
ANd may I not boldly affirm, this medicine to be given us of god, saying
hit never helps, except a ma be given to holiness of life? Verify where as
we be brought into the favour of god by two virtues specially, that is by the
chastity of body, and abstinence of meat and drink, as the laws of christen
people bear record, let him be sure except he bind him self straightly in
these bonds, he shall not only come unto this medicine in vain, but shall go
forwards also in the same wi^h no little danger. In so much that it is plainly
know^n, that he shall dye without remedy, that uses any woman before the.xl.
day after the cu^e is begone, either because the body so emptied, is not able
to suffer the injury of that act, or else because god will not that any ma
should use such his great be fy^e vnpurely. And therefore amongst all th^m that
proved this wodde in Almayne, it happened one fellow to dye, that through this
fault, as they that were present affirmed by their oaths.

And next unto this the use of wine is known most pestilent, an must be
avoided in this cure. For it loses the joints of the body, and hurts the
synowes. And for as much as it hath vehement power to enter into the lymmes,
and shake al the body / it is thought, that this decoction of Guaiacum shall
not profit in his body, that uses wine, but shall rather put him in ieoperdy
and fear of death, when these things Guaiacum and wine, which are most
contrary, mete and come to gether. Therefore some there be, that monyssheth to
absteyne from wine an whole month after the time of this cure be paste, for so
much as this medicine kepeth his course of workynge many days after it is
drunken. And therefore left any thing shulde stop or set it, they take away
the use of wine, and he that flees the voluptuous pleasure of the body must
take heed, that he give no place to glotonie. For the old proverb witnesses,
that hunger never begets adulterye. And again it is said / that Venus
waxes cold without breed and wine. Aelianus writes, that Zaleucus the lawyere
of Locrense, forbede sick men wine under payne of death with out the phistions
counsel. But be it the nature of Guaiacum might suffer this voluptuous act, did
not abhor wine? yet doth the physicians books with full mouth make mention
that they are very hurtful grievous unto that body, which is take, with this
sickn^s, and principally for the joints. Wherefore Celsus reports, that there
were some that were vexed with ache in their limbs, which through one years
abstinence from wine and women have been safe all their life. And the same
Celsus concludes / that such as are borne chaste / or be gelded, or children,
or ever they fall to woman's company / and likewise women, except them that
have their flowers stopped, are seldom tempted with this disease. And Alexander
in his problems saith, that such as drink water only, are quycker in all
senses than other. For wine stops the ways of the mind / and dulls the
senses. And Cicero saith / that for so much as wine profits the sick but
selde, and hurts very often, it is much better not to give it, than under
the hope of doubtful health to run into open ieoperdie. And Venus, in what so
ever state a man be, coldeth the belly, dries it, if Aristotle be true. For in
such coupling / the natural heate departs, and through the evaporation
that than is made / drynes is caused and engendered.

Lo sobernes and chastity two holy ordynances of life, be the principal
observation in this thing, the highest precept / the chief point of health,
which diligently kept, no ieoperdye can rise. For be it they tarry the
medicine or utterly stop and let it, yet they put not a manne in
ieoperdye of his life / when they be neglected.

That salt must be eschewed in this cure. Capitu. xvj.
Amongst all the things that must be avoided / sum men do marvel, why
salt is forbid to be used for the space of this dyete, considering there is
other times nothing more wholesome for man body: and they say, that they can
not perceive, howe any hurt shulde comme thereof in this disease. The which
comes all together of the corruption and putrefaction of the blood, saying
only salt most of all things preserves and defends from both these. And
more over the nature of salt is to make fast and dry up, to bind and
cleanse: which proprete were thought most metest and necessary to be
ministered, to pluck up this disease by the rotes. First because the body
infected with the pockes, is loosed and shaken: secondly because the humours
proceed and flow out from one matter: Thirdly, which is the chief point of
al, because the corrupt and infect blood is yet within the body vnpourged.
For this syckenesse is no other thing / than a certain order state of the
body changed through the trouble of the blood: Even as it happens in a city,
when a sedition partakynge enters into a come welthe, and the come people
be moved in their minds: than are all things skattered abroad without order,
and moved out of their places, nothing hangs to gether, nothing stands,
nothing abides, no quietness, no peace, but all full of trouble, unto the
which change of the body, motion of members, and shaking of joints, with
all such troubles, there must come some sad and wise father, a man of high
auctoritie in the come wealth: for his godlynes and good deservings toward
all men (who as Virgyll saith) may govern and rule with words their hearts /
and quiet their stomachs. So in like manner is it in salt / which as I said,
through fastnyng, dryinge, bynding, and purgynge / doth put to quietness
things, that are moved, doth unite and knit things that are broken, doth
bind to gether things that are plucked apart, doth make calm and quiet
things, that are troubled: and brings quietness and safeguard unto all
things: yea howe great a thing and howe necessary thought Plinie salt to
be, saying without salt a mans life can not endure? And therefore say they,
how can that hurt in this syckenes / which in other diseases conserveth all
things? And for as much as in this cure we must take heed, that no corrupt
humours be abundat, and salt resolves and cleanses all fylthye moystnes / and
also kepeth down and restrayneth the flowynge of the body: it is thought we
shulde be more plentuous of salt herein than else where. Not withstanding
these reasons / we must have an other consideration herein. And first of all
as much as appertaynethe unto this disease, howe the sick must forbear
salt meates, not all manner, but only such as are very sharpe: Let it be
asked of the physicians, which have lunge before time prosecuted that matter
to the uttermost: for this time, saying the medicine of Guaiacum is specyally
entreated of, we may say, that though al physicians know the use of salt,
except it be very little, to be noyous and hurtful in all other passions of
the synewes, and in such diseases as spring of corrupt blood, and of yelowe
and black colour, or salt fleume, for so much as with his tartnes, it
sharpens coler, and burns the blood, and with his na^iue dryenes causes
the humours and nutrimet of the body to dry up, and by that means distroyeth
all things, that shulde help unto helthe. Yet never the less about the
administration of Guaiacum they forbede utterly all manner use of salt, for the
same consyderation they forbede all sharpe things, and moreover all things
penetratiue: and amongst these, spices, and wine. For so much as all such
through their sharpness and persynge power, do open all poores and entreyes /
and go deep: which violence running through the body, cum can have no place to
work. If these reasons do not satisfy those men's minds / I will say unto
them, as the philosophers say of the stone Magnes, if it be anointed with
garlycke, it draws not iron to hit, so likewise Guaiacum hath a certain
secret virtue / and can n^t tell whither it be as yet known, to abhor
specially the use of salt, and which power is lost if salt ones come unto
it. And this have we spoken of the forbearynge of salt in this cure. Now
will we speak of the sklender fedynge and hunger, wherewith the body must be
weakened and made lean, whereupon all the matter of this dyete hangs.

Of sklender fedynge, and huger, necessary in this cure. Ca. xvij.
ALthough we spake before of the small and thyn fedynge, that the sick must
use, and how his meat must be diminished, he brought to hunger / yet we think
it very necessary to warn you ones again of the same thing, in this place:
not only because this medicine requires a void and an empty body / from
all manner fulness / but also because I would declare / t^at in old time the^e
was a like manner to cure the like. And we may also rede in Diodoro, that the
Egiptians did heal their sick other with fasting or else with vomyt. For
they affirm, as he recyteth / that sycknesses are engendered specially of the
superfluite of meat: And therefore they thought that way of curing to make
most unto helthe / that takes away the first causes of the disease. Let not
therefore these dronkerdes, these intemperate fellows, given to surfetynge / be
grieved with this dyete, which as Persius saith, delyteth only in delicious
fedynge, and may live scantely half a day without meat: whose bealy as the
prophet says, is their god, and all their mind and life is nothing but
fedynge. Let such fellows, as I said, cease their grudging against this
dyete / saying that thereby so excellent and so good a thing is obtained, and so
great an evil is avoided with so little labour. And let them not than in this
thing speak of the great ieoperdye, which may comme of weakness, through
lunge abstinence: as who saith, that he may faint, that eats after this
manner. For Plinie saith, that none dies for lack of meat before the.vii.
day: and may continue vntyl the.xi. day. And al be it he writes, that in his
time there was a woman in Germani, which lived sometime full twenty days
without meat: and sometime.xxx. And that he saw a man, which continued.vij.
weakes without meat, drinking every second day only water. Plinie also
saith, that he knows for a surety / that the Scythians having certain
herbs in their mouths, abide huger thyrst sometime.xij. days. And some also
say, that the christen philosopher Amonius / never eat but only tosted bread /
which thing if any man greatly marvel at, let him remember / that this is
also written in the stories, that certain of the mages lived ones by meal and
herbs only. And that Diodore writes, that the old Egiptians meat was herbs
and rotes. And Hesiodus monyssheth / saying, we should live eat Malus
asphodelo. And Plato writynge of the laws makes mention, that Epimenides was
contented sometime so to live. If any man will set these things before his
eyes, consider the, tha shall he perceive, yt we live very deinteously in this
diet and do take in a manner more than needs. But if it were a very harde
thing to absteyne so from meat, what is he that loves him self so little,
but he would to get his helthe, suffer this grief? or that had not lever
suffer.xxx. days hunger, than to be s^cke as lunge as he lives? or had not
lever pass over so many days with stronger hunger / that he may live the
resydue of his life hole and sound of body / than to avoid this little
grief, and to be tourmented all the days of his life with intolerable
sorrows, and to have runnynge frome him stynkynge and fylthye matter? I have
told you: that this is no new manner of curing: for always the best
physicians have commanded abstinence to the sick. Of the which nombre is
Asclepiades, who, as Celsus says, writes, that the most soueraygne remedy
against the fever is, as he hath proved it, to diminysshe the strength of the
patient with much watch and abstinence, in so much that at the first
beginning of the syckenes, they shulde not so much as wasshe their mouth.

Abstinence, saith Eusebius, both kepeth the bodyly helthe / and the
shamefastness of mind. Whereby it appears, that little and perate fedynge is
profytable to the flesh and the soul, as wytnesseth Timotheus, which being
on a season with Plato at supper, having before him such meat as he was
wont to have / turned toward his friends said: They that Plato receives to
supper, shall be well at ease lunge after, meaning that after much eating of
divers and abundant costly dysshes, deynteously dressed, there followed evil
and raw digestion, and great grefe of the stomach. Wherefore afterward when
it chanced him to mete with Plato, he said unto him: Ye Plato do ete this day
rather for to morrow than for the time present.

And in Lucian Gallus the cock Pithagory jugs it a great benefyt of god give
to Micyllus, because he could always with huger avoid all fevers. And for that
cause was without such disease. Now what shall we say to that, which as
saint Hierome writes, that certain diseased with the joint ache and the
gowte, after their goods were gone, and were fro them, and were brought to
poor fare and simple meat, they did recover their health? For they (saith
saint Hierome) toke no thought nor care for their household, and the habudance
of meat and drink / which do break both the body and the soul. And anon
a^ter he saith: There is nothing that dullethe a man mind so much as a
full bealy: rysynge and tournynge hyder and thither, blowynge out wind with
baskynge fysting and fartynge.

This story may be a learning unto many men, which is red of a certain
great belied fat abbot. As he was carried unto certain bathes, hit fortuned
him to mete with a gentleman, who asked him, wither he was going? the abbott
made him answer and said, that he must go unto the bathes. Why (quod the
gentleman) are ye sick? Nay (quod the abbott) I am not sick, but I have no
manner appetite unto my meat. I go ther^ore now unto the bathes to get
again mine appetite / which I did of late lose: for they are holsomme
therefore. Verily ({que} the gentleman) In this thing I can be a better
physician unto you. And toke the abbot with him, put him in to a deep dark
dungeon, where he fed him certain days hungerly: and than at last he asked
him / whither he had an appetite to his mete? Ye ma^y (quod the abbot.) I faith
(quod the gentleman) than is it reason that thou give me a reward for my
medicine, and made him pay.ii. hodred crowns / and sent him away in good
helthe, with such an appetite, that he could have eaten both beans and lekes:
where as before he refused all manner meat / were it never so deyntie: And so
was he well ordered / seeing he sought not mete with hunger, but hunger with
meat. But peradventure we have spoken more than enough of this thing:
therefore let us go unto other matters: But first I must tell you (to make
an end of this chapiter) that Guaiacum requires not a bealy that is
replenysshed with variety of meates, or troubled with wind in the inward
parts / but purified and cleansed from all rawnes and grosnes of humours.

Howe hunger may easily be suffered. Capit. xviij.
ANd this scarsenes of mete can not only be borne, but also may easily be
borne, and that through the virtue of Guaiacum: which after the body is ones
brought down, doth both preserve the life and also causes that the sick
shall not need to eat any thing at all. Therefore did I not without a cause
give warning, that the sick shulde absteyne from meat as much as may be. And
if he wax feeble or faint, he may not be helped with meat, but with the sweet
sa^ours, which I speak of, as much as is possible / put to his mouth, and
specially with hot breadde. But if any feel him self to be wasted and ready
to slyde away through weakness. Which thing howe it shulde chance in any
manne, I can not tell: for in me there happened no such thing at all, that I
needed any manner help: Than I would counsel him to use these things, which
Plinie thinks eases hunger, and quenches thyrste, when they be very fy^tell
tasted of, that is butter and lykeresse, reclisse lykoresse. Orels in this
thing we must follow Celsus, which saith thus: This one thing must always
be ob^er^ed, that the physician be often times caused to sit by the patient,
to consider what ^rengthe he is of, and to cause him as loge as he hath any
strength to wrestle and fight with hunger. And if he begin to doubt of his
weakness, to help him with meat. Except any had lever follow that, which
Gellius saith, that Erastrate did write / that the Scythians / when they for
sum cause must needs suffer hunger, do thrust together their belly and bind
it round about very straightly with broad ^wadlyng bonds, thinking that by such
pressynge to gether of their bealy, hunger may be put away / or the easelyer
borne. For seeing, as he saith, hunger comes of emptynes, and is caused of the
voydnes and holownesse of the entrails / and of the bealy, than when the bealy
is gyrde in harde, so that the emptynes is filled / the holownes joined, there
can be no hunger where as these things be not, and utterly forbearynge of
meat / may lightly be born. But why say I, utterly forbearynge of meat /
which can not be in this cure? I may well call it honger / what so ever it be,
that any abides. For it may be suffered well and easily / though a manne take
nothing in the world to help it. But unto these deynteous sick persons
what thing can be light? which can not only suffer no hunger, but also not
to have a stomach unto meat, they think it intolerable. For the which if at
any time they be sick, we mought pray god, that they never recover /
considering they esteem hit a great grefe to bye helthe with a little
sufferynge.

Of these manner persons if I speak some what largely, I do it after mine
accustomed manner, specially when I perceive many of my country men the
Almaynes, to err in this behalf.

The praise of temperance in spite of riot. Capit. xix.
But I beseech almighty god / that this nation may ones know it self. Which
thing I do not desire so much, because it is uncomely, that the people that
rulethe all the world, shulde so live, as for that, that such intemperancy
and riot is an occasyon to us of great evils, and also to be greatly
despised. If other people shulde eat and drink as much as they could, they
think they shulde pass the law of nature: but when we cromme in so much /
that we can not bear it, we loke after laud and praise. What means these
stryues and contentions of our valiant drynkers? When he that drynketh is
received with triumph, when it is glory to overcome in drinking, and no
shame to be drunk and cast it up again. O country, o empire. As for the
Polonias, or if there be any other that passethe us in dronkennes, I regard
them not, but this nation I say ought to remember them self, and have regard
to their dignity: except it seem, that other nations are come under this
em^ire, not for the reverence and opinion, which they had of our noble
forefaders, but to despise and mock us. Verily it must needs be, that they
were far other men / that had such honour given unto them than we be, that are
thus despised. Is there so much as a child in Italy, that knows us by any
other name, than by the name of dronkerdes? Saying that than other strange
nations do speak sooner of our vice than of our humanity or virtue: shall ^e
not change our living? Shall we not fere to lose this honour to our great
rebuke and shame? Or shall we not think / that it is more shame to us to lose
the title and profit of the empire, that hath ben a glory to receive, when it
was offered unto us? Or that sober men and reasonable will be content to be
under the rule and dominio of a drunken and barbarous nation, being without
all good humanite. But if hit can not happen into the brains of our men to
vnderstonde their own shame, yet at the le^t let them know their own
destruction. And if we set so little by the loss of our glory, and the
rebuke and shame of our voluptuous mind, that we will not leave for that our
vnthryfty living: l^tte us at the lest wise have so much wit as to care
for our bodily health, which must needs be troubled and brought to nought in
such festynges, surfetynges, and drinkynges: about the which, as the satirike
poet saith, leapethe and skyppeth in great companies of al kinds of
diseses. But Germanie has lost his wit and vnderstondynge, and hath
forgotten it self, not all Germanie, but many in Germanie. These be they that
draw their dyners unto soupper, and their suppers in to far night. These be
they, which through their mysorder, have caused a strange poet, but yet not
an ylle poet / for he seems to hate i'll men, to write to the great sclaunder
of this country / saying: Bacchus sytteth at the deyse, And Appollo is caste
out of all company. For al the life there is nothing else but drinking, that
is, they set more by drinking than by wisdom. Howe be it these dronkerdes /
that err through madness and lightness, mought lightly be despised: but these
that with their deynteous fare, and nice and wanton apparel cast them self
heedlonge into the mydmayne see of voluptuousness and pleasures. These I say,
be worthy to be hated of all the world. These be they, that lye upon their
pyllowes of down heped to gether, that consume what so ever may be gotten by
land or see, not to susteyn their life, but to delight their sweet ^outhes,
that must wear the fyneste lynnen, that must be robed in purple, that
rejoice, to be wrapped in soft myes skynnes, not so much to keep them from
cold, as for delicacy and wantonness. These be they, that may not touche
come clothe, whose skyn can not suffer but the finest and softest thing that
may be gotten: that take their counsel in quaffynge and in their counsels
quaff, that meddle with no sad matters, but led all their life in
feastynges.

These things are not used (I say ageyn) through all Germanie / but specially,
which thing is to our great shame and rebuke, among the chief and the nobles
of Germanie: which pamperde up daily with all manner deyntie fare, exercisynge
dyners and suppers meat for popes, in them they banquet, in them they bring
one to an other, and therein have such pleasure / that they had lever dye, than
to be plucked from hit. They have none other care, but to fylle the bealy: by
whom Salust if he had suspected such bestes ever to com in Germanie, might well
have spoken this his saying: Many men given to fedynge and slepynge, have
passed even as strangers their hole life, without knowledge and learning. But
let a man caste with him self what opinion the Romaynes had in these days of
the people of Germanie: and than set before his eyes, what a monster, and
howe ha^eful this cherysshynge of our throats, that we now use, had been than?
In the which when we have spent a great par^ of our life, and have received
thens those things that must needs follow that kind of life, that is
innumerable kinds of diseases: than do not we cofess^ nor knowledge our fant,
but do accuse god of cruelty. And though hit be we our self, that get and
bye with great cost and expenses the sedes of all our syckenes / and norysshe
with all our heart our own mischief and destruction / cherysshynge our evils
with the lost of our hole patrimony: yet when we be ones down / and set
up with quosshens and pyllowes heped round about us, not able to move hand
nor foot: than we blame nature, and say, we may thank god of all our evils
and peynes. For no glottons do otherwise, than they did, which Iuuenall
speaks of, which believe, that god in his fume and wrath doth cast these
diseases upon their bodies: and therefore call them the gone stones and
weapons of god. But would to god we wold return to our oaten porage, and be
covered as we were in time paste, with wolle garments, so made that every
limb and part of us mought be scene, to wax weary of this sylke, hate these
garments so full of playtes. For what other things are all these, but first
the wasting of our patrimony, and than the purchasing and incresse of all
evils and diseases? Verily our ancetours / being very nyggardes in this
things, did great acts and excellent things with high glory. But when
did we, that to fulfil our pleasant affection receive venom in the stead of
meat / any thing worthy the honour and glory of Germanie? It was far
better for us to be called and counted barbarous, when our living was homely
and rude, than now to have in this ryottous life, and this shame / the laud
and praise of wits and good learning.

What would great Charles say now, if he came again to us, and saw our princis
in their utter garments of sylke: saying that he him self wore a shirt of
habergyn? Or what would one of the Othons say, which stretched out and
enlarged their virtue and valyantnes in dust and durte^ when our men anoynte
them self with strange and costly bawmes?

There is a notable execration of Chrysyppus against them, that use oyntmentes
voluptuously to the pleasure of other. The devil take these delicate fellows,
says he, that have sclaundered so good a thing: the people that were wanton
and given to pleasure used it in times paste. But it was never thought / that
the Germayns shulde ever come to this point, to smell of oyntmentes and bawmes.
And now we cal for pomaders, muskeballes, dam^ske pouders, and all manner
savers / as things necessary to our life: and think it great honour to us to
smelle of such strange savours. Another is hit women only that are in this
faut, but men, specially princis and priests.

Solon forbade oyntmentes to be sold in a cite of Greece: And the Lacedemones
expelled them from their city, saying: that they corrupted and marred their
oil.

And Lycurgus toke away from the same Lacedemones bankettynge, feastynge, and
costly dyners. And Socrates (as Xenophon says) did grenously rebuke such
ryottous abundance.

Truly the old Germayns minded no such voluptuous plesures, and they thought
it a very strange thing / to live any thing wantonly or nycely. I have hard
some old men say / that when they were yonge men, it was a suspect thing to
wear a gown: when we now a days do honour and worship purpull. And
therefore we may well cry, O corrupted and wretched world. They were covered
with the skynnes of wild beasts, and lay in their feldes under the sky /
and were made stronger with contynnall labour, where we that be wantonly and
nycely clothed, and take our pleasure under our gay gilted houses, be through
all kinds of riot and voluptuous pastimes utterly weaked, and of all manly
stregthes depriued. And may any ma thynk, that this manner of living can lightly
have an end, seeing the chief principal example thereof comes fro them
specially, that be called prestes? What they be in dede god knows, and they
only / to whom it hath pleased god to give trewer eyes to se with. These do
not use al manner pomps and excesses in things appertaining unto the service
of god, but every one of them must swim at home in his house in all manner
of costly and deynteous dyshes and cups, and they call eating and drinking
living: or if they do not so call it, yet verily they so esteem it. And
therefore seeing they do so, other men think they may do the same.

And this the laudable and naturalle custom and fascion of Germanie is
banished. For we be so far gone, that we exceed all other nations, be they
never so evil, in such abundance and voluptuous pleasures. It had more
becommed us to have driven these things out from the midst of us, and as
Diogenes did to the Tartis and fine manchettis / so to have said to this
strange ryottous manner: O guest go and get the hens quickly. Ye the
examples of strange nations ought ones to have taught us. And saying to
banquet and surfeit most largely is now adaye counted most kyngly, why do we
not here the answer of Menedemus the philosopher, which he made to Antigonus,
asking him whither he should go to a deynteous and costly f^ste or not? Have in
mind (said he) that thou art a kings son. And Antisthenes, to a certain
person praysynge delicious fare, said: I would our ennemies fared delycately.
The words also of saint Paule ought to be written in our hearts, saying:
Meates are given to the bealy, and the bealy to meates: but god shall make an
end of both. The same Paule when he condemned the works of the flesh,
amongst whi^he he nombred excess of drinking and eating, he addethe to these
words: Of the which things I now warn you, like as I have before times
warned you, that they, which commytte such things / shall not be the
inheritors of the kyngedome of god. But they now do the same things, which
ought to be our gides into the kingdom of god / priests, chanons, bysshoppes,
and prelates, in so much, that it is now come into a proverb through out all
Germanie: Let him be made a man of the church / that loves to live
pleasantly, as though such a life were meteste for them.

The frugality of my grandefather Laure^ce Hutten / which is worthy to be
written, ought to move us unto much glory, who all though he were rich / and
much oc^upied in great matters of our princis, both in war and peace: yet
would he never admit into his house pepper, saffron, gynger, nor such other
strange spices, nor used garments but only of our own woll, al though there
were sometime precious vestures given unto him for the well doing of ^is
busynes. And he did not only this him self, but also amongst his equals he
rebuked greatly the fascions manners of men, saying: We seek ever strange
things / as though we had not growing with us, wherewith our meat may be made
delica^e. If we will please and delight our taste, or as though the great price
of our garments did increase the qualities of the mind. But I will cease to
speak more of this man, leest I shulde seem to covet mine own glory. If I had
first told you this one thing me thinks it is not so goodly a thing to be
borne of this my stock and family, in the which be sum causes besides
this, whereof I may glory, as to be borne his nephew, that thus hath lived.
Our predecessors, and such as I my self have scene old men, when I was but a
child / when they did keep, in their mete, drink / and clothing such
temperance, they were of good liking of body, and through great labour were
hardened against hunger and thurste, heate and cold, where as we at the first
frost, sheuer and shrink together both hand foot: as soon as winter begins
we be treble furred, and be shut up in our hot houses, out of the which we go
not vntyl mydsommer / when the son heate bourneth and parches all things.
And as I say, where as now scantly the.x. person of the noble men can be
found in Germania, but he has either the gowte in his fete, or in his
hands, or is grieved with the dropsye, sciatica, or lepry, or is tourmented
with this french evil, which brings these greatest evils with him.

But at the last let us return enter into that life, which is metest for this
nation empire of Germanie, and which even they, whom I told you lived
wantonly, can be well contented to here praised. For I think there is not one
of these, that give them self to such delicate ryottous life, but he hates
the same in other, except he be so blinded through inteperancie, that he
loves these vnthryftie manered Sardanapales, and Heliogabalos, or doth hate
the persimonia of many, which be of the contrary facion. Truly virtue seems
very amiable even to them that doth little follow or regard hit.

It was an old meat of Catos, poradge made with chese and eggs. And Plinie
rehersethe, that gruelle made with otemelle grootes was ones the meat of the
very and true Germaynes, as it is yet of many unto this day. But we fed
upon strange and beyond see victuals, thinking that we have so much need
of them, that every house holder has decreed to sell these things, that
grow with us, to bye the other with: which one thing has enryched the
Fuchers: which in the mean season, that we thus nouryshe our bodies, have all
the money, and like wise all the excellent goodly places in Almayne. For they
being the ministers of our voluptuous living, are so increased, that there is
no prince in Almayne able to compare with them in riches. So far be we gone,
and so little perceive we, what things Germanie devours and consumes.
Wherefore I think that he was of excellent wisdom (if any such was) that
feared in times passed, lest such voluptuous and delicate life shulde enter
into Germanie: whereof (as every ma may plainly see) spryngeth so much
pestylence, and so many diseases: and ageyn perceived, that they shulde live
quietly / that could be contented to lack such pleasures and delyciousnes.
For they that dress our herbs, live with them (as there be some true
Germaynes yet remaining) they are of good health and bodily liking: but they
that be spyce fyngered, and belch synamom, and smelle all of cloves, and have
all their pleasure in goodly array, these be they, that are subjects to all
kinds of diseases and evils. Howe properly therefore did the Satirike Poet
call the gowte Rich? For it medleth not with them that are poor, and drink
no wine, but hit is a companion for rich men, dronkerdes, surfetours and
delicate livers: which (as the same poet saith) to get sweet morsels, leave
no place vnserched.

And so, though this country bring forth that that is necessary for the
life, yet as though nature had utterly forsake them, they ron unto strange
things, fetching their garmetes, their meatis medicines fro Hercules pyllers,
from the ilonde of Taprobana, from the river of Ganges, and frome places
farther of than these, even almooste from the heed of Nilus.

The wrath of god lyghte on these deed men's heeds, ye first received these
evils in to Germanie. For they have done a thing unworthy for the grauite of
the Germains Truly they, our forefathers, were none such: the which
preferred the labours and peins of Hercules above the flesshely lusts, above
the delicate meatis and soft beds of Sardanapalus. But O lord Christ, howe
delicate, howe holsomme fedynge is breadde made of rye or whet, and gruelle
made of millio, oriza, ptisana, and otemele porage? Add thereunto so many
kinds of herbs, and so many divers garden spices, as anyse, coryandre,
cynomum, fenell, musterde, neppe, oynions, lekes, garlyke, and specially if we
will believe Plinie, persley hath a singular good grace, to season meates with.
And for drink we have ale and bier. And for the rich men there is wine,
which is the pure and clean drink of the earth, as Appollonius judges: so
that it be used scarcely, whether it grew in France, or upon the banks of
Rhenus. We have also of our own beestes flesh both tame and wild, which
are not of unpleasant taste. We have fruits of trees, not to be despised, howe
rich is Germanie, howe plenteous of all meates, howe abundantly doth hit
ministre all things necessary for the life of man? Wherefore my chief desire
vow is, that they never lack the gowte, nor the french pockes: that can not
live without pepper: And I pray god / they may ones be brought to extreme
hunger, which now search in all places, not for meat to live with: but for
delicates and deintees, wherewith they may stere up their sweet mouths and
provoke their appetites. Howe iustely did Galenus envy health to such fellows,
when he forbode al phisitios from the curing of dronkerdes, of them that are
given to the bealy? If such at any time were sick, for they by and by (saith
he) through intemperate living hepe up again gros^e and vndigested
humours, so that they be cleansed and purged in vain.

The necessite of nature is lightly contented, saith Hierom. Cold may be
expelled with course clothing, and hunger with little meat.

When Anaxerses the king of Perse was brought to that necessite, that he eat
dry figs and barley bread, than he beholdynge his fortune, and such a
great change, said: O what pleasure is this / that my regal abundance
kept me from? By the which example we may know, that they only live in
knowledge of their own life that live scarsely and soberly: And on the other
side, they that be given to the norysshynge of their bodies, and the pouryng in
of all things, be as men erryng in darkness, and perceive not their own life,
so far are they from the life of pleasure. Howe be it within short space,
when they be ones fallen into diseases, than they begin to feel and perceive,
what life they have chosen, and what is the reward of the same. For as Persius
saith, when the harde and stony gout, the branches of their old surfetynge,
hath broken their joints: than they morn, that they have passed their days
so grossely, and consumed their life so fylthely, and be so sorry to late of
their life to comme.

Do we than doubt, what is the cause of all the syckenes, that the Germayne
have? seeing we may yet remember, that this pestilence and mischief of the
body did enter with that rank and riottous life. For here we do now so give
our selfes to whores pleasures, that we seem to strive with other strange
people for the maystry of fylthye living, as men do in games for the best
wager. And for this purpose we have certain ministers very expert. These
get and convey unto us from the fardest parts of the world provocations of
glotony. These bring in from far, with marvelous delight / both to eat, to
drink / also to clothe our selfes with. Wherein seeing they have lunge and many
days continued, to their own (as I said) great advantage: they have made
some so delicious, that when they be here in Almayne, they must drink wine of
Corse, they must have meates out from Italie: and contrary wise, when they be
at Rome, they use wine of Rhene, or that which Neccarius brings forth. O
peruersed custom of living. O myschieffe / worthy to be hated of all men:
even so much the more that they be bysshoppes / which do these things, and
are the ring leaders thereunto. Such manner of persons I believe do desire of
god / as Aristotle writethe of Philoxenus, to have the necks of cranes.

Aristophanes reproves the tables of the Syracusanes, and the voluptuous
aboundace of the Sibarites. If at that time he blamed such things, what would
he say, if he now lived / and saw our bankettynge and feastynge, our
quaffynge and drinking? Therefore as many as coueyte virtue and knowledge,
let them take heed and harken to Pythagoras, which says: that a man, that
rises above man, can not taste or attain any high thing, that is to say, as
lunge as a man lives vnchastely and dissolutely, he shall never do any great
thing with wit or mind. The most holsomest fedynge for man (saith Plinie)
is one manner meat, the heapynge of divers tastes is pestiferous, and sauces
are worse than that.

Persius well perceived these things when he thus spake in great mode: Thou
would have lyttie joints, and a hole body in age. Ye but the full dysshes,
and the fat denteous, will not suffer the gods nor Iupiter to grant
thereunto.

And Cicero brings in Cato saying: that a libidinous and intemperate youth,
makes age very feeble. And he aduyseth and counsayleth us to eat drink so much
as may sustain the bodyly strength, not oppress it, thinking that nothing can
be so vnfrendely unto the mind of man, which he callethe an heuenly reward
and gift, as voluptuousnes is. Nor as lunge as lust and pleasure bears rule,
Temperance can have no place: Neither virtue may bear any stroke, where lust
and pleasure reigns. And therefore he judges, that we ought to give great
thanks unto age, which causes that we list not to do that thing, which we
ought not. For voluptuousnes, saith he, being an ennemye unto reason, stops
and lets all good counsel, and blyndeth the eyes of the mind, and medleth
nothing at all with virtue. And therefore he thinks, that old men are happy,
which when they lack feasts, full dysshes, and the cups oft walking,
they lack also dronkennes, rawnes of stomach, and be not encumbered nor vexed
with dreams, which manner of things, accompany them that are given to such
wantonness. For Hierom saith, that diseses come of to much eating.

There is a pretty jest, of a certain physician of this country, which had
a syke man in cure, that had rounnynge legs, and that not withstanding was
given to bank ettynge and drinking myghtily, and yet complained that his
medicines prevailed not, And that his soores ran faster, than they did at
the beginning: Truly said the physician, they would cease rounnynge out, if
thou would cesse powrynge in.

Galenus affirms, that the great chuffs, whose life and occupation is
fedynge, may neither live lunge nor be helthfull, and their minds be so
wrapped with over much blood and fatness, even as it were with myer, that they
have no manner heuenly meditation, but do always think upon eating,
drinking, fartynge, and shytynge.

The old Romaynes called that fedyng^ necessary, that was slender and
sparynge.

And among the greeks little meat was much commended by the writing of
many.

The Effees, which were a certain sort of philosophers among the old Iewes,
are landed of Iosephus, because they had turned their daily abstinence into a
custom, an another nature. The same Ioseph praises the continecie of the
Phariseis. He that would ones have had us destroyed, I think hath desired /
that this custom of living might enter among us. And therefore saying Marcus
Cato (as hit is written in Plinie) did take great care and fear, leeste the
Greeks shulde invade Italie, with their wanton and voluptuous living: which
of our forefathers hath provided / that none of these spycis and sylkes shulde
be sold in Germania? farewell pepper, farewell saffron, farewell sylke. Or if
there be any use thereof among other nations, I pray god that this nation never
know it, or se it. And Christ send our country men this mind, that they
may call home again the frugalite of their elders, facion them selfes to their
honest sparynge.

With what stout stomach doth Anacharsis bost the order of his living? Unto
me (says he) hunger is a sweet morsel / the ground is my bed / a cloak of
Scithia (that is a beasts skin) is my garment. Sober Demosthenes drove
drunken Aeschines out of the city. Socrates hating the tavern haunters, and
such as have al their delyte and pleasure in their throats, said: Many men live
to the intent to eat and drink, but I eat and drink to live. O, very wise
man / and worthy so to be taken by Apollos commendation.

And this saying of a greek poet is to good to be forgotten: Thou thy self
must rule the brydell of thy belly.

What say you? Whatte manner fellow think you Epicurus was? Whom all the
world persecuteth, as a fellow of pleasure / which put the highest felicity
in pleasure? Truly what so ever it be, that he made so much of, he meant in
the only use of breed and water, did much commend slender living, and such
as may quickly be gotten. And writing unto a certain friend of his, he
saith: Send me a little chese of Cithridi, that I may, when I woll, fare
somewhat more deynteously.

Anaxagoras said: He that eats sauourly, needs but little meat. Porphirius
wills the mind to be cleansed and purged with abstinence. And Philostrate
wrytethe / that Porus, the king of Inde, was excedynge strong and mighty, not
withstonding he never fed but upon bread and water. Masinissa lived. lxxxx.
year without any manner deilcate fedynge. And Mithridates, king of Ponte, which
kept wars with the Romaynes.xl. years, used to eat his meat standing: so
far he was from our facion, that he would not sit down on a soft
quoysshon.

Titus Li^ius writing of Anniball saith: He measured his mete and drink after
the need of nature, and not after pleasure. He had not the times of watching
and sleping destincted by the day and the night, but when his besynes might
spare him, than toke he his rest, and yet not such as is caused with a soft
bed and silence.

And amongst the lands of Augustus Caesar, this is the chief / that he was
content with little meat and drink. But we had lever order our life after
the facion and manners of glottons and pleasant fellows, living contrary unto
nature, to the destruction both of body and soul / tha to the preservation of
them both to set before us these examples of life, so noble and so
helthefull. And I pray you / the Turks and other / that are not of this our
religion / will they ever desire to become christen men, when they se us thus
to live? But I trust that our nation will ones at last beware and wax wise
again, being taught with our own harm.

Now again unto our pourpose. And for so much as I have spoken of abstinence
and sklender fare, I will show whatte I think of him, that orderethe him
self after this dyete, whether he may be restored, which some men do think,
even without the drinking of Guaiacum.

Whether a man may be restored by this dyete only, Capi. xx.
OF them that be good ought to be none evil opinion, neither suspicion: but
truly these come phisitios be sore grieved, that this medicine can do so
much / and that it alone can do it, even without their meddling. They fume very
sore / that so many in every place be suddenly helped, of whom they trusted to
have had a perpetual stipend and continual lucre. Wherefore they strive very
styffely, fearing lest in time to comme it shall take away the trust that
men have in them. They have spoken of late certain trifelynge vain words,
which if they spake as they thought, must be ascribed to their ignorance: but
if they spake it of envy, unto their mischievous mind. They say, that a syke
man may be recovered only by this dyete and order of life, which is prescribed
in this cure of Guaiacu, though he never drink of this decoction of Guaiacum,
another receive any other medicine. And I my self have scene them, that have
promised, that they would sethe the shauynges of Juniper, and of oak, or asshe,
or pine tree, or al these together, and they doubted not, but that they wold
with these help men of such diseases, as well as with this decoction of
Guaiacum. Where unto (all though I suspect their malicious intent) yet I pray
god send them as good fortune as they would wysshe. For what could be a
greater commodite unto this nation, than to have such a remedy growing in our
own woods / which must else be fet from so far? But I greatly fear, lest they
go in vain about this their rash promise, both because I think this to be a
greuouser disease than may be put away with hunger, without any other medicine
ministered, specially after it hath fastened his roots deeply, as for the most
part it is wont to do. And also if these trees, which I spake of, could do any
such thing, their virtue and power I think should not so lunge have gone
unknown, saying they grow here among us. Never the less I am content, they
make a proof. For what other thing hath a physician to do, but daily to find
out somewhat / and to know by experience, and to search what will help every
grief and sickness? But this thing I would all shulde be admonished to believe
/ whereof I spake before / that the help of frugalite and scarsenes, as hit is
great in other diseases, so is it, and that specially, in the french pockes:
but yet not so great that it may amend the blood that is infected and
corrupted through the venom of this disease, without such medecines, as have
their power strength to do it. As by example. If two kept war together, and
the one of them obtained of me / that I shulde not help his adversary: verily
I may impute unto him, that I hurt him not / but that I have help him, I may
in no wise. And likewise the absteynynge from meat and drink, as it doth not
take away the disease, so doth it not norysshe. As one might say, that he
another bound a person when he might, another losed him when he might not.

I have showed you / that many have ben restored to their health from the gowte
and joint ache / when they brought them self to a more slender and a sobrer
diet, absteined fro wine women: but I never thought so of the french pockes /
and the maladies that follow thereof. For that enters so deep that it can not
lightly be plucked up, spredeth so broad / that it can not with a little
thing be brought to gyther, but it so infects the hole body, on which it
ones catches hold, that it can not be taken from any part alone / but when it
is driven out from the hole, as at one brayd or pluck. Believe me, that have
proved many things herein to my great hurt, if any man moughte have avoided
this evil with sobre and scarce living / I had avoided it lunge syns. For by
the space of.iii. hole years I kept my body as lowe and as lean as could be /
in so much that in that space I felt no grefe of my disease, but yet I was not
clean rid from it. Never the less go to ye noble promysers / sethe ye asshe
/ make ye ready Juniper and pine tree, and take box to, if hit please you, and
horne beam, and plane tree, and ye shall get right great thank of all men,
if through your diligence we may have here at home, that we must else seek
so far of. Ye and ye shall do much more for us, than the Fuchers should,
though they made pepper or cynamum to grow in this country. And so gladly as
I wold receive this thing at your hand, if ye wold ever give it forth: so
before ye give it, I will not believe, that there is any such thing in you, no I
will not so much as hope for it, saying I have gaped so often times in vain
lokynge for those golden hills.

Howe a man must ordre his belly in this cure. Ca. xxi.
AL the time of this cure the bealy a^oydeth very little and harde, and that
with much ado, and that is not only by cause he eats little but also by
cause the nature of this medicine is to dry bind. How be it I have harde say,
that this thing happens not to every man a like. For some say that anon after
the beginning they were lose belied, and some were so continually: Whereof I
did marvel. For in these.xl. days it never went from me so much as ones,
but as it was compelled. For in this diet it may be kept to the.v. or.vi.
day. without any ieoperdie: And than in the morning the shauynge of this
Guaiacum soden in water must be drunken to the maintenance of half an uncle.
And if it move not at the first, it must be given again the next day, so the
third day, and if it help not, so ye must than pour in clysters vndernethe
or suppositoryes prepared for ye nones. For the belly must needs be losed. And
if a man will lose him self by drinking or eating Cassia, I think he doth
not much amiss so that this be done but ones, and that morning let him not
drink Guaiacum: I would not that he shulde be eased with vomitis: for they
make the body cold: and (as Plinie saith) they be evil for the eyes, and
speciallly for the teeth. There be many things in this cure, that stop the
bealy. First because the body is emptied in the beginning with a pourgation,
and than because there is little meat received. But as this place is closed
and shut from eiections, so is there somewhat in the mean season, other by
sweating, through the strength of Guaiacum that expels things hurtful
and superfluous, or else in the urine, the which is more moyste than that
comes of the meat. And one thing is greatly comfortable, that in the time of
this cure there chances no swellynge / nor there are no peynfull throws or
aches felt / nor the taste comes not bitter, nor there rises no lothynge of
meat, nor vapours breathe not lightly ascendynge from the stomach to the heed,
as in other diseses. And that the paciet is pourged, it is easily perceived by
making of water: nor to the intent that shulde be done / none other
prouocacyon shulde be sought. Now will I speak a little of sweating.

Howe in this cure one may be mo^ed to sweat. Capi. xxii.
IF the patient can not sweat, sum think, that means shulde be sought to
provoke him thereto. And therefore they caste on him many elothes, and let him
lye three or four hours covered hot. And though this among all things that
we suffer, be one the hardeste: yet I felt even to the very feyntynge, that so
chances no fayllynge, all they that were cured with me, endured it most
grievously, and they said, that this was the hardest thing in all this cure.
But if I might laufully say my mind here in (all most I dare not show that
that I have learned) I would no man shulde be pro^oked to sweat, save that the
patient shall as the thing requyrethe, keep his bed three or four hours,
and pass not, and let him be covered, but not with over many clothes, nor to
lye over stylle and stere not: but in any wise let him not be put to much
vexation.

And I think verily, that as well in this cure as in other, the physicians of
my country do many things fondly, which ought not to be done. For as this
medicine of hit self causes one to sweat, even so hit will not abide
compulsion. Whereof this may be a dew proof, that I perceived my self no
sooner to sweat, when I was covered with three or four furs, than when I
had to wry me but one couerlede. But this I wold ye should understand, that
the patient must needs sweat, and if it will not come naturally, than it must
be provoked meanly. For I allow nothing that is forced. And I warn you, that
ye eschew those, that are wont to toste the bodies at the fire, or that would
have the stews over hot. For such hea^ ^roye the bodies, and dry up the
humours that nourysshe the strengthes. And where I said sweat must be provoked
meanly, or easily, must be thus taken: that if one be wryed with the clothes of
one bed, so that the loode of the clothes grieve him not or erke him: I suppose
through the operation of Guaiacum, he shall sweat enough.

Howe this medicine shall help, and whether it heals men suddenly, or at
leisure. Ca. xxiii.
But now, I suppose, hit is high time to declare, howe the effect of this
medicine may be perceived and understand, and when the pacientis begin to
mend, and whether this curing be sudden and swyft, or late and slow.
Wherein, as I use in all other, I will open to you those things, that I my
self have both scene and known: but this I warn you of before, that if it
have chanced otherwise to any manne, than I write, that he lay not the
blame in me.

I have learned, that Guaiacum helps by little and little, and not ^odaynly,
and gothe forward fair and easily, and not violently. For it is so far from
the truth, to think that it helps one suddenly, that ^ometymes, from the
first day to the.xv. the disease comes so sharpe, and the peyne and ache so
augments, and the foores so enlarge, that a man would think him self in
worse case during those days, than ever he was before: either because than the
disease is rooted up drawn from the inner partis, and the rootynge up is
peynfull, or else that the alteration / which than is caused in the disposition
of the body, breaking out with a great violence and shaking, puts a man to
grievous peyne. For undoubtedly this medicine drawethe out this myscheuous
disease by the rootis: and that doth it unto some forth with after they begin
to take it, and to some oth^r it tarries a longer time: but hit doth so to no
man before the.vii. day: and to many (as it did to me) after the.xx. day: if
it tarry longer er hit work this effect, than the defaute is other while in
the pacientis, when they will use excess in fedynge. In me (as I said before)
the fa^te was in sithynge of Guaiacum / for by reason that the physicians in
preparynge thereof, made it smaller than they should have done, I was the longer
er it wrought on me. And I have harde physicians say, that according to the
coplexio of the bodies it works sooner and slowlyer. And this is sure and
certain, which thing Stromer oft affirmed unto me, that if they, the whose
wit is more subtyle, and are right attentively g^uen unto study / hap to
fall sick / their diseases shall be more vehement and longer continue. And
many think, that it skylleth greatly, as well in this disease / as other, in
what placis of the body the syckenes shulde chance, for the right part is
more healeable than the left: Because, saith Alexander, by larger exercise the
matter is stopped, and made more apt to heal. Also they say, it is more
harder to heal the uttermost partis, because they be far of from the body,
it is lunge er they can be nourished and fed. And there it is to be taken
heed, whether the grefe doth ascend or discende. Celsus saith, that what so
ever grefe gothe downward, is the more curable. And again. All grefe, which
proceeds upward, is worse for the medicine to come unto. And that such
diseases, that chance in our secrete partis / as they are most peynefull and
sharpe, by reason of inflammation (whereunto those partis are specially
subjects) so are they forthewith and soonest healed. Which as in all other
medicines they may be moved, so for the new use brought up of Guaiacum, I
wot not whether it be always so or no. But this let every man take heed of,
that where so ever the grefe be, and with what so ever kind of the pockes they
be peyned, that they prepare well Guaiacum / and after they have drunk so long
thereof that it be spread and rounne into the veins: than ye may be sure
their ache little and little goth away: And otherwhyle the ache comes again
/ and is more sharpe and peynefull: and goth away again. For after it ones
begins to swag, and than waxes soore and peynfull, it endures not lunge.
And they that have soores, shall have the flesh eaten away about the soores
of a great breadth: And that is a token, they begin to heal. For unto me
it chased, as it never did before, that about the.xxv. day my legs wear
eaten so bare, that ye might have scene the bone the breadth of a man nail,
which thing put me in great fear: but without any difficulty, within a
few days after the flesh grew and was restored again. And by this I
perceive well, that the nature of this medicine is to purify cleanse the soores
vndernethe, and under the flesh to prove and show first the virtue thereof.
Hitherto have I scene few or none, whose soores were clean healed, that were
kept close till they held. And therefore I have harde many expert therein
say, that than Guaiacum makes an end of his operation, when the patient
returns to his meat and in every thing takes again his old custom of
living. I told you before / that it was necessary for me to keep in, till
the.xl. day. All things well pondered / I perceive, that this medicine
requyrethe a lunge season to work perfectely. For the nature of this medicine
is not to break, or pluck away the blondde, but by little and little to
amend and purify hit (in which blondde being corrupt, rests al the force
and strength of this disease) and to expelle and divide from the body the
hurtful humours, thht are norisshementes of this disease, from some in their
urine and sweatynges, and from other some in their sieges. And when of this
disease a man begins to wax whole, than the first operation of ^uaicu^ is
to make a man to (...), and secondly by the passages of the urine it purges:
by which means it fetches out and voydeth marvelous foul fylthynesses. And
than the hands and feet wax marvelous cold, in so much that they seem to
have no heate in them at all. Whereof physicians say this is the cause, that
than this medicine draws the heate from the utter parts to the inner: the
which inward partis after they be warmed and made hot, tha the hete spredeth
it self into the vtward partis. For this, without any doubt is proved, that
their lymmes, that be healed with Guaiacum be most hot. And.vi. or vij.
wynters next following my legs and fete would be so cold, that I could
never get them warm enough, though I wrapped them in never so many clothes:
now they wax so warm, that with a very thynne hose or such like garment /
I put away the cold. These things thus understand and known, we must
comme to this point, that is, to know the operation of Guaiacum / and against
what sycknesses it helps.

What power Guaiacum is of, and what sycknesses it helps. Cap. xxiiii.
THe most principal and the chieffest effect of Guaiacum is to heal the
freche pockes clean / plucking them up by the roots, but specially when a
man hath ben diseased with them of a lunge time. For I have scene them, that
many a day lay soore peyned with the pockes, sooner and better restored unto
their helthe, tha they, on whom the scabs began newly to appear. Not that
on those, newly diseased any thing should be left vnhealed, but that the
curing goth forward more hardly, and the disease stycketh faster and is more
grievously plucked out. For Guaiacum doth resolve and destroy marvelously
swellynges / getherynges to gether of ill matters, hardnesses / bumpis, and
knobs. Fluxions or runnynges it utterly takes away / either consumynge or
turning the same an other way. It causes the soores to impostume, without
any manner of grefe. And if any thing lye hid within, it roots it out. And
so of some (as it did to me) it makes the bones bare, of some hit shows the
synowes, and breaks the veins, or eats most deeply in, and it heals
these partis that be infected with this disease, and with such stynche and
fylthynesse / that the savour canne not be abyden. And therefore the physicians
say, that the virtue of this medicine is to heate, to dry, and to amend the
fautis of the blood and of the liver: but it works all these things with
such a temperance, that indifferently, whether the cause be hot or cold it
eases the patientis. Wherefore with the drynes thereof it restreyneth the flyxe,
destroyenge the hurtful humours that flow out, or else plu^keth up by the
roots the cause of their beginning, and restorethe again the good
disposition of the body. It doth extenuate fleme / and the poores or passages
of the urine, that chance many times by pervnctions to be shut, and also
other in this disease hit opens, ye and provokes compels the urine to
make and have way. For the which skylle some think it helps them that have
the stone, and that it compels the stones to issue out of the bladder. I
have experience, that hit greatly minysshe black colere. And therefore it
makes a man more gladsome, and quenches anger. Undoubtedly hit has a
great virtue against Melancholy. And hit takes away runnynges and
droppynges, and it lyghtneth his heuynes, by heatynge (as it may be thought)
the brain. It is said, that hit amends soores, which were before ill
healed, howe so ever they came, and cuttethe again the scars. It amends
the leannes, which hath lunge continued in the body. And therefore when this
cure is done, me wax very fat al their life after. They say it hath a
marvelous virtue against the stynkyng of the mouth, doth amend the grief of
the brethe, which also comes through the fa^te of an^yntynge. It helpethe the
inward parte^, and specially the stomach, the which hit hole renews, and
makes the brookynge as good as ever it was before. His effect is excellent
for the members that be fallen away and diminisshed, it increases them and
fylleth them up, it stretches forth the synowes, that are shronke, and those
that be loose it fastens and makes strong. It is also proved, that such
partis as through this disease be made deed without feeling, are again
quickened and brought to their old feeling and lustynesse^ I said before /
that as touching the bealy it varied. For some it did bind, and some it
made laxe till they were weary. And again some it did bind in the beginning,
and afterward it losed them, and made them lank belied. And that the very
shauynges broken as small as could be, to the mountenaunce of half an uncle,
was given in drink to {pro}uoke a siege. I have also said, that the measure
thereof is not given after the proportion of his strength, that receives it.
For hit makes not one weaker when it is mynistred. And now this one thing I
affirm, that if it be.iiii. times sodden, yet is not all the virtue gone out.
Wherein I do not believe other men, but I my self have proved it. Howe be it I
deny not, but the first broth is much stronger. Some there are, that
steadfastly believe, that it is very good for fistuls and cankers, and for the
parts that be eaten with cankers. Certain hit is, hit helps them that
fetch their wynd with pein, and can not breath, if that fault com through this
sickness, or through an oyntyng.

And for as much as I have showed before, what evils come with this syckenes, it
^ere but labour in vain to repeat them / which all it takes away,
distroyeth, and vanquyssheth, as I before told: and that (if they be old)
very lightly. And in like manner it helps the gowte. For I my self have scene
two restored to health, which were sore vexed in their feet: but yet the
physicians say, that it helps only those, that have gotten the gowte
through cold, which thing I leave to them to complain of. It is also an
helthefull remedy for the palsy, and especially when it is new and lately be
gone. For than it quenches and drives it away: which thing I do write
upon the report of faithful and sad me, that have knowledge thereof. For as
for me, I did never hitherto se any that was so delivered.

Ricius told of a leper, the which though he were not clean delivered by this
medicine, yet was he made much better and cleaner, and such a man as men
might suffer his company: so that Ricius judges, that this medicine is able
to hyde and stop leprosye, though it can not take it clean away. But if this
cure were used ones again or often, than he believed, that the great hurt of
that disease shulde be put of for a lunge time. And more over he had great
hope, that if this syckenes were thus prevented in the beginning, it might
utterly be purged and cleansed, and the syke restored. And for as much as this
medicine hath virtue to dry up, some go about to minystre hit for the water
betwyxte the flesh and the skin, which is called the dropsye, the end
whereof we loke for. It is well known to be profytable against the falling
evil, as the physicians say, if the disease be of a cold kind. I have scene
them that were inwardely diseased and grieved with many other syckenesses, that
were of an evil and corrupted stomach, and could but badly digest, and when
they would recover them selfes from their long feblenes and sycklynes, and
repair again their strength and helthe, have prepared them selfes unto this
cure, the physicians not aduysynge them the contrary. And Ricius approves the
same in many. For so much as he knew (as he said) that a whole man, or but
little acrased, might come unto this cure without any hurt: and he did
perfectly believe, that the good liking of the body was kept, preserved,
defended, and confirmed therewith. Let it now content you, to have harde
spoken these things of the helps of Guaiacum, of the which if any man will
ask me the causes, I will send him to the physicians that be expert. For as
for me, I profess no such thing. Neither yet did I begin this book / to
thentent that I would by and by give a reason of these things that I would
write, but this thing I promised what so ever I found of Guaiacum, and
perceived by experience, other in my self, or in other, and what so ever I had
either scene or harde of other, that would I faithfully and truly put in
writing, leaving an occasyon to many after me, to declare the thing as it is
worthy. And now that all men may know, what Guaiacum hath done in me / I
will show in what parts of my body, and after what fascion I was diseased.

What diseases this remedy hath taken from me. Cap. xxv.
BY this one chance hit is known, that we ought not to dispeire in any bodily
disease; though we be brought never so ne'er to deaths door. For howe many were
we, after the physicians had given us up, that were restored to health through
the sudden and (as a man would say) the heuenly help of Guaiacum?

I knew one / my very sure friend / which when he saw me so bitterly vexed
with this siknes, that for pein I could another rest by night, another eat by
day, advised me to kylle my self, saying there could no remedy be found, and
my body seemed to drop away in fylthy matter, to my great peyne and sorrow /
and no hope at all of recovery: saying to me, It becomes the to be
delivered frome this evil, whether hit will or not. But he had forgotten,
that we were christians, and remembered to well, that we were friends and lovers.
For hit is our part to behold all things in them that wytnessed in times
past, whom we now call martyrs, unto the world, our saviour Christ manfully
sufferynge for his sake great tourmentes and peynes: Howe be it if any thing
may cause a man to lunge for death, truly it is the tourment of this sycknes.
For I utterly deny, that ever the father of Licinius Cecine, suffered any such
sorrow or peyne, when he flew him self with the iuise of Papauers, Or that
ever any other, which did likewise, felt so intolerable evils, as this
syckenes causes. For this pestilence besides all his vexatios and tourmentes,
(which pass far all other) only with his fowlenes and lothelynes is able
to make one weary of his life.

When Speusippus the philosopher was ones plucked and drawn with the palsy,
that he dispeyred to escape, and then met with Diogenes, and bad him well to
fare and good helthe: Diogenes (they say) answered, saying: And thou likewise
farewell in no means, saying thou art such one and can be content to live.

The same Diogenes, that was wont to be so styffe a philosofer, what trow ye
wold he have said, if he had behold scene me, when I was likewise vexed, as they
yt had the palsy: and besides that was so loathe some both in (...) savour, that
al were grieved with me, some did hate me? And yet I did live and had some hope /
although I had ben oftetimes deluded and mocked through the great promysis of
the phisitios. And left any man shulde think that my disease was either light,
or in one part only: I will show in what taking I was. First I could do
nothing with my left foot, for there had this evil dwelled.viii. years and
more, and in the mydlegge, where the shynne is covered with flesh very thynne,
there were soores inflamed through the inflammation of the flesh, rottynge
with great ache and bournynge, and as soon as one waxed whole, an other
brake up. For there were many, here some and there sum / which could by no
help of the phisitios be brought to gether in one. Over them was a knobbe so
harde, that a man would have thought it a bone, and in that was excedynge peyne
and ache, beatynge and pryckynge without ceassyng. There was also very nygh to
the right ankle above, a certain swellynge and gatherynge / which was also
harde like a bone, and was the oldest of all / where in remained the remenantes
of this pestilence fresshe and new risen.

When the physician went about this with iron, with fire, with hot irons, or
with any other instrument, they profited nothing: sometime it was swollen very
vehemently, with great peyne and akynge, sometime it aswaged and was gentyller.
And it grieved me less when my foot was hold toward the fire / and yet wold
it not suffer to be covered with much gear: it ran so that a man would have
thought hit would never have ben stopped. And as often as I would rest or
stoned upon my foot, my peyne was intolerable: than upward the calfe and
the knee were marvelous cold, and as things deed. The thygh was clean
worn away consumed to extreme lennesse, and the skin was so thynne, that
there seemed nothing else left to cover the boon with. Moreover the joints
were so louse, that lunge time I had much ado to stoned hilone: and to be
short: the one of my buttocks was but a thing weathered away. In my left
shoulder there was such peyne that I could not lift up mine arm: the extreme
parts of my shulders were weke and woxen very styffe: in the midst of the
brawn of mine arm there was a swellynge as much as an egg, and as for the
rest of mine arm even to the very hand, was clean worn away. And on the
right side a little under the lowest rybbe, there had I a sore, which was not
in dede peynfull / but it boiled out certain foul and stynkynge matter / and
issued very fylthyly after the manner of a fistule with a narowe mouth
outward, and inward it was of a large holownes. And above him there was also
an other as though a bone had been bred there upon a rybbe. And to conclude
I did plainly feel a streme and issue come down behind from the top of my
heed unto all these. And where it began the leeste touche in the world made my
heed to work as though the brayn pan had ben broken^ another might my face be
turned backward, but as it was turned with the hole body. This one thing
yette wolle I not pass, where from if Guaiacum had delivered me, and done
nothing else, yet ought I to have lauded and praised his virtue greatly, and
that is noone sleep, which I coueyted so deedly, and was so much given
thereunto, that almooste in.vi. years space there escaped not one day / when
the physicians cried out upon me, saying: that was the cause of all my
diseases, and yet I could not refrain my self from it. But now is that gone
so far from me, that I trow if I should enforce my self to sleep in the day
time, I could not. With all these, and so great evils all though I was so
maystred, that all men dispeyred my health yet my good angel (I believe) willed
me to tarry and loke for somewhat. And lo through the help of Guaiacum I am
bold now to ^yne / and to draw brethe again. Which mind god give to all
good men, that they never cease to hope and trust. As for me I repent my
self in nothing: and if by any means lunge life might be granted unto me, I
have great hope that I shulde live whole, sound, and lusty. And of this
disese, and of the remedy of Guaiacum / I have writ these things that cam to
my mind very faithfully, truly, and as my lernyng would suffer me: and here
would I make an end, if I thought it not necessary to admonysshe them, that
shall rede these things, howe after this cure, the sick must be ordered, as
touching the order and manner of their living, which thing I will perform and
that breuely.

As touching the ordre of living after this cure is paste what is to be
observed. Ca. xxvj.
I Gave warning before, that after this cure is paste, and the patient is
departed owte of the cloister of this medicine, wherein he was close kept he
must use consequently in his living a certain diet and order by the space
of.iii. or at the left.ij. hole months. And now that we be come to the very
propre place to entreat of the same thing / I say that it is so necessary to
be done, that who so ever hath recovered his helthe, except he afterwards take
good heed, diligently observing many things, and live for a space under a
certain rule, as though he were yet shut up: I say plainly that his health
shall not lunge endure. And therefore three months are appointed unto such as
were either greattely consumed and lowe brought in their syckenes, and had
many issues, and avoided much, or else were sore hurt in there synowes and
lymmes, or be so weakened, in their body, that a little time can not be
sufficient to gether up perfitely: their cromes again. And on the other side,
they that be strong and not so far gone, nor broken, unto such, ii.
months after their setting out are enough as it is thought. But by cause I
would provide surely for them that will follow me, I will advise them to
observe and keep this prescripte very lunge, and to begin with, they shall
absteyne them selfes lunge time frome the flesshely act: Because they that be
recovered through Guaiacum, have their bodies very tender and utterly weak as
yet, as though they had been lately new borne? And therefore if they shulde
have the company of woman, whereby the new gotten strength is weke and grene,
and not yet ryped: it would by and by dissolve and destroy the strength and
myghtis of all the members for ever. And for as much as the use of carnal
copulation brings into peril not one membre by him self but al the hole
body at one chop: What other thing may we say, he pretends, that medleth
carnally with women (being so febled) tha wyllyngly to ^lee him self, or at
the left speedily to destroy his natural strength, and plainly caste his health
away?

And if some be forbodden the company of women, which be never the less of
good liking in body, and have no disease at all: Howe much ought they to
avoid and flee it, that thus have lost their health might, and must labo^r al
that they can to repair the same again? And if before, xiiii. year of age
none is strong enough unto that act, because his strength is not full
furnished to put so ieoperdous a thing in experience: How than ought he to
beware take heed / that is thus new borne again, and hath so yonge tender a
body, that he offer not him self to be rasshely plucked and toore^ before he
have received his strength, and is well hardened therein.

The next point here unto is this, that though they shall have a gredye and
sharpe appetite to meat, being emptied with continual hunger, yet they must
resyste the same, and as much as may be to behave them self very soberly and
scarsely in their fedynge. And therefore they must first use very little
meat, and afterward some what more, going forth by little and little, so
that there may be a good space er that they come to their old custom of
eating, exercysynge them self softly, beginning no new thing hastily or
suddenly, utterly absteinynge fro al wynes except it be first delayed with
much water, and be also of hit self small and of good savour and clear, and
yet so, very moderately: Let him also, that is cured, be well fensed against the
violence of the air, and specially in those times that be grievous with cold
wind and rain, or else let him goo forth abroad very seldom. He may take
meat twyse aday, but at euentyde very little: and all that time he may never
follow his appetite, but must avoid fulness, as the greatest evil, that can
be. He must also above all things forbear fysshe, and feade upon yonge and
tender flesh, such as is of lyghte digestion, and nouryssheth purely: which
they be ye may know by the physicians teachynges. And these things must have
place, in the said two or.iii. months, for other things which shall be
further observed, may be serned more plainly in the things following. For now
I will advise and monysshe with few words, not only them that are recovered
by Guaiacum, but other as well from what so ever disease they be delivered, if
they tender their good helthe and welfare, and desire to be lunge in
prosperity, whatte things they shall follow. And here hit is chiefly to be
noted (howe be it all doth now know it) that this one thing is it that makes
this sycknes to be very grievous, because there is great difficulty in
dyetynge. For when this disease is overcome, hit is not one only that must be
observed in the order of our living, but many things: and diverse must be
reckened upon. In so much as what so ever things there be, whether they be
with or against all the diseases, which I said before followed this syckenes,
he that is recovered, must set them before him: endeuorynge him self with
all diligence to obteyn them / that make with him, and to avoid them that be
against him. Wherefore he must be always very careful in his living, that
all thing may be done ordinately. Not withstondynge if this medicine have
saved any, there is for them great comfort, because they that are expert
thereof, plainly think, that after the patients have ones received their
health, the time of observation, which follows this cure be past, nothing that
is not contrary to their old manner of living can put them in any danger, so
that they used not before to live without order utterly. For that same order
shall serve him, that is thus restored, as shall serve them, that never had the
sycknes. Wherefore they think it not so much to be regarded, what a man eats,
as howe much he eats: And there fore no kind of meat to be forborne, no
choice of meat to be had, concerning the quality of fedynge, nothing to
be cared fore, but that which is known to apperteygne to the come
conservation of helthe, and to the universal avoiding of all maladies and
diseases. Wherein that that Celsus teaches, perchance shall not be the leeft,
which is, that every man take heed, left while his body is in prosperity,
the aids and succour against aduersite be consumed and wasted.

Helthe is preserved (as the same Cells{us} saith) by diet, by medicines, by
oyntynges, by frictions rubbynges, by baynes, by exercise, by caryage about,
by clear and pleasant reading: which things howe they ought to be considered
fully and hole, I leave you to ask of him. Here will I breuely touche a few
things, and such as apperteyne to dyete. This I think they must fed
pleasauntely and moderately / and take such meates and drynkes as be of
lyghtest digestion. For as Paule says, The chiefes^ point of education is,
that the meat be such as will lightly digest and nourysshe well, not slow
in digestynge, nor clammye / nor plentuous in superfluities: and the drink to
be small wine / white, pure, and a little delayde with water. And Celsus
saith: Se your meat be not fatty, clammy, nor wyndy. And by his counsel ye
must absteyne in all such diseases from all manner salt meates, sharp, sour,
and bitter. For the same reason I think, whereof I made metion before. And
Paule says, In eating, the greatest fawte is satiety and fulness, For al
though the bealy digest well / yet the veins to much replenysshed, labour
soore / they swell, they break / they be stopped and filled with wind, and
plain it is, that the worst diseases of all comme of sacietie. He thinks
this only to be avoided, that no man fylle him self. And I jug the same but
not only, for I would more over nothing to be dressed deinteously, nothing
to be sa^ced curiously, and that many dysshes of diverse kinds be not set
before us / another will (as these rich men use) six. or.vii. or sometime.x.
meases at one soupper to be brought in: For a man would not believe, howe much
these things hurt, not only the stomach, but also the hole digestion. And
therefore I will repeat again this thing which is spoken of the same author:
Variety of meates is greatly to be avoided, specially when contrary
operations and virtues be in them. For when they be so thrust in, they resist
digestion. And the same thinks Galene, and A^icene / and as many as be of
pure judgment in physic.

Cato (as Tully writes) commands so much meat and drink to be received,
as may refresshe the strength and power of the body, and not oppress it.
Wherefore by the counsel of Xenophon, we must make for the most part a small
dinner, that there may be a place for the supper.

Plainly this disease is of that sort, that Galenus thinks to come of fulness:
which thing is thus to be understand, not that I think all that lives in
surfetynge, straight way to be caste into the french pockes (al though such
shall not escape diseases, no not most grievous) but if any have ben vexed
before with them, and than healed, eat drink intemperately, he must needs
fall again into them. And therefore the meat that is received, let it another be
diverse nor much, that the stomach be not loded, and digestion let. And
again let it be (as I monysshed) easy in digestynge. Plinie saith, All manner
sharpe meates, all that is to much, and all that is hastily received be harde
in workynge / and harder in somer than in winter, and harder in age than in
youth.

It is written in Tully, he that medleth not with exquysite meates, looded
tables, and often cups, shall not be encumbered with dronkennes, rawnes of
stomach, or dreams. But for as much as wha^ this cure is done, we must
provide, howe the body, that hath hitherto been emptied and made lean, may
be brought ageyn unto his old state, therefore peradventure those meates must
be used / that increace and fylle the body, not with noyfull humours, but such
as Celsus rehersethe in the.iij. chapter of the first book.

Plinie also saith, The bodies grow and increace with sweet and fat meates
and with drink: they diminish and go down with dry, lean, and cold
meates and thurste. But this must be wisely vnderstonde, for those things
which I have often before monysshed. But saying Galenus warns us in all
things to take heed to the bealy, For what so ever, saith he, is corrupted, in
that it is a cause of rot unto al the body, and so of diseases: I think hit
best to take those drynkes and meates, as Celsus teaches, which^ do both
norysshe and make the bealy soft.

But if any, through the dyuess provocation fill him self, and lode his
stomach with mea^e, more than it is able to bear: if he list to seek help by
sleep, let him here Plinie, saying. To digest in sleep, it makes more for the
corpulentnes than the strength of the body. And therefore the physicians wold
have the great fat wrestlers to make their digestion by walking. But if he had
lea^er ease him self by vomyt, as many do counsel, and Paule specially
teaches, for through vomits many evils oftentimes have ben stopped and
withstonde: let him rede his doctrine, showing howe one may lightly vomyt.
And if another of these be regarded, or to late proved, than peradventure he
must go to phisike, whereunto if the sick be compelled, I can give him none
other commandment, but even the same which I have oftentimes spoken, that he
commytte him self to a sober and learned phis^tion, or to a well expert,
rather than to one that is of high exquisite lernyng to him that powers in no
medicines, but of very costranite ye those medicines that be simple and not
compowned and mingled with many things, and as much as may be ministers the
things of our own country growing, and not things far fette. And if such
a physician counsel you to take a laske, than see ye remember that which
Paule teaches: which is that ye do it not oft, le^te through often
provoking, nature forget the office of clensing of the body of her own
motion.

As concerning meates, which be wholesome, and which vnholsomme, and howe
every kind of meates helps or hurts, except a man declare it to the
uttermost, it were better speak nothing thereof: And therfore^ I would have
the authors red, as Celsus, which entreats shortly of the kinds of
meates. And Paulus which handles at large in.xxiiij. chaptres the natures and
virtues of meates: or else Galenus which by him self is sufficient for all,
pretermyttynge nothing in the books of nourysshementes. And so would I now
have made an end of feadynge, if there had not chanced to come to my mind
certain things worthy to be noted. And first I will admonysshe you of eggs.
There is no meat (saith Plinie) like eggs that noryssheth in syckenes, and
lies not heavy, and that is in stead of wine and meat both. And Aui^ene
affirms, that the yolks of eggs of a hen, of a partridge, or of a
phesaunte do pass all meates for them that have their blood diminished or
their heart fainted. Alexander Aphrodisens thinks that it conteyneth in it
self the qualites of all the elements, and to conclude there is in an egg a
certain show of the world, both because it is made of the four elements,
and again because it is gathered round in sphere fascion, And hath a lifely
power. Eggs fried many do forbydde: among the which are Paulus and
Galenus. And doth not allow the food of herbe^. And many other do forbid the
same, although Marc{us} Cato praises brassica above the moan. He that eats
daily his fylle of ptisana, his nutrimente Galenus thinks can by none other
meates be hyndred. And the same thing would I say (says he) by beans: if
they filled not with wind. Of the use of milk both in meates and also in
medicines, Paule doth entreat very goodly. Alexander says, milk is lyghte
in digestynge, and nouryssheth well. For that may lightly go into blood, that
is made of blood, and in a manner hit is blood made white.

Of many things I have showed you a few, but yet he that desires to have
health, ought, says Paule, to know howe great power wine has. And the same
says, if wine fret any man, he must drink cold water. And the next day
drink the iuise of wormewode, and walk upon it: he must rub his body and
wasshe it, and than refresshe him self with little meat. Wynes that were
lately must, and also wynes that be to old must be avoided, saith Galenus. For
these heate to much, and the other nothing at all. That fedynge faith Paule,
that kepeth a man bare and sklender is much surer for the helthe, than that
which makes one fat. But for as much as little meat gives another strength
nor stedynes unto the body, therefore he after addethe saying, Such meates as
are of a mean nature, are the chief nourysshementes of all. For they engender
blood of a mean substance. And as such are most metest convenient for our
bodies, so be they that bring forth ill humours most noyfull, and therefore
must they always be avoided. This says Paule. And he teaches more over /
that rye breadde nouryssheth more than all other, and that wheaten bread is of
harde digestion and wyndy, and that barley bread is of little strength. He
that will know the vttermooste of fedynge, let him rede this Paule and
Galenus as I sayde^ we in this country never used annoyntynges, in Italie
they have used them, but now they be almooste left. And Galene comendethe
rubbynges of the body above all things, inculcatynge oftentimes and many
things thereof, and specially in his books of preserving helthe. And the same
doth Asclepiades highly a^ance, and Hippocrates also very greatly, whose saying
this is which was after him repeated of many. Through rubbing, if it be
vehement, the body is made harde, if it be soft and easy, the body is made
soft, if it be much, it diminissheth, if it be mean, it fylleth.

In our days that high learned man Erasmus Roterodamus, vsynge thus daily and
specially in the morning at his vprysynge, thinkith therbi that he preserves
his health, the weakness of his body (which is very great) not withstondynge.
And has warned me diligently, that above al other things I and all other
students shulde use the same. I follow the counsel of my friend, and find
ease therein. Sum forbydde wasshynges and all manner bathes, and they say,
that they be vnholsomme for all such as be recovered from this disease. I
think by cause they mollify the synowes, and lose them, and therefore they
will not that water shulde touche them: and yet they do not, saving for that,
improve sweattynges, water hurtethe the synowes though it be warm says
Alexander: not because it is warm, but because it is moist. Paule commending
warm wasshyng saith thus: It takes away werynes, it shakes down fulness, it
heats, it mitigateth, hit mollifies, it disperses, it provokes slepe^ and
makes all the body fat. And is very commodious and agreeable both to man and
woman yonge and old, so saith Paule. Not withstondynge the Italianes now a
days wasshe not but very seldom, whereof I do not meruaylle, saying in times
paste they used it daily as writing testifies, also the tokens of the b^thes
remaining at Rome, which were buyld^d like unto cities.

In exercises Galene teaches, that mesure must be kept and observed,
saying, Immoderatenes I reprove every where. He likewise saith: As exercise
before meat is ye chiefest thing to preserve health, so is al manner motion after
meat most noyful. For the meat is scatered out of the belly before it be
digested, and thereof gadreth many gross and raw humours in the veins, whereof
all manner diseses are wont to be engendered. Paule aduyseth us, so lunge to
exercise our self, until the body begin to swell and wax reed, our
motions strong, equal, and easy, and the sweat seem to be mixed with
vapour: than first to rest, when any of these begynnne to change. They
monysshe also to give rest and quietness unto that membre, which was lately
restored to helthe. And Hipocrates says: The remedy of the foot is rest.
Whereof Alexander gathers that that, which is healed again must needs have
rest. For motion (says he) causes flowynges of the superfluous matter,
which may reyse and styr up inflammation. The worst thing that can be to him
that hath akynge knees, is to ride, says Celsus. He also thinks hit not
good for them that be gowtie. The old men exercised them self also in voice
that they moughte singe and also rede more clearly.

I said I wold entreat of these things, as occasyon gave, not much
regarding any order, but as every thing, worthy to be noted, should com to
mind. And therefore let no man loke for any great thing here, if there be any
that would know, I have showed in what authors what things he shall find.
But loo here comes an other to mind, he that will preserve his health, must
take heed (says Galene) to.ij. things specially: one is, that the meat be
agreinge and mete for him: an other is, that there follow good brookynge, and
clensynge of those superfluities, that are left of the meat. It is recyted by
Paule, that the old men thought it was sufficient to defend and preserve
health: if the bourden of the belly bladder were daily vnloded well without
fault, according to the portion of the meat and drink received. Galene as
concerning the use of Venus, has left nothing untouched, affirmynge that
act to be an ennemy unto the helthe of all them that are dry of complexion,
and specially of them that are also cold. For Venus (saith he) is vnhurtefull
only unto them that be hot and moyste, and be abundant of sede. And again
he says: They that have their bodies well tempered and without fault, ought
not utterly to absteyn from Venus, as they that be cold and dry ought. Also
Paule saith: dry copulations hurts all men, and most of all if cold be
joined to dries: so that they only / which be hot and moyste, may use it
without ieoperdye. As labours are profytable unto health, so are also
copulations if they be used with mesure. This one thing ought all to know, that
al they that have had the french pockes ought with grea^ care, for love of
their synowes to avoid carnal copulation. Paule judges it well done to
exercise children, that through the labour of body and mind, they may be
brydeled and restrained from the violence of bodily pleasure. Hipocrates
compares that act unto the falling sycknes. Alexander Magnus was wont to say,
that copulation and sleep were two the greatest tokens of mortalite.

The holsomes also of the air must be looked upon, which is a good post of
health. That air, saith Paule, which is infected with evil vapours, puffynge
out pestilent blasts, or is nygh unto a synke or draught, or is musty / or is
kept in a valley, compassed roud about with hills hurts al ages. And the
best air is most wholesome. For unto a temperate body a teperate air is
profitable, saith he, and a distempred is for him that hath a contr^ry
temperature. Sickness is nothing else, saith Galene, saving a motion without
nature. Tha he saith: The physicians understood him to be hole, al whose mebres
be according to the course of nature: contrariwise tha to be sick, if any part
go out from his nature. It is forbidden by the doctrine a^ the physicians, that
no ma drink straight upon chafyng. They say also, that al sudden changes are
dangerous. This is also admitted for troth, that continual idelnes is most
contrary to good health. And contrary wise, Mean exercise is great aide succour.
Galen saith, deep rest of the body is the greatest evil that can be for the
preserving of the health, as moderate labour is the greatest good. As
perteynyng to sleep, when it ought to be taken and howe much Paule teaches
abundantly, and also what commodities follow, when it is well taken in time.
With noone sleep there is none that holds. For such as be of a sad nature,
or be troubled with thought and care / the physicians jugs very good to cal
for some manner pastimes mirth, to find out by some means, whereby the hart may
be chered, the sadness of mind eased. Pensi^enes saith Paule, must be driven
away with the sweetness of sounds.

He that is in good health (saith Celsus) at his own liberty needs to care
another for medicines nor oyntmentes. Which thing as I do allow, and would not
them that be of good liking and health to be bound greatly to any manner rule
of living: so think I it needful for them, that have ben sick, or have
syckely bodies, or do follow such kind of living, that they can not well
defend the bodyly helthe, to have a rule of living, to order them self by.
For Galene monyssheth, that a law and rule of living is in no wise
superfluous. For dyete, says he, is a very medicine.

These things that I have here written, most noble prince, I repute most
profytable to this pourpose, both by mine own and others experience, and also
by the teaching of them that were highly learned. The which things I have
written unto your excellence, not because ye shulde your self make a proof of
them (from the need whereof I beseech our saviour Christ to save and keep your
magnificence) but that they may be ready, if any of your court chance to have
need ^f them. And of such things as I have written, ye shall use the iugement
of Stromer, as I said before. For your other physician Gregorie Coppus hath
scene those things already, did help me in some of them, but that was
incidently, when from him I sped me to Moguncia, for business that I had there.
But if it had so fortuned that I might have ben in your court with him (For
than ye were away in Germanie) I shulde have entreated more warily of all these
things, and set forth my book more perfectly. But how so ever it be now, I
pray your excellence to take hit well in worth. And I present hit unto you
for a gyfte and token of this new year, which I pray god may be lucky and
prosperous unto you, And as fortunate as your own heart woll desire, without
disdain or envy of any person. Thus I commend me unto you, most noble,
most worthy, most benign, and excellent prelate, whom almighty god long
keep in good helthe and prosperity. Amen. Written at Moguntia with mine own
hand.

Thus ends this book De mor by gallico, compiled by Vlrich Hutten knight.

