The treasury of health conteynyng many profitable medycines gathered out of
Hypocrates, Galen and Auycen, by one Petrus Hyspanus translated into English by
Humfre Lloyd^ who hath added thereunto the causes and signs of every disease,
with the Aphorisms of Hypocrates, and Iacobus de Partybus redacted to a
certain order according to the members of mans body, and a compendiouse tabl^
conteynyng the purging and confortatyue medycynes, with the exposicyo of
certain names weyghtes in this book contained with an epystle of Diocles unto
king Antigonus.

Ecclesiast.xxxvii. The Lord hath created Physycke of the earth, and he that
is wise will not abhor it.

To the Gentil hearted Reader Humfrey Lloyde.
Although diverse learned me of no less judgment then practyse, have
berebefore translated and set forth sundry books, containing the most wholesome
and profitable precepts of Physic, wherein they seem to have openid and at
large declared al such things as seemed necessary and expedient to be had and
know in this our vlgare English tongue: yet never thelesse, I calling to
memory the notable s^ntence of Cicero, that every man is not alonly borne for
him self bu^ chifely to profit his native Country then his parents,
afterward his children and friends, seeking a means whereby I might profit
this my natyue Country, thought it best to traslate this little treatise which
was gathered out of the works of the most noble and Ancient phisicions
Hipocrates, Galene, Dioscorides, and Auicen by one Petrus Hispanus which
(although he chanced in a barbarous and rude time) was a man of great
knowledge and lunge practyse unto which work conteyninge alonly ye simple and
bare practyse, I did add before every chapiter as brefely as I could, the
causes and signs of the sicknesses and dyseases, trusting thereby both to
gratify and somewhat ease the pains of the reader so that he n^de not ^lles
where to seek the causes and signs of such diseases whose remedies were
coteyned in this book, and upon that consideration I did also translate and
add herunto the Aphorysmes of Hipocrates redacted unto such an order yt as the
members of manes body be disposed to receive some one disease and some another,
so the Aphorisms, which entreat of every disease that may happen to that
membre be gathered together into one chapiter beginning at the head and so in
order to the far: and also because men often times desire to know the names
and properties of compound medicines, I did translate a little book of such
compounds drawn out of mesue by one Iacobus de partibus, which work I have
redacted to the self same order that the aphorisms be in and furthermore
because I wold gratify the reader, and wold not he should be ignorant in the
names and weyghtes herin contained. I have hereunto added two tables, of the
which the first doth brefly express such symples compounds as do either
comfort or purge any disease or hurtful humour infectynge any member of mans
body, and the second expounds certain general names of medecines and
weyghtes commonly mentioned in this book and thereupon have made an end of this
rude simple work, employng my ^ole labour dylygence to set the same furthe as
truly as ny the authors mind as I could, not thinking but that there do some
faults remain therein both because the barbarous and arabic terms which the
author doth chyefly use, and of the diverse and sundry opynions of most notable
and well learned Phisicions as well in the names as in ye natures of herbs and
simples, and especially that we be either ignorant or destytute of English names
for a great sort of them, yet I did as nigh as I could follow Dioscorides and
in such things as I could not find in him I did confer Fuchsius, Ruellius and
Dorstemius together, and followed the judgment wherein they did al or the most
part of them agree, and in the Englyshing thereof I al other which intend any
such work are much beholden to Master Wyllyam Turner, who with no small
d^ligence hath in both his herballes most truly and syncerly s^t furth the
names and natures of diverse h^rbes, unto whose judgment and correccio and all
other learned in the most necessary science of Physycke, do I submyt this little
work and treatise, desiring them most heartily to take in good worth this my
first labour to accept my good will, not thinking it to be done to hurt any
man, knowing what a perylous thing it is for them that be not learned both in
the complectyons of men, Age, Regions, and time of the year, with the knowledge
of the Orygyne and causes of the diseases, to take upon them the cure of any
patient that rather they shall do hurt then good with the sole and only
practyse thereof except they do thereunto add great knowledge and perfyte
judgment had with painful study and long practyse, therefore I wold that all
such rash temerariouse persos should perfectly know, that it was never my mind
or will that this work should be set furth to maintain there fylthy lucre
and blind boldness, but ^hefely to be a toke and sign of the entye^ de^yre I
have to set furth the thing which should ^e acceptable and pleasant to the
Reader, ^lso I wold that it should be for ye use and pro^yte of such honest
persons as will modest^y and discretelye (either in time of necessyty ^hen no
learned Phisicion is at hand, or else ^onferryng with some learned man and vsynge
(...) council) minister the things herin coteyned go about the practise
thereof, upon these most honest godly cosyderacyos, I take upon me this heavy
burthe hard prouynce, therefore I shall most heartily desire the gentle reader to
pardon my audacity bear with my sclende^ judgment, and not to despise this
simple work because it is not garnished with colours ofrethorik and fine
polyshed terms, but rather to consider that Physike is an art content^ only
to be plainly and distinctlye taught and nothing desirous to be adorned and
decte with eloquence and gay painted sentences, wher^fore I trusting to the
syncer and indifferent^ judgment of the reader, do entirely desire him to pray
with me to him that created physick^ of the earth, and commanded that we
should honour the physycion, to preserve this Realm^ of England in most
prosperouse and continual health, and to endow the inhabitants thereof, with
perfyte understanding and the most desired knowledge of his holy word. Amen.

Places of scrypture which seem to make for the praise of Physyke.
MOses brought forth Israell frome the reddesee and they went to the
wilderness of sir, Exodi. 1^.
and they went three days in the wylldernesse and could find no water, and at
the last they came to mara but they could not drink of the waters for ye
byttern^s thereof, and Moses cried unto ye lord and he showed him a tree, and he
caste it into ye waters and they waxed sweet.

Also if you r^de over the.xiii.xiiii,xv, chapters of Leuiticu^ (where the
prestes be taught to dyscerne the Leprosy frome all other dyseases) you shall
find many things that make for the praise of Physycke.

H^zekish was sick to the death, and after he had prayed to the lord he sent
Isayahe unto him, Regist. 4. cap. 10.
who put a lump of figs upon the sore and he recoueryd.

Helyf^us the Prophet healed the nought and bitter waters of Ierycho and the
barennesse of the ground, Reg. 4 chap. 4.^
with casting salt into the spring thereof, he healed also Naaman of his
leprosy and the potage that was made of collyqu^ntyda.

The heart is glad of a sweet ointment and savour, Pro. 27. Tobi. 6.
but a stomach that can give good counsel rejoices a mans neighbor.

The angel said unto Tobias, take out the bowels of this fysh and as for the
heart, ye gall and the liver keep them by the for these things ^re necessary for
medicine.

For the falling of the Hear.
The Causes.
THe falling of the Hear is of two kinds, of the which the one is called
alopecya which is caused thrughe the malignite of vytiouse and noughty Humores
which rote and corrupt the rotes of the Hears whereby they fall away. The
other is called Deflunium capillo{rum} comes of ye rarytie of the skyne lack
of the Humore by the which ye hear be come furth and nourished for the
relaxatyon losnesse of the Skin is the cause why they be not steadfast and
want of their humour doth extenuat the same whereby they do fall away.

The Signs.
The signs or tokens be plain enough for in the first, the hear is more
lose in one place then in an other, and in the second they fall in all places
like.

Remedies.
Diosc. Isac.
IF thy hears fall, make lye of ye Ashes of Cvluer, dounge and wash thy head,
it is provide.

So do walnut leaves beaten with Bears sewet, restore ye hears that be
plucked away.

Seth the leaves of an Oak and the mydle rynd thereof in wa^er and wash thy
head, it is proved.

The ashes of little Frogs burnt Do cure the falling of the hear.

The ashes of Gootes dounge, mingled with oil, Galen,
doth engender hear.

The Decoctyone of a Mallowe Rote in water makes the scurffe of the head fall
of, if thy head be washed in that water, it is proved.

The water of the decoction of ye middle rynde of an elm thy head being o^ten
washed therein, Galen
doth the same.

Wormewoode stamped and laid to the temples doth quickly remedy the payne in
the head. Macer.


Stamp Parsley with the blood of an Hog, let them sethe in white wine and
afterward let it be strained through a cloth over cold water, and let the
Fat that flyteth or swimmith above be gath^red together and mengl^d with the
yolke of of a sodden egg and Mastike and Cumin and let the bare place be
anointed there with and there will hear grow quickly, it hath been provide.

Annoynte the place with raw Honey and sprynkle it over with the (...) over
with the Ashes of a grene Lacerte burnt, it engedreth much hear it is provide.

Diosc.
The blood of a Tortoise, if ye bare place be anointed there with engedreth much
hear and curethe the Leprye.

The same doth the Shell of the Snail being brent.

Gerard.
The Milk of an Ass doth make black the hear after a wounderfull manner.

Burn Barley bread with Salt, and mengle it with Bears sewet, anoint on what
place so ever thou wilt and the hears will grow there.

The Joyce of Sloes and Ink the utter rind or shale of a Nut braid and
tempered with vinegar so that they be moist, let them be applied for an
ointment and they do make the patients hear black.

The Ashes of a Goats claw, menglid and beaten with Pytche, remedies the
falling of the hear.

Let thy head be washed with Dogs peace, and thou shalt not be bald

Make lye of the ashes of the wod of Iuye, ye rind first pulled of wash an old
mas head therwyth and his hears shall be yelow two months space after.

These things following make hear to grow after Auicenius opinion first Oil
wherein a kind of flies called Cantharides be sod and boiled doth greatly dry
the fleme afterward let these be applied which follow. Oil of Eggs, Auicen.
bears sewet, Ashes of the herb called Condise or Lanary and of the pintle
and spleen of an Ass, the ashes of the ears and belly of an Hare burnt, ye
ashes of Laudatiu or Cist sage of sothernwod, of Teintworte and the ashes of
burned filberts also of wal^uttes, oil of Radyshe and Bayberys.

A Lacert and horse leches, minglyd together with the Oil called Laudanum and
let the place be anointed therwyth, and for a suerty the hear will grow, it is
provide.

Galen.
Burn the head, of a Fox together with the skyne unto ashes, and boyle a
Lacert (the head being cut o^) in oil mightilye a hole day, anoynte and
sprinkle that place with ye ashes where you will have hear grow. The same
thing workithe the ashes of Gotes doung, or of the claw of a Got.

Burn a quycke Snail upon a Tile and crushe it to ashes with.. of alume and
as much Mary of a Dere, sethe these in Wine a noint the baldnes. The same
thing doth the ashes of Bees myxte with oil.

Euphorbiu mingled with oil is wonderful good.

To take away Hear.
The Causes.
IT is a comin saying that if the one contrary be known the other is plain
and evident. Auicen.
So like wise he that knows why the hear fallethe or is little in quantytie,
is not ignorant why the Hear is much in quantytye and stedfaste, which
comes of the multitude of incorrupt humours and thycknesse of the Skine of the
head with streytnesse of the holes through the which the hear grows.

The Signs.
There is no declaracyon of the tokens necessary if a man do either se or
feel the head.

Remydes.
IF thou wilt yt the hear shulde never grow up again, pluck them up by the
rotes, anoint the place with the blood of a back or with the blood of a little
Frog, it is proved.

Put also to the place horse leches taken out of the standing water dressed
with strong Vinegar.

The ashes of a Colewortes stalk made in a plaster lets the growing up
of hears, it is provide.

The milk of a Bitch if the place be anointed therwt will not suffer ye hear
to grow. Galen.
The same affirmith Galene also, of ye blood of a bitch.

Let the joyce of a Gored, well delygently mengled with water be put on the
bare place.

Lapdanu the gum of an Ivy tree Emetes Eggs Arsenicke and Vinegar boude to
the place where ye will apply the and there will never hear grow.

Put the ashes of a grene frog brent in a bathe and al the hears y^ be
washed of ye bathe will fall away it is provide.

The Bran of Lupines or penny bean laid on the hearye place, Isac.
will make the hear to fall, and will not suffer other to grow.

The Joyce of Fumitorie myxte with gum of Arabyke and laid on the place the
hears first plucked out by the rotes will not parmytte the hears to grow.
Dioscor.


Been flower laid to the preuye mebres of a child, will not suffer the hear
to grow.

The things that let the growing up of hear after Auice be these opi^m,
Henbane, Auicen.
the roughnes or cot^on yt is found in Fleworte the blood ^f water Frogs, of a
water snail ^ of a Rear mouse, and the oil of ^he Decoccyon of a little grene
la^ert and the earth called Cymolea

Let the rote of Rape Violet or Sowbread be sod in water where in let the nape
of the neck be washed and afterward anointed with the oil of the Decoction of
Rape Uielet or Sowbread for it heals myghtly.

Let the breaking out of the ring worm of the head be washed with strong
Vinegar, and sprinkle thereon afterward the ashes of the rind of wodbinde and
without dout it will heal al ye scabbines and filthy Ringe worms.

Circan.
Take Vinegar wherein wine lies hath boylid a little and anointed it al over the
scurfe first cleansed, and it myghtily heals and dries it, or take the
brauches of a grene Fig tree and the leaves also and stamp them in water
mightily, if the scurf be new, let them be vside daly with Vinegar, till it be
like mary then apply it to anoint the place.

Cleanse bitter Almondes and thereof, Constable.
with the cold water of Fystyke Nuts make an oyntmet, it is very good if thy
head being shaven be anointed therwyth.

Stamp the rote of Helena Compana, the Braunchys and Leaves of the Fig tree,
and bitter Almodes, mengle them well with oil strong Uyneger, afterward
put therein the ashes, of the rote of Cole wort and Litarge Quick Silver,
white Lead and Common salt and blynne them well together and afterward wash
clean the place with Uyniger or Urinne then anoint ^t, it is proved.

Wine Lies called Tartarum made in powder and put upon the Scurffe being
clensyd, Circan.
menglid ^n oil and Ueniger is very good ^herto.

The Ashes of an wild Coucu^er root mengled with cold water Constable.
doth cleanse the place wounderfull well.

Sethe beat Oak Apples and the Gall of a Bull and bitter Almondes together till
they be thycke and annoynte the place.

Make a confeceon of the flower of Fenell Seed in a Glass with wy^e and
annoynt the head therwyth and it will lyghly heal it, it is proved.

Macer.
Wormwood stamped and laid to the head heals lightly.

Let the Seed of Staphisagre boyle in water, Circan.
and temper with the same water a good quantity of chosen wine Lyese, and let
the head be washed with this water twyse or thryse.

Of great Ualoure and efficacy thereunto is this, let Ship Pytche Be
dyssolued one whole night in strong Uyneger in the morning let the Oil of
Nuts be add mixte there unto and Arsenike and ^he rotes of an oak and let it
be well ^eaten and put there unto a little quick silver and let the head be
anointed therewith, but first let it be ^hauen, it is proved.

Let the Rote of Helena Cam^ana, boil with bread in strong Ui^eger and
afterward strain it, ^et the head be washed with the stray^inge thereof, and
beat the Roots ^hat are not sodden with Bores Grease, and let a little Quick
Sil^er and Wine Lies be put ther^o and anoint the place. It is ^roued.

Stamp the leaves of radyshe ^ Hogs grease, or mingle quick ^me quenchyd in
water with old ^reise.

This is good for all Scabs ^nd Ringewormes, Circan.
take and make confeccyon of wine lies litarge, with Ueneger and let it stand
all a night together, in the morning set it over the Fire with oil of Nuts
put thereunto, and when it is done take it of and annoynt the place.

Take the dry doung of an Ass, of an Hog, and of an Ox, and wine Lyese
well punnyd, and stir them together, but yet wasshe the place and dry it,
first rub it with Ueniger or Urynne that it blede again, it is proved.

Powder of Amptes, myxte with Oil, and therewyth annoynte the Scabbe against
the same it is very good.

Sethe the Leaves of anoke, and the myddill Rynde thereof in water and wash thy
head, it is proved.

Beat old Grease, Brymstone, Salendinne, and salt together and annoynte the
bare place therwyth. Ten times, it is excellent.

Take of Alume.. 8. of salt..ii. dyssolue it in strong Vinegar and anoint the
place and it will heal it

Water of the decoction of nut leaves cures the disease in the head or berd
where the hear fall way. Plini.
And other deseases of the hear.

For the worms in the head, Galen.
lay over all the head Ellebore stamped with hogs grese.

Lay over the head in manner of a plaster the raw liver of an hog, the space
of.ix. days, wash it afterward with old water, it will heal.

The powder that is fylyd of from a hearts horne given in wine to be drunk,
Gilbert.
doth not suffer nether nitts nor lice in the body, much more being made in an
ointment.

Al bitter things that cleanse and consume, and kill Nyttes.

Stauysagre salt peter, Arsemion, menglid and tempered with vyneger and oil
kill lice.

The same works salt water with brymstone in it.

Burn gum, and a horsleche together, and mingle it with hogs blood and
anoynte the head therwt and there will nether Nittes neither any kind of worms,
Lice nor fles live in the head.

Dios.
The sede of Staphisagre, myxte with oil, kills Nittes.

Cir^ain.
If Quick Silver and Staphisager, be mingled with oil and Uyneger, and be
anointed on, they kill the lice.

Burn the head of a great Ratte and myngle it with the droppynge of a Bear
or of a hog anointe the head, it heleth the desease called Allop^cia.

Against forgetfulness or drousynes.

The Causes.
THis disease is called in Greek of the effect Lethargus and in latin veternus
and is caused of cold and putrified phlegm which hath made cold, and filled
the brain.

The Signs.
The Lythargye comes with great sluggishness and such desire of sleep as cannot
be eschued, with great oblyuion, and forgetfulness so that they can scant tel what
they have done, nor make answer when they be spoken unto.

Remedies. Capi. iiii.
Against this disease of forgetfulness apply Few and red myntes with oil and
very strong Vinegar unto thy nostrils. Galen. Costan.


Burn thine own heate and mingle it with Vinegar and a little pytche and apply
it to thy nostrils, Constable.
for it wouderfully stirs quickneth yt persons diseased with forgetfulness. The
ligthes of an hog laid unto the head being shaven is very good

The blood of a Tortoys anointed on ye forehed is of much valour

The gal of a Crayne being made warm in a leaden vess^l doth thoroughly and
lightly stir up the deseased body if y^ nape of his neck be anointed
therwyth.

Fume made of Roes leather, doth myghtyly sterre him up.

Fume of Kyds skins doth quicken forgetful persons and those yt be infected
with the falling syknes and weme also that have their flowers stopte.

The sent or smell of Dog fennel, takes away sleep.

Grind Mustard sede with Vinegar, and rub it myghtyly on the plates of the
feet, and it doth quicken forgetful persons.

Sauery beaten and sodden in Vinegar laid in form of a plaster to the hinder
part of the head doth merrily awaken those yt are heavy with sleep.

Nothing doth better quicken forgetful persons then the smoke of a mans hear.

A drink made of Anacardiu is a peculiar remedy is this desease. Galen,


The smoke of Galbanum or of an h^rtes horne is best of al things

The skin of an Hare burnt and the ashes thereof droncke with calament heal
the lytargie.

For the Frensye.
The Causes.
THe Phrenisye comes of great abundance of blood or choler fyllyng up the
brains or paunicules thereof. Which choler if it be adust engenders a most
peryllouse peruiciouse phrenesy.

The Signs.
They which have the frenesye be troubled with a contynual fever and madness
with great watchings and little sleep, and when they wake they roar and cry
and cannot tell what they say or do, and if it come of blood they laugh, of
choler they fight and brawl and skat be ruled without Cords or Chains.

Remedies. Ca. v.
First let ye matter be put back with the joyce of Playntayne or morel and
Uyneger anointyng the teples therewith, then make a coif or cap of wax
terebintine and womans milk and put it upon the head, for it will ease the
pains provoke the pacyent to sleep.

Constable.
Let the fume of the matter be drawn downward with a suppository or clister,
with moderate rubbing of the hands and feet, then put a sponge dipped in the
decoction of Henbane or a whelp or a cock rypt over ye belly upon the head, or
ye lights of a swyne, also bind the arms and legs of the pacyent, and let
him smell Opium, camphory, Henbane, Basyl, Saffru or wax mingled with Rose
water, afterward anoynte the ears, eyes and nodle with mirth, storax,
Castoreum, or wash, the head, with Henbane or Smalage that have be sod in sweet
wine

Make an oyntmet of Dogfenel detain and oil of Roses, and anoint his head
therwyth and it shall cause him to sleep.

Also take of Opium. ii. of leven.ii. well beatyn with honey and vinegar and
anoynte the Pulses there with.

Make a plaster of Opium, henbane sede, and Sugar, mingled in the joyce of
lettys and lay it to his forehead.

Make a suppositori of Opium and oil of Uyolettes.

White Popie, and Henbane seed distempred with the white of an Egg and laid to
the forehead provokes sleep.

It is very good to let blood of ye vain which is in the myddel of the
forehead.

Take..i. of opium..ii. of black popy distempre them with populeon and the milk
of a woman that gives suck to a wench and lay it to the forehead.

The wax of the pacyentes ear, given him in drink causes him to sleep.

Seth Henbane in sweet wine and wash therewith thy ears temples nose thrilles,
it provokes sleep. The hot lights of a goat clapped to the head takes away
the frenesy so doth a Spoge dipped in warm wine and put to the left Pap,

It is very good to anoint ye forehead with oil of Roses, and to put a horsleche
to the forehead.

Constable.
Safron in all meates provokes sleep.

Lay to the pacyents head Saffro Mandrage and Opium he shall sleep.

Galen
If the head be anointed with oil of Roses, Dogfenell, and Castoru, it swageth
the pains and causes the pacyent to sleep. Galene.

Sprinckle the powder of Mandrage and Arsenike upon a shaven head, and the man
shall sleep.

If the face be washed with hot water of the Decoctyon of Popy ye pacyent
shall out of hand either sleep or dye,

Lay ye rote of Neproyal boiled to the head and it will draw furth the matter
of the madness, Dioscor.
it hath ben provide.

If the pacyent be very sad, Galea.
let the joyce of Iuye be put in his nose, Myntes sod in Vinegar be laid to his
head.

If the Fratyke ma have is head anointed with Castoreum, without dout he shall
sleep.

If thou wold, cause a man to sleep take Opium, Henbane, Plantayn Popy, and the
leaves of mandrage and yue leaves and beryes, mulberry leaves, and the joyce of
hemloke and lettyse, of every one of them. i. stamp them al in a mortar, then
let a sponge dryncke them up and put it in the Son to dry, afterward lay
the sponge to his nose he shall sleep, and when thou will awake him, deep
another sponge in Vinegar and hold it to his nose.

For the head ache.
The Causes.
THis disease called in Greek cephalalgia and in arabike Soda comes sometimes
of great multitude of humours contained, in the head and sometimes of an
outward cause as of heate of the son of cold, of drunkenness, and of a
stripe, which be also diverse and sunday, but because the aucthore is so short
in his remedies (and I entende to write nothing here but that shall be
necessary for the understanding of him) I will pass the ou^r at this time.

The Signs.
Great pains in the head.

Remedies. Cap. vi.
THe joyce of ground yuie cast into the nostrils purges the head and
takes away the payne.

This doth purge the head wonderful well in every kind of head ache. take wax,
Masticke Pellitory, mustard seed, town crosses, Nigella romana, Stauisager,
Cynamon, of black and white, hellebore, of either.ii. ounces let these be well
puned and put in a bag of lynen clothe, then let ye pacyet fasting hold this
bag i his mouth chaw it betwixt his teeth, Gerard.
after wash his mouth with warm wine and Honey.

When al remedies fail a cantery in the hinder part the head helps

Against the Room.
The Causes.
A Great multitude of cold humours in the brain wych fall down to the nose and
throat.

The Signs.
This disease is soon known especially in cold weder.

Remedes. Capi. vii.
IF the Room come of a could cause lay hot Calamet or runnynge Time bruised
to the head.

Diosc.
An emplayster made of Garlic, cloves leaves stops ye humore causynge the
room.

Ysope bruiled in ye embres and so laid to ye head, stops ye Room. A
little bag full Darnel salt and anyse laid to the head is very good

A pomander made of the powder of Cub^bes, ma^ys, Laudanum, Gr^ke pitch doth
remove from the brain al superfluouse humours.

Maces and Cubebes chewed in the mouth do the same.

The joyce of colwortes cast in the ^ose thrilles doth purge the head. Mace^


Sorel punned with oil of Roses is good for the head ache.

Against the turn or daselyng^ in the head.
The Causes.
A Gross thycke humore in ye brain, fro the which rise vaporouse spirits and
move disordinatly about the brain and sumtimes these spirits or exhalatyons
come from the stomach.

The Signs.
The pacyent thinks that all things which he sees move and turn round,
and oftentimes falls down.

Annoynt thy forehead with opium, Mandrage hebane and Popy sede mingled with the
joyce of nightshade and oil of Uyolettes.

Rasis.
If it come of old pains in ye head dissolve Opium and Camphory in oil of
Wylow, and pour it into ye ears nosethryls, or put oil of v^olettes milk
into the nosethriles

There is no medicine to be compared to tamaryndes for this disease

Dioscor.
Mustard seed, or leaves bruised laid hot to the head takes away the pains
there is no better medicine,

The vapoure of celydone sod in wine and received at the mouth asswagith the
grefe.

There is nothing better then to blow to ye nostrils nesynge po^der with
powder of Pepper and Castoreum.

Dioscor.
The joyce of Sowbread mingled with Honey, and spouted unto the nostrils
doth purge ye head.

Oil of tystikes heals the hemicrane and watchynges. Auicen.


Make a plaster of the rote of a wyld Cucumer and wormwod boiled in oil, and
lay it to the head.

The seed of mandrage heals al pains in the head. Rasis.


This emplastre is wonderful good, take Gum, wild Rue, the utter rynde of the
rote of Cappares French Garlycke and euphorbium or clary, of al like quantity,
stamp them with odoriferouse wine, and lay it to the head.

Siler Montayne is good for ye head ache. Macer.


It is good to distempre powder of aloes with oil of roses.

He that uses to receive three pills made of Aloes and the joyce of colwortes
of the bigness of a bean, shall never be troubled with pains in the head.

Let thy head be oft washed with lye made of the ashes of Colworte roots, and
nettle rotes, with the rote of bryonie, for it is of great efficacy against all
pains in the head.

Galen.
If you have the hemicrane, anointe thy brows and nostrils with the joyce of
Iuye leaves mingled with oil and Vinegar.

Plini.
Anoynte thy head with the ashes of a hertes horne, myxt with oil of Ros^s.

The suffumigacion of ye oil of kerua is good for al diseases in ye head

The joyce of Popy mingled with oil of roses provokes ye pacyet to sleep if
his head be therwt anointed

Gal^n
Theodoricon empericon takes away all pains of ye head, so do the leaves of
ground Iuye stamped with the white of an egg laid to ye head

Galen,
Anoint thy belly with this ointment following, it ^aseth the head ache, purges
the stemake, comfor^eth the appetite clarifies ye eyes, ^ake of the joyce of
smallage. ii. of mercury. iiii. of gosgrese and h^n^es grese of either a poud,
of rosyn ^ ii. of masticke and frankesence of ^yther. v. of casiafistula.ii.
make ^f all these an oyntmente and use it ^ut if you add thereto the joyce of
^alwort and the rynde of an elder ^t shall be much stronger.

Galbanum emplastred to the head ^s of great efficacye.

For the falling Evil.
The Causes.
Gross and slymye humores, which stop the ventricles ^f the brains, and
ways of the ly^ely spiri^es.

The Signs.
The pacyent to fall as dead ^o some at the mouth, and lose his ^ences.

Remedies. Capi. x.
Sixtus.
THe Powder of hertes horne drunk with wine heal^the the falling Evil.

The brain of a Fox given to infantes cures this disease.

Also the stones o^ a bore drunk with wine be good therefore, so is ^ gall of a
B^re drunk with warm wat^r.

The milk of a mare broke doth preserve from falling, so do the ston^s of a
Cock drunk with wat^r but the patient must absteyne from wine.x. days after.

This is a sou^raigne remedy for this disease, Galen.
make powder of castoreum, Oppoponax, Antimonium Dragons blood and use this.

Gerard.
A like virtue hath Antimonium, with castoreu alone, or antimoniu receyuyd with
wa^er.

The eggs of a Rave drunk b^ very good, ^o is the joyce of wild Rue.

The ashes of the skull of a dead man drunk is wound^rful good. Auicen.


Five leaved grass^ drunk.xxxiii. day^s doth perfectly heal. Diosc.


The red stone found in a swallow heals the falling evil. Dioscor.


Aristologye carried upon a man ^ureth him, so doth the dung of a ^rlewe if it
be drunk.

The flesh of an wolf eaten and especially the heart thereof is of great
efficacye.

It hath ben prou^d that Misceltow drunk cures the disease.

The ashes of a want, welel, frog or swallow, brennyd in an erthen pot, and
drunk it is very good.

It is good to drink three sponful of the joyce of Horhounde mingled with three
sponful of honey.

There is nothing better then wine wherein hemlock hath ben sodden Powder of the
liver of a Kite or ye Rasis.
joyce of Cowslope drunk.ix dai^s together heals without doubt.

The blood of a wesell drunk, or the joyce of sparow tongue do cure ye falling
evil.

Macer.
A pie made of the blood of an hare, gromel seed, and oth^r spices doth heal
perfectly, so doth ye liu^r of an ass sod and eaten.

Gilbert.
The gall of a bear, or of a dog, ^aten is very good.

Make powder of the heart, liver loges and all the entraylles of a dog, give it
him that is seek, for it heals wonderfully, likewyse doth the powder of the
blood of a dog.

Galen.
The remnet of an hare given thirty daye^ together early, in the fashion or
bygnes of a fetch healith the faulyng Euell.

Pyony tied about the Pacients neck kepith him safe from the falling evil.

The sand of a wall made in powder with dogs toorde, and ye joyce of slo^s
drunk with warm water as the disease begins to come on the sick pars on
will heal him for ever.

Give the sick party the heart of an ^art to drink with warm water, ^d he
shall be healed.

Give ye pacyent to drink the hart of a Gripe, with warm water and he shall be
whole.

Let the hart the liver and lights of a Grype, or vulture be dried well against
the fire, and let the patient drink the powder thereof with oximel, and the
falling sickness will go from him.

The ston^s of a Bear, be very good eat, and so are the stones of a Rame, of a
Boor, a boor big. In Tuscia there was acertayne ma delivered healed of this
diseass, of a certain husband man, by onli ordering or dressig of wild rue
afterward were many healed, after the same manner.

The joyce of Coryander given to the patient to drink, will not suffer the
humore to asced into ye head and it works also great h^alpe to the patients.

Take a Frog and cut her through the midst of the back with a knyefe and
take the liver and fold^ it in a cool wort leaf and burn it in a new
earthen pot well closid give the ashes thereof unto the si^k person in his
si^knes to drink with good wine and if he be not healyd at ons do so by another
frog and so do styll, and without dout it will heal him.

Powder made of ye stone of a swalowe heals without doubt those which have
the faulling Evil, for it is a sure experymente.

Against madness called mani^.
The Causes.
GReat quantity of incorrupt blood flowynge to the brain.

The Signs.
It is like to the Phrenesy saving that the frenesy comes with a fever and
this without

Remedies. Capi. ^i.
Certain men say that a rost^d Mous eaten doth heal Fraticke persons* Diosco
Gilb. Lapi^ariu^-


A red stone found in a swallow carried about the patient and tied in a
clothe of lyno and put under the lift arm doth heal Frantyke and lunatike
persons,

A Radysshe stapt, and bound to ye brain will heal one of ye faullinge sickness
by and by.

Against al deseases in the eyes
The Causes.
Seeing that therbe many dis^ases in the eyes therefore have s^ndry causes, and
that ye remedies be not digestyd to order for every cause, it were but vain to
recyte ye causes in this place wherefore I will pass them over.

The Signs.
The signs do ever follow the causes.

Remedies. Capi. xii.
Give unto a daselled person Sothernwod to drink, and lay on his head being
shaven, Galen.
theodoricon emperion, ana cardium, for it draws and sucks out the venomous
vapours.

Baume beaten with oil laid unto the brain and forehead, is good therefore.

Lyons flesh doth heal fantastic^l persons. Escula-


One dram of Armoniacke is good therefore mynystred with honey.

Gilbert,
When as the patient faulleth first in to his sickness, give him the joyce of
Columbyne to dryncke, or make him potage of Ualeria or of Sage or of Rue he
shall be hole for ever.

The brain of a Camelle being dried and taken drives away the ^aulyng
sickness. Plini.


Of the same operation is his ^oud being drunk.

The blood of a Lamb drunk with wine, takes away the falling sickness.

The herb that is called sparows tongue heals, if it be drunk.

The stone that is found in a hearts head stamped and given to the sick person
heals him.

Sees the heart of a stork in water and give the broth the^of to drink and
the heart to be eaten of the patient, Robertu^
but let the blood be drawn out of the heart first, and he shall never have the
falling evil again.

The ashes of Rue snuffed up, into the nosetrelles doth purge it incotinente.

Xistus.
The spleen of an ass eaten oft doth remedy.

The brain of a camel myxt with oil of roses anointed on the patient behind
and before through out al his body doth thoroughly heal^ which is not so
wonderful an exp^ryent as it is true.

The blood or gaul of a labe doth heal the sick of the faulling Evil

The donge of a Peacock taken in drink heals them also.

Swallows if th^y be eaten are good therefore,

The l^tle stones that are found in swallows bellies bound to their right
arms doth perfectli heal the

Cauteries applied to the head are good for this disease, if it have reigned
long upon him.

The bird that makes her nest in the banks under the ground yt hath anecke
that is of a changeable colour black blew, and is much like to ye clear
elemet, with her wings burnt and beaten so after drunk heals those that are
taken.

Put the leese of wine the bran of wheat in wine a day and a ^yght, Galen.
and afterward make pills which pylles minystre to melacholyke persons
fasting.

The white of an Egg beaten together and scummed and put into ye eye, Xistus.
takes away the heate and pricking thereof.

Let the white of an egg the joyce of Perritory of ye waul be beaten well
together and scummed and let one drop of the licore remeyninge be put into
the eye and it shall heal the web in the eye. This is true proved.

The joyce of Scala, Celi or Salomons seal, strained and put into the
nostrils is very good for many diseases of the eyes.

The joyce of wormewod, womans milk and Rose water mingled together, if they be
ordered in form of a plaster they will asswadge ye greeffe and take away the
blood and other spots in the eyes.

The sede of the herb called dragons being taken in drink helpith the syghte.

Wormewod new stampte with ye white of an egg and laid over the eyes, takes
a wai the blood and redness thereof, of what humour so ever it come.

If the eyes before with blood or whote tears put in them the joyce of the
tops of a black beary tree with the white of an egg and fine Flax, and they
wylbe whole, this is proved.

The joyce of chickenweed with the joyce of the top of the black b^ry busshe
put into the eye takes awai ^he blood the white spot in ye eye.

New made cheese washed oft in water and mengled with the white ^f an egg and
rose water, so laid ^o the blood shoten eye, or that is ^ull of hot humours
doth quikley ^elpe and remedy. Petrus.


It is also of the same operation be^ng onli put in scalding hot liquor The
yolke of an egg sod in rose water or myxt with oil of Roses ^pplied to the
eyes doth asswadge ye grefe of them, this hath ben proved Roses put in a bag
and being ^ell boiled laid to the eyes, take ^way the payne and swelling from
^he eyes.

Against a great payne take the ^sshes of the leaves of Colwortes, ^ the
yolke of an egg roasted in the ^ier and woman's milk and myn^le with al a little
honey and bind it ^nto the eyes till they be hole.

If thy eyes be burning hot minggle Richardus
the milk of a Bitch with th^ joyce of an herb called, Scala cel^ and anoint
them therwyth.

Sixtus dioscor.
The lights of a Ram or weder being^ hot bound over the ey^s doth lightly
take away the blood, (...) is proved.

Another experiment is this th^ gaul^ of a Part^itche put or dropp^d into the
eye takes away ye dymnes of th^ eyes.

The same operation hath ye gaul^ of a Turtle Dove, that hath ben^ proved.

The joyce of Rue mixed with honey that hath ben scumed and put into the eye a
little atons, riddeth the paci^nte of an ancient dimnes of the syghte.

If thou put into thine eye.ix. grains of the seed of Oculus Christi, thou
shalt not f^le the, yet they will purge the eyes.

I have oftentimes scene that little stones like unto the nauil of a man which be
found growing together like beds by the sea side, put into ye eyes purge the
and yet are not felt. The water of the decoction of wild time doth dry up the
tears or watrynes of the eyes if they be oft washed therwythall, this is
true.

Take and sees the leaves of betonye, and the root of Fennel and wash thine
eyes with ye water thereof and the tears will be dried up.

The joyce of the leaves of woodbynde stampte and strained with woman's milk
and put or squyrted into the eye doth put away the blemysshes of the same.

The joyce of chyckweed doth clear the eyes of blemysshe or spot if it be
puryfyed.

The joyce of knotgrasse puts a way the spot of the eye.

The joyce of plantayn or ribwort applied to the eye with a little silk
Dioscor.
it heals the sore and hollow ulcers of the corner of the eye within ten
days.

Of the same operation is the powder of horsehoofe that growethe by the ground,
put into the eye.

Lapida
A saphix a smaradge heal ye eyes of th^m whom they touche.

Dios.
The joyce of ye rote of great gallga beig put ito ye eyes doth clear the.

The water wherein flewort hath be stepped all a night put either in^o the eye, or
washed over the eye lids doth incontinent dry heal ye t^ares with the heate
and ytchyng.

The same doth a fumygation wherein the flouers of pomegranates or ye leaves of
an oak or plaintaine have ben sodden in, this is proved.

Let Tutia be washed in rose water till the water change the colour put the
same water into the eye, it takes away ye blood, ye heate the abundance and
humydity of the tears.

Burn sower grapes upon a tyleshard the dust thereof being syfted through a
fine cloeth and put into thine eyes, Gerard.
it takes away the rednes and also the humydity thereof.

The yolke of an egg, mengled with Rose water, bran, womans milk, is by
asswadging the payne a very good repercussyne medicine.

Tuty doth dry and clear the eyes, more then all medycynes restrayneth and
kepth back sharpe matter fro flowynge up the eyes. Sixtus.


Stamp rue with comyn myngle thereunto the yolke of an egg, Constable.
it healith wonderfully well and clearith the eyes of congealed blood.

Anoint the eyes that are blearid with the joyce of gandergose or lady traces yt
grows on montaines or inmedowes and they shall be hole incotynent and the grefe
taken away. For ye dimnes bloudshotting of ye eyes stape aloes with ye white of
an egg (...) it is wonderful good.

Galen.
Gallens collyry is exceeding good to heal the dymnes of the sight in one day
take of Antimonium, and the joyce of slowys of eiche, v, of Endyue, i. and of
burnt brass washed. ii. of white lead. i. of myrh^ half. i. of castoreu, of
opium, of g^me Arabic, of the joyce of whet of each. i. temper them together
with rose water and the white of an egg and cast it into thy eye,

Against fistules, make powder of Frankensens, Aloes, Sarcocolle, Dragons
blood, flowers of Pomegranates, Anise, the flower of brass and when need is
press the holowe vlcere, so that the rottennes may be queashed or crusshed
out, then let ye patient lye on that side yt is whole distell a little of this
powder with the claryfyed joyce of plantayne, let it be droppyd into the sore
corner of the eye, so let him lie.iii. or.iiii. hours.

Put the ashes of a burnt snail upon the spot in the eye, Bartholomeus.
and with in three days it will take it away.

All kind of milk doth assuage the payne in the eyes, but chyefelye when it
is made in form of a plai^r with the yolke of an Egg and (...) of Roses.

Betony stamped made in a playstre, Macer
heals a stripe in the eye.

If thy eyes be washed with the water wherein Betoney, or the root thereof,
hath ben sodden, they shall be whole without Dymnes, or other blemysshe.

If you drink a drame of Betony with water, Plinius.
it will bring down heal the cloudynes and bloudines of the eyes.

The same being eaten dries up the tears of the eyes.

Item the oft eating of great Colwortes clears the dimmnes of the eyes.

Stampte Comin dried against ye fire ( not burnt) with the white of an egg
mingle it with cromes of bread and put it on your eyes and yt shalt clear the
blood from them, this is proved

Ueruen stamped with ye white of an egg and bound unto the eyes at ye evening,
takes away the watrynes of the eyes.

Resolve aloes in a good quantity of the joyce of Fennel put into a latin
basin.xv. days, and after put it into the eyes that are full of itchyng and it
is very good for them.

Rogerius
Item Beans, the rynde or over skin being pulled of, bruised and menglid with
the white of an egg and applied in form of a plaster to the temples, or
menglid with mastycke keep back and restrain humours flowing up to the eyes.

The same being plasterid with wine healith the eyes that have had some
strype.

Acacia made in a plaster is wonderful helping against swellinges or other
humours of the eyes.

Lyk^wyse this precious powder is of great effycacy to extinquishe the spot of
the eye by removing the blood and restraynyng the tears.

Take of Tutia. ii. of Dragons blood. i. of ^uger. i. stamp them and sift
them finely and put into thine eye a verey little, it is safe and without
danger in wa^rantise oft approved.

Item let the spot be ryped before you use dissolving medycines with oil made
of filberies sodden in water stampte and crusshed.

Make powder of Roses sugar and salgem of eiche like quantetye and put it upon
the spot in the eye and it will destroy it incontinent. Galen,


Take cerusse tutia.iiii. times quechid in Vinegar and Sugar stap a little
marchasit, and let the poude^ be put upon the spot, this hath ben provide.

Let the root of Fennel boyle with water in a pot, of the same water take one
drop put it into thine eyes

One drop of the patients own vryne doth might^ly heal the watrynes of the
eyes.

Stamp burnt Almondes, Cerusse Sarcocol, Tutia, of eych like quatitye with
clear wine and let them be dried again and Stamp them and put a little thereof
into thine eye and so shall it be whole.

Put Camphorye bruised and strained with the joyce of Fennel upon a little
blemysshe in the eye. The ashes of Hearts horne burnt on a tyleshard heals
the blemish or stripe in the eye.

Fine wheat flower mingled with water strained, Dios. Isac.
put into the eyes restrayneth and purges the tears and humores that else
would flow unto the eyes.

The green leaves of the Plane tree sod in wine used as a plaster cure the
Room and wattines of the eyes.

The milk of the rind of a Sal^owe tree when it bears floue^s being cast
into the eyes, heal^th and claryfyeth them and being tender comfort them.

The joyce of the seed of Playntayne cast into the eye, takes away the soornes
thereof.

A pumyse made hot, and thrysse quenched in wine beaten to powder if it be put
into the eyes it heals those that have pain thereof.

The white of an egg clapped what to ye sore eyes restores and heals Diosco


Clear Common oil dropte into ye eyes puts away incontinent the spots
and whiteness thereof. Auicen.


The joyce of Thistell of malowes and wild Endiue put away the blemyshe out of
the eye.

Item take of the ashes of a swallows head burnt. ii of chosen honey. ii^. of
the joyce of fennel. i. mengle th^m together and put the in a vyol of glass,
and stop ye mouth thereof clos^, afterward it boyle i a skell^t full of water
seething still ^il the one half be mynysshed and let the other half remain,
and anoint the eye early in the morning* and a little before the paciet go to
supper: and also when he goes to bed put one little drop thereof into the eyes
it shall appease the grefe. This hath ben proved of diverse authors.

The powder of Succory put into the eyes sharpneth the sight. Auicen.


Morel also put into ^e eye heals the hollow ulcers of the eye.

The leaves of wild malowes chewed in the mouth and a little salt applied as a
plaster to ye eyes, make clear the hollow ulcers of ye eye and make the
flesh to grow.

Myngle the ashes of Coluers dounge burnt with vinegar and afterward let it be
dried brayed fine ^ye and temperid with the joyce of fennel, Pet. Lucrotus.
and drop the joyce into the eyes upon the blemysshe, it is a principal
medysyne.

Wine of the decoction of tormentile drunk daily without any other drink and
the herb thereof sodden every evening emplaysteryd over the eyes ye space
of.iii. or.iiii. months or more restores the sight, Yea to those that have
there eyes as though they did se, yet se not at al

The leaves of veruene stamped with wine and salt and bound over the eyes as a
plaster day and night hath a wonderful efficacye against the blearynesse of
the eyes.

Stamp Rue and strain it with Uyneger Honey, put of yt which is stryned out a
little in ye eye, it dries up the tears wonderfully.

Tempre ink with the white of an egg and sterre them well together till a
froeth rise over it and th^, let it stand, put that into the eye which fletyth
above every night till it be whole.

Pet. Lucratus.
Stape the rind of black thorne being grene with a little wine put into thine
eyes one drop of y^ liquor and thine eye will be hole within three days.

Again, temper honey ink and strain it through a cloth and cast a drop
thereof into thine eye, within iii. days it will heal it and clear away the
blemysshe.

Take a bruised cocle and press out the joyce, put it hastly into thine eye
for it puts away the blemisshe in the eye wonderfully.

Item if. ii. of Alowes and. i. of mastike be mynistred unto the patient
temperid with Fennel water, it ^s amedycyne of great efficacy and often proved
to clear the sight.

Take of the wood of Aloes, of ey^ight, of running time, of sauery, (...) Isop,
of spyke, of eiche. i. of ma^s. vi. of Uiolettes half. i. let the al be made in
powder by them selfes then myngle them together, and of this powder sprinkle
the quantiti of i. scruple every evening two hours after supper on the
foreparte of the head by the joint Sagit, from the joint yt comes up to the
crown of the head, full unto the point of the crown, called zenithe, the
breadthe of four fingers, yet so that the first powder be taken away, for the
second powder must be laid upon ye place, this were good to be used.iii. or.iiii
days and is a great help in apt complexions.

Item take of the uttermost part of the Ivy tree, of the seed or leaves of
Oculus Christi of amysticados of each. i. of Cala mynte of wild Margeram ana.
i. of the roots of condisi or lanary. i. of the rotes of holyhocke.. a half
seth the all in two pottels of water until ye wasting of the third part, then
after let the ashes of ye same be shed over it finly sifted, with the water of
the ashes let thy head be washed ons or twyse in a weke gently rubbing it
with white soap, for it dries up the spots and vapours in the eye, by sokyng
them to the hinderpart stregthing the substance of the brai and eyes.

The joyce of smalege and ye white of an egg mengle them together put into the
patients eyes going to sleep.

Of the same opera^ion is the ashes made of a sallow tree dried burnt and put
into the eye.

It^m the fat of fre^she river fys^hes molten and mingl^d with oil and honey
at of great excellecye for ^he clearnes of the eyes. And they are good against
the watrines when it ^rst begins in the eye.

The joyce of wild put flane drop^ed in the eye, puts awai the web of the
eyes without doubt.

The joyce of ground Ivy put in^o the corner of the eye where the white is
turning the head aside takes the freatting of the eye and removes the little
whiteness that is be ^inde.

Against the cloudynes of the sight ^ake morning dew ^he joyce of ^ue, and the
flowers of Bytone, and ^ut them into thine eyes.

Put a good quantity of Salt P^ter burnt into thine eye it is very soueraygne.

The gaul of a Grype or Ramm^ mixed with mans ordure and wine, well strained is
very good to clear the sight.

Against the ytchyng haw in y^ eye, mengle soute the joyce of sm^lag^ with
good white wine, then le^ it stand al a day afterward, anoyn^ wash the eyes*
it is very good.

To take away the payne blood in the eyes, mengle Alowes and opium with ye
milk of a woman tha^ gives a man child suck it is very good therefore.

Cut a what lofe of barley in two in the midst lay the dust or powder of wild
Parsnep upon the raw flesh about the eye, and hold the ho^ lofe ha^de to thine
eyes, it clearethe thy sight very much.

The self same thing doth ye powder of ye mulberey leaves, this have I proved.

Take Time eat it, it puts away the dymnes of the eyes.

Cerusse dropped into thine eyes takes away the pain and clears the eyes.
Of the same operation is camphorye.

Ungu^ntum preciosum dropped into the eye with a feather dries ye watrynes and
put away the spot in ye eyes, and sharpneth the sight.

Quench the stone called Calaminaris being first burning hot in ro^e water
three times, after the same manner do by Tutye, and with that water wash the
eyes.

Furthermore take of this Calaminaris stone dried well dressed. ii. of Tutia
preparyd after the same manner. vi. of the wood Aloes, half a.. of Roses. ii.
let them be beaten and made in powder wraped in a sylke cloeth double folded,
thereof make an ointment, with.ii. pound of swines blood that was pigged ye
year, a pound of Rose water let them seth together till the rose water be
consumed, then cole it, and with the same blood mengle the pouders above
specified, they shall be kept in their lively strength. This hath ben proved.

The wine of the decoction of rue unto ye third part dropped into ye eyes
clearith them fro all filthey blood.

Of the same operation is the dust of the coals of a dry sallow tree put into
the eye.

Petrus.
This water folowig is marvelous good against al spots in the eye, and to
comfort the sight.

Take of fennel of Rue, of eybright of Ueruen, of Endiue, Tormentill, Betone,
of Siler mountayn, of the rote of Galingal, of ^iche like quantity the first
day after they be stapt let them be put in wine, the second in ye urine of a
maid child, then after let them be distelled in a Lebike ye first water yt
comes out is as precious as silver, the second as gold the third as bawme.

Take the seeds of fennel, of perseley, of smalage, of anise of oculus
cristi, clary, ye rotes of saledyne, of fenel, of betone, of galigal, ye leaves
of agrimoney, of eybright, of tormetil, of rue, of verue of ^tche like
quatytie, let them be stamped al together, let the be put ye first day in the
vryne of a maiden child, ye second in wine, ye third in ye milk of a she ass
on the fourth day let them be distellid keep it, as bawme it sharpneth the
sight, it clarifies the eyes it puts away the pynne and web.

Camphorye water betony have ben greatly proved to clear ye sight, stamp of
eyche together like quantity that myghtly well, and strayn the joyce out thereof
through a cloth and dis^ill or drop it into the eyes through a quyl.

The joyce of the Lyly rote put into thy eye takes away the haw.

The ashes of mans ordure cast into thine eye doth mightlye put away al
spots of the ^ye.

Plini.
For the web and cloudines in ye eyes, take stamp indisshe Pepper, and put to
it y^ joyce of a Fenel rote let it be put for.xv. days in a basin of brass,
so put it into the eye, it is very good.

Galen
A bathe of warm water doth g^etly supresse the burning or fyery ytchynge and
the grief of the eyes.

The lights of an Hare cut in small pieces takes away the swelling of the
eyes.

Take the gaull of a Cock mixte the joyce of Salendyne and honey and anoint
thine eyes therewith, it restores thy sight perfectly.

The ashes of a great swallow might with honey put into thine eyes, takes
away the dimmnes of the eyes.

Of the payne of the Ears.
The Causes.
Going or riding in cold wynd^s, or bathing in cold wat^r and sum times it
comes of a hot inflammation.

The Signs.
Great pains in the ears ether with hete or cold.

Remedies. Capi. xiii.
THe joyce of wild Cucumere leaves, Diosc.
takes away ye grefe of the ears.

Take and put the grene wood of an Asshe in the fyere, and save the liquor that
comes out at the end of the same put it into thine ears it causes the payne
of ye ears to cease and amends the hearing.

Stamp earth worms, the eggs of Emetes ye leaves of Rue together and being
sodden in oil strain them let faull one drop of that oil being warm into
thine ear it restores again the hearing, being ons lost.

Put oil scalion seed together, and megle thereto the joyce of lekes, and
wormewod, and womans milk sees them over the coals strain it, and put one
drop into thine ear and stop it fast with silk in the morning, after six
hours, take it out, turn the sore ear downward and wash it gently, it is a
goodly experymente.

Item in a hot cause, lettis made in a plaster is much worth. Hemp tow dipped
in the white of an egg is very good it is proved.

Item worms of the earth stapte with Rose water and applied to the ear are
very good also.

Item hot water with woman's milk only, applied for a plaster is of much
efficacy.

Rogerus.
Item if a little stone or a grain or any such like thing faull into a mans
ear, let one person or other put his mouth to the ear let him blow into it
strongely and a good while, and after set to his mouth again and suck.

If a worm have crept into a mans ear, drop thereunto of ye joyce of the
ryndes of nuts or of the leaves of a peach tree.

Arype apple yt hath a good savour is to be applied unto the ear being warm
somewhat opened on the lower part that fasteyneth to the tree in the morning
you shalt find there a worm al to pieces through the savour of the apple.

The oil of bitter almondes, and the curnel of a peach doth open the ears
very much.

Against the worms of the ears let the joyce of wormewod be dropped into the
ears.

Put the joyce of Sengrene, oil olive, the joyce of a leek, the milk of of a
woman yt gives a man child suck into a vyole of glass three days three
nights setting the mouth open, it is said to restore the hearing wounderful
well.

The gall of a Got put into the ear with joyce of a Leek, takes away the
pain in the ear and restoring the hearing.

The gal of a Goat and womans milk temperid with honey, and a little mirhe is a
principal medicine.

Boyle the joyce of sengrene put in a holowe scallyon in the fire, put the
joyce that is strained therout in to thine ear, lay the Onion over the same,
in manner of a plaster it is very much worth in both causes.

^ostan*
The joyce of wild Margeram mixed with woman's milk put into thine ear takethe
away payne thereof.

The joyce of Ivy myxt witg common oil put into the ear takes away the
grefe.

Item Betelles that are found in ye dounge of beasts grynded myxt with oil
Roses and the rynde of a Pomegranate, if the oil be put in to the ears, and
the rest being the dreggs be plasterd on, they will take away the payne of the
ear^s.

Item of a stone, Platear.
or a corn fall in to the ear, put into it things that will soften or make
easy, let the patient always lye on that ear, that if it decline or be coming
forthward be ever readi to receive it, if not, let him stop his nostrils and
mouth and provoke himself to snees, if it will not be so nether, apply ventose
unto the ear with fire, then again put into ye ear Turbentine or bird live
upon the end of a stycke, and let it stycke to the ear, yet put it in, and
pull it out again.

The joyce of an onion, with woman's milk doth wonderfully asswadge Isaac.
the grefe,

Dioscor.
The joyce of Betone cast into the ear luke warm, is very profitabl^ against
the payne, deafnes and other impedymentes of the ears.

Item the fat of a Fox doth greatly cure the payne of the ears.

The joyce of bay leaves distellid in to the ears doth not permyt deafnes, nor
other strange sounds to abide in the ears.

Galen.
Oil mingled with cinnamon is ye most soueraignest thing of al that delay
grefe of the ears.

Oil wherein bitter almondes have be stamped, or oil of Juniper, or oil of ye
decoctio of onyons, or of a radyshe, al every of these are good for ears that
have their gr^fe of a cold water.

These ioyc^s kill the worms of ye ears, the joyce of wormwood, and the
eoyce of peach ^eaues, or ye joyce of wyld cucuminer,

Distell into the ear the fat of an Eel with the joyce of an onion ^f
singrene yt grows on tiles, put ^t in luke warm and it takes awai ^he
deafnes,

Likewise the joyce of Isop mixed with oil, Macer.
and blood warm put in^o the ears takes away the pain^ul ache of the ears.

Item a perfume of whote Uyneger doth greatli open the ears and ^oth much good
to the hearing for ^he sharpnes of it. Gilbert.


Item stamp Amptes eggs and ^train them thorough a clothe and ^ut there unto
the joyce of Swines ^rasse or Knotgrasse and dystell it ^nto the ears it
helps lunge conti^ued deafnes. Galen. Diosco


The vryne of a boy poured in ^o the ear dries up the humour of ^he dyseas
and heals it quickly. Stamp onyons comyn with oil and rub the ears lay it
to hot, ^ it will take away ye grefe of ye ears

Plini.
The fat of frogs instilled (...) dropte into the ears takes away tynkling
or sound in them.

Escula.
The fat of a Lyon or of a Fo^ i^ of much valour against the payn^ of the ears
all pains besides.

Plini.
The joyce of creuises myghtly^ healpeth the grefe of the ears.

The ioice of a willow tree leaves pu^ into the ears helps the hurt.

The fat of a Dormous put into the ears helps the grefe thereof.

Constable Macer.
Take of Alume. i. Castoreum. i of salt Peter. i. a half, let the seth in the
best wine that may be gotten, then strain it let the same wine be put into the
ears luke warm.

It wold much healpe to anoynte the out side of the ears to lay it there in
form of a plaster.

The gaul of an hare made hot with the sewet of a Fox and spick^arde heals
deafnes.

Drink a whole mouse stamped and ^yxte with wine and Spiknarde, ^ wonderfully
heals an old con^inued payne of the ears.

For the morphew.
The Causes.
Gross and slymy blood changed (...) white phlegm, or to melancholy.

The Signs.
The skin to be spotted like (...) a Snake.

Remedies. Capi. xiiii.
TO expel or take away the Morphewe or Ringworme ^ixe milk with ye water of
ye inuere ^ernelles of pine apples and with ^e cream yt fliteth above ye warm
^ylke anoint the ryngworme and (...) will heal, it without dout. ^ bathe made
of the chafe of barley ^rotes of the leaves of Mallowes Rogerus.
and wormewod, and after annoyn^ it with this oyntmet. Take bath^ meal and
flower of Fenigreke and Borace, make dust or powder of th^ eyche in like
quantity, and myngl^ it with the joyce of an onion hon^ scummed and clarified
and anoint the place therewith.

Against the Ringwormes or morphewe that hath long reigned upon one, take of
Camphoyre. i. of Borace. ii. of the meal of Ciche peas being tedde. iiii.
mengle them with joyce and honey.

The fat of Lions, smerde over the face with Rose oil kepeth the whytnes.
Plini.


Against the morphew in the face sees a Lacert being grene together with white
wine in oil unto the thryd part, Galen.
strain it, and put thereunto white wax and an noint the place therwyth, this
is proved.

The rote of a little bur sodden in Vinegar and dried over the ringeworme
heals the same.

The same doth the rote of a plantayne stamped with Uyneger salt strained and
after the place with warm Uyneger must be anointed

To put away the wrinkles out of the face and all other grief, stamp the dry
rote of a wildecucummer, sift it and myngle it with water, wash thy face,
wash it again with other cold water, do this for iii. days space, and it
shall have woderfull effect.

To make al the face fair, smere thy face all over with bulls blood it takes
away the bl^myshe in the face, and makes the face fair.

Coluer dounge ground in vyneger and smeared over thy face puts away al
morphewe tawnines this hath ben proved.

A sheep liver fresh killed warm laid to thy face, it makethe a fair
coloured, and amorous face,

For the toth ache.
The Causes.
The ^ynowes being very hot or cold or great quatity of humours, falling from
the head to the gummes.

The Signs.
The payne is known well enough

Remedies. Cap. xv.
IF you wash your mouth ons a month with the wine of the decoction of the
root of Wertworte, Dioscor.
thou shalt be healed of the tooth ache

Salt myxte with dow baked against the fire, and so laid on the tooth
heals the ache perfectly.

In a vehement ache put a little of the joyce of groude Ivy, in thine ear on ye
side as thy ache is, it will a little grieve the, but incontinent thy toth ache
shall cease.

The joyce of yellow flag put in to thine ear is of the same operacio

Put henbane sede upon the coals and receue the smoke thereof into thy teathe by
gaping and and holding thy mouth over it, it kills ye worm and asswagiche
the payne, this hath ben proved.

Anoint thy toth with mary of an horse it hath ben tried yt it doth heal.

The flower or meal of wild popyseed put into the hollow tooth doth quickly
heal.

Item let the mouth be washed with the decoction of our ladies Thistel, it takes
away the payne.

Fill the tooth with a piece of Radyshe rote, dioscor.
or let thy gummes or thy teethe be rubbed therewith it takethe away thy ache.

That thy teeth never ache, take the powder that comes of fylyng of an hearts
horne, and let it seth in water in a new earthen pot and so put it into thy
mouth where thy grefe is

Dios.
Wine or water after (as the cause is) of the decoction of wild Cucummer holden
in thy mouth dryuethe away the payne.

The joyce of Succorye put into the ear or nostrel that is on the contrary
side to the grefe takes away utterly the tooth ache, the stone of a Date
takes away the pains,

Kyr.
Sethe the rind of a mulberry tree rote, in the joyce of a clufter of grapes
unto half, and wash thy mouth therewith, and thy teeth shall never ache.

Rub thy teeth often with a Persenepe root, Macer.
and it shall take awai the worms in them and aching for ever.

Against a strong payne sethe violets in wine hold the in thy mouth

Uyneger wherein the root of Henbane is sodden takes the ache in ye teeth
away, diosco^
if thy mouth be washed therwt and hold a good while therein. Hearts horne
burned till it wax white, Auycen
and beaten fine makes the teeth clean the gumes ceassethe the burning payne
in them.

Stamp two cloves of garlyk^ tie it about thy arm on that side that ye tooth
aketh, Galen.
ne'er to the hand it draueth away al the payne.

Put into the ear of the same side that the teeth ache, Diosc.
the joyce of Bleit and of the leaves of wyld cucumer, it takes away the tooth
ache.

Let thy teeth be washed with the decoction of wild Margeram, Galen. Rogeri^
Constable.
or put into thy tooth a burning stick, for above all herbs, or more then
all herbs the same helpethe the teeth.

Serapine stampte and put into the hollow tooth takes awai yt pains Dios.
thereof.

Galen.
Vinegar of the decoction of Colloquintida, held a good while in the mouth, is a
principal remedy, or if it be sodden in the rind thereof.

Dios.
The milk of wertwort baked with the bran of Corn and put into ye whole of the
tooth breaks the toth.

Fill the hollow tooth with the gum of Ivy it will take away the tooth ache.

Diosc.
Touche the tooth that aketh with the rote of water crowfote, incontinent it
takes the payne away breketh the tooth.

Dios.
Wash thy teeth with the water of the decoction of pomegranates flowers and put
the powder of the said flowers into thy toeth, it doth make the teeth fast and
takes away the ache thereof bi restraining the room.

Make a gargarysme of the decoction of sage, Rue, Pelletory, Isop, black
Ellobor of the rot^ of wild cucummer, the root of Calamyne of the stalk of
Organ, part of it beside, put into the ear on ye side as the ache is of, with
oil.

If the grefe be exceeding painful put thereto Opium temperyd with the yolke of
an egg half sod. There be also which make of ye dregs of oil, the lyknes of
silk thriedes the take the dregs of oil that hath no grounds of Dirt or
sand and sethe it in a caudro of brass till it be thick and then they put it
upon ye teeth yt ache, for it quecheth the pain and he that doth the same with
the joyce of sower grapes till it be like honey put thereof upon the teeth yt be
eaten hollow, it pulls them out by the rote, or else makes a way to the
easier pulling out of them.

If the hollow toth be filled with crows doung it breaks the tothe and
takes away the payne.

Boyle five corns of the seed of Ivy in the rind of a pomegranate with oil of
roses put it to the ear one the right side, and it will take away the pain of
thy teeth on the lift side and so of the contrary part.

The rote of black Henbane mightily heate, it be applied to thy tooth that
aketh and the roots thereof, it will faull out by it self incontinent, but
beware lest it touche other teeth also, for then they will foul out as many as
are touched therewith.

Of the same operation is the herb being rubbed upon the toth

Costan.
Mengle the powder of pelletory callid in Latin Pirethru with the milk of
wertwort and with Galbanum, and lay it on the tooth and it will break, and the
pain shall be taken away thereby.

Rub thy tooth with a root of walwort, it take^h away ye payne thereof.

Dioscor.
Put the joyce of affodyll into the ears, it takes away the payne of thy
teeth on the contrary side, of the same operation is the joyce of succorye,

Sethe the root of henbane in vyneger, which vyneger hold a good while in thy
mouth it takes away the ache of ye teeth.

The joyce of town crosses put in to the ear on yt side yt aketh, takes away
the ache thereof.

Let Isop boyle in vinegar let the tooth be washed therwyth, it take away the
payne thereof quikly.

The root of cynkfoyle or the water of the decoction thereof, put into the
mouth and as it were gargarysed, Dyos.
takes away the ache of ye teeth. A decoction of the leaves of the tree yt is
called of the apothecaries, Tamariscus, helps the toth ache.

Powder made of dogs teeth put in to thy toth doth put away ye tothach The
brain of a partridge put into Sixtus.
the hollow tooth breaks the same takes away the akyng.

Water or wine wherein ye leaves of the damasyne tree or the rynde of ye rote
thereof have be sod, the mouth being often washed therwtal, it fastyneth the
teeth and gumes and kepeth all the whole mouth from al kind of payne.

The joyce of ye rote of dog fenel or of the herb thereof put into the hole
of the tooth will not permyte any worm to live therein.

Rue sod in wine, laid in form of a plaster upon the payne in the gumes by
drieng up the humour it takes away the payne.

Dioscor.
The rote of Sperage stamped and laid unto the tooth yt aketh with wol draws
out the same, without payne.

The leaves of Sage laid unto the tooth yt aketh ^aketh away the ache and
comfort the teeth yt are hurt through cold, that they be no more put in
grefe thereby.

If thou, fill thy teeth that are hollow with pytch of a Cedre tree, it will make
them to break: if you hold it lunge in your mouth it will take the payne away
quyte.

Mastike somewhat mollified with the white of an egg raw applied to the gumes
closes ye choppes of ye gum lips, this hath be proved

The liver of a slelly on laid unto the tooth yt doth ache will appease the ache
incontinent.

Take of Sumache, of okaples, of the berys of the Myrhe tree, of acorns husks,
the seed of myrhe tree the seed of plaintayn of etche. i. of white vitriol of
alume broken in pieces of each. i. and a half. of flowers of Gilofer and of the
seed of Roses of eiche. ii. a half, let them all be stamped together after a
gross manner, and let them sethe in a pot with water, wherein let.xl. yonge
buds of a bramble that bears beryes be put continually to boyle, till half
ye water be consumed, which beyng^ strained and cooled, let the pacyent wash
his mouth with the same very oft, which done let him apply it to the Jaws and
teethe.

Ite take of Camphorie let it sethe in vinegar, a little afterward let the sick
person hold his mouth over it and it shall make the ache to cease.

Myngle mans hear being bret with oil roses, Auycen
and put it into thy ear, the grief of thy tooth shall cease.

Put the powder of red Coral in the hole of thy tothe and it will foul out by
the rote.

Smalladge rote hanged about thy neck doth allay the tooth ache. Put the joyce
of ground Ivy into ye ear of that side that the tooth doth ache, Auicen
it is of wonderful effect.

If thy teeth be oft washed with the decoction of the rind of our lades
thistel root, thy teeth shall be fastynned thereby, and thy gumes graven about
will be made whole.

The Decoction of Pomegranate flowers or the powder of them, being laid thereon
doth the same.

The powder of coral being laid thereon also is most pryncypall in comforting
the gumes. Auicen.


Masticke chewed with wine in a mans mouth, Peter. Lu.
takes awai the tooth ache.

The root of Horehound drunk or chewed of a man fasting doth quickly heal
the ache of the teeth.

Strawbery leaves chewed, in continent takethe away the tooth ache, is is a
sure and tried experynt.

Light a sharpe stick of ash and while it burns put into the hollow tooth
first filled with triacle it is much proved.

The body and fatness of a Frog applied, doth make an easy means to pull out
the teeth, therefore do y^ teeth of living beasts that take ^ eat them,
quickly foul.

(...).
Let the gumes be rubbed with the ashes of a Delphin tooth, the teeth are there by
greatly helped, or if they be touched only with the tooth it self.

The rote of mouse ear, put in ye hollowness of the tooth takes awai the tooth
ache, this hath be proved.

Stap the inner rotes of nut trees mix it with oil, put the ioice into ye ear
on ye cotrari part yt ye teeth ak^ he shall be delivered out of pains. Let the
skin of a serpet be sod in Vinegar hold the same Uyneger a good while in
your mouth. Constable. Galen,


Peter. Lu.
Sup up (so that there be nothing thereof swallowed but gargarased) a cup full
(at times one upon another) of the joyce of yarow fasting thou shalt be rid of
thy tooth ache there by.

Sees the scrapinges of ye rote of a mulberry tree in wine, which wine ^old in
thy mouth it cease ye grefe ^ncontynent.

Of the same operation is wine of ^he decoction of yuy rotes. Galen.


If you take one corn of Salt wrap it in fair whyt cobweb put ^t into thy
hollow tooth it will heal ^t. Richardus


For bledynge at the nose.
The Causes.
A vain or arteri opened or bro^en within the nose with great abu^ance of
blod, or to much labourig.

The Signs.
To blede at the nose.

Remedies. Cap. xvi.
THe joyce of hogs dounge cast into the nostrils doth ^estrayne the blood.
Constable


Beware that nothing bind the body harde, as thy girdle or such like, and
hold thy hadful of shepa^ders purse and st^dfastli loke up to the soon, it
stauncheth bledyng, this is proved.

Like is said of veruen.

Lay the joyce of night shade against the liver if it run out of the right
nostrell, if not upon the spleen, it stauncheth the blood.

Diosco.
The flower of a bean the over skine pulled of, put into ye nostriles
stauncheth blood, if it be a wound.

The half of a bean laid upon a wound closes up the wound and restrayneth
ye blood, especially where horesleches hau ben, this hath ben prou^d.

Cold stones laid upon the veins of the temples and hard holden thereon,
restrain the blood.

The joyce of R^e put into the nostrils restrayneth the blood. Dios.


The joyce of a nettle put into the nostrils makes ye blood to flow,
Dioscor.
but being anointed on the forehed makes the same to stop.

Yarowe smelled unto, or being ^rok restrains blood, yet put into ^he
nostrils, makes it to bleed.

Item the stone Iaspis burnyd ^nd applied, stauncheth blood. Lapida


The ashes of the rote of rue, blown into the nostrils doth won^erfully
stanch the blood.

The very blood it self burnt and made to powder, blow up into ye ^ose, doth
wonderfully stanch ye ^loud, and close up wounds: if the ^loud run from
the left nostrell ^ut a ventose upon the spleen, if fro ^he right upon the
liver.

If it be a woman after the same ^aner lay it on her teat.

If a woman blede put flax in ye white ^f an egg apply it to her teat, on that
part as the nose bledyth, or with the joyce of night shaede.

Item make a plaster of potters clay, vinegar the white of an egg^ and apply
it to thy codds it is good and hath ben proved,

Galen
Let the person which bledyth ly^ up right let his own water being cold be
dropped on his face with vyneger.

If the hears of an Hare be put into the Uyneger and water, and be put into
it, is wonderful good.

The blood of a Cow laid upon the wound doth stanch the blod incontenent,
but I say it is of more valour being burned.

The ashes of a Cowes horne, cast into the wound doth quyckelye restreyne it.

Powder made of ink, and layd^ upon the wound with ashes of a Fern rote,
stach^th the blood and heals the wound.

The ashes of a Frog burned in a well closyd pot, Richardus
stancheth all bleding though it be of wouds, it closes up the veins and
arteries and healyth burninges,

The blood of a Thrush, a partridge, a dove, and a turtle dove, Auicen.
put into the wound stops the blood wounderfully.

The urine of a man made in form of a plaster, and aplied with the ashes of a
vine, stanchyth bledinge.

Chawe the rote of a nettle until you may swallow it, Pet. Luc^a
and without doubt the blood will stanch.

Chawe the same till you may swallow it, but in no wise swallow it, than will
it stanch, for if a ma kep^ it in his mouth he can less no blood.

The powder of the scrapynge of a caudron or a fryeng pan Stamped and mengl^d
with the joyce of a netle, put into the nostrils doth stanch the blood
incontinent, this hath ben provide.

Cons^
Plaster burnt and stamped with hares hears and made in a plaster with the
white of an egg stacheth blood if it be in an artery or vain

A certain herb that his comonlye called Torch or moleyne stapt and laid
upon the branches of the teates, doth stop the bledynge of any place.

Plini.
The ashes of a burnt Frog applied to ye place that bledith, doth stanch it
in continent.

The Fresh dounge of a bore is a chief Remedy against bledynge at the nose as
I find in the book of natures of things.

The joyce of an assys dounge dropped into the nostrils or into woudes, stancheth
the blood though it be of a vein or artery that is woundyde of the same.

Five leaved Grass drunk, and anointed in the nostrils, Diosco.
stancheth blood*

The ashes of Hens Feathers snouft up into the nostrils, stanceth blood.

The joyce of violet roots, gargarised in your mouth, throat, Mace^
and swallowed stancheth oft times bledynge at the nose incontinent.

The powder of a nettle snuffed into the nostrils, Galen.
will stanch blood incotinent.

Item stamp earth worms with white frankincense and the white of an egg it is
good.

Prymrose leaves stamped and laid in the place that bledeth, stanchithe the
blood.

Put into thy nostrils ye rind of wodbinde, and the scrapynges of a Radyshe, it
is good. An onion only put into the nose is good also.

If a vein be broken within let the patient drink Pepper the sede of Town
Crosses. Take one pa^te of Terrasygyllata, and an other of the gum called
Sa^asenicum, an other part of Draganc^, stamp it with wine that is old, make
pills and give the patient to drink.

Here unto sethe Goats mylk. with dragance and use it one day for an electuarye.

Mengle potters clay with Rose water and vinegar and make a plaster and aplye
it, the blood thereby shall be stanched.

Take Confery and Terra Sigillata of each like much, make a powder and
minister it with rain water three days, this hath ben prouid.

Rycha^.
The hears of an Hare chopte small myxt with the white of an Egg, and laid
upon the place that bledyth tak^th away al flowing of blood.

For the Palsy.
The Causes.
Gross humours flowing to the synowes.

The Signs.
That the meb^r hath lost both s^nce and mocyon.

Remedies. Capi. xvii.
PArali^is is a sickness called the Palsy: wherein ether al the body or one
member or many mebres be mortified and be depryued of feeling and moving, it
happenith ether of an impostume stopping the rotes of the sinews, yt they
being depriued of y^ lively spirits which serve for them be come dead, or else
of the Fleumatyke humour gross^ and vndigested which stoppith the said places
some time of a stroke or foul, whereby the joints of the back bone are loused
and the synowes which come from the neck or nape of the head, are stopped other
while the synowes and the rotes of them hu^te with a bruyse engenders the
palsy, specially in a old man.

Lapida.
If the tongue be sodely wrythed through cold, make a whote gargarysme of the
wine of Decoction of Sage, Rue pellytory, it is very good.

Put these pylles in thy mouth, and under thy tongue.

Take of Castoreum, of Pellytory, of Pyonye roots, of each like much make
pylles with Triakell it is very good.

Anoynte the patient without with oil benedicte or the oyntmet called
Martiaton, with castoreu these be very good in al palsis of a cold cause.

Rue, Pellitory, Sage* Cinnamon, Mustard, salt, let them all boyle to gether in
oil to ha^f, and anoint ye patient therwyth it is very good.

Take a dead earth worm, make a ster and lay it upon the hinder par^ of the
head where it rises with pyche wax old oil, Bears suet, coluer dounge,
quick lyme mans, ordure Castoreum, Pellitory.

If thou stamp a sylke worm, make a plaster and lay it in the nape of the
neck, because lightly the disease rises there, if it rise in another place
put it there, and not upon the hurt member.

If the tongue or throat be in flam^d draw thereon a Saphyre, upon the grefe for
it takes away ye swellynge.

Against al grefes in the flap being in the mouth which covers the wind
pipe.
The Causes.
The recourse of humours from the head to that place,

The S^gnes.
Great difficulty in swalowyng his meat redness and swellynge.

Remedies. Capi. xviii.
FOr dyseases in the mouth especially in the little flap whicouerith the
wyndpipe called Uvula, some call it Co^umella that is a little flap, it is
ryghtlye a little piece of flesh hanging in the roufe of ons mouth which sometime
swells and greuyth one very mouche.

If the piece of flesh be to lunge hanging, make a ointment if it be so
requesite, and afterward make a gargarisme with the water of ye decoction of
Pomegranate flowers, Vinegar, the husks of acornes and such like, make a powder
of pepper, and the joyce of flows and put it to the piece of flesh with thy
thumb.

Fill a shell an inch thick with piche, Galbanu, Opoponaxe, Calaminte, and
aplye it to the nape of ye neck beneth the no^, it greatly helps the grefe,
of Unula by drawe^ng it, and better it were if a another part like wise were put
in the crown of the head being shaven, the^e i^* have I proved. Lay a whole
egg well sodden and the shell pylled of somewhat bruised unto ye crown of the
head.

Mengle Gum, Rue, Musterdsede, Frankencens, Pyche Oppoponaxe, Galbanum and
Calamente, let them be applied in a grievous sickness.

A cautery with Gold is the best remedy.

The ashes of Coleworte Rotes burnt, Diosco
put with ons finger to the flape, doth ease it by drieng up y^ humours.

Pulioll royal warmed in Uyneger given to drink and applied to the nostrils
doth quickly Restore speech suddenly lost. Macer.


Of the Squinancy.
light wheat somewhat moist with Uineg^r wherein fy^st Rue hath bi^ sodden,
the^ open thy mouth to su^ the it restores wonderfully ye speech being lost.

Dioscor.
The ashes of anyse rote dries up helps the dyseas of the mouth and the flap
if it be swollen.

Let the rote of Saledyne stampte sethe in wine, whereof a Gargarysme made
healith the swelling in ye mouth and purges the head.

Gilbert.
A plast^r made of dogs turd mans ordure and the gall of a bull is very good.

Make a gargarisene with the decoction of dried Figs, and dogg^s turd it
doth quickly open ye apostume.

I have harde many expert men sa^ yt Uerue stamped and laid to whote as a
plaster, hath healed oftentimes the squinanci.

Dioscorydes says that Ueruen ^onde to the swellinges doth open ^hem, heal
them, and sparse them.

The flower of Ox eye contynuallye eaten, Dysco.
never will suffer the ^quinanci to rise or grow.

The earth of a Swallows nest ^ade in a plaster takes away the ^wellyng of
the Jaws and t^ares. Auicen.


The flowers of Pomegranate Camphore made to powder is a ^lessed medicine to
heal the swel^ing in the throat.

Gaules with salt Ammoniake are good therefore.

This hath ben proved, take of the ^eed of Roses a pound a half, of ye ^oyce of
goats beard. iii. sethe the ^n wine and make a Gargarisme.

Against a dangerous squinacy ^urne old swallows in a new ear^hen pot,
Galen.
mengle the powder thereof with honey, and with a quyl put ^t down into thy
^hrote.

In the danger he^of t^ke away ye blood with ventosis applied betwyne y^ sho^ders
of ye paciet, it doth much dymynishe the matter and drawyth it to the contrary
part.

Gerard.
Wrap al the throat on the utter part, with wolle depte in the decoction of Isop
and oil olyue.

Con^t.
Dyp a sylken thread in a mouse blou^, so let that thread dipped in ye mouse
blood be swallowed of the patient, it is ^ery good.

The ordur of an infant, of a ma in l^ke ^ase being dried mengled with honey,
healyth the squinanci.

Let the^e be made a plaster of the fresh ordure of a man, applied outward, with
leven, gum of trees, and the ashes of burnt Time* the fat of a hedgehog,
this doth rypen and draw out yt matter, warily breketh the aposteme: beware yt
you use out wardly no ^epercussy^es, but dyssoluyng, drawing ^yping medices.

Scabiouse gargarised and drunk, or made in form of a plaster, healith the
squinanci yt is past hope of healing, this is of certeyn^e

Item in the mouth of the patient being open, put a stick, as a gag and
mark well the place of the aposteme and prycke it with a sharpe stycke, there
is nothing of like efficacy, for many Authors have oftentimes proved the
same.

To heal the disease of the mouth in the Unula, put fine Salt in a cloth and
bind it to the kerneles of the neck it is very good.

Against horsnesse and cough

The Causes
The cough comes of superfluouse humours coming from the head or of cold,
dust, smoke, and such like horsnesse is when the humour falls into the wynd
pipe.

The Signs.
To cough or to be horse.

Remedies. Capi. xx.
THe gum that is of the che^ trees dyssoluyd with old wine, and give to sup
up, doth very well ease the sharpe Arteries of ye breast.

Diosco,
Rostyd Fylberdes or hasel nuts stamped and ministered with honi heals the
grefe of a lunge continued cough.

Against a continued and dangerous dropping of the room, and against the
vlceracion of the liver, apply unto the head being shave: mustard seed, the
skin shall be exasperate and the room dried.

Sees Bay beryes in water and the smoke thereof receyuid at ye nost^ylles and
ears, will thoroughly dri up the room.

Take ye fume of Laudanum and Frankincense, cast upon who^e coals, nothing
dries better ye room and conforteth the brain.

Assafetida taken with a reere egg in the evening opens the stoppynges of
the lever that comethe of gross and fleymy humours, Cons^;
and helpyth them that be short brethed.

Item lye made of the ashes of a great oak opens mightily the stoppynge of
the lever, Dioscor.
chefely that which comes or engenders of any venemouse matter, by
dyssoluing and cosuming the superfluous humours The lights of a fox is very
good for short and painful drawing of breathe and to all strayghtnes of ^
liver. Sixtus.


The tongue of a Rame eaten ofttymes is good wholesome therefore. Galen.


The powder of a dogs tord sprekled on a felt of hear or cloth dipped in
honey, Galen.
and old grease made and applied to the breast or neck of the diseased
heals the squinaci.

Put mustersed in dry Figs, and give th^ patient them to eat in the euenyng^
it do^h di^olue the gross humour and op^nyth the stoppynge of the lights, and
also the condites of breathing.

The Smoke of Arsenicke receiuid by the mouth helps them that have great
pains to take there breath.

Against spyttynge of blood.
The Causes
A Strype, great cryenge, hot room, repletyon, or great dryn^sse.

The Signs be plain enough.

Remedi^s. Capi. xxi.
WHen a man spits or vomyttith blood, Gale^.
give him to drink ye joyce of Knotgrasse and it shall cease in continent, it
was provide.

The grease of a Hen, a Gose a Pygge, and a Duck, the Mary of an Ox, fresh
butter, Oil of Uyolettes, of each a like much, mengle them all to gether and
melt them, and put there unto wh^te Wax, Gum Arabycke Dragons so that it
be like an ointment but first lay Tow upon the breast of the pacyent, dypte
in the Decocty^ion of great Mallowes, and keep it there vn^yll he sweat, than
let the breast he anoyntid with this ointment, and lay above the same a Fox
skin, or else another like thing warm nothing helps more outwardly than
th^s.

Sethe dry Figs in white wine or in claret, Dios.
but first fill the figs with musterd seed, and let him drink the wine every
night when he hath eaten the figs, it opens all stoppynges of the lever so
that he may breath at his will.

Gum of a Peach tree give to him that rechit or spits blood, helps
greatly and opens the inward clawesures of the breast and purgethe the
inwards of the lunges.

The powder of dry mulberyes is ye chefest remedi, for them ye spit blood A
Sirupe for them that can scantli take there breath, take the joyce of the rote of
sweet br^r, young Time, bo^e Armyniacke, ye joyce of flows white coral, and the
powder of Rue, folefote, or mynts, the ryndes of pomegranates, okeaples, gum
of Arabic* Dragance, Camfery, Knotgrasse of the seed of Rybwort, of Manna,
Sumach, dragos blood, of blood wort, of each of these.. ix. and of Sugar take
four pound, then make a syrupe of ribwort and give it with the decoctyon of
quinces, lentyles, and meddlers this is very good against the body flux,
vomytinge and such like.

Englyshe time, and venician time stamped them to gether and boil them in
seething water, Dyos.
let it be set aside a day a night in a pot well closyd that the smoke may not
breathe out, let it be strained put melroset thereunto and being scommed of, let
it be given to the patient in ye going to bed it healyth the stoppinges of the
coundytes of them which be short breathed.

Almondes given to them that spyt blood is a singular help.

The rote of dragance or serpentine with claryfyed honey cleanses humours out of
the breast, Macer.
so that yt shall never return or engendure again.

Of the sudden losing of stregh and debility of the vital spi^ites.
The Causes.
It comes of all great euacuatyons, as losing of blood, great laxes,
vehement mocyon, swe^inge overmuch, sorrow, fear and of the intemperance of
the heart, but the author touches that alonly which comes of euacuacyons.

The Signs.
To lose all the strength suddenly with cold of the extreme parts, swetinge
in the face, with despair and great pains.

Remedies. Capi. xxii.
SEthe a Hene in a pot well closed on every side till you perceive ye tow parts
are consumed the take it forth apply ye hen cut in pieces to the patients
nostrils give him the broth to drink thereof, add to the same Hene, mastike,
cubebes, Basyll. An^hos and such which comfort the heart, The milk of a
bitch is very g^od. Petrus*


Give the pacyent this p^ast^r following, take the scraping of gold i. magarites
of both ^ortes. i. of mastike. ii. of cubebes of spodiu of the scrapinge of
Ivory, the bone of an hearts heart, of burnt Sylke, of ros^s of each. ii, of
white and red coral of each. i. of cloves i of sugar two pound of musk of
a^b^r of each.i. make a plaster or a powder thereof it doth wonderfully comfort
in all kind syncop^, if it be of to much sweat or heat^, give unto the
patient Sugar of rosys with cold water sprynkle on him some rose water, ^oral
doth greatly comfort the heart Macer.


th^ wod of aloes, musk, amber, mastike, such like do comfort ye heart
renewyng ye liuelines of ye spirits, and natural heate.

Margarites, coral, the scrapinge of Ivory, the bone in the harts her^ Gold,
Silver, Hellebore and other such like do strengthen the vital spirytes by
puryfyeng the blood in the body and by altering the unnatural heate.

Treakel in al causes, the root of affodile having in it the virtue to
quicken and to strengthen, doth cheryshe the hart by defending it from poison
and keeping it in strength.

Of yeskyng and lothynge,
The Causes.
Yelking comes either by lack of meat and great euacuatyon, or of corruptyon
of the meat great quantity of sharp humours, loathing comes of much corrupt
meat or sum gross and sharp humour.

The signs be evident.

Remedies. Capi. xxiii.
ANyse seed dried smelled unto takes away yeskyng and loathing. Dyosco.


Betony myxte with honey and after a sort mynystred, Macer.
makes good digestion afterward it is good to purge, Dioscor.
the same also taken takes a way vomyttyng.

Endyue made in a plastar and applied to the stomach, Isaac.
doth comfort the same wonderfully, the same takes away the pain of the
stomach and the cough, also short breath. Macer.


Wild Margeram drunk with warm water takes away the gnawyng of the stomach
incontenetly.

Gum of a cheri tree dyssolued with wine and given to drink takethe away the
lothesomnes of a weak bealkyng stomach,

Water of the decotion of Opium, with water and honey takes away the belkyng of
the stomach.

Watercrowefote stamped with Isac.
cremmes of bread a plaster made thereof takes away the heate of the s^omake.

Dyos.
Coral stamped and drunk with water, ape^ith for ever the grefe of ye stomach
and bel^.

Auycen.
Stamp pomegranates ^ole with the rynd, and tak^ a pound of honi let them boyle
tog^ther till the be thecke, give thereof a quantite unto the pacyent fasting
with cold water, it restorith the appetite very well.

Isaac.
The joyce of pomegranates taken and made in a plaster with barlye bran, and
applied on the mouth takes away the gnawinge about^ ye heart and stomach.

Ue^uen b^ynge eaten doth wonderfully styre up the app^tyte it has ben
provide.

(...). His.
Th^ joyce of w^lworte ministered ix. days with honey, tak^th way the swelling
of the stomach and losith the belly.

The rotes of mugworte, and Fenel, and the leues of Wormod stape to gether give
to ye pacyent to drike with warm water and honey, provoke vomyting
incontinent.

Masticke baterid with white of an egg, and vinegar applied unto the spoon of
the stomach, Dioscor.
it comfortethe the stomach immediately, and restreineth vomyttynge* zedwary,
chawed of the patient fasting and swallowed down takes a way the grefe of
the belly.

Aloes helps the stomach above all other medicines. Dioscor.


Against ye payne of ye stomach of a cold cause, stamped english Galengal, and
let it boyle in oil and so be plastred on the mouth of the stomach, it is a
pryncypall remedy.

Make a plaster of.iiii. or Olybanum and.iii. of wa^, and. a half of cloves.
Calaminte tak^n Neppe with wine takes away the payne of the stomach.

Water Roses, stamped and drunk with wine, do greatly restreine vomyttyng.

Against over much vomyttynge and flux of the belly, Galen,
boyle cominin Uyneger let the pacyent drink the vyneger or eat the comyn.

Boyle Frankincense and joyce of myntes and a little Uyneger to gether and make
a plaster thereof and bind it to the spoon of the stomach.

Stamp of masticke of Comin, of Bay beries of each. i. mynglid with joyce of
rue, aplye the same with tow upon the the stomach it hath a wonderfully
operation.

Of the pains in the lights.
The Causes.
Great heate or dryness, much drinking of wine, eating of salt meates, or
room.

The Signs.
Pains in the lift side with coug^inge and difficulty of brethinge.

Remedies. Capi. xxiiii.
THe grefe thereof that comes by crying, by smoke, bi dust and by heate, is
easily curyed, if you give the pacyent when he goes to bed cold water to drink
wherein licoris hath bin sodden, and therein put sugar candye, in the morning
when he rises give him a little morsel of bread dypt in the same water it shall
slake his thyrste of the same operation is clear water.

These pylles are very good for ye same take of Gum Arabic, dragance of
every one. ii. of Frankesece. i a half make th^m up with honey.

Against the Pleurysy.
The Causes.
Great qantitie of hot blood having recourse to ye thine skin which is about
the rybbes.

The Sygne^.
Difficulty of breathynge, the cough, great pains and prycking in the side
with a sore fever.

R^medies. Capi. xxv.
Against the Pleurisy the best counsel is to cut a vain of the contrary side
to the dyssease, after full rypyng it ought to be on the same side, for in the
beginning the influence of the matter is to be turned on the cotraripart after
the first phelebothomy thou must use hot r^percussiue medicenes that the out
ward pa^tyes of the body may be comfortyd and the matter goo away, if in
dede there be any suspicion of cold matter, use partly rer^percussyue medicenes
partly euaporatine cofortatiue maturatiue among all which the best is a
bleder full of the decoction of Camomyll, Honey, and Fenegreke and such lyk^.

In a hot Pleurysye never make euaporations, for then aft^r must you make the
sorer attractions because that layeng to of things euaporatynge, wo^keth only
the increase of payne, for all medecynes euaporatynge and draw frome the
inward part by subtyllynge the humore and increasyth Room by opening the
ways, use therefore Maturatiues Ingrossatyues, and Diuisiues, as these
following, Root of Holyhoke, dry Lyquyrys, rise, the Milk or joyce of Wheat
steyped in water a certain day^s, Lynesede, Fenigreke, Fleworte, Peas,
Barlye, and such like the seed of Maiden hear, Endyue with Popis^d myxt with
warm things I have receuyd this knowledge of a certain man worthy credyte,
yt this is a most sure remedy and with out danger because it makes the cause
and humour of the pleurify to come forth.

Stamp the rote of Scabiouse half a pound of red coral.ii. ounces of sugar,
and make a syroup, when the decoction shall be gynne to be almost enough put
into ye same a pound a half, of the joyce of scabiouse of ye powder of coral
asmoch let it be straygned, and give thereof a good draught to the pacyet it
breketh and openethe the aposteme incontenent and clesith it by spitting.

Stamp a cluster of dry figs, with suet or oil of gum, make a plaster
thereof, is of a wounderful efficacy.

Make a plaster of the root of holyhoke and fenigreke, with bran of Hempsede
and butter.

Make a good plaster of the bran of Fenigreke and linesede, and whet, and of
leuin, make bread with butter and aplye the same hot.

Boyle the bran of fenigreke lyneseed in oil of violetes and butter myngle
them with mallowes dyssolued, Plini.
and with fresh hogs grese hete al to gether, and make a plasture of it being
hot, and renew it often.

Dyp wol in the decoction of holyhoke and butter, and let thy side be wrapped
often therwyth.

Mengle well leuenyd bread with butter, and with the decoction of holyhoke, and
oil of bays given to the patient part thereof to eat, and after make a
plaster and lay it unto the apostume behind and before, and thou shalt find
a wonderful cure.

Rue drunk healyth the pleurysie quickly. Diosco.


The dounge of a bore with water is a synguler help to those that spit
blood.

To be laxatyue, or against costyuenesse.
The Causes.
Immoderate excercyse, or lack thereof, with vsynge of restryctyue meates.

The Signs.
To be costive and have no seg^,

Remedies. Capi xxvi.
G^len
TO louse the belie, mengle ye gaul of a Bull* Aloe, Saltg^me, and oil together,
anoynte fouo^met, within a momet it prouok^th a man to the stool, sowebrede
rote stampte and laid to the nauil and t^e belly of the patient moves Flux.

Diosco.
The joyce hereof laid to with sylke very well purges the belly.

Sweet Cherries eaten in a morning fasting with the kernelles do provoke the belly
so myghtely, Dioosc.
that the fete b^ynge sore by some infirmity, shall be healed thereby.

Collyquintida myxt with honey bulls gaul, and applied to the belly doth lose
the same.

One pyll here of taken and eaten doth in contenent move the belly, it hath bin
prouid.

Take wolle or sylke dypte in the joyce of sowbread rote, and in wine use it
for a subpositorye.

Mallowe root stampte first and sod mengled with old hogs greas a little bra
put there unto applied to the stomach mouyth the belly.

Walworte rote or the joyce of the midell rynde of an elder tree myxte with fat
of a mouse and laid under ye nauil, moves ye belly to be laxative. a
suppositori mad of hard soap an^ited with butter a little salgeme sprinkled thero
or else gum, loses ye beli. Malows mercuri sode with hogs suet eaten, cause a
wholesome stole. Take of nesyng powder, of black hellebor, hermodactile, brioni,
spourge, of Henbane, of the great Galingal, of singrene, ye joyce of
coliquintida, of Aloe of each like portion, when you will have a laxe, anoynte
the plants of your fete: and if thou will vomyt, anoynte the palm of thy
hands, and when thou wilt bind thy self again wash thy hades, or anoynte
them with Martiaton.

One corn of Comonbaysalt, being put into the fond^ment, doth incontenent
move the to the stool.

Stamp Sauyne well sodden first, with hogs suet, and stamp them both in
the water thereof, and make an ointment and anoint the nauyll.

Mengle bulls gaul, Aloe, salgeme and oil together, and anoint therwyth
within the mouth of the fundament it provokes flux of ye belly in contenent:

After the same manner the gaul of a bull bound to the nauil with tow provokes
to the stole. Of the same operation is oil of baize.

The whaye of milk doth work after like sort. Isa^*


The joyce of walwort rote, and of the myddel ^inde thereof, of an elder tree
root, of wyld cucummer, of the root of both ellebores, of the joyce of
Wertwort, of spurge rote, of malow rote, of Mercury, of the rote of such Fern
as growethe upon the wall let them boyle together, with butter and oil, after
put therinto Wax, therewyth anoynte thy nauyll and it shall lose quickly thy
belly, specially if thou add thereto scamony, the herb called spurge anoxe
gaul, this hath ben provide, nether is there any other medicine like unto this.

If also thou make hereof a suppository it will lose the quickly,

Take butter, Alume, plume salgeme, make a ointment, anoynte the ^undament,
deeply it lousith incontinent.

Galen.
Mengle the joyce of hellebore with course bran or meal from the mylstone, and
put a little butter thereto, and if you would purge upward, put it upon the
stomach, if downward, upon the navel.

The water of the decotion of an old Cock loses the belly.

Against the flux.
The Causes.
Eating of fruit, great cold or heate, and chiefly of ulcers in the bowels
with receiving of laxative medecynes.

The Signs.
To go to the stole very oft or to have to many sedges.

Remedies. Cap. xxvii.
A Dogs tord, that only eatith bones doth bind y^ belly myghtyly. Auyce^


Cryakle is very good for all fluxes.. Auice^.


Roast Popy, and Myll^t and l^t them afterward bestapt and make a broth thereof
with cow^s milk, or gotes milk well soden, and with the fat of the reins of
a Goat, for the flesh thereof is a great bynder.

Almondes blaunchid and sodden with honey, till they be black, and let them be
eaten fasting it restraynith the flux of ye belly wond^rfully but yet much
more if they be not blaunchyd.

Make bread of the first grounded meal, after the peckynge of the mill eat
it it is named for a principal remedy.

Abath of ye decoction of ye midel rid of an oak, doth greatly bind ^ belly.
Dios.


Take eat. S. Ihons herb it is a very strong help against the flux of the
belly.

Auycen
Opium used in suppositories doth restrain the flux.

There is a wounderfull property in rewebarbe in restraining the softenes of
the belly.

Galen.
Milk wherein a goats mydryfe hath be sod, doth greatli restrain the belly.

The decoction of the rote of the herb called in Englyshe Ueruen, mallow, if
it be drunk, doth sodely help the softenes of the belly.

Auicen. Galen
Old chese much tosted and dried if the pacyent take thereof. i. it is stronger
then any thing else.

Auicen.
Water of the decoctyon thereof is very good.

The matter ought to be removed and cleansed with myrabolanes, somewhat dried and
myxt with rose water after as the matter requires after the workynge of the
medicine, give the pacyent fasting such an electuary, with rose water or with
ye decoctyon of sumach.

Take of Cassiafistula and of masticke of each. i. ypoquistidos, Acatia,
spodium, Cubebes, Ana. i. of Smalage.. and a half, ye scrapyng of old chese
sod in Vinegar. ii. let them be made up in a lectuary with water of Sumache, of
Sugar a pound, let the patient eat Barlye bread, or millet, or else Turki
wheat minglid with water.

Beans sod in Ueniger and eaten, Dios.
or used as a plaster, do greatly withhold Laxatyon.

Likewise Peers and Cheris sodden in vinegar, and given to drink with mastike
doth greatly bind.

Styll water of the leaves of an oak as you do of Rose leaves, the same water
drunk doth bind also.

A pine apple without kernels if it be dipped and suppled in Scamonye and
afterward part thereof laid on hot burning coals, and be received v^ through
a close stoule, it doth wounderfully bind and takes away the disease called
Tenasmus, which is a desire to go to the stole and yet may do nothing, with
burning and some time a bloody sege, it conforteth also those members,
restrayneth the humours.

The powder of the pitch called Colophonia or greca, Gilbert,
and the flouers of Pomegranates, Acacia, let the be vsid in susfumigacions they
bind myghtily.

Fleworte sede roasted with an egg and stamped and so given to drink with wine,
doth bind harde.

Diosco
The sede of Corader drunk doth greatly bind the belly.

Resolve coluerdounge in water of the decoctione of Fleworte or salowe tree,
and let thy fete be washed therwyth it is wonderful in operation, and true.

The decoction of Acorn rindes myghtyly binds the belly of a ma,

Wine or water of the decoctyon of Saynct Iohns herb, is a most mighty help
against the laxe and all Flux of the Belly, and of blood, or if the herb it
self be drunk.

Take of Opium, Frankencece Myrhe of each like much, mengle them together, and
butter them with the white of an Egg and make a supposytorye, and tie it with a
thread that it may the more easily come forth, it mightylye restraynethe the
Flux of the belly and bryngethe sleep on the party immediately.

Make a suppository of Acacia, Ipoquistides joyce of black Popy myxt with
pytche of greece, it binds mightily.

A great ventose said upon the belie and remaining there.iiii. hours takes
away al losenes of the belly. Auicen


Water wherein pears hath be sodden, is very good against ye flux of the belly.

Dioscor.
The ashes of a fig tree braunchis temperid with water, causes ye laxe to
stop.

Fill a pot with water of roses, put eight cloves therein mastike, let the pot
boyle with scalding lycour and let the water be take for drink it is exceeding
good to scour the filthy of the inner parts engendered of sharpe matter
chiefly of Scammonye.

Gum of the Peach tree is good to bind.

A catia given to drink or put into the foundamet especially used in a
suppository with opium binds vehemently.

The joyce of sanicle the less binds all losenes of the belly.

The stalk of a Coleworte roasted in embers, Diosc.
and eaten restranyth much flux of the belly.

The flouers of Colewortes give twice a day with old wine, heals the
laxatyne lowsnes.

Sethe Horehounde in wine and oil, and being stamped make a plaster thereof,
and apply it upon the share.

The Rennet of a Kyd or a Leuerete is after one manner available tempered and
given with the joyce of Platyne it bind^th incontinent. Galen.
Ite for a flux of matter cleanynge to the inner parts or stomach of a man,
make thin fine cakes, bake them and let the pacyent eat them, myxte thereto
Terebetine it draws with it slymy matter.

The lever of any best sodden in vinegar and eaten doth myghtyly restrain
blood and bind the belly. Peter. Lu.


The powder of a marbul mingled with the white of an Egg and sodden in wine
and so eaten, is a mighty binder.

Item powder made of the maw of an Ox given in drink or meat doth
wonderfully bind the losenes of the belly.

A certain Physician healid al his pacyentes with the same one medicine.

Myngle bran made of dried service or quike berys with honey and the white of
an egg, let it be sodden on the coals, and give it the paciete fastinge, or
else raw put it in by a clister, it mightylye binds.

Fill a hen with sumache and ypoquistidos and such like, and let her sethe
well, and drink the potage and eat the flesh ^f it be a lunge continued
disease, it doth comfort and bind much.

Dioscor.
Item sodden milk drunk or used for a clyster, doth bind the belly, and heleth
meru^lously well the corrosyons of ^he inner parts, and specially gotes milk
or asses milk

Above al things the best is cows milk sodden with an iron or a stone, and
above al suetes bears suet is best worth in this cause.

Item take Bramble berys, and sethe them in the water of the decoctyon of
gladin, which being administried is a good remedy and help, for him yt hath
the Flux, if it be with out an agewe but if it be wi^h an agewe let him be
bathyd in the water of the deco^tion of gladin, or wypt over with a clothe wet
therein.

Item powder of roses doth bind the lousenes of the belly. dioscor.


Tryfera the great, mynystred with an onion* heals utterly al Laxes and
r^straynythe vomyttynge.

For the flux when the mete comes Galen.
forth as it was eaten overmuch solublenes, make this throughli approved
plaster, take sower and wild apples roast them, make a plaster lay upon the
reins and navel, and when it is cold renew it and put a hoot one in the
place, do this often till you be healed, it quickly helps those that are past
help.

Mengle the joyce of a Pigs head with Rosyn, and lay it upon a hot Tile,
and let the patient take the smoke thereof fro beneth, three or fouer times,
this hath ben approuyd, and it is true.

Seth Quynces made clean with in and without and Okeaples, and Cinnamon
together, and put to the decoctyon sugar, and give of ye three in three nights
and the patient shall be healyd.

Sauery tempered with the joyce of Plantayne leaves is very wholesome herefore.

Take the flowers and ryndes of pomegranates, okaples, Acacia sumache, Saffron
cubibes, opium, make pills thereof with the joyce of Rue, as you will and give,
v. or seven of them to the pacyent going to bed.

Take of myrhe, of opium, Acacia of Prunes storax of each. i. of frakencense,
of masticke of each. ii. of lavender gentle.. a half, mengle it with the joyce
of the Tops of brambles or of Rybwort, make pills and give the pacyent.v
or.vii. it hath wonderful effects withal.

One knot of Mollen rote given to drink, doth bind the lousnes of the belly.

The root of Five leaved grass is very profitable against the flux of the
belly. Dioscor.


Let the patient receive from under a close stoule or such like, the smoke of
a rusti iron burning, hot quenchid in veniger.

Item fine cakes fried with lard and wax, and so eaten do greatly bind the
belly.

Give to the patient wine with a soft egg and salt to drink fasting and let
him tarry fasting a good while after, and on the morrow give him the second
time likewise, and he shall be healed.

Item milk sodden, with myxt Staphisagre and drunk is a sure tried medicine.

Beans sodden in vinegr and eat be a singular remedy for those which have
the laxe.

Almondes bind ye lousnes of ye belly

Make little pies of the substance of Colewortes stapt w^ll wrong of chese
broke in pieces staped dissolved in water well wrong, of hogge^ l^uer and whytes
of eggs first sodden molte sh^pes talowe, white wax, let them be laid (...) a
^urnace or fried in a pan, let him eat them to his breakefaste, it binds
myghtyly.

Coluer dounge stamped and used for a plaster with strong veniger and applied
to the navel, Mace^.
bindethe incontinent al flux of the belly.

The dounge of a camel dried and drunk is of the same operation. Kye.


Of the colyke and the payne called yliaca.
The Causes
The Colyeke comes of gross* and slimy humours or of wynd contained in the gut
colone, and yliaca is engedred of raw and corupt meates specially fat, and by
drinking cold drink after great heate.

The Signs
Grypynges and payne in the utter part of the belly with restriction thereof, and
belchynge and lothynge of meat do signify the Colycke, and yliaca is when the
pains and swelling is in the small guts with belchynge and murmuring in the
belly.

Remedies. Capi. xxviii.
DOunge of beasts yt are kept up in stables very rank even from the place
where they peace dried and laid to the grefe with fryenge oil, doth apease the
grefe woderfullye.

Wolves dounge bound to the thighs, or to ye bone above ye preuie members
takes the grefe away incontinent.

Make a powder of wolves turd dogs berde, coluer douge quik lyme mengle with
molte, pitch, suet meltid, lay it to whote, it is very good.

Make a bath wherein put all the sundry tordes as may be found, the same
resoluith wyndines and sl^my humours this have I provide.

Give Treakle in warm wine wherein dissolve cloves. Galen.


Sethe the flesh of an old cock or an Hen with a good deal of sale, and
give the broth thereof unto the pacyent at even and at morn.

The herb called Seaholme being stamped together with the rote, and drunk with
honey and water, asswageth the Colyke.

The ashes of the branches of colwortes burnt, Macer.
mixed with stale greece and used for a plaster, takith a way the ache of the
belly, the sides, and of the reins, for it dries and wastith myghtily.

Sethe old oil and butter and strong Ueniger, Galen.
and sethe of them equal porcyons till they be thick, afterward dip th^rin
mo^st woll apply it to thy belly, and ^haung it as often as it coleth, it is
good in a hard and untolerable colyke.

Parytorye drunk with wine, or used in a plaster or after y^ manner of
fomentacion, takes away the pain of the colyke.

Coluer dounge, brayd finely drunk with wine and used for a plaster, is above
al for the colicke,

Item take a hot shepes turd with got^s ^alowe stamped well, put there on pitch
all to b^aten in fine powder and well menglid to gether apply it warm as a
cerote, it hath with out doubt wonderful efficacy.

The dounge of a Wolf, if it be newly made, and so applyd there, is nothing
better then it for to heal ye Colycke, if it be stale dissolve it in old oil.

Horehound stampte and sod in oil olive and applied to ye grefe doth assuage
the pain woderfully A yong^ whelp not nyne days old killed clean o^dered,
Sixtus.
healyth ye grefe or payne in the guts for ever.

The rynde of the pine apple tre^ sodden with wine the same wine drunk, Dyo^.
doth myghtyly take away the wrynging of the belly.

The root of Affodyl drunk with wine, takes away the pains of the sides.

Take of Agaricke. i. drink the same, it allayeth the g^ypynges of the belly,
by ^myshing raw humours.

The ashes of scorpions g^uen in drink is very good. Auicen.


Hearts horne burnt and given in drink, takethe away the Colycke incontinent.

The powder of the bowels of a Wolf, is of great efficacy to help those
that be payn^d with the Colycke.

The dounge of a wolf g^uen in drink, help^th him that hath the colicke
streygth way.

The rote of a Lily given to drink in the decoctyon of Horehound, appe^ethe
the colike it hath be proved.

Give the patient Garlic with a little bread, for it breketh wyndynes more
then all other medicines, and ingrenderith no thryst, and therefore it is very
good in this cause.

Give Trynkle unto the pacyente with things that induce sleep, Galen.
they assuage quycklye the grefe.

Make a suppository of Castoreum and Opium, it is very good to assuage the
payne of the ears y^ ey^s and of the Agewe.

Marche Mallowes sodden in water heal the payne in the bowell^s within three
days, we have provide it, and also Dioscorides.

Diosco.
The powder of Coral drunk with warm water doth a peas the grefe of the
stomach and of the belie.

Water of the decoctyon of Holyhoke taking the smoke thereof from bin^th, thris
in a day, heleth ye pain of the belly.

Heate the joyce Plantayne put it into a close stoule, Auicen.
sit thereon and receyu^ the air thereof upward, it takes away the payne of
the belly incontinent.

Mengle the joyce of Myntes, or of the leaves of Christ's thorne called Rhammis
with eight corns of Pepper and a little Honey, and give the pacyent to drink,
the effect thereof is wonderful.

Take the flour of Lyne sede and of Barlye, Galen.
sethe them with oil of Camamell, and lay it to the nauyll hoot.

Make a plaster of y^ bigger Dock leaves, and of Mallow leaves sodden in water
and stamped, it is wonderful good,

Hydroleon and Allegant broke is wonderful good also.

Hydroleon is made of.ii. parts of water and the third of oil sodden tog^ther
to the consumption of the water.

Isaa^.
Take an old cock filled with oak fern or walferne, saffro sede of ye east
part, and wild co^wortes, let them all seth together till the flesh fall
from the bones, Auycen
the decoctyon is v^rye wholesome for those that be pained with the colycke.

Use Rue sod in oil and butter, inform of a clister, it takes away the
payne incontinent.

The rote of Tormentyll stamped and drunk, takes a way the pinchynges and
pains of the belly.

Galen.
Take of Bay leaves, of Rue, Ana. ii. of Comin one part, heate it upon the
fire in a fryenge pan, and apply it to the place where the grefe is, it
healith mightily and dissoluyth windines and takes away the payne.

Syler, montayne and Comin sod in wine, laid to the stomach, is of (...) same
operation.

The scrapynge of a hearts horne given vn^o him that is sick of the colic
with water and honey being so together and used.ix. days helyth the Colicke
parfytlye.

For the worms in the belly.
The Causes.
Phlegm putrified in the stomach or bowels.

The Signs.
Great pains in the belie with much desire of meat.

Remedies. Capi. xxix.
TO kyl worms give unto ye patient fasting clean milk to drink.iii. or.iiii.
days together the.v. day give him garlycke stapt with warm venig^r to
drink.

Make a plaster of the peach leaves or leke blades with veniger, bid it to ye
stomach of the paciet let him sit in his warm bed, the worms will not a bide
the bitterness thereof.

Dioscor.
The sede of Colewortes drunk, kills al the worms of the belly.

Smallage sede drunk, kills y^ worms, is mighty in operation.

Ribwort stamped and bound to ye navel as a plaster or drunk especially with
Vinegar, A^yce^
of his own prop^rty kills worms.

Sethe the rindes of Pomegranates, and the root of an Ash in wine, and drink
the same wine fasting, it sleeth the worms wonderfully.

The joyce of Basyll or Myntes, mingled with Goats milk, ^alen.
kylthe worms.

If the navel be anointed with bitter Almondes and the oil of Peach kyrnels,
it mightily distroyeth the worms.

Dios.
The scrapynge of hearts horne drunk kills worms.

Auicen.
If the fundament be de^ely anointed within and without, with milk and honey
minglid together, or else if sylke being dypt therein be vsid as a suppository,
the worms will descend to the sweat place incontinent.

If the worms hurt the mouth of the stomach put honi combs in the mouth
fasting, they will draw unto the honey, so voyed bi ye mouth, it hath ben
proved.

Agarike given fasting to the pacyent kills al the worms.

Sumache dissoluid in water and drunk, is wonderful against worms. Auicen.


Pursland sede in good quantitye, drunk, kills the worms.

Acacia drunk in water of the decoctyon of Pomegranates, or sod ^n venyger
kills them.

The decoctyon of grene myrhe drunk doth sleye the worms meruelouslye. Ga^.


Pyls made of Galbanum and sugereandy stamped together, give to the patient, do
greatly help

Take of the joyce of mynte, rybwort, of orpyn, of singrene, of p^ach leaves,
strong v^niger, and an oxs gaul, oil of peachis, flours of Lupines, smalage
sede, of each like quatitie, make an ointment and anoint the navel and there
about and they shall al dye.

Leke seades kill the worms, also radish myxt with water and honey.

For the Hemorrhoydes.
The Causes.
Much melancholyke blood conteynyd in the liver.

The Signs.
The veins in the fundamente brekyng furth and bledynge.

Remedies. Capi. xxx.
Galen.
YArowe drunk restranyth the flux of the hemorrhoydes, and aswageth the payne
of them ye flow not, being drunk, or inform of a plaster.

Make a bath of molle sod in wine vsyb in a plaster helith.

Item the leues of henbane, Pursland, the yolke of a rostyd egg, the pyth of
bread, oil of Roses, mingled together, and made in a plaster, apply them to
the grefe, the same in continent heals.

If the hemorroydes flow over much, make a supposytory of Ceruse alone, or of
Ipoquistidos, or else myxt burnt led, Ceruse, Ipoquistidos, Acasia with pitch
called Collofonia, and order th^m as a suppository.

Against the payne of hemorroydes make a plaster of ceruse, of burnt led, the
yolks of roasted eggs* oil of roses, minglid together, put th^r unto Sumache
it helith all the hemor^hoydes and al ulcers about ye fundament.

Anyse sede brunt and laid unto ye grefe with honey, helith hemorrhoydes

The dust of rosty iron, or the seals of iron mingled with the joyce of
Mollen, is very good.

Galen.
Dyp old sylke in the water of the decoctio of Dill, and afterward dry it, and
there with wipe the hemorrhoyde, and make a supposytory of the same.

Dyos.
A plaster of Rosemary leaves, helithe the hemo^rhoydes.

Common clay restranyth the flux of the hemorrhoydes.

Ashes of eggs shells that chickens were hatchid in, given with white wine
fasting, heal th^ hemorrhoydes incontin^nt,

Against the hemorrhoides being sw^llen not running, sethe horehounde in water
wine and salt put it in a close stoule, sit over the same to take the air
thereof upward being hot, and lay ye herb thereto for a plaster.

If the hemorrhoydes be much haging and painful, Peter. L^.
make a plaster of lynnen coth and hard pitch, and upon the plaster cast
powder of smalage rote and mastycke, apply it to the gref^ it helps
incontinent.

Myngle Antimonium with the joyce of Mollen, wet sylke therein aplye it to the
hemeroydes, it heals the pains thereof.

The powder of Agaricke menglid with the joyce of Sowbred warm oil, is bery
good.

The hears of an hare made in powder and caste upon the Hemerhoydes doth
incontinent restrain there bledyng.

The yolke of a roasted egg myxte with oil of Rosys and laid to the grefe in
form of a plaster, U^at^.
healethe the payne of the hemeroydes.

Against desire to the stole without any sege.
The Causes.
Aprykyng humour, or dry douge in the small guts.

The Signs.
Great desire to the stole without avoiding of any thing at all.

Remedies. Capi. xxxi.
Diosco
Stamp rue first sodden, and use it for a plaster, it h^lethe v^ry well.

Sethe mollen and stamp it, and m^ke a fume thereof, or use the herb for a
plaster, it heals also.

A^um got^o made of Teribenthine cast on the coals heals.

Sethe the rynde of a pomegranat, and the rote of an ash in sweat wine and give
the same wine unto ye patient to drink, it is very good.

Take of white Frankesence. i. of Ameos. i. of Opii.. a half, of Safron..x.
myngle them with honey and make a suppository. for this is very good.

Put Comyn, Anyse, dyl, and greek pytche upon hot ^oles, and when it burns
let the patient receive ye smoke thereof clo^ly from beneth.

Dyp old Sylke in the decoctyon of Dill, and afterward dry the silk let the
patient wipe his fundamete there with.

Afumigacion made of sarcocoll upon hot Coals, h^aleth the paciet of this
desease.

Annoynte th^ Raynes and al pertes down ward to the end of the back bone
with honey, Platea^.
and sprekle thereon powder of Greek Pitch, and of town crosses, the sede of
Penyryall, Isope* and Organ, and let it be bownde with a towlar.

Peritory made in a plaster hely^he the hard sege and the swelling of ye
fundament.

Against chynes and ruptious in the fundament.
The Causes.
Sharpe humours, or going much in cold wynd.

The signs be evident enough.

Remedies. Cap. xxxii.
Galen
A Provide medicine ggaynste Hemorroydes and attrycious in the fundamet, take of
plantayne.iii. handfuls of yarowe, and Fenel, white myntes of each fouer
handfuls, stamp them and press out the joyce thereof, and put thereto viii.
grains of Pepper,.vii. grains of masticke, drink it fasting renew the
dryncke as need shall be, till nyne days be past.

Sethe Cinksoyle in gotes milk, and drink it, iii. days, it is good if the
fig blede.

Myngle.ii. yolks of Eggs with oil of Roses and white wine* and distill it
upon the grefe through a quyll, it helps myghtyly and that incontinent, for
it hath ben provide.

Comyn eaten makes the hemorrhoydes to flow.

Cast brymstone beaten into powder upon Coals, and incontynente upon the smoke
let there be cast in an herb called Blind nettle, and let the smoke thereof be
receyuyd upward closely, and do so thryse it takes away the grefe incontinet
and so after it dries up the hemorrhoydes it hath ben prouid, for I mi self
have tried it.

Take and stamp the stalks of Rue, and the fresh ordure of a ma. together,
and blende them with the yolke of an egg and make aplaster it is very good.

Here unto take Sage, rue, Frankincense, Wax, oil, Galen.
and gotes milk mingle them together, and anointe the place.

Marigoldes put to the fundamet do lightly heal the figs and hemorrhoydes.

For the Hemorrhoydes that appear hanging in the fundament, myngle the donge
of a colt, french soap, the stalks of mollen together, and put it into the
fundament the third day thou shalt find thy self hole th^rby.

The powder of mollen myxt with the joyce of horehound, br^keth the swelling
hemorrho^d^s of the same operation is the root of hole wort plasterd with
Organ.

Of the coming furth of the fundament.
The Causes.
Resolutyon or imbecility of ye muscles which be about the fundement not
being able to draw in ye gut.

The signs be manifest.

Remedies. Capi. xxxiii.
HEeate aposcolicon against ye fire, and touche the fudamet there with, it shall go
in again incotinent^, do this.iii, or.iiii. times as it shall com out,
afte^ward let ye paciet bath him self in the water of Perytorye, and Fig
leaves, and Pear tree leaves, or only Peritory.

The leaves of Rosmary applied inform of a plaster, take away the swelling of
the fundament.

Item make a fume of Gr^ke pitch cast upon the hot coals, it has ben
provide.

Also cast upon the fund^ment powder of harts horne burn^, ^t is good.

This is a suer experym^nt above all make fumes closlye beneth with the warm
joyce of Garlic being clear, Rogerius
and afterward let it be sharpened with the powder of a Hart^s horne burnt,
and pi^che burnt, with Fra^k^nsence and masticke, it is ve^ye good, not only
for the going forth of the foundament, but also against the going forth of the
matrixe.

Galen.
Make a warm suppository of woll that is moist dipped in y^ joyce of L^kes
without the blades, and when it is cold heate it again, when it is dry
renew it again.iii or.iiii. times, it is a sure remedy for those whose
fudamet comes forth, or else put the water of the decoetien of white
frankincense alone into ye fundament.

Of the oppilatyon of the liver.
The Causes.
In Apostem, or gross humours therein contained.

The Signs.
To be euell coloured in the face and great pains in the right side.

Remedies. Capi. xxxiiii.
IF thou wilt open the stopping of the liver anoint the place against the liver
with this oyntmet, take common oil, butter, Gose grese, Hensgrease, and Hedghoges
grese, and myngle the together and let them be meltid, but first let them boil
in a pot mingled with the sede of gromell and Saxfragge, of each like much, of
Fenell, of Carowes, of sauery, of Calament Ana.. and a half of fenell roots,
Percely. i. strain these same and use them, and after thou hast anointed the
place, apply thereunto a plaster of Wax, Pitch and butter like much, then
caste upon the grefe this powder. Take of Sage dried of Sauerye of Anyse, of
Fenell, Gotes dounge, of al like much let the be mingled make a powder thereof,
afterward give a little quantyty of scene, and a garicke, with Uermilyon it is
very good against the stoppyng of ye liver and heals them that have ye
dropsye of a cold cause.

Such alike drink as this doth very well op^n the stoppynges in the liver of
a hot cause.

Take of Hearts tongue, of rybwort, of Betonye, of Litarge as much water as
shall su^fice, let the same boyle therein suffycyentlye and strain them, and
let the straining thereof be drunk early in the morning with Endyue stampte,
and myxt with oil of Uyolett^s, and Ueniger.

(...).
Ribwort sod healith those yt have the dropsye.

Of the Hydropsye.
The Causes.
Water conteyn^d betwyxt the bowels and thy thine skin that goes about the
comes of it coldness in the lyueer.

The Sy^nes.
Swellynge in the belly evil colour and lothynge of meat.

Remedies. Cap. xxxv.
THe hidropsye y^ is ingedred of a h^e cause, when it is not much confyrmyd is
easly healid with o^te eating of endyue and drinking of the decoctyon of the
same this have I provide.

A plaster made of both the plantaynes applied against ye liver with vinegar
barley meal is much worth among al hot things, immoderate exercise, also make
anoyntmet of ye oil of al sorts of sanders and Rosis of ye sede of plantayne
let it vsid in such like electuaries. Take of al sorts of saders, Ana. i. a
half of vasyl, of cub^bes i. of the four cold se^es which be melons, citrous,
cucumer and goourdes of each. i. a half of endiue of pursla, Ana, a poud let it
be made with the Decoctyon of endyue* use it every morning if the substance of
the liver be not already, di^solued wtou^ doubt it shall shortly be clean and
helthful.

Constable.
Fill a pot almost full to the brink with the joyce of plantayn, bind a bout
the pot a lynen cloth upon the cloth put ashes, and let it sethe so upon the
fire unto the half, and give thereof every morning to those that be sick in the
spleen, and there are infectyd with the dropsy it is a pryncypall remedy.

Kye.
Gotes blood heate on the fire, give to drink, doth perfectly heal those
which have the dropsy.

dioscor.
Wine of the decoctyon of wild cucumer rote, quyckly heals those who have the
dropsye ingendryd in them of a cold cause.

Kye
Mingle of the powder of ox douge vi. of brake vrsyn, iiii. three raw eggs,
apoud of brimstone make a plaster thereof and with the same plaster, thou shal^
heal those that be sick of the gout, of the dropsye and of such like.

Give unto him that is diseased with the dropsy the joyce of briony with
honey, Diosco
it shall heal him without danger.

Water of the decoction of ye said bryony helith the dropsye.

The rote of an Elder sod drunk giuith perfect remedy unto ye dropsi. Kye.


Wine of the decoctyon of cucumers rote being drunk, Dios.
purges ye swellynge from those that have the dropsye.

Mustard sede drunk, or the wine of the decoctyon thereof, doth lightly heal
the dropsye by dryuyng up the humour and taking away the heate of the liver.

The kernels of Pears ^ampt and drunk with honey, takes away the grefe of the
liver,

Water or wine of the decoctyon of walwort if it be drunk is a present remedy
for those yt have the dropsy.

Wine that Isope hath sodden in being drunk, burns ye hydropical humours so
that it can not engender again.

Water of the decoctyon of stauesagre being drunk, doth greatly heal the
dropsy it hath ben provide.

A^icen.
Goats p^ss^ heals the dropsy.

If those that have the dropsye be anointed with common dur^ that is found in
the carte ways or upon ye cartes they shall be hole.

Gilbert,
A certain man healed the cold dropsye by gyuyng every morning a sponefull of
a black goats peace or of a black sheep in the water of the decoctyon of
spicknard.

Amans own urine being drunk is very good.

Plini.
The fat of a Delphyn meltid drunk with wine, heals the sick man of the
dropsy.

Dioscor
The powder of the stone magnes drunk with milk, resolves ye dropsy

Hares peace drunk healyth ye dropsye* for if the patient drink.ii. spoon
fulles thereof, Diosco, Kye.
it will perfitlye heal him.

For them that be splenetike
The Causes.
Great abundance of blood or choler in the spleen.

The Signs.
Swelling and great pains in the lift side.

Remedies. Capi. xxxvi
Wine wherein the rynde of Ash hath ben sodden broke fasting is a most certain
remedy for those which be sick in the spleen as saith Costatine after the use
hereof, Galen.
three days space use to anoint ye spleen with dialtea and oil of Baize the space
of.vii. days, and after make a plaster of Goats dounge baked with strong
veniger, and let it be often renewyd till the pacyent be hole.

Hearts tongue drunk with wyn^ xxx. day^s do^h dry up the spleen dymysh^th i^.
Diosco.


Wine of the decoctyon of the rind of a willow tree, mollifyeth the swellynge
and hardenes of the spleen.

Dioscor.
Egrymoyne taken with meat, wastyth the spleen.

Kye.
The leaves of a willow tree stamped with a little salt* and applied unto the
spleen, appease the ache and grefe thereof.

Dyosco.
St^mpe ^uye leues sod in vinegar and make a plaster, for it wast^th ^he spleen.

Kye.
The rind of a Sallow tree sod with water and ho^y, and given to the patient to
drink, loses and molyfieth the spene.

Diosco.
Se^he the rote of an elder in water unto the third part thereof, it
wonderfully helpith the spleen.

Macer.
The root of dock sod in strong vinegar, stamped, and applied unto the Spleen
inform of a plaster, doth utterly take away the swellig of the spleen.

The leaves of dock, Dios.
sod in Ueniger and plasteryd upon the spleen, lose the swellynge thereof.

A plaster of Goat^s dounge mingled with the powder of horehound leaves, and
Rue, and Elder, Gilbert.
and ye ashes of the stalk of a Uyne, with wine, and a little veniger, is of
great efficacy to dissolve the hardness of the spleen.

The powder of a Fox dried upon the hot coals, Sixtus.
if it be give in drink doth utterly wast the spleen.

Sethe the twigs of a Wylowe in water. and give the same water unto the
patient to drink, it vtterli consumyth the spleen.

Goats dounge losith the stoppynges and al hardenes of ye spleen or of the
stone. Dyos.


Peniryall sod with salt, and applied to the grefe, losyth i'll humours of the
spleen and takith away the sw^llynge.

Coral stamped and drunk with water, dries up the spleen.

Raw Colewortes eaten with venyger, is a help for the spleen.

Against the stopping of the spleen the rote of hearts toge is very good made
to powder, Galen.
and put in wine, at the wane of the moon the said wine is to be given to the
pacyente to drink.

Diosco.
Grass sod and bound to the grefe brings great help to the spleen.

The leaves of Tamariscus sod in veniger, and stamped, applied unto the spleen,
are very good.

Take a dry coutord, the joyce of a nettle, oil of eggs and of brimstone
make a plaster thereof, it is very good for those that be diseasid with the payne
in the spleen, the falling Evil, and dropsy, for it is a precious medicine.

Bind the spleen of a dog to the spleen of the patient, it shall heal him.

For the yelow iaundes.
The Causes.
An opilacion in the gaull or spleue, with great heate in the liver or
debylitie of attraction in ye milte.

The Sygnes^
W^nne and yelow colour of the skin and white of the eyes with sum grefe in
the spleen or liver.

Remedies. Capi. xxxvii
This is a good experiment, Gilbert.
to heal the Iaundys, take of ye scrapynge, of Ivory of the joyce of
Lyuerworte, of Saffron, as much as shall seem to be sufficient, of French Soap
to the quantitye of a Chess Nut, and bind them all in the Corner of a
Clothe, and swing them up and down in the water till the virtue of al ye said
things be in the wa^er, and give ye same to the pacyent to drink, this is
wonderful good.

The vryne of the patient drunk with the joyce of Horehounde healith the
Iaundis.

The scrapyng of Ivory with the water wherein it was washed, doth myghtyly
heal.

A certain old woman healyd me which were almost full of the dropsye, with the
joyce of planten sod to half, it might also be made in a syrope.

Make a bathe of the water of the decoctyon of Gladyn, Diosco.
and of ye rote of Ci^lanim, or stamp them drunk it with water, it h^leth the
Iaundis, if the Pores be open that the patient may sweet, for in the sweet you
shalt perceive choler to proceed.

Saffron dissoluid in water and drunk, healith incontinent.

The ioice of Camomil give to drik unto the patient dysea^yd with the Iaundis
or fever, with warm water is a present remedy.

The joyce of morell drunk is a help therefore.

Water of the decoctio of mouseare or wine healith incontinent.

The donge of wild goats bet to poudere, and drunk.iii. days, Dio^
healith those that have the Iaundys.

Of the stone in the raynes or bladder.
The Causes.
Great heate, ^ryeng up gross and putrified humours contained in eyth^r of
them.

The Signs.
Gravel in the vryne with great pains in the dyseasyd place.

Remedies. Capi. xxxviii.
TAke of Cloves, of Iua non mu^kata, of b^ttels, of Galingale, of dried
grass^hoppers, of Gromel, of lunge Pepper, of saxfrag of the ashes of a
scorpyon, of gotes blood dried, of ye stones of a man, of each, ii. make powder
thereof, give it the secke (being in a bathe made of the decoctyon of Bochers
brom Sperage, Smallage, Fenell) with white wine, wherein great Galingal, and
Englyshe Galangale, and the rote of Radyshe have be sodden, this is wonderful
good.

Item take Goats blood, the ashes of a Scorpyon, the powder of Grasshoppers, of
Spodium, of spiknard, of the blood and hears of an hare, of Galingale, Dragos
blood, of Gromell, make powder thereof, myngle it with Syrope of gromel, and
Saxfrage, and give it to the patient in the morning that he may sleep upon it,
it helpith very much

Seth all those symples yt break the stone, put them to gether in a go^rde
that is old, and stopped it incontinent with the patients yard, so the hole
air thereof may entre through the hole of ye yard, and let him use the same
oft times a good while, after the same manner, for it brekith the stone,
enlarges the ways loses the humours of the blad^r, and consumith, dries and
also expellith the stone inespecially if many flees called cimyces be sodden,
afterward make a plastere o^ the dregs, and apply it to the yard and to ye
bone above the yard.

Item put the Powder of the Worms called Cimices, dioscor.
in the condute of the yard, they perform a synguler remedy.

Item if the yard be anoyntid over with Fox blood, Const^.
the stone will break incontinent, for put a stone into the blood of a Fox, it
will break in three days.

Item.ix. Ivy bertes given with warm wine to drink, purg^th the stone
prouokith vryne myghtily.

Burn hares blood and the hole skin of an hare, in a new pot well closyd,
and of the same ashes give ye patient a sponefull in warm wine in a bath, and
fasting, it brekith drives out the stone.

Item the stone of a man, given in drink unto the patient fasting, breketh the
stone and brings it out myghtily with his urine.

Before al things the patient must be purged, and nourished with such things
as open the pip^s and veins, and cleanse slimy humours, or else al the medicines
that shall be given will little avail him.

In the head of a great Tod there is a stone, which stone being stapt, and
given to the pacyent to drink in warm wine, makes him to pise the stone out
incontinent, but if the stone be to harde and to great, take the powder of
Snails for it is a good experiment.

Woma^s flows dried and beat to powder and given to drink, breketh the stone
more then ought else.

Take a good deal of mugworte, stamp it and wrynge out the joyce thereof,
drink a good draught thereof every day to the quantite of half a cupful, it
breaks the stone wouderfully, and causes the gravel to yss^e forth, it hath
ben provide.

Item if the stone will be droken by no means, Gerard.
put in a spout of brass softly through the hole of ye yard till it touche
the stone, then punch it till thou torn the stone out of his place, and it be
setlyd in some other place of the bladder, there it may remain forty years
without danger.

The gum of Cherries doth mightyly Dyosco.
break ye stone lose the grauil.

Kye.
Item the herb and rote of sea^olme sodden and drunk with wine Honey, early
in the bed, helyth the stone if it be used sixteen days.

Gal^n.
Stamp goats blood thy liver, ye lights, raynes, yard bowels stones
altogether. make a puddig thereof in the great gut of the same goat sethe it
and give it to the patient to eat, and thou shalt se wonderful operation
thereby, in taking away the stone.

Dioscor.
Betony given to the patient to drik with wine* honey and pepper* mingled to
gether, takes away ye payne of the raynes, and expels ye stone out of the
raynes and blader.

Galen,
If thou doubt whether the stone be in the blader, make a plaster of ye herb
that is called checkwede sod in water and bood to ye yard and to the bone above
the yard and if the grefe increase it is in the bladder, if (...) it do not
increase it is not there but in the the raynes.

The gum of a damasyn tree breketh the stone, Diosco.
and causes it to issue

The rynde and beryes of a bay tree drunk, brekyth the stone.

Goats pysse drunk expellith and breakyth the stone.

Ameos or in the sted thereof the sed of charuyll, Auycen.
losith the difficulty of making water and drives forth ye stone broken.

Item the ashes of grasshoppers given with the syrupe of spiknard. Roses.
is of wonderful operation.

Sethe seven heads of garlyke in water a good while, Petrus.
and give the same water unto ye pacyent.iii. days, it a provide medicene
against y^ stone.

Take.ii. or.iii. yonge leuerettes, drown the in vinegar, that they dye there,
and afterward boyle them in a pot well closyd without any thing else, and
give the ashes thereof to him that hath the stone, it breketh the stone.

Goat^s blood, and Gose blood, mingled with veniger, and sod together with a
slow fire, doth mollyfye the stone.

Macer.
The leaves of Enula, Campana, sod in wine and vsid for a plaster, is a great
help to them that be franty^e through the pain of the stone

C^can.
Item English galingale stamped and sod with oil, plasteryd warm upon the bone
above the yard, provokes urine without doubt.

Fox blood fresh drunk brekith the stone, for it is known that if a stone be
put into it, it will break.

The powder of a hare burnt quick in a new pot, and ye powder of a hearts
horne if it be taken, is greatly to be comendyd, for it breketh ye stone.

A Fox eaten, and the suet thereof anoyntyd on the pacyent is a great help.

A special remedy after Auicen, Auic^.
is a wagrayle.

Make powder of grass Hoppers taking away the f^te head wings myngle it with
Gillofloures, Gilbert.
and Sixfrag made also in powder.

The stone of a man the stone in a sponge, the stone that is found in ye
bladder of a hog be very good.

Oil wherein Betels and Paperwormes be sodden, anoyntid or put into the
holownes of the yard with a spout is very good.

Stamp the rotes of Olyue, Galen.
comin, and Chibols, the se^h them in oil* and apply them hot upon y^ share,
it moves him to pysse incontinent.

Stamp Peritorye* and apply it warm unto the same place, Gerad.
it is of wonderful effect.

The blood of an old Got made to powder, and myxt with ye decoctyon of
spiknard and cinnamon, and dry grosshoppers beton to powder, and given to drink
causes the stone to gush out wonderfully.

The feet of a Cock given to the paciet to eat, at very good but not the
rest of the flesh,

To cause the stone to break and issewe forth, make ten or more toules of
Radyshes rotes, put them in white wine al a hole night in ye morning drink
the wine fasting, use it every day till the stone go from the.

(...)
The raynes doung, blood, ashes hears of an hare break the stone.

Of the Strangury.
The Causes.
Ulcers in the blader or an Apostem in the liver or reins, which causes the
vryne to be sharpe pricking.

The Signs.
The urine ever dropping at the yard with great desire to pysse.

Remedies. Cap. xxxix.
Ox dounge myxt with honey, Auicen^
and wa^me applied to ye bone above the yard, is very good.

Item.iii. flies called cantharydes (there heads and wings taken away) myxt
with goats milk, and drunk, do lose the stranguryon.

Paper worms stamped with oil, and with the fot of a hedghogge anoint the yard
and the place there about therewythall, it provokes vryne myghtily.

Water of the decoctyon of galingale provokes the vryne.

Make a plaster of hensgrese gose grese, and the grease of a hedghoge of the
sead of gromell, Saxfrage and goats blud.

Apply Galbanum upon the belly under the nauyl, it causes the patient to make
vryne incontinent.

Pyls made of Rye meal, and applied upon the yard (it being anointed with
vnguentum, Populeon) helyth lightly.

Dioscor.
There is nothing that prouokithe urine more mightily then a radyshe rote.

Item the rote of a Dock sod with wine and oil and plasterid above the yard,
provokes vryne in great quantytye.

The powder of the beryes of briony doth greatly heal ye stragurion.

The rind of a Has^l nut tree or the leaves help greatly the stragurion Isa^.


Dioscor.
The leaves of Plantayn which grow ne'er the rote, being drunk healith al
difficulties of the blader.

Radyshe rote s^d in whyt wine and a little powder made of hares here's mynglid
thereto, causith ye paciet to make water incotinet it hath ben provide.

Warm eggs applied above the yard, heal the great of blader and raynes
wonderful.

Item Filbertes stapt and broke with water or wine heal the pains of the
blader and raynes.

Of ulcers or pustules in the yard.
The Causes
Sharpe and bitter humours.

The signs be manifest.

Remedies. Capi. xl.
Wash thy yard often with win of the decoctyon of sage. Macer


The ashes of a dry gourd helith quickly the rotten ulcers of the yard. Dyos.


Item a fomentacion made with wine of the decoctyon of olyue leaves, is very
good.

If it be swellen about the yearde, take dry figs and flouer of wh^te Constable
myngle it with oil, and apply it to the yard.

The joyce of planten sodden and put into the holownes of the yard, heals
the ulcers thereof.

Circan.
Litarge dissoluid with oil of rosys, is very good.

Diosco.
Sethe the milk of an Ass, or of a got, with the joyce of plantyn it heals
if it be drunk, the ulcers of the raynes bladar and yard. Isac spekyth only of
the very milk.

Of them that cannot hold there water.
The Causes.
The weakness of the retractio and great strength of attractyon in the
reins.

The Signs.
Great thirst, and inuoluntarye making of water.

Remedies. Capi. xli.
Against this disease give y^ patient the blader of a got or of a black sheep,
Constable.
or else of a Bull made to powder, give it him to drik with vyneger water when he
goes to bed.

Give him for.iii. days at the wane of the moon, Dioscor.
ye blader of a fresh water fyshe.

The brain of an hare given in wine to drink, causes the pacyent to with
hold his vryne.

Filberdes rostyd are wholesome against the distillacion of urine.

Stamp to powder a dry blader of a sow Pygge, Galen.
give it in drink for it is very god and wholesome.

Item gallingale withholds the flowing of the vryne, Constable.
ingenderyd of the coldness of the reins and blader

Ite the blader of a bore rostyd, Plini.
restraynyth ye incotinency of ye urine. The ligthes of a Kid eaten boude under
the nauyll with holdyth the distillacion of the vryne.

Of inflatyon and swelling of the codd^s.
The Causes.
Abundance of hot or cold humours falling to the coddes.

The Signs.
Great inflatyon and swellyng^ in the coddes.

Remedies. Capi xlii.
Diosc^. Isa^.
IF the coddes be swollen, take been flouer and temper it with the joyce of
walworte, and common oil bind it unto the coddes i^ loses the swelling thereof
incontinent.

Of the same operation are the ioyces of Elder and walwort.

Goats dounge dissoluid with wine tak^th away al the swelling of the Coddes.
^ye.


The seed and leaves of Henbane stamped Dios.
bound to the coddes take away the payne and swellynge thee of. This cure is
wrought many ways, first let the plac^ and fundament be mollifi^d with
d^coctyon of Margeram, and aft^rwarde the things mentioned before myxte
together and made in a plaster, suppli the same till he be hole of ye swelling
Another form of plaster is this, take of Marciaton, wax, pitch, ship rosen,
and Terebentine, of Frankesence, Mastycke, Dragons blood, bole Amonike new, of
each like quatiti^: aft^r that let him use such a like syrupe as this
following.xx. or.xl. days.

Take o^ veruen, Styche wor^e, Calament, wyld Marg^ram, Platayne, Starewort,
Sc^b^o^se, of the rote of restharowe, let the boyle well tog^ther, afterward
^ake Frakensence, Dragons blood bole Acmyny^ke, Fenegreke, of mastycke, of ^che
like much stamp them and blend them with whytes of eggs, and put therinto a
good quantity of the foresaid decoction, and give it unto the patient early
and late, so shall he be healid.

Coluer dounge, dogs turdes, Gotes douge with the joyce of walworte and
common oil, is much worth.

Of the inflatyon of the yard.
The Causes.
Uaporouse wind therein contained or ye arterys being very open.

The Signs.
Swellynge and pains in the yard.

Remedies. Capi. xliii.
Constable.
IF the yard do swell, and be grievously pained, mingle Wax oyl^ and ye joyce of
purslande togethere, and apply it unto the yard it is a provide remedy.

Put Betony sod in wine unto the yard.

Barley bran sod in wine honey, and bound unto the yard as a plaster takes
away the ache and swelling thereof.

Olyue leaves stamped with honey helyth the Cancer in the yard or else where, also
let the place be washed with warm vinegar and dried with a lynen cloth, sprynkle
thereon pouof gaules, do this thryse a day and it shall heal it perfitlye in
short space.

Item the joyce of water lentyls anoyntyd upon the yard, Alber^.
healythe the yard, Cods, stones, and taynes and raynes, and suppressith ye
fleshely lust.

The joyce of lenttyls laid upon ye ranker of the yard kills the same.

Against great desire to fleshly lust.
The Causes.
Use of hot meates and such as do increase much seed.

The signs need not to be declaryd.

Remedies. Capi. xliiii.
Macer.
HEmlockes bound to a mans stones, take utterly away all desire of copulation.

If Opium, Henbane sede, madrage be mynglid with wax oil, in the which they
have soden, and the members therewith be anointed and a plaster thereof being
made, bound unto the coddes, it takes away the desyer of copulation.

Anoynte oftentimes the members, with the joyce of Night shade Singrene, and
vyneger.

Al men and inespecially Dioscorides says that P^per, Rue, Tutsayne,
Calamint, Castoreum, waste the s^de of generation, (by driving it up) of there
p^opretie and strong heate.

Item let the yard be anoyntyd with oil, Costa^.
wherein Camfore hath ben resolved, and he shall have no fervent desire to it.

I a man eat the flowers of a sallow or willow tree, or of a Poplet tree,
they will make cold al the heate of carnal lust in him.

Been flouer made in form of a plaster and bound unto the pryuye members of a
boy, Dioscor. Isac.
quenchith al concupiscence and sufferth not hears to grow there.

Lettys sede dryethe up the seed, quenchith the desyer of copulacon. Auicen.
Anonte the privy members with ^he joyce of Hebane, and the carnal
concupiscence shall be quenchid thereby.

Against an aposlem or harde swellynge in ye matrix.
The Causes.
Wythholdyng of the flowers, or pains in child birth, or of an old ulcer or
in flamacyon.

The Signs.
Sudden losing of strength, pains in the head and neck, hardness and grefe
abouts the share, with with holding of vryne.

Remedies. Cap. xlv.
THe rote of lilly sodden with common oil molletieth hardnis of the matryx and
openithe the same. Dioscor.


A fom^tatio of ye water wherein mallowes or holy hoke have ben sodden in,
takes away the hardenes of the matryx and openith the mouth thereof. Mingle
gose grese with ye joyce of lekes and anoint the neck of the matrix, it
vnbideth the same draw together after ye issuing of ye flouers

Item cokle, myrhe, white frankecence* safron* let them all sethe togethere in
wine or water, and if a woman be anointed there with it openyth the narrones of ye
matrix, and makes her apt to conceptyon.

The rote of walwote soden, Diosco
and a fomentatyon made thereof, helpith all the hardenes and clausures of y^
matrix.

To provoke the flowers.
The Causes.
Oppilatyons in the matrix, abundance of gross blood, or after great
evacuation, or fatness in the womb.

The Signs.
Pains in the lower parts of the belie, desire to sleep in the same, the
intemperance of all the body, wytholdyng of water lack of dysgestyon and no
desire to meat.

Remedies. Capi. xlvi.
THe wine wherein wild margeram hath ben sod in, doth provoke the flouers,
likewise the herb laid to the matrix in a plaster, or y^ suffumygacion of the
same.

A supposytory or pessarie of coton dypt in Citbyntyne, doth cleanse the
matrice.

The dregs of oil put into the matri^ doth cleanse the same, bring furth a
dead child.

The ro^e of madder made in a pessary hath no l^sse stregthe. Wine of the
decoction of Calaminte or pulyoll drunk* doth quickly provoke the flouers, but
mugwort is much better for the same purpose.

The rote of a Li^lye rostid under th^ Embres and stamped with oil, being laid
to th^ matrix doth wonderfully open the same, so doth the sede thereof also
b^ing furth a dead chyld^ with out p^ryl.

Purflane doth vtt^rly dissolve all swellinges in th^ matrix whether it ^e
drunk emplaster^d or the place be washyd with ye decoction there of

Sethe sage and d^inke it, either stamp it and lay to the matrix, for both
ways it provokes the flouers and after burdens.

Holworte drunk and laid to the matrix clensyth the matrix and takes away the
after burdens after child birth, nevertheless it is corysiue and therefore
perilouse.

The flouer of nigella, Romana, put to the ma^r^x with honey, draws out al
cont^nt^s with great violence, wherefore it is perelouse.

Let the root of g^adyt, be made like a pessarie and anoint the same with oil
debay or common whole, the cast thereon powder of walwort and put it into the
matrix all a night till it provoke it to blede.

It is very good to make a bath of such herbs as do provoke the flowers and to
wash the members there with, and to receive the fume thereof standing over a
close stole, such herbs be those.

Wild margeram, clamint, sauery, Mynte, Mugwort, Cynamon, Cardamomum. i.
Galingale, Cappares, the rinds of Cassia fistula, et Cassia liguea, fenell
sede, sage, pulyoll, afterward make a pessary or suppository of black helebor,
nigella, Romana Scamonie, wrappid in a lynin cloth, put that into the matrix
without doubt it will provoke the flowers wonderfully.

A pessary of cotton dypt in oil wherein coloquintida hat ben sod is very
effectuouse.

The flowers lunge stoppid are brought furthe with a bathe of the decoction of
ye herb called bawme.

A pessary of lynen cloth full of sod garlic heads stampyd with oil, is very
good.

Also one Clove of pillid garlyke put into ye matrix doth open ye same Bitter
Almodes blauchid stapid put to the matrix like a pessari or other wise, do
draw forth al fylthe corrupt humours contained in ye matrix or else where.

Cinnamon (having great virtue to provoke vr^ne) doth cleanse the after burthes
of a woman, and yt much better if it be mynglyd with myrte. Chickwed roasted
under the embres and stampid laid to the matryx, provokes the flowers.

There is no medicine like unto oil of lyllyes, if the members be anointyd
therwyth, it helythe all dyseases of the matrix.

Powder of scamony cast upon a pessary of the rote of malowe doth bring
forth the flouers, this have I provide.

A bathe made of the decoctyon of Maid hear and reynworte doth wounderfullye
purge the matryx.

Mugworte stampid and put to y^ nauyll or the joyce thereof mynglid with myrre
and made in a p^ssarye doth provoke the flowers.

Sauery drunk or emplaysterid to the matrix doth cast out a dead child.

A pessarye made of Galbanum doth myghtily provoke flowers.

To stop the flours
The Causes
The veins broken or opened, erosyons in the matrix or losinge of a child.

The Signs.
Change of colour, swelling in the feet and lack of appetite.

Remedies. Capi. xlvii.
IF the Flowers will not cease in there natural time, make a pessarie of goats
douge, and the joyce of shepherds purse or ribwort or Platayne, and put it into
the matrix.

Yarowe stampid with the water of the decoctyon of ypoquistidos, the flouers of
pomegranate, stops wonderfulli.

Make abath of these herbs Platayne, Shepherds purse, wild Tasill, and the
middel rind of an Oak, and afterward use this pessary. Take the powder of a
hearts horne, Ipoquistidos, Acacia, bole armeniake, new plaster, wax, Talowe
of a Got, and of ye which remaynethe make a plaster to the raynes share and
it stops Flowers on warrinsise. Likewise make a bathe of the rind of an
Oak, quicken beres or service, and plaster, this is of great efficacy.

As many grains as a woman doth drink of Coryander sede, so many days shall
the Flowers be stoppid.

Apessary or powder of ceruse or white lead minglid with powder of smallage,
doth meruelousli stop the Flowers.

The joyce of Lekes stops both the flowers and after burden,

Coral drunk stops the flowers, so doth the ashes of brent acornes cast
into the matrix dry and heal al fylthy and nociue hummours.

Acatia made in a pessarye is very good for the same, likewise agreat ventose
laid to the papes and kept a hole hour.

Rybwort drunk or made in a pessary stoppithe al flux of matrix and there is
no medicine comparable unto this.

The sede or rote of water lylly hath a peculiar virtue.

The water found in an holowe Oak is g^od with Rain water for the same rso is
water of Pulyol drunk.

A decoctyon of Akorne shales doth me^uelously enclose the matrix, and so doth
a pessary of morell.

Sanct Iohns herb drunk, doth stop utterly both whyt and Red flux
Cynabarys of some men callid dragons blood hath a maruelouse strength to stop
the matrix.

For the moder.
The Causes.
Much a bundance of humours with stopping of the flowers, or the cotencyon and
putrefaction of sede in the matrix, or great cold in the time of the flowers.

The Signs.
Sadness, pal^ colour sluggishness, weakn^sse in the legs, and in the
fytte, desyer to sleep, dotage, losing of all the senses and voice, with
cramps in the legg^s.

Remedies. Capi. xlviii.
IF a woman be greuid with the moder* stape netle leaves put the to ye matrix,
and let her also drink parsnepsede with wine for it is very good and losith
the suffocations and cleanses the sede contenid in the matrix.

A pessary of oil of bitter almondes, doth assuage the grefe utterly.

This is a principal medicine, let the woman smell to enphorbiu that she may
nese or blow it to her nostrils then shall she drink Castoreum cloves and
assofetida.

Also louage, Isope, wormewode Fern leaves, sod and made in a plaster and
laid from the nauyl to the share do wounderfullye help the moder.

Sethe wormewod and Fern or ether by it self and stamp them for a plaster
thereof doth break the pains of the moder.

A lynen cloth sod in the lye of the ashes of colewortes doth take awai the
ventositie of the matrix.

Triakle cloves and garlic dyssoluyd in strong hot wine, is present
medicine for the Moder, this have I provide.

Likewise doth a great ventose with much fire upon the share: also let her
receive stynkyng and filthy sauoures at her mouth a suffumigacion or diverse
sweet and odoriserous things beneth.

Rue sod and stamped in oil with hens grese and gose grese hot laid betwyxte
the nauyl and the share, is an excellent medicine.

Nettle sede drunk in wine doth a swag all pains in the matrix, take away
the ventositi thereof.

A suffumigacion of myrhe doth open the Matrix being inclosyd: so doth the
fume of Terebentine receiuid by the mouth.

Make a pessary of mint, calamint Sauery, hilwort and musk with castoreum put
this into the matrix, and let her smell assafetida, and rue this have I provide
to be wounderfull god.

Also Rue sod in water and put into the matrix asswagith the pains even so
doth the suffumygacyon of galbanum.

Rain water minglyd with strong vinegar and spout^d into the nostrils doth
soddenly drive down the moder, and like virtue have.xv grains of Peonye
drunk with wine.

To help conceptyon.
The Causes.
Immoderate heat or coldness in matrix or much fatness^, with diverse other.

The signs be plain.

Remedies. Capi. xlix.
THe suffumigacion of cocle frankensece is very good therefore. An implayster of
laudanu laid to the matrix or the same sufumygated doth dispose the matri^ to
conceive if the let come of cold.

A pessary or suff^migacion of nep doth dry and heal the moyste and cold
matrix, but chiefly a pessari made of Theodorico scammony and put into ye
matrix: after the natural stoppyng of the flowers if she use ye company of a ma
it will make a barra woman conceive.

Herb Bawme suffumygatyd do^h wounderfully comfort the matrix.

Let a woman eat the mat^ix or Rennet of an Hare and she shall conceive.

This is a present medicine take y^ dounge of an Hare and the Rennet thereof and
mingle them with honey, and afterward make powder t^erof and let the woman
drink ye same three days and three nigthes with ye shauynges of Ivory, and
wytho^t doubt she shall conceive.

The powder of the stones of a bore made in powder dronk^ doth marvelously
help conception, likewise doth a bathe made of the decoctyon of rosemary, and
of more efficaci is garlyke sod in oil of Roses woll made in a pessary, this
is a present medicine.

If a woman do use to anoint her members with this oil she shall conceive
without fail, take of dates a pound, of Fistikes a poude, of Nutmigges, and
Cinamoum Ana i. of lunge Pepper, of nuts of Egypt ana i. of gaules. ii, of
Gynger. i. of Sugar a pound mingle the with honey and make anointment thereof.

Also let an egg shell be filled with. i of greek pitch. ii. of Castoreum bind
it upon the nauill for it is very good, so is the suffumigacion of Aloes.

Here follows a pessary of great virtue and efficacy for y^ after burdens
and al pains in the matrix, beside this doth marvelously help coceptyon, take
ye brains of a hart or calfe of grene Ysope, butter of gotes milk or cowes
milk almondes, storax claryfyed honey of every of them. i. of oil of
spike..ii. then stamp those which be to be stampid and melt the rest
afterward mingle them together and with wol make a pessarye thereof and if the
woman use it three days and there upon use the company of man although she hath
ben barren of lunge time yet she shall conceive.

Also this hath ben often prouid very good for the purpose take comfery, the
rynde Pomgranattes, the skin of a medler, the rynd of an ^ke the leaves of
sweet breare ana. i of nut curneles cloves and nutmigges ana. i. make powder of
al these and of the same with rose water make little balls and dry them in the
shadow, and when you be dysposyd to use them dissoluyd one in rose water and
with the same bath the matrix, and you shall conceive without doubt.

Of the swelling in the paps.
The Causes.
Much abundance of hot blood, or the milk therein coteyned waxed hard like to
chese.

The Signs.
Great pains and swelling in the Paps.

Remedies. Cap. l.
IF the tetes be swolle up through superfluity of milk, first of all put it
back with potters clay and vinegar or else with a bean broken and stamped and
minglyd with the white of an egg or which lentils sod in veniger apply it unto
the tetes in all increase of the same, with oil of rosys it takes away al
swelling and hardenes of the tetes.

Bind unto the breast cromes of bread myxt with ye joyce of smallag^. Constable.


The rote of Colewortes, myn^es, been flouer all every of these lo^e and dry
up the milk.

If there be any holowe ulcer or cakar in the breast, got^s dounge tempered with
honey kills the same, takes away al fylthe.

If the head of the tete be anoyntyd with bawme, it takes away the payne
thereof.

Item the orure of a man burnt applied unto the tetes, helyth the cakernes and
mueterate vlce^s.

The leaves of an olyue tree stamped kill the Canker and worm in the breast.

Against the swelling of the tetes apply malloes stapt and made hot with
common oil and bind them to the same. Diosco


Henbane sede stamped and put in Macer.
wine and applied to the Tetes takethe away the payne thereof and of the kyrnels
also.

Dioscor.
Gotes dounge minglid with veniger and bran and applied for a plaster, losith
wounderfully al swelling of the breasts.

Co^ta^.
Ashes made of a dogs head sparsyd upon y^ holownes of the breast, that is
ingenderyd of a kankar kills and brekith away al filth thereof: Coluer dounge
with honey and wax is much worth and of great efficacy hereto.

Knot grass being carried about the person takes awai the swelling of the
Tetes incontinent.

The grese or fat of a Hedghogge anointed upon the Paps, sletthe the milk
therein by opening of y^ pores and losing thereof.

Mouse turdes anoyntyd upon the breasts with water losyth the hardness payne and
swelling thereof.

Brimstone stampte with wine plasterid over the Tetes, Isac.
brekith the hardness of the same.

The shells of partrigis eggs stapt and minglid with wax and Terra Sigillata*
do heal the tetes being ready to fall of with ache.

Against the pains in child birth.
The Causes.
The faintness or gross fatness or weakness of the woman, or the innaturall
coming furthe of the child.

The signs be known by ye woman's telling.

Remedies. Capi. li.
Against dangerous child birth many say that the scrapinges of Dates stones
give with ^yne doth wonderfully ease women ^f there trauaylinges in child birth.
Dip a lynnen clothe in the joyce Isac.
of slone Perstie or of Common persty and put the same into the mouth of the
matrix, and it shall cause ye dead chyldes delyu^rance and the after burdens
also, and the same being drunk in any kind of drink clensyth the matrix and
the child of all gross humours.

Oak fern stamped and plasteryd upon the feet of the traualinge woman, causes
the child birth ether a live or dead.

If a woman drink maiden hear in wine, Aui^en.
it causes spedy deliuerace.

Item drink made of Castoreum is very good in such causes.

Peter. Lu.
Also if the priuityes of a woman be anoynt^d with y^ ashes of an asses houfe,
it is a very good and easy remedy.

Also give unto a woman in th^s case an other womans milk to drik it causes
spedy delyuerance.

Gilbert,
Stamp^ Ueruen and give it to a traualinge woman to drink with water it causes
delyuerance also.

Item myrhe given to drink in warm wine the quantyty of a big nut, causes
deliverance of ye child either quick or dead.

Dragance bound to the privities of a woman in labour, causes her to be
delivered incontinent but there must head be take that it be quickly removed,
least it draw forth the matrix with all.

Sethe Mugwort in water plaster it hot upon the nauyl and thighs of a woman
laboring with child, Rogeriu^
it causes both child birth and y^ after burden also, if it tarry lunge there it
will cause the mat^r to follow upon

The joyce of Lekes hath a mighty operation in this case, if it be broke with
warm water.

The joyce of Figs or powder of Dyttanye given to a woman that laboring in
child hath the Ague, with water, if she have not the Ague, with wine, it
causes ye dead child in her womb to issue forth. A horse curd drunk and
suffumygated causes delyuerance, as well of the secondines as of the child.

Kye.
Item take pyony sede, when it is black, stamp it and blend it with oil and
anoint the loins and priuyties of a woman traualinge with child, it makes
delyuerance of the child in her womb without pain

A suffumigacion made of the horns and houfes of Goats moves myghtily the
matrix to deliverance.

Dios.
Take of Betony sodden with water and honey i. it hastens the delyuerance, and
delyueryth y^ laboring woman out of her danger, but in any case beware that
there be no peers in the house wherein the woman traualeth for they are very
hurtful and do not suffer the matrix easily to open.

If the woman cannot easily be rid of the after burden, take borage and leke
blades, and the ioice of parsl^ ro^s give the same with oil it shall be
delyuerid incontinent.

The leaves of Iunip^r drunk with water and honey causes the delyuerance of
the child and of the secondynes, Costan.
and after burden.

Dissolve a swalowes n^st with water, strain it and drink it, it causes the
birth of the child to be very easy.

The pains after child birth.
The Causes.
Cold takyn in the berynge of the child, with divers other.

The signs be manifest.

Remedies. Capi. lii.
FOr ye payne after child birth, take y^ yolks of eggs mightyly sod in
water, break the to pieces mingle them with suet and the joyce of mugwort and
Cumyn and make a plaster thereof.

Sethe onyons in water and after stamp them with oil and Cumin and yolks of
eggs, it is very good applied in like form as the other.

Sethe in wine or water the rotes of maryshe mallowe and walworte and stamp
them well mingle them with Common oil warm, and a make a plaster.

Diosco
Let Bay berys being beten to powder, be put upon hot Coals, let the woman
receive up the fume thereof, closely, it helpith much the payne of the matrix,
and concepcio, and wastethe the superfluytyes of the Matrix, also it causes
delyuerance.

For the Gout.
The Causes.
Much surfettinge and dronkenesse, to much accompaingin with women, imoderat
excercice, long stadynge, and such like,

The Signs.
Great pains and swelling in the joints chyeflye in spryngtyme and heruest.

Remedies. Capi. liii.
THe iointe sickness is thus deuidid, into sciatica, which is in ye huckle bone.
Podagra, ye gou^ of the legs and feet, and Chiragra, the gout of the
fingers Arthritica which is in every other part of the body.

Town crosses stamped made in a plaster with suet, takes away the joint
sycknes lunge hanging upon a man before, if it be used.

Asphaltuum made in a plaster with Dioscor.
salt Peter heleth the joint sickness and the gout.

Isac.
Water of the decoctyon of rape, through the working thereof, helith the payne
of the Iointe sycknes gout of his own property.

Dioscor.
Cost or detin plasterid upon the gout, and disese called sciatica, healyth the
same, by drawing out the humours from the bottom: and after the same sort it
is good for them yt have the palsy, and joint syckn^s.

The root of holy hoke or marishe mallowe, stamped and myxte with y^ grease of
an old hog, healith the gout within three days.

Playntayne leaves plasteryd with fresh grease, is a good r^medye to take away
the payne and swelling of the gout. The sede thereof also used in plaster is a
great help against the gout.

Mace^
The leaves of Crosses myxth with bran and vinegar and emplasteryd upon y^ grefe
are of much effect.

Ite take musterd sede a little bread dry Figs, honey and as much vinegar as
you will, put them all to gether, and bind it to the grefe.

Take the flesh of a fat Cat, the grease of a Gose, Gilbert.
of a gray and of a Fox, the mary of a hearts horne Ivy* Sage, Rue* Uyrgius
Wax, Frankincense, the yolks of rostyd eggs, Snails, put them all in an
earthen pot that has a hole made in the botome for the nones, and let it be
close above with paste that no air may issewe forth at al and put under the
same pot, another whole pot close the together and put the nethermost in
ground. as it were bury it in earth, and compass it about with fyere above,
there will distill a wonderful good oyntmet out of the upper most pot which
wylbe good for the cold gout.

Against the cold swellynge Gout, take stale grese, and the whites of eggs,
beat them togethere a good while mingle together brimstone, the rote of red
Docks, quick silver without any fire, use the same plastered upon some
leather, early late let it be renewed, it shall cause it to ytche greatly, but
yet doubt nothing of it, for it will heal the.

Also this plaster folowinge hath ben proved of this Gylbert is an wounderfull
invention. Take of ye bare earth of Emetes. iiii. of barley bran * i. of
Rose. a half, of been flower. a half malowes madrage ana vi. sethe the mallowes
and mandrage in three pound of water unto half, and make therwyth the other
medycines beaten to powder in a mortare, and myngle therwyth Wax* and yolks of
eggs, of Safron. iii. kneade them all well together and it shall need none
other plaster or medicine.

An other plaster which is to be used when the grefe is most vehement. Take
of honi comb. i. and of the milk of Barlye styepen in Rose water and Rain
water minglid together. i. and a half, mingle them together in a mortare, and
blyende them well with the white of an egg, make a cerupe, and apply it, is
very good.

Item sethe six Backs or Reremyse in Rain water, afterward streyne it, and
put thereto of oil of Roses, and bows of Wyllowes, sethe them unto the
consumpcyon of the Oil, it is much worth both in a hot and cold cause, for it
has an unknown virtue.

Sshippe Pitch and salt Ammoniake mixte together is a syngular help for them
which have the Cramp. Diosco.


Item Betony stampte and plastered upon the grefe of the gout, eases the
same, and the decoctyon thereof being drunk doth the same son^r.

Woman's flowers anoyntyd upon the grefe of the gout takes away the payne.

Item a bathe made of decoction of flewort takes away al gout.

Time stampte with the white of an egg and applied for a plaster is a good and
helthful medicine for ye joint sycknes, especially the sciatica.

Take Bay berys and the leaves of Rue, Time, Organ, Pennyrial, old soap,
myngle them together and fry them and apply them upon the hot gout, with
tow, the place being first annoyntyd with honey it takes away the gout and al
other grefes.

This is a precyouse ointment against al gout and joint syknes, take the three
sorts of Snails gathered in may, and put them in a frying pan, use it for
an oyntmet

This following is approu^d remedy, in all cases, without purgation, anoint
the place with y^ joyce of Galyngale and of artychokes, or lay a spouge upon
the grefe dipped in warm wine of the d^coction of comin, it will draw out the
hurtful humores* it hath ben provide.

Hares dounge discomperd with warm wine and plastered heleth utterly those yt
have the sciatica, Kye.
though they be past hope.

Anoynmet made of hearts horne is good for the same disease also.

This is a most assurid ointment against al old goutes and io^nt sickness and
against the pal^ye. Gilbert
Take Fox flesh and sethe it in good wine till it faule from the bones,
afterward stamp the flesh myghtylye, being hot and wring out ye joyce
thereof and sethe the same joyce till it be as thick as an oyntmen, afterward
put a little red wax thereunto and little of powder of Masticke of Castoreum,
bdelii, myrre Bayberis a quantity of euforbium and a little of musk, and let
them be incorporatyd all together as anoyntment.

Another most certain approuyd ointment. Take a byge root of Bryonye, make it
hollow put into the holownes thereof ye joyce of Hellebor, Calamint, Time, or
Rue, unto two hollow parts and let the third part remain empty, and put
the pouders therein mencyoned in the formare oyntemet, Pyretory the root of
Getian, and hermodactilys, and put thereto Petroleum or sum old oil and Wax,
and let it be stopped with Potters clay or paste, and let it be put in the
embr^s there let it boyle a good while and afterward stamp it and wrynge out
the joyce, use for anoyntment.

Another ointment of efficacye, thereunto, take the joyce of a wild Cucummer
rote, grene Grapes, parritorye, the leaves and beryes of Iuye, Juniper berys,
euforbium, Castor^u, the fat of a Gripe, of a gose, of a Heron, of a Fox, and
of a bear then take a fat Cat and pull of the skin and fill her with all
these foresaid things, and let it roast well upon a spyt against the fire and
let the drippyng that comes of her be kept and resolve a little Wax therein,
and annoynte the grefe therewyth.

Item kyl a whelp of.xxx. days old and anoint the painful grefe with the
blood of the said welpe, it is very good.

Item sethe the flesh of the said whelp in wine, with Rue Betany Fenigreke,
Egrymony, and Sage, afterward stamp them al to gether and put to a little mary
of a Hearts bone, a few ashes sethe it in manner of anoyntment, and anoint the
place, it is very good.

In a great and extreme payne of the joint sycknes, take a whelp of the age
aforesaid and roast him, and cut him in the midst alongyst the back, and
apply it hot it is very good and much worth.

Constable.
Item seth Rue and Sage in oil together and being hot stamped, apply it to
the grefe, it will allay the payne incontinent.

Boyle the joyce of Henbane in ye grese of hog, Constable.
and put thereunto a little wax and anoint the grefe therewith: ye herb it self
also sod in wine and bound unto the grefe appesith it immediately.

A plaster made of the rote of walwort and Hermodactiles stampte with Hogs
grese, and bound unto the cold gout, helps the same.

A plaster made of Ox, and hogs dounge sodden in veniger, and Ravens grese,
cattes grese, or Hearons grese, is very good against an immoderate pain. Make
to powder i. of Opiu minglid with Saffro and yolks of Eggs, and oil of
Rosys, this myghtylye asswagithe and restraneth the matter.

Item take Emetes and the eggs of them, and a little of ye earth wherein they
did a bide, and common salt, mengle them with the grese of an old Hog, and
being put betwyne a clothe of lynnen apply it unto the grefe.

Misselto boylid in water and the grefe being bathid with the said water hath
great help thereby.

Item ashes of burnt Time mingled with the white of egg plasterid upon the
place, brekith gout and draws out the hurtfulnes.

A bathe wherein emetes and there eggs being stampte have ben sodden, doth
quyckly heal an old and almost incurable joint syknes.

Gotes dounge takith away the hardenes swelling of ye joints. A^i^n.


Grene Rue plasterid with salt and Honey takethe away the payne

This confectyon is most proper and certain medicine for those that have the
joint sycknes.

Constable.
Take of Sauayne. ii. of Pepper, of Ivy, and Rue leues, Ana. vi. of Germander.
ii. give the sam to the pacyent with wine.

Item boyle Mules pysse with wax* oil, and litarge, make a plaster thereof and
it will remedy.

If the grefe be myxte with swelling, take of beans. iiii.v. yolks of Eggs,
blend them togethere, and plaster them upon the grefe.

Item Bay leaves sod in water and myxte with water of Purseland, if the
grefe be washed there with it much helpythe.

Take of Lyons grese, ii, pound of Wax, a pound, of Masticke, oil iiii. it
utterly takes awai al grefe of the joints.

Item anoyntement of a Cat helythe the pacyent in one day, if it be made
after this fashion, it is very good.

Take a fat slayde Cat her bones being pullyd from the flesh, stamp it
myghtylye and put it in the belly of a fat Gose, and put salt grese thereunto
with Pepper, musterdsede, of Dragons, of Pellytorye, of warmewoode, Garlic and
beres suet, Ana. i. of wax. ii. roast it and keep the drippynge.

Myngle the ashes of colewortes burnt with fresh hogs grese anoynte the
Gout there with, Galen
it will heal it in three days.

Gilbe^
The dounge of a stork mixed with hogs greece, helith along contynuyd Gout.

Temper persly and oil of Rosys with woman's milk, and anoynte the grefe
therwyth.

This potion folowinge is wounderful good for the gout and joint sickness take
of hermodactill. iiii. of Cumin and Ginger ana i* give thereof at once unto ye
paciet. ii.

Hermodactil made in a plaster with veniger is very good.

Pepper plasterid upon the grefe warms the Joints and sinews so that there is
no medicine like unto it.

Flebothomy or the cuttinge of a vain next the greets joint, Galen.
is very good.

The rote of wyld Mallowe staped with stale grese, and plasterid helith the
gout in three days.

Take of Armoniacke and pitch like quantytie, Dios^*
mingle it and make it in a plaster it is a singular medicine for the gout,

Oil sod in water honey plasteryd with cokle (after that the paciet hath
bathid the grefe with water) healith the disease.

Take a good deal of wormewode of the rotes of Walworte, of whet bran, of
dung and salt, let them sethe together in vyneger till the Vinegar be cosumyd,
afterward stamp it and apply it hot.

Rats turdes stamped and minglyd with old grese losyth all swellynges of a
cold cause.

Item coluer dounge sodden in wine, till the wine be consumyd plasteryd, helyth
the gout.

Take half a pound of Wax, of oil olyue.v pound. of good wine a pound, let
them sethe together till the wine be consumyd, afterward ming thereto. ii. of
Euphorbium made to powder, make an ointment thereof it hath ben provide in y^
gout and joint sycknes.

Take a drame of y^ joyce of popler rind, drink it, for it is very good.

Sethe a dead Wesyll till the flesh foul from the bones, strain it with
oil, and mingle wax thereunto and anoynte the joint grefe therwyth, and the
great ^wyn^ pokes, it mightyly heals all corrupcion of the sinews and
Joints.

Sethe nettels that grow in hot and dry ground in lye made of the ashes of a
Vine, and with the same lye b^inge hot wash the grefe and plaster the nettels
upon it, it is very good in al aches of the gout.

Sethe salt and syfted Whet bran* honey, and red wine till they be thycke,
and so apply it unto the grefe.

Be sure of this one thing that in some cause medicines yt are made (except
they be purging, or breking or at the lest except some sufficient euacuacio of
ye matter go before) do not greatly h^lpe, therefore let the hot humour be
purgyd with an electuary made of the joyce of rosys.

Let those patients be well ordered and warily and let the matter be bi little,
and little purged, that the nouryshynge virtue be not dystroyd, for in Pills,
many things are received that draw with violence, as euphorbium,
harmodactill, Colloquiti^a, Turbith, scamony, which all are as it were poison,
therefore vndiscretly mynystred causes faintness through the debility of
vital sperites, in that nature cannot with stand the mattre, and such things
are never mynystred except they have stoned settled a good while after
commixtion, and full ordrynge, so that the strength violent operation of them
is mynyshed, by lunge taryaunce setlynge. And yet is not their whole virtue
distroyd, but their operacio is better and helth^uller.

Costan.
Item wild myntes yt grow in holes, made in an ointment delyuerithe him yt
hath the Sciatica and gout of his grefe, by heating drawing furthe the
matter.

Gilber^
If the grefe be two out ragyous take of Opium. i. of Saffron. iii. mingle them
with.iiii. yolks of Eggs, or.v. and plaster the same upon the grefe, for it
myghtyly ass wagythe the pains and restrayneth the corruptyon.

Item Gotes dounge sodden with cattes grese, or the fat of a raven or vulture,
is much worth in this case

The dounge of a stork myxte with hogs suet, is very good also.

Above and more force then all things else is to keep the belly louse at al
times.

The joyce of sallowe or willow rote myxt with oil of rosys is wounderful good
for the hot gout. Galen.


Against the chopping or ruptures.
The Causes
Much going in cold wyndes and dryness.

The signs need no declaracyo.

Remedies. Capi. liiii.
Hemlock leaves stamped and oryed so made in a plaster, heal all ruptures or
choppynges within.ix or.x. days.

English Galangale healethe the choppynges deep wounds.

Lyuerworte stampte and drunk with wine, every day is helthfull good.

Yonge Hares dressed orderid with honey in manner of Pylles, and so ministrid, do
close up and make hole choppes and ruptu^es.

Item hares dounge myxt with Honey and given often unto the pacyent to drink,
in the bigness of a bean closes up the ruptures mightylye.

Let the head of a got be sodden hear and al, y^ in water of a gourd, and
eat the meat thereof, or drink the water, it makes all the inward parts of
a man hole and sound.

Of the Agew called ephimera which endures but one day.
The Causes.
The vital spirits in a wonderful unnatural heate without putretactyon,
which comes of much watching, sadness, anger, hoger, or dronkenesse.

The Signs.
Great heate in the body with a fever ending in a sweat or vapour.

Remedies. Capi. lv.
First make a syrupe of the decoction of saunders, and the flowers of water
Lylyes, then let the pacyent avoid and eschew all things that burn the
heart* al that are gross and hot, and if ye vital spirits be in flamid
cheflye above all things bring the patient in a soft sleep, and let him
smell to Camfore with rose water, and violettes and such like, and minister
things that cause coldn^s and comfort the hart, as Margarites, sanders, and the
scrapynge of Ivory, or let him be anoyntid with oil of Rosis and Nenufar,
upon the breast and plasture thereon cold things teperid with Uenyger, and it is
very good against the heate: if ye natural spirits be inflamid, take cold
syrops and electuaryes that cause coldness, as are sugar, Rosys, and Uiolettes
and plaster the rosys sauders upon the liver, but if it be of a cold cause
beware of letting of blood, to engender more cold the^by specyally if it be
with a room.

Give unto the pacyent rose water newly made myxt with sugar or violettes, and
let him smell to basyl, yet let him not smell to other sweet sauoures, yt be
hot, and in a hot rewmatike cause, let him use a cold fomentatyon and
ointment, but chefelye if it come of over much labour, or copulation or heate
of ye air and such like, let the holownes of the hades and the souls of the
fete be anoyntid with oil of Uyolettes rosys woman's milk, also anoynte the
back bone, the forehead and teples with oil of rosys, Populion, woman's milk
that gives a woman child suck, and let his meat and drink be of light
dygestyon, and cold, but if it be of over much labour or of over much emptines
he must be nourished with resumptiues and confortatyues, if he cannot sweet,
this will heate him incontinet and minister occasion unto the patient to sweet.

Let the leaves of Sallowe tree Holyhoke, Uiolettes and rosis, and such like
boyle together in water, wherein put a great clothe, and l^t ye pacyent be
wrappyd in the same being warm and coueryd therwyth till he sweet, and
afterward let him wash his feet arms legs in the same decoctyon.

Item the joyce of Cucumers with oil of rosys anoyntid upon ye pulsys and upon
the heart, Dyosco.
asswagethe the heate of the Ague.

Platearius had a certain paciet destytute of strength, and put him in a
bathe of water, wherein sodden Eggs were resoluid and after the bathing he
departed strong.

Put a grene Gored in paste, and bake it in an oven, and afterwrynge out the
joyce and put it into a pot and sethe therein Hens flesh or of some other bird
(first well washte with wine and salt) and a few grains of whet and Barlye
Lycorice, gum, of Arabike, dragos Rosys, flowers of water Lylys, fleworte,
Almondes, of the gum of ye Almound tree, Basil* Reasons, myrabolans, Sebesten
sede, the sedes of a gourd, Melon and Cucumer being al clean dressed put the in
a pot well closyd with clay, and let them boyle till the third part be washid
afterward strain it and put sugar to the strayner and make a syrupe thereof
and give it unto the patient, it restores very well, temperately colythe and
helthfullye comfortithe fayntinge persons.

Of a contynual Agew.
The Causes.
Abundance of putrefyed humours contained within the veins.

The Signs.
Continual heate and pains unto the end of the Fever,

Remedies. Capi. lvi.
TO mytigate the over much heate in a continual Agew, Macer.
sethe Coleworte leaves with oil of Rosys, and plaster it upon the stomach.

The same thing may be done of Willow leaves, Morel and flewort

A certain curious practicionar showed me for a certainty, ye Pympernell
drunk with warm water, takes away the contynual Fever.

Put the sede of Flewort hole in water all a night, Auycen
then let it be strained and put thereto Sugar, give it unto the patient it
colethe, and intolerable heate of sharpe agewes.

Syrup of nenufur doth mightily heal sharpe Agewes. (...)


Galen.
Item if the Agewe be not very sharpe, let the pacyent drink cold wine myxt
with water it openythe the stoppynges within, bringithe furth corruptyon
through ye urine and confortith weak members.

Diosco* says that if the patient drink a great deal of cold water the
intolerable heate wylbe extynguyshed thereby.

In this cause apples that are called bitter swetes are very good.

Of the tertian Fever.
The Causes.
Much choleric humour putrefyeng in the sensible parts of the body.

The Signs.
To have a fit every other day and not to endure above.xii. hours.

Remedies. Capi. lvii.
IF it be the right Tertian give unto the pacyent to drink, ye joyce of
Dendelyon before coming of the fit.iii. or.iiii. times and the Agewe shall go
from him this am I sure of.

The matter being digestyd cause thy self to be let blood in the fourth or fyft
hours before the coming of the fit, and if it so be there go before any tokens
of digestio, he shall have the Agewe no more.

The matter being digestid make a plaster upon the pulses of ye arms of the
lesser nettel that grows in a very dry and warm place stamped with much
salt, for shortly after the Fever shall cease.

Myngle Radyshe rote being stamped, with Wheat bran, and make a plaster*
apply it between the nauyl and the share that the matter being first digestid
he shulde not perceue the payne and wringinges this remedy hath ben provide
against al kind of Tertian fevers.

The joyce of Ribwort give before the fit do com, takith away ye same.

Of the same operation are.iii. platayn rotes stamped and drunk with water
before the fit come. Diosco,


Three grains of Coryander put in a rear egg and given to the pacyent to sup
of after the.iii. or.iiii. fit will deliver him of the Agew.

The joyce of sower grapes vsid.ii days in the morning, takes away the
Tertian Fever.

To take away al tertia fevers* take mellilot. Cellydone, white black Pepper,
netels, and salt Peter w^l bound unto the pulsis of the arms this was tried
by a practionar.

The joyce of pympernell drunk as the fit comith doth vtterli take it away.

Of the same operation is cychory, the same thing workithe the joyce of
Parselly drunk after ye sam^ fashion.

Item stamped Ueruen leaves and iii. rotes thereof dissoluyd in water, take it
before the fit come, it will drive it away.

Take vine leaves and put them in wine, Dios^
give the same wine.ii. or iii. times to drink, it will rid him of the tertian
or quart Fever.

Rewponticke is a singular remedy against Fevers.

Take, iii. slyppes of, iii. leuyd grase stamped it and put the joyce in water
and drink the same water, it is very good for the Fever.

Take Rye bran, the joyce of Ueruen, Syngrene, Peter. Lu
Nettelles and Plantayne, myngle them together with.iiii. Eggs and plaster it
over the belly before the coming of the fit,

The joyce of mollen put into the nostrils of the patient in the coming of
the ^yt, takes away the disease.

Gilber
The powder of Crystal given in wine and Dendelyon, before the coming of the
Agewe, takith away the fit thereof.

The powder of Crystal given to drink to a nurse, takes away ye Agewe from
the children that she gives suck unto.

Item the liquor that comes fro the sodden lights of a Rame, healyth the
tertian fever, and ye disease of the raynes.

Garlyke bound to the outward members of a man, takes away ye quodyane and
tertian Fever, but it must be applied as I vnderstond before the fit come, for
by that means the matter is drawn to the extremities, that is to say to the
hands fete so that ye principal members are helped.

Of the Quotidian Fever.
The Causes.
Putrefyed phlegm driven by nature to all the sensible parts of the body.

The Signs.
To have a fit every day about xviii, hours lunge.

Remedies. Capi. lviii.
IF thou will spedylye heal the quotidian Fever, Macer
take these approved medicines, give to pacyent. ii. of Betonye. i. of
Plantayne, with the straynynge of them, before the coming of the fit, and the
pacyent shall be hole thereby.

Give unto the paci^nt this syrupe, take the leaves of Betonye, the rotes of
Persly, of Fenell, of Filipendula, of Maiden hear, of Hearts tongue, of the
middel rind of an elder, Ana. M.i. of Agaryke. i. of oak fern. ii. of wild
Time. i. and much honey as discrecyon will give to be sufficient, it is of much
and great efficacy.

Item stamp crumbs of bread and gall, of each like quantytye mingle it with a
soft roasted egg, oil of Baize or oil of Cyprus and wet a clothe therein
and apply it over the stomach belly, it hath ben prouid to be very good.

Provoke vomyt unto the patient with an electuary of cassia, and a little
Cinamound with the decoctyon of wild cucummer rote: radyshe rote vinegar made
in a sirupe with honey is very good.

Take the rote of Galingale the sedes of Radish, and the sede of Orenche, the
rote of black hellebor and as much Honey and Vinegar as shall be thought
sufficient mengle them together and let them seth to half, and let the pacyent
dry^ke thereof.ii. hours before the fit comethe, and afterward let him eat
nothing in five hours, or at lest in a good space after.

Item give unto the patient before the fit come upon two penny w^ightes of bay
beris made to powder with a soft Egg, or pults with out doubt the pncyent shall be
made hole.

Mustard eaten before the coming of the fit expellith ye cold Fevers yt come by
course as in quotidias and Quartaynes. Mac^.


Item Isope given with water h^ny purges slymy humours.

After purgacyon of the hole body apply unto the veins of both the Arms, this
plaster following. Take four leaves of Nettelles, Galen.
of Morel of Sengrene Ana. m.i. of Cobwebes. ii. as much Common Sa^te as shall be
thought sufficient stamp them all together and make a plaster.

One says in his book of practyses that he hath helid many of the Quotydyan
Fever, with ye middell rynd of an elder given with warm water, or with the
rind of a nut tree give after the same manner, with.ix grains of leasse spurge
or of Pioni but these things are to be ministrid unto strong men and
laboriouse.

Give unto the pacyent, woman's milk yt gives aman child suck, Petrus.
with water, either before the fit or in the fit it shall so heal him.

Take.ix. rotes of waulwort, of ye bignese of a mans finger, cut them in pieces
and stamp them strain them with Ale or with white wine, give thereof unto the
pacyent before ye hour of his fit, let him not sleep in any case.

The liver of a Hare dried and given to drink with water, takethe away the
Fener.

Take of agarycke. i. give it unto the patient to drink with wine and honey, it
takes away all fevers Quo^idians, tertians, and quartaynes, through purging
slimy corruptiue humours.

Take wine and myngle it with asses blood, Estula.
drink the same for it healith the quotidian Fever.

Of a Quartain Fever.
The Causes.
Melancholy putrefyed having recourse to diverse parts of man.

The Signs.
To have two good days and the thryd a sore fit.

Remedies. Capi. lix.
TO take away the quartain Agewe give unto the paciet three or four pills as
follow, take of opium, of brimstone, myrhe Agaricke, Rue leaves, cassia
Fistula, Ana. i. mingle them with the joyce of Wormewoode, and make pylles in
the bigness of a bean, give unto the pacyent before the fit do come on him.

Item Trochiskes are of certain provide where with many have ben healyd of the
Agewe at once drynckynge, but they are best in quotydyan Fevers. Take of Rue, of
alu, Myrhe, Opiu, ana.. a half of safron. ii. cassia fistula. ii. of quick
Brymstone. ii. of Henbane..vi. make Trochiskes and give the with water.

Also Beres flesh eaten heals the Quartayne Fever.

Item strong wine wherein Egrimonye hath ben sodden heals the quartayne
Fever.

Make a hole in a bean and put therinto the small stynkynge worms that breed
in paper or wod called Cimices, they take away ye fever

Item cynksoyle stampte with a little Pepper and drunk before ye fit come, is
good against ye quartayne.

The joyce of Mollen drunk before the fit, sleeth the same.

Item yarow given to drink before ye fit comes with wine, takes a way the
quartayne.

Item the joyce of Camomill being drunk before the fit, takyth a way the
Fever.

Take Assa fetida, Rue leaves* pepper ana. ii. mingle them with honey give them
unto the patient.ii. hours before the coming of the fit as big as a Chest
nut, it hath ben provide.

A swallows donge drunk takes away the Fever Quartayne.

The joyce of horse houfe drunk used.x. days takyth a way both the Tertian
and quartayne fever, The joyce of mugworte myxt with oil give unto the paciet
warm iii. days, takes away the fever.

Take of dragons blood and wild Time of each in like quantity, as much as
shall suffice sethe them in water till it be thycke, and afterward mingle, there
unto of the stone called Lazulus. ii. give unto the patient thereof the space
of.iii. days one. ad^ye* the first day it takes away yt the rigorousnes the
second the fit the third day it heals all together perfectly, this same hath
ben prouid

Item Briony stamped and plastesteryd unto the pulses of the temples and arms
before the fit com, takes away the quartayne agewe.

Circan
Item Assafetida sodden in wine put it in a holowe rote of soubread and put
therinto sugar given unto ye patient before the fit ( a purgation ministered
before it), it helith.

Give unto the pacyent to drink before his fit the sedes of Henbane. Mandrage,
ana. ii. Assafetida. i and a half, and it will heal him.

Let the patient fast all a hole day before his fit come on him, and let him
watch all the night after, in ye morning roast him a Partridge and let him eat
thereof, let him drink good wine strong, let him eat no other thing al y^
day, and afterward let him sleep his fill.

This same also is namyd to be a helthful medicine, Azarabacca if it be fresh
gathered stamped it ^ethe it a little while in wine let ye wine be given unto the
paciet.ii. houe^s before his fit if the matter lye in ye stomach it causith
vometynge, if other where it wastyth it.

The matter being digestyd give unto the patient before his fit a little oil
of Ienoper, (a purgation presupposid) it is of much strength in the quartayne
agewe.

Give unto the patient.iii. grains of Ivy gum.

Take the rote of sperage let them seth a good while in water and give thereof
unto the pacyent that has Fever quartayne.vii. days, and th^ is a wounderfull
help therein.

The joyce of rybworte, drunk with warm water and honey two hours before his
fit come upon him, takes away the quartayne agewe.

Of ye sam^ operacio are four rotes of platayne stapt broke with water.

Fill a hen yt is but a year old with percely and Basil as much as shall be
thought sufficient, put into her al the hole substance of a raw egg beside
the shell, and salt sufficient and put her in past and bake it upon the herthe
under some vess^ll give unto the patient one part there of one day and so much
another day, let him eat no other thing it is good also for the tertia
quotidia fever it provokes vryne disiestith ye matter takith awai ye fever.

The blood of an Ass anoyntyd over the back bone while it is fresh and warm,
Constable
takith away the quartayne Agewe.

Wine of the decoctyon of the rote of Gensian is good, for let the patient
drink thereof, and it shall take ye Fever away.

Take holworte hensdonge and stamp them together, distemper the with white
wine strain it give it unto the patient before the coming of his fit.

Certain practitionars say yt turmentil drunk before the fit losythe the
quartayne.

But a skorpion in oil let ye soles of the fete palms of ye hade be anoyntid
therewith the forhed and back bone before ye fit comith, Kye
it expellith both the quartaine, quoridia and tertian Fever

The fat of a vulture myxt with oil if the patient be anoyntid therwyth Kye.
it drives away the quartaine.

Macer.
Take.iiii. leaves and.iiii. rotes of Ueruen seth them in wine and let ye pacyet
drink ye same before his fit.

Dyosco.
Calamint given before the fit, takith away quartayne. Wyld margeram doth
extenuat wast ye fits.

Dioscor.
Calamint, wild Margeram Peniryall, Buglosse, Borage, Hearts tongue, scene, the
rindes of the ^ote of tamarike, of ash, betony, iarmander, Time and wild Time
Ana. ii of Betony.m.i. of Mugwort of egrimony, of Sperage.m.i, let them seth
all to gether in whyt wine and put a little honey thereto, let the paciet drink
thereof, morning and euenig it mightylye wastes choler adust melancholy.

Take of Uiolettes, of Borage Flours, of scene, time, and wild time ana* i. a
half, Myrabolans Cytryn, rewebarbe ana. i. sethe them unto the.iiii. part,
then streyne it (...) sethe it again till it be brought to the full point of.
ii. or.i. and in y^ end of ye decoctyon put to rewbarb^ and let it be sharpnyd
with. i. of spurge or of the joyce of scamonte, and give it an hour before his
fit come on him, and without doubt it will heal al quartaines.

A cure provide of one often times, before the fit give all the sorts of
myrabolans scene with cynabarys made to powder, put there into a little of spurge
with cream of euenning milk, and if the paciet be a woman full of choler put
thereto rewbarbe

Take nepe stamp it and wring out the joyce and drink it with wine it losith
al ye hole matter into sweat and so takith away his disease. Diosco.


The joyce of Mugwort that has one stalk, mixed with oil of Rosis anointed
on the backbone pulsys, takes away the fever and healyth the patient soundly.

Orenche seade stampte sodden in drink takith away ye quartayn.

Take ye joyce of Pellytory myngle it with the powder of Mirabolas of India, give
it before the fit.iii. hours, before the very fit give.i. penny weight of wyld
Margera it shall heal without doubt.

Diosco.
Take. iiii. of Betony with wine honey water before the fit, it takith away the
Fever.

Macer.
The decoctyon of black helebur passith all medycynes in operation against a
lunge contynuyd quartayne Fever.

G^bre
Take of white and black Helebur Ana. i. of the stones called Lazulus and
Calaminaris Armeniacus of each. i. of oak fern. i. a half of Borage flouers.
i. of Gotes blood dried. ii. make a powder thereof and give the patient in drike
iii. hours before his fit, the matter being first digestyd and extenut by
purgation.

Stamp persly all the hole substance of an egg and half a pound of hogs
blood, incorporate them well together sesond with salt, take a hen stufe her
there with, the make a pie and back her therein, let the patient eat thereof, it
takes a way the quartaine fever by a little little* it conforteth the hart,
stomach, and noryshinge virtue, and prouokith apetit.

Take.xl grains of Pepper with warm water and drink it, it is very good to
take a way the quartayn and intermyssiue fevers.

The cuttinge of a vain before coming of the fit distroythe greatly the
fever, let it be used often and little at once,

The rynde and leaves of a nuttre drunk in vinegar, takes away the Fever and
rygorousnes thereof.

Cost or Detyn stamped mixed with oil, Dioscor.
and anoyntyd upon the back bone and pulsys of the patient, heals the
intermyssyue rygorousnes of the fits.

Item fill a capon with oak fern, flowers of Borage, scene, with ye joyce of
Garlyke, make potage there of, it purges the raw humours, and birnt choler, if
you put thereto a little Penyryal for it wastes more better the ill humours and
makes the potage of better operation.

Musterd sede stamped and drunk before the fit, dryuyth it a way.

Penyryal, both kinds of Time, Scene, Calamint, wild Marge^a, mingle them al
together with honey sethe it let it be scoumid clean, let the pacyent take
thereof, it is very good for the quartayne Agew, and against the stoppyng in
the spleen and liver.

The ordur of a man dried and drunk with wine or honey testranyth the fits.

A sea Crab eat is good in the quartayne fever. Auicen.


Camamyll drunk is good for all fevers.

Mingle the joyce thereof with oil anoynte the rigge of the back and the pulsys
of the patient before the time of the fit, he shall have no fit.

Stamp rosemarye and give the joyce thereof unto the paciet to drike before his
fit, and he shall be hole in continent.

Sethe.ix. handfuls of Rue in sufficient wine. Peter. L^.
and give the same unto the patient to drink in the hour suspectid of the
fevers approaching.

Stamp the rote of holworte and sethe it with water and honey give the patient
thereof to drink before his fit, Macer,
it will take away a lunge cotynuinge fever if it be oft used.

Take the inward skin of nut curnelles and stape the same sethe it with
good wine, and drink the same when it is claryfied a little before the fit, and
it will cause the same to cease.

A grene frog sodden in oil of myrhe, if ye patient be anoyntid therwyth
before his fit, it shall clear him of his Agewe,

The joyce of Hemp, before the fit takes away the fever.

Wine of the decoction of sage, rosemary, Lauader drunk before the coming of
the fit, healith the quartayne Agewe.

Rewpontike is a singular help unto intermissive and cold fevers.

Centory stamped with wine and drunk before the fit, causith it to be no fit,
this experiment is known to be of most certantie.

The rote of wild cucumer give to drink before ye fit, takes away the Fever.

Make lye of fine wine, oak ashes of y^ rote of rede coleworts of rustines of
iron burnt and stapt to powder, give it to drink lunge before the coming of
the fit, it mightylye lowsyth the bowels and takes away the quartayne fever.

For a Carbuncle and venomous bytyng.
The Causes
Gross and hot blood having recourse to any one place.

The Signs.
A sore painful ulcer or boil with a foul scabbe as it were brennyd with fire
with a great heat fever.

Remedies. Capi. lx.
THe brain of a hen or potage made thereof, eat or applied to the place of
the grief is of more better operation the any thing else.

A patients own spittle is very good against venomous bitinges,

A scorpion stamped and applied to the grievous place, is contrari to her own
stinging, and other of her kid and therefore it is a wounderfull remedy.

Lyra.
A fig leaf or the rind of a fig tree stamped and applied, is very apt good
against venomous stingiges

Gotes blood warmyd over the fyere drunk, is of myghtlye operation against al
drynkinge of poysones.

Gotes dounge temperid with honey and put unto the stinged place, heleth the
same.

Ox houfes sodden and eaten with mustard, withstand al poison, so yt nothing is
able to hurt.

Dioscor.
Agrymony drunk with wine, is wonderful good against the venemouse bytinge of
a serpent, a dog or a man, and a carbuncle.

Take hounds tongue grene or dried and lay it to the Carbuncle stinged or
venomous place, and it will ripe it.

Mollen stampte and plasteryd, is of great efficacye against the stinging of a
serpent, or when a meber is wounded put the joyce thereof into the wound, and it
will cause the venom to issewe out.

Cressys stampte and mynglid with bran healyth the carbuncle plasteryd thereon.

The ordure of a man is very good oft times before brekyng forth and after.
Auycen


Juniper berys are medicinable against poisons for there is none of like
operation unto it. Dioscorids also affyrmith that they do help against poisons
and stinginges of serpents.

Cheruill and coluer foot are very good against the carbuncle: Gilbert
in ye danger of death give unto the patient milk mingled with wine water

The rote of brom put into a vesel of wine, preserves the drinkars thereof
from all poison it hath ben provide.

Dyosco.
The rotes of Affodyls expelli^h al poison incontinent, and it preseruyth from
euell venomous meat and plasterid helthfully helps venomous bithinges.

Isac.
Rue, nuts and honey, stamped together and plasterid, break wouderfullye a
melancolike or flegmatike aposteme.

Dioscor*
Nuts stamped and applied to ye grefe, to gether with the rides, disstroy al
apostemes within the body.

The sede of a palm tree drunk with wine helith al venemouse bitinges

Fill an egg shell full of the joyce of egrymony, give it unto the patient to
drink it purges mightylye al poison upward with a wounderful faciliti helith
the biting of serpetes other vene mouse bestes.

Bees, and flies, bound knit with honey wine in a clothe, draw out al venom,
also apply stamped garlic there into till it break.

Dytany stampte plasterid and ye joyce thereof drunk, Cons^
is very good against all poison, and v^nemouse bytynges.

The same expellith and drawethe out of the body an arowe or shaft. Dioscor.
Take a kernel of a great nut, Isac.
stapt it with the leaves of Rue, plaster it on the grefe early and late, without
doubt it will break the apostem or any kind of swelling else in ye body. An ox
gaull brekyth a felon, or the sore yt is called a cartes hear brekinge out in
the fingers.

Mulberies very ripe bronken applied to the grefe, break wouderfully the
apostems.

The sede and herb of cressys minglid together and plasterd, healethe the
Carbuncle.

If a man eat of garlic, and the drink the blood of a cock with warm wine,
he shall be hurt with no vemous beast.

The blud of a Duck drunk with wine preserves the drynkar fro all poison.

Saynct Ihons herb stampte plasteryd immediately upon the bytynge, doth permyt
no operation of the poison in him.

Of the measels.
The Causes.
Nature purging all corrupcion from the inward parts of ye body.

The signs be evident to the sight.

Remedies. Capi. lxi.
HE that will heal the measels ought first to labour and bestow his endeavour
that they first come al furthe, thereto take dry figs flower of lentyls
munified made clean ana. x. of the gum (...) Dragace ana. vi. let the be
sodden in five pounds of water unto iiii. strain, it and put therinto. of
Saffron and give the pacyent thereof to drink before meat, when he goes to
sleep, till all come forth.

Salt peter myxt with terebentine opens the Carbuncles* Galen,
draws out the fylthye corruption.

Take of the leaves of Basyl, and fill the place of ye ulcer that makithe the
carbuncle, there is nothing more stronger then this.

Against felons in the fingers, make a plaster of brimstone, Rosen,
terebentyne, put a little saffron thereunto and the Tallow of a calfe.

Leven of whet breketh the venemouse humours and apostumes. Isac.


Any clothe dyed purple hath virtue of attraction.

Against a hollow ulcer or fistula.
The Causes.
A corrupt and sharpe humour in any membre.

The Signs.
A deep hollow ulcer narow and harde with al.

Remedies. Capi. lxii.
Against ye disease called fistula mingle the milk of wertwort, with the fresh
grese of a hog let them boyle a little together and incorporate the afterward
put thereto powder of myrhe and anoynte ye tent with all and put into the hole.

Wine of the decoction of spurge put into the holownes of the ulcer, healethe,
and of the same operation working is ye joyce of coluerfote. Take of both
kinds of plantaine, of coluerfote, coryandre, marigold yarow, Primrose, daysy
that groeth in meadows, ye tender stalks of dock, and Betony make the al to
powder or to a joyce and give it to the patient dyseasyd with the fistule, at
morning nountide and night, it is sovereign and heals al kinds of fistules
and hollow ulcers if they be curable if not the patient shall vomyt it up
again.

Powder made of a bogs head healith the fistule, the cancre, and al
fylthynes in hollow ulcers.

If the Fistule have many holes be not straight yet, Costan.
if a medicine may pierce into the there is nothing better the to put into the
holownes of them gotes dounge with warm honey myxt withal, for it losyth all
sw^lling, draws out rottennes purgyth foul and defylid senowes healith up
the fistule asswagith the Cancre and grefe thereof.

If the Fistule be outward put therinto ye joyce of coluerfote it healyth, if
it be inward drink it, and it healith also.

Time stamped with salt plastrid upon the fistule helith the same.

Mans dounge burnt having myxt therwyth pepper beaten to powder, kills the
fistule cacre above al things.

Sethe the joyce of Mollen with honey, skume the same till the ioyc^ be
consumed, then put thereto of the rindes of Pomegranates and of ye stones of
myrabosanes, apply it to the cancre, it helps in continent.

Take the joyce of a cow turd (in a woman) and of an ox (in a man) wash the
fistula with the ioice and apply the residewe thereto plasteryd, it helps
quickly.

Dioscor.
Put leaven in strong lye so apply it to the fistule, and so it shall be
lightly, healyd, for it draws the rottynes even from the bottom of ulcer,
and dioscorides affyrmyth ye same of the lye Isaac of the leave.

This potion is wonderful very often prouid of me, for it kills the Fistule
in what place soever it be draws out the corrupt and broken bones.

Take the rotes and leaves of platan, strawbery leaves, the leaves or seade of
Hepe, the leaves or sede of mustard, ye tops of sharpe dock, red colewort
leaves, tansey, let them al sethe in good quantity, in white wine, afterward
strain al the hole and put into the straining as much honey as shall be thought
mete, give it unto the patient early and late, till such time as the clear
potyon come furth by the mouth of the Fistule, which must always be kept open
with a silver pipe put into it, and keep upon it always a red colewort leaf,
it is of a wouderful operacio.

The blood of a sea Tortoys takith away often times the holownes of
scrophules. Gilbert,


Plantayne stamped and the joyce wrong out, Dyosco.
and put into the hollow

A drink most certainly approuid of wounderful and incredible efficacye, which
being given to be drunk of woundid men so that the wound be not mortale wypyth
out within xiii. days al filthines fro the would, and drawith there out al broken
bones heals up the wound.

Take of red colewortes, fen^greke Percely, sothernewod, tansey, strawbery
leaves, and suet, brere leaves, plantayn leaves, hemp, redmadder smallage,
cransebill, Alam, nuts, before al things let them be sod together in pure
white wine, put thereto a little honey, give it unto the patient early late, and
anoynte ye wound without when he hath drunk of ye said potion, lay thereon a lefe
of red colewortes keape the same cotynually over it, it opens it and hath ben
often provide.

A wounderful good and approuyd powder, take, of Eg^imoney, of pimpernell, and
plantayn. ii. a. C. gratnes of ryshe sede, verdegrece, the place being
mudified, put this powder in.

Take as much powder of holworte as you can take up in three fingers. and use it
at none and at night, for it purges downward the hole fistike and helyth it
wounderfully.

Advance drunk with wine and in plasterid often unto the ulcer helith the
Fistula. Alber^.


The water of nightshade healith the hollow ulcers though they be in the eyes.

Poly drunk with wine and benet thistell, has a wounderful effect in
drawing the holowe ulcers called fistules but when it is drunk the powder of
egrimony most be pourid up on the Fistule.

Agrimony is of wounderful profit in midicines and inespecially against hollow
wounds and ulcers

Of the Scab, Pockes, and Leprousy.
The Causes.
Gross and fylthy humours mingled with thynne sharpe matter,

The Signs
Scabs in the outward parts with great pains and ytchyng, if he have the
lepre mystempre and pains through al the body with fylthy scabs and
falling of the hear.

Remedies. Capi. lxiii.
THese remedies folowinge are against the French Pokes lepry and such like.

Make anoyntment against the Scabbe that is ingend^rid of salt fleagme, of
Aloes and vnquenchyd lime with common oil.

Diosco
French garlic fried with oil, kills the ilscabbe and the breking out
th^rof applied upon the apostem, so yt it touche no other flesh by, it brekith
the same Immedyatly.

To heal an old Leprye. Auycen
Take a serpent of a dry hyl, and cut of the head thereof quickly, and the
tail, let her blede stur about the blod till the bleding cease, and afterward
let the Serpent be modified from his inwards, and let it be sodden cause the
patient to eat thereof every day. i. and drink ye wine where in the serpent
hath ben sodden, till the leprouse person be swollen and puffed up and be gynne
through Anguish to be in a manner beside him self, then put the patient in a
stew or hot house, and let the hole body of the patient be anointyd with the
liquor wherein the adder or serpent was sodden, for the hole flesh and skin
is thereby renuid, and so shall the patient be perfytly healid. Take a black
serpent the head being cut of, bury her till she be full of worms then let her
be dried, and give thereof unto the leporouse. i. with a syrope of honey every
day.

Put corn in water of the decoction of serpents, and fed hens with the same
corn, and let them drink ye same water, and there feathers shall fall of, and
when they be vnfetherid let them be sod, and let the leprowse person eat them,
and drink the water where in they were sodden and let him wash his hands, face,
and berd therewith.

This same experiment is said to heal the pockes for a certayntye in one day,
take of mollen, pytche. iii of qui^ke brimstone, of salt Peter, Frakencese
ana. ii. as much oil as shall be thought sufficient, make it and work it up
well reserve it as ye shall ocupy it.

Circan
The back of our ladies Thystell stamped with vinegar and applied, takyth utterly
away al scabbynes (...) curffe.

Take nesynge powder, louage, fennyll, and sees them all to gether in wine,
wash the patient that hath a deformytie of the skin enclyning to a leprye,
and it will clear him.

A precious ointment against ye scabbe, which is wounderful, in effect and
hath ben of^ provide.

Take of quycke silver. ii. of euphorbium. i. of stauisagre. ii. of litarge.
iii. of suet a pound half make an ointment let ye paci^nte be anoyntid
therwyth, al the arms, shulders, and back bone, and about the knees, either
against the son or against the fire, and if you perceue by anointing the
patient with this vnctyon, that he be inclined to vomiting, or else any
swellynge of the upper parts in the body, anoynte him no more if not, cease
not to anoint him till ye seueth day be past, if the he break not out, make a
sometacion against the stomach with water of the decoct^on of Rosemary, and
Sage, and after three days let make a bathe with water of the decoctyon of
enula capana dock and lay a white lynnen clothe upon the anoyntyd place, that
the ointment touche not the other parts of the body, by this manner of ordering
have many Leprouse persons been healid.

Gilber
Against the French Pokes, take of brimstone. ii. of nesyng powder quick
silver, Cumin, Ana. i. of Staphisagre. a half and incorporate the with. vi. of
stale hogs grease, by this means every evil disease or sickness is for a
surety healed* excep^ it be of glandules or kernels which must be cured after
an other mean.

^eape a cock fastinge three days, and then tie him to a stake with some Corde,
and tie a tod by him with a corde also, so that the cock may eat him, within
two days after the eating of the Tod, kill the Cock, and sethe him in pure
good wine a good while, put raw honey therein, let the patient use the same
every day, a hen were better. But thus hath it ben provide.

The leaves of Lilly stampte and plasterid upon ye grefes, heals the. Petru^.


Uitriolum citrine dri^d mixed with vinegar, burned upon a tyle shard and do so by
it thryse, lastely make it to powder being applied, it healith the sycknes.

The rotes of Lekes, made in a plaster and applied upon the glandules or
kernels (whereof the syknes comes) heals it and anoint the ulcers with this
ointment.

Take the joyce of leke blades oil and wax and incorporate the, and so anoint
the places yt be cancrous it heals them wounderfully.

Melt talowe and dryppe therein a linen clothe, and so bind it to the legs it
doth excedynglye well heal ye pustules of the legs else where.

Take the pythe of leauened bread stamp it and tempre it with wine and honey,
make them boyle together myngle thereto talowe spr^d it upon a lynen clothe, and
apply it hot to ye bruyses grievous pultules of the legs.

The cuttynge of the vain that is nyghe the bigger joint doth myghtylye
heal the scabbe and the evil pustules on that side.

Diosco.
Dry figs stampte with ye flowers of Ivy, so applied do mighty lye help the
painful pustules of of the legs.

Stamp red myntes, Rue, black bery or bramble leaves, and morell together
with the rotes of lilly mixed them with the whytes of eggs, vyneger oil,
strain them all together and anoynte the therewith, it is wounderful good.

Sethe the rotes of dock, Diosco.
and stape them mightily with hogs grese put thereto quycke silver quenchid
with Sage and ashes, incorroporate it anoint the therwyth, it will yield
wounderful effect.

Sethe the flowers of wertworte mightyly in vinegar put oil th^rto, anoint the
therewith, it will heal the lepry, the scab, and al itchinges.

Apply to the ulcers being first mundyfyed, tryacle and in ye spring following,
or the (if it be then sprig) thou shall be hole.

Take staphisagre litarge make a powder, and a bathe, and a^ter wash thy self
it is good against ye mor few.

The smoke of henbane sede (ye grieved member being fumigatyd therwyth) heals.

Anoyntment therewith expert and Cunning men say that though ye paulmes of
the hands and sooles of the feet (being nothing grieved) be anointed therewith
yet al scabbynes is taken clean away from al ye body. Take of oil of baize.
iiii. of white Frankincense, and clear white Wax. ii. of quick silver
quenchyd with spettell. i. of hogs fat well fried, v. of bay salt well
stampte. viii. of the joyce of plantayne, and fumytory as much as you will,
myngle them all together, and if your conf^cion be just and good, it is a
wounderfull experiment.

Kye^.
Take a snake and roast her with salt, and afterward burn her in a pot well
closed unto powder, and give the same against al Leprye: al other desperate
grefes.

Of Glaudules or curnelles,
The Causes.
Gross and thick phlegm gaderyo to one place.

The Signs.
A curnel in the flesh not very harde.

Remedies. Capi. lxiiii.
TO take away the glandules, Diosc^*
inco^porate brimstone and whet bra with Cerpentine, make a plaster of. Darnel,
Circan Dyo^.
quick brimstone lyne sede and coluer dounge, take them and sethe them in wine
and apply it to the scruphules and weles, it kills and brekyth them.

Lentil sede given with wine that is fyued, doth expel and drive forth the
glandules.

The rote of wild Cucumer stapt with barley meal, Diosco.
and made in a plaster takith away old swellinges filthy and hard.

The rote of betony incoroporatyd with grefe and co^uer dounge, the strophules
mightyly.

Macer.
Wylo Poppy, quick brimstone, coluer dounge, and Lin sede, let the be all
sodden with pure wine first stamped together so plasterid it healyth al the
scrophules.

Gilber
Take and sethe an egg well and break it in ye milk or joyce of spurge, give
it ye patient to drink three days early late, and let him eat no supper and
so shall he be delivered thereof.

Take of coluer, Gotes and Ox doung dried, of litarge of the ashes of
coleworte rote, of serapine, of bitter almoundes Ana. i. incorporat them all
with pytche a little stale oil or stale grese, and so apply it, y^ same helpith
and lowsethe quickly, specially if they first take a purgation of turbythe.

Macer.
Mustard sede stampte and punned with old grese and so plasterid, clensyth the
scrophules clean.

Make dow of bean flouer with ^he joyce of coryander, bake it, and plaster it
hot, it helith perfytlye the ^crophules.

Snails boylid stamped so laid ^o, mollyfy dissolve. ye scrophules. The powder
of black pepper dried mixed with hard pitch, Diosco
doth disperse put away, scrophules infantes.

A sodden fig plastered thereon helith them.

Lycoryse, stamped plasterid takes away the swelling of ye scrophules.

In the wane of the moan, let ye patient use to drink.ix. days together the
joyce of Agrimonie why fasting, so shall he be hole of the glandul^s.

Melt pytche and hogs greece, put thereto quick brimstone whet bran, and so
make a plaster, it he^ithe the pustules of ye neck throt applied there.

Go^es dounge is good to resolve the glandules.

Mengle the ashes of the feathers of coluers wings, and burnt henbane, with
bread, and so apply them to the scrophules of ye neck for thereby they shall be
resolved consumid

Take the joyce of wild Lylly euforbium, temper them together give the
patient seven pills made thereof in the morning for.xxx. dais continually, for
it expellith the scrophules, so yt one shall not remain.

Take the rote of a lylly and lynesede stamp them myngle them with vinegar,
and put thereto coluer dounge and plaster it on ye scrophules for it is
wouderful in operacio.

Ribwort fresh gatherid myxt with clear grease plasteryd losithe all
swellynges.

The blood of a Wesyl dropped upon the scrophules, is very good and medicinable.

Gilbert Sixtus
A plaster made of walworte doth assuage mytigate and extinguyshe ^he
scrophules.

Radyshe taken of the patient in any form ether of meat or drink, is
wounderful good against the scrophules.

Peach leaves stampte with salt and plasteryd, are much worth. Galen,


Apply the rote of bryony stampte and myxt with hogs grease, and if the
scrophules beharde, take go^es dounge and vinegar, mollyfy ye gotes dounge
therewith, and put in ^o a lynnen clothe, and so apply it.

Of Wartes.
The Causes.
Gross and cold melancholy or Phlegm.

The Signs.
Every man knows a wart.

Remedies. Capi. lxv.
TO take a way Wartes make this experiment put the feel of Hens in the hot
Embres till the scales or skin thereof be seperatid, and shronke from there
legs and the same skyne warm rub the wartes three or.iiii. times, or more,
and it will drive the a way.

The Rind of a sallow tree burnt temperid with veniger and so plasterid, takes
away the wartes and scabs that be in any place.

Dyos.
Egrimony myxte and stamped with veniger so plasterid, puttith out the wartes.

Pursland rubbed upon the wartes, pulls them up by the rotes by his own
property.

Lyra.
Burn the grene vine that berithe grapes of the the inner side, and with the same
water that comes therout anoint the wartes, bunchis, Figs about, or give it
the patient to drink it shall cause them al to foul out by the rotes.

An egles turd anoyntyd or bound on the wartes, takes them away.

Take a red snail cut her over thwart the back, Gilbert,
and reserve the liquor that comes thereof, blende it with salt and apply it,
for it shall kill al the wartes.

The milk of figs anoyntyd, Dyosco.
pull^th them out by the rotes with out any bytinge.

Arsenicke myxt with vinegar applied on the wartes, takes them away.

The gum of Iuye applied after the same manner is of the same effect

Pull up the marks on every side and lay about the sides vnquechid lyme and
then anoint the with oil of lylyes.

Of brennynge with fire.

The Causes and Signs be evident.

Remedies. Cap. lxvi.
TO heal the burning of fire skauld a Hare and take the hears cute very small
and fine, and sprinkle it upon the place.

Mingle the oil of Nuts and wax to gether, and anoint the place it is very
good.

Gilbert
Wash quick lime in several waters.ix. times, and that which remainyth in the
last water myngle with como oil, mighteli sti^ing it about and anoynte the
place, this ^xperiment hath ben provide.

A certain practitionar saith for a surety, Diosco
yt if straight upon the burning. Ink menglid with water common oil be bound
unto the place, it will shortly heal it.

The rote of Lyllye rostid upon ye coals and resoluid with oil of rosis,
Macer. Diosco.
doth mightily heal the burninges with fire.

Apply unto wounds yt be moist old.v. partts of the joyce of Lylly leaves and
one of vinegar, in especially unto the head.

Take a mou^e skin and apply it hot unto the burning take i^ not away till
it be hole.

Take the ashes of a dry Cucumer, and sprynkle it upon the burning it hath
great efficacy to heal the same.

Soap anointed upon the place is very good.

Ashes made of a dry snails shell healyth the burninges. Auycen


Burn Doves dounge in a lynnen cloth and myngle it with oil of Rosys, and
anoint the place, for it is very good and m^dicinable.

Sethe lekes, then stamp them and apply them they are also very good.

The leaves of holihoke sod in oil and plasteryd, healith burninges.

Take the whit of an egg raw and oil Olife, stur them about so lunge to
gether till it be come into a thick oyntmet, anoynte it upon the place, there
shall apere no scarre.

The leaves of a pere tree stamped applied, heal the burning of fire.

For the wyld fire or creapinge ulcers.
The Causes.
A fluxyon mingled with hot blood and choler.

The Signs.
A certain redness in the skin and not very painful.

Remedies. Capi. lxvii.
THe body being first purgid of burnt humours, apply unto the place raw eggs
and lay thereon a blete leaf, and thou shalt wounder at the healing thereof.

Take the horne of a got and burn it in the flame of the fire and ye rind
that rises thereof at that time take and stamp it with vinegar over noynt the
burned place therwt, for it heals wounderfullye.

(...).
Barley meal fri^d or coluers douge dissoluyd with oil and put a lynnen clothe
bound unto the burnt is wounderfull in efficacy for thou shalt find no
stronger medicine against this disease called wyld fire and al other burninges.

The Grene leaves of a plain tree stamped and myxte with grese helith often
times the burninges. Dioscor.


The leaves of rybworte stamped plasterid are a singular help.

The yolke of an egg temperyd with oil and so applied assagithe al burnynges.

The ashes of the rynde of an elm sprinklid upon the burning, healith
myghtlye the burnynges with out scars.

Salt stamped myxt with oil applied doth quench this disease.

Vinegar is of valor above all thing for burninges. Albert.
And dioscorides saith yt it healith this disease called ignis sacer.

The powder of hares hears burnt Dioscor.
and sprinklid upon the burning heals the same quickly and causes y^ hear to
grow.

To draw out any thing fixed in ^he body.
As for the causes of this chapiter of the rest unto the end of the book,
because that either they be manifest, or else before touched, I will wryt
nothing at al.

Remedies. Capi. lxviii.
Macer.
SOthernewood fresh greece of there own property do draw out spriges,
thorns, and other things yt fast in ye body.

Holeworte stamped and applied is of the same operation.

The same operation hath the sede of roket.

^lexan.
Gose turdes plasterid upon the grefe, drawith out y^ sticks and Iron that be
fastenid in the flesh. Of the same operation is the joyce of ^elber
Dytanye mingled with Gose dounge.

The ashes of a burnt Swalowe myxt with vinegar and applied, is like in
operation.

Okeferne stamped with hogs grese and bound unto the grefe, is very good
also.

The root of gladen stamped and applied to the grefe, Diosco.
is good in operation for it draws out the broken bones and if it be drunk
it heals bruysynges.

The braunchis of wild poppye unripe figs, Isac.
draw broken bones out from ulcers.

Bytony drawith bones out of brekinges wounderful well. Kyra.


Dog Fenel rote expellith the broken bones. Dyos.


Ashes made of Fumitorie stamped mixed with raw honey, and applied upon the
woudes, draws out the pieces of broken bones.

Stamp a rote of Enula and of a read with hedghogges grease and honey, and
apply them for it draws out ye thorne or such like thing fastenyd in a mans
body.

^bert
The ashes of earth worms with honey sodden and applied, draws out broken
bones.

A drink for them that be hurt and bruised. Remedies. Ca. lxix.
^len.
FOr them that be bruysid, take Betonye, Egrimony, Strawbery leaves, Azarabacca
or foal foot, malowes* buglosse, tasy, margeram, Five leaved grass, Saynct
Iohns grass, Pimpernell gather of each.M.i. stamp them and sethe them with.iii.
pound of wine and the same wine yt remanith strain, and put thereto an hundredth
corns of pepper, and the oftener that the patient drinks thereof, the sooner
shall he be whole, but let him beware from all poisoned and hurtful things.

Incorporate the powder of fragratcense and whet bran with percely joyce that
they may be good and thick, so apply the same to ye sore.

Take a gober of lard, take honey bran and Fenigreke and wine sethe them all
together, and apply it upon ye sore of the strip, it wouderfully helpith and
healith.

A drink that is wounderfull against bruysing.

Take Egrimony, betony, Sage, Plantayne, Ivy leaves, rospercely poune them
together and myxte wine thereto, give the patient it oft to drink till he be
whole.

To cure beasts that are sick or hurt.
THe blood of a gray myxt with salt and instilled into the horns of beasts
preserves the from the moren this is well known and provide

Pulyal royal applied to there nothrils Dios.
with vinegar, takes away the hurt of them.

Peter. Lu.
Cut the beast put into the would powder of black Hellebore which with his
property draws out poisoned humours, and so the beast shall be delivered from
the moren.

If the beast drink a good hearty draught of ink it will heal it.

Against dronkennes. Cap. lxxi.
Give unto that man that is given to dronkennes the lights of a sheep, and he
shall feel no dronkennes.

Give unto a drunken man the ashes of burnt swalows, and he shall not be drunk
while he lives.

Of them that take werynes by Iourneinge. Capi. lxxii.
Give unto the wearied person to drink at night, ^osco^.
the rote of mugwort, and so shall his werynes depart from him.

Water of the decoction of lyne sede it self being hot applied to the
stomach, provokes sweat, and causes werynes to issue out.

Calamus Aromaticus, Pelliter, Calament, Carobes the less, detin Maioram, any
of these that I have mentioned, either simple or compodred sodden with oil,
the patient therewith anointid, provokes sweet

The ashes of an old wild fig tree, drunk provokes sweat this same hath
ben provide.

A good drink for wounded men. Capi. lxxiii.
This a good drink for wooded men. Take mouse ear, betony, Sanamud, sage, of
each.m i. as much red madder as of al ye rest before, make a powder thereof boil
the premises in wine, and give thereof to the woundyd party as much thereof
thryse a day, as will into an eggs shell.

A good oyntmente for wounded men, take of good vermilion. i. of cynomond. i.
of cardamomum. i cloves, in number.xx long pepper. i and a half, black
Pepper.xx. grains, of Saffron. i. make an ointment with the foresaid pouders and
good whit wine and honey, and the make a plaster and apply it unto the wound
as thus. Take of Lille Malowes yonge that grow harde by the rote.m.i. wyld
Gellefloures.M.iii. boyle them to gether with strong wine and make a plaster,
apply the ointment and lay to the plaster.

A drink against the Fistule. Capi. lxxiiii.
MAke cloves Pympernell, valerian, mouse ear, herb Robert, tansey sethe the
al in white wine, give unto the paciet twyse a day thereof.

Pills to heal al sores. Take the sede of red colewortes, the sede of tasye
and Cabage, of yche like much, of the greater madder, make of the hole as much
as shall suffyse for ye hole year, give thereof twyse a day, keep always a
Colewort leaf upon the fistule.

Take of dragos blood, seagyrdel of Cinnamon, of Cardamonium, Ana. i. of Alume.
i. of Gentiane. a half, of Saffron..i. make anoyntment, then after you have
give the potion twyse a day, have this respect whether ye woundid so doth
preserve and keep the said potion, if he cast out the potion thrice, then is it
to be doubted of his health.

To pourge the choleric humour down ward. Capi. lxxv.
TO purge Choleric humours downward by the belly, and that in helthful men:
first let the matter be digestid, with Oxizaccharum, or else with sirupus
Acetosus, the matter being digestid, pourge it with this medicine. Take of ye
electuari desuccorosatu oximel, resoluid with the joyce of rosis ana. ii. of ye
joyce of scamoni. a half mingle the together if you will you may give ye paciet
thereof tempered with wine or you may make thereof pills.

If it so chance that the matter be contained from the navel downward or in
any other part of the body, then myngle with the fore rehersyd medicines. ii.
of the powder of mirabolanes citrines, of al this make pills, and let them be
given to ye patient.

Of Melancholy natural. Capi. lxxvi.
TO purge natural melacholie in helthful men, fallen in the nether parts of ye
body, first digest ye matter with squillitike oximel, or else with some syroupe
made therefore, ye matter being digestid purge it with this medicine.

Take of Hierologodion. ii. of hiera rufi. i. of theodoricon emp. i. of honey
Anacardine.. mengle them together and make pills, and give it in the euenning
let them be sharpenyd with. i. of spurge.

If the matter which ought to be purged, be in the middell parts of the body,
as in the stomach, or in the inward of man thereunto must be applied laxatiues,
as Cassia fistula..c. or as the medicine above mencionid.

But if it be inseueral parts of the body as in the gout in such a case must
strong medicines be ministrid as is rehearsal of before, they ought to be
doubled.

Of purging burnt collar. Capi. lxxvii.
TO purge burnt collar or salt phlegm, let the matter be preparid with
oxisaccharum in three parts thereof the fourth part of a syrupe, of diuretike
things or of syrupes made of the joyce of Fumitori, and purge it with this
medicine. Take Catar: Imperial, oximel laxative, of each. ii. of Hierologodian.
i. of spurge. i. mengle them together and make pills give them in the evening.

Of the Quotydyan fever. Capi. lxxviii.
Against the Quotidian fever after the fourth coming of the fit, take of the
joyce of Germandre. i. of the joyce of Cynksoyle violettes ana. iii. of wine of
pomegranates. ii. sugar a poud a half and the same is good against the
quartaine after the.vii. fit, the joyce of Germandre being doubled these
medicines are ministrid to: helthful grutched not greatly vexed wi^h fits of
the Agewe.

To pourge phlegm in quotidian Fevers. Capi. lxxix.
TO purge natural phlegm in quotidias, take of electuariu ducis. i. temper it
with warm water give it unto the patient to drink in the morning.

Of a quotidian fever through sweat Phlegm. Capi. lxxx.
Against a quotidia of sweet phlegm, make this decoction and give it unto the
patient, take of Uiolettes.. and a half of pruines. oak fern. i. mirabolans
kebules i. make a decoction and minister it unto half a pound.

Of a quotidian of sharpe phlegm.
Against the quotidian that is of shrape phlegm, take this ordre, digest first
the matter with oximell simplex, or oxizacharum or with syroupe composiue, and
being digested, purge it with this medicine, tak^ of violettes. ii. of Scene,
time, wild time, oak or wall fern ana. of cass^a fistula, of tamarindes, ana. a
half, mirabolans kebules, ii make a decoctyon, if it be a strong patient give
him al, if weak, give him but half, and mark that this medicine that is
ministered against a quotidian of sharpe phlegm may be mynystred against the
same of slimy phlegm and against a quartayne of melancholy natural.

Of purgynge of choler in Tertian Fevers, Capi. lxxxii.
TO purge choler in Tercians mak^ this recepcion. Take of violettes. ii. of
Cassia fistula. i. of tamarindes., give them unto ye patient in the morning,
but first make a preparative of the decoction of prunes a poud, first strain
it resolve the foresaid things in the straining. A syrupe against a tertia of
red choler, take maid hear.m ii of violetts. iiii. of these.iiii. melos
gourdes, cucumers, Pepons, of the sead^s of pursland, o^ Sandarache white and
red of each.. a half of white poppy. i. o^ ashes of spodiu. a half, of wine of
pomegranates. i. of prunes.v. of clear cass^a fistula. i, of manna.. a half
mirabolanes, citrin.. Rewbarbe. i. make a decoctyon.

Of tertian of yellow choler. Capi. lxxxiii.
Against the Tertian of yellow choler, or glassy, or else like salt, take ye
rotes of fennel, parcely, teyntwort maiden hear, endyue, cychory, hearts
tongue, ana. m.i. violettes. iii of iniubes of these.iiii. melos gourdes
cucumers pepos, of lettys and pursland sede ana.. of dil.. of wine of
pomgranats of sugar.ii. poud make a syrupe clarify y^ straining thereunto take
of Uiolettes. iii. of iniubes, and of the.iiii. cold sedes before namyd, maiden
here, cassia fistula, clered tamarindes, anise, fenel ana,. a half, of citryn
mirabolanes, Rewbarbe ana. iii. of prunes xx. make a decoction.

Of a simple or double tertian. Capi. lxxxiiii.
Against a double or simple fever Tertian, after the third fit prove this
experiment. Take of the joyce of Endiue, of Cychory, of southistell. i, of the
joyce of plaintaine, of hearts tongue. i. a half of wine of pomegranates,
pounds ii. sugar a poud, a half make a syroupe, and let a yonge man drink.v.
sponefull thereof, and an old man iiii. with water, of both the endiues ana.
m.i. of these.iiii. melons gourdes cucumers, pepons, of purselade ana. i.
violettes. iii. of ye flowers of Borage. i. of sugar a pound of wine of
pomegranates make a syrupe. A decoctyon for the same, take of violettes.. of
Borage flowers i. mirabolas citrins, kebules, ana. i. prunes.v, oak or
walferne.. a half, turbith. ii. of Anise, fenil sede Ana.. a half. make a
decoctyon.

Of a Tertian fever of red choler, Capi, lxxxv.
Against a tertian of red choler, take of Maiden hear, Teyntworte,
sowthistell, lyuerwort, of winter Gelefloures Ana. m iii. of violettes. iii. of
ye flowers of water Lyllyes. i. of these.iiii. cold sedes, Lettyse, Purslayne,
white poppye and sanders, ana. i. Prunes xx. of sugar.ii. pound, make a syrup
and let it be clarifyed.

And if it end not either by sweat or seege, or else bi some good success in
ye declinatio of ye fever, give unto patient this decoctio. Take of violets.
iiii. of ye.iiii cold sedes. ana. ii. of Casia fistula. ii. of myrabolas
citrin.. a half, of rewbarbe i. so make the decoctyon.

Against the fiuer tertian or quartayne take of Nettell.m ii. of a cobweb,
salt. i. make.iiii. plasters thereof, let the be put in the.iiii. extremities on
the ^aines pulsatiues, after the third fit.ii. hours and before the fit.i.
hour, give unto the patient.. a half, of camphory with Rose water.

Of the quartayne fever that comes of burnt choler. Cap. lxxxvi.
Against the quartayne of a burnt choler in somer, take of Endiue, cychory,
Hearts tongue, citterache, maid here, teint wort, ana. m i. of violettes.
iiii. of borage floue^s. ii. of the.iiii. cold seades melons Gourdes, cucumers
Pepons, ana. i. prunes.x. time, wild Time ana. iiii. scene, dodder, ana.. a
half, sugar.ii. pound, make a syrupe and claryfy it. A decoctyon thereunto, take
of violettes, sebesten, of Borage flowers, ana.. a half, of mirabola^s citrin,
kebulis Indi. ana. iii. of rewbarbe. i make a decoction.

Of a Quartayne in harvest. Capi. lxxxvii.
Against a quartaine of burnt coler in harvest, take ye rote of fennel, parcely,
of bochers brom sperage, cinksoyle* of grass, of Endiue, cychory, cyterach,
maiden here tentworte, Hearts tongue* Lang^ebefe, Lentils, Acasia. ana. a half
prunes.xx. wine of pomegranates, a pound a half, of sugar.iii.l^. make a
syrupe. A decoctio hereunto take of violets. iiii of borage flours sebestene,
cassia fistula, tamarindes ana. i. o^ time, and wild Time, of both ^ortes of
sticados mirabolans citrinia Indi, the four cold seades, M^lons, Gourdes,
cucumers Pepons, ana.. of Prunes.xx. make a decoctyon.

Of a quartayne bred of natural melancholy Ca, lxxxviii.
Against the Fever Quartayne bre^ of melancholy natural. Take the rote of
Fennel, of Perselye, of buchers brom, of sperage, of cinkesoyle, of Hearts
tongue, of the rote of langedubefe, of hogs tongue the rote of an elder,
walwor^, germader, ground Iuye, of both sorts of stychados, Calament, Organ,
of the cold herbs, Melons, gourdes, Cucumers, Pepos ana. m.i. of violettes, of
Borage flowers, Ana. ii of Spikenarde. iii. of the joyce of borage. i. of whit
veniger, a poud of sugar.iiii. pound, make a syrupe with the decoctyon of.iii.
poud of germander, let the patient Receive the syrup with this decoction early
and late.

Against a quartayne Agewe. Take violettes, borage flowers* scene, time,
epithime, ana. ii. Mirabolanes, citrin, Kebul^s Indi, Ana.. make a decoction
and give it to the patient (if he be strong of nature) before the fit.

A potion for a quartayne. Capi. lxxxix.
FOr a quartayne this potio is good to pourge by little little is given fro three
days to.iii or fro iiii. to.iiii. as is nedful* for it purgith and disgestithe
specially if it be with a cough.

Take wild time, calamint, black helebour, Scene, violettes, hysope, oak or
wall fern. Ana. i. a half of fenell, Lequoryse, of the rotes of Fennel, and
smallage, ana. and a half, let them be sodden and stand to settill that it
may clarify, and take of the decoctyon.v. pound: and let it be made in a
syrup^ give thereof in a receptyon unto the patient. ii. in the morning.

A confectyon of pylles to purge all corupt humores. Capi. lxxxx.
A Confectyon of pills wherwt humours are dissoluid, take the inner part of
coloquintida. i. of agaricke. a half, of Baurach i. of Liquoryse. i. of Nettels
sede roket royal, ana.. and a half, stap them and make pills.

Of heuynes or drousynes of the head. Capi. lxxxxi.
A Certain experiment agayns^ the heuines of the head. Take of Agaricke. v.
of the joyce of wild Sage, Rewbarbe, Holworte, ana i. whit sugar. ii. and a
half, make pills like to cyche Pese, and drink one thereof thryse in a weke,
or else every day till you have made an end of al, it helpith in the midst but
specyally in the end without any danger.

Take of cloves, macys, Nutmigges, Galingale, Dragons blood anyse, comin ana.
i. as much of spurge as of the al and make a powder.

The aphorisms of Hippocrates redacted unto a certain order, according unto
y^ members of a mans body, and the dyseases that may fall in any of them.
Of the disposityon of the head. Capi. prim.
VRyne troubled like unto the water of an Ox or horse signifies pains in the
head.

Milk is evil for them that have the head ache,

If y^ pains be in ye nodle of ye head it is good to cut ye vain in ye forhed

If any matter or water flow out at his nose or ears which hath the head
ache, it takes away ye pains.

Whatsoever helthful man is sodely pained in the head therewith losyth his voice
routeth withal, he dies within seven days, if an Agew take him not.

Of the lethargye or forgetfulness. Capi. ii.
To tremble in a lythargy is very evil.

Of the payne in the head called subeth. Ca. iii.
IN this disease painful sleep is mortal.

Of to much watchynge. Cap. iiii.
Immoderat sleep or watching is very evil.

Of the Palsy. Capi. v.
PAlseys do commenly chance fro xl. years of age till.lx

It is hard to help a small palsy, but to heal a greuouse palsy it is
ympossible.

It is no matter what kind of spume or froth be about their mouths which be
strangled or have thhe palsy, and be not yet dead.

Of the madness called melancholia. Capi. vi.
A Swellynge or weakness endurynge a lunge time brings a mato a melancholy.

Peryllouse eruptons in al melancholyke dyseases, do signify either the palsy
a conuulsyon, blyndenesse or madn^sse.

The Hemorrhoydes be very good to such as be melancholyke.

Of Raging madness. Capi. vii.
IF he that is mad be take with a laxe or hidropsye, it is good

The Hemorrhoydes breaking out, take a way madness.

If a mad man use to laugh it is a laudable sign, but if he be very sad, it
is peryllouse.

If a mad man find ease in sleaping it is good, but if his rage increase, it
is to be fearyd.

Of the falling Evil. Capi. viii.
They which have the falling evil in their childhod be oft healed, but if they
be past.xxv. year old, they die for the most part.

The changing of place time, and age curethe the falling evil in young men.

Of the diseases in the synowes. Ca. ix
ALl cold things be noyouse to the synowes, the bones, ye teeth the brains the
mary in the back, unto those al hot things be profitable and good.

A sudden Fever heals y^ crape.

A convulsyon after sleep in an ague, is to be feared.

To be short breathyd in an ague is the sign of a convulsion.

A convulsyon or gripinges in the belly in sharpe agues, be very evil.

A convulsyon after the drinking of hellebore, is deadly.

To have a convulsyon with a sore wound is death.

A conuulsyon is perillouse to him that hath blede much.

A convulsyon or yeskynge after a great inadityon be very euell.

If a drunken man lose his speech have a couulsyo he shall shortly die.

A convulsion comes of immoderate fullness or emptiness so doth yeskynge.

Yeskinge, vomiting, a convulsio or m^dnesse coming upon him yt is payn^d in
the small guts are, to be fearyd.

The cramp or madness with much watching, is very perillouse.

He that is taken with a sore convulsyon if he live four days shall e^kape.

A convulsyon after a purgatyon is very perillouse.

If a yonge man being fleshy be taken with a distension of the synowes in the
Somer time. let him be washed with cold water for ye doth increase the heate,
and ye heate doth assuage his pains.

In sore wounds a convulsion or distencyon be very evil.

Of the drousynes in the head. Capi. ^.
TO dote or to be astonished after a blow or stripe is, very evil,

Of the members being set awry. Capi. xi.
IN a continual agew if the lyppes, the eyes, the brows or the nose stand
awry, so that the pacyent can not hear or see and be therewith very weke, he
shall dye shortly after.

Of the disposition of the eyes. Capi. xii.
OF the times of ye year if it chase the winter to be dry and ye northwind to
blow, the springtime moist with the southwynd, ye somer following there shall
many be troubled with blernesse, but of the contrary part if the winter be moist
with much southwind, the springtime dry with northwindes, men shall be likewise
vexed with dry blernisse.

If in autune, or Heruest there be much drought, and northwyndes, it shall do
good to moist persos and women, but other it shall vex with dry blernes.

When the times of the year be dry m^ny shall have bler eyes.

The southwynde blowing daily for a season, will engender daselinge in the
eyes.

Diseases of the eyes do cheflye rainge in somer.

In a continual agewe, if the eyes be wrythen a side, and the pacyent weak
and cannot see, it is a pr^sent token of death.

In all kinds of Fevers, and other diseases, voluntary tears be laudable*
but if they flow contrary to the pacyentes mind, they be to be fearyd.

It is very good* if he that is diseasyd in ye eyes be taken with a sode lax.

All dyseasys in the eyes be healyd either by drinking of sweet wynes, or with
baths of whote water or letting of blood or with a purgacio.

If a man be seek mark his eyes when he slepyth for if any white thing
appear betwixt the eye lids, and the patient have no great laxe nor
received any purgatio before, is a terrible and deadly sign.

Of the disposion of the ears. Capi. xiii.
Whosoever uses to void choler, and in ye mean while waxes defe, the laxe
stops, and of the contrary part, a sudden lax deiectyon of choler takes
away defnesse.

To wax defe in a continual agew (the pacyent being weak of body) is a
token of death.

Uoluntary bleding at the nose or a sudden lax doth take away the de^nes
which comes of an ague.

Of the disposition of the nose. Capi. xiiii.
THey whose nostrilles be full of superfluouse moystnesse, and have also their
nature or seade very waterish, be not helthful of body, and they that be
contrary enjoy continual health.

Horsnesse and continual fluxion of sneuil in old men, do in no meas wax
ripe.

A dry Somer with often northwynd and a moist Harvest with ye southwind, doth
engendre in ye next winter the head ache, ye cough horsenesse, and much
fluxyon of room by the nostrils, but if the Heruest be dry and the northwynd
blow, the room shall endure much longer. Old men be often grieved with
fluxyon of room and ye cough.

Much room contained in the stomach is changed within twenty days to plain
matter.

All cold things as snow and ise, do engender distillatyons.

Of the bledinge at the nose. Capi. xv.
OLd men and children do oft blede at the nose.

If it chance him that is seek of an agewe to blede, he shall have a laxe in
the decrease of his fever.

He that waxes deffe through an agewe bledithe at the nose shall recover his
hearing.

Who so is like to have an apostem in any of his joints and in the mean while
bleadeth at the nose is sure to recover his health.

If a woman whose flowers be stopped do chance to blead at the nose it is a
good sign.

Bleding at the nose or ears takes away the headake.

To have the cramp or to dote while the nose bledeth is an evil sign.

Of nesing. Capi xvi
IF a woman having the mother, or beig in pains of child birth, chance to
nese. it is very good.

Nesinge takes away belchinge.

All nesing that comes of the head is caused either of the brain being hot,
or the empti place of the head being very moist, for the air with in
contained brekith out through a narowe passage, and thereby causes the noise.

Of the disposions of the mouth tong. Capi. xvii.
YOnge children and infantes be often troubled with ulcers in the mouth, and to
much vomytinge.

Of al other men they which lisp, be most troubled with mani sieges, and
laxes.

Of the diseases in the teeth. Capi. xviii.
IT is the sign of continuance in an ague, to have much slimy matter about the
teeth.

When the teeth begin to grow children are pained with fevers, cramps, and
ytchinge of the gummes* espicially in the growing of the gum teethe.

Of the grefes in the throat. Ca. xix
OFtentimes diseases propre for the somer season do chance in autume, as the
squinancy, shortness of breath, and the pains in the flape that covers the
wind pipe.

A suffocatyon chancinge to him that hath an agew, and no swelling remain in
the throat, is a token of death.

If the squinancye fall down to the lights, and the patient live seven days,
the fluxion will turn to matter

If he that hath the squinancy do swell in the neckei, tis a good token for the
fluxion is driven outward.

He that hath an agew not being able to turn his neck, neither to swallow
his meat, without a manifest swelling in the throat, shall short lye dye.

Of the breast and lights. Cap. xx.
TO have the brethe somewhat stopped in an agew is an evil token, for a
convulsyon shall shortly follow, they which have swelling in their backs before
they be xiiii. year old coming of shortness of brethe, or a sore cough, shall
shortly dye.

If it chance a droken man suddenly to fall speechless, he shall shortly dye of
a conuulsyon, except either he fall to an agew, or else he receive his speech
again at the hour when the surfyt is digestyd.

They which suddenly are taken with pains in the head, therwyth lose their speech
route, they dye shortly, if they be not taken with an agew. Whosoever hath his
brains hurt any way, doth sodely lose his speech.

Of blood spyttynge. Capi. xxi.
YOnge men be chieflye troubled with spittyng of blood, consumptyons, hot
fevers, and the falling Evil.

The spyttel in a continual Fever being wane of colour, bloody, stinkyng, or
choleric, is an euel toke.

He that spits frothy blood is diseasyd in the lights.

If he that spits blood, spit therewith al filthy matter, it is an evil
sign.

To vomit blood without an agew is helthful, but in an ague peruicious

Of the pleurisye. Capi. xxii,
IF in the beginning of a Pleurysye the pacyent use to spit, it shortneth the
disease, but if it chance afward it prolongs the pains.

The Northwynd blowing a long season to gender, engenders colykes coughs, and
pleurisyes.

Pleurisyes, peripeunomyes, rewmes, and coughs do chiefli raygne in the
winter.

If he which hath the pleurisie, be not purged in.xiiii. days, the fluxyon
will change to matter.

The pleurisy once changed to matter, if the paciet be not purged with in
forty days after the brekinge furth of the matter, he shall fall to a
consumptyon.

A sudden laxe following a pleurysie or a peripeunomy, is very peryllouse.

They whose belchinge smellith ^umwhat sharpe or tart, be not given to the
pleurisye.

The frenesye in a peripeunomye is an evil token.

Whosoever having filthy matter in the void place of the stomach, or having
the hydropsy, is laced or brened, if all the matter or water issue furthe, it
is present death.

Of the consumpsion or ptisike. Cap. xxiii
AUtume or heruest is very yuill to the which be in a consumption.

A dry somer with much northewynd, and a moist heruest with southwyndes, do
engendre in the winter following coughs and rewmes, to diverse, consumptyons.

In consumptions purge downward, and upward.

They which be betwixt.xviii..xxv. be chieflye troubled with the ptisike.

If his spittell which has a consumpsition being cast upon coals do stincke,
and the hear fall of his head, it is a sign of death.

A sudden laxe to him that is in a consumptyon and his hear fall o^ is
deadly.

Milk is vnholsome to the which have the headake, or that be syke of any
fever, and to the which hau^ noise and wind in the hyer part of there belyes,
and that have choleric decoctions in hot fevers, or yt have lost much of
their blood, of the contrary part, it is good to such as have a consumption
without an agew, and also it may be ministered to them which have agewes long
time, if none of the abouesayd tokens do appear, to such as have been lunge
seek of a consumption.

Aptisike or laxe with spittynge of fylthy matter if the spittinge cease is
deadly.

Of the dispositions of the heart Ca. 24.
GReat brennynge in the stomach prickynge about the h^rt is an evil token in an
agew.

They which lose their strength of ^entymes without manifest occasio ^hall dye
suddenly.

Of the Paps. Capi. xxv.
IF the Paps of a woman whi^h is with child of two do wax little, ^he shall
lose one child, and if it be ye right Pap it is a man child, and if it be
the lift a woman.

If a woman, that neither is with child, another hath brought furthe a child,
have milk in her paps, she is past her Flowers.

Blood drawing to the paps of a woman, is a sign of the frenesy.

If thou wilt stop the flowers of a woman, put a great ventose upon her
paps.

Much milk yssuyng out of the tetes of a woman yt is with child, betokens
the child to be very weak and feeble, but if the paps be hard the child is
strong and helthful.

Like as the decreasing of the paps is a sign of the destructyon of the
child, so the hardness of the same signifies great pains, in the paps,
legs, knees, or eyes, and the life of the child.

Of the stomach. Cap. xxvi.
THe stomach is most hot in the winter and springtyme and then also the
slepes be longest.

Men can not well away with much meat in the somer and herueste, but meanly in the
spring, and best of all in the winter.

In all dyseases to be steadfast of mind, and to be content with such things as
be mynystred to him, is a laudable sign, but the contrary is very evil.

Drink of wine doth take away hunger.

If he which goes very dry to bed steppe, it is good.

If they which have certain murmuryng and wynd in their belyes, have great
pains in the loins, they shall have moist deiections, if ye wind do nether com
furth nor great multitude of vryne, and al these do chance in fevers.

If in a laxe or vomyt such things be purged as ought to be purged, it doth
ease the paciet and it is nothing greuouse, but if no it chances contrary.

Let such as can not easly vomit, be purged downward, but not in the somer.

In all kind of diseases if black choler be purged upward or downward
without a medicine, it is perillouse.

In the pains of the small guts called yl^aca, vomytynge, yeskynge,
convulsyon, or dotynge be evil.

A convulsion and yeskyng after a great purging, are to be fearyd.

A sudden and voluntary vomiting, heals him that hath had a lunge laxe.

Yeskynge is good to him which hath a heate swelling in the liver.

Of the diseasys in the liver. Capi. xxvii
AN agew takes away ye grefe and pains in the liver.

A wound in the brains, heart, midrife, small guts, stomach, or liver is
deadly.

If he whose liver mattreth be brenid and therout issue pure and whit matter,
he shall eskape, but if it be lik dregs he shall shortly dye.

Many diseases proper, to ye somer do chance in harvest, as quartaines and
Hydropsyes engendryd in the spleen.

If he which hath the dropsye be woundyd, it is harde to heal him. Whosoever
hath grypinges about the hauel, and pains in the loins and cannot be helped
bi purgatios or otherwise shall fall to a dry hidropsye.

The cough going before the hidropsye is evil, but in the hydropsy much
worse.

If they which he splenetike, have a blody flux which will long continue, they
fall to the hydropsye, or their meat shall cume through the vndygestyd and so
they dye.

A bloody flux, an hidropsy or madness after a frenesy, are laudable.

Whosoever have their liver full of water, and it break downward to the belly, it
is death.

If he that hath an agew be taken wi^h the yelow iandes ye.vii. the.ix. the.xi.
or.xiiii. day, it is laudable, if the right side wax not hard, but if it do,
it is contrary.

An agew takes away the pains under the syddes, if it be without great heate
and swelling.

Of the gaul and spleen. Capi. xxviii.
IF the yelow Iaundes, chance in an agew before the seventh day, it is evil.

They which have the yelow iandes be not full of wynd.

If there liver which have the yelowe ye iandes be hard, it is an evil sign.

A bloody flux is good to th^ y^ be splenetyke.

Of al kind of fluxyons. Cap. x^
IN a laxe diverse kinds of (...) be good, except they change to (...) as be
evil.

Black sieges like to fylthy b^ude bein^ voluntary be wounder^l evil wh^rther
they be with an (...) or without an agew, and ye de^ker to our they have, the worse
they be, but if these sieges com through a p^rgacion they be more laudable,
(...) although they be of diverse colours the be not evil.

To have a siege of plain m^cholye, or to perbreake the same in y^ beginning
of any disease is deadly

Whosoever is brought weak ether by some greuouse disease or siknes of lunge
contynuace, or by woudes received, or eny other way, and thereupon have a syege
of melancholy like to black blood he shall doutlesse they the day after.

A bloody flux beginning with a melancholic siege, is deadly.

Little peaces ^f flesh appearinge in a bloudye sie^e, be tokens of present
death.

Uayne desire to the stole in a woman with child, kills the child.

Tart or sharpe belching suddenly chancing to him whose meat comes through
him indigestid, is very good.

In log continuace of a bloudye flux, to abstain fro meat, is very evil if it
be with an ague much worse

A bloody flux is good to such as be splenetike.

A sudden bloody flux after a sincer or clean siege, is to be fearyd.

If a great laxe chance in a white morfewe, it takes away ye disease.

Frothy sieges in a flux, do declare the phlegm to come from the head.

It is an euell token in a sharpe agewe, to have a convulsion, or painful
gripinges in the belly.

Pains in the hyer parts of the belly, be more gentle of leasser peril then
they which be in the lower part.

If he which hath the strangurye, be take with the pains in the small guts
called iliaca, he shall dye with in seven days, except a fever take him with
much flux of vryn.

Of the fundament. Ca. xxx.
IF the Hemorrhoydes chance to such as be melancolike mad, or frentike, it is
laudable.

If he that hath lunge time had the hemorrhoydes be healyd, not one left open,
it is to be feared least he fall to a consumptyon or hidropsye

The hemorrhoydes be very good to such as have a melacholike madness, or great
grefe in the raynes.

Of the disposicyon of raynes. Capi. xxxi.
THey which have the pains in the raynes after.xl. years of age, can not be
healyd.

They whose vryne is full of gravel be seek of the stone, either in the raynes,
or in the bladder.

Dyseases in the raynes and bladder, are scant curable in old men. Little
bladders or bubles in a mas vryne, do betoken pains in the raynes, and lunge
diseasys.

The hyer part of the vryne fattye thick, is a sign of pains in the raynes
and sum greuouse disease.

If the above said tokens appear in such as be seek in the raynes, also have
sore pains in the muscles of ye back, if the pains be inward it signifies
an apostem in the inner parts, but if they be outward the apostem shall be there
also.

Much phlegm contained betwixt the stomach and the midrife, hauig no way to
the belly, is soon dissoluid if it issue by the veins to the bladder, and
thence furth in vryne.

Of the diseases in the bladder. Cap. 32.
IN moist and wet season, lunge agewes fluxes, rottenesse, ye falling evil,
the squinancy, and the palsye do cheflye raygne, but contrary in dry seasons,
cosumptions, blearnes goutes, straguryes bloody fluxes

Children be often grieved with pains in the throat, and falling of the jaws,
worms in the belly, stranguryes.

Old men have most comenlye these diseasys, shortness of brethe, room, the
cough, the straguri, difficulty of vryne, goutes, daselinge in the head,
pains in ye raynes, palses in their bodies out of just temperanse, y^ ytche,
watchings with moystnesse in the belly eyes and nosthriles dullness of sight, and
hearing.

If his water that is seek of an Ague be little in quantity thick and full of
crumes, th^rvpo his vryne follow much in quantity and thine it is very good,

Whosoever in an ague hath his water troubled like to the vryne of an ox or
cow, hath or shortly shall have the headake.

In such diseasys as shall be endyd the seventh day, there shall appear in the
pacyentes vryne a red cloud the fourth day with other reasonable tokens.

Uryne white and clear is not laudable, and especially in them which be
frentike or do^ing.

They which be like to have an apostem in their joints, be deliuerid thereof by
much vryne white thick as that which comes from such as have ben iiii. days
seek of an ague

Blood or matter in the urine doth declare ulcers, and biles, either in ye
raynes or blad^er.

Little pieces (...) flesh and hears in the vryne co^ ^rom the raynes.

Contents lyk^ bran in ye urine signify a Pocke or Scabbe in the bladder.

They which p^sse blood have a vain broken in th^ ^ynes.

If they which (...) blood or cromes, or else hau^ ^he ^tranguri, if the pains
be bene^h the beli about the share, the disease is in the bladder.

Gravel in the vryne betokens ye stone in the bladder.

He that pisseth blood or matter, he in whose urine skales do appear, or the
water have a strong smell, hath ulcers in the bladder.

Whosoever hath pustules or welkes in his yard, and if they break and the matter
run out, they shall be shortly hole.

To peace much in the night, doth betoken a lytlel siege.

The strangury chances to that parson which hath a hot swelling in the
fundament, or matrix, and to him whose reins do matter, yesking ever follows
the heate swelling in the liver.

Diseases in the raynes and blader, are hard to heal in old men.

Contetes in the botome of the urine like unto thick bran, signify the
disease lunge to continue.

If the water do appear unlike of substance, it betokens great mystemperace,
for diversity of humours within the body.

Drinking of wine, heals ye stragurye, and him yt cannot hold his water, it
is also good to let blood of the inner veins about ye ankle.

Of the membr^s of generatyon in men. Capi. xxxiii.
Likewise in men, either for the rarity of the body, the spirits goo out, so
that the seed ca not come to his due place: or for the thiknesse thereof the
humour cannot get furthe, neither wax hot for the coldness, and so it heaps
in yt place or else ye same thing comes of great heate.

A bone a gristel, a synow, and the the top of the yard being cut, will
nether grow nor join together.

Of the members of generation in women. Ca. xxxiiii
IF the winter be moist and warm the southwind blow, the sprig time dry with
northwyndes, those women that be then with child shall of every light occasyon
lose their children, the children then borne shall be weak and seckely, wherefore
they shall either dye strenght with, or else al their life time be, fayntye and
full of diseasys.

If a woman with child must ned^ be purged, let that be from ye fourth month
to the seventh, yet those suwhat leasse, but before four after seuin let the
receive no purgacions

The suffumigation of sweet odurs doth bring furth the flowers, is good for
diverse other things if it did not cause ye head to be drousi.

Lettynge of blood doth kill the child, but the nyer ye birth the more
perillouse it is.

If a woman with child be taken with any greuouse disease, it is death.

The fluxyon of the flowers takes a way vomiting of blood.

If the flowers stop it is good to blede at the nose.

It is perillouse for a woman with child to have a great laxe.

Nesynge is very good to her that hath the moder, or that trauaylethe of
childbirth.

She whose flours be evil colourid or that keep not their comyn cour^ had need
to take a purgatyon.

If thou would know whether ^ woman hath conceyuyd or no, geu^ her water and
honey mingled together to drink when she goes to sleep and if she feel
grypinges and pains in her belie she is with child, i^ she feel non she is
not.

A woman which hath conceuyd a male is well colouryd, but if it be a female,
it is contrary.

Those women which be very small and lean before they conceive, shall lose one
child before they wax gross, Those women which being mean of body, do lose
their children the second or third month without manifest occasyon, have the
closures of their wombs full of fylthy matter, wherefore they cannot sustain
the weight of ye child, but sodely break.

They which be very fat cannot conceive till they wax lean, for the ^outh of
their matrix is stopped ^p with fatness.

If thou will provoke the flowers ^ause the woman to nese, and in the ^eane
while stop her nose mouth

They which be with child have ^heyr wombs closed up.

If a woman with child be taken with an agew, and wax very hot, without
manifest occasion, she hath great pains in childebyrthe, or else ^he loses her
child with peril of her ^wne life.

If a convulsyon, and faintness ^ake a woman in ye time of her flou^s, it is
perillouse.

If the flowers have to much issue there do ensue diverse diseases, if they be
stopped there follows great grefe in the womb.

If a woman hath not conceived, thou wilt know whether she shall conceive or no*
let her be well coueryd with clothes, beneth let a suffumigacion be made of
hot things and odoriferous, for if the smell com up through her body to the
nose mouth, be sure yt she is not barayne of her self.

If a woman with child have her flours, it is impossible ye child should be
helthfull.

The flowers stopping with an ague or great cold, and the woman loathe her meat,
say she is with child.

The matrix cold and gross, or very moist, is not apt to conceive, for ye seed
is therein quenched destroyed. Likewise if it be dry and very hot, for the is
the seed lost for lack nourishment, but they whose matrix is of a mean
temperature be pletifull do often conceive, if you wilt know more rede above in
ye disposion of ye Paps.

Of the disposyon of the outward members Capi. xxxv.
IF two great grefes do happen in diverse mebres at one time, the gre^ter
takes away the leasse.

Pains in the knees and loins, or grypynges in the belly coming upon him that
hath non agew, do sygnifye that he shulde be purged down ward.

In painful fevers apostemes do often happen about the knees and chekes.

The sickness shall chiefly remain in that place which was grieved before it
began.

The joints of such as have had a fever for a long season, shall ache be full of
pustules.

Great pains swellynges in the joints with any brekinge or issue, do signify
that the gout or crape shall follow, and many be remedied with much washing with
cold water, for yt doth extenuat the humour and take a way the pains, for a
mean cold extinguishes.

Letting of blood doth utterly take a way such pains as begin at ye back,
thence remove to the arms. Enuches be never bald nor gouty.

Women have never the gout as lunge as they have their flowers.

A child hath never the gout until he hath known a woman.

All kind of goutes (if the inflammation be quenchid) within forty days, do
end.

All goutes do chieflye reygne in springtyme and harvest.

If the hipp bone fall out of his place after a long sciatica, there shall
much matter follow, or the leg will consume away, and the patient shall
halt, except he be brennyd.

Of the Fevers and Agues. Capi. xxxvi.
THe sickness it self, the time of ye year do plainly declare the time of the
fyttes, the chief time of the disease, the order in y^ fits.

Old men be never troubled with (...) sore agewes because their bodies be cold.

All sharpe diseasys are judged in fourtene days.

Quartanes in somer be very short in Autume much longer, in winter longest of
all.

It is much better that he which hath a convulsyon be take with an agew, then
he which hath an agewe be taken with a convulsyon.

If his flesh that hath a sore ague do either fall nothing away at al or
decay very much it is evil for the first betokenith long continuance of the
disease, and the other great wekenesse in the person.

At the beginning and ending of an agew, al things be of more stregthe then
in the chief part thereof.

In al diseases they be in leasse jeopardy to whose nature age, accusto, or
time of the year the sickness doth agree, then they with whom it doth in no
point agree.

Wh^n the somer is not unlike to the spring time you shall loke for much
sweting in al agewes.

In dry seasons there shall reygne diverse sore agewes.

All dyseases in the harvest season be perillouse and deadly, but in the
springtyme most gentle and easy.

In the somer these do chiefly reygne, contynual and brenynge agews tertyan and
quartayne fevers, vomyting, laxes, blernesse with ulcers in the mouth and
pryuy members. A cold stiffness chancig the sixth day in any fever doth take
away all judgment.

All fevers which do not intermite and give over the third day be perillouse,
but if the patient have no fyte that day there is no ieope^dy.

If great coldness take him which is very weke thrugh a continual agew it is
deadly.

If in a continual agew the outward members be very cold and the inward
parts hot and dry, it is a token of death

If in an agew pustules and pains chance in the joints, it is a sign that
the patient fedeth well.

In a continual Fever, if the lyppes, the eyes, the Nose or the mouth be
wrythen and out of fashion, so that the patient can not se nor here and
therewith all his body be weak, it is a sign that death is at hand.

A sudden laxe or dotage in a continual fever is deadly.

An apostem which doth not break at the first judging day in a Fever, doth
signify the lunge continuance of the disease.

Uoluntary tears in agewes be laudable, but they which flow against the
pacyentes will be to be fearyd.

Al Agewes with swelling in the foundament be evil except such as endure but
one day.

If he which hath an agew do sweat very much and the disease contynew it is
evil, for it betokens log syknesse and abundance of humours

He that hath a convulsyon or dissension in ye synowes, and thervpo an agew, is
suddenly delivered.

A tertyan not endid in seven fits shall continue lunge.

The yelowe iaundes coming upon him that hath a Fever before the seventh day is
perillouse.

To be afraid in his sleep, or to have the cramp is evil.

To be short brethyd in an agew is the sign of a convulsyon.

Soryful sighs in sharpe agewes be to be fearyd.

They which have the quartaine have seldom convulsyons, and if he which hath a
convulsion fall to a quartayne he shall be deliuerid from his conuulsyon.

If he which hath an agew sweat in these days following it is very good, the
third, the.v.vii, ix.xi.xiiii.xvii.xxi*xxvii, xxxi.xxxiiii. for ye swetes do
judge ye fever, but if they be otherwise, they declare lunge continuance of ye
disease great pains.

Of the diet to be observed in agues. Capi. xxxvii
IN al diseases of long cotinuance the pacyent most use little meat, exquisite,
but in sharpe diseasis yt is perillouse, yet to eat to little or to much be
both evil.

Secke m^n do more often err in vsynge little meat, then in that diet which
is somewhat larger, whereby they be oft hurt, yea and to such as be in health
small fare, and exquisite diet, is very perillouse, because they easly err
therein.

Unto extreme diseases extreme cures be necessary.

When the disease is most extreme and sharpe the pacyent shall by and by have
woderful pains, wherefore he most use most small and thin diet as the disease is
from extreme pains so most the diet amend.

When ye seknesse is most violet then most the paciet use least meat of al.

The phisicion most mark well wither the pacyent vsynge such small diet may
endure to the state strength of the disease, or wither the pains will first
assuage or no

If the sickness in the beginnynge be most fervent, then most the pacicyent use
little meat, but if the siknes be afterward most violent the pacyentes meat
most be somewhat before diminished, but in the beginning he most fed well that
he may be able to abide the disease.

The pacyent most forbear meat in the fyttes, especially in such agewes yt
do intermyt come bifits. Among al other old me may best a way with fastig, the
such as be of middell age, after young men, and worse of al children especially
such as be quick and lusty.

Such as grow, have much natural heate within them therefore do require much
meat, which if they have not their bodies do soon consume, but contrary little
meat will ^erue old men, because they have but little natural hete which with
much meat is soon queched, therefore they have not so fervent Agues because
their bodies be cold.

The stomach inward parts be most hot in winter springetime, wherefore men
most then fed better, for ye inward heate the being much doth require much
meat for a proof thereof mark ye ages ye chapios Moist meates be best of al to
such as be sike of agues, chiefly to children, to such as have be acustomed like
meates.

You must mark whether you shall give them meat onse or twyse, and to whom
you must give more, to whom less, and suwhat you most bear with the time of
the year, the cotrey, the age of the person, and with the accustomed use.

In somer and autume men may scarce awai with much meat, but in the winter
best of all, and mean in the spring.

To such as have their sickness bi certain fyttes in order, you shall give
nothing, nether add nor dimynishe before the time of judging.

Here end the Aphorisms of Hyppocrates, set in order for every membre, and
translatyd out of latin into Englyshe by Humfre Lloyd.
A Book conteynyng the names of the compound medecines, which be good for all
ky^de of dyseases that may chance in any membre of mans body, in reading of
which book I would the gentle reader should be admonished of one thing, which is
yt I do comenly through al this book use the latin names, have not translatyd
ye same to ye Englyshe tongue, being moved thereunto, because that many of them
he such that they cannot be well Englished, and also t^at the Apothecaries which
have such medicynes to sell do comenly use the Latyne or rather Arabike, and
Barbarouse terms, and not the Englyshe n^mes thereof, upon which consideracions
I thought it best to use the same through all this present book.
For al diseasys in the head. Capi. i.
THese confections following do not suffer the hears to wax whore gray
electuarium de aromatibus, cofectio alharif, oleu costinum and de alchana.

These be very good for all diseases in the brain, the electuarye of Perles,
Triacle dyatessoron and the confection of musk.

These comfort the brain, aromaticum rofa{rum}: maius aromaticum. dyambra,
galie elephagine pillule stomatice.

These purge the brain, the confectyon alphescera, pillule elephangene,
Oximell squillitike opens ye opilatyon of the brain.

The infusion of hyera heals the melancolike pains of the head.

These be good for the falling evil, confectio de musco, thiriaca diatessaron,
confectio alfescera, syrupus sticados, acetum and oximel squilliticum,
vnguentum de bdellio, oleu de cucumere asmino, de lapide gagatis, de piperibus
and philosophoru. Cofectio alharif kebuli coditi, be very good for al diseasis
in ye senses

These purge ye instruments of ye senses, pillule elephangine stomatiche*
aggregate and pillule lucis maiores and minores.

Hyerapicra purges al cold diseasis of ye head, so doth hiera hermetis,
hieralogodio rufi, pillule aggregate

The cold diseases of the head are healyd with the confectyon of water and
honey.

These confectyons ensuynge are good for all pains in the head, oximell
squillitike, infusyon of Hyeratrociskes of cr^o: oil Anet, oil of Laurel, of
spiknard, of elder oil of wild cucumer,

The infusion of hyera clensith the head, so do pillule stomatice and pillule
aggregate maiores.

Hyera hermetis purges the hemicran, and pillule alhadach an eplayster of
mustard and oil of euforbium heal the same.

The electuary of rosys purgithe the head ache of an hot cause, and so do
pillule alhandach.

These heal the turn or daselynge in the head eyes the confection of musk a
sharpe syroupe of citrones or of prunes, vinegre or oximel squllitike, but
these purge the same hamech, electuarye of Roses, confectio psilii, hyera
hermecis, and hieralogodion ruffi.

For the pains diseases in the ears. Ca. ii.
Oil of bitter almondes, oil of peches and of be, are good for al pains
noise in the ears.

Oil of of Spiknard is good for wynd in the ears.

For al diseases in the eyes. Ca. iii.
THe elec^uarie of Roses purges the superfluites which descend to ye eyes,
also oleum Philosophorum is good for watery eyes.

Pillule de yera, and trifera persica purge al diseasis of the eyes make clear
the sight.

For al diseases in the nose and face. Ca. 4
Oil of wild Cucumer takethe away the steche in the nose and oleum
Philosophorum opens the oppilatyons of the same.

A syrupe of Popy and diacodion with pillule contra catartum, purge heal all
weles which be upon the nose and face.

These cleanse all foul colour, and difformitie of the face, diacucurma,
diamorosion, diacodion, trifera minor, cofectio rauedseni alkakengi, trochiskes
of Roses of rewbarb^.

For al diseasis in the mouth throat. Ca. v.
FOr an Apostem in the throat dyamozo and dyacarido be very good

These confections folowinge be good for them which cannot take their breath,
the confectio of musk loche of squilla, loche of pine, loche ad Asma, Loche
Alfescera, dyasulphur, philoniu, the confection of perles, and alchermes.

Diacodyon and a syrupe of popie heal a room and cough, so do pilbule contra
catarrhum.

Uyneger squillitike heals roten and lose gummes.

Oil of sweet Almondes and of sisami takes away the asperity and roughenesse
of the throat.

Oil of grysomyle takes away all impediments of the tongue.

These confectios make the mouth to have a sweet smell or odour ye electuarie of
atomatikes of perles, of citrones, the confectyo of xiloaloes, aromaticum
muscatum, aromaticu nardinum* trifera saracenica, a syrupe of the pilling of
orenges, mellicrat of orenges, trochiskes of gallia muskata, sufuf xiloaloes,
aromaticum, pillule dyarhodon.

An electuary or syrupe of peches, Peches condite, trochiskes of xiloaloes,
take away all stench in the mouth.

Dyatryonpipereon takes away all belching.

A iulep of iniubes heals al horsnesse.

Diacalamentum, philonium, diacyminu and a syrupe of myntes do utterly stop
al painful and cold yeskyng.

These confectyos of musk, ti^iaca diatesseron sirupus of sticados, the cerote
of alexander, oil of pip^r and oleum philosophoru, hyerahermetis, with
hieralogodio do purge the same wounderful well.

Let him that hath an old painful cough use these, Dianisum, athanasia mag:
if his breast be full of matter, these be good, dyasulphure, loch de pino,
lochsanum with syrupes of myrte, of licori^e* of Calamente, of prunes, of
iniub^s, of Ysope, and these do extenu^te the gross humores loch ad asma susuf
ad Asma, and if they cannot sleep take a syrupe of Popie.

For a cough of a hot cause tak^ loche of popie, loch ad caliditatem a iulep
of violetes, and a syrupe of ye same, with the sirupe contra catarrhu, but if it
be a dry cough, take a syrupe of tereniabine of popie, loch bonum and loch of
almondes.

Pillule de agarico pillule ad omnes morbos catachi, do purge ye matter of an
old cough.

Lochsanum and expertum or a syrupe of iniubes take away horsnes that comes of
cold phlegm.

Oil of Cartamus of nucis indice, of sisami, do clarifi the voice, and so doth
vinegre squillitike.

Musa acnea, oleum philosophoru, be good for the toth ache, and acetu
squilliticum fastens the teeth.

For the morphew yelow iaundes and al other deformyties of the skyne. Capi. vi
THese confectyons make the skyne well colouryd, electuarium de aromatibus,
confectyon of quinces, confectio anacardina, algarif syrup of fumitory, oil of
saffro of cost trifera galeni, the confectio of mana.

Unguentum alfesericu and oleu de cucumere asinino, takes away^ the roughness
of the skin, hamech purges al diseases which be in y^ skin and ye
elephancye.

If you will have your skin smothe clean, use these trifera muskata,
dyacucurma, diamorusio oil of been, of Cherystones, of citrones of elder, of
serpetes, of eggs, of whet of juniper and oil of ash.

Unguentu sericinum is good for to cause the skin to grow.

Unguentu rosaru, violaru, vnguetu ceruse, oleu de iunipero defraxino,
trochiskes of arsenicke do heal wyldfyre and ringwormes.

These confectyos heal the yelow iandes, confectio rauedseni, trifera persica
cofectio de psilio, trochiskes (...) of Rosis, of reubarbe, of camphory and of
enpatori electuariu rosaru, sirupus de fumoterre pillule inde.

Hyeralogodion ruffi, hamech, cofectio epithini, pillule inde, Pillule fetide,
do purge all matter of morphew and leprousy.

Syrupus de fumoterre, and epithimi, oil of iunyper, vnguentum alfesericon. do
heal the leprousy.

Unguentum aragit, oleum de been, de nucleis cerasorum, de granis cittaguloru,
do take away the spott^ of the morphew.

Unguetum alhariel, takes away the spots of the skin.

Pillule Collequintide do purge an old morphewe.

Pillule aggregate minores purge and take away al ytching and skratchynge.

These be good for scabs, oleu nucu, vnguetu cerusae alphesericu.

For al diseases in the stomach. Capi. vii.
AN hard apostem of the stomach is mollified with moist hisop, a cerote of ysop
of galenes descriptyon, dyaquilon with the emplaster of oribasius, and oil of
masticke.

These do styre up appetite ones lost, aromaticum rosatum the confectyon of
quynces, of alchanzi and of orenges, trochiskes of Myrabolanes do increase
appetite wounderfull well.

These confectyons do make good digestyon, dyarodon, acondite of orenges,
aromaticum nardinu, and rosatum, hyeralogodyon ruffi, pillule stomatice,
rosatum maius, diaciminum, diambra, diatrioupipereo kebuli co^diti, a condite
of quinces of buglosse, sufuf xiloalo^s, sufuf aromatu, vinegar squillitike,
trochiskes of rose, pi^lule elephangine, pillule de turbithe.

The confection de galanga, diaciminu oximel squilliticu be good for belchinge
that comes of sharpe matter.

Confectio de aromatibus comfort the stomach that cannot abide the smell of
meates, so doth aromaticum rosatum, and gariofilatum, and syrup deminta.

Athanasia magna, lochbonu aqua mellis sirupus de liqueritia pillule de agarico
trochisci aneti, do clese ye stomach.

Loch de papanere, loche de squilla loche alphescera, syrupus de ysopo, sufuf
ad tussim antiquem, oleum de ketri de lillio take away al pains in the
stomach.

Lochsan^m cleanses al filthy matter out of the stomach.

Loch de amigdalis heals the vehement dryness of the lunges and stom^ke.

Sirupus de prassio de thimo de kesmes heal all cold disease of the stomach.

Oleum de cartamo oximel squilliticum, sirup de ^upatorio, ^roch de absinthio
open ye opilations of the stomach.

These confections take away ye asperity or roughness of the stomach

Loch ad calliditatem, iulep vio: iulep iniub: syrupus cucurbite, sirupe de
prunis, sirupus de granatis, oleum papaner: oleum violace.

Electuarum de aromatibus, de g^mmis, confectio xiloaloes, oxim^l squilliticum,
and oleum nardinum, heal al diseases of the stomach which com of gross and
slymy phlegm.

All ventosites and inflations of the stomach are cured with these confectios,
electuariu de aromatibus, de citro alxicostu, troch de spodio: vnguetu rosaru
cerotum sadalinu cofectio de galaga de zizibere, philonium, diacyminu, trifera
muscata, diacucurma, diamorusio secacul conditu, pillule aggregate maiores.

These confectyons comfort a weak stomach and cause good digestion, electuaryes
de aromatibus, de citro de granis mirthi, de persicis, de sorbis, confectyons
xiloaloes, alkinzi, de citonus, aromaticum rosatum, gariofilatum, nardinum,
trifera galeni, yeralogodio ruffi kebuli coditi emb^ici coditi, citonia persica
condita, zuecharum rosatum, syrupes de piris, de citoniis, de corticibus citri,
de granis mirthi de albela, de absinthio, de fumotere mellicrata de citro
debuglasso decitoniis, rob de piris, de citoniis, de graatis, fructibus, de
aggresta, trochiskes, de gallia de rosis, ramich de absinthio, sufuf xiloaloes,
sufuf diarodon, sufuf aromaticum, pillule elephangine aggregate, stomatice,
diarodon, Cerotum Alexandri, emplasters, dyafinicon, stomaticum, de Gallia, de
Fermento, Oils, de stincho de Citoniis, maluinum, myrtilorum masticum,
costinum, and of elder.

Let him yt is pained in the stomach with multitude of hot and sharpe humours,
use these dyarodo galeni, acetum squilliticum infusio de Hyera, pillule
elephangine but if the pains come of cold humours these be very good
confectio anacardina, philonium Musa acnea, Athanasia magna oleu de Cartamo and
de kerua.

These mitigate the vehement hete of ye stomach, electuarium de persicis,
confectio de acetosa, de Pruuis, trifera persica, iulep rosatu. syrupus de
Persicis, de portulaca trochiskes de Caphora de Sandalis, Sufuf Dyarodon rob de
ribs de berberys, de sumache demoris.

Against the humidity of the stomach use aromaticum maius rosatum,
gario^ilatum, cofectio de cynamomo, trifera saracenica, diacucurma, dyamorusio,
emblici conditi, trochisci dyarodon.

These confections purge the stomach, hierapigra galeni, hiera hermetis*
pillule elephagine, and agregate fetide and sebellie, electuarium alharif.

For the inflammatyon of the stomach, take sirupus de succo acetose de agresta,
de pomis, and sirupus acetosus t^reniabin.

These comfort a cold stomach, syrupus de menta, de thimo, secaniabi de
calamento, mellicratu coditu.

Let him that vomits overmuch use these aromaticum rosatum, and gariofilatu,
sirupus acetosus de citoniis* de prunis, and de m^nta de agresta, diafinicon,
troch: ramich, if he vomit choler and phlegm, take ye confectyon de citoniis a
syrupe de calamento, but if it be choler alone, use these rob de ribs, de
agresta, de berberis, de sumach, de moris de sceni, de granis.

These do expel and dissolve al ventosities out of the stomach, Aromaticum
gariofilatum, diaciminum oleum nardinum aromaticum nardinum, dianisum trifera
saracenia muscata alkanzi trifera hieralogodion ruffi electuarium m^u, sufuf
aromaticum emplastrum de alliis, oleum amigdalarum amararu, nucum de kerua de
enula.

Let him that is in a consumption use these confectio testieulorum vulpis,
lochsanum trochisci de camphora oleum amigdalarum dulcium.

These oils make fat the body oleum amigdalarum dulciu, sisami de nuce
indica, oleum de granis papaneris.

These confections quench thyrst and keep the stomach moist, electuarium de
persicis, confectio de acetosis, alxicostum trifera persica, persica condita,
Succharum violarum iulep rosarum, syrupus de per^icis, de acetositate citri,
Acetosus de pomis, de citoniis, de prunis, de cannis, de portulaca, Rob de
ribs, de sumach de berberis, de Agresta, de moris, de steni, de granatis,
trochisci de camphora, de spodio de berberis, de sandalis vnguentum rosarum

For al dyseases in or about the heart. Capi. viii.
ELectuarium de gemmis, and confection xiloaloes, be good for al diseasys about
the heart.

These heal the trebling and beating of the heart confectio de acetosa
xiloaloes and de musco syrupus de pomis de prunis conditum de citro de
buglosso. rob de agresta cofectio xiloaloes.

These confections comfort the heart electuarium de citro, de pomis. Aromaticum
rosatum, muscatum, Gariofilat, Dyambra, Pira condita Poma persica, Citra,
zuccharum Rosatum syrupus de pomis, rob de ribs de Citoniis de piris,
trochisci Galley muscate, Ramich, sebelline g^ie elephangine, Dyarodo, sufuf
xiloaloes.

Let him that hath the heart brennynge, use these, Alxirocostum, syrupus
acetosus de succo fructuum Sirupus de Succo Acetose, Rob de Ribs, de Berberis,
de Sumach de Moris, de sceni de G^anatis.

The confection of xiloaloes doth make a man, merry, so doth Dyambra and
confectio de Musco.

Dyalulphur is good for poyso and trifera persica against the pestilence.

For al diseases in the liver. Ca. ix.
THese confectios heal al dyseasys of the liver yt com of gross fleygme or
ventositie, electuarium de Aromatibus de gemmis, cofectio xiloaloes, diacucurma
magna confectio de galaga troch: dianisis emplastrum de gallia, and de
sermento, sirupus de thimo, secaniabin de calam: mellicratum conditum, Also
hyerapicra alharif purge the same.

For the stiche pains in the liver use confectio diarodon, Athanasia magna
sirupus de absinthio, de eupatorio pillule de reubarb. pill: alkakengi, ysopi
cerotum oil of euphorbium if it come of a cold cause. For the weakness
debility of the liver take Diarodon, Aromaticum muscatum d^alacca, confectio
alkazi, sirupus de absinthio, citra codita trochisti xiloaloes and if it come
of great heate emplastrum de gallia diafenicon be very good.

These comfort and make strong the liver, Aromaticum nardinum, elect: de
granis mirti, confectio de cytonus, sirupus de fumoterrae, conditum de citro de
cytoniis troc: galley elephangine and ramich pillule aggregate minores oleum
costinu.

For al inflammations heate in the liver take conf^ctio de pomis, de tereniabin,
and d^ portulaca trochisci de caphora, de spodio cum semine acetose de berberis
de sandalis, vnguentum rosarum cerotum sada. eplastrum de fermento de melliloto
andromachi diaquilon.

The hidro^sie of the liver is healed with tiriaca diatess^ron the oppilatyons
thereof with the confectio of fumitory, dycodion Athanasia sirupus de eupatorio
de fumoterre secaniabin de kersinii deradicibus trochisci de Reubarbaro, de
Rosis de lacca, de absinthio, and Pillule de Rauidseni.

Pillule stomatice and aggregate clese the liver, and cofectio alrengi, pillule
de turbith, and sebellie purge the same.

Cerotum ysopi, troc: de reubarbe and de eupatorio heal an apostem in the
liver.

Syrupus de agresta, de pomis de tereniabin, be wounderfull good to quench
thirst.

For all dyseasys in the lunges. Cap. x.
THese cleanse the lunges of al gross humours. loch de squilla, emplastrum filii
zacharie, oleum philosophorum, confectio de musco and sirupus de thimo, also a
syrup de granis mirti, doth confort the loges, it is clensyd with a syrupe de
liqueritia, and oleum cartami.

Oil of Uyoletes and of sweet almondes, do take away the asperity of the
lunges.

A iulep of Roses is good for the ^nflatyon of the lunges.

For al diseasys in the spleen. Capi. xi.
UNguentum arthanite, oleum de been and philosophorum, do dyssolue al apostemes
and hardness of the spleen.

For all pains and oppylatyons of the splenne, take Dyacucurma, Magna
Athanasia, Syrupus diacodion, secaniabin de Radicibus, and de Kesin, acetum
squilliticum, Sirupus acetosus de Radicibus, de calamento, trochisci de
eupatorio de lacca pillule rauedseui, Sebelie and inde, confectio alkekengi,
oleu, Nardinum, and de euphorbio.

These do dyssolue and mollyfye the hardness of the Splenne, Dyasulphur,
secaniabin de Calamento trochisci de Capparis, Cerotum Isopi, Diaquilon,
emplastru Andromach and de melliloto oleum philosophorum.

For al dyseases and pains in the back^ and sides. Capi. xii.
OLeum de pipere, vulpinum philosophorum, be good for all pains in the back
if the pains come of hete take vnguen^um de papauere.

These pills purge the matter which causes pains in the back, pillule
aggregate maiores de serapino and de oppoponace.

For pains in the sides, take philonium loch de squilla loch de alfescera
syrupus de ysopo, oleu tute electuarium alesiof purgith ye matter.

Emplastrum Andromachi aristarchi swag the swelling in ye side.

For the pleurisie take loche de papauere, iulep viol. iniuba^um syrupus
cucurbite de prums, de granatis, de cannis, de iniubis, de violis oleum
violaceum.

For all dyseasys in the bealy gutte^ and entraylles. Cap. xiii.
EMplastru de aliis dyssolueth an apostem of the entraylles.

For the colike take diaciminu diafenicon, Philoniu, musa aenea, oleum de
cartamo, de lilio and de piperibus.

These purge the humour causig the colike, hiera hermetis, electuariu indu,
alesc^f, confectio de dactilis, Dyacitoniten, aqua mellis, pillule aggregate
and fetide maiores.

For the hidropsye, use Diacucurma magna, diamorosion diallacca diacoston,
diasulphur, Sirupae de cupatorio, trochisci xiloaloes de rosys and de reubarb.
emplasters, de alliis and Andronachi, oleum almereseron, and these purge the
matter, confectio de eupatorio and de alkakengi, pillule sebelaro, de reubarb,
almeresion, and vnguentu arthanita magum.

Oleum de kerua and de ass be very good for the pains in the small guts.

Aromaticu rosatum dries up the humydite of the entrailles.

These conforte and make strong ye guts, aromaticum nardinu succoru rosatu,
dyacostum, syrypus de granis mirti, mellicratu de citoniis. For ye lubricity
of ye bowels when the meat comes furth vndigestyd use these, electuariu de
granis myrt^, dyalacca, trocisci ramich.

Cofectio de seminibus, dyacoston, oleu lauri heal ye pains in ye belie which
com of wind therein coteyned, hiera hermetis with electuarium. alescof purge and
clese ye same, these also be good against al pains in ye entrails, oximel
squilliticum, diafinico, emplastrum arabicum, oleu de ouis, if it come of slymy
phlegm take diatrion pipercon, dycyminum cofectio anacardina, and an emplaster
de granis lauri.

Syrupus calameti, oleu rute, emplastrum aristarchi, do hete ye entrails yt be
cold, and dyaciminum, dianisum, decoctio alhast, dissolve ye vetosites in the
belly contained.

Emplastrum de fermento heals the inflammations of the guts, secaniabin de
calamento, or emplastrum de melliloto mollitie the hardness thereof.

For the flux use the confection de citoniis, citonia, syrupus de albelach and
de meta, emplast^u^ de gallia, and if it come of choler take el^ctuarium de
fructibus, sirupus acetosus de succis fructuum, Trochisci de spodio, emplastrum
diafinicon and if the Flux be bloody athanasia magna* is good, but if the
cause be phlegm take confectio de storace, rob de fructubus, trochisci de
Berberis.

Succharum violaceu makes the belly loose.

For all pains in the raynes and bladder. Capi. xiiii.
THese confections heate the reins, electuarium de aromatibus, trifera galeni,
secacul coditu, confectio de zingibere, oleu de lilio de ruta, aromaticum
rosatum.

For the pains in the reins, and bladder take diacucurma, dyamorusion,
philoniu eplm de granis lauri oleum, lauri, de keyri, de ruta de ass de
piperibus, oleum vulpinum, philosophorum and nardinum.

These break the stone in the reins and bladder, dialacca, oleum de nucleis
cerasorum, de granis citrangulorum, de scorpionibus, de piperibus.

Hyerapicra, hyera hermetis, electuarium indy, purge the raynes.

Syrupus acetosus, de radicibus, opens the opilations of the reins and
trochisci alkakegi heal the ulcers thereof.

For the hardness of the bladder use cerotu ysopi, and for ye breninge heate
thereof Oleum amigdalarum dulcium.

These provoke urine, diacalametum, diacucurma, diamorusion, diasulphur,
secaniabin de radicibus, de cheisyu, trochisci de lacca, pillule aggregate,
oleum philosophoru, philonium, masa aen^i, oleum ask.

Oleum quartuor seminum frigidorum maiorum is very good for all brennyng and
heate in the yard

Syrupus de piris and de citoniis be good for him yt loses his nature

For al diseases in the matrix and pryuy members. Ca. ix.
GErotum ysopi mollifies the hardness of matrixe.

For the pains in the matrix comenly called the moder, take diambra oleum
nardinum, philonium, musa aenea, emplastrum de granis, lacca, de ruta de croco,
and philosophoru, and if the pains come of cold, use oleum de enula, and
hyerapicra, hiera hermetis, pillule de serapino, expert.

These heate a cold matrix electuarium de gemmis, oleu rute lilii an de
piperibus.

Aromaticum muscatum and oleu de lapide gagatis, be very good for the moder.

Diacalamentu and pillule de serapino expert provoke ye flowers, and trifera
minor stop the same.

For the hemorrhoydes and all dyseasys of the foundamet. Cap. xvi.
Oil of lynseed is good for all pains in the fundament. Trifera saracenica,
trifera muscata trifera galeni confectio alkakengi heal ye hemorrhoydes, these
assuage the pains thereof, oleum de grisomilis and de nucleis persicorum.

These stop the flux of ye hemorrhoides, pillule de bdellio maiores minores,
and of the contrary part pillule aggregate, lose the same.

If they swell anoint them with oleum de grisomilis.

For the gout, ye sciatica, and all other ulcers ache in the outward mebres.
Ca. xvii
OLeum viola{rum}, and cerotu sandalium, are good for al hot apostemes these
ripe dissolve ye same, cerotu andromachi, emplastrum de fermeto, and dyaquilon.

Oleu auellanaru, vulpinum, de lapide gagatis, philosophoru heal a cold gout,
if it be hot use oleu de ranis*, for an old gout* cerotum alexandri, oleu de
nucleis cerasoru de granis citrangulorum be very good. hieralogodio, hamech
purg a cacer or crab, these ointmentes heal ye same, diafinicon alpheserico
emplastrum arabu. oleu iun^peri de fraxino, these ripe break it, sirupus de
epithimio, pillule inde.

These dissolve al hard knobs swellinges, dialacca, oleum amigdalarum
dulcium, and sisaminum, cerotum ysopi emplastrum diaquilon and de alliis.

Oleum lilii, masticum and sinapis, ease al pains which come of cold, but if
they be hot take oleu rosaru de papauere, these assuage al aches, oleum
rosatu, camomilli, de melliloto with cerotu andromachi.

Unguentum egiptiacum cleanses an old fistula very well, but yeralogodion ruffi
purges the matter, these oyntmentes heal the fistula, vnguentum diafeicon. de
lino and alpheserico, oleum de onis, syrupus de epithimo and emplastrum arabu

Pillule aggregate and de oppoponaco purge the matter that causes pains in
the knees, and emplast^u andromachi takes away the ache. These purge al goutes
of cold causes, hyerapigra, hierahermetis, electu^ium iudu, confeetio
alkakengi, pillule alhandhal, de hermodactilis de oppoponaco, but if it come of
a hot cause, take electuariu de succo rosarum, and these purge all kind of
goutes, electuarium alescof, pillule stomatiche, aggregate, fetide, of serapino
and coloquintide.

Anoint cold joints with cerotum alexandri, and oleum de stincho conforteth
lose joints.

For al pains in the joints, take aqua mellis, oleu masticum, de storace, de
euphorbio, de been, de lauro de keire de cucumere asimino, de granis
citrangulorum de piperibus, also use cerotum isopi, acetum squilliticum,
emplastrum andromachi filii zacharie.

Emplastrum diaquilon ripeth all swellynges.

Trifera sarasenica is good for werinesse.

Unguentum alphesericon, oleum de iunipero and de fraximo heals the pains in
the legs.

Confectio de ass diasulphur be good for bytynges of venemouse beasts.

Emplastrum de fermento draws al fixed things out of ye body. For ye sciatica
take emplastrum andromachi, eplm sinapis, oleum de piperibus and philosophor.

Anoint thy body with oil of dyl thou shalt sweat, and oil of quinces doth
stop the sweat.

Pillule aggregate maiores and serapine purge the sciatica.

Hyeralogodion ruffi pillule aggregate minores purge foul ulcers

Unguetum nobile, nichodemi ceraseos, ceruse, oleum almezereo de iunipero de
fraxino heal old ulcers

Oleum de be takes a way ye scar of an ulcer.

Unguetu sericinum vnguentu ceruse heal al brinning with fire.

^For wounds and al dyseases in the syno^es Capi. xviii.
HYera hermetis purges well all ^ymy ma^ier coteyned in ye sinews ^o do
pillule alhadal de opopona^o, for cold diseases in ye sinowe, use ^irupus
sticados, aquamellis, vnguetum de bdellio, oleum, nardinu, de croco, de
piperibus, de euphorbio de storace, de scorace, de be, oleum de enula, cerotu
andromachi, oleum costinum de sanbuco, oleu nucu, if they have a cotractio
cerotu Alexadri, for ach in ye sinews, take ysopi cerotu, oleu amigdalarum
amararum, auellanaru, nucu, lauri, taoniil, sabuci, keyri, melliloti, mast^cis,
and de euphorbio.

If the sinews be hard or swolle, take oil of bitter almodes, of lynsed of
safron, of nuts, and of laurel, oil of quynces is good for loose synowes.

Cofectio alphescera balanscioch good for the synowes.

Unguentu diaphenico vnguetum arabum be very good for broken bones.

Emplastrum synapis is good for pain in ye bones if it come of a cold cause,
and emplastrum de fermento draws out broken bones.

Syrupus de epithimo vnguentu de lino, diafinico, emplastrum Arabicum,
vnguentum daceraseos, do wonderful cleanse and heal woudes and if the wound
putrefy, take vnguentu cericinium, and egiptiacum magnum, and if the synow be
hurt take vnguentum basilico magnu.

Oleu philosophorum is good for an old sore, and oleu de grisomilis asswagith
the swelling in a wound and emplastrum de fermento dries up a hurt ye mattreth
wonderfully.

Emplastrum andromachi aliud, doth brene and consume the skin ^nd flesh as
it were a cautery.

For the cramp, take sirupus stic^^os, pillule de serapino, vnguentu
^ebdellio, oleum de been, de croco, ^e piperibus, and de lapide gagatis

For al agewes. Cap. xix.
FOr al hot Agewes, use confectio de acetosis, de prunis, sirupus cucurbite,
Acetosus ^e pomis, iuleb violaceum, cerotum violaceum, trochisci de rosis, and
de spodio, reubarbarum, trochisci de eupatorio.

For the quartain, take confectio de assa, de dactilis, diasulphur, sirupus de
eupatorio, secaiabin de radicibus de calamento, infusio de hyera, dyarhodon,
trocisci de rosis, de eupatorio, de absinthio with pillule inde be good for a
quartayne.

These purge sharpe agues, trifera persica, alxilcostes, cofectio de dactilis,
syrupus acetosus de succis herbarum, and decoctio cupatorii.

For hot fevers, use iuleb violaru sirupus de prunis, de granatis, de
acetositate citri, de portulaca, trotisci de caphora de berberis de sadalis, ye
same be good for pestilet agues.

Sirupus de bisantiis, is good for old fevers of lunge continuance, so is
confectio de psillio, for choleric agues take syrupus de succo acetose and
agresta.

Sirupus acetosus de tereniabin, is good for hot fevers yt be very perillouse,
for agues in ye which diverse humores be putrified take sirupus diacodio,
troc^sci de rosis eupatori^

Decoctio de sticados trocisci diarodon heal agues that com of corrupt phlegm.

These purge al kid of agues, pillule aggregate, de rubarbaro de alkakengi, in
the cold or shaking it is good to anoynte the patient with oil of dyl or de
enula.

For al corruptyon and dyseases in the four humours blood, choler, phlegm, and
melancholy. Capi. xx.
HYeralogodion ruffi, hamech, decoctio epithimi do purge melacholy These purge
choler wonderful well cofectio de psillio cofectio de manna, electuariu rosa^u,
diacitonites, pillule de turbith, de coloquintida, sirupus acetosus laxarinus,
aqua fructuum, aqua casei, insu^io de succis herbarm, cofectio fumiterre, and
de croco, with myrabolanes.

To purge choler adust, take syrupus minor fumoter, syrupus de epithimo, acetu
squilliticum and decoctio capilli veneris pillule de lapide lazuli and de
armuico, pillule stomatiche purge both choler and melancholy

These aswage delay ye hete of choler, succharum violac^u, sirupus acetosus
laxatiuus, syrupus acetosus de succo fructuu. Gross thike choler is made thine
easy to degest with, sirupus acetosus de radicibus, secaiabi de radicib{us},
trocisci de ramich These be good to purge phlegm, hieralogodion ruffi, decoctio
alharif, of myrabolanes, pillule de euphorbio, de turbith, stomatch, de
satcocolla de serapino and de coloquintida.

If thou will break gross slymy phlegm take syrupus mayor de fumoterre.

Diacala: galeni, purges al slymy matter so doth acetum squilliticum pillule
aggregate maiores, and fetide minores, infusio hyere, and if the humores
descend to ye sinews, take pillule de euphorbio and lay to the place
euplastrum de alliis.

Confectio de dactilis purges raw humores wounderfull well.

The blood is mudyfyed made clear from all corruptyon by these confections,
cofectio anacardina, decoctio capilli venetis, aqua fructuu decoctio fumiterre,
and pillule ad febres cholericas purge the blood.

Aqua fructuum, Alxicostum trochisci de camphora, delay the heate of the blood.

Athanasia magna and trochisci de terra sigillata be good for them that spittte
blood, but for bleding at the nose take trochisci de ramiche de terra sigillata
and de karabe, and they be also good for a bloody flux, oleu philosophorum
dissolveth blood gathered to one place.

Rob de prunis, de fructibus, trochisci sandalorum, vnguentum rosarum, violarum
and oleum mandragore be good for al inflamatios and brennynges.

Hamech purges al dyseasys which come of choler or salt phlegm.

These open oppilations thrughe all the body, diacyminum, cofectio de
seminibus, syrupus acetosus, de succis herbarum* de fumoterre, secaniabin de
radicibus, trochisti de aniso, pillule aggregate minores, ol^u amigdalarum
amararum, de been, costinu, persicorum de piperibus.

Electuarium alescof purges the superfluities of al the body.

These purge melancholic, pillule inde, lucis maiores, de lapide lazuli and
zebelie.

A Table containing ye weightes which phisicyons do comenly use, the
interpretacyon of the names of the compound medicynes herin contained with the
quatitie time yt they ought to be received in.

THe least first of al weightes (comoly used among phisicyons) is a barley corn,
and.xx. corns make a scruple, three scrupules make a drachme, eight drachmes
make an uncle, xii. vnces make apoude. A quarter of poud is three vnces,

And they be this notid.
A corn. gra. A scruple.) A drachme. An uncle.. A pound li. A quarter. q. A
half. s. A handful. m. Ana. of every one.

All compound medycynes be either receyuid within the body, or laid to the
same without* they which be received into ye body be these.

ELectuarium confectio differ in this alone, that electuariu is moist and made
with sugger and honey, confectio dry made alonly with sugar, and because they
be for diverse diseases theris nooe certain time or measure, for the receiving
of them.

Mixtura is when diverse electuaries or cofections be mingled together, is
received.ii. hours be fore meat. Tragea is when diverse pouders be megled
together with sugar and they be received a.. at onest with soppes of strong wine.

Conserua conditu be when diverse spices be mixed with sum sirup and be comely
receiuid early and late after the bygnesse of a walnut.

Loath is a medicine which may be liked with the tongue, may be received at al
times in the quantity of a hasel nut.

Iuleb is a clear potyon made of diverse waters and sugar.

Rob is a joyce made hard thick with the heat of the soon or of ye fire and is
commonly mingled with electuarys, and conserves.

Syrupe is a moist medicine which may be receyuyd early or late

Decoctum is a medicine made of rotes leaves, sead and flowers where unto is
added sugger or honey.

Infusio is when diverse medycins be beaten to powder or hole laid to stepe a
certain space in sum liquor

Trochiscus is a round confectio and plain, made after the manner of a whele,
the which before it be receiuyd most be beaten to powder, and drunk with wine
or other licoure the weight of one. commonly.

Pills be know to al men ought to be received two or three hours at after
supper the quantity of. i.

Sief is a confectyon made after the fashio of a sugar lofe most be dyssoluyd
in liquor before it be receiuid

Collirium is a moist confection made of sief dissolved.

Sufuf is a fine powder made of diverse spices.

Secaniabin is a sharpe syrupe wherein is put sugar or honey.

Masticatoriu is a confection which is held in the mouth chewed to purge the
head of phlegm.

Suffimetum or suffumigatio is when diverse pouders be cast upon the cools,
and the pacyent doth receive the smoke thereof.

Gargarisme is a confectyon of diverse maters and sum decoctyon wherein sum
rob is dissolved, which is gargarised in the mouth and not swalowed down.

Here follow the compound medycynes which be applied to the outward parts of
the body.

UNguetu an ointmet, is made of oils, spices wax, ought hot to be applied to
the place beig somewhat before rubbed with a lynen clothe.

Linimentu is in all points like to vnguetu saving that there goes no wax to
the composityon thereof.

Emplastrum is made of herbs spices, not being beating to powder but a little
bruised mixed with sum liquore or decoctyon, being hot is put upon a line
cloth and so laid so laid to the sore.

Plus dyffereth not from an emplaster saving that meal or bran god to the
composityon thereof.

Cataplasma is made of grene herbs or dry sod in water till they be soft then
applied to the sore.

Cerotu is made of wax or rosyn with oils spices, and is laid upon a cloth cut
after the form of the mebre it should be applied unto.

Dropax is an ointment only used to take away hear.

Sinapismus is an emplaster made of mustard to vlcerate the skin make the
same red.

Epithema is made of diverse pouders mixed with sue ioice or distilled water, and
commonly laid upon scarlet is applied to the seek membre.

Embrocha is when the membre is washed gentilly with a spoge dypt in the
decoction of diverse herbs, rotes and flowers.

Fomentu is a bath made of the decoctyon of diverse herbs to wash the sore
place with al.

Euaporatio is when the diseased membre is holden in ye hot vapour of some
decoctyon.

Saceuly be bags made of linen cloth wherein be coteyned herbs rotes and
leaves which being hot must be first dypte in Wine or vinegar, and then
laid to the membre that is grieved.

Encathisma or insessio is a decoctyon of certain things wherein ye pacyent
most sit for certain space.

A table of comfortatiues.
SAge, Rue, margera. Betoni, Peony, Sauery. Symples. Camomyll Pulyoll,
Calamynt, Nutmykes, Hot medicines which comfort the head. Cubebes, Musk.
Fenell. Aurea alexandrina, Letificans rasis, Pliris acroticon Compounds.
Dyacastoreon, electuarium de gemmis Diacodron iulii, Dianthos cum musc^. White
Popy. Henban^. Lettis, Uyoletes. Camphory. Dymples. Mandrage Wylow leaves.
Uyneger. Cold medicynes which comfort ye head Dyapapauer. Diacodion mesu^
Dyagregantum. Kebuli conditi, Compounds. Diap^nidion sin^ sp^ciebus, Iulep
violatum. Succarum rosatum. Borage. Cloves. Rosmary Symples. Aloes. Musk
Cubebes. Hot medicines which comfort ye heart. Saffron, Myntes. Diamargariton
Diacinamomum Plirisarcoticon Compounds. Diaborraginatum, Electuarium
letificans Dyanthos, Succarum buglossatu Electuarium regum Camphory. Uyolettes,
Margarites. Symples. Iuo^. Coral Water lyllyes Coryander Roses Cold medycynes
which comfort the heart Dyarrodon abbatis Succarum rosatum Manus christi
Syrupus violaceus Compounds. Rob derybes Triasandall Trocisci de camphora.
Succarum rosatum Syrupus nenufarinus Myntes Sage, Margeram Wormwode Horehounde
Symples Anyse Comyn Mastyke Gynger Maces Hot medicines which comfort the
stomach Diatrionpipereon Dyagalanga Rosata nouella Mel rosatum colatum
Compounds. Dyanisum Dyacymynum Dyacalamentum Philonium mesue Dyacucurma
Dyalacca Rose Violet Plantayne Lettyse Symples. Pomegranates Quynces Gourdes
Melones Purslane Uynegre Cold medicines which comfort the stomach Dyacytonyteu
cum succaro. Dyarhodo abbatis Succarum rosatu, Rob de berberies Rob de rybes
Compounds. Succarum violaceum, Iulep rosatum Rob de moris Triasandall, Spyke
Squ^nante Cynamone Symples. Wormwode Fumytory Fennel Ameos Hot medicines
which comfort the liver Dyacymynum, Theriaca magna Dyacosta Confeccio
anacardina Rosata nouella Compounds. Dyalacca Dyanysum Aromaticum rosatum
Dyacalamentum. Endyue. Lettis Purssane Symples. Uyolets. Liver wort. Camphory,
Berberyes Cold medi^ines which comfort the liver. Diarodo abbatis
Tryasandaly. rob granatoru Succarum vyolaceu* Compounds. Succarum rosaceum.
Cappares. Tamaryndes, Borrage Symples. Buglosse Crosses, Calament, Time.
Almondes, Anyse. Hot medicines which comfort the spleen. Fenell Dyacayparis,
Dyacalamentum, Compounds. Dyacimynum. Lettyse, Endiue, Symples. Gourdes,
Cucumers, Cytrones, Cold medicines which comfor^ the spleen. Uyneger*
Dyaboraginatum, Triasandali. Compounds. Saxifrage Gro^ell, Alexander Simples
Nettle, Rocket Spiknard. Hot medicines which comfort the raynes. Paritorye,
Juniper, Dyagalanga, Trifera magna, Dyacalamentum. Dyalacca mesue, Compounds.
Electuarium ducis. Aromaticum rosatum, Philanthropos, Theriaca. Water lyllyes.
Lettys Symples Purss^ane. Endyue. Whit Popy. Cold medicines which comfort the
raynes ^latayne, Sirupus menufarinus. Compounds. Syrupus ace^osus. Mugworte,
Rue, Sag^, Sa^yne, Symples. Pulyo^e Cala^int, Myrhe. Opopona^, Hot medicines
which comfort the matrix. Cynamom. Dya^alametum. Electuarium ^cis. Dyambra
me^ue. Compounds. Philanthropos, Dyamargariton, Theriaca magna Electuarium de
bacci^ lauri.

The cold medicines that comfort the raynes, do also comfort the matrix.
Hermodactyles, Saint Iohns herb, Symples. French garlyke, Folefote,
Castoreum, Crosses, Oxdungue Hot medycines which comfort the joints and
outward parts, Organ Prymrose cofectio anacardina Electuarium dymarte Oximell
iuliani, Compounds. Oximell squilliticium Morell Syngreue Symples. Lettys
Endyue. Vinegar Cold medycines whicomforte the joints outward parts.
Rosewater Syrupus nenufarinus, Sirupus acetosus Compounds. Oleum rosarum,

Purgatyue medycynes.
Coloquintida, Agaricke, Symples. Aloes, Lapis lazuli, Lapis armenius, These
medycynes purge the head. Kebuli indi. Hierapicra. Hieralogodion, Pillule
cochiae, Compounds. Pillula^ aureae, Pillulae de hyera, Hysope, Wythwynd,
Symples. Agaricke, Casiafistula, Gladyne, These purge the breast and lights.
Colloquintida, Diasene, Paulinum, Pillule de agarico mesue, Simples. Aloes,
Wormewod, Mirabolanes, Medicyns which purge the stomach. Dyaprunis, Stomaticum
laratiuum, Catarcticu imperiale, Compounds. Hyerapycra, Pillule de hyera,
Pillule Stomatice mesue, Pillulae lucis. Simples. Wormewod Fumytory,
Tamarindes. Gladyn. Medycynes which purge the liver. Mirabolani citrini.
Dyaprmnis. Trifera sarasenica, Compounds. Pillule de reubarba^ mesue, Agarick^
Simples. Scene. Black belebo^ These medicynes purge the spleen Calamint,
Dyasene, Compounds. Pillule inde Hermoda^tiles, ^urbith. Oppoponax, Symples
Salgeme Euphorbist, Centory, Wyld cucumer, These purge the joints and outward
members. Such fern as grows upon walls. Electuariu de su^co rosarum.
Hamech. Benedicta. Compounds. Hermodactili, Pillule de benedicta, Pillule
arthreticae, Catarcticon imperial^ Wormwode. Tamaryndes, Scamony, Aloes.
Mirabolanes citrines Reubarbe, Water of chese Joyce of roses, Casia fistula,
Symples. Uyoletes, Manna, Prunes, Spour^ Withwind, Fumytory. These purge
choler. All pills wherein is diagredion, Electuarium de succo rosarum,
Diaprunis Rhabarbaru, Compounds. Aqua tamarindorum, Hiera picra, Pillule
aloes, Electuarium de psilli^ Pillule alephangine, Pillule aureae, Kebuli,
Emblici. Belerici. Mirabolanes, Agaricke. Turbithe. Colloquintida Gladyn Been,
Symples. Wild cucumer. Hermodactiles, Folefote. Pepper Sugar Gynger Centorye
Elder Hellebore Okeferne These purge phlegm Benedycta Stomaticum laxatynum.
Theodoricon Paulinum Hyerapicra Pillule arthritic^. Pillule fetide, Pillule
cochye, Compounds. Pillule auree, Pillule sine quibus, Hiera archigenis
Pillule de hermodactilis maiores. Pillule asayret. Mirabolani indi Spurge
Wallferne Lapis armenu^ Lapis lazulu^ Scene Symples. Calamynte Fumytery black
hellebore Saltgemus Garden saffron Sticados Prunes These purge melancholy.
Wyld time Hyera ruffi, Dyasene Catarticum imperiale Diacatholicon Compounds.
Ha^eche* Pill^le de fumaterre. Dyasene Pillule inde Pillule de lapide lazule.
Hoppes Tamaryndes Maydenhear^ These medycynes purge and clese the blood. Joyce
of roses Casia Manna Fumytory Aloes Lapis lazuli Reubarbe.

The epystle of Diocles unto king Antigonus, which teaches a man to preserve
him self in health.
IN so much that your grace being now somewhat run in years (most noble
Prince Antigonus) is endowed with knowl^dge above other kings, and that in all
parts of Phil^sophy and the arts called Mathematical wherein your grace has
wounderfully profited: I thought that part of Philosophy which teaches a man
to preserve himself in health not worthy to be dyspysed and left untouched of
your regal majesty, wherefore I thought it necessari to declare v^to your
majesty in this Epistle, the causes of diverse diseases with the signs and
tokes which goo before the same, and last of all the remedies wherwyth ^e same
may be healed and cured, for like as the (...) no raging hideous tempest
without sum^ ^anifest and open signs which declare the same to follow, whereby
men which have knowledge and be learned in ye Arcane and privy works of nature
do so provide for themselves that they be sure from all perylles and i^operdyes
that may ensue, so is there no kind of disease or sickness that may infect
any membre of man body but that hath before such evident signs and tokens
that it may be easlye known to follow. Therefore your grace putting your trust
and confidence in those our precepts may easly attain to the perfect and
absolute knowledge of all things.

First of all I have divided the body of man unto four parts, that is to say
the head, the breast, the belly, and the bladder.

Th^se signs and tokens do de^lare when any kind of disease is about to
infect the head, daselyng in the eyes, the headache, heuynesse of y^ brows, a
noise in the ears, prichinge in the temples, the eyes to water in the morning
the sight to fail, with dullness or want of smelling and the lifting up of the
gummes.

When thou doest perceive any such tokens, it is the best remedy to purge
cleanse the head (and that with no purgatyue medicine) but with, v. vnces of
wine made of wytheryd grapes, or of new wine sod till half ^e wasted a way,
therewith thou shalt wash t^y mouth fasting, and gargarise it therein till the
head be purged of phlegm therein contained, and this is the easyest remedy for
al dyseasys in the head. Also it were very good and helthful, if the pacyent
fasting wold eat a quatitie of mustard which have been macerate or steped in
^at^r and honey mingled together, gagarysynge the same wold draw down the
humore contained in the head, but first of all yo^ most take heed the head be
coueryd tyill it h^ar, whereby the slymy phlegm may b^ made more apt mere to
flow down to the mouth.

Now of the contrary part, whose despises these signs and tokens shall be
troubled with these deseases, or one of them, the ophtalmy, ye perle in the
ey^s, brekyng out about the cares poukes or weles in the neck, the c^nsumptyo
in the brain, heuinesse in the head, the squina eye, worms which eat the
hear, the pains in the flape that coueryth the wind pipe, the falling of
the hear, s^abbes or ulcers in the head, and the totheache.

You may perceive by these tokens if any man is like to be diseasyd about the
breast or no, first a sweat through al the body breast the tunge to wax
rough or thyck^, the spittel to be salt or bitter in taste or choleric,
sudden pains in the sides or shulders without manifest occasyon, of tyaning
much watchynge, suffocatyones, thirst after sleep, great sadness, coldness
in the breast, and a shaking in the arms and hands, and the dyseases thereof
ensuing you may avoid with perbraking after a mean supper, without
receyuinge any medicine. Also it is very good to vomyt fasting,

Therefore let him that wold vomit, eat Radyshe, Towneressys, Roket, Mustard*
or purslane, and afterward drink warm wat^r he shall vomyt furthwith, but he
that serrythe lyt^ll by these presagyes and signs ought to fear these
diseasys, the pleurisy, pains in the lunges, melancholical madness, sharpe
agues, the phrenesy, the lythargye, and a burning ague with yeskynge.

When ye belly shall be dyseasyd, sum of these signs do comenly appear
before, the throws and pains in the belly, meates and drinks to ^me bitter,
heuinesse in the knees, cold stiffness in the loins, weariness of al the
body without any occasyon, lack of senses in the legs, and easy fevers,
Now when ^riye of these tokens do appear it is best to make ye belly^ soft and
lose with some kind of dyete and with no purgig medicine, for it is leasse
ieopardye to use such things that a man may scant err in, as betes sod with
water honey, sod garlic, malowes, docks, or mercurye and sweet metes made
with honey, for all these things do mollifye the belly, but if any of the
foresaid signs be manifest or endure lunge add to the said decoctyons the
joyce of b^stard Saffron, for thereby it shall be swetter and more wholesome. Also
Col^wortes sod in a great quantity of water, or four vnces of ye joyce thereof
receyuid with honey and salt, is very good, and of no less effect is the
water of the decoctyon of Cichepcasen or bitterfitch broke fasting, But they
which think these signs to be of none effect, are oftentimes diseased with
these syknesses, the flux in the belly, pains in ye bowels, the lyenceri,
iliaca pa^sio which is a disease in the small guts, the ^ciatica, the fever
tertyan, the gout in ye feet, ye apoplexye the hemorrhoydes, and the joint
syknesse.

Al dyseases of the bladder, ^e know by these tokens, to be very full after
little meat, great in flatyons, much b^lc^ynge, the pale colour of all the
body, heavy or sad sleep, vryne wane of colour, and great pains in the
making there of, with swelling about the pryuye members, after which tokens it
is good to use odoriferouse things which move urine, as the rotes of Fenel or
persely which have ben steped a while in good doriferouse white wine, of yt
which let the pacyent take every morning fasting three vnces with the water af
yelowe carettes or lonage or enula campana, for they be of like operation, of
no less effica^y is ye water wherein Ciches have been steped in, if it be
drunk with wine. But whosoever doth lyghtli passover these tokes shall loke for
sum of these dyseases the hydropsye, the bygnesse of the spleen, pains in the
lyu^r, the stone, pains in the raynes, the strangurye, and th^ d^stentio of
the be^y. And her it is to be noted that in al these signs before rehearsed we
ought to minister gentle and easy medecines to children, and to such as be
elder, medycynes that be of more strong operatyon and greater efficacye.

Now I entende brefly to declare unto your majesty the two turnynges of the
soon callid in latin solstitia (at which times such things do comenli chance)
and what meates your ^ur grace shall use or absteyne from in either of them,
taking my beginning at the winter turnynge.

The winter turn.
Soluitiu ^emale which I call yt witer turn is about ye xi. day of December
when the so enters the Goat.
IN the winter turn do rewmes and humidity increase in means bodies till ye
sprig equinoctial, therefore it is good to eat who^e meates and to drink
sweet wynes and especially with wild marg^ram, and also to use ye company of
women.

There be from the winter turnynge to the spring equinoctial nynty days.

The springtyme equinoctial.
From the spring equinoctial unto the rysynge of the seue sterres called
vergiliac, doth phlegm and sweat corruptyon of the blood engendre in mans
body, The spring equinoctial is ye.x. day of Marche when the son enters the
Rame.
and for that cause it is good to use moist and tart meates, to exercise ye
body, not to absteyne from women, fro the spring equinoctial to the rysynge of
pleyad^s be.xivi. days.

The rysynge of the seven stars.
Choler and vytter matter berythe rule in man from this time unto the somer
turnynge, The seven sters called vergilia^ or p^e^ad{is} rise with the scene about
ye.ix day of may
therefore use meates that be sweet, laxative, beware of acts venereal, fro the
resig^e of p^e^ades unto the somer turn be xlv days.

The somer turnynge.
At this time is melancholy augmentyd tell the heruest equinoctial, therefore
dryncke cold water and smell odoriferouse things, The somer turn is about.x.
of July, when the soon enters the Crab.
as for ^enus you most either use it moderately or exchew it utterly, we have to
the heruest equinoctial nynty and three days.

The heruest equinoctial.
Phlegm thine flurrons abound fro this time to the setting of ye seuyn
sterres, The heruest equinoctial is about ye. 14 of Septebre when the son
enters the balace.
therefore it is good to purge ye humours or to stop ye fluxyons, and to eat
al tart and moist meates, to perbrake nothing at all, to excercyse ye body,
and to flee women, from which time to the setting of the seuin sterres
be.xxxvi. days.

The setting of the seven Sterres.
From this time to the winter turnynge doth phlegm bear domynyon in man, The
seuyn sterres set with the soon about ye.x. of nouebre
therefore you most eat fat bitter things, drink sweet wynes, and excercyse
the body, from the going down of the.vii sterres till the Winter turn be five
and forty days.

Finis.
The table of this book.
Against the falling of hear cap, i To take away hear cap. ii To heal ye
pustules or weles in ye head, ca. iii Against forgetfulness cap. iiii Against
the frenesye cap, v Against the headache cap, vi Against the room cap. vii
Against the gyddynesse of the head cap. viii Against the headache which comes
of to much watchynges cap. ix Against the falling evil capi. x Against madness
called mania cap. xi To heal all dyseases in the eyes cap. xii Against
dymnesse of the sight ca. xiii For all pains in the ears defnesse ca. xiiii
To take away the Morphew R^ngwormes Capi. xv Against the totheake ca. xvi To
stop blood at the nose ca. xvii To heal the Paulsey cap. xviii For
horsenesse and all fautes in the speech and for the Cough capi. xix Ahaynst
spyttyng of blood capi. xx For the sudden debility of the vital spirits
coming of emptynesse capi. xxi Against yeskyng and belkynge cap. xxii For all
diseases in the lights ca. xxiii Against the pleurisie ca. xxiiii To make a
man laxatyue cap. xxv To bind or make on costiffe capi. xxvi Against ye
colycke frettig of the guts. ca. ^7 To kill worms in the braly cap. xxviii
To stop the flux of y^ hemeroydes cap. xxix To heal the disease called
remasinus which ^s a desire to goo to the stole without a voydd^ng of any
thing ca. xxx To heal the Emeordes being exstante and ^ffurs in the fundament
capi, xxxi Against ye com^ng furth of ye arsegut cap, xxxii To heal ye stoppig
or opylacio in ye liver ca. 33 Against the dropsye capi, xxxiiii To heal all
diseases in the splenne cap, xxxv Against the yelow iaundis ca. xxxvi Against
the stoppyng in the raynes the stone and disease of the bladder cap. xxxvii
Against the stranguryon cap, xxxviii To heal ulcers boils of the yard cap,
xxxix For the that ca not hold there water, capi, xxxx Against the swelling of
the coddes capi, xli Against the swelling of the yard ca, xlii To a^wage
fleshli lust ca, xliii Against the hardness and apostem of the matryxe cap,
xliiii To provoke the flowers capi, xlv To ^ope the flours capi, xlvi Against
the suff^catyon of the matryxe called the moder ca, xlvii To make a woman
coceyue ca, xlviii Against the swelling of the tetes through much abundance of
milk cap, xlix Rem^dies against hard delyueraunce of children capi, l For the
pains after the delyuerance of the child cap. li Against the gout joint
sycknesse and sciatica capi. lii Against ruptures and brekynges cap, liii
Against an agew yt holds a ^. a one day ca. liiii Against the brenn^ng agew
cap, lv Against the tercyon feu^r capi, lvi To heal a ^uoridian fever cap,
lvii For the quartayn agew cap, lviii Against a carbuncle cap, lix To heal the
mesel^ capi. lx To heal a fistula or hollow ulcer capi. lxi Against the scabe
and french pokes cap. lxii Against glaudules kurnels. cap. lxiii To toke a way
wartes cap. lxiiii To heal burninges of fire cap lxv Against the disease
called wyld fire. cap. lxvi. To draw out arowe heads or thorns that frycke
in the body. cap. lxvii Against brusynge cap, lxviii To cure beasts that be
hurt or seek. ca. lxix Against ^ronkennes cap, lxx Agayst werynesse cap. lxxi A
drink for wounded parsons, cap, lxxii A drink against the fystule cap. lxxiii
To purge cholryke humours dounwarde. cap. lxxiiii, To purge melancholy humours.
cap. lxxv To purge choler adust cap. lxxvi A purgation against the quotidian
fever. cap. lxxvii To purge phlegm in a quotidian. ca. lxxviii A purgation
against a quotidian ^f sweat fl^gme. cap, l^xi^. A purgation against ^a
quotidian of sharpe phlegm, cap. lxxxx To purge choler in a tercyan cap. lxxxi
A purgation against a tercyan of yelow choler, cap, lxxxii Agkynst a simple or
double tercia ca, lxxxiii Against a terc^an of red choler ca. lxxxiiii Against
a quartayn of bret choler. ca, lxxxv Against a quartayne in autume or harvest.
cap. lxxxvi. Against a quartayne of natural melancholy cap. lxxxvii A pocion
against a quartayn. ca. lxxxviii A cofectio of pills against euel humo. ca.
lxxxix Against ye heuin^s in ye head. cap. lxxxx
The table of the aphorisms.
OF the dysposicios of the head. cap. i Of the lethargy cap. ii Of the pains
in ye head called subeth. ca. iii Of to much watchynge cap. iiii Of the palsy
cap, v Of madness called melancholia cap. vi Of raging madness^ c^p. vii Of the
falling eu^ll cap. viii Of the deseases in the synowes cap. ix Of drousynes in
the head cap. x Of the mebres being set a w^y ca. xi Of the disposicions of
the eyes cap. xii Of the dis^osityons of the ears ca, xiii Of the dysposytios
of the nose cap. xiiii Of the bledyng of the nose cap. xv Of nesynge cap. xvi
Of the disposytion of the mouth cap. xvii Of the diseases in the teeth cap xviii
Of the grefes in the throat cap. xix Of the breast and lights cap. xx Of ^loud
spyttyng cap. xxi Of the plenrisye cap xxii Of the cosumption or ^isyke cap.
xxiii Of the disposityon of the heart cap. xxiiii Of the paps. cap. xxv Of the
stomach cap. xxvi Of the dyseases in the liver cap. xxvii Of the gaul and
spleen cap. xxviii Of al kind of fluxyons cap xxi^ Of the fundament cap. xxx Of
the disposition of the reins cap, xxx^ Of the diseases of the bladder cap.
xxxii Of the mebres of generation in me c^. xxxiii Of ye mebres of generatio in
weme ca, xxxiiii Of the dysposicion of the outward members Cap. xxx, v Of
fevers and agewes ca. xxxvi Of the diet to be observed in agues ca, xxxvii
The table of the compound medycynes.
FOr al dyseases in the head Cap. i For pains in the ears ^op. ii ^or the
pains in the eyes cap, iii (...) the dyseases of the face cap. iiii (...) the
dyseases in the mouth throat ca, v (...) the morphew yelow iandes cap* vi (...)
^ll dyseases in the stomach cap. vii (...) ^he dysposycyons in the heart cap,
viii ^ dyseases in the lyu^r cap, ix ^ pains in the lunges cap. x ^ ^seases in
the spleen cap, xi ^ ^ayne of y^ back sides cap, xii ^ in the guts and
entraylles, Ca^ xiii For ^ in the rains bladder ca, xiiii For ^ in the matrix
cap, ^v For ^ ca, xvi For ^ scyatica cap. xvii For all ^ cap, xviii For all ^
ca. xix For the ^ in the four. cap. xx.
Impry^ (...) London in Fletestreate at ^ of the Rosegarland by ^ Coplande.


