A very brefe treatise, ordrely declaring the pricipal parts of physic, that
is to say: Things natural. Things not natural. Things against nature.

Gathered, and set forth by Christopher Langton.

Anno dni. M.D.XLVII.

Wylm Baldwyn*
Who so desires health got, to preserve:
And lost, to procure: ought chefely to know
Such natural things, as thereto may serve:
Great knowledge whereof, this book will him show.
Which small though it seem contains as much
Of art to be known of them that are wise,
As byg mighty books agastfull to tuche,
As well for the wayght, as for the heavy price.
Read it therefore all ye that love your health,
Learn here in an hour, else where in a year
Scarce red, the which Langton willing our wealth
Hath englyshed brefe, as it doth appear.
To whom the free geuer of your so great gain,
Yield thakes praises, a payment for his payne.
Consule valetudini.
The contents of this Book.
The first book.
OF what kind of arts physic is. Cap. i. Of the sectes in Physycke. Cap.
ii. The parts of physic. iii. The distribution of Physic in to three
forms. Cap. iiii Of the number of things natural. v. Of Elements. Cap. vi.
Of temperamentes. Cap. vii. Of Humours. Cap. viii Of the parts of man body.
Cap. ix. Of powers or faculties. Cap. x Of Actions. Cap. xi. Of Spirits. Cap.
xii.
The second book.
OF the number of things not natural. Cap. i Of Air. Cap. ii Of meat and
drink. Cap. iii Of exercise, and rest. Cap. iiii Of Sleep and watch. Cap. v
Of Fullness and emptiness. Cap. vi Of the perturbations and sudayne mocions of
the mind. Cap. vii
The third book.
OF the number of things against nature. Cap. i Of the causes of diseases.
Cap. ii Of diseases. Cap, iii Of Accidents, Cap, iiii
The fowerth book.
Howe to judge of any disease. Cap, i Of Urine, Cap, ii Of the excrementes of
the belly, Cap, iii Of the Spettel, Cap, iiii Of the Pulses, Cap. v
Finis.
To the right high and mighty Prince Edwarde, Duke of Somerset, Protector of
the kings may. realms and dominions, and governor of his most Royal
person, Christofer Langton wishes health and encreace of all godliness.
Physic hath been so afflicted clogged with ignorant wryters (it were to
tedious to rehearce either their names or their opinions) that before
Gallenes days, none knew which was the truth. And though Gallen wrote orderly,
yet by the injury of time, the best part of his works be lost, to the great
hynderaunce of all such as shall be students in Physic: Yet if but half that
that remains, were englysshed, I would then think yt we should have al
things in Physic a great deal the playnar, to the great profit wealth of
the realm divers ways. For first it would save great exspence of money,
which unlearned strangers daily carry away. Than it would be the safeguard
of many men lives, which might be able to do the king otherwise right good
service: And finally it would cause a great increase of wisdom, which passes
both gold precious stones. Wherefore I considering the wealth of the greater
number, have taken upon me to write orderly of a great peace of physic which I
dedicate unto your grace not that I think it worthy so noble a Prince, but
partly because I judge you a man much desirous to know such things as be
here set forth for the bodyly health, partly for that I trust your nobleness
will further al godly ententes: which if ye do, ye shall not only encorage me
(which am but a lernar, and as yet a young student in Physic) but other also
(which are already perfect in the works of Physic) daily to set forth such
things, as may profit many, and hurt none. Thus I pray god grant to your
grace in al your affayers, most prosperous success, and after this trasitory
life, joy without end. Amen.

The first book.
The first Chapter. Of what kind of arts Physic is.
Saying that I have taken upon me, to write a brief treatise upon Physic, for
the alonlye commodity of ignorant and unlearned students in the same, I
think it very necessary and expedient to open and declare, both playnlye, and
brefely what physic is, which in Latin is called Medicina, in English
word for word, Medicine.

Hyppocrates in his book de flatibus, which is as much to say, as in his
book of Spirits, or blasts, affirms that Medicine or Physic, is nothing,
but the adiection of that that lacks, or the subtraction, or taking away,
of that which is superfluous, redounds: the which declaration or definition,
Gallen allows in many places, truly not without a cause: For there is no part
of phisike but it is comprehended in this finition. Auerroes in the.vi. book,
and the.i. Chapiter, of his gatheringes doth define physic very fetely, in
these words folowinge. Medicina est ars factiuarum una, ratione, et
experimento inuenta, que tum sanitatem tuetur, tum morbum depellit. which is
as much to say in english, as Phisike is one of those arts which doth make
things invented, or found out by reason and experience, and the which partly
defends health, and partly bets away disease, and siknes.

Herophilus would have defined it, after this fashion. Medicina est scientia
salubrium, insalubrium, et neutrorum.

Which in englyshe is as follows. Physike is a science of things wholesome,
vnholsome, and of neither of both: Gallen uses this finition, in his book yt
is called ars medica, not because he doth so greatly allow it, but because yt
serves his pourpose, which is easy to be known of that, that follows:
where he says that this word scientia, must be taken in that place,
according to his common significatyon, and not as it signifyeth properlye:
wherefore phisike is an art, and no science, and saying yt is an art, I
think yt well donne, to show in what kind of arts it is: For there be many
differences of Arts, but especially.iiii. One is called in Latyne,
Contemplatoria, which hath his end only in the saying and beholding of
things, and may well be called contemplation or knowledge, such is
Arithmetic, Astronomy, natural philosophie, for there is none of these arts
that doth any thing but is only ended in contemplation and study.

There is an other which is called in Latin, Actiua, in English practise, and
consists in doing, as dawnsyng, and harping, with other like.

The third in Latin may be called Factiua, which beside the practise and
study, leaves behind his work, as painting, buyldyng, and of this kind
there be two arts, for some make the works them selves, as weuyng tanning,
and some correct and amend the things, when they be made: as botchyng and
clowtyng of old garments houses, other thiges The fowerth in Latin is called
comparans, which in our tong may be called a getting art, for it doth make
nothing, but by study, industry gets certain things as fysshynge and
hunting, these truly do make nothing: but their study labour is to get something.
And to be brefe, Physic as Gallen says, is a kind of those Arts which
restores their works now already done, and corrects the same, and not of
them which make their works new. For Physic of her self makes not her
examples, as the art of buyldyng, knyttyng, and weuing doth. But as that art
that mends old houses, and piceth old garments: so phisike doth amend the
evil constitution of man body.

The second Chapiter. Of the sectes in phisyke.
YT is now already showed, that phisike is an art which restores health
being absent, and defends the same being present, but howe this art may be
gotten yt is not agreed upon amongst all men, for some think experience
sufficient to the getting of this art, and do cal them selfes thereof
Empericos. These be they that have there first respect unto the heap of
accidents, and begins their cure of them, without any knowledge ether of
the disease, or the cause, and they call the forsayde heap of accidents in
Greek, (...), the which in Lattyn is called Congeries, and concursus, and in
English a heap, and concurryng, or runnynge to gether. Secundarilye, they
observe, and mark, in the cummynge to gether of Accidents, Medicines which
they know to be mete for the disease, only by use and experience. Thyrdely
they learn remedies of the history, of such as they have before proved:
Fowerthly they go from like, to like.

For what soever remedies they have proved by experience, in many men, and
often times (but always they prove them in the same and like measure, orelles
by chance, and as a man would say unloked for, they mark and observe them
to be like, to have one effect) the same they use boldly* nothing curious in
the inquyryng what faculty or nature they be of, that is to say whether they
be hot or cold, dry or moyste, they believe and credit the old auncientes,
which hath left in wrytyng, such things as they have noted and observed by
experience, that yt the selves have observed marked, they cal in Greek, (...),
which in English, may be called their own inspection, and look what they
have observed, marked by chance, as if a ma by falling from high, be wooded,
or hurt, or else if a man being sick and following his appetite, drike cold
water, the which hath either done good or evil, they call (...), which is to
say an observation made by chance. But when they learn that that is marked
by other, they call it in Greek, (...) which may be called the observation of
other.

They use also to go from like to like, whiles they intermedle with such
thiges, as they have not yet proved, although they be of one kind, and this
is called of them in greek, (...), which in english is going from like to like,
and by this rule they transfer one medicine to divers evils, and from one place
affected to another from one medicine which they knew before, to an other of
the same kind unknown.

If the natural egestions be holden to long, then the party hath a byndyng
disease they say: but if they run to much, that they call an open disease:
And if a man be both bound and lewse together, than they call that sycknes a
combynation of both the fornamed evils: as if the eye should suffer a flux,
and an inflammation together, of the which, the inflammation is a sycknes that
binds, and the flux an open disease: then their remedy in such a case, is
to bind that that runs, and to open that that is boude, as if there be any
inflammation in the shoulder or arm, what is their rule? what, but without
deliberation, or consideration of the place affected, straight to lewse the
belly, if it fortune both the forsayde evils to chance at one time, in one
membre, then what do they? utterly necglect that that is of the least danger:
and these be they which reprehend Hyppocrates, because he says that physic
is a lunge art, and that man life is but short, for they say that it is
not so, but rather clean contrary. For as they say, if al that is superfluous
were cut out, physic might be easily learned in.vi. months. The beginner
of this sect, was Syrus, Asclepiades scholer: after whom came Thessalus,
Proclus, and many other.

Moreover there be other which be called Dogmatici, because they ground all
their doings upon reason. These do learn diligently the nature and
costitution of all such bodies as they take in hand to heal: and do mark
very dilygently, every day, the alterations of the same, beside this, they
say, that yt is every honest Physician his part, to know, and consider well,
both the nature of the air, waters, and wyndes, and the place also where the
sick abydethe, and his accustomed diet, as well in meates, and drinks, as
bathes, exercises, other things, to the end, that he may have a sure
knowledge, both of the causes, remedies, of all diseases. They will also that
he be such an one, that he be able, to prove by reason, what nature any kind
of medicine hath, and that he be able to apoynt, (though he never saw yt
before) what yt is able to do, and they counsel every Physician, to begin
his cure, according to the strength of the sick, and not as ye disease
peradventure shall will him: And they do not deny, but that experience is
necessary, howbeit they deny it to be sufficient to cure all malledies, and
to find, and search out, all things. And also they say, yt without reason,
experience can hardly be come by. The first author, and founder of this sect,
was Hyppocrates Lous, without dowt, the most learned, and noble Physician,
that ever was, after him came Diocles, Praxagoras, and Chrysyppus, with many mo,
no less learned, then famous.

The.iii. chapter. The parts of physic
THere be.vi. especial parts of physic, the first doth considere the
constitution of man nature, body. The second defends the body from
sycknes, keeping it in health. The third inquires the causes, and accidents,
of sickness, and diseases. The forth conteyneth the knowledge as well of
things past, as also present, and to come. The fifth shows an order, and a
way, how all diseases, should be healed: and this part, is divided into three
other parts. The first of the three, teaches the healing of sicknesses, by
diet only, and therefore it is both the chief, and most noble part of
physic, and without the which, the other parts, which serve to the helyng of
diseases, can not be: and hereof it is, that Hippocrates wrote three great books
of the remediynge of all fervent diseases, by diet only, in the which book, he
proves evidently, that of a little faut or error in the diet of such as be
sick, follows death without remedy, the which thing if it be true, as
vndoutedlye it is, what be such Physicians worthy, as do utterly necglect
the same, and think that they have done a great feat, when they have written a
byl or two, to the appoticarie, taking no care in the mean time, what manner
of diet, the sick kepeth.

The second part, heals by medicines inward, outwardly taken. But there be
medicines of.ii. sorts, that is to say simple, and compound, and first to the
parfit curing of the disease most necessary is the knowledge of the simple and
this care which is a great charge, is committed to such, as be vnlerned, yea
and in many places (more is the pity) to foolish, ignorant women: I would
rather wish, the handlynge of such Jewels, to be in the hands, of ye best
learned, and wisest Physicians: For as it is a thing to be laughhed at, if a
Painter know not his pencil, or a coblar his nall, or a tannar his leather, so
think ye that a Physician is not to be laughed to scorn? if he know not the
matter of that art, which he professes? But now adays he is most set by; and
had in the greets estimation, which knoeth ye least, which can make one
medicine serve a thowsande diverse diseases, which is as like to be true, as
one shoe to be mete sit for so many feet. And as for medicines, they be not
worth a vile straw, except they com out of Ethiop, Arabi, or India, whereas for
us english men, there is non so good, as our own English simples: For it can
not be proved, yt nature ever brought forth any where living creatures, where
as she left nothing to fed them with all, and likewise as she hath provided
meat, so hath she medicyns also, but the suttylties of men, for their own
gain, and private Lucre, hath browght to pass that al thing is out of order,
both in the shops of the appoticaries, and other places else where. The
third part is Surgery, which is wrought by man hand, which Gallen commends
highly, in many, and sundry books.

The.iiii. chapter. The distribution of Physic in to three forms.
QVre forfathers have distributed, and divided Physic, into three forms, or
orders, and that for no other pourpose, but that yonge students of Physic,
might learn diligently, and a great del the better remember, what so ever they
had red, in the monuments of old writers. The first order is of those
things, of ye which, manes body is made of, and it hath pleased the foresaid
elders, to call such things, as our body is compact, made of things natural,
because to the perfection of man body they be necessary.

The second order, is of those things, with the which, our body is
nourished, that yt may remain in health: these things be called not
natural, not because they be utterly against our nature, but because if they
be given without discretion, they may make such alteration in the body, as may
extinguish and abolish utterly, the life.

The third order, is of such as hurt, and harm the body, and corrupt it,
therefore, they be called, things against nature, be cause they be clean
contrary to nature.

The fifth chapter. Of the number of things natural.
Now it is time to speak of the first part of Physic, which entreats of
the natural costitution of man body, this part of Physic, is not put
first, without a cause: For no ma can do any good with a medicine, which is
ignorant in the constitutio of man body, therefore the things natural
whereof man body is conpact made, be seven in number.

1 Elements: as the fiere, air, water, and earth.

2 Temperamentes: as hot, cowlde, moist, and dry.

3 Humores: as blowed, fleume, chollar both yelow black.

4 Parts: as flesh, bone, brain heart, liver, heed, and hands

5 Faculties: as Animal, vital, natural.

6 Actions: as Animal, natural.

7 Spirits: as animal, vital, and natural.

These things I entend (god willing) to express so well as the sterillite of
my simple wit, will give me leave, beginning first with the Elements.

The sixte, chapter. Of the Elements.
TVlly ye eloquent Romain, counsels very well every ma, first of all and
before he make any far procedynge, to defyne the thing, of the which he
pourposeth to entreat, to ye intent that every ma may perceive what it is ye is
spoke of therefore according to his counsel (I will first define what an
element is: wherefore an element, (as Galen says in the.viii. book of the
decrees of Plato, and Hyppocrates) is the lest part of that thing, of the
which it is an element, and of these amongst the hole nature of things, there
be but four in number, which is the fire, Air, water, and earth: and as of
these all things natural, have there beginning, so at the length, they shall
be resolved into the same again. For Hyppocrates says, in a book, which he
entytelleth the nature of man, that after the soul is once dissolved from the
body, every thing, whereof the body was of first, is returned in his own
nature again, as loke what in the beginning was dry, that is turned in to
dry, what was moyste, becomes moyste again: and likewise heat is turned into
heat, and cold, becomes cold again, but after these elements be once
mixte in the body they can no more be called elements, that is to say pure,
and simple bodies, that ye is made of them, is a body mixed, and corruptible.

Therefore as Gallen counsels in the first book of elements, go not about
to search out or to find in any natural body, any thing that is simple, and
not mixed, or compounded, lest thou lose thy peyne, but be contented if thou se
a member that is could, hard, and dry, and a another that is moyste, rare, and
fluxible, to think the tone to come of the earth, and the other, of the
water, And likewise when thou consider with thy self, in thy mind, the
nature of a spirit, then remember the air. For seeing that the elements, be
the lest parts of owre bodies, it is not possible that they should be
perceived by any sense. If these elements were not mixte all together, nether
man, nor no other living creature, could be made of them, for what part of
the body they should towch, they must of necessity, corrupt the same. For there
is no part of the body that can abide safe without hurt, or damage, the
towchynge of any thing, that is ether extreme hot or extreme cold, moyest,
or dry. And hereof it is evident that these elements be not mixed in man
body, as wheat, or barley, is mixed in a hepe, for of the grain there is no
alteratio, seeing after the mixture it remaynethe hole, but the elements be so
altered, and changed, that after the mixture, there remains nothing, but
only a signification of their qualities, the which qualities, whiles they be
in the elements, altering the substance subject to them, do cause the mutual
alteration, of ye elements. Yt is necessary for a Physician, to consider
exactlye, and diligently, the nature of the elements, to the end that he may
know, howe health is made of the temperature, of heat, cold, dry, and moist,
and of the distemperature of the same sickness.

The seven chapter. Of temperamentes
Amongst things natural, the temperamentes, have the second place, a
temperament is no thing else, but a complexion, or a conbination of ye four
elements or else of heat, could, dry and moist: of temperamentes there
be.ix. differencis, of ye which one is temperate, be cause it excedeth in no
quality, the rest be all distemperat, of the which.iiii. be simple, as hot,
cold, dry, moist, and.iiii. be compound, as hot moist to gether, cold and dry,
hot and dry, could, and moist. The ix. difference, which I said before was
temperate, may be taken.ii. manner of ways, ether temperate simple and
absolutely, or else temperate in every kind of things: loke what is
temperate simply, and absolutely, that in the respect of all things, is
temperate and in it the elements be equally mingled, and such a thing must be
known by cogitacion only, for other ways it cannot, as Gallen is a manifest
witness in the first book, that he writ in the defence of health.

And that is temperate in every kind, in the which, is the same mediocrity of
contrary elements, as is convenient to the nature, not only of man and best,
but also of trees, and plants, and this temperament is in all them that be
hole according to there nature, and it may be known of his functions, and
officis, who is hole according to his nature.

For he that can do every thing well, which he is apt to do naturally, is as
hole as nature made him, whether it be man or best or it be tree, or plant: as
an apple tree is very well, or hole, according to his nature, when he bears a
great number of good apples, and likewise an horse, when he runs very swift.
Therefore this is not the temperament, which is mesured by weight, wherein there
is as many degrees of heat, as of cold, and of dryness as of moisture, for
that is no where, nor can not be known, but by cogitation, as is a foresaid:
but in this temperament which is in every kind of things the elements be so
mixed, that the temperament which comes of the mixture, agrees both to the
nature of me, bestes, and plants. Therefore it is called a temperament,
according unto justice, which mesureth to every man, not by weight, but by
dignity: wherefore what soever thing exceadeth this temperament, ether in
heate, could, drynes, or moisture, ye same is not temperate: and of the same
that redounds it takes ye name, as if it be hete that is superfluous then it
is called hot, loke what thing hath more hete, then cold, that same is hot,
contrary, if it have more cold than heate, it is called could, likewise that
that hath more moisture, then drines, is named moist: and again, if it have
more drines the moisture, then it may be called dry: and here of it comes ye
summer is called hot, because it hath more hete then could, and winter is
called cold, because it hath more cold then heate: furthermore if a thing
exceed in heat and moisture to gether, or in cold and dryness, or in hete and
dryness, or in cold and moisture, then it must take name, of the qualities
which excedeth: as if heat and moisture exceed, then it must be called hot and
moyste: if cold and drynes, cold and dry: and so of the other. And hereof it
is evident, that sumtyme one temperament is equal and temperate in one
opposition, and distemperate, and not equal in an other.

For if it be not necessary, for that that is hot to be dry, but may be moist,
then it may also be temperate, because the mean is nygher to the dry
temperature, then is ye moist: and likewise an other temperature that is cold
if it may as well be dry as moist, may be temperate also: because the mean is
nigher to the moist temperature, then the dry is.

The same answer may be made of dry and moyste, that before is made of hot
and cold. Therefore it is no marvel, though there be sumthinge temperate in
the one half, and not temperate in the other. But here thou must take heed, if
thou be axed of what temperature a man, an ass, or an ox is, that thou
answer not symply and absolutely: For to that that is spoken diversely, and is
diuerie also of it self, no man can make absolutely simply a direct answer:
Therefore before thou make thine answer, you must bid him, show yt ye ma, the
ass, or ye ox, whereof he doubts: then if he dout of a man, thou must have
a respect to the perfect man, which (as Gallen says in the first book of his
teperamentes) is neither hot, nor could, and as he differs from him, so
make answer, saying either that he is hot, or otherwise as thy judgment
shall led the: but if he doubt of a best, then thou must have an eye to the
hole kind of men. For all other kinds, compared unto it, are distemperat, as
he differs from mankynde, either in hete, or otherwise, so shape him an
answer. And that thou be not deceived, in making thine answer, thou must
understand, that heat, could, dry, and moist, be taken diversely: For first
they be taken absolutely, and simply, that is to say without any admixtion of
other bodies: and of this sort, the only elements be hot, could, dry, moist:
secondarely they be spoken by excess, as when there is in one thing, more hete
then could, more dryness, then moisture, or other wise: and of this fassion
blood, fleme, wine, oil, honny, be called hot, cold, dry, and moist: and
that, that is called hot, cold, dry, and moyste of this sort, is spoken
yet.2. manner of ways. first absolutely, that is compared to no one alone, but
to the hole nature of things, and of this fasshio a dog, simply, absoluetly
taken, and not compared to any thing alone, is dry: otherwise that is to say
not absolutely, but compared to sum one alone, may be moist, as to a pismyre. And
moreover, there be.iii. diverse manner of comparisons, the first is betwyxt two
of diverse kinds, as a man to a beast. The second is when ye distemperate is
compared to the temperate of the same kind, as a man compared to the parfit
man, whereof we spake before. The third is, when.ii. distemperate of one
kind, is compared together: as one man to an other, one lyon to an other, one
horse to an other. Whosoever doth diligently examine these things, may easly
judge of what temperament the iiii. times of the year, that is to say ye
spring, summar, autumn, and winter, be. For every one of these by him self
and without comparison, may be called hot cold, dry, or moist, of this
fashion the spring is without all excess, because there is not as is in
winter, more cold then heat: nor as in summar, more heat the cold: likewise
there is a mediocrity of dryness and moisture, and therefore Hippocrates
says, that it is the most holsumest time of all the year, and a time in the
which there chauseth no deadly sickness. For ye most part of the diseases of
the spring, happen by reason that all the evil humours be driven from the innar
parts, in to the skin. Wherefore the diseases be rather to be imputed to the
body, then to ye time of ye year. For what body so ever hath good homours,
that body remains styll in health, so long as the spring lasts:
peradventure it doth not so in summar, autumn or winter, because these times
breed or encrese evil humours: as summar increases chollar, autumn
melancholy, winter fleme waterish humours. It is possible, that sum man will
reprehend my sayings, objecting the beginning of the spring to be could,
according to winter, the latter end hot, as in summar. In dede I confess no
less, then ye beginning of the spring, to be a little could, and the latter
end, a little hot, but not in excess, as it is either in summar, or winter.
Wherefore it can not be called hot and moyest, as sum do suppose, because it
can not be hot and temperate, both at one time. As for summar by the consent, as
well of the Philosophers, as of physicians, is hot and dry, because there is in
it more heat then could, more dryness, then moisture. Autumn simply, and
without exception, can not be called cold, and dry, as sum hold opinion, for
it is not could, because there is as much heate as could, seeing the middle
of the day is much hotter, then the morning, and evening. Therefore it is
found to be distemperat, in heat, and could, and so mixed of both, that it
can nether be called hot, nether could. Therefore it is full of perilouse
diseases because it is distempered both in heate, and could: and because it
hath more dryness, then moisture, therefore it is called dry. As for winter it
is moist, could, not because it is more moist could, then ye other times of
the year, but because there is more moisture then drines, more could then
heate. Now that I have so brefelye (as I could) declared the temperamentes of
the times of the year, it is mete convenient, to show in as few words as I
can, the temperamentes of the iiii. ages, which are chyldehode, youth, man
state, and old age: Chyldehode is from the chyldyng the space of.xv. year next
following, and it is hot and moist, and that is easy to be perceived hereof,
that the first constitution of the child, is of seed, and blood, the which
both be hot and moist. Youth begins where chyldehod ends, continues.x.
years: in this age there is more firye heat, less natural heat the is in
childehode as Gallen witnesses in his second book of temperamentes. Man
state begins at.xxv. and continues to.xxxv. the which time is hot and dry:
Old age begins at.xxxv. and continues the rest of the life, though sum
do reckon it but to.ix. and forty year, and it is cold dry. Ye shall find
in other places, mo differences of ages, howbeit I think these sufficient, for
such as be not to deynty, and exquisite. Whosoever thinks him self not
satisfied, with this brefe exposition of temperamentes, let him read
diligently Galenes.iii. books of temperamentes, and I dout not, but he shall be
satisfied. For I making haste to better and more profitable knowledge, cannot
find in my heart, to tarry any longer in this disputation, yet whosoever ever shall
dilygently examine in his mind that that is writ before, may easily (if he
be not half foolish) gather ye rest which wants without a techer, or an
instructar.

The.viii. chapter of humours.
HVmours be four in number, that is to say, blood, chollar, flewme, and
melancholy: of the which, blood is hot, moist, and sweet. Flewme is could,
moist, and unsavoury, like unto the pure water: yelowe chollar, hot, dry, and
bittar: black chollar, or melancholy, could, dry, sour, and stipticke.

These humours be called hot, could, dry, and moist, because they be so in
power, and not in act, and there is great difference betwixt things that be
hot of power: and things hot in act. For that thing is hot in act, which is
hot already, and that is hot in power, which is not hot already, but may, and is
apt to be hot afterward, so we call brine, or vinegar dry, though they appear
to the eye to be moist, yet experience hath proved them dry, because they
consume the superfluous humours, both of flesh, also other things. When
these.iiii. humours reserve their forsayde qualities, then the body wherein
they be, is hole, and without disease, and the before named humours, be called
of the Physicians, natural. The receptacles of blood, be the veins, and
pulses, but the blood, that is contained in the pulses, (as Gallen says in
his first book, and first chapter of affected places) differs from the blowed
of the veins, in that, that the blowed of the pulses is both hotter, thynnar,
yelower. The well of the blowed, is the liver, not only that, but also the
first instrument of man body and the natural and true colour of the
blowd, is red: which Galen affirms in many places. Where blowed redounds
the body is feat, fair, merry, plesantly disposed. Flewme, of colour is white,
which at the length by ye means of natural heat, may be turned in to blood:
and therefore saying it is a nowrishment but half boiled, nature hath provided
no propre, or peculier receptacle for the pourgynge of it. For flewme engendered
in the stomach or maw, be cause it is carried together with the juice that came
of the meat drink up in to ye liver, is at length by much alteration turned
into blood, and that which is carried together with the blood in the veins,
may scant be spared, because it mittigateth the great fervent, and outrageous
heat of ye blood: therefore it hath morenede to tarry styll be altered, then to
be pourged, carried away, but yt that remains behind in the guts, is
pourged, carried quite out at the fundament, by reason of the chollar cumynge
fro the liver (as Gallen says in the.v. of his books, of the use of the
parts of man body.) The excrement which falls fro ye brain in to ye
mouth, can not properly be called flewme but rather muck, or sniuil: flewmatick
bodies, be slothful, slepy, fleshye, soon horeheared. Yelowe chollar hath his
name, of his culour, nature has provided a proper place for it, which is ye
blather under ye liver: for it was necessary for it to be parted from the
blood, lest at the length ye hole body, should becumne yelowe, as it doth in
the yelowe Iawndies. Choleric men be angry, sharpe wytted, nymble, and quick
in all their affayers, inconstant, and lean and good digesters of their meat:
melancholy is the dregs and filth of the blood, and therefore it is black,
as it appears in the name: it were great danger, for it to be left in the
liver, therefore the splyne is provided of nature, to receive it, the which
splyne if it draw less then it should do, then the melancholy, or black
chollar, is left with the blowed: by reason whereof the body gets a black
colour, or at the least a fever quartayne. Men that be melancholy, be sottell,
covetous, great frettars with them selves, vnfaythful, sad, and careful,
envious ferfull, and weak sprited. The use of these forsayde humours, is such in
especial as follows. The blood serves to the nowrishment of the hole body,
flewme helps the moving of the joints, yelow chollar cleanses the intestines
of of their flewme and filth, melancholy healpeth ye action of the stomach,
(as Gallene writes in his v. book of the use of the parts, of man body) by
reason yt it draws the stomach together, whereby the natural heat, is
increased: the concoction of the meat, made much the more parfit. Soranus an
Ephesian borne, writes: that these humours rule the body by course, each of
them.vi. hours to gether: as blood begins at.ix. of the clock in the
night, rules until.iii. of the morning, yelowe chollar begins at.3. in the
morning, and governs until.ix. of the morning, melancholy begins at.ix.
and continues to.iii. in the after noone. Flewme begins at.iii. of the
after noone, and lasts till.ix. of the night. These humours, sumtyme lose
their natural qualities whereby they hurt the body, and be called not
natural. Blowed becummeth unnatural, ether when it putrifieth in the veins,
be cause the pores be shut, or else when it is mixed with sum other evil humour,
as in the dropsy, where it is mingled with water, or finally, when it is mixed,
ether with over much chollar, flewme, or melancholy, whereof it takes a new
name, and is called either choleric blowd, flewmaticke, or melancholy blood:
For it is never natural, except in the mixture, it have the rule and dominion.
Of unnatural flewme, there be.iiii. kinds, (as Gallen wytnessyth in his
second book.vi. chapter, of ye differences of fevers). The first is watrysh, of
the cullar of molten glass, whereof it has to name citrine is very cowld. The
second kind, is that which after ye hawking out, hath a sweet taste, is called
sweet flewme. The third is sour of taste, is not so cold as the citrine,
cowlder then the sweet. The fowerth is salt, either by ye mixture of sum salt
humour, or else by putrifactio, is called salt flewme. Of unnatural yealowe
chollar, there be.v. kinds. The first is yelowe, like unto the yolks of
eggs, as Gallen says is engendered in ye veins The second is colowred like
lead, or garlic is bred in ye stomach or maw. The third is of a rusty
colour, it also is bred in ye stomach. The forth inclines somewhat towards
grene, and is engendered in the place beforesayd. The.v. is of the colour of
the sea, and grows in the stomach also. Of melacholy, or black chollar, there
is but one kind unnatural, it is somewhat browne of colour, and so sharpe and
sour that it eats, frets the body, where it goethe.

The.ix. chapter, of the parts of man body.
THe first division of parts of manes body, is of those, that ye latin men
call similares, dissimilares, which in english, may be called like, and
unlike* For similares be such parts as be like unto them selves in all
things, which when they be divided, or parted in sonder the lest of them
kepeth the same name that the hole doth, whereof it is part: and dissimilares,
be such as are unlike them selfes in all things, which when they be divided or
parted a sunder, none of them can be called by the name yt the hole is, as in
example. No part of the head, can (if it be separat, parted, from the head) be
called an head* no more can any part of the hand be named an hand, nor of ye
foot, a foot: nor of the eye, an eye: yet every part of water is called
water, and every part of blood, is called blood, and every part of bone,
bone: and every part of flesh, is called flesh. Therefore these last rehearsed
be such as the laten men call similares, and the other be the self same, yt be
called dissimilares, or instrumentales. Gallen says, yt the same parts,
which the latyns call similares, be the first elements, and begynners of
man body, although the self same, be common to brute beasts also, for
there is nether ox, horse, no dog, but they have pulses, veins, senewes,
tiinges, gristilles, skins, and flesh, yet not in all points like unto man,
and beside these, other that man hath not, as horns, bills, spowres, skales:
of these, the other which be called dissimilares, or instrumentales, be made,
as head, hands, feet, such like. An instrumental part, differith from the
instrument, because that sum of the same parts, before is called similares,
be instruments, and yet may not be instrumental parts. For every part (as
gallen says) that brings forth a parfit actio, is an instrument: whereof it
comes that the pulses, veins, and senewes, be instruments, and no
instrumental parts. Of ye instrumental parts, there be three called chief,
or principal: ye brain, hart, liver. There are sum, which adds unto
these, ye privy parts, because they conserve and keep ye kind.

There be belonging to these, iiii. other, as to ye brain, senewes: to the
hart, pulses: to the liver, veins: and to the pryuye parts, the sparmaticke
vessayles: beside these, there be certain other parts of the body, which
nether rule other, nor yet be ruled of other, but hath a faculty of them
selfes, whereof they be governed: as bone, tiynge, skin and flesh. All ye
parts of man body, have need of pulses, and veins, to the keeping of there
substance: veins, to the intent yt they may be nowrished, and pulses for the
keeping of natural heat in good temper. Hitherto I have spoken generally of
the parts of man body: whosoever is willing to have a particular rehearsal of
all the parts, let them seek Gallen, or Vesal^us. For they have writ hole
books, and great volumes of them: and as for me, I have written of the same,
in an other place, so well as my wit, lernyng, knowledge, and the sterilitie
and baraynes of the english tong, would give me leave. Therefore if that I should
write the same again. I should both be over tedious to such as showld hear
me, also I showld break my promise, because I have promised, to write a brefe,
and a short treatise, upon Physic.

The.x. chapter, of powers or faculties.
A Faculty, or a power, is the cause, fro whence the action procedethe. There
be.iii. faculties, or powers, diverse each to other, which governs the body,
and be called Animal, vital, and natural. The animal power or faculty,
cummeth from the brain by the senewes, gives both moving and feeling, to each
part of the body, and is author of the senses, and all voluntary actions. The
vital power cummeth from the heart, and is carried in the pulse throughout the
body, where it gives life: whereof it is evident, that the hart is the well of
lifely heat: the natural power, comes from the liver, and is carried to every
part of the body, by the veins, and serves to the norishynge of the same.
This power, or faculty, is divided in.iiii. other powers, the first is
attractive, the second is retentive, the third concoctiue or alteratiue, the
fowerth expulsiue. The attractive power, is the same, by ye which, every part
of ye body draws to it, such juice as is mete and convenient to norishe it,
and that juice, which is sooneste made like, is most convenient for
nowrishment: therefore this power, seeing that it prepares matter, to the
norishment of every part, serves to the power alteratiue, or concoctiue. The
retentyue power holds ye same which is al ready drawn, vntyl it be altered
changed: this power also, serves unto the alteratiue, or concoctiue power.

The alteratiue power, hath name of his action, for it alters the juice, and
at the length, makes it like to the part, that is nourished. The expulsiue
power or faculty, separateth the evil from ye good, lest with long tariynge
together, the one should mar the other: this as the other, serves to the
alteratiue power. These.4. powers, be in every part of every natural body, as
Gallen witnesses, in his books, of powers or faculties.

The.xi. chapter, of Actions.
AN action, is an actual moving, procedinge from a faculty, and therefore the
faculty is always the cause of the action, wherefore when the power perishes,
there follows no action at all: That which the action hath made finished, is
the work: as blood, flesh, bone, and as ye may call every action a certain
work of Nature, so ye can not call every work, an actio: as flesh is a work
of nature, not an action. There is in ye body.ii. manner of actions. One is
called Anymall, or voluntary, which proceeds from the synowes, and muscules,
this is such an actio, yt when it is, it may be seized, when it is not, it may
be raised, as a man lists, as in example. The head, arms, and legs, may be
moved, or holden styll, as it shall please the dody, that hath them. This action
is parted in to three. The first is of feelynge, which is divided in.v. as in to
the action of saying, hearing, felinge, smelling, and tasting. The second, is
the action of voluntary moving. The third, is the action, of the cogitation,
memory, and reason, which of all the rest, is most noble, and excellent. As for
respiration, is a voluntary action, because it is in our will to hold our
breath: or to let it go, which is evident of the seruaunt (that Gall speaks
of) which held his breath vntyl he dyed. Wherefore it is evident, that sum
voluntary actions, be free: sum, serve the affections of the body. For to walk
any whither, or to speak with any body, or to take any thing, be fre actions,
but to ease the belly or to make water, serve the necessity of the body. Yt
is possible for a ma, to hold his peace (if he have so constitute with him
self) an hole year to gether, but to hold his excrement, or his water.ii.
months, or.ii. weckes, it is not possible. For they provoke so oft, and grieve
a man so much, that oftentimes, they will not abide, till they may be
conveniently let forth, and like unto these, is respiration, or the actio, of
brething. For whosoever has his brethe stopped, but a very little time, it
is a great doubt, if he dye not fourth with all. But the natural action,
which is not voluntary, cummeth of the veins, and pulses. For let a man do
what he shall, and yet they will do their office, without any let. Amongst
the natural actions, be reckened, generation, Auction, nutrition, Formation,
Alteration, appeticion, attraction, concoction, retention, distribution,
excretion, such other. But as for generation, it is not one simple natural
action, for in it is, both alteration, and formation. The amplyfycation, and
increacement, in length, bredeth, and depenesse, of all the vttar parts of the
body, is called auction. Nutrition, is the assimilation, or making like, of
the nurishment to that, that is nurished: to the which, apposition, and
agglutination or adhesio be necessary. For after that the juice, which
afterward shall nurish every part of the body, is once fallen from ye veins,
it must first be put to, and then joined or glued, last of all, made like. It
is very mete and expedient for every Physician, intending his patients health,
diligently to consider all the actions, as well the animal, as natural:
because of them, the constitution of the body, is easy to be known.

For what body so ever is in health, the same hath all the actions parfit and
sownde, and what body is sick and diseased, it hath clean otherwise. Moreover
the action for the most part, declares the place affected. For there can be no
action hurt, but that part or instrument, wherein it is, must be affected also.

The.xii. chapter, of spirits.
A Spirit is a subtle, thynne, and bright substance, made of the finest parts
of the blowd, that the power may be carried from the principal parts of ye
body, to ye rest: whereby each may do his duty and office. There be in
number, only.iii. spirits: the animal, vital, and natural. The animal
spirit, hath his place, in ye brain, and being dispersed in the senewes,
gives the power of mouinge, and feeling, to each part of the body: It is made
of the vital spirit. The vital spirit, is in the hart, and is carried in the
arteries, throughout the body, being the very cause of all natural, and lively
heat: It is made of the exhalations, or the dryest, and finest parts of the
blood. If there be any natural spirit, it is in the liver and veins, and in
dede to say the truth, there is no great need for any spirit, to carry any
power of nowrishing through the body, seeing yt every part draws his
nurishment, even as the adamant stone draws iron: beside this, the liver
hath no such matter, as any spirit can be made of. For if there were any
matter, whereof the natural spirit might be made, that must needs be the
vital spirit, of whom the animal spirit also, is made: but seeing that the
vital spirit is engedred in the hart, and by the pulses carried through the
body, it had ben necessary, that there should have ben great pulses, from the
hart to to the liver, which might have brought so much vital spirit, as
should have sufficed to have made natural spirit. Howbeit it is evident, yt
there cummeth no arteries to the liver, but such as be with the smallest for
such a pourpose, and then there is no such cauitie in the liver, as is in the
brain, or hart, where any generation of the natural spirit, may be. Moreover,
there is no vessels prepared of nature for the carriage of it, except a man
should say, that it is carried with the gross blood in ye veins, which is
not like: saying the veins, have but one cote, and that of no great thickenes,
nether ( if that were true,) the veins should beat, as ye arteries do. Also
there is no way or entrance for air, whereof it might be nowrished as the
animal vital be. And again, the blood of the liver, is so gross, and mixed
with other humours, that it is not mete to make any spirits of. Therefore,
saying that there is nether any end, wherefore it showlde be made, nor matter,
whereof it could be made, nor nourishment to preserve it, nor a convenient
place, to make it in, nor finally any way or conduit, whereby it might be
brought in to every part of the body: I may justly, and not with out a cause,
doubt of it, although it be a common opinion amongst ye phistions, that there
is a natural spirit.

The end of the first book.
The second book.
The.i. chapter, Of the number of things not natural.
Things not natural, be.vi. in number.

1 Air.

2 Meat and drink, or any thing, iwardlye taken.

3 Exercise, and rest, both of the body, and parts.

4 Sleep and watch.

5 Excretion, and retention, or fulness, and emptines.

6 Affects or perturbations of the mind.

These be called things not natural, because they alter our bodies, and if
they be not discreetly taken, utterly abolish health: on the other part, if
they be wisely and soberly used: they do not only defend health, but also
strengthen nature in all her works and actions. Therefore they be in yt part
of physic, which defedeth health And to the end that no man, be ignorant in
ye use of them, I pourposse brefely, in as few words as I ca, to declare show
the uses of each of them alone by himself.

The.ii. chapter, of Air.
QF things not natural. Air is most necessary to be considered, because ye
natural heat, can not be kept in temper, without it, and because, we must
needs receive it into our bodies, be the weather never so foul, and finallye
there can neither health be defended, nor disease cured, or remedied without
it. Therefore it lies us in hand, to take especial heed, and diligent watch,
that we minister it in due time and season, that it may be as it should be, a
cause of health, which no doubt it shall, if first we mark well the substance
of it, whether it be pure and clean, or gross and thick, or cloudy. That is
ye best and most holsume, which is purest, not infected with no standing
pooles, nor no marrishe grounds, nor with the carren of bestes, nor with the
putryfactio of herbs, fruit, or grain, and such like.

When we have well considered the substance of the air, then we must mark
well the quality. For as to temperate bodies, the most temperate air is
holsumest, so to bodies distempered, air distempered in a contrary quality, is
most holsum: as to such as be cowlde: air that is hot, and to such as be
hot, cowlde: and to them that be dry, moyste: and to such as be moyste, dry.
But if it happen so, yt the air be not contrary of quality, then it must be
prepared and made for our pourpose by art: as if the disease or sickness be
hot dry, then we must by sprinklynge of cowlde water on the pavement or
floor, by strawyng of herbs be setting up of such boughs as be cold moist,
prepare ye air make it could, moist: On ye othersyde, if the disease be
cowlde and moist, then the house must be perfumed with such things as be hot
and dry, until the air also be made hot, and dry. In long diseases, there is
none so good a remedy, as to change the air: and thereof it came, that so many
going to saint Cornelis, were healed cured of the falling evil: by changyng of
the air, and not by miracle, as we poor fools thought, kneling, creping, to
saint Cornelis horne: but thanks be to the omnipotent, and ever living god,
and to our noble king, such most vile abominable ydolatry, is now well
left here in this realm.

Of meat and drink. The.iii. chapter
I Would counsel every man, as well the hole as ye sick, to take good heed
what they eat and drink: For both the goodness, mesure, quality, custom,
delectation, order, time, hour, and age, must be considered. Therefore he that
purposes not to be sick, nor to have a sickly body, let his first care be to
eat such meates, as make good juice.

For there is nothing so apt to breed sickness, as is the evil habit of ye
body, which is gotten by feadyng of meates, that make evil and noughtye juice.
That is always good meat, which is light in digestyng, and thynne of
substance, and the which also bredeth good juice: and that is evil, which is
contrary unto it. His next care ought to be, that he eat no more at one time,
then is sufficient to serve Nature, so he shall bring to pass, that either he
shall never or else very seldom, fall in to any perilous disease: Howbeit ye
Physician should give great diligence, in dieting of the sick, For a little to
much sumtyme, though the meat be never so good, makes a fault incorrigible: a
quick or sharpe sickness, a sickness that is long slow, may not be measured
both a like. For a sharpe, a short disease, must have a thin, and a slendar
diet: and a lunge disease, a more fullar. Therefore the Phisicio in prescribing
of diet, must mark well the strength of his patient: first according unto his
strength, then according to the nature of the sickness, prescribe ye measure of
his meates and drinks.

After the measure the Physician ought immediately to mark well the quality of
the meates: For such as be hole, to the end that they may keep their health,
must be fed with meates of like, not of contrary quality: and such as be
sick, ought to be fed with meates of contrary quality: As they that be sick
for hete, must be remedied by meates that be could, they that be sick of
cold diseases, must have hot meates: and in diseases that be moyste, dry
meates: and in dry diseases, moist meates. Therefore such as have moist bodies,
as children, must be fed with moist meates: and such as be sick of dry
diseases, as of fevers, must also be fed with moist meates, the tone to keep
their bodies moist styll, the other, to amend and correct their dryness: and
likewise of the rest. Such as be hot of nature, must eat hot meates, yt they
may keep their heat styll, but if their heat once wax unnatural, then it must
be brought in temper, by ye healp of such things, as are cold: and if they be
over cold, by heat: and if they be over moist, by dries: but if their heat,
cold, dryness or moisture be natural, exceed not, then it must be cherished
styll with meates of like qualities, as I said before. Next the quality
consider the custume, for that ought not to be broken, except there be great
cause why, seeing that such meates as a man hath accustomed him self unto,
although they be worse, hurt not so much as the other do, of the which he hath
not accustomed to eat of. Therefore in diseases, the Physician may not be to
busy, in plucking away their patients from their accustomed meates drinks:
but if it happen so, that of necessity there must be a change, then it may not
be done rashly, or all at ones, but fair softly, and by little, little. For
all sudden mutations, be dangerous. And it is mete for the Physician to
observe, in what meates ye sick deliteth most. For such as he hath pleasure
of in the eating, the same the stomach enbraseth more gredely: and digests
or alters much sooner, therefore they must be taken, preferred before better,
though they be worse. Furthermore he must take heed what order his patient keep
in his diet, for it is a preposterous ordar, to begin with quynces or orynges
and end with salads, made of herbs, and oil.

Take this always as a general rule, that that meat which is most easy to be
digested, should be eaten before that, that is hardar: that also that is
moist, before that that is dry: and that that is leuse and slippery, before
that yt is hard and byndinge. Amongst other things, the time of eating would
not be forgotten.

They that be hole, should exercise the selfes before they eat, should not eat
against their appetite, nor abstain when there appetite provokes them: they
that be sick, should utterly forbear, until there fits were in the
declination, or full finished.

Howbeit the disease may be such, the patients strength so weak, yt it shall
be needful to fed them, both in their fits, out of their fits: howbeit I
leave that to the discretion of the Physician. And I think it but well done,
to put you in remembrance, what your diet should be, in the.iiii. several
times of the year: In winter, more meat and less drink, and meates and
drinks that be hot and dry, as roasted meates, and wine then may safely be
drunken, without water. In the spring, we should eat sumdele less, and
drink a little more then in winter, and eat also more of flesh, and change
fro roasted to boiled: In summar we must endeuer our selfes, yt our bodies may
be soft, and cold, and therefore we must eat less, drink the more, and eat
for the most part boiled meates, such as is cold. In Autumn we should eat
sumthynge more then in summer, and drink less, and of byggar drinks be
sumthinge more bolder then in summer. And as the time is to be considered, so
is the age also. For children must be fed, with moist meates. And such as be
not yet at their groeth, because their bodies be more temperate, must have,
more temperate meates. And lusty men such as is already paste their groeth,
because their bodies be hot, and dry, should have like meates, that is to say
such as is hot dry: old men because their bodies be over cold and dry, must
be fed with meates, that be hot and moyste.

The.iiii. chapter, Of exercise, and rest.
EVery soft mouynge, is not an exercise, as Gallen says, but yt that is
suthing vehement, as lepyng, coytyng, running, tennys, footbale, shootyng, and
such like. Exercise hath many notable commodities but.3. in especial: the
hardness of the instruments, the encrese of natural heat, and the more
vehement and quicker mouynge of the spirits: each of these hath his peculier,
and particular commodity. The instruments by means of their hardness, may
endure to labour the bettar, and also perform their actio more easily. The
encrese of natural heat amends the alteration, and concoction of the meat,
whereby the body is much ye more luckily nurished. The quicker vehementer
mouynge of the spirits, healpeth to pourge the excrementes, both by the
raynes, skin, guts. Exercise brings these commodities to ye body, if it
be take in due time, or else it hurts more then it profitteth: for if it be
taken when there is ether any cruditie in ye stomach, or veins, it will fill
all ye body full of evil humours, by reason that ye crude, and raw iuyse, is
plucked in to each part of the body. Wherefore exercise, should ether be taken
before meat, or else after that ye concoction of ye stomach liver is ended: ye
parfit knowledge of this time, is taken of ye vryne. For when the concoction of
the liver is donne, then the vryne waxes yelowe. Howbeit the very best time of
exercise is when yesterdays meat is thoroughly digested: as one time for
exercise, is better the an other, so one kind of exercise, profits ye body
more then an other. That is ye best kind of exercise, in the which every part
of the body, susteyneth like labour and payne, and yet in the same there may be
committed many errors and faults: for it may be to much, or to little, yet of
both, less hurts to little. Therefore the exercise, would continue so lunge,
until the body swellethe, and waxing read, begin to sweet all over: and
when any of these tokens chances, then the exercise would be seized
incontinent, lest the good juice be expelled together with the evil, so the
body shall be made leaner, and dryer, which will hinder the groinge. As
exercise, if it be discretely mynistred, prevails much to the defence of
health, so rest and quietness, if it be not taken in his time, fills ye body
full of sickness: For it causes cruditie, which is ye mother, and root in
manner, of all daugerous sickness. There be many good times for rest, but the
very best time, as Hyppocrates witnessith, is when the body is wearied with
labour, and exercise. For then he says, that ye rest takes away the
werinesse.

The.vi. chapter, of sleep, and watch.
Sleep is the rest of ye animal power, or as Aristotell says, the privation
taking away, of the senses, which cummeth of a profitable humour, falling from
the brain in to the senewes. Of sleep the body receives many profitable
commodities.

For whiles the animal power rests, the natural power laboreth most
strogly, by reason whereof the meat is well digested, and ye body luckily
nurisshed.

There be.iiii. things, which in sleep, would by earnestly looked upon.

The first is the sleping time, as the night, which for sleep of all other
times, is most convenient: both because the night is could moyste, and
because that then, all things is quiet without any noise. I would counsel no
man to sleep on the day except he feel ether a great weariness in al his
body, or have not slept ye night before, and yet then it would not be taken
upon a full stomach neither, but rather fasting, and empty.

The second is the quantity, for sleep if it continue to long, beside other
incomodities, it lets the pourginge of excrementes.

The third, is the lying a bed, for thereby the digestion may be either
furthered or hindered. Wherefore first it is best to lye upon the right side,
and then upon ye lift, that the meat, and drink, may go lowe enough, and the
mouth of the maw shet the better.

As for lying upon the back, it is utterly condemned of all men, for it is the
cause of many perilous diseases, as the apoplexy, such like.

The fowerth thing, which must be considered in sleep, is the nature of the
dreams: for by them the Physician shall have a great guess of what quality the
humour is, which redounds and is superfluous. The Physician ought to be as
diligent, in the ministration of sleep, to them that be sick, as to them yt be
hole. For as all other things, so sleep, if it be not well ordered taken in his
time, may hurt very much. It hurts them most, which have any of their
innar parts inflamed: wherefore such must be kept from sleep, lest the
inflammation be encresed withal: and moreover in shaking fevers, the sick
ought to be kept waking, while the cold shaking endures, lest the natural
heat, blood be drawn in to much, by reason whereof, the fever will be much ye
more stubberne to be cured. Such as be hole, and without sickness, must
beware of over much sleep, lest ye good temper of their brain be quite marred,
their strength also clean resolved: and of the other side if they watch to
much, their bodies shall be filled with raw humours: therefore it must be used,
nether to much, nor to little, but moderatlye, in a mean. Of sleep watch,
much more might be written, howbeit, this may suffice well enough, at this
time.

The.vi. chapter, of fullness and emptiness.
GAllen says yt there is.ii. kinds of fullness. The tone is when the
qualytie alone excedeth, and the other, when the humours be grown to much in
quantity. There is also yet an other kind of fullness, which is called
repletion, and that is properly of meat and drink.

Howbeit Gall makes.ii. kinds of repletion, the tone is, when the veselles
be so full, that they can not receive easily any more, as when a man hath eaten
so much, that his belly seems to be extended withal: and the other is when
ye power is loded to much, though the veselles be not half full, as when a
man eats more meat then nature or the power that governs his body, can
digest. Yet the abundance of humours, is divided in to mo kinds, for when all
the humours do abound to gether, it is called of ye greeks, (...) (...), and of
the latines plenitudo, and in english, it may very well be named fullness: So
when the blood only redounds it may be called fullness, because it is not so
pure, but that there is both chollar, flewme, melancholy, water in it: and
this fullness is mente.ii. manner of ways, as when the holowenesse of the
veins is filled, so that the veins swell withal: or else when the power
that makes blud, is not sufficient to alter or digest that that is contained
with in.

When the body is filled, either with yelowe chollar, melancholy, flewme, or
waterish humours, then it is called Cacochimia, which in English, is as much
to say, as evil, and naughty juice.

I could never nether in Gallen, nor in any other notable author, find any mo
differencis of fulness, then is before rehearsed: therefore saying that I have
brefely, said all that I can concerning the differences of fullness, or
repletion: it remains behind to show my mind concerning the differences of
emptiness, or euacuatio, which may cum many ways: as by letting of blood,
pourgyng of ye belly by medicine, by the setting to boxing glasses, by
fastinge, by slepynge after hungar, by vryne, by drawing out of the spettill,
by bledynge at the nose, by bringing down of women's flowers, by the
Hemorrhoides, by carnal copulation, by insensible evaporation. Of the which I
entend to speak of each in his ordar. The body, hath most need of blood
lettinge, when the veins be so full, that they be extended withal: For than
it is a present remedy, and howe much the more a man fealeth him self heuyer
then he was wont to be, so much that kind of fullness which is referred to the
strength, is increased: but then the vessels, are thought to be full, when
the body is much extended with prickynge pains, then the Physician may be
bold to open ye veins, so that ye patient have copetent strength, but the
other kind of repletion, may not always be remedied with blood letting, but
sumtimes other ways, as by fasting, pourging, and such like, it is as
necessary to open the vain, when by means of sum stroke, or for sum great
payne grefe, or by the debylitie of sum part, the blood is inflamed, as it is
in the kinds of fullness, or repletion before named: to be brefe when so ever
the disease is outragiouse, if ye strength serve, there is nothing so necessary
as to let blood. Amongst al other things in letting of blood, the age must
be considered: for children before.xiiii. years be full complete ended, old me
after they be past lxx. years ought not but upon great considerations be let any
blood: Howbeit, if in this age they be full of blood, and have good strength,
and if the time of the year also serve, and the disease be such, that it
requires blood lettynge, the Phisicion may boldly open the vain a little.
Therefore the number of the years are not only to be considered, but the
complexion, or the habit of the sick man body also. For sum at.lx. years,
may abide more, then other sum at.l. wherefore when the strength serves, the
sickness requires the taking away of blood, the phisitio may boldly, at
one time, take away as much as shall be coueniente, to the curing of the
disease: but in case the strength of the patient be feeble and weak, then the
blood would not be taken away al at one time, but rather at twice, or thrice,
as the sick, may depart withal. In extreme burning fevers, if the strength
serve, the best remedy is, as Gallen says, to let blood, until the body
waxes faint, and swoune with all, for the coolynge of the body, will
extinguish the fever, and in many, both lose the belly, and also provoke
sweat. In letting of blood, the natural constitution of the body, must be
well looked upon, for they that have great veins, be nether to lean, nor to
white, may spare more blood, then they yt be very lean, white, have but
small, and little veins. The region, may not be forgotten nether, for such as
do dwell in regions which be very much distepered ether with heate or cold,
may not abide the taking away of much blood, because that their bodies
which dwell in the cold region or contrye, losing much natural heat with their
blood, wax afterward to cold: the strength of their bodies which dwell in
ye hot country, is afterward dissolved or dissipate, with overmuch heate: and
by this reason, nether summar, nor winter, be convenient to let blood in, but
the spring only, because that it is temperate. As cocerning what time, or
hour of the day, Gallenes counsel is, that they that be hole, in the
morning, within an hour after that they be risen, they that be sick, at all
hours, both of the day, and night (so that their strength and sickness do so
require.) The Phisitio ought before he let any vain be opened, to inquire
diligently of his formar life, and diet: For if he have lived ydellye, and have
been fed with such meates as nurrishe much, he may take boldly without fear ye
greater quantity of blud, howbeit if he have been a great riottour, a common
drunkard, then Gallen says that it is mere foolishenesse to do any thing at
all, for such by their intemperat life, will fill as fast as they be emptied. In
blood letting, the especial care ought to be, of the vain. For saying that
there is.iii. veins in the arm, ye innar vain, which is called of the
Surgiens, basilica, and is the liver vain, should be opened, for all
swellynges, or payne under the neck. But the utter vain, which is called
cephalica, in english the head vain, owghte to be smitten when the parts
about the neck be troubled, as ye head, and face. The middell vain, which is
called Mediana, would not be meddled with, but there as the other veins, appear
not. There be veins also at the knees, and anclees, which when ye disease
liethe lowe, is most meet to be opened. The last care, and charge showlde be,
of the stintyng of the blood: For how much the better it runs, so much the
soonar it would be stinted, or stayed: but after that ye vain is ones smitten,
it should not be stayed, vntyl ether that the blood, or pulse were changed.
The second way of emptiynge the body, is by medicine received in to the
stomach, which should not be used but when the body is replete with evil, and
corrupt humours: wherefore such as be in health and have good and sweet humours,
Hippocrates wold in no case to be purged, by any medicine, for fear of
dissolving their power. But such as have need of pourgynge, must first make
them selfes apt meet for the same, by bathes eating of moist meates: for so
they shall deliver their guts from obstructions. Howbeit if the humours be
thick clammy, then they must be made thin, subtell and apt to run, by
such decoctions syrupes as do incyde gross matter. But if ye humours be
thin and subtell, the they have no need of any preparatyue, and the Physician
ought always to observe, that he pourge no humours which be crude and raw,
except for their multitude they swell the body, then without any more
delyberation, they must forthwithal be taken away with a pourginge medicine:
lest the strength of the body be dissolved, or the fyerye heat of the fever
encresed, or finally the humours be driven to su principal part, whereby Nature
shall be less able to deliver the body: For if nature be not helped before that
time, she shall be in such a rage, that nothing can be done well or orderly
in the body. The next care is what humour should be pourged. Therefore the
Physician should take heed that he pourge no moo humours, the be hurtful to
the body: As if fleume do redound hurt ye body, it only is to be pourged: if
chollar, ether yelowe, or black, offend the body, then he should utterly
abstain fro fleume and likewise when water abounds, it only should be taken
away: for as Hippocrates says, if such humours be pourged, as ought to be, it
profits the body, and is donne, without gryefe or payne, but else it is
clean contrary. Beside this, the time of ye year would be considered, as well
in pourging as in letting of blood. For there be sum times of the year in the
which it is very madness to lewse ye belly: For in winter, when it is frost
or snow, or in summar, when the heat is outrageous, whosoever is pourged shall
be much the worse for it: and yet of both times, the less mete for pourgyng,
is the summar. For then the body is so adust, with heate of the whether, that it
is not well able to bear the sharpness of the medicine, and nature also
being made weak with the heate of the summar, is more weakened of the
medicine: insomuch that many being pourged then, fall sick of fevers, be quite
destitute of their strength. Therefore the spring time, of all other times of
the year, is most wholesome, both to powrge the body, and to let blood.

In pourgynge the body, the region also must be considered. For if it be very
hot, it lets the workinge of the medicine, because it draws the humours in
to ye skin, and the abundance of heate healpeth to dissolve the strength. The
age may not be forgot: For children because they be not yet at their grows,
be nothing mete for pourgations: likewise old me when they wax weak, should
not be troubled with any medicines. And as in all euacuations, so in pourging of
the belly, the strength of the sick must be earnestly looked upon: For so lunge
as the sick, may abide easily the taking away of his humours, he may safely
be pourged, no longer though all be not gone.

In leusyng the belly, vehement strong laxes, be utterly to be abhorred: for
besides that they weaken the strength, they hurt marvelously the stomach.
Last of all in pourgyng of the belly, the excrementes would be taken heed
to, of the Phisicion, because he may divine diverse things both of their
substance, quality, and colour. The third way to cleanse the body is by
vomit, whereof Nature hath much good: For they that vomit often, for the most
part be always hole. For there is evacuation made as well of flewme, as of
chollar: by means whereof, the stomach is not filled with evil humours the
head finds much ease. Vomiting is most profitable for them that be
choleric, having large breasts, short necks, wide mouths, it profits also
to such as by means of great eating drinking, reserve crude, and raw humours
in their stomachs: yet he that will be hole and pourposeth to be old, let him
not be to busy with vomittynge: For the much use of it causes deafness,
hurts the eyes, it breaks ye veins of the breast and lunges, it offends
the teathe, and causes head ache. Therefore it is ye Physicians duty to
declare, who is apt to vomit, and who is not. For such as be not apt to
vomit, should be pourged dounwarde, and in no-case constrained to vomit: such
as be not apt to vomit be they that be betwixt fat and len, having their
breasts narrow, and their necks long: and such as be lean, slender, and have
wide breasts, short necks, be apt to vomit. In vomittyng the excrement must
be looked well upon, for the sight of it, shall amend the conjecture of the
Phisicion. The forth way of emptying ye body, is by boxyng: which (as Gallen
says in his book yt he wrote of boxing) doth not only make evacuation and
draw out much matter, but also eases the payne, and diminishes the
swelling, dissolveth wind, and styrreth up appetite where it was almost lost,
confirming the strength of weak stomachs, calls again life in swoons, and
fayntynges, it draws also swellynges and fluxes, from one part to another,
stints bledyng, and stays women's flowers. There be.2. kinds of boxing, on
is without any scarifiyng, which prevails most in drawing back of humours,
as in ye drawing back of women's flowers when they rune to much, these be light
boxing glasses, which be used without scarifiyng. The other is with scarifiyng,
which is used in hard swellynges, cummynge of melancholy, or when ye parts be
troubled with the flux of any sharpe matter, which must be drawn from one to
another: in sharpe quick diseases, whereas ye patient may spare no blood:
scarifyinge profits watryng eyes, and also pains, both of head, breast, back
The.v. kind of emptying the body, is by bathe, and here ye must mark that
there is.ii. kinds of bathes, one is natural, and an other artificial. That
is called natural which springs of his own accorde, without ye healp of
manes invention.

Of natural bathes sum be hot by the mixture of niter, salt, allume,
brimstone, chaulke, lyme, yro, copper, goulde, silver tin, which ether lies
in the bothom of the bathe, or else in the rocks, or hills from whence the
spring cumeth, whereof water takes his quality: by this reason, ye bathes
which be in a town, called Bathe here in Englande, be hot: to the great
admiration of all ignorant people. These kinds of bathes be good for such as
be diseased in their joints or have crude, raw matter in their bodies, and be
diseased ether with pockes, piles, or emeroides: but for men, that be in
health, and have sweet humours they be nothing mete, yea and the use of them, is
very perilous. Artificial bathes, be made by man wit, therefore they be
not in all places like: But here in Englande they be nothing so commendable, as
in Germany and other places. For here there is but one hot house, and
therefore the subtell part of the humour is drawn out, and ye gross is left
behind. But in Germany, in other places, they have diverse houses, first one,
where they put of their clothes an other where they be anointed and rubbed, and
in the third house they sweat and be washed: the forth house is not so warm
as the third, the fyfthe is somewhat cold: now that I have declared the
parts of the artificial bathes, which were used in the old time, and yet be
in many places, I purpose to show in as few words, the commodities of the
same, beginning with the first part, which is a warm house prepared with
fire, or with warm water and sweet herbs, to the entente that the little
pores of the skin may open easily, and the hole body with all the humours, be
somewhat warmed. The next house being sumthynge warmer, stirs up the
spirits, and dissolveth the gross humours, and the rubbing with the
annoyntynge, corrects amends the hardness of the senewes, joints, and
loins: the third house by his great heat, dissolveth mightilye the gross
humours, by means, whereof nature pourgeth the body of them: and the luke
warm water, moysteth the hole body, takes away werynesse, if there be any in
the utter parts: ye fowerth house, because it is somewhat coldar, reducethe
nature by little, and little, to here pristinate state. The fifth by means of
his cold, shutteth again the pores of ye skin, which beats the natural
heate in, and causes good concoction, amending the action both of the
stomach and liver. The sixth kind of those things which lewseth the body, is
sweat: and it ought to be provoked when any evil humours, is in the innar
parts, as in fevers pestilent agues.

It may be provoked diversely as by the heate of dry bathes, hot stones,
irons, or by sweet herbs and warm water, ether in pots or in blathers. But
in all vehement, and sharpe diseases, and especially in hot agues, the
Phisicio should take great heed of the sweat, markynge very dilygently which
is good, and which is evil: For by them he may conjecture much of the cause
of the grefe, but as Hyppocrates says, those sweates in fervent and hot
diseases, which comes in the iudgyng days, do end the fever, be best and
most holsume: and it is not evil when the patient sweateth in every part of
his body, so his pains wax less withal: but when ye body sweateth much, and
the pains increase, it is not good: Howbeit it is worst of all, if the sweat
be cold. And when the face, head, and neck sweat only, if it be in any hot
ague, it declares death whichout any remedy. In provoking of sweat, the
Physician should take heed, that it be not to much, for fear of dissoluyng of
the strength of his patient. The seventh kind of evacuation is exercise,
whereof we spoke before in the fowerthe chapter, of this same book. The.viii.
kind is abstinence, or hungar, which doth not extenuat nor make evacuation of
him self, but by means that that is not restored which with abstinence or
fastinge, was wasted. Fasting or abstinece may be take.ii. ways either utterly
to forbear both meat and drink, or else to take so much, as is sufficient
to keep the soul and the body together, and no more. There is nothing, that so
much profits ether the sick, or the hole, as doth abstinence, if it be
taken in due time and orderly: and therefore Plinie, (none of the worst wryters
of Physycke) commends sobriety in meates and drinks, saying that it is
very profitable for all men to be temperate in their diet. And the very father
of Physic Hyppocrates, affirms moderate eating and drinking, to be the
castle of health, and many times such as be diseased and sick, be cured only
by abstinence. In prescribynge of abstinece, the Phisitio should discreetly
consider who may best bear it, for as Gallen says in his.2. book of
temperamentes. They yt have small veins, have but little blood, wherefore they
can not fast without hurting their bodies, they that have great veins, have
plenty of blood, wherefore they may the better away with abstinence, without
any decay of their bodelye health or strength: of such as be sick, they yt be
full of crude, raw humours, be least hurt with fasting, yea the best remedy to
all such is abstinece: but to be brefe none should be commanded to fast of the
Phisicion, but such as be strong, or else be sick of such diseases as cu
of cruditie. As abstinence, if it be given in seaso, to such as hath need of
it, profits very much, so if it be taken out of time, or be given to such as
need it not, it hurts twice as much: It is taken out of time, when ye body is
weak the disease easy to be over cumme, or else when it is prescribed unto
such as be of nature choleric, for in such it bredeth chollar causes fevers
with many frettes and pinchinges both in the belly also in the mouth of the
maw.

Sleep has the.ix. place, of those things which healpe evacuation: howbeit
all sleep doth not extenuat, nor at all times, but that only which is taken
the body being hungery, or else by and by after exercise and labour: for the
natural heate in sleep is called in to the innar parts, which when it finds
no nurrishment nor meat to be altered and digested, it doth waste and consume
the profitable humours of all the body, and so of necessity it both dries the
body, lessenneth it also: the which thing Hyppocrates witnesses saying: Much
sleep dries his body which before hath been to much pourged any manner of
way. Also in his.ii. book that he writ of good ordar of diet, he affirms yt
sleep extenuateth the body which fasteth or kepeth abstinence, and makes it
could, consumynge all the humiditye within it. Of all other times, that sleep
which is taken in the morning after exercise, dries the body most, the same
also doth sleep taken after bathes. For the bathe opening the poores, makes
evacuation of all the excrementes which lurked in ye skin, and sleep
immediately folowinge the bathe, calls in the natural heat again and wastes
the profitable humidity of ye innar parts. The.xii. kind of euacuatio is the
provoking of urine, which should be used when there is any obstruction, or any
great abundance of humours about that part of the liver, which in latin is
called gibba or else in the raynes or bladder, for if the obstruction be in cauo
hepatis (which as gibba is the plumppest part and the top of the liver, so
cauum is the holowest part the lowest of ye same) the it is better to lewse
the belly, then to provoke vryne. For Gallen says as the top of the liver,
which before is called gibba is cleansed by prouokinge of urine, so the holowe
part of the liver, which I called cauum is pourged by lewsyng of the belly. The
which saying he repeteth in the.vii. chapter, of his.ii. book that he write to
his frynde Glauco, and in many other diverse, and sundry places. In the
provoking of urine ye Phisicion must beware that there be no flux of blood,
nor exulceration in the raynes or bladder: for the it is better to pluck from
thence in to other parts of the body, the to draw from other places thither.

The.xi. kind of evacuation, is the drawing down of the spettell, or the
excrement of the brain, by the mouth: whose use is, when the breast and the
instruments of brethynge should be pourged: wherefore when the spettell is
equal both in quantity, and colour, then it declares the breast, the
instruments of brethynge, to be in perfect health: but when it is otherwise,
that is to say of diverse colours not equal, it declares the instruments of
brethynge, and the hole breast so far to be distempered, as it differethe from
his own natural colour, and quantity. Wherefore the Phisicion should
diligently consider what Hyppocrates has writ in the.ii. book prog. and
Aphor.43. also in sum of the other following. The.xii. kind of evacuation, is
by holding medicynes in the roof of ye mouth, which is called gargelyng,
under the which kind is contained the putting of medicines in to the nose
called nisynge: and these if they be used in their time, profits and healpeth
the brain very much. The.xiii. kind is the bledyng at the nose, which
amends the obstructions of ye brain, the distillations from the head, in to
all parts of the body: wherefore the Phisitio should diligently attend that
in bledyng at the nose, he know when to stynt it, when not: For sum time,
when it has bled but a very little, it must be stayed incontinent. Sumtyme
it is not stayed without great danger, as if it chance by the abundance of
nawghtye blood, for then it is better to healpe nature to expel the nawghtie
blood, the to stay it: wherefore every Phisicion, should well remember this
saying of Hyppocrates: when so ever the bledynge at the nose, quiets not the
body, it must be stopped with a dry medicine. The.xiiii. kind of evacuation, is
women's flowers, which chance to weme at times appointed of nature, that by the
means of them, ye hole body may be pourged, and so health defended: wherefore
if the flowers be suppressed at any time, except that time that the woman
goethe with child, or gives suck, it decays health utterly, and mars
the good constitution of the body, as well as when they run to much, which
Hyppocrates witnesses saying as follows. Of to many flowers, cumeth diseases,
but of to few or not at all, follows diseases of the womb. Yet in stopping
of the flowers, the Phisicion should behave him self wisely, lest he stop
them to soon or to late. For su women hath them naturally longer, then other
have, which Hyppocrates witnesses saying: to such women as have moist bodies,
their flowers continues long, if they cu not down quickly, they swell with
all. The xv. kind of evacuation is done by the hemorrhoides, which is the name
of certain veins cuminge to the loweste part of the fundament, by the which
nature purges the body of melancholy whereby it delivers the body, of many
diseases: which Hippocrates affirms, saying. They that have the hemorrhoides
be safe fro all pain of their sides, and inflammatio of their lunges, nor shall
be troubled nether with boils, scurfe, nor no kind of lepry. Therefore the
Phisicio must take great heed in stoppynge of them, lest they be the authors of
great and perilous sicknessis, as of the dropsy, consumtions. He that
requires a longer disputation of this matter let him read over Hyppocrates
books, written of the same matter. The xvi. kind of euacuatio is the fleshly
or carnal copulation, which profits ye body much if it be used moderately and
in due time: For it amends the fullness of the body, and as Aetius in
the.viii. chapter of his.iii. book, Agineta in the 3. chapter of his.i. book
witnesses, when the body is at the grows it makes it strong, nymble, and
quick, and amends the hard habit of the body: For it mollifies the
instruments, and dilateth the pores and pourgeth the body of flewme: Morouer
it quickneth ye wit pacifies anger, wherefore it profits all them, that have
lost there wits, either with anger or else with sorrow, it profits them also,
which have the fawling evil: such as have heaviness in their brows, and ache
in their heads, many times be cured by it. Which Hyppocrates confirms
saying: carnal copulation, which is called venus* amends all diseases that
cum of flewme, howbe it if it be used to much, it hurts the eyes, and all the
sensis, and the head, senewes, breast, rains, loins thyghes, and morouer
hastens old age and death, and utterly dissolveth the strength of the body:
and hereof it comes that they that use it to much, be forgetful, and be
weak full of payne, both in their joints, loins, thighs, it brings many
to ye strangury, many to the gout. Of all times of the year, it may safest be
used in thy spring, it is utterly to be abhorred in autumn, and in sumar.
Winter also by means of his great cold, is not very good: the best hour for
it is as Gall says when the body is in a mean, betwixt full, and empty,
and excedeth nether in heat nether in cold, dryness nor moisture. Therefore
who so ever will use it, let him beware of cruditie, drunkenness, hungar,
werynesse, vomittynge, pourging of the belly, watching, and all other such as
healpeth to dissolve the strength of the body. After moderate eating is the
best time of it, and before sleep, for that amends ye strength, and makes
that there follows no cold after it. For sleep immediately following it, takes
away the werines of the muscles and senewes, and calls in the natural heat:
which makes the concoction perfect. Moreover this time is best and aptest, to
the procreation of children for many causes: but especially because the woman
while she sleeps, holds her husbands seed best. The.xvii. kind of
evacuation is perspiratio, or evaporation, which is done ether by nature, or
else by medicine, which so finely subtylith the humours, that they pass by the
insensible poores of ye skin, without any putrifiynge. Hitherto I have
declared the kinds of euacuatio, or emptines the which every diligent
Physician must so well observe, that he may know when to use this kind or
that, or else when to stop, for sumtyme it is better to increase humours* then
to diminish them. Finallye the Physician should observe, and mark, howe he
should make evacuation and where, and what, and when, and how much.

The.vii. chapter. Of the perturbations, sudden motions of the mind.
THe Affections, which be the sudden motions, and perturbations of the mind,
ought not to be neclected of the phisitio: because they be of great might, and
make great alteratio in all the body: ye which amongst al other, fear, Joy,
angar and sorrow declare evidently. Fear by drawing the spirit and blood in
to ye innar parts leaves the utter pale for cold. Anger sets the body on
fire with moving of the blood to the utter parts as in anger the pulse bets
mightily, so in fere it beats almost nothing at all: sorrow is an affection
wc the which ye hart as though it were smitten, is drawn together, and doth
tremble and quake, not without great sense of payne: and so by little and
little whiles the sorrow goes not away, the strength of the hart, is quite
overthrown, and the generation of spirits is let, by means whereof, the
life is utterly extinct: such a cruel scourge is sorrow unto ma.

Fear and sorrow differ of this fashion, ye sorrowful ma suffers that by
little and little, which the fearful ma doth suffer all a tonse. Joy is a
sudden motion, with the which ye heart rejoicing dilateth him self, and
suddenly sends furth al his natural heat and spirits, whereby sumtyme it
chaunseth that a weak body diethe in Joy, because for lack of strength the
hart ca not call in again his natural heat and spirits. Aulus Gellius, in
his.iii. book and.xv. chapter writes a history worthy to be remembered of one
Diagoras yt had.iii. sons, which were all crowned of the people in one day at
the plays of the hill Olimpia, whilst the people and his iii. sons rejoicing,
embrased their father, casting their garlands upon him, he died in their
arms.

Philippides also a maker of plays when he had ye victory amongst the
Poettes, which he looked not for, died by and by amongst them all.

Howe be it anger kills no man, because it nether cools the natural heat
nor yet dissolveth the strength.

The physician should mark earnestly not only these, but all other affects
of the mind also: partly, that he may know of them, what humour redounds: but
especially, that he may learn, how to resist them: and by his counsel master
them in the end.

The end of the second book
The third book
The first chapter of the number of things against Nature.
Things against Nature be.iii. in number: the first is the cause which goes
before the disease.

The second is the disease it self, by whom the action is first hurt.

The third is the accidents following the disease.

This same part of physic, which inquires of the causes and the accidetes
of diseases, is called of the Greeks, (...), sounds nothing else but the
moving of any thing that is affected: wherefore he hath his substance no longer,
then he is in moving, altering, or changing: and so he differs from affection
taken specially, the which is nothing else but an alteration remaining in a
thing that hath suffered: by this means, the disease and the cause, with the
accident, which be affections of our body, as pale, and evil culour, be
called affections, and yet the same accidents be called also passios. The
rest which be the faults of sum action, as over much inanition, or retentio,
be alonly called passions not affections: because they be not things
permanent, but is only, and remain so long as they be in growing. Here it is
to be noted, that a thing may suffer.ii. manner of ways: first when it
suffers of it self, as if the guts suffer payne, of any sharpe, or
bytynge humours contained within them, which may be called their own passion.
Secondarily, when a thing suffers not of it self but of another, as when the
head suffers payne by reason of evil vapowres, cummynge from the stomach,
which is called a passio by consent of other: ye shall find this matter
disputed more at large in Gallenes first book of places affected.

The.ii. chapter, Of the causes of diseases
THe cause of ye disease, is an affection against nature, going before the
disease, and stirring it up: which of it self, first, hurts no action: but
accidentally, that is to say, by other. And secodarily, as by healp of the
disease cummynge betwixt, as shall be showed more plainly hereafter. There
be.ii. manner of causes of diseases: one is external so called, because it is
outwardly received, and was not before with in the body: as cold, and such
other. The the other, is called internal, which is within the body, as humours
putrified within the body, grown out of temper. Gall speaks of no mo causes
of diseases then these.ii. Yet Auicen with other of the same layer, affirm that
there is an other cause, which joins ever with the disease: and the taking
away of it, is as they say the curing of the sickness: as if rotten, or
putrified humours, kindell a fever, the by their saying so soon as the
putrified matter is take away, ye fever must cease of necessity: howbeit it is
for ye most part scene that ye fever remains after the putrifactio is clean
gone. wherefore it is evident, that Auicen, and all that be of his opinion is
foul deceived therein: howbeit I think this to be ye thing, which deceyueth
them. They define sycknesse as it were the actio hurt already, and not that
that hurts the actio first, so that they call that the sickness, which
Gallen calls but the accident of the sickness: I could take Auicennes
part in this matter, saving that he agrees with Gallen in the defining of
sickness, forgetting him self to be in contrary tales: wherefore I would
counsel all yonge students in physic, to learn the causes of sickness of
Gall, or else of such as follow him, as Aetius, Paulus Aegineta. How be it
there is none to be compared with Gallen because he hath written of them in
such a good ordar, as never any other hath wryt the like, and this I dare
affirm that every well learned man, can do no less the confess the same.

The.iii. chapter, Of diseases.
A Disease, is an unnatural affection of the body, by which the action is
first hurt, therefore it differs fro the cause in that ye the cause never
hurts any action of him self, but by means of the disease. Of diseases
there be.3. chief principal kinds: one is in those parts of the body that is
called of ye latins similares, such be ye bones, senewes, veins, with all
other simple, sparmaticke parts: another is in the instruments, as in the
head, eyes, hands, and feet: the third consists in them both. That disease
yt happens in ye sparmatick parts, is such a distemperature ether of heat,
could, dryness, or moisture, that it hurts sum action, for a man may be
distempered in sum part and yet be hole, and not sick: but when the
distemperature grows so much, that it hurts any action of the body, then it
may be called a disease of the sparmatike parts. Wherefore who so is of this
sort distempered, is sick: and he that is distempered and hath no action hurt,
may not be called sick, but intemperat. For of them that be hole, if sum
should not be temperate and sum intemperat, one of these.ii. must needs be
true, ether all men always to be sick, or else all men to have one
distemperature, which both be very false. The same distemperature which before
I called a disease of ye sparmaticke simple parts, is divided in to.ii. Eagle,
not egal: it is called an eagle disteperature, when all parts of the body, are
distempered alike, as in the fever hectica, which is a cosuptio, wherein al
parts of ye body, be like hot: and the contrary unto this, is the
distemperature, which is not egal as in that kind of dropsy, that falls in
to the legs, and feet, and in all kind of fevers, except the before named
hectica. Of unequal distemperature there is also ii. kinds. The.i. is the
only alteration of the quality, as the burning of the fire, or of the sun.
The.ii. is, beside the quality, the flux of sum humour, as in yt kind of
swellynge, yt is called phlegmon, Beside this of distemperatures, one is
simple, and an other is compound: it is called simple when on quality, as
heat, or cold, excedeth alone: and compound, when many exceed together, as hot
and moyste, cold and dry, excedynge to gether, in one member. The the other
kind of disease which only is in the instruments, may be called the evil
constitution, or composicio of them. But there be.ii. kinds of instrumental
diseases, for sum be simple: and they be.iiii. in number, one is to be scene in
the vncumly comformation, another in the number of parts, the third in the
quantity of each part: and the.iiii. in the composition. The disease of
conformation happens of the vncumly figure, as when sum part is holowe from
the nativity, or else after by casualty, which should not, and also sum
other part rough that should have ben smothe: of number, when there be ether
to many, or to few parts: of quantity when they be ether to big, or to
little: of coposicion when they be put in wrong places, or when they that
should agree together, do not. The third kind of disease, is common as well
to the simple and sparmatick parts, as to the instrumental: and it is the
division of that that is hole, and of one piece, which division if it be in the
riynges or byndynges it is called anulsio: in the flesh, a boil: in the bone,
a broken crevice: in the senowes, a conuulsion, or cramp. These diseases
sumtyme be compound, which is when they be joined to other. Hitherto I have
brefly declared the.iii. first kinds of sicknessis, of the which sum be very
quick, and sum be dull, or slow: Such as be very quick, will be at the worst,
in.iiii. days, or soon after. Of such as be quick and sharpe, there be.ii.
sorts, for sum will be at the worst, in.14. days, and sum not under.40. All
other diseases, which pass.40. days before they be at ye worst, be called dull
or slow. But as quick, and short diseases, have their beginning of blood
and chollar, which be hot humours, so slow dull have their disseases,
beginning of cold humours, as of flewm melancholy. Let this general, and brefe
declaration of diseases, at this time suffice.

The.iiii. chapter, of accidents.
THis word accident is take.2. manner of ways: generally and specially,
generally, it signyfyeth any thing contrary to nature: specially, all things
against nature, except the causes of diseases, and diseases them selfes.

Therefore it is nothing else but an unnatural affection of the body, which
follows the disease, as the shadow follows the body. The accidents
specially taken, be divided in to.iii. parts. For sum be the fautes errors of
actions, sum affections of our body, other sum follow them both, ether by over
much excretion, or retention of excrementes other like such things. Of the
error in actions, there be.ii. differences: animal, natural. The faults, or
errors, of the animal actions, be yet divided in to.iii. for ether they be
faults of ye senses, as of hearing, saying, tasting, smelling, feeling, or else
of mouinge, or finally of the principal actions, as of imagining, thinking
and remembering. These be all the animal actions, of the which each one may be
hurt iii. manner of ways: first if the action be utterly extinct, as if a
man see nothing at all: secodarily, if it be not utterly abolished, take away
but decayed sumthing or not parfit, as when a man sees but even scantly as
they do, which the ignorant call sand blind. Thirdly when it is depraved, and
wrong wrasted, as when a man of force, sees things which he did not behold
with his common sense, as they do which loke a goggell: And as it is evident,
that all these fautes happen in the sight, so they happen also in each one of
the other before named sensis.

There be thus many as follow natural actions, appeticion, concoction,
digestion, pulsatio, attraccion, alteration, retention, expulsion. Of the which
each may err.iii. manner of ways, as is said before in the actions animal:
and the fautes or errors of the same, be accidents following diseases. There be
beside these.iiii. manner of accidents, which be affections of our bodies: as
unnatural cullers, ether in ye hole body, or else in sumpart of it: Fylthy
savours also ether of ye mouth, nose, or ears and obsurde and unnatural
sapores, belonging to the taste: and beside these, hardness, drines, roughnes of
the skin.

As for the unnatural inanitions, or detentions from whense so ever they cum,
they be contained under one of these.iii. differencis: For either they be
unnatural i their hole substance, as that flux of blood that is called
commonly the emorroydes: or else they are in their quality, as sumtyme it
chaunseth in women's flowers: or finally in their quantity, they be found
unnatural, as the great abundance or lack and scarsnes either of the vryne or
sweat. The which every one, is handled to the uttermost in Gall, where he
entreats of ye causes, of accidents.

The end of the third book
The.iiii. book
The first chapter. Of that part of physic which teaches the knowledge of
things yt be past, present, and to cum.
THis is that same part of physic, the which (as I said before) contains
the knowledge of things that be past, and the inspection, or the beholdynge of
such as are present, and the prophecy, or prognostication of things to cum.
And therefore the mo commodities it hath the more exactly it would be learned: for
first it teaches ye knowledge of all passions, diseases: in ye which (if the
Physician be ignorant) he shall never be able, to do any thing worthy praise,
in the body. Therefore that yonge students, may the more luckily, attain to
the knowledge, of this part of physic, I would counsel every each one of
them, to read diligently Gallens.vi. books of places affected: in the which he
handles this matter at the large. For so it shall be brought to pass that he
shall be expert in the diseases, of every part, be the part never so little.

Who so is exactly scene in this knowledge, shall besides other, have this
especial commodity, which is, that among the sick, his credit shall be
great: for the sick man trusts none so much, nor is so well ruled of any,
as he is of that Phisitio, which is able to declare things present paste, and
to cum. Therefore the disease is easily cured when the Physician, and the
patient, be both against it, moreover he shall bear no blame, what so ever
chance or happen to his patient, yt I may omytte the great praise, glory, and
renoune, which with one consent shall be given him every where. Therefore
Hyppocrates counsels all Physicians, diligently to learn this knolege. The
which, no man hath so well discussed (I except Hippocrates always) as Gallen
hath. Wherefore they that be able to understand him, let them go no farthar:
but as for yonge and ignorant students, (for whose sake only I have taken this
in hand) if they read diligently this little rude work, I trust though they
be not satisfied, yet they shall not less all their payne. Therefore first of
all to the accomplysshynge, or getting of this knowledge, it is necessary to
expound this word Crisis, which the lattyns call iudicium, in english it may
be called iugement: but at this present time it signifies any sudden mutation
in every disease whether it be lunge or short, and this sudden mutation is
parted in.iiii. For ether the sick is made hole incotinent, or else is in a
great towardness to health, or dies out of hand, or finally becumeth a
great deal worse. The first of these mutations, which without any delay cures
the disease, is simply and absolutely called Crisis, The other which only
amends ye disease, is called crisis insufficiens, which is to say a
insufficient iugement. The third is called mala crisis, that is to say an evil
change, or judgment. The.iiii. may be called both vnparfit and evil also. To
ye knowledge of this change which is called crisis, the.iiii. times of the
disease, that is to say, the beginning, the encreasynge, the height, and
declination, must be observed, and marked of the Physician. The beginning is
divided in.3. the first invasion of the disease is the first beginnynge, is
simple without any breadth. The.ii. hath breadth, and continues to the third day.
The third is the time afterward, till ye beginning of concoctio. The time
wherein the sickness grows, is fro the beginning of concoction, until the
disease be at his full strength which before is called the heygth. The.iiii.
time which is called the declination, begins after the heygth, and lasts
till the disease be full past and ended.

These be the universal times in disseases, besides which there is other
called particular: as in such fevers as keep fits, the beginning of the
fit, is the cold in the utter parts: the growing is whiles the body waxes
hot: and the state, or hayght is, when the heate is egally dispersed
throughout the body: the declination, when the heat goes away. Before I declare
howe to know this sudden mutation, which of the greeks is called Crisis, I
think it expedient, and necessary to show in few words, the difference of
ye signs tokens going before, which be of three sorts: of the first sort, is
ye signs of cruditie, and concoction, as the excrementes of the belly, the
vryne, and spettel: by the egestions of the nether belly it is known how the
stomach alters: the vryne ether declares cruditie, or good concoction in
the veins: the spettell shows ether ye good, or evil constitution of the
lunges, and instruments of breathing.

These signs what time of the disease so ever they happen, keep always their
power firm and stable: For the signs of concoccion, always declare health,
the contrary signs, ether great pains lunge sickness, death, or finally the
turning again of the evil. Of the.ii. sort be the signs of life death: as
quick sleep, easy brethinge, goodness of the pulse, like in face to them that
be hole, hansume cumly lying in bed, sweat, and such as to these be clean
contrary. Of the third sort be the judging signs, of the which sort there
be.ii. kinds: for sum be as signs, and causes both together, as vomittynge,
excrementes of the belly, the great quantity of vryne, and sweates, bledynge
at the nose, or the falling of humours out of one place in to another: and other
be as signs alone, as watch, dead slepes, troublesum dreams, difficulty of
breathynge, dimness of sight, dullness of sense, head, neck, and stomach
ache, singing in the head, involuntary tears, quiuerynge of ye neither
lip, forgetfulness, face, eyes, nose red, abhorring of meat, vehement
thurste, with other such like. All these, in that yt they declare any sudden
mutation, be called judging signs: and in that that they follow diseases, they
be called judging accidents. These have not their power always firm, and
certain, as the signs of concoction, and cruditie have, but they are to be
liked if they happen after concoction, that is while ye sickness is in the
state: and in the beginning, and before any concoctio, they be not only not to
be belyked, but to be feared, as deadly signs. Concerning ye Nature or
property of signs, for this time, let this suffice: but as for such signs,
as declare sudden mutation before called crisis, to be good* I entend yet (god
willing) to speak a little more, which may be known.iii. manner of ways.
First if before Crisis cum, there be concoction of the disease, I mean of the
vryne, the egestions, and spettell: the which each, ought to be considered in
his proper place: For in the diseases of ye breast, lunges, the spettell should
be taken most head of, and best marked, and yet the vryne ought not to be
neglected, no nor the excrementes of the belly nether, but in an ague, which is
without any inflammation either of the liver raynes, bladder, or spleen, ye
urine must be regarded especially: as if the stomach, or maw, be grieved, the
excrementes of ye belly would be considered before the other. Yet the vryne, is
not then to be abiected nether. Secundarily if the cumynge of it, be signified
by any of the judging days, it is to be liked of the Physician: the
declaration of the which days, I omyt, because I have observed that there is in
them, more error then truth, more superstition, then knowledge: and bysyde
this, the scripture commands us Christen men, to observe no days: yet if
any man be willing to know them let him seek what Hyppocrates, Gallen hath
written of them: then I doubt not (though he be dull wytted) but that he shall
quicly know what is meant by them. Thirdly it is good, if the mesure, and form
of the excrementes, be correspondent, and aggreable to the disease: as if in an
hot burning fever, the sick blede at the nose: or after a fervent shaking,
sweat much, and hot in all parts of his body: or vomit much chollar, or
finally void much by syege, for so ye fever tertian should end: the
quotidian not only by much sweating, but also by the avoydynge of flewme, both
upward, and dounward, in great quantity. The frenesie, is judged by much hot
sweat, cummynge in every part of the body, but especially if the head sweat
fervently: yet sumtyme it is judged and ended, by bledynge at the nose: howe be
it in the lythargie, bledynge at the nose is evil.

The pleuresie is betwixt these.ii. For bledyng at the nose in it, is to be
liked better, then in the lithargy, worse then in the frenzy. The
inflammacions of ye liver and spleen, be always judged by bledynge at the
nose: the liver, if it blede on the right side, and ye spleen f the lift:
beside these, the age and complexion of the sick, and also his forma^ diet,
and place wherein the sick abides, with the time of the year, and the present
constitution of the air, be to be considered of the Phisitio, whiles he
judges crisis to be ether good or evil. For as the disease is choleric, all
these choleric also, it is necessary that when crisis happens, chollar
pletifully to be voided: so if flewme redound it is needful for flewme to be
pourged: if diverse humours, ye evacuation must be also of diverse humours. But
when the Physician shall know these things exactly, then of ye end, he may
easily know the rest: for if the sick, which already hath suffered crisis, be
delivered of his ague and other accidents be better culloured, having also
better pulses, and more strength to rise, without doubt the crisis was good.

The knowledge of the evil Crisis, as there is in it much conjecture, so there is
also in it much incertaynty: For as where nature is strong, and rules easily
the humours, she moves orderly, and makes an end of her actions: so when she
takes a fall, her motions be both incertayne, and inordinate, and therefore
hard to be known. wherefore such a case requires an artificer, and a well
exercised Phisitio, the which may first declare whether there shall be any
Crisis, at all or no: secudarily whether this day, or that: last of all whether
it shall kill the sick forthwith, or but only hurt him. What should need
many words, by these.3. it is easily to be known whether the sick shall die,
or live: first, by the kind of the disease: secundarily, by the greatness of
it: thirdly, by the manner, and fashion of it: fortly by the moving of it. The
kind of the disease, is known of ye accidents following it, as in example:
the pleuresie is known by the pricking payne of the side, ye difficulty of
brething by the fieuer which always is annexed to it, by ye cough, hardness
of the pulse: but ye greatness of it, may be learned by the quantity,
vehemence, of the forsayde accidents: and the manner of it, by the accidents
which follow it: as if they be many in number, if they be lunge, mighty, and
evil, or such as to these be clean contrary, the mouynge of it, by the time
of the parts of the fit. To these.iiii. the consideration of the cutry, the
time of the year, the nature, costitutio of the sickmanes body, with other
such, as is in this same chapter before rehearsed is necessary also. Of these,
that Physician which is an artificer, shall easily judge life or death in his
patient: he yt is not, let him speak no farther the he knows, so he shall
sustain no blame nor shame.

Of the vryne. The.ii. chapter.
Seeing that the vryne is the alonly mark of ye liver veins, in what error
think you that the Physicians are now a days which take upon them, to judge
all diseases by the vryne: which is as absurd impossible, as of the spettell,
to declare the gryefe of the bladder, and raynes: wherefore saying that against
all knowledge, and good learning, they do so shamefully abuse the lookynge of
the water, deceive the poor, ignorant, and simple people so craftily, I think
them worthy to be called, as Aristophanes calls them, covetous and vnlerned
Physicians, since that they esteem more their filthy lucre, then the truth.
But now to my pourpose. The vryne is the excrement and watery substance of the
blood, which after ye concoction done in the veins, is drawn thence by the
kidneyes or raynes, in to the bladder, where it is reserved till it may
coueniently be let out: in the beholding of the which, there is.4. things to be
considered, which be these following: ye substance, cullar, quantity, cotentes:
of ye which no man can well judge, which knows not parfitly ye holsummest, of
all other the best urine, where he may compare the rest.

The best water, or vryne, and the which is of a temperate man, in substance is
nether to thick nor thin, but moderate, in quantity as much, no more then
he drunk: in cullar somewhat inclinynge towards yealowe, having a white,
light, and equal sediment: such a water as this, of a yonge Physician should
often be looked upon, to the intent that when he seethe any other differ never
so little from it, he may forthwith coiecture the same man, whose water he hath
scene, so much to differ from parfit health, how much his water differs from
the other. Now after I have showed which is the best water, there remains
behind, the declaration of such things as is in ye vryne, especially to be
considered: which I pourpose to declare orderly. The substance of the vryne, is
ether thick, thynne, or moderat and equal betwixt both. That which is
moderat, is of all other the best, and if it be to thin or thick, it
declares vnparfit concoction: Of the thyn vryne, there is.ii. differences: For
the one is pissed thynne, and clear, and so remains styll: and the other is
pissed thin and clear, and after becummeth thycke and troubled: but they be
both crude, raw, and do lack concoction, thus they differ: The tone
signifies extreme cruditie, declarynge nature as yet, not to have begune any
concoction. The the other shows that nature hath begun concoctio but very
lately. The troublesumnes signifies great plenty of wyndie spirits, to be
mixed with the watery substance of the vryne. Of thycke and troubled waters,
there is also.ii. differencis: if it be thick when it is pissed, then afterward
it waxes clear, having a residence in the bothome, which proficieth of sum
inequall turbulent matter remaining behind in the veins: And on the other
side, sum other water, which after it is made is thick, and remains so
still: which signifies great trouble and agitation, as yet to remain in the
blood. Hitherto I have declared the substance of the vryne, wherefore now
follows the cullar: of the which there be.vi. differencys in especial, which
is white pale, tawny, yellow, red, black: For all the rest be contained under
these. Vndar white is contained the cullar of crystal, snow, water, the which
all signify great cruditie. Not so white as these is milk, horne white, the
hearres of a chammell: And as the vrynes of these cullars, differ from very
white, so they declare better concoction. After white they be next, that be sum
deal pale, the which because they be a little tincte, they are not extreme
crude. A pale cullar is made, by the mixture of chollar, and water together, so
that in the mixture there goes but a little chollar, to a great del of water:
of pale by means of concoction, sutime is made a light tawny which Actuarius,
takes to be the cullar of gilt. After a tawny follows a light yelow, which
is a cullar like the flowers of cartamus, which is commonly called the gardyn
saffaron: after the which, comes yealowe, which is the cullar of saffaron:
and a light red, which is ye cullar of a certain drug, called bolum, is next:
then red it self which is the cullar of a cherry: after these is a dark red,
which is the cullar of a mulberry: and yet there is a darcker, which is made
of white, and red, egally myxte together, and of the latyns it is called,
Venetus: grene is the cullar of beetes, which the gardiners call the white
beetes, or else the cullar of ye precious Emmoroyde: Beside these, there is
yet other cullars, as the cullar of oil, the cullar of lead, and all cole
black cullars, which is known almost of every child. If I have here in the
discripsions of cullars, miss or wrong named any cullar, I pray the
painters, to accept my good will, and pardon my ignorancye: in the iudgyng of
cullars ye Phisicio should be provident, because that oftentimes, with every
light occasion, the cullar of the urine doth alter, and change, not only in
them that besicke, but also in the yt be hole: of this mutatio, or change
there is.3. special causes. The first is meat not well altered, or digested,
which is not apt to make blood, wherefore it changes the cullar of the vryne
to ye same cullar that it self is of, which is wont to happen to them that is
sick and diseased, yea and sumtyme to such also as is hole: moreover sum
medicine will alter the cullar of the urine. The second cause of ye altering of
ye cullar in ye water, is the drink: for the vryne commonly kepeth the cullar
of those things which is received in the drink. The.iii. cause is the
collyquation of such things, as consume and melt in the body, as the fat,
which when it wastes, for the most part cullereth vryne. Beside these there be
other causes also which do the same, as exercise, hungar, sleep, watch, with a
great many other such like. which in the beholdynge of the vryne each one by
him self should be diligently considered of the Physician. Now I entende to
declare what may be conjectured in the urine of the substance, cullar. A thin
urine, signifies the lack of natural heat, not without the obstructions of y^
liver, raynes, spleen, by means of cruditie: A thick declares excess of
matter, humours fillinge the belly, guts, and the holowe parts of the liver:
which if it be scene in a fever, thynne going before, it signifies the
dissolving of ye fever. But if after yt the fever is already cu, ye vryne
appear thick, nor in continuance of time waxes no thinnar, the it signifies
plenty of humours. Concerning ye cullars what white, pale, yelowe, read
signify, partly is already declared, more may be gathered, of these ye follow.
The dark red which is the cullar of the mulberry, shows yt the blood
burns in the veins. The grene signifies the worst kind of chollar to be
encresed both in quatitie, quality. That vryne which hath ye cullar of oil,
shows ye colliquatio of ye hole body, or else of ye raynes only. The black
water sumtyme declares health as in the pourginge of melacholy, but if grene
went before, the it is a very argumet of death, it is more to be feared in men
then women. Now we be cu unto the quantity which in them that be hole should
be so much as was drunken. The water excedeth in quantity for ye most part, by
means of these causes following: first when a man eats and drinks to much,
the meat being to moist, or the drink being watrishe wine. The second when he
hath taken medicynes, which provoke vryne. The third when the raynes is
distempered with over much heat. The forth when the belly is drier, then it
ought to be naturally. The fyfte when there proceeds no euacuatio of ye belly
nor other ways, which Hyppocrates witnesses, saying: Water much in quantity,
made in the night, prophecies of a small siege: Little water happens of contrary
causes: First of little drinking, dryness of meates, much exercise, and
other like unto these, which be wont to dry the body. Secondarily, for meates
medicyns which for their grosnesse, make obstruction in the liver and spleen,
and other places. Thirdly for the grosnesse and clammynesse of humours. Forthly
for the plentiful pourgynge of the belly. Fyftly for the vehement heat, and
dryness in a fever. Sixtly, for the weakness of the excretiue power, both in
the raynes other parts serving to the avoydynge of the water, or vryne.
The.iiii. thing which in the vryne is to be considered be the contents, so
called (I think) because they consist in every part of the altitude of the
body of the water. And as the height of the body of the water is divided in
to.iii. as in to the bothome of the vryne, the brink, or highest region, in to
the middell of these extremities: so of the contents sum swymmeth in the top,
and other hangs in the middell, and sum goes to the bothom. In ye contents
there be.iii. things to be considered, ye substance, cullar, and quantity. The
substance, because sum be thick, and other sum thynne, and sum in a mean
betwixt both. The contents of healthy waters, be moderat of substance, light,
eagle. They be called light, which be continual of of one piece, not rough, nor
broken in any part, such as is to these contrary may be called rough. Cotentes
yt be gross, signify copy plenty of crude, raw humours in the veins, sumtime
ye strength of the excretiue faculty, in pourginge superfluous humours.
Contents yt be thin, signify weakness of nature in ye second cococtio*
declares also gross humours to be subtyled, made thynne. Concerning the cullar
of contents, su be very white, sum pale, sum yealowe, sum red, sum
bluddy, sum black, sum of diverse cullars. Contents very white be ether
pieces of slymye humours, or else matter to much baked: which comes from sum
of the innar parts: pale contents be evil, because they decline from the
natural cullar: yealowe be evil also, in that yt they declare the over much
encreasinge of chollar: red signify lack of concoction, and the contynuynge
of the disease. Blodie declare yt the blood is not thoroughly laboured of nature:
black signifies ether ye mortifiyng of natural heat, or else the pourgynge
of melancholy. Now since that I have brefely declared the cullar, and
substance of the contents, there remains behind the quantity, which if it
be much, as it shows the nurisshynge of the body, so it doth the fortifiynge
of the excretiue faculty. For while nature laboreth much in altering the
nurrishemente, she must needs make many excrementes. The scarcity lack of
cotentes, happens ether of fasting, or exercise, or obstruction in ye veins,
or finally of over slow concoction. Sumtime there is an evil savor in the
vrin, which signifies ether rottenness of sum part of the body, or else the
mortifyinge of the hole body: specially if ye substance, cotentes be evil.

Of the excrementes of the belly. The.iii. chapter
THat siege, or excrement is best,, most natural, which is soft, and lies
together hole, and well compact, made at the accustomed time in health, and in
quantity, correspondent to that yt is eaten: of the contrary part, that is an
evil and an unnatural siege, or excrement which is hard, thynne, or rough,
not made in ye accustomed howre of health. If the siege be very much cullared,
it is evil and signifies over much chollar in the guts: and if it be not
tincte at all, but like unto the meat which was eaten, it signifies cruditie,
no chollar at all to resort to the guts: but if ye siege be yealowe in ye
declination of the sickness, the it declares the body to be pourged of
chollar very well. If the siege be grene it shows that there is great plenty
of rusty chollar: and if it be black it signifies ether the abundance of
melancholy, or else the adustion of blood in the stomach. If it be of the
cullar of lead, then it betokens the mortifiynge of the innar parts, or at
the least an extreme cold in the same. If it be ether fatty, or clammye, no
like meat hath be eaten immediately before, it signifies the hole body to
consume. If it be very much stinkyng, it is a sure token of putryfaction. In
these things, the nature and quality of the meates, be as well to be
considered, as the imbecility an weakness of the guts, in suffering
fluxes, and reumes from the head. when the excrement in cummynge forth makes
any noise, it declarethe wind to be mixte with thynne moisture, and the
fundement to be drawn ne'er together. When any wyndye spirit strives with
moisture, then commonly there remains sum some in the siege. The siege being
diverse in cullar, shows ye body to be diversely affected: wherefore for the
most part it is a sign of long sickness.

Of the spettell. The.4. chapter
THe spettell is to be considered in all diseases, but especially in the
diseases or griefs of the breast, and lunges: in the which diseases, if the
patient spent nothing at all, it is a toke of extreme cruditie: but if he spent,
though it be moist crude it signifies the first part of the disease, which is
the beginning to be newly ended: after that it is more baked cummeth up first a
little, then more more, the the sickness is almost in ye state at the worst,
when it is well baked, cumeth a great pace, then the disease is already in the
state, which is to say at the height, because the it ca grow no higher, after
cummyng less, with more ease less grefe in coughyng, and taking of breath,
being also well cococt, not crude, it signifies ye sickness to decline,
depart. If the spettel be sumthynge nigh unto yelowe, with a light some upon it,
it is a token, of cruditie only, without any furthar evil. But if it be very
yelow, tawny, grene, or black, or clammy with much some, it is not to be beliked
at all: if it be blody, it is nothing so evil as black and yellow, but the
manner of excretion, must also be well marked: For if it cum up easily, the it
is to be accounted good, and if not but with difficulty of brethyng, the it is
euel. The absolute note, mark, of concoction is when the spettel is light,
white, and egal, of substance nether thynne, nor thick: if the spettell be
thynne, not black, it signifies nothing but the lack of natural heat, but
if it be the cullar of lead, or rustinesse or black, it is extreme evil.

The.v. chapter of the pulses.
THe pulse is a sensible mouynge of the hart and Arteries, (that is to say
veins, having two coats growing of the hart, carriynge both blod and spirit)
by the which they be lifted up and let done again. This mouynge hath ii. uses:
For in the dilatynge of the arteries, cold Air is drawn in which doth not
only stir up, but also refreshes the vital power, whereof the Animal
spirits be made, and in the submission, or cotraction of the forenamed
Arteries, the smoky excrement which came of burnt humours aduste, is expelled.
Parauenture sum will loke, that here in this place I should have declared
the differencys of the pulses, because that without the knowledge thereof, there
can be no diuinatio by the pulses. Howbeit I willingly at this time omyt them,
because Gallen and Archigines with other mo ancient writers are not as yet
agreed of them, Cornelius Celsus (non of the worst Physicians) seems to doubt
much whether any thing may certainly be conjectured by them or no. But this I
am assured of that though I should have set them furth so plainly as I could
for my life, yet they should not have been thoroughly known, but of such as
already be well entered, practised, not only in the works of Physic, but also
in Arithmetic, and Mathamaticke: and as for such let them search what Gallen
and other old physicians have written: For to them this little rude book is
not written, but only to such as are ignorant in the lattyn tong, yt they may
by healp of this my book, not only learn suthyng for their bodily health, but
also save their money, which they daily wast in feeding such Physicians as be
not lernyd, wherefore gentle readers accept my good will though I have not
satisfied your expectation, remembrynge the old poets saying: Rebus et in
magnis est voluisse satis. which is to say that in matters of weight, to have
ben willing it is sufficient.

Finis.
Imprinted at London in Fletestrete at the sign of the Sun, over against the
condyte, by Edvvard VVhitchurche the.x. day of April.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


