An introduction into phisycke, with an universal diet, gathered by Christofer
Laugton. E W

To the right worshipful knight sir Arthure Darcye his humble servant
Christofer Langton wishes health increase of virtue.
A Soft as I remebre your kyndenesse and benevolence toward me (my singular
good master) it is harde to say, howe greatly I desire to recompense the same:
lest I shulde either seem unkind and unthankful, or else not to understand
and perceive the greatness of your manifold benefytes, employed vpome: of ye
which, as ye one is a sign of a noughty heart, so the other is a toke of a dull
wit: but they be both very evident arguments of vnthankefulnesse and
ingratitude. From the which, as I have always hitherto abhorred, so I desire
now to be void from all suspicion of the same. For me think, I perceive
every day more and more, howe much shame and fylthynesse is in that vice,
almost by the testimony of every wise man in somoche that I think him to
trespass greatly, against the society of this our commune life, which doth
vnthankefullye receive benefytes of any man. For as gratitude or thankfulness
doth increase lyberalitye, which is the especial part of justice: so
ingratitude dissolveth utterly, and abolysheth the same: the which liberality,
if it fall ones in decay, it takes away the comutation of offices and the
doing of one for an other, the which ones taken away, what help I pray you is
left to the conservation of ye comune wealth, seeing yt the hole course of our
life, consists in ye society and mutual doing one for an other. Wherefore
the wise kings of the Parcians made laws, for to punysh such as were unkind
and unthankful personnes, because they thought none to be so unnatural as
they, nor any to trespass more against the comune weal. These other such
(mine especial good master) hath caused me to desire vehemently, to show some
token of the pure zeal and love which I have ever borne unto you, lest I
should be found unnatural, either unto you, or to this my native country.
Wherefore saying that fortune hath given me no rychesse, wherewith I might lunge
yer this have recopenced some part of your kyndenesse, I thought mete to offer
unto you, the first fruit of my studies and learning, verily trusting, that
your wisdom will esteem for the best, my loyal heart, and diligent endeavour,
although my book peradventure shall not satisfy your expectation.

Physyke speaks in her own person, to her mynisters and Phisicious.
AFter that Prometheus had stolen fire out of heaven, the father and ruler
of the gods Iupiter, being sore offended with his malicious fact, swore by
a great oath, that he would not only be revenged upon him, but of all his
posterity, wherefore, commanding his son Vulcanus to shape a beautiful
woman, called al the gods, and goddesses together, to who he spake on this
fassyon: what avails us our sceptre crown most valiantly conquered, of
our father Saturne? whom we deposed for tyranny: what avails us the notable
victory of Thiphocus and his brethren? or the punyshmentes of Titius,
Tantalus, Siliphus, and Ixion? seeing that one can not be ware by an others
harm. I am sure none of you be ignorant of our injuries, which we have
received of the hands of Prometheus: my wife and sister Iuno, for Paris his
sake destroyed the whole natio of the Troians, and my daughter Minerua burned
an hole navy of the Grecians, for one mans offence: and shall we Iupiter father
of all the gods, and ruler of heave and earth, suffer our eternal fire to be
stolen out of heaven vnpunyshed? while he spake these words, Mulciber his
son brought in the lady which was now already shapen, tha Iupiter,
comaundyng as well gods as goddesses, to trim deck her to the uttermost,
named her Padora, because every god and goddess had given her something, and he
him self gyuyng her a box, wherein was enclosed al manner of diseases and
maladies, sent her to Epimetheus, by his son and faithful messenger
Mercurius, which Epimetheus, although he were warned of his broher Prometheus
to receive no gift from Iupiter, most lovingly retained her: and opening her
box, let forth abroad al manner of maladies, and diseases, wherewith al
mankynd was cruelly punyshed, until such time as Iupiters furor and
indignation was suwhat slaked through the prayer of Esculapius, to whom he
sent me as a remedy and medicine, to all such evils and gryeffes. whom for
his faythefull service, I made a god. And I pray you, have I not rewarded both
Hypocrates Gallene accordynglye? saying that at this day they are glorified in
fame as much as either Alexander Magnus, or any other notable prince? but out
alas what cruel fate of fortune is this, that I sometime the spring well of al
felicity and goodness unto man, am now clean turned to the contrary. For
where as before I was author of health, to every masekyng for me: now I am not
only a comune murderer, and a comune thief, but also a mayntayner of
Paricides, much more vile then ye stynkynge whore of Babylon. For you that be
my mynisters and Phisicios to you I speak: I pray you tel me, why doth every
man now utterly abhor my company? trumpyng eftsoon in my way, who is
willing to dye, let him goo to Phisyke: who is willing to be robbed of his
money, let him go to Phisyke, if I be not a thief a murderer? But what said I,
did I cal you my seruautes? no, I know ye not, much less ye know me: wo
shall be unto you, which rauyshyng me against my will, hath thus brought me in
captivity bondage, wo shall be unto you, which for your own lucre and
aduauntage, hath made me an instrument of mischefe: woo shall be unto you
which have sclaundered me with the death of so many thousands: woo shall be
unto you that have robbed and polled of their money so many nacyons. But
peradventure ye will say that I wrongfully and without all cause do sclaundre
you, laying the fault in me, that ye heal not as other, that were my
servants and mynisters did, because there is not like virtue in me now, as
was then: and whereof I beseech you comes that? of me, or of you, which know
me not? For what soever he be that hath not exactly learned natural
Philosophy, be he never so well practised, he never knew me. Therefore
whosoever will be my seruaunt, let him first be sure that he have a good
natural wit that he may be able to practyse any thing that is taught him, and
tha let him be exercysed, even from his tender age, in dialect, arithmetic,
and mathematicke, he must also be very painful, setting his mind on nothing
but only on learning, and conferring his studies always with the best, and
ought always to be a very diligent sercher of the truth, forsakynge all other
things, and cleauynge holly unto it. Moreover he must take an ordre in his
studies, not beginning as the most part of you do, with the symples, and
practyse at the first, ouerleapynge the elements, the temperatures, the
section of the body, with all the faculties and actions of the same: then after
he hath constitute an ordre, in his studies, he must exercise the same: so
doing he shall not need to seek on me, for I will offer my self to him,
without any sekyng. But as for you that have not sought my service of this
sort, ye little know me: yet with your lying and craking, calling your selves
excellent Physicians, ye have brought me in deep sclaudre with you, but I
counsel ye take heed, and leave your lying, lest I put you to a foul rebuke:
and if there be any of you that knowledgeth his fault, and would serve me, I
have already showed him a way, without the which it is not possible to know me.
Now ye know my mind, beware how ye presume to my service.

The.i. Chapter.
Of the diversity of sectes in phisike, which are to be followed.
THe old and ancient physicians, among the Greeks which passed al other in
phisike were divided into.iii. sectes. They that were of the first sect, were
called Empirici: and they that were of the second sect, were called
Methodici: the last and best were called dogmatici. Empirici were they that
wrought only by experience, and thought it a great point of wisdom in no
case to admit reason, markynge very diligently, by what manner means they had
healed any maladies or diseases, in the which if they had like success
afterward by healpe of the same medicines, than they were bold to call that
same medicine, by the which they had helped oftentimes one kind of disease,
Preceptum fidele, which is as much to say as a faithful precept, and when
they had gathered of these a great number, they called the whole gatheriges in
greek, (...): which in Latin word for word, is as much to say, as
Intuitus proprius. and in our vulgar tongue, it may very well be called a
certain memory of those things, the which hath been scene oftentimes to
chance of one sort, the which also may very well be called experience, for it
is nothing, but an observation and memory of that which hath chaunsed
oftentimes after one fassion. Than after that they had gathered after th^s
fashion, a great many of experimetes, they did utterly abolyshe, and condemn
all reason as void, and of none effect to the learning of phisyke. They did
also nothing regard the time of the year, the temperature of the whether, nor
yet the powers of ye patient, putting no difference betwyxte yonge and old,
weak or strong, whote or could, dry or moyste, but thought that they might
safely venture that upon one, with the which they had healed another in like
disease, and of this sect was Thessalus, Cornelius Celsus, with all their
scholars. The second sect was called Methodica, the which did nothing regard
the place affected, nor ye cause of the gryefe, nor the age of the patient, nor
the time of the year: nor the temperature of the country, nor the habit of
the sick manne, nor yet the kind of his former life, constantly affirming
that there was but two dyseases, the one the stoppynge of the pores, and the
other the overmuch opening of the same: condemned utterly Hyppocrates, because
he said that physike was a lunge art and that mans life was very short: for
they affirm that it is clean contrary, that is to say, that mans life is
lunge, and phisyke is so short an art, that if all things which (as they
say) be superfluous, were cut out: it might be learned easily in.vi.
months. They descent also from the first sect of physicians, in that they
think there comes no profit of expe^ience, until such time as they have
learned the virtues faculties of medicines and remedies And moreover that it is
not possible to find any remedy or medicine, by diligent markynge, seeing that
all remedies, be gathered of such things as be evident to the sense, and of
this sect and opinion was Erassistratus, Asclepiades with all their retinue.
The third and last sect were called Dogmatici, the which joined experience
always with reason (cosyderynge very diligently the causes of the evil, as
well those that be obscure, and harde to find as those also, which are
evident and open to every mans eye) and doth give much both to the nature of
the air water, and region, where the sick abides, steadfastly affyrmyng that
it is most necessary for the Physicians, both to know and consydre the
differences of the same, also to mark diligently his accustomed diet, as well
in meates and drynkes, as bathes, exercises, and other things. And to compare
things that be past, with such as be present, to know perfytely the powers
and virtues of medicines, by the which they may take easily away the cause of
al maladies, and finally that he be such a one the which ca prove and improve
by good reason, that this medicine hath this facultye of nature, to the which
he may attain, by the help of Logycke, he must know also (they say) the
internal parts, by diligent search, and cuttynges of bodies, he must be scene
also in natural Phylosophye, Astronomye, Mathematycke, and Arithmatycke. Of
this sect was Gallen, and lunge before him Hipocrates, whom wold to God our
Physicians would set as a glass before their eyes, I wold then think, that
Physycke should not be so little set by as it is. But alas, there is no mans
Physycke so little regarded now a days as Galennes is, and in deed to say
the truth, it may very well be perceived, by their doings, that they
werneuer Galennes scholars: for he teaches them, not to judge all dyseases by
the vryne, where as the most part of them (I do not say all) after that they
have ones scene the water of the sick, yea though they never knew him, nor can
not be informed by the bearer in what state he is in, will not stycke to write
the Appotecarie a byl for such manner of drugs, ye if they were laid before
their eyes, they could not tell, whether they were the same yt they write for,
or no. How is it possible for these Physicians, to do any less then kill their
patients, but it makes ye less matter, saying they be hired to it, with
gold and silver.

Well, I will say no more at this time, but surely, if I were disposed I
could prove that there is as much iugglyng, and deceyuyng of the people now a
days amongst our physicians, I will name none (but every man knows his
own weakness and infirmity) as ever was amongst the Popysh preestes, and a
redress might be had, if it pleased the kings hyghnesse, yt none might be
suffered to practyse, but such as be learned.

The.ii. Chapter.
Of the Elements.
NOw after that I have declared and opened the sectes and opynions of the
most noble and most ancient Physicians, I I think it very mete to show
the nature of the Elements, which be iiii. in number: the fire, air, water,
and earth. But to avoid ambiguity, I will (by gods grace) first declare the
signification of this word Elementum, which we may very well call in our
tongue a beginning of any thing: and thereof it comes yt the Alphabet
letters be called elemetes, because they are beginners of al manner of
languages, the principles also of every art be called Elements, because they
are begynners of the same. The Physicians also do call the veins pulses, and
bones, with all other such parts as the Latyne men call similares, sensible
elements: because they are the first beginners of man body, as much as
may be perceived by sense. For the fire, air, water and earth, (of the which
all things under the moon be made) can not be perceived by any sense:
wherefore as they are ye first begynners of man body, so they are not the
first sensyble begynners. For if they could be perceived by sense, then every
man as he passes other in quycknesse of sense, so should he se, and feale most
fine elements as the Aegle, because his sight is most perfyte, should
easelyest perceive the least Element, but percase some will say unto me, that
there is no man so mad to say, that the fire, air, earth, and water, can not
be felt, and perceived by sense: But whosoever shall move this doubt, I will
answer him, of this fassyon: that if he mean our fire, our water or our earth,
I will say as he saith which is, that they may be felt and perceived by sense.
For in dede they are no Elements, but things mixed and corruptyble: having
their composition of diverse things, where as the pure element is a body most
simple, without all generation or corruption. Now be it, of fire made thycke,
comes air: and of air made thycke, comes water: and of water made thycke,
comes earth. And yet here is neither corruption, nor yet generation of the
whole, for this is a mutatio of the parts only. Then as I said before,
Elementu in this signification is a body most pure and simple, and the leest
part of the same, wherein it is: which can not be divided into any other
kind, and of it all things natural have their original beginning. This
definition is taken both out of Gallen and Aristotle: therefore I trust, no man
will be so impudent to contrary or impugn it. And there be also as is
aforesaid.iiii. Elements, of the which the fire is extreme hot, and
moderately dry: the air extreme moist, and moderately hot: the water extreme
cold, and moderatelye moist: the earth is extreme dry, and moderatelye cold.
In heate the fire with the air, and in dryness with the earth, in moisture the
air with the water, in heate with the fire, in coldenesse the water with the
earth, in moisture with the air, the earth in dryness with the fire, in
coldness with the water, doth consent and agree. And as ye water to ye fire is
extreme contrary, so is the air to the earth. Of the myxture of these
elements, al natural bodies have their composition, yet it is nothing
necessary yt they be equally mingled in the body but according to that, that
hath dominion, the body is named either choleryke, sanguyne, phlegmatycke, or
melancholy: and these names be given of.iiii. natural humours, that is choler,
blood, phlegm, and melancholy, which take their qualities of the elements,
for choler is hot and dry according to the nature of the fire, and blood is
hot moyste, according to the nature of the air, phlegm is cold and moist,
according to the water, and melancholy in no point dyssenteth from the earth.

The third Chapiter.
The differences of temperatures.
HOwe that I have declared unto you, howe all natural bodies be made by the
mixture of the elements, I think it most necessary, to show in as few
words as I can, the differences of temperatures.

Temperatures in number are.ix. of the which.viii. do exceed, therefore in my
fantasy, they may better be called distemperatures, than temperate crases:
the nynthe in dede is temperate, for it excedeth in no quality. Of the
distemperate.iiii. be simple, and.iiii. be composide. the simple are heate,
cold, drynes moisture, of the which coupled and joined together, the rest
which be distemperate are made. The nynth is neither hot, cold, dry nor
moist, and yet is made of them all: and therefore the greeks call it (...),
which is as much to say in latin, as Been temperatum, and in Englyshe: well
tempered. And this is that which Arithmetricions call Temperamentu ad pondus,
which we may cal in our language, a complexion measured by weight, because
there are as many degrees of heat, as there is of cold, of dryenes as of
moisture: the other which are distemperate crases, be measured not by weight,
but by dignity, as in the heart well tempered, heate doth exceed, in the brain
well tempered, moisture doth exceade, in the fat well tempered, cold: in the
boones well tempered, dryenes.

And this is called Temperamentum, secundum iustitiam distributatiuam.

Which is as much for to say, as a temperature measured according to
justice, which gives every man his own. But peradventure this declaration
shall seem some what harde to such as be unlearned: and therefore I entende to
declare ye same again, both more largely and also more plainly.

First ye shall understand, that these.iiii. heate, cold, dryenes and
moisture, which are called the first qualities, because all other come of them,
have each of them.iii. diverse significations. Whansoeuer ye find heate, cold,
drynes or moisture, absolutely and simply spoken, than understand that it is
meant by those simple bodies, which be hot, cold, dry and moyste, in the
hygheste degree: and that is only the fire, water, earth and air, which be
the.iiii. elements whereof we spake before. And when ye find the same
qualities myxt in any natural body, by the which it is named either hot cold,
dry or moyste, than suppose yt it is spoken either by comparison, as hot for
hotter, cold for coulder, dry for dryer, or moist for moyster, orels that it
is hot, cold, dry or moyste by nature, as when there is in one body, more
heate than cold, more drynes than moisture, or otherwise. as Summer is called
hot, because it hath more heat? than cold: Winter also is called cold, be
cause that it hath more cold than heate: hereof it comes, that one body is
choleryke, because in the myxture of the four humours, which is choler,
blood, phlegm and melancholy, there is more of choler, than of any other, and
therefore choler hath the dominion, causynge the body to be named cholerycke
after it: and in like manner doth each of the other, where he bears rule
governance. But he that will know perfectly howe to judge the differences of
bodies in temperature by comparison, must constitute in every kind of things,
that same temperate mean, which before we called Eucraton to the which he
must refer the same body or complexio, of the which he dowteth, and than if
it do exceed the mean, either in heate, cold, dryness or moisture, it shall
take name thereof, and be called either hot, cold, dry or moyste, because it
exceadeth the mean which is named Eucraton, when it is either hot, cold,
dry or moyste.

Sum do use to judge the diversity of complexions, by comparynge one
distemperate body, to an other of the same kind distemperate also, as in
man kind, Socrates compared with Aristotle, is hot, because he is hotter
than he, but in respect of Aristippus, he is cold, because Aristippus is
much hotter, thus one man compared to divers, may be both hot, cold, dry
and moist: And some by comparynge distemperate bodies of divers kinds learn to
know ye constitution, as a dog compared with a man is hot, with a lyon, is
cold, and with a sheep, is dry: with a pysmyre or a fly is moyste, and of this
fashion contraries may be in one body, and none otherwise. Howe be it (as I
think) the best way is to seek out the mean, to the which al that be of
the same kind, ought to be referred, and afterward as he excedeth in any
quality to have his nomination according to ye same But percha^ce ye will say it
is hard to find in every kind a coplexioned body measured by weight, which is
the mean, I grant yt, for in dede there was never any such, nor shall be,
yet as that sect of Philosophers which were called Stoykes, what time they
defyned a wise man, did descrybe such one, as was not possible to be found
any where: and as Quintilian descrybeth his orator, so we, to bring our
purpose about, must imagine such an one in our mind by cogitation, as
never was made, neither is like to be, by consent of nature, as thus. In the
hole kind of living things, that that is most temperate and perfect, is as
a mean to the rest, which by the hole consent as well of the philosofers, as
of the physicians, is man, by cause any of the other kinds compared with him,
is distemperate, than if ye will prove man also to be distemperate, ye must
seek amongst the hole kind, the most perfect and temperate: and he that is
perfyt and temperate, and worthy to be a mene to the rest, is neither over
thick, nor sclendre, nor very full of heer, nor yet smooth and without heer,
nor soft, nor yet harde, black nor white, hot nor cold, dry nor moyste:
and to be short, keeping a mean without all excess. If ye can find such a
one in the hole kind, then are ye sure of the complexyoned body measured by
weight, which we spake of before. In case ye can find none such, ye must
imagine a like in your brain: and ye must not do this only in makynde, but
also in other natural and lively creatures, as well in the kind of lyons,
dogs, elephauntes, and wolves: as also of birds, fish, worms and trees,
coparyng every one in his own kind. But in case ye will find what of all
things is most temperate: then must ye go again to the man before said which
is neither hot nor cold, and the skin in the myddest of the insyde of his
hand, is of all things most temperate. For the temperatest part of every
man body, is the skin in the myddeste of the paulme of the hand: then the
temperatest part of the most temperate man must neades be the most
temperate thing in the world, seeing that of al living creatures man is most
temperate.

Now that I have showed howe by comparison made, in every kind, the
differences of the body may ease lye be know, there remains behind to
declare how to find out the same without comparison. Where as I said before,
that every quality, might be taken three diverse ways as heate in the highest
degree, is only in the fire, and in a natural body myxt of the Elements, it
is either referred to an other, by comparison: as hot for hotter, or else it
is so of nature, which may be taken two manner of ways, as hot in act or
in power. Things that be hot in act, may easily be judged by sense of
fealynge: for who has so dull sense in fealynge, that he can not perceive the
fire to be hot: if he put his finger in it. But to know which is hot in
power is a thing of more difficulty. For it can not at the first brunt be
perceived by any sense, neither of fealyng, smelling, hearing, saying, nor
tastynge. For who can perceive by any of these, yt castoreu, or euphorbiu or
nasturciu is hot, or that Mandragora, Salamandra or Papauer is cold. But in
case ye take any part of them inwardly, either as meat, drink, or medicine:
then ye shall easily discern which is hot and which is cold. But
peradventure ye will condemn this proof as nought, because it is dangerous
medlyng with poysos: I grant that, therefore it is much safer, to lay them as
a plaster, to some utter part of your skyn, where as they can not hurt, and
after that they have lain there a while, they will show their power and
quality, which shall be perceived quycklye by sense in feeling. But to judge
things moist, or dry, I can show you a mochesurer rule, what soever thing is
soft, and moderately hot, that of nature is moist: whatsoever is harde and
moderately hot, yt of nature and power is dry: and this is always true, as
well in lively bodies, as is other things.

The.iiii. Chapter.
The geueration of the liver, bert, and brain.
FOr asmoche as there is nothing so necessary to attain to any perfyte
knowledge in Physic, as to be perfyte both in cutting and in opening the
body, and parts of the same. And seeing it is shame for a manne to be learned
in so many arts, and have knowledge of so many things (as the most part
of men now a days have) and be ignorant in his own body, the which he
should most perfytely know: I think it no less then my bounden duty, to
employ my labour and diligence to the furtherance of the same, that such as
be but begynners as yet very raw in Physycke, whose bringing up hath not ben
amongst learned men of the vniuersityes, whereby they are destitute, both of
dialecte, natural Philosophy, and other arts, with out the which Physycke
can hardly be learned, may have some help by this my little rude book, both
to attain some learning in Physycke, also to know their body. Blood and the
seed of the man be beginners of our generatio, of the which blood is the
substance and matter whereof our body is made, and the seed of man is next
under God, the maker and fashyoner of the same, and these same be made of the
same elements which I have spoken of already, which is the fire, air,
earth, and water, and these two differ one fro an other in temperature. For in
the seed there is more of fire and ever then of water and earth, and in the
blood there is less of fire and air, then there is of water and earth: and
yet in the same there is more heate then cold, and more moisture then
dryness. After that these two be received, and.vi. days retained within the
womb of the woman, the great heate which is there doth so bake the seed blood
being mirt together, yt it copasseth them about with a skyn, or a crust, not
unlike the utter cote of an egg, which the Greeks call (...), in latin is
called secudine, or secudina: what our mydwyues call it I can not tel: how
beit, it may very well be called a skyn wherein is wrapped yt that is conceived,
and this is made in ye first.vi. days, with diverse pulses and veins, as fine
small as any thredes, which serves afterward to nourysh the infant by the
nauyll. For in this same skin, which before is called Chorion, there are
many fine holes, much like the little holes in the small lamparie heeds, by
the which the nauyll after the seueth day, doth draw unto it both spirit and
blood, to the nourishment of the infant. Then in the mean seaso the rest of
the seed boylynge all hot, doth make three little bladers, which is the place
of the liver, heart, and brain. For a vein which is stretched right upward
from the nauil doth draw up the grossed blood, which for lack of heate
easily congeleth in ye seed. And there is made also a double forked vein,
and to one of the forks of the same vein is fashyoned this forsayde congeled
blood, which is the liver: and like as from the nauyll, the vein bringing
gross blood into the forsayde little bladder was cause of the generation of
the liver, so likewise a pulse or an artery bringing fine blood and spirit,
coming from the same place, somewhat ne'er ye back, into another like bladdar,
is cause of making of the heart, which is made of very sound flesh,
thycke and gross, mete for such a pourpose, and of the most fine and subtyle
blood, that comes from the heart, the lights be made and the whole breast
also wherein they are closed. In to the third bladdar, which is mentioned
before, a great part of the seed being full of spirit, is driven, the which
to keep him self moist, doth draw a great part of the seed to it, and
makes a little sell, which is the brain, to ye which there is added afortres
of hard bone. And thus the brain, is made of the seed only, that he might be
furnysshed with most fine spirits, whom the brain conserveth and alters,
the which are the cause of sense, and voluntary mouynge, as shall be declared
more plainly hereafter.

Next to the brain grows ye mary of the backebone, which the Arabians
call Nucha, it is of the same nature, that the brain is, and differs very
much from the mary, of the other parts.

I have showed to you now, thoghe very rudely, the original beginning of
man body* Of the sede is only made all the bones, gristels, veins, pulses,
strings, synowes, tyinges, sells and skynnes, which be called Spermatyke
parts, because they be made of ye seed and not of the blood. They are the
very same, which I said before that the Latyne men called Parts
similares, and the Physicians, sensible elements, al the rest be made of the
blood, as the liver, the heart, and the lights, with al the flesh, and
fat of the body.

The infant while he is within his mothers woumbe, is nourished of that blood
which is called Sanguis menstruus. drawing it at his nauyl, and after he is
delivered, it is turned all to milk, which is his meat long after, and
therefore there is many conduytes from the woumbe, to the paps.

After that the infant is fully proportioned, figured, i the first months he
pisseth by the conduit, that comes through his nauyl, in the later months
that is shut up, and he pysseth with his yerde, he avoids no excrementes at
his fundament, because he receives no norysshemente by his mouth. There is a
skin, much like a puddynge, which receives his urine and excrementes, lest
they shulde hurt either him, or else his mother. I shulde seem both to lunge
and also to tedious, if I descrybed the hole body, but because the action of
the instruments, canne not be understand, except I shulde touche ye most
principal parts, therefore it was necessary to entermedle with the descryption
of the body, in the which I will not be so scrupulous, as to rehearse every
little part or the situation or figure of every bone and vain, no nor the
knyttynge of every muscle, (for why shulde I make me more cunyng than I am) in
dede it passes my learning as yet, but I entende to show, and set forth
the greatest, and most noble parts, the which he must needs know that will
profyt in physic.

The.v. Chapiter.
The sections of the body.
THere was no need in y^ old time, to write of the body, for than children
were excersised in their yonge and tender age, daily in cuttynge and opening
of the same, but now that this diligence is utterly extyncte, we have very
great need of writing, wherefore I have taken this little payne upon me, which
I shall think well bestowed, if it shall either healpe the studies of those
that be rude and raw in physic, or satisfy them that be learned. And first
I will declare (by gods grace) such parts as covers the head without,
afterward those that be within, beginning with the hears though they be but
excrementes, superfluities, next vnderneth the hear, there is a skin somewhat
thycke and fleshye, wherein the hear is rooted: vnderneth this skin, there is a
little flesh, about the brow temples. Than next vnderneth, there is a fine
kell, which is made of synowes and tyenges, coming thorough the seames of the
scull, which the Greeks call (...), under the which immediately, is the
skulle, in greek called (...), for the defence of the brain, it is made like
an helmet, the latyne men call it Caluariam, and it is not one hole continual
bone but is divided by certain seems in to seven bones. Then within ye head
vndernethe the sculle, is Dura matter, which Galen calls Crassum (...) it is a
thycke and harde kel or skin made of many strong sinews and bonds, to the
intent it might hold up and sustain the veins, which nouryssheth the
brain: After this is pia matter. which is an excedynge fine skin, made of
synowes, not only compassing the hole sub^tance of the brain, but also
penetratyng into divers parts, that are within the brain, noryssheth it as
much as the skin which before we called Chorion, doth nouryshe the sede,
because it is made of synowes, it gives sense to the brain. At the last we
be come to the brain, the which when I consider that it is made of the seed,
I can not chose, but marvel, howe all our cogitations ymaginacions should come
fro thence howe the brain being so gross and massye of substance, should hang
as it doth without any stey or vndersettyng, in such hollow wide places, we se y^
houses be underset with posts, or else they wold overwhelm ye flower under the,
but the brain being underset with nothing, how fortunes it, that so lunge as
life remains in the body it chokes and overwhelms not the wide holowe
chambers vnderneth* When I did deeply consider the cause of this, I thought
the brain had a certain similitude of the sky. For as the sky being a great
heavy substance without any proppes, or vndersettes, doth not fall, nor is
stricken out of his place: so the brayn by a certain divine nature yt it hath
doth consist without any stay or fortress that can be perceived by sense, and
thereof it comes that man is called (...), which we may call in our touge a
little world, surely the bright spirits which come from the brain to the eye,
doth declare, that there is a certain cognation or kynderede between the
sky, and man brain, which though it be made of the seed (as I said
before) yet it is some divine and celestial thing: yea and the nature of ye
seed is so much the more to be marveled at: how much it passes our
knowledge and capacity, to show declare the causes whereby it works such
wonders in the brain, which is full of holes, as eyes, replenyshed with
spirit, may very well be the cause why the brain falls not down. Howbeit,
both the substance of it, and the wonderful motions also may better be
marveled at, then descrybed. This I dare say, that it is made of the finest
part of the seed, and of that, that is fullest of spirit, and is divided
into two parties, by that same skin whyth before is called Dura matter, ye one
lies before and the other behind.

That which is before, (as it is of the finest and most pure substance) so it
brings out most fine and subtyle synowes, and is the place of reason and
intelligence: the other (as it is course of substance) so there grows of it
great and strong synowes, not unlike them that grow of the mary of the back
bone, and it is thought to be the place of memory: now that after a rude
fassyon we have descrybed the brain, there remains behind the description
of his sells, and chambres, which in number be.iii. in the former part of yt
heed, there are.ii. deep hollow places, not unlike ye figure of the moon when
she is new changed, and of ye bygnesse of an egg, reaching down almost to
the ears. The same cavities (though they be.ii. of them, one on ye right side
another on ye left side) yet for the most part they be called ye first chaumbre
of the brain, which always is full of spyrite, having his sides covered, and
clad, with the same rymme or skin, which before is called Pia matter, which
is full of veins and pulses for ye nutrimet of the brain: under each of these
chabers there is (if I may so cal it) a long rope, which is made of veins
pulses, covered with a fine skyn yt grows of Pia matter, these small lunge ropes
hath ioyninges, whereby they clasp, be red, much like worms, wherefore they be
called worms, and do extend in length as far as the ears, and the middle
chaumbre of the brain, whom they replenysshe with spirit. In the same place
at the end of the first cavities, under them is an other cauitie. For at the
latter end of the foresaid worms or ropes there are two lumps, which of the
very similitude of buttocks be called Nates, and be clad with the skyn of the
worms which when the said cauitie or chamber: is draw together do touche one
an other, and when it is open, they also be seperate. This chambre or sell is
as big as the yolke of an egg, and being covered round about with the
brain, is called the middle chamber or sell, which is shut with a pessule or
bar of the bygnesse of a little walnut, and therefore it is called in latin
Glanduia or, conarium, and it is just betwyxt the myddell chambre, and the
entering into ye third, his offyce is to sustain, and bear up, the veins
and pulses, which bring spirit to the middle chambre. The third chambre is
behind in the last part of the heed, which before we supposed to be the
place and feet, of the memory, and in this chambre is a great part of the
brain, which the Grecians call (...), in latyne it is called Cerebellum: in
our tungue we have no propre name for it, which I can do no less then count
the negligence of our Physicians to be the cause of: for if they had written of
their art in their mother tunge, as they do in other places, why shulde we
lack english names, more then we lack either Latin names or Greek names? and
yet to say the truth, it is better for us English men to have English names,
then either Latin or Greek. Of this part of the brain grows the mary of the
back bone, which is called ^cha, under the mydle chambre, th^ is an hollow
cauitie, which receyue^ the excremetes and superfluyties of the brain, the
which being turned into spettyll, comes out after at the nose, the Greeks cal
this cauitie (...), the Latin men infusorium, or infundibulum, we have no
proper name for it: howe be it it may be called a dropping pan. Next
vndernethe be the jaws, furnished with xxxii. teeth: the four foremost of each
side be called deuiders, because they tear the meat: the next of each side be
called dogteeth, because they be like tusks: all the rest inlatyn be called
Genuini, or Molares, which we cal gumes: and they have two roots at the leest,
where as the other have but one: with those teeth the mouth is compassed round
about, and defended: wherein as a precious Iew^ll in a strong tower or
fortress, is ^closed the tungue, which is ma^ of very soft and raw flesh,
full of ^les and full of pulses, veins and synowes: full of synowes, to the
intent it may move dyuerselye, and also feale and taste: full of pulses or
arteryes, because it hath great neade of spyryte, and natural heate, saying it
hath so many dynerse mouynges: and it is full of veins, that it may be well
nourished. There is also added to it a certain moisture, lest it should wax
dry, because it is moved daily: above ye tunge, is a pipe, which the Grecyans
use to cal (...), and the Latynistes call it Gulam, the unlearned or ignorant
call it the wesaunt, and it is a lunge pipe, having two skynnes or cootes, the
which draw down the meat and drink into the maw or bag, and the utter
cote helps the stomach to vomyte.

There is also in the former part of the neck an other pipe, which (to the
intent that nothing should go that way, but only air) is covered with the
root of the tunge, and it is made of harde grassels, joined together like
rings, and doth conduct only air and spirit to the lights, and heart,
being nothing so long as the other, which draws meat and drink, down to
the stomach or maw, and it hath a great knobbe al most at the end, next
the jaw, which the Greeks cal (...), in latin Nodus gutturis, which in English
is the knot of the throat, and whenever we swalowe any thing, it goth up
above the jaw. The wind pipe is the formoost part of the neck, to the
intent it may take air and spyryte the easelyer. And the wesaunt or meat
pipe (for why should we be ashamed of these names, saying we have no better)
is put far whythin the neck, because it shulde have the more heat, how be it
we will omytte to speak of it vntyl such time as the lights and heart, with
all that is contained in the breast, which the Physicians call the middle
belly, be declared so well as my simple wit and learning will give me leave.

To the loweste part of the wind pipe, (for it is as well the instrument of
brethynge, as of speaking) be fastened the lights, which being made of light,
and most subtyle and fine flesh, not unlike the some of choleryke blood
congeled, hath the figure of an ox houfe, cloven in to.ii. parts, and doth
compass the hart, roud about with.v. globes.iii. on the right side, and.ii. on
the lift.

And loke as the pulses doth conserre and keep temperate the natural heat,
thoroweout the hole body, so ye lights preserve the heart from choking by the
receyuynge of external air, which least it shulde hurt the hart with cold
coming suddenly upon it, is tempered there before, so that I can never wonder
enough at ye high and divine providence of god, which foreseing al these
things, hath constitute such an order in man body, as I dare say was
never in any publyke weal. For what publycke weal, either is there, or has
been, syns the world began, in which the subjects have been found ever
obedient without all grudgynge to their lord and prince, were he never so
noble or valiant? yet in mans body though there be infinite subjects there can
be found no disobedience to their lord and governor, which is the heart:
for if any poison be gathered there within the body: or otherwise, which
with his venym, would pearse the heart, I pray you is not every part ready
to defend him? though it be to the utter destruction of them al for ever? and
to say truth, he is worthy to have no less homage or service, saying he is
auctor of life to al the rest, helping his subjects servants, at al such
times as they be in danger.

And to the intent that no one part, might be destitute more of help then
another, by reason of the distance between him and his governor, Nature hath
provided the hart to be set so egallye in the midst of the breast, as is
possible to be devised, by al the mathematikes in the world, which is
compassed about with a cote, the which Galen calls (...) it is made of
synowes so thycke, and so strong, that it is softer than a bone and yet it is
sufficient to defend the heart, it is tied to the skin which covers the
rybbes, and to the mydryfe, and the heart strings, containing a little
quantity of water that never dries up, until such time as life and all
natural heat is departed from the body: There is also a little fat, least
the heart thorough his contynual mouynge, shulde be dried up: within this
foresaid cote, enclosed as a most precious jewel, the heart, having.ii.
chambres, one on the right side, an other on the left. To the chambre on the
right side, the great master vain, which grows on the liver, doth bring
blood, that is distributed in to.iii. parts, ye subtylest and most choleryke,
to the nutrimente of lights: The second part, is carried in to the chambre of
the lift side, where by the virtue of the heart, it is formed in to vytal
spirit, the third and last part is reserved to the nourysshement of the hole
body, after that it hath received of the heart both vital heat and spirit.
And like as from the chamber of the right side, the great master vain,
brings blood thorough the hole body, so from the least chamber the master
pulse brings vital spirit, of the which the liver takes his power, and
facultye, whereby he nourysheth the body brayn, by his virtue, by which he
gives both feeling and moving to the same.

I would not now that any manne shulde think, that I do defend the error of
Aristotle, which thought that the heart, as he is author of life, so to be the
gyuer both of feeling mouynge, to the hole body: for that the synowes grow
of the brain, every man having his syghte, may perceive easily, and that
they give both feeling and moving to the body: ye may know if ye take a
dog and tie both his pulses and veins and let him go, he shall both feel
run, so long as ye animal spirit lasts, which is all ready in his synowes,
but in case ye tie his synowes, he shall not be able to styre one foot. This
is a very manifest proof, that the heart gives not sense and mouynge, to the
body, yet as I said before, both the brain, and also the liver, take their
power of the heart, for after that the heart hath engendered vital spirit,
part is carried to the liver, and part to the brain. The liver of his,
engenders new spirits, called natural, the which he doth distribute by
his veins, thoroghout the body so the nuryshement of the same.

The brain also turns those spirits which he received of the hart, in to
other spirits, called animal these being dispersed amongst the synowes, is
cause both of moving and feeling.

Since that I have according to my promise made before, declared by what
means the brain gives sense and mouynge to the body, I will as bryefelye as
I can descrybe the residue of the parts, which I think most necessary to be
known beginning there, where as I left with the heart, which beside his
chambres, hath also two ears, the which be grassels made of synowes being
full of wrynkles and foldynges, and they be also called the sells or butteries
of the heart.

I promised before to declare as ne'er as I could, those parts yt the breast
which is called the middle belly, doth conteyne, and I have al ready so to my
little power, descrybed both ye heart, the lights the instruments of the
voice, and brethyng with the parts couerynges, of the same therefore now
there remains the mydryfe, which in latyne is called Mediastinus. and the
skin, that compasses the rybbes, which in Greek is called (...) the heart
strings, which in greek is called (...) The mydryfe doth deuyde the breast
(...) in length, and makes.ii. chabers one on the right side, and an other
on the left side: And because it is a very strong skin, it doth fashion
both veins, pulses and synowes to the breast, and it is tied before to the
brestbone, and behind to the joints of the backebone. The second skin is
that, that is called (...), which covers the rybbes on the insyde, and the
muscles also that be betwyxt the rybbes. Next vndernethe this is (...), which
the Latyne men call Trausuersum septu, or pcordia: we may cal it an overthwart
bridge or the hertstrynges, it is made of synowes flesh, covered with.ii. fine
rymes, made to move the lights, also to draw in and let out air, and to
separate the lowest belly from the mydle belly, vnderneth the hertstrynges,
somewhat toward the ryghtside the maw or paunch, which before we called the
lowest belly, being round, with a great bottom, and something narowe
toward the left side is fastened to the.xiii. joint of the back bone, and in
the same place the wesaut that before we called the stomach, is tied to the
maw, which hath.ii. mouths, one at the lowest part of the wesaunt, and the
other in the right side of ye maw or pache The mouth by the which the meat is
received into the maw, doth shut the nether part of the wesaunt, and is
called, the hither mouth of the maw: the mouth that lets out the meat,
shytteth the nether part of the maw, and is called in Greek (...), in Latyne
Iauitor, in our tongue a portar or a keeper of the gate, and both these mouths
(to the intent that the meat and drink may not fall out at any time
vnconcocte) be set in the side of the belly or pauche, which be fast shut as
soon as ever the belly hath received meat, and thereby natural heate is very
much increased within the maw, being made of synowes and of flesh, and it
hath also two cootes, of the which the innermoost, hath more synowes then
flesh, and it is very thycke and rough, full of wryncles, by the which the
meat is drawn down and retained. The utter cote is more flesh, and serves
only to expel that, that the belly refuses and hath done wtal. The
temperature of the belly is cold and dry, according to the nature of synowes,
whereof it hath abundance that it may be delyted with such thiges as be coueniet
mete for it, and may abhor such as be noyful hurtful unto it. I have spoken
somewhat brefely of the belly and maw, but before we descrybe the liver, I
will first rehearse.ii. cotes or coueringes of the belly, which (nature by her
divine and high sapiece) hath provided for the defence of the belly and
entrails The first covering is called in latin Omentu, ye Grecians do cal it
(...) our bouchers call it the kell, and it is woven like a net, of veins,
pulses and senowes, being covered with a great deal of fat, to the intent
that it may hold in, the natural heate, which is in the maw and guts, for
it covers all the belly from the top to the too, the next cote or covering
the Greeks call (...), which covers not only the belly, but also the
liver, mylte, and reins, it grows of the bladder, being thycker in some
place then in some, it tyeth the lowest parts of the belly to ye back, and
doth sustain the muscles of the belly, which the Latin men cal Musculos
abdominis, upon the which muscules is a great deal of fat, then the skin
that covers the whole body. Next unto the maw, immediately downward be the
guts and entrails, the which although they be all one whole and continual
body yet they may be decerned both by their figure, situation, and action.

The first, which is fastened to the nether mouth of the maw, is called
Duodenum, because it is.xii. inches lunge, and it is in the right side, in the
region of the liver. Next unto Duodenum is I eiunium, which is so called
because it is always empty. For to this gut there comes much choler from
the liver, and because it of all the rest is next the liver: therefore the
liver draws from it very quycklye by his small veins, such iuise as came
from the stomach before. And from this gut there comes choler into the
rest, to expel the excrementes. The next is called of Galene (...), which
hath many circuites and boughtes, because it shulde retain the juice longer,
and it doth far pass all the rest: joined unto this, is the gut called
Cecum, which doth receive the excrementes and it is called Saccus, because it
is the wydest of all. Then follows (...)* being two cubytes of length, having
diverse boughtes* and compassynges, lest the excrement shulde fall strayte out:
and in this gut the excrement takes his colour. The last gut which we
call the fundament begins under the left reyne and is stretched down even
to the very hole in the tail: it is tied to the great back bone, being large
wide to the intent that the excrement may go down more at ease. Since I have
descrybed the guts entrails, I will add something as cocernyng ye matter
that they be made of. They be made of flesh sinews, hauig broad striges, by ye
which they expel the excrementes. There is a certain skyn mixed amongst the
guts, which is no gut but a fortress or a stay for ye small veins which
come fro ye liver and it is called in Greek (...), thereupon al the small veins
be called Mesaraice, and it is a fine and subtyle skyn, made of very small
veins gathered on an heap together, amogest the which there is a lump of
flesh, like unto a kernel, which we call the swyt bread. Underneth ye
bastard ribs in ye rightside of ye maw or stomach is ye liver, whose substance
is red flesh, not much unlike cogeled blood being replenished with veins, which
be ye brauches of ye great master veins, yt is of ye vein which is called
Porta, also of yt, that is called Caua vena, we have no names in our tungue
which be propre or peculier to them only, but must be fain to call them
master veins, and in dede so that we understand the thing, it shall make but
little matter for names: howbeit Gallen saith, that the one is called Porta,
because that the juice comes through it, from the stomach to the liver: and
the other I think is called Caua, because it is a great hollow vein, well
what so ever it be called, it grows of the liver, and carries blood from the
liver to the heart, and though it to be byg: yet there grows many fine small
veins, both of it, and of the other, which be dispersed throughout the whole
body of the liver, to the intent that the juice may more easily be turned
into blood: for the very duty and office of the liver, is to engendre blood,
for the nouryshmente of ye body, and therefore it is hot and moist according
to the nature of blood.

Moreover it is the very flesh of the liver, which doth change the juice in
to blood, making it red like unto it self. Although that sum think the
heart to be the well, and original spring of blood, notwythstandyng I had
rather say as Galene says, that it is the flesh of the liver, which
engenders blood, although the liver receive both vital heat, and spiryte of
the heart, and therefore from the great master pulse, which in greek is
called (...), there comes many little pulses to the liver, bringing with them
vital spirit, but so soon as ye juice is concocte, it is made blood, and
purified in ye midst of the liver (...) receives choler, of the small veins,
in the midst of the liver, while the blood is purifyinge and cleansynge,
which conduit or way, if it fortune to be stopped, by any manner of chance,
so that the choler can not be seperate from the blood, then there follows
hot fyeuers, or else the yelowe Iandies.

On the lift side, the spleen or mylte enbraseth the stomach, which being
black of colour, is made of subtyle rare flesh, and is the same, which
before is called the receptacle of melancholy, it is tied unto the back
about the midst of the bastard ryb and doth draw unto it melancholy or
black choler, by a vein which comes from the liver, receyuyng heat of the
heart, to digest the forsaid black choler, by certain pulses annexed unto it.
From the mylte also there is a conduit to the uppermost mouth of the
stomach, bringing melancholy thither, partly to draw together the mouth of
the stomach, and partly to provoke appetite.

There be.ii. kydneys that be called in latyne. Renes, of the which one is set
vnderneth the liver toward ye back and the other is set on the other side,
right against ye mylte, they be made of soud and thycke flesh, least they
shulde be dissolved of the water, that they draw daily from the blood, by two
veins, which be called Mulgentes, and in our tongue, suckynge veins, there
is drawn also, beside the water, sum blood to the noryshment of the reins or
kydneis, in the midst of the which there is as it were a little pane, into the
which the forsayde kydnies do sweat out the water, which they received of ye
suckynge veins, and in this pan the vryne takes his colour, from whes it is
brought down, after the concoction had therbefore, by certain conduits that
be called (...) in greek and in latyne, Vrinarii, we may call them the
conduytes of the vryne, fro the raynes to the bladdar. The bladdar in man
joins to the taylegutte or fundiment, from whens the neck of it recheth to
the yard, but in women it is set upon the mouth of their woumbe, therefore they
have both shorter and wyder necked bladdars than men have, and also be less
disesed with stone in that place, It is made of skynnye synowes, and there
cummeth to it, both veins and pulses. the neck only is of flesh, and hath
certain turnynges and boughtes, that it may houlde the water more easily,
there is added a muscle to the mouth of the bladder, to the intent yt we may
either letout or retain the water, at our own will pleasure. But howe small
and fine the holes be by the which the water is received into the bladder may
easily be perceived, because that when it is taken out of any dede body, that
there appears none at all, more than that, which is in the neck, to let
out the urine or water.

Manne surely hath great profit of the bladar, for if that same superfluouse
water, should not be carried away, but be permitted to run to gyther in the
veins, with the blood after that the body were ones fulle, most part of
the members shulde crack, and break and man should be suffocated or choked.

Therefore the bladder is made for this pourpose, to receive the superfluous
watery substance of the blood and reteyne it so lunge, vntyl the due time of
lettynge of it out, be come.

Now I have descrybed all ye parts of the lowest belly, so well as I could,
saving the privy parts both of man and woman, which for divers causes I will
omytte at this time, first because I will give no occasion to youth of
wantones, and then that I will offend no honest ears, in descrybynge them
playnlye and saying my promise was to tuche but certain parts, I think I may
as well omyt them, as a great many that I have spoken nothing of.

The.vi. Chapiter.
Of veins, pulses, and synowes.
Veins be codytes with thin cotes, which carries the thyckest blood,
throughout the body, wherewith it is nourished, they grow all of the liver, for
the master vein (which passes all the other in largeness and wydenesse)
comes from thence. Aristotel thought ye heart to be the author and beginner
of ye veins, but Hypocrates thought otherwise and Galen also (whom we follow)
hath evidently confuted Aristotels opinion. Pulses, or arteryes, be conduytes
that grow of the heart, and do carry vital spiryte, and some part also of the
finest blood, therefore it was necessary that they should be both thycker and
stronger, then ye veins, lest the spirit being so fine of substance, might
break out, wherefore nature hath enclosed it in.ii. cotes of the which the
inner is.v. times as thyck as the utter, and yet is it as thick as any cote of
ye veins, yt encloses ye gross and thickest blood: Veins, pulses be so nygh
cosyns, yt there is no vein in any part of the body, without his pulse: nor no
pulse without his vein, to the intent that the veins may minister nourishmet
to the spyrites. And again the spyrites may refresh the blood with lively heate:
and as ye se in a lap, ye flame to be nourished with oil or wax, so ye spirit
plucks to him blood out of ye veins, with the which he is fed with. And here
(as me think) nature hath showed us a marvelous notable example of doing one
for an other, in this civil life. Synowes grow of the brain, also of the
mary of the back bone. From whence they bring sense and voluntary mouynge to
all parts of the body. There hath been much to do amongst the old
Physicians, whether the synowes have any holownesse or cocauitie in the, to
receive the animal spirit, wherewith they give moving fealing to ye body, or else
whether they take their power of the spirit, as the lute or harp string doth
of the finger: howbeit, it is now concluded, yt there is none holowe, but
only.ii. which bring spirit to ye eyes, be called Optici, and yt the rest do
take their power of ye spirits There grow of ye brain.vii. pair of synowes,
of ye which, some be distributed to ye seses, some to other parts: as to ye
stomach or maw, and those yt grow of ye brain be much fyner softer tha those
yt grow of the back, which be not only ye instrument of sese but also of
volutary moving, there be of the.xxx. pair, which be dispersed every where
through all ye body.

The.vii. Chapter.
Of humours.
ALthough that the spring well of humours may then best be perceived, when the
manner and way how to nourish the body is declared, yet because we be styll
occupied, in descrybynge ye parts of the body, I am not willing to omytte the
differences of humours, which be.viii. in number.iiii. natural and.iiii.
unnatural. The natural is blood, fleume, yellow colour, and black, the
unnatural is the same also, turned by putrefaction, or else some otherwise, from
their own natyue qualities. As concerning the generation of the natural
humours, I have some deal mentioned before, wherefore I will omyt at this time
to speak or reason any further in that matter, saving ye I put you in
remembrance, that the same food which is received by the wesaunt into the
stomach, for the preserving of the body, is the matter and substance,
whereby, by the virtue of the liver, they be made and engendered.

The.viii. Chapter.
Of blood.
BLood is hot and moist, and the greatest part of yt that nourysheth the
body. For notwythstandynge, that other humours be carried together with the
blood to nourysshe the body, as blood delayed with fleume, both greatly nourysh
such parts yt be cold, and moyste, as the brain: and coleryke blood the
lights, and melancholycke blood the bones, and splen: yet the especial part
of the noryshment, is that that is properlye called blood. For the
nouryshmente ought to be sweet, or else delayed with sweet juice, and such is the
blood.

The.ix. Chapter.
Of fleume.
FLeume is a watrysh humour cold and moist, which is begone to be altered into
blood, and is not yet thoroughly cococt, therefore it is white, thynne, and
unsavoury: not fat, nor coloured like blood, it serves to mitigate the
outragyous heate of the blood, and nourysheth the blood, making it thin and
being mingled with the blood, conforteth such parts as be flegmatik.

The.x. Chapter.
Of choler.
CHoler is the some or flower of ye blood, which is made of the hottest and
driest parts of ye blood or juice, after that it is boiled, wherefore it is
also hot and dry, and of a bitter taste, therefore it is called of Galen
(...), which in latin is Amar{us} and in English bitter. Natural choler is as
well red as yelowe, when it is mixed with the blood, it opens ye veins, doth
norysh choleric parts, as the lights: nor it is not carried al with the
blood, but the more part of it is reserved in the bladder, under ye mydle globe
of the liver, to cleanse the lowest belly, or entrails: ye may, (and ye will)
call them guts.

The.xi. chapter.
Of melancholy or black choler.
Black choler or melancholy is a thycke terrestrial humour that in the blood
falls down to ye botome, very like unto old red wine, that is thick and
black, it is cold and dry: part of it is carried with the blood, both to make
it thycker also to help, and increase the power retetyue, in the veins and
other places where it comes, and also to nourysh the melancholyke parts, as
the bones and splen.

The.xii. Chapter.
Of the unnatural humours.
NOughty humours be called unnatural: they be made nought, or corrupted each
of them two manner of ways, either because the substance of them without the
admixtio of any other, doth degenerate: or else, that they be mingled, with
such as be already putrified and corrupted: blood is made nought, and goes
from his kind when he putrifieth in the veins, because the pores be shirt, or
else when he is mingled with some other evil humour, as in the dropsy, where he is
myxt with water.

The.xiii. Chapter.
Of noughty phlegm or unnatural.
Unnatural phlegm is a raw wateryshe humour, cold and moyste, redoundynge in
that body, where as is a weak concoction, and it is sumtyme much thinner than
spyttle, that falls from the mouth or nose. There is an other kind of
naughty and unnatural phlegm, which is salt in taste, that comes of the
mixture of choler with phlegm, which is plentiful in such bodies, as feed for
the most part of salt meates.

The xiiii. Chapiter.
Of unnatural yelowe choler.
YElowe choler, degenerates from his nature, when it is bourned black, and is
made thycke and bytynge, or when sumother humour is mixed with it as watery
phlegm, and this is called citrine choler, Galene calls it pale choler,
because it is of the colour of lead. But if it be thick phlegm wherewith it is
mingled, than it is called of ye latynes, Uitilina bilis because it is like in
colour, to the yolke of an egg, of this kind of choler, for the most part
are engendered all fyeuers tertian.

The.xv, chapter.
Melancholy, or black choler unnatural.
Melancholy or black choler, is made vnnaturalle, when other humours, or
else it self, is burned as dry as a^hes. For Hypocrates saith that both
blood and red choler will be turned soon into Melancholy, when for lack of
air, they be smothered in the veins, the stoppyng also of the pores, doth
make a body which all ready is sanguine or cholerycke of nature, melancholy.
And hereof comes so many kinds of madness. For if Melancholy, be delayed
with a little blood, it makes a manne merry mad, if it be mixte with a great
deal of red choler, tha it makes him stark wood, as Hercules Aiax was. But
if it be mixte with phlegm it makes him slothful without all mean or
measure.

If melancholy it self, without the admixtion of other humours be burned,
than it makes him sad and solitary, as Bellerophon, which as Homer says,
being full of sorrow and care, forsook all company, and wandered in desolate
feyldes solitary al alone.

Howe be it the same humours hath not like effect in every body, for in
sum they are not so outeragious, as in sum: Homer him self dyed for sorrow,
that he could not dissolve a certain hard question which was propounded unto
him: and the old philosofer Haracletus, being borne an Ephesian, did always
lament with weeping, the manyfolde miseries of man life, which as
Theophrastus saith, was of nature melancholy, because he lived solitary
alone, and wrote confused obscure things, well at the last thorough his fylthy
and vnclene living, he caught the dropsy, wherefore trusting to dry up the
water that was betwyxt his skin and flesh, commanded his body to be
anointed with doung of oxen, and laid abroad in the hot sun, from whence
he was brought dead. Yet Democritus madness was somewhat more pleasant, which
laughed always at men folyshnes, whereby he prolonged his life an hole
hundred years.

Empedocles was so outeragious mad, that he leapt alive in to the burning
fire of the hyl Ethna, but Sophocles madness was much sweter, the which did
ease the incommodities of old age, with making of verses. Marius when he was
mad, fantasied nothing but fighting. But Lucullus being mad, was merry,
full of game and sporte.

The.xvi. Chapiter.
Of Spirits
Spirit is a subtyle vapour of the blood, which by the virtue of the heart,
gives power to the body, to do all manner of works and actions, and although
there is but one well or spring of all spirits, yet they be diserned by their
places. Vital spirit is a flambe in the heart, made of blood, carrying vital
heat to ye other parts: the pulses be made to carry this spirit, whose
dignity and worthiness may be esteemed hereof, that every part of the body hath
need of vital lively heat, to ye conservation of their substance And this
vital or lyuelye blood, is preserved kept, by that same little sparc^e of
vital spirit, which in old time wise men did so much marvel at, that sum
thought it to be manes soul, and sum the instrument of mans soul. And
Aristotle saith that death is nothing but the quenching and putting forth of
lyuelye heate, and thereof it comes that so many precepts be given of the
physicians for the conservation and instauratio of spirits, the which
doubtless be corrupted and extinct, either with evil diet, orels with disease,
sickness, or with the weakness of ye hart, in mouynge affections, or finallye
with immoderate labour.

The.xvii. Chapiter.
Of animal spirits.
Spirit animal, is a spirit that by virtue of the brain, is made brighter
and convenient to the works of the senses, also to move and stir the
sinews. For I houlde well with them, that affirm constantly, the hart to be
the first authoure and beginner of spirit, and afterward, to take a new
nature of the brain.

And in dede there appears a certain affinity between the vital animal
spirit: For loke with what spirits the heart is best tempered, the same in
the brain, bring forth most noble and excellent affects, how be it for all
yt there is differences between them, because they have divers offyces and
effects. For the vital spirit ministers heate to the body, the animal
spirit styrreth up the senses, moves the synowes. S^me add unto these another
kind of spirit, called natural, which nourysheth the blood in the liver:
But Galene doubts of it, saying, (...), id est Si spiritus naturalis est
aliquid, which is as much to say, as if the natural spirit be any thing.
For although it can not be chosen, but that there must be spirit in the
liver, yet it is brought thither by ye pulces, which is a token that it comes
from the heart, but I will determine or constitute nothing of this matter:
leaving every man to his own judgment.

The.ii. book.
The first chapter.
Of natural powers or actions.
Whosoever will perfytely know, how many natural powers is in every body, he
must diligently search out the natural works of the same body, for every
work comes of some action, and also every action of some cause, for while ye
infant is within his mothers wobe, as yet vnperfyte) all his parts is but one
natural work, procedynge of a natural action called generation but after that
it is brought forth, an other natural work is to bring the same to their full
grows, which is done by the faculty called auction, that they may long
continue and endure, nutrition only doth make and bring to pass. Howbeit,
generation is not one simple natural action, as the other be, but rather
copounde, of alteration and formation. For howe could either been, synowe or
vein be made without any alteration of their substance: or how could they
be well figured or proporcioned, except they were first out of all fassyon, and
ordre. Auction is an amplification or encreasemet, in length, breadth, and
depenesse, of al parts of ye body, and ye child, while he is in his mothers
womb, is destitute neither of this, nor of nutrition: yet generation hath tha
ye chief rule and dominion, the other be as handmaids unto it: but after it is
delivered (vntyl such time as it com to ye full growth) auction hath
governance, alteration nutrition, be but inferior powers. Then as I said
before, it appertains only to the power or virtue called auctio, to encrese
in leght, breadth depenes, al such parts as by help of generatio hath already
their due figure fassion. But how every part is made bigger, it ca not better
be know, then by an example: children be wot to take the bladders of oxen swyne
and blow them full of spirit, rubbing them very much before ye fire, that
they may take heate without any burning or harm otherwise: and when they
have stretched or drawn them out aboundauntlye, they blow them full of
spiryte again, stretchynge them out more then they did before: and after they
rub them, and chafe them still as is aforesaid until such time as they think
the large enough, but in this chyldysshe work, loke how much the insyde of
the foresaid bladders is made wyder so much the bladder is thynner, and if that
were not, I might well say that children could make (as well as nature) little
bladders, great.

Howbeit, the wisest man in ye world can not do that: so much the less
children: For that is only propre unto nature. Wherefore it is very evident
that nothing can be increased as it ought to be, without nouryshment: and they
only be made longer, brother and deper at one time, which grow naturally:
or else if they be stretched along, they decay in breadth nor there is any thing
in the world without breaking, may be stretched forth every way at one time.
For that pertayneth to nature alone: and therefore auction is such a thing as
can not possibly be without nouryshment: whereof now by gods grace, we entende
to speak.

The, ii. Chapter.
Of nutrition.
NUtrition is the making like of that which nourysheth, to that, that is
nourished: and in nutrition, there is alteration, but not like as was in
generation. For in generatio that is made flesh, which before was none: but
in nutrition, the meat or nouryshment is made like to that that is nourished:
therefore the one may be called ( not without a cause) generation, and the other
assimulation: but because we have spoke suffycietly of these.iii. natural
faculties and because no living creature neadeth any other having how he may be
increased, and also having, howe he may long continue, it shall not need to
rehearse any mo natural powers. But again, if a ma cast in his mind saying to
him self, he hath mentioned as yet, no action of the stomach, entrails,
liver, nor of any other part of the body, he shall think this, but the
beginning and Proheme, of more profytable and better learning. Generation,
auction, and nutrition, be the first fountains or sprynges all the natural
works: and yet they are so perfyte of them selves, that without external
help of other, or (at the leest amongst them selves) mutual service, they
can almooste do nothing. And as concerning what generatio and auction de need
we have spoken before: but what is required unto nutrition, we entende now to
declare: for I shall be thought about to show (as well the very instruments
prepared for concoction of the nouryshment) as also the powers and faculty in
the, to be made for the same purpose. For seeing that assimulation is the only
action of nutrition, and saying that nothing can be made like, which in
quality differs, or be contrary. Therefore every living creature can not be
nourished with every meat, neither can be nourished incontinent, with such
as afterward at more leisure, peradventure he may: and by reason of this
necessity (not only man) but brute beasts also, endued with life, have
neade of mean instruments, to the altering of the nouryshment. for that
yelowe may be made red, or red yelowe, one simple alteration or change, is
sufficient: but ye white may be made black, or black white: all the
alterations or chaungynges which be betwyxte black white: be required before,
so that yt is softest can not be made at the first hardest: neither that that
is hardest, foftest. Then if this be true, how shall a bone be made of blood,
except the blood first be made thycke, and afterward white, or how shall blood
be made of bread, except the bread change his colour before, from white to
red. For it is no great matter, to make flesh of blood: for so soon as it
is ones made so thycke, that it can not rune, it is by and by flesh, but that
the same may be made a above, it must both have long time, and much
alteration, and this is one cause why there be many instruments provided of
nature, for the altering of the meat: another cause is the nature of the
excrementes. For as we can not be nourished with grass, although bestes are
nourished with it, so we may be nourished with roots, but nothing so well as
with flesh.

For our nature may change, or alter it easily in to good blood, but in a
root, that that is convenient to norysshe the body, and may be changed
though very hardly not with out great concoction, is but a very little, for
the most part of it, is full of excrementes, and doth pass the instrumetes
of concoction, wherefore there is but a small portion of it drawn up in to the
veins, of ye which al is not profitable, for ye body, wherefore nature did
lack another separation of such excrementes as be in ye (...) that nature
hath ordained only for nutrition, which as I said before, is the assimilation
or making like of that that norysheth, to that which is nourished, the which
to be done as there must needs go before, agglutination or adhesio, so before
agglutination, there must of necessity, be apposition, or putting to of the
nouryshment, to that that is noryshed.

For after that the juice is fallen out of the veins, first it is dispersed
abroad, and by and by, it is joined or put unto that part, which shall be
noryshed, and afterward fastened, or glued to the same, last of al made like.
And than it may very well be called nouryshment, and not before, But yt there
is difference between assimulation and agglutination, it is very evident in
that kind of scurfe, which of the Latyns is called viti, ligo, we call it the
Morphewe.

And also yt kind of dropsy which in greek is named (...) declare a certain
difference between admixtion and agglutination. For this kind of dropsy,
cumeth not for lack of humidity, as consumptions do, saying that their flesh
which is troubled with this dropsy, is as weet, as if it had be swylled in
water, which causes that the noryshment can not cleue, because it can neither
be made dry enough nor thycke like glue, which comes only, of natural
heat.

In the Morphewe, which in greek is called (...), and in latyne Vitiligo,
there is agglutination, but there lacks assimulation, wherefore it is very
evident, that as we said before in nutrition, there must first be
adiunction, and then agglutination, fynallye assimilation: and properlye that
is named nutrimcutum and in our tongue, nouryshment which hath noryshed all
ready, wherefore that same that is in the morphew, or that that is in the
dropesie, can not well be called norysshment, because they have not noryshed as
yet, and of this fasshyon that that is in the veins, and also that which is
in the stomach, yea and all good meates may be called nutrimenta, or in
english norysshementes, because they will nouryshe at the length, if they be
well digested, and hereof it is that Hyppocrates says in his book, that he
writes of dyete. Nutrimentum quod nutrit Nutrimentum quod est, veluti
nutrimentum, nutrimentum, quod est nutriturum. which is as much to say as
nourysshement that doth nourysshe altedye, and norysshmente that is like
rysshement, and norysshement, that hereafter will noryshe.

For that that already is made like, Hyppocrates doth call nutrimente, but
that which is but put unto, or that which is fastened only, and not made
like, he names it to be like nutriment, and all that which is in the veins
or maw, he calls nutrimente in time to come, because if it be well digested,
it will norysshe hereafter. Wherefore now I think it very euydentlye proved,
that noryshment is the making like of that that nouryssheth, to that which is
nourished.

The third chapter.
Of such faculties or virtues, as nature hath furnished every part with,
serving to nutrition.
THere be.iiii. powers of faculties, ye may if ye will call them virtues,
which is in every part, that is either nourished it self, or serves for
the nourysshment of other, of the which the first is named attracti^e the
second retentyue, the third concoctyue, and the fowerth and last ex pulsyue.
If nature had not endued ever sins the beginning, al the nutrityue parts of
every living creature, with these.iiii. virtues: it had not be possible either
for men or beasts, to have continued alive.x. days. For if neither God, nor
nature toke care of us, and if we were also destitute of all art and
prouidens, being ruled with the sudden momentes of our substance only,
having no facultye or virtue, that could draw such things unto it as
should be mete for it, nor any that could put away or expel things
noyfull, or such as were hurtful unto it, or that could altre and fassyon, or
glewe, such as shulde nourysh it, I can not think, but we should be thought
foolish, if we shulde despute of any natural action, and much foolysher if we
speak of any animal action, yea or of our hole life, either. For it shall not
be possible for any creature that hath so many divers parts, set so far
one from an other, to live or continue a very short time: if he lack ye powers
aforesaid. For first, if the attractyue virtue were not, there could be no
admixtion: if there could be no admixtion, there could ensue no agglutination,
and without agglutination, there could never be any assimulation, without the
which nutritio can not be had, and whether anything could live not nourished,
that I leave to your judgment.

The.iiii. Chapter.
Of the power or virtue attractive.
THe power attractive is a virtue which being in every part, serving for
nutrition, doth draw unto it things of like qualities, such as be mete and
convenient for it, as the adamat stone draws yro, the jet stone chafe, or
straw. How be it, peradventure some defending the Epicure and his train, will
say and constauntlye affirm, that there is no such power in stones,
attributynge the drawing up of the iron, or chafe unto other causes, as the
Epicure did to his little mottes. The which opinyon, because it is very
foolysshe, and hath been confuted of divers noble Philosophers, but especially
of Galene the most excellent Phisitio and Philosopher, (I except always
Hipocrates) that ever was, I will not ones touche or meddle with all: partly,
because I can say nothing in it, which is not said before of them, but
chefely that I will not be so arrogant or proud to meddle with it after
Aristotle and Galene (as who should say) I trusting ouermoche in my self,
could find somethynge to say against the Epicure, more then they could.

Therefore whosoever delyteth to know parsytely the Epicures opinyon, let him go to
Galenes first book of natural faculties, and there he shall be satisfied. Yet
this I dar say, that the Epicure with all his adherentes, is shamefully
deceived.

For, not only stones have power to draw things of like qualities, but also
medicines, insomoche that some will draw out thorns, which have lain.iii.
or.iiii. days within the flesh and some (which is much to be marveled at)
will draw the poison of a snake only, and other some the poison of a tod,
and in such men as have short necks, and wide throats we se oftentimes the
meat drawn from their jaws, before it be half chawed: what is it that
draws the meat so greadelye? if there be no power attractyue? neither in the
maw nor in the wesaunt: and howe could the watery substance be separated
from the blood, if there were no attractyue power in the reins or kidneys, or
if there were no attractyue power in ye bladder, or the gall, why should it
not be filled rather with water then with choler? saying that water, is more
fine and subtyle then choler is. Wherefore I dare conclude with Galen, that no
part of any living creature, being nourished, doth lack this power or virtue
named attractyue.

The.v. Chapter.
Of the power or virtue retentyue.
THe power retentyue is a virtue which retains that, that the faculty
attractyue hath draw. For if that juice that is already drawn, shulde not
rest there, wither it is drawn: but should be carried to some other part,
styll chaungynge his place, it were not possible yt there might ensue either
agglutination or assimulation, which is the very end wherefore nature hath
endued every body with this power or virtue, that of the very action or
offyce, is called in Latyne Retentiua virtus, and in our tongue retention, or else
ye virtue retetyue which in some parts of ye body is so evident, yt it needs
no demostration, for it may be perceived by senee: and in other some it may
better be known by reason and cogitation then by sense, as in a woman, howe is
the infant retained.ix. months, in her womb, if there be no virtue retentyue
there, and that the meat, is retained in the stomach or maw, vntyl such time
as it is altered cococted, every man may know yt will take a dog, or any other
brute beast, fed him, tha after he hath rest an hour, ryp his maw, for loke
what ye fed him with, ye shall find it there vnconcoct, which is an evident
proof that there is some virtue there yt retains it. But peaduenture some will
say that it is retained because the nether mouth of the stomach is very
narowe. Then how fortunes it that the stomach doth not only retain meat,
but drink also, which for his slyppernesse and subtillitie, would pass
throughout a very little hole, not drink only, but also all manner of
decoctions sorbitions, as myske wine, mead, with such other. And in such
men's stomachs as be weak and feeble, all decoctions and liquyde things (for ye
most part) do swym lunge above in the higher mouth of the stomach, so much
the less they pass through straight way, after they be received and taken.
And that this is true, everyman may know by ye belches crying in their bellies
after drink or any like thing: ye same is also manifestly proved by their
vomyting.ii. hours, yea sometime hole vi. after they have eaten, or drunken.

The.vi. Chapter.
Of concoction, or the virtue concoctiue.
COncoction is a mutation or an alteration of the meat, into his substance
that is nourished.

And this kind of concoctyng, dyffereth as much from the alteration of the
meat into the juice, as nutrition from the chaungyng of the juice into blood.
For there be many kinds of concoctions, and the first is in the maw or
stomach, where as ye meat is altered, and turned into juice, the next is in
the liver, where as it is made of juice, blood. The third is in the veins,
where as ye blood is prepared, for the nourysshmente of the whole body. The
fourth and last, is in the parts, where as it is made flesh, or at leest
like unto that, that is nourished. And manes body may very well be compared to
a Princes house, where as is kept daily a great many of tables, at divers times
of the day, so in mans body, all be not fed at ones, but sum wait till
the other have done, as the stomach liver and heart, be first fed, and
than the veins, after the which, every part, as he is best able, so he is
served before the other, for as it is a common saying, he that worst may shall
hold the candle, so in man body the weakeste part goes ever to the
worst, yet it chaunseth sum time that the weaker plucks from the stronger
as the stomach from the liver, when the liver is full of meat and the stomach
is empty and hath none. For it is no matter for a boy, to take apples or nuts
from a man which hath more than he can hold in his hands: But if they be
both loded a like, than I think it impossible for the weaker to take any thig
from the stronger, by violence. And look as the weakest hath lest part of yt
that is good, so he hath enough of excrementes, and of that that is nought, and
thereof it cummeth that the utter skin of our body doth receive all the
excrementes which afterward breaks forth in boils or scabs, for if the
virtue expulsiue were as strong in it, as in other parts, why shulde it be
more laded with excrementes, then the rest be? howe be it nature hath made it
a receptacle for the excrementes of al the hole body, therefore it hath
neither animal nor vital action, but only serves to the use before said.

The vii. chapiter.
Of the virtue expulsyue.
Even as the attractyue virtue draws unto it things convenient, even so ye
power expulsyue, expulseth from it things noyfull or hurtful, and this may
be evidently perceived in the example aforesaid of the woman going with
child, for so lunge as every thing about the child frames well, so lunge
the power expulsiue rests, as there were none such. But in case any thing be
amiss, so that nature dispayreth to bring it to good pass or effect, then
forth with all it is expelled, which the virtue expulsiue only doth, and none
other.

If this be not sufficient, to prove that there is a facultye or power in
every part, which doth expel from it things hurtful, I wold ye told me what
it is, that in the maw parts the excrement from the good juice, or in the
liver, the water from the blood. Wherefore I may iustelye think, that nature
passes all the artifycers in the world. For Praxitiles or Phideas, which in
their time were most excellent, did but trym their images only without, leuyng
the innersyde very raw rude, without al work manshyppe, because they could
not come to every part of it. But nature which doth extend to every part
of the body, trimmeth the innerside more gorgeous than the outsyde making
every part of bone, bone: and every part of flesh, flesh: keeping in every
part, due and just proportion, and furnyshyng them with most noble and
excellent virtues, faculties and powers. Moreover neither Phideas nor
Praxitiles, no nor yet Apelles could make of wax, Iuerye or gold, nor of
gold wax. For every one of these, tarrying ever sins his first generation, in
his own figure, and shape, saving for the workmanship that he hath on the
vtterside is made an image, where as nature is always full of variety, or else
all the parts of man body, should be only blood.

The.viii. Chapiter.
Of the provoking of appetite.
APpetite is provoked in the higher mouth of the maw, when the parts being
very mouche wasted, doth lack nouryshement, and endeuoreth to draw of the
veins, the veins of the liver and the liver of ye stomach or maw, the maw
of his over mouth, which is drawn together, and vehemently desires meat.
This drawing to gyther comes of the melancholy. which is brought thither by
a vein coming from the milte, and of this fasshyon hunger or appetite is
stirred up and provoked, if it be lunge vnslaked, it may turn to farther in
convenience. For in such case always the liver fylleth the stomach, with
excrementes, and thereof it cummeth that many means stomachs, be good
about.viii. of the clock in the morand at ten or.xi. though they be styll
fasting, have lust to eat nothing. Sum think that hunger comes not as I
have descrybed, but yt there is a peculyer power in the nutrityue parts, as in
the stomach and liver which do provoke it, as in fish that be called
pykes, when they follow their pray, somewhat gredely, they be so moved by
very fervent desire, to overtake it, that their stomach rises up to their
mouth, in the which example, the nature of gluttons is very well painted as
I thyncke, and truly for the most part they be rauenars, and great eaters,
which hath short necks and wide mouths.

The, ix. Chapter.
Of the diversity of meates and drynkes.
IT is very profitable, for every man, as well for them that be hole, as for
those, that be sick to know ye dyuersite of meates and drynckes. For such as
be whole, to the end that they, knowing the right use of them, may keep
their health stylle. and such as be sick, may recover again their
pristinat estate and sanitye.

Wherefore I entende to declare, as bryeflye as I canne, what difference I have
(by lunge observation, and partly by mine own experience) marked in meates,
and drynckes.

First ye shall understand, that all bread corn, is of great power and
strength: I call that strongest, that nouryssheth most. Also all.iiii. footed
bestes that be brought up tame, in the house, and be daily used for mente, and
every great best, as gootes, hearts, swyne, oxen, and sheep, and also every
great bird or foul, as goose, swan, peacock and crane and moreover honey
and chese, how much less it is to be marveled at, if that kind of bread,
that the old ancient Romaynes used, were of great nouryshmet, seeing that it
was made of wheat, fat, honey, chese. Howbeit in the middle form, and in a
lower degree of nouryshmentes be numbered, all those herbs, of the which we
eat the roots, and of.iiii footed beasts, the cony and hare: all wild
foul, exceptynge neither hens nor capons. Also all fyshes yt can not well
suffer salt, nor can be bryned hole. In the lowest kind or form of
nouryshmentes, is reckened all manner of sallettes, whatsoever grows in a
little stauke, as cucumers, gourdes, or capers, and such like: and apples,
olyues, and also cokles. But although we have distributed the whole kinds
in.iii. parts, yet some that be of one kind, differ very much one from an
other. For one is either stronger or weaker tha an other. For there is more
nouryshment in flesh, then in any other meat and wheat is stronger, and
nouryssheth more then mile, and mile more then barley: and of whet, the
strongest and hartyest is that, yt we call rye: in latin it is called Siligo
next in strength is the meal, having nothing taken from it: weakest of all is
fine wheat flower, and beans also be of stroger nouryshment then peas. And of
roots, the rape roots nourishes more then either the pasnepe, or radysshe.
And of herbs, beetes be much stroger then lettuse: and offrute, grapes
figs, and nuts, be stronger tha such as properly be called apples: also of
those birds which be of the middle ordre: they be stronger that seek their
meat on their feet, then they that fly abroad, and of such as fly
continually abroad, the byggest be the strongest nouryshmente, and their flesh
is lighter that live in the water, tha they that live in the land. But amogest
the.iiii. footed beasts, hogs flesh is lyghtest, and beaffe hardest: and
also of wild beasts, ye byggest be of the strongest nutrimet Of those fish
that be in the myddel ordre, the strongest is ling, and such as be salted,
then tenche, carpe, hadocke, codlynges, and whytinges after these, gurnardes,
pikes, roches dace, perches, gudginges. And there is not only difference in ye
kinds of beasts, but also in them selves, as in their age certain parts, in
ye teperature of ye whether, country where they be brought up bred: For every
sucking beast of.iiii. feet, nourishes less tha such as suck not: also fysh
in the mydle age, which be not come as yet to their full bigness, nourishes not
so much as they yt be full grown. And of lamb, or kydde, the purtenaunce, is
of less strength, then the other parts be: and therefore they may be put in the
middle ordre. Of birds, the necks wings, be of lyghtest nouryshment as
concerning the ground: that wheat is better that grows on an hill, then
that yt grows abroad in the field, and fysshe bred amongst the stones, is
lighter nouryshment then that yt is bred in the sand: and in the sand,
lighter tha in the mud. And therefore such as be breedde in fens and
standing pooles be harder of digestion, then ye same bred in runyng waters,
or amogest stones: and yt is lighter easlyer of cocoction, which lives in the
deep, tha yt that lives in ye shallow. And wild bestes be of lighter flesh,
then tame: that yt is bred in moyste whether, is lighter, tha that yt is bred in
dry whether. And morouer such as be fat, be better tha such as be len:
though they be of one kind: they that be fresh, be easelyer of digestyon then
they that be salt: and new be better tha stale or old: and that that is
sodden better then that that is either roasted or fried. Harde eggs be of a
very strong nouryshment, and soft and rear, very weak. Of drynkes, ale is
the strongest feder: and tha milk: and wine that is made of the mulberye, and
all old wynes: And therefore such as be of weak natures shulde never drink
any old wine: and of all drink, water nourysheth leest: and that is strongest
ale, which is made of strongest malt: and those wynes, whose grapes grow in
fat ground, are of much stronger nouryshment then the wine of such as
grow in lean. Of waters, the lightest, is rain water, and next unto it is
the water of a fair spring or foutayne, then of a running floude, and after of
a well, then snowewater, worse then snowewater is frose water: and worse then
frozen water is the water of a stading poole: worst of all is fennewater, and
for such as be diligent searchers, it is easy to know the nature of waters, for
the best is lyghtest, and if there be two like in weight, the finest and best
is that, yt will soonest be hot, and soonest cold. And for the most part,
this is always true, that every thing, as it is of strongest substance, so
it is hardest to be digested, or altered into good juice, but where it can be
altered, it nouryssheth more then that, that is much fyner. Therefore, there
must be an ordre observed in these meates, and drynkes aforesaid.

As he that hath all his natural powers and actions lusty, and is himself of
a strong and harde complexion, leadynge his life in great labour, may
safely eat the strongest meates: but he that is of a weak body, and lives
ydelye, must be fed with the weakest meat, and with that, yt is easy of
digestion, and will soonest be turned into good juice and blood.

The.x. chapter.
Of the diverse qualities in meates
NEither be these only the differences, for some meates breed evil juice, and
some good, and some make much grosser fleume then other some do, and other
some be more mete for the stomach, then other some be: and some be full of
wind, and other some be not, and some engender heate: and again, there be
other some breed cold.

Some putrifieth easily in ye stomach, and some will not putrify at al: some make
leuse the belie, some bind ye same: some provoke vryne: and some restrayneth
it: some causes sleep, some, styrryng up the senses, provokes watch. The
which, all ought to be known, because one profyteth the body, or the health,
more then an other doth.

The.xi. Chapter.
What things have good juice.
Wheat, rye, wheat broth, and ryesse, be of good juice and be gentle, very
mete for the stomach, making it moderately hot: barley broth, some call it
prysane, milk, and soft chese, and all birds of the middle ordre, with some
of the bigger, as feysaut, peacock, curlewe, and capon, breed or engendre very
good juice, and of fish, such as be betwyxt tender, and harde, as
mullettes, pykes, gurnardes and perches. And of herbs, as lettuce, mallowes,
cucumers, and gourdes: of eggs, such as be reere and soft: of fructe, all
that be sweet and also sweet wine, and to conclude all fat or chammye
flesh.

The.xii. Chapiter.
What things have euel juice.
MIll, barlye, and all poudered flesh, and also all salt fyshe, and old
chese, and the grain like peas, called fytches, certain rotes also, as rapes
and radysshe, and moreover, beetes, thyme, onyons, garlyke, hysope, rue,
fenell, cumyue, dyll, musterd? seed, lyekes, and also myltes, kydneys, and
entrails almost of every great beast, bredeth euell juice noughty blood,
furthermore all sower and tart fruit, and to be brefe al things that be
sharpe, tart, or bitter, and almost all fysshe that live in fens, lakes, or
muddye ponds, or such as we cal ouergrowen fysshe.

The.xiii. chapter.
What things of their nature be gentle, and mild, and again what be keen
sharpe.
SUppynges, brothes, ptisans both of barley, and also of wheat, and all fat
flesh, and clammye, the which almost is in every beast yt is tame, brought
up within the house, but especilly in pygges and calves feet, and in lambs,
kyddes or calves heads, also the brains of the same, as well as of birds, be
gentle and mild, but all things that be sower, or bitter, and all that be
salt, also garlyke, onions, rue, leekes, cucumers, beetes and all herbs, for
the most part be sharpe and keen.

The xiiii. chapter.
What meates make thycke fleume, and what makes thin.
REere eggs, ptisanes of wheat rise, and ptisanes of barley, and milk, and
all clammye meates make thycke fleume, and al salt meates, sharpe meates, and
tart meates engender thynne fleume.

The.xv. Chapiter.
What meates be good for the stomach.
ALl sharpe and rarte meates, such also as be lyghtely poudered, be very mete
and wholesome for the stomach, and besides these, unleavened bread, and rise, or
ptisans and all wyldefowle, having white flesh, of domestical beasts, beaffe
hath no fellow.

Of other beasts, the lean is better for the stomach then the fat: and
beside these, swynes feet and ears and the woumbes of barrayn best. Of
herbs, lettuce, pasneppes, and sodden cucumers. Of fruit cherries mulberies,
tender pears, orenges, and quynces, beside these steped grapes, reere eggs,
pineapples, white olyues soked in sharpe vinegre, orels black: that were not
gathered before they were thorough ripe, or else have been kept in sweet wine,
be very meet convenient for the stomach.

The xvi. chapter.
What be euel for the stomach.
All hot meates, all salt meates, all manner of potages, and al things, that
be very sweet, and all fattye meates, all suppynges, and leuened bread and
also oil that is made of mile or barley, and salads yt be sawesed with salt
and oil: moreover almaner of these milk, green figs, and dry, and
finallye all that engender wind, do greatly hurt the stomach. Here it may
be perceived, that all meates which engender good juice, be not good for the
stomach, no nor yt that is good for the stomach, therefore bredeth good juice
because it is holsom for the stomach.

The.xvii. Chapter.
What meates make the belly swell, and what delay the same.
AL manner of corn, and all manner of sweet meates, and fat meates, and
potages and new wynes also, make the belly swell, of herbs, garlyke, onions
and lekes, and all manner of roots, except pasnepes, and read carretes, also
both dry and grene figs, but of both the grene by ye worse, morouer grene
grapes, al manner of nuts, milk also and chese, and all meat that is eaten
raw, provokes the swelling of the belly. Birds yt have white flesh, and
all manner of venery, and all fysshe of the middle order, and al manner of shell
fyshe, and beside these rear or soft eggs, old wine make no manner of
swellynge in the belly, Where note that fenelle seed and anyse seed, do
greatly ease and help the swellynge of the belly.

The.xviii. chapter.
What things engender either heate or cold,
Pepper, salt, flesh sodden in pottage, garlyke, onyons, dry figs, salt
fysshe, and wine, do engender heat, lettuce, and the most part of herbs
eaten raw, as sucorye, endyue, borage, violet leues, ma dragon and pople. Also
coriander, cucumers, and gourdes sodden. Of fruit, mulberies, cherries, sour
apples and tender pears, and specially vine eager, taken either as meat or
drink do augment cold.

The.xix. chapter.
What things putrifye easily in the maw, and what do not.
LEuened bread, ye and all manner, of bread, yt is not made of wheat and milk,
and honey, and all manner of chese and wynes, either yt be over sweet, orels over
thynne, do easily putrify in ye maw or stomach Howebe it unleavened bread, and
all wild foul, of the middle order, beoffe also, and all harde and lean
flesh, and all salt meates, sharpe wynes, will continue long without any
putrefaction.

The.xix. chapiter.
What things do leuse the belly.
Unleavened barley bread, lettuce, purslane, dyl, onions, garlyke, mallowes,
beetes, cucumers, cherries, mulberies, raysins, dry figs, oysters, muscles,
and all manner of shell fysshe, but especially, broth made with them, also young
and tender fysshe, and fat flesh in potage, or else boiled, or such birds
as swim, and besides these, milk, raw honey, sweet wine, and al that that is
drunk luke warm, and all fat or sweet meates, do make the belly laxatyue.

The.xx. Chapter.
What things bind the belly.
RYe bread unleavened, harde roasted eggs, little birds, but especially such as
be tame brought up in the house, and uses not to fly abroad: also crane,
hare, and gootes flesh: and beside these, beaffe, and harde chese, and honey,
yt hath sodden lunge on the fire, peers also that be not ripe, and specially
such as be called rolling peers. Also orynges and quynces, white olyues, and
wine yt is tart and sharpe: and finally al thiges yt be harde, lean, tart, or
sharpe, and of flesh that yt is roasted, sooner tha that that is sodden, have
power to bind the belly.

The.xxi. Chapter.
What things provoke vryne.
AL things (for ye most part) that smell fragatlye, help to provoke urine:
mynt also and rue, dyll, anysseede, parcelye seed, and fenellseede, besides
these, time, coriandre, onyons, and wormwood, thynne wynes also, and both
round and lunge pepper, also musterd seed, and pyneapples.

The. xxii. chapter.
What things provoke sleep. and what cause watch.
LEttuce, pople, mandragon, mulberyes, and garlyke, provoke sleep. Time, rue,
hysope and vnyons styre up the senses, whereby they cause watch.

The end of the. ii. book.
The. iij. book,
The first Chapter.
Of exercise.
Exercise is necessary for ii. causes, the one to pourge the body of
excrementes, and the other to change it from a worse state to a better. For
saying that every labour is not an exercice, but only that ye is vehement,
these. iii. must needs cosequetly follow exercise. Hardness of ye limes, or of
such parts as be exercised, encrese of natural heat, swifter moving of ye
spirits. These profits exercise brings with him, of necessity beside a great
many other yt come of these, as of ye hardness of ye parts the body is made
both apt to endure much labour without payne, also quicker, redier, finally
stroger to ye same Of ye increase of natural heate, ye power or virtue
attractive is quickened in all parts serving to nutrition, moreover the
alteration, or concoctio in the same is made much stronger, by reason whereof
the body is nourished much better, and more luckily, then it should have
been: and every part also sprynkled, with a sweet moisture or dew, that
makes such members as be harde, soft: and also mollifying the pores or fine
holes of the skin, do open the same, which by reason of the strong and oft
moving of the spirits be clean purged of all their excrementes and filths,
and also the excrementes of the hole body be had away. Now if al these come of
exercise, as no doubt they do, peradventure it is an harde matter to show the
due seasonable time of taking it: for because it helps ye concoction
throughout the whole body, there may be no quatitie of raw juice, neither in
the maw, nor in the small veins about the liver, lest the same be snatched
into every part of the body, before it be made mete or profitable to the same
by concoxion. Therefore because it doth cleanse and purge the little pores, and
also expel the experiments, it may well be taken before meat. For Hypocrates
saith: If thou nouryshe unclean bodies, and such as be full of excremetes,
thou shalt do them more harm, then good. Wherefore it is very euydet that the
best and metest time for excercyse is when yesterdays meat is concoted, both
in the stomach and also in the veins. For if it be taken at any other time,
either before or after, it must either fill the body full of crude and raw
humours, or else augment pale, and citrine choler. Doubtless, the true mark of
this time is take of the urine. For white water betokens cruditie, read,
ouermoche concoction, and that, that is somewhat pale, and a little turned to
yelowe, is a token that the second concoction is now already down: and so
lunge as the water or vryne is not infected with choler, it is styll white: and
when it has taken to much of choler, then it is red. Therefore when it is
betwyxte read and white, then it is time to begin exercise, first easynge
the body of the excrementes, of the guts or entrails, as well as of the
vryne or water, in the bladder, lest some part of the foresaid excrementes,
be either changed into the habit of the body, or else (through the violence
of the great heate, which exercise and the vehement exagitation causes) do
putrifye, whereof there may ensue much inconvenience. Therefore seeing that
exercise (as we said before) is a vehement mouynge, it is very mete and
necessary to show for what bodies exercise is most convenient and holesoome:
for Hypocrates counsayleth them, whose bodies exceed in heate, to beware of all
violent and vehement mouinges. Then shall such bodies live in idleness,
without exercise? or any mouynge? no. For although Hypocrates forbid such to
use any exercise that is violent: yet nevertheless he forbyddeth them
idleness, commanding them to use those kinds of exercise which be not
vehement, as walking riding: but such as be cold of nature, or at the leest
exceed not in heate, and especially they that have many wast and supersluous
humours, may safe lye use the vehement excersyces that be, in case they observe
the time beforesayde, and do not sodeynlye, and at the first brunt, excercyse
the selfes as vehemently as afterward. For as ye se lute or harpestringes, if
they be sodeynely and vehemently stretched, be put in great danger of
breauynge, so the synowes, and the fine small veins, if they be vehemently
plucked any way with any sodden mouynge of the body, be in no less danger
then of breaking. Therefore whosoever will excercyse him self vehemently, even
at the first, let him after he hath put of his clothes, chafe his lymmes
softly, until they wax red, and be moderatelye hot, and then annoynt his
joints with oil after let him not spare to exercise him self sum what
vehemently, but such as may take their exercise at their own will and
pleasure, let them begin softly encresynge their labowre, styll more and more,
until such time as their flesh be throghlye swelled, and begin to sweat, but
then it is time to leave, lest such humours as be good, and profitable to the
nouryshment of the body be expelled, as well as they yt be nought And also
immoderate excersise, dries up the body, and consumes as well the natural
heat, as the natural moisture, whereby the spirits decay which shortneth life,
and hastens old age.

There be many kinds of exersyses, which may all well be allowed: as
shotynge, dyggynge with a spade or mattock, bowelynge, either in the field or
in the alley, haukynge, hunting, daunsyng, running, leapyng, tennes, and
footebal, but of these, or else of other, which is not rehearsed, the best be
they that excersyse al parts egally, as shotynge and tennyse, for dyggyng doth
excersise the back to much, and running or dancing, the legs. Wherefore
they be not so well to be allowed, as the rest, which exercises all parts a
like.

The.ii. Chapter.
Of dinner or eating time.
DIogenes being asked when it was best for a man to be refresshed with meat,
answered on this fasshyon saying, a rich manne when he will, a poor man when
he may. As I do well allow that a poor manne shall not eat before he have
meat, so I do utterly condemn that a rich manne shall eat when he will.
For meat taken either out of time, or to much in quantitye, is cause of many
evils and maladies, to the body.

It is taken out of time, either when the accustomed hour of eating is broken,
as to defer dinner till.iii. of the clock at after noone, orels when that
time is spent in eating, which is ordained for an other pourpose as to eat in
the night, which is ordained for sleep, and it may be taken to much in
quantity, many ways.

For sum man eating but.iii. bittes, of beaffe, shall surfeit as sore of it
as sum other that peradventure be side other meates, deuowreth four grotes
woorthe of beaffe.

And he also takes to much which ceases not from eating, so lunge as he
is able to eat or swalowe any more as well as he yt eats so much that his
belly is harde withal.

Of these kinds of repletion, comes either sudden death by breaking of the
skin, called Peritoneum, or else a continual laske, called Lientery, which
always brings with it, a consumption, with many other diseases, of the
which. I entende not to speak of, at this time. wherefore it is good, and
wholesome for every man to leave eating, with an appetite, and not to eat so
much at one meal, as might well suffice nature, iiii. also to feade of such
meates, as is most holsom for his body. If he be cholerycke, and strong of
nature ledynge a laboursume life, than he may fed of gross and strong meates,
as beaffe and such meates, as is put in the first order, but if he be
flenmatyke, and of a weak nature, than let him take heed of gross meates,
and fed of such as be in the middle order, of the which repletion is
nothing so dangerous, as of the other.

As concerning the time of eating, every man when he is hungered, if he may
have it, yet one time is better than another, and the very best time is after
excersyce. For then the body is clear pourged of all excrementes, and natural
heate is increased, and made much stronger. And the next time is at.xi. of the
clock before dinner, and again at.vi. a clock of the night. How be it children
and such as be not yet at their fulle grows, and old men which be weak
and feeble, had need to eat oftener, so that they take the less at ones, and
put four hours, at the least, between every meal. (...)

and also of the synnowes, which be the instruments of mouynge, and that the
foresaid vapours whythe do fume up to the brain may not be crude or raw,
the heart plucks in to it both the blood and natural heat, that is in the
utter parts. And this same rest is good for.iii. causes, first to moyster the
brain, and then to the generation of spirits, last of all, to make an end
of the concoction both in the stomach and liver. The material cause of
sleep, are the sweet vapours, the which when they be made moist, styllyng
down, do stop the coduytes of the sensis. For they be not clamye or gross
humours, such as hurt the brain, but they be sweet fumes, the which after
they be ascended, be made thycke by the coldenes of the brain, rune down,
sprinkelyng the brain with moisture. Therefore Aristotle doth compare the same
motion of vapours to the floude Euripus, because in their going up they turn
back again, and other follow, and come after, but the efficient cause is
somewhat more dark and obscure. For it is certain that the heat and blood of
the utter parts, is (as Hypocrates says) drawenin to the heart, and though
the body then be hotter with in, it is cold without: therefore when we sleep,
we have need of many clothes. The heate and blood is draw in because that
when the concoction is begone, the vapours do fume up, naturally: and when they
be disolued they come down fulbut on ye heate of the heart, which drives the
back to the utter parts: and thus ye heate is driven styll more and more to
the heart: the which heate gathered together doth make an end of cocoction,
that the vapours which ascend to the brain, may both be more pletifull and
also sweter. But I think that the heate is drawn into ye heart, not somoche
for the coming down of vapours, as that the vital and animal powers be
sociate and cowpled together by the diuyne prouydence of god. For what part
soever be diseased, the heart, straight like a natural Prince or governor,
endeavours all that he can to help it, therefore he callethe in his heate,
that he may help ye necessary action, both of the stomach and liver. And when
the utter parts of the body be at rest then the heart labours most,
drawing unto him both heate and blood: of the which he enhendreth vital
spyrytes. And truly I se not a suffycyent cause, why so much heate should be
called in, except this same society of the powers were ordained of God, that
as soon as the utter parts were at rest, the heart either for his own cause,
or else for the stomach or liver, might draw unto him more plentiful heate
to help the innermore actions, which be necessary for the conservation of
nature, and as every man is most grieved, and afraid of his own iepardye, and
doth covet first to defend him self: so every part of the body first
prouydeth for him self, and this natural inclination is given to all manner of
creatures, to coueyte first to save them selves. And therefore the heart
especially for his own cause, draws to him self heate, because he hath
neade of blood, and because his spirits be almost spent. And therefore he
also healpeth the well of the blood, which is the liver, that it may cherysh
it self, bring forth, new, and fresshe spirits, and moreover the brain
being weary and desyryng rest, leueth moving of the utter parts, and
whenever the body hath need of recreation or quietness, the actions of al
the virtues be agreed by and by. And this same consent or agreement, god hath
give to all the parts, that after defatigation or werynesse, they may be
refreshed with rest and quietness. The final causes be great benefytes, the
which sleep gives to every virtue or power, one by one: it helps nutrition
because it makes an end of concoction, and there is nothing more certain
tha that the crudities which come for lack of sleep is uncurable, because not
only the meat is left vndigested, but also the virtue of the stomach, is
utterly destroyed, partly by the burthe and weight of of the crude and raw
meat, partly because the synowes be hurt by the wekenes of ye brain that
comes for lack of sleep, as Hypocrates speaking generally, saith that ouermoch
watch brings most cruel cramps, and there have ben many which for lack
of sleep have felt often cramps in their necks, and the palsye in their
legs, and also a great imbecility and weakness in their stomach. And
bysyde these the natural heate, throughout the whole body decays sore,
because it is not cherished with vital spirit. And hereof it may be
perceived, how much need we have of sleep, to the conservation of nutrition.
For when the concoctio is done well, and as it should be, there is nouryshment
distributed to every part of the body, wherwt they be cherished: and there is
also spyrites engendered, which mynistreth new strength to the body, and yet
the boylyng heate of the body is mitigated with taking rest, and the body it
self is sprynkled with a sweet dew, that comes from the brain: and the
brain also takes strength wherewith ye fynowes be made more lusty. It helps
the vital power, because the heart drawing to him heate, doth bring forth
great plenty of spyrites, the which be made so much more brighter how much
the blood is purer. And again it helps the animal powers (for whose
conservation it is ordained of God) because ye virtue both of the brain
synowes shulde be destroyed clean, with ouermoche dryness, except yt it were
cherysshed, with sleep, in the which the brain is made moyste, gatherynge to
him again his pristinate strength. How acceptable also is sleep in diseases,
and sorrows, the which many times it only heals, to man great profit
ease.

The.v. Chapter.
Of slepyng time, and of the wholesome lying in bed.
Sleep ought to be taken in the beginning of ye night and there ought to be but
a little space betwyxt supper and sleep, therefore after a little soft walking,
to the intent that the meat may go down into the maw, and also that the upper
mouth of the maw, may be shut. I would counsel every man to take rest, lying
him down first on ye right side, lest with lying on ye left side, he open the
upper mouth of his stomach, howbeit after his first sleep, he may safely
lye on the left side: and whosoever hath a weak stomach, let him lye grovelling
upon his face, for it helps cocoction, and lets the generation of fleume,
increasing natural heate, by reason whereof evil and noughty humours be degested
and concocted.

And no man that is wise, sleep upon his back: for thereof comes many sore
diseases. It is very wholesome to sleep, the shulders and heed lying on hye: for
so the heate is easily gathered together, which makes concoction perfyte, and
destroys all crudities and rawnesse, concerning also natural heate, engedreth
good blood whereof the body takes both strength and lively colour.

The.vi. Chapter.
What cummeth of lunge watchynge.
WIthout doubt, there is no thing that decays the strength more, either of
the body, or of the wit, then to watch long after supper, because there
follows not only cruditie; but also natural heate is dispersed abroad, and
the virtue of the stomach faints decays, noughtye and unclean blood is
engendered which is cause that the body is filled with euell humours, whereof
comes an euell habit, as paleness or leanenesse, and the troublynge of the
spirits with great infirmity and weakness of the brain.

Wherefore youth ought to be accustomed and used to omytte study in the
beginning of the night, and so much the less to haunt banketynge and
drinking till mydnyght no nor to spend the time in exitious labour which god
hath ordained for every creature to rest in. I have heard in this matter, the
diligence of many noble men, which being trowebled with matters of the
common wealth, have ever observed this custom, that after supper, they went
straight to bed, and in the mornings they did always dispatch their business.
Sener writes that Asinius would not so much as vnseale a letter at after
supper, so much the less read one, to the entente that he might go to bed
with a quiet mind. And if thou will sleep sweetly (as Homer says) thou
must take heed of cruditie in thy stomach, and also have a quiet mind.

For the sorrow and pensifnes, of the heart, also the boylynge and great
heate of the blood and spirits, and earnest anger, distempers ye brayn with
vnquyetnes, and will not suffer the hart to go about any natural action, and
besides these, think ye that it is no sin before god: to punyshe so cruelly
and corrupt the nature of our bodies? saying that holy scrypture, commands
to give honour and reverence to the body.

Therefore we ought to give dylygence that (as much as we may) we use well
this rest and quietness ordained of god, by the which we are warned of our
resurrection after the mortyfyenge of our bodies. As this rest which we call
sleep is ordained of God, that in it our life may be renewed, because there is
then a great number of spirits engendered, so let us think that death is not
eternal misery, to the faythefull, but a little space, in the which, it is
mete and convenient for us, to be borne again, to a better life.

The.vii. chapiter.
Of dreams.
ALthough the question of dreams pertayneth to the inner seses, yet I will
speak of them even now. For I pourpose not to prosecute the lunge
circumstances of the natural philosophers, which endeavour to show a natural
cause of every dream. Homer the old and ancient poet jests excedynge
featly of the.ii. gates of dreams, of the which gates, the one is the way
or entranse of vain dreams, and the other of such as do signify sum
thing. A dream is nothing, but an imagination made in the sleep, when that
divers spirits meet together in the brain, which being the instrument of
our thoughts, do make divers images.

Furthermore in sleep, the inner senses be a great deal more at lybertye than
the utter be.

The.viii. Chapter.
Of dreams natural.
THe first kind of dreams, be common to every manne, therefore they may well
be called natural. These dreams be, when we fancy such things in the night
as we thought on, when we were waking, whereupon Claudian the poet says,
judges dream of strife, and controversies of the law, carters dream of their
cartes, orels when our dreams, answer dyrectelye to certain humours, the
redowndyng or moving, of the which doth move our imagination, or spirits.

As they that have plenty of fleume, dream of swymmyng or drowning of this
fashion night mares trouble us in our sleep, whanso ever any thycke or gross
humour is either in the brain or breast, letting the breast to move, the which
moves our imagination, that it thinks our breast be pressed down of sum
other.

The. ix. Chapiter.
Of that kind of dreams that foreseeth things to come.
THe second kind of dreams, foreseeth things to cumme, but not be any
divine power for every man as he hath a good tempered body as he hath peculier
gifts, and properties of nature, before other men: as one man is better
skylled, in musycke then an other, an other more nimble to climb than he, so
many by a peculyar gyfte of nature, have dreams that declare things to come
by allegories and proverbs: Such were the dreams of Scilla, Lucullus. And
Augustus Cesers Physician called Musa, dreamed that Augustus his own tent was
taken of his enemies.

Wherefore Augustus warned of it, departed from thence, and even as the
physician had dreamed, it chaunsed. For that wing where his tent was being
put to flight, his own tent, and tabernacle, was taken, of his enemies.

Tullye the eloquent romayne, rehearses many like examples, he him self
dreamed, that Octauius shulde be emperor of Rome, lunge before he knew him.
And Pontanus writes of a certain manne of war, which dreamed yt he was
devoured of a serpent, wherefore when other of his fellows toke shyppyng to fight
against their enemies, he only tarried at home, and it chanced that there was a
fray in the city yt day where it fortuned him to be slain, with a
gunstoone, which in their tongue was called a serpent.

Gallen also writes of a certain man that dreamed himself to be bathed in
his own blood, and the next day when he opened his dream to the Physicians,
they said that he had overmuch blood: wherefore contrary to Galenes counsel,
they let him blood, so he being destitute of strength dyed as he had dreamed
before, bathed and washed in his own blood. Of these kinds of dreams there
is no evident cause, neither in the mouynge of humours, nor yet in their
quantity or quality, but that there be certain natures that foreseeth
things to come, which have dreams oftentimes that signify somethynge. Nor I
will not be against them that think this property to come of the excellent
temperature of the body, as the Astronomers do: but I think them not wise
which give precepts of the interpretation of dreams, attributynge the cause^
to the motion of humours, saying that one man hath not always like dreams.

The. x. chapter.
Of that kind of dreams the which prophecies of things to come, by divine
power.
THe third kind of dreams is godly, which god works in men's minds,
either by him self, or else by his angels, such were the prophecies of
Iacob, Ioseph, and Daniel, and other like, which holy scripture doth affirm to
come from god, not of light or tryflyng matters, but of Christ, and of the
governing of the church, king domes, of their ordre. This kind of dremes
ought well to be decerned from the other: for in the other there is no truth.
And this one kind of dreams is very certain and true, as it shall appear
better hereafter.

The. xi. chapiter.
What kind of dreams is devilish.
THe fourth kind of dreams is diuylysh, as when wytches and conjurers do
dream of feasts, and plays. And the devil him self also oftetimes shows
horrible spectacles to men in their sleep, as Valerius writes of the Romayn
Cassius. And there was a certain Romayne called Latinus, which was commanded
in his sleep to remebre ye consul, of certain things as cocerning the stage
plays, the which because he had not done, the devil killed his son. Here
both the cause the effect also doth declare, that the dream was deuylysshe.

For the devil always endeavours to stablish such customs as be wicked, and
noughtye, and he is delyted with unjust death: there hath chased many like
unto this in the old time, no less superstitious. And we have heard now of
late days, the vain dreams of the Anabaptistes, commanding sin, or
confirmyng errors, and heresies: the which doubtless may be perceived and
judged of godly and wise men.

The. x. chapter.
To what kind of dreams we ought only to give credit.
I Have rehearsed.iiii kinds of dremes the why^h if they be well ^onsydred and
looked upon, it shall be easy to judge of this commune question, that is:
whether any thing may be conjectured of dreams, or no: and whether any man
ought to give credit or to trust to dreams or no. One kind of dreams is
true and certain: wherefore every man ought to give credit unto it, which is
the same kind, that prophecyeth of things to come, by revelation from God,
insomoch that they which have such dreams, know that they come from God.
Iacob and Ioseph knew that their dreams came from God, and therefore they
knew the signification of them. Also god doth add a noble testimony of this
unto the profit Daniel, when Nabuchodonozor had forgotten his dream, god
showed it again unto Daniel, that it should be known, that it came from him.
Therefore this kind of dreams is except from that rule which forbyddeth us to
give credit unto dreams For when they come from God, and when God testifies
that he is the author of them, then it is necessary to believe them: of the
other dreams there ought nothing to be affirmed. And as concerning the.iiii.
kind of dreams, it is utterly to be abhorred. Dreams of the second kind,
although theybe conjectures, yet there ought to be no affirmation of them:
wherefore we ought to give no credit unto them, and for the most part, they
be full of ambiguity. Therefore many kings and capitaynes have been deceived
with such dreams. The last battle which Pompeius fought with Caesar, he was
moved to it with a dream, which promised him victory, because he had dreamed
yt he was in his royal seat at Rome: and thought the people rejoicing in him,
clapped their hands for joy: but Pompeius was deceived in the interpretation.
For that same reioysynge with the hands of the people, did not pretend
victory, but rather the encouragementes annd prouokementes of Domitius
Lentulus and Labienus, which the morrow after his dream, counsayled him to
fight, promysyng him victory, and setting his mind on fire with vain hope.
Darius also dreamed, that he saw the host of the Macedonians to go through
Asia burnig, to come to Babilo, and there Alexander him self having a Percians
robe, to go into the church, and straight to vanysh out of sight. Therefore
Darius thought that the stames of fire did p^ende death to Alexanders army, and
that Alexander should become captyue, because he was decked after his country
fassyon: but by ye fire was fignifyed the great hast of Alexander, and his
victories, his garment betokened that he should be king and lord over the whole
dominion, and empire of the Pertians. Hamilcar captain of the Carthageneans
dreamed that he supped in Siracusa therefore the next day purposing to take the
town, made battlement to the walls, where it fortuned him to be taken by
reason of a tumult in his own army: so being a captyue he supped in the
city, as he had dreamed before. Wherefore we ought to give no credit to this
kind of dreams: saying they be so varyable and deceitful. Therefore let them
be as conjectures, which sometime chance or happen. But I would that everye man
shulde think, that they be both deceitful conjectures, and also uncertain,
as many mo be. Let superstition be set aside, and let us remember the saying of
Salomon: where many dreams be, there is much vanity and error.

The. xiii. chapter.
Of Venus or bodelye pleasure.
HIppocrates saith that Venus or bodily lust, is a part of the falling euel
Therefore it is not to be desired, over gredely, nor yet utterly to be
abhorred, saying that the kind of al living rreatures, is conserved by
generation, and as Celsus says: If it be used but seldom, it makes the
body to grow, and used often, it doth not only dry the body, but also it
dissolveth it, utterly because both vital, animal, and natural spirit is
wasted with the immoderate use of it, and the body is begyled also of his
nouryshement.

How be it when there follows neither greyfe nor sorrow after it, there can
comme no great harm of it, and the use of it, is worse in summer, and in
autumn, then either in the winter or in the spring, and it is holsommer in the
night, then in the day, also it is better full, then empty, and all manner of
labour after it, is utterly pernicious.

The. xiiii. Chapter.
Of the times of the year.
THe holsemest time of the year is the spring, and next unto it is winter,
sumer is not so good, and autumn is extreme perilous. For they be best, which
be most temperate and egal, whether they be hot or cold. Therefore autumn
is very dangerous because it is hot then about noone, the morning and
evening both being cold, thereof it comes that the body resolved with the heat
at noone, is made stark, with the sudden cold of the evening, which causes
many diseases. And in the spring, where as is equality (if there be any in
the year) the fairest days be most wholesome, and raynye days be better than
clowdye without rain, and in winter those days are best, that be not wyndye,
and in summer, when the western wind blows.

Sum peradventure will loke that I shulde have writ of bathes saying that
there is nothing that is more medicinable than they be: But forasmuch as we
englyshmen have no use of them, and also saying that there are divers, which
have wryt of them very well in English, I thought I had no need to
entermedle with them, yet if any man will use them, let him bathe him in
warm water, before meat, and after meat, in cold, and he shall not greatly
err in the taking of them.

Finis.
The contents of this book.
The first book.
An exhortation of Physic to her ministers. Fol. iiii. The diversity of
sectes in phisike. Fol. vi. Of the Elements. Fol. xii. The difference of
temperatures. Fol. xiii. The generation of the liver, of the heart, and of the
brain. Fol. xix. The sections of the especial parts of the body. Fol.
xxiii. Of veins, pulses, and sinews. Fol. xl. Of humours. Fol. xlii. Of
blood. Fol. xliii. Of fleume. Fol. eodem. Of choler. Fol. eodem. Of
melancholy, or black choler. Fol. xliiii. Of unnatural humours. Fol. eod. Of
unnatural fleume. Fol. xlv. Of unnatural yelowe choler. Fol. eod. Of
melancholy unnatural. Fol. eod. Of Spirits. Fol. xlvii. Of animal spirits.
Fol. xlviii.
The second book.
Of natural powers and actions. Fol. xlix. Of nutrition. Fol. li. Of the
faculties or virtues, with which nature hath furnisshed every part, serving
to nutrition. Fol. lvi. Of the power or virtue attractive. Fo. lvll. Of the
virtue retentive. Fol. lix. Of concoction. Fol. lx. Of the virtue expulsiue.
Fol. eod. Of the provoking of appetite. Fo. lxiii. Of the diversity of food.
Fol. lxiiii. Of diverse qualities of meates. Fol. lxxiii Meates of good juice.
Fol. eod. Meates of evil juice. Fol. liix. Of meates that be mild and gentle
of Nature, and of the contrary. Fol. eod. Of meates engendering fleume. Fol.
lxx. Meates good for the stomach. Fol. lxx. Euel meates for the stomach. Fol.
eod Of meates that make the belly to swell, and what delay the same Fol.
lxxi. Of things engendering heat or cold. fo. eod. Of meates that putrifye in
the maw, and other that do not. Fol. lxxii. Of things that leuse the body.
Fol. eod. Of things byndyng the belly. Fol. lxxil. Of things provoking
urine. Fol. eod. Of things provoking sleep, and other that cause watch. Fol.
eodem.
The third book.
Of exercise. Fol. lxxiiii. Of dinner or eating time. Fol. lxxvii Of rest
after meat. Fol. lxxix. Of Sleep. Fol. lxxx. Of Slepynge time of the wholesome
lying in bed. Fol. lxxxiiii. Of lunge watchynge. Fol. lxxxv. Of the
diversity of dreams. Fol. lxxxvi. Of Venus. Fol. xciii. Of the times of the
year Fol. xciiii.
FINIS.
Fol. 4. Pagi. i. Line. 4. rede Tipheus. Fol. 6. page. i. line. 12. rede to
perceive. Fol. 6. page. ii. line. 15. rede gathering. Fol. 14. page. i. lin. 69.
rede distributiua. Fol. 15. page. i. line. 17. read (...). Fol. 27. page. ii.
line. 22. rede rare. Fol. 35. page. ii. line. 14. rede Ieiunum. Fol. 69. page. i.
lin. 8. rede clammye. Fol. 79. page. i. line. 14. rede noone.
Finis.
Imprinted at London by Edwarde Whytchurche. Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum
solum.


