THE Touchstone of Complexions. Generally appliable, expedient and profitable
for all such, as be desirous careful of their bodylye health. CONTAINING MOST
easy rules ready tokens, where by every one may perfectly try, and thoroughly
know, as well the exact state, habit, disposition, and constitution, of his
own Body outwordly: as also the inclinations, affections, motions, desires of
his mind inwardly.

First written in Latin, by Leuine Lemnie, and now englished by Thomas Newton.

Nosce teips um.

Imprinted at London, in Fleetesreete, by Thomas Marsh. Anno. 1576.

Cum Priuilegio.

TO THE RIGHT honourable, his singular good Lord, Sir VVilliam Brooke Knight,
Baron Cobham, and Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports: Thomas Newton, his humble
Orator, wishes long life, increase of honour, with prosperous health, and
eternal felicity.
SVndrye times (right Honourable and my singular good Lord) debating with my
self the chief causes, why Arts and disciplines do (in these Alcyon days of
ours) so vniuersallye flourish, although I know well enough that sundry
men can coign sundry reasons, and allege manifold verdictes and probable
arguments therefore: yet in my simple judgment, nothing more effectually
whetts the wits of the studious, nor more lustelye he awakes the courages
of the learned, then doth the favourable furtherance and cheerful
countenance, of the Prince and Nobility. For, honour, preferment, dignity,
praise, feeds nourishes and mainteyneth, both Arts and virtues: and Glory
is a sharpe spur, that vehemently pricks forward gallant heads, and
pregnaut natures, to attempt worthy enterprises. We see, that thig to be
greedily (and as it were, with a certain kind of Ambition) on al hands
sought for and pursued, whereunto the Prince and Peers are studiouslye
inclined. And therefore the less marvel is it, though in Royalmes and
Countries governed by barbarous Princes, monstrous Tyrannes, learning be
utterly prouigated: and though the Muses taking their flight thence, do
abandon that soil, where they see themselves so slenderlye regarded, and so
churlishlie entertained. As contrariwise, where they be reverenced, cherished
maintained had in price, there do they endenizo themselves, settle their
dwellings. And this surely (my L.) do I think to be one, or rather an only
cause, which in this old age later caste of the world, raises up among us,
such a plentiful Harvest of ripe and excellent wits, conspicuous in every
faculty: because by special Privilege fro the Almighty, and of his great
bounty and gracious goodness towards us, we have such a godly, virtuous,
learned Princess, such an honourable State of noble Personages, themselves not
only in every several Art singulerly skilled, but also to the professors
thereof (like terrene Gods) benign and bounteous. Of whom, may be said that,
which (though of unlike persons) Cicero reported of Socrates, saying, that
there were further deeper matters to be conceived and thought of Socrates, then
in all Plato his Books, could be purported or fully decyphered. Whose
lenities and favourable inclinations, would not, neither ought to be abused
(as they are by some to much) with the Patronage of every frivolous facy
tryflyng toy, tending neither to profitable use in the common wealth, nor to
any available purpose, touching public society. Whereas many of the, if
they could find in their harts, otherwise to tickle their pens with matters
of better importance, and employ their golden gifts to the aduauncemet of
virtue and commodity of their Country: in steed of being fine Architectes
and contrivers of matters offensive and scandalous, they might eternize
themselves (like good mebers and worthy Ornaments of their Country, within
the Beadrolle of Fame and perpetuity. What opinio that invincible Prince
Alexander of Macedonie, had of all vain Arts, foolish baables, fantastical
toys, and curious devises, well appears by the reward, which he in
presence of his Nobles, and Soldiers, publicly gave unto a certain dapper
fellow (one of his hoaste) who partly upon a bravery and ostentation of his
cunning, but chieflye in hope of some magnificent reward, did before the
Kings presence, cast or throw a kind of small Pulse, called a Cichpease, through
a Needles eye, beig set a pretty distauce of, that many times without any
missing. Which vayn trick, thriftless devise, (sauouringe altogether of a
little foolish curiosity, and nothing at al, of any expediet use or commodity)
many of the beholders with admiration commended, and deemed right worthy of
recompense. In fine, because the skilful Squire, should not loose the hoped
fruit, of that his practised knack, and notable singularity: the King
rewarded him only with a Bushel of Cichpeaso. A codigne guerdon (doubtless)
and very fit to counteruayle such a peevish Practise and unnecessary
Mataeotechnie.

A great folly therefore forwardness is it in man nature, to bestow such great
study, pain, care, cost, industry in attaining such needless frivolous
tromperies: the having whereof, nozzeleth the hauer Artist, in loitering
idleness, breeds otherwise great inconvenience in the body of the whole
common wealth: Which deformity and abuse, many learned Clerks bewaylinge,
have in each of their several professions, by writing and otherwise
graphicallye depainted. And among many, this Author whom I now (upon
confidence of the generosity of your noble nature) presume to present and
exhibit unto your Lordship, going a nearer way to worcke then many others,
doth not only) by artificial conteplation) wade into the very Gulf Camaryne
of man apparaut wilfulness: but also rushing into the very bowles of
Nature, bewrays, (as with a pencil) lively sets down the affections,
condicios, plyghtes, habits, and dispositions, of every several Complexion.
And, as one that well knew himself not to be borne only for himself, hath
frankly, friendly, and learnedly bequeathed the Talent of his knowledge to a
public and universal commodity. In reading whereof, I am persuaded, that
none of indifferent judgement, shall think his oil labour lost, neither his
time and travail misspent: at least wise, if it were with like grace in any
respect, delivered out in English, as he hath done, and left it in the Latin.

But surely I have done my best, trusting that others in recompense of my
travail, will not, upon a Spleen, requite me with their worst, neither
miscostrue my meaning, which was in plain terms and vulgar phrase to go as
near to my Authors plotforme, as my adle head could well imagine.

And now being arrived to Land, after a pretty long voyage and pleasant
saylinge, in this his Philosophical Sea, I approach in most dutiful
humility, with such News and Wares, as I have heard, seen, read, and
gotten, unto your Honour, whom for many respects, I mistrust not, but will
honourably deign to hear me. And now do I stand at the Bar of courtesy,
to hear your Lordshippes doom, concerning this my temerity. The comfortable
expectation whereof, puts me in no small hope, that all the better sort
(moved by your Lordshippes example will be the more easy and ready, to
dispense with my unmellowed adolescency. As for the forwarder and eluisher
Crew, which be so dainty mouthed, that nothing can please, so squeymish
stomached, that nothing can satisfy, let this poor Book (in Gods name)
take his chance among them, as it falls out: yea let it be as AEsope his
fyle, to grate and grynde their viperous teeth withal. Sure I am that their
severe and Critical cesures, can no more disquiet me hereafter, then the
Conscience of mine own imbecility hath terrified and displeased me already.
Yet if things were to be obtained and compassed by wishing, I wold that
neither this Book, neither any other heretofore by me published, should
offend any, no not the very waywardest. But because my case may peradventure
now stand no better, then it did lunge agone, with the Philosopher Theodorus
Atheniensis, who complained of great discurtesy showed unto him, because those
things which he gave with the right hand, were snatched up and taken by his
Auditory, with the left: meaning thereby his works and Lectures, which he
publishing to good purpose, were wrested, and sundrely by captious carpers,
canuassed with sinister interpretations: therefore for refuge I flee into the
Sanctuary of your Lordships wonted clemency, with trust, thence not to be
shouldered out and rejected, but freely to be allowed the benefit of your
goodness, that I may lean upon the staff of your approved wisdom
authority, and creep under the Targe of your favourable prorection, against
the currish bawling, rancklinge tooth of barking Theon. In assured hope whereof
I rest: beseeching God to endue and bless you, with the Right honourable Lady
Francis, your Lordships virtuous and loving wife, with the rich gifts of his
heavenly grace, and with continuance of prosperous health both of soul and
body, to his honour and glory, your own desires and comforts, and to the
profit of this your native Country.

From Butley in Cheshire, the 21. of September. 1576. Your good Lordships,
wholly to command Thomas Newton

FOR THE MAINTENAVNCE AND preservation of Health (being the best and chiefest
thing that any man in this life can wish or desire) it is most requisite to
have a perfect knowledge of our own bodies.
The first Chapter.
CICERO that worthy father of al learning and eloquence, Lib. 2. Offic.
saith ( in my opinion right pithilre) that man his health is preserved, by
knowledge of his own body, and by using such things as are thereto either
beneficial or hurtful: finally in continence of life, ordrlye usage of
body, Mainteners of health.
and forbearing of pleasures, which in my judgment are not so hurtful to the
body, as they be pernicious to the mind. It behooves therefore and it stands
every man upon, perfectly and thoroughly to know the habit constitution of his
own body, which consists in a temperament a mixture of four qualities,
hoate, moist, cold and dry. For by this means shall he be a great deal better
able to keep himself in health, and to wythstand sickness or recure diseases
whenever they happen.

And since natural health is nothing else but a right constitution and state
of the body and all parts thereof, Health.
whereby every several meber discharges orderly executes his proper fuction,
office, duty and action, without any manner of let or greeuaunce: and sithence
Sickness, as an affect contrary to nature, Sickness.
either making worse or altogether hindering this action, molestinge payning
nature, clean contrary to health and natural sadness: I cannot see how any
man conveniently can either keep himself in that present state of good
health wherein he is, or restore the same being empayred and discrased,
unless he have the knowledge of his own body, be ripe and skilful in the
temperament thereof.

And albeit the Soul be far more excellent then the body, Soul.
and be the better part of ma, for the furniture and garnishing whereof, I would
have the chiefest care and industry bestowed: yet notwithstanding, I judge it
right needful also to have a diligent eye and respect to the body, least
(otherwise) it should be a burden to the Soul, and hinder it from matters of
more wayght and worthiness. For the body being healthful, every member doth
his office and duty, and is to the mind (at whose commandment it stands)
obeysaunt and serviceable. To this end is that worthy saying of the Poet
Juvenal.

Most chiefly ought our prayers to be made,
For healthy mind within a body sound: Sat. 10.

Ask courage stout, and live in honest trade,
Fear not at all, of death the lethal wound:
Pass forth thy days, use Natures gifts aright,
In pleasant sort with them thy self delight.
Acquaint thy self to labour, toil and drudge:
Shrink not a vvhit, rage not with svvellinge ire,
Have not to deal with trade of scraping snudge
Who never hath enough to his desire:
To quiet life is no mo ways but one,
If thou wilt know, it virtue is alone.
Which gifts of body mind, True goods.
whosoever is endued withal, unto him can no surer and stedfaster possession
happen: against them prevails neither the instability of fortune, neither
cathe mutability of worldly fickleness chaleg either right or superiority. For
great wealth, Health passes gold.
large possessions, sumptuous buildings, huge revenues, ample patrimonyes,
glorious titles, and Honourable Styles in comparison of these are of none
account, neither serve they to any use, nor bring to man any cotentacion.
Consider what the Poet doth here say, and by these, consider of all the rest.

Not house nor land, not gold nor fee,
The Corps can ease from crazed plight,
Nor mind from cares: Hor. lib. 1 Epist.
sound must he be,
That gotten goods would use aright.
Wherefore sith health of body and health of mind are by good right to be
reckened among the chiefest goods and of all other the best: reason requires,
and expedient also is it for all men, in procuring and preserving ye same, to
bestow their chiefest care and whole diligence: and both for themselves for so
many as depend upon them, earnestly to desire these comfortable stays, and
cheerishmentes of life, the better more commodiously to pass the race of this
transitory pilgrimage without dislykinge or greeuaunce. For if we will
credit Horace: What better thing can mother wish,
her tender Babe until,
Then vvysedome, Epist. ad Albium.
utterance, favour, fame,
with health and wealth at will?


He therefore that gladly would run his race pleasantly pass forth his whole
days, must have special care to keep himself in perfect health: but first
and pricipally in the health of mind, and next of body, without whose
perfect state and soundnes, the mind it self is not rightly sustained,
upheld nor comforted. For by the ignorance or not knowing of our own
selves, and by negligent looking to the state of our own bodies and minds,
Nosce te ipsum.
we are haled, and (will we nill we) thrown into sondrye diseases and
innumerable affections, and (like a ship full fraighte with wares in tempestuous
boisterous weather) carried and dashed upon the rocks of perturbation. Whereby
it comes to pass that many are by death cut of, even in their lustyest
time, which have no care, no orderly respect, nor choice, in preservation and
maintenance of their bodily health. To this very end and effect, is that
wholesome admonition of the wyseman: Take heed to thy self, Eccles. 7
least thou die before thy time.

By which saying, he warns every one, so to order and dispose his life,
Death by ill diet many times hastened before his due time
that through riot and intemperate dealing, he hasten not his death before his
time, and before he have in a manner rune half his race.

Now let every man consider with himself, how miserable and how wearysome also
it is to have a body never in health but altogether martyred with sickness and
soars, (reason being mastered, banished and oppressed) to have the mind
defiled and utterly with inward vices polluted. Howe can life (I say) be unto
such a man pleasant or sweet, or howe can the mind be quiet and well
stayed? For so much therefore as nothing is better then health, let every man
diligently look to the same, and mark how much he hath swarued and strayed
from moderate order and temperature.

This consideration with himself shall work in him much good effect, and
stand him in great steed, that in case his body be lusty and healthful,
he may in the same state still continue and cheerish it with helps and
preseruations thereto convenient. But if it be fall into worse plight, and not
in so good case of soundnes as before it was, then to seek ways and means
how to recure bring it again to his former state of healthines. For as humours
are easily changed one into another, and suffer mutual transmutacion through
moderate exercise, and such convenient meats and nourishmets, as to natural
heat are cherishable: So again the ill distempered state of body, through
wholesome diet and order, is made lustier and reformed into better. And even as
we see members fractured, burst, wrenched and dislocated, to be brought into
their right places again: so may health (being empayred) be restored and
reduced into his former integrity. For the minds and bodies of men be in a
manner as it were young Sproutes trees, which being artificially handled, and
cunningly dealt withal (yea although before wield and unfruitful) yet as
Virgill saith.

If they be graft a new, and put
in other changed soil, Lib. 2. Georg.

From nature wild which erst they had,
They quite and clean recoil,
And yield such fruit as best you like,
by force of handy toil.
Contrarywyse, if the husband be negligent careless, his ground becomes
barrayne, rugged, ouergrowen with wredes and disabled fro bearing any grain
that is good or profitable. The like reason is to be yielded of the minds of
men. The mind.
For there be many excellent wits and very towardly natures, which by
unthrifty company and lewd education, do degenerate from their good inclination
of nature, and become altogether rebellious, wilful, lewd and barbarous. Some
again, whose nature is prove and inclinable to evil, yet by help of
learning and good education are reclaimed and won from their froward
disposition become worthy members, stays ornaments in their Country. And
therefore no man is to think or persuade himself, that an ill nature may not
be altered, sithece rude wits, not yet trained to any discipline and
learning, may like soft wax, or as tractable and moist clay, be fashioned,
framed and made applyable to learn any knowledge, and virtue, any civility:
and by artificial instruction be trained to conceive Arts and behaviour both
comely and commendable. Thus likewyse in graffinge and planting (which is as
witty a devise as proper a feat as any) we see wild trees to change their
old nature, and to bear fruit both wholesome and toothsome. Among wield
Beasts also, we see how the diligence, forecast, wit and policy of man
makes them tame serviceable. An example hereof may we see in Mago, a worthy
Duke among the Carthaginias, who (as Plinie saith) ib. 8. ca.
was the first among them that dared with his hand stroke and handle a tamed
Lion: 7.
for which Act, his Countreyfolks attainted him, as one, whom they thought not
amiss to restrain from liberty and debar from authority, Mago made Lio
tame.
for yt his wysedom and wise dealings seemed so excellent, yt they judged him a
man able to persuade any thing yt him listed, who had thus strangely trained
and tamed a wild Lion.

But that persons of Melancholic nature or of any other constitution
whatsoever, (so that the distemperature have not been of to long cotinuaunce
and the party to far stricken in age) may be altered and brought to a better
state, there is no ma that needs to doubt. For who doth not plainly see, that
strong and very hoate wine, with cold water, or other milder liquor, is may be
allayed? Semblably again, wine that is small, mingled, and of watery relice, yet
being put to other liquor that is stronger and of a better grape, is
quickened, and made both better and sharper. And so humours in a man being
either of themselves evil, or meeting with others of other quality, are through
their comixtion therewith, qualified and wax milder, and leaving their own
natural quality are altered into an other, of stranger nature, effect, and
operation. Thus is the heate of Choler, by access and myxture of blood
phlegm, mitigated. Thus is phlegm by admixtion of yelow Choler, heated, and
much ^bated from his own cold and moyste quality, becoming thereby less
hurtful to the body. And in like sort may we conclude of all the rest.

Such nourishments and meates as engender good blood juice are hereunto very
available, out of which the humours spyrits (which be the incensours and
stirrers forward of the mind) obtain and receive their nature. What makes
good digestion.
Now, there is nothing more effectual to make good perfect digestion and to
stir up the Spirits, then sleep, exercise, and wine, so ye same be pure,
good, and moderatelye used, as the other also must be. For so doth it stir
up make sincere, lively and clear Spirits, from whence proceeds
cheerefulnes, joy, quickness and mirth of the mind. For the meates nourishments
(which by nature are laboured into humours) being eaten and washed down with
good and wholesome wine, have freer passage into all the parts of the body, and
distribute their nourishment into them more effectually. There is nothing
therefore yt so much banishes phasyes sorrow out of a mans mind, Eccle. 31.
as pleasant merry company, and moderate use of wine. And of this, What
makes a man merry.
did that precise and sterne natured Zeno, give a notable example: whose mind
was so much estranged from all pleasant conceits ordinary courtesies of
common humanity, that he was never at all moved with any affections, no not
such as be naturally incidente and engraffed in every man. And yet when he was
a little whittled with wine, he began to change his copy, and to be as merry
and as bone a companion as who was best. And being on a time asked by one of
his merry mates, how it happened, that he being otherwise so woderfully severe
and crabbed, yet at the wine was so pleasant and conceiptuous: he merely
answered, that he was like to a kind of Pulse called Lupines. The nature of
Lupines.
Which kind of Pulse, although they be naturally bitter, and by their
bitterness, of force to kill worms, yet the same being steeped soaked in water,
renounce and leave all bitterness and become both sweet pleasant. And this is
naturally given to all men, that when the body is refreshed with meat and
drink, al bitterness, sorrow and heaviness is expelled, and banished. For the
Spirits by moderate drinking of wine are stirred up, and the mind of man,
(which in them that be fasting and hungry is faint, weak and like unto fire
raked over with ashes, almost quenched) A dead man heavier the a living.
is reuyued. And this is the cause, why a dead body is heavier the a living,
because all his Spirits are vanished and departed out of him: and so likewyse
is a fasting person heavier then one that hath filled his belly: and one yt
sleeps weightier then one yt watches. And therefore my fashion is to advise
and counsel, Melacholique folks and sullen natured personnes, to use
banqueting and good cheer among honest and merry copany. For thus, after
Plato, writes the Poet.

Even old Dan Catoes stomach oft, Hor lib. 3 Oda 21.

By vvyne was made to come aloft.
Which man (although churlish, sterne frowning) yet did wine so much drive away
his natural seueritye and grimm countenance, that among the other guests,
he became a pleasant companion, and of manners very gentle and familiar. For
this worthy Gentleman, (although otherwise he was a very precise comptroller,
and of Stoical gravity) perceived well enough, that mas nature required some
relaxatios delights, and yt it may not log continue, without some mirth pleasant
recreation. Let therefore every man take surueigh of himself, and search out,
what his nature most desitreth, in what state his body stadeth, what thing it
is that he feels himself to be helped, and what to be offended withal. And
if he find the plight and state of his body to be in equability and perfect
temperatenes, it shall be good to cheerishe and preserve it with his like: but if
it shrinck from his said temperate habit, and decline to an inteperatenes,
then had it need to be helped and recured with his contraries.

Thus if a man through abundance of humours, Every man must search out his
own inclination and nature.
and stoare of blood and Spirits, feel himself prone to carnality and
fleshly lust, let him by altering his order diet, enjoin to himself a more
strict ordinary, frame his dealings to a more stayed moderation. But if he
feel himself to be of nature somewhat sulleyne and sterne, give somewhat to
be wayward, whining, testye, churlish, and intractable then reason wills,
such a one to be reclaimed to an order and trade of life, gentler and
pleasanter, insomuch it shall not be ill for such a one to frequent daucing,
It is some^ ^ time good to change nature.
singing, women's flatteries, alluremets and embracings: provided always, that
all the same be not otherwise done nor meant, but in honesty and comeliness,
within a reasonable measure, also within the bounds of lawful wedlock. For the
state of Matrimony (as Columella avouches out of Xenophos book of Household)
Lib. 12. Cap. 1.
is in such sort appointed by nature, that in it is contained not only the
pleasautest, but also the profitablest societye of life. And least mankind in
process of time, Genes. 2.
should come to an utter ruin and decay, it pleased God by this lawful means
to join man and woman together, that of their inseparable combinacion, the
state of man should might by mutual help one of an other, be eased and
comforted: and that (beside the love and desire that they have to bring furth
children) The commodity of matrimony.
they might be tied and bound together equally and indifferentlye to
participate all fortune whatsoever should betide.

But for so much as approved and skilful me that have written books for the
maintenance of men's health generally, do specially set down these three
principal things: To eat moderately, and leave somewhat with an appetite:
Three most wholesome things.

To use convenient exercise:
And to live continently without vvastinge seed of generation.


I take it to be the best way, to reduce the whole substance of the matter
mayntenauce of health to this prescribed rule and direction. For seeing that
measurable repast and feeding (all surphet and glotony being banished) makes
a sound body: seeing (I say,) exercise by shaking of all drow tsinesse and
sloth, makes the body strong and lively: then no more, but hark what a
short lesso Virgill gives for the other.

No better vvaye the strength of mind,
And povvers thereof still to maintain: Georg. 3,

Then Venus play and Love so blind,
To shun and vvarely to refrain.
Of the nature and differences of Spirits, what they work in mans body, and
what affections they cause. The second Chapter.
Forasmuch as the Spirit is the original maintener and conueigher of
natural heate, whereunto moisture necessarilye adheres: that the Soul (by
the mynisterye and aid thereof) performs her powers and faculties, and
atchieueth all her actions: it is requisite here next to discourse upon it, and
upon all the differences thereof. For saying there be three especial things,
The body consists in three things.
in whose temperature and moderation, the health of mans body doth pricipally
consist, vz. vital moisture, natural heate, Spirit, which combines all
things, and imparts his force, virtue nature, unto them: our present purpose
being considered, we cannot by order choose, but of necessity must presently
somewhat speak thereof. Vital moisture is the nourishment and matter of
natural heate, Humour.
whereupon it works, and by the benefit thereof is maintained and preserved.
With this Humour or vital moisture, is natural heate fed and cherished, and
from the same receives continual maintenance, Heate.
and from it participateth vital power, whereby all Creatures do live, are
nourished, increased, preserved procreated. Spirit is the seat and caryer of
Heate, Spirit.
by whose help and mynisterye, it is conueyed and sent by the conduits and
passages of the Arteryes, to every several part of the body. Wherefore
worthily is this Spirit thought to be the chief and principal Instrument,
that procures and executes every action.

These three do vnseperably cleave together, mutuallye help one an other, and
cannot be sundered, without present death of the party, and for this cause, do
we thus in one definition express, conclude and comprehend, their force and
nature within one definition. Natural heat is nothig else, but an original
humour, with vital spirit and heate totally moystened. But forasmuch as
Spirit conteyneth vital heate, and is of all the faculties, ruler and
directer, spredeth it self most swiftly throughout the whole body, carries and
extends his powers into every part thereof universally, beside this, doth
manifestly change and alter the state both of body and mind: therefore as the
rest require great labour and diligence upon them to be bestowed, so specially
upon this is ye chiefest care to be take, to restore, mayntein, and cheerish
it. For if it be sincere and pure, not mingled with any strange or foreign
quality, it causes tranquillity of mind, frames manners in good order fashio,
and finally qualifyeth and calmeth all affections.

The mind of man to honesty it frames,
And with the love of virtuous life enflames. Pers. Sat. ^.

But if it be any white infected, or with any vice soiled, then is the
quietness of the mind disturbed and stirred to many inconvenient enormities.
For, as great blustering wynds upon the Sea and Land, cause grievous,
terrible and raging tempests, and much other harm to ensue: So likewyse, if
the Spirits be disquieted out of frame, they engender and procure diverse
sorts of affections in the mind, carry the same (maugre all reason) like a
ship without guide and Rather, upon the rocks of sondry inconveniences. Now
the things wherewith our inward Spirits are most dulled, Things hurt full
to the spirits of man.
quenched, and damnifyed, are these: fulsome Air, ouermuich carnal copulation,
unseasonable watching, excessive heate, chafing and labour, lunge fasting,
heaviness of the mind and sadness: According to that saying of the wise man:
A merry hart makes a lusty age, Prouer. 17
but a sorovvfull Spirit dries up the bones. Heaviness brings old age
before the times, and carefulnes vveareth avvaye a mans days. Eccle. 30.


But quiet and seasonable sleep, good, pure well relished wine, Things
cofortinge the Spirits.
meery company, moderate exercise, sweet sinelles and fragrant savours,
refresh the Spirits, quicken and revive them, yea being dulled and greatly
impaired. Which is evident to be seen in such as falling into trauces and
lying (for a time) as dead, yet by the smell of sweet savours are brought
again and recovered into their former state.

For saying that the Spirit is a certain vapour, effluence or expyratio,
proceeding out of the humours, What Spirit is.
it stands us upon, to use the most exquiste diet that may be, to thend
that the meates and nourishmets being laboured into good wholesome juice, may
make the Spirits, pure, sincere and perfect. And thus, sweet air, pleasaut
sentes, devoid of gross and fusty vapours, strykinge up into the brain, do
marvelously comfort and clarify the instruments of the Senses, and enable
them to do perform al their proper actions.

And although ye Heart in a ma, be as the Well spring or fountain, The heart is
the fountain of life.
from whom the Spirits are derived, because the Arteryes come from it, even as
synewes from the Brain, and veins from the Liver: yet notwithstanding,
according to ye diversity and nature of the place, they are called by other
names, and have other powers appropriate unto them. Of these and al other
faculties reigning in man, the principal and oryginall beginning is at the
very principles and beginning of generation, to wit, generatiue seed and
feminine blood: which be afterward conserved and maintained by nourishmentes,
even as the flame is with oil: and out of these the Spirits proceed.

For ye better understanding of all which things, I will particularly set down
the procreation of the Spirits, with their nature, power, difference and
effects: beginning first at the powers and faculties natural. For by their
office is it brought to pass, that the meat we eat is concocted turned into
the nourishmet of the body. Also there be four virtues, whereby all living
Creatures with meat received, are nourished increased: The first attractive,
the second retentive, Four natural povvers.
the third digestiue, and the fourth expulsiue. To which virtues or powers,
appendant and belonging to all the parts of the body, the first chief
original of the Spirits ought to be referred. For first, as soon as the
meat is mynced chawed with the teeth, The office of digestio.
it descedeth into the stomach, being thither attracted, then digested, and
made substantial and turned to the proper nourishmet and increase of the
member. And such part or portion thereof, as serves not to this use, it
refuses and rejects. Here therefore the Spirit hath his first beginning.
And if nature be good strong in this office of digestion, it happens thereby
that the Spirits be made pure, clear, and sincere: Howe affections are
caused.
but if concoction be hindered, or any other distemperatnes happen, the is the
meat altered and changed into vaporous belchinge, stinking fumes, and fulsome
breathing, which ascending up out of the stomach, disturb and hurt the brain
and mind, insomuch y^ such persons are easily quickly provoked to brawling,
chiding, strife and dissention. For when the Humours be not sufficiently and
enough concoted and attenuate, impure Spirits proceed out of them, enforcing
a manifest alteration of the state, as well of the body as of the mind.
Cruditie hurtful.
And therefore in any wise, cruditie is to be avoided, because it makes ill
humours troubled Spirits, as well of meates of good juice, as of those y^ are
bad: albeit the diseases engendered by want of concoction of meates hurtful,
be worse and of more danger. For they cause loathsome smells and fulsome
belchings, and make the body to break out illfauourably in every place with
scabs, botches, blaynes, and mangmesse.

For when there is abundance of humours in the body, Oppilation and
putrefaction, the original cause of diseases.
it cannot be chose but Agues must needs be engendered of that continual
obstruction and putrefaction: and stoare of diseases must needs spring out
thereof, unless those excrementes by continual labour and convenient exercise
be purged, and the humours reduced into good blood. For then a sweet pleasaut
sent proceeding therout, comfort the head and tempers and connenientlye
moysteneth the brain. Otherwise, if concoction be troubled, there do strike up
into the head, gross fumie vapours, such as by example we see green wood to
make, that is smered and covered over with pitch and talowe. And hereupon it
happens that the mind sometime conceives strange and absurd imaginations,
yea sometimes falls into dotage, raving, madness, frenzy, melancholy,
fury or some other distemperaunce.

But if the Stomach do his part and office thoroughly, if concoction be not
altogether hindered, and that the passages about the Liver, and the other
parts of the body, do give free passge to ye humours, then ye vaspours
asceding up into the head, are nothing so hurtful, neither do they greatly
disturb and trouble the inward mind: and yet is not a man altogether clear
and free from affections: but they be such (I say) as he hath in his own
power, easily to qualify, stay, and inhibite. Natural Spirit therefore
being made of the purest alimente in the Liver, is the beginning of the
residue. For by it is the vital spirit and the animal also nourished,
insomuch that the power or faculty animal, uses the spirit natural as an
instrument to these great affections and motions, whereunto (retecting and
little regarding right reason) we are many times provoked. For even as in a
civil tumult and sedicious uproar among the common people, ye Magistrate hath
much ado to appease and mollifye the wilful peoples rage and headiness: so
likewise reason is not able easily to subdue the lewd affections, and vnbrydled
motions, that grow by immoderate gurmandyze, surphet, and drunkenness. What
riott brings a man to.
For who is he, that being thoroughly whittled in drink, doth not beastly
rush into venerous lust, and filthy desires? For when the body is bombasted
with drink, and bellycheere, the privities and secrete parts do swell, and
have a marvelous desire to carnal coiture.

Hereof it comes, that such persons are delighted with unchaste Rhythmes,
and songs of rybaldry, odious to honest ears, and pernicious to the mind,
indecent hopping and dancing, unseemly clipping and kissing, and much other
filthy behaviour. By this means that mynsing minion, through her fine and
lascivious daunfynge, Matth. 14 Iohn Baptist beheaded.
caused the head of holy Iohn Baptist the forerunner of Christ, to be
chopped of: for the kingee mind was so enchanted with her filthy and
pernicious love, that (clean abandoning all reason and right judgement) he
granted to her the head of him, whose wholesome admonitions and counsel he was
wont before pacientlye to hear and well to like of. Which Evangelical example
is a warning to all Noble men, and as many as have the government of common
weals, that they cruelly rage not against the innocent neither torment and
put to death, such as painefully and syncerely preach the truth, but rather by
all means to wythstande and root out such as be favourers of factions,
Disturbers of public peace ought to be rooted out.
enter into any practises contrary to right and conscience, only to disturb
the public tranquillity, and to prejudice their Country.

The workmanship and frame of mans body consists of many parts, and
therein as in the state of a Common wealth be contained many orders and sondry
offices. The form of a common wealth.
In the Common wealth there be the poor Comminaltie, lowest in degree, in
which nober are reckned drudges, Porters, Sailors, Cobblers, Tinkers, Carters,
Tipplers, handy Artyficers, filthy Bawds, Butchers, Cooks, Botchers and such
like: next in degree to them are Merchants and Trafiquers, among whom, some by
craft and subtlety, enueigle and deceive others of meaner calling and
ability: albeit, there be also of them, which practise their trade honestly and
commendablye, not by collusion and fraudulet dealing, but by godly and
necessary means. After them, are the high Magistrates and Peers of the
Realm, who by due administration of the Laws and political ordinances,
keep the rude multitude in due order of obedience, and see public peace and
traquillity maintained. Last of all, are they whose office being of higher
authority, do instruct and train up the residue in the true knowledge of
Christian religion: and to plant in them an undoubted faith, of their salvation
at God the Fathers hand, through his son Christ. The like order,
comeliness and agreemente is in the body of man, wherein every part doth
properly orderly execute his peculiar office. And hereuppon S. Paule by example
of the harmony and agreement of mans body, 1. Cor. 12.
and all the parts thereof, takes occasion to persuade and exhort every man to
do his office and duty, Members of mans body.
and carefully to labour in his vocation. For all the members of the body be
so lyncked and knit together, and such participacion and consent is between
them, that if one of the smallest toyntes, or the little toe be hurt or pained,
the whole body is distempered and out of quiet. And thus (as Chrysostome
saith). if the foot or one of the fingers ends be pricked with a thorne or
other sharpe thing, al ye other mebers are jointly grieved as well as they, in so
much that the head, which is the honourablest part of all other, stoups to
behold it, the eyes look down, the hands offer their diligent service to
pull out the prick, and to bind up the wound. So likewise there is no part
of the body, which in such case desires not to help his afflicted fellow
member.

Aptly therefore and very properly (as Liuius witnesses) did Menenius the
Orator for example, Li. 2. Dec. 1.
use this persuasion, at what time the common people in a civil broil,
rebelliously disobeyed stubbernelye maligned the Senators and Nobility:
likening this their jarring and discord, to the sedicious contention and
falling out of the members of mans body among themselves.

By which witty devised fable, he persuaded the to forsake their mad
enterprises, and to return every man in peace home to his own house. For as
in the body, so likewise in a common wealth, mutual sedition and civil
variance, tends to the spoil and overthrow of the whole: but contrarywyse,
Concorde keeps and vpholdeth all things, preserves as well the Common wealth,
as the body of man in perfect staye and order. Howe frendlye they all do agree
together, and how of so many parts, every member doth perform his office and
duty, every man in himself by experience sees. No meber in the whole body, but
it serves to some necessary use.
For there is no part nor meber thereof (be it never so small) but it carries
with it not only a comely shape and proporcion, but also otherwise serves for
some necessary use and purpose, of the whole body and every part thereof.

And first to begin from the lowest to the highest. The Foundement, Entrails,
Stomach procure the sustenance and health to the chief members, by whose
help mynisterie, the meat being thoroughly digested, is proportionably
distributed by the veins, unto every several part of the whole body. But if
the Entrails (appointed for the concoction of nourishment) be weak and
feeble, or if any other impediment or fault be in them, whereby the meat
concocted cannot have due recourse and passage to nourish the body, the doth al
go to wrack, and turn into corruption, mynistringe matter and occasion to
Agues, and all other kind of diseases. Signs whereby to know when a man is not
well at ease.
Which by certain tokens may partly be known and felt aforehand, that a man
in such case commonly loathes his meat, hath a puling stomach, and is
inclined to gaping, vomit, stretching, stiffenes in his body.

And because the Spirits exhaled by humours, do participate with other qualities,
thereby disteper the brain, it commonly happens that such persons become
thereby wayward, testye, and very easily carried into sondrye other affections
of the mind. For natural Spirit being caused in the Liver, cannot be made
pure, neither attenuated into airy substance, unless that viscousnesse be
clearly purged free from all affection. But vital spirit hath his original
procreation and beginning of the natural, Vital spirit.
which is spread and diffused from the heart by Arteryes into all the body,
frames in ma diverse manners, according to that grossenes or subtility which
it receives partly of the nourishment, and partly of the condition of the
Air, and state of the Regio. So, they that dwell Northward and in cold
regions, Northern people.
by reason of gross blood and thick Spyrites, are seen to be bold and full
of venturous courage, rude, vnmanerlye, terrible, cruel, fierce, and such as
with very threatening countenance and manacinge words, make others to stand
in fear of them. As concerning any dangerous exploit, they are not a white
afraid to hazard their bodies in the adventure of any perilous extremity.
Which courage and disposition of nature, is not to be found among the people
of Asia: for they be but mere meycockes, and persos very effeminate, shrynkinge
at the least mishap that happens, and with the smallest grief and fear
that can be, their hearts fail them, they as white as a kerchief. Which
difference of mind stomach, Lucane in the hurlyburlies of the civil wars,
in these Verses expressed and uttered.

Such as in th'East and scorching Clymes
are bred: by course of kind, Lib. 1.

And Countries influence, meycockes soft
By daily proof we find.
The North, that cold and frosty it,
Such vveaklings none both breed:
The folks there borne novvarres can daunt:
of death they have no dread.
In this their error happy they.,
whom greatest fear of all,
(Of death I mean) cannot affray,
nor courage once appall.
They reck not they, what brunts they bear,
they fear not enemies blade,
These lads dare venture life and limb,
in manly Martial trade.
For whatsoever they be that have thick gross blood, Gross blud
have consequently corpulent and strong spirits, and herevppon it grows
that they will bear a grudge in memory a lunge time, and not easily forget
those motions and heddines that they once take: hereuppon also it happens yt
many of them being wooded or hurt in fight, upon the sight of their own
blood, do run upon their enemy more fiercely and egrely, and bestow their
blows more vehemently, then before.

But they that have thin blood, have also slender spirits, Thin blood.
and such as soon pass away. Such are soon angry at the first very raging,
but by and by their anger is assuaged and cooled, and as soon as they have a
wound or see their own blood, they are ready to faint and fall down.

But to know how to qualify, bridle, and subdue those great affections and
motions of the mind, that are engendered by great heate of the spirits: I
judge it not amiss for every man, to search out, by what kind of Spirit he
is most led, to what motions in dealings he finds himself most
endaungexed, how fervent or how remiss the agitacions of his mind be. For by
this means, may those things that consist without mediocrity, be reduced and
brought to temperatenes and moderation. Now, this diversity of Spyrites, out
of which springs such and so great diversities of natures and manners,
conceive and take sondry alterations at the humours. Thus the Soul (although
it be singular, as Cicero terms it, vnigena, yet brings forth sondry and
manifold actions, according to the nature of the Spirits, Whence the
diversity of natures comes.
and differences of the instruments. Hence comes such and so great variety
diversity in the thoughts, desyers, affections, actions and perturbatios in
men's minds, insomuch that reason and discretition without a special
assistance of heavenly grace, can scarcely tame and repress the same.

For when the natural and vital faculty, together with the natural and
inward Spirits wax somewhat strong, Rebellio in the body.
and partly by abundance, partly by the quality of meat and nourishment,
have attained strength and power: they reject and cast away the bridle of
reason, draw the spirit animal also (for they be al deryued out of one
fountain) into their faction disordered rebellion. Whereby it happens, that
when any lewd deuyse or wilful thought arises in the mind of man, he is
prone enough to run into dissolute riot, libidinous lust, filthy and
shameful pleasures: if he fortune to espy any pretty wech or beautiful
damsel, Levvde thoughts.
that likes his fantasy, his mind is straight ways inflamed and set on
fire with unlawful desire of her person, for the satisfying of his unbridled
concupiscence: and by reason of the stoare of humours and cocourse of Spyrites
resorting thither fro every part of his body, his privities vndecetly swell, his
meber of generatio becomes stiff, so yt many times it happens, mans mind to
be overcome drowned in fleshly concupiscence, unless by the special grace of
Almighty God, and by meditating upon the wholesome precepts expressed in his
sacred Word, he stoutly wythstande the Sommons of such naughty desires.
This promptness and inclination to evil, is naturally ingraffed in man. The
imaginations and thoughts of mans heart, Gen. 6. 8.
(saith Moses) are only evil and prone to vvickednes, even from their youth
and first beginninges. But the blessed and most comfortable coming of CHRIST
toke away this blemish, who by his precious death and glorious resurrection,
abolished the calamity, and cancelled the bonds of that misery, whereto
Adams transgression had brought us.

The consideration whereof ought in is minds of all men to work thus much,
that because their spirits are provokers and prickers forward both to vices
virtues, every one should with more careful consideration and heed, attend
loke to conserve and govern them orderly.

And although the Animal Spirit be more excellent the the other, Spirit
animal.
and before the rest in dignity, yet in order is it the later. For out of the
natural, which resembles vapour, and proceeds by virtue of the Liver, from
blood, it produces the vital, which is of Aerye nature, and mynistreth unto
it nourishment. And the vital doth procreate the Animal, which by reason of
his thinness and subtility is airy. For it being laboured, prepared and made
in the contexed net, celles and cornerie ventricles of the brain, is greatly
with sweet smells nourished, and with fragrant things refreshed and
cherished. From it is fetched and deryued al the power and facultye which the
soul hath, and from it do al actions issue and proceed, making the same
appliable to all functions. Well worthy therefore is this animal spirit
deemed the proper instrument of the soul to all the senses, for maintenance
of mouinge and nimbleness, and for preservation of the strength, and firmitie of
the Muscles Synewes: for it transports and diffuses his virtues and powers
(as the workemaisters of actions) into the Synewes that have the power of
feeling and moving.

All the instruments therefore of the Senses, endued with this power and virtue
of the Spirit Animal, attain thereby stablenes, for the achievement of
their functions and charges: as for example, If the ways and passages whereby
this spirit ought to go and have passage, be stopped affected, the power of
moving and feeling is taken away, as we evidently note and see to happen in the
Apoplexy, Palsy, Tetanus, and many diseases more. And this spirit Animal is
conveyed into the Synewes, even like the beams of the Sun through a clear
shyninge glass. And even as a fiery heate pierces and enters into a glowyng
hoate iron, yt is very hard, insomuch that the some therewyth becomes soft
and tractable: so doth the Spirit that is finest and thuinest, slylte slyde
into the Synewes. All things therefore that need feeling, moving and
agility, require the force, aid and power of the spyrite Animal: As those
that by nourishment are to be maintained, continued, and kept, require the
natural and vital faculties and spirits. He therefore that would preserve
his spirits vndemnifyed, and them make most sincere and perfect, must
endeavour at any hand to keep his body in right good plight and order.

For as Galene witnesses: The keeping of a good temperamente and order, 12.
Meth.
is a singular aid and help to conserve the natural faculties, and to
cheerishe the spirits. And as unkindly blasts and uncouth whyrlewyndes, do
sondrywyse affect our bodies, and not of men only, but also of Beasts, Corn
and Plants, either through their tomuch moystnes or tomuch dryness, or
finally by their nipping cold or parching heate: Even so the Spirits within
us, either through their abundance or quality, engender bring forth sondry
affects in us, and manifestly alter y^ state as well of body as of mind. For
where the Spirits be gross, thick and cold, it happens the mind to be
ouerclowded (as the dymmed Sun) not to shyne bright out. And this is the
reason, that persons in this sort affected have duller wits, and blunter
capacities. For proof whereof, we are to see and consider, such as are borne
and bred near to the Pole Artic icy Sea, who (for the most part are very
huge strong bodied, but for wit and learning, mere doltes Asseheads: albeit
this Nation through the great care singular wisdom of the most noble Prince
Erick king of Svveden, Erick king of Sweden.
is now trained to more civil order, have their minds with goodly qualities
right virtuously adorned.

But such as have their Spirits moderatelye cold, are persons constant, sted
fast, Germans
and faithful to deal wtal, and every thing which they atepte, is advisedly
and earnestly done, so that lightly they will not start from their once
conceived opinion: but by reason of their coldness fayntnes of heate (except
industrious education cause the contrary) commonly they be not very quick
witted nor of very precise judgement, neither yet crafty and deceitful, nor
such as by subtle drifts wiliness, seek to supplate and vndermyne their
enemy.

But they that have moist spirits (so that the Holladers
same be moderate) either by the nature of the region or quality of the air,
where they dwell, are quick and ready conceyuers of any thing, but not long
retayninge the same in memory, but forgetting as quickly, as they conceive
speedily. Even like to very moist and soft wax, that will not easily take
any print or form. Hollanders forgetful sleepy.
And therefore they be oblyuious, sleepy, vnapte to learn Arts and
oecupations, dull witted and gross headed: and as they have bodies burly,
big moyste, so is their memory ill and forgetful, which judgment is also
to be given of those bodies which be constituted in a vehement dryness.

And hereuppon it comes, that old men by means of their dryness joined
with coldness, Old men children, forgetful.
are oblivious, so are Children likewyse, by reason of their tomuche moystnes.
And these qualities make men also fearful, timorous and faintharted, in
repulsinge and suffering mishaps and adversity, which is a thing peculiar
to womankind.

Notwithstanding, education, institution and discipline, Education alters
nature.
alters the usual nature, and ordinary conditions of every Region: for we
see the common sort and multitude, in behaviour and manners gross and
vnnurtured whereas the Nobles and Gentlemen (altering their order diet, and
digressing from the common fashion of their pezantly countreyme) frame
themselves theirs, to a very commendable order, and civil behaviour.

But if this moystnes be with measurable heate somewhat warmed, as it is in them
which dwell in plain and open Countries, Zeladers.
where few Trees grow, as in Zeland, where commonly in winter ye people be
grievously nipped with cold, in Somer scorched with parching heate, those
countreyme (I say) as they have bodies big, strong, toiling, painful laborious,
burly limms, boisterous mebers rough skines: so likewise have they midst
stubborn, churlish, testy, vncurieous, clubbish, vnmanerly: Notwtstanding
they be of judgement sharpe of industrious forecast: for trade of merchandise
very ready and skilful, The nature of such as be borne and bred near the Sea.
and in their dealings right wary and cyrcumspecte. The rest of the Low
Coutryefolks, being better stored with Trees ouershadinge and defendinge them
from wynds, and which dwell in soils of holesomer air, wherein is lack
neither of pleasaut running ryuers, or delightful Springes of fresh water, to
fructifye the same, are of mylder nature, not so blunt as the others, but of
them some be wiser and fitter to achieve any weighty matter then other some
be. Flemyngs
So, the Flemynges for pythynesse in their speech and subtility of invention
are very excellent.

Brabanders setting aside all sternenes and severity, Brabanders.
with their decet meery natures and friendly courtesy, win the hearty good
wills of men: yea with a certain pleasant grace, facility of speech, and
allurements of words, they ordinarily enterlard their gravity.

But if the breast and brain be endued with Italians.
a Spirit perfused with temperate moisture and heate, such as be of that
special constitution, are in their dealings, watchful, sharpe, industrious,
in forecast, quickness of wit, industry of nature, excellency of learning,
notable utterance, and flowing eloqu^nce, surpassing other men. Italians will
covertly bear a secret grudge in mind a great while.
Finally such personnes will bear in memory a long time things past, and will
not lightly suffer any grudge to grow out of remebrauce. And if any wrong be
done unto them, they will reuyue the memory thereof after many years: yea so
destrous be they of revenge, that they will not forget a private grudge or
offence even among themselves. Which affection I do ascribe unto heate, which
doth so exceedinglye exulcerate distemper their minds with indignation, that,
humour and moystnes, is not able to allay, quech and qualefye it. So vnstayedlye
for the more part be the minds of this people carried with wilful motions,
somewhyle inwardly and closely keeping within their own breasts their
conceived devises, and somewhyle openly to the world, bursting out in hoate
terms of outrage.

With choler hoar, and raging fits
their breasts so boyle and svvell:
Pers. Sat. 5
That pipkins full of purging drouges,
can neither quench no quell.
Near approaching to them in quality (but yet somewhat differing) are
Englishmen: Englishmen.
who being of heate more weak and less boiling, (as the which is well enter
meddled, overcome and qualefyed by moystnes) are of stature comely and
proportionable, of body lusty and well complexioned, But to the studies of
humanity, not so greatly given, and in exquistie Arts not so well furnished.
But if they hold on their course as they begin, I mean, to apply their
minds to worthy and excellent matters, their dexterity for the attaynment of
any notable atchieuaunce surpasses, and their forwardness to any Arts or
mysteries, is found to be right apt inclynable. And because they have somewhat
thick spyrits, Englishmen and Scottes have great stomachs angry.
slenderly perfused with heate, they will stomach a matter vehemently, and a
long time lodge an inward grudge in their hearts, whereby it happens yt when
their rage is up, they will not easily be pacified, neither ca their high and
hauty stomachs lightly be conquered, otherwise then by submission, yielding to
their mind and appetite.

But if the spyrite through heate of the heart and quality of the air or
region, Spaniard^
be very hoate, it likewyse brings forth and causes hoate and quick
motions, yet such as by reason of their tenuitie and thinness by little little
will be cooled. And this is the cause, that some of them when their blood is up,
will rashly and unadvisedly attempt any thing, and not ear for any perils
so they may bring to pass, what their desire is to compass. Also when they
conceive in mind the doing of any thing, as they be at the beginning,
marvelous wilful tooto heady with might main to set forward their purpose,
hardly admitting any counsel to the contrary: so again, their minds many
times be wavering, vnstedfast and unquiet, except their inclinacions by the
reyne of reason be the better bridled.

Their fickle and vnstedie heads,
now this now that devise:
They flote in fancy to and fro, Vir. lib. 4. A Enei.

and vvrangle sondry wise.
Which thing is commonly incident to angry persons, and such as be desirous of
revenge, and to such also as have somewhere fixed their love inordinately,
whose minds flootinge and ballancinge up and down with variety of fantasies,
are easily and quickly carried hither and thither, by affection, neither
steadfast nor advisedly resolving upon any certain resolution. But this
Country borne people, Spaniardes have good wits.
if they earnestly frame themselves to the attaynemente of any Arts (though
the same be never so hard and curious) yet do they profit in the same
wonderfully, cary away great commendation.

Such as have thin spirits temperately hoate, have sharpe and ready wits,
and prompt and flowing utterance: Frenchmen.
upon whom also these gifts of nature are bestowed, that for deuyse and
invention they be very sharpe and ingenious: for brave setting out and
beautifyinge of a matter, Frenchmen prompt and ready witted.
plentyfull and copious: and such as for the explayning of their meanings and
purposes have talk and tongue at will. And as touching the inward inclination
of their minds and manners, they be lively fellows, lusty, dapper, nimble,
lacking no grace of pleasant gesture. Many of them which lack good
bringing up and have not been trained in learning and civility, are of
disposition, wavering, inconstant, captious, deceitful, falseharted, destrous
of alterations and tumults, babblatiue, and full of much vain tattling: in
consultation and counsel so subtle and crafty, that whatsoever they once
conceive in mind or purpose to do, without delay that do they judge best,
forthwith to be enterprised, out of hand to be achieved: and whereunto so
ever they addict their minds, therein prove they right excellent.

Seeing therefore, the diversity of spirits, and the differences of wits and
manners proceeds of the condition and nature of the Place, Air, Country and
nourishment, let every man foresee in himself, which way he may best provide
for the maintenance of his health, and to shun all such things as may in
any wise harm, annoy, crushel, or empaire either his health or Spirits.

It is therefore most expediente to observe the best order of diet and life
that conveniently may be followed, Good diet, wholesome Air.
and to live in the holesommest air. For these be the things that restore
health when it is decayed or empaired, and which make the Spirits most pure
and sincere. For if the body do abound and be full of ill humours, if the
Spirits be impure, and the brain stuffed full of thick fumes proceeding of
humours, the body and Soul consequently cannot but suffer hurt, and be
thereby likewise damnifyed. Hence proceeds (as from the very cause) such
raving dotage, distraughtnes of right wits, hence issues blockishnes,
foolishnes, madness, and fury, in so much that they think sometimes to see
those things that are not before their senses to see, and to hear such
words as no man speaks. For imaginatio in them is marred, common sense
(which judges and discerns all things) is preiudiced, memory decayed,
sight dymmed, their eyes dazelled, and all the faculties of the Soul (that is
to say) all the natural powers, whereby it accomplishes all his functios,
are enfeebled, perform their offices, duties, and operations both faintly and
remissely.

But if the Spirit animal be perfectly pure airy, (such as is the sent of
Blood exactlye laboured) not only the sight of their eyes is clear and good,
but all the other Senses both external and internal are perfect, and
perform their functions and ministeries orderly, duly, and conveniently.

Of the Spirit universal, generally inspired into the whole world, all ye
parts thereof. Which being from God above, breathed put into man, infuses and
endueth his mind with special and peculiar gifts. And by the way also, in
this Chapter, is entreated of good and ill Angels, which being entermingled
with the humours spirits, cause sondry chauges and mutations in men's minds.
The third Chapter.
THat power of the Spirit which is infused and breathed by God above, Spirit
of Nature.
into these lower bodies, is it, that disposes and moves this frame and mass
of the world, fosters, stregtheneth and cheerisheth all that is within the
compass and coape of Heaven contained, stretchinge and extendinge his force
far and wide. For why, this governs and rules all things, makes all
things fruitful, and unto the same imparts vital heate. Neither is there
any cause why a man should think or persuade himself, that there is any other
power able to do these things, then that Spirit, by whom from the very
beginning, The Spirit of the Lord.
the world and all such things as are visiblie seen with the eyes, and
sensibly perceived by the senses, were brought into so comely and beautiful
order. For by the Word of the Lord, Psalm. 33
were al things made, and by the breath of his mouth, al the comlynes, beauty
and furniture thereof. Genes. 1.
For he doth maintain and stregthen al things, and gives power unto every
thing to increase and multiply in their own kind, Iohn. 1.
and to maintain and conserve themselves.

Thus the wonderful Creator of Nature, by his word and Spirit, put into all
things y^ were created, a power precreatorie, the order of their encreasinge
propagation, for continuance of their kind, posterity, and succession: y^ is
to wit: the Spirit of GOD being diffused into every Creature, susteyneth
and maynteyneth Plants and all living creatures as well man as beasts, by whom
they live and have their being. There is nothing therefore in the whole
world, but it feels the strong power of God, is satisfied with the
plenteousnes and fullness thereof. For when Heave and Earth were made, and the
first Elemets, (yt is, the first beginnings of things constituted) The Spirit
of God moved upon the waters: that is to say, made moyste and liquid matter
(otherwise barreyne) to be fruitful.

The very meaning of which saying, Basil surnamed the Great, did very well
and lively expound in these words: The Spirit of GOD (saith he) moved upon
the top or upper face of the water. Hexa. lib.
That is to say, did nourish and give a vital fruitfulnes and a quickeninge
Soul to the moyste Element and to all other Creatures, in such sort, that all
things with the Spirit of God were moystened warmed, even as a Bird or Foul
that sits upon her eggs, who gives vital power and heate, to that
whereupon she doth sit and cover.

An example whereof we are to take at a Hen, Gen. 1.
which gives life unto her eggs, brings out fro thence the shape of a
perfect creature. Now, whereas the Spirit of God is said to swim upon the
waters, or to rest upon a moist Element, this is to be understood of the
fecunditie, yt is infused and put into it. But whereas the universal nature of
things, and all Creatures that breath and have being, do enjoy this gift of
Divine spirit, through the virtue thereof have their essece, yet namely and
above al others, Me, by singular privilege special prerogative are fully
endued with all things, have their minds taken out of a portion of Gods own
spirit, as Cicero saith, or rather accordig to the testimony of the holy
Scriptures, have received the breath of life, and an Image after the similitude
of God himself. The Poet Ouid had from the Hebrevves a little spark of
understanding touching this opinion, and that did he utter in these Verses.

Gods Spirit within us vvorketh still, Lib. 3. de Art amadi.

His motions in our hearts we find:
This sacred feed directs out will, Lib. 6. Fast.

And with his power enflames our mind.
Which sentence S. Paule being studied in a more heavenly kind of
Philosophie, went about to inculke into the minds of the Athenians, with intent
to draw the, fro their old rooted superstitions inveterate errors, to persuade
the in beholding the goodly frame beautiful workemaship of the world with al the
furniture and ornamet thereof (wherein Almighty God shows out to al men a taste
or proof piece of his divinity) thereby to acknowledge his divine power, and
by saying his works to agnyze his omnipotence. For in this sort he preached
unto them: God which made the world, Acts. 17.
and all that are in it, and is Lord of Heaven and Earth, dvvelleth not in
Temples made with hands, neither is vvorshipped with men's hands, as though
he needed any thing, seeing he himself gives life and breath to all men every
where. For in him we live, move, and have our being: as a certain of your
own Poets saith: Aratus in Pheno.
for vvee are also (...) Generation.

Now, man at the hands of his Creator, being furnished with such excellent
gifts and garnishmentes of mind, as first to be endued with a natural and
internal spirit, and then to be moved and inspired with a Divine spirit, hath
also (notwithstanding) external spirits recoursing into his body and mind.
Men of old time called them by the name of Genij, Angels.
the books of the holy Bible terms them (in respect of their office and
mynisterye) Angels: which is as much to say as Messengers: because they bring
the comaudmentes and will of God unto us. Hebr. 1.
S. Paule calls them, mynistring Spirits, appointed to certain offices and
purposes, and to minister for their sakes which shall be heirs of Salvation.
Cicero and others that never knew God nor religion aright, calls them
familiar or domestical Gods, having under their protection the care of mans
life and safety, and gives them the name of Lares, Lares.
or Penates, or Dij Tutelares. And of them they make two sorts, the good Angels
and the bad: Good Angels.
because the good pricks a man forward, to grace, goodness, virtue honesty: ye
other eggs him to lewdness, Ill Angels.
mischief, shame, villainy, and all kind of loose dishonesty. For this is
their only drift, and pretence specially, to plunge a man in as much mischief
as they can, draw him from God as far as may be.

Now, for so much as Spirits be without bodies, they slyly and secretly glyde
into the body of man, even much like as fulsome stench, or as a noisome and
ill air, is inwardly draw into the body: and these not only incense and
prick a ma forward to mischief, but also like most pestilent Counsellers,
promise to the party reward impunitye. By this means the wily Serpent
enueigled Adam, Saying: You shall not die therefore, but ye shall be as Gods,
knowing good and evil. For the Devil (having his name hereof) is most
subtle and crafty, Daemo, a sciendo.
and lacks not a thousand slights and policies to bring a ma to mischief.
Yea, his fetch is slyly to insinuate himself into our minds, cogitations,
counselles and wills, 2. Para. 26
albeit it is not easy for him to bring his purpose about, for so much as
Eod alone knows the hearts of men, and unto him only be all our deuyses and
thoughts open and manifest. He is (saith Paule) the discerner of the thoughts
and of the intents of the heart: Hebr. 4.
neither is there any Creature, which is not manifest in the sight of him: but
all things are naked open to his eyes. Psalm. 7.
Which thing also Dauid declares: God (saith he) is the tryer of the very
hart and Reins, That is to say, he perfectly searches out and knows all
things, finds a way into the most secrete corners, and innermost places. And
he brings in an example, taken from the entrails that be fardest of. For
there is nothing in mas body, inwarder then the heart and Reins: in so much
that the concocted meat must be conueyghed by many crooked bywayes wyndings,
before it can be brought thither. Furthermore he specially names those parts,
for yt, out of them chiefly the thoughts and cogitations of the mind, and
all licentious lusts and dissolute desyers, do proceed and spring, which are
not nor cannot lye hyd, or vnespyed of God.

For so much therefore, as these deuilles be airy spyrits, and as well by long
use and practise, as also by policy of nature are of great experience and by
long trial know much: How the devil learns the thoughts of me.
even by conjectures and tokes which they espy in the eyes, countenance,
gesture and other motions of the body of man, they slily gather and guess the
inward dispositions and thoughts of the mind, which to a man of great
experience and wit, is no great hard matter to do. One man a devil to an
other.
And therefore even as lewd and deceitful merchant, practyse all ways and
means to spoil others, leaving no occasion unattempted, to cyrcumuent and
catch them at unawares and vnprouyded: so likewise the deuilles lye in wait to
catch us at a vauntage, and the godlyer any one in conversation of life
manners is, the busyer and earnester are they with their poison to sting him.
In such sort, the devil was not awhit afraid by al manner of shifts to
tempte even Christ himself, thinking to have persuaded or inveigled him with
Ambition, Matth. 4.
Gluttony, or desire of rule Souereignty. Neither was he ashamed to assault
Paule also, partly carrying him into a boastinge and pride of mind above
measure, 2. Cor. 12.
and partly by incensynge his aduersaryes with spiteful rage and cruelty
against him.

The holy man Iob also was wonderfully shaken up, Iob. 30.
and driven to suffer the violent brunts of his most terrible temptations: but
God who rewards and recompenses all things, made an end of that conflict,
prescribing the Feend his limits, how far he should extend his tyranny.
Whereby we are to learn and understand, that devils can nothing preuaile
against us, Howe farr^ devils are able to hurt us.
neither do any further harm to us, the it pleases God to suffer and permit
them to do.

Now, albeit their use and fashion is, many sondry ways to assault men which
way to hurt them, yet specially they seek try all such means as they can,
to vanquish and seduce them, with those inclinations and properties that are
peculiar, natural, and indifferent to all.

Thus, do they incite and egg those that abound with Blood, Humours give
occasion to vices.
and be sanguine complexioned, to riot, watonnesse, drunkenes, wastfulnes,
prodigality, flithy and detestable loves, horrible lusts, incest, and
buggerie. Them that be Choleric, to testines anger, to brawling and chydinge,
contention, railing, quarrelling, fightinge, murder, robbery, sedition,
discord, and to put all these in proof and practise, they will minister many
allurements and sondry occasions. Them that be Melacholique, unto envy,
emulation, bitterness, hatred, spright, sorcery, fraud, subtlety, deceipte,
treason, sorrow, heaviness, desperation, distrust, and last of all to a
lamentable and shameful end. Them yt be phlegmatic, they help forward, to
sloth, drowsynesse, bitterness, sluggardy, slackness, sleapines, rechlesse
vnhedynes, and to a despysinge of all virtuous and good exercises.

And furthermore as pure subtyle air breaths into lyuig Creatures into
green herbs, a lively and wholesome spirit: so likewise the good Angels impart
wholesome air, and with a pleasaut sweet inspiratio refresh our inward minds.

Again as a pestilent wind induces sickness and infection: so do evil
Spirits exhale breath out a pestiferous poison, to the minds of men bring
mischief and destruction. Sapien. 1.
For by them came the first spot, ruin and destruction of mankind, so yt
there was no other way to bring him to his first excellency, dignity and
perfection, but only by that most woderful restorer, Gen. 2.
Christ. And because the imbecility weakness of mas nature is such, that he
is not able to withstand the subtle ambushes devises of this his most
raging ennemy Satan, Christ being ascended into Heaven, caused to be sent
down a Comforter, to hold us up, and give us invincible courage against all
the devils crafty suggestios. What the Holy Gh^ works (...) us.
This is he that inspyreth into our minds sondry good gifts, assuring us of
the good will of God towards us, and shaking away all distruste, brings us
by Christ unto the father. For he stirs up and comfort our minds, and
encourages us in such sort, that boldly with an assured trust, Gal. 4.
we dare to hope and ask all things of him, and cry unto him for help, by
the name of Father. Moreover y^ Spirit which God hath inspired into our harts,
doth certify and witness with our Spyrits, that we be his Sons, and Heirs,
Rom. 8.
yea Coheyres with Christ. The spyrite of God therefore, confyrming our
minds, doth engraffe in us faith, grounded upon the word of God, which faith
engenders an assured trust confidence toward him, with an undoubted hope to
obtain his promises.

And forasmuch as these virtues be not idle, Faith brings forth works.
they do produce and bring forth most plentiful fruits of Charity, to the
performance whereof, the holy Ghost the Comforter, with his strength arms us,
and with his aid protects us in the truth, to continue and persevere
constant, steadfast and immutable, without being seduced and carried lightly into
erroneous opinios and superstition: which is nothing else (as Eusebius
witnesses) but a false and counterfeyte shadow of true Relligion, De
preparat. Euag. lib. 1.
grounded upon no sound doctrine or foundation of Scripture: In this sort
according to the saying of the Poet Horace. Superstition.


Most of v's Poets old and yonge,
Mistake for virtue, Art. Poet.
vice and wrong.
With cloak of virtue clad is vice,
deceyuing many one:
By bearing face and outward show, Iuue. Saty. 14,

of honesty alone.
Severity it counterfaictes,
in deed yet nothing less:
Behauour, counmaunce, raiment, gate,
All smells of vertuousnes.
Yea borovved names of honesty,
and Virtue geeuen be,
To vices: as, the cancard Chuff,
and Snudge with wealth and fee,
Is counted one that given is,
to thrift and husbandry.
And it oftentimes falls out (saith Cicero) that many in seeking after the
best things, Tuscul. 3.
miss their purpose, and are deceived, not so much upon will, as by mystaking
their way, and using a wrong course. Rom. 10.
Thus doth S. Paule deem the Jewes not altogether forlorn, and estranged
from godliness, but led with a certain feruentnes and zeal to Godward,
although not according to knowledge: so that they do not altogether err in
their affection toward Godlynes, Zeal without knowledge.
but rather upon ignorance and lack of better understanding: and because
they go blindlye to work and folter in their dealings without any judgement,
they are destitute of the Spirit of God. Within the level and danger of this
vice, are al they, that obstinately either maintain or wilfully suffer any
old inveterate errors, such as can abide nothing of all that to be altered,
which by little and little hath crept into use, by custom had some continuance.
Which me if they had within them this bounteous Spirit, no doubt there would
not be such diversity of opinions and doctrine in men's minds as now there be.
But let no man think these things to be superfluously spoken, or clean
beside the purpose, neither let him lay in my dish this saying of Horace.

A Flagon first began,
Why comes now out a pitcher small, In Art Poet.

or little pretty Canne.
For the heavenly Spirit, is the guide governor of the Spyrites of mans
body, which are then more qualefyed, quieted, and kept under better order,
when they be governed and led by the conduct and direction of this Spyrite.
For if they once begin tumultuously to ruffle styre up sedition within the
body, This Spirit their fumishe fits restraynes, A Eneid. lib. 1.

And them to quiet order traynes.


Of the Elements of Human body, and of the first qualities of beginnings of
generation, where of man consists and is made. The fourth Chapter.
ALl the Complexion temperamente of mas body proceeds from the powers of the
Elements, and not of the Humours: IIII. Elemetes.
and of them is the whole body tempered and compounded.

The Elements be in number four, Fire, Earth, Air, and Water, and unto them
are appendant so many qualytyes: Hoate, Cold, Moist, Dry: which of the Air
encompassyng us, and of our meates nourishinge us, do take and conceive either
profit or harm. For being either in excess or defect, the qualities are
depraved and corrupted, and through their corruption engender many and sondry
diseases.

But the things which dispose and affect our bodies, Tued. valet. lib. 1.
are (saith Galen) of two sorts: the one, taking his beginning even at our
Nativity and birth, deryued and issuying from the very prynciples of Generation
as from a root, which possibly cannot be avoided: the other, such, as man
may decline, as things estranged from our bodies, not naturally in us
engraffed, but externally happening, and yet (nevertheless) such, as are as apt
and ready to disquiet and annoy our bodies, as those that be naturally planted
in us. And these be, Meat and Air a like necessary.
Meat and Dryncke, wherewith we restore all such ouerdrye or over moyste
substance, as to the body is requysite. And these twain, if they be either
immoderately taken, or be corrupt and unwholesome, they do engender great
stoare of excrements and sondry diseases. Next unto these is the Air, that
compasses and on each side enuyroneth us, which being either extreemelye
hoate or dry, or overmuch moyste or cold, causes enforces a manifest
alteration in the state of the whole body.

But to come somewhat near and more aptly to declare this matter: it is to be
understanded, that the very beginninges of mans nature and principles of his
generation, is feminine Blood Seed generatiue. The one as it were of certain
apt, convenient, and tractable matter, like moist clay or soft wax, is ready
to fashion out and proportion any thing that the workema employs it unto:
And the Seed, is as it were ye workman himself. Both these things consist
and are made of the same general Elements, and conteyne within them the
qualities above specifyed: but the difference among themselves is in the order
and measure of their temperamet. For in the seed, The nature of seed and
blood.
there is more of fiery and airy substance, that is to say, it is partaker of
ethereal Spirit. In the Blood, there is more of watery and earthy: albeit in
this last, the heate is above cold, and moist above dry. For we may not say
and affirm, that Blood is dry, like bones, but to be moist. Now is Seed
dryer the Blood, and yet it is also moyste, fluible liquid. Thus on both
sides, the oryginall of mans generation proceeds of moist substance, yet so,
yt thence is laboured and made other parts of the body yt be dry, as
Synewes, Veins, Arteryes, Bones and Grystles. Now, that which in the wobe is
conceived, and together of those principles formed, waxing dryer, takes (as
it were) ye first lineaments and proportion of every member, afterward
coming to perfect shape, takes further increase, so grows to his just
bigness and decente quantitye. And when it hath raught to his full growth and
bigness, (as when the bones for want of nourishment are no longer pliable)
then doth a man cease from further growig, Cause of tallness.
waxes neither taller nor broader. For comely tallness and length of personage
comes and is caused of the abundance of heate and moisture, where the
Spyrite is thoroughly and fully perfused.

And if it happen that any, either old or young, through sickness or some other
affect, to fall into a cold and dry habit or disposition, their bodies become
and are lean, wrynckled, slender, illfauoured, thin and lancke, and their
lymmes weak and crooked. It fares by them, much like as it doth by Horses,
Oxen, or such like beasts, that are skanted nipped of their fodder feeding: or
as it doth by Trees and other green Herbs, that lack the juice of the
ground, not conveniently watered.

Therefore a fashio that some Scholemasters others that take the charge upon
them to teach and board yonge boys, is (me thinckes) both lewd
unconscionable: who being at a plain bargain and certain stint of money,
reasonably agreed upon between them and the childrens friends, pinch their
poor pupills and borders by the belly, and allow them meat neither
sufficient nor yet wholesome, yea not only beastly, sluttishlye, nippinglye use
they the seely children, but threatninglye enforce them to bear out the labour
of their studies, ^ildren ^ulde not s^ated of e^r victu^.
with a slender allowance, and small pittance of unsavoury resty flesh,
stinking fish, and hoary vinewed bread: which thing causes them to be ill
complexioned coloured, the shape, comlynes and beauty of their bodies to
degenerate grow out of fashion, the quickness, courage, lyuelynes and sharpness
of their wit to decay, their spirits to be dulled, al ye lively virtues
towardness of ye mind, which before was in them (either by the benefit of
Nature, or by ye industry of the parents, Naughty unwholesome meat spills
nature.
or finally by the only special gift of Almighty God) to be extinct utterly
quenched: insomuch yt neither their mind is inflamed with desire to attein
achieve any worthy attept, nether frame they themselves unto those thigs,
wheruto they were inclinable, by nature apt towardly. As touching ye outward
case of their body, they comoly break out, have their bodies pinked full of
scabs, by reason of ill humours, ouerwhealed engrayled with loathsome blisters,
blaines, Short stature how it comes.
boils botches. Whereby it comes to pass, yt in growth they seldom come to
any personable stature, to ye use of their full powers, to perfect strength
firmity of their members, or to any hadsom scature, or proper copo^io of bodily
proportion: the cause is, for yt in their tender growing age, being kept under
by famine, and skanted of convenient meat and drink, their native moisture
which requires cotinual cheerishing mainteynauce, was skated debarred of his
due nourishment copetent allowance. Whereupon, the vital juice being exhausted
spent, they arrive to old age sooner the otherwise they should do, are snatched
up by death long before their time.

Now, that affect plight which brings the body into a cold dry disposition,
Old age.
is called Old age, because it is the cause of corruption, decay destruction
of all as well Creatures living, as Plants herbs. Death, what it is.
For death is nothing else, but the extinction of nature, that is to say, of
the natural Heate, natural Humour. In which two things, life consists: to
which extinction end many are brought sooner then they should be, either
through want and defect of nourishment, or through intemperate life, as
toomuche carnal company with women, unseasonable watching, heaviness of mind,
thought, and many other causes, which hasten old age, bring death unloked
for, before his time, contrary to the order of age and course of Nature. Do we
not see many old me, Lusty old age whereof it comes.
lusty, merry and well complexioned, strong of limbs, good footeme,. in their
old days as fresh active as many young me be: all which comes upon no other
cause, but that in their youthful days, they lived orderly well, and spent not
their adolescency in unruly riot lechery. Again, there be of youngme a great
number, weak, worn to the bare stumps, feeble, lame, faint and impotet, dry
as a kixe, pale as ashes, wane coloured, for that they spent exhausted all the
pith and strength of their youth and adolescencye, in wanton sensuality,
disordered riot, and immoderate use of Venerous daliauce, cosuming therein the
very flower and prime of their lusty age. For even as pleasaut gay March
flowers in ye Spring of the year, with nipping weather and sharpe
Northernelye wynds, ^hat ma^th yonge ^e weak.
do fade and wyther away again: so likewyse, youth and flourishing age, by
using ill order and fashion, is dried up before his due time, and ere it come
to his full rypenes.

Therefore, to decline and shun such things as be hurtful, and to prolong
life many years, and to bring to pass, that old age shall not be tedious,
cumbersome, and burdenous, but easy, pleasant, and delightful, it lies a man
in hand, to take that order and trade, whereby health may be maintained and
still preserved, or if it happen to be discrased and empayred, how it may
again be restored and bettered. What thigs are hurtful to health.
The things that hinder and crushe it, and which do weaken, alter and corrupt
the temperament that naturally is in us, are not few. For the Humours of the
body, receive and take sondry qualities according to the faculties that be in
our nourishment, and in the order of our usual diet. Whereunto are to be added,
Bathes, Heate, Exercise, Cold, Weariness, Thyrst, Huger, Sleep, Rest, the state
of ye Air, and affections of the mind: all which do sondry ways, alter the
habit and state of our bodies, for the most part, makes them worse. By this
means, the body that was hoate and moyste, is by little and little brought to
be cold and dry, or to some other ill quality. Also as years age steal on
us, as times come and go, as the world frames with us, either forward or
backward, in prosperity or adversity, in good fortune or bad, many things
hap unto a man which shake shrewdly batter a mas good health. Unto which
effect, the Poet Horace, very aptly in my opinion writes thus: While years be
fres he gallant is our age,
Full many joys and pleasures do we taste. Art. Poet.

But elder years those iolie joys doth svvage,
And disadvantage to us bring as fast.


Whereunto accords yt same sentence of holy Iob, where he doth lively
express set out the frail, momentanie, vain, trasiory state of mans life,
and to how many discommodities, dangers and changes, the same is subject and
endangered: A man (saith he) that is borne of a woman hath but a short time
to live and is full of misery, he comes up and is cut down like a goodly
flower, Iob. 14.
and vanishes away like a shadow, never continues still in one state.

For as years do pass and mans age doth march forward, there still happen
changes and mutacions. For age is no other thing but the race or course of
life, or the time that we have to run from our Infancy till we come to
old age, in which time, the state and constitution of mans Body is altered,
and steps from one temperamente to an other, and at length (native heate
being extinct) by death is divorced and brought to final dissolution.

Thus hath Infancy, Infancy.
(which of all others is the moystest) in it, great abundance of natural
heate, and in the fourth or seventh year suffers mutation, in those years
commonly we be in great danger.

Next after it, Childhod
is Childhood, contynuinge till about the fiftenth year of our Age, and the
same subject to no few hazards and discommodities.

Pubertie, Pubertie.
is prone and subject to very many inconveniences, which takes his end at
the age of xviii. years.

As for wilful and slypperye Adolescency which ends at xxv. years,
Adolescency.
is (as the others) subject to sodry casualties mutacions, as daily experience
shows.

Youth or flourishing Age, wherein the body and mind be in their chiefest
prime and iolitye, Youth.
lasts till a man be xxxv. years old: during which Age, Blood bears
swaye abundantly, and Humours somewhat waste, whereby it happens that this
temperamente in continuance and process of time, begins to be taken for
Hoate and Dry, whereas Adolescencye is abundantly stoared both of moisture,
and heate.

Mans Age reaches to the fiftyeth year or somewhat further, Mas age.
in which time man is in his full rypenes, and leaving former pleasures and
delights, his mind aduysedlye, carefully, and wisely deals in every thing
that he enterpryseth. But the Body stands at one staye, suffers no great
mutation, till sixty three, or sixty five years of age: for then Age
hastens on apace, and draws toward his lunge home, and then begins the
body to be cold and dry, being the first entrance and steppe into
Oldeage, which is the next neyghboure to decrepicie and dotage, that stands
at the pits brincke, nearest unto death. Which as it is not rashly to be
wished for, so neither is it among Christians at all to be feared, Death to
the faithful not to be feared.
considering that the Soul being by Faith assured of a better and sweeter
life, and having an undoubted hope of a Resurrection, ought in this point to
be thoroughly persuaded, and be full willing cheerefullye to depart hence. In
the mean space, while he hath to run his race in this world, every man
may so behave himself and qualefye his dealings, that through temperate
usage and orderly moderation of life in youth, he may be furnished with
helps, and have in stoare some of his former strenghte, the better to pass
over his Old Age, and therein to feel the less tediousness. For whereas
every other Age hath his certain time and prescripte term how lunge it shall
last: only Old age, hath no time to it appointed, but to live as lunge as he
may, and to wait for death and bid it welcome when soever it comes.

Pythagoras very properly applies the four quarters of the year, The times
of the year compared to the ages of man.
that is, Spring, Somer, Autumn and Winter, (being times comprehended within
the two A Equinoctia the two Solstitia) to the four ages of man: Whose saying
and opinion Ouid in Verses to this effect descrybeth.

Do we not see the year by course,
in quarters four divided: Metam. lib. 15.

How jump it aunsvveres to our age,
if well it be decided?
For sucking Babe and tender Imp,
the Spring resembles right,
Which into Summer glides apace,
like blade devoid of might.
When Spring is past, then marches on,
the Summer trick and gay,
Which likened is to lusty youth,
strong, dapper, lacking stay.
When youthful fancies mellovved be,
then Autumen steppes in place,
Twixt young and old, of judgment ripe,
with medley hairs on face.
Old crookebackte Hymns last of all,
with trembling pace appears;
With furrovved face, clean bald, or else
All white and mylky hairs.
This changeable alteration, this conversion, mutabilitye, inconstancy, and
inclination of things from one to an other, in the whole course of nature,
doth manifestly argue and prove all things to be momentanie, vain,
transitory, brittle, ruinous and vanishinge, as a flower of the field quickly
fading away.

Saying therefore the body continually slides into worse and worse case,
suffers many detrimentes, whereby our strength and powers be empaired, and
many ways both inwardly and outwardly enfeebled, it stands us upon, not
negligently, but carefully to loke to the conservation thereof, and so
carefully to provide for the same, that it may continue in state sound health
full, so long as nature hath limitation. Here is no need of any examples,
reasons or proofs, (since every man is therein thoroughly experienced and
persuaded) how unwilling al men in general be, to leave the sweetness of
this life, with what great care, study industry every man will strive to keep
his body in health, and rid it from sicknesses and diseases, which do not
only for the time grievously assault, bruise, torment afflict the body with
pain and dolor, but also set before our eyes a certain representation or
show of death it self.

I will not here speak of the disquietnes and trouble, wherein the mind
thereby is plunged, of the manyfolde affections at such a time specially
oppressing the same. Who is he I pray you, that being in these so great and so
many calamities turmoiled, in these vexatios, miseries, grief and shortness of
life so charged and overwhelmed, would not gladly seek some remedy and
mitigation of his dolors, and provide for some helps to comfort ease his
irksome labours? Which things who soever is desirous to seek and obtain,
must not think, that things momentany, Traquillity and quietness of mind
as wealth, rychesse, honours, Lordshippes, great possessions, fair houses,
sumptuous and costly apparel after the bravest guise and manner wrought and
devised, Temperament.
can help him thereto: but a quiet well stayed mind, free and clear from all
perturbations: and next to that, a sound and healthful body, that is free from
sickness: which be the best and chiefest things that a ma can ask and have at
the bountefull hands of God, so log as he hath in this world to continue his
pylgrimage.

The fifth Chapter, describing what Crasis or Temperamet is: wherein consists
the plight, state, constitution, and complexion of every mans body.
CRasis or temperamente (for the order of our work requires the same by
definition to be declared) is an agreemet, Temperament.
and convenience of the first qualities Elements among themselves: Or, and
equal mixture or proportion of the qualities of the Elements, wherein no
excess blameworthy or faulty is to be found. Contrarywyse, Inteperature is
that, Intemperatures.
which is compact of the disagreeable and unlike powers of Elemets and
qualities, and swarueth from moderation. And as in Musical Instruments there
is perceived a certain accord of times and a sweet agreeable harmony in
stryking the strings, yt no vnpleasaut discord or bugling jar, dislike ye
curious ear of the hearer: so likewise in a temperate habit of the body,
there is an apt and convenient mixture and temperature of the Elements and
qualities, insomuch that no one quality can by it self be showed, but a
constant, absolute and perfect composition, mingling of the qualities and
Elements all together. And as in making Salads, Sauces, or medicines of many
sodry herbs, the Compounds be al mingled together, and every of the
ingredients become as one, insomuch yt no one thing appears or can by it
self be discerned or perceived: so likewyse happens it in ye qualities of
the Elemets, of whose mixture comes is made at our creatio nativity, ye first
original of our substance. In which teperatures mixtures, there be ix. several
differences, whereof one is temperate, in each respect absolute, lac nothing
that is thereto requisite, in the which no one of the clementall qualities
exceeds or passes an other, but be in an equal measure even proportio, without
any thing amysse or any disteperaunce at all. Eight be intemperate, whereof
Four be simple, and Four compound.

That temperature which is only hoate (wherein heate surmouteth cold) is the
equality of moisture and dryness. Cold, wherein coldness bears dominton:
Moist, wherein moisture chiefly rules: And dry: where dryness is above
moisture, the rest being a like and equal, that is to say, tempered with
hoate, and cold.

The compound temperatures which be compoud of two qualities together, are
these: hoate moist, Hoate and dry: Cold moist: Cold dry: of whom the
constituion of the body (which the Greekes do call (...), and the common sort,
Complexion) among the Physicians is named and termed, of that which in the
myxture, bears chiefest swaye: For with them, that body is called hoate,
where is most stoare of heate. Dry, wherein drynes raygneth. And likewise of
the residue. So, the composition of medicynall drouges, wherein be sodry
ingredientes, hath his name of some such one of the same as is chiefest, and
more of force then the other: as Dianucum, Diacappar. Compound drouges named of
some one of the chiefest Ingredientes.
Hiera picra, Diaphenicum, Oleum Vulphinum. c.

Now, because I would have this matter exactly understood (as a thing not
only to Physicians, but to all y^ destre to live in health) right wholesome and
available, I will as far as I am able, and as diligently as I can, declare
and set out the reasons, order and effect of every one. And first will I begin
with the state of the Temperate nature, or at least, I will portrait set
before your eyes, a pattern and image thereof, first coceyued in mind or
imaginatio: not yt there is any such to be showed in the whole world, neither
can any such be found in deed (unless peradventure (as a man should say, that
God specially and originallye had privileged some such from heaven:) but I
will set it down, for y^ all yt other natures in me are ought hither to be
referred, by this rule to be tried: that every man may perfectly behold, what
in himself is to much and what too little. Neither let a ma be ouerrash and
hasty in seeing a body that is of hoate habit, to judge heate in the same, to
be above moisture, or cold to prevail above dryness: unless he have a very
diligent and careful respect to this perfect temperature, and first set it
before his eyes as a mark whereunto to level and direct his dealing and
judgment.

Of a Complexion, perfectly and exactly temperate. The Sixth Chapter.
THe temperate state of body that is in each respect perfect absolute,
requires very diligently to be handled, and thoroughly to be discoursed, for
that I would have the whole mind thereunto to be directed, al the rest of the
states or habits of the body to it applied and leveled, as it were by rule
lyne, y^ every man may note and observe in himself howe far he is of, from
good sound disposition, or integritye of temperature, what way he were best to
take, to bring himself (as near as he can possibly) into his former state
again. For the farther from this, that any man is, in worse case of health is
he, and a great deal readier to fall into diseases of body, perturbatios of
mind. A body yt is in each respect perfect sound, may most aptly be termed
called Polycletlabus Rule. Polycleti Regula.
Which proverb is appliable to al such thigs as are done most perfectly well,
wherein there is nothig lacking nor amiss: so yt all other thigs ought by it,
as by a Touchstone to be tried. The Metaphore is take of one Polycletus an
excellent skilful Image maker, whose cunning grace of workmanship (as Fabius
witnesses) Lib. 20. Cap. 10.
far surpassed al others. He in ihs art of Imagery so artificially hadled his
work, finished the same with such excellent perfection, that al other Carvers
Statuaryes in proportioning framynge their Images, set him before them as an
absolute Pattern for imitation. This Proverbial figure or phrase of speech,
used Galen in his book De tued. valetud. Where he describes and sets down
the best state of body that may be as Polycletus Rule, that is to say, so
neatly comely set out, with such just congruet Symmetry proportionable
commensuration, as to behold is right pleasant and delyghtful. And therefore
such things as are written of the best state of body, worthily and by good
reason ought to be referred to a thing y^ is most perfect absolute. Whereupon
we here do describe and set out a state and habit of body after such a
sort, as Cicero Fabius do an Orator, whom they would have to be ymitated,
after such sort as S. Chrysostome and Erasmus do describe and furnish out a
Preacher: De Sacerd. De ratione conc^onandi.
to thend that such as study Eloquece or as are appointed to instruct preach to
the ignorant, should frame themselves (as near as possibly they may) after the
example pattern there set down before them. And although he do not in al
points thoroughly attain to yt perfection that he doth conceive in mind, yet
ought he, reason it is that he should go forward therein: and although ye things
which we study seek for, be very hard difficult, yet ought we not to despair
of ye obtaining our purpose, nor cowardly to recoil faint in industry. Many me
(saith Cicero) De Oratore.
being in despair out of hope ever to com to thend of their purpose, are
afraid to give any onset, or to put the matter in any trial practise: because
(forsothe) they have no hope ever to win it. For the best things, ought not
upon dispairt to be give over, in things yt be excellent, those are to be
accounted great, which are next nearest to ye best.

Therefore have I thought good to set down to shadow out the best state of
Body, that by the view and pattern thereof, diligently imprinted in mind, and
steadfastly marked by eye, every man may imitate express the same, or come as
near thereunto as possibly he may.

Such a body therefore, Notes or marks of a body perfectly teperate.
whose pattern we do here exhibit and show, hath all his Senses fresh
perfect, every of ye faculties natural, duly doing his office and function
without stop, impediment or greeuauce. His memory is steadfast and holding
fast, for that, his brayn is neither too moist nor too dry: his mind quick,
sharpe and industrious, wyselye and cyrcumspectly dealing in every thing that
he takes in hand, his manners and conversation honest and virtuous, in none of
his doings and conversation, digressing or swaruing from comelynes, his wit
singular and excellent, of nature quiet, courteous, and subject to no ill
affections, abandoninge all rashness, and workinge all things by good judgment
and consideration, of notable and surpassing towardness, plenteouslye
garnished with many singular gyfes and commendable qualities, in life and
couersatio, upright vnreprooueable, in so much that he may well serve for a
notable pattern of virtue (that is to say) a most absolute perfection of nature
in every point. For in him plentifully appears and is evidently descried,
humanity, gentleness, frugality, equity, modesty, and a continent moderation
of all affections: in attemptinge and achieving his affairs and busynes,
neither rash and heady, neither slow and lingering, as one that forsloweth and
delay his business from day to day: but in forcasting and forscinge what
may betide, uses advise counsel, and in bringing ye same to effect pass,
adhibiteth convenient speed and quickenes: in the mutable haps sudden
chances of fickle Fortune, he is not lightly dismayed, nor brought into
fear, therefore neither puffed up with swelling pride in prosperity, neither
thrown down and utterly discouraged in adversity, but suffers all the
discommodityes of life with a mind stout, cheerful and invincible, and such
a one as will not at any hand be drawn away fro his constancy and settled
determination. To which effect, this saying of the Poet Horace aptly agrees: A
man that's armed with Constancy,
and virtue hath in price, Lib. 3. Ode. 3.

Cares not a rush for frantic fits,
of peoples fond device.
No frovvning brovv of Tyrant dreads,
no chance can him dismay:
Though Heaven and Earth run all to wrack,
he still is at one stay.


Unto which disposition S. Paule framed himself, Rom. 8.
and requires the same affection in all them that are ingraffed in Christ,
and have consecrated themselves to embrace his truth and religion, that even as
he was for his part, so every ma semblably should certainly and undoubtedly be
resolved persuaded, that nothing (be it never so dreadful and terrible) should
be able to seperate and pull us fro the love of God which is in Christ Iesus,
to who we have addicted and surrendered our selves by profession.

Such a one therefore as we do here shadow out and describe, is in heart and
mind so well settled and perfectly stayed, that he is not to be draw to either
party, or to waver and totter this way and y^ way, but perseveres still in one
stay of stedfastnes constancy, without any kind of alteration or mutability. In
him there are (in deed) affections, but yet such as be natural not
discomendable, Affections natural.
as, love and zealous affection to his wife, Children and such as he wishes well
unto, whom as he doth not fondly cocker and suffer to run at radon, or to
have the full scope of their own wanion wills: so again, is he not to the
bitter, strait, rigorous, spiteful, wayward nor stubborn, but so, that in
familiar communication and company with them, he uses a gentle mi^es, seasoned
with an earnest and reverend gravity, without much prattling tatrlig, without
byring skoffes, upbraiding taunts, ^oural uncomely and vnciull ies^hinge,
pleasantly conceited, and meerye with honesty, not Using therein any
filthynes or rybauldrye: and as he is most far of from all malapert
scurrility and scenical gesture, so is he again most far from sulleyne
sterne severity, from Stoycall indolency: for who will not judge them boyde of
all humanity, and without any sense of mans nature?

Whom gentle speech and language sweet, A Enei. 4.

no more can mollyfie.
Then if they Flint or Marble were,
that grovves in Marpesie.
Likewise in manners order of life he is altogether unlike both to Democritus
and also to Heraclitus: which two persons in nyppinge Satire, were by the Poet
shaken up and set out in their colours. For To gygling laughter geeuen was
Juvenal. Sat. 10. The nature of Democritus and Hetaclitus.

Democritus always:
Contraryvvise, Heraclitus
to vveping night and day.


And not only in the inward mind of man, do these ornaments and gifts of
nature appear expresselye show out themselves, but even in the outward show,
shape and behaviour of the body there is evidently descried and perceived a
comely grace and portlye dignity. For in the countenance, which is the Image
of the mind, in the eyes, which are the bewrayers and tokentellers of the
inward conceits: in the colour, lineaments, proportion and feacture of the
whole body, there appears a kind of heroical grace and amyablenes,
insomuch that the very view sight thereof, allures and draws every one by
a certain secrete sympathy or consent of Nature to love it, without any hope
of profit or commodity thereby to be reaped or received. The body is decently
made featly framed, conteyninge an absolute construction and comely frame of al
the parts together. The head not aslope cornered, but round and globewyse
fashioned, the hair of fair aburne or chesten colour: the forehead smooth,
cheerful and vnwrynckled, beautified with comely eyebrowes, and greatly
honoured with a pair of amiable eyes, not hollow, but delightfully standing
out. The colour fresh, sweet and pleasant. The cheeks and the balls
thereof steygned and dyed in a perfect hew of white and red, and that
naturally, specially in the lusty years of Adolescency. The port state of
the body bolt upright, the gate or going framed to comelynes, not nycely
affected nor curiously counterfaicted, as it were Players disguised Masquers,
Counterfeit gate.
who by a kind of upstart stately gate, hops the rather to win credit,
estimation and authority, and to be made more account of, among the common
people. The tongue prompt and ready, distinctly and sensibly able to pronounce
and deliver out his meaning, in words of gallant utterance.

There are beside these, certain other things, necessarily and according to
the condition of mas nature, requisite. For in eating and drinking he uses
moderacion, and through wholesome exercise, concocteth well his meat and
distributes the same to the good nourishment of the body: for the better
performance whereof, he either uses a lively straynable voice, or else
convenient walking. Whereby it happens that in the body there is gathered
very small store of excrements, and sleep is the quieter and sounder, not
disturbed, not empeached, nor troubled with any absurd and troublesome dreams.
And if any shapes, forms or likeness of thigs do vissblye seem in dreams,
to appear and offer themselves to his mind, when the night is well spent, and
the cocoction of meates thoroughly finished, such representations surely
happen not without some divination, that is to say, they import signify no
vain, nor frivolous predictio or foreshewing of thigs to come, but earyeth a
presage that is well to be considered, and not lightly to be neglected.

But in this frail and transitory life of man, in this so great corruption
inclination of nature, I do not see, to who these thigs ought more aptly to be
applied the to Christ himself, of whom Dauid prophesied: calling him, Psalm.
45.
Fairer then the children of me, full of grace sweetness of words, unto who no ma
may be thought comparable. For as he, above al others in all kinds of virtues
aboundatly garnished, with integrity of life, mildness of manners, excellency of
doctrine, strangeness of miracles, and unspeakable divinity, drew and allured
ye greatest part of the World into an admiration and love of him: so also he
wanted nothing of all those things that can either be devised or in mind
conceived. Christ a pattern of perfection.
Who therefore doubts, but that he which had al gifts, had also a body most
beautiful comely? And although his Divinity be rather to be respected and
considered, and the use and purpose for which he was sent and give unto us:
yet is there nothing to the contrary, but we may in mind suppose judge that
there was in him such an excelling form of bodelye shape, as for such a
dignitye and majesty was fit and worthy. For his outward port and heroical
stature was agreeable to his worthynes, and consonante to the Divinity and
inward gifts of his mind, Ioan. 1.
which he bountefully powered out upon us. And therefore in descrybing an
exact constitution of the bodily state of man, we ought to chose no better
pattern, nor set any perfecter exemplar before our eyes, either for the body
or the mind, then him alone. For in him (as S. Paule saith) Collos. 2.
are hid all the treasures of knowledge and wisdom, and in whom dwells
corporallye all fullness of Divinity. For no blemish nor fault was in him,
Heb. 4.
to no sickness or sin was he prone and subject.

Now, whereas we read, that someiyme he was in speech very earnest and
hoate: in reproving vices, Ioan. 11.
very vehement, sharpe: with tears and weeping to have sorrowed and lamented,
and in angry mood to have testified howe much he detested the haynousnesse of
some lewd fact: the same was a token and argument of his singular gentleness,
gracious favour and hearty goodwill that he bare to all men. For, he being
wonderfully desirous of the Soul health of all mankind, was angry and sorry
that many, (whose amendemente and not destruction he so earnestly wished) did
so wilfully and stubbernelye persist in their error, Christ void of all ill
affections.
refusing and despysinge such a fit occasion to repent, and attain their
Salvation, there so freely and fitly to them offered.

Let this suffice, as touching the absolute state and perfect disposition of
mans body. Next whereunto is that age that is fresh, flourishing, in his
chief prime: specially that, which from very infancy hath bin well
instituted, and commedablye trained up, which (yet notwithstanding) doth even
strayghtwayes fade, in continuauce cannot but at length utterly faint pass
away. For as in other thigs, so likewyse in mas nature, all things that had
beginning, do dye and decay, and things that had increasing, wax also old,
after a certain race of time here run, do hasten towards their death, vanish
away to nothing. Which mutability inconstancy is a good warning lesson for
every one of us, to despise these frail and transitory things, which so soon
pass away, to lift up our hearts and minds, to such things as are parmanent
and eternal.

Which thing S. Paule, goes earnestly about to beat into our heads, where he
saith: If ye be risen again with Christ, Collos. 3.
seek those things which are above, where Christ sits on the right
hand of God: Set your affections on heavenly things and not on earthly things.
Heb. 13.
For we have not here any abiding City or place of continual dvvelling, but
we seek for one to come, whose builder and maker is God: Heb. 11.
Who ( as S. Peter saith) hath called us out of darckenes into his marvelous
light and appointed us to life everlasting. 1. Pet. 2.


Of a hoate Complexion. The vij. Chapter.
Among those that digress from a mean, and differ from temperatenes, the
hoate complexioned body is first to be spoken of. For as it is the first in
order, so for conservation of health, it is better then the rest. Hoate
complexion.
And he namely is to be thought and accounted hoate, in whom that quality of
heate abounds excells the other that be moderately constituted, that is,
those that be tempered with moist dry. Of which state and condition if a man
be disposed thoroughly to search out, and mark all the notes and signs, he
shall by proof find, that whosoever is of that Complexion constitution, is of
stature comely and of shape and beauty agreeable and consouate to manly
dignitye: Tokens of a hoate Complexion.
of body not gross sat or corpulent, but reasonably fast fleshed For heate
dissolveth and dissipateth all fat things: of conler red or (if blood be too
hoate and boiling, as in them that dwell in hoate regions and parching
countries) browne or tawny. For there be in every body (according to the
condition of the air and region (sondry degrees of heate, Degrees of heate in
man.
and diverse considerations and differeces, both of this and of the other
qualities also. The Indians, AEthiopians, Moors, Asians, Egyptians,
Palestines, Arabians, Greekes, Italians, Spanyatds, Polonians, Muscouites,
Germans, Frenchmen, Duchmen, c. are of sondry and different Complexions,
every one in his kind hath of heate, several and sondry differences.

For even as fuel and matter combustible for Fire, is some hoater and more
burning then some other is, and as the fire pan or hearth wherein is burnt
either Seacoales, fatty turues of the nature of bitumen, the burning lyme of
chaulkye clay called Naphtha, oil, pitch, rosen, or (finally to speak of
wood,) Oak, Hornebeame, Larche, Byrch, Elm, Popler, Wyllow, the fire is
vehementer and the hearth is of heate sometime extreme, sometime more soft
mild: So likewyse in every mas body according to the nature of the place, and
order of life and diet, this heate is increased or dyminished, and this is the
very cause that men be of so sondry colours, and of hairs so diverse differet:
for in every hoate Coplexioned body mixed with moderate humour, the skine is
rough hayrie, the beard fayreand comely, but the hairs of the head somewhat
differ, by reason of heate, are of other colour. For hairs being generated of
a fuliginous gross excremente of the third concoction, Black haytes.
become black, when as (the vapour being aduste by force power of heate) the
excrement is turned into an exact fuliginousnes.

Curled and crooked hairs proceed of a dryness of Complexio, Curled hairs.
caused through immoderate heate: or else, by reason of the straictnes and
narrow issue of the pores, where ye roots of the hairs be fastened. For then
have they much ado to peep up and find any right way to appear out, whereby
it happens that they grow crooked, curled frysled, specially in them, in who
it so happens naturally, beig not artyficially procured nor by toto superfine
curiostly frisled: as some nice dames Prickmedainties, which curiously comb
bring their hairs into a curled fashion and crisped locks, thereby ye more to
set out their beauty, to commend themselves (as they think) after a more
glorious show to the beholders.

Therefore all they yt dwell in hoate dry regions, have hair black, of small
growig, curled, crisp, and as the Egyptians, Spaniardes, AEthiopians, Moors,
and all other which in nature and condition, ars like unto them. For we see
many in every region, yea of them that dwell Northwarde toward the Pole
Arctick, which (if we consider their hairs, colour, coplexio of their whole
body) seem rather like foreyners strangers, then Country borne people. So among
y^ Netherladers low Duchme bordering upon ye Sea, many be black curl heyred,
tawnyskined, specially they which in Somer are much in ye heat of ye Sun, use
much labour: howbeit this variety of bodies may be referred to sondry causes,
Variety diversity of body.
as either to the nature of the Country Regio, or to the power faculty of
their meats nourishmet, or else finally to the hid ymaginatios of the woman or,
mother. Which ymaginations are of so great force efficacy, Imagination.
that the things by her in mind earnestly imagined in at the very instant time
of her coceptio, is deryued into the infant child then begotten. For this Sex
being wanton, VVomes intemperance.
toying, steadfastly eyeing every thing yt is offered to sight, it happens that
the natural faculty being then in workinge forming of the child, directs
her cogitatios inward coceiptes y^ way, brings unto ye Infat, an other foreign
shape form, in nature coditio altogether unlike ye right parents.

This even in our days and of late years hath bin by experience found true:
A true report.
at what time ye Emperor Charles, ye si^t of yt name, coming out of Spain
into y^ lowe Countries, arrived there with a well appointed navy of royal
ships, having in his copany a goodly train of noble Getleme yeome. Many women
therabout, being the great with child, through much beholdig well eyeing those
galat Spaniards, after ix months brought their Infantes and children, having
eyebrowes and hairs black and curled, and in all respects coloured like
Spaniards. And this happened not among filthy Corteghians common brothelles
(whom it might well be thought to have bin underlings hackeneyes to those
hoate natured and lecherous Nation) but the same fell so out also, among right
honest tried Matrons, (whose approved chastity and virtuous dispositios were
so irreprooueable, that they were not to be once charged with the lest
suspicion of any such lewednes) and yet these affections and impressions in
their children took place accordingly.

In like manner, when y^ Emperor Maximilian (who was descended of the house of
Austrich) had also the government over the Low Countries, the women being much
in compaignie and sight of the Germaynes, brought forth their Children with
yelowe flexen hairs, and in each point like to Germaynes. For they and all
other as many as are borne and bred in cold and moyke Countries, have hairs
fine, straight and somewhat ruddy, and beards of the colour of brass: for yt
the hears are neither adusted by the Sun, nor yet by any inward heate: for
having moisture plentifully and issues out at the poores easy enough, the
abundance of the excrements, wherwyth they be nourished, makes the hairs
thick, and the adustion which causes the colour to be black, it makes
weak. Black hair therefore comes of vapour by heat aduste, when the
excrement is wrought and turned into an exact fuliginousnes. Black hair
The cause that produces yellow hair, is when the vapour is not much adust
and heated, for that which is then impressed in the skin, Yelovv.
and seeks eruption, is the feculent excrement of yelow Choler, and not of
Melancholy. But white hair comes of Phlegm and of a humour cold and moist.
White.
Red hairs, as they be mean between yelow and white, Red.
so doth the generation of it proceed of a certain nature, mean between
Phlegm and Choler.

Now, they that dwell in countries temperate and between these, have of hair
much stoare, strong, somewhat blackishe, meanly thick, and neither
altogether thick and gross, nor altogether straight plain. Which differeces
Galene applies to every several age. For as touching the colour, Lib. 2. de
Temper.
he ascrybeth such hairs as young Infantes have, to the Germaynes: of such as
be in their best flourishynge years, to Spaniards and Mauritanians: and of
them that be Spryngalds or in the beginning of their Adolescency, to such as
inhabit temperate Countries. In the natures also of bodies, the hair is of
form colour according to the difference and respect of Ages and Countries.

For tender age and Childhood is bare without hairs on the body, Why
children h^e no bea^des.
or else with very small, soft and mosye hair only, because either there be
n^ pores in their skins for the exhalatio to evaporate and grow to the
bigness of hairs, or else there wants effluxe and fuliginous excrement,
wherewithal the small threads of the hairs, are wont to be drawn and
produced out. But when they be come near about the age of xiiii. years,
they begin to bourgen and show forth, little and weak. Lusty and
flourishing Age, hath hairs stronger, fuller bushed blackishe, for that, the
pores and passages then begin to open and be enlarged: and finally stoare of
fumous exhalation abounds in those parts of the body, which are apt to
generate and produce hair, as the Head, Chin, Arm pits, Privities. For
although the Breast, Arms, Thighs, in some that be of very hoate complexion
abound with fuliginous vapoure, be seen to be rough and hayrie, yet do those
hairs grow, neither so copiouslye nor to any great length: which thing (for
example sake) in certain dry and musculious places of the body, as the
eyebrowes eyelyddes may evidently be perceived.

Therefore the much stoare and thickness of hair comes of aboundauce of
humours: Much store of hair how it comes.
and the colour thereof is according as the heate is of greatness. Therefore all
those parts in mans body are most rough and hayrie, which abound in most
heate. For it attracteth the vaporous fumes that issue from humours, and
fashions the same into a hayrie nature. And for this cause, many Springhaldes
have not in that Age any herds, neither any other parts of their bodies
hayrie.

My order is (to such as resort to me for advise and counsel, howe they may
make their beards to grow) to open and make wide their pores passages, by
applying and geeuinge to them such things as stir up heate in those parts,
bring out humours, altering concocting the same into the use of hairs. The
Lintment that I customably make for this purpose is this. To make the beard
grow.
R. of Reed or Cane roots, Brionie roots, Beete, Radish, Flower de lice,
Onions, of each alike, viz the quantity of four Ounces, six fat figs
bruised stamped very small, Maydenheare, Sothernvvod, Dill, of each one
handful: seethe these all together in sweet and well relyced wine, then force
wring out the licoure and strain it through a strayner, then put to it
fresh butter never salted, pure honey, Ana. ii. oun mces, Oil of Almonds both
sweet and sower, Oil of Sesama about the quantity of i. ouce, Oximel
Scyllitic. half an oz. the powder or meal of Lineseede, Nigella, Fenugreke,
well sifted and thoroughly bolted in a fine boulter, one Pugil or small grasp,
of ye gum Labdanu one ouce. Let al these be set upon ye fire and stirred with
a stick till they be thick enough to make a Limment withal. To what part of ye
body soever this liniment is laid and applied, it makes hair to grow: and if
the Chin or bare Cheeks be therewith anointed, the same will quickly be
hayrie and have a comely beard.

For it opens and relaxeth the skin being thycke, and makes the passage
and and euaporacio for ye humours, of who through the help and operation of
heate, the first buddig out and generation of hairs proceeds. And if the
baldnes or bareness of hair proceed not either of eldershippe in years, or
else by reason of some sickness, or vicious humours as bodies infected with some
loathsome disease, or with French Pockes, commonly are (for the bodies of such
persons even in the secretest parts, become in each place pylde, and sheedeth
all their hair like unto Trees, whose leaves fall of, if in the root reign
any saltishnes or venomous licoure) this liniment is a present help and
remedy: but the body must first by Purgation be clesed from all ill and filthy
humours inwardly.

But to proceed in my purpose matter: women by ye very same reason that young
Stryplings are, have no hair on their bodies, but be smothe and slick
skinned, saving only their heads crown where their hair grows in
marvelous great plenty, Women full of hairs on their head.
for that the vapours do very much abundantly ascend upward. In their other
parts their skin is smothe and vnhayrye, because moisture is above heate.
Saving y^ in and about their secrete pryuityes, Hayrie women, lecherous.
where also hayrinesse appears, such women as be greatly destrous of carnal
lust and copulation, be very rough and thick growenr with hair thereabout,
and the more lecherous, the more hayrie fruitful. And the cause why some
women (otherwise abounding with generatiue seed) do not conceive and bear
children, is nothing else but y^ want of heate. For even as a fenny and very wet
ground bears no corn but chokes it up, so likewyse a womb that is
slypperie, Barenuesse inwome vnablenes in men to get Children.
is not fit for conception. In like manner also, there be some yonge men, who
maryinge to soon, and ere they be fully ripe, are vnfruictfull and not able to
get any children, for that they lack manly strength, their seed to cold and
thin. It is therefore by reason of heate, that men be hayrie and bolder then
women be. But if heate increase in mans body immeasurably and above a
mediocrity, and that through Choler ye blood be stirred and toomuch inflamed,
it oftentimes turns into mere desperate rage fury. Heate causes holdnes.
And hereof it comes, that many being angered and their blood either with
public or with pryuate injuries stirred, in their desperate mood, will
Bedlemlyke run upon their Enemies with minds enraged. The hoater of
complexion therefore y^ every man is, and further of from moderate temperature,
the hayryer is his body, and the fiercer is his courage. Which thing by
Juvenal is right well expressed, where he saith: A bushy Beard, and Arms
ouergrovven
with bristled hairs, Sat. 2. declare
In man, a savage cruel mind
devoid of any care.


For vehement heate makes men stout of courage, rage, fierce, testy, crafty,
subtle, industrious, politic, of which sort of men we find in writing,
some, that not only in their outward parts, but in their very Entrails and
inward parts, also have bin found rough and hayrie. Lib. 11, Cap. 37
Plinie makes mention of one Aristomenes Messenius, who by his subtyle
Stratagemes and warlike shifts is said (being alone) to have put to flight,
whole Bands of men. Which thing is a plain Argument and toke as well of his
craftiness and suttletie, as also of his excellent and wonderful fortitude.
This man after he had slain CCC. Lacedaemonians, was by them once or twyse take
captive cast into pryso, but escaped their hands by creeping out at a little
narrow hoale in the prison as Foxes and Weesels do. The subtlety of
Aristomenes.
Being again taken he espied convenient time when his keepers Iaylers were
well whittled with wine fast ^ulled, then crawled rolled himself to the fler,
and there burning a flonder the Cords and Gyves wherewith he was tied,
together with y^ part of his body where they were fastened, escaped again.
Being taken the third time, the Lacedaemonians his enemies, meaning to make
sure work with him, and desyringe to see what was within him, ripped his
breast, and found his heart to be ouergrowen with hair. Iudie. 15. 16.
Hereby we are to conjecture and guess, what mali heate and strength there was
in Sampson, who with the Iaw bone of an Ass slue a Thousand persons, and pulling
up the Doares of the gate of the City, the two side poastes, with the bars
and all, laid them upon his shoulders and carried them up to the top of an
hill: Who breaking a sonder the coardes bands wherewith he was tied, boldly
and without any fear set upon them yt lay in wait for him: and pulling down
the mayne pillars of the house, oppressed and slue a wonderful multitude of his
ennemies. No less notable wonderful was the stout valiance of Dauid, 1.
Reg. 17.
who flercelye flying upon a Lyon, and likewise upon a Bear that came with
open mouth to have devoured his flock of Sheep, slew them both, and
afterward vanquishinge and foylinge that proud and despiteful Philistine
Goliath, cut of his head, and brought the same with him into the City as a
worthy Trophy and Monumet of his noble Prowess and victory. For this cause
also is Sangar the son of Anath in Sacred Chronicles registered enrolled, Iud.
3.
who flew of the Philistines vi. hundred men with a Plough share, or (as some
do translate it) with an Ox goad. And although such men as these for the
most part be of strength and courage invincible, yet is it many times seen,
that a great sort of them are led and carried headlonge by wilful affection
and vnrulynesse of mind, to commit and attempt things neither honest nor
allowable. Whose inclination being such, that (if they would be guided by
virtue) they were able and of power to compass right worthy exploits, and
lack no means nor helps for the atchieuinge and furtherance thereof, yet do
they oftentimes take the worse way, giving themselves to notable vices, and by
craftines, subtilitye, coseninge, filching, murder, and bloudshedding, seek
to enrich themselves and to come by wealth, dominion, power and authority.
These men quighte abandoning the virtues, of Maguanimitie Fortitude, desire
rather ye name of harebrayned boldness and cruelty, then of valiance and
stoutenes.

In the attempt and adventure of any danger, Bold rashness.
they show themselves courageous and hardy, but this their courage and
hardynesse tends not to any commodity or profit of their common wealth and
Country, but of a certain pryuate lust, affection, and disorderlye outrage in
themselves, to feed their own sensual phantasyes, and wylfulnes: and so they
may have their wills their turns served, they make no great conscience, how
the common state of their Country fares.

Thus, many times by proof we see, yonge men of right good hope and
towardness, through lewd compaignie of disordered Rakehelles, Virtues defaced
and marred by vices.
to degenerate fro the virtuous inclynation of their own manners, into lewdness
and villa^e and whereas by foldwing ye disposition of their own virtuous
nature, they might full well thryue, be in great likelyhoode to become right
worthy and famous members of their Country, they seek to compass and bring
the same to effect, through ill Arts and discommendable means, in the
learning and practise whereof, they show themselves as industrious and take as
great pains, as would conduct and bring them to matters of better
excellency, and a great deal worthier renown.

And as dull spirited, heavy, slothful sleapy persons, commonly do not bring
to pass nor achieve any memorable act, either for goodness or harm
notorious, neither attempt any great feactes or noble enterprises: So
contrariwise these persons are sit and apt to every thing, that they set their
minds unto, whether it be good or bad, virtue or vice: neither is any
thing so harde and cumbersome, but (if they bend thereto their mind and
industry, they will compass and overcome it, and therein attain to a notable
excellency. And therefore in my opinion Plato judged right wisely, Lib. 6. de
Rep.
in saying that, horrible wickedness, and graceless desperate villainy
proceeds not of a lowtishe and dull nature, but rather of a noble and
excellent mind, that is marred corrupted by ill custom and lewd education.
And such persons as these, be of a hoate complexion and disposition of body,
which pricks them forward to do and execute such pranks. For they that be
cold (because they be fearful dastardly) never yet (as the proverb saith)
deserved tryuph for any worthy exploit done, neither dare to give the onset
and enterprise, to any thing wherein is any great difficulty, danger, or odd
singularity.

They therefore that have hoate bodies, are also of nature variable, and
chaugeable, readypropt, lively, lusty and applyable: of tongue, trowling,
perfect, persuasive: delyuering their words distinctly, plainly and
pleasantly, with a voice thereto not squekinge and slender, but streynable,
comely and audible. Big voice.
The thing that makes the voice big, is partly the wydenes of the breast
and vocal Artery, and partly the inward or internal heate, from whence
proceeds the earnest affections, vehement motions, and fervent desyers of
the mind. But if civil and virtuous education be lacking, they many times
become cogging shifters, crafty cosoners, sly makeshiftes, nymble conueighers
foystinge filchers, troublesome and seditiously natured, unconstant, waueryng,
fraudulent untrusty and factious.

Who takes joy and pleasure still,
In wars, AEnei. 1.
in shifts, and vices ill.
And for that their loins be very hoate, they are also for the most part
greatly geeuen to leacherie and whoorehunting, and thrall to all other
pleasures of the body. Unto which vice if they much yield and addict
themselves, frequenting it excessively above measure, it happens y^ by reason
of overmuch profusion and wast of humour, they become bald and piled on the
forparte of their head sooner then otherwise they should: their colour also
fades away and decays, their eyes wax dim and bleared, their temples fall
down, their legs buttocks wax thine wearish, their lustines fails, their
face is lank and lean, and finally all the beauty and comeliness of the
body thereby decays and perysheth, beside a great many of other
discommodyties and inconveniences whereunto they be subject: As first, to
Consumptions and ill favoured habits or liking of the body, Feeuers hecticke,
which taking once hold in the inwardest parts, and thoroughly settling in
the bones and marowe, brings the body into apparent consumption. But if men
of this constitution and complexion do circumspectly look to their health, and
order their bodies and minds well and conveniently, they are healthfuller and
lustyer then any other men, and seldom happen to be sick, or to gather any
superfluous abundance of ill humours, which bring putrefaction and
corruption to the whole body. For the moderate substance of natural heate,
defends and makes them free from all sickenesses and greeuaunces.

It is expediente therefore and behooveful, to use a right orderly diet and
good trade of life. And beside these, that serve to the constitution of Man
body, there be Six things which being carefully looked unto, and diligently
observed, are able to keep us in good health, Things not natural.
so that we use and not abuse the same, otherwise then orderly and
conveniently. For the will of God the maker of all things, hath put these
things to dispose at our own choice and election. Galene calls them, causes
conseruatorie, because they serve are able to keep our bodies in good state,
Artis Medicae 85.
if they be orderly and conveniently used. The Physicians of later time call
them by the name of things not natural: not for yt they be without nature:
but for y^ they be things that be not naturally within but without us: and for
that, by their use and effect and by the order of their quality and measure,
they do empaire and dainnyflte nature if they be not well and aptly used. Of
the which sort are these: Air that enclooseth us, Meat and Drink, Exercise
and Rest, Sleep Watch, Evacuation and retention, and the Affections of the
mind: all which, natural heate requires as things necessary and needful to
her conservation and healthful maintenance.

First the Air doth sometime slyly and closely, sometime manifestly and
apparantlye, Air.
enter and breathe into ye body, where it either corrupts or else refreshes
the spyrites within, sometime with corrupt and stinking savour, and sometime with
wholesome and sweet afflation. Fulsome pestilet air more hurtful then
pestilent meat
And this is to be noted, that unwholesome Air, and contagious or pestilet
scents, do more harm to sound health, then meat that is of veuemous quality.
For the meat may by vomit be cast up again, whereas the Air and all things
liquid, if they once catch possession in the vital parts, and enter into the
veins, they settle so surely and take such strong possession, that hardly
it is to remedy and again thence to dispossess them. Seeing therefore, that the
Air encompassinge and containing us, doth so diversely affect our bodies (for
beside the pestilent exhalations that slily by it be conveyed into the
laps of the lunges, it either heats, dries, cools or moysteneth to much)
every man is to stand surely upon his own guard and diligently to loke to
himself, that he be not thereby harmed. For as to temperate bodies, holesomest
air is fit and requisite: so to bodies lacking of temperatenes, that air is
to be accounted best, wherein contrary qualities excel. Thus to a body that is
hot, cold air is to be applied: to moist, Contraries are remedied by their
cotraryes.
dry best serves: for cold, hoate: and for dry, moist: and if the same may
not otherwise be had, it is expediente by Art to procure it. And therefore in
hoate and dry diseases, or in very soultery hoate weather, When schorching
Doggedayes extreme heat^:
With parching drought and sickness great, A Enei. 10

In scovvling Sky doth rage and reign,
And putts poor seely vvightes to pain.


The better to qualefie and mitigate this hea^e, Doggedayes.
it shall be very good to sprinckle on the paueme is and cool the floors of
our houses or chambers with springing water, and then to strew them over with
Sedge, to trim up our Parlours with green boughs, fresh herbs or vine
leaves: which thing although in the Low Country it be usually frequented, yet
no Nation more decetly, more trymmely, nor more sightly then they do in
Englande. For, not long agone traueylinge into that flourishing Land,
Englande praised for clenly trim ming their houses.
partly to see the fashions of that wealthy Country, with me of fame and
worthiness so bruited and renowined, and partly to visit VVilliam Lemnie, in
whose company and weldoing, I greatly rejoice (as a father can not but do) and
take singular cotentatio inwardly, even at my first arryual at Dover, and so
alog my journey toward London, which I dispatched partly upon Horseback, and
partly by water, I saw and noted many things able to ravish and allure any
man in the world, with desire to trauatle and see that so noble^ Country. For
being brought by D. Lemnie (a skilful Phisicion and w^l thought of there
for his knowledge and experience) into the company of honourable and
worshipful Personages, every Gentleman and other worthy Person showed unto
me (being a Stranger borne and one that never, had been there before) all
points of most fre^dly courtesy, and taking me first by the hand lovingly
embraced and bad me right heartily welcome.

For they be people very civil and well affected to men well stricken in years,
and to such as bear any countenance and estimation of learning, which thing
they that half suspect and have not had the full trial of the manners and
fashions of this country, will skarcely be persuaded to believe. Therefore,
Learned me and aged greatly reverenced in England.
francklye to utter what I think of the incredible courtesy, and frendlinesse
in speech and affability used in this famous Royalme, I must needs
confess, it doth surmount and carry away the prick and price of al others.
And beside this, the neat cleanlines, the exquisite fineness, the pleasant
and delightful furniture in every point for household, wonderfully rejoiced
me, their Chambers Parlours strawed over with sweet herbs, refreshed me,
their Nosegays finelye entermingled with sondry sorts of fragaunte flowers in
their bedchabers and privy rooms, with comfortable smell cheered me up and
entierlye delighted all my Senses And this do I think to be the cause yt
Englishmen, living by such wholesome and exquisite meat, and in so wholesome and
healthful air, be so fresh and clean coloured: their faces, eyes and
countenance carrying with it, and representing a portly grace and comeliness,
gives out evident tokens of an honest mind: in language very smooth and
allectiue, but yet seasoned and tempered within the limits and bonds of
moderation, not bombasted with any unseemly terms or infarced with any clawing
flatteries or allurements. At their Tables although they be very sumptuous,
and love to have good fare, yet neither use they to overcharge themselves with
excess of drink, neither thereto greatly provoke urge others, but suffer
every man to drink, in such measure as best pleases himself, which drink
(being either Ale or Beer) most pleasaut in taste and holesomely relyced, they
fetch not fro foreine places, but have it among themselves brewed.

As touching their populous and great hauted Cities, ye fruictfulnes of their
ground soil, their lively Springes and mighty Rivers, their great Herds and
flocks of cattle, their mysteries and Art of weaving and clothmaking, their
skilfulnes in shootig, it is needless here to discourse: seeing the multitude
of Merchant, exercysinge the traffic and Art of Merchandise among them,
and Ambassadors also sense thither from foreign Princes, are able abundantly
to testify, that nothing needful expediente for mans use and commodity
lacks in that most noble Land.

But to fall into my matter again, from whence I have a little digressed: we
must be no less wary and precise in choice of the Air, wherein we live,
then of the meat and drink whereby we be fed, sustained and nourished.
Wherefore, to defend the body from being lightly and easily attainted with
Sickness, Meat drink.
or fro being made subject and open to Agues, it stands us upon, to acquaint
and accustom our selves to the best meates, and such as increase or engender
no ill juice nor corrupt humours: the same meates to be taken at due hours and
seasonable times; and also in good order and moder^te quatity.

For (as Columella saith) like as it is (...) the field or ground arable to be
weaker then the husbandman that tills and breaks it up, Lib. 1, Cap. 3.
least if the ground be stronger and p^euayle, the tyller or husband be crushed
or ouermaystered ^ likewyse expedient and meet it is, that the meat be weaker
and under the powers and ^aystrye of nature, both that the stomach be not
ouer^loyed and charged with superabundance or excess, also for the speedser
concoctio and better digestion thereof. Which thing is hardly brought to
pass, (...) the stomach is too much pampered and (...), and the meates
either ill and unwholesome, ^ diverse and repugnant qualities among themselves:
or finallye when neither respect, order nor mean^ of (...), custom, hours,
age, nor (...) is observed.

These c^cumstances also think I good to be prescribed in the Act of
carnal copulation, namely to young (...) folks, who upon their new ma^y^g^,
with vnaciable beastlynesse and frequ^ci^ of coiture, think to overcome and
tyre their wives, whereas they yet remain still vnsatisfyed, and the men
utterly spend and soked. In diet also and order of life this thing is to be
observed, specially where the body passes not the bounds of temperance and
moderation, that as near as is possible, nothing be eaten used, but those
things that be like or as very agreeable to nature as conuentently may be: for
to feed upon contraries is a thing right hurtful and dangerous, which
thing in each several age, time, country, and custom (which alters a man
fro his own nature to an other) is greatly to be respected, wayghed and
considered.

Thus no children require moist nourishmet, Moist nourishmet fittest for
children.
and things that be very hoate and dry are not to be prescribed and given to
them, because ye same is a hindrance to there growth. For which cause Plato
and Galene do forbid Children ye drinking, Lib. 2 de leg lib 1. de tuend.
Valetud.
yea the^stinge of Wine, because the drinking thereof sets their bodies in
heate, fills their heads wythfumes, brings great annoyance to their
minds. Wine hurt full to children.
Yea they be of opinion, that for big Stryplings of full growth to drink
wine, is not allowable, except: it be very sparinglye and little ^e cause it
carries them headlonge into anger, makes them prompt and ready to pursue
^centious lusts and inordinate affections, and also dulls and troubles that
part of the mind which is rational. But they that be entering into mas state
(because they then consyste and be in their best temperamente) require such
dyer and nourishment as is wholesome and temperate. As for example, Veale,
Mutto, Pork, Hen, Kydde, Eggs, fine Mathet bread of the best and cleanest
Wheat. For Youth and mas Age, because, they draw (...) and heate and somewhat
to dryness: Qualefiers and al^yers of the heate of blood.
and for that their blood waxes hoate, specially in Somer season: it is best
to allay and qualefie y^ same heate, with things that be moderately moyste:
such as these, Buglosse, Orrage, Mallowes, Spinach, ye herb Patience, Lactuce,
Purselane, Melons, Cucumbers, Cheeries, Corncile berries, and of these many,
for hurtinge and annoyinge the stomach, may be boy^ed: or if we eat the raw
in Saletts, it shall be right good to myngle put unto them, Rocket, Crosses,
Mynte, Watercresses Guard Dragon wort, which now a days grows in a manner
in every Garden. By this means shall we bring to pass that heate shall not
too much prevail or get the vpperhand by ouermaystring natural moisture.
Therefore when a man of a hoate complexion, or of an other constitution,
begins to grow into distemperature, it shall be expediente for him to alter
nature to her contratyes: for by things like, ^
are diseases procured, and by distemperaunce nourished.

Therefore at any time, when soever thou art disposed to alter y^ state of thy
body and to drive away sickness, enjoin to thy self a contrary order of Dret
and usage, but yet so, that nature be not in posthaste, but leisurely and by
little and ^sle translated to an other custom. For as it is a wysemans part
(saith ^ullye) by little and little to wy^d out himself and shyft of those
frendships which he greatly likes not: Li. 1. Off.
so likewise an old rooted custom may not be hastily and sodely changed, but
softly, leisurely, and discretely. For sudden alteration and change brings
the body into danger, and is very preiudicial to health. But this is specially
meant of the body: for in the state of the mind, there ought to be neither stop
nor delay, but immediately and out of hand to abandon and banish all lewd
manners and dishonest enormities.

Furthermore as in young men all things are to be reduced to the perfection and
syne of temperature, and every way to be attempted for the amendment of that
which in them is amysse, and for framing of their bodies to a right proportion
or agreeableness: so in Aged persons nothing ought to be rashly taken in had
or inconsiderately attempted: for that, it is a great deal better for that
Age, still to continue in such things as they have been trained up and
accustomed unto, Ill customs must by little and little be taken away.
(yea although they be somewhat butifull) then to begin any new alteration
in their diet and order of living. Contrary wise young men must strive and
assay to alter, and bring themselves from those things yt be nought and
hurtful, although they have ben used thereto even since they were children. For
their strength and powers are well enough able to suffer a moderate alteration:
and because they may live a longer while, it is to be hoped that they (by
chaunginge and framynge themselves to a better custom and order) may receive
thereby profit, and be otherwise beneficial to their country: Change in old
men, daugerous.
But an old man, if he go about to shake from him or to change that order
of life, which by long use and domestically he hath frequented, doth but loose
all his labour, trauayleth therein all in vain. For although he proceed
somewhat forward therein, and seem to have won thereby some part of his
desire, yet shall he lack time and space to glean and enjoy any fruit of his
wished estate.

He doth herein much like to him that (being spent in years even at the
pits brincke, carefully and busely saves and purueigheth (the nearer yt he
comes to his journeys end hath less way to go) Cicero in Senect.
greater store and foison of victual for his wayfaring expenses: a thing, in
the opinion and judgement of Cato so absurd, as nothing more. In which
doing he wastes all his labour and deals much like (saith Galene) to ^ man
that in his old doting and decrepit days, Lib. 5. de tued. Val.
goes about to learn some Art or occupation: whereas more meet it were for
such a one to cal to remembrance what a small time by course of nature he hath
here to remain, and that his cotinuaunce here cannot be long, but must be
packing away and depart to his long home.

Saying therefore old Age is to enjoy and take no commodity by chaunginge
usual diet ordinary custom of living, it is better by every manner of way to
cheerishe and comfort it, and to heate and humect his cold and dry body
with nourishment conueinente, then doubtfully and by haphazard, and otherwise
then that age permits, to begin any new order: sythence old age is weak
and feeble, and not well able to bear out even the least disdiete that may
be: but if it fall thereinto, hardly and with very much ado can it escape and
recover it self out again.

But forasmuch as natural heate by moderate motion or exercise is increased
and stregthened, The profit th^t comes by exercise.
and the Body and mind of man (wearied with troublesome busynesse and cares) is
destrous with rest quietness to be refreshed, to have some reasonable truce
relaxation: even as good heed and great regard hereof in every several
Coplexion would be had (for according to every mas nature, is ye same sonderly
to be used) so in this hoate state Coplexion of body for the better
maintenance and conservation of health, it would be well looked unto and
cyrcumspectyle considered. Nothing is holesomer nor more available for
health, then seasonable Exercise convenient motion. For by it the quickness and
vigour of the mind is reuyued, the faint drowsye Spyrites stirred up and
awaked, the soul and mind checred and exhilarated, all the parts of the body
all the senses both within and without made nimble, active, perfect and ready to
do their proper functions: the colour fairer fresher, appetite provoked
sharpened, ye possages pores opened, ye coceptories of the Veins enlarged and
made bigger, (whereby humours have freer passage way into every several part
of the body) excremets commodiously purged, concoction speedelyer finished, the
juice or humours (being well cococted) better distributed to the sustenance
and nourishment of every member in the body: last of all, when the mind is
quiet calm, then is sleep sound and quiet also, and not interrupted nor
broken with fantastical dreams nightly imaginations, yea then be al things
duly, seasonably, and orderly used and done, when the meat is thoroughly
concocred and excrements by evacuation purged: which by too vehement motion are
drawn into the disposition or habit of the body, stop the streit narrow,
pores thereof.

When a man is disposed to exercise himself, Order of exercise.
it shall be good to prepare his body thereto by beding and bowing thereof, to
stretch out his synewes and other parts of his body, which peradventure for want
of exercise are stiff, thereby to make the nymble pliable. By this means shall
he with no greeuaunce or weariness use exercise, and so log is it good for him
to bestir his body, till his lymmes begin somewhat to swell, a fresh ruddy
colour in his face body, with sweating to appear: which so soon as it happens
is plainly to be perceived, it behooves streightwayes to cease fro exercise, to
chafe ye body no further: for if it be continued lodger not stinted, by by ye
colour vanishes away, the body becomes dry lancke. And like as hot
coplexioned me, if they use vehement swift motion, with exercise heat chafe
themselves thoroughly, they have thereby bodies slender and (by reason their
natural humour is spent) somewhat enclyning to dryness: so again, Slouthe
and ease hurtful.
if they live idly or give themselves to drawsynes, or to spending their time
in riot; distemperaunce, loytringe, sloth, wantonness, ease nice delytes, they
grow full of humours, and ware wouderous gross, fat and corpulent. I may
peradventure seem to the s^emish and full stomached Reader, to bestawe herein
^o wo^des then for such a matter are needful, but le^ him understand that our
purpose herein tedeth to this only end, to admonish al men in general and
namely Students and men of honourable birth, Advertisement to the s^dious.
a^d such as further and favour goad Studies and virtuous Arts and disciplines,
not to meddle with painful and vehement strong exercises (specially when they
be fasting or immediately after meals;) neither to sit at their Books at
unseasonable hours, wearing away themselves still within doors, and greatly
wassing their animal spirits the faculties natural of their bodies. For in
both these sorts; I see measure or mean in them wanting: whereof I purpose
more at large to speak, when I come to the discourse of the dry Complexion.
Furthermore forasmuch as there be sondry and diverse sorts of Exeraise, and
every sort not apt decente for every Age: let every man try and consider in
himself whereto he is by nature most apt and inclinable. Horace in Art Poet.


How much his shoulders carry may,
And what they can not well vpstaye.
As for Wrestling, Sorts of exercise.
Coytingo, Tennis, Bowlinge, Whorlehattinge, liftinge great waightes, pitching
the harre. Riding, Running, Leapinge, shooting in Gunnes, swimming, tossing ye
Pike, Tyltinge, Barryers and Tourney, are reckened among the exercises of
strong men: albeit some, of them (because they are violently and forciblye,
done, have of a merry beginning, a heavy and lamentable ending: as of late
years it happened unto the French King Henry the second of that name, Frech
king killed in running at the Tilt. 1559.
stout Prince and of courage muincible: who in a royal. Iusting or running at
the Tilt, for the more solemnisation of a nuptial Pomp the prepared, received
his deaths wound, with a splint or shyuer of a broken spear, which pierced
got in at the sight hoales or beaver of his Helmet, and stroke the king into
the eye, and so to the brain, whereof he suddenly fell into an Ague, and after
a few days dyed.

There be other kinds of exercise not of so great travail as these, Gentler
exercises.
and less troublesome: as to be carried in wagons, or to be rowed in Boats:
sodrye sorts of frictions: walking either softly or apace, Singing and
Musical melody, chanted either with lively voice, Music chere^h makes
meerie the mind of man.
or played upon sweet Instruments, to the ears mind right pleasant and
delightful, driving away heauynes, and cheering and reuyunge the Spyrites,
when they are damped with thoughts, and careful pensiveness. And if thereto be
used a clear and load reading of big tuned sounds by stoppes and certain
Pauses, as our Comical fellows now do, that measure Rhetoric by their peevish
Rhythmes, it will bring exceeding much good to the Breast and Muscles. No less
ease and profit likewise shall a man thereby find for the opening of his
pypes, and expelling thence al obstructions, specially if he use himself a
little to hold in his breath, and pinching together his lyppes, with his
cheeks full blown, to let his breath gush out with a full sturdy sound.
De valet. lib. 5.
But this, in yonge men (saith Galene) is to be moderated till they be at
consistente Age, and in mornings when the body is empty and not infarced,
neither with the nightly exercise of venerous pastimes before, wearied and
weakened.

This Exercise also of al others is most chiefly coueniet good for them yt
either by imperfectio A fit exercise for crokebacked persons
of nature or by negligece of Nurses are crookebacked: For ye Muscles of their
bulk breast, and the laps or bellows of their Loges being drawn together
crooked toward, their backs, causes the to be shortwynded, which by this
means is greatly eased, they thereby made to fetch their wynd a great deal
better with more facility. Horses of good courage breed^, when they feel the
Spur, with coursinge, tramplinge and f^tching the capre, caryre, or curuetty,
do ye very same thing naturally, with their snuffing Nosethrils (a toke whereby
to know good coragious Horse) which men do, when they hold in their breath,
stroute out their C. jeekes. This trick to make the snuff, y^ Horscorsers use,
by pinching them by the Noses: To try good horses.
and if thereupon they forthwith puff and blow, they take it for a certain
sign and sure token that the same horse is good, and hath in him no hidden nor
secrete fault. For if he pace not well, if he fling out with his heals and
kick, if he have a stiff leg or a blind eye, and such like outward
impediment, it is evident by sight and looking on to be perceived, by other
outward tokens, ought and may easily be found out and tried.

I could here repeat a great sort of other exercises more, Recreatios not
commedable.
as Dice, Tables Cards, but because they be the pastimes recreations of idle
persons to be done standing still or sitting, and again, be not in y^ nober
of commendable delights, laudable solaces, I have spared in this place to speak
any thing of them. For men of good nature and disposition, when they have any
spare time from their other earnest busynesse, desire frequent such solaces
sports as are joined with honesty, Husbandry praised.
such as are the pleasures of ye country practise of husbadry, which brigeth
with it not only pleasure but profit gain also, ye plentifully without any
dislykig toil. For the master or owner of the ground needs not with his own
hands, to moyle toil, dig and delve, plough, and carte, sow, harrow,
break cloddes, to dig about his trees and cleanse away the superfluous and
hurtful earth, sithence he may take less pains, by committing the doing
thereof to his Hinds and meigniall Hyerlings whom he may daily oversee and by
word of mouth, berke, or figne, appoint what he will have to be done and taken
in hand. Which thing is meant by Terence, where he brings in one old ma
reproving an other, for drudging and moylinge in his ground himself, saying
thus: The toil and labour which thou take with thine own hands, Heau.
sce. 1. Act. 1.
if thou vvouldest bestow the same in ouerseeinge thy folks, and setinge them
to their busynesse, thou shouldest have more work done by a great deal.

The owners foot makes a fruitful field, (saith the Proverb) and the
Masters eye fats the horse. Now when we leave of from exercise and come to
our meat and drink, which restores strength, we must be very wary careful
that we overcharge not our stomachs with superabundaunce and saciety. For as
too much abstinence and hunger is oftentimes hurtful, Saciety or fulness of
Stomach to be eselievved.
so too much fulness and saciety is never profitable wholesome: for there with
the Stomach is too-much stuffed and distempered with cruditye, engendering
oppilation and putrefaction, the very breeders and procurers of Agewes and al
other diseases. To maynteyne preserve bodily health in perfect stay and
soundnes, all things are to be done in due order and by right choice of
judgment, so yt according to the precept of Hyppocrates, Epidi 6. Aphor. 5.
Labour or Exercise, Meat, Drynck, carnal Act, all must be used in measure,
and be done in their due time and order. Hereby we see, that by his opinion,
healthynes must take his beginning at Exercise, after which meat and drink
comes next, The harm of Venery or Carnal Copulatio.
then: Sleep and last of an carnal Act, meetest for them (saith Galene) ^
usually have recourse thereto and feel sheve by least harm, that is for
(...) Age: for so Old age and dry bodies it is exceedingly hurtful and most
pernicious.

Neither ^it without danger and harm, to be frequeted of those that be of
(...) Complexions, specially being used out of season or immoderately, or when
the weather is hot. In the Spring time it is more tolilerable and wholesome,
after that the body is with moderate ^ meat and brincke heated and moystened,
and being also before sleep. For by this means, the weariness ^ doing, is by
Sleep incontineutly (...) cased, and repaired.

Emptynesse and Repletion.
THis moderation is in other things also to be observed, as when the body
requires with meat and brincke to the refreshed, or being with humours app^ete,
defyreth (...) provided always that good consideration be had, what strength
the body is of, what nature is able to bear, and how far herein a man may
safely apuenture. Which thing also in well and cyrcumspectly to be weighed and
(...) of, in opening of Veins, in prouokinge sweat, in procuring laskes, in
skowringe and purging the Entrails, and prouokinge vomits: for in these,
regard and respect must be had both of time, age, custom, nature and
Country.

Neither ought any man of custom to use and try any of these experiences
rashly upon himself, except great cause thereunto move him, or that he be
troubled with much abundance of noisome humours, which require either by
purgation or else by evacuation to be expelled. Bloudlettig not rashly to be
enter pryled.
For in every Country almost there be some, which at all seasos of the year
use to be let blood, or else by scaryfyinge the skin to be cupped, to the no
small hindrance danger and empechmet of their health: for together with the
blood (which is the treasure of life) Blood spirit the treasure of life.
there passes out no small deal of the vital Spirit; whereby the whole body
falls into great coldness, and nature weakened, thereby made less hable to
perform her work and function. Not good for men in health to use medicine.
So likewyse, others without any advise of the Physicians will swallow Pylles
dryncke Purgations, whereby they enfeeble their strength and hasten old age
before the time.

The same now and then happens to sondry in provoking vomit, Vomit seldom
to be provoked.
when think it good holesom once or twyse in a Month, to clear, empty ye
filthy sink of their gorged. Carcasses this way: whereas it is at no hand
expedient good for them that be in health, to haunt this beastly custom,
neither to be ruled by any that should thereunto counsel them.

And whereas some take hold of a certain saying in Hippocrates, De ratione
vict. lib. 1.
whereby they ground the use hereof to be good, such men in my opinion do not
thoroughly conceive and understand his full meaning in that place. For he
being daily couersaunt and practizinge Physic, among such a Nation and
people, whose fashion and ordinary custom was to keep revel rexe, and use
all kind of ryotous and ingluuious guimandyze, did not prescrybe unto them any
laws or orders for vomitinge: but if they should fortune to overcharge
themselves with excess and surphet, he judges it a better way for him that
hath used himself to vomit every Month, to continue the same two days
together, that the second day may make clear ryddaunce of the remainder of
the first day, rather then at the end of xv. days eftsoon to renew the
same. For by that means shall he expel and send out the humours that were
engedred of his former surphet and distemperaunce, keep his body free from
future sickness. So that this reverent and Aged Phistition in that place
exhorts no man to vomit, When to vomit.
for any holesomenes that is therein, but judges such manet of evacuation to
be expediente for them that with excess and immoderate feeding have
surphetted or whose stomachs through crudity corruption of the meat, drink
before eaten, betch up sower stynkinge fumes, whereof y^ one commonly happens
in cold stomachs, the other, in hoate. So the wise Hebrevv, Iesus the son of
Syrach, in every place exhortg to frugality moderation, Eccle. 31.
wills thee if thou feel thy self to have eaten too much and more then
thy health ca well brooke, to arise and go thy ways and to cast it our of thy
stomach, least otherwise thou bring thy body in danger of Sickness, but he
would not have any man customably to use it. Let not him that desires to live
till he be old, To what persons vomyting is hurtful.
use vomytinge often, specially if he be lunge and round necked, either very
slender or very gross bodied, or streict and narow breasts. But he yt
leads his lyre temperately, shall not need to seek any help at vomytinge
for conservation maintenance of his health.

Sleep and Watch.
Sleep and watch are after one like reason way to be considered of, which
being moderatelye used, within the bounds of mediocrity frequeted, are very
available to health, bring with them most needful commodities.

Sleep is nothing else but a resting of the Animal faculty, and a Paws^ng
from the actions and busynes of the day, whereby the virtues of the bodies being
faint, and the powers thereof being resolved, are reuyued and made fresh
again, and all the weary members Senses recomforted. For when the powers
natural be fresh and lusty, native heate gathering it self inward, is of more
force and strongly applies concoction, performing the same not only in the
Stomach, but also through the whole body beside, whose vapour and pleasant
sent moysteneth the brain, brings asleep the Instruments of the Senses.
The commodities of sleep.
Nothing therefore after meat moderately taken, is to the body holsommer the
seasonable Sleep: for it refreshes the wearied powers of the body, styreth up
the Spirits, recreateth the mind, puts away sorrow, brings a man into
good and quiet temper. Neither can health in any wise be continued and
maintained in any part of the body, without this amiable recourse and due
use of watch and Sleep: whereby we wythdraw our selves for the time, from our
earnest busynesse, and at seasonable hours geeue recreation to our wearied
Spyrits. And after sleep, fall again to our busynesse and affairs, whether
they be to be done with labour of the body or industry of mind. For howe could
mans mind continue still in his perfect vigour and strength, if these thigs by
turns be not used, if this varietye of life and quiet resting after labours of
the day, be not intermingled? These make the state of our life the less
irksome and burdenous, and us to be thereof less weary cloyed. For as Ouid
doth rightly say, That thing that lacks alternal rest,
continue cannot long, Epist. 4.

It makes the povvers of body fresh,
and vvearyed members, strong.
The Sun beig once up, sodry delightful sights appear, innumerable gallant
spectacles of the world nature, preset themselves unto us, to chase drive
troublesome facies, dups, cogitacios, out of our careful pesiue minds. And loke
what commodity we reap by the days travail, that doth Sleep in ye night
covteruayle requite. The day appointed for labour, and the night for rest.
For as the day seruig for watch dispatch of our needful busynesse, doth
exercise the body, in hope of Sleep makes al things lighter and easier: so
the night being appointed for rest, brings with it a forgetfulness of the days
toil, a sweet end of ye labour thereof. Wherefore we may not be negligent,
remiss and slack in the due consideration of these things, but carefully
beware ye they be not, either unseasonably, disorderly, or immeasurably
frequented. So that Sleep (which belongs to Eight hours for Sleep.
ye night) may be continued near about the space of 8. hours, or (if Supper
were somewhat large and full) somewhat longer. Howbeit in some persons it is
not to be measured, so much by the number of hours, as by the soundnes
profundity of Sleepig, as Porters, Whyrrime, vehement Laborers, Sound Sleepers.
Caryers, Sailors c. For these such like (for that, their brains are very
moist) do sleep marvelous soundlye and cannot be awaked but with much ado:
because their natural virtue being resolved with overmuch exercise, desires
by Sleep, to be refreshed, and with the humydity yt descends from the brain,
to be repaired restored: whereby it happens that yt virtue Animal, and
Instruments of the Senses, being lulled in ease and fast deteyned, Sleep most
soundly seizes upon them. And yt thing which weariness causes in great
labourers such as use much exercise, Why children and Dronkerdes be sleepy.
ye same doth moisture and refrigeration in children and drunken folks: for in
both of them, heate recuyling to the heart, (which is the welspring of ye
vitalfaculty) the head likewise stuffed with tumosities, sleep happens and
steals upon them.

But they y^ have the nookes celles of their brain slenderly moist, Who be
soon awaked out of sleep.
are ready to awake at every little styrig or waggig, for yt the thin vapour
small fume which possesses ye head, being nothing thick, doth quickly vanish
pass away. For I have know mauy, worn in a manner to ye stumps, partly by
overmuch study, partly by Agues Venery, who in their sleep, plainly perfectly
understood every word spoken by the staders by, insomuch yt being awaked with
the least noise y^ might be, they could recopt rechearse ye most part of those
things which had bin there spoken uttered. Not after the guise fashio of some,
which of set purpose at baquets will couterfaite themselves drunken a sleep.
Wily winkers.
For these good fellows under colour of being cupshot heavy headed, do slily
undermine, epsy mark what every man saith at y^ board, specially of such
words, intetes meanings, as me being heated well whytteled in wine, do then
report, and vnaduysedly utter. This trick not they only, but promoting
Catchpoles, Catchpoles.
and crafty Scouts, that raung about the country, to espy how men live what
they do, notig the dealings and narrowly sifting the life, behaviour, and
manners of other men, whereby they glean to themselves no small gain
commodity. For the fourth part of the goods, for their catchpollinge,
falls to them, for their lot and share: which thing makes them to be very
prying, double diligent, and inquisitive, where to have a purchase, and by
other men's losses to enrich and grease themselves. The Poet Juvenal (a very
precise and notable reprehender of vices, and one that would never go behind
the door to tell men their faults) shows that this was a custom usual and
ordinary among Bawds and Cuckolds (nay rather wyttoldes) which for hire would
be contented to let out their wives to open prostitution, or when they had any
persons in suspicion and jealousy. And to the intent the Adulterous Lecherers
might the more freely and licentiouslye have the use of their wives bodies,
these fellows as though they had been busied in other matters, and looking
an other way, or as though their minds, eyes, and faculties animal had bin
earnestly fixed and bent upon other cogitations, tooted and gazed into the
top of the house and viewed some trim feelings, or Images and pictures,
lively painted set out in their Parlours and Chambers. For thus doth the Poet
depaynt and set forth in his colours, one of this generation: and by this one,
gives a light to lead and direct our conjectures to judge of the rest.

To his own vvyfe, a Bawd and Pandar vile,
A vvittold, Iuuen. Sat. 1.
feigning sleep and vvynking many a vvyle,
Who can his lyrypoope, and gaze full mannerly
For birds nestes in the roof, while others syckerly,
Dubbes him an horned knight, and that right worthily.
The very same thing also sets down Ouid, and to the same purpose, albeit
by other occasion taken.

If that the goodman have an heavy noll, Lib. 1. Amor.

Or else a Bordeaux hammer beating in his head,
Both time and place shall us direct and toll,
Till with his vvyfe, our purpose we have sped.
But now again to fall into my bias, and leaving this digression to return
to my purpose: I say, nothing doth so much conserve, renew, revive and cheerish
the powers of body and mind as Sleep in the night, take about an hour and a
half after Supper. The manner howe to lye in bed.
At which time it is best, first to lye on the right side, that the meat may
descend and approach better to the Liver, and be the easelyer digested.
Howbeit it is not altogether amysse nor unwholesome for them that have feeble
digestions, to lye somewhat groueling and prostrate on their bealyes, specially
if their Stomach be charged with any superfluity. The commodity whereof, to
them whose bellies be somewhat swelled and styffe, is right profitable, both
for the digestio of the meat, assuaging of all inflation and pain of the
Stomach, Lying upon the back very vnholsome daugerous.
casing of ache and griping in the bowels. Lying flat upon the back is most
hurtful and dangerous: for so many as sleep after y^ sort, lye with their
mouths open, their eyes staring, their eyelyddes unclosed, sleeping very
unquietly, and without any refreshing or ease, by reason that the Muskles of
their breast neck be drawn hard together. And beside diverse other
discommodityes, they be oftentimes troubled with the night Mare, and falling
sickness, and are also subject to Palseys, Cramps and Apoplexies: which
diseases also are incidet to them that sleep at Noone, or mydday upon their
beds.

Let no man therefore of custom use himself to sleep in the day time,
Sleeping in the day hurtful.
unless he be thereto driven by weariness and lassitude gotten through heate
or labour, or when he hath overwatched himself the night before. For in such
case, a nap at noone may without harm be allowed borne wtall. And even as
Sleep vnseasonablye or vnmesurably take either by day or night makes me dull,
The harms of ouerwatching.
oblivious, lazy, faint, heavy, blockish, and mars both wtt and memory: so
again, watching being not within medtocrytie and measure used, dries the
brain, affects the senses, empayreth memory, dymmeth eyesighte, mars the
Spirits, wastes natural humour, hyndereth concoction, and finallye consumes
all the grace, beauty, comelynes and state of the whole body.

The Perturbations and affections of the mind.
what harm and inconvenience the mind suffers through perturbations unruly
affections bearing sway in the same, as Hatred, Anger, Wrath, Envy, Fear,
Sadness, immoderate joy, anguish, pensive cares thoughts, with many other
troublesome motions, repugnant and greatly squaring from reason, there is no
man but he hath either in himself by experience tried, or by observation in
others sufficiently noted. For what man in this so great imbecility and
frowardness of nature, is not with some of these tempted and assailed? All me
subject to affections.
And although some be better able then other some, either to withstand or to
qualefie and subdue his affections, yet is there no ma so perfect yt is not to
some of them thrall and subject. How violent and vnrulye these affections be
in some, which yield their natures wholly to the impatencie thereof, and how
greatly they disturb and bring out of frame both the mind and body, by
manifest examples is daily seen For many have procured to themselves present
death destruction through rage, The great hurts of affections.
anger, shame and immoderate joy: by reason, that the heart being left
destitute of blood and vital Spirit faints, shrynketh, and is dissolved.
Which felfe same thing (albeit by an other and diverse reason) oftetimes
happens also in fear, sorrow and sudden frightes, at which times the heart
is oppressed with too much abundance of blood, and the vital Spirit choak^d
and stopped. Anger (which is a passion so like to fury and madness, Anger.
as nothing in ye world more) what force it hath, and how much it alters the
state outward show of the body, appears chiefly by countenance, colour,
grymme visage, cruel and fiery eyes, puffinge wrynkled nostrils, biting
lyppes, enraged mouth, trembling shaking lymmes, vnsteadye gate, stammerynge
and fearful voice. This affection or rather perturbation of the mind, when it
once rejects the rule of reason, and grows into disordered outrage, is
offensive and troublous to others, but chieflye and specially, the party
himself (therewt affected) throws himself into peril of death, or at least
into diseases very daugerous. The mind therefore must be reyned by reason, and
curbed by temperance, that it yield not to affections, but procure to it self
quietness tranquillity, Tuscul. 5.
which (as Tullye witnesses) is the chiefest point that helps us in this
life to live well and happily. Tranquillity of mind.
Which none can have, saving he, that can subdue and master his affections,
and shake of the tyrannous yoke of lewd vices: this is by no other means to be
brought to pass, but by a fyrme assured trust and belief in God only, and
the same to be steadfastly grounded upon his holy Word and Heavenly
Spyrite: by whose directio a ma shall not fail to have the gift of
Tepeperaunce, to qualefye all his wilful affections, Temperance.
to withdraw and keep him back from all licentious lust, Gods holy spirit
subdues qualy fieth outragyous affections.
Insolency, immoderate joy, excessive mirth, hatred, anger, desire of
revenge, greedy scrapyng, covetousness, and all other victous affections
whatsoever. And by this means both the parts of man, that is to say, both
Soul Body, (which by a certain Sympathy or mutual consent and conspiracy
agree together) shall be in perfect state and soundnes without being with any
Sickness, or grievous malady distempered.

Of a cold Complexion. The viij. Chapter.
BEcause the cold Coplexion is clean contrary and opposite to the hoate
Constitution: and for that, this is the worst of al others, furthest from yt
state which is perfectest best: I will address my next speech to discourse upon
it, to thed (if it be possible) it may be amended and brought to a better case.
For since life doth consist in a temperature of hoate moyste, whereby bodies
increase to their growth, and attain to manlye strength and stature: worthily
and by good reason, may this be accounted of al others ye worst, for that, in
every point and respect (that tends to the furtherance of strength
maintenance of health) it helps no whit, neither geeueth any increase
thereto at all. For considering that in it there lacks heate, and all the
powers and faculties natural, it is not able for the weakness of the
Instruments and Organes, to attracte digest that nourishment y^ is moyste, nor
to make it like and consubstantial witht he body and mebers. Heate the stayer
and maintener of life.
And even as natural heate of all the faculties in the body is strongest to
do his functions: so, Cold is clean contrary unto it, and fit for no
function, specially concerning the Act of Nature in the alteration of
nourishment. Cold the decay spoil of life.
For in it, is no manner of utility or help touchig the conservation
maintenance of the body, either in the offyce of concoction and digestion, or
in any of the other virtues or powers of Nature. But yet, Cold coupled with
heate.
in this quality (although it wat of integritye and temperature) there is
always some heate, but the same is very faint, weak, and through cold,
blunt and feeble. For if heat should totallye fail, or be utterly
extinguished, life could not continue. Therefore in this body, heate is not
altogether consumed and wasted, but cold is above it and overcomes it, and in
the mixture of ye other qualities, In cold bodies heate doth not altogether
lack.
is more in quatity and stronger then any other, and thereupon hath it his
name to be termed, Cold. And therefore so lunge as life remains in man, and
any portion of vital heate in the body, it is good and expedient by al ways
and means to stir up cheerishe natural heate with nourishment exercise
convenient, that it be not through cold, oppressed and trodden down. For there
is no greater enemies thereto, then Sloth, ydlenes and cold meats: as
hereafter shall be more at large declared. Some (I think) do marvel how men
of this constitution and complexion can continue and live, since their blood
being cold, their virtues Animal and Spirable be decayed and dead. Creatures in
touching cold.
But let every ma note, that there be many Creatures of most cold nature, as
the Salamandet, the Fire worm, the Torpedo of the Sea, and many fishes more,
whereof some be of nature so extreme cold and chillinge, that if they touch
fire, they streightwayes quench it, as it were ice: some do so astonne the
lymmes of them, that touche them, that they have no feeling nor sense in their
hands or lymmes a good while after. The blood of Fishes is cold.


There is no kind of Fyshes (which by mine own experience I am able to
aduouch and testify) that hath warm blood, saving Whorlepooles, Porpeses and
Seals, or Sea Calves, which have hayrie skines, Tonyes, Dolphins, and as many
as are rough skinned or thick leatherye hyded, such as (among those that live
as well upon land as in water) are the Beaver and the Otter. What sorts of
fishes being taken out of the water live longest.
These have warm blood, but all others have cold. And for this cause Monsters
of the Sea being taken out of the Water, do by reason of their inward heate
and store of warm blood, live lunge: whereas other sorts of fishes as well of
the Sea, as of fresh waters, as soon as they be taken out of the Water, or
cast on shore geeue but certain gaspes and die immediately: which is an
undoubted argument and certain token, that in them is very much cold and
congealed humour, and of heate very little. For which reason, they be not able
to be kept lunge, but will soon putresse, if they be not streightwayes
salted, Eating of fish hurtful to them that are given to be solitary.
or put in pickle.

By this may easy conjecture be made, of what plight bodily state, those
persos be, which still eat fyshe, and live a solytarye life, without keeping
company with others, and being forbidden flesh (which the Father of Nature
hath created and appointed with thankesgeeuinge of all men Genes. 1. Act. 10.
to be eaten) do commonly feed upon rotten stinking Saltfysh. 1. Tim. 4.
Which kind of people (for many of that stamp and disposition have for many
years used may advise in Physic) I am wont to persuade counsel, that they
should drink after them, good, strong and pure wine, and abandoning all
idleness and sloth, use continual Exercise.

I have known sondry of them that through gross and claminie glewysh
phlegm, have gotten the Letharge or drowsse evil, the Apoplexy, the Cramp,
Solytary livers subject to the Apoplexy.
Polsey and W^ye mouths. There is none of these persons, but he abounds and
is replete with much Phlegm, and Phlegmaticke excrementes, which makes them
lumpish, and sleapie, forgetful, ^low of body and mind, pale coloured, except
some time at the coming of some of their especial friends they be heated
with wine, and thereby have dumps driven out of their minds. For by this
means their colour is made fresher, and all heavy drowsynesse banished and
chased out of their minds.

If therefore thou desire to have a pattern of a cold complexioned person,
ryghtlye portrayed out unto thee, set before thine eyes, men that by
profession of life, live in this order, and by their former wonted trade of
diet, are brought unto this habit, yea although aforetime they were of a
disposition and manner of life clean contrary.

These men do live, A Snails life.
but their life is like the Periwinkle or Snail, whose substance consisting
of a congealed liquor, concrete moisture, is liquefied and resolved into the
same. Which thing is to be tried and proved by casting upon them Salt, or
glass, or Alume: for therewith they presently resolve and consume into a
liquid substance.

And as men and mute Creatures, so also sondry Plants and great stemmed
herbs, Venomous Herbs.
are endued with this quality: which by reason of their deletory coldness bring
destruction unto Creatures, as ^ebane, Madrake, Napellus, Solanum Mortiferum,
Aconitum, the juice of black Popie called Opium, which although in respect of
their temperament and clementary quality, they be cold in the fourth and
highest degree, yet by the benefit of vital heate dissusing it self from
celestial things into these lower bodies, they do live and flourish in a
fresh verdure. For in every nature, especially humayne, there is a certain
celestial or divine virtue, over beside that which is constituted of feed and
of the feminine blood. For ye warm calefactiue Spirit, which a little before we
said was infused into the whole world, and into all the particular parts
thereof, labours upon the Elements, and geeueth life to all things, and
finally works in them that virtue and efficacy, whereby through
propagation they increase, and procreate kinds like to themselves, and produce
a Creature of the same nature they themselves be. For the first procreation of
living creatures being produced made of Elemental concretion and of the
Parents Seed, which is a portion or part of the purest best concocted
blood, then doth nature, (whose skilful workmaship no hand nor curious
craftesma is able by imitation to reseble or reach unto) having her original,
divine supernal, applies the work she hath in framynge, brings her things
to perfect pass, conueigheth the powers animal, with the Spyrites vital, and
virtues effectual into the matter she hath in hand, by whose mynistery she
perfectly finishes all the lymmes, proportioneth all the lineaments, fitteth
them to the rest of the mebers of the body, gives such shape proportion to
the things animated, as daily we see represeted set before our eyes. This
wonderful force of nature which we elsewhere have showed to issue flow fro the
most abundant fountain of Divinity, being diffused into each part of ye whole
body, moves slyrreth the mass thereof, directs governs the mind and
understanding, makes the same applyable to sondry actions: by whose benefit
and help eve those thigs do live have their being, which are stiff and numbed
with cold, although heate in the be faint feeble: which (least it should
altogether droop be utterly extiguished, least you cold quality, where ye dry
is of affinity should toomuch preuaile increase) must be stirred up excyted with
hoate fomentatios. For when natural moisture is all wasted inward heat extinct,
the death approaches the whole frame of the body tedeth to dissolution ruin.
It comes the to pass eve as Salomo by an elegat apt similitude describes,
Eccle. 12.
yt when the composition knittinge together of the body is lewsed a sonder
strength decayed gone, the shall ma be turned again into dust, fro whence he was
taken made, the Spirit shall return into his everlasting dwelling, to God
which made it. But to theud every ma may perfectly know the nature condition of
this coplexion and constitution. I will compendiously as it were by the way, set
down certain marks tokes whereby it shall easily be known. Tokens of a cold
Complexion.
A cold Complexio if it be compared to a hoate, hath al properties contrary. For
eve as heat beig diffused into each part of ye body imparts his quality unto
ye humours makes ye body, y^ parts thereof to be of colour ruddy: so cold
imperteth his quality unto ye mebers humours, makes ye body of colour pale and
unsightly.

But if we be disposed particulerly to mark observe al the notes and tokens
thereto incident, we shall find in the cold complexioned body, all things
contrary and diverse from the hoate. For the body is piled and smooth, the
hair loose and soft, of colour partakinge with red and white, and quickly
shedding. The skin in touching, cold, Idleness makes the body fat and cold.
under it, some store of fatness. For when heat in mas body is fait dull, fatness
engedreth: which, as it much happens to ye feminine Sex, so also breeds it
in many others that live idle at ease, without labour or exercise. And for
this cause through immoderate coldness ye body waxes gross, fat, and
corpulent: again, by immoderate heate, (which melts away and dissolveth
fat) the body is made lean and dry.

For there be many things not coming to man by nature, or from his
nativity and beginning, but accidentally and otherwise procured: as either by
chaunginge of the ordinary custom of life, or by alteration of diet, or by
heate, labour, sloth, solitariness, lumpishnes, fear, sorrow, care and
sondry others: many ways chaunginge the state of the body: making it sometime
slender lean, sometime fat corpulent. Which things also to the making of the
colour of ye face body fair or foul, good or bad, are of no less force,
and efficacy. Heate makes good colour.
For what things soever do excite and stir up native heate, as Laughter,
mirth, exercise, wine c. do make the face pleasantly freshly coloured: but
such things as be cold, suppress heate, Cold wastes and takes away colour.
as cold air and nypping wynd, toomuch drynkinge of water, immoderate sleep,
overmuch eating of cold meates, fear, sadness, carefulnes, such like, make
the body to be white coloured.

Thus, they that be of cold Complexions, are white coloured, unless this
quality grow surmount to an excess and great intension. For then it declyneth
to aswart and leaden colour, Wanne colour.
such as we see in men in the cold Winter, the wind being at North, whose
cheeks, Noses, lyppes, fyngers and ears are swart and wanne, with stiff cold
benumbed. But yet this commodity they have by cold, that it makes them very
hungry greedy of meat, and not easily satisfied, albeit they do not well
digest nor concocte it. And if the tunicles of their Stomach together with the
cold, have in them any sowrish or sharpe humour, they are in eating insatiable
and very ravenous feeders: The hungry Sickness.
which affect is called Canina appetetia, the Dogs appetite, or ye hungry
Sickness: which is qualefyed and taken away by drinking the purest strongest
Wine. To prove yt appetite is sharpened with cold, Cold things stir up
appetite.
may well appear by Salads and sondry other sower and tart Condimentes,
which we use in Summer season to provoke appetite withal. And as native heate
makes men nymble and actyue, Cold persos drowsy and vnweldie.
so cold causes them to be slothful, loitering, sluggish, drowsy and unapt
to any labour or exercise: because they lack the Instruments wherwyth to do
any such functions.

Such persons have foltering tongues, and nothing ready in vtterauce, a nice,
soft, and womanish voice, weak feeble faculties of Nature, ill memory,
blockish wit, doltish mind, courage (for lack of heate slenderness of vital
spirit) fearful and tymorous, at the wagging of every straw afraid. These
and such like defects and wats of Nature, The help cure of a cold body.
must we to y^ uttermost of our power study to amend, by using a wholesome
diet and exquisite trade of living, which consists in a teperament of hoate
and moist.

In this body especially it is expediet to excite and cheerishe native heate with
exercise, and wine yt is pure good, and with meates yt be calefactiue: of which
sort are such Byrds as bestyrre much exercise themselves with flying, Fowls hard
of digestion
as Sparrows, Lynets, Chaffinches, Cvluers, Partriches, Phesauntes,
Blackbyrdes, Thrushes, Figgebyrds (among those that be homish and tame) Capons
and Cocks: for Ducks, Swanes, Geese, Cootes, Gulles, Hearneshoes other Water
fowls, require a very strong stomach to digest them. Of four footed beasts
fittest for this nature, are Veale, Meates fit for cold persons.
Mutton, Pig, and Cony. Among fruicts and such as the earth by tillage and
industry of man brings forth, ye best are these, Almonds sweet sower,
Peachkernelles, Dates, dry Figs, Reysons y^ kernels being taken out,
Coraunts, Pine apples.

And because the increase of our Gardeins ledeth us many helps to this use and
purpose, I think it good also not to omit them, for yt they be easy every
where to be had neither costly nor chargeable: Garden store.
of which sort is Parseley, certain kinds of Carrets, Seahollie, Skirwyke
roots, Thistle, Artichoke, Nauew, radish, Chichpease, Crosses, Rocket, Mynte,
Wormewodde gentle, such as in Winter serve for Codiments sauce, Onyons,
Garlic, Leekes, steeped in water to take away their rank savour strong smell:
or else for them yt cannot well abide the strong air sent of these, may put
into their meat outlandish and foreign spices, as the Germans and English
Nation commonly use: as Ginger, Saffron, Pepper, Grains, Cassia Cynamome,
Nutmigges. And persons of meaner calling smaller ability, such as are not well
able to bear out the cost of these things, may take out of their own hoomish
gardeins ground, such things as in stregh and operation counteruayle these
aforesaid, yt is to wit, Rosemarie, Basil, sauerie, Organie, Maiorame, Dill,
Hot Condimentes.
Sage, Balm c. For with these many others of like sort, may the defects of
Nature be beaten down, ye faults thereof of overcome, and thereby ye body by
little little, may be to a better and quieter state reduced. For if dryness or
Siccity should lick in join with this quality, the truly life (which consists
in hot moist) cannot long continue: but needs must out of hand, come to final
end: whereof in the Chapter following I purpose somewhat more at large to
discourse.

Of a Dry Complexion. The ix. Chapter.
Forasmuch as that disposition and habit of body which is dry, is much
like to that state and complexio which is cold, yea next unto it: I will
briefly declare, what I think thereof, by what means it may be expunged and
bettered. These ii. qualities be in a manner alike distant from perfect and
good temperatenes, in what age soever they happen: howbeit in Oldeage this dry
distemperaunce, can hardelyer and with much more ado be qualefyed and
vanquished then in Youth, when the same ill habit comes through Sickness or
incontinency of life. For as Oldmen by reason of their age and long
continuance of years have bodies dry, barreyne and forworne: So likewise
Yongmen by dissolute living, unseasonable watching, and immoderate Venerye,
bring their bodies before their due time to a cold and dry distemperaunce:
hastening their own deaths by wasting their vital humour, arryue to their
last ends, and dye by natural death as well as Oldme do, although in deed
sooner then otherwise they might do.

And it is called natural, because it is common to all men alike, and not able
by any means to be declined. For Oldage or the last cast of ma, is not to be
accounted natural, in such sort as increasing nourishing be, which are the
works of nature, and whereby the natural facultye continues and maynteyneth
it self: but because it so falls out necessarily and by the due course
right order of Nature. For this is natures decreed order, that all things
having beginning, must also have ending, and arryue to their final decay:
for otherwise death should vnproperlye and unaptly be termed Natural,
considering it is rather against Nature, and a professed enemy to our life.

For if Sickness (which I account as a step or as a Summer to death) be an
habit state contrary to Nature, If men be loath to be sick, it follows that
they be loath to die.
either deprauing or at least hindering the actio thereof: how much more is Death
to be deemed a thing contrary to Nature, which quite abolysheth and utterly
despoyleth life?

For nothing is more repugnaut to the laws of Nature, then to dye, to be
depryued of this most pleasant light and breath. Which thing every man may
try, and in himself find most true, when soever he calls to mind, and
deeply with himself falls into any cogitacion of the same: Death
dreadful.
for it drives a certain fearefulnes, terror dread into his mind, that
(were not his mind armed strengthened with an undoubted hope and expectation
of an other better life hereafter) there could nothing be more miserable nor in
worse case, then mans life is. For what thing could deliver us out of fear,
carefulness, desperation and distruste, saving only a firm trust in Gods
mercy, that our Souls after this corporal dissolution, shall be transported to a
place of eternal joy and felicity? As for death, it was not brought into the
world by Nature: for y^ ugly face of Sin, Sin the cause of sickness death
and the wilful transgression of Gods precepts at the beginning of the world
gave unto us this deadly wound, wrapped us in: all this mysery. Therefore death
is called Natural, not in respect of Nature, but of the consequence: because
it hangs indifferently over all men's heads, Sap. 2.
as common indifferently to all, and sparing none: yea all things be within
the compass and reach thereof.

Now forasmuch as there be two sorts of death, the one Violent the other
Natural: 2. Kinds of death.
that kind of death is of Philosophers Physicians called natural, which
happens unto Oldemen such as are in that bodily state that Oldemen be: that
is to say Cold and Dry, without sense or feeling of any payne: for in them,
their languishinge and forspent body forsakes their Soul, and not the Soul
their body. Insomuch that they dye in a manner as though they fell softly
asleep, whereas others (dying by means of casualty, ruin, fire, sword,
Squinste, Pleurysse, Inflamatios of the Lunges or other diseases happening to a
ma in his fullness of humours) dye a violent death, struggling painfully, and
long languishing in extreme agonies before they give by the Ghost. So that the
Soul is perforce compelled to abando and forsake the body, like a Guest that
fleethout of a ruynous house, that is weatherbeaten and much shake with force of
tempest, only to avoid further danger. And hereupon doth Cicero very notably
write, De Senect.
that Yongmen and such as be in their flourishing and lusty Age and full of
humours, do dye and take their end much like as when a great flaming fire is
sodeinlye quenched with great stoare of Water: Again, he saith that Oldmen
decease like fire, that of it own accord quenches and without any other
violence goes out. What a deal of smoke, what soot, what sparkles do we see
fly up into ye air? what crackling noise doth the great nubre of sparks make,
when we assay to quench a light burning flame? or with pouring great
abundance of water, to slecke a great heap of wood laid al upon one fire?
Whereby we may coniecte, what vehement and painful struggling, what sharpe
conflict, what raging stir and stryuing is in a Yonge body: when as
through violence of Sickness or other destiny, the lustynesse of his Nature
(being not yet spent) his warm heat, and lively Spyrites be oppressed and
stifled.

To this end, is that elegante and apt comparison of Cicero: For (saith he)
as raw and vnrype apples are not plucked from the Tree but by violence and
force: but being ripe, fall down of their own accord, or with little
touching: So likewise the life of Yonge men is taken away with force, but of
Oldmen, by maturity and rypenes.

This thought I good here to enterlace, as a thing not greatly beside my
purpose, diligently aduertyzing all men even from their infancy and childhood
to shun and decline all such things as are prejudicial to their bodies and
harmeful to their health, whether the same proceed of outward or of inward
causes.

Whosoever therefore is desirous to keep himself from being toosoone Old, To
be long lived.
and to prolong his life as lunge as may be, must very diligently take heed
of many lets and hindrances that damuifye and lye in wait to prejudice his
life, but namely and specially let him have a careful eye to keep himself
from this Dry plight state of body. And by what men he may so do, after
certain ^tes first geeuen, whereby to know what person is of this Complexion,
I will briefly and compendiously geeue plain instructions: asking to all
Students and personnes politic, (doubtless) right (...) me, profitable and
expedi^t to be know^.

All they therefore that either of the Nature of their own bodelye state and
Complexion, Notes of a dry Coplexion.
or by any defect in their Parents at their birth procreation, or finally by
any accidental mishap or custom of living, as by wat of food, thought,
watch, heauynes of mind, or immoderate labour, have commonly bodies slender and
thin: and their shin (where dryness is great) skuruye, rugged, unseemly
and lancke, like unto hungerstarued horses, that lack meat and attendance:
of colour ill favoured, swarte, and yelowe as a Kites foot, and at the last
grymme visaged, sower coutenaunced, faced like death, fylthy, loothsome, and
lean as a Rake: to conclude, in all respects resembling the Physsognomy and
shape of Envy, described by Ouid.

A face like Ashes pale and vvanne,
a body skraggie lean,
A learning look, and teeth all furde
with dross and filth unclean: Lib. 2. Metam.

Her Stomach greenish is with Gall,
her Tongue vvyth venom fraught,
And never laughs, but when mishap
or harm hath others caught.
No vvink of Sleep comes in her eyes,
and rest she can none take,
For fretting cark and cankered care,
her watchful still doth make.
Full sore against her will it is,
that any man should thryue
Or prosper in his busynesse:
For that doth her depryue
Of all her rest and quietness,
thereat the hellish Elf,
Doth stamp and stare, doth fret and fume,
and pines away herself.
And to her self a torment is,
for seeking to annoy
The wealth and state of other folks,
herself she doth destroy.
And because dryness feeds upon, and wastes all their humour, Baldnes
comes for lack of humour.
they be thin hayred and wax soon bald, crook nailed, their voice feeble
and slender, and sometime squeakinge, (by means that drynes exasperates their
vocal artery) their pulses beatig faintly, slow gate, hollow eyed, pale lypped,
shrunken temples, hanging cheeks, cold crupled ears, of stature not greatly
tal, of sleep (which is a most sweet refuge, release, truce from labours and
cares) through distemperature of the brain, very little. And if their brain be
altogether dry and hoate, Dry brain causes ill Memory.
then is their Memory nought and in a manner none at all: then be they very
oblyuious, blockeheaded and heavy spyrited. For since the Spyrits fail and
be defective, which (as clear sincere vapoure) proceed out of purest blood by
ye benefit of heate have great force virtue in directing mouig forward actions:
it is not possible yt the faculties powers natural being destitute of their
forces, should perform rightly discharge their due peculiar functions. But if
the virtue or power Animal be perfect vigorous, the brain not altogether
destitute of heate, the is ye memory steadfast, firm retentive, for as
immoderat moystnes causes forgetfulness doltish folishnes, as in young Children
dronkards appears: so moderate dryness with the help of measurable heate,
makes a good and faithful Memory, Good Memory.
highly furthers toward the attainment of Prudence Wisdom. For a dry
brightness, induces a mind full fraught with wisdom: the more store of
moystnes that is therein, the less is the wit: which thing we do also note
and see to come to pass by the air, when ye weather is scowling and not
clear. For the Stars shine not bright out, when the air is with clouds and
foggye mists overcast and darckened.

Now the cause why many in their Oldage, dote and become very forgetful
(albeit this Age be said to be most dry) yet ye same happens not by reason of
drynes, but of coldness: which manifestly prejudices and hinders all the
virtues offices of ye mind. For out of it spryngeth madness, loss of right
wits, amazedness, raving, dotage, and want of the right use of the Senses,
whereby the virtues of Nature be so oppressed overcharged, ye they be thereby
either altogether disabled from performing their functions, or at least, do
the same very faintly and feeblie.

Therefore when Memory is perished or affected, it proceeds of some cold
disteperature, Restoring^ of the memory.
which must with things moderately hoate* be removed and expugned. For to
humect or to arefie, is not the best way. But if coldness be joined with moystnes,
then to use arefactio: if it be linked with dryness, then to use humectacion.
Now, if this quality be not thoroughly settled and rooted, these signs and
tokens aforesaid, do not exactly answer to this descriptio: but as the
disteperauce by little little grows increases, so do they appear show forth
themselves every day more and more.

Which happens namely to them that be affected with this habit, not
naturally but casuallye and accidentally, or by some sickness of the body, or
by some vexation of mind. For Temperamentes are subject to many and sondrye
alterations: In some, heate wasting spending up moisture, induces a dry
distemperaunce, and many times too much stoare of moisture quite quenches
heate: and many there are, unto whom vehement coldness brings dryness: which
is the worst distemperuance of all others, and to Nature most hurtful: for
that it hastenethe Oldeage and brings a man to death lunge before his time.

The body of every one is then inwardly dry, Galen lib. 5. de tuen. Val.
when it is neither able to attract and draw nourishment into the Veins,
neither sufficiently able to digest and enjoy the benefit thereof: whereby it
happens, that the principal parts and Entrails (appointed for concoction
of the meates) be dried up, the resitdue (seruinge to purge excrementes) do
abound with Phleginatick humours. Which thing hath made many to stumble
overshoot themselves, who have thought Old men to be moist of Complexion,
whereas me solide parts, the Arteryes, Panicles, skins synewes and muskles
are not moyste, but the capacities, receptoryes and pores which stand the body
in steed, to expel superfluityes, are endued with some moisture: and hereupon
the body (by reason of weak and feeble heate) ceases to be nourished, and
is finally brought into an exteme dryness. And therefore not without good
reason doth Galene think that this is the worst plight Lib. 6. de tuend. val.
and state that the body can be in. For the same thing that happens to men
aged and stricken in years, happens to many Yongme even fro their first
beginning. And therefore it is needful to humect and warm them with moderate
exercise, moist and hoate nourishment, but specially with hoate and sweetish
wine: for sower harde wynes be hurtful to this Complexion, Hard wynes or of
the second sort.
namely to Old men, except they be well sweetened with Sugar or honey. This
thing also ought to be observed in the eating of Milk, Milk.
which is made for them a great deal better and holesomer, if it be well
seasoned with these or such like condimentes. For by this means, shall no
obstructions by eating thereof be engendered, neither needs the Stone and
gravel in the reins thereby to be feared: And for doubt of being at any time
with the same troubled, (because it comes and is bred of gross tough
humour and meat of hard digestion) such things should be prescribed unto them,
as open obstructios and provoke Uryne, Herbs having virtue to make one to
peace,
of which sort these Herbs, Gardensmallage, Sperage, Alkakegie, Cheruyle,
Saxifrage, Christa marina, Betonie, Maydenheare, Rosemarie flowers: and (if the
bealy be bound or costive) Mercurye Fumitorie, bastard Saffron with a Prysane,
Sea colewortes boiled in broth with fat flesh, Malowes, Arrage, Elite, all
sorts of Docks, Nettles, Hoppes, young Elderbuds, specially in the Spring time
of the year, or such other as be in their chiefest virtue in Summer Autumn,
as Cherries, Plummes, Figs, and Mulberyes being eaten at beginning of Meals.
For whereas Horace in a learned and elegante Verse commedeth unto us Mulberies,
thinking the same best to be eaten last and at the lat^er end of dinner, he did
it not by way of any Physic or holsomnes y^ is therein (being so taken,) but
for that, the common use and custom, was so to eat them. His Verses be to
this effect: At end of Dinner, Mulberies,
who uses still to eat,
Each morning early gathered, Lib. 2. Sat. 4.

himself in Somers heate
Shall safely keep in wholesome plight,
devoid of Sickness all,
Whereby no kind of malady,
attach his body shall.


For these and also Grapes, Peaches, Corneilbearies such as will not be kept
long in Somer, ought to be eaten before other meates, for if they be otherwise
preposterously taken or out of order, they putrefy and corrupt the body and
fill the bealy full of wynd. In Winter season also there are many things yt
make the bealy soluble and skowre ye Guts Entrails: as Must, dry Figs,
great Reysons, Damask prunes, either stewed or steeped in some licoure,
putting thereunto a good quantity of Sugar or honey. Whereunto are to be
added, these that have an expediet virtue in medicines, Scene, Polipodie, Manna,
Epythyme, Cassia, Rhabarbe, and the infusion of Hebene or Lignum Indicum,
Mirobalanes, Thamar or Dates of India, and all these to be geeuen either in
Whaye, or in the broth of a Hen.

And forasmuch as for preservation of health, and driving away diseases not
only in Oldme but in all others that be subject to any sickly affection,
there cannot be any holesomer thing then Turpentine, Turpentine wholesome.
it deserves also to be reckened in ye number of these aforesaid. For it not
only mollyfyeth and loses the healy without all harm danger, but also
purges and skowreth all the Entrails, and inward parts, as the Liver,
Mylte, Reins, Lunges and Lights: but it must be of ye best sort and clear
shining through, not counterfecte nor paltered withal.

And ye best is that, which issues out of ye Larch, the Pine, or the Fur
tree. I have proved this to be of most effectual and sovereign force to
provoke Vryne in them that could not well pysse, to break the stone and
gravel: in the Strangurie: and in the fylthye ulcerous dropping or effluxion
of ye Vryne, called of the Duchmen Den Druyper: in the Gout as well of the
hands as feet: in curing the loathsome botches, contagious pollutions of the
Privy members secrete parts, got by having carnal knowledge with common
Brothelles Pocky harlots: in curig and helping al inward grieves infections
accopanying the same disease: whereof many settle so deeply within the bones, yt
the pellicles, rymmes, Synewes, Muskles, Tedons or Chords through outrage of
humours are shrunk, crumpled, spoiled, haled a sonder. And albeit Galenes use
was, Lib. 3. de tuen. Val. lib. 5. tu. val.
to minister the same in the bigness quatity of a Fylberd Nut, sometime of two
sometime three: yet my custom is (because I would that it should the better
penetrate and search into all the Veins and parts of the body) to make it
after the manner of a Potion, mingling with it some distilled water, or else some
wine. For it will become liquid without any fire, and through continual
chasing it will easily be brought to a notable whiteness, and that is this
sort to be done:

First I take an ouce or two of right and perfect Turpentine (wherein is
neither fraud nor legter du mayne used) Preparig of Turpetine.
it do I bruyse dissolve with a Pestil in a Mortar, and add thereto a little
of the Yolke of an Egg: then do I myngle and put to it two or three ounces of
the water of Alkakengie or Smallage, To make Turpentine liquid and potable.
or some other liquor, accordingly as the Nature of the disease, or state of
the person seems to require: All these do I beat together, till they be well
myxt and incorporate: the myxture will be of such a pleasant mylkye whytenes as
though it were Cream: yea my patients are persuaded that it is so in deed,
none other thing which I give them to drink. I also use to make it into little
round Pills, and rolling it in fine unleavened wafer Past, to give it them to
swallow down, or else in y^ soft pap of a Quince, but first must the
Turpetine be well washed in Rose water, or Fenel water, to take away his resinie
tallage.

And because nothing to this Coplexion which we here describe, Sleep.
is holesomer then sound and quiet Sleep, (for therewith all the members are
generally moystened, and with convenient warmth refreshed) it shall be good for a
person thus complexioned, to take his full ease and sleep in a soft bed,
largely and somewhat plentifully: For Sleep in the night is the refreshing
making lusty again both of the body and mind.

The invvard peace of mind, is Sleep.
To vvearyed body; ease it brings.
By it, themselves men lusty keep,
And fresh to do their needful things.
And when Sleep is shaken of, it shall be right commodious to use rubbing or
friction, neither soft nor hard, Friction.
but mean between both, the profit whereof to them that use it is almost
incredible: For it styreth up vital strength, it calefyeth moderately, and
makes distribution of the nourishment into the body easier, and readier,
specially if it be done with the wet hand, or with a moist and course cloth.
For who doth not perceive yt the hands, cheeks, arms, neck and cares, being
rubbed, will wax ruddy, and with heate gather blood into those parts.

And although the use of rubbing and anointing, among us now a days be
clean grown out of custom, yet in tholde time men used it very often, as a
mean to keep themselves in perfect health, and to strength their bodily
powers. So Augustus Caesar on a certain time espying his old compaignion
Pollio, being above an hudreth years old, demanded of him what order he used
in conseruinge himself in such perfect sound strength, and in so lusty and
green old age: unto whom his answer was, that he came to it, by using,
within, Wine: without, Oil,

Men in tholde time did not riottouslye abuse oyntmentes and Oils, to satisfy
their effeminate delicatenes nice wantonness, but for safeguard and preservation
of health, thereby the better to keep themselves from Sickness. For vnctions
and Frictions orderly and duelye used (for there by many sorts thereof as
Galene witnesses) either indense the body, Lib. 2. de tuen. Val.
that the Air wyndes should not batter and damnyfie it: or else rarefie it,
that it be not stopped and inwardly pestered, which abundance of fullginous
humours and oppilacions. Six sorts of Frictions.
Hard Rubbing doth snarle together and condense the body: Sustained, lewseth and
resolves it: Much, doth extenuate dimynishe: Mean, hath a power to make it
increase fill: Rough draws out humours to the utter parts: Gentle and smooth
takes away nothing, but reteyneth his force and power in the parts. Among
these sorts of frictions, that which is in a mediocrity, is most behooveful
for those persons yt be old and lean. For as hard and styffeleathered boots
yt have lain log vnoccupyed, by being suppled in Oil are made soft: So
likewyse ye bodies of Fol Dry persos, being stroked over humected inwardly with
Wine, outwardly with Oil, lay aside al severity, z loke with a cheerful and
lively countenance.

To prove that this use of vnctions in the old time was of diverse sorts, beside
the testimony of sacred Scriptures, Lucae. 7.
beside ye report of Solinus, Plinie. Strabo in his description of the manners
fashions of the Indians doth sufficiently testify. Lib. 15.
Physic (saith he) among them consists in meates, not in medicines: and
of Medicines, they best allow of vnctios Cataplasmes: al other being (as they
think) not void of harm annoyance. Therewt they customablye propulse
sickness, mitigate heate, drive away lassitude weariness, revive their
wearied powers feeble Spyrites, refreshing themselves therewith, even as we by
sweet smells do recreate our inward soul, and restore the faint faculties of
naure.

No less commodious and profitable to this body, Artificial Bath.
is a warm Bathe of sweet water: for it doth humect and calefie, it
dissolveth lassitude, it mollyfyeth hard and stiff parts, it disperses by
evaporation the abundance of humours, it resolves wyn^yn^sse, and procures
Sleep: for yt it humecteth the brain with a pleasant vaporous and deawye
moisture. But the natural Bathes, Natural Bathes.
which have all their virtues of Alume, Iron, Lyme, Ockre, Brymstone,
Saltpetre, Bitumen, Lead, Brass, Copper c. are not so wholesome for this
Complexion and Nature, unless ye party do first ask advise of some fkilfull
and trusty Physician, openymge unto him the whole state of his body, whereby he
may upon the conssideration thereof, geeue judgment whether it be good and
expedient for him to adventure into the same.

Carnal lust and Venerous Act, Carnal dealing with women very hurtful to dry
and cold complexios
as it is an utter ennemye to all dry Natures, so especially to it most
hurtful to them that beside dryness are also cold. No less hurtful is over
much exercise, weariness, watch, carefunesse thought, lunge abstynence from
meat and drink, heauynes of mind and anger, wherewith such complexioned
men's minds are seldom stirred: but when they be thoroughly chafed angered,
hardly will they be pacified and quieted again.

And because unseasonable Study is a thing that greatly wearies wears
Students, Studying by night and Candlelight hurtful,
making, when lean, and exhausting their bodies: a measure and mean also
would be therein used. For we se^ many great and painful Students, still
sitting at their Books, without taking any regard to their bodily health (by
the help whereof the good state of the mind is holden up maintained) to look
with wearyshe faces, pale and without blood, nothing almost on their bodies,
but skin and boane, the ventricle and stomach feeble unable to digest their
meat their strength and powers clean worn out and exhausted.

For by wearying themselves with late watchig, and sitting at their study till
far in the night, their Animal Spyrites through toomuch intesion be
resolved, and their native humyditie dried up. Wherefore it is requisite to use
therein a moderacion, and narowlye to look to the preservation of health,
Bodelye health.
least otherwise through continual poring and study* the body chance to pine
away fall into some Consumption. For as Plutarch saith: Of al the good things
that learning brings to man, De tued. Valet.
nothing more excellent can be given to the body, then to be in perfect
health, and without impediment, either for the attaynmente of the knowledge of
Virtue, or for the necessary use of life. For if sickness or gyddynesse of
the head hyppe, streightwayes the mind being destitute of the help of the
body, drowpeth, Body and mind sick and well together*
quayleth, and is neither lusty nor actyue in doing his ordinary functions:
but together with his Companion and fellow of all his labours the body, is
mutuallye affected and alike distempered. For which cause Pla^o his counsel is
right commendable, aduysing us neither to exercise the body without the mind,
nor the mind without the body: but to keep as it were an equal poyze of
matrymoniall consent and agreemente together between them, as it were between
man wife.

Forasmuch therefore as the inward and native heate by exercise and motion, is
increased strengthened, and the mind reuyued and made lustyer: it stands all
Students upon, and as many as be sickly of wearish or quaysie health, to use
themselves thereunto, and namelye to such kind of exercise as brings with it
no wearysones or lassitude, but which is stayed within y^ boudes of mediocrity:
of which sort is a decet straynable and clear voice, and reading or declaming
with a load and big sound, which is as expedient and as profitable a thing
as any, to open ye breast, to stir up the Spyrites, and to clear the heart
from all gross and fulsome vapours. A wholesome exercise for students.


Notwythstandyng, this must by the way diligently be observed, that they may
not streyne their voice to speak ouerbigge and load, when they be either
thoroughly harneysed with wine, or full gorged with meat. For the Spirit and
breath overreaching and streyning it self with toomuch and too violet braying
out, exasperates the vocal Artery, and many times causes either inflammation
in the throat, or else by breaking some of the small veins, makes them to
spit blood.

There be other sorts of recreations, wherewith men of this calling and
vocation, may well refresh themselves, taking (for ye time) reasonable truce
with their other appointed studies busynesse: Moderate banqueting not
discommedable.
as moderate banqueting and making merry among honest and pleasant conceited
copany, such (I mean) as know how to use themselves in each respect, and can
frame their talk, place their words according to time, Recreation of the mind
age, person present, and to some profitable purpose of Iyfe: in earnest and
grave matter using grave speech, Comely mirth at the Table.
and in sporting mirth, merry deuyses and pleasant cofereces: hauig in their
mouths no kind of lavish talk, but only such as to the hearer may be both
pleasant and profitable. In which point, many digress from comeliness, do
not greatly delight their Audience, for that their table talk neither serves
for the time, neither is to the hearers either pleasant or commodious. For
wheanye wayghty perplexed matters be in question, or among them debated, these
busy taglers be ever buzzinge. Thus, many even in their Wagons, at the Mile,
in the open streets and cross ways, in their Wheries Boats, yea even upon
their Alebenches, will take upon them to reason of the holy Scriptures, and to
dispute of Religion. But how? forsooth, even after such a sort as men, whose
bellies be full paunched, bombasted as much as the skin will hold, do argue
and reason of frugality thryft. Which kind of people, right aptly worthily
(although in a matter of less account) the Poet Persius in his time quipped
and rahated, where he saith: Each Peazante now with pamperd paunch,
on Alebench and at vvyne,
Sat. 1.
Dare chant and prate of Sacred lore,
and Mysteries Divine.


But let them rather yield to the wholesome admonition of Horace, writing thus:
Discuss not matters mystical,
when stoare of Bellycheere,
And dainty fare, the Tables gay
Lib. Ser.
doth furnish every where.
2. Sat. 2.
Learn (Friends) but yet in due time learn,
not with the Stomach full,
When belching fumes of surphetting,
your eyesight makes dull.
When mind that's prone to vvickednes,
and following of will,
Rejects Virtue stubbornely,
and vice frequents still.
Come sober, and not ouerchardge
with gurmandize I say,
When so ye ever mean of search,
the true and perfect way.
And why? forsooth I will you tell
(at least vvyse if I canne:)
A bribed Judge, that gapes for gain,
the truth to^ yft and skanne
Is far vnmeere and eke unlike,
to judge twixt man and man.


Hereuppon it comes, that many utterly ignorant and mere blind in the Holy
Scriptures and matters touching the state of their Souls, suffer themselves so
wilfully and headlongly to be faryed away by their own sensual affections:
for that, they busy themselves where they should not, Curiosity in searching
to high miste-ries.
and leauell not at that mark whereunto their mind ought principally to direct
it self, entermedlyng and troubling their brains with scrupulous quiddities
and diffuse questions, having such spyced consciences, that sometime they are
myered and stand in doubt of things most plain and manifest: and lodging once
within their harts any erroneous doctrine or superstitious opynio, waver n Faith,
and doubt in conscience, myssyng the right Haven sure Ankerholde, whereunto
they should only trust, run upon the rocks of human tradicions, and
throw themselves wilfully upon the dangerous Shelves of men's fantastical
traditions and invented trumperyes. And therefore because, the mind of man is
ever busy and diuerslye jarring and unsettled within it self, and neither in
word, deed, opynio, nor in the whole order of life so firm and constant as is
to be wished: I would advise counsel every one, that desires to live in
tranquillity of conscience and quietness of mind, to dispose all his actions,
purposes, deuyses and meanings, into times and oportunityes thereto
convenient, doing every thing in his due order, apoyncting to each function his
proper turn, and tempestiuitye: and not confusely to shuffle up and myngle one
thing with an other in disorder, nor to wrap and entangle himself in many
matters at once: which thing is meant by these sayings of the Preacher, Eccle.
3.
where he appoints convenient seassons and orderly times for each
functions of this life, and assigns to every thing his proper and due office:
so that the night which is a time appointed for rest (banishing all
phantasyes) is to be passed and spent in Sleep, not to be entermedled with
those busynesses cares which belong to the day. The time to eat his meat,
the time to relaxe and sport his body, the time to refresh his powers and
reuyue his Spyrites, let him so precysely and orderly observe: that laying
aside (for the time) all other cares and cogitations, he only attend to his
meat, Each thing ought to be done in his due time right order.
meerilye decently cheerishyng his body, not suffering himself to be
interrupted, or otherwise disquieted during the time fo his ordinary repast,
and usual meals.

Thus, when we resort to the places of public prayer, to hear godly Sermons,
when we pray, and offer up unto God our devout meditations, al such things as
may in any wise hinder our devotion, ought then to be secluded and laid aside
from us, that our minds may only erect it self upward to Godward, and to
think on nothing but heavenly things. This also both in public and pryuate
matters, in common Pleas domestical Affairs, in the traffic and trade of
Merchandise, when a man hath dealings with himself or bargaining with other
men, ought circuspectly to be observed: for by using this ordinary custom
and trade of life, he shall reap great commodity and feel great ease in
himself, al the days of this his earthly Pylgrimage.

Of a Moist Complexion. The X. Chapter.
BEcause radical or original humour is the maynteiner and feeder of natural
heate, and the thing that preserves and maynteyneth life, even as Oil doth
nourish the flame in the Candlewieke: therefore the Complexion that is thereof
constituted is not ill, neither to be myslyked. For both Physicians
Philosophers commend ye temperature which is moyste, as not altogether
disagreeing and strange from natural disposition. And although in young years
it be not all of the best: Moist Coplexion.
Yet when further age and heate be joined to it, it becomes much better and
perfecter. For moystnes will quickly conceive and take heate, and is both ready
and plyaunte to be wrought and framed which way a man will, even like moist clay
that will take any manner of print or form. It helps therefore wonderfully
to nourishment, and is of very great force and efficacy touching ye height,
talnes growth of man.

For albeit moystnes hinders the other functios, and of it self helps them
in executing their actions nothing at all, but is rather altogether weak, and
vneffectuall, (because it is neither fit to attract, neither to reteyne,
neither to expel:) yet being joined and perfused with heate, it helps and
brings something to pass, and furthers the other quality in the
alteration of those things which be conioygned among themselves.

For as water being no less cold then moyste, through heat of fire, boils
things that be raw: making the same wholesome food for mans body: Or, as Oil
in the fryinge pan, through the heate of fire burning coals, Heate in ma
likened to the Sun, and moisture to the Moon.
becomes most skaldynge, boils fries fishes fit meet for the sustenance
and meat of man: So likewyse moystnes in a mas body joined with natural
heate, works many effects in the body, even as the Moon doth in y^ Earth,
through the light that she boroweth at the Beams and shyninge rays of the
Sun. The influece force of the Moon.
For as this Planet in her monthly course refreshes woods and fields, geeuing
to all earthly things growth increase, causing ye Sea to observe his tides in
Creeks, Havens, Roads and Shores, and to ebb and flow according to her
course and motion, as she is nearer or further of, sometime with swellynge
floods filling them, sometime with lowe ebbes emptying them, as she also doth
Oysters and all shellfish beside: So lysewyse this wholesome vital humour,
moystening each meber in the body, makes the same full of juice and moisture:
therefore they that be of this nature and complexion, are long livers, if they
keep themselves within moderation, and that the moystnes for want of heate,
grow not toomuch out of square and beyond measure. For as toomuch abundance
of water quite quench fire: so too much stoare of moisture oppresses
natural heate.

But if these ii. qualities, concur and meet together in a moderate
temperatenes, and that neither moisture be too abundant, neither heat too
remiss and faint, the (certes) all the offices of nature are most exactly
performed. For when heate hath moystnes pliant, ready and obedient, it
attracteth the meat, and very well concocteth the same: and being reduced
and brought into the likeness or fashion of dew, distributes and
disperses the same into the very innermost and secretest parts of the whole
body, geeuinge nourishment to the members, whereunto it is made like and
consubstantiall.

Moystnes therefore through the help furtherance of heate is of wonderful
force in geeuing nourishment to the body, causinge it to increase and grow
up, in other functions being weak and feeble. For in it, is neither virtue
attractive, concoctiue, alteratiue nor digestiue, but yet it is of some force
as touching the virtue expulsiue, by reason of the slyppery nature which is in
it.

For we commonly see that those persons which be gross, corpulent and moist
of body, are for the most part loose bealted and soluble, by reason that their
power retentive is not fyrme and strong, because their pores and passages are
made open and wide, for the humours to pass out.

In Bodies which be hoate and dry, al things happen contrary, because in them
the power retentive is strong, but the expulsyue (by means of dryness, and
for that, the passages be empayred decayed) is faint and weak: whereby it
happens that in their avoiding of excrements, going to the stool and
skowringe their Entrails, they strain themselves sometime all in vain with
Coughing, hawkinge vomytinge, yet be not able by evacuation to ease themselves.

Thus the moist Complexion being adversary to the dry, hath all things and
properties in a manner from it contrary, even as the case stands between
Children and Old folk. For in Childhood, heate by little and little
increases, having more store of moystnesse, grows more more, till they come
to full age and mans strength. But in Old age, this heate by little and little
decays, and when moisture is all wasted a man falls into a cold and dry
distemperaunce, and finally thereby brought to his death. The condition of which
qualities, as we have a little before described, so in this place the order of
our present matter now in hand, craves to have some certain arguments and
tokens showed, howe and whereby to know a moyste Complexion. He that is of
this Constitution and temperature, The tokens of a moyste body.
(clean contrary to the dry disposition) hath a body soft, not rugged and
rough, white skinned, and without hair, the veins and joints not standing
out nor greatly appearinge, heir plain and flat, and for the most part
thick withal, which in women evidently appears. For young damsels and
Maidens, being any thing grow in lusty age, have their heads thick heyred,
and longer then Yongmen have.

Albeit many times it happens to this body, as it doth to plashy wet
ground, wherein by reason of overmuch moystnes and wet, no young trees, no
Shrubs, nor grass grows, as it also falls out in very dry and hungry
ground, where no moisture is at all. For where toomuch wet is, there the
hairs grow thin, because heate wants power and lacks strength, to bring
out the pores and work the humour under the skin into hair: and for this
same cause, happens it also that the heirs be of colour White, bright,
Yellow or Red, which in continuance of time and space of years (as heate
more increases) begin a little to incline to black colour: their
countenance and forehead pleasant and cheerful, Gray eyes.
their eyes Greye and bright, standing out forward, lively and quick, and by
reason of the purenes of their Crystalline humour, clear, bright, amiable and
smylinge: all which be tokens and signs of a good nature and virtuous
disposition, a quiet mind, plain, simple upright dealing, and finallye of
such good towardness as geeueth an undoubted and certain proof of courtesy and
humenity.

For in them is no galley bitterness, as is in Choleric persons, Moist
complexios not given to be malicious spiteful.
whose malignant humours incite and prick them forward into sondry
inconvenient affections: whereas they that be of moist complexions are not so
lightly angered, nor so fumysh and desirous of revenge. And forasmuch as heate
doth not incende set on fire moisture, Moyste natures not fumish and testy.
the mind of these me is nothing so easily heated and chafed, but rather is
far more quiet, calm and myelde.

Now, as touching the shape, feacture, proporcion and form of their bodies:
Tokens of a moist complexioned body.
it is to be be noted that these complexioned personnes be of stature mean,
big set, rather then tall, grande paunched, stroutingly bellied, which
comes partly by nature, and partly by the custom and order of living, by
idleness and ease, want of exercise, bolling, swilling, lunge sleep, and
many ways beside, whereby the body grows and becomes burly, fat and
corpulent.

I could here recite al the other tokens of each several part of mans body,
that is of this moist constitution and complexion, as ye Nose in a manner
camoysed and flat, with the grystlie end blut and big, swollen and blown
Cheeks, round Chin, many signs more: but they do show the several nature
and quality of each singular part by it self, and not of the whole body in
general: Every part of the body is by it self severally to be considered
hath his proper temperature.
so that we may not by one small part give judgment of the whole body, but of
every proper in^ber, special consideration must be taken: albeit for the most
part, they resemble and participate in nature and temperament with their
chief and principal Entraile, that is to say, the Heart and Lyeuer.

Concerning the inward notes and tokens of the mind: Men of this Complexion,
as their mind is nothing quick, The state of the mind in moist complexions.
so neither is their tongue (being the interpreter of ye same) prompt, ready
or quick, because it is so drowned in overmuch moisture, that it is not well
able to advance and set out it self in good and clean utterance: their wit
neither sharpe nor fine, their courage base and nothing haultie, not atteptinge
any high enterprises, nor caring for any glorious and difficult adventures: and
the cause is, for y^, heate which is the thing that pricks forward
emboldeneth to take in hand worthy attempts, is in them very weak and small:
for this cause, are me quicker witted, Why men be wiser then women.
deeper searchers out of matters, and more diligent and ripe of judgement
then women: for a woman compasses and doth al things after a worse sort, and
in going about affairs and making bargeins, hath not the like dexterity and
seemelynesse that a man hath. And unto this end appertains and may be
referred that saying of the wise man. Eccl. 42
It is better to be with an ill Man, the with a friendly VVoma. c. Which is by
reason and effect of heate, which whosoever lacks, or else have feeble and
faint, are for the most part persons effeminate, nice, tedor, without courage
and spyrite, sleepy, slothful, weakelings, meycockes, and not apt nor able
to beget any Children, because their Sperm is too thin and moist, and thereby
unable to piece and join together with the woman's seed generatiue. For albeit
the desire of carnal knowledge and venerous acts for the most part
proceeds of a slypperie moist disposition of body, and is to persons of this
temperature less hurtful then to others: yet forasmuch as this moystnes
humour is slowly forced forward by heate, and the members of generatio not
filled with swelling spirit, it follows yt they be unto carnal coiture fubling,
slow, not greatly thereto addicted, neither therein take any great delectacion
or pleasure. And hereupon it happens, yt fat women and corpulente, have
greater desire to fleshly concupiscence and bodily lust in Summer, Carnal
lust in Summer to me hurtful.
then in Winter: because in Somer, heat enkindleth moisture styrreth up Venus,
but in men (cotrarily) it quenches it: for manly strength, by immoderat heate,
is resolved and enfeeblished.

Likewyse these herbs, Rue provokes lust in women, but takes it utterly
away in men.
Thyme, Rue, many others that be very hot dry, quech and take away in men all
desire of carnal lust, because they wast the generatiue humour, whereas women
thereby are much provoked, stirred to venery, by enforcing heat into their
secret parts pryuities. And for this cause, when y^ Genitoryes or mebers of
generation begin once to grow into coldness, yt ye generatiue humour is not
forced nor calefyed by natural heat, then are such things good to be mynistred
to the parties, as are of power able to stir up the loins with a certain
tickling cocupiscece to provoke the genital seed with desire to be expelled.
Now, how such persos may keep the selves in bodily health, clear free fro
sickness, here mean I briefly to decy^hre.

First, Diet meet for a moist Coplexio.
because health consists in a teperamet of hot moist, this costitutio ought
to use a moist diet, yt is to say, such nourishment food as is thereunto
familiar much of affmity: such whert in is reasonable good store of heat, of
which sort is sweet wine, Milk, Rye bread, Rear eggs, Veale, Pork, Pig,
big labes waterfoules, beans, Chestnuts, Chitchpease, Dates, Reyss, Figs,
Almonds, Pine apple kernels, haginge sweet grapes, such as Muskadell grapes
are, Sea fish, Brains. Among garden or pot herbs: Lattice, Arrage, Rape,
Parseips, Carets, Melons, Cucumbers, but good heed must be take y^ he use not
to eat to^much of any of these, for fear of making the body exceed to much in
moystnes. For by overmuch moist diet fare, Phlegm cold ^amy humours, causing
sundry daugerous diseases be engedred, to wit, y^ Apoplexy, Crape (through
fulness or, else abundante of Phlegm) browsy evil, Palsy, fallig Sickness,
Astonmet insensiblenes, of the lymmes, when as the power Animal is so venummed
and depryued of his function, that all sense of feelynge and moouinge is taken
away, Diet over moist, hurtful.
and a man suddenly thereby (as it were by some preset revenge sent to him by
Gods great wrath) is styfled. This body therefore must be conserved within the
bounds and rules of healthynesse and temperance, using expedient exercise,
and shaking away al sloth and ydlenes: specially, it shall behoove him to have
good regard orderly to evacuate and purge his bodelye excrements, to go to the
Stool, to pysse, to arise betimes in the morning, and frequent some
convenient exercise, and by using a somewhat vehement motion or walking, to
styre up his inward or natural heate.

As concerning Sleep, in this body it ought to be moderately used, Moderate
sleep good for moist persons.
not exceeding the space of vi. hours at the furthest. For it is better to
Sleep little and somewhat with watching to soak away humous, then immoderatly
to bolne, Moist folks must sleep but very little.
swell and therewyth thoroughly to be cloyed. As for example, we see those which
geeue themselves too much to bellycheere and Sleep, to become therwyth so
gross and corpulent, yt their Chin hangs down danglinge, and joins to
their breast, and as the Poet Persius says: Their paunch and gullet with fat
bears out, Sat. 1.

A good foot and half, of assise about.


Whereby it happens that such persons are oftentimes even upon the sudden
cast into diseases. For their veins and arteryes being slender and streict,
and also void of blood and Spyrite, their natural heate is quickly and for
every light cause oppressed and styfeled, which thing is meant by Hyppocrates
where he saith: Lib. 2. Aphor. 44.
They that be by nature very porzy gross, live as long as they that be slender
bodied: because their pores be wide, and their conceptacles of blood large,
so that lightly no outward or inward causes can greatly hurt them. Which
persons although with dainty fare, idle life and much Sleep, they bring
themselves many times to this porzynes corpulency, yet they be not so
dangerously sick, when any discrasie happens, as they that be of ye same
constitution and state from their first beginning. For although some which in
their youth were slender lean, happen afterward to be fat, gross, and
fleshie: yet their veins, Arteryes and other passages and cunduites of their
bodies remain still large and wide: which thing plainly appears, whenever
they (feeling themselves not well at ease) have any occasion to be let blood.
For in this accidental habit of body, although the party be fat and
forgrowen, yet the veins lye not hid vnappearing, as in them that naturally be
gross: but swell out and plainly appear to the eye, offering themselves to the
Lauce, by incisio hasomly to be cut. Therefore although this moist Coplexion,
being cherished by heat, be laudable good, for that it prolongs life,
differreth and keeps away Oldage, suffers not the body to grow into
dryness: yet if it exceed toofarre, or stand in the point of extremity, it is
dangerous. For when by reason of the veins being full, the body ceases to
be nourished, and the faculties of nature (which distribute nourishment)
intermit their office and cannot work, in this case needs must the body go to
wrack and incur inconvenience, so that either sudden death thereupon
ensues, or else (al least) some rupture of y^ Vessels and veins happens.

These things being considered, it shall be good, speedely and in time to foresee
break this habit and disposition, and by y^ means of moderate evacuation,
abstynence, and watching to prevent further danger: using such a prescripte
diet and ordinary, as best serves to reduce the body into a safer and less
dangerous Constitution. For this is genera lye to be noted, yt a body is not
to be accounted reckened moist, Moystare feeds nourishes heate.
in respect of abundance of excrements and humours, but of a temperate
moystnes of all the parts and of the whole, proportionably together: with which
teperate moisture, natural heate is fed and nourished, and life thereby many
years prolonged.

Finis Libri Primi.
THE SECOND BOOK, WHERE IN AS IN A GLASS is plainly and lively described the
perfect state and express Image of every particular Nature: By the which
every man may most readily find out the very right Constitution, plight,
condition, affect and disposition of his own Body.
Of a Compound Complexion. The first Chapter.
Compound Complexions, consistinge of two qualities a piece, are in number
four, like as y^ simple be: vz, hot and Moist: Hot and Dry: Cold and Moist:
Cold Dry: unto whom there belong and are appendant so many Humours, diffused
into every part of the whole body: Blood, Phlegm, Choler Melacholie.
According to the nourishment that a ma is fed withal, humours either encrese
or diminish.
These, according to ye nature of nourishmet received, are increased or
diminished: suffering chaug alteration are easily one into an other transmuted.
And albeit these humours (being of great force diverse ways, and sondryly
affecting the body, yea the with fulsome, and vnpleasaunte exhalations and
sentes is oftentimes greatly annoyed and encubred, even as ill naughty wine
brings to the brain affects both hurtful and daugerous) The gross
exhalacion of humours hurtful to the mind: as dead and fulsome wine, is to
the body.
may not be accounted Elements, neither are able to constitute any Complexion:
yet are they endued with Elemental quality and virtue, and help much to the
conservation keeping of the whole body in good plight and order.

For as we see the fire to be fed with matter combustible: and Torches,
Lynkes, Candles and such like nourished with Oil or some other rosennye and
fatty substance: so likewise the elemental qualities and all the powers and
faculties of nature derpued into ye vital spermaticke seed of our Parents, do
stand in continual need of nourishment. For if the body should not be
sustained with nourishment, or if the humours (which moyste every particular
member) should lack the preseruatyues and fomentations wherewith they be
maintained, the whole frame of mans body must of necessity decay, and be
utterly dissolved, and every part thereof vanish away into his like, whereof
it was generated, or into that; whose nature it conteyneth within it self,
whether it do participate with Fire, Apre, Earth, Concord harmony in mans body.
Water, or draw near in nature and be famylier to any of them. They depend
mutually one of an other, and are steadfastly maintained by the help and stay
one of an other. Neither is there any part in mans body so small, so vile or
so abject, that hath not respect to the comeliness and conservation of the
whole body, doth orderly discharge his due office and proper function
whereunto it was created. And this I would not have to be only spoken and meant
of y^ use and utility of every of the members parts severally, but also of the
humours, which by the help of nourishment, do meynteine, support and
vnderproppe the temperamente and complexion of each body: and by the help of
natural heate, do geeue increase and growth to al the members generally.

For which cause Hippocrates and Galene, De Natu* humana.
not without good reason apoint the four natural humours (being perfect and
pure) the Elements of Creatures endued with blood: Humours after a sort are the
elemets of man.
for out of them comes a secundarie oryginall of our procreation. For they
minister matter plentifully, and help highly in the breeding and shaping of
the Infant or yonglinge, specially if the body be well ballassed with good
wholesome meates, and now and then heated with a draught of good wine: for
without these, Venus games are performed but faintly sorilie: which thing
seems to be meant by the young Strypling Chremes in Terence, who being sober
began to abhor and loath his harlot and Concubine: but being well whittled
in wine, to take therein great delight and pleasure, and not scarce able to
qualefie himself from committing further folly with her, as in this
Proverbial sentence he flatly professed.

Take meat and drink and vvyne away. Eunuch. Act. 4. Scaen. 5.

Small is the lust to Venus play.
For the Testicles, Genitories and members of generation draw unto them fro the
principal mebers and convert into Seed, the best most exquistielye concocted
humours. Which seed, having (...) great store of effectuous profitable Spirit
is the worker of heate of all the other faculties, and in the begetting and
procreation of Children is the chief parent and causer. Into it, is a
wonderful virtue and divine power (by Gods good will and appoyntmente) infused,
for the shaping and fashioning of the young Creature, The force, and virtue of
Seed.
within the mothers womb: for it produces a fruit of seemly most beautiful
workmanship, rightly shapen and in each point perfectly proporcioned, if the
Seed (whereof it was begotten) do issue from a sound and wholesome body: for
otherwise, if the seed be of a diseased, corrupt and infected body, Sound
parents beget sound Children.
the issue and ofspringe cannot choose but be monstrous and deformed.

Somewhat therefore to recreate the Reader to make this argument more plausible,
delightful and popular, I will depaint and set down y^ nature and condition
of the Humours that rule and bear sway in mans body, because they produce and
bring forth their like qualities. For Blood is partaker of Hot and moyste:
Choler of hot and Dry: Phlegm of Cold and moyste: and Melancholy of Cold and
dry. Therefore that Temperament which is Hoate and moist, may very well be
referred to a Sanguine man: Hot and dry, to a Choleric: and so forth of the
rest: but yet so, that we confess the Complexion and temperament of ma not to
grow or proceed elsewhere, then of the Elemental qualities, for of the have
they their names not of y^ Humours.

First therefore there be iiii. Elements, Fire, Elemetes 4. Qualities 4.
Humours 4.
Air, Earth Water, which of al things made, are the original beginnings. Next
are the Qualities, that is to say, the myxture of Hot, Cold, May and Dry: of
who, proceed the differences of Complexions. Last of all, the four Humours,
whose force and Nature, ye seed comprehends and conteyneth within it: unto
whom (beside the qualities which are to it in steed of an Instrument and not
of a woorker) the chief cause next under God, of the fourmyng and creation of
al ye parts is truly to be attributed. These wholesome humours, to the
conservation of health and maintenance of life are right necessary and
profitable. For of them do consist and of them are nourished the entyer parts
of all Creatures, and for this cause, so long as a man lives, he can never
want these without great detrimet danger of his health. Notwithstanding
according to the course of time and season of the year, according to the
quality of ye air enclosing us, according to ye condition of the place where
we dwell, and according to the nature of each age, they are increased or
dimynished.

For Blood being the best of all the humours and endued with heate and
moisture, The nature of blood.
is in his chief pryme force in the Spring season: namely peculier and proper
to lusty flourishing age, which commonly is of a sanguine and ruddy colour,
which nevertheless wants not also in the other Natures.

Phlegm, Phlegm
being like unto water, is of nature cold and moist, and takes his increase
in winter, and engenders diseases like unto it self.

Choler, Choler.
being of quality hoate and dry, resembles tyer, hath his most force in
Summer, which although in sight and touching, it appear moist, and of colour
yelowish, like Maluesey, yet in operation, power and effect, it is hot of
ardent nature.

Melancholy, Melacholie.
not unlike to Earth, cold dry, increases and takes force in Autumn, this
is the dryer and grosser part of blood, and the dreggie refuse thereof.

All these differences of humours, when a vein is opened (for it is not all
pure blood that gushes thereout) In blood all the other humous are mixed.
is plainly of all men to be perceived. First, before it be cold, it doth show
and represent to the eye, an airy fomy Spirit, which by and by vanishes
away: then an exact pure liquor of most perfect and excellent ruddynesse, y^
which is pure and right blood: When a vein is opened, all the humours are
ocularly to be seen.
in which there swymmeth Choler, and sometime tough clammye Phlegm, sometime
liquid and thin, according to the nature, condition and state of ma: Last of
all, if you turn up the whole mass or lump, you shall find Melancholy,
altogether of colour black. And thus every humour abundinge in the body,
bewrays it self by his own proper colour: insomuch that sometime y^ blood
that issues out of the veins, liquefyeth and is dissolved into Choler or
Phlegm, or clottereth thickeneth into Melacholie, reteyneth either no colour
or very little of blood. And if a man were disposed by taste to have further
knowledge in these humours, Humours have both colour and taste.
he may with his tongue and palate as well judge and discern the relyce and
tallage thereof, as he doth their colour by his eye. For Blood is sweet in a
manner of the relyshe and taste of milk, because it is much like and of kin
unto it: Choler is bitter, of the nature of Gall: Phlegm, unsavoury as water,
and without all quality, so lunge as it is not rotten, nor myxt with other
humours, for then is it either salt or sowrishe. Melancholy, is sharpe, eigre^
tart. These tastes and relyshes there is no ma ^hat perceives and feels
not, when as in voanyting perbraking he casts up any of them: yea in sweat
and even in the spettle, these tastes are manyfestlye descried perceived:
Spettle and Sweat, have their force power of humours.
for of these h^mours they have participate their powers faculties, and with
their qualities are they endned.

Of a Hoate and moist Complexion: and by the way: of the disposition and nature
of a Sanguine man. The ij. Chapter.
Having heretofore set down the descriptio of simple Complexions and
temperatures, which be so termed, for that they consiste of one only quality,
bearing swaye and dominion more the any of y^ rest: by course of my purposed
work, I am next to entreat of them that are compoud.

For in the very beginning and first entrauce of this work, my promise and full
intent was to set down and describe such a Complexion and state of body, as
was in every point perfect and absolute: and to repulfe keep away al such
harms and inconveniences as in any wise might empayre, health, or bring the
body from his good state into worse case and taking. I have therefore thought
it good here in this place first to inserte the temperament that is hot and
moist: because it is n^ereste and like to the best. For no state of body
(saving only the best and chiefest) is better or more commendable then this,
nor any that longer prolongs life, and keeps back Didage, so that the same
consist and be within y^ limits and compass of temperatnes, that is, of
hoate and moist. Therefore since this state among al that be compound, is
accounted chiefest: we must stand upon the discourse thereof the more
narowly and precysely, and the rather because sundry Physitios make no mo but
sour differences, grounding their reasons (and not altogether painly) yt it is
not possible (as Galene wytnesseth^) that any temperature or distemperature
Tued. Val Lib. 6. De Tep. 1
can long continue alone and simple: For so much as necessarilye it adopteth and
takes to it an other. For y^ Hoate (consumynge wastinge moisture) engenders
and brings dryness: Temperatures subject to chasige.
Cold, consuming wasting nothing, after a sort increases humour. Semblably,
the Dry quality in those ages that a Creature grows and increases, makes it
hoater: but when it decreases and draws toward decay, it makes cold and
dries the solide parts of the body: but the Receyuers and conceptacles of the
humours it fills with excrements, which thing in Oldmen is plainly to be
discerned perceived, who aboude and are full of Phlegm, Old men by nature dry:
but in condition moist.
spitting spatteringe a^ their mouth, with their Noses ever dropping and
sneuillye.

Which thing later Physicians (eve of our time) as yet observing, rejecting
simple temperatures (which notwithstanding may not well be so shak^ of and
forgot) appoint only four, to wit, them that be compound: unto who they have
geeuen names (not of their qualities but (somewhat unaptly) of those commonly
termed know humours, y^ is to say Saguine, Choleric. Phlegmatique,
Melacholique: by y^ squire leauel of who, they wold have these 4. differeces of
coplexio or teperature, to be reduced tried. Which dealig reasonig of theirs,
as it savours of popular iudgmet learning to the common sort, very plaussble:
so stands it not with the precise opinion and censure of them that would have
each thing skanned and measured in his right nature and kind.

In the mean season, Dissensio diversity of opinions, dangerous
I as one desirous to recocyle Physicians thus factiously iarrynge in opinion
(and would God this vniformitye and atonement were also brought to pass in
matters of Religio, for the better quieting of many men's Consciences) both
parties shall suffer the chief place to be assigned and geeuen to ye hoate and
moist Complexion (excepting always as I said before, the temperatest of all,
whereunto as at a marcke we must direct our mind and leauel our whole matter,
that by it every man may try his own nature) which so log as it is in his
perfect strength, vigour quality, produces brings forth a Sanguine man.

And thus, there is in a manner no difference, neither prejudicial to any
party, either to call it by the name of a hoate and moist Complexion, or else
by the term of a Sanguine man: who by the benefit of this wholesome humour,
conteyneth hath within him these qualities; albeit Blood it self (for we will
keep all things within their prescripte limits) doth not engender and cause
heate and moystnes, but rather heate and moisture produces Blood.

Now, Blood of all iuyces and humours, is ye best, and to mans life an alimente
and maintener chiefly appropriat, famylier and domestic: for through the
force The profit of blood.
furtherance of vital Spirit (which is the preserver, and seder of natural
heate into every part of the body, Blood is conveyed by the cunduytes and
Vessels of ye Arteryes and Veins, so both nourishes, mainteyneth and
preserves the whole body.

And for that, this pure, clear, defecate, loouely and amiable Juice, is the
special thing yt conserveth every living Creature in his being, wherein also
consists the life and vigour of every nature that lives by breath:
therefore the Hebrew Lawmaker Moses, Leuit. 17. The cause why Moses forbad the
eating of Bloud^
by the direction and appointmente of God himself, forbad all manner of blood
to be eat, because ye life of al Creatures consists in blood, is therwyth
nourished and maintained even as the flame of a Candle is with the Oily week:
as it plainly appears, by a man that bleeds very much, whose body is then
in every part cold, wanne (for want thereof) fayntinge, and in a manner ready
to geeue up the Ghost. I have known many, Blood not rashly nor unadvisedly
to be let.
whose vital spyrite bleedinge out and yssuinge together with their blood,
have been thereby brought into great danger of their lives. And therefore this
treasure of Life, must most carefully be conserved, because it is of all
Humours the most excellent wholesome.

Now, Whence th^ Arteries Veins spring.
as the Arteries (which abound more with vital spyrite then with blood)
spring from the heart: so, the Veins (which conteyne more blood then airy
spyrite,) proceed and spring fro the Lyeuer, and are dispersed abroad in
brauches and fibres into every, yea the very furtheste places of the body.
The Liver, the shop of Blood.
For the Liver is the shop and chief workemaster of gross thick blood,
although the first oryginall thereof be ascribed to the Heart, The heart,
fountain of blood.
by whose power faculty the blood is made and thoroughly wrought: being endued
with vital spyrite, conueigheth natural heat to each part of the body.

Blood and vital Spyrite are in their chiefest Pryme and most abound in lusty
and flourishing years, The colour shows what humours be in the body.
albeit there is no age yt lacks the same: although in old worn age, blood
begins to draw to a coldness, the vital spirit, then neither so hoate,
neither so strong and effectuous: which thing as it is in them well to be
observed and perceived by their frequent gestures and often moving of the
body and the parts thereof: yet specially may it be seen noted by their
colour, which in a yonge lusty Stryplyng and youthful body of good
constitution is ruddy and fresh: but in them that be further stricken in years,
or further of from this temperamente, is not so pure, so beautiful, nor so
pleasant to behold, for that, all their comeliness beauty is either faded
away, or through some evil humours, and hidden imperfection or blemish
appears in them worse then in the younger sort.

So, many being affected or distepered in their Spleen, womb, Liver, ventricle
and Lunges, are commonly either pale, yelow, tawny, dunne, dusky, or of some
other ill favoured colour.

There is no surer way (saith Galene) certainly to know the humours and juice
in a Creature, Tuend. val. lib. 4.
then by the colour and outward complexion. If the body loke very white, it is
a token yt phlegm in that body, chiefly reigns most abounds. If it be
pale or yelow, Affects of the mind change the colour of the face and body.
it argues the humour to be greatly Melancholic and Choleric, and the
blood to be fresh and reddy: if it be blackish, it betokens black adust
Choler, specially if no outward accidental occasion happen, as great heate or
chafing, labour or weariness: or if the mind be not intoxicate, and
perplexed with affects and passions, as Anger, Joy, Sorrow, Care, pensyuenes:
for these make the humours sometime to resort unto the skin utter parts, and
sometime to hyde and conueyghe themselves far inwardly: and for this cause,
we see men y^ are fumish and testy to be in a marvelous heat, proceeding not
of any sticknesse or discrasse but of *the motion and stirring of the humours:
again, them that be affrighted and in mind amazed, to be pale. Some to loke
as wanne as Lead, some white and swarthy, sometime blewyshe, sometime of
sondrye colours: all which betoken crude humours and raw juice to bear rule
and swaye in the body, either of phlegm, glasselyke tough, or of some other
sort, or else many rot humours clamped up in y^ body, which by outward tokes
and signs bewray show themselves what they be, and what they signify.

They therefore that be of a hoate and moist constitution, and have great
store of blood within them, are of a purple and ready colour, soft, warm
and smooth skinned: comely of stature, of reasonable feacture, fleshye bodied,
and a little rough, aburne heyred, red or yellow bearded, and comely bushed:
of which feac^ure, plight and bodily shape the Scripture witnesses that Dauid
was: 1. Reg. 16.
who being (after that Saule was cast of and rejected) appointed King, and
onnoy^ted by Samuel, was of a brownish Complex^o, excellent beauty, well
favoured in sight, and (...) ^tenauce very cheerful and amiable. Such a
comety grace and Princely shape, was to be scene in the most victorious
Prince Philip King of Spain, Philip king of Spain.
and sovereign Ruler of all the lowe Countries, his Grace being here with us
the last year at Zickzey outwardly arguing in him a most mild nature and a
mind most virtuously disp^sed.

There be yet many other notes, marks, and tokes appertaining to this
Constitution, which a man may not always safely trust unto as infallible,
because they suffer alteration and change by age, and years, yea almost in
every moment of time: but yet so, that by them appears always certain and
undoubted tokens, that the state of the same body aforetime hath been and was
in this right good case, plight constitutio, albeit now altered or perhaps
clean decayed. For as great, huige and sumptuous houses, being fallen down
and decayed, show evidently by the ruynes and delapidations thereof, of what
hugeness and magnificence they erst were, howe curious and busy the frame
was, howe skilful and industrious the Architect and workman was: so in a
laudable state, Constitution and habit of body, which is decayed and faded
from his former disposition, there appear certain relics, notes, and tokens
of the good temperament that aforetime was in the same. Albeit sometime through
grievous sickness or by some great misfortune and outward calamity, mans nature
is so frushed and damped, that al the vigour of the body, all the beauty,
comelynes and shape thereof is nypped and clean abolyshed, like a goodly fair
building that is either by tempest shaken battered, or by misfortune of fire
utterly burnt and wasted. Thus, fear, astonment, sudden a^frighting, the
dread of dangers or death suddenly threatened, do so wast and destroy the
powers, form, shape and beauty, and so clean alters some me fro that they
were before, as though they had never been the same.

Whereof there happened in our time a notable and strange example in a young
Gentleman A strange example of a young man, suddenly become gray headed.
of noble birth and Parentage. Who in the Court of the late Emperor Charles
they far ouershooting himself, without regard of duty, remorse, or
reverence of the place, had carnallye deflowered a certain young Gentlewoman,
whom he loved exceedingly: which fac^ to be perpetrated upon the bodies of
yonge Ladies, and noble virgins, is accounted a thing most heinous, punishable
by death, yea although no force be offered to the damsel: and although by
secrete consent and apparent likelyhoodes she greatly seem not to ret^t an
amorous suite to her, in such sort tendered. This Gentleman therefore was
committed to prison, lookynge the next day folowinge to be executed put to
death. For this is narowly looked unto, y^ no^e presuming or daring to commit any
such villainy, or to distein the Honour of the Princes Court with such lewd
filthy pollution, shall escape scotfree or go away unpunished, according to the
greatness of those his wilful libidinous demerits. Languishing all y^ night in
great perplexitye, grief, agony sorrow, al the while conceyuyng inwardly in
mind, the terror dread of death so near approchig, he was so altered and
changed, that at his arreignment the next day, none of his own familiar
acquaintance, neither yet the Emperor himself could know him. So much had the
horror of death the despair of any pardon win few hours pallifyed his
colour, and altered the state of his former costitution. All his beauty, comely
shape fresh coplexion was (as it were) so faded and exiled, his face so
incrediblie dis^nowledged, his colour (of fresh clear) turned into wan,
swartye, deathlike, his countenance to behold, loathsome ugly, his head
covered over (with gray heirs, (far unmeet for those years) his beard
sluttish, dryueling filthy, with spattering sneuel deformed. The Emperor
earnestly fixing his eye upon him suspecting him not to be the self same man
which had committed the fact, One suddenly gray headed.
mistrusted that some other person had been put in his place: whereupon he
commanded present search to be made, y^ matter to be thoroughly bolted out,
whether it were the self same party or no, and whether his hoar heirs and
gray beard, were counterfeited by some confectioned ointments, (artificially
for the nonce coloured) or no. But the matter being found true and plain, and
no deceipte nor coloured collusion therein used: his Majesty was at the sight
thereof so stunned: that his former resolution and purpose to have the said
Gentleman punished, was now turned into compassio over his pytifull case, and
judging him to have already suffered punyshment sufficient, pardoned him his
life and remitted his offence.

The honourable, Nicholas Mychault of Indeuelda, a Gentleman in great favour
with high Princes, of all Noblemen worthylie esteemed, demanding of me on a
time, sitting at the table, the cause of this so strange and sudden change:
I answered, that ye very cause thereof proceeded of nothing else then of his
extreme fear, and vehement thinking upon that danger wherewith he saw
himself distressed: the remembrance and cogitation whereof searched the very
innermost Senses in his body. For that trouble affection so nearly touched him
and so grievously perplexed his mind, y^ al vital heat spirit was in him in a
manner utterly extinct, whereby each part of the body, streightwayes altered
and changed fro the fresh comely colour which they had before, into an ugly
and unsightly habit: insomuch that the roots of the hairs (which he y^
vaporous humyditie that lies within the skin be nourished and preserved
fresh in colour) Why some men even suddenly are changed in Complex i^n and
colour.
when the same humydity fails, and in place thereof a cold dry quality
reigns, do dry up and clean lose their former ^atyue Complexio and colour:
even as grass, that wanting the moystnes of the earth to comfort it, cannot
but wyther patch away. For even as the Leaves of Trees, the brauches of green
(Vynes serving to defend y^ grapes from the injury of weather) are by extremyty
of heate, hayle, rain, and Northern blasts, (which sometime blusterouslye
blow in the Somer season) altered from a pleasant green verdure into a
yealowysh tawny colour: So likewise the natural Complexion, Iustynesse, and
shape of the body, drowpeth and decays, and the hairs (which of themselves
are no part of y^ body, but an appentise, superfluitye and ornament to the
body) lacking the strength and humyditye ye nourishes them, become hoary and
gray lunge before their due time: which thing we see commonly happen to all
those that spend their time in the wars or in dangerous traueyles on the
Sea, or which be much troubled visited with sickness, wherein is a certain
imagination of very death in their minds. For they remember and look for
nothing else, they think upon nothing so much when they stand in battle
array, ready at the sound of the Trompet to join with the Enemy, and to try
it out by dent of sword, but even there presently either to slay or be slain,
making account thence never to escape alive: unless peradventure they be
such, as with lunge custom have so hardened and inured their minds in many
like dangerous brunts, that they neither fear death nor care for danger. Of
which sort we see sondry old beat Soldiers, and such as have been long and
thoroughly experienced in many a sharpe storm upon the raging Sea.

Of such force is a thoroughly settled imagination (as by many Arguments
elsewhere I have declared) Imagination.
that a woman at the time of her conception, steadfastly fixing her imagination
upon any thing, deryueth induces certain marks and tokens thereof into the
Infant: which thing is well enough known to happen also unto me, that
ardentlye earnestly fix their imaginatios and thoughts upon any thing. And
thus, did the cotemplation of Christ, nailed on the Cross, imprint certain
strikes, stamps, and marks, upon the hands and feet of S. Frauncis, if (at
leastwise his religious sectaryes, fautours, followers deserve herein any
credit:) for ye Images and Pictures in his name resemblance made and
enthronyzed in Churches, holding his hands stretched out and open, are carved of
such fashio, and show him to have been such a one.

In what perplexity, distress, agony and fear our Saviour Christ was, even
by this to every man evidently appears, that, he fixing his mind upon the
instant danger wherein he presently stood, Luke. 22.
and as it were before his eyes beholding his death now imminent and at hand,
the sweat trickeled down his body to ye ground like drops of blood. Fear of
death more terrible the death it self.
For the terror and fear of death, deeply sinking into a mas imagination, is
far more grievous terrible then death it self: for many have their Senses so
astonnyed benumbed, y^ death happens unto them without any feeling of pain at
all, Who dye in manner with out pain.
as they y^ dye of ye Apoplexy, or drowsy Evil, or such as fall into
trances, whom the beholders cannot perceive to feel any manner of pain, but
to synck down, falling (as it were) into a sleep or slumber.

And thus, in dangerous aduetures and perils hazarded by Sea and land
(which to the eyes and mind represent a very Image of death) there is no man
but feels in himself motions of fear, The cause of fearefulnes when a man
is in danger
and looks pale upon the matter, for y^, his blood at the sight of such
dreadful extremytie, recuyleth and flees into the innermost parts of his
body. For when as all the parts of the body be forsaken of their vital juice,
there is none of them that thoroughly and well executes his right function
and office: the feet stagger and stumble, the eyes dazzel, the lustynesse of
the mind drowpeth and is dulled, the cheeks seem flaggie and hanging down,
the tongue stammering and the teeth gnashing and whetting.

His hairs for fear stand staring up, Lib. 3. Aeneid.

his tongue is tied fast.
There is no man (be he never of so constant stout a heart) but is at one
sudden chance or other appaulled, A wyseman sometime is put in* fear.
therewith shrinks in courage: but yet so, that straight ways abandoning
fear, and ankoring his firm trust upon God, he eftsoon recovers his
courage, and banyshing dastardly fear, remains constant vnterryfyed: And if
ye case so stand those imminent dangers be not conveniently to be avoided,
courageously and stcutly obiecteth himself to the push of any hazards, with
vnappaulled stomach going through stitch with his purpose.

Therefore, there is no creature living by breath, unto whom death is not
dreadful and terrible, Astonnishmet of mind takes away the feeling of pain.
because it brings destruction and utter dissolution unto all: unless only
to such whose minds be stupefyed and their Senses blunted and vnperfecte:
as, old decrepit persons, young Infantes, fools, Madmen and Rauers, which
have no remembrance or cogitatio of any thing that is fearful and
formidable, neither feel any payne and grief, as others, whose brain is
firm and sound, and their Anymall faculty perfect do: but specially (as I
said before) they that are oppressed with the Lethargy, Apoplexy or in
Trances sownings with do as it were by little little close their eyes, and seem
as though they fell into a gentle slumber without feeling any payne at all.

The effect of this my overlong discourse tends to this end, that although
there be in the body of man many goodly furnitures, and in the mind sondry
excellent ornaments, yet notwithstanding, the life of man is subject every
where in all places to innumerable casualties, myssehapps and inconveniences,
and is on each side beset torn in pieces with such a number of miseries and
byrecknyngs, as every way weaken and appayre the perfect vigour and lusty
state thereof. But if no myschaunce or harm assault the same, it may in good
case temper many years continue: as by frugality, wholesome diet, orderly
qualification of all affections: insomuch that even till the years of
decrepicie, there do appear the tokens and marks, of a right good
Constitution and habit: which thing is manifestly to be seen by some that
in Oldage are as lusty, and have their wits as fresh and youthlyke, and
their bodies not so barreine, vnactiue fruitless, as many Young men have.

Now, forasmuch as the lustily and full grown age of Adolescency, doth
consiste in a temperament of hoate and moist, continuing in a manner for the
most part in a moderate mean of equability, and performing all his actions
thoroughly and inculpablye, so also as touching the manner and order of Sleep,
it keeps such stint and measure as is not greatly to be mysliked. For their
Sleep is quiet and nothing troublesome, nor disturbed with any distemperaunce
or nightlye vanities. For the brain is moystened and refreshed with a sweet
pleasant vapour, so that the mind thereby is not troubled with any manner of
absurd annoyaunces, but only the labours, exercises and deuyses of the day,
and the needful cares for the daily maintenance of this life: the
performance whereof rests and appertains for the day to accomplish.

These doth the mind and imaginative part of man deuyse and study upon,
toward morning, after a man hath slept his dead or sound sleep: which is so
quietly done, that therein is no phatasticall dreaming. And if the mind and
spyrite do then revolve and debate in dream any other strange or
unaccustomed thing, then only such as falls out for the day to consider
upon, the same (certes) signifyeth abundance of ill Humours to be pestered
within the body, causinge the troubled spyrites to send many confused
ymaginations and vain foolish visions up into the chief Castle of the mind:
and of such sonde dreams to interpret, or prognosticate any event or hap of
future things to depend, or rashly to gather any signification or meaning,
is childish, vain, wicked, and superstitious, as the Scripture plainly flatly
witnesses. Notwtstading, Leuit. 19.
sometimes dreams (such I mean as are sent heavenly suggestion) happen not
without some divination and infallible presage or foresight of things to come.
Deuteronomy. 13.
For our heavenly father uses now and then to admonish and awake our drowsy
minds and retchlesse natures, Dreams sometime sent from God.
laying before us in visions and dreams somewhile good and wholesome, sometime
ill and lamentable haps, thereby to try, whether yet at length we will be
obeysaunt to his admonitions or shryncke aside and refuse the lore of his
prescriptions and commaundmets. For many being hoodwinked and bewitched with
the tryfling doctrine and frivolous traditions of mans invention, reject and
forsake the pure and clear founteyne that perpetually yields most aboudant
store of the everlasting water of life, and seek after ryuers that are dried
up (and as Hieremie terms it) Cap. 2.
dig to themselves Cesternes and broken pitts that can hold no liquor or
drop of wholesome dotryne. That worthy constant, and thoroughly tried Soldier
Iob, Cap. 7.
bemoaneth his own case, offirming that in the night season he was sore
disquieted with troublesome dreams and dreadful vysions. To what use and
purpose sleep serves.
For the nature office of Sleep, being nothing else then a mitigation of
labours a quiet surceassing (for the time) fro toil, and a refreshinge of the
body, with the busy cares and dealings of the day before wearied: from these
cares troubles, did not his Sleep in the night disburden and ease him, but
rather increased and doubled the same: that his mind still remaining terryfied
with dreadful dreams and apparitios. For thus doth he reason with himself, and
these complaints doth he utter in that his worthy dialogue or rather
Tragicomical discourse: If I think to my self, that my bed d^ shall comfort
me and mitigate my grief, and that I shall have some ease and refreshing upon
my Couch, then trouble thou me with dreams and make me afraid through
visions, insomuch that I wish for death, to come and make an end of al my
sorovves.

As touching the inward notes of this complexioned The virtue and force of
blood as touching the framing of the inward disposition manners of the mind.
body and his inclination of mind (for a man ought in each point and respect
thoroughly to be viewed and considered) a hoate and moyste quality incident to
blood, produces in men diverse natures, and according to the more or less
mixture of other humours, frames in them sondry manners and diverse
dispositions. They that be mere Sanguine, Persos mere Sanguine, for the most
part starcke fools.
and have none or very little Melancholy or Choler mixed therwyth (as most
neerelye approchinge to the nature and Sense of brute beasts) are commonly
doltes and fools, or at least, not greatly cumbred with much wit. For sythes
(as Galene saith) sharpnes fineness of wit comes of Choler, Constacy and
stedfastnes of Melancholy, Comet 1. de not human
Phlegm to the framynge and disposinge of the manners, helps nothing, neither
stands in any steed: it remains then, that simplicity and foolishnes
proceeds of Blood. Thus are young Cattle (which in comparison of the elder
ones, have great stoare of Blood) for the most part (as we see) foolish,
sotlike and bettleheaded: as Kyddes, Calves, yonge Sheep, Lambs, young wield
Kidds or Roebuckes, young Kyttons, and the yonge of all other dumme Creatures
beside: and among Men, the nearer that any one approaches to the nature of
brute Beasts, the more like unto them in manners and conditions is he. Which
thing any yt is but meanly skilled in Natures works, may easily judge and
discern, even by certain significations of their eyes and countenance: each
of which is as a glass wherein to behold, and whereby to discover the inward
affections of the mind.

In many men there is a great resemblance affynitie in nature with other
Beasts, and the further that these digress from the purity of teperament,
the less sway in them bears Reason, Judgment, Understanding, willingness to
do good, Wisdom, and discretion: to be short, they are partakers of all
those things that are common to Beasts.

And thus, there be many which either for lack of good educatio, or through
this deprauatio of Nature, degenerate into Beasts, and in all their actions in
one point or other, resemble them in conditions. Man a Wolf.
Many, like Wolves are bloudsuckers, extortioners raueners: Many like ^erce,
Mic. ca. 7.
cruel, outrageous and terrible, lying in wait to sheede blood, Man a Lyon
and hunting their brother to death. As the Price will, so saith the Judge.
Likewise saith Ezechiel: Cap. 19.
Iehoakim is become a Lyo, which hath learned to spoil devour folk to make
vvidovves, Ma an Ape.
destroy their houses, make their Cities desert. Some be as foyinge, gesturous,
and counterfe^cting of any thing by ymitacion as Apes. Man a Fox
Some Forlyke, are subtle, wily, deceitful, and crafty to entrap and
catch the innocent at aduauntage. And in like sort, there be others, which
resembling the nature and conditions of other beasts, and degeneratinge from
their integrity and excellency human, either degenerate quite into Beasts,
or at least become much like unto them. Children* quick, stir^nge and playing,
and the cause why.
As for Children yonge Stryplinges about 14. or 15. years of age or under, by
reason that their blood is pure and full of swelling spirit, are still
stirring, quick, nymble, active, wanton, unmodest, malapert, saucy, proud,
without wit, and much given to toying and playing: for we see them as wanton
as Calves, that is to say, in mowyng with their mouths, in voice, gesture,
becks, clapping of hands, light songs, vain ioyfulnes, where there is no
cause, immoderate mirth, disordered fysking Up down, and uncertain motion
gate: all which do signify a shuttle waueryng nature, a mind subject to great
mutability and vncostancy, proceeding and caused of the boiling of their blood
within them, which boils up, as it were seetheth in their V^ynes, Boiling of
blood in youth, like to spurging of new wine in the Tun.
even as new Wine, Ale, or Beer spurgeth and works in the Tun.

Hereuppon the Netherlanders and Lowe Duchmen, have devised certain proverbial
terms, wherewith they are wont commonly to quip those yonge princockes and
lusty gallants whom they see overjoyed or toofarre gone in wanton jollity,
making themselves as ridiculous and jesting stocks to the whole company.
Neither are they incited to these immoderate pleasures through reason or auy
well stayed discretion, but by impotency of mind and wilful affection,
digressing and swaruyng from modesty, temperance and moderacion: y^ lack
whereof googleth their unstayed heads, and carries them into many inordinate
pranks of childish insolency. Playig with the head what it signifyeth.
They also bewraye their own inconstancy and unstayed minds by much shaking
of their heads, and continual playing and toying with their hands and feet,
insomuch that some account them no better then stark mad, or persons distract
of their right wits. Neither do they sind themselves occupied in any earnest
matter that is to any good purpose, neither show they forth either in words
or deeds any piece of wisdom, but vndecetly for their age, lasciuiouslye
return unto their boyishnes again, whereas meeter it were in respect of
their time passed, now to fall to some thryft, and to frame their life after
the prescription of some good order.

Hereuppon do we use a Proverbial similitude taken of the nature and
conditions of yonge Calves, which in the Spring time of the year (in ye
green pastures, when their bellies be full) skip and leap up and down,
wantonlye and toyingly fysking and iumpynge, now this way, now that way,
now round about, one while raising themselves upon the forefeete, an
otherwhyle upon the hinder Legs: whose manners fashyos, such young youths as in
their daily order of life do imitate and resemble, are said in latin
vitulari, which is, to be as wanton and toying as a yonge Calfe: or not to
have shed all their Calves teeth: or that their Jaws ytche with Caluishe
wantonness:

The Book of Wisdom (fathered and asscrybed unto Salomon saith: Sapien. 4.
Spuria vitulamina no agent radices altas, nec stabile fundamentum collocabunt:
Bastard Slips shall take no deep roots nor lay any fast foundation.

By these Phrases of speech, we mean that wilful and unruly age, which
lacks rypenes and discretion, and (as we say) hath not sowed all their
wield Oats, but as yet remain without either forcast or consideration of any
thing that may afterward turn them to benefit, play the wanton yonkers, and
wilful Careawayes. Saying therefore yt Adolescency and youthful age consists
in a constitution of Hot and moist, is fuller of blood then any other: it is
to this place therefore namely and specially to be referred. Neither can any
plight or Complexion of the body more aptly be applied unto it, then this: for
all the qualities, fashions and marks of this Age and State, agree thereunto.
Which thing I see was well observed by Horace in his description of the Nature
inclination of youthful Age, where he saith: A youthful beardless Strypling,
void
and free from Tutors check, In Art. Poet.

With Horse and Hound doth range the fields,
and brave himself doth deck.
To vice he pliant is as vvaxe:
to them that wish him well
And warn him for his own avail,
rough, churlish, sharpe and fell.
A slender Husband for himself,
a vvaster of his gold,
High minded, rash, presumptuous,
in love soon hot, soon cold.


And if they happen to lyncke themselves in company with any lewd
Counsellours Lewd and ill disposed Cousellours do youth much harm
(as in this slypperie and dangerous age commonly is seen) their fickle
heads, flingbrayned wits be easily allured and drawn into folly, and to
pursue that way which is worst. For being now in their most wilful age, and
standing upon the most doubtful and dangerous point of al, between virtue
and vice, lacking experience, and void of all good advise and counsel,
misseled by the peevish allurements of their associates, they run for the most
part headlong unto that which they see the common multitude embrace, are ready
to slyde into that trade of life which of all other is worst and most
pernicious.

Green heads in greatest danger are,
in doubtful choice they stand, Pers. Sa. 5

And hang in Balance of deuyse
what trade to take in hand.
But if (in lieu of these) they harken and geeue good care to the wholesome
admonitions of some faithful and virtuous Tutor, Good counsel and virtuous
education brings youth to goodness.
and by his prescription frame the order of their life and conversation in
their tender years (for in this Age is Stuff, matter, and towardness, both
good and excellent, if good education do polish, and a skilful workman have
it in handling) no doubt they are to be brought to much goodness. For such is
the force and power of blood in mans body, specially when through access of
age it grows to heate, and daily more more increases in vital spyrite,
that it causes a promptness of mind, Blood uses the help of other humours in
framing the manners.
quickness in deuyse, and sharpness in practyze, which by daily use
exercise atteyneth in thend to wisdom, knowledge and experience of many
things. And thus by the benefit of nature and good bringing up, it is
brought to pass that they be garnished with many excellent gifts of the
mind, and through a ready utterance in the discourse of matters, be to
their Country a great staye and ornament.

And although hoate and dry natured men (which are the Choleric) be right
well furnished and skilful in perfect utterance, Difference between
Sang^ine Choleric.
vehemence of speech and readynesse of tongue: yet is there not in them such
waighte of words and pythynesse of Sentences, neither can they so well rule
their own affections, because in their reasonynges and discourses they be very
earnest and hasty. And this in such persons is not only by the pronunciation
of their words, but also by their swyft gate and hasty pace, easy to be
perceived.

This difference also is between them, that the Choleric are bitter
taunters, Choleric persos great flouters.
dry bobbers, nyppinge gybers and skornefull mockers of others, but the
Sanguine nothing given that way, Saguine courteous and mild natured.
meddle not at all with such dog eloquence, neither use to hit men over the
thummes with any such figuratyue flowtes, whereat many men are commonly as
heynouslye offended, and take the matter in as great snuff, as they would, to
be Crowned with a Pyssebolle: but they be pleasant and courteous natured,
meerye without scurrility, and civil without fylthy rybauldrye, behauinge
themselves orderly in all companies, cumbersome and odious to none, but
delightful and welcome to all.

But if it happen that Blood be allayed or mingled with other Humours, and by
course of Age to become hoate, as namely if it be mixed with yelowe Choler,
wherewith the Humours are stirred up, or to participate with any other Humour
whatsoever: Inciination of nature.
It is seen, that as the mixture is, so the manners, disposition, delight,
trade, and inclination of man, falls out accordingly. As thus, suppose a
Body c^ieflye to consiste of these three, Best proportion measure of blod to
other humours.
Blood, Choler, and Melancholy, whereof two parts to be Blood, and the
other third part to be Choler and Melancholy equally proportioned: Of
these three, thus mixed together, proceeds such a Complexion and bodelye
habit. as produces sundry motions, affections, and inclinations of the mind,
and which doth inwardly dispose, fashion and frame their Natures and
dispositions (yea before they break out into words) enhablinge them fit
and meet to discharge and execute the part of any personne, that we either
of our selves take in hand, or which by nature and public function is to us
assigned.

First Nature frames us apt and meet,
To every kind of chance:
Sometimes she helps, Horat. in Art, Poet.
sometimes with ire,
our harts doth wound and lance.
Sometimes with thought to throw us down,
with grief and dule amain:
Then, aftervvard the tongue declares,
the minds deuyses plain.
And as we see, Nature in producing herbs and flowers, and painting them out
in brave attire and colours, to show forth a most excellent and inimitable
workemaship, and right gallantly to set the same out to the gazing view of
each greedy eye, clad with many, and the same most pleasurable differences of
goodly verdure, some lyghte and entermedled with whytishe, some of a sad or
dark green, some watrishe, blunkette, gray, grassy, hoary, and Lecke
coloured, whereof every one hath their proper virtues, peculier effects: So
likewyse, Blood being mingled with humours of other quality, conceives other
force and other colour and yet (nevertheless) not quite bereft and depryued of a
Bloody of Sanguine colour: insomuch that it pierces into the very innermost
corners of the mind, incensing to sundry actions. And although the Planetts
and Stars, stretch out their influence, and extend their force mightily
upon these lower bodies: yet is it the Humours and Elemental qualities which
do constitute the complexion of humayne body, and cause diverse sorts and
sondry differences of Natures and manners. Humours of more force then the
pl^nets.
And in this sort, doth this constitution whereof we now speak, breed and
bring forth into the Theatre of this world, some that be stout Braggers and
shameless praters, some Parasites clawbackes, some Dolts and cockscombes, some
self pleasers, which think more of themselves, then all the rest of the Town
beside doth, some Mynstrelles and Pypers, some graceless Ruffians and
Spendalls, ryotously wasting and consuming their Patrimony: Some Dycers and
Gamsters, some Trecher friends and Coseners: some Counterfaiters, Skoffers,
Tumblers and Gesturers, some Iugglers, Legier du maine players, with a great
rablemente of other lewd Lubbers of other sorts beside.

A rabling route of idle louts,
consuming grain and corn,
Devoid of thryft, Hor. lib. 1 Epist. 2.
ciphers to fill
up room and tale, forlorn:
Right vvoers of Penelope,
stark verlettes, flattringe mates,
And Bellygoddes, addict toomuch
to cheer and dainty cates.
Who love to snort in bed till none,
and hear the mynstrelles play
On vvarbling Harps to banish dumps
and chase all care away.
For slthens they neither observe stay, nor moderation in their lives and
conversation, neither frame to live in any good and laudable order, but loiter
and haunt the company of wilful and lewdly disposed persons, Blood eggs a
man to riot and wilfuines.
it comes to pass that in manners they prove stark nought and graceless
and by means of the heate and abundance of blood, prone and prompt to
pursue the enticements of all sensual lusts and vnbrydled affections,
reputing the chiefest felicity to consist in pleasure. And of this sort are
al Riotours, all Banqueters and dissolute lecherers, whose whole care, industry
and delight, night and day, is to drown themselves in the gulf of Sensuality
and bellycheere. They live (as the Proverb is) a Minstrelles life, that is to
say, nycely, ydly, altogether in a manner upon other men's cost: and for that
they keep neither ho, nor measure in their affections, but wholly addict
themselves to ingluuions excess, unseasonable watching, and immoderate lust
of carnal venery, therefore their bodies lye open to al such diseases and
Sickness, as consist in ye fulness of humours: namely, the Squinzye, and
swelling of the Jaws, Inflammations of the kernels of y^ mouth, and the
Uuula, swelling of the fundemet, Piles, Hemorrhoydes, bleeding at the Nose,
Pleurysie, Stitches, Inflammation of the Lunges, and many other: for all these,
it shall be most expedient to be let blood. To this number is also to be added
the Ague Ephemera, or Diaria, so named because commonly it is of no longer the
one days continuance, Ephemera, or Diaria
albeit sometime it lasts till the fourth day: and hereunto is to be
referred the Sweating Sickness (which because it began first in England, is
called the English Sweat) the Accident of which disease is swooning greenous
pame at the heart, joined with a bytinge at the Stomach, The English Sweat a
kind of the Ague Ephemera.
whereby a man is no less pained then if the heart if self (being the
fountcyne of life) should through any contagious air, be infected and
oppressed: As by proof it fell out in the Month of September 1529. at what
time al the Low Countries were in a manner generally visited with this
contagious Sweat, When the Sweating sickness first began in Belgie.
and pestilent Ephemera, proceeding of corruption of the Air, wherewith so
many as were infected, were brought into great terror, tremblinge and swooning
through feeblenes of mind and panting: their heart labouring beating within
them extremely. During which infectious time of vistacion, there happened an
other mischief and inconvenience which made the matter a great deal more
lamentable: For certain ignorant Empyrykes contrary to the Rules of Art,
Blind Byards.
and without taking any regard or consideration to ye strength and powers of
nature, violently kept their Patients, sweating the space of xii. hours:
whereby many by extreme heat, overcome, were with their bolsters many
bedclothes styfled up.

Seeing now that corruption of the Air is the cause of this grievous malady or
Ephemerall Ague, and that the Symptoma or Accident thereof (which even attends
and wayteth upon it, like as the shadow on ye body) is grievous payne at the
heart and sownyng, so is the Sweat it self the Crysis thereof, whereby Nature
being strong, dispelleth and sends out moyste fulsome fumes and sty king
Humours, and consequently banishes the disease: In what sort ^o sweat and how
lunge.
it must therefore at any had be moderate, and not above the space of iiii. or
vi. hours at the most, according to the imbecility and strength of nature.
For toomuche, clean throws down all the strength, and utterly destroys
the vital spyrites.

Now, why this disease is termed by ye name of the English Sweat, I suppose
grew hereuppon, for that the people of that Country be oft therewith
attached, partly through their curious and dainty fare and great abundance of
meates, wherewith they cram themselves very ingluuiously, even as the
Germaynes Netherladers do with dryncke: and partly (which I noted at my late
being in that Realm, about the time of Mydsommer) by reason that the air with
them is troubled, cloudy and many times with foggy dampes overcast, whereby is
engendered the cause and original both inwardly and outwardly of this
disease: Englishmen subject above other Countries to the swearing sickness.
the vehemecy whereof, brings the into a bloody sweating, wherwt they must
wrestle strive as with a most fierce strong ennemy, and which they must
endeavour with al might to supplant: hereupon happen Trances and sownynges
through feebleness of body and mind, fainting and drowpyng of the spyrites,
decay of powers, stopping of the pypes and voice, and life almost thereby
clean yielded up, and the party brought even unto deaths door.

For this Country people (not able to abide any great travail and labour, as
being persos cockering themselves in much tender nicety and effeminate life,
are very procliue and apt to be thrown thereby into the languishing
extremity of this perilous disease. It is expediente for them therefore to be
recomforted, cherished, revived and refreshed with sweet odours, and with the
drynkinge of pure good Wine. And hereupon comes it that this Nation
peculiarly and almost daily uses to dryncke Maluesay or Secke, to comfort
restore their Stomachs when they be quaysie or surcharged with excess of
sundry curious dishes: which thing I find to have been used and put in ur by
men of elder time, to help such discrasyes: whose order was with this wine, to
drive away, payne at the hart, Stitches, Swooning or Trauces, Cholick, fretting
of the guts, and belly ache. Thus, the Poet luuenal trumpeth a certain
miserable Chuff and niggardlye Pinchpenie, for that, he denied to geeue a
little wine to one of his friends that fell into a sown or trance, through
feeblenes toomuch sweating 'being in great danger of his life.

He stoares and drincks old vvyne, long kept:
Even since the cyuile strife
When garboils and dissension Iuuen. Sat. 5.

in Common wealth were rife.
Who Snudgelike to his friend (whose heart
was paynd with stitch and grief)
Not one poor draught thereof would send,
to ease him with relief.
They that be of this constitution (over beside these before rehearsed
greeuaunces and discommodities) are subject to other Agues no less dangerous:
whereof one proceeds of putrefyed and rotten blood, the other without any
note or sign of putrefaction is caused of inflammation of blood. Both these
sorts of Agewes ye Greekes comprehend in this word Synochus, and the Latinistes
Continuum, because it is continual, without geeuing to the Patent any truce
or intermission: for when the fit comes, it leaves not of, Hot and moist
Complexios subject to putre faction.
but continues for many days together. And that Age which is hoate and moyste
is more subject to these kinds of Agues then any other, for it quickly
conceives takes putrefaction through oppilation, specially in the Spring
time of the year, when as Humours freshly increase: much the sooner if they
use any distemperance or lead on idle and restful life without ordinary
exercise. For when the Pores and spyramets whereout blood is wont to have
difflation vaporous expulsion be stopped, the party cannot choose, but grow
into putrefaction and ye vital parts with fulsome corruption to be infected.

For even as close houses whereinto the wind, hath no manner of access: and as
Garments, fetherbeds and Mattresses, Cushions, Sheets Blankets, Carpets and
Counterpoynts become musty and ill scented, unless they be now then shaken
and hanged out in the open Air: so likewise doth the body of man become
putrefyed, corrupt, stinking and rotten, if it accustom not it self to
exercise and agitation. For by that order and mean, are excrementes evacuated,
al fulsome fumes and exhalations proceeding out of them, dissipated.

To keep themselves therefore the better fro Sickness, and to be the less open
and subject to Agewes, it shall behove the, to use seasonable exercise,
(abandoning al sloth and drowsynes) duly observing a moderation in meat drink,
sleep, watch, and carnal conjunction. And in the beginning of the Spring, it
shall be good for them to be let blood, or by fcarysycation to be cupped. But
if they be loath or unwilling after that way to be emptied, Receiptes Laxative
soluble.
to prevent future dangers, let them take some such purgatiue medicines, as
make the bealy soluble, namely Cassia fistula, Syrup. Ros. Laxat: Diaprunum
simplex, Syrup. de Epythymo, and Fumitorie, Polypodie, Mercurie, Manna, or
honey of the Air, and Whaye.

And in using of exercise this must diligently be taken heed of, Howe
exercise is to be used.
that it be not frequented used, either when ye parties be replete with humours
and excrements, after meat, or when their Stomachs be full. For being in
either of these sorts used, The head takes hurt by the disorder of the in
feriour mebers.
it fills the head full of fumes vapours, (which chief Member being
distempered and diseased, all the inferior members likewise suffer grief and
participate discrasie with it) it bredeth Rhewmes, Catarrhes and distillations,
it makes heavy, and brings oppilation to the Lyeuer. Oppilation of the
liver from whence it comes.
For violent motion drives the meats being vncococted into ye narrow streits
of ye veins, where they stop the passage of the Humours, and make an open way
occasion unto putrefaction.

When any such inconvenience happens, our parts be, forth with to seek
remedy for the same, by applying thereto such things as are of force to take
away and dispatch all those annoyaunces that stick in the way, and hinder them
from having their right courses. Tuend. Val. 6.
Of which sort (saith Galene) are, the infusion of Wormewoode gentle, stieped
in Wine, or Wormwood wine, called Absynthytes, Succorye and Endyue, Doder,
Egrymonie, Wormwod wholesome for the liver. Things putting away oppilation.
Rhabarbe, the seeds of Anyse and Fenel, Peach kernelles, bitter Almonds,
great Reysons with the kernelles taken out, Oximell sympl. each of these to be
geeuen before meat, when concoction is perfectly made.

The same regard and consideration is also to be observed and kept in doing
the carnal Act of Generation: Harms of Venetie carnal copulation.
for toomuch use thereof enfeebles the powers, and through inflamacion arising
thereof, engenders Gout and pain in the Joints. For there be some so
wylful, that without respect at all of concoction or cruditie, without any
consyderation and difference of night or day (quite neglecting the opportunity
thereto belonging,) do greedily desire, and inordinately hasten (for this
tickling lust can brooke no delay) to satisfy and stanch their fleshly
motions in this kind of pleasure: and in the use thereof be so insatiable and
so far pass ye bounds of moderacion and qualification thereof, that they
waste and destroy the pyth and synewes of their whole bodies. For carnal Act
takes away exhausts that power of the body which serves to concoct the
meat and to convert the same into Blood: which if it be not accordingly
accomplished nor syncerely wrought, then falls it out, that very great
store and abundance of excrementes superfluous humours be engendered, which
breed and cause innumerable diseases. Albeit to many, Commodity of Venery.
this v^ of Carnality (unless it be out of all measure) brings no hurt at
all: for seasonable and tempestiuious coiture riddeth away great store of
Phlegm, and skowreth away other Humours, which being engedred within a ma,
damnyfye and annoy the body and mind.

And this thing is to be observed and marked in yonge lusty Damsels and
Virgins, which remain long unmarried, or which by professio of chastity are
waned and debarred from Wedlock. For beside their unruly motions of tickeling
lust, Seed beig corrupt, is cause of much inco^enience.
beside their secrete flames and burning affections they be ill coloured, and
nothing pleasantly complexioned, their minds vnstedy and out of quiet frame,
by means of a naughty vapour that ascends upward and disturbs their
brain. And hereuppon it is, that sometime in Imagination, thinking themselves
to lye with me by beholding or touching of them, they be troubled in their
sleep with the night Mare, and the effluxios of seed, wherwt they pollute
themselves in the night season: Hereuppon comes trembling quaking of the
heart, by reason of gross fumes, which invade the pannicle or coffyn of the
heart, called Pericardion, and lye heauelye upon the body pressing it down
as though they were night Hegges, or Hobbegobblins.

Them that be married, which lawfully may use this carnal knowledge with their
own wives, and they that dissolutely lead a lecherous life, and run riot
on whorehuntinge, are to be advised and counselled, not to yield themselves
too much thereunto, Moderatio of Carnal dealings.
least afterward they bewail their lamenes and lack of strength, when as all
their vital juice shall be clean gone and exhausted: whereof the wise Solomon
geeueth to every man a right wholesome exhortation and advertisement, that a man
should not geeue over or enthrall his credit and honour to harlottes, Prou. 8.
nor to spend and consume his lusty years in hauntinge the company of
Whores, who greedilye gape to defeat and spoil him both of his wealth and
strength, as they, that will never be satisfied and glutted, neither with
Venus games and coiture, neither with rewards and expenses, but remain still
insatiable, Whores in lecherous lust never satisfied, nor in rewards.
and ever craving more. Let each man therefore take herein good heed to
himself, leasse in the end when he is clean wyped from all his wealth and
bodelye strength, he morn, and with sighs bewail his former wylfulnes, and
the decay of his forspent and wearish body.

Therefore to escape clear without takings any harm by immoderatly using
this venerous act, Art. Modic. 86.
so much space of time (by Galene his prescription) ought to be used
between, that neither any resolution be thereby perceived and felt, neither
lassitude: And again, that a man may feel himself lighter and lustyer, and
having disourdened and disbalassed himself of his provocative supersluous
Sperm, to fetch his breath the better. Also a convenient and fit time ought
to be taken, to wit, when the body is meanelye constituted, neither too
full nor too empty: of which matter elsewhere we are to speak more at large.

But if any Sanguine complexioned person, (the better to serve God) be
delighted in leading a single and unmarried life, by profession of chastity:
him do I counsel and advise very cyrcumspectlye and precysely to consider his
own state, disposition and nature, whether he be well able to qualefy and keep
under, this disordered unruly affection or no. For in such a waightye case a
man must cyrcumspectly look about him, and very advisedly foresee, that he do
not inconsyderately tie himself to any profession without judgement, choice,
and discretion, least his foolish rashness bring him afterwards to repentance,
when he shall feel himself surcharged, and vnhable to wield the burde which
he hath take upon him to bear. Sperm or Seed.
For the Sperm or Seed of Generation, being a redounding excremente and
superfluous Humour (residue and remaining of the last alimente, and coming
from the vessels of y^ Testicles, where it is exactlye formed, and thoroughly
laboured) is employed to beget issue: yea ye natural power faculty, is
desirous to have this collection of Humour to be purged, and by the euacuatinge
thereof to be eased of a troublesome and intolerable caryage, even as ye other
parts of the body (for their parts) desire to be disburdened of their
superfluous excremets: to wit, vryne, ordure, spettle, sweat, sneuel, spattling
and Phlegm.

Right good and wholesome therefore have Ieuer deemed that worthy admonition and
Counsel of CHRIST in the Gospel, Matth. 19 1. Cor. 7.
and of the Apostle likewise, that they which can comprehend this matter, and
are able to perform and keep it, should remain chaste, and joyfully embrace
the same as a heavily gift: assuring themselves that Gods Divine assistance in
so godly a purpose, will not fail them: without which all that man purposes
or takes in hand is frustrate vain, as beside S. Paule, Sapient. 8
the wise King Salomon witnesses. For it is not to be doubted but a man may
subdue and vanquish this slyppery affection, (although very hardly) and by
living a continent life, may perform his determinate resolution and vow, so
it be done and taken in hand, only upon zeal and devotion, the better
thereby to entend Gods service, Continency and Chastity a special gift of God.
and geeue himself to heavenly conteplacions. For they that be wrapped in many
cares, and (shakig away from them all sloth and idleness) do mortify
themselves spend their time in watching, hunger, sparefeeding, earnest study,
fasting and prayer, continual meditation of holy Scripture, and painful
preaching night and day, (whereby this kind of Devils is cast out,) Matth. 17
they I say) feel not themselves greatly moved in desire to this thing: For
why? these that I mean, do willingly voluntarily, not forcibly
superstitiouslye betake themselves to this kind of life: the better thereby to
apply their evangelical function, and more freely to intende the sacred study
of Divinity.

Of a cold and moist Complexion: which sets out and declares the
condition, state and nature of persons Phlegmaticke. The iij. Chapter.
NExt after the Hoate moist Constitution, order requires to describe and set
out the Cold moist Temperature, wherein reigns abounds Phlegm: whereof
(after blood) no small portion is diffused into every part of the body. And
this Humour draws somewhat near to the nature of Blood, and is in affinitye
with it, both in respect of essence, and society of their conceptoryes. For it
is (as it were) a certain Blood vnconcoct, Phlegm the matter of Blood.
or a rudimente and first beginning of Blood yet imperfect, not exactly
laboured: a reseblaunce, show, or pattern whereof, we may well behold in Must
or new Wine, while it is yet hoate, and newly taken wrung out of the Press.
The myxture of the Humours compared to wine.
For (as Galene right learnedly notes) the subtyle and ayrte part of the Wine
(which is ye some or spurging thereof) boils up to the top, and underneath,
is an unsavoury Humour, in relyce like to ye nature of sweetishe water, which
being excocte, settled, cleansed and fined from the dregs, obteyneth and is
brought to the nature of pure and good Wine. And albeit Phlegm be whytishe,
and have no redness in it at all, yet being excoct, and the coldness thereof
taken away and subdued by the force and efficacy of heate, it is reduced and
brought into a ruddy fresh coloured liquor. And eve as natural Phlegm
(which participateth with a certain sweetness) is through heate converted and
wrought into Blood and red colour: so likewyse Blood in the Dugs or Teates,
Milk of Blood.
partly of the nature of the place where it rests, and partly of the heate of
the heart (near unto whom the Paps are placed) is brought and turned into
Milk, white and gay coloured. For this cause, some (as superstitious
Phylosophicall as Pythagoras) abstained, not only from eating of flesh, The
cause why Pytha goras Scholars would eat no Milk.
but also from Eggs and Mylk, because they reckened and accounted the same no
other then liquid flesh, because the on^ being a certain space covered and
kept warm by the natural heate of the Hen sitting thereupon, will within
few days bring forth a Chicken: the other (if the colour were changed) they
accounted even very blood.

But this seems to many a thing very straug and prodigious, Milk in the
breasts of yonge Children.
that yonge: Children newly borne (yea of the Male kind) have Milk in the
Nypples of their Dugs, running out either of it own accord, or easily with
the fingers (...) sed pressed out: which thing I my self upon a certain time
finding by experience trial true, advised the parties at certain times to
(...) and force it out, least otherwise it should clotter, congele and curd
together into an hard substance. For this Mylkie liquor in children, is
engendered of the great and abundaunte alimente, which at those ^ssues, nypples
and spouts, by nature of the place, and help of the Heart (which is the
founteyne and Welspryng of heate) is converted into Milk. Now, the Mammiles or
dugs (which be the Receptacles of Milk) being spongy and hollow, and the
glandulous or kernellie flesh within them, Kernellie flesh as in the dugs.
bloodless and white, do transmute and alter yt blood which they receive, into
Milk: for every part of the body, alters and changes his nourishment,
making it in colour, similare, like, and familiar to it self.

And thus, the generatio of Mylk Sperm is made of blood thoroughly and exactly
concocted: Every part of the body hath his several virtue
and of the nature of those parts wherein they be laboured, become in colour (as
we see) white and mylkie.

Thus also the Lyeuer being of substance (as it were) coagulate blood,
engenders a raddy liquid substance: the Lunges causes a fomie froathie
liquor: the commissures or setting together of the Joints, a glewish humour:
ye tongue, spettle: the hollow bones produce and bring forth white marowe, as the
Ridge bone of the back the brain do, where als things are exactlye laboured.
For in Lambs and other young cattle, the marow is not white but bloody. Every
part therefore of the body works his humour like to it self, and transmuteth
it into the nature, whereof it self is.

No man therefore ought to think it absurdly spoken in saying and affyrminge
Phlegm by the force and faculty of the Lyeuer to be altered and changed into
Blood. And this liquid thin humour in the bodies of all Creatures is to
purpose and use, no less profitable then necessary. For being conveyed every
way into the Veins, The use and effect of Phlegm.
it qualefyeth and alayeth the heate of Blood Choler: finally it makes the
Joints nymble and styrringe, kepinge them from being stiff and lumpish
through dryness: and last of al it nourishes all Phlegmaticke members, and
them continues in lusty state.

And although there be commonly no certain place assigned where Phlegne
rests, The place where Phlegm, is.
yet the greatest part is still in the Stomach or ventricle, wherein the meat
is first boiled and altered into a thin juice or liquid substance. For we
see men that have surcharged their Stomachs, in vomyting and perbraking,
sometimes to cast up great abundance of loathsome, clammie tough Phlegm, or to
scour and evacuate the same through the guts: those I mean that have
excessiuelye and ingluuiouslye surphetted either in eating or drinking. Whose
heads (consequently) being filled with moystysh vapours, those fumosities
strykinge upward as in a Stillatorie, grow into a thick, fylthy, and
sneuillie phlegm, whereby through^ coldness of the brain, the parties
becomes subject and open to sundry diseases, as the Poze, Diseases
{pro}ocedinge of Phlegm.
Murre, Hoarsenes, Cough, and many others, of which sort is the Rheum or
distillation of humours from the head, wherewith in the Lowe Countries of
Belgia both rich and poor, high and low, in Winter season are much troubled
find by experience to be true, and yet they be people commonly healthy, and
as sound as a Bell.

In perfect Health, and thoroughly sound, Hora. lib. 1. Epist. 1.

But when that Phlegm doth much abound.
Insomuch that I sometimes am driven into a wonder, to consider how such
abundance of filthy humours should rest in the head, which nature one while
at the mouth, an other while at ye Nose and Throat expels and purges.

The head therefore and the Stomach (namely and much more then any of the other
parts) are pestered with the excrement of Phlegm, The he^d Stomach, the
engendrers coceptacles of Phlegm.
specially if a man use to eat such meates as be cold and moist, and
discontinue exercise, whereby it happens that this humour being too crude is
very hardly to be concocted, and brought into an wholesome juice, profitable
available for the body.

For it is a certain vliginous moystishnes and superfluous excrement, which
ought rather to be sent out and purged that way which nature specially
allows, and whereby most conveniently she is wont to exonerate herself.
For as the original of this inconvenience begins first at the Stomach and
afterward infesteth the head (as we may plainly perceive observe by Wine
copiouslye quaffed and swilled, which although it descend down into the
Stomach, yet doth it assail and distemper the head) it stands us therefore
upon, carefully to foresee y^ in those parts, as little of this Phlegmaticke
excrement as may be, be engendered: because the harm and inconvenience
redounds to the general harm and detrimente of the whole body.

And as it fares in a Realm or Kingdom, The harms of a body, and of a
Realm first begin at the head.
in a Common wealth, in a Cruile Policy or Corporation, in any Honourable
household or worshipful Famylie: so likewyse in the Body of man, that disease
of all others is most dangerous ill, which takes his oryginall beginning at
the head and principal members. For the harm diffuses and spreads it
self into all the inferior parts of the body, and them greatly damnifyeth.
As (for more plainness) let every man take an example at any house which he
enjoys hath in occupation. For even as those houses that will hold out neither
wind nor weather, be very unwholesome to dwell in, and a great backfrend to
health: or when the Ridges or Roofs thereof be ill tymbred and (for want of
good looking too) runs in ruin, and takes water as often as any rain
falls: So likewise, as lunge as the head is distempered and affected with
this baggage Phlegm, and distilling Humour, both it and the rest of the body
can never be in perfect health. For being it self of a cold and moyste
nature, it quickly drinks up vapours out of a waterish stomach, being thereby
replete with humiditye, moysteneth likewyse, Prou. 19. 17.
those parts that be under it: yea this distilling Phlegm is as noisome and
grievous to it as a brawling and scolding wife is to a quiet man. A brawling
wife is like the top of a house where through it is ever dropping.


For out of the head continually do Humours distill and (like soot out of a
Chymney) fall down into the Throat, Ears, Nose, Eyes, Breast and Lunges:
whereupon happen tumors swelling of the eyes, Bleyreyednesse, dryness of sight,
whyzzing and running in the ears, hardness of hearing, and sometime behind
the ears Impostumes, Diseases {pro}ceedinge of Rewmes Catarthes.
botches and wexekernelles, beside many sorts more: for the Instruments of the
tongue be affected, the voice hindered, yea sometime stopped that a man is not
able to utter out a plain word. The Syn^wes, Pellicles, Muscles, Wesantpype,
and Veins of ye throat, called Iugulares, and the parts that serve to frame
y^ voice, being surcharged with toomuch Humour (as in drunk persosis
manifestly to be seen) make the tongue vnperfecte, foltering and stammering,
and all the members to reel and staggar, their words double and not
intelligible, insomuch that at sometimes they be not able to speak one plain
word, nor in sesible terms to declare their own meaning. Droken me stammer
double in their speech
And thereby being by nature otherwise vnreadye and in utterance staggering,
and now also thoroughly whitteled soaked in Wine, their tongue doubles,
slammereth and foltereth a great deal more: insomuch that they bring out
their words by stoppes and pauses, like the that have the hicket: such persons
cannot speak softly and stilly, because their voice commonly is stopped and
kept back, which makes them to force out their words ye louder. They must
therefore earnestly strive and accustom themselves roundly and distinctly to
deliver out their words, Stammere^ cannot speak softly.
for otherwise their tongue through default and imbecility, and lacking
stablenesse fails them, and furthers them nothing in their pronunciation:
but chatter babble so obscurely, that no man can understand any thing of that
they say: For we see them to be scarce able to utter even a few words with
one streynable tenor and treatable uniformity, but sometime slowly and
dreamingly drawing them out: and sometime powryng out by lumps the same, as
fast as the tongue can roll.

The self same thing which superfluitye and distemperaunce of drink,
brings unto the haunters thereof, doth the dystillation of Humours and
defluxion of Phlegm, bring to them that be troubled with ye Catarrh, which
(beside these) is accopanyed also with sundry other incoveniences, to every one
of sharpe judgment well known and easily perceived. For who so is disposed
exactlye to syfte and search out the very marks and tokens of a Cold and
moyste Complexion, Nature of persos Phlegmatike.
shall find them (through abundance of that Humour and quality) to be
sleepy, lazy, slothful, drowsy, heavy, lumpish and nothing quick at
their busynesse: as they commonly be, which mind nothing else then
gurmandyze and bellycheere, and use seldom exercise.

We see also among Beasts, Fowls, and other Creatures both wield tame, What
Beasts, fowls, fishes be holesomest to eat.
that such as use little or no exercise, but lurk still in hoales and Caves,
and be pet up, and franked cowpes, are neither so wholesome, neither so sit for
man to eat, as others, that are greatly exercysed and use much styrryng. Such
wax (in deed) very fat, and grow bigger bodied (I cannot deny) but the
nourishment which they geeue to the body, is somewhat unwholesome and
excrementall: as among fyshes, Ecles and other slippery fyshes that lye still
myeringe themselves in mud, using no exercise, styring or agitation of body.

And this is the cause why Eeeles being dead (contrary to the nature of all
other fyshes) float not above water, A dead E^le floats not above water,
why.
by reason that they feed upon muddy and standing water.

But that every man may thoroughly and perfectly know the state and condition of
this Body, it must be painted out in his right colours, and is to be
descrybed by his own proper indications, marks, Notes of a cold and moist
body
and tokens. All they therefore that are of this habit (if their Constitution
be natural and not accidentallye happeninge) are gross, pursy and fat
bodied: their stature not so tall as big set, and strongly pitched, their
skin soft, white, and vnhayrie, their Muscles and Ueynes not appearing but
lying inwardly, insomuch that when occasion serves to be let Blood, the
same Ueynes do not apparauntlye show out themselves. The hairs of their head
be either white or dusky black, or else of the colour of Barley straw, which
will not fall of, nor become bald, till after a lunge time, (...) but they
soon wax hoary for want of heate, and imbecility of the member, which is
not of ability to excoct the nutriment, into the use and comelynes of Hairs.

For hoarynesse is (as it were) a certain refuse vinewed baggage, of Phlegm
putrefyed, Whereof hoary hairs come.
or a fusty dank^shnesse under the skin, whereof (through w^nte of heate)
proceeds hoarynesse and whytenesse of the H^yres. Such a like hoary Down,
or vinewed mouldynesse, we see to be in Loaves of Bread and Pies, that be
somewhat lunge kept vnspente, and also in Vaults, Hoaryne^e in meates.
Arch Roofs, Syelynges, hoales and Cellars under the ground, and other
musty, fulsome, dark, fylthy, and stinking places. Their Pysse and Uryne white
and very little or rather nothing at all ruddy. Their Excrementes; and
Ordure, thin and liquid: their Sleep very sound, and longer then health
requires, not without stoare of sundry Dreams, whereby (and not vainly or
deceitfully) may be nearly conjectured and found out, Dreams show and
bewray the disposition, state Coplexion of the body.
of what disposition the body is, and what Humours therein chiefly reign. For
the causes and original beginninges of these things proceed out of the body:
which although they be referrible to outward causes, or to the actions and
deuyses, which the mind earnestly conceives, deliberateth and forecasts in
the day time: yet is it easy enough for the learned and skilful Physician
to discuss the meanings, and expound the events thereunto incident.

For, as concerning Dreams by Divine motion sent into the mind of man,
Natural Dreams interpretable.
not depending upon natural causes) none is able to yield any certain
interpretation, without a special pryuiledge of Heavenly inspyration. Thus,
Divine Dreams.
they that be of Cold and moist Complexio, in Dreams imagine and think
themselves dyuinge over head and ears in Water, Dreams of the Phlegmatic.
or to be in Bathes Baynes: which straight ways argues great stoare of
Phl^gme to fall out of the head, into the nape of their neck, Jaws, vocal
Arterye and Lunges. Semblably, if they dream of Hayle, Snow, Ise, storm
Rain, it betokens abundance of Phlegm, sometime thick and gross, sometime
thin and liquid.

If a man in his Dream think himself to be styfeled and strangled, or his
voice stopped taken from him, it argues him to be subject and like enough
shortly to be troubled with ye Squizie, privation of speech, murre, or finallye
either the Drowsye sickness, or the Apoplexy.

In this sort (as Galene wytnesseth) there was a certain man, which dreamed
that one of his Legs was turned into a Stone: which man within a while after,
through a cold Humour that fell down into it, was taken with the Palsy.

Now, although too scrupulous and curious observation of Dreams be
prohibited, yet is there no charge geeuen to the contrary, but that we may
lawfully search out the meanings of all such as consiste within the compass
and reason of things natural, the Author and conseruer whereof is God
himself: Leuit. 19. Deuteronomy. 13.
so that we do ye same without any superstitious vanity of Divination,
neither therein fixinge any assured hope and trust, neither terrified with any
fear of the events thereof.

Whenever therefore natural Dreams do happen wherein be neither mockeryes
nor illusions of mind (for all these are banished put to flight by reposing a
firm and constant trust in God) they admonish and put every man in
remembrance to look well to his health, and to amooue and decline all such
occasions and inconveniences, as may either empayre and damnify health, We
may not rashly credit all Dreams.
or enforce any perturbatios of Dreams. For the Imaginations and phantasyes
which in Sleep be offered, and seen apparatly in Dreams by night when a man
is at rest to occur busy his mind, are caused and stirred by vapours fumes
proceeding out of the humours agitation of the Spyrite Animal: in some of
which Dreams and Imaginations, the mind renews the memory and thinks
upon some busynesse and actions that fall for the day, some plainly signify
the abundance of Humours, or else some earnest greedy desire to compass
somewhat, which we would very fain bring to pass.

Hereupon they that are thyrstie, glut themselves and swill up drink
abundantly, they that be hungry devour meat greedily and insaciablye. Thus
likewise, they whose Genitoryes and privy parts be swelled with stoare of
excrementall Seed and spermatike Humour, or in the day time did earnestly
fix their eyes and mind upon any beautiful and fair yonge Woman,
Pollution effluxion of Seed, howe it happens.
do in their Sleep think themselves to enjoy their desired purpose, and
through imaginative dealing with her, defile themselves with nightlye
pollutions. For the Soul (when the body is in sound Sleep, and al the
outward senses at rest) wythdrawinge it self into the innermoste parts of
the body, perceives, understands, beholds those actions which y^ body is to
do by day, and loke what things the body desires and longs after, the same
doth the Soul enjoy as present by Imagination. Hereupon, I think were
these Proverbs first devised: Canis pane somnians.
The Dog dreams of bread, of rauging in the Fields, of hunting. For what
things soever, a man earnestly and exceedingly desires, or hath his mind
still running on, ye same (being a Sleep) he thinks and dreams upon in
the night.

Whereunto it is like enough that Essay the Prophet alluded, where he shows
that the counsayles and deuyses of the wicked shall come to nought, and
vanish away like smoke as Dreams seen by night: Cap. 29.
Even as (saith he) a hungry man Dreams that he is eating, and when he
avvaketh is yet hungry and empty: And as a thristy man Dreams that he is
drinking, and when he avvaketh, is yet faint and thirsty: Even so fares
it with them that gape and seek after innocent Blood to glut their
cruelty therewith, A place of Essay expo^ded.
for they shall miss their purpose like them that Dream, and not obtain the
things which they earnestly desire or think themselves sure to compass
bring about.

Now, Tokens of a cold and moist complexion.
to satisfy them that are desirous to know the inward notes and tokens of a
Cold and moyste Complexion, and Phlegmaticke persons: I will here by the way
set down the same, declare of what Nature, condition, manners, conversation and
order of life they be: howe beit, there is no cause, why any man should hope
to find in them of this constitution and plight, any stoare of excellent,
singular, rare gifts, sith in them appears small quickness of wit, small
worthiness or excellency of mind, small sharpness of judgment learning, small
knowledge or skill in achieving and compassing matters: for that, the same
with prudence and wisdom cannot conveniently be brought about. For those that
are numbered and referred into the order of this Complexion, are persons of no
very sharpe and exact judgment or (as the Proverb by interpretatio soudeth)
Emuctae naris, Reason yielded howe these Proverbs, Emucte naris, Obesae naris
first began.
fine witted: as (cotrariwyse) they whose noses be stuffed with Phlegm sneuil,
are likewyse by ye Proverb termed Obesae naris, gross witted, applying by
Translation, the fault from the body to the mind. For as both their tallage,
taste, smelling, and other objects of their Senses, be blunt gross: so are
they likewyse in mind wit dol^ish and dull, slothful and lumpish: finally
neither by nature neither by use, forecasteful, sharp witted, nor crafty: by
reason their natural heate is languishing and feeble, and drowned in moist
quality and cold Humour: therefore also their memory is very fayleable,
oblyuious, and nothing at all (in a manner) retentive: Their speech (as
likewyse their pulses manner of gate) slow and soft.

But this in them specially deserves commedation, that they be gentle and
quiet of nature, not greatly addicted to venerous dalliance, Praise of a
Phlegmatike person.
not fumishe, testy or soon angered, being such as (although they be thereto
provoked) will not lightly chafe and fret: to be short, not geeuen to fraud and
subtilty, cogging and foysting, craft and cousinage, wrangling and quarelling,
as the Choleric are. And because commonly they be assailed with many and
sundry diseases, for that they be geeuen to sit still, loving their ease and
ydlenes, first they are to be enjoined and prescribed a Diet that is hot,
Phlegmatik persos must use exercise
whereof in the Discourse of the Cold Complexion and also of the Moyste, hath
been spoken abundantly: and next, they are to be persuaded pricked forward to
use themselves to exercise. Lib. 1.
For sluggishness and sloth (as witnesses Celsus) dulls the body, but labour
and exercise makes it firm and lusty: the one brings Oldage before the
time, the other makes Adolescency and youth to last long. And therefore
stronger motions and exercises are for these persons more requisite, least
(otherwise) the humour toomuch increase, and heat quail be enfeebled.

Let them therefore use in ye mornyngs to walk abroad, and namely up hills
and s^epe places, when they be yet fasting their stomachs empty: yea it shall
not be amysse to use the same after meat, but these stirrings and bodily
agitations must be done with a very soft pace: and those ye be about mydday,
swyfter and faster, (which precept is expediet for them that be hoate and moist
to observe) but yet (as Galene saith) not so fast and vehement as they use,
Tuend. Val. lib. 5.
when by occasion of some earnest busynesse they be driven to make speed and
hast. It shall be good also for them, to continue long fasting, and to use
sparing suppers. For as all they yt be in perfect health, may and ought at
Supper to feed somewhat largely and (except custom be to the contrary) be
allowed to eat more fully and liberally: so again, to them that be of this
Complexion, The Phlegmatik must use light suppers.
a spareful and light supper is most fit and agreeable: because ye brain shall
thereby be the less encumbered disquieted with fumes and exhalacios, in the
night ascending and proceeding out of the Stomach. For these be they, that
engender distillations and Catarrhes, out of whom spryngeth swarms of many
diseases. And that the same may the better be avoided and declined, I will
briefly set down the differeces of this Phlegmatique Humour, what effect is
thereby wrought, and what diseases ensue and grow thereupon.

OF Phlegm there be four sorts of differeces or kinds: Four kinds and
effects of Phlegm
Sweet, or (if it be crude) vnsauoury, making me drowsy and heavy, desiring to
Sleep more then nature requires: by reason that the Brain which is a
principal member, and the oryginal of all Senses, is moystned and made cold.

Sower, makes hungry: For the mouth of the Ventricle or Stomach, Gal. de.
Plenit.
endued with this Humour, is stirred up to an appetite and desire of meat:
Saltish, makes thyrstye and nips the Stomach. Glassy, in toughnes and
coldness passing all the others, brings loathsomnes and abhorring of meat.

The myeldest and least hurtful of all these, Sweet Phlegm.
is the Sweet: which (after that concoction is once dispatched) is bettered
and turned into the nature of Blood: which yet (notwithstanding) wants not
his poison and malignant nature, except all the inconvenience thereof be
thoroughly by heate excocted. For it makes loose, soft, and rising tumours or
blysters, white whythoute any redness, and other whealie breaking out of
Phlegm beside, in the utter part of the skin, as mattrye, skabbes, wheales,
pushes, and pymples in Women and yonge folks, which sometime break out and
are full of matter and fylthy corruption: but it causes not great ytch nor
heat, as the skabbednes which comes of salt Phlegm or abundance of Choler
doth, which is endued with a sharpe biting brynyshe saltnes.

Sower Phlegm (in quality and effect resembling like unto Melancholyke juice
in cotinuace of time gathered into ye stomach) Sower Phlegm.
is less cold then the Glassye, and more cold then the Sweet Phlegm. This
doth prick and byte the Stomach, with mordication annoys it: for being
endued with a sense most exquisite, it is offended with that Humour which is of
sharpest quality: For the savour and relyce thereof is so tart, eigre and
bitter, that if it chance to be perbraked and caste up by vomit (as in Winter
and Autumn seasons happens) it astonneth and brings out of taste, ye
tongue, the roof of the mouth, ye Chawes, and sets the teeth on edge, no
less then Veriuyce, or the juice of vnrype and sharpe grapes, called of the
fyner sort of Physitios Omphacion, and of the common sort Agresta: in so much
that the relyce and tallage thereof will remain and be hardly qualefyed,
allayed or taken away. This kind of Phlegm settled in the mouth of the
Stomach or ventricle, and impertinge unto it, some portion of his sowrnes and
sharpness, engenders an insatiable lusting to meat and (as we say) a
doggish appetite, incident commonly to women with chyeld, Doggishe appetite.
about iii. months after their conception, specially if they be with child
with a girl: who being in heat feeble, and of strength faint and quaisie, it
chances that their natures be not well able to cococte those Phlegmaticke
humours: and thereupon it is, that they have such puelinge and squemishe
stomachs, and be so much troubled with rambling and belching. For their chief
desire and special longing, being for sharpe and sower things: they greatly
thereby annoy their ventricle, gather together many ill humours.

Not women only, but men also be subject hereunto: for whom the best way is,
to use to eat meates of heating nature, and to drink wine of the purest and
best sort. For if this Humour should chance to putrefy within the body, it
then engenders the Ague Epiala (so called, Epiala.
because they that have the same, be in body inwardly of great heate and
outwardly stiff with extreme Cold:) for this Humour being kindled and
set on heate, may well be likened to green flame or as wet wood, which
sends out nothig but stoare of thick moist smoke, by reason yt moystnes
lets hinders the heat, yt it cannot break out: they that have this
impediment for the most part have not only alteration and change in their
Complexion and colour, but annoyance and inconueniece also in their minds.

Salt Phlegm (which hath some affynitie with Choler) is engendered of the
commixtion of Choler, Salt Phlegm.
or of a saltishe or Whayie humiditye: or else of Phlegm putrefyed: the
sharpness whereof being once kindled, brings not styffenes and cold, but
a shyueringe and shaking to the whole body. And among all ye kinds of Phlegm
none is worse nor more hurtful then is this. Harms of salt Phlegm
For in what part of the body soever it settles, it breeds and engenders
great dolours and painful gryeues, and through the biting force that is in it,
affects the members of the body with ulcerous lassitudes, it defourmeth and
vglyfyeth the skin with dry, skuruye, skalie, mangy, and fylthye eruptions
or breaking out, as Tettars, Ringwormes, Leprosy, skurfe, ytche, skabbednes
c. But if it be myxed with Melancholy other naughty Humours, it brings the
skuruie Elephantiasis (which is the Hebrevves Lepry) ye ulcerous Herpes, running
Cankers, Frech Pockes many diseases more, which pitifully pearce eat the
flesh, even unto the hard boane.

Glassy Phlegm (so called, Glassy or clammie Phlegm.
for that it resembbleth and is like to molte Glass) is of al others the
coldest, wherefore it is very hardly to be concocted or brought into any
holesom, familiar and domestic humour. It occupies and besieges for the
most part, the Head, stomach, Entrails, payning them with very grievous and
troublesome discrasyes. For it pricks, wounds, tears a pieces torments:
What parts of the body be subject to Phlegm
And this Phlegm being glewyshe and clammye like Byrdlyme, or such as the
stuff is, whereof drinking Glasses be made, is so tough and lymie, that
skantly will it be parted asuder: yea it cleaves so fast to those narow
conceptacles where it rests, that nature stryuing and bickering with such a
strange and uncouth Humour, is driven to suffer grievous payne and torment,
before she can be able clean to banish away and rid herself from it. Great
is the inconueniece, and sundry and intolerable be the diseases grieves
caused thereby: as namely ye Cholicke, wrynging of the Guts, payne gryeping of
the Bowels: difficulty and excoriation in avoiding natural ordure: great
lust desire often to go to the stool, without being able to evacuate or
avoid any thing at al, unless peradventure a small quatity of glassy Phlegm,
and fylthy baggage, and that not without great labour and enforcement of
nature.

For remedy and ease of which affects and all other grieves and gryepinge of
like sort, my custom and use is to amend and recure with nothing better then
outwardly with fomentes, and inwardly by inections and Clysters, Use of
Clysters.
which skowreth and clean washes away al Phlegm before engrossed, clamped
and gathered together. Herewyth are all those distemperaunces and annoyaunces
of health in the lowest parts, without danger of any Agew, qualified and
helped: unless the payne be too outrageous and vehement: for that, therein is
neither putrefaction nor inflamatio, and also for the ignobility of the member.
But if this kind of Phlegm should assault any chief and principal member,
and beside putrefaction, grow into inflammation, it brings the Agues called
Lipyrias: and in this case the Patient feels in the innermost parts of his
Bowels, Cold, Heate dissolveth moisture, even as the Sun doth ise.
in his utter parts, Heate. For even as ye heat of the Sun melts dissolveth
ise, snow and hayle, turns the same into fluible liquid water: so likewise
doth the fits of an Agew cut asunder and liqueste gross clottered Phlegm:
thus it is seen, yt in one and ye same body there is both heat cold felt
perceived, at one the self same time: like as appears in the yt sit by a
fire, hauig wet moist cloths upon their backs, or in them that handle snow or
ice with their hands, whose members at one self same time and instant, feel
both heat and cold.

But for that, All men in danger to phlegm.
the most part of me be in Winter, specially troubled with one kind or other
of Phlegm, it stands them upon diligently and by all means they can, to
accustom themselves to hoate meates, and of the same to make exact perfect
digestion. For through cruditye and lack of perfect concoction in the
Stomach, is engendered great abundance of naughty baggage and hurtufll Phlegm,
Crudlty engenders Phlegm.
endaungeringe and evidently damnifying (as much as any thing in the world else)
health and welfare. Therefore all such things as be very Cold and Moyste, must
in any wise be eschued, as Sothernely wyndes, plain and smooth fyshes,
Wyeldings, Crabs: and of herbs, Lactuce, Purselaine, Cucumbers, Melons,
Gourds, Mushromes: or if any of these come in place to be eaten, let them be
used with hoate sauces and condiments, and convenient exercise, and such also
as be of nature able to cut and attenuate gross and clammie Humours, to
dispel wyndinesse, and suffer little or no Phlegmaticke excrementall Humour at
all to rest within the body: for by these not only the body, but the mind also
is carried away, and by affections shrewdlye mysseledde.

Preseruatiues and helps for the Memory: with means and ways to remove and
take away all inconveniences, harms and hindraunces thereof. The iiij.
Chapter.
FOrasmuch as both ye distemperature that is Cold Moist, and that also which is
Cold and Dry, growing into excess and drawing into extremity, oppresses
and deadly wounds the Memory: I have thought good into this work to inserte
and enterlace some such notes as may serve to the furtherance thereof and
preseruatio of it from all such myssehappes, harms and discomodities as in any
wise threaten thereunto annoyance. And howe the same is to be done and brought
to pass, I purpose compendiouslye by the way to declare: since not to
Students only, but to al sorts of men in general, it shall be a thing right
expedient and profitable. For al the actions and dealings either public or
private, which a man takes in hand, and enterpryseth: all his affairs,
cogitations, deuyses, meditations, cares, purposes and studies, all labour and
industry ye is taken for doing and speaking, wherein is any exercise at all of
ye mind, All things done by memory.
cannot be brought about and accomplished without the help of Memory. For in
this Treasure, the speciallest chiefest part of reason, understanding and
judgment rests: and out of it, as out of a most rich and plentiful
Storehouse is fetched and taken a coplete furniture of most hid and far
fetched matters. Which power and virtue of Memory, if it further help us not,
as a faithful maintener and keeper of the things which we devise, imagine and
learn: all (be it never so precious excellent) goes to wrack and is raked up
in oblivion.

The proper and peculiar place, assigned allotted for Memory, is the Brain,
the mansion dwelling house of wit and all the Senses: which being affected or
by any disteperature discrased, Memory rests in the Brain.
all the functions and offices of nature are semblably passioned: insomuch that
wit, reason, understanding and judgment being once empayred, and diminished:
there steps in place, Sottage, forgetfulness, amazedness, dotage, folishnes,
lack of right wits, doltishnes idiocie. Which affects imperfections may happen
to me many ways, as by some blow or wound in the head, by some rupture or
cracking of the Skull, by some fall or cotuston, by pestilent diseases
maladies, which (of the contagion of Air on each side enclosinge us) inspyreth
infection into our bodies: and beside external accidents, which sometime
cannot well be avoided, there be some harms which through our own wilfulnes
and disorder, we heap upon our selves, incurring thereby much inconvenience:
and these be, Surphettes, Drunkenness, Gluttony, unseasonable watching, Things
hurtful to the Memory.
meates cold and Phelgmaticke, immoderate use of Venery, and carnal company
with Women, thereby the quickness of wit is blunted and waxes dull, Carnal
knowledge of women is a weakening to the body
Reason, Understanding and Judgment dymmed, and the strength of nature in
many, so weakened and enfeebled, that in three days space or more after, vneth
is it able to recover ye vigour lusty plight wherein it was before.

And not this discommodity alone, but certain other sickly and foul
affections insurge thereupon, no less pernicious to the mind, then dangerous
to the body, utterly ouerthrowinge, oppressing and ruinating the power
Memoratyue. For even as toomuch drynes of the brain (gotten through excessive
surphet, lack of expediente food, A dry brain hath little remembrauce
and Venery) is very hurtful to Memory, because that quality is nothing apt
to take any impressions, or forms of things (for drynes hardness takes no
printes nor Images) so also toomuch moisture (proceeding of ydlenes, sloth,
immoderat sleep moist meats) quite destroy drown Memory Moisture (in deed)
is more A moyste brain vnhable to remember.
capable, will sooner take ye print forms of things, but by reason of softness,
the same tarries not, but passes away again: even as stapes or Seals, being
affixed and imprinted into substance or matter that is toomoyst, liquid and
fluible, makes therein no stamp, form or print, but such, as presently
fleets and immediately vanishes away again.

Forasmuch therefore as the virtue and power Memoratiue, consists in a sure,
faithful, and steadfast keeping and conservation of Images, it follows, that
the same in Children and in as many others as have moist Brains, is weak
nothing retentive. Old folk, yonge Children have ill memories, but the reason
of the one is contrary to the other.
Old folks also have the same imbecility and forgetfulness, and the reason is,
because their brains be so cold and dry, that nothing is able to enter or
fyrmelye to be imprinted therein: and for these causes, both sorts of them be
oblivious and nothing Memoratyue. For of this (as also of all the inward
senses) the power and faculty is according to the temperature of the Brain.
For out of the gross substance of that part, Temperature of the brain, the
maintenace of Memory.
or when the Spyrits and Humours therein be gross, thick and with many
vapours pestered, proceeds Oblivion, slowness to understand, hardness to
conceive. Again, of a moist Brain, that is too liquid, comes forth a dull
or blunt sense, and a Memory nothing retentyue but son forgetting. And a dry
Constitutio of the Brain makes a very weak and ill memory: by reason, that
it will not easily admit any impression (even like unto a piece of Lead, Iron
or Steel, which will not easily suffer the point of any engrauinge Tool to
enter and pearce into it.

A good steadfast and fryme Memory therefore is to be referred unto the
disposition and temperature of the Brain: this power of the mind, is ascribed
to the benefit of Nature: but yet so, that it may be help and maintained in
his perfect state by Art, Memory, the gift of Nature, and is by Art helped
and made better.
and if perhaps it decay or take harm, yet through care industry, it may
again be restored. And therefore special care must be employed, and great
diligence taken, that the body may in perfect health and sound constitution be
preserved: that moderatio both in life and diet be used: always within the
compass of temperauce and frugality: that y^ meat be exactly concocted: that
the mind be in peaceable tranquillity, and free from troublesome affections:
that no mishap betide to disturb and dim the same: for lustynesse of
body mind, holesomnes of Air, temperature of the Brain, perfect Constitution
of all ye Seses, the Spyrits, both Animal Vital (which proceed of y^ Humours)
being clear and sincere, be great helpers most available preseruatyues for
the maintenance of Memory.

For by these it happens that all the faculties of the Soul (among which
Memory is chief) be fresh and perfect, that nothing of al that which we either
by view of eye, cogitation, wit, learning or meditation conceive, slips
out of our remembrance. Yea, many things that were thought to be clean
forgot, and cancelled with oblivion, be revived as fresh in Memory seem to
the eye as plainly, as things but newly done: in so much, that although
sometimes we forget what we did but yesterday, yet perfectly can we
remember things done many years ago, when we were Children. The reason
whereof I take to be this, The reason why children ca remember things long before
done.
for that, tether age and Childhode, gredily, attentyuely with great admiration
fyxeth things in mind, and is apt, ready, willing and full of courage to
coceyue what is put unto them. For whyse the mind is yet free from carking
cares of the world, and not overcharged or busied with weighty matters and
dealings, it retains suerer and kepeth faster in Memory those things which
are instilled into it in childish years, their minds being yet free from al
other cubersome disquietations.

Now, although Memory and Remembrauce of things, be conceived in the fore-part
of ye head, where the common wits or Senses specially rests, yet those
things y^ are by the benefyte thereof attained, be kept and fostered in the
hinder part. And therefore they do very well, which keep their Nucha and nape of
their necks warm, The Nucha and nape of the neck must be kept warm.
and fense themselves safe from the danger of cold, injury of wyndes: For
these parts being distempered or affected, bring a man in danger of the
falling Sickness, the Drowsye evil, Astonment, Palsy, Cramp, and Oblyuion.

Wherefore it shall be right good and expedient to remove and take away all such
hindrance discommodities as prejudice and hurt Memory. And because many and
sundry things settle in mans mind and Memory, A ma would be glad to forget
some things.
even against his will: such things (I mean) as he would not gladly remember,
but rather would be willing to forget and commit to oblyuion, as some lewd and
loose pranks, dishonestly aforetyme perpetrated, are: and again, many good
and wholesome things, which are expedient and needful to be remembered, slyppe
out of mind and be forgotten: a ma is in these points to take diligent heed
and regard that he do not (as ye Common sort use) without any choice and
difference either neglect, or retchlessely forslowe the due orders of both
these things, indifferently. Those things therefore which a man would gladly
remember, it shall be good for him to think upon, and many times with
himself in mind to meditate and revolve: and such as he would fain shake of
forget, as hurtful and pernicious to his mind, let him with reason and
judgment stoutly resist and strive against. For as by the corruption of our
nature (which is fallen away, Mans corrupt nature more, prone to ill the to
good.
from his first integritye) we be a great deal readyer and apt to that which
is nought, then to that which is good: and far more proclyue to conceive and
learn the same, then things of better importance and purpose: so also those
that be ill, stick faster in memory, not easily to be shaken of or abolyshed,
without great ado and difficulty. Which thing caused Themistocles to demand
of one which professed to teach him the Art of Memory: Themistocles wished to
learn the art of forget fulness.
Whether there were any Sciece yt could rather teach him the Art of Oblivion:
for (said he) I can well enough remember what I lust, but I cannot so easily
forget such thigs as are settled in my mind unwillingly and otherwise then I
would desire.

For some things we would be gladder to forget then to remember, for so much
as many men be of such nature that they cannot abide to have old soars
rypped up, Old grudges are to be forgot.
and stale grudges (log agone stille and pacified) by new rehearsalls reuyued
and brought fresh again into question. To which end appertains this
Proverb. A mischief well quieted and brought a sleep, would not be stirred
anevv, nor rubbed up a fresh.

Now, whereas there be many helps and sundry furtheraunces devised by
Rhetoricians to preserve corroborate Memory: I have thought it good here not to
stand tediouslye in particular recytall thereof: and the rather because many
of them be very curious, and without marvelous precyse carefulnes scarcely
able to be observed: for the sharpness of wit and understanding with such a
rabble of precepts, is overcloyed, and the native virtue of Memory overwhelmed.
But among al other helps and preseruatyues of Memory, this namelye is to be
considered, that ye body may in perfect health be maintained, Health the
strength of the Memory.
without being endangered to Sicknesses, specially such as may disturb and
damnify the head.

Sleep must be moderatelye used, not lying upon the back, but on the one
side: the mind quiet and calm, free from all busynes and troublesome
garboils. Crudity and surphet the spoilers of Memory.


Now, for so much as this faculty of the Soul is brittle, tender delicate, there
is nothing that works more harm thereunto, then Cruditie, Riot,
Intemperance, Surphet and dronkennes.

In the mean season, for the preseruinge and cheerishinge of the Memory, all
helps must be used all furtheraunces, which any way may coduce to ye
mainteynace increase of the same must be put in ur practise: among which, is:
continual use and exercise of writing and speaking: adhibiting therein order,
reason measure, not patteringe the same over rashly, confuselye or without
aduysement. There is nothing in the world more refreshed, maintained and
strengthened, through care, study, industry, diligence, regard and heed,
then Memory: Again, nothing in the world through negligence, sloth, securitye
and carefulnes, so soon marred and defaced.

And even as it is a mere vanity and foolish braggrie (as one saith) in this
Miraculous gift of Memory, Ad Here Lib. 3. tit. 7.
to boast of Art rather then of Nature: so again, I deem him a right wise
man, that bestows care diligence to make the gifts of Nature and qualities of
his mind, flouryshing, pregnant and fruictful: even as the good and thryftie
Husbandman by manuraunce doth unto his ground, to make it rank and fertile.

And now, Memory greatly helped and preserved by light Suppers.
that I may here set down precepts of Physic, to keep this field from
growing? barreyne, first of all I am to advise such as be desirous to preserve
and keep this goodly and necessary Virtue perfect and steadfast, to use light
Suppers, or if he hap to make full and larger suppers, to walk after it: to
be meery and pleasantly conceited: to lay aside (for the time) earnest cares:
and not to perplex his brain with troublesome thoughts, nor his mind with
scrupulosities. And after he hath in this sort after Supper, spent an hour and
a half, let him go to bed and take his natural rest, lying upon the right
side: and arising early in the morning, let him exonerate nature by all those
official members that serve for evacuation and auoydinge of bodily
excrementes: First, let him rub his tongue, and comb his head gently with an
Yuorye Comb, let him use to have his head polled, specially if the season of
the year, the Country and Custom require or permit it: for to use it in
Winter, or where the weather is extreme Cold, it is no less hurtful and
unwholesome, then foolish and ridiculous. For they bereeue, take away and
disapoynte themselves of those helps defences of Nature, which propulse cold
and other outward injuries, in steed thereof keep their heads warm with other
devised covertures.

But when the weather is myelde and calm, and the Country temperate, I
mislike not (as touching healthynesse of body) shauinge of the crown of the
head. For thereby gross vapours which hurt the Memory, have more scope and
liberty to evaporate and fume out. And therefore some in my opinion, take a
wholesome way for healthynesse (so they do it without any manner of superstition
otherwise) which go pollshorne and have their heads shaven to the hard scalp.
In some, shauinge of the head is a helpinge to Memory, in other some a
hindrance.
For by this means all they that are encombred with Rhewmes, Catarrhes, and
headache, find much ease, and so do all they that have their eyesighte (through
abundance of Humours) dymme, and their hearing thick, and their smelling
stopped: insomuch that for the redress of certain diseases of the head,
Shauinge of the Beard helps Memory.
loss of right wits, feeblenes of brain, dottrye, frenzy, Bedlam madness,
Melancholic affections, fury and frantic fits, Physicians deem it the
best way to have the hair clean shaven of. Which in my judgement is not to
be taken as a vain or absurd fable, for that both experience and reason
persuades and enforces some credit thereto: for so much as every man after his
beard hath been trimmed or clean shaven of, feels himself a great deal
meryer, and less wayward and overthwart then he was before.

Furthermore my ordenarye custom is to advise them that have defectyue and
dymme eyes, and that be thick of hearing, or subject to the poze, to have
their heads rubbed, and their Beards shaven or some such order and fashion,
as may most commodiouslye serve for those parts: And accordingly as every
Country hath his peculier guise, to use the Barbers help in trymmynge and
handling ye same: for after ye same, every man looks both smugger and fairer,
and is also of mind more myeld and tractable, so that his outward courage
seems to rejoice to be pleasaut and lusty: his Memory made more perfect and
clear: his Spirits (which are they ye move us to do this and that) reuyued and
stirred up: and all the Senses (a little before dulled and brought as it were a
sleep) show forth themselves in their most bravery and perfection.

And if he use now the to rynse and wash his mouth, Jaws and palate: to rub
his teeth, to wipe and cleanse his Nose, to pick his ears mundify them from
al baggage fylthynesse, still to dilate to open his breast with Coughinge,
hawking, neesing and popping or smacking with the mouth, to exonerate his
lower parts, as the Ventricle, Mylte, Liver, Bowels, Bealie and Bladder of
their ordinary Excrements: not only the Memory, but also all the Organes of
the mind beside, and every several faculty of the Soul shall be well enhabled
thoroughly and without stop or let, to discharge and do their proper
functions and offices.

And because for the most part, the Cold and Moist quality is most hurtful
to Memory and oppresses it, therefore the same by his contraries is to be
subdued maystered: by such (I mean) as have virtue, power, and efficacy, to
wast and dispatch superfluous Humours, and to strengthen and comfort the
Brain: of which sort are these: Thigs good for the Memory.
Nuttmigges, specially those that are not clean dry, rotten, and without
juice, Rosemarye flowers, and the stemmes thereof all confectios made with the
same: sweet Maioram, Balm, Stychas of both sorts, Pionie roots, and the
yonge bearies thereof, mystleden, Hyssope, and Sauoury, Herbs that sharpen the
wit.
which being boiled with meates, yields forth a pleasant smell and savour,
for it flourishes green in Winter withers not: in the number of these, add
Betonie, Cowslips, Maron, Restoratives and remedies for the Memory being
empayred or decayed through coldness moisture.
or common Organie or weld Maioram, Basil, roots of flower Delyce of both
sorts, Enula Capana, Radish which is a root usually echwhere eaten at meals
in Summer to provoke an appetite: and among forreyne and outladish Spices,
Zedoaria, Cloves, Macis, which is the rynde that covers ye Nutmigge, Gynger,
specially green condite in Honey, right Glade, Cassia, Cynamome, Cubebes,
Myrobalanes condite or preserved in honey.

The more part of all these may either be reduced into Syrupes, or stamped
into powder or Condiments: or else the decoction or infusion of them may be
taken, specially of such as dwell in Cold and Moyste places, and be of nature
very Phlegmaticke. To restore a Memory seemig past all recovery.
For they that be stricken in years and their Humours dried up and exhausted,
had need to have as well their bodies as the Instruments of their Senses
moystened, with nourishinge alimentes of sweet and pleasant quality to be
humected, as the Ryndes of Citron, that is, of Pomegranades condite, Lyquirice,
water Lilly commonly named Nenuphar, Buglosse, Borage, Reysons (the stones
being taken out) Coraunts and all such as do moderately calefie and humecte. Of
which sort are these, Honey, Sugar, Wine that is swetish, Butter and new laid
Eggs, Pyneapplekernelles, sweet Almonds that be not fusty, vinued nor old,
Onyons ill both for the eyes Memory.
Nuts called Pistacia, Chestnutts meanelye parched, and fylberds: for Walnutts
be hurtful to the Memory, and so are Onyons, because they annoy the eyes with a
dazzling dymnes, through a hoate vapour, Lactuce dims the sight. Rapes very
beneficial restorative* for the eyes.
even as Lactuce doth with cold, through a somniferous virtue and power in it.

But Rapes and Turneppes either sod or boiled, do wonderfully clarefye the
eyes, and are very beneficial for the sight, and they that be disposed to try,
shall find it by experience very true: by reason of their great stoare of hot
moist flatuousnes, whereby they also increase generatiue Seed, and stir up
Venus, specially being codite with Gynger.

As touching what kinds of small Brains be best for this purpose, What sorts of
Brains be best for Memory.
this is first to be vnderstaded, that there cannot be any thing of more virtue
and strength to comfort Memory and keep it in a right sound perfection, then
ye Brains of Partridges, next of Sparrows, and all such Byrds as be naturally
much stirring, exercise themselves still in flickering and flying, whereof in an
other place we shall speak more at large.

Washing of ye head, although many greatly mislike not, Washing of the head.
yet do I counsel none to use it. For it weakens the skull and Brain pan,
and makes it at every small cold and blast of wynd, subject to distillations
Catarrhes. But to wash ye feet in a decoction of Bay leaves, Rosemary Fenel,
I greatly disalow not: for it turns away from the head vapours fumes dimming
and overcasting the mind.

Now the better to repress fumes and propulfe vapours fro the Brain, it shall be
excellent good after Supper, to chaw with the teeth (ye mouth being shut) a few
grains of Coriander first stieped in veneiger, Coriander.
wherein Maiora hath bin decocted, the thinnly crusted or covered over with Sugar.
It is scarce credible what a special commodity this brigeth to ye memory. No
less virtuous sovereign is the cofection of Quinces called Diacidonion,
Conserve of Quinces.
if a pretty quantity thereof be likewise take after meat. For it disperses
fumes, suffers not vapours to strike upward, ye fame effect also have certain
grains of Mastix swalowed.

Also it is right excellent cofortable now then to smell to such things as
yield a sweet odoriferous savour, Sweet smells cofortable to the spirits.
namely such as be of nature pearsing calefactiue, as Lignu Aloes,
Clofegelofres Rosemary flowers, Basil, Nigella, Ambregryce, Syuet, red Roses,
Honey suckle flowers, Frech spyknard, and many other y^ yield forth a strong
smell, but the seem right pleasant, comfortable, delightful. All these refresh
the Spirits, with their soot savours wonderfully comfort the Brain.

If a man or woman seem (to outward judgment) in a manner past recovery, The
confectio of Anacardus good for the Memory.
and be brought to extreme oblivion, as they be yt have y^ disease called
Lethargus or the drowsye evil: it shall be right good for them to annoynt ye
outsyde of their Nucha and nape of their necks with the Oil of Castor, To
restore speech.
Nigella, Euphorbe, Costus, Rocket, and inwardly to take a little of the
confection of Anacardus, or else therewyth to rub the tongue. For is
dissolveth Phlegm that is extremelye cold, moist, and viscous: Insomuch that
it restores speech to them that be stricken with ye Apoplexy, and recureth the
staggering and staying of the tongue, bringing it again to his right use:
Which thing may also be done and brought to pass with Oximel Scillit. and
Aqua vite, wherein a few grains of Rocket have been stieped.

Unto these helps, To restore the right use of the tongue to them that have
the Apoplexy.
in dangerous and desperate discrasies (when nothing else will help) we flee
for refuge and succour: but in distemperauces and grieves that be myelder, and
not of such extremity, others now rehearsed may serve, as Syrupe de Stichade.
Dia Anthos dulcis, Aur^a Alexandrina, The virtue of Lignum Aloes.
Dia castorium, Pliris cum Musco, Triacle and Mythridatum.

By experience and daily proof it is found true, that Agalochus (commonly
called Lignum Aloes) being either used in perfume, or smelled unto with the
Nose, hath a marvelous virtue to corroborate the Brain refresh the Senses:
insomuch that being stamped, A Cock to crow continnally without ceasing.
puluerized, and mingled with some Cloves and the boane of a Ravens heart, and
then all mixed with Oil of Nigella, hath such sovereign virtue in
strengthening comfortinge y^ Brain, that if the head of a Cock be therewith
anointed, he will crow continually without any ceasing.

Of the state and disposition of a hoate and dry body: with a Discourse of the
nature, condition, manners, and inclination of a Choleric person. The v.
Chapter.
For so much as among the outward things of Nature, All things subject to
change.
there is nothing of any lunge continuance and stability, neither that long
keeps it self at any certain state and vigour, but all subject to decay,
alteration, and case worse and worse: truly the state of mankind doth
specially and more then any other, suffer sundry alterations, and is subject
to great change and mutability. Thus, is a Hoate and Moist Complexion, in
process and tract of time, brought into a state Hot and Dry, For, Heate by
little and little both slyly and closely wast and consume natural Humour, and
brings all the body into dryness: which quality for prolongation and
lengtheninge of life, is the greatest ennemy that can be. For as the flame in
a Torch or Taper feeds upon the combustible matter thereof, and is therewith
nourished, which being all wasted and consumed, the same flame also quenches
and no longer burns: so likewyse native heate by little and little wears
away, and diminishes the juice moisture, wherewith it is nourished, and
finally brings the cause of destruction both to it self, and to the whole
body beside.

Now, that constitution of body, which consists of a hoate and dry quality
and thereof hath his name, A Choleric man.
having warm Humour through these qualities increased, makes and
constitutes a Choleric man, by reason of the great stoare of Choler which
is in him: Choler natural and beside nature.
of which Humour there be two sorts and differences: the one natural, the
other beside nature. Natural Choler is the excrement of blood concoct, bitter
in savour, and in colour and effect fyerie. When the heate of the Liver is
moderate, then is it yellow and shyninge: but when this viscositye is overmuch
kindled, then doth Choler also boyle with heate, and is of colour darcke,
Yelowish, like unto Pruse Bier, called in Dutche Iopen Bier, or like unto Oil
or melted Butter, when it is burned, and with much frying becomes blackishe
of colour: whereby it comes to pass that the colour before Yelowe, changes
and is turned into a sad black: which sometime apparauntly utters and
shows it self in the utter part of the skin, whenever this Choleric
Humour diffuses and disperses it self into the same skin.

Choler hath in the body two offices: for part of it being mixed with the
blood, The office of Choler.
passes into the Veins, to make the same more conveniently to penetrate into
every one of the narow passages, to be conveyed to such members as require
have need of the nourishment of Choler. The other part, is sent to the
bladder of the Gall, annexed and tied to the nether end of the Liver, wherein
the wonderful providence of Gods Almighty handyworke well appears, in y^, he
hath appointed the same Entraile, whereunto he hath geeuen an admirable virtue
to attract and help digestion, to be also a receiver and Receptorye of
superfluous and unprofitable Humour: to thentent no harm or inconvenience
should thereby in any wise happen to the other members.

For Choler is of that nature y^ yields out a fiery force, whose motion (as it
were a fire brand) stirs up and inceseth our minds to hasty moods and
furious rages. Anger what it is.
And for this cause Anger is defined to be a heate and certain boiling of the
Blood about the Heart, wherewith the Brain also being excyted by Choler, is
set in a heate and testines, desirous of revenge, whenever any injury is
offered. And to the lower parts provoke and irrite the Guts and Bowels to
avoid superfluous excrementes: For which purpose, Natures providence hath
devised and framed sundry passages needful for y^ purging, conueighaunce and
evacuation of all such superfluous Humours: to wit, the Kidneyes and the
Vryne Pypes, the empty or fasting Gut called Intestinum Ieiunum (which
through ye sowrenes of Choler flowing into it, continually drives out the
Excrements, By what parts of the body Choler is purged.
) the Bladder, Ears, and Pores, appointed for the auoydaunce and expulsion of
sweat. And in the most part of these, if obstructions should happen, all the
whole fylthy mass of noisome Humour, is thereby kept within the body, and then
geeueth violent assault to some of the principal parts. So when the bag
or Bladder of the Gall or Receptacle of Choler, is not able to exonerate it
self of that baggage, dross and superfluity, which it drew from the Liver:
it emptyeth and casts it either into the Uentricle, or else into the
holownesse of the Liver. And thus it comes to pass, that Choler being
diffused and spread over all the body, imperteth both his quality and colour to
the Blood.

Hereof comes the Iaundice (named Morbus Regius, Iaundice.
for y^, it requires a most exquisite dict, and Princelike fare) which makes
all the body Yelowe as a Kites foot, and coloured like Saffron or as Silver,
that is stroked over with Gold.

And if the small and slender Guts be therewith tainted, it puts a man to
intolerable torment payne. Wringynge of the small Guts.
This passion is called Iliaca Passio, the wrynginge of the Guts, and also
Conuoluulum, for that, the Guts do seem to puckar and cruple together like
the string of an Harp, or any other Instrument.

This disease comes either of an inflammation, or of costyuenes, when the
ordure is dry hard parched, and no sufficient stoare of Choleric Humour to
expel scour away the Excrements. So if the upper part of the Gut be
affected, the meat is caste up: if the neither, ordure avoids at the mouth:
by reason that the Tuell or foundment is so closely shut, that not so much as a
poor fyest can pass or get out thence. Many affects beside, doth Choler
engender, as Tertian and burning Agues, when as it putrefyeth without the
Veins, which because they be largely and diligently set out in sundry Books
of Physic, by many sundry learned Physicians published, I think it best
here to surceasse from any further recital and declaration thereof.

But I purpose now briefly by the way to show the nature and conditions of a
Hot and dry Coplexion, then of a Choleric person, Notes whereby to know a
hoate and dry Coplexion.
finallye by what marks and tokens they are to be perceived, discerned, found
out and known. And first to speak of the outward signs: A body of this
Constitution is hot, slender, lean musculous, of decet bigness and mean
stature: and although some be of growth and talnes but small little: yet are they
lively, daper, quick, ^ymble, and as little Bees, ever stirrynge and whyskinge
about, And Within that little Corps of theirs, Virg. li. 4 Georg.

right noble Stomachs have.


Of colour they be brownish, aburne or somewhat ruddy, specially when their
angry mood is up, or their bodies chaufed and set in heate with exercise: some
be pale or yelowish. Their skin rough: their arteries and Veins big and
apparent, not lying hidden under the flesh: their Vryne red, saffron
coloured, or bright yelowe according to the proportion of Choler and heate:
Their Pulse quick and swyft, as also their gate and manner of going is. Their
tongue rolling at pleasure, ready and flowing in utterance: their hair
black: and in some, curled and naturally fryzeled: when as the heate and
dryness is very great and vehement: Neither will the same till after long
time wax hoary and gray, but yet by reason of dryness soon wax bald. Their
Nose crooked like a Hawks bill: and in many, especially Germaynes, Polonians,
Hungarians and Dutchmen, Yellow hair.
red beards, and bright yealowye hair, which comes of glittering clear
shynynge Choler, that is not adusted with fervent heate. Red beards.
In the Lowe Countries, those that be red hayred (are of the vulgar sort)
noted, as men subject to some naughty disposition and lewd conditions,
secretly harboroughing within their minds.

For as Themistocles his Tutor gave judgment of no mean thing, Nature of
Themistos cles.
like to prove come to pass in his said Scholer, but that he would be either
a singular staye and ornament to his Country, or else some notable plague and
detrimente to the same: so also the Belgiana, by a common and usual by word
among them, say, that at the hands of such persons, either things most
excellent, or else most villainous, are to be expected and hoped for.
Furthermore in their daily speech they use this as a common Proverb among
them, Rooden baert selden goedt oft van goeden aerdt, Which is as much to say,
y^ Red bearded men are seldom of any good disposition: for that, in the
whole course of their life, manners, conversation, dealings, byinge, selling,
bartering, they seek to vndermyne and ouereach others with sly shifts and
crafty bargains, evidently arguing, what cunning dealing lurks within them to
entrap and deceive other me.

Which disposition and inclination, as I can not deny but is found true in
very many of that Constitution, for want of virtuous bringing up, Red beard^
argues not always an ill disposed person.
and laudable institution: So again, do I know many, having such coloured
Beards, whose commendable qualities, and rare virtues have advanced them to
Honourable roumes and dignityes. For even in Princes Courts, in Asseblies of
Nobles, Peers, Magistrats, among honest substantial Trafiquers, and namely of
those that dwell Northernely, we see very many of tried Virtue, singular
wisdom, right worthily with integritye vprightnes admynistringe their
Public charges and functions wherein they be placed.

Now, whereas some haskerdly Peizaunts, rascal persons, having such coloured
beards, be prattlers and praters, in keeping counsel, as close as a Syeue,
setting all upon six and seven, without any regard or consideration of any
thing, Dingthryftes and Spendalles, the same do I impute to lewd education,
which draws the procliuity of their Nature to untoward and pieuish manners.
For hereof it comes, that such persons be found to be inconstant, Wily Foxes.
crafty, deceitful, subtle, wily, cogging, turning the cat in the pan,
full of leigier de mayne, so fickle of word and deed, that a man may not well
safely deal with them nor trust them, as persons in whom there is no more
hold then is of a wet Eel by y^ ^ayle, and in any bargain or dealing be it
never so intricate and cumbersome, can find means to slyp the collar and
wyende themselves out of danger. Whereunto if other imperfections defects of
the body be added, they argue yet a worse Nature more geeuen to mischief:
whereupon the Poet Martial very aptly saith: Black hayrde, short footed,
purblynde eke
and Beard all over red: Lib. 6.

Take such a one in doing good,
and strike me of his heed.


Which disposition is rooted in them, partly through the influence of the
Planetes, viz. of the Sun and Mercury, partly (which I rather take to be the
chief and special cause) through thynnes of Choleric Humour and of
unclean Spyrits, which being enduedwith a subtle heat, pricks a styrreth
them forward to put in practyse such kind of pranks and Pageants.
Furthermore among these kind of persons, there be some diversely disposed, and
of sundry conditions, wranglers, busy meddlers in other men's matters, yallers,
hot as a toast, Choplogicks, prattlers, with tongue at will, and are as Iuuenall
fotlie saith: Of dapper wit and desperate bold,
fine phrasde with gallant grace, Sat. 3.

More eloquent then Isaeus,
for every time and case.
Each person can they aptly play,
at each Art can they am,
At Grammar, Rhetricke Geometry,
Painting, and for the game.
At soothsaying, and cunningly
upon a Rope to dance,
At Physic, Magic, ripe are they,
and free of every Haunce,


Such commonly are Dizardes, Gesturers, Stage players, Iugglers, Tumblers and
Roguish peddlers, ydly ranging about the Country, Jangling prattlers, Fortuile
tellers, mynstreis such other like busy bragginge Counterfeictes, looking
big upon the matter, and in their manner of gate, hands, countenance, eyes and
speech, full of gestures, impudently presuming to shuffle themselves into every
company and place of assembly, having an Oar in every mans Boat, and
entermedling in other men's matters, wherein they have nothing to deal. In
Sleep, very unquiet, leaping sometime out of their beds, because their
Spyrits be very hot, which incyte awake the up (even being a sleep) to motion
walking about. For Choler frames and fashions the minds of men many ways,
producing and causynge in them diverse manners, phansyes, delights and
inclinations. And hereuppon it happens that whosoever is of a hoate and dry
Constitution, reckened in the number of Choleric men, is naturally fierce,
arrogant, imperious, stately untractable and unruly: Quick, Horat. in Art.
Poet.
testy, not entreatable.
of stomach very stout:
Not thinking Lavves were for them made,
but fight and blade it out.
This is my will, this is my hest,
thus shall it be, I say, Iuuen. Sat. 6.

Thus I command, my will in steed
of reason bears svvay.


But as he is by Nature very testye and soon angry, so is his Choleric
mood soon allayed and pacified.

Now, since beside yealowe Choler which only is called Natural, there be
divers other differences thereof also, we must orderly entreat as occasion
falls out, of every one particulerly.

First of Yelowe Choler is engendered Pale, Pale or Citrine Choler
or of the colour of a Pomecytron, mean between green and yelowyshe. It
bears chief swaye at the beginning of the Spring, in yonge men and bodies
not yet come to their full growth, when as fresh Blood newly sprowteth in
their Bodies. Whereupon, that Age specially at this time of the year is
much subject to Tertian Agewes, Tertian Agues.
namelye if this Humour through obstruction do putrefye, and being scattered
without the Veins, happen to be inflamed. Much like whereunto is the
Bastard Tertian: so called, for that, it is engendered not altogether of Yelowe
Choler, but hath some part of Phlegm also joined with it. Bur^ing Age^es.
For Burning Agewes do proceed and be kindled of red Choler, putrefyinge
and rotting within the Veins, which bring a man into idle talk, Phrenste and
raving. For they that be herewith affected conceive in their minds certain
fond and absurd imaginations, thinking themselves to see some tertible
apparitios and sights, whereby in the nights they be greatly troubled in their
sleeps and sore affrighted.

Tossed and turmoylde with dreadful dreams,
and grisly griepes by night, Lucan. lib. 7.

Vexed with vain terrors in their Sleep,
appearing to their sight.
They dream of fire and burning of houses Towns, and think all the world
to be in an uproar and hurly burly, Choleric folks have many dread full and
terrible Dreams.
killing and sleying one an other: and some of these fantastical
imaginations sometime happen to a man without any Agewe, when as the fumosity
of Choler stryketh up into the Brain. Which if they happen of any lunge
continuance to disturb the body and mind, it shall be most expedient to take
an other order of diet, and foorthwyth to purge Choler by vomyte, sweat, and
evacuation by Siege, which may be conveniently done with Radix Pontica, and
such things as provoke Vryne, as these Herbs: Alkakengie, Sperage, Gardeyne
Parslye, Anyse seed, Howe to purge Choler.
and Fenell seed: forbearing all hoate, fat and sweet meates, which are very
apt to be turned into Choler, excepting only Reysons Liquirice: and only to
eat such things as are of virtue to qualefye and allay the heate of Blood.

And specially Sleep must be provoked with Lactuce and other salet herbs,
Sleep whole some good for Choleric folk.
that do humecte and refresh the Brain and all other parts of the body. For
albeit to hot and dry complexions, and all Choleric persons many things be
both hurtful and pernicious, yet is nothing more noisome and prejudicial then
unseasonable labour, watch, long forbearing of victuals, fumish anger and
testynesse, Venus and immoderate company of Women. For every of these doth
waste and consume the strength and powers of Nature: neither may any thing be
conveniently taken fro them that be dry and lean may mary, they had rather
need to be franked and tenderly fed with delicate fare and deinty cheer, to
restore and mayneteyne them: then either to be skanted, or to take that which
wastes nature. For es Cattle best likes in rake pasture wherein is good grass
and water enough: so do they of this Complexion require exquisite fare. And
even as those Trees and Sprays that do not burgen and ramifye, would not be
lopped nor cut: so likewise wearish weakened bodies (lacking many things in
respect of a firm habit of bodily constitutio) ought not in any part to be
weakened, neither can well spare any thing to be taken away from them.

But there is an other kind of Choler, swaruing and degenerating from Natural
order and mean, Yolkie Choler.
called of Physicians Yolkie Choler, borowing his name of the yolke of an Egg,
whose colour and consistencie, it doth neerelye resemble. For by means of his
excessive heate it is thickishe, and of colour f^ery, and very yelowe: which
if it should happen to putrefye and be inflamed, it breeds Agues most
ardent and burning. Therefore for so much as this kind of Choler is shrunk and
gone from mediocritye, it shall be expedient to frame a clean contrary diet, and
to ensue an other manner of order, for the subduing and driving away of this
strange quality. For if a man should still cheerish and tender it with his like
nourishmentes, he should do nothing else but exasperate the distemperaunce,
increase the tyranny thereof, and make it more vehement.

There is also an other kind of Choler, called Leekish, Leekish or grieve
Choler.
so named because it is as grene as a Leek, which is bred and engendered in the
Stomach, through naughty and corrupt juice, of certain gross potherbes: of
which sort, are Garlic, Leekes, Onyons, Crosses, Rocket, Colewortes, Betes,
Cheruyle. For when as Nature is not able to subdue and master these and such
like nourishmets, they be turned into a Leekish or green Choler, which being
sometime parbraked and cast up by vomyte, leave in the tongue Chawes, a
certain bitter relice and sharpe savour, insomuch that with other sweet liquor
it is hard to be gotten away and abolished. Also this noisome Humour sometime
is engendered in the Liver and Veins, by means of some grievous sickness, when
as yolkie coloured Choler is adust with vehement inflammation of strange
heate, which to vomyte up by perbraking, Lib. 2. praedict. ca. 39
Hippocrates affirms to be most dangerous.

Out of this proceeds yet an other excremet, worse then any of the rest,
Rusty or Brassy Choler.
called (of a likeness that it hath with rusty brass) Rusty or Brassy Choler,
which is engedred of Leekish or green Choler vehemently adust. For when the
humidity is with intensed heate excocted, it becomes dry resembles the rust
of Brass: which thing we may plainly perceive by hot glowing things,
extremely burnt in the fire, whereunto the nature of Choler may very aptly be
compared. For the force and virtue of fire, changes the wood, first into
burning coals, then into black coals, and last of all, when the fire hath
quite consumed all, and heate is slaked, into Ashes. So likewyse in the body of
mankind, Choler is first of saffro colour, then (as heat increases) Leekishe,
somewhat contrary to nature: next Brassy or rusty, last of al, bluish or
sky colour, like unto Wadde an Herb that Fullers and Dyers use in colouring
and dying their clothes, which last of all is turned into perfect black Choler
or Melacholy.

All these sorts of Choler, endued with virulent and poisonous qualities,
infect the mind with lewd conditions, and the body with loathsome diseases,
whereof many be of such malignant nature, that hardly will be cured: as eating
Cankers, corrodinge ulcers, running pockes, loathsome tettars or ryngwormes in
the face, Morphew, the Carbuncle, wield fire or S. Antonies fire, Herpes, the
eating devouring Ulcer called Estiomenus, The Wolf (...), disease.
and of Courtiers (who commonly more then others are thereto subject) named the
Wolf: for it exulcerateth the skin, and eats the flesh to the very
bones, rottinge and putrefyinge the same, depryuing the member of life, and
from feeling of any pain, beside many other loathsome and cotagious diseases,
proceeding and sprynging out of the common syncke and concurrencye of these
Humours, in so much that a man in this case carries about with him nothing else,
but a stinking rotten and corrupt Carcass: And loathsome lymms, replete with
mattry filth. Virg. AEneid. 1.


Of a cold and dry Complexion: wherein the Nature and condition of a
Melancholic person (because he is of this temperature subject to Choler) is
at large declared: with remedies how to qualefie and subdue the same, fully
decyphered The vi. Chapter.
THose bodies of all others are in worst case habit, which consiste and be
constituted of ye combination and composition of Cold and Dry. For considering
that the maintenance and conservation of life consists in Hot and Moyste:
who is he that can rightly commend or allow that quality and constitutio of
body, which wears away wastes these fomentations or cheerishmentes of life,
being the chief only (...) of health and welfare? For we see in the whole
course of Nature, and in all things within the universal World, Plants,
Herbs, all Creatuers endued with life, Men and all that live by breath, when
they be once depryued, or lack heat and moisture, quickly to decay, grow unto
destruction.

For none other thing is Death, neither can any fitter definition be devised
for it, then to say, Death.
that it is an abolishment and destruction of life Nature spirable, an
extinctio of the first qualities, whereof the Humours have their being and
maintenance. Man subject to many casualties.
Whenever therefore a man arryueth is brought into these qualities, either by
Sickness, Nature, or by Age and course of years, let him make his full
reckoning that Death is not far of. For as touching uncertain, haps and
sudden casualties which every minute of an hour hauge over all our heads
generally, I think not meet hitherto to be referred, nor in this place to
be reckened: for y^ they hap violetly and against Nature, making an end of
life sooner then by course of nature else should be. Which haps and chances
as they ought not to terrifye and dismay any man, either journeying or
Seafaring (forasmuch as every Christia ought to commend and refer the
success and event of his whole affairs and busynes, into the hands of God his
Divine providence pleasure, and unto him only with firm Faith to lean: So
also in this plight and disposition of body, (threatened with death and
extreme dissolution) there is no cause why a ma should quail in courage, or
retchelessely (by all convenient means he may) neglect to tender and cheerish
his body: but so lunge as any spark of life lasts, never to cease to use
all such helps and foments, as may serve to the prolongation of his days. For
God of his bounteous liberality, hath graciously geeuen and appointed many
things, whereby the same may well and fully be brought about.

For as fruictlesse trees, by pruning and industry are made fruitful: and as
barrayne ground, (wearied with long tyllage) with dunging and composting, is
again restoared to fertility: so likewyse bodies that be dry, are with
nourishment fit for the restoration of Nature, comforted, and brought even unto
the full appointed prefixed term that by Nature is limited, as it were into
the Haven that we lunge wished. Which hope of prolongation and lengtheninge of
life, no man of reasonable and indifferent judgment in consyderation of
Human things can disalow, so that, every man herein (submitting his will
mind unto his Maker and Creator in whom all things have their being and
consistence) refer his dealings and desires, What limitation our prayers and
wyshes ought to have.
unto his godly dispensation and appointment, acknowledging all things
(whatsoever they be) to be governed directed by the decree of his omnipotente
pleasure.

But because Melancholy is subject unto a cold and dry quality, neither can
any plight or state of body (proceeding hence) be worse then it, nor more
incommodious to health: therefore it seems needful, to make some further
discourse of the condition, nature, effect, strength and differences thereof,
and how greatly it affects both the body and the mind of man.

For all me for the most part at the beginning of the Spring and Downfall of
the Leaf (at which season of the year this Humour doth most ryfely abound)
are subject to Melacholicke affections, No man but is subject to Melacholy.
namely those that be Magistrates and Officers in the Commonwealth, or
Students which at unseasonable times sit at their Books Studies. For through
overmuch agitatio of ye mind, Students much troubled with Melacholy.
natural heat is extinguished, ye Spyrits as well Animal as Vital, attenuated
and vanish away: whereby it comes to pass, that after their vital juice is
exhausted, they fall into a Cold Dry constitution.

And of this Melancholic Humour there be two differences, Two sorts of
Melacholy.
the one Natural, the other beside Nature. That Melancholy which is natural
and familiar to a man, is mylder and less hurtful then the other. For being
carried and conueyghed into the Veins together with the Blood, it nourishes
the members that be of like Nature and condition to it self, unto them
mynistreth nourishment, as the Bones, Grystles, Ligaments and Synewes.

For this Humour is not unlike unto Beasts feet when they be sod and brought
into a Iellie, which in eating, Whereto Melacholy is like.
cleave to the fyngers and lyppes, as tough as Brydlyme: whereby it causes
Blood to have a good power retentyue, and to be thicker: because when it is
joined with perfect Blood, and with the sweetness thereof tempered and allayed,
as a sower grape with Honey or Sugar, it thereupon becomes in taste and relyce
not altogether sower or bitter, as those things that exasperate the Jaws and
Palate, but somewhat tart and sowrysh, and as it is commoly termed, The taste
relyce of Melacholy.
Ponticke: such a relyce I mean, as is in a grape (out of which new Must is
pressed) being not as yet come to his perfect rypenes and maturytie, such as in
the latter end of Autumn is brought out of Germany and France into the Lowe
Countries, to slaunche and sill the glutting desire and greedynesse of some:
which being very sower in taste, (insomuch yt it seems to take away the upper
skin of the tongue,) their use is to condite with honey and honey combs: to
make it (for them that have quaysye stomachs) better relyced, pleasanter in
taste. And as ye dreggs, mother, or settlinges of Oil, reteyne a tallage of
the Oil: and as the Lees of Wine keep a certain taste, relyce and smell of
the Nature of Wine: Even so Melacholicke juice which proceeded from Blood,
reteyneth the spettle and taste thereof. Wherefore this Humour may seem
somewhat unproperly to be called Atra bilis, since there is in it no
adustion, De locis affect. lib. 3. cap. 5.
but (as Galene saith) a blood or Melancholic juice, which is nothing else
then the dryer and thicker part of blood, altogether like unto dregs and
Lees, yt settles in the bottom of the vessel, and conserveth the strength
vigour of the Wine, and suffers it not to wast and vanish. And as the Lees or
Dregs of Wine called in Dutch Droesen or Moeder, serve to good use and
purpose, for the making of Aqua vite withal: Even so Melancholic juice which
(it I may so plainly term it) is y^ settling and refuse of Blood, hath in it an
holesom use and commodity. For one part goes into the Veins, and helps
blood: the other part (much like to the former) is drawn by the Liver into
the Spleen or Mylt: The use and Nature of the Mylt.
having thence afterwards issue into the Stomach, (on the left side whereof it
lies) styrreth up appetite to meat, through the sharpness and sowrenes that
is in it. This viscous substance being soft thin, fungous, and like unto a
Spuge, is the Chamber of Melacholie, and a Receptory appointed by nature, to
draw out unto it, the dregs of Blood: and sometimes so much swelled with
aboundace of excrements, as though it would oppress and kill a ma: according
whereunto the Cappadocian Bawd in Plautus bewails his own case in these
words: My health decreases day by day, In curcul. Act. 2.

My pain increases on as fast:
My svvagging Mylt doth every way,
like girdle, round begyrde my wast.
A man would judge that I did bear,
within my Beally, Children tvvayne:
VVretch that I am, I greatly fear,
least burst I shall in middle, plain.


Which part of ye body because it is a great hinlet to nymblenes and agilitye,
The Mylte hinders agility and quickness of body.
and a foul cubersome load to Runners, Posts, Currours and speedy
Messengers, the ignorant common people sometime thought and were persuaded,
that the best way was, cythe: to have this viscous substance quite taken
out, or else to be cauteryzed. Mylt cannot be taken away.
But in very deed it is not without great danger and hazard of life to be
taken out, no more then the Testicles or Stones can from the Castor: which is
a kind of Beast that lives both in water and on land: whom huters (reporting
a flymflam tale of Robinhoode) do absurdely affirm, that with their own teeth
they byte away their own Stones, and for safeguard of their lives throw the
same at those, which pursue and chase them. Yet notwithstanding this viscousnes,
if it swell and bolne overmuch, may be qualefyed, kept down and repressed by
using Roman como Wormwood, ^etrach, Polipodie, Scene, Epythyme, Rosemary,
Capers, Doder, Fumitory, Hartstongue, bitter Almonds, Peach kernels, Tamarixe
sweet Broom: For ye more yt it increases waxes bigger, the more the body
pyneth away, becomes leaner: The Spleen likened to a Princes Exchequer or
Treasury
so yt very aptly did Traiane the Emperor compare lyken a Princes Exchequer to
the Spleen. For as when a Princes Coffers be full stuffed, his Treasuries
enriched, yt common people be wrung, pinched empouerished: so, when the Spleen
waxes big increases, the body is pined away and wasted with leanness. For
so much therefore as God his careful providence hath made and ordained this
meber to purefie y^ Liver, to purge and skum away the gross feculent part of
the Blood: it stadeth every ma in hand, by al means possible, carefully to
foresee, y^ it incur not any inor take any harm. For if the Spleen or Mylte
should suffer obstruction, or fall into imbecility and weakness: the
Melacholike juice disperses it self into every part of the body, making the
skin to be of a sooty and dunne colour: and further disquiets the mind,
with sundry strange apparitions, and fantastical imaginations.

But if it thoroughly perform the office, The Mylte causes a ma to laugh be
merry.
for which it was ordained, do exactly drink up y^ drossy feculencie of
Blood, it makes a ma thereupon wonderful meerye and jocund. For when the
Blood is syncerely purefyed, and from all grossenes and feculencie purged, the
Spyrits consequently are made pure, bright and clear shyninge: Whose purity
and clearness causes ye mind to rejoice, and among meery companions to laugh
and delight in pretty deuyses, merry coceiptes and wanton fancies. Which thing
likewyse commonly happens to them, that moysten and whittle themselves well
with wine: who (although otherwise in dealings they be naturally sterne and
surly, Wine cheers the hearts of them that be severe makes them as merry
as a Pie.
and outwardly in countenance and manner of gate, pretending a kind of
severity:) Yet being somewhat heated with Wine, and lighting in the company of
amorous beautiful Damosells, they set cock on hoop, and shake away from them
al their former grimnes, and wayward manners, and become as meery as the
meryest.

And thus have I my self known some, and that of no mean calling, who
(either through inclynation of their Nature or custom of life) clean geeuen
from all company, looking with face and countenance grim^e and severe, with
brows knyt together frowning, with eyes sullen, sterne, terrible, glancing
aside and eskated, What time Melancholic persons be out of measure merry.
enough to make such as meet them afraid to loke upon them: who
(notwythstading) when they have been in company with yonge pleasant Maidens
and meery Gentlewomen, have (for the while) forgone laid aside their seueritye
and Stoycal precysenes, and in Dancing have shaken their legs, and footed
it as roundly as the best: But the meery convocation being dissolved, and the
solemn mirth finished, have eftsoon returned to their Old Nature, wanted
manners, and accustomed gravity.

My advise and counsel to them in this case is, Best for grim and severe
folks to use merry company.
to exhort them to use such merry compaignyes: and often to frequent such
pleasaut conferences: thereby to acquaint themselves with courtesy familiar
humanity, discontinuinge and abandoning that their former counterfeit and
disguised severity: and to dispose their minds to the well liking of Nuptial
society.

To them therefore that be Splenetique and sick of the Mylte, and to as many
more, as are of Nature, sorrowful, lumpish and sow^measurable drinking of Wine,
exercise of body, company meery fellowship brings both a sound health, and a
pleasautnes of life. For by framing themselves this way, natural heate is
strengthened, and (like fire with often stirring and rakinge) begineth to
shyne, glitter sparckle: the wearied and laguishing spyrits (when this synke of
Melacholie is once exhausted al fuliginousnes banished) are revived, with their
shining brightness clarify illuminate all ye senses, whose mynisterie the mind
uses, making them ready and apt thoroughly to achieve and execute their due
offices, actions and charges. And therefore this old Verse (although not
curiously penned and fyled) which is common almost in every mans mouth,
seems to me not altogether absurd: neither much swaruinge from truth.

Men's sapit, Pulmo loquitur, Fell suscitat iras,
Spen rider facit, cogit amare iecut.
In English thus: Wit from the Mind, Speech fro the Luges,
From Gall proceeds Ire:
From Mylte is caused Laughter: from
The Liver, Loves desire.


From the functions of which Entrails, The souereigntye of the heart.
the Heart which is the founteyne of life and natural heat, and the oryginall
of vital spyrite, is not excluded: as in whom, rests the chiefest and most
pryncipal power and faculty, in the exployting of any thing incident to
Nature. Of it, such famous men as excel, and be renowned for wisdom and
experience, are called Cordati: they that want, Cordati.
and are further of, from the same, are termed by names, taken of the
impotency imperfection of the mind in that behalf, of such affections as
differ most from Temperance and moderation. Herevppon are they that nosle
themselves in Sloth, idleness, negligence, lazynesse ease (neither addicting
themselves to any profitable study, tendinge to the Glory of God, neither to
their own avail and furtherance in dyrectinge them to any virtuous living,
Socordes.
are called Socordes. And an other sort worse then these (called Vecordes) be
they, Vecordes
which imagine and devise in their mind nothing but fraud, collusion, deceit,
murder, treachery, burning, treason, spoil of their fellow citizens,
destruction to their native Country: and finally in their minds lay the
Platform and weave the toil, of most villainous myschyeues.

Which inward vices, and graceless outrages of the mind, evidently and
apparautly descry and show out themselves in the eyes, face, countenance,
forehead, eyebrowes, and in all the outward shape and habit of the body
beside: if it so happen that they be therein taken tardy, they fret and
fume, they slampe and stare, they stand mute and speechless, they stagger and
solter, they cog and dissemble, they wrangle face out the matter, they flatly
deny the deed, or else answer so doubtfully and perplexedlye, y^ a ma
cannot tel* where to have them finally either they will lay the fault in an
other mans neck, as did Adam: Genes. 3.
or else coign odd shyftes to clear themselves. And if we be desirous to have
a pattern of such a one, Catiline.
let us behold Catiline, a factious yonker, (as Salust reports) and armed
with the brands of sedition against his friends and Conntrey: whose colour
(through the conscience of his ungracious deeds, disquietnes of mind) was
pale as ashes, and without any blood, his eyes terrible and grymme, his pace
gate somewhile quick, and somewhyle slow, and in whose face and countenance a
very harebrained and raging madness appeared.

With the like fury and outrage was king Saule incensed, to commit murders
many other detestable enormyties. 1. Reg. 20
Cayn also stynged with the same furies and remorse of mind for killing his
brother, fell into desperation and utterly mystrusted any forgeeuenes or mercy.
For when as the Lord God examined him of ye murder which he had committed,
Genes. 4.
and charged him with the heinous cruelty thereof, Cain as though he had been
guyltlesse in the matter, flatly answered, that he could neither tell what
was become of his brother, Cain a pattern of desperation.
neither where he was, nor howe he fared, nor what he did, but impudetly
averred himself utterly ignorant of al dealings touching the same.

Of the defects of the heart and infirmity of ye mind and reasonable part,
are they termed Excordes, in whom is restaunte some part of Melancholy, but
the same brutish: for they be void of reason, foolish, blockeheaded, doltishe,
dull and doting, whom some plain wryters cal insensate. S. Paule, reproving
the Galathians of foolishnes, Gal. 3.
calls them (...), that is to say, grossewitted, dullards, blocks, fools
and not of capacity able to conceive things good and wholesome, but starters
back from the profession and doctrine wherein he had instructed them.

And therefore the Brain or principalitye of Reason, Agreement between the
Heart and the Brain.
conspyreth and agrees with the strength and power of the heart, and these
twain do mutually aid one an other: so that they (in whom reigns wit,
reason, judgement and understanding) are very aptly called Cordati, discrete
and wise. For by the means of those helps and furtheraunces, they stoutly
attempt and courageously compass great and waightye matters, and what soever
the mind conceives, they by direction and guiding of wisdom, bring to pass
and execute.

The other before rehearsed Entrails, The Gall is the fouteina of Anger.
have also their proper force and efficacy, as the Gal ministers cause and
occasion to Anger, brawling, contention, T^e Liver causes lust and carnal
desire.
chydinge and quarrelling. The Liver abounding with Blood, heated with Wine,
incyteth the Reins to ye desire of amorous embraces, fleshly
concupiscence, lecherous lust, riot and lasciviousness. The heart, by help of
the Luges, the vocal Artery and tongue (which serves for utterance of words
and internal devises) expresses and utters the cogitatios and meanings of
the mind. The Spleen or Mylt (if it be not otherwise empeached) makes a man
exceedingly to delight in jesting, The Mylte being in right case, cause of
mirth and cherefulnes
laughter, mirth, pastime and watonnes, minding no earnest matters, but letting
the world slyde, geeueth himself to pass the time merrily. Contrariwyse if it
be surcharged and overwhelmed with toomuch cofluxe of fylthye Humour, and be
debarred or disappointed of the ordinary help and aid of the Liver, either
through imbecility or obstruction, then brings it many discommodities and
annoyaunces, no less hurtful and preiudicial to the mind then to the body,
The Mylte affected, makes the mind heavy and sad,
as Heaviness, sorrow, sadness, fear, and dread of mishap to come,
carefulness, thought, desperation distrust, yt* is to say, clean out of hope
of any better Fortune. Which affections and perplexities cast a ma into
exceeding grief, Perturbations of mind
torment, vexation and martyrdom, wearing away his beauty, and wasting his
bodily comeliness, and making him to loke like silver al fustyed with chimney
soot, or as bright and handsome things in a reekie house that are besmered,
dusked and smoked.

For when the dregs refuse of Humours have recourse thither in greater
abundance then the heate and natural power of the member is able to wield and
qualefye, ye greater is the decay thereof, and much more dangerously is it
oppressed. For as a Porter or labouringe man which carries burdens, heavier
then his strength will allow, cannot but fall down under the weight, thereby
many times hurtinge both himself, and spoiling his carriage: So when greater
stoare of Melancholic juice is conveyed deryued into this viscous member,
then it is either able to bear or by concoctio to overcome, it is thereby
sundry wise distempered and brought into many diseases.

For when the Spleen is affected, the Stomach consequently suffers cruditie,
Diseases of the Spleen.
loathing of meat, and is much infested with breaking of sower wind upward:
the Hypochondrion or wast, and the heart strings inflated and swollen, ye body
becomes slender and thin, the gummes vlcered with mattry wheales, the teeth
wan coloured, rusty, loose, hoarish rotten, their mouth stinking, their Chawes
rammishe, And throat vpbelching fulsome breathes. Pers. Sa. 4.


Into the number of these sickly distemperauces and affects of the Mylt, I
reck also the diseases, yt of old writers were named Stomaracce Scelotyrbe, in
Dutch, namely of the Phryselanders (of whom many in the Spring and Autume be
there with troubled) vulgarly called Schoirbuick, of some Barbarous wryters,
Scarrificatio of ye belly. It comes is engedred of much corrupt baggage, and
filthy ^yncke of naughty Humours, which shyfting out of the Mylte into the
Stomach, beerayeth the teeth and gummes with a certain loathsome and
contagious infection: and for that, a part thereof falls down into the
feet, it is presently seen that the Legs and Knees shrincke together and
wax weak, ye joints lewse and enfeebled, the colour along the Thighs and
Hams, even to the soale of the foot, of sundry hues, and ugly to behold.
The nature and curatio of which disease, because it is exactly discoursed and
learnedly handled already in a several book by it self, by D. Guil. Lemnie,
I deem superfluous needless here ^n this place any further to prosecute.

But all these discommodities and inconveniences of the Mylt might the better
be borne wtal, so that the lowest members and the abject ignoble parts, were
only subject to the harms annoyaunces thereof, (and yet are these no less
necessary in a body, then Pryuies and Synks in a house which serve to scour
and cary out al fylty Sullage) but when the principal members, and Organes of
wit and Reason, chance with semblable harm to be attached, and with sundry
affections be distepered, ye case requires, greater diligence and care to be
employed, for the packinge away of such backfrendes and enemies. For the
fulsome vapours (which as it were out of a dampishe Marsh or stinking
Camerine,) stryke upward, do annoy ye Brain with grievous and odious fumes, and
distemper the Spirits Animal with a strange and foreign quality. Hereof
comes disquietnes of mind and alienation of right wits, Signs of a
destepered Brain.
absurd cogitations, troublesome Dreams, gyddinesse of the head, ringing of
the ears, dazzling of eyes, mournefall sighs, trembling and beating of heart,
a mind sorrowful, cofortlesse, perplexed, pensive and fearful: insomuch that
they which be in this sort affected, distrust, be afraid as well of their
friends as of their enemies, looking about them for fear of danger every
mynute of an hour, trembling at every small noise and wagging of a leaf,
Torments of an unquiet mind.
ready for fear to run into a mouse hoale, although there be no cause of
any such fear at all: and if they be demanded y^ cause why they so pine away
themselves, with needless care and bootless sorrow, either they will make
no answer at all: or if they do, very unwillingly with much ado. Insomuch
that thereupon they will desire to shift and convey themselves out of all
company, not abiding any fellowship nor conference with friends, but peaking in
dark corners and secrete solitary places, Timon a hater of all men.
like Timon (syrnamed (...), because he hated all men) and Belleropho, who (as
Homere reports) assayed to shake of his careful thoughts and pensive
dolours by bestowing himself in some waste wilderness or solytary corner.

For he poor soul, in queachie woods did stalk,
Abroad in Fields, Iliad. 3.
vvaylesse soils aloane:
No sight of men, no company, no talk,
Could he abide: but fret his hart with moan.
By many and sundry ways do men fall into this ill case and habiting, who
before were clear free enough from it. Causes of Melacholy affections.
Some by the staying of their Hemorrhoides, and stopping of their natural
Purgations or Flowers, or by the restraint of some ordinary and accustomed
issue. Some be brought into it, through long sorrow and heaviness for the
death of their Parents, or some great loss of worldly wealth, or finally by
missing and being disappointed of some great desire and expectation, which they
hoped had, of some thing to come to pass.

Yea there be some that have fallen into this Melancholic habit by watching
in the night at their Study at unseasonable hours, by leading a peakish and
solitary life, by hunger, penury and streict fare, or else by using and
accustoming some kinds of nourishments, whereby they brought themselves into a
cold dry distemperaunce. Many through the conscience of their former
myssedeedes, and remorse of their wicked and abominable life aforetime led:
have plugged into these Melacholike affects, driving themselves many times into
such great incouenieces, Torment of an unquiet and guilty conscience.
that what with blindness, furi^, madness wate of right mind, they become
weary of their lives, and suffer many horrible and bitter torments. For as
Juvenal right aptly saith: Aye lasting sorrow, thought, pining care,
Surpryseth their distressed minds full sore: Saty. (...)

It slakes not at meals and daily fare,
But day by day increases more more.
In night when Sleep should vvearyed limms restore
And fresh again to vvonted labours make,
Their guilt will not permit them rest to take.
Streightvvayes repair into remembrance than
Their Sacryledge, and sin against their God:
Each flash of lightning makes them pale vvan:
They svveat for fear: they loke for vvreckful rod
Of Divine Justice: who amysse have trod
Their steps on earth: one thunder clap will make,
Their harts like Aspen leaf, to pant and quake.


Behold here (gentle Reader) the pangs, vexations, fears and torments of a
wicked mind of an afflicted Conscience, Remo^ Consci^ for wi^ deeds
denounced by God to light upon so many as forsake his laws, and
rebelliously contemn his commaudements: inso much y^ (as the Prophet saith) he
sends upon them, Essay (...)
the Spirit of dizzenesse or gyddynesse, makes them to err in every good
work, eve as a Drunken man staggers in his vomyte, so that by reason of
their blyndnesse of Heart, contempt of God, and his Word, in any distress
or calamity, yea in the horror of Death, they have nothing wherewithal to
comfort their weakness, Despysinge of Gods word, avenged and punished.
or to salve their troubled consciences wtal: but have al their wits, deuyses
thoughts perplexed and confused: because they lean to a broken wall, that is,
to a thing without strength, not able to relieve them, but rather sit to hurt
them: Essay. 36 Leaning to a broken reed.
and as Essay saith, They put their trust, in a broken staff of Reed: Whereby
he means, that they repose their hope and confidece in that, which is so
far from being able to help stay them, 4. Reg. 18.
that it rather hurts so many as lean unto it, Ezech. 29.
and (as Ezechel saith) bruises and rents their hands.

There are beside these, many other Examples whereby God puts the wicked in
fear, and threatens plagues to such as despise forsake his word and
Commandment. If thou (saith he) refuse to harken to the voice of the Lord thy
God, Deuteronomy. 28.
he will smite thee with madness blyndnesse, geeue thee an unquiet heart,
dasing eyes sorrow of mind: thy life shall hang in doubt before thee: and thou
shalt fear both day night, shalt have no assurauce in thy life. In the morning
thou shalt say, would God it were night: and at night thou shalt say, would
God it were Morning, for fear wherein thy heart shall be, and for those
sights and visions which thine eyes shall see. Again in another place, he
shows what plagues, disenses and vexations he will send upon them. I will
(saith the Lord) and that quickly, Leuit. 26.
visit you, with cold, hunger, extreme heates: you shall flee when as no man
follows you, and the noise of a shaking leaf shall make you afraid: and
when ye flee the svveard, you shall fall, no ma folovving upon you, your soul
shall pine away in your vnrighteousnes, and myssedeedes. No white better
haps doth Ieremie the Prophet thuder out upon the y^ shrink from God and
resist his word, seeking to oppress ye worshippers thereof in truth, Saying: Be
thou not terrible unto me O Lord, Iere. (...)
for thou art my ^ope, in the day of my tribulatio affliction: Let my
persecutours be confounded, but not me: Let them be afraid, and not me.
Bring upon them the time of their plague, and bruyse them with double
contrition. For when a ma is both tormented in mind, and afflicted with the
loss of worldly wealth, Double c^trition.
and also distempered and out of good frame in body, that ma is with double
contrition plagued.

For so much therefore as these Melancholic furies and perturbations proceed of
sundry and diverse causes, it is expediente first of all, to take away the
headspryng of the whole mischief, to pluck up by the roots that inconvenience
which distepereth the mind. The next is, to cheerishe tether the body with all
convenient behooveful attendance: and by al means possible to assay,
somewhat to ease and mitigate those great distemperaunces that infest as well
their bodies, as their minds. For surely the case of these kind of persons
is to be pytied, insomuch that none (except such as make non account of
honesty and humanity) either will or ought to flowte or mock at them, but
rather will lament be sorry to see them brought into such pytiful taking, and
to be so lamentably fallen from the judgment of right wit and reason.

S. Paule hath a worthy saylinge, which also may well ve applied to these
persons. Let him (saith he) that thinks himself to stand, 1. Cor. 10.
take heed lest he fall: Whereby he aduyseth and admonishes every man (in the
whole course of this life) not to be too proud of any prosperity welfare,
neither (in putting toomuch trust therein) to promise unto himself security. For
it may com to pass, yt by some misfortune or outward accident he may be taken
tardy, fall himself into worse diseases both of body and mind, and greater
the they, whom a little before he so much scorned and mocked.

But because every one may readily understand and know the notes tokens of a
cold and dry Complexion, Notes of a cold dry Complexio.
I will here by the way describe show as well the euidet marks of the bodily
shape outwardly, as those of ye mind inwardly, which in words, deeds and
conversation, show out them selves apparently: and finally what effect
Melancholy works. And because Melancholic nature is subject to this
Constitution, the same signs and tokens are also hither to be referred. For
whosoever is disposed to have full trial of a cold and dry complexioned body,
and thoroughly eyes them that be Melancholic, shall at ye first sight,
plainly perceive them in al points to agree together. For these complexioned
persons are of body ill favoured, lean, dry, lank, pylde skinned, and without
hair, crokenayled, which through dryness or siccitie become and grow
crooked, eve like horne or leather that crumpleth together: specially when this
habit is thoroughly by continuance settled, and with increase of qualities
hath taken deep roots, as appears in them y^ be worn w^th sickness and
Oldage.

And because al the parts of the body do fade, drowpe, Persos Ph^gmatick (...)
coloured.
and be no longer nourished, it happens that the hairs wax thin, and by
little little fall of, and the face becomes pale, yelowyshe swarthy. For in
all them that be Splenetique, ye colour fades and decays, the feet swell, ye
Stomach is with crudity distempered, and by reason of ill humours having
influence into it, is many times troubled subject to belking sower vomitting,
y^ breaking out whereof, doth greatly ease them. As touching ye notes marks of
their minds, they are churlish, whining, wayward ill to please, stubborn,
intractable, obstinate, greedy of worldly goods, covetous of money, pinching
and sparing, when they have got it, not daringe to sped or bestow upon themselves
such things, as the necessity of mas life for use requires. A man may also
know the by their kind of gate: for they use a certain slow pace soft nice
gate, holding down their heads, with countenance loke so grim and frowning, as
though they were lately come out of Trophonius den, Trophonius Den. S.
Patrickes Purgatory.
or out of some Cave under the ground (such as the fabulous yawning of the
earth in Irelande, commonly termed S. Patrickes den or Purgatory) is. To
conclude, the grimm and surlye Planet of Saturne, together with Melancholy so
disposes them, yt (as though they were bound by vow to sylence taciturnity) a
man shall scantly get a word out of their mouths. These therefore and many
other like, are incident unto that coplexion and habit, which is cold and
dry: and do ordinarily accompany that kind of natural Melancholy, which is
somewhat is digressed from his right state and purity.

But yt, which is in ye body beside contrary to nature, is far worse and more
pernicious: Three sorts of unnatural Melacholy.
and it is aptly termed black Melancholy, whereof there be three sorts or
differences. One is of Melancholic juice, turned either by putrefaction or
combustion of strange and forreyne heat into Ashes, like Wood, or other
combustible substance burnt, with the force of fire brought into Cinders. That
which is putrefyed hath a sower, sharpe and tart quality. That which proceeds
of heate, doth adure or burn, and with his sharpe and biting Nature doth much
infes^e and disquiet the body, differing from Melancholic juice as Lees burnt,
do fro Lees feces not burnt: For these feces and Lees which were never adusted
and burnt, are a great deal myelder then those whereof Aqua vite or Aqua
Composita is made. The second which is worst of all, is compact and made of
yealowe or yolkie Choler aduste, whereby it comes to pass that it is black,
like pytch, and shines like to Ieate, Bitumen, Colophonia, and as certain
resynie stuff, intermyngled and perfused with a Yelowyshe black shining, by
reason of the fiery consistence of the parts, in that thick and compact
matter. It is therefore black of colour when it is not much aduste, burned
inflamed like unto Walworte, or Elder berries, Pryuet, Peonie beries, or the
Kernelles of black Cherries and black Grapes: the juice whereof dies and
colours a mans hands, with a black or bloody colour. And if it happen to be
inflamed and set in extreme heate, The col^ of Mela^ choly en^med.
then is it of colour entermingled with a purple shining, like glowyng hot
Gold, newly burnt in the fire. If it be immoderatelye and toomuch inflamed, it
brings the mind into furious fits, frantic rages, and brainsick
madness: Contrarylye, when all things consiste within mediocritye, it causes
and brings forth sharpness of wit, excellency of learning, subtility of
inuentio, eloquence of tongue right skilful utterance, with knowledge howe to
speak. The last kind of Melancholy, is engendered of ye adustion o^ Phlegm.

Forasmuch therefore as there be so many sorts of Melacholie, and because
Melancholic persons be of so sundry conditions, manners, natures, inclinatios,
bodily proportions, complexios colours, therefore every one must be found out
and known by the proper marks and tokens, peculiar, incident and appertaining
to them. Signs of such as be subject to Melacholy.
For they that be brought into this case and habit by Choler or blood adust,
have big swollen veins: for they swell with wyndynes, their bodies tawny
coloured, and very rough withal, thick hatred and bushy, by reason of
thabundaunce of heate, swelling and big lips, by reason of the concourse of
Humour and flatuous spyrite, into the higher parts, wheruppon it also happens
yt their eyes sometime be eminent and bearing out: Again, sometime (when
Humours decrease) hollow and standing inward: sometime swyft moving and
twynckling, sometimes staying, unmovable and not at all quivering: the tongue
(which is interpreter of all secreets of the mind) somewhile quick and ready,
somewhile stammering, foltering unable to deliver out a plain word: which
distemperaunce and affect, Stameringe of tongue.
may many times happen by occasion of the time of the year, Age, Country,
weather foggy and dim, or fair and clear, and finallye by the quality of
meat and drink, and hereuppon may it be endued with some cold Humour.

This Humour is manyfolde and of sundry sorts, wonderfully framing in the
bodies and minds of men diverse dispositions, and in them constituting sundry
habits, manners and conditions. For it may after a sort be resembled unto Iron.
Seacoales or Charcoales, which being flered, appear glowing hoate, shining
like burnished Gold, and burning the members of the touchers: but being
quenched, they look black, cankered rusty. Even so Melancholy, albeit it be
cold and dry, and in colour drawing somewhat unto blacknes, yet reteyneth it
some heat of the faculty and nature of that, Melancholy hath some heate in it.
fro whence it came, that is to say, Choler or Blood. For so the Dregs or
mother of Oil, the feees or vinegar of Wine, Embers and Coals, retain and
have a certain smack or nature of the Brands when they smoked and were on
fler. Therefore Melancholy is not altogether without heate, but reteyneth some
deal of that quality in it. For although it be a long while ere it will be
inflamed and thoroughly heated, like Iron which must both be mollified and
tempered with force of most ardent bituminous coals, also with the help of
blowing Bellows, for ye making of ye same malleable apt to the Forge Anvil:
yet being once thoroughly heated, hath such an excessive glowing ardentnes, y^
there cannot be any thing more adustiue. And hereupon, in a manner all at one
instate without any time betwixt, do we see them suddenly changed fro laughter
mirth, into sorrow pestuenes. For when this Humour is once heated (because fro it
proceed come bright sincere Spirits) these Melancholic persons are
exceedingly set upon their mercy pin, (past al godsforbod) jocund, pleasurably
geeuen to singing, daucing skippig sporting, (contrary to their accustomed to
everyone courteous, affable, liberal and friendly, yea altogether pleasantly
disposed and not squeamish to offer a kind kiss embracemet unto any lusty
wench: and nothing then so much desiring as marriage, thereby to enjoy the hoped
fruit of Children, and to have their name in remembrance to posterity: very
earnestly bewaylinge their loss of former time, repenting that they had not
long agone tied themselves to the World, married. Melancholic persons fickle
headed and inconstant.
But when this great heat is cold, and the earnest pangs of this newfagled
mind settled, when their Blood waxes cold, their spyrites at rest, they go
back from all former resolutions, and are ready to vnsaye al that ever they
said before. They condemn and deteste yesterdays deeds, and are much
ashamed of their own ouerslight and foolishnes.

Whenever therefore Melancholy grows into much coldness, Affects of
Melancholy, cold.
it takes away from a man his sharpness of wit and understanding, his
assured hope and confidence, and all his manlye strength and courage, so that
he hardly either attempts or archieueth any matter of excellency worthynes:
for such be doltish, dull, slow, and lupishe, unapt to attain, learn and
conceive any good disciplines or commendable Arts: and this happens in that
kind of Melacholie, which is mixed with great stoare of cold, Doltishe or
Asselike Melancholy.
and tough Phlegm. Whereby it comes to pass, that such kind of men (like
Asses or other brute beasts) be blockish, unapt, dull and forgetful.

But they, whose Melancholy is with moderate heat qualefyed, The force of
Melancholy much increased.
and with Blood other sincere Humours humected allayed, have excellete good wits
and sharpe judgements, and seem to do many things so notably as though
they were furthered and inspired by some Divine instinct or motion. Probl.
sect. 30. Quest. 13.
And for this cause doth Aristotle not unaptly lyken compare this Humour unto
Wine. For as Wine produces and causes sundry, the same very ridiculous
fashions according to the several nature of every man, and according to the
effect and operation of the Wine it self, (for one force and effect hath
Spanish wine, an other French, an other, Maluesye, an other Corsycke, and an
other Rhenish) so Melancholy causes diverse manners and sundry constitutions.
And hereuppo in the Dutch phrase of speech, Sundry conditions of Drouken folks.
there are reckened up certain conditions and delights of Drunken men. Some
being cupshot, are contentious brawling: Some still, and never a word but
mum: Some very babblatiue and keeping a foul coil: some weeping, howling
and heavy couraged. Yea some of this beastly Crew we see to be threatners,
cruel, bitter, fierce, spiteful, arrogant, selfwilled, vainglorious, proud,
wanton, lascivious, toying, full of foolish gesture, unquiet, unstable, geeuen
to carnal Lust, and loves desire, but as Iuuenall saith: Which have great
lust to Venus game,
Yet in the Act, Sat. 10.
weak, faint and lame.


For drunkards and Melancholic persons are very lecherous and desirous of
women's copanye, Melancholyke folks lecherous.
by reason that their genitall members swell and be with inflations distended:
but all their courage is streightwayes laid, and al venerous lustynesse soon
quayled, Drunkards in the act of generation, very weak and feeble.
insomuch that their wives many times, be defeacted of their hope, and think
themselves with child, when they be not so in deed, by reason that their
bellies be swelled and inflated with wind, rather then with Seed.

Melancholy therefore and Drunkenness, are in condition alike. For Drunkards
are led with many affections and phanstes, gybing and gesturing as though
they were Stage Players. For as Horace very aptly writes: What thing dares
not a droken nolle adventure?
All secretes of the heart it doth unfold: Lib. 1. Epist. 5.

It vvarranteth our hopes as by Indenture:
A man unarmed to fight it makes hold:
From pensive cares and troubles manifold
It ryds the mind: it Arts doth teach with grace:
Who hath not Cups well fraught made eloquet?
Whose tongue hath not thereafter trould apace?
This pleasant juice to them such force hath let.
What poor so picht, that doth not quite forget.
His ruful state, when vvyne he have met.


Things no less ridiculous and foolish are likewise to be seen in persons
Melancholic: for many in their daily dealings, show very apish and fond
fashions, and (although their wits be nothing at all empayred or alienated)
yet do they occupy themselves in matters light, tryflinge, vain and
frivolous. For they be distempered in their right Wit, feeding their own
fantasies, and doatinge not earnestly and in deed, but after a pleasaut
sort, as persons dwelling in a delightful and pleasurable madness: insomuch
that there be some of them which think themselves ill apaid, and be right
sorry that they have recovered the right state of their wits and come well home
again: sharply expostulating with their welwilling friends, which friendly
laboured and toke pains for their recure: and blaming them as men that had
rather done them harm then good. One of this plight, a Grecian borne, of no
base house pedagrew, doth Horace depaint and set out unto us thus: Who thought
himself brave melody to hear,
And galaunt Bloods on Stage their parts to play, Lib. 2. Epist. 2.

Such pleasure he conceived in this gear:
That on the Stage which empty was all day,
He sate and fed his fancy every way,
With sight of that which was not so in deed,
Yet seemed to him as true, as was his Creed.
At length when he by means of wealthy friends,
And diligent attendance at any inch,
By drougs dricks (which help succour leds)
Recured was from that his grievous pynch,
And rid from that his Melancholy vvrynch:
In faith ({que} he) my freds, you have my spoiled
And kylde me clean: by you I am thus foiled.
Sure, unto me you have done great displeasure,
To make fro me (perforce) this doting treasure
which fed my mind with joy vvithoute measure.


So since the time that I first began to profess Physic, many have bin brought
unto me, whose minds ran upon absurd imaginations and fond Phatastes.
Certain histories of Melancholic persons
There was one which thought himself to have a Nose so big, and of such a
prodigious length, that he thought he carried about with him the Snout or
Mussell of an Oliphant, and that the same in every thing that he went about,
hindered him: insomuch that sometime (as he thought) it lay in the dish
wherein his meat was. The Physician was sense for, who suspecting (as truth
was) ye same to be nothing else then a Melacholike affection, hadsomly, closely,
cleanly coueighed a log Pudding unto his Nose: that done, he toke hold of a
piece of the very typpe of the flesh thereof, and with a Barbers rasure finely
cut away ye Nose which in Imaginatio y^ party before thought himself to have: and
immediately thereupon bringing his Patient a sleep with a kind of confected
drink, and prescribing unto him a wholesome diet otherwise, banished and toke
quite away fro him, all ye fear of harm and inconvenience, which before
enconbred him.

An other Hypochondriake person, that is to say, one, whose Hartstrynges were
embolned and swollen with Melancholy Humour and inflammatios, was verily
persuaded, ye he had frogs and Toads in his bealie, which gnawed eat
asunder his Entrails: neither could he by any man be persuaded to think the
contrary: The Physician to make him more obedient and willing (for Melancholic
folks will hardly be dissuaded or brought from their opynions, that they once
lodge within their own coceipts) soothed his sayings, and plainly affyrmed
that of certaynty there were such things within him in deed as he reported.

Hereuppon after the party had taken a Purgation, and used the help of a
Clyster, there was a mean found to put some such crawlynge vermin into the
basin of his close Stool. Now, when the Purgation had wrought his nature
effect, he made many Syeges and the same very abundantlye: and after view of
his excrements taken, and saying therein what kind of creatures swymmed, he
rested satisfied in mind, and dismissed from him that foolish and vain
opinion before conceived.

An other there was which thought his Buttocks were made of glass, insomuch
that he durst not do any thing but standing, for fear least if he should
sit, he should break his rum^e, and the Glass fly into pieces. These and
such like kinds of Dotage and foolery, which either provoke others or
themselves to laughter and gladness, are quieter (as Hippocrates saith) and
nothing fierce and outrageous. But those which proceed of a certain study
and careful meditation are worse, as they that be accompanied with a certain
furious temerity and rashness, suddenly and unloked for, damnyflyng and
preiudycinge both themselves and others.

After this like sort even within our Memory, a certain Gentleman fell into
such an agony, fools paradise, that he thought himself dead, was in
himself persuaded to be departed out of this life, and hereuppon when his
friends and acquaintance with all kind of fair speeches, A notable story and
report of a certain Melancholic man.
flattering terms and chiding words had assayed to restore him to his former
strength and powers now decayed: he turned the deaf ear to all that they
said, and refused all that they to him offered, affyrminge himself to be
dead, and that a man in his case^needed no sustenance or nourishment. So long
continued he in this fond Humour, till he was ready to starve for hunger. When
the seventh day was now at hand (longer then which day, Such as he starved up
with famine elye upon the seueth day.
starved famished persons cannot live) they began to deuyse with themselves
which way to heal this absurd passion and distemperauce of their friend. They
used therefore this policy: They caused certain counterfeit persons lapped in
their shrowdinge sheets, and tied after ye manner of dead Corses that be laid
upon Coffyns, and carried to burial, to be brought into a dark Parlour:
where these disguised persons sitting down at the Table, which was well
furnished with choice of sundry dishes, tell to their victuals lustely. The
Passioned partly beholding these fellows, demanded of them whereabout they
went, and what kind of people they were: They answered, ye they were dead
men. What? (quoth he) do dead men ear and dryncke? Yea (said they) and that
shalt thou prove true, if thou wilt come and sit with us. Streightwayes
skipped this Patient out of his Bed, and with the other counterfect dead men,
fed very well and largelye: and after Supper was he broughtt into a Sleep
by a drink of purpose made for that intent. For they that be distraught of
their right wits, Sleep eases the ydlenes of the brain or raving.
must be handled artyficially, and by no way so soon recured and brought into
order, as by Sleep. So by Sybilla as Virgill writes, was tamed, That Hellish
Cur, enradge with hungry crop,
That Cerberus with throats vvyde open three, Aneid. 6.

Was luld brought a sleep with charmed sop
Which up he slapped with fangs full merely,
As gub that hurled was to him for fee,
With druggs and honey made full sweet to be.


It rests now, to show by what means order Melancholic affections many be
expugned or at least mitigated. How to expunge and beat down Melacholy.
First we must search out howe and whereupon this disease toke his beginning,
and in what part if consists. For saying there be iii. differences of
Melancholy, one principally affecting the Brain: Three sorts of Melacholye.
and other, the whole body: the third Hypocondriacall or flatuous, which
coming of crudity and ill Humours, distempers the Brain by consent: these
do require to be by sundry and several ways recured. If the whole body
therefore be opplete and filled with Melancholy juice, it shall be best to
begin the cure with letting the party Blood: When to let Melancholic persons
blood.
in the rest, this remedy is thought unprofitable, and to no purpose, except
overmuch abundauce of Blood seem to require the same. Thus also, for the
Stitch, swelling of the Spleen, or for a Quartaine Ague, it is right excellent
and good to be let blood in ye Vein called Splenetica, in the inside of the
left Arm.

Furthermore forasmuch as these kinds of me be for the most part costyue, it
shall be very profitable and requisite, Good for Melancholic persons to be
laxative soluble.
gently to make them soluble laxatyue with Aloe, Epithyme small fearne. For when
the Entrails be slippery, and that the excrements may conveniently scour
away and be avoided, less vapours and fumosyties do ascend and stryke up
ward: wherefore Hippocrates is of opinion, Lib. 6. Aph. 48.
that it is right wholesome for persons Splenetique and Melancholic, to be
laxative: Finallye yt the Hemerrhoydes, swelling of the Ueynes with Melacholyke
blood, swelling of the tuell, and the Piles to breed and swell in the
Fundemente and neither parts, Spirits shuffle themselves in, among the humours
is for them that be frantic and out of the right course of their wits,
very good. And although evil Spyrites dommixe themselves with humours, making y^
same a great deal fiercer and vehementer, yet the chiefest cause and
founteine of all this mischief and inconvenience is to be imputed to the
outrage and domination of Humours. For when noysom Humours be purged gross
fumosities dispersed, the fury is well calmed, and the mind brought again
into his former state and perfection.

Therefore it shall be most for their ease profit, to procure euacuatio to ye
whole body, namely by ye part, whereby nature most allows to be purged:
Melancholy folks must keep them selves soluble.
and that, leysurably and by convenient order of times: for it is not good to
stir such coals as these, with any strong medicines and purgations: then
must they have prescrybed unto them, a right good and precise diet, and eschew
all such things as engeder thick blood: as Beef and Bulls flesh, Bacon, and
such as hath been long bryned, or hanged in the smoke and hardened, wheruto are
to be added Brawn Bears flesh, and Venyson ofred Dear, which commonly is
brought in, for a service at Noble men's tables: Hares flesh, which commonly is
used for a festival dish, to furnish out the Table, when friends meet to make
meerye. Insomuch, that I cannot but marvel at the usual fashion of Dutchmen
and Netherlanders, among whom this flesh is. as highly esteemed desired as
any: neither think they any banquet sumptuous festival enough, Hare geeueth
Melacholike nourishment.
unless one dish thereof be Hare: whereas no flesh in y^ world is nearer of
nature unto Melacholie then it. For it is cold dry, unless the seely beast be
first well coursed and hunted, Hare the holeso^er (...) ^g^hly hunted
for that is the way to make it somewhat more hot, toothsome, and wholesome.

Every part of this beast, is of a drying force virtue, Ahore good for many
purposes in Physic.
is endued with an astringent facultye, both the hairs, the skin, the blood,
the Maw and the flesh. For the Maw of a Hare mingled with red Wine and
dronck, stops the bloody Flixe y^ comes of the excoriation and gnawig of
the bowels: it also stays women's terms: the hairs being burnt or chopped
small, are a present and right sovereign thing to stay any great flux of
blood in a wound. The Brain wastes the superfluous moisture and dryuelinge
of the mouth, and makes the teeth to grow: y^ Huckle boane, the commissures
ligaments thereof, are good to break the stone. The flesh also of an Hare, if
it be much eaten and used, cures the rewine that falls out of the head, and
helps y^ Epilepsie or falling Sickness, which is a disease engendered of
gross and clammie Phlegm: so that each one of these doth sufficiently prove,
this Beast to be dry, Melancholic, as the whole condition and nature thereof,
plainly shows: namely the flesh which in colour enclyneth to a blackness.

Now, whereas some both of old later time, have been and yet be persuaded,
that the eating of Hares flesh, makes men pleasant and merrily disposed: and
not that only, but also in bodelye shape and countenance to be fair, gallant,
beautiful: I do not think, neither am I of opynio, ye any such thing can
happen through eating ye flesh of such a fearful and timorous seely Creature:
but ye rather hereuppon it had his beginning: because when meery Compaignions
are disposed to make good cheer, they commonly use to inuit call into their
compaignies some beautiful Damosells, and pleasant Peates to pass away the
time more merrily: whereas they that be of small account and harde favoured to
the eye, are never requested unto any such pleasurable assembly, but be suffered
to sit still at home, being reputed in comparison, but as gross Stuff of the
second sort, and such as never (according to ye proverb) tasted or eat of an
Hare. Which thing ye Poet Martial in a certain pleasant Epigrame doth
intimate unto his Lady and Mistress, in words to this effect.

O Gellia, Lady mine, thou say,
when Hare thou sendste to me:
Days seven (Mark) thou shalt be fair,
and beautiful of glee.
If these thy words (sweet heart) be true,
and rove not out of square:
Then surely, Gellia, thou thy self
not yet hast eaten Hare.
Which opinion of ancient long time agone in many men's heads settled, To eat
a Hare, a Proverb.
I suppose hereuppon toke his first beginning (for hither to of none hath it
been expounded) that he which had been at any solemn festival banquet, ( such
I means wherein Hare is one service) appears for ye next seven days,
courteous, pleasant, jocund and full of merry conceits. For when a man hath been
in pleasant company and at good cheer, where all things have but meerilye
discoursed, the tyms joyously passed, there appear for the space of certain
days after in his face and countenance, forehead, brows, lips, eyes and
beckes (for all these are be wrayers and tellers of the mind inwardly) great
tokens of mirth and alacrytie, Moderate mirth and baquetting stirs up a
pleasant colour and revives the Spirits.
and many arguments do outwardly testify the chereful dispositien of the
internal Spyrits. For the body being heated with laughing and ioyinge, with
kissing and dalying, with dancing, Wine, and singing, is made fresher and
better coloured, for that the Blood is diffused into the utter part and habit
of the body. These are therefore the causes, why the eating of an Hare drives
away and dispelleth the Cloudy cares of the mind, makes the countenance
clear and delectable, the face ruddy, fair, and wall complexioned,

For as they that be angry, or perplexed with fear, The outward countenance
of a man, bewrays the inward affections of his mind
are commonly seen to be of a troubled and disquiet mind, and by many
outward signs to bewray the affections of their afflicted consciece: even so
they that have the world at will, and their hearts far from all careful
affections troublesome perturbations, show forth sure and certain tokens
thereof in the body outwardly: yea the very countenance, colour, face,
forehead, eyes, mouth and generally all the other fashions gestures thereof, do
pretend and witness a certain securitye of mind that is at peace and quietness
within it self.

Now, Diet for Melancholic persons.
as touching Diet: Let them that be of this cold and dry Constitution, and
they that be Melacholike, accustom themselves to such meates as be of good
and laudable juice, to drink that wine which is of the best sort and purest:
let them lye in very soft beds and sleep well lunge, let them eschew forbear
all things that be salt and sower: above all things, let them take heed of
crudity, let the use moderate exercise stirring of themselves. For as maryshes
standing waters become dampish and stynking: so likewise the body lacking
exercise, gathers fulsoments pestilent savours. If violent motion exercise be
unto them painful and laborious, they may recreat and exercise themselves with
pleasant singing, Musical instruments and delectable and walkinges.

Let them banish away all affections of the mind, heaviness, sorrow, thought,
hatred, anger, indignation, envy, c. Neither let them suffer any such to lodge
within their hearts: let them also avoid solitariness, long abstinence,
lassitude: and let them use at possible means to restore their right powers,
Liquid meates do quickly non rish.
first with meats and nourishments that be liquid (for they do quicklyest
nourish, and encomber not the Stomach greatly in concoction) but when their
powers be increased, let them acquaint themselves, and use meates that be
solide and substantial. Let their bread be of the finest wheat, Such as be
subject to sickness and quaisie, must eat but little bread.
and let them eat thereof but measurablye and sparinglye: for it is hardly
concocted, and tarries lunge in the stomach: and therefore to Labourers,
Caryers, Mariners, Carters and such like, it brings strength, engenders
flesh durable fast. Now, they that in time of perfect and sound health, The
cause that brigeth a strong breath.
do use to eat little bread: have strong breaths and stinking mouths. This
proporcio therefore is requisite, there in to be used, to eat twyse as much in
bread as in victual or other cates.

As concerning the order that they are to keep for Dinner and supper, unless
custom be to the contrary, or that they be troubled with distillations of the
head, let their Supper be larger and more in quantitye then dinner: foreseen,
that immoderate faciety surphet be always eschued.

To be short, to knit up this matter with an wholesome advise and counsel: let
all such things as be prejudicial to health, Wholesome exhortatio.
and hasten oldage before his time, be put away and banished. Chiefly and
especially maynteining and keeping wything our selves tranquillity and
constancy of mind, Quietness tranquillity of mind makes all in good order and
frame.
which gift we are most humbly and earnestly to crave at his hands, which most
bountefully bestows and powers out his blessed gifts lyberalitye upon us,
who is God our heavenly Father, and his dear eternal Son Christ our only
Saviour. For beside y^ outward gifts and things transitory, which at his
bountiful hands, for our use commodity we most abundantly taste and enjoy, he
also directs our minds with his holy Spyrite, and moves our cogitations
wills every minute, to ensue that is good and godly. He urges and pricks us
forward continually, so that we feel the motions of his mighty power working
in our harts, by stregthning and confyrming our Faith, that we thereby
constantly leaning to the promyses of God, may rest in a sure trust and
undoubted hope, to be afterwards made partakers of his Heavenly joy in
everlasting felicity. Amen.

Thomas Newtonus, Cestreshyrius.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
Adolescency. 29. Aduertisemente to Students. 52 Affections natural. 35
Affections how and whereof they come. 9. proceeding of surphet dronkenesse.
10. 59. Affections of the mind alter the colour, coplexion of the face and
body. 90. Affections common to al men. 59. harms thereof. ibid. Ague called
Ephemera. 102. Ague called Epiala. 107. Agues tertian. 132 Agues burning. ibid.
Agreement betvvene the heart the brain. 141 Anacardus good for the memory. 126
Angels good and evil. 22. 24 Angels entermingle and shuffle in, themselves
among our humours. 153 Anger. 58. 128. 141 Apoplexy. 126 Aristomenes his
subtle shifting 43 Arteries. 89 Astonishment. 94
B
Baldness how it comes. 69 Banqueting fit for persons melancolique. 5
moderately used commendable. 76 Bathes Artificial. 74 Bathes natural. ibid.
Beard how to make it grovv. 42 Beard red, not always a token of ill
nature. 130. Best things and excellent, must not upon despair be geeuen
over. 34 Blood hath all the other humours mixed in it. 86 87. 89. Blood
forbidden by Moyses law to be eaten, why. 89. Blood of great force in
framing the disposition manners. 96. 99 Blood boils in young persons like
spurginge of new vvyne in the tun. 98 Blood provokes to vvilfulnes. 101
Bloudletting not rashly to be enterprised. 55. 89 Blood and spirit the
treasure of life. ibid et 86 Blood of fishes cold. 61 Blind byardes. 102 Body
full of sickness makes life vnpleasaut. 3 Body consists of three things. 7
Body cold and dry how it looks. 27 Body and mind, whole and sick
together. 75 Bold rashness. 44 Brabanders. 17 Braggers. 101 Brain dry,
causes il memory. 69. 120 Brain moyste, nothing retentive nor memoratiue.
120 Brain temperate, the maintenance of memory, ibid Brains best to be
eaten for the helping of memory. 125 Brains distempered, by what signs we
may know them. 143 Bread. 156 Brothes, and liquid meates, soonest nourish and
are quickliest digested. ibide.
C
Caine, a pattern of desperation. 140 Caloes. 99 Canis panem somnians, a
proverb. 114 Catchpoles. 58 Carnal act, hurtful to dry and cold
complexions. 74. hurtful in Summer. 81. vveakeneth the body. 120. 133. dulls
the wit and memory. ibid. harms thereof. 105. commodities thereof. ibid.
moderation. ibid. very hurtful to old men and al dry persons. 55 Cause of
fearefulnes in dangers. 93 Cause why many die in lustiest age. 3 Charles the
V. 91 Chaste living. 7. 107 Change in old men dangerous. 51 Children
forgetful and why. 16. must not be skanted of reasonable victuals. 27.
without beards why. 41. sleepy. 58. stirring quick why. 97. remembering
things done long ago 121. Childehoode. 29 Choler. 86. of two sorts. 127.
the office and property thereof 128 Choler by what parts of the body it is
purged. 128. 133. Choler pale or citrine. 132 Choler yolkie. 133. Leekish or
green. ibid. Rusty or Brassye. 134 Choleric folks dream many dreadful
dreams. 132 Choleric persons, great flouters. 99 Christ for bodily shape, a
patcine of perfection. 37. void of al ill affections. 38 Clysters. 118 Cock
how to make him crovv continually with out ceasing. 127 Cold, the decay of
life. 60. vvasteth colour. 65 Cold bodies not altogether without heate. 60
Cold persons drovvsie and vnvveldie. 65 Cold things stir up appetite.
ibide. Comparison betvvene a common wealth and a body human. 11 Copoud
medicines named of some of the chief ingredientes. 32 Compound complexions
four. 84 Complexion moist. 78 Complexion dry. 65 Complexion cold, 60
Complexion hoate. 38 Complexion temperate and perfect. 33 Complexion hoate and
moist. 87. subject to putrefaction. 103 Complexion cold and moist. 107
Complexion hoate and dry, or choleric, 127 Coplexion cold and dry, or
melancholic. 135. Concorde in a Realm. 12 Concord in man body. 84
Cotinecie chastity a special gift of God. 107 Contempt of God and his word
punished. 144 Contrition. 145 Convenient exercise wholesome. 7 Coriander. 126
Countenance outward bevvrayeth the affection of the mind invvardely. 156
Countenance, the image of the mind. 36 Counterfeit gate. 36 Colour shevveth
the complexion. 89 Cousellours levvdly disposed do much harm to youth. 98
Counsel good, profitable to youth. 99 Cough. 109 Creatures most cold in
touching. 61 Crasis. 32 Crisis. 102 Cruditie hurtful. 9. 118 Custom that is
il, must by little and little be altered. 50 Curiosity in searching high
mysteries. 77
D
DAuid slew a Lyon, a Bear, Goliath. 44 Death what it is. 135. 28. Death
either violent or natural. 67 Death by ill diet and surphet, hastened before
his time. 3 Death, of it self dreadful. 67 Death to the faithful not terrible
nor dreadful. 30 Death without any payne. 93 Dead persons heavier then living,
why. 5 Degrees of heate in man. 34 Democritus nature always laughing. 36
Description of a body perfectly temperate. 34 Devil a crafty and sly spirit.
22. how he learns the thoughts of ma 23. his long experience in mischief.
ibid. his temptations ibide. how far he is able to hurt. ibidem. Diet for
cold persons. 65 Difference between sanguine and choleric folk. 99
Dinner. 156 Diseases proceeding of phlegm. 109. of Catarrhes, and Rheumes. 110
Diseases of the Spleen or Milt. 142 Discord and dissention in a country, what
mischief it brings. 12 Disturbers of public tranquillity must be rooted
out. 11 Diversity in natures. 14 Diversity in opinions 88 Doggish appetite.
116 Dogdayes. 47 Doltes. 101 Dreams after perfect concoction in the night,
happen not in vain. 37. 95 Dreams show the disposition and complexion of the
body. 112 Dreams natural are interpretable. ibid Dreams divine. ibid.
Dreams peculier to phlegmatik persons, ibid. Dreams not rashly to be
credited. 113 Dronkardes sleepy, and why. 58 Dronkardes stammer and dovvble in
their speech. 111. their sundry conditions. 149. in the act of generation,
weak, lumpish and feeble ibidem. Dycers. 101
E
EAsterlye people fearful, and timorous. 13 Education alters nature. 16. 99
Eel, being dead floats not above the water. 111. Eyes. 80 Elements of
man body. 25. 86 Elements fovver. 26 Emptines. 55 Englishmen. 18. well
coloured. 48. sumptuous at their table. ibid. England for cleanlynesse neatnes,
praised. 47 Englishme more subject to the Svveate, then other nations. 102
English Svveat when and where it began. ibid. Erick king of Svveden. 16
Every ma must search out his own inclination 6 Every member in the body
serves to some necessary use. 12 Every part of the body hath his several
office virtue. 108 Evils must be cured by their contraries. 47 Exercise
conveniently used very wholesome. 7. what profit comes thereof. 51. order
thereof. 52. sorts thereof. 53. when to be used. 104. Exercise fit for
crookebacked persons. 53.
F.
Faith brings forth good works. 24 Fasting person, heavier the one that
hath eat meat. 5 Famished persons dye the seventh day. 151 Fear of death,
vvorse then death it self. 93 Fishes having warm blood. 61 Fishes living
long after they be taken out of the water. ibid. Fish, ill for surly and
solitary persons. 61 Flemminges. 17 Food holsommest to eat. 111
Forgetfulness of some things is best. 121 Form of a common wealth 11 Fowls
hard of digestion. 65 Four natural povvers or Virtues. 9 Frenchmen. 18.
prompt and ready vvitted. 19 French king killed at the Tilt. 54 Friction 73.
Six sorts thereof. ibid. Fullness of stomach hurtful. 54
G.
Gall, the fountain and vvelspring of anger. 148 Garden herbs good for cold
bodies. 66 Generation of milk. 108 Generation of sperm. ibid. Germans. 16
Good diet. 19 Good for every ma thoroughly to know his own complexion. 1
Gross blood. 13
H.
Heart, the fountain of life. 9, 89 Hare makes melancholic nourishment, 133.
being hunted and chased is much holsomer. ibid. good for many purposes in
physic. ibidem. Harm to a Realm and to a body, first proceeds from the
head. 110 Harm of venerye and carnal copulation with women. Vide carnal
act. Hair black. 39. 41. Curled, 39. Yealovve, 41. 129. White, ibid. Red,
ibid. Aburne, ibid. Hairs hoar. 112 Head harmed by the disorder of the lower
mebers. 104 Head and stomach engendrers and receptacles of phlegm. 109 Heate
likened to the Sun, and moisture to the Moon. 78 Heate causes boldness. 43
makes good colour. 64. Health what it is. 1. passes gold or treasure. 2
Health as well of mind as of body to be cared for, because the one cannot
well be without the other. 2 Health sundry ways assaulted, crushed and
altered. 29 Heraclitus nature always vveping. 36 Herbs that are venomous. 62
Herbs provoking urine. 71 Herbs good for the memory. 125 Herbs hot, good
for cold bodies. 66 Hoate complexion. 38. Tokens thereof. 39 Hoarinesse in
meates. 112 Hoarcenesse. 109 Hollanders. 16. forgetful and sleepy. ibid.
Wholesome air. 19. as necessary for bodyly health as wholesome meat and drink.
26 Wholesome exhortation. 156 Holy ghost, what he vvorketh in us. 24 Humours are
changed one into another. 3 Humours ministre occasion unto each several
complexion, to ensue several vices. 23 Humours gross, as hurtful to the
mind, as dead wine to the body. 84 Humours after a sort, are the elements of
man. 85. 86. Humours of more force then the Planets. 10 Hungry sickness. 65
Husbandry praised. 54
I
IAundise. 128 Idleness. 64. makes the body fat cold ibid. Imagination of
man, evil from his birth. 14. 19. Imagination of women at the time of their
coception. 40. 93 Infancy. 29 Intemperature what it is. 34 Influence and
force of the Moon. 78 Inclination of nature. 100 Ihon Baptist beheaded. 10
Italians. 17. their nature. ibid. Iugglers. 101
K.
KErnellie flesh in the dugs. 108. alterethe blood into milk. ibid.
Knowledge of the case o four own bodies, very expedient. 2
L
LEaning to a broken reed. 144 Learned aged me, reverenced in Englad. 48
Lattice, ill for the eyesight. 125 Levvd thoughts. 14 Liver, the Shop of
blood. 89 Liver provokes and eggs to carnal Just. 141 Lignum Aloes. 126
Limitation for our prayers and wishes. 136 Lyquide meates soonest quickliest
nourish. 156 Long life, how it may be orderly procured. 68 Lupines a kind of
pulse, the nature operatio thereof. 5 Lying in bed on the right side, best. 58
Lying upright upon the back, dangerous. 58
M
MAgo tamed a Lyon. 4 Maluesey. 103 Mainteyners of health. 1 Many good wits
by ill education levvde copany marred. 4 Man age. 30 Man a VVolfe, 96. An
ape. 97. A Lion, A Fox c. ibid. Mammiles or dugs, the receptacles of Milk.
108 Manns corrupt nature, more prone to ill then to good. 122 Man, daily
subject to casualties. 135 Matrimony pleasaut and profitable, the cause why it
was first by God instituted. 6 Measurable feeding most wholesome. 7 Meates fit
for cold persons. 65 Melancholy. 86 Melancholy may be altered. 4 Melancholy
incidet to al me, especially to Students. 136 Melancholy of two sorts.
ibid. vvherunto it is like. ibide. Melancholy what relish and taste it hath.
137 Melancholy unnatural of 3. sorts. 146. 152 Melancholy inflamed, what
colour it hath. 147. Melancholy hath in it some heate. 148 Melancholy cold,
what affects it causes. 148 Melancholy, doltish or asselike. ibid.
Melancholy well tempered brings forth excellent wits, and sharpe
judgment. 149 Melancholy how it may be qualified and expugned. 152
Melancholik persons, sometimes out of measure merry. 139 Melancholic affections
how they come. 143 Melancholic persons, fickle headed and inconstant. 148
Melancholic persons lecherous. 149 Melancholic passions, and certain
histories of sundry persons of that Complexion. 150 Melancholic person, fully
persvvaded that he had Frogs and Toads in his belly. ibid Melancholic
persons imagination of a lunge nose. ibid. Melancholic person that thought his
buttocks were made of glass. 151 Melancholic person that thought himself to
be dead. ibid. Melancolick persons are best to be laxative and soluble. 152
Melacholick persons, when to be let blood, ibid. Melancholic persons diet. 156
Members of the body how they agree, and be linked together. 11. Memory good.
69. how it may be restored. 70 Memory where it rests. 119. what things be
thereto hurtful. 120. is maintained preserved in a temperate brain. ibid. ill
in old folks children, and why. ibid. Memory the gift of nature, but by Art
preserved and helped. 121 Memory by healthynes strengthened, by crudity and
surphet spoiled. 122. by light suppers preserved, and bettered. 123 Menenius a
wise orator, by telling a fine devised Fable of the members of man body,
dissvvaded the Nobles and Commons from civil uproar discord. 12 Men wiser then
Women, why. 81 Morphevv. 134 Moist nourishment fittest for children. 49 Moist
complexion. 78. not given to be malicious, spiteful, fumishe and testy. 80.
their diet 82. their stint of sleep. ibid. Moistnes. 79 Moisture feeds and
nourishes heate. 83 Murre. 109 Music cheareth the mind. 53 Milk 71 Milk
is white blood. 108. never eaten by Pythagoras, and why. ibid. Milk in the
breasts and dugs of young Infantes, asvvel male as female. ibid. where it
is generated and made. ibid. Mind in moist complexions. 91 Minstrells. 101
Milt, and the use thereof. 137. Hinders agilitye of the body. ibid. cannot be
taken away. 138. likened to a princes Exchequer. ibide. provokes laughter.
ibid. being well in good case, and plight, causes mirth and chearefulnes. 141
being distempered, affected, or out of right course, causes a heavy mind.
ibid. Mirth how it is caused. 5 Mirth at the table. 76 Mirth and pleasant
company profitable for Melancholic persons. 5. 139. Mirth moderately used,
banqueting, revives ye Spirits makes a ma fresh coloured. 154 Mixture of
humours compared to wine. 107
N
Natural heate. 8. 60. Nature of Spermaticke seed, and feminine Blood. 26
Nature of persons phlegmaticke. 111 Northern people. 13. 16 Nosce teipsum. 3
Notorious villains proceed not from loutis he natures, but from excellent
minds, corrupted by levvde education marred. 45 Notes of a dry complexion. 68
Notes to know a Phlegmatic person, and his nature. 112 Notes whereby to know
a Choleric complexion. 129 Notes of a Melancholic Complexion. 145 Notes and
nature of a Sanguine person. 101 Nucha or the nape of the neck must be kept
warm. 121
O
Oldage. 28. hath no certain number of years appointed, how long it lasts,
as each other age hath. 20. Old men forgetful and why. 16. sometimes as lusty
as youngmen, and why. 28 Oldmen by nature dry, but in condition moist 88.
much harmed by using carnal copulation and venery. 55. Old grudges. 122
Onyons ill for the eyes, and memory. 125 Oppilation of the Liver, how it
comes. 104. how to be avoided. ibid. Oppilation and putrefaction, the
original cause of all diseases. 10
P
PArasites. 101 Parts of the body subject to Phlegm. 117 Patrickes purgatory.
146 Persons mere saguine, comoly stark fools. 96 Persons Apoplectique. 129.
how to restore the to the right use of their tongue. ibid. Perturbations of
the mind. 59. 141 Philip king of Spain. 90 Phlegm, the matter of blood. 107.
the use effect thereof. 109. what place of the body it is in. ibid. Diseases
grovving through it. ibid. Phlegm. 86 Phlegm of 4. sorts. 115 Phlegm
sweet. 116 Phlegm sovver. ibid. Phlegm salt. 117. harms thereof. ibide.
Phlegm glassy. ibid. Phlegm common to al men. 118 Phlegmatique persons il
coloured. 146 Phlegmatique persons praised. 115 Phlegmatique persons must eat
light suppers. 115. Phlegmatique persons must use exercise. ibid. Playing with
the head what it signifies. 98 Pockes. 134 Polycletus rule. 33 Power
attractive. 9 Power retentive. ibid. Power digestiue. ibid. Power expulsiue.
ibid. Poze. 109 Proportion of blood to other humours. 100 Proverbs, emunctae
naris, obesae naris, expouded. 114 Pubertie. 29 Putrefaction. 10 Pypers. 101
Pythagoras. 30. his comparing of the ages of mans life, to the four quarters of
the year. ibid.
Q
QVaysie stomachs. 156 Qualefiers of the heate of blood. 50 Qualities. 86
Quinces conserved. 126 Quietness and tranquillity of mind. 156
R
RApes good for the eyesight. 125 Rebellion in the body, 14 Receiptes
laxative. 104 Recreations discommendable. 54. 76 Remorse of conscience for
wicked deeds. 144 Repletion. 55 Restoratives for the memory. 125
Ringvvormes. 134 Riot and bellicheare. 10 Rue provokes lust in women,
extinguishes it in men. 81
S
SAmpson. 43. his great strength. ibid. Sangar. 44. with a plough share
slew. 600. Philistines ibid. Sanguine persons courteous, and mild natured.
Vide Blood. 99. Scottes. 18 Scoffers. 101 Secke. 102 Seed. 85. 105. 106.
pollution and effluxio thereof how it happens. 113 Shaving of the beard helps
memory. 124 Shaving of the head. ibid. Short stature. whereof it comes. 27
Sickness what it is. 12 Signs of sickness approaching. ibid. Sickly persons
must eat little bread. 156 Signs of a brain distempered. 143 Signs of such
as be subject to melancholy. 147. Sin cause of sickness and death. 67
Sleep and the commodities thereof. 57. 73. time space thereof. 57. to what use
it serves. 95. good for Choleric persons. 133 Sleepers soundly. 57. Small
unquiet sleepers. 58. Sleep by day, ill and vnholsome. 58. good for raving or
Idleness of the brain. 152 Sleeping person heavier then a vvatching. 5 Sloth
and ease. 52 Sound Parents beeget sound children. 85 Solitary persons subject
to the Apoplexy. 61 Snails life. 62 Soul. 12 Sounding. 133 Sovereignty of
the hart. 109 Spaniardes. 18 Spettle. 87 Speech how to be restored. 126
Spirit. 7 what it is 8. requires great care. ibid. being in good case temper
causes tranquillity of mind. ibid. being distepered it vvorketh sundry motios
brings disquietnes. ibid what things be thereto most hurtful, and what
most comfortable. ibid. 19. 20. greatly comforted with sweet smells. 126
Spirit animal and theffects thereof. 15 Spirit vital. ibid Spirit of
nature. 20 Stammers, 111. cannot speak softly. ibide. 147. Stitches. 103
Stinking breath how it comes. 156 Stomach and head engendrers and keepers
of Phlegm. 109 Store of hair how it comes. 41 Strong breath and stinking
mouths. 156 Study by candlelight hurtful. 74 Students exercises. 75
Superstition. 24 Supper. 156 Svveate. 87
T
Tallness of personage. 27 Temperance. 60 Temperature, what it is. 32. nine
differences thereof. ibid. subject to change. 88 Testicles. 85 Tettars. 134
Text of Essay expounded. 114 Themistocles vvished to learn the Art of
forgetfulness. 122. his nature disposition, while he was young. 130 Things
making good digestion spirits. 5 Things good for the memory. 125 Things not
natural, six. 46 Thin blood. 13 Three most wholesome things for health. 7
Timon, a deadly hater of al men, and al company. 143 Time for every matter. 77
Tokens of a cold complexion. 64 Tokens of a moist body. 80 Tokens of the
disposition of phlegmaticke persons. 114 Tokens of sanguine persons. 99
Torments of an unquiet mind, and guilty conscience. 143 Tranquillity of
mind. 31. 59 Trance. 103 Trial of good horses. 54 Trophonius Den. 146 True
goods. 2 Tumblers. 101 Turpentine. 72 Turpentine, how to prepare it. ibid. to
make it liquid and potable. ibid,
V
Venery, Vide Carnal act. Vein opened, shevveth oculerly, each of the four
humours, 86 Veins from whence they spring. 89 Virtues defaced and marred by
vices. 44 Vital moisture. 7 Vital spirit. 12 Ulcers. 134 Vnholsome meates
spills nature. 27 Vnablenes in some to beget children. 43 Vomit must be
seeldome provoked. 55 when to vomit. ibide. to what persons it is most
hurtful. 56 Voice. 45
W
WAnne colour. 65 VVasshing of the head. 126 VVatching overmuch hurtful. 58
VVavvvard persons. 12 VVhores. 106 VVolfe, a disease. 134 Women full of hair
on their heads. 42 Women hayrie lecherous. ibid. cause of barrennes in women.
43 VVormevvood wholesome for the Liver. 104 VVringing in the small Guts. 129
VVyfe bravvlinge, and skoldinge, likened to a dropping house. 110 VVylie Foxes
130 VVylie vvinckers. 58 VVyne, hurtful to children. 49. makes the hart merry.
138. VVisemen sometime fearful. 94
Y.
Yougmen sometimes weak, vvearish, feeble, and why. 28 Young man suddenly gray
headed. 91 Youth. 29
Z
Zeal vvithour knowledge. 25 Zelanders. 17 Zeno. 5
T N.

FINIS.
Printed at London, in Fleetstreete by Thomas Marsh. 1576.

Cum Priuilegio.


