A green Forest, or a natural History, Wherein may be seen first the most
sufferaigne Virtues in all the whole kind of Stones Metals: next of Plants,
as of Herbs, Trees, Shrubs, Lastly of Brute Beasts, Fowls, Fishes, creeping
worms Serpents, and that Alphabetically: so that a Table shall not need.
Compiled by Iohn Maplet, M. of Art, and student in Cambridge: intending hereby
yt God might especially be glorified: and the people furdered. Anno. 1567.

Imprinted at London, by Henry Denham.

To the Right Honourable, Lord, Lord Thomas, Earl of Sussex, Viscont
Fitzwalter Lord of Egremont, and of Burnell, Knight of the most Noble order of
the Garter, Justice of the Forrestes Chases, from Trent Southward, and Captain
of the Gentlemen Pensioners, of the house of the Queen our Sovereign Lady,
BAthyllus, he of Samos (most honourable Lord) was one which the Poet Anacreon
sang always of, minding him in every song for a certain conceit of
worthiness which he thought was in him: Likewise Ligurinus was always one at
the end of Horace his pen and mouth. And as a report goes (and many Romaine
Histories show the same) Numa Seruius are by Poets commended, up to the Orbs
of the Firmament or Sky: where they say they live as they list: whose bread
is Nectar, and drink Ambrosia, a sugared and confect kind of Wine, which is
served out in a fair Goblet or Cup by a fair waiting Boy named Ganimedes.
These Poets figured hereby (most Honourable Lord) that any of the nine Muses,
whatsoever kind of Harp they used, it should be strung and tuned so that it
mought reach to Diatesseron, the only note of Noble men's commendation. And so
do I gather, it is best used. I hereupon now wish that although Anacreon be
gone, I had yet his Harp: for then would I now set and tune it many Notes
higher than ever could he in the praise of Bathyllus, or Horace in the
testimony of Ligurius: For I would use it to recognize and regester the
memorial of Yours such absolute Virtues. But since this Harp is denied me: and
the very Instrument which I now sound of, is not as I would it were, my
intent notwithstanding and not my possibility is to be considered. Yet rather
then I should have showed nothing at al of better testomonie of my good will
towards your Honour, this shall suffice me (until hereafter I may do better) to
use so simple a sound. And if so be I could worthily comende you (as those
Poets did Numa and Seruius) to high Olympus: you should surely by such our
means come by some of their Iuncketts that they have: But this would I rather
be done, by message had to and fro from these (which way Hercules used with
Hyla Thiodamant his Son: Apollo with Hyacinth: Diana with Hyppolitus:) then
that you enjoying the presence of those, our Country should lack you, such
her ornament and beautifying. Therefore for their better remembrance of you, I
will do so much at the least as to signify unto them your cognisance the fair
bright Star: which besides that, hath his hid signification. But to leave
these: and although Typhis and Iason be bold: yet I hope (most Honourable
Lord) I have not theirs, but Vatienus his face. Whose simple Treatise of mine,
when I was excited to bestow it of your Lordship, I straight ways gathered
with my self that you were not Licinius the Emperor which was malicious
toward the learned: neither yet Britannion, an utter enemy to the mother
Science, and her daughter Discipline: neither yet Valentinian: but rather
contrariwise Iulius Caesar, excelling both in Martial prowess, and also
serious after the inquisition of good Discipline: or else Iulianus: or Marcus
Aurelius. Which small gift of mine, if your Lordship take in good worth: I
shall be encouraged after a while to enrich these: and to attempt much greater
and better hereafter, so soon as I shall attain to a little more ripeness.
And thus ceasing to trouble your Lordship any more I make an end: desiring
GOD to bless you in all his gifts, both ghostly and bodily: and to continue
you in long life and true Honour, to his glory: the help and assistance of
others: and your own, and endless comfort. Amen.

Your Honours humble Orator, Iohn Maplet.

The Preface to the Reader.
Whatsoever things (saith Cardane) are of Natures tempering and dighting,
either in the earth his closet or entrails, or within the water (being all
void of f^ling and moving) may well be divided and sorted into these four
kinds: Earths Liquors or Iuices, Stones, Mettalles. Earths, saith Diascorides
in his fifth book (as also the same Author abouesaide) have their difference
either in colour, in smell, in savour, or else otherwise in other their use
purposes. Proper or pertinent to earths are many sundry kinds and sorts, as
those which either are in house with them, and fare as they fare, as Sand,
which Isidore names the lightest carth, as others: or those which are never
absent from the earth but are intermedled with the water, as Alume, which of
some is called the ^arth his salt, as salt it self and such like. In earths
are diverse dispositions and far diverse effects (which thing Diascorides
pursues abundantly) there are also reckned diverse names of diverse kinds: as
that of Eretria a famous City in the I'll of Eubea, hath his set and
disposition of colour and show ashy like, and is in his kind in operation a
sore binder, besides this marvelously cold. And that that is plentiful in
Chium in Eubea also (for there is of this name besides this, two more, one a
City of Caria, and another in Rhodes by Triopia) in effect and working is
far otherwise, which being aplied or used in medicine, dries up and burns.
The like dissent is in porcions of ground with diverse Inhabitants of opposite
quarters Climates, which by common name they cal earths, as in Samia is a most
tough earth like to that natural Lime which is called Bitumen. But let us come
to Brimstone which is ye father of Metals: as Mercurie or Quicksiluer their
Mother. Brimstone saith Harmolaus in Greek is called Theion. Isidore will have
it called Sulphur, for that it soon runs on fire. It grows (as they both
agree) in the y^es of Aeolia between Sicilie Italie: that is best that grows
in Melus a town of Thessalie which Nicius the Althenien captain, wanne by
famishing the inhabitants: Further, it grows within the Hills of
Neopolitane, companions of those which be called Leucogei. Harmolous saith,
that there be four kinds heareof. The first which is called Apuron live
Alume, this is solide and most massey: almost on clottes, which kind only
Phisicions use. The second which is called Bolus a lump like mettle. The
third is called Egula used commonly of Fullers to make their will and yarn
whight. The fourth which is called Cauton which they use in the wicke of Lamps
of Oil Candels. Thus much of this.

Quicksiluer in Greek is called ydrargyros, it is as Cardane saith, a certain
water made thick not by heate, because it is not hardened, neither by cold,
for then should it be either in the stone his kind or else in the metals: but
with most thin and pure yearthy part. Whereby it comes to pass, that it
is so heavy, so cold, so bright and clear, so liquid or renning. It is
rather mingled or tempered after a certain sort, that his own, then congeled
or compound, for as much as it is both liquid and fluxible. The reason he
shows why this kind, (as is also the water) are in figure round: for that
they refuse in their fellowship drought or any mixture of earth. It searches
seeks to the very bottom of each thing. It is for his raw mixture, of some
called metal Inconcret. And as it is with ise which dissolveth, then when it
vanishes away, and doth not vanish till it be dissolved: in like sort doth
this (but more principally, all metalles) which do endure well till that they
be molten. Dioscorides saith, that this Quicksiluer is most found in silver
quarries or mines: is then ^ound when Silver is dug up: some will have it
found in Mines by it self. It is best of all preserved and kept in those
vessels that be of Glass, of Lea^e, or of Tin and Silver. All other matter of
whatsoever kind it is of, it eats through ^loweth forth. It is a deadly
drink ouerlading breaking in sunder the inward parts with his weight, in
remedy whereof many have taken forthwith Wine and Wormwood, and have been
helped.

But now to the second part of our first former division. Liquores or Iuices
be Oils, Wines, and whatsoever else is watery or of ye water air. They be
called Liquores, for either being actually moistened, or else by power
possibility. But now let us speak somewhat ingenerallye (as we have of the
other two) of stones, which supplied in our first division, the third rometh.
Of Stones some be more base and common: other some more Precious and rare: but
the common Stone hath his name and vocable (if I may so say) hurtfoote, for
that it is in moving from place to place journeying the footes pain and grief.
The common stone hath almost infinite kinds which offer themselves every where,
and therefore to speak of them particularly, or in several sort, it were both
tedious and without delight: We mought therefore so have sorted Stones that we
mought have made some of them both base, and common: other some base, but not
yet common: lastly of all some neither base nor common but altogether rare and
precious. Of the first sort are all these that are so plentiful with us and
without estimation: of the second sort is the Pumelse concrete of froth as
Isidore witnesses, very cold of nature and in working so cold as he says,
that it being cast into a Hoggeshead of Wine and continuing there a while
takes from the Wine his natural heate. Of the last and chiefest sort are all
such as are of greatest price, for men's estimation spent on them, called Gems
or Jewels: as is that which they call Dionysius stone in spots ruddy: and be
speckled round about, as that of Phrygia, in colour wanne: in weight heavy: in
virtue hid and secret: as that of Arabie, as white as Ivory: without spot or
speck: as likewise the Sanguinarie which in Greek is called Amatites which
being well chafed and rubbed, bleeds. After this sort it hath pleased Dame
Nature thus to dally in each kind, thereby to show her cunning. But now let
us go to the last part of our division. Mettalles and those of the mettalick
sort, saith Cardane lie close for the most par^e in Mountains, in manner like
to the branch or body of a tree: and are nothing else but the earths hid
occult Plants, having their root, their stock or body, their bough leaves, be
in all these parts proportionally dispersed: further he saith, that both
Stones and Metals have these four parts as those that be necessary to their
^eeing and increase: a Root, Barcke, substance, and veins. The Stone his
Root says he, is either some other Stone out of the which it grows, or
else the earth: ye Metals Root is either Mettle, or some thing Me^allick.
Their rind or barck saith he, doth differ manifestly fro ye rest of their
substance, both in outward place and hardness. Their veins do appear
manifestly. But thus much shall suffice us to have spoken of the whole as
concerning division. Now let us come nigh each of them, and especially touch
the best of them, leaving the rest, forasmuch as it is our purpose not to seek
in all things what may be said of all, but espeically and principally to see
what is in them especial and principal. And therefore we were about to have
named this our Book the Aegemonie, of Natures thre^ middle Daughters: For that
in them all, that is sought forth, than the which there is nothing better,
nothing more excellent in all the whole kind: For such is y^ Greek word,
Aegemonia, as if you would say Principatus: The best and chiefest of the whole.
Those other two, that is yearthes and Liquores, we purposedly omit: only
covetous to bestow and employ in this first Book (but as briefly as we can,
and in order as chances) our travail and diligence in inquisition after
Stones and Metals: not that which I would, but that which I may for my poor
skill knowledge: not to teach or show the learned, howe in this point Nature
hath wrought (for that were as the proverb is, ye Sow to Minerua:) But to
record repeat in manner of Story, with the residue of men simple plain: And I
cannot tell how it may somewhat help those that be learned also, If they shall
epsy and consider but the effect and proof of these. I therefore desire a
Reader not learned, but unskilful: yet rather learned then immoderate. For the
one will be an impudent rayler: the other although he finds fault, yet shall a
man have him reasonable able herein to stay himself. Thus much of this
Preface, now to the residue of our matter.

Farewell.
Our Chiefest Authors herein.
Aelianus. Agricola. Aristotle. Albertus Magnus. Auicen. Ausonius. Cardane.
Cicero. Diascorides. Harmolaus Barbar{us}. Isidore. Iorach. Laurentius Lippius.
Lonicer. Lucane. Mantuan. Oppian. Ouid. Plin^e. Ruellius. Remigius. Solinus.
Theophrast. Volateranus with others.
Psalme. 104. O Lord howe marvelous are thy works: in wisdom hast thou
made them all, the earth is full of thy riches.


A pleasant Discourse with the chief kinds particularly of Precious Stones,
Plants, Beasts, Fowls, after the order of the Alphabet, never heretofore in
Print. The first Book.
Of the Adamant Stone.
THe Adamant is a Stone of Inde, small and rare, in colour like to Iron* but in
clear re^lection and representation of image more Crystal like: It is found
in bigness of a Walnut, and never above: It yields or gives place to
nothing, neither is it heat by iron or fire. Wherefore the Greekes call it
Fickleforce, for that it can not be brought under. But whiles it is invincible
or can not be won that way: yet notwithstanding with the warm and fresh
blood of the Goat, it breaks and riueth in sunder. It differs, from the
Lode Stone for that the Adamant placed near any iron, will not suffer it to be
drawn away of the Lode Stone. Diascorides saith that it is called the Stone of
reconsiliation and love: for (saith he) that woman that hath withdrawn her
love from her husband, by this, is brought to love him anew: yea, it goes
further: for it is said to give proof whether she be chaste or no: for if she be
say they, she shall whilst she is in sleep embrace her husband through the
working of this stone, if not, she shall fly and go back from him.

Of Alabaster.
ALabaster, as saith Isidore, in his.xvj. book and fifth Chapter, is a white
kind of stone died, and bespotted among with diverse sundry colours. Hereof
are made vessels to keep and contain all Ointments incorrupt, wherein they be
most purely and safely preserved. It grows about Thebis and Damascum, and
especially that which is whitest. But the best of this kind is brought from
Indie. It being borne about one, say some, keeps him in amity and charity
with all men.

Of the Amitist:
THe Amitist also grows in Indie: It is Princes among those Gemes that be
Purple coloured. Diascorides saith, that there be five kinds thereof: but that
which is Purple coloured, he reckeneth the chiefest. His force or virtue
avails against drunkenness, it kepeth a man waking, and drives away ill
cogitations and thoughts, it sharpeth the understanding. And is also one of
those sorts that is easy to engrave in.

Of Achates.
AChates is a kind of Gem, but black in colour, enterlined here there with
white veins: and it is called Achates of a certain flood of that name in
Cicilie, about the which flood this Achates was first found. There is a certain
kind hereof seen sometimes in Crete as Diascorides witnesses, having strokes
on each side like to blew veins. There is another kind in Indie bespotted on
every part with spots like blood. That of Crete is said to make a man
gracious, and to bring him in favour. That of Indie is good for the eiesight it
remedies venom, and being put into the fire is odoriferus.

Of the Stone Albeston.
ALbeston is a stone of Archadie, in iron colour, having gotten his name of the
fire, for that it being once set on fire, can never after be quenched or put
out: Whereof in old time was built that kind of work Mechanical, whereas the
Gentiles being once taken in sacrilege, dyed. Isidore saith in his.xvj. book,
that in a certain temple of Venus there was made and hoong up such a
Candlestick, wherein was a light burning on that wise, that no tempest nor
storm could put it out, he believes that this Candlestick had somewhat of
Albeston beset within.

Of the stone or Gem Alabandine.
THe Gem Alabandine, as saith Diascorides, had first his name of Alabanda, a
country in Asia, whose colour saith he resembles the Herb Calcedonie: but it
is somewhat more rare and in colour clear.

Of the precious stone Absistos.
ABsistos is black, marvelous weighty, bestroked and beset with red veins:
This being once heate, keeps hot seven whole days after, as Isidore
records.

Of Amatites.
AMatites is that kind of Gem, that touching a mans Uesture or Garment, it
makes it able to resist fire: so that it being afterwards cast into ye fire
hath no power to burn, but through the fires brightness becomes more bright
it self. Thus saith Isidore in his xvj. book.

Of Argirites.
ARgirites is a kind of Gem, that in colour and show is like to Silver, giving
also appearance of golden coloured Gravel, his figure or form is four square:
his virtue such as the Adamants is. The Mages suppose that it had this name of
his power or ability in brideling and keeping in perturbations and troubles.

Of Asterites.
ASterites is a Gem: but white, keeping close within it self light, and shows
it forth but little, even as the Star doth: but to him that beholds it
thoroughly, it shows him the Suns manifold reflexions.

Of Astrion.
AStrion is a Gem, found first in Indie, of very nigh consanguinity with the
Crystal, in whose Centre or middle point: as saith Diascorides, a certain
light is seen shining, without reflection much like to the Moon. The same
Author also thinks that this light that it hath* it takes of the stars,
against ye which it is helden.

Of the Berill.
BErill is a Stone rare, but not so precious, for it alone grows in Indie: it
is found green like to the Smaradge. It is first found also raw and rude
without either good look or pleasant show, but afterwards it is better
polished of them of Indie, and they use to polish it in manner and form of
Angle or Corner, to the intent that through ye dullness of his own colour,
this manner might show some glittering the light having his stay in every each
corner: Some say, they fashion it a^ the first, seven cornered: and otherwise
they say it shimmereth not. There is also another kind of Berill, which of the
Greek word is called Golden Berill, as saith Diascorides, whose interchauged
green colour resembles almost the wan and yelow colour of Gold. They say
that this being borne about a man, and being put now and than to his eyes,
kepeth a man out of peril of his enemies.

Of Brass.
Brass is a kind of mettle, one of those seaue that are compound of Brimstone
Quicsiluer* and is called Es of the Airs resplendeshing: The Brimstone that is
proportionally wrought in this (as in all other Metalles) is most earthy,
nothing pure, having his colour red and as it were burned: Quicksiluer, it hath
but meanly, gross also and nothing subtle. Yet this kind of Mettle being
well purged scoured, sodden also and washed from all his infections may be made
regular, brought to what point you will. Of all other Metalles, this is most
soundable for his shrill and harde noise: With this therefore, as that which was
most plentiful in ye former time, they eared and tilled their ground, but after
that Iron and the residue of Metalles by succession were found, this kind
ceased in that and such like uses. So even as the years change: so also doth
things themselves change, as well and wisely sang the Poet.

Of Calcedon.
CAlcedon, is a kind of stone pale and wan, of dull colour, almost a mean
between the Berill and the Iacinct. It hath three only kinds: whereof every
one of them is almost impossible to be graven in. It being well chafed and
warmed will draw to it, a straw or a rush. It is as they say, the Lawyers and
Orators friend, and others who plead causes.

Of Ceraunium.
CEraunium is a stone like to the Crystal, bespotted with blew, and is found
in Germanie: There is another of this found in Spain firelike and like to a
flame: his sufferaigntie is, that being safely and chastely borne about a man,
kepeth him safe and preserves him from Thunder and Lightnings, likewise the
house wherein he is: and is otherwise effectuous to bring a man in sweet
sleep.

Of the Coral.
THe Coral grows in the red Sea, and so long as it is and hath his being in
the waters, it is a kind of Wood, but by and by after that it is taken forth
of the water and comes into the air (and his reach) it hardens, and
becomes a stone. His boughs under the water are espied white and tender: and
being by chance through holdefast Nets in part or parcel brought to land,
change also their colour and become red, and for their feeling, are as hard
stones. Isidore in his.xvj. book. The Mages report that it resists
Lightninges. Therefore even as much worth and of estimation as is the precious
Margaret, that, that comes from Indie, so much worth and in estimation,
likewise is the Coral with them of Indie. Hereof are said to be two only kinds,
the one red the other white: this last is never found in bigness in length
more than half a foot: that other often bigger and longer. They say that it
is of power to rid us from all devilish dreams and pieuish fantasies.

Of the Cornellis.
THe Cornellis is one of those sorts that be somewhat rare also, but not so
precious, and is in colour red almost like to the Coral. It being hoong about
the neck, or worn upon the finger, is said, in all kinds of reasoning and
disputation, to appease the party that wears it, and to keep him from
childish brawlings.

Of the Carbuncle.
THe Carbuncle is a stone very precious, so called for that (like to a fiery
cole) it gives light, but especially in the night season: it so warreth with
the pupil or the eiesight, that it shows manifold reflexions. It hath as
some say.xij. kinds: but those most precious that come nigh the Carbuncles
nature: it is found in Libia.

Of the Crystal.
THe Crystal is one of those stones that shines in every part, and is in
colour warrie. Isidore saith, that it is nothing else then a cogeled Ise by
continuance frozen whole years. It grows in Asia and Cyprus, and especially
upon the Alps and high Mountains of the North Pole. It engenders not so
much of the waters coldenesse, as of the earthinesse mixed withal. His
property is to abide nothing in quality contrary to it self: therefore it
is delighted only with cold.

Of the Chrusopasse.
THe Chrusopasse is a Stone of Ethiope, which in the day light shimmereth not,
but in his quality lies hid: In ye night time when darcknesse arises, it
then bewrays his own and peculier quality. In the night time it is
flamelike, in the day time yelow or wan.

Of the Diamond.
THe Diamond is one of those that be counted something precious, it is in
colour almost Christallike but somewhat more resplendishing, and is as good (if
it be of any bigness) as a looking glass. Iorach calls it an other eye:
such certainty truth gives it in things done in his presence.

Of the Dionise.
THe Dionise is black or rather browne, all bestrowed with bloody strokes or
veins. It being put faith Isidore in Wines, makes them fragrant, or well
smelling, and is thought with his smell or savour to remedy drunkenness.

Of Dracontides.
DRacontides as his name also mentions, is plucked forth of the head or
brain of a Dragon, which only is in bright and fiery colour (as saith
Isidore,) as long as, it is come by, the Dragon being alive: wherefore the Mages
skilled in this point, cut it forth out of the Dragon his brain, he being by
means cast in to sleep. The most bold and adventurous men, are said, to
seek out the lurking holes of the Dragon, and whilst that the Dragon is from
home, these men bestrew his Lodge with certain Grain, which being received of
the Dragon, brings him into a dead sleep. And whilst they have thus
brought their purpose to pass they rip in sunder the noddle of his head to
take forth the Gem, and after that sow it up again and so depart.

Of Dradocos.
DRadocos is a kind of stone very pale, yet as shimmering withal, as the
Berill. It is said to bring to a man fear of Devils and other strange
thoughts fantastical: It being applied and laid upon a dead man, loses his
operatiue virtue. Wherefore they call it, the holy stone, for that whereas Death
frequents or takes, it utterly abhors.

Of Echites.
EChites is a stone both of Indie and Persia, which in the shore and Sea
banks of the Ocean, in the very bosom of the Indian and Persian Sea, it is
found: it is in colour Violet like: And there is a pair of them, Male Female,
and be most commonly found both together in the Eagles nest, without the which
the Eagle can not bring forth her young: and therefore kepeth them, as most
necessary in this behalf always in her Nest. These stones bound to a womans
body, being with child, do hasten child birth. And Iorach saith, that if any
man have these or one of these, and put it under that mans meat or trencher
that he suspects to be in fault of any thing: If that he be guilty, he shall
not be able through this to swallow down his meat: If not saith he, he may.

Of Efestides.
EFestides is in colour and Physiognomy very shamefast and childish, which
being had and carried about the stomach, or heart, kepeth a man safe from all
peril and endamaging. Diascorides saith, that if it be helden against the
Sun beams, that then it is very fiery, but being thrown into the water, it
leaves boiling, by little and little waxes very cold.

Of Elutropia.
ELutropia is a Gem, in colour green, or grassy, in part coloured and
bespotted with Purple speckes blood coloured veins. This is a marvelous
Juggler, for it will cause things object to be presented to our eyes as it
lists. It being put into a Basan of water changes to a mans eiesight the
Sun his beams, and gives them a contrary colour. Being also moved and
beaten in the air, makes to appear a bloody Sun, and darkneth the air in
manner of an Eclipse: and therefore it is called Eloutropia as you would say,
the Sun his enemy. There is of this name also a certain Herb which
Enchaunters Witches have oftentimes used, and do use, as also that above said,
whereby they have mocked and deluded many, which by means and working of
enchauntmet, have so dazzled the beholders eyes, that they have gone by them
invisibly.

Of Ematites.
EMatites is a stone somewhat ruddy, somewhat sanguine, found both in Africa,
in Indie and in Arabie: so named for that it resolves changes oft into a
bloody colour: and is called of some stench blood, for that it stops his
vent or course of flowing.

Of Enidros.
ENidros, is mean or small in bigness, continually sweating or dropping,
neither doth it for all this melt away or is lessened: of the which the
Lapidare hath this note and tune as follows.

Perpetui fletus lacrimis distillat Enidros
qui velut ex pleni Fontis scaturigine manat.
Distilling drops and tears full oft
That Enidros the Stone doth drop:
Which as out of a Fountain full,
Doth always run and never stop.
And here question might be moved why it doth not vanish or wax less, through
such daily flowing. The answer is for that his virtue or working doth bind
and thicken the air, that which is next to it, and so brings it to his own
nature, part by part in his order.

OfGagates.
GAgates is of the precious sort also, which was first found in Sicilie in a
certain flood called Gagatus of the which it took his name: although that in
Britannie, it is a good geast somewhat common as Isidore saith: It hath two
kinds, the one russet in colour, and the other black, this last easy to be
fired, and as smoky as Frankincense. It being left in the place where
Serpents breed, drives them clean away. And Diascorides saith, that this
being put into ye drink of a Maid or Virgin will easily give you judgment
whether that she be a true and right Maid yea or no. For saith he, after that
she hath drunk of this and doth not anon after make water, but can continue,
then take her and esteem her a pure Virgin, and contrariwise, if she do not
continue and stay herein some season, judge of her otherwise.

OfGalactites.
GAlactites is a stone in colour ashy, in taste very sweet pleasant, which
being pressed or grouned, yields and gives a certain Milky and waterish
humour, as saith Isidore: This being kept in close, and shut up in the mouth,
desturbeth and lets the mind. Further, it being bound to a Woman's thigh,
causes easy deliverance in child bed.

Ofthe Gem.
I Must needs before I journey any further or hasten to other, somewhat speak
of the Gem: for that we have been occasioned and shall be hereafter to use it
as the generaltie or notion of the name and stock in these kinds. It is called
a Gem saith Isid. for that it shines and is smooth as the Gum. This hath his
best beautifying in the variety and interplacing of colours, it is called
precious, for that it is rare: all things that be rare are precious. Neither is
it to be marveled why each Gem is precious, since that al and singular are not
without their divine virtue. Of Gems, some are found in the earths veins,
are dug up with Metalles: some are cast up to land and brought thither from
the Sea his bottom, and their place of generation is unknown: other some are
bred and found in the bodies bellies of Fowls, Fishes, Creatures Beasts of the
earth, Serpents and such as creep miraculously by God provident nature in
their manner of working tasked. But in this kind as in al others we must take
heed of Sophistication: for to discern judge truly the right Gem from the
counterfayted, is the significatio of a most cunning man. It hath been seen
that in stead of a Smaragde some have had sophistred and counterfayted Glass:
Wherefore let not colours deceive thee: as well green to eiesight is the Glass
as the Smaragde, thou must take heed as the Poet ^iddeth, much colouring is
there and many decei^es.

Of Gelacia.
GElacia is a Gem very white, having the figure or show, likewise the bigness
quatitie of an Hailestone, and is of such excessive coldenesse that by no
means of fire had and applied thereto it becomes who^e.

Of Geratites.
GEratites is a kind of stone black, but his virtue exceeds and is above his
colour: If any man carry this in his mouth close, he may tell what every man
thinks of him: as saith the Lapidare. It also makes amiable and brings him
into others favour that hath it about him.

Of Gold.
Gold is the head of all other Mettalles, and is in the chiefest degree that
Nature instituted Metals by ripeness and perfection at the last to come unto:
but even as by stoppes and lets, partly by such imbecility as is within us,
and about us, partly by envious clean contrary disposition of the Air and
Planets in their Orbs, fighting and striving with us somewhile, anon against
us: we be many of us cut off before we come to old age, the last degree of
Nature, so that we can not attain to this last, through such our hindrances
and impediments: so there is order and ways to order in al Metals from the
first to the last, from the most vile and base, to the most precious richest:
which kind of order and degree every Mettle although it were of the rawest
and basest sort, should attain to in his due time, were it not for impediments
and hindrances, either of cold and barren ground, or for lack of the Sun
his purifying and ripening, or for infection of rusty and copperous Mineralles
being nigh neighbour to them: or for such other stoppes, whereby they stop
and stay, and so become gross for lack of their natural and first growth and
tidinesse in ripening. Isido. saith that it is called Gold of the Air for
that that the Air being stroked shimmereth the more. It is natural to all
Mettalles that they shine and look bright, especially being moved and helden
in the light. The Hebrewes call this Mettle Ophar, ye Greekes Chrusos.
Aristotle saith in his fourth book of Meteores, that this kind as all the
rest proceeds and is compound of Brimstone the very subtlest and red, and
Quicksiluer also as subtle, but white, and this last very smallie and
proportionally. Amongst al Metals there is none more solide, more compact then
this is: and therefore it being put into the fornace doth not evaporate (as
other things do) neither doth it leese of his weight. It is more du^tile
easy to be brought to what point you will then any of the other. For upon a
Stith with a Mallet it is brought into most thin leaf or plate without rupture
or breaking. There is nothing to look to so beautiful as this, neither is
their any thing so pure. The Physicians say that it comfort and expels
all superfluities in the body, and is effectuous against the Leprosy.
Likewise his leaf buried in wine makes it auaylable against diseases
consumption of the Spleen, and other perturbations Melancholic. Likewise
Incision or Adustion done with an Instrument of Gold is better than of any
other Mettle or matter, for it kepeth the place of vstion, free and clear from
ill smelling and rancoring. There is also a certain vain of the earth, or
whether a man might call it a kind of stone, easily dug up and broken,
having the very look and face of Gold, and of some is the stone Arsenick, is
wrought as I think of Arsenicum, which also they call the golden earth. But
this Arsenicum is double, one ashy colour, and the other as we above said, in
colour like Gold. The first is used to medicine, for it hath power to dissolve
to purge: And besides that, they say it is used to Ointments depilatiue.

Of the Jasper.
THe Iaspar is a Gem very green, like to the Smaragde, but of a little more
gross colour. Isid. saith that this hath. xvij. several kinds and he calls
it the green stone. That of Cypria, (saith Harmolaus) is more dusky coloured
and gross: That of Persia is like to the Air, for the which it is called
Aerizula: That of Phrygia is purple coloured: There hath been in ancient time
seen a Iaspar in weight.xj. Ounces. There is also in the head of the Serpent
Aspis found a little stone much like to the Jasper of marvelous virtue, which
some by cutting away the first letter, have called Aspis. It is thought to have
so many ways in working as it hath kinds.

Of the Iacinct.
THe Iacinct is blew, and of nigh neighborhoode with the Sapphire. This is a
marvelous turncote, for that it doth conforme it self to all sets and
dispositions of the Air, for being held in the cloudy and dark Air,
becomes also cloudy and dark: and being in the bright and clear Air,
becomes also both bright and clear. It is taken to be medicinable, to give
vigour and strength to the limbs, to increase the sinews, and to provoke quiet
and sound sleep.

Of Iris.
IRis is a kind of Stone Mathematicallye wrought, as being dug up in form
six cornered, which at the first was found nigh the red Sea: but is now found
in many places, as in Germanie, in Irelande, and in the North parts and
quarters, and is of colour as clear as the Crystal. It is called Iris for
likeloode to the Rainbow, which being touched stricken of the Sun his
beams, under any covert, doth represent and show both the figure and colours
of the Rainbow upon the wall next to it, and that oppositely as Diascorides
saith. It hath the same force and working that the Berill hath, but is not in
quantity so great.

Of Iron.
IRon in Latin is called a feriedo Ferrum, for that through his hardness it
stryketh, molifieth, and brings under all kind of metals. This kind
according to the manifold difference of earths and quarters of the earth. is
diversely called. It is engendered (as Aristotle saith) of Quicksiluer very
gross, nothing pure, unclean and earthy: and of Brimstone also as gross, as
impure, as earthy. In composition whereof there is more of the Brimstone: so
that through the temperature of cold which is in the Quicksiluer, of the
drought and earth, which is in the other, it is so wrought compact on that
wise. Iron through blood touching waxes rusty, and getting within him, can
scarcely, or not at al, be rid of it, corrupting within otherwise. Rust
therefore is nothing else but a default and an offence in the uncleanness and
impurenesse of any substance, whether it comes either by fellowship and
placing next to the earth, or through any ill quality of mans blood, or of
moist and infectuous vapour. As Isidore records. Of Iron Mans blood is
soonest revenged, for that by nothing so soon, Iron is brought to his
corruption. It hath a natural amity with the Adamant, which Adamant (as we
before mentioned) draws it to it, and this last follows and obeys. Iron
being polished is very like to Brass. There is a certain Iron which is for
the most part white, which if it be buried a certain space in a Uessell either
of Wine or of Milk, remedies diseases in the Spleen, is otherwise available.
If you go to use and wade no further, this kind of Mettle is principal
amongst the rest, which thing necessity teaches, and is the best proof:
which we also do approve then, when as we are constrained and driven to Weapon
and Armourie: for without this could we neither be quiet at home amongst our
selves, neither could we keep off, from our Country borders and limits, other
our outward enemies. Further (to stay our selves in things at home and not to
seek other) there could be no mans Art practised, no commodity had by
occupation science: further, not so much as the earth could be either sow or
reaped to any increase without this. Therefore in this behalf it mought be
called all grain and fruits Nurse.

Of the stone Kaman.
KAman the stone may well be called a turncote, for that it is now black, now
white, now shamefast blushing. And is in colours very diverse, and therefore it
is called Kama, as you would say in Greek Kauma soon kindled. It is found in
hot places, and especially in those that have good store of Brimstone and be
Sulphurous: as Diascorides reports. It helps saith he the drop sie: and is
easy to be engraven and carved in.

Of Kabiates.
KAbiates is clear coloured, very like to the Crystal. It is thought being
borne about one to make a man eloquent, to make him honourable, and to get and
win him favour. It preserves one also from hurtful and venomous Serpents, and
cures pain and grief in the Maw and Spleen.

Of Kalpophanus.
KAlpophanus is a kind of stone black, yet be painted with other colours,
which being carried in the month is said to clarify ye voice, and to help
them that be h^arse, as the Lapidare witnesses.

Of Lead.
LEad saith Aristotle, comes and arises of Brimstone, both gross, impure,
full of dregs: and of Quicsiluer also, watery, and in manner like to an
humour. Isidore saith, it was called Lead at the first for that at the beginning
with it was found forth and tried the Sea, his depth and bottom. There are
two sorts of Lead, the one white, the other black: but the whitest is best,
which kinds was first found in the Isles of the Sea Atlantike. But is now found
in Lusitania and in Gallicia, in many other places. It is found also in
Mineries in manner like to Gravel and Sand, which afterwards is sodden and
molten to greater quantity in fire and fornace. That other black Lead is found
most in Catabrie, whose origin or being is after two sorts, for either it
proceeds of a vain by it self, or else it grows next by silver, and
ouercrosseth his veins with it. Therefore his first liquor running when as it
is molten is almost Tin: the second, in a manner Silver: that which is then left
and remains (adding also to it his vain and so entermedled) becomes black
Lead. In Indie saith Isidore, there is neither Lead nor Brass of his own,
therefore it changes for his own Merchandise (as with Gems and Margarets)
wherein it is most plentiful. In Spain and France it is very hardly hewn
out: In Britannie with very much ease. Hermes saith, that Lead being boiled,
looseneth al other sound bodies and weakens their hardness, as also it
enfeebles the Adamant.

Of the stone Ligurius.
LIgurius, is a stone in colour like to Tin. It is engendered in the entrails
and privities of Lynx the wild Beast, and is of that virtue that it draws to
it any offall of chafe or straw. It also helps pain in the stomach, and
bewrays Uenome or Poison.

Of Lipparia.
LIpparia is a Gem brought from the Syrtes, sandy places and gravelled in the
borders of Africa, next towards Egypt, whose property is to delight and
inamour all kind of beasts, with his look or show, unto ye sight whereof
they all hastily run. Therefore the Huntsmen for those that they can not get
by course of Greyhound, or other kind of Dog, they use only to come by them
by means of looking in this stone, with the which sight they bring them to
them, as ye Lapidare reports.

Of the Lodestone.
THe Lodestone comes from Indie, and is almost Iron colour like. It is found
most rife amongst the Trogloditas people, in the furthest part of Africa,
beyond Aethiopia, who are said to dwell in Caves, and to eat Serpents flesh.
It draws Iron to it, even as one Lover covets and desires an other. The
common people therefore having sometime seen this so done by secret and
unknown working, have judged and reputed ye Iron lively. There is another kind
of Lodestone in Thessalie, that is of contrary set and disposition, which will
have none of Iron, nor will meddle with it. But for the other that is reckned
principal and best, which in colour is blew. Saint Augustine saith, that if
any man put under any vessel either golden or of brass, or hold under these
any piece of Iron, and lay above the vessels or upon them this Lodestone, that
even through the very motion or moving of the stone underneath, the Iron shall
move up and meet with it as nigh as the vessel will suffer at the very top.

Of the Margaret.
THe Margaret of all Gems, those which be in their kinds white, is esteemed
the chiefest: as Isidore consents, with others herein. Which kind he will
also have thus named, for that it is found growing in the meat of certain
shell fishes, and those of the Sea, as in the Sea Snail, and in the greatest
Oyster, and such like as have their shell. It is engendered of a certain
heavenly dew, which in a certain time of the year, both the Sea Snail and
the Cockle do take and drink up. Of the which kind of stone certain are
called Unions, for that by one and one, they be found, and never above one:
there be some of these also seen sometimes yellow, but the other are theverie
best.

Of the Mede.
THe Mede is a precious kind of stone only found amongst the Medes, whereof it
is so named, which stone in some places there, is seen green, in some other,
black. It helps the Gout, mingled among with the Milk of a woman, n^w
bearing a Son, and remedies the Frenzy.

Of the Melanite.
THe Melanite is a Stone, which distills drops that juice which is very
sweet and honey like: wherefore it may well be called Melanite as you would say
Honistone, and it is double coloured, on the one side it is green, on the
other side yellow.

Of the Mirrite.
THe Mirrite is a Gem, both in taste and colour like to Myrrh, which being
wrong pressed hard, gives as pleasant a smell as Nardus or Spikenarde.

Of the Marble.
THe Marble by Gre^ke word and name is interpreted green. There are Marbles
in great and huge bigness, and length: which are of many esteemed and had in
reputation for their spots and colours. The sorts and kinds of Marble are
infinite: for not every of them are hewn forth out of Rocks: but many be
dispersed under the earth, as the Marble with the Lacedaemonians, which is both
grene and precious: So likewise that kind of Marble which is called Ophites,
which hath spots like a Serpent, is much esteemed. Of Ophites two sorts are
mentioned: the first white and soft, the other black and hard. There is another
kind almost Coral like, found in Asia* having certain blots besprent upon
it and about it proporcionally. There is also a Thebane Marble dipped here and
there, and dyed like in manner to golden drops, and is found in a part of
Egypt. There are other kinds also which breed and have the very rocks to be
their shop houses, as ye Marble in Corinth, whereof whole Pillars and great
Beams are made. And there is another Marble called Caristeum very green,
having his name of his good look, for that it is available to their eiesight
that engrave therein. The green colour hereof refreshes the eyes. Marble
therefore is more sound, more fair, more profitable than any other stones
are, with Lead and not with Iron (contrary to all others wont) all stones of
Marble are hewn and cut, which thing is marvelous. For neither with Steel
nor yet with Iron, neither with Mallet nor cutting Shears, neither with Saw
by any force or striving withal, it is subdued.

Of the Melochite.
THe Melochite is a green Gem, much like to the Smaradge, his green colour
notwithstanding is somewhat more thick gross: wherefore for his only colour, of
some it is called green Malue. It grows in Arabia, and is to feel to very
soft, and in effect very medicinable.

Of Nesorpora or Toads stone.
NEsorpora is a stone of Pontus, very precious, marvelous white, and as they
say, it is found in a Toads head, out of the which it is plucked and taken
forth, and is purified by lying a certain space steeping in strong wines and
running water, as Diascorides bears witness. In this stone is apparently
seen very often the very form of a Tod, with bespotted and coloured feet,
but those ugly and defusedly. It is available against invenoming.

Of Nitrum.
NItrum (as saith Diascorides,) is a stone but nothing precious or Gem like: it
is also very white, easy to be riuen, and to look to, it is clear also. It
is called Nitrum of Nitrea, a Region or Country in Egypt. Of this stone many
Medicines are made and are dighted therewithal, as one principally to take,
and rid out of the body all filth and annoyances. The dust hereof also wrought
with honey doth clarify and beautify the face.

Of Onix or Onichus.
ONix of some Onichus, is a stone of Indie and Arabie, having colours all
about it intermedled very like to a mans nail: whereupon the Greekes call our
nail Onikin. That of Indie hath a colour like to fire, is dyed with white
Veins or Zones. That of Arabie is black, yet died with white Lines or Zones.
It hath many kinds as Sardonix, so called for that by comixture of the Onix
which is white and Sardus which is red, it becomes but one of them both. It
being borne about one, riddeth him of fear: and in manner of a Glass it
shows a mans visage, as saith Diascorides.

Of Oppalus.
OPpalus (as saith Diascorides) is a stone in colour like to vecie many, and
those clean contrary Gems. For it represents in some part as good a green
colour as the Smaragde: in some other part it looks like Purple, and in
another part like to a whote Cole as the Carbuncle doth.

Of Orites.
ORites is a Gem black, and in figure round. It hath diverse kinds, whereof one
is green having white spots. This being worn and hung about the neck of any
woman, prohibiteth and lets conception, or, and if she have before
conceived, it hastens her delivery, and makes the birth untimely and
imperfect.

Of Parius.
THe stone Parius is a kind of the finest and most excellent Marble. This is
found in Para the Island, wherefore it is called Parius, it is very profitable
and good to keep and preserve all kind of Ointments.

Of Prassius.
PRassius, is in manner of an Onion or Leek very green, and comfort a
weak and f^eble eiesight. It is found sometime with bloody drops, and sometime
with drops that be white. It is nothing precious, neither in any laudable sort
effectuous, but only for a show to the eyes. Whereof the Lapidare hath this
Uerse.

Vtile nil offer nisi qui viret decet Aurum.
To no purpose or kind of good
Prassius the stone doth serve
But only that with fresh green look,
it from offence th'eine doth preserve.
Of Pirrites.
PIrrites is a kind of stone, yellow, like to the fire his flame, and in
quality almost all one with the fire: for the which I suppose it took his
name, it is soon kindled and set on fire. It also sparckleth, and being hardly
holden pressed in any mans hand burns him sore or he perceives it. Whereupon
the Lapidare hath these two Uerses.

Tangi vult leuiter blanda{que} manu{que} teneri
nam pressus nimium digitos tangentes adurit.
The Pirrite must with easy hand
And marvelous soft enholden be:
For being pressed and held to hard
Doth burn thy flesh or ere thou se.
Of the Pionite.
THe Pionite is a stone thought to be only a Female, for in very short time
and full quickly it conceives brings forth his like, and is an help also to
such as be pregnant and big with child.

Of Panteron.
PAnteron is a stone of all colours, or at the least of the most part of them,
whereupon it is so named: for it is in some part black, in other part green,
in other part purple, and so forth. This is said to bolden a man, and to make
him invincible.

Of the Quiren.
THe Quiren is a stone which is found in Ilandes and Fens, most commonly in
Lapwings Nestes: this is a betrayer of dreams, and of a mans secrets when as
he is in sleep. It being put under his head ye sleeps, causes him to speak
out all that he hath in his mind in secret wise, and to himself only
purposed.

Of Quandias.
QVandias is a stone very vile in colour, but of much virtue as saith
Diascorides* It is found in the Vulture his head, and is mans friend, for it
drives from him al things that be hurtful.

Of the Ruby.
THe Ruby is a stone which of some is supposed to be found in the Crabs head,
most commonly red, yet notwithstanding sometimes found in yellow colour. It
avails against the biting of the Scorpion and Weasel, if it be applied
thereto plaster like.

Of Rhombites.
RHombites is of two sorts, the one which consists of Scales, having the
likeness of Rhombus, a figure with ye Mathematicians four square: having the
sides equal, the corners crooked, whereof comes Rhombites, This is very
white as Cardane reports: there is another of this which hath ye figure of
narrow Rowler, but coloured and dyed within and without, so that it likewise
represents the figure of Rhombus.

Of the Sapphir.
THe Sapphir is Sky coloured or blew, like to the Sky in the most fair
weather. It is one of the Noblest and royal sorts amongst al Gems, and most
meet to be worn only upon Kings and Princes fingers. This for his
sovereignty of the Lapidare, is called ye Gem of Gems. It is found most
especially in Indie, although that sometimes, otherwhere. Cardane saith, that
it is next and above the Adamant in reputation: fifth or last in the degree of
those Gems that be noble and precious: he saith also, it is good (if it be
not otherwise overlaid) to the eiesight, and that nothing in the whole world,
doth more recreate or delight the eyes than the Smaradge Sapphir do^. Albartus
Magnus saith, that he hath proved it twice, that with the only touching of
this precious stone, the party so diseased, hath been rid of the grievous sore
the Carbuncle. It is marvelously effectuous against al venom. Wherefore, if
thou put a Spider into a Box, and upon the mouth of the Box, being shut thou
lay the true Sapphir and keep the Spider but a very short time within the
same, the Spider being vanquished and overcome by such mean of close virtue
dies suddenly. In old time it was consecrated only to Apollo: for the which
they thought their business in Wars and affairs at home might be the sooner
ended, if through such means they had enriched and honoured him, who by Oracle
in all things those which were waightiest made only the answer.

Of the Sardye.
THe Sardye is a kind of Gem red coloured: so called for that it was first
found in Sardys, (whose kinds) those especially which are more thin and
clear (for this is something gross) have other names: as when it is most pure
and clean, it is called Carneolus, of some (certain letters being changed)
the Cornelles. Cardane saith, that this of all other stones is most meet to
engrave in, to make Seals thereof, and he gives these three reasons: First,
for that it cleaves not or doth not hold fast to the Wax: secondarily, for
that it is easily carved, for it is but of mean hardness. Thirdly, for that
through clear humour or vapor it is not so soon dulled or duskied as many
other be.

Of Sardonix.
SArdonix, as the Lapidare saith, is bred and borne of the Sardye, which is the
father to him, Onix, which we before mentioned, in manner his mother. Isidore
saith, it is three coloured, black about the bottom, white in the midst, red at
the top: It is as fit for Seals as the Sardye. There be five kinds hereof
seen in Indie. This in working makes a man lowly and shamefast in his doings.

Of Silonite.
SIlonite the stone is seen in Persia, in colour like to the Jasper, or like
to a fresh and flourishing green Herb. It increases and decreases even as
the Moon, taking ye Moon herein to be his pattern or example, belike for that
it consists of humour abundantly.

Of Silver.
Silver in Greek is called Argurion, not far from the Latin name and
appellation. It is compound of the best and purest Quicksiluer, and of the most
white Brimstone, and that which in their mixture and composition, by no means
is burnt to red or black, as Aristotle rehearses. Quicksiluer therefore hath
this proper and peculiar to it self, that it doth not gather together in manner
of curd, or waxes thick unless it be intermedled with his fellow like
acquaintance, Brimstone. Thereupon Aristotle proves that Quicksiluer
Brimstone are the Elements, that is to say, the Matere and cause of beginning
in all things liquable or those which melt, which are commonly called Metals.
Quicksiluer doth much breath forth and evaporate, whose breath or fume doth
greatly hurt those, whom it apprehends. For it brings to a man the Palsy,
and vndoeth and looseneth within him his Sinews and Joints. Without this
notwithstanding, there could be no mixture, neither in Gold, in Silver, nor
yet in any other Mettle. Silver therefore hath these qualities peculiarly. It
is clear, it is shrill of sound, easily ductile, a marvelous preserver of
sweet balms, the Iaspers friend, and with whom the Jasper better agrees
than with Gold. It is also medicinable, for his offall or dust remedies
wounds. Further, it taking earth, rustieth: but being new rubbed over with
Sand and Salt, comes to his old colour again. Isidore saith, that there
is three kinds of Silver, Gold Brass: and of other Metals. That which is
graven or by any wise seized upon: that which is wrought, and that which is
not wrought: that which is sealed or coined, as is Money, or goth for Money:
that which is wrought and made otherwise, as is Uessell or Plate: that which is
unwrought is called a lump or bar of raw Mettle, of some a wedge of Mettle.

Of the Smaradge.
THe Smaradge hath his name of his excellent and fresh green colour. For
every thing that is grassy green, is properly called in Greek Smaron. It
passes both the leaf and bough of any Tree or plant in this his colour, and
in this point alone triumphs, neither is the Sun by his Sun beams, any
let or hinderance to this his show. There is no greater refection to the eyes
than the sight of this. It being polished and dressed, shows a man his lively
Image, whereupon the valiant Caesar had no greater delight, than in looking on
this, to see his Warriors fight, and to behold in the Smaragde which of them
went best to work, and was most active. Isidore saith, that there be.xij.
kinds hereof, but the most noble is found in Scithia, the next in Bactria.
This stone saith Cardane, serves to deuination, and to tell of a certainty,
things to come, or otherwise. For that that shall come to pass, it will never
let it sink or slip out of mind, and that that shall not, it easily
suffers the mind to forget.

Of Sol.
SOL the Precious stone, is in colour like to the Sun, and is called Sol, for
that it gives reflexions of Sun beams, even as the Sun doth.

Of Tin.
TIn after his Greek name, is called a deuider and distinguisher of one thing
from another, for all adulterous and counterfayted Metals it doth betray, and
sets them severally asunder. It also discerns Brass Lead from Gold
Silver. Tin being rarely powered upon Brazen Uesselles, makes their savour
more pleasant, and bridles kepeth under the poisonous rust. Aristotle saith,
in his fourth book of Meteores, yt it is compound of Quicksiluer indifferent
good, but of very base Brimstone, and therefore this kind of Mettle is nothing
proporcionably mixed, but al out of square compound, for the which it looks so
raw, and hath Silver his very colour, but not his goodness. Cardane saith,
that Tin descrieth and revels if any poison be hid, for both it hisseth and
cracks if it be so, and also shows thin stripes in manner like to a bow. I
have seen it my self when as this kind of Mettle being molten in the pit
and but a sponefull of water being cast into, it hath floushed and leapt up to
the top of the house: but a whole Potfull of Beer or Ale being cast in, it
hath not once moved, but laughed by and by. The cause I may give that, that
Cardane doth, applying it to all Metals only Gold excepted: for saith he all
other (only Gold excepted) are fertile and fat. And being thus, laffe at
their like, and refuse the residue. And thus much of Tin.

Of Talchum.
TAlchum the stone is like to Glass, having as it were about it Hills and
Edges naturally set in it. This being drunken (saith Cardane) in quantity as
big as a Walnut, doth marvelously ease and remedy pains in the bowels.

OfTaraxippus.
TAraxippus the stone as the name gives, doth signify the Horse his trouble
and disquietness. It is in colour very fiery, and it so shimmereth
especially by night, that the horse casting his eyes that way, espies his like
with a fearful look: whereat he stamps and stares. Cardane him self
records, what as concerning this purpose, befell in his presence and
company, three years before he wrote his book de Subtilitate. I was saith
he, in Ianua, whereas I supped with the worthy and renowned man Francis Duarde
ye Emperors Lieutenant: when as I had supped it rayned great showers, I was
ready to put on my Cloak, my Hat and such Uestures, so to defend me from these
showers. This Duarde perceiving I should be wet or I got home (as he is very
civil and courteous) lent me certain of the best Horse he had, and of his men
as many, to accompany me. There was also present with me, and who should also
go my way Lodwick Ferrare. Preparance was made: we took our Horse and so
departed. As we should go by a certain way hard by a certain fornace, we saw
in ye very walls thereof a fiery colour, as it were of quick and burning
Coals, which thing the Horse having espied, would no further, but drew
backward, wrestled with us to have gone back, so that we could not rule them.
We at the length fearing displeasure such as might befall to us, for fear of
more danger alighted, having some there to stay them, went our selves nigh
approached to the Fornace, whither when we came, we might epsy a fiery colour,
but nothing burning or on fire, which also considering what this should be, at
the last perceived well enough that it was this Taraxippe, that had so feared us
and our Horse, and so departing, being thus deceived, we rid another way.

Of the Topaze.
THe Topaze as Plinie saith, is a Gem of grassy colour: although that in
Germanie it is found like to Gold. It was first found in Arabie, in a certain
Land there: whereas the people Troglodite such as live by Snakes flesh and
other Serpents, being compelled thorough very extreme hunger: and they also
being on the water or Sea, drive thither by tempest, and so both wore and
hungry, digging up the Roots of certain Herbs, by hap and chance pulled up
this. This Island afterwards was sought of Mariners and Merchants, and was
ransaked where as they found (having had of them knowledge hereof) their best
Merchandise. After that, for those peoples sake, by whom they had so won and
done so well, they would never change the name hereof, but after their proper
and peculiar speech called it a Topaze. For Topazein in Greek is as much, as
to find by seeking. Plinie saith, that it hath been found of that bigness and
quantity that Philadelphus is said to have framed, and made thereof a statue
or Image in length of four Cubits.

Of the Turches.
THe Turches or Turcois, is of the common sort called Eranus. It is in colour
airelike or like to the Heavens, and looks clear also as saith Cardane. It
is called a Turches for that it is only found in Turkland or amongst the
Turks. This hath such virtue and hid manner in working, that it supports and
sustains, being worn in a ring, a ma from falling of his horse, and is said
of the above said Author to receive the danger of the fall it self, and to
break and burst in sunder, rather than the man should fall and miscarie.

The Conclusion.
OF Ydachides I need not to write, for that I find nothing of his praise in
other Authors but this: that in manner Spherelike it hath one within an other.
Neither need I write of Zeblicu, which is found in Misaena, whereof I find
nothing else, but that it avails against venom. Neither need I speak of
Zinguites, the ashy coloured stone, which being worn about ye neck, stencheth
blood: lastly of all, I have not much to entreat of Zenieth, which of some is
called and reckned the stone Lazulus, whose only commendation is for that it
purges Melancholy passions, and stops them. But these which I have before
entreated of, I therefore entreated of, and so far forth I spake of them, as it
mought somewhat move men not to be dull or slack in the searching out of these:
for that much profit comes to man by them. If I should have spoken of all
kind of stones, as well Gems as other: I suppose it would have required large
and infinite volumes. For the kind of stones as Isidore saith, are infinite.
But these have I gathered with good will, and briefly. Wherefore gentle Reader
favour us, and bear with us now; as thou wilt have us hereafter peradventure
to enrich these.

FINIS.
The second Book of the Aegemonie or chiefest virtues in all the whole kind
of Plants, and of his parts, as of Herbs, Trees, Shrubs, after the order of the
Alphabet.

Psal. 135. Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in Heaven and in Earth* c.

The Preface to the second Book.
IN value more, and in degree of Nature higher: In Nobility above Stones and
Metals, are Plants, if they had their just reputatio were valued as they
should be. But herein is corrupt and depraved judgment (I might call it abuse,
but that this word is not so fit and agreeable in all points as that other:)
and therefore it is true that the Poet Gualter saith: Whilst that we being
fastened and set upon pleasures, do stray from the right rule of Reason, to
satisfy our minds to nourish corrupt judgment, we set most by that that is
less worth: we most esteem where less estimation should be, and have a
preposterous manner in judging, and an awke wit in many things, their
preferment. But this he spake (as it seems) most of all moved with the Uulgar
and common sort. For the other kind of men (whom Tullie calls polished and
well addighted in all things) which govern and stay themselves by wise prudent
means, he saw (unless they were I can not tell, howe by some evil means
bewitched) to reckon and esteem of all things as they were: And therefore he
may seem with al intent of mind fully bent to check and upbraid the
Multitude, and their baseness in judgment, whom the aforesaid Tullie
trippeth eftsoon, but especially in his Oration had for Cneius Plancie, whereas
he reckneth up a heap of imbecilities and ways of halting in all office and
duties, and first after this sort. In the common sort (saith he) is no perfect
knowledge or skill, to select or choose forth amongst many things what is head
and principal: there is no sound reason, there is no desert of having well,
there is no industry or diligence. And in his Oration for Quintus Roscius after
this sort. Thus stands it with the Commons. They esteem many things by figure
fantacie, but few veritably and uprightly. Further, the self same Author in
his Offices holds him not Heroical or Princelike, which leans or hangs
upon them. Wherefore let us go on, and give them their natural, pristmate, and
just place and order in degree: forasmuch as in the other abouesaide, in
Metals Stones, all is in their hid secret virtue, there making abode stay
hereat: unless peradventure thou be moved with the goodly show. Which with ye
Suns reflexions and light, moreover the shimmering air the Mettle his
purifying more or less, meeting all together, one helps, colours sets
out another: thou being in love with so goodly a show, and brought to it by
evil accustoming, gives consent and so won dost beckon at it, and wilt say
that it is only proper to the Mettle it self: but from yt have I brought
thee, set thee in another belief: whereas I spake particularly of Gold,
Silver, and such like, if thou wilt but only way of what stock or household
they be of. But to return to our purpose. In Plants there is not only
occult and hid virtue: furthermore, fresh flourishing colours, wherewith I
perceive thou would be delighted: but there is in them that nature that
comes somewhat more near (than those other do) to the principal Creature
man. For in them is the life vegetatiue or that life which nourishes,
augments brings forth his like, more apparent also, and in sight more than
those other be, which lie shut up in the earth as dead bodies without life, and
have their manner of increase or decrease therein, as all other things
incensible have, and are said to quicken or die but unproperly: In the Plant it
is spoken on that wise properly after such sort, as mankind first next after
his conception is said to quicken and continue withal in reaching by mean of
natural order to his last kind, imperfect at the first, by this mean of
vnperfection, in the which he lies and stays in after, his conception. 70.
days, and so long is he plantlike: then the rest of time hath he in part and
parcel like, so disposed and ordered of Nature to lay hold on, and to
apprehend the other life above this, called sensitive, in the which time so
bespent* he seems of no greater account or force than other bruit beasts
be, whose property is (as brute beasts is also the like) to feel grief and
pleasure, to move, to have sense, and that newly, then begun by Orgaine or
Instrument diversely framed. And then even then it becomes to have an appitite
to that which it holds good and pleasant, and a recess or lothsomnesse to yt
which makes against it. All this at that time, (even as bruit beasts have)
hath man in that not yet finished, imperfect shape or form. But the other
greater and that which is his own, being once perfect, as to perceive judge by
sense both inward and outward, to stand in fantasy, and to mark and observe
all ill deserts (whereat also brute beasts stay at:) but to leave these, and to
proceed further, to be mindful of, to have in remembrance or record things
past, to confer and apply them with the present time, or adjudge thereby
what is in the time coming: to understand, to utter the thought in way easy to
be understood: this divine power (that I may so say) hath man only, that man
principally above others that is a man in deed, and not by appellatio or name,
withal those other powers that be in the other two kinds abouesaide: but so
proportionably wrought; in such manner sorted and placed, as the third number
is over the first second, holding and containing them both in his number and
account, but of neither of them reckeneth again in making their account. The
Plant therefore is of the Philosophers reckned in ye number of those na^ures,
that hath life: for in them as Aristotle saith, is a portion of life, even as
in savage and brute beasts, saving that in these last their manner of life by
way of moving from place to place, by greedy desire to feed and repast
themselves, it is more manifest: in those other by reason of their abode and
continuance all in one place (as settled hard to the earth, by ^oote and
moisture) and by their more hid receipt of necessaries such as maintain them
being also close and occult, have given great causes of doubting. Anaxagoras
being moved (I know not wherewith) affirmed that there was not only a desire
in them to tarry and continue in their state, but also that they had and felt
both sorrow and pleasure: and his reason he gathered of the distillation of
humour in the Plant his Leaves, and of the Leaves increase. Plato saith that
they be moved and led by appetite for the necessity of their provision in
nourishing. But both of these Aristotle in his first book de Plantis,
refelleth and reproves by argument: whereupon we entende not to stand. Yet
may it be doubted for as much as with Theophrast and such others, rather yea,
than nay is answered. And they bid us look in each their appearance. Doth not
the Cucumber hate the Olive, and where the one is, the other through a certain
malice prospers not? Cotrariewise, doth not the Vine love and embrace the
Elm, prospers the better, the nigher one is set by another? And as of these
question is had, so may there also doubts be made of the other. But let every
man judge of these as they list. I had rather be still then have a do herein.
Now to their parts and manner of division.

Plants be sorted and divided into three parts: the first is the Herb: the
second the Shrub: the third the Tres: there are which have added hither a
fourth kind which they cal Suffutrex a mean between the Herb and the shrub:
but it may better either of the one or of the other of these two be called as
they are called being greater or less, tha to wander so far for so small
advantage in them by way of amplifying division.

The Herb is that saith Theophrast in his first book De Plantis and fifth
Chapter which springs out of his root well leaved without any body, and
bears seed upon his stalk or stem as al herbs do, which are used to the
Pot. The Shrub is that says he, which out of the root comes up in manifold
stock or body and shouteth out arms in his mean kind of growth, as the
Brom and Brier. The tree is that says he, that from out of the root arises
in one only stock or body, and grows up in many kinds to great height:
beside this it is full of boughs, it is full of knots: besides this it is full
of slips and shoots as the Olive, the Fig tree, the Vine. That other which
they call Suffutrex and make it the fourth part hath a certain thin and
small stock: but such a one as excedeth not the thin and small stalk of the
herb: as the Rose and such like. Thereupon we may easily perceive that all
these kinds above said in that, that they live through the life Uegetatiue
and have their place of growth in the earth, and in that, that they all live by
heate and humour whereof the first (as that which is not much spoken of) seems
of some to be forgotten in them: further in their leaf and branches: and
other outward dispositions herein they all agree and are alike. But herein they
are said to differ (as all things of sundry sorts do) in these four points:
Whereof the chief and principal is their strength or virtue. The second their
smell, which to the learned teaches their contemperature: for the odor and
smell of each thing doth much bewraie the thing. The third difference is
fetched from their taste or savor: as the one sweet, the other sower, the one
pleasant, the other of sharpe taste unpleasant. Moreover as they have those
qualities which be proper and peculiar to the taste or want them. The fourth is
(and that which is most infinite) of their figure and form in leaf, of their
own figure, of their colour, of their flower, of their fruit, of their stock,
which is as it were the prop or stay of the Plant: of the bark, which is the
defence (and as I mought so say) their house to lodge in: and to defend
themselves from storm and tempest: further in the root, difference is found,
and to have one word for all, in all their whole composition and mixture. It
is to be marvelled how Dame Nature hath upon the face of ye earth (as it were
in her Garden or Orchard of delight) for variety sake so manifoldly varied
multiplied ye kinds of colours either simply died, stained: or else chaugably
almost in every plant or thing growing. But the greatest marvel that
outwardly appears (and that which ye most cunning workman or Painter may
follow, but not attain to) is in the excellent show and infinite their kind
of flowers. Whereof some be Milk white, as the Lily: some purple coloured as
the Violet and Saffron flower: Some Scarlet red as the Aramanth: some Oc^ie or
yellow as the Mariegold: some grassy grene as the Primrose: some be speckled
as ye Carnatio, some cole black but those (as Authors affirm very rare) in so
much that the sad blew coloured flower, as is Calcedome, hath been taken of
some for black, only for their most like kind of apparai^ing. So that a man
may see howe Nature works in many, as in these and six hundred more like,
after simple sort without any intermedling: In as many and rather mo as
chaungablie. Wherein if I travailed and did so largely run at roia^ or lavished
in seeking out their especialties, as Nature most liberally and abundantly
hath bestowed her labour and wrought in them: I had need of long time greater
study herein to follow such exact discourse, but that I mean not, neither
do I purpose it.

Plants may moreover (to stay and continue yet a little in their division) so
be divided, that some shall be said to be of the Garden: some of the Field:
some that like well by the Sea and floods: some by the Sea banks: other some
there be that only grow in Fens: some upon rocks and stony walls: some
in the sands, and there are which are seen to grow in Wels as Liuerwort.
Again some be fruitful, other some barren: some bearing branches and leaves:
some without al these: some of great growth: other of as small: some thick and
grossly set, as the Cyprusse: some as rarely and thinly disposed as the Beach:
some full of knots as it were jointed or divided as the Reed: some without any
such partition, but all over plain: as Hemp. Some which spring up and increase
by seed sowing: othersome which arise up of their own accord not known how:
some most wholesome: othersome most hurtful. And to twine up this thread of
division upon some bottom (for it were to long to undo the whole skaine) some
seem to have both sexes and kinds: as the Oak, the Laurel and such others:
some without any such apperaunce but only one in kind, as the Palm and the
like.

The Plant therefore (for of that name we shall have great use) may by
Etimologie of word so derived, be so called, for that it is planted graft in
the earth, fostered up by his root and by that nourishment that the root
takes and feeds on ministered and put to it by his Nurse the earth, and of
such daily food gets every day greater increase. Plants have such
nourishment through the earth and their root naturally within, and be in
every their chief part and all about a like Organick that being engraft
whilst they be green and not to far gone through drought in any stock
(onlesse it hath another manner of difference or almost a contrarieti^ in his
quality then that others, and thereby not available) are able by secret force
of Nature to take and resume again like life and power, and do as well in the
last stock as it did being a member or part of the first natural body. And
here upon it is that whereas through any imbecility or let espied and
gathered either inwardly or outwardly in the tree, so that it is thereby
hindered of his liking and doing well, men in time of year use to cut them off,
such as are thought to prosper better in another place, and graffe them into a
new stock: and being so cut off, are of a greater continuance (but by
resemblance to show thee howe alike) than those small and siely Worms be,
who have imperfection in their Nature as Wasps, Bees, Emites and such like,
which by Latin word are called Insecta that is, in part and member distinct
and severed, having for all this life proportionably and equally besprent
throughout the whole body. In so much that these for a time after that they be
cut or plucked into pieces in every their part so severed, show both life,
sense and moving: but in this point coming behind them, for that being once so
discerped can never after neither in applying their own parts together,
neither yet in fastening or binding them to any body of any their like revive
and quicken again. But now let us leave this our straying abroad (which manner
who so uses in common conversation familiar talk is coumpted and reputed
light and a talker: in stile and in endighting any thing a wanderer from the
purpose) and come to our task: yt to which we before settled our selves to:
herein requiring the Reader not to accuse us lightly, and on a sudden to check
and reprehend us as those which have entered into y^ business which requires
long and exact discourse, and have made a preface after that sort as though we
would go about to extricate and weed out what might be said at adventure of all
things, not only intending an Aegemonie which we only promised and is but the
chiefest part, but an vniuersal^ie which is ye whole. Unto whom I would that
our sentence or meaning were well known: that thereby they might understand
(perceiving also what a preface is) that I had not greatly squared, if I had
pursued many more divisions, for what is there so far of (so that it belongs
to the thing whereof we intend to speak) that may not be added the thing it
self being once had in hand. But now as hastily as we can and as briefly as
we can, we mind to bring in other Authors thereby keeping our selves free from
blame in this Aegemonie or Sufferaigntie of things growing upon ye earth: not
absolutely or thoroughly (which thing I would to God it were in our skill and
wit (neither do I mean to give the cause why: which was enough for Theophrast
(as we read written) who hath laboured all his life time, and that sore
laboured, and hath not yet given and found an absolute perfect end of such his
knowledge, who although for his time he hath done well brought great light and
undid or made naked many things in that his kind of study and travail, yet
hath he gone and passed by many things without either eiesight set upon them
or mean of acquaintance had: partly for that the mother of all such green
things as grew upon the earth multiplies every each day with increase, and
diversity of many kinds and plays the prodigal his part: and partly that
although man mought by art and inquiraunce after these attain or come unto
knowledge herein, yet the race of this life was so sudden and short so often
perilled and every each momet at death his nod and beck, which things all
summined and accounted, every day the more he watched in these the more offer
the had of them to be of his acquaintance, even when as he was old and lay
upon his deaths bed, now ready to make a farewell of the body and soul,
began to accuse Nature of Injury doing and offence, and fault in percialtie
for that she had so dealt with the Heart and Hind, the Crow night Raven, in
prolonging and giving them so long life (which good gift on neither there parts
was little or nothing considered) but to Mankind she had dealt so straightly,
and no point according to equity or right reason, in that that she had given
him such short term of years, and not so short as uncertain, and sudden:
wherein if she had dealt more equally and had been mans friend (as she mought
have been) it had come to pass that our manner of life had ben more profitable:
science, or ye Arts liberal, (whereas now they be raw) should have been much
more absolute: perseverance of every thing his cause (now small) should then
have been more amplified. But now let us hear in each Plant his principality,
the minds of other men, what is found in them worthy marking: And the first
in our Alphabet shall be the Almond tree.

Farewell.
The second Book of the Aegemonie treating of Plants as of Herbs, Trees, and
Shrubs, perticulerly and Alphabetically.
Of the Almond tree.
THe Almonde tree in Greek is called Amygdale, in Latin Nux longa, a long and
straight forth kind of Nut. Of this Aristotle hath these words. The Almond
tree saith he, requires much attendance and diligence to be kept from
endamaging and hurt, whilst it is tender and young. It prospers not unless
it be set in good ground, in the which it yields much fruit. It dies and
fades away, whereas overmuch ^old abounds. Wherefore his best liking is in
those Countries whereas heate reigns. It yields two several kinds of
fruit, the one used to meat, the other only to medicine. Diascorides saith,
that if the Fox happens to eat and digest of this kind of fruit, he by and
by dies, except he licks in water in the present place, and that
immediately. It may peradventure so be, for that which is wholesome and good for
one kind, oftetimes is hurtful for another. The same Author saith also, that
that Almond tree which is most sweet of taste, if it be once bitten or gnawen
of Cattle, it by and by loses his goodness, and becomes most bitter and
sower.

Of the Alder tree.
THe Alder tree (which by corrupt and accustomed kind of speaking they
commonly call the Elder) is of very barren and vnfruitefull nature, as
Theophrast witnesses: this is his only best and the chiefest thing he hath,
in that he grows straight up in body, and is in his Wood and inward Marie
very soft. His growth saith he, is in moist and watery places, and else no
where.

Of Aloes.
ALoes, is a precious Wood which grows in Indie, a Wood of most sweet smell,
very medicinable. Cardane saith, it hath a great leaf and gross, very fat,
whereout distills that kind of Gum that is most odoriferous. It is taken
also with Physicians for an Herb which is most sharpe bitter, which grows in
Indie and Persia.

Of Aegraton or good old Herb.
AGeraton hath one and the self same name both with the Greekes and Latines,
and is a small shrub, very full of young shouts and slips. It is like Origan
or Marigold, hath his flower alike coloured as saith Diascorides It may be
thought that it hath that name, for that it preserves a great time without
loss of his virtue, or not being otherwise hindered by sickness and age.

Of Agarick.
AGarick, as saith Diascorides, hath both Male and Female: and is in efficacy
or effect such, that it may be applied to all sicknesses, such as the sick
person must patiently abide, whether yt it be used with water or wine, in which
sort it is most commonly ministered.

Of Agrimonie.
AGrimonie, of Mesues, is named Maudlen, the Latin word is Eupatorium. It is
a short shrub, of no great or just height. It hath his leaf parted as it were
five portioned. The decoction hereof, saith Diascorides, or his poulder dried
is an excellent remedy against the oppilacion of the Liver Spleen, by reason
of fleume, and is taken either the Herb it self alone, or else sodden among
with Wine.

Of Annet or Dill.
ANnet or Dill is an Herb whose seed as Diascorides saith, may be kept by ye
space of three whole years next after it is gathered, without loss in any
point of his operation.

Of Anise.
ANise hath the like virtue that Dill hath, but in savour and taste, it is more
pleasant and sweet. It commends unto us the good breath and sweet, and
betrays the contrary.

Of the Apple tree.
THe Apple tree is of good sound body, of wrinkled barck, and in outward
Cote very full of knots. In flowers at the spring time very beautiful, in
sweetness of fruit in the Autumn almost not comparable, in fruit and
increase very wonderful, and under this one name it hath infinite kinds.
Plinie saith, that unless it be often cropped, and rid of superfluous and
troublesome boughs, it will soon war barren, and leave off fruit bearing.
The same Author saith also, that the fruits hereof must be gathered in fair
weather, unless that they being laid up with outward plenty of accidental
and airy humour, do by and by rot: he monisheth also that they be gathered
before they be full ripe, for their better goodness than being preserved.

Of Artichoke.
ARtichoke the wild, most commenly called the Thistle, is an Herb wrought and
fashioned on every side in manner of a sting, or Spearelike, and hath in the
top of his stalk or stem, a certain head wherein his seed lies. It
flourishes and likes best, in those places that be least frequented or
nothing looked to.

Of the Balm tree.
THe Balm tree is rather a kind of shrub, then a Tree, and may well be
counted of that house for his lowe and humile kind of growth: for it
heightneth never above two cubits. The Timber hereof is called in Greek
Xulobalsamon, his fruit or seed Karpobalsamon, the juice is called
Vpobalsamon, because the bark of this Tree must first be stricken and hewn
with Iron wedges, before it yields any fruit, whereby it being so wounded, by
and by drops and distills a certain humour, in a manner tearlike, which
humour thus issued through the coldenesse or other affection of the Air about
it, dries to a kind of Gum. Plinie prefers this his smell before all
smells. But herein good heed must be taken, least we match and march with the
greek Sophister. And the same Plinie saith (as also Theophrast doth) that it
only grows in a certain Dale and Ualie of Siria, which Ualie hath his whole
compass in a manner in two only Groaues, and hath been ye possession of long
time of two sundry and several Princes. Whereof the greater was supposed to
be in contents.xx. Akers: and the other less.

Of Barley.
BArley, in his excessive Drought differreth from all other our kinds of
grain, and is called in Latin Hordiu, as if you would say Aridum, hard and
dry. It is never sown but upon such kind of earth, as is dry. Plinie saith,
that amongst all other kinds of corn this is last sown, with the first
reaped: that which also experience with us here at home teaches.

Of the Beach tree.
THe Beach, saith Theophrast, grows only in rough places, and most commonly
upon hills. It hath many and sundry kinds, of some accounted four, of
othersome five. In name all one, but in fruit bearing every one disagreeing.
One of his kinds bears a sweet Mast or Acorn (as the Oak or Chestnut doth)
and of some is taken for the Oak. It is called of the Greekes Phage, because in
ye former time men lived herewith, had it in stead of bread. This kind as
Plinie saith, is after a sort hairy Locked, almost growing out of fashion. It
is nothing solide or massy, but much porouse: and therefore of the less
endurance, as saith the same Author. Of this kind of Wood being brent to
Ashes is made Glass, Art, herein playing the workesman.

Of Beete.
BEete, is a Gardain Herb, and in good plenty with us. Thereof are said to be
two kinds the one white, and the other black: both medicinable. Aristotle saith
yt upon his root (as upon any stock) any young set or slip may be set and graft,
and through the root his good liking in growth, may be brought from his own
nature into natural parentage with the Tree.

Of Bearefoote.
BEarefoote, is an Herb whote and moist, in the first degree, as the
Physicians say: and is used of them as a remedy to the Spleen, and to give the
vital and living sprites more easy and loose passage.

Of the Bean.
THe Bean saith Theophrast hast his manner of growth thus. His root is thick
and gross: somewhat more deeply set than the Reed his is. In the length it
is indifferent, sometime four Cubits high* It gives fruit by manner of
Cellar: one only in one part of his Husk. It is in his chiefest bravery, and
likes best being sown in moist grounds, and especially in the Fens and such
like. It is also said sometime through the rancour of grouds to come up vnsowne.
The Pithagorians condemned it, as y^ which was not meet to meat. For said
they, it dulls and makes gross each sense and spirit. It also causes and
exciteth up in sleep horrible dreams. Varro thought it was forbid for that as
he said, the souls of the dead were therein placed.

Of Betonie.
BEtonie is a water Herb which for his singular cold worcking and growth
also, in cold Countries and places is called in Greek Psikotrophae. It
remedies saith Diascorides the consumed Gall.

Of Birds tongue.
Birds tongue, is an Herb whose chiefest working is to provoke Venery, and
causes most rank seed. It figureth the tongue of a Bird, whereof it hath
his name.

Of Borage.
BOrage, the best that it hath, as Isid. saith, is as I find to engender good
blood, either sodden among other things, or else taken raw by it self.

Of Bindweede
BIndweede, of some Withweede, is an herb very noisome or hurtful to the
other fruits of the Gardaine. It hinders their growth, and troubles them with
the inwrapping and circumplication about ye other their stem or stalk.

Of the Blackberie tree.
THe Blackberie tree, is after his sort bushy* bearing that fruit that
eftsoones refreshes the shepheirde, he being in the field, and often
contents his lust. This his Leaf or covering is said of Diascorides to
destroy and kill Serpents.

Of the Bremble.
THe Bremble, of some is called Bucephalus, of other some the water Bremble. It
is of two sorts: one the field Bremble, which most commonly grows in waters:
and the other Gardaine Bremble, or sweet Bremble, which hath a very good
smell. They of Thrace and those which dwell about the flood Strimon, feed
their horse with ye green growing Herb or Leaf of the Bremble, and are said
to be marvelous fat therewith.

Of Britanick or English Herb.
Britannic or English Herb, hath the very look of the greatest Sorrel, but
in colour a little more black, somewhat Mossy or Mealie. The best saith
Diascorides, that is found in this Herb, is his juice, very wholesome and
profitable to many things.

Of Brom.
Brom is a Shrub, which of some is called Mirica for the bitterness of his
taste. It grows in stony and barren ground, and in such places whereas no
culture or care of ground tilling is had. And his only presence is a thorough
sign or evident token of barren and dry ground. It hath his boughs
flourishing as well in the Winter tide as in the Summer. His flower yellow, and
Cod black, both of noisome smell, and of bitter taste. Yet in working, saith
Diascorides, it is very wonderful. For his Leaf or flower being sodden and
boiled among with running water, brideleth and kepeth away swelling of the
Spleen. It helps the tothache, and stencheth the flowing of the bloody Flix.

Of the Bulrush.
THe Bulrush hath one kind, which of some is called Sons brow: The Romaynes
call it Sea Bulrish or Manuad: And it hath two kinds: one which hath a square
top or crown very blunt withal: and the other is rather Spearelike and
sharpe topped. This last saith Diascor. intermedled with drink, brings on
fast and sound sleep.

Of the Bur.
THe Bur of the Greekes is called Philanthros, man friend, for that it
covets to catch hold and to cleave upon man his Garment holding fast by such
kind of roughness as it hath.

Of Cammock.
CAmmock saith Theophrast is an Herb thoroughly beset with Prickle, and is one
of those that continue but for one year, or for the Spring time, Summer and
Autumn: and so fade away. His leaf is like Rue. It grows in such ground as
is tilled, especially where as Corn or such like grain is most rank. It is
plucked up by his root, then when as the earth through the Sun beams is
fervently hot, or else not. In some place for hindering staying the Husbandman
it is called Rest harrow: in Cambredge shire Whine.

Of Cammomill.
CAmmomill, is an Herb used of Physicians to purge the head, and to empty it
of superfluous humour and other gross matter. Auicen saith, that there is three
kinds hereof. One which hath a Saffron flower: another whose flower is as it
were Purple coloured: the third is white. This hath that laudable pre-eminence
for that the more it is trod and kept under, the more a great deal and the
better it comes up and prospers.

Of Capers.
CApers or the fruit which is called Capparis, is so derived from the Greek
name, for that it hath a round head in the top of his stem. His best liking is
in dry stony grouds, and is called of the Physicians the purging Herb, of
some it is called Doggues Bremble, of other some Doggues Apple, of other Hares
heart. The Mages call it Pentheron.

Of Casia.
CAsia, is one of those sorts which have their pre-eminence and are had in
price for their odoriferous and pleasant smell. Which (saith Plinie) hath three
kinds, in no point one coloured like to another. For the first is white, the
second red, the third almost black. The first is of least value, for that it
soon rots, and is consumed and eaten of Worms. The best is tried thus: by
savour or smell, taste and colour. It grows in Arabia. His stalk or body
saith Theophrast, is somewhat gross or superfluous, representing therein
strikes, small and long, not much unlike to Sinews. It hath a bark and rind
but most difficult to be pared away. It is cut in the bigness and length of
two fingers, or a little more: and that only about the uppermost and most
tender twigs, and is after sowed up being so cut whilst it is fresh and
green with some strong binding, the binding most commonly being of an Ox his
hide. The true Casia we have not, neither the true Cynamon.

Of the Cedar tree.
THe Cedar tree is in Leaf like to the Cyprouse: his Wood is counted precious,
and is long endurable for that it neither harboreth Moth nor Worm. Whereof (for
this such his goodness) the Pillars and Beams of Princes Houses and Palaces,
likewise of Temples are made hereof. It grows in Africa, Crete, Siria, and
especially upon the Mount Libanus. Rabanus saith, that it is the very Lady
and Queen of Trees. Theophrast saith, that it is of marvelous high growth,
very light, straight up, about the body without wem or knot. And above al
places saith he, that bears the freshest, and is of greenest lea^ that is in
Cor^ica. From thence is brought that sweet Poulder which is called Cedria,
which they use to bestrewe upon Garments, upon books such like to preserve
them from worm eating.

Of Cerfolie.
CErfolie, is an Herb in operation and working in a manner fiery. His best is,
saith Diascorides in that that it being wrought tempered with Virgins Wax,
remedies all kind of swelling.

Of Cetewale.
CEtewale, is an Herb whose root the Physicians use to gather in Summer, and
being then dried endures in good case three whole years next after.

Of Centorie.
CEntorie, is called the bitter Herb, for that it is most bitter in taste: some
call it the gal of the earth: his working was first known by Chiron the
Centaur, who used it first in Medicine.

Of Celedonie.
CEledonie, is an Herb which bears a Saffron coloured flower, whose flower
also gathered and held in the hand dies, and stains the gatherers hand.
Plinie saith, it is then in his best lust, when as the Swallow abides and
builds amongst us, and serves the Swallow (as the same Plinie and Aristotle
also do witness) to great use and purpose. For say they, if at any time by
any mischance or fortune, her young be hurt or perilled in their eiesight, the
dam goes to this Herb, presses forth his juice, which being so done, she
annoynteth it about their eyes, and so restores them to the better and their
former state and case again.

Of the Cherie tree.
THe Cherie tree saith Theophrast, heightneth and matches with any in that
point what so ever. It sometime reaches saith he, to 24. Cubits, his leaf is
like to the Medlar, saving that in handling of it, it is somewhat more rough.
His flower is white, which having gotten full ripeness becomes blood red.

Of the Cinnamon.
THe Cinnamon shouteth forth out of a young set or spring in bigness about two
Cubits. It grows in Indie and Arabia, as Theophrast mentions, and is called
Cinnamon, for that it hath his top as it were folded or plaited. It is of ashy
and dusky colour: his Leaf is like to wild Maioram. It never smells till
it be thoroughly dry. It grows amongst Briers and very hard Rocks, and is
gathered with much pain and difficulty. In Fables we find that this fruit is
found in the Phoenix Nest. Theophrast saith, that is of the best goodness
which is next to the twigs and top, and that is less good, which is next to
the root.

Of the Ciprous tree.
THe Ciprous tree is so named of ye Greekes as Isidore saith, for that in his
growth and especially beneath about his root, it figureth the Pine Apple tree,
or that figure which the Geomitricians call Conus. It is singular in sweet
smell. And for this purpose they were wont in old time to bury their dead
with the Wood hereof, hereby thinking to keep under, and to suppress all ill
smells and savours of dead Carcasses.

Of Cokkell.
COkkell is an unprofitable Herb or rather (to give him his right name) a
hurtful weed which will always be meddling with the pure Wheat, and doth
often choke it up, and hinders his growth: So that the old Proverb is herein
verified: the ill weed ouercroppeth the good corn.

Of Coltes foot.
COltes foot of some is called Bethicon, of the Egyptians Suartha. His leaf is
like to the I uie leaf. It arises from the root direct and straight up.

Of Coriander.
COriander hath his name common with us and the Greekes. For it seems to be
so called Apo tou koriou, of plenty of seed. Which seed being taken in
sweet wine, provokes a man to much venery. But this being after this sort
drunk without moderation or reason in so taking it, causes Frenzy and
madness.

Of the Chestnut tree.
THe Chestnut tree is a very tough wood, and so massy or sound, that it may
be the principal Beam in all buildings. It is so fertile and rank in young
shoot and slip, besides this in budding and giving of flower, that being
once cut or hacked in pieces, will be the better for that, and bud so much the
more. It is called Castanea in Latin quasi Castraria a Castrando because it is
so often lopped or gelt, or because it is first opened before it is roasted in
the fire. Some say that those kind of Coals wherewith the Smith mollifies
and works his Iron are made with this.

Of Chastlambe.
CHastlambe or Agnus castus hath y^ flower and seed that being digested of us,
opens forthwith the poores of the body: consumes and dries up that
natural moisture within. Diascorides says that with so working, it makes
men chaste.

Of Crowtoe.
CRowtoe of some is called Vacinium, in Greek Iacynthos. It hath a leaf like
to Porret, a handful in height, in breadth it is less or more small than a
Maidens finger. His colour is green as ye preci^us stone is of y^ name: his
top is full of Purple flowers. His root circlelike or round. It being drunken
saith Diasco. with Wine purges the Gall of his superfluousnesse. Of this
Herb.ij. sundry fables have sprung up with ye Poets. One that it was first a
Boy entierly beloved of Apollo, whom he at a time by a certain mischance
slew, which thing done in his fury (less that with his death his memory
should also die) he turned him into this kind of Herb or Plant. Another is,
that it sprang up of Aiax blood the most valiant Captain that ever the Greekes
had. And for the remembrance of so worthy a Knight or rather Princely and
Heroical person, the Gods are said to have given to this Herb two veins,
figuring and evidently showing these two Letters A. and I. with us it is
commonly named as we said before, Crowtoe.

Of Crowfoote.
CRowfoote of some is called Astrion. The Romanes in their phrase of speech
call it bloody leaf. It spreads saith Diascorides, all abroad upon the
earth, rather than by any means it should heighthen. His leaf is cut about
or bepinked. It bears yelowe flowers, called Goldknops, and wheresoever it
grows (whosoever list to dig under and about it) shall never find his root
without great store of humour and water, like as in Camomill.

Of Crosses.
Crosses with the Egyptians are called Moth. The Romanes call the Nasturcia
This kind being drunken says Dias. much avails and is a certain remedy
against serpets. The Persians used it as the best Sallet that they had in al
their feasting and banqueting. It avails much to memory, whereof arises
this Proverb: Eat well of the Crosses.

Of the Cucumber.
THe Cucumber after Plinie grows both in the Gardaine and in the field. It
is of those sort says Isidore as also Theophrast, that change their leaf
and stalk often.

Of Cinkfolie.
CInkfolie or five leaved grass of some is called Pentadactylon, or Asphalton.
The Mages call it Ibis claw or nail: some cal it Mercuries fingar. His leaf
is like to Mynt, and hewn or hacked toothlike, in manner of Saw. His flower is
yelow and somewhat pale withal. It grows in moist and watery places. It is
ministered often of the Physicians with Lusters and Purgations.

Of Daffadill.
DAffadill, some call Anthericon, the Romanes Kings spare. It is in his stalk
very thin and light, and bears his flower in his top: it is of plentiful
root. It being ministered medicine like, remedies the Serpents sting.

Of Dictamus.
DIctamus is an Herb which grows in Crete and is very wonderful in losening
unbinding the straights of the body. Tullie gathers this to be true by the
manner of the Dear or Heart, who being stricken in the ri^ with any Dart or
Arrow, so that it sticks hard fast: they straight ways hunt after and
hasten to the water banks of the F^n where this Herb grows, and finding
this, eats it as a present remedy to have thereby help in such a distress:
which Herb being once eaten, they shake out the Dart or Arrow out of their
ribs as they list.

Of Dill.
DIll some call Anis. The Egyptians Arachis. The Mages after their tongue, Dogs
head or Hounds locke. The Arabians Mercuries brood. The Romanes as before
Anis. Diascorides saith, that it hinders and hurts the good eiesight being
often taken, and is a hinderance to issue.

Of Dragaunce.
DRagaunce is an Herb so called for that it is bespotted and is specked in his
colour much like to a Snake: representing the very Viper or Dragon, which
Herb the Viper it self stands in dread of. Of some it is called Colubyne,
for it hath his flower Purple coloured: it is also cloven and sharpe as the
Serpents tongue is. It is black in the midst of his flower. This saith
Diascorides, having his root dried and beaten all to powder confect also with
water of Roses beautifies and clears the foul face, as being with other
things handled helps otherwise.

Of Dragon.
DRagon the greater and the less. The greater of some is called Aron, Isaron,
Iaron. c. The Romanes call it Serpentarie. This grows only in shadowy
places, and such as be hedged, so kept away fro the Suns heate, which thing
it cannot abide. The lesser hath white spots, and those little, his stalk
straight up: and his length about.ij. Cubits.

Of Dwale.
DWale is called in Greek Struchnon Ypnoticon in English s^eeple Dwale. It is a
kind of shrub saith Diase. which grows nigh to the Sea, very abundant and
plentiful in young shoots. It is marvelously effectuous to bring a man on
sound and fast sleep. There is another kind of the self same name which is
called mad Dwale. Which being druke shows woders by a certain false show of
imagination.

Of the Elm.
THe Elm is a tree whose wood or timber is yelow, very sinewy strong. It is
called of some all heart. It is used and occupied principally about magnificall
or beautiful gates. It is then best of all riuen, cloven and cut in sunder
when it is moist and green, and with more difficulty being once dry.
Theophrast saith, that it is in his kind very barren. It only bears a
certain Grape, but nothing else. It is one of those kinds that putrefy and
breed worms.

Of Esele.
ESele of some is taken for Eiebright: this hath his leaf very thin and
plain. It is not of so fresh a gr^ene colour, or of like look, as many other
Plants be: but this it hath above them, for it being pressed, doth give a very
dainty and most medicinable juice or humour, not much unlike to milk. Diascor.
saith, it purges fleume and other such superfluities of like nature.

Of the Elder tree.
THe Elder* saith Isid. is very soft in handling, and of very small height or
growth. Hereof are made certain kinds of instruments and especially a kind of
Symphonie which the common sort call a Pipe: the learned and more civil kind
of men name it a Dulcimer. As the abouesaid Author, witnesses, in that his
tractate of Musical instruments. It hath boughs thick and gro^se, very
plain and well compact with all in his outward appearance. But within they are
very hollow, and have nothing else but a soft Marie, which is commonly called
their pith. Plinie saith, that if the middle Bark or Rind be pared or cut
somewhat more toward the upper part of his stock or body, than towards the
nether part, or contrariwise, so it will afterwards augmet either upward or
downward, with spreading forth of his arms or branches after that sort.

Of Fenkell.
FEnkell is an Herb of the Gardaine and field common to them both, but not so
common, as effectuous. The Latin word signifies, that it should be sharper of
the eiesight, Diascorides also saith, that the juice of this Herbs root
quickneth the eyes. It is called of the Greekes Marathron. Plinie (as also
Isidore in his.xvij. book saith) that the very Serpents (if nothing else did)
were sufficient to Noble to cause this kind to be well reckened of, for that
through the only taste or eating hereof, they shake off many sicknesses, and
thereby keep away, or of from them weak old age.

Of the Fig tree.
THe Fig tree, is of no high growth, neither nice in body, but grossely set
and thick, all his Wood not so plain, as wrethed wrinkled: the colour of his
Leaf and Rind somewhat more wan or pale: his flower Medlerlike. It is called
Ficus in Latin a fecuditate as some say, for such fertility as it hath and
increase: for so soon as his fruits, those that be all of one time in growth
begin once to ripen and are pulled or plucked therefro, it straight ways with
no less abundance shoots forth other. It hath that humour (as it is said)
that is like woman's milk. It hath also that vnctuous and Oily nature in taste
and smell, so unpleasant to the Bull, that there is no better bit or Bridle to
stay and quiet him, then to bring him to the Fig tree, whereas he may have but
only sent and smell hereof, and being never so fierce, is forthwith tamed. It
hath diverse appellations and names of diverse Regions Countries. There is one
kind saith Theophrast in Indie, which even from his boughs or branches
gives yearly root. There is another Fig tree called Aegiptiaca, which in
Wood and fruit bearing, is like the other: but in effect and manner of working
is contrary both to this kind and to all other: for it being thrown into the
water, it straight way descends and seeks to the bottom (and that which is
most to be marvelled at) after that it hath been so a long time drowned, and
hath every part or poor full of water (at which it should seem to be more
ponderous) it then arises up again to the waters top, and so keeps ^uerlie
and above the waters highest superficie, and swims as Saint Augustine saith*
as all other kinds of Timber do, above.

Of the Fir tree.
THe Fir tree saith Theophrast, hath this one manner and custom peculiarly to
himself, that being cut, either hindered or hurt, by any storm or tempest in
ye left side of his stalk (which kind of stalk it hath both light and smooth)
it by and by takes hart a grass, and grows round about and garland like, a
little beneath his top: which some call leaping about: other some the dancing
of the round. It is in colour somewhat black, to feel to hard above measure.
Whereof the standing Cups of Arcadie were wont to be made. And this further it
hath peculiarly, that cutting ye boughs without shill, or hurting the top,
it forthwith dies.

Of Firse.
FIrse or Gorse, is a most sharpe and thorny kind of Herb, growing in
Woods, Forests, Deserts and in such grounds as be most weedie. It is said to
prick and wound the feet of him that passes by, and catching hold of some
part of a man, soon pierces to the quick. The common sort call this
daungerous^ herb.

Of the Frankincense tree.
THe Frankincense tree is very plentiful in boughs giving. In leaf it is
like to our Pear. Saving yt it is much more small. It is in colour as green
as Rue, in rind bark as soft as Laurel. The tree it self hath ere now been
called Libanos, in Greek Dendrilibanos his Gum or tear. Libanotos of Galen.
Euripedes again cotrariwise used Libanon for the tear: and Libanotos for the
tree. It is so fabled with ye Greekes that it had his name of a young man, and
the same an Assyrian, whose name was Libanos, who afterward was turned into
this kind of tree, whom certain envious persons slue perceiving him so
serious in worshipping the Gods. (For the which their malice being not long
after acquitted and revenged) it was afterwards and hitherto is holden in
opinion that there was no better nor more acceptable sacrifice to the Gods than
Frankincense offered up. There is a certain Manna of this Frankincense, which
Plinie will have to be ye purest of this his humours drops wrung forth by great
pressing. There is also a certain smoke in this, sweet and pleasant, after
that it be burned, as there is also of Myrrh.

Of Fumitorie.
FVmitorie of the Epyptians is called Lynx of the Greekes Kapnos, with the
Latines Fumus terre, the earth his fume or smell. It is a bushy or shrublike
Herb like to Coreander his flower, white or more like Ashy colour.
Diascorides saith, it lets the hairs of the eye lids, being plucked away
to grow again, anointed and laid with Gum. It is in his best working, then,
when as it is green.

Of Garlic.
Garlic, hath his name of his strong and unpleasant smell: because it smells
saith Isidore so strongly, and with that so lothsomly, that it takes away,
^ereaueth for a time the good and sweet smell of all other things. The best
that it hath, is that it is good of increase. For every and each coat of his
(those I call coats which are as it were on both their sides behemmed and
parted, and are as it were in several corners of the house, but yet in house
and so by that means all one) set in the Gardaine or otherwhere, will soon
come up and much prosper. Which thing the Onion as Aristotle saith, haltet^ in:
for that is set only by whole heads, so comes up or else not.

Of Ginger.
GInger* in Greek is called Zingi^eris, it grows in Arabic, his growth is by
many and infinite small (...): in smell and ^auour not much unlike to Pepper.
Choose faith Di^scorides of the (...) hereof (...). Take them for the best and
principal, which have not been ^aton, neither gn^wen with wo^mes: for they have
their worms also as al other roots have.

Of Gladiolus or Sword herb.
GLadiolus, his form and proportion of leaf is like to Sedge, his flower
yellow in a manner like to the flower Deluce: some call it Arion, some Sword
point or edge tool: other some cuttle haft. The Romaynes as before. It grows
for the most part in the field. It hath a double root one placed settled
within an another. This his root saith Diascorides, being taken in wine
provokes and stirs up to Venery.

Of Grass.
Grass of some is called Asyphylion. They of Africa call it Eball, the
Egyptians Anuphi, the Romaines Cattailes meat. His growth (as what it is also)
is very well know of all men. Herein lurcketh the Serpent, and hydeth him
self safely. With this all beasts and Cattle of the field do live. It
helps and remedies, saith Diascorides all hindrances and stops to urine.
There is a kind of grass in Babilon, which is like Cane or Reed, which
being tasted or eaten of, kills the Cattaile, and it grows by the high way
sides on every side as they journey. In the Hill Parnasus, there grows
another kind of grass more thick and rank than the other, of better size:
for it bears a leaf like Ivy. In Cilicia there is a kind of Grass which
is called Heracha, and of the Egiptians Apap, which grows in hedges about
walls and Vines: whose leaf is like Mercuries Herb, and as full of
Briestles.

Of Grunswell.
GRunswell in Greek Ereigeton, it grows upon walls and Tileshads, and is
hoarelike to an old mans beard. It hath a dusky flower. Diascorides saith,
that his stalk being boiled in water, and afterwards drunk with wine, doth
ease the sore grief of the stomach.

Of the Gilofer.
THe Gilofer is called Gariophilus, his flower of al other flowers is most
sweet in smell. There be many kinds of Gilofers, although but one name for the
all. There is also a tree of y^ name called Geu of othersome Benet, which hath
fruit in taste like ye Peppercorn

Of Hares foot.
HAres foot, of some Hares commyn. It grows in Gardaine Allies. And is as
Diascorides saith, a singular Medicine to keep and defend the inward bowels
from swelling.

Of Henbane.
HEnbane, hath the name to be a cause of madness or fury: Isidore saith, that
it kills and binds the spirits: The Herb it self hath a top or small
head. In old time, upon the Crown or Myter of the high Priest stood a
flower right up on the top, not much unlike this Herb, about a finger in
height, supereminent, underneath this, in the lower part of the garland or
Myter, round about his Temple or Forehed, there was a golden circle in three
sorts ordered, and set upon, the which stood with yellow flowers from one
side to another. We must gather that something was figured hereby, and that the
high Priest or Bishops were not on this wise ordered for nought

Of Horse tail.
HOrsetaile but more commonly with us called Cat^es tail, of the Greekes
Hippyris of the Mages Saturnes food. It grows in watery places and those
softly dighted and banked about. It creeps up by stalk aloft, and reaches
over his neighbours head, coveting and preasing as much as it may to be the
higher. In his top it figureth a tail to look to. And thereof had it his
name. His root is tough and very harde. Diasc. says, that it is a sore
hinder, and that it stencheth eruption of blood.

Of Houselike.
HOuselike in Greek is called Acizoon, as you would say, always alive. It is
always green and well liking, and for his endurance is resembled to Ambrosia:
for his colour to the Marigold, for his roundset or figure to the Bullocks
^ie: Insomuch that the Romaines call it Iupiters eye. It hath a fruitful leaf
in the bigness of a mans thumb: in the end thereof it is sharpe or like a
tongue. It is given to drink saith Diascorides against the biting of the
greatest kind of Spider, and that kind principally which hath the most
io^ntes, as some be thrice iointed. There is another of this name, but it is
less, and is called Acizoon to Mikron, or with the Romanes Vitalis herba, or
Semperuiua. Semgreene. It grows upon Walls and tiled houses and is many
ways medicinable. Dia^corides.

Of Humlocke.
HVmlock in Greek is called Koneion. With the Egyptians Apemphi, in Latin
Cicu^a. It hath his stalk and stem like Fennel. His flower is white. His seed
like Anise seed, but more white. It is one of those kinds of Plants which
destroy and kill as soon almost as it is taken. Wherewith as we read
Socrates the good Philosopher died forthwith, after that he had been once
caused and compelled of malicious Judges to take y^ Cup wherein the juice hereof
was poured, and so to drink it off. Diascorides saith it kills through
extreme cold, vanquishing and extinguishing all natural heate.

Of the Herb Iacinct.
IAcinct is an Herb having a purple flower It took his name of a certain
noble child, which among the Syrtes in a Pasture there was found dead. So the
child his funeral gave name to this Herb. His colour is properlye Aerie,
bespotted among with Purple and red. It hath a certain flax like Snow. Of
these iij. colours were the Priests robes of, as we read in the old law.

Of Isope.
ISope is an Herb of mean growth, but of much virtue, and principally in
purging the Lungs. Wherefore in the old law says Isidor, by a bunch of
Isope, they would be besprinkled with the blood of Lambs, which would be
counted and reckened clean.

Of the Juniper tree.
THe Juniper tree is so called of similitude and likeness to the fire. Pyr in
Greek signifies the fire: or as some think it is so called for that in his
manner of growing it is like that figure which the Geometricians cal Pyramid, we
may say sharply topped. Or as other some say, it is so named for his good and
long manner of retaining and keeping fire, insomuch that if Coals of fire be
raked up, and inwrapped with the Ashes hereof, they continue as they say,
vnextinguished by the space of a whole year. It grows saith Diascorides, in
stony and desert places. Plini^ saith, that the only shadow of this sleath and
kills Serpents: and therefore his fruit is reckned to be a remedy against
poison.

Of Iupiters beard.
IVpiters Beard, called of the Greekes Chrysokome, as you would say Goldilocks.
It is hairy like Isope. Diascorides saith, it is taken in Wine eftsoones to
purge.

Of Ivy.
Ivy saith Isidore, is so called, for that it creeps all about, and cleaves
fast to the tree, some say (as it may be also) that it was so called, for that
at the first it was given to the Kid and Dear as nourishment meat. For
Haedera is the Latin word, and we may fetch it as it were word out of word,
Haedera quasi Haedis data. It is plentiful in giving Milk, wherewith the Kids
were more full of Milk. It is a token and sign with the Philosophers of cold
and moist earth.

Of the Kastainy.
THe Kastainy is a tree of good high growth, so called as Isidore witnesses,
for that it must be often lopped or gelt. For this so soon as it is cut down,
by and by (as it were a fair green grove) spreads abroad and bears
infinite blossoms, and buddeth wonderfully. His fruit hangs between leaf
and leaf, and that double or by couples, in manner of a man his privities.

Of the Laurel tree.
THe Laurel tree hath been from the beginning, the very seigniory and badge
of all such as have gotten amongst men the name of honour, dignity and praise.
Insomuch that in old time (as also in many places now or not long since) the
Garlands Crowns of Emperors, hardy Captains, valiant Soldiers and such
like, were made hereof. With them of the old time it was called Laudea,
afterwards the letter d through an other custom had his change into the
letter r, and is now called Laurea, (as many other words of like sort) of
the which is Meridies for Medidies and the like. The Greekes named it Daphnis,
for that it is always fresh and never leaseth his gr^ene colour. Aristotle
says that this kind of tree (whereas other and those infinite are) is never
hurt by thunder and lightning.

Of Laus tibi.
LAus tibi or white Daffadill in Greek is called Narkissos. It hath his leaf
like an Onion. His stalk yelow within his skin, and hollow. Diascorides
saith, that it joins together those sinews which are cut, being adhibited
and used plaster like.

Of Lattice.
Lattice says Isidor, is so said for that it being eat, hath that humour
which (...) soon converted into milk: and to the woman it increases milk
abundantlye. To the man he saith, it is cause or prouokement to Venery. There
is both field Lettise and Gardain Lettise. Diascorides saith, that it puts
away all hindrances of sound sleep.

Of the Leek.
THe Leek hath his time of lustiness and youth, and his time also of age,
even as man hath. For the first year it bestows all care and travel in
growth and nourishment to his own perfection and ripening: then the next year
following, that that he can he reserueth and bestows upon seed, to the
preservation of his kind.

Of Laburnum.
LAburnum is a tree growing upon the Mountains called the Alps, whose wood
is white hard: and hath his flower one Cubit in length, so noisome that no Be
will touch it. This grows in hard and dry places and hates moisture or
water.

Of Libardbaine.
LIbardbaine of the Greekes is called Ak^niton, it hath leaves like the
Cucumber, but somewhat more less and rough. His root is like ye Scorpions
tail. In colour it is as white as the Alabaster. They say that if the root
hereof be showed or offered to the Scorpion, that it enfeebles him, and
bereaves him for a while of his lively powers, of both his inward and outward
senses. But contrariwise if you show him Barefoot or Terworte, he by and by
leaps, and is aloft. Diascorides saith, that this root being stamped to
poulder, and being bespiced or bestrewed upon their meat, as flesh, and such
other things wherewith they live, destroys and kills the Panther, the
Libard, the Wolf, and all other beasts, those especially which live by
ravening, and that whilst their meat so ordered is in their mouth. There is
another of this name, englished Wolfbane: whose lea^e is like the Plane tree,
which hath iij. kinds. The one which the Huntesman uses: which grows for
the most part in Italie, with the which after their addighting they destroy
Wolves, as Diascorides saith: the other which serve the Physician to good use
and purpose.

Of Liricumfancie.
LIricumfancie, or as other judge May Lily, for resemblace alike: It hath his
flower very white. In Greek it is called Ephemeron, for his short continuance
and daily dying. As also there is a little kind of beast in the River Hipanis
of that name, as Aristotle records, which lives but only one day, and
dies at night: so ordained of God and provided of Nature: herein to learn and
teach us that all things created made, have their end: some with long looking
for it, other some have it as suddenly, and as short: And to inform us further,
that every thing hath not a like end. No, infinite things there are, that have
no proportion, or seem not to be (although they be) conference comparison
being once had, the one with the other.

Of Licorise.
LYcorise, is so said especially through the Greek word for that it hath a
sweet root. Gluen in Greek is interpreted sweet. It is not only sweet,
but it is also moist, insomuch that if slakes the thirst.

Of the Malew.
THe Malew hath that pre-eminence, that it molifieth, and loseneth all
hardness of the inward parts bowels of the belly: as Isidor shows, whose
liquor or juice saith he, being contempered with any clammy Oil, and being
anointed upon any mans body, he cannot be stung with Bees.

Of the Mandrake.
THe Mandrake saith Diascorides, of some is called Circea. For that the Poets
feigned, that C^rce the Witch or Sorceress used it in her amorous and
delicious drincks. It bears saith Isidore, an Apple of sweet smell, which of
some is called the Apple of the earth. The Poets call it Anthropomorpheos, for
that it hath his root in ye earth in figure like to a ma. Whose roo^e being
boiled with wine, and given the patient to drink, the Surgeon forthwith
casts the Patient into a dead sleep. There is of this both Male and Female.
The Male is of ^ike leaf to the Beete. The Female to the Lett^se.

Of Maioram.
MAioram sweet, or Maiora gentle, took his name of a certain Kings weighting
Boy, which in fetching his Lord certain ointments at the Apothecaries, by
chance (whilst he bare them) had a fall, so by the spilling of every each of
them (meeting together by their flowing, and by such confusion) a marvelous
sweet smell was made, which as they say, this Maioram represents.

Of the Mastick tree.
THe Mastick tree, distills and drops a certain tear or Gum: and that
kind of gum which is in working very dry, empties the head of all moisture,
and al other superfluities, as Diascorides saith.

Of the Marigold.
THe Marigold of Manardus is called Lysimachia. Ruellius calls it Woodwaxen,
it grows in Meadows and Pastures like to Brom, so bitter that no beast
living will eat thereof. Other will have it called Lostriffe or Herb Willow.
It bears a red flower: It being put saith Diascorides into the fire, sends
forth that kind of smoke that is noisome to Serpents, and drives away Flies.

Of Molin or Longwort.
MOlin or Longwort, is one kind of that Herb, which in Greek is called
Phlamos, another of that is the Primrose. Of some it is taken for the
Rosecampin. It hath a long root, a white flower, somewhat wanne. Aristotle
saith, that this is the fishes deadly destruction, or they coveting to taste
hereof, by the power of his working, are weakened and brought low insomuch that
they thereby for the most part, leese their life.

Of the Mulberry tree.
THe Mulberry tree hath a sovereign red colour in fruit bearing: whereupon in
Greek it is called Moros, which signifies red or ruddy coloured. There is
saith Theophrast ye Egyptian Mulberry tree that is not much unlike ours in the
Gardaine: but it hath a singula^ manner by it self in fruit bearing, for
neither upon his bough, neither yet upon his leaf, it bears fruit but only
beneath out at his body, in the bigness of our Fig. But forasmuch as it
lacks his inward Karnell (which other fruits have) it is somewhat slack in
hastening toward ripeness, and is never mature or mellow, until such time as
it be pressed and chafed with Iron Instruments, such as they have in Egypt.
Which kind of fruit being on this wise used as it were the space of four
days, it wareth ripe by and by, and in the eating is very pleasant.

Of the Mushrom.
THe Mushrom or Toadstoole, in Greek is called Moketon, in Latin Fungus. It
hath two sundry kinds, and they both differ in goodness, for the one may be
eaten: the other is not to be eaten, but is deadly to eat. The first also
eftsoones by other means, not of himself, but taking it of another, becomes
poisonous or deadly. Diascorides saith, that this thing sometime comes to
pass through neighborhoode and feloship either of rusty Iron, or Nails: or
else sometime by rotten and filthy Rags cast among them, and consumed to
dust: sometime also by harbouring Serpents, such as are all venomous: sometime
also through the next neighbourhood of venomous and infectuous Plants, and so
forth.

Of Mint.
MInt is an Herb of sweet smell and is of two sorts the one of the Gardaine,
ye other of the field. The Latines cal it Calaminthus. Isaac saith, that it
stops and stencheth all kind of swellings.

Of Milfoile.
MYlfoile of some Yarrow or Nosebleede, is a small and short set or shrub. It
hath his leaf like to the Birds feathers. They are divided by cuts, and are
sharpe also like the Cumin. Diascorides saith, it is profitable to stay
eruption of blood.

Of the Mirhe tree.
THe Mirhe tree saith Plinie, grows in the pastures and woods of Arabia,
whose leaf is much like to the Olive, but more sharp and thorny. It hath
boughs like to the Juniper. It is in his growth about five Cubittes high. It
distills drops out of his side, or body, both bitter green, which some cal
sweating. Isidore saith, that the best of it comes by resolution and loose
giving within it self. And that he saith is a great deal more precious, which
comes forth and issues of his own accorde, than that which comes by stroke
and Iron Instrument violently brought forth. Dead bodies anointed with this
distillation, are said to be preserved from corruption or rottenness.

Of the Myrt tree.
THe Myrt tree saith Isid. was first called Myrtus, for yt it grows most
commonly nigh to the Sea shore. It is one of the odoriferous kind, or sort,
those I mean which have sweet sent or smell. Diascorides saith that it
repairs and refreshes anew old wearied members.

Of the Nettle.
THe Nettle is a burner, is called Vrtica, of the active verb Vro: as Isid.
saith. It is of fiery and extreme hot burning nature, burning with handling of
it only. And when as it hath once done with burning as much as it will: it
straight ways causes ytching, to the intent that the place being scratched
might swell ye more. Which ill weed is not through this his dealing one ways
hurtful to a man, but many ways. Yet it hath in it saith Diascorides somewhat
praise worthy: for it is singular (so as it may be used) to stench blood.

Of Nightshade.
NIghtshade of ye Egyptians is called Alleto in Greek Struchnos, the Romaines
cal it Batrachium some other Solanum. His leaf is somewhat like Percelie.
Diascorides saith it helps the burning and inflation of the stomach. With
this the valiant Beggars and most cunning in that their daily craft, (craft
it may be well called and taken in the worst part) do make their flesh seem
raw and rancored, as often as they will, to the intent men may pity them the
more, and give them the sooner their Alms: whereas peradventure, they be as
whole as lusty as those that have pity of them in very deed. But here we
may perceive there is a counterfayting almost in every thing. They therefore
to beguile men, thus use it. With this they chafe their legs, their arms and
other parts also where they will, till it blister and break the s^inne,
having so done for a time it shows a marvelous ill look. And so I warrent
you to that look they, for their parts, can counterfeit as good. In most
places in England it is called Gold-knappe ^r yelowe Crace, for the golden
colour of his fruit,

Of the Nut tree
THe Nut tree may be called that very aptly, an injurious unquiet neighbour.
It hurts the fruits next to him by all means, both with his shadow, with
dropping ill tears or humours from out his leaves upon them and also with his
root. Insomuch that by al ways it vexes and hinders the next to him.
Isidore saith they may all generally and with one and the same name be called
Nuts, whose fruit is hid and kept up in husk or shale: As the walnut, the
Chestnut, the Almond and the like.

Of the Nymphs tree
THe Nymphs tree of the Greekes is called Lotos, it is of exceeding great
height, very soft tender in bark. In fruit it is like the Cherie, as sweet
and as small also. Cardane saith, that Neptunes Daughter a Nymph, fleeing from
Priapus, was turned into this tree, and thereupon it had first his name. There
is an Herb also of this name, which the Poets imagine and feign, that
whosoever eats thereof shall so be in attendance upon Venus and upon her
Court Ladies, that he shall not be able to move from the place where he so
tarries or rests in.

Of the Olive tree.
THe Olive is a kind of tree had in much price amongst the Ancients for his
peasible and concordant nature. Insomuch that the old Romaines (as in their
Histories and Chronicles doth appear) were never wont to send their Legates
or Ambassadors either to ask and require peace: or else to offer and
proclaim peace with their outward enemies, without small brauches hereof borne in
their hands. Remigius saith, it is for a token of sign or atonement and
covenant made between God and man. As then especially when as ye Dove fleeing
forth of No his Arc, fetched first and foremost to him a small twig hereof.
Plinie saith, in his.xv. book, that the valiant and noblest vanquishers in the
City of Athens in old time were honoured and crowned with the Olive. The same
Author also records, that there be diverse kinds hereof. There is also a
certain juice of this Olive, as Isidore saith, which the more new and fresh
that it is, the better it is. There is also the wild Olive like to the other,
but that it hath a more broad Leaf.

Of the Oak.
THe Oak is called ye sound bodied tree, and his principality is in long life
endurance. It is said that Mambra that tree, was a kind of Oak, under which
Abraham dwelt which continued and endured many hundred years, even from his
time to Constantines the king and Emperor. His fruit is commonly called the
Acorn.

Of the Oleander.
OLeander, in Greek Naerion ye Latines call it Rhododendrum. It is thought to
be a tree inleaf like to ye Almond tree, but at the end somewhat more sharpe.
In flower it is like the Rose, and bears fruit with shale, as the Almonde:
within his shale are fat and full seeds, as soft to feel to as purple silk.
His leaf or lint of flower being eaten of cattaile is their cause of death.

Of the Onion.
THe Onion hath al his strenght and manner of working in his root or head,
therefore it is called Cepa in Latin, for that all his profit is placed in ye
head. At one years growth it takes no great proof, neither doth it seem to
riot until such time as it is plentiful in yielding seed.

Of Orchanet or wild Buglosse
ORchanet, of the Romaines Greekes is called Anchusa. Some of our countrymen
translate it wild Buglosse. It hath his leaf sharp set and thorny. This
root saith Diasco. hath that kind of juice, that being wrong out, dies in a
manner a sanguine colour.

Of the Orange tree.
THe Orange tree whereof Mantua so much makes mention of, in his Eclogues: is
first reported to be brought from the Medes, whereof is thought to arise this
Latin word Malus Medica. The Greekes call it Kedromela, for that his fruit
is in smell, not much unlike to the Cedar. The Orange saith Diascorides,
helps and remedies all venom. And so the Poet means, whereas he saith:
And hereof is the souls best nourishment. This tree is at all seasons of ye
year fruit bearing or fruitful: insomuch that it is never found without
fruit, but after a diverse sort in their ^ualitie manner: for when the first of
their fruit is mellow, and ready ripe: then the second you shall epsy green
and sower: and the third new blosoming and in flower. So that as the first is
plucked off: the residue one after another hasten to rypenesse, the first to
the third his point: the third to the second, and that, that is not (but in
possibility and power is) then springing forth.

Of Organnye.
ORgannye of some wild Maioram. His root is like the Rape, ruddy within, and
without very black. Diascorides saith, that if his root be stamped and mixed
with Uiniger, that itis a singular Medicine, and remedies the bighting and
eating of Spiders.

Of the Palm tree.
THe Palm tree, is bespred with boughs plentifullye, and the same in a manner
resembling the small lines in our hand. It is of indifferent height, swift in
shooting forth, and in his growth, keeping and retaining still his Leaf
without fall (which thing the most of all other kinds do not) but have
yearly at one time of the year the fall of their leaf. The Greekes in their
language call it Phoenix, fetched borrowed as I think, from Phoenix the Bird
of Arabie, which is said to be of so long life or continuance. Plinie saith,
that there is hereof both Male and Female.

Of Papirus or the Rush of Egypt.
PApirus or the Rush of Egypt, and Siria, in length is reported to be ten
Cubits. It grows in the Fen and Marshy grounds. Of this was Paper at the
first made, as his name yet seems to testify. This kind of Rush being well
dried, is the fire his best nourishment: with this also in Egypt and Siria,
they make Candelles and Torches (even as we) with out wi^ke and cotton.

Of the Pear tree.
THe Pear tree as Isidore witnesses, is called Pyrus, for that it is in his
fashion and kind of growth, Piramidall or firelike, broad about the middle of
the body, but at the top Arrow headed, or Pinnaclelike. It hath but one name,
for many and sundry his kinds. There is in a certain Town in Italie called
Crustiminium that kind of Pear, which is as red as blood in one of his sides,
and in the reasidue otherwise.

Of Pearserthnut.
PEarserthnut of many in english, in Greek in called Astragalos. The* Romaines
call it Ficus terrae, the Fig of the earth. In manner of growth it seems to be
but a small and very short shrub. It is in leaf and branch bearing like to
Cicer his root: of the Physicians it is said to be by many ways medicinable,
as to stay and stench blood, the like. But it is very hard and scarcely able to
be beaten to poulder.

Of Penroyall.
PEnroyall of some Chrusitis of others Iupiters beard: of others it is thought
to be a kind of Calamint. It hath locks very like Isope: The Greekes amongst
them by their manner of name and word giving (as we may interpret) seem to
call it golden Herb. His root is a great binder, causes excessive heate.
Plinie comendeth it for this one thing above all other herbs: For that it being
hung up in ye larderhouse, either by branch, or otherwise, in the midst and
depth of Winter, yet for all that buddeth forth his yelow and golden Flower.

Of the Pine tree.
The Pine tree is called holdfast or pitchy tree. It is said to sweat, and to
drop forth Pitch. Theophrast saith, that this kind of tree furdereth and
agrees with al other their natures whatsoever, as also the Fig tree doth the
contrary. It bears that fruit which we call the Pine Apple. At the first it
is very raw and grene, but being ripened, it comes most nigh to the Chestnut
his colour.

Of the Pionie.
THe Pionie had his name first of a ^ertaine Phisicion whose name was Peon as
Isid^ reports. Some call it Penterobina for his number of grains. Other some
call it fiuefingred leaf, for ye fingers likeness. Auicen saith, that there is
of this both Male Female. The Male saith he, druncken in Wine helps the
Opilacion of the Spleen.

Of the Pepper tree.
THe Pepper tree grows in Indie, and upon the side of the hill Caucasus right
opposite to the Sun. His leaf is much like the Iunipers leaf. It grows
amongst the Groves and Woods, such as the Serpents inhabit: But to be free from
any their kind of endamaging, the inhabitants of that country saith Isidore,
when the fruits hereof ripen, do set the whole Grove on fire, and by that
means the deadly Serpents fly, and are driven away. So that the sire hath two
effects in so working: the one to their terror and fear: the other to make
black and becolour the Carnels as it were most browne: when as both they and ye
residue of their fruit by natural growth and proper colour are all white. It
takes also of this fiering, not only black colours, but wrinkles also, as
we may see upon his upper skin. They that will be Crafts masters in this
merchandise, have proof of both old and new thus. If it be light, they judge
it old: if more weighty, then take they it to be new. But herein sometime
the Merchants play the very Merchants. For they intermeddle now and then
amongst their old Pepper the froth or sinders of Silver or Lead, and such
like, to make it way heavy.

Of Phleum.
PHleum saith Theophrast, is in his leaf very fertile, and in a manner
fleshly. It is of great stock, and as small of height. It hath a certain
influence and more plentiful mean of increase of the Stars which be called
Pleads: And therefore it may be said that it is called Phleum It gives
orderly leaf after leaf as they fall away.

Of the Plane tree.
THe Plane tree in Greek is called Platos, for his breadth and plainness of
leaf. Zerxes the King of most mighty power had this in admiration above al
other trees, insomuch that he fell in love with it, and at such time as other
hastened him, made preparance through him to battle, yet he would somwhile
slack under this tree, and spend there the most part of the day. He departing
also from thence by motion and trauaise of body (yet still permanent there in
his mind) would leave behind him pledges and tokens of his love: Armelets,
Chains, embroidered array, which he for testimony only of his love, hoong up
upon the Boughs.

Of Piperitis.
PIperitis the Herb of Castor the Physician, was said to be effectuous in
remedying and helping the falling sickness.

Of the Pomegranate.
THe Pomegranate, is of some called the good kernel Apple. It hath in his round
set and proportio of skin, a multitude of small kernels. Isaac saith, that this
being immoderatly taken engenders vexations griefs, inwardly and outwardly.

Of Persely.
PErsely, is a Gardaine herb and used much with Cooks in dighting setting out
their meates, as often also to farce and stuff here wtall. It had his name as
the Latin word gives for growing on stony rocky places. Diasco. saith that his
seed may be kept ten years without loss of operation. There are diverse kinds
hereof: but that of Macedony is counted the best.

Of Plantaine.
PLantaine of some is called Lames tongue: his leaf is very plain but
sinewy, after the likeness of this Herb^ was once the attire of the high
Priest made. It remedies and helps the biting and swelling of mad Dogs.

Of Popie.
POpie or Chesboule is in one sort, of the gardaine, in another of the field.
This of many is take in Bread, for better healths sake. It causes sleep: and
drives away watchings, as saith Diascorides. Therefore Diagoras the
Philosopher, a man most vigilant and studious, when as other used it, he would
not take it, no not then, when as he had taken to much upon him by study
watching: least he thereby should accustom him self to fall fro his old
wont: yet Mnesidem{us} another Philosopher, would eftsoones use to smell
hereof, and to receive of the juice purposedly to provoke sleep.

Of the Plumb tree.
THe Plumb tree, hath many diverse kinds, although but one name for all* But his
chiefest and principal kind is the Damascen, brought forth first out of a
certain place or town called Damascum, where it first grew.

Of Polipodecke or Okeferne.
POlipodecke or Okeferne, grows on the tops of Oaks and walls. It being
roast in the Carcass of an Hen saith Auicen, remedies the grief of the
guts.

Of Purslane.
PVrslane, is an Herb in colour very fresh, and green. Plinie saith, yt it
being chawed and kept a while between the teeth, doth make the loose teeth
hard, and sets them fast again.

Of the Quince tree.
THe Quince tree is in Latin called Cydonia Malus of Cydon a certain town in
Cr^te. Cato was the first that called it Cotonea, for that his Apple or fruit
is all over apparelled with a certain kind of wool called Coton. With the
Germans it is called Quittenbaum. Amongst the Germans it is most rife, and
grows in cold and moist places. Many think that this is that fruit which
the Poets call golden Apple: in Greek Chrusomela. Lonicer saith, that the
juice of the raw Quince helps them that have their wind or breath stopped:
and which have no good digestion in meat taking.

Of Reed.
Reed is half take with the Herb and tree, but in force or growth, above the
Herb. And nothing in strength to the tree his comparison: It is all without
very smooth and plain, within like an empty vessel. It is carried and bent on
every side with the wind. Isidor saith, that it took his name of soon sudden
change in his array. Arundo saith he is derived out of the Adiectiue Aridum,
for that it so speedily dries and withers.

Of the Rose.
THe Rose saith Theophrast, (although it hath but one name for so sundry
kinds) yet it is known well enough in his kinds, either by number and
account of leaf, either else by sharpness, lightness, colour, or smell.
They of this kind for the most part have five leaves: there are some found
that have.xij. other some.xx. other some have far many mo. There be also
saith he, which been called hundredth Leaves. Whereof many came from Philippos,
which being first brought from Pangeus the very armehole or elbow of Thrace,
are now set and do grow in many other places Those be saith he of most sweet
smell, which grow in Cyrena: and hereof is made with the Apothicaries a most
sweet confection or Ointment. In Cyrena also there is the best Violet, and
that which is of pure smell.

Of Rosemarie.
ROsemarie by his Latin name, should seem to have been called in ye former
time, wholesome Herb. His leaf is somewhat like Fenel, but more sharply ended,
and gross about. It can not be soon reckened, to howe many sundry uses and
purposes it serves to.

Of Rue.
RVe is called the Medicinable Herb: and especially there where as excessive
heate is found. For it is said to be most whote. There is hereof both that of
the Gardaine, and of the field. They say that in this Herb it is taught us,
how the enuenoming of Serpents may be helped: for that such things living as
have a do with Serpents, do first arm themselves with this Herb, before
they encounter with them. Plinie saith, that the Weasel having well known the
effect and sorce of this Herb, at the meeting of the Cockatrice (having first
eaten hereof) goes forth quietly, and encoun^teth with him, and so vanquishes
him.

Of Saffron.
Saffron saith Isidore, was first named in Latin Crocus, of a certain town in
Cicilie called Coritium, whereas it is especially most abundant, although
plentiful in many other places. Many things saith he took their name of the
first place whereas thy grew. It hath this sovereignty or best goodness, in
that that by whole winters long, it keeps his green colour, leaseth it not,
whatsoever cold nipping whether, or tempest can do to appall it. In summer it
suffers the leaf to wither, in mid Autumn it takes it freshly again:
and gives then his fruit in a soft and tender head.

Of Sauin.
SAuin, is one of those kinds which all the whole winter time wears his
green cote, and bears leaf all seasons of the year. It is often used of
Phisicions to fomentacion, and especially to remedy and help all griefs in
the inward parts and bowels.

Of Saxifrage.
SAxifrage is called the stone killing herb for that his operation is such,
that it dissolveth and wears away all sand and gravel which takes root in
the bladder.

Of Scammony.
SCammony of the Latins Colophonia, in Greek Skammonia: it hath a leaf like
Ivy, but softer and in figure and show most like to the Triangle: It bears
a white flower. Diascorides saith, that it is given to purge and deliver from
colour, and saith he so it doth but it commonly leaves a worse matter behind
it.

Of Saint Iohnes seal.
SAaint Iohnes seal, of Ruellius Salomos seal: of Manardus, Saint Maries
seal: of Iohn Agricola fraxinella or scala Caeli, in look appearance is like
ye Laurel: in taste like the Quince. Diascorides saith that there grows
between every leaf many flowers of white colour, and in great number.

Of Spikenarde.
SPikenarde saith Plinie, gives name to many kinds. Spica nardi or Spikenarde,
is only supposed to come out of Indie. It is so called saith Isidor, for that
his leaf is gathered swimming aloft in the floods, and streams of Indie,
without either root or stalk. Which leaf they finding, do pierce and prick
it, and do lay it up to dry. They say that there is a leaf in Paradise much
like to this Mardus. There is one growing also in Indie, another in Siria. This
last being kept awhile in the mouth dries up the tongue and saliuous humour.

Of stony Sage or Wall sage.
STony Sage or Wall sage, which most commonly grows upon the Tiles of houses,
or upon the top of Walls, of some is called Heraclea. The Mages after their
language call it Titans blood, or the Scorpions tail. Some call it Oxes eye.
It hath a Leaf like Sage: and grows plentifully amongst the Sands. The best
virtue of this is saith Diascorides, to seek and search to the bottom of all
maims and wounds.

Of Sycamore.
Sycamore or foolish Fig tree, in leaf is like the Mulberry tree: In other
points, it is the self same with the Fig. It hath a milky kind of juice or
humour, many a time seen at the Leaf his end. It hath Grains within his
fruit as the Fig tree hath: But this to be most marveled at, for that it
never ripens until it be stricken with an Iron instrument.

Of the Thorne tree.
THe Thorn tree is armed about with Dart and sting. And therefore Isidore will
have it named Spina, quasi speculis septa: as you would say, befenced with
sting. It is used with us as for his best worthiness to enclose, and to be a
defence and a partour of our neighbour his ground and ours.

Of Terebull.
TErebull, is the Leaf of an Herb in Indie, which swims about in Pooles
Ditches, without any root that is seen. Those of Mauritania and of Greece
call it Malabathrum. Whereof comes a most precious, and sweet Oil. Cardane
saith, that it so coforteth a man, that the very Leaf being taken then, when
as a man is in grief and vexation either of mind or of body, it stays or
quiets him, yea although he be in a swoune or dying.

Of Tragion.
TRagion saith Diascorides, only Crete Cicilie brings forth. It hath his
bough, seed and leaf like to the Mastix tree, but not altogether so great. It
flows and distills that humour that is like gum. With this as with
Dictamus (whereof we spake before) the Goats Dear of Crete being once wooded,
help and remedy themselves, and then especially, if it be by Arrow or Dart,
sticking fast in their Ribs, they so loosen it by this harts tongue or Cetract.
And Diascorides saith, that al harvest time his leaves smell rammishly, in manner
like the Goat, and this grows upon the hills and lofty places. There is an
herb also of this name which some call Scorpion, the Romaines and Greekes
Tragos.

Of the tree of Paradise.
THe tree of Paradise saith Cardane, is of short life, for the second year his
body dries up and waxes barren: It bears fruit like a cluster of Grapes,
but in bigness of an Apple. It is covered with a yelow coat, his leaf is
very long broad, for the which it is of so short life, for that which is great
and gross hath need of great humour, that also which goes to much at riot:
or else it by and by dies.

Of Trifolie.
TRifolie, or three leaved Herb, as the word or name may be general to all
such as have only but three Leaves: so is there a certain fruit or Herb so
properly called. Of some it is called short vine, of ye Egyptians Epaphu. It is
of sweet smell. It grows saith Diascorides, in a shadowy and dark place:
His flower is purpled Circlelike, his seed droncken in Wine is much
medicinable.

Of Turbit.
TVrbit whose Leaf is like the Laurel, grows in Egypt, and is not the same
which men think, they receive at the Apothecaries hands: It is given to purge
fleume. It is said (being drunken in Uiniger) to remedy the biting and
stinging of the Aspis: for the which there are but few remedies.

Of Wake Robin.
WAke Robin the Syrians call Lupha. It is leaved in figure like the Dragon: In
his stalk it is purpled. It gives a sharpe set stomach enough to digest, and
to satisfy Natures desire, being once taken.

Of Walwort.
Walwort the Greekes cal Symphyton whose heygth is commonly two cubits: his
leaf is rifted like Buglosse, his root and nether show black: but within
very white and oily: It helps and puts away blood spitting.

Of wild borage.
Wild Borage or Alcibiadio is that herb that Alcibiades used to paint his face
with. The Latins cal it Alcibiacu, it hath his leaf, white, is wrought like
Orchanet: his best is saith Diascorides, for that it helps ach and anguish of
the Lungs.

Of wild Rue.
Wild Rue or woodsage in Latin Polimonion. It hath small stalks saith
Diascorides in a manner like a birds Feather: his leaf is a little bigger than
our Rue. It hath a tuft which is full of black seeds. They say, that if it be
applied to any part of a man, No Scorpion can sting or wound him: or if she
doth, it can not hurt him.

Of Veruen.
VEruen, of some after their language is called Holy Herb. The Mages call it
Iunoes tear, or Mercuries moyste blood. The Romaines Cocks comb. It grows
only in the waters, and is thought to be that Herb which in Greek is called
Peristeon, because the Doves being in company and in their flight, seek after
their food at this Herb.

Of the Violet.
THe Violet is in two kinds: white purpled. His best goodness is in a sweet
kind of smell, especially that Violet which grows (as we said before) in
Cirena. Some say that there is a kind of Violet like Honey. Look howe much
the more effectuous or good in working this his flower is: so much ye more it
is said to hold down his head, and to bow and bend his body downward, to
the earth.

Of Wintergreene.
WIntergreene of the Mages is called Wolves heart, so to translate it. The
Sirians call it Merida. The Frenchmen Juniper. The Latines after theirlanguage,
black Lingwort or the earths leaf, it is like to our Beete. His seed saith
Diasc. taken in wine, helps the grief of the inward bowels.

Of Woodbinde.
WOodbinde of the Mages is called Venus hair. Of the Egyptians Tucon. It is a
humile and weak kind of shrub, and hath his leaf says Diascorides, one set
a good way off from another. It twineth like a thread or line, about other
herbs and fruits, and is a hindrance to their prosperity and growth. They
say that if it be drunken.xxxvj. days together, it causes a barren and
unfruitful nature: further it helps the Fever intermedled with Oil.

Of Woodherbe.
WOodherbe after the Latin translating, in Greek Kaetaphysis, it hath a leaf
like Crowfoote and grows about in the groaues and fields as plentifully as
thick as grass. It being stamped saith Diascorides, and mixed with ye brawn of
any thing living, remedies cures Ulcers and Biles. It is also said, that if
it be brought home whilst it is fresh, and bestrewed about the house, to
prohibit and let the Flees of their engendering.

Of the Willow tree.
THe Willow tree in Latin is called Salix a Saliendo, for his swift skipping
and coming up. The best praise that it hath given him is, for that the more he
is powled and cut down, the better a great deal he prospers. His second
praise is for ministering oftentimes meat to the Cattaile.

Of the Yew tree.
THe Yew tree in Greek is called Smilax, the Romaines call it Taxus. It is in
bigness of leaf like the Fur tree. Diascorides says, that it first grue
in Carbonia a part of Italie and Spain. It hath that secret manner of working,
that whosoever sits or lies on sleep under it, keatcheth no good thereby:
for oftentimes hurt hath come thereby, and sometimes also death. It was told us
of it saith Diascorides, that we should avoid it by a certain friend of
ours, for fear of greater danger. And Virgil in his Bucolickes warns and
charge the shepeherds of his time, that they should not suffer their sheep
to feed neither under this, neither under the Juniper tree, neither under
those trees whose shadow is hurtful. As in his Georgickes he warns also,
how the swarms of Bees should be kept away in any case from the Yewes of the
Isle of Cirse or Corsica in this verse and the like. Et tua Cyrneas fugiant
examina Taxos.
If that thou wilt thy Bees to be
in weal and in good case
Take heed of Cirsies Yewes I say
and of that dangerous place.
And Plinie also in his natural History and xvj. book records of this,
that in Arcadie the Yewes are of that force to weak and enfeble the vital
powers in any man sleeping under them, that sometime he forthwith and presently
dies. And Plutarch in his Sympose renders the reason, for that the Brain
being distempered with so noisome and deadly a sent or smell, causes the rest
of the head not to be well, but vndoeth his good settling, and all at once
bereaves him of all. Thus saith Plinie it doth, whenever any long tarriance is
made under it. But then doth it especially cumber and hurt, yea, most often
kill, when as it newly shoots out and buddeth forth flowers.

FINIS.
The third Book of the Aegemonie or chiefest virtues in all the whole kind of
bruit Beasts, Fowls, Fishes, creping worms and Serpents, with the
Alphabetical order.

Psalm. 148. Praise the Lord of Heaven, ye beasts and all cattle: worms and
fethered Fowls.

The Preface to the third Book.
THe division of Savage and brute Beasts, r^ueth somewhat more at large: And
may more plentifullye be sorted and severed into their branches, then those
other two more base Daughters and of les^er pr^ce, which we next before
immediately in their order showed off, what was their best and sovereign
goodness. For this is the close and wise working of Dame Nature, that the
further and in degree the more high, she labours in hers to have them reach
to the chiefest perfection in whom are all things absolute, full and without
any point of lack or imperfection, she gives to each of them in thei^ kind a
several gift. And whereas all of them can not be alike, neither is there in
them equal condition, yet for the best she provides for them in that that may
be: always foreseing to avoid impossibility. I mought here therefore set
these two last Daughters, the plant and eke the brute Beast, the one from the
other by this note and difference (for many men have children alike, and yet
they are known and have their difference by one mark or other) First and
fo^most in moving from place to place, with an appetite to repast themselves:
and this is the chiefest, used and sought forth of Philosophers: the next in
feeling and sense, perceiving grief and pain, good and evil. And herein and
in these, they chiefly dissent. Insomuch yt the Plant is only portioned with
the life vegetatiue, and therein in every each power fully abundantly. This
other last steps up a Stayer higher, layth hold and apprehends another
kind of life in degree more Princely, and in force or large power most
manifold: for with this, it hath might to m^ue, to have lust or appetite: to
have and hunt after what it will, and to wander and straye therefore whether it
will, neither ought that to be reckned ought which Anaxagoras and Empedocles,
men partial in this point reasoned: Whereas they spake of that other the Plant
his praise. Insomuch, that they would pe^swade others of their time, that in
that kind there was both moving abroad and appetite to that which it
perceives to be best: but they are refuted of Aristotle by sundry and
sufficient reasons whereof we entend not to speak: only se^ling ^ur selves to
gainsay them herein, with ^his one reason chosen forth of the rest, that
Aristotle uses. If they have sense and appetite, they must needs have
feeling: if they have feeling, they must needs have organ, parts
instrumental for the manner of feeling. But in the Plant there is none such
perceived: Therefore with so little a tr^p they are clean cast down. Further
some of them ad (but that which may be the more borne withal) that many of the
kinds of Plants have both Male and Female, As ^mpedocles and his like: of
whom I demand whether yt they have conjunction yea or no? or whether they
have th^se parts which ^e destined to pr^creation yea or no? and lastly,
whether they coni^yne each other with their like? for ye ^als saith Aristotle
is that which ^y coniunc^ion begets his like in another. The ^emale that
which likewise doth even so with another. But in this last they may be the more
^uffered, for that Aristotle himself in the conclusion and winding up of his
former book De Plantis, doth as it were distinguish those of the same kinds,
although they have a nigh resemblance and are taken of some for all one. And
thus saith he, you shall know the Male from the Female. The Male is of more
spisse or tough branches: of leaf and bough, more abundant: of less humour
or m^ysture than the Female: yet more forward in ripening. And hath his leaf
and s^ippes also di^fering. The Female hath all these, but nothing like in
nu^ber, affection and quality. But we mind not thus to give back or to s^ip
aside with any more conference or comparison had. Let us fall now to every
thing living and Creature of life h^s accustomed division. All living Creatures
therefore (I do here necessarily but unwillingly comprehend man not me^ning to
speak what his s^ueraigntie is nor what is in him best, but purposed to stay
before I come at him, who stands on the st^yer a step higher than we mean to
climb: bu^ speaking of living Creatures, my meaning is of brute Beasts, the
word restrained and cut a little short.) First to go to their place where they
accustom to live, differ thus. For one part of them lives upon the earth,
another in the Sea ^at^rs, the third part in both* doubtfully: so that one
while they keep in the broad air: anotherwhile in the water, and e^rth as the
Crocodile. Those of the earth some of them have (...) to go with: some creep:
some swim: some fly. The next diff^nce is noted and perceived in their manner
and kind of living, as Aristotle witnesses; in his books De animalibus very
often. Some saith he, be as it were mild, hurtful to no body, as the
Bullock, the Goa^e, the poor and ^ielye Sheep: other of such fierceness, and
so wild that they can not be tamed, as the Tiger, the wild Boar, and other
of haughty stomach as the Lyon: othe^ some of increadible might or strength,
as is ^he Elephant, the Cammell, and such like: other after a sort subtle and
why, working man much evil and displeasure, as the crafty Fox, the devouring
Wolf and so forth. Plinie as concerning this matter hath this diui^ion. All
Beasts saith he, or Creatures living, hath this difference: some be full of
blood, whereby they be long lived, as the Hart, the Hind, the Roe, other are
without blood: but in stead thereof have their natural humour: as the Be, the
Wasp, the Betle, the ^lie. All which are of wrethed par^ed body. Again he
saith, some difference is in them for their food: for that the most part to
account of, of all manner Beasts, live by flesh, and be called in Greek
Cinophagai: other are indifferent for that matter, and eat that, as other
things, when they may come by it: as the D^gge, the fleeing Eagle, and the
like. Some again, which will none of i^: as for the most part all Fowls of
the Air, and Fishes of the Sea. Further, some be of good memory, or retain
for a time in their head a good turn done to them or an evil as ye Dog, the
Lion, the Cammell: Other as forgetful of such kind of deserving, and
unmindful as the Ostrich, the Dove. And there is in some a certain kind of
perceiueraunce and adiudging or esteeming what is what (but the s^me spoken of
us by resemblance and unproperly) which we may perceive they have through their
care in bringing up tendering their young: as also in artificial manner of
building their Nest, in hunting and seeking after their pray, in remedying and
curing wounds: in espying what shall hurt them: And further in s^me through
foreknowledge and skill to prognosticate what shall afterwards happen by storm
tempest: as is the Swallow by his departure, when cold and Winter begin to
come in. As is the wild Crane, which also shows us through her flight from
place to place, whereas exceeding Fr^sts shall be: And there is not this only
in the Crane, laudable or praise worthy, but that which requires far greater
praise and long time to admiration. Aristotle saith, ^hat he hath marked this
that when the Cranes by company, fly over the broad Sea (which is large,
wide, and infinite) to continue in that their passage the better without
rescue, and to endure to the end, they use this knack or practise. Their
company then is brought into fiues, and so they fly two a breast, and the fifth
or odd Crane in manner of a persiue sterne, to make the other way in the Air,
flies all alone before, till he be weary so doing: when he is weary, another
goes and takes upon him his office and painetaking, and that other comes to
their place which be of breast, and in like sort do all the other by course,
till their journey be at an end: and so their flight is like a Triangle, sharpe
at the end, and broad about, and easied therewithal by one another his
helping. Again (to leave their entrails and inward parts so to come by
division) they are said to differ in outward attire and kind of array: for
some have hair for their vppe^ Garment: some have only their bare skin: other
have feathers: other have hide: other have their skin full of prickles and
briestles: and (to speak of their manner of defending themselves) some have
sting, some have tusks, some have horns: othersome help themselves by flight
and lightness of wings: and as for their voice, some have soft voice: some as
loud and shrill. The Cow saith Aristotle, is in voice more loud than the
mighty Bull. I could gather also differences in showing how every part is
placed both within and without, not all alike: moreover, of their use and
purpose, of their affection also, of their sets and disposition in life: but
I had rather (as they say lose the Hare) then to take such infinite pains as
to hunt so far for her. I will therefore now make h^st home again,
peradventure ye number of company of ^yles going, in taking such pains, would
weary us: It is counted wisdom not to take to much upon a man, neither more
than he can well suffer. But now to every living thing or Creature his
sovereignty, so far forth as we can, ou^ Pen and Hand shall hasten. And
first let us begin Alphabetically (as in the residue of our work before) with
the Adder.

The third Book of the Aegemonie treating of brute Beasts, Fowls, Fishes,
creping Worms Serpents, particularly and Alphabetically.
Of the Adder.
THe Adder is called by Etimologie of Latin name shadowy Snake. Coluber saith
Isidore, is so fetched word for word, and derived thus, as if you would say
Vmbras colens, lurking or living in dark places and black shadows. It is
reported to envy and hate the Hart, to kill the Lyon. And by all manner of
means to flee from the Herb Rue. It casts off yearly his uppermost skin or
coat. It loves to live among hollow trees, to seek his food in Pasture and
Grove: to set much store by Milk: to hurt both with tooth and mouth, and
also with his hinder part or tail: to suck flesh: to eat Flies, and now then
among to eat crummie and dry ^arth. Plinie saith in his. 30. book and.4.
Chapter, that the fat or brawn of the Adder, especially the water Adder,
remedies the stinging and biting of the Crocodile. And again, if thou have
about thee but the Gall of an Adder, no other Adder will touch or hurt thee,
but fly from thee: the scent or smell thereof doth so annoy him.

Of the Ape.
THe Ape in Greek is called Simeas, of his flat nose and filthy face, on each
side thereof plated or wrinkled. Some will have him so called for
counterfeiting of the like, or for imitation, and derive Simia the Nowne
substantiue out of the Adiectiue Simile, the like: For that he would be like in
playing and toying. But I do not greatly gainsay them herein. Isidore saith
in his.xij. book, that when he is angry he frowns: In the new Moon he is
pleasant, and for that time very jocund: but when he waxes old, he sorrows,
and is of sad look. When he hath two young ones at one broad, that of them both
which he most entirely loves, he always bears in his arms, the other (as
not much passing of it) he whurleth upon his shoulders. Isidore reckneth up
five kinds of Apes: One which is not much unlike our Dog in figure or show:
another that hath a tail standing up in good length thickness like a Fox:
another kind is said to be of soft silkie hair: there are the fourth kind
called Satyri. The fifth are said to have a hairy beard a square visage
withal. Plinie saith, that the fierce Lion is very desirous of the Ape his
flesh: and with hungry ^ating thereof he riddeth himself of many infirmities.

Of the Aspis.
THe Aspis is a kind of deadly Snake, of most perilous bite or sting: some say
it is called Aspis ab aspergendo, of besprinckling and casting about venom.
There are diverse kinds hereof. Plinie in his.viij. book and.xxiij. Chapter
saith, that there is a principal and pure love between the Male and the
Female, after that they be once knit together, and have (as all Mates have)
house and home, and all things necessary common to them both alike. Insomuch
that they live always, and go together to seek their food, and such like. So
that if it be by any means, that any man kill either of these by any mishap,
or by good will: the other left alive pursues after the slear with incredible
care and couetise to revenge. And kills him in whatsoever thorough fare or
throng of people he can find him, unless he hastens the s^oner away,
escapes by straigts of narrow rowme, or by often turning and ouercrossing the
way, or by passage had over Floods and Rivers. But Nature hath yet for all this
been mans friend, for whereas if with her flight and swift glancing upon the
earth, she had eiesight alike to it, she would soon be requited, and would
soon come by him: she is herein somewhat behind, and hindered, and is said to
pursue him only by hearing, whereas he is, and by sharpe smell. There is as
Isidore reports five kinds of Aspis. The first named Dipsas in Greek, in
Latin Situla Thirsty Snake. It is of white colour, cloven in the tail, and
beset with black spots or strikes. He that is stung with this Snake or Worm,
shall feel such excessive heate unquenchable thirst in himself, that by no
means he can quench his thirst, neither by Wine, by Milk, by Bear or Ale, or
by clear water. But the more he drinks the more he may. Insomuch that
through thirst at ye last he dies, as Isidor witnesses. The second Aspis is
called Hypnalis, which kills a man as he is in sleep. Which kind of Snake
Cleopatra used, and therewithal died in his bed with very much ease. The
third is called Emorrois, which whom soever it bites, he shall sweat forth
blood. It so loseneth the Uaynes and opens very wide the poores of the
body. The fourth is called Prester, which always runs towards a man with
open mouth, and hath a very loathsome and ill smelling breath. The fifth is
called Septabificus, which by bit and stinging, causes a man to consume away,
and gives him so, a deadly deaths wound.

Of the Ass.
THe Ass is named after Etimologie of Latin word Rescuy beast, for that men
at the first were sane to rescue them selves in journeying, by setting
thereon, or as some say, for that it is a beast of dull wit, gro^e sense. Senos
in Greek say some is Sensus, and Asenos insensible or slow. It is of very
heavy and dull nature. His chiefest food saith Auicen, are Briers and
Brembles. And Aristotle seems to beckon to him, for that he saith thus. The
Ass by briestling amongst the Bushes and Briers hinders the small Birds in
bringing up their young, and in their Nest building. And therefore the little
Sparrows do him all the mischief that they can. And will often peck at him
with their Bill. And especially then when as the Ass by rubbing himself
against the Thorns or Briers, causes their Nest to go to wrack. Therefore
when as the Ass braieth (which is a horrible fearful kind of noise) to
them, they al then fly away for a good time. And coming again afterward to
the place where he is, and espying him prickled in any place by rubbing him
amongst the Briers, in the place so raw and hurt, they never leave off pecking,
till they have made it very sore, have eaten it in very deeply: by this means
hunting him and compelling him to go away as fast as he can from their nestes.
Here we see that a small silly Bird knows how to match with so great a Beast.
Auicen saith, that the Crow and the Ass are at natural ^nmitie. For so soon
as the Crow espies the Ass, she flies and flacketh about his eyes face,
pecks and scratcheth out his eien. But it is very seldom that she pecks
them clean out, he hath such a deep settling of his eien. Plinie saith, that
he loves his young so tenderly that he runs through fire and water to save
the: Although it be most against his will to adventure in the waters.

Of the Ant or Emote.
THe Ant is called in Latin Formica, quasi micas ferens, carrying her meat by
crumbs into her Lodge. Solinus saith, that they be but of small bigness, but
of great discipline or skill in provision for them theirs. Plinie in his.ix.
Book and.xxxj. chapter, saith, that they are all busied alike, and be about
the like business daily, and by companies hunt about to find victuals.
They have amongst them a Public weal, every one for his power tendering
maintaining it. Their sorest labour is, when the Moon is at ye full, and rest
then when as the Moon is at the change. Aristotle in his 8. Book de
animalibus saith, that they have a very perfect sense of smelling, hating all
strong and noisome smells, as suffumigation of Brimstone, or Harts horne being
beaten to powder. Plinie saith in his. S. book, that when the Bear sickneth
or feels her self not well at ease, that then she scrapeth in the earth with
her Paws intending to find of these, which being found and presently eat of
her, she recovers her self and is well.

Of the Be.
THe Be says Plinie in his.xij. Book, is one of those kinds that be cut
and girdled about in their parts, which although it be but little, yet is very
fruitful. Isidor saith that it is called in Latin Apes for that it is first
born without any feet. Aristotle saith, that it is engendered of the dead
body or carcass of the Bullock. It is one of those that tether common profit.
And hath within the Hive (as it were within the City) his ^entes Courts of
very good workmanship. Of some they are reputed civil, for that they have
their King Guides, and every one also distinct and several offices. So that
some are only set over the residue to see that every one labours in his
calling. Other some labour themselves, part by going abroad to bring home
sweet Honey, part by stading at the Hive door (as it were at receipt of such
as the other bring home) part play the workmen within, and amend or make up a
new all such things as are amiss: and every one of them knows his duty. At
that time that their King is present with them, they live even as they will:
but he being once absent, the whole swarm is disturbed, and flees watering by
companies, it cannot tell whither. Such safeguard have they by their King, that
they cannot be well without him. So that if he happens either through casual
or natural death to die, they morn for him a long time after, carry him to
sepulture, as solemnly after their sort as our mourners do.

Of the Bear.
THe Bear with her mouth licking, brings her young which be at ye first
without al fashion, to that form which they have: and is called Vrsus as
Isidor reports, quod ortos digerat lanbendo, for that by often licking, she
brings every part in them to an order. The best in all the whole kind is
as we find, for that she can play the Physician for her self: for she being
crazed and distempered within her body, uses her claw for a spade, and
digs up Emmets or Ants out of the ground, which being taken, she immediately
recovers.

Of the Beaver.
THe Beaver saith Plinie, lives and is found in the I'll of Pontus, and is one
of those sorts which are called doubtful, for often exchange had in place
where they live: for they live one while altogether upon the earth, and do
accompany other brute beasts, those which s^ray abroad are four footed:
another while, they are conuersat in the waters, and live the fishes and
serpents life. When they are huted, they espying the Huntesman earnestly
pursuing them (least through such occasion they should be let in their
flight) the Male is reported to bite off his own stones and to geld himself,
and by that means becomes very swift. He hath his tail not much unlike the
fish, and the residue of his body not much unlike to the Otter.

Of the Boar.
THe Boar saith Isidore, in Latin vocable or word, is called Aper a feritate
of fierceness or wildenesse (change of the Letter. P. had into the letter.
F.) of ye Latines he is eftsoones called Verres for his great strength. He being
gelt saith Plinie, Auicen, becomes so much the more fierce and wild, whereas
all other Creatures living wax thereby the more mil^e. His armourie is a sort
of strong ^ushes or tusks and sharpe. His use is, to keep a good while in his
mouth the stalk or sedge of Barley, such as is sharpe, to enter to the skin:
keeping it of purpose to file sharpen his tushes, which if it will not, he
hunts after the Herb Organnie, of some called wild Maioram, which he uses
as a Whetstone to whet his teeth withal. Aristotle in his sixth book de
Animalibus saith, that the Boar at such time as he hath young is most cruel
and fierce, insomuch that he can not abide any man to come nigh him, but is
marvelously vexed with him.

Of the Bull.
THe Bull is the he Bullock, not gelt or having lost his parts to generation.
Plinie saith in his.viij. book, that his noble courage is in his look, in his
frowning countnance or forehead. Aristo. saith, yt he hath his Liver round, in
a manner like to a man his liver. And is fed alone before such time as the Male
Female do conjoin: but afterward at that time he feeds and associateth in
self him pasture with the Bullock. They are said to strive one with another
for the Female which they best like: and after much strife and warring had, who
so first tireth and is weary, is counted vanquished, the other the vanquisher
forthwith runs to the Female, and leaps up upon her back, and so
satisfies his desired lust.

Of the Bugle or wild Ox.
THe Bugle or the wild Ox, is said to be so wild, that his neck by no
means can be brought under the yoke. And is called Bubalus for nigh
resemblance to our Ox. In Africa they are very plentiful: he is of great
strength and force, almost not to be tamed: but only with an Iron ring put
through his Nostrils or Snowte, wherewith they lead him whither they list.
There is another kind of wild Ox, which the Philosophers call Aptaleo, but
nothing so huge or great, but hath horns much greater, very sharpe also
wherewith he heweth down trees, and thrusting up his horns sometimes up to
the boughs of the Trees, intending to reach food thereby, doth now then with
force of his horns had, stick fast by them in the Tree, wherewith he being
chafed and vexed, howleth out aloud, whose horrible cry the Huntesman having
once hard runs with fast foot thither, whereas he is snared, and so comes
by him, and else by no other means, and so sleaeth him. There is also another
kind of wild Ox or Bull, called of Aristotle Plinie Bonasus, a little
shorter than our Bull, but more thickly set, and hath his Mane like to our
Horse. His flesh is Uenesonlike: for the which he is so often hunted. And in
the game time he uses this knack or property: he runs until he be weary,
and in his flight taking and course, he flings forth and befowleth behind
both of his urine and dung, even whole furlongs long after him, and with such
annoiance wearies the Courser or Huntesman.

Of Barbell the fish.
BArbill, is called the beard fish, for that on both sides of her Mouth she
hath finns like to a hairy beard. In Greek she is called Trigla: with the
Germanes Ein Berb. Of this kind Oppiane sings thus. Accipiunt Triglae trino
cognomina partu.
The Barbill for her oft increase
Trigla by name is called:
Thrice in the year she gives young
herein all kinds excelled.
Aristotle in his fifth Book de Historia animalia affirms that this kind
brings forth young thrice in the year.

Of Calamarie the fish.
CAlamarie the fish, of many Authors called Loligo hath his head between his
hinder parts, and his belly: and hath two bones the one like to a knife, the
other like to a quill: she is like the Cuttle, but that she is a little longer:
and in that they differ also, for that the Cuttle shows and pours out a
black kind of blood in all her fear and disturbance: this Calamarie vomits
a good red pure blood.

Of the Cammell.
THe Cammell by Greek word is called K^mae, his signification for the most
part is lowliness and submission. And well had the Cammell this name, for that
at every burden laid upon him (to ease the labourer) he lies down,
suffering him to lay it on, even as he will. There are two kinds of Camels,
one which is only in Arabie, which hath two kibes in his back: the other in
many other countries, al plain in his back. His use is to journey no further at
one time than he hath been before used accustomed to at another, neither to
cary heavier burden at another time then he before hath carried. They live
some of them.50. years and some of them.100. They can be without water the
space of four whole days, and have their best delight in drinking then when
as by foot they trouble the water. Aristotle saith, yt there is in the Camels
a certain honest care to keep themselves within their bounds. For they
think it unnatural and a most heinous offence to have ado with their Dam.
There was in a certain City saith he, the Mother or Dam of a young and lusty
Cammell, all covered over with a cloth, with whom the young one being incensed,
unwittingly attempted and assayed generation: who, or it were long, thr^ugh
ruffling of the cloth, by certain notes espying that it was his Dam, came down
and ceased therein before he had his full lust, and biting her most cruelly,
through extreme anger slue her. The like example of honesty observing, he
renders there of a certain mans Horse.

Of the Cameloparde.
THe Cameloparde hath the very head of a Cammell: the neck like our Horse, and
feet like the Bugle or wild Ox. He breeds in Ethiope: he is bespotted
stained dyuersely with diverse colours in a manner like ye Libard.

Of the Chameleon.
TThe Chameleon is a small kind of beast, whose body is such that with easy
conversion it changes into all colours, a few only excepted. Auicen saith,
that it is all one with Stellio or Cousin germane to the Lysarde, for that he
hath on his back light spots like stars. And for that fear that it is
naturally in, and the paucitie or rareness of blood, he hath so often and so
diverse transfiguration in colour. It is very commonly said with the old
versifiers, and those also which would be esteemed Philosophers, that the
Chameleon lives only by air, as the Moule doth by the earth alone: The
Heering by the water: the Salamander by the fire. And these be their verses
wherein they show this purpose.

Quatuor ex Puris vitam ducunt Elementis,
Chameleon, Talpa, Maris Halec, Salamandra.
Terra cibat Talpam, flame Pascunt Salamandram,
Vnda fit Halecibus cibus, aer Cameleonti.
These four Elements give food
to four things, each other
The Herring, Moule and Chameleon
and eke the Salamander.
With earth the Moule is said to feed*
with flame the Salamander:
And water is the Herrings meat
the Cameleons the air.
Of the bird Caladrius.
THe Caladrius saith Aristotle is of milky colour, without any black spot,
whose natural property is this, that when as any man is grievously pained
with sickness or disease, if there be any hope of recovery in the party so
diseased, she hath always a cheerful look towards him, if there be no
amendment that it can perceive, it is of very sad look and countenance, never
giving him cherefull look, or once looking at all that way.

Of the Carpe.
THe Carpe is a kind of fish well known of us: she is arrayed in all her whole
body with her coat of fence that is stiff seals of mean indifferent
bigness: insomuch that there hath been found of this kind some weighing ten
pound: she is of very soft f^esh phlegmatike: with ye Germanes it is called
Karpff. Erasmus called it in Latin Carpa, when as other called it Carpio.

Of the Cat.
THe Cat in Latin is called Catus, as if you would say Cautus, wary or wise.
In Greek she is named Galiootes, with the Germans Kaiz. She is to the Mouse
a continual enemy: very like to the Lyon in tooth and claw: and uses to
pastime or play with the Mouse ere she devours her. She is in her trade and
manner of living very shamefast: always loving clenlinesse. There is also a
kind hereof called the wild Cat, which of all things is annoyed with the smell
of Rue, and the Almond leaf, and is driven away with that sooner then with any
other thing.

Of the Crab.
THe Crab in Greek is called Kakrinos, in the Germanes language Krebs: with
the Frenchmen Crabe. Plinie used this Latin word Cancer, for a general or
common name for all such as have, wear shaled garments. The Crabs saith Lonicer
have a portion of venom and that occult or hid coming from their tail in the
middle of their backs by line or thread which kind of matter pulled out
before they are sodden, leaves the whole altogether pure and without
corrupting.

Of the Serpent Cerastes.
CErastes the Serpent hath on both sides of his head, as it were the horns of
a Ram, bending upward and wreathen all about. He lurks saith Isidore in the
high grass, wherein nothing can be espied of him saving only his horns,
which thing the small Birds of ye field espying, weening to find (as in all
other dead bodies their horns, worms meat alone for their appetite and
desire) they being busy and pickling on them not knowing this Serpent his
deceit hid, are caught of him with a sudden twining of himself about them,
and are so suddenly snared. The like wiles he uses with horse and man, to lie
as though he were dead, or secretly as though there were none such, yet
whilst they unawares tread upon him, he twineth about either them, and so
stings them.

Of the Coccatrise.
THe Coccatrise by his Greek name should seem to have been sometime reckened
the Prince in his kind, for he is reported to be the king of all other
Serpents. For al things living whatsoever they be, coming into fight with him,
fly back. He is so poisonous that he kills with his breath. There is no
bird that escapes him that comes in his dent, but she is his own: yet
Nature for this thing hath well provided. For they use to seek for the Weasel
which will have this kind of serpent tamed. The greatest stature that it is of,
is not above.xij. inches or there about.

Of the Crocodile.
THe Crocodile is called yelow Snake for that he is in colour most Saffron
like. Isidore in his.xij. book. He is one of those kinds which always keep
not in one and the same place, or which are not pleased long with Elements
alike. One while he is couersant upon the earth, another while in the waters.
He is of such hard skin, that being stroke in the back or body with violent
stroke of stone or Iron s^ing, esteems it not a Rush. In the night time he
harbours in the waters, in the day time he lives upon the earth. Aristotle
saith, that the Crocodile alone amongst all other Creatures living moves the
upper lip, and keeps the nether lip unmovable, contrary to all other
herein. It is a most glotonous serpent, and a very rauener, who when he is
farced full, lies all long by the Banks side belching and panting as though
he would burst. Whereupon saith Tullie, when he is in this case, and so far
gone, a certain little small bird called of us the Wren or Kings bird, of
the Greekes Trochylos, flies toward him, and often assays or he can come by
his purpose, to go into his throat or entrails: but is repelled so long as he
is awake: but falling once on sleep and opening his jaws as he uses being on
sleep, the Wren goes into his throat, and being within there a certain time
by flickring and moving, causes his throat to itch, wherewith he being
delighted, at the last falls on sound sleep. The Bird perceiving this, goes
further to his heart, and pecks at it with her bill, and at the last gnaws
it out, and so feeds her self full and escapes away. The like thing is read
of Enidros the Serpent, which creeps in the grass of Nilus who being eaten
down quick of the Crocodile, gnaws his heart out in sunder within, and so
kills him.

Of Chelidros the Serpent.
CHelidros the Serpent or of some in Greek Chersidros, is in placebeing, one of
those kinds which be doubtful. For it is now abiding upon the earth now in
the waters. This saith Isidore, makes the earth smell well, or to have good
breathing there where as it creeps as Virgill describes in these verses. Seu
terga expirant spumantia virus
Seu terra fumat teter qua labitur anguis.
In question is it whether that
The fomie flesh and rancored Sell
Of Chelidros that poisonous Snake,
Should give such odoriferous smell.
Or that the earth by which this Snake
Doth slide and glance along,
Should give to the nose object so sweet
Or minister scent so strong.
Isidore saith, that it goes straight out in limb, and body, and finds
thereby a marvelous great ease: whereas if he should bow himself he should
strain and hurt him self.

Of Cencris.
THe very like in this behalf, that Chelidros doth, the same doth Cencris, as
Lucane reports of him thus.

Et semper recto lapsurus limit Cencris.
As Chelidros so Cencris doth
in eake alike their sort*
By stretching forth their body, both
in gliding find comfort.
Of the Caddesse or Choffe.
THe Caddesse was first called Monecula, and is now called Monedula, because it
in finding money and gold hides it. And upon this Tullie in his Oration had
for Valerius Flaccus hitteth him home with the like. Non tibi plus pecuniae est
committendum quam Monedulae. I would commit money to thy custody no more than I
would to a Daws.

Of the Crane.
THe Crane by proper name should be called whisperer, or flackerer, as Lucane
hath of her thus. Et turbata petit dispersis litora pennis.
In raging waives of the Seas stream
the Crane by flaking wings,
Hath pleasure passing all delight
in this than in all things.
Their flight is on high, espying thereby what land they were best to take: by
his voice they are all ruled which is their guide or leader, whose voice waxing
hoarse, another straight ways takes his rowme. In the night time they have
their watch, every one of the nightly by course, and whosoever plays the
watch man least he should sleep, hath a proviso: he holds fast in his claws
little stones, which in their falling from him straight ways awakes him. The
other by his pain taking, sleep quietly and take their rest. Aristotle by
obseruauncy had, much commends their flight beyond the Sea: It is done with
such cunning and ease.

Of the Cokow.
THe Cokow in Greek is called Kokkux, with the Germanes* Gauch, in the French
tong Cocou, and is of ashy colour, and in bigness as big as our Dove,
building her nest most often in the Sallowes. In the spring time she comes
abroad: and or ere Dog days arise she is gone and hidden. Aelianus calls her
the wily bird or aduouteresse, for that she most commonly hatches her young
in the Larks Nest or Siskins, which Siskin is not much unlike to the
Goldfinch: whose young or brood she knows to be bred and borne in colour
bigness most like to her own, and therefore she is the bolder so to presume:
whose Nestes if she sees good store or plenty of Eggs, she destroys
certain of them, and in their place and number recompenseth and makes them
good with her own.

Of the Cuttle.
THe Cuttle is in colour very white, but she hath her finn black: she is
called Sepia of a certain rotten humour that she hath: of the Greekes she is
called Saepedoon, for that she abounds in black blood as it were ink, with
the which when as she perceives any deceits wrought, she defends her self
with dispersing it abroad in all the whole waters. And the water being so
fouled, she goes and hydeth her self. The Germanes call this Ein Blackfisch:
the Frenchmen Seche.

Of the Dear.
THe Dear the Latines call Dama* of some the fallow Dear is called Damula:
Isidore thinks, yt it is so called (as by deriving it also we may know) for
that it flees from our hands not knowing how to defend it self, but only
through flight. In stead of his weapon he shows us his heals as Martial in
a manner witnesses, thus reporting of the Dere, the Bore and the Hart.

Dent tenet Aper defendunt cornua Ceruum
P^ofugit e medio Damula. c.
By tooth and tusk the Bore catch hold
and horns defend the Hart:
The Dear being chaste all about
with this hath his hearts smart.
Of the Dragon.
THe Dragon is the head and chiefest of all other Serpents, and flies from
his Den or Cave in the earth his holownesse up to the top of the broad air,
and of Dragon in Greek, is englished flight. Plinie saith, that between the
Dragon and the Elephant there is a natural war. Insomuch that the Dragon
enrowleth twineth about the Elephant with his tail, and the Elephant again
with his Snout used as his hand, supplanteth bears down the Dragon: The
Dragon with twining about him holds fast, and with his might somewhat bends
backward the head and shoulders of the Elephant, which being so sore grieved
with such weight, falls down to the ground, and in the fall the Dragon hath
the worse, for that he falls to ye ground first, and is therewithal slain:
but that other escapes not scotfree, for with one another hold and rushing to
the ground the Elephant also is broused, and often withal slain. Again they
strive together after this sort. The Elephant espying him sitting on the loft
of a tree, runs as fast as he can with full but to that tree, hoping thereby
to shake down the Dragon, and to give him a deadly fall: but in that he doth
not after the wyse^t sort for him self. For the Dragon so falling, oftentimes
lights on his neck or shoulders, and agrieueth him as with biting at his
Nostrils, and pecking at his eyes, and sometime he dazeleth him, and goes
behind at his back and sucks out of his blood, so that if he shakes him not
off betimes by such wasting of blood as he will make, thereby he is quickly
enfeebled: he falls down heavily with the Dragon also holding about him,
and are killed both with so heavy and burdenous a fall.

Of the Dromedarie.
THe Dromedarie or that other kind of Camel, that hath two Kybes or Bunches on
his back, is of less stature then the other Cammell is: but more swift in
passage, of ye which property he borrowed his name. Dromos in Greek is swift
in course or running. He will go 100. Miles and mo in one day. They are gelt
saith Auicen, in their youth, least they should be thereby more slow or hindered
in their journeying: and also least they should (being at ripe age, provoked to
Venery as they journey) slack it oftentimes draw backward, till that they
have had their lust. It is such a kind saith Plinie, as is not covetous of
variety or dainties. For after that it hath had never so long a journey, it is
well content with grass and the Herb Dactylus, or the Pionie.

Of the Dolphin.
THe Dolphin saith Isidore, hath a fit name or vocable, fetched from a man his
speech or sound, or for that they cluster together, and are all in one
company, hearing the sweet sound of any Instrument. There is no Fish in the
whole Sea so swift as this is: for oftentimes through that light and nimble
leaping yt they have they mount over the tops of Ships. Tullie saith, that they
are so much delighted with Music, that they have taken and carried the
Musician from out of the peril of the Sea to the Sea Banks. As when Arion
Methimnaeus was thrown out of the Ship into the Sea, the Dolphins being their
ready, took him on their backs and carried him to land.

Of the Dog.
THe Dog in the Latin hath almost the same name that he hath in Greek.
Kunos in Greek signifies a shrill noise or sound, after a manner like to song.
There is saith Tullie, in the Dog a marvelous perceiuerance and sharpe sense
to know who doth him good or who doth him the contrary: who makes much of
him, and who hurts him. Therefore upon his Master he commonly fawns: to
strangers he is eager and cursed. In histories there is such record testimony
of their love had and borne to their Masters, that the Master by chance or
casualty, or else by cruelty miscarying, the Dog also even with his Master
hath miscaried. Insomuch that we read of some, who having had but the sight of
the dead Corps of their Master, by lamentation, and by bewailing at his side
never joyed after, but perished and famished with long howling mourning. Plinie
remembers of a Dog which in Epiro a country in Greece, so assaulted the
murderer of his Master in a great throng and assembly of people, that with
fierce barcking and biting, at the last he compelled him to confess his fault.
In like sort did the Dog of one Iason in Cicilie who being slain ye Dog for
sorrow would never eat meat after. The like love or gratitude (and somewhat
more to be marveled at) is red of Titus Gabinius and his company, whereof one
of them named Titius a Sabine, had a Dog (he being in Prison) that would never
go further from him then to the ward or Prison Gate: whose Master a little
while after, being condemned, and put to death or execution, and the dead body
anon taken down from the Gallows, and lying dead there, the Dog sorrowed
and howled most lamentably, and being compassed and hedged in with a great
multitude of people, whereof one of them casting him meat thus howling to make
him hold his peace, he carried it forthwith and put it to the mouth of his
Master their lying dead, whose dead corps anon after being thrown into Tyber
the deep flood or River, the Dog swam after it hastily with intent to
uphold and sustain it, with marvelous astonying and wonder of the people
had, that such a kind of faith should be in a dumb beast. And so with heaving
up his Master so long as he could, when as thorough weariness he could do so no
more, they both drowned together and sank in the place alike. Plinie saith in
his.viij. book and.41. Chapter, that of all beasts living with us and amongst
us, of most assurance, trust and faith, is the Dog, and next after him the
Horse. For better proof hereof we will adioyne one or two examples more.
Celius a Senator in Placence a City of Ligurie, being on a time besieged and
assaulted sore of his enemies, and wist not how to be kept from their hands,
was kept off from them all by a Dog, never wounded or hurt till that the Dog
in his Masters quarrel was slain. We read also of Garamante the King, who
being banished sometime from his Country, returned back home again, and
brought with him.200. Dogs, which he used in warring against those that
resisted him, and so conquered them. Amongst all kind of Dogs there are some
so eager and stout stomaked that they have Maystred and been good enough for the
Lyon and Elephant. There was a Dog as we read sent as a present to the noble
and great king Alexander, from the King of Albany, which at the first dash or
onset given in the King his presence, daunted and toused the Lyon.

Of the Eagle.
THe Eagle of his eiesight most sharpe and pressed took first his name. Isidore
saith, that he is of such sharpe eiesight that he flying about in the top of
the air in such height as he can not be seen over the Sea and waters, yet for
all that, through his clear even, there is none so little a fish that
swims so nigh the waters top, but he sees and espies it, and thinking he
may come by it, flies swiftly down to the water where as she is, and ducking
a little, doth so suddenly catch her, as Gonshot that is shot off, or that
that is more swift. The chiefest property also that he hath else, is that he
is good in finding out false play or adultery done: And this is his trial.
He takes his young when as they be young tender, and have not full steadfastness
in their eyes, and holds them with there eyes right opposite to the sun
beams. Those that have constant and steadfast look not dazzled by such
experiment, he holds legitimate and truly begotten, and hath ever good care
after to them their bringing up. The other that have their eyne twincle in
their head, or which be dazzled at such proof had, he counts them Bastards
and misbegotten, and never after regards them, but repells them.

Of Echeneis the fish.
THe Fish Echeneis or Remora, staiship, amazes also (even as the Lodestone
doth) the beholder by his hid and occult natural set or virtue. She covets
the Shipbord even as the Lodestone doth Iron, he is said to be a good stay to
the Ship, when as tempests arise: and with clea^ing fast, do staye ye Ship be
it never so great. Plinie saith, in his.9. Book and.25. Chapter that it is a
very small Fish always accustoming and living amongst the rocks. Aristotle
thincketh that this kind hath fat, placed in a manner like a birds wings.

Of the Eel.
THe Eel in Latin is called Anguilla. Isidor gives the reason that it should
be called so, for like figure saith he, to the Snake. Aristotle saith that it
engenders of the Mud: the chiefest that is marked in the Eel is that it is
slippery, never ye nearer katching or in assurance of her when thou hast her
most fast in thy hand, but the harder that thou hold her, the sooner she
slips and escapes out of thy hands. The flood Ganges hath Eels some.30.
Foot long. They say, that the Eel being killed addressed in wine whosoever
chances to drink of that wine so used, shall ever after loathe wine.

Of the Elephant.
THe Elephant came first by his name of the Greek verb Elephio which
signifies huge or like a hill. He is of exceeding great body, his tushes are
of Iuerie: his beck is helped with that snout that helps him even as our
hand doth. The Medes and Persians use to carry in their warfare their Casteles
and other preparaunce on the Elephants back: he is of good memory and long
mindful of a good turn. Plinie saith, that amongst all the beasts of of
the wild forest, he is most mans friend. Insomuch that if a mans journey lies
so, that he must needs through the Forest, (least he himself so mostrous huge)
should first fear him, he goes a little a side out of his way: further if the
Dragon should assault the man, he goes forthwith and warreth with the Dragon
keeps him off from the man: so that whilst these two be at strife, the man
passes away. Aristotle saith, that this kind is without his Gall; therefore it
may be that he is so quiet and peasible. Solinus saith, that they seem to have
some skill in the art of Astronomy, and play the Phisicion his part every
month in purgation taking purging themselves: for after every new Moon they
hawk after ye clear rivers, so wash off all filthiness, such as may cumber
the body. After that they bathe them, this being so done, they go again al
frollike to their wonted pastures. And to the intent that their youth should
keep good rule and not go at royat, they have them with them: such care have
they over them. They have a marvelous and most honest shamefastness in the
act of generation. Therefore when the time comes that this must needs be
done, the Female witting the Male his pleasure, goes straying before towards
the deserts of the East, seeks the most secret place where that their intent
may be done and ended closely. The Male he anon hastens after before their
meeting or conjunction had together, they are busied awhile in seking out the
herb Mandrage, which the Female takes and receives to make her of more
fertile nature and pregnant: and the Male also eats of it to procure a more
earnest desire. Of al things that it stands in fear of it is most afraid of
the sily Mouse, which frets him then most when as he is tied to the Manger
and cannot away.

Of Ephemera the fish.
EPhemera is a fish which arises in the Sea water even as the Bubble doth,
where as much rain is. Whom Iorach in his Book de Animalibus reports after
three hours of the day to die.

Of the Falcon.
THe Falcon, is a bird of haughty stomach matching with birds a great deal
bigger and mightier then him self, stryking at them both with foot and
breast.

Of the Fane.
THe Fane, or Hind Calf is called Hinnulus, for that at his Dams beck or
nod, they are ready to come home from straying rioting abroad in the Parckes
or Groaues.

Of the Fesaunt.
THe Fesaunt hath yet no other name then it had first of the place whereas it
was first found: and that is reported to be an Island in Greece, called Phasea
from whence it was first fetched, as this Distichon shows.

Argiua primo sum transportata carina
ante mihi notum nil nisi phasis erat.
By Argolike ship I first was brought
and shewde to other lands
Before that time I knew no place
but the Island Phasis sands.
Of the Flecke.
THe Fleck saith Isidore, goes with rolling foot, and hath often anfractes or
turnings. He is naturally subtle, and hath many fetches to deceive one. For
when he lacks meat and wot not how to come by it, he hath this craft or
wile. He lies all along with every limb of body stretched out, very quietly
even as though he were dead. The sielye Birds espying this, and weening
thereby to have a great pray, fly to his Carcass, and are very busy about
repasting. He, as they are unawares of him, suddenly snatches up with his
Paws certain of them, and so pleasures himself, and stencheth his hunger.

Of the Frog.
THe Frog saith Aristotle lives quietly all the time of cold weather, and
never stirs abroad, until time of coite or conjunction. And then by croaking
voice he allures the Female stirs her to Venery. There are Frogs called
Seafrogs, of whom Tullie speaks after this sort. They ouercouer themselves
with sand, a knack used of them to beguile the little Fishes, and as they come
by them, they step out, and catch them and so swallow them up.

Of the Fly.
THe Fly in Latin is called Musca. It hath his name of the earth, even as the
Mouse hath. This kind saith Isidore being drowned in the water, after one
hours space quickneth and revives. Aristotle saith, that they are engendered
of the earths dung proporcionably digested and ordered. There meat and drink
is filth, and they of themselves are nothing else but filth.

Of the Gnat.
THe Gnat was first called Culex of her sting, wherewith she sucks out
blood: she hath in her mouth a Cundite or pipe in a manner like a thorne or
prick: wherewith she soon pierces to the flesh, comes by our blood.

Of the Gylthead.
THe Gylthead is a noble kind of fish, and only for a Gentleman's tooth. The
Latines call it after their vocable or word golden fish, as also the Greekes,
Chrusophrus, say they is the golden fish, so called for that his head
represents the right colour of Gold. The Germanes call it Ein Gold forn: the
Frenchmen Truitte. Aelianus saith that it is at continual strife with the
Dolphin.

Of the Goshawk.
THe Goshawk is a Bird of far better stomach than claw: and is called
Accipiter of a certain greedy desire, she hath to catch the other small
Birds. She is very extreme and sore towards her young. For after that they be
once feathered, and are able to fly abroad, she hath them forth with her, and
beats them in the air with her wings, and is somewhat rigorous to make them
seek their meat alone. And so by sharpe usage they have no joy to tarry with
their Dam, but every one goes his way, and provides best for himself.

Of the Grasshopper.
THe Grasshopper of some is called the Cricket, it hath his name of his shrill
sharpe voice. He uses to go backward, and loves to dig and bore in the harde
earth and mortered places. He is heard most in the night time. Isidore saith,
that the little Aunt or Emite hunts him, he not seeing it for his long hair
hanging down: which follows him into his Lodge and to epsy him the more
clearly, blows away the dust as he goes, so coming near him, claspeth him
about in his arms, and at the last stings him to death, and so comes by
his pray.

Of the Gotebuck.
THe Gotebucke is very wanton or lascivious, very much given to Venery, and
always prone to it minding conjunction: whose eyes for insaciate lust thereof,
turns in his head and lie as it were but in one only angle or corner of his
brow. He is of such excessive who^e nature that his only blood being kept
warm suppleth the Adamantstone, and dissolveth it whereas no fire is able to
do it.

Of the Griphin.
THe Griphin is a Foul of plentiful and thick feather, four footed withal.
This kind of Foul is said to live in the Hills or Mountains, called
Hiperborei, which be as some say, set in the fardest part of the North right
under the Northpole. In their head they be like the Lion, in wing flight like
the Eagle. It is said to be envious both to Horse and Man. Some say that they
are set to keep the Precious stones as the Smarage, the Jasper and so forth of
such as grow there. And to look to them.

Of the Hare.
THe Hare is called lightfoote after the Greek word P^ox is a swift runner. It
hath no defence for it self, but only swift ^light. Wherewith it eftsoones
escapes. They sleep not as others do their eielids being shut. Aristotle
saith in his third book de Historia amimaliu, that his feet is hairy beneath
towards his paw, (which thing in others is never espied.)

Of the Hearon or Hernsew.
THe Hearon or Hearnsew is called Ardea for mouting aloft. It ca not abide
showers of rain, but to be out of their dent, she flies far above the
cloudy Region of the Air, there where as rain is engendered. With this her
high flight, she serves some to prognasticate ill weather.

Of the Hercynie Birds.
HErcynie Birds take their name of the place where they breed, the place is
called Hercinia, a Wood in Germanie, being in breadth.xi. days journey: in
length.xl. whose feathers shine so by night, when as the Air is shut in, that
although the night be never so darcke and close, yet they give then their best
light: so that to a man journeying they are to his great furderance, being cast
before him in the way whereas he goes.

Of the Hedgehog.
THe Hedgehog hath a sharp and quickthorned garment on his back: He presages
by such skill as he hath, what blasts of winds, what tempests will follow.
Plinie saith, that he hath good knowledge in the difference of the Northern and
Southren winds, whereupon he saith; that on a time a certain man in the City
Constantinople kept a Hedgehog in his Gardaine, by which he would always know
whether of these two winds blew, truly and infallibly. He is as good a meates
man and Catour for him self, as any thing living is. For when his vittayles be
scant or nigh well spent, he gets abroad to Orchards and Groaues, where he
hunts after Vines and other the best fruit. At the Vine (as likewise at the
Apple tree) he plays his part thus: He goes up to the boughs shakes them
down When he hath perceived he hath shake down enough, he comes apace
down, and gathers the Grapes or Apples dispersed abroad together: and when
he hath done, he falls heavily upon the heap, and so almost on every
prickle or brestle he gets an Apple or Grape and home he goes.

Of the Horse.
HOrses at ye first were called Equi, as they be yet, for that they were
coupled by pair and Mates, and were so used to the Chariot or Wagon. Of some
they are called Sonipedes, for noise making with their feet. They be of that
sort that are well stomaked: their pastime is by coursing and running in the
fields. They know well and are acquainted with the sound of the Trumpet, and
therewith have the better will to war. It is a grief to them to be
conquered, and they are as ioconde if they win. Some of them have such memory
that they know their Adversary, will (when it shall happen) wait them a good
turn. Some will not suffer no other man to come on their back save only
their Master, as Bucephalus King Alexander the great his Horse. Plinie saith,
that there is a certain obseruancie in kindred and blood with these. Aristotle
in his 8. book de animalibus, records of a King in the North, which had a
very fair Mare, who brought forth a very fair Foal or young horse. and within
few years after (esteeming so much this kind) was very desirous to have
more of the same brood. Insomuch that he shut them up always in Stable
together. This done of a long time, and espying them nothing forward in this
point, thought he would work a policy with them, as he did. For after that,
he separated them the one from ye other: Insomuch that ye one mought forget the
other. And after such time had, and the Dam so attired used, that the Colt
should epsy no apparent sign that she should be his Dam, was brought to the
Mare thus used, frolic and lusty, and he not knowing of this, and unwitting,
fell anon to conjunction, and ere he had ended (the Dams face by chance
discovered) he was by and by at this daunted, departing as it were in a
frenzy, and running up upon a certain Mountain, threw down himself
headlong, and dyed.

Of the Iay.
THe Iay by that only property that is applied to him, is called the chatting
Bird. Whereof arose first this Proverb, bestowed upon such men as be never
well, but when they be prattling: Graculus graculo assidet: One knave or pra^ler
will always accompany another. And again: Graculo cum fidibus nihil. And
touches them that lacks both eloquence and learning, scorn at them which
have both.

Of Ibis the Bird.
IBis the Bird of the flood Nilus purges her self with pouring in with her
bill, ^ater into her fundament as Isidore witnesses: she lives by the eggs
of Serpents, carries them to her nest: fedeth thereof, as of the best meat
that she is delighted with. This bird profits Aegipt very much, and is the
best riddance or conveyance that they have, of such discommodities as be
brought by Serpents out fro Libia to Egypt by the Southrene winds. Plinie in
his.viij. Book.

Of the Lapwing.
THe Lapwings name is borrowed Apo tou ololuzein, that is, of sorrowing and heavy
note or cry: for when he cries, he mourns laments, wherefore in old time
the Soothsaiers Augurers took heed to his cry, did prognosticate thereby ill
whether to come. And when as this kind lamented, they said it betokened heavy
tidings to come, when she flew quietly, they professed prosperity thereby and
good luck for to come.

Of the Lark.
THe Lark of many is called Woodlarke. He foresheweth with his pleasant note (as
also the Nightingale doth) the day his coming appeering, as Cicero shows in
his Prognostickes.

Et matutinos exercet acredula voces.
The wodlarke as the Nightingale
that hour and tune doth keep
And shows by her pleasant note
when men should rise from sleep.
Of the Leach or Bloudsucker.
THe Leach or Bloudsucker is a worm of the water, very desirous of
bloudsucking. She lies in wait for such kind of cattaile as come to the
water to drink, and cleaves fast twineth about their hooves, drinks blood
her fill: when she hath so done she vomits it forth again, and falls to
fresh blood anew.

Of the fish Lucius.
LVcius of many men is called the Macrell. The Germans call it Ein Macrell.
The Latins Luci{us}, by ye figure Antiphrasis, which is when a word hath a
contrary signification. They say that this fish keeps always at the very
bottom of the waters, so avoiding as it were all clear light, whither when as
the fishermen by night sail with firebrand torch, so that they epsy it, they
amazed there at and astonished in their flight are so caught.

Of the Lamprey.
THe Lamprey in Greek is called Muraina, with the Germanes Ein Bricken: there
is of this kind two sorts, both differing in colour. For the one is black in
colour, died among with ashy spots: the other is white having black spots. She
swims all whole in flexible sort, and all alike bending her body: above the
land she creeps no other wise then our serpents do. The best of this stock
or kind are those that be called Flutae, in Greek Plootai, good sailors or
fluites, for that they keeping always at the waters highest can not be
drowned. Antonia, Drusus wife had such delight in a Lamprey that she dressed
and arrayed her all over with gold Rings, and the same beset about with
precious Stones. Likewise Crassus by surname the rich, so loved a Lamprey of
his own bringing up, that when she dyed he lamented sore, and bestowed also
great cost of her burying. And when as he was laughed to scorn of Lucius
Domitius for so doing, he gave him this answer. Thou marvel saith he, why
I so bewail this Fishes death. But I marvel more at him that having had the
loss of three Wives, never yet for ought that I could see, bewailed it. This
Domitius is reported to have poisoned three Wives for hope that he had of
reward or greater riches thereby.

Of the Leopard.
THe Leopard is a very tyrant aduouterous also in his kind: as saith
Plinie. The Lioness and Leopard having conjunction together, or the Lion and
Libardesse, bring forth a third kind, even as the Horse and Ass, or he Horse
and Mare do. The Female saith Aristotle, is more cruel than the Male, his
colour is bespotted about: his upper part of body, and his feet also, and
tail are all alike to the Lion in outward show. But in ye head they have
their difference: In body he is less than the Lion. And by that means he is
even with the Lion, and not behind him in revenging as Homer witnesses. He
hath his cabbage in the earth with two contrary ways undermined to enter into
it, or to run out of it at his pleasure: very wide at the coming in, but as
narrow and straight about the mid cabbage: whether his enemy the Lion running
sometimes after him, and a pace, at the first coming in thither is narrowly
pent: Insomuch that he cannot neither get forward, nor backward. That seeing
the Leopard, he running a pace out at the further hole, and comes to that
whereas the Lion first ran in, and having him hard pent, his back towards him,
bighteth scratchet him with tooth and Nail. And so by art the Leopard gets
the victory, and not by strength. The same Leopard also saith Plinie, seeks
after the brood of the wild got intending therewith to recover his health.

Of Lynx the beast.
LYnx in face is like to the Lion, in body bespotted like the Panther, his
urine is of yt set or nature, yt it turns by and by into a precious stone,
which we before called Ligurius. He so envies man, and would that he should
not be the better for this, that he hides and covers his urine with dust
earth, to the intent that no man should find it, but Plinie saith it is so
much the better in his effect working.

Of the Lyon.
THe Lyon in his greek vocable and word is interpreted King: he is reported
to be the King over all other beasts. There are diverse of this kind* they only
differing in their Mane either long or short. His strength is in his head. His
virtue in his heart, he sleeps (as the Hare doth) with eielids unshut. When
he awakes forth out of sleep, he rubbeth out the print of his body and
steps, least the huntesman espying them, should easily find him out. He is
very gentle to man never hurts him unless he be greatly injuried by him, or
that he is thoroughly an hugry. He knows saith Plinie, when the Lioness hath
played him false play, and hath played the Aduoutresse with the Libard, by a
certain rammish smell or sweat which arises of them both. Yet if she washes
her self thoroughly, she may deceive him. Aristotle saith, that the Lioness at
the first birth or brood brings forth most of her young: then after that, she
lessens every brood one. For at the first, she brings forth five: at the
second time, four: at the third time, three: at the fourth time, two: at the
fifth, one: and ever after that, she is sterill and barren. Of their
remembrance of a good turn I need not speak, or howe they have done man a
good turn one for another. As that which had a thorne in her Claw being helped
of one named Androdus, eased thereof: even when as he through envy was
delivered up to be punished, throw into her Den, that Lioness that he eased
so before, did then well remember him. As also I need not to speak how God
oftentimes brideleth in all beasts devouring whatsoever, to show his pleasure
and possibility what he can do and work by means of these. There was a
fierce hungry Lyon let loose to Darius the Martyr, which not only hurt him
not, but also preserved him from the cruelty of other brute beasts. As
likewise Daniell escaped scotchfree by Gods providence, turning the fierce
countenance of that Lion that his enemies had thought would have soon
devoured him into a fawning and cheerful look, not once having power to hurt
him. Hamo a Carthagien borne, is first reported to have tamed the Lion.

Memnonides or the Birds of Egypt.
MEmnonides or the Birds of Egypt are named of the place where Memnon the
Son of Thiton which came to the aide and rescewing of the Troians died, and
is buried. They are said to fly by companies out of Egypt to old Troie, to
Memnon his Sepulchre, and to be only his memorial: and are therefore called
of some the Trojan Memnonides, as Isidore records in his.xij. Book. Every
fifth year they fly to Troie, and fly about Priam his Palace, and that two
whole days space, the third day they make battle between themselves, and
do torment and slay one another with their sharpe nails beck.

Of the Moth.
THe Moth is our Garment worm, and by his latin word is called Tinea
holdefast, for it biding in one place in the Garment never leaves it, till it
be gnawen and eaten forth thorough. Isidore saith, it mought be named Pertinax,
perverse, for that it urges always upon one and the same place. Aristotle
saith, that the Moth sucks out of the Garment all humour, and leaves it
marvelously dry.

Of the Mouse.
THe Mouse after Isid. is counted the smallest living beast, and is named Mus
quasi humus, earth or earthy. It hath his growth at the full Moon, as other
and sundry kinds have. It is for his bigness a very rauenour or greedigut,
and for a little meat is often soon entrapped. It smells his vittailes a
far off, and comes the sooner to them by smell.

Of the Mule.
THe Mule of the Latin word Mola, which signifies grinding at the Mill, took
his first name. For he being put into the Mill, is there, where he should be.
He is engendered of a Mare and an Ass (as of an Horse and an Ass also) is
engendered the Mulet. Plinie saith, that the Ass and the Mare do never covet
copulation together, except they have been from their youth forth accustomed
and brought up together: And be fed with the self same meat, as Milk and
such others. Aristotle saith, that the more the Mule drinks water, the more
his meat doth him good.

Of the Nightrauen or Nightcrow.
THe Nightrauen or Crow is of the same manner of life that the Owl is, for
that she only comes abroad in the dark night, fleing the daylight and
Sun. There is a certain Shrickowle or Owlet which when she cries, she
shricketh and is thought to be one of this kind. Whereof Lucane speaks thus.

Quod{que} strepens Bubo quod Strix nocturna querutur.
That that the Owl by noise doth make
and howling voice doth fear:
That doth the shricking Strix and shrill
with note unpleasant to hear.
Of the Nightingale.
THe Nightingale was named first, of good melodi^ loving, or for having delight
to frame and sing a pleasant and sweet note. With her pleasant tune she
plays every day before the Sun his arising a fit of mirth, and is very
melodious to welcome the sun as it were a Bridegroom coming. She is called in
Greek Aaedoon of aei and ado, which is to sing continually: she is one of
those also which do prognosticate as Aratus saith. In histories we read that
many Caesars or Emperors, especially those which were of the youngest sort,
have had Nightingales Starlings or Stares that have been well instructed and
taught both in ye Greek Latin tongue. As there was also a Crow in Rome,
which being framed and taught to that purpose, every morning would fly to the
Court Hostilia over the river Tyberis to salute Garmanicus Caligula ye Emperor
his Father, and Drusus, Emperor also, then next after the whole body of Rome.
This Crow is said to be Apolloes bird: As the Eagle Iupiters: the Crane,
Palamedes: the Kings fisher, Thetis the mother of Achillis. Merthes also the
King of Egypt had a Crow so taught and instructed, that whither soever he had
bidden him go, either to carry or to fetch letters, he was not ignorant whither
to fly, by that means did his masters message speedily. But to return to
the Nightingale from whence we first came. Plinie saith, that in the spring
time she most commonly brings forth sixth eggs, and to the intent that her
grief in traueiling should not be sore or great, she passes away most of the
night with pleasant songs. Whole fiftene days at the spring time or at the
budding forth of leaves, she continually sings. This kind doth often strive
between themselves, and being almost dead, yet to the very end he will rather
want of his breath, then leave off his song. This bird sang as Histories make
mention in Stesichorus mouth, he being an Infant or child: even as Bees flue
about Platoes mouth he being on sleep in the Cradell, and left there some
part of there Honey: and as the self same kind also sat without hurting him,
upon Ambrose his mouth, he being a child. And as upon rich Midas the Phrigian,
he being young, Pismiers filled his mouth with wheat, whereof every one of
these, such like have their hid signification.

Of the Onocentaure.
THe Onocentaure is a Beast monstrous, half a Bull half an Ass. Onos in
Greek is translated into our speech, an Ass. But some Philosophers think
that he is in body half a man and half an Ass. For from the Navel upward
say they, it hath the figure of a Man, and downward to the foot it
resembles an Ass. Of this opinion is Plinie. These and such like monsters are
nothing else but Natures dalying, and showing howe she can vary and alter
things in their kind, as we may plainly see in the Hippocentaure, in the Fane
Satire, which Indie breeds. It is fabled with the Poets, that Ixion, Iunoes
Secretary, provoked her to Venery, which thing Iupiter understanding, made by
and by a certain Cloud to appear like Iuno to his eyes, with whom he being
incensed, in lecherous love (nothing supposing but that it was Iuno) bespent
his seed upon the Cloud, and thereupon were engendered those Monsters which
are called Centauri; otherwise Genitauri, quod ex aura sint geniti.

Of Orix.
ORix is a small beast and watery, of that Nature that the Dormouse is, for he
likes the better through good nourishment and long sleep. All winter long he
snorteth, and is as he were dead, but in Summer awakes and takes life
again.

Of the Owl.
THe Owl is called the dastardly Bird: she is of such sloth and
sluggishness, she hath feathers enough to fly abroad day and night: But the
sluggard sleeps all day long, most commonly, it lives in old Sepulchres,
and in Houses or Barnes not often frequented, and in caverns or holes of stone
walls, of which thing Ouid hath these verses. Faeda{que} sic volucris venturi
nuncia luctus,
Ignauus Bubo dirum mortalibas omen.
That filthy Bird and Messenger
of sorrows ill to come:
The sluggish Owl hath been to man
most often danger some.
For if in the City in the daytime they had espied her, they gathered hereof
some sorrow to come. The I'll of Crete is void of this kind. They are
dedicated to Minerua. There is also a Shrickowle which is always helden
unlucky. Of this kind one sat upon Pyrrhus his Spear he marching forward in
battle ray toward the Grecians army, portended and foreshewed sinister and
ill fortune. This kind, as the abouesaide, is hated of all other birds,
against whom she uses a very crafty kind of warring. For if the company
of small birds be many, she lies groueling fights with her feet: and
covers her self all over with her Bill and Claws. Plinie saith that the
Bussard or Kite rescues him oftentimes thorough a certain natural agreement
or truice had between them. Nigidius witnesses with Plinie, that this kind
lur^keth and sleeps lx. days throughout Winter, and hath nine voices or
sounds. These be very plentiful in Athens: Insomuch that they have brought
forth their Proverb. Noctuas Athenas mittere: In Grammatical sense: to send
over Owls to Athens In Tropicall sense, meant of such as bestow largely upon
them that have no need: and much after that that we say, to cast water into
the Tems.

Of the Panther.
THe Panther is every living Creatures friend, except only the Dragon, whom
he hates d^adly. He is in his colour bespotted and in every part of his skin
or hide, he shows as it were eyes. He loves exceedingly all other kinds,
such as be like him, as the Leopard. c. The Female never bears young but once
in her time for all. The reason is for that she never ioieth at the first birth
or brood, whereof she being mindful ever after with what pain she brought
forth, never seeks more after it. Plinie to this gives another reason, all
beasts saith he of sharpe Claws or Nails, do never bring forth often. The
Panther his smell or breath, to all things living except the Dragon, is most
delectable and pleasant. Insomuch that all the other follow after her, moved
with that her scent. So that by that means when as she is thoroughly hungry
she comes by some of them to her pray. The Dragon flies back and can not away
with her smell. Plinie writes that a Panther fawned upon the father of one
Philenus a Philosopher, that he should help her out with her young that were
fallen into a mirie Lake or Pit. In the former feet they have five toes: but
in their hinder feet four only.

Of the Partridge.
THe Partridge is called ye fleting bird, never settled or stayed upon one
thing: Therefore oftentimes in that which he goes about he loses his labour.
For he taking away other Birds their Eggs, and bringing them up as his own,
doth not for all this greatly profit himself thereby, for so soon as those
young can hear but their own and Native Dams note, they leave their Stepmother
or Nurses food by and by. The Male destroys his own Eggs often: least that
the Females care in hatching them up or sitting on them should hinder him from
Venery using: he is so lascivious. The seventh day also after their hatching,
he banishes them and thrusts them out of his Nest. He is consecrated to
Iupiter the Goddess Latona, and Appollo his father. He purges himself with
Laurel. Beotia is without these.

Of the Parrot.
THe Parrot hath all her whole body green, saving that only about her neck
she hath a Collar or Chain naturally wrought like to Sinople or Uermelon.
Indie hath of this kind such as will counterfeit readily a mans speech: what
words they hear, those commonly they pronounce. There have been found of
these that have saluted Emperors: give them Wine and they will be wanton
enough: they are as hard in their head as in their Beak or Bill: When they
learn to speak they must be beaten with an Iron Rod, or else they feel it
not: Plinie saith that in a certain Wood called Gagandes this kind was first
found: of all other Fowls she and the Turtle Dove have greatest friendship.

Of the Peacock.
THe Peacock, had his name first with us, of the selfsame note that he himself
sings daily, whose flesh is so hard that it cannot easily be sod or roasted:
His jolly bravery in him self is through setting up his feathers aloft, and at
his espying in himself so many gay colours: but having his fill at the length
with so goodly a show, in his upper parts, casting his look towards his base
feet, seeing himself therein deformed, forgets by and by all the former
conceit of pride, and thereby is brought to acknowledge himself. He is said
to be Iunoes bird. The Female coceiueth not until she be three years old:
at what time she then begins to be so arrayed in colours: There is noted in
this kind both selfloue* as in her former property: envy also, for that she
will rather hide away her dung, than that man should have profit thereby, being
many ways medicinable. Hortentius the Orator killed first ye Peacock that was
tasted whither yt he was meat meet for a man, yea or no. And there is also a
report yt Alexander the great, seeing once a Peacock in Indie so marveled at
that sight that by a commandment given, he charged yt no man in pain of
death, should slay or kill so fair a bird. The Dove and the Peacock are very
great friends.

Of the Perwincle.
THe Perwincles in Greek are called Kokliai, whereof some be of the Sea: other
of floods, others of the earth. They are always clothed with one and the same
shale. The Poets call this and the Snail also, Domiporte, that is their house
cariour. And this is the fable that they father upon them. When Iupiter had
bidden all creatures things living to a feast or banquet: these kinds of all
other made no apperaunce: Iupiter therefore demands the cause or reason of
their absence, who gave him this answer. Quae domus cara, eadem domus optima.
Which is, that house or mansion place which is most esteemed that we reckon the
best. At the which answer, Iupiter being stirred, he commanded them to their
own house or lodge as to perpetual prison, and that whither soever they went,
they should carry their House and Home with them upon their backs.

Of Phaenix the bird.
Phaenix is a bird of Arabie, of marvelous long life, she lives above six
hundereth and sixty years, and at the last being weary of her life, goes to
the groaues there, and gathers small slips and twigs of such kind of trees
as be both extreme what odoriferous withal as is Cinomon and such like: and so
bestreweth her nest, commonly made in the highest fur trees, next to the
Sun: and flying thither lies voluntarily in her nest, abiding both the
burning of the spice Sun, and therewith is consumed to ashes. And of those
ashes animated by the Sun, and other Planets, arises another Phaenix, which
maintains and continues the kind from time to time. Some have ye opinion
that no man ever ^aw her eat. She is consecrated to Sol: Plinie saith that
there was one of these brought into the City of Rome when Claudius was Censor.
The year of the City.800.

Of the Pelican.
THe Pelican is a bird in Egypt, dwelling amongst the deserts of Nilus. She is
said of Ierome, to revive those of her young which in her absence have had
their blood sucked of Serpents, whereupon they died. And she revives them by
wounding her self, and pouring into them certain of her own blood, and so
within three days, they which were so dead, revive quicken again. Volateranus
saith that that is the Pellicane which Pline calls Platea, commonly the
Shoueler: but other do not herein agree. This Platea is a bird which flies to
the shelfishes of the water, and eats her fill of them, which being made
very tether through heate in her belly: she vomits them up again that after
the shell being once opened she may come by their meat with more ease.

Of the Perch.
THe Perch in Greek is called Perkae: with the Germanes Ein Bersig with ye
Frenchmen Perch: some think that it is called Parca by Antiphrasis, signifying
another thing then the word shows. For with whom soever she is angry, she
wounds him with her ^innes, or if she can not come by him, they are sure to
have it that are next to her. There is hereof both Male and Female. But they
have their difference: for the Male hath his ^innes red, the Female hath not
so. Lonicer saith that when as the fish Lucius is hurt or sore wounded of any
other kind, and can not help her self, she seeks out the Perch, which so
soon as she sees him, she touches and suppleth his wounds: and so is she
healed. It is a fish of very tender meat or flesh. As Ausonius records of
her thus.

Nec te delitias mensarum Parca silebo.
Amongst the kinds of delicate meates,
the Perch I would have spread:
Whose flesh so soft and morsel sweet
in all feasts is the head.
Of the Puttock.
THe Puttock saith Isidore, got his name of his soft flight. Miluus saith he,
is, quasi mollis, soft of flight. It is one of the ravenous sort, making havoc
of the small birds. Tullie in his second book De natura Deorum saith, that the
Puttock and the Raven or Crow be at natural enmity together. Insomuch that
one of them (when they may come by them) breaks another Eggs. Aelianus
thinks that the Male in this kind is seldom or never seen. Insomuch that
the Female stretching herself along and conversant toward the East and south,
conceives so brings forth young. They also bear a continual hatred to ye
Fox.

Of the Pie.
THe Pie is reckned Mars his bird. It had his Latin name first of Pycus
Saturnes son which in his prophesying and soothsaying used this bird: as
Ouid witnesses. By Greek name he is called the Oaks grief, for yt with his
Bill he pecks makes hollow the Oak with such daily accustoming. In one and
the self same day he changes his tune.

Of Rhinoceros.
RHinoceros in Greek is interpreted horned beast or Monoceron, and is
englished the Unicorn. Plinie in his.viij. book saith, that his Horne is set
above his nostrils. His continual strife is with the Elephant, uses to defend
himself thus. When he seeith his enemy come, he whetts his Horne against
sharpe stones, then sets on: and in his fight wardeth and foyneth at the
Elephant his belly, the most tender part that he hath, and so riddeth him.

Of Rinatrix the Serpent.
RInatrix is a Serpent which with enuenoming poisons ye water, so that into
what clear Fountain or River he swims, he infects it, as Lucane
witnesses.

Rinatrix violator Aquae. c.
The Rinatrix of Serpents kind
and the poisonous Snake:
With intermedling doth infect
each Pond and every Lake.
Of the Salamander.
THe Salamander as Plinie saith, is like the Lyzard in face and countenance.
He infects the fruits of Trees, and corrupts the waters so that whosoever
drinks thereof dies by and by. He lives only in the fire and is nothing
hurt through the fire his flame.

Of the Salmon.
THe River Rhenus and Rhodanus in this kind do alone excel. The fish it
self is big and fat. His meat or flesh is red: in taste very sweet: the
Germanes call it Ein Salmen. The Frenchmen Saulmon. Plinie in his.ix. book
and.xviij. Chapter, prefers her before all those Sea fishes, which accustom
to Aquitania the flood, which are many and great, and reckned dainty.

Of the Scorpion.
THe Scorpion is a Serpent of the earth, stinging deadly with his tail and of
some is called flatering worm, for fair face showed and friendly
countenance. But if any man come near her behind she pays him home. Plinie
saith that it brings forth young sometime seven at once, whereof, the Dam
eats up five of them, but ye other the wisest of them, get about their
Mothers back and buttocks, and so bite her. This kind sleaeth his parents, and
hath only care to revenge their Brothers quarrel: and in that point Nature
well provided that their should be no great multiplying in so perilous a stock
and kind. Orion when as he had made that boast that the earth should bring
forth no such Monster but he would kill it: the earth it self cast up such a
Scorpio as slue him in the presence of the people with most sharpe sting.

Of the Silkeworme.
THe Silkeworme is the Tree or his branches worm, by whose web weaving silks
are made. She is called Bombix, for that she leaves nothing in her belly but
empty air whilst she is about spinning of her thread.

Of the Sole.
THe Sole Varro calls Lingulaca, for his great sound. The Frenchemen Sole: It
is a kind of fish all plain: of very soft meat or flesh, and easy to
digest.

Of the Sow.
THe Sow is called Sus, of rooting up the clots of the earth with her beak
or snout. She bears saith Plinie, sometime four, sometime five at once,
sometime more, but cannot bring them all well up, and therefore eats up some of
them: it hath been scene, that she hath eaten up all her brood, save only the
oldest, whom she most entierly loves, and him she feeds most often, gives
him or her the best teat. As Aristotle saith.

Of the Shoueler.
THe Shoueler is called Platalea saith Tullie, he gets his meat with flight
had to those birds that deeuing down to the waters to ketch fish, drown
themselves, or if any come out with any pray, he meets them presses their
heads, till they let go that which they have caught.

Of the Sparrow.
THe Sparrow is called Passer a Paruitate, of small or little quantity. Tullie
in his Divination saith, that they should be in those kinds that are noted to
prognosticate: for saith he, that kind of divination which is marked by event,
or animaduersion, is not natural but artificial: of these some be perceived
to be done by sudden conjecture, as Calcas with Homer, which through a certain
number of small Sparrows, prophesied and divined before of the City of Troie
his siege. It is in his kind very lascivious and rioting. It flies in his
extremity always to man for help. Seuerus the Abbat had a Sparrow, that for
fear came flying to rescue him into his hands, was glad to take meat at his
hands, he reaching it him.

Of Stellio.
STellio the starred and speckled beast saith Plinie, lives most by the dew of
Heaven, and spirit of the earth. And all his best iolytie is in coun^erfayting
colours, yet for all that is venomous.

Of the Swallow.
THe Swallow, saith Aristo. in his six book de Animalib{us}, makes her nest
breeds twice in the year, and that is done so artificially, as man cannot
devise to better it. Isidore saith, that he is so named for eating his meat as
he flies about in the air, or for often turning and retire had to one and the
same place. Aristotle saith in the same book that the even of his young whilst
they be tender, being hurt, he fecheth straight ways medicine at the herb
Calcedonies hand. She is one of those kinds also that foretell things
afterwards to come. Cecinna a Volateran Knight in Pompeis camp when as he had
come by certain Swallous he sent them as messengers before of victory won to
all his friends, that was done with letters tied about their feet which they
carried speedily and roundly.

Of the Swan.
THe Swan is called the sweet singing Bird, for that (as it were in footed
verse) before her death she joys. In the Shipmens note or rule, the Swan
prophecies lucre good luck, as these verses seem to declare. Cygnus in
auspicijs semper laetissimus ales
Hunc optant nautae quia se non mergit in vndis.
A token of good luck it is
the joyful Swan to see
Which hides not her self in sea
but will with Shipmen be.
She is fairly fethered whight, but in flesh most black. She is one of those
that knowing what vncleanesse comes by venery, before she goes to food,
will to the waters to purge and make clean her self. This is Apolloes bird.
There is a fable with ye Poets that this Swan was altogether Phaetons love,
that after ye fall of his proud and presumptuous request, he was turned into
this kind of Bird. Pythagoras thought that the soul or spirit of the Swan
was immortal, and therefore said he it is, that she joys so when as death
calls for her.

Of the Stork.
THere is in the Stork a marvelous piety or gratitude, which for such pains
taking as there parents had with their young, when they could not shift for
themselves, the young promise (as in deed they do) to acquit and recompense
the same when their Parents wax feeble and can not help themselves. Those of
Thessalie nourish and maintain this kind to be rid of Serpents wherewith they
be greatly annoyed. Aelianus saith that through the benefit of the Gods
perceiving them to be so kind as we abouesaide, this kind in certain Lands,
were translated into Mankind. The Image of the Stork in old time was wont
to be printed and graven in the Kings Sceptre Diadem, to the intent that men
should have eiesight of pietye or gratitude in their Prince so figured and
painted. Their chiefest food is the Herb Origanum or Origan.

Of Stockfish.
STockfish in Greek is called Salpae, with the Germans Stockfish. Aristotle
saith that it is a very miry fish: and which can never be well sodden
unless it be beaten with a rod or wand. Amongst ye Germanes it hath raised a
Proverb, which is, Salpa pelutantior aut lasciuior: More foolish or wanton tha
a Stockfish: applied to such as have their minds set upon wantonness: and
which will do nothing of their own will unless they be compelled to it. With
the Germanes it is after this sort. Er fantasiert ein Stockfish. In the person
of this Laurentius Lippi{us} dalied with a Distich or double verse on this
wi^e.

Salpa, obscenus ego dicor, nec decoquor vnquam
Ni ferula caedens verbera multa dabis.
As a muddy Stocfish I am
which never will be sod,
Unless she hath good store of stripes
and be beaten with Rod.
Of Taxus or the Badger.
TAxus, of some Melus, of Melos one of the Isles called Ciclades, which for full
plentiful flees of wool, is called Melota. This saith Plinie, hath a
certain wily head to deceive, and daunt his enemies, the Spannell, Fox, for
being in danger to be taken in hunting, keeps in his breath with constraint
had thereof, and in so doing, his flesh and skin puffs up, and swells so,
that he being thereby bi^ten, feels no sore* He is a good provider for
himself also, and hath a forecast in time weather. His house is some hollow
Cave in the earth, in diverse sorts diversely wrought: so that on whatsoever side
thereof the wind is blustering, he turns his tail and keeps off cold, so
from the rest of his body, and at the other contrary hole, he takes both
air and breath. It is also careful in laying up store for Winter, both the
He and She: Insomuch that when the nipping cold Frosts come (at which time al
living things are most hungry) he fearing the Female to lavish and to be no
sparer of such vitta^es as they have, and fearing least (if they should so be
spent) they should both famish, stenteth the Female, and gives her her task,
wherewith she being moved and as crafty as he, espying her time when and how
she may come to the Lawder or Uittailehouse, he not espieng her, finding such
opportunity as she looks for, goes another way to the Uiander and
vittailes, and there eats her fill, and comes again stealing and s^inketh
into his company without any surmise or suspect had of his part of any such
kind of deceit. The crafty Fox also is his natural enemy, who espying him
to come forth of his Den or Cabbadge, hastens thither and annoieth the place
with filthy excrements.

Of the Tench.
THe Tench lives whereas much Mud and Mire is. The Germans call it Ein
Schlein, which kind of fish unless it be well cleansed from such infections as
it hath, is very hurtful. Ausonius calls it the poor mans dish, for that
in the old time it was only the poor mans meat or dish: of the welthiest
men little set by. And in this sentence or verse he seems to show the same.

Quis non virides vulgi solatia, Tincas norit?
Who doth not know the Tench to be
the poor mans meat or fish
Which to him once bequethed was
to be his chiefest dish.
Of the Tiger.
THe Tiger is a beast of most swift foot, or flight, and of all beasts most
fierce, named of the Persians arrow, which they call Tiger, in their phrase of
speech. Peradventure for resemblauce herein, their flight may be thought to be
both a like. There is a certain river also of that name, one of those four
rivers which flow forth out of Paradise called Gion, and passes through
Armenie Mede. The best increase of the Tiger is in Hircanie Indie. He is not
only of most swift pace, but also of smell. Wherefore saith Plinie, if that at
any time her brood or litter (which is numerouse or many) be stolen away in
her absence (as then is the time when as the Huntsmen comes by them) the
hunter carrying them never so fast away by horseback, with never so much hast,
yet at her returning to her Nest, when as she espies falsehood plaide, she
flies and strayeth abroad fiercely as she were mad, and with her swift pace
and good Smell, she hitteth at the length into that way that the Hunter
betook him, whom he hearing, not far off, broiling fiercely, makes away
as hastily as he can, he lets one fall down, and hastineth yet for all
that away as fast as he can. The ^am in the way finding one of her Litter, and
brood, goes with that one home back again, and conveys her to the Nest:
that being done, yet she leaves not but pursues after, comes by a another
after the same sort, like wise takes ^ines with that one home again. And so
likewise is ye huntesman fain to do so more often, except he be past her reach
or out of peril of her, as by ship taking, the like. The Male saith Plinie,
hath no regard of his young. And the same saith also, that there is another way
that some huntsmen beguile her with, as so bestrew spreede in the way Glass,
by ye which she coming and espying there ^ir own shadow represented, we^eth
through such sight, that there were of her young* and whilst she here thus
tacieth long time, deceiving her self, the Huntesman hieth him away so
escapes. Yet to speak a little of her mildness sometime shown, Diuus
Augustus is reported to have shown in Rome a Tiger very well tamed and kept in
a Cave or Cabbadge.

Of the Tortesse.
THe Tortesse is reckned one amongst the Snail or Worms. Aristotle saith that
he hath such harde chaps and jaws that he breaks stones in sunder, being put
in his mouth.

Of the Turtle Dove.
THe Turtle dove of al fowls is most honest and shamefast. She lives in the
tops of mountains and in the deserts. She is not fellowlike with man,
conversant with him as the other kind of doves are. Yet the other doves have
their praise of gratitude remembrance of a good turn showed, are called after
their Epithet simple or mild. The reason why they be so is, for that they
^acke their bitterness of gall. Aristo as concerning this last kind saith,
that they bring forth.xj. times in ye year. There is another kind called the
Kingdoue very chaste and tempera^e. And as for the Turtle Dove, her best praise
is in keeping vnde^iled wedlock (and lesing her Mate) for her constant
widowhood. The other Doves also have been mans messenger sotimes to fro, as at
the besiegi^g of Mutina, where they carried Letters tied to their feet to the
Consuls tents through Decius Brutus.

Of the Viper.
THe Viper is a kind of most venomous serpent, so named by the Latin word, for
that she brings forth delivers her young with much pain and grief. For
when as her belly is big, and her young ripened, she desiring to be delivered,
(as they also covet to be out of so straight a p^ace) gnaw and ^ate a way out
of their Mothers side, so with both their great grief, and most often their
Dams destruction, they come out are borne. I sid. saith that their manner of
conjunction is not as others is. But ye Male being in time of year plentiful,
full of seed, to be rid thereof, after their own and natural manner, the Male
puts his head into her mouth, and casts up of his seed into her throat:
With the which the Female by exceeding great pleasure taken therein, and almost
wood or mad therewith, with holding fast, bigh^eth of the Males head, and so it
comes to pass that all the whole kind is in all their doings most sharply
and painefullye aggrieved. This kind saith Plinie, lives in the earths or deep
Crannies, whereas the most part of Serpents live in rocks of stone, other in
the hollowness of trees. Al winter time it lurcketh is hyd, but as soon as
the Sunbeams warm the earth, she breaks out, and being dazzled in the eyes
through accustoming in the black earth, she by and by seeks after the herb
Fenell, and anoynteth them and so sees clearly. This kind is most dangerous
to adventure upon. Politianus saith that Ampicides was killed with the bites of a
Viper in Lybia: and with that his so deadly a bites, died out of hand. Likewise
is Orestes reported to have had the same death, after that he came to himself
again.

Of the Vulture.
THe Vulture saith Aristotle, builds her nest in most high Rocks, so that
very seeldome or never her young are scene. For the which thing a report went
that Herodotus, Brisons the Rhetoricians Father, thought yt this kind came from
another world. And his reason was, for that no man could see the Vulture his
nest: yet when they were scene flying, they flew always by many and great
companies. This covets and hawketh after dead carcasses, hath a maruilous
good smell. Their chiefest dainties are fitches. Hermodorus ponticus witnesses,
yt the Vulture of al other fowls is the simplest, for that that he never
raueneth or destroieth any such kinds of grain as mankind sows to nourish
him and his. Their smell is so wonderful, that they will smell (as is
reported) any dead carcass five hundred miles off.

Of the Weasel.
THe Weasel in Greek is called Galae: with the Germanes ein Wesil. This is the
subtlest amongst the residue of beasts which are by natural grouth small
or little: And it hath a wonderful care to keep and preserve his young without
harm taking and endamaging: Insomuch that he nourseth them whilst they be
sucklings, in the neathermost and most hid Crannies or Dens of the earth. Of
this sort three kinds are mentioned: one long like a Lamprey: the other called
a Ferret, the third called Meles, of some englished the Powlcat. This is the
greatest and the chiefest enemy yt Serpents have: with whom when he
encounters or makes battle, he goes and arms himself with the Herb
Rue, the scent whereof, he knows to be most offensive or annoious unto them.
They of the Ci^e Thebes have worshipped and done hono^r to this kind. This
kind and the Crow hear a natural grudge the one to the other: as doth the
Eagle and the Kings Fisher: the Owl and the lesser sort of Birds: as also
the For and Putrocke: the Horse and the Griphin: the Dolphin Whirlepoole: the
Lamprey, and Conger: the Elephant and little Mouse: the Elephant again and
Rhinoceros with his snout so crooked: the Scorpion and Stellio which is so
bespeckled: the Salamander and the Snail: the Frog and the Be: the Be and
the Betell: the Be also and the Swallow: as also again the Weasel is the
chiefest enemy that the Cockatrise hath: the Rat of Indie the greatest enemy
that the Aspis hath. And as there is such natural strife between these and
such like: so is there again (in as many kinds as we before made mention of a
natural agreement or love made by confederacy of like kinds, or else those
that are not greatly disagreeing or differing. The Turtle Dove and Parr^t or
Popinjay take parts and hold together: as also the Choffe and Woodlarcke: the
ring Dove Partridge: the Peacock and the other common Doves: the silly Sheep
and the he Got: the Iay and Sterne or Seamew: and many other do the same,
which to rehearse would require large volumes.

Of the Whirlepoole.
THe Whirlepoole in French is called Balene. She is a fish of the Sea like a
beast: for whom many strive to have her called the Whale: other are at
variance to have her named Pristix of ye infinitiue mood of the Greek verb
Prizein, which is to cut or sever, as this is reported to cut the waives of the
Sea as she swims: she is of wonderful length. Plinie saith, as also
Aristotle, that she breaths in the water: which thing they two strive at to
be done in the residue of fishes. She gives her young milk by Teat: which
thing very few other fishes do. She is often dulled in ye water: for the
which she often covets ye Sands to refresh her spirits, and will there
sometimes play: sometimes also sleep a while.

Of the Whale.
THe Whale with the Germanes is called the Wallfiche: many of the Latin
wryters are at strife to have her and Balena al one. Aristo. as likewise
Plinie, will have all those fishes called Caete which are of ye greatest sort:
and which bring forth young, and that a perfect and living thing so soon as
they are delivered: To speak of the hugeness or vastness of this I need
not: for that every traueiler knows it. Of her love towards her young I must
somewhat speak. This is the report that goes of her: at one time she brings
forth many: and over those many as though they were but one, she is all alike
vigilant. The greatest perils that most damage them are the Sea storms or
tempests: at these therefore she uses this knack. She is said to encompass
them all round about with her bending body, and so as in a Parlour house
safely to defend them: of other she is said to swallow them up into her
entrails or belly for a time: and there to keep them safely: after the
broiling of the Sea being once ended she pours them out again, and so by
this means they are without their peril.

Of^he Wolf.
THe Wolf is called Lupus saith Isidore, as if you would say Leopos, footed
like the Lyon. It is a most rauinous kind of Beast, terrible, and astonying a
man at his first sight: whereof arose an old Proverb, Lupus in fabula.
Signifieng, that there it was best to stay, and to have no more such talk of
him as was talked of before. Aristotle saith, that in time of coniunctio they
be most fierce, always wood so long as they have young. And the same Author
also saith, that when they are hunted and put to flight, they cary their young
with them, in their journeying they eat of Origan, to sharpe their teeth,
which are in a manner like to our Saw. They being in extreme hunger (rather than
they should famish) feed heartily upon earth and such like gross matter. Ouid
records of a pleasure done or of well deserving in this kind to two brethren,
Romulus Remus, whom Amulius their Grandfather sought to have destroyed. And
thus he shows the same. Venit ad expositos (mirum) Lupae faeta gemellos,
quis credat pueris non nocuisse faeram.
A Wolf with belly big with young
to two twins abject came
who in the world would not have though^
that these should have had harm
Likewise a he Wolf of wonderful cruelty is reported at the beheading of
Edmond King of England to have taken away from the copany his head, and to
have preserved it long time without hurt or blemish.

Of the Worm.
THe Worm is called Vermis, quasi Vertens, for complication or folding had in
her body as it crepeth, some will have it called Vermis, for showing herself
first in the springtime at what time, the whole kind comes forth. As they
have diverse kinds, (although but one common name) so have they diverse means to
engender. For some arise of rottennes of flesh, some of corrupt humours, some by
dry rottenness: Again some by meeting had of both kinds. Worms are very
wonderful in their kind. One kind which is called the Panlmer that that
makes havoc of our fruit in the Garden or field: another which breeds in
the tops of Ashes and Olives, and is in colour green: in humour or juice
very poisonous, and is called Cantharis, another which is called the Cauler,
which eats out the sides of ye leaves of many herbs and especially of Basel.
Another which is named Cnips, which eats through Timber and having eaten it
through never rests in al one place: wherefore he hath his Proverb. Cnips in
loco stare non potest. And is properly applied to men, that be wavering and
inconstant. And there is a Worm called Cerastes, which when she hath had her
belly full and eaten enough, engenders another. And there is another which is
called the fire Worm, seems as it were to be a kind of Spider: which flies
by night to the candlelight or flame of the fire, and hath her pastime so a
while, till her wings be singed or brent: after that she herself also lacking
these, cannot escape, but is also brent: whose folly hath also raised up a
Proverb Pyraustae gaudere gaudium. The fire worm hath joyed his joy: foolish
men pleasure is little and short. The Betle also is of the same linage and
stock that the Worm is: likewise the Spider both y^ of the earth, and that
also of the water. This last is of such nimbleness that running upon the water
never drowns nor deaueth, likewise the Butterfly: out of whose dung Moths
are said to breed, with many more else, which do require longer discourse.

FINIS.
The Conclusion.
AS Vatinius Seruilius in his life time was hated approchfully spoken of for
that he like a Snail spent all his life time in ease and idleness, without
any fruit that he gathered either to better himself or others: so
contrariwise could Cleanthes the Philosopher well away with labour and
painetaking in writing after his sort: was glad to utter abroad yt that was in
him best to do. And as Cleanthes is yet spoken of, not for any great works of
his, or for that he in stile and indicting excelled other: but for that he
employed all his endeavour to the commodity of others: so have I (gentle Reader)
one as far behind Cleanthes, as he was the sect and Geneologie of the
Peripaticians, somewhat unlaced or unripped, some of the Seames of the third
quarter of Philosophies attire or array: (for her whole coat as we read, hath
but three quarters: the one called Dialectike: the other Moral or Civil: the
third natural or wonderful.) Although I have not showed thee her altogether
naked which thing Aristotle others of his sect, as also Albert Plinie have
done: the sight or show whereof if thou couerest, I would wish thee to resort
to these: For theirs is the Fountain: and mine a small Arm thereof. Yet had I
rather be an arm either of these or of some other as Cleanthes was, then to be
nothing at all as was Uatinius. And yet for all this when I had enterprised
this, I was not ignorant that Sicconius that meant so well, had his Cat^llus:
every Turnus had his Drances: every Cicero had his Sal^st: for such his
malice is now called Ciceromastix Ciceros whip. Likewise every Plato hath his
Xenophon. Uarro hath his Palemon, yea this Liver is so wh^te on fire that the
witch and Sorceress Cyrce envies yt Scilla so amorous a Nymph should have a
do with Glaucus or have his love: insomuch that she hath infected that
Fountain wherein Scylla was wont to wash her self. But let the Queen take
heed least she at the request of Scylla be not turned into a Sea monster. And
let muttring Mutius take heed least he be served with the same sauce. Uirgil
requited Bauius and Meuius. Further, let these understand that every man is
not at Corinth. Neither can every man carry a Palm or Laurel Cheek by
Cheek with Orpheus or Dorceus: neither yet hath every man Harmog^nes Harp.
Tell me, can thou play after Tellens tune, or have this to be thy peculiar
Proverb? Cane ea que sunt Tellenis. Sing after Tellens sort: that is to say,
sing sweetly, or let us hear a heavily noise. No. Let not every man look to
play and strive with Tellen or with Agathon. It shall suffice us to have
Philomelus his cunning. And ye Hellyconians, although that Babies come in in
place amongst you: as he did when as Minerua played so sweetly, yet if he
shall disquiet you (as Babies did Minerua) shame him not with ieasting or
jarring (no more the Minerua did) but think that his shame is great enough
(whatsoever he be) if that he plays harpeth ylfauouredly. If God give him
life he may have better perfection and ripeness. And thus much I had to the
learned sort. The other I do not mistrust: for whom principally I was covetous
to bestow this such my travail, and will (if I shall see them thankful
hereafter) more abundantly to their delectation and profit. So that if they
have any consideration at all, they may be moved at this the working of God in
these such his inferior Creatures: who is to be praised for ever and ever.
Amen.

Imprinted at London by Henry Denham, dwelling in Paternoster Rovve at the
Star

Anno Domini. 1567. June. 3.

Cum Priuilegio.


