HISTORY OF HEAVEN: Containing the Poetical fictions of all the stars in
the firmament: gathered from amongst all the Poets and Astronomers. By
Christopher Middleton.

LONDON Printed for Clement Knight, and are to be sold at his shop at the
little North door of S. Paules. 1596.

To his very good friend master Robert Traps, C. K. wishes health.
SIR, in kindness to requite some part of your courtesies, who have tied me unto
you as in the debt of friendship: I have chosen your self as the fittest
Patron, under whose protectio I might put forth these vnpolished lines of the
Authors: which though of themselves they deserve not so general an applause, as
popular affection have linked unto other men's labours: yet let the worth of the
subject somewhat strengthen the weakness of the outward semblance, and so
feeding a young muse with the show of a friendly smile, as accepting his good
will, though your expectation be not fully satisfied in his work, you shall
imbolden him in a better vain to perform some more perfect labour, that may
deserve more favour. Which if it happen into my hands, I will make your self
a partaker of that, for your forward acceptance of this. Fare you well.

Your loving friend. C. K.

The History of Heaven.
WHen from a chaos of confused things
Was framed the compass of this crystal sky,
The subject which my home-borne muse now sings,
Though far unfit to reach a note so hie,
As is the music making course of it,
Whose lowest stream orereaches every wit.
Then when perfection in her course did bring
The hidden knowledge of those god-like arts,
That worlds fair frame, which heauen-borne Poets sing,
Was made to memorize great men's deserts:
Where, by succeeding ages should be seen
The wonders that in oreworne worlds have been.
This true vnstainde record not spangled then
With everlasting characters of gold,
Where now is writ the works of gods and men:
The stories that time long ago hath told,
Was then vnfurnisht of those glorious lights,
That now makes day time of the darkest nights.
This is the circuit which some please to call,
The glorious starry spangled firmament:
Others imagine it that golden wall,
That compasses the heavens continent:
And of those nine fair Orbs great judgements write:
This is the highest object to our sight.
Whose motion forms these elemental frames,
Quickens the naked shapes that nature makes:
Sorts every subject to the several names,
And works what Gods intended for our sakes,
Turns back perforce the motion of the sun,
Makes morning, evening, night, and cheerful noone.
The first that in this monument of fame
^
Next to the Artic pole supplies a place,
Is fair Calisto, famous by that name:
Descended from the Arcadian kingly race,
Whom for her beauty Cynthia did entertain,
That she might wait upon her maiden train.
This Nymph once bathing on her in a brooke,
To cool her body in the crystal glide:
Where to that end her fellows she forsook,
By Iupiter was lucklesly espied:
Who with her sight set suddenly on fire,
Gins study how to compass his desire.
Long time his wavering thoughts did run about,
Orelabouring of themselves to find the way,
That from this labyrinth might lead him out,
And yet himself thus loath for to bewray,
Transforms his substance to Dianaes shape,
By that means thinking to obtain her rape.
Where, with the damsel underneath a shade,
He spends that pleasant day in sweet delight:
Offering to show himself: yet half afraid,
Least with his sudden change he might affright
His fearful Love, not yet come to his call,
And by that means lose labour, Love, and all.
Gins like a nibbling fish that half mistrusts
The golden show of an enticing bait,
Makes many offers for the thing she lusts,
Daring to deal with that she deems deceit:
So plays this amorous God, with his fair prize,
Whom love and lust bids board, but shame denies.
At last as swelling tides breaks down their bounds,
That all this while hath kept them in perforce,
Orelying forcibly their neighbour grounds,
And loath to come into their former course:
So driven to the deed with strong desire,
He gins to make a flame out of his fire.
Which when the shamefast naked Nymph gins see,
How subtly she poor soul was oretaine,
With modest words defends her chastity:
Alleging what an everlasting stain
Would clean unto her soul for this offence,
With which nor Gods nor mortal men dispense.
When like a subtle Siren he begins
To tell her it was credit to offend
With mighty men, their credit cloaks their sins,
What they misdoe, their might doth straight amend:
And therefore was Achilles weapon said,
To heal the wound that it before had made.
At last with his persuasive tongue he won
The castle of this maidens constancy:
They melt with words as wax against the sun:
So weak is many women's modesty,
That what sometimes they most would seem to shield,
Another time vnaskt poor souls they yield.
On her this wanton God begot a son,
Whom she called Archas, at whose luckless birth
Diana (for this trespass she had done)
From her sweet service doth expel her forth,
Plaguing Calisto with this rigorous ^w,
That her mishap might hold the re^t in awe.
And jealous Iuno, that had seen all this
That her escaping husband had done here,
Inflicts a heavier doom on her amiss,
Changing her body to an ugly bear:
And makes her now perforce poor soul to dwell
In desert dungeon, groves thrice worse then hell.
Where after many years she had oreworne,
Grieving at that, hard hap had brought to pass,
Changed from the shape wherein she first was borne,
And save her mind, nought left of what she was:
The fates yet more to cross her weary will,
Inflicts upon her now a greater ill.
For whil*st her stripling son ranging abroad,
To seek amongst the shady trees some game,
Whereas his woeful mother made abode:
Thither by chance her careless offspring came,
Who seeking to pursue some beast or other,
Was first of all encountered by his mother.
She willing to interpret her intent,
For that her tongue denies to take his turn,
With fawning friendship tells him what she meant,
And would say how (poor soul) her heart did burn
With the incessiue joy, a mothers eye
Surfeits upon her childrens safety.
Thus standing at a bay, the foolish boy
Misconstering her motherly good will,
Cheers up his heart with over cloying joy,
He had found a beast he was in hope to kill.
And casting from his hand a harmfull dart,
Pierces his mother through her tender hart.
Which murder that it should not here remain
A wondering president for times to come,
How in despite of God, his Love was slain
By her own offspring, and his base got son:
To heal this harm and make all injuries even,
He takes them up and places them in heaven.
Where in the Isie frozen Arctic clime,
Turned into stars in likeness of two Bears:
This mother and her son since spends their time,
Keeping continual motion with the spheres:
Seven of which stars that in their shapes remain,
Are by our common people called Charles wane.
But Iuno for to cross them he had blessed,
Compounds with Neptune God of watery seas,
That where all other stars do take their rest,
These two should never taste that quiet ease:
Against whom this God opposes such great lets,
That in all Europe these stars never sets.
Next them compounded of thirteen fair stars, ^

A hideous Dragon circles most of these,
He that kept safely with his watchful wars,
The golden garden of the Hesperides:
Whom the right rendering Gods have placed there,
For to requite the toil that he took here.
Then stands Cephaeus, sometimes Egypt king, ^

Husband to Cassiopeia the fair:
From whom Andromeda Perseus Love did spring:
Upon whose stock the Gods had such a care,
That at his beauteous daughters happy birth,
They swore none of that kind should waste in earth.
Boots next, on whom the Gods have placed, ^

To keep the Bears that Jove here dignifies:
Least Iuno in her egar wrath should cast
Her husbands darling from the azured skies,
And quit the fault before he had misdone,
Upon this wretched mother and her son.
Then of nine silver stars is made a Crown, ^

A garland beauties Goddess once did twine,
And gave to Ariadne for a boune:
When as she matched with Bacchus God of wine:
After ungrateful Theseus fled away,
And left his Love to perish and decay.
Which Bacchus in remembrance of his Love,
Plaste in the heavens as too good to dwell
Beneath with men, but with the Gods above,
Where it should never wither, but live well,
And be the trophies of their nuptial pride,
Which Venus gave him for to grace his bride.
^
Next them, the labouring conqueror of kings
Alcides is, whose looks yet menace wrath
To the succeeding issue of those things:
Monsters and men that here he put to death,
Armed at all points there this worlds captain stands,
With his victorious weapon in his hands,
He from his wife, whom long he had not seen,
Received for an intermissive good
A poisoned shirt, that by her means had been
Stained in the venom of a Centaurs blood:
Whom once himself bereaved of his life,
For offering wanton dalliance with his wife.
Which he suspectles puts upon his back,
And proud of his wives favour he was in,
Wore it, till it began to work his wrack,
And forcibly did pierce his skarles skin,
Eating his strong made limbs and joints asunder,
Whose might was to the world a matchless wonder.
Which treason when too late he now perceives,
How thus untimely he was made away:
Urged with the poisoning pain, he madly raves,
Disdaining that the world of him should say,
How he which ransacked hell, and conquered earth,
Should by a woman's means be brought to death.
So on a mountain making up his nest,
Where Phoenix-like he now intends to die,
And bring his hapless soul to hopeful rest,
By this undoing of his misery:
Casts his decaying limbs into the fire,
Where death had quickly finished his desire.
But for of several substances combined,
Begot upon Alcumena by great Jove,
His mothers earth to earth he there resignde.
His godhead that the Gods do hold above,
As loath their substance thought it here descend,
Should with mortality make here an end.
Next that, the golden Harp whose well touched strings ^

Could move the massy stones with melody:
Raise rooted trees, and stir all liveless things
To follow on her heavenly harmony:
Make rivers turn their streams another way,
And come unkindly for to hear her play.
Some say the river Nylus overrun,
To water the black burnt Egyptian plain:
When time called back her streams whence they begun,
To keep their course into the sea again,
There with innumerable fishes more,
It left a Tortoyse sprauling on the shore.
Which dried with the moisture drawing sun,
Young Mercurie, as once he passed by,
Stroke it with his staff: whereat the shell begun
To make a musicking murmuring melody.
Which the young God takes up with an intent,
To make of it a formal Instrument.
And to that sweet tungde Poet that did sing
Such pleasant Poems in the jaws of Hell:
The Gods decree to give this heavenly thing,
For that his art could exercise it well:
After whose death their deed they did reclaim,
And fetched this Harp to heaven back again.
^
Then sits a silver Swan, under whose shape
The wanton God obscured his deity,
When as he purchasde lovely Ledaes rape,
And reuelde in a richer treasury
Then was combined up in Paris joy,
Whose sun-bright beauty burnt fair blowming Troy.
Meanwhile enamoured Jove with her fair eyes,
Consorts with wanton Venus for his will:
She like an Eagle, he in the disguise
Of a white seeming Swan, seeks to fulfil
His hungry hope that sets his soul on fire,
With never dying flames of hot desire.
And as the Lady sitting by a brooke,
Under a broad bloomed Rose sweet smelling shade,
Apollo for to glut him with her look,
Stops the strong passage his proud coursers made:
Wishing ten thousand times in Thetis sted,
This beauty were conueyed to his bed.
When these beguiling birds, as though by hap
The Swan had fled his furious foe for fear:
He for his refuge takes this Ladies lap,
And courteous she content to keep him there,
Sits her down further underneath the shade,
For to prevent the means the Eagle made.
And looking lovely on this beauteous bird,
Smoothing his silver plumes with her soft hand,
His silke-like feathers here and there she stirred,
He with his wings the sweet fumed air fand,
For to allay the over smoothering heate,
That valed her angels face with pearlie sweat.
Thus lies this God in beauties proudest bed,
Covered with curtains of her ivory arms:
Her snow white breasts are pillows for his head,
Her sugared words enticing heavenly charms,
Whose silver sound were able to assuage
Wars furious God in hottest of his rage.
At last, enticing sleep persuades her eyes
To feed her idle senses with content:
Which this love armed God, straightwaies espies,
And takes that time to practise his intent:
When in her slumber softly there he wrought
The full content of his inveigled thought.
For which good turn, to gratify his friend,
Under whose covert he contrived his lust,
And brought his hopeless thoughts to happy end,
In quenching of his dry desirous thirst,
Placed her within this compass amongst the rest,
Where for that deed for ever she is blessed.
Then comes fair Cassiopeia Egypt pride,
That with her beauty brau'd those peerless dames,
Nereides the sea Nymphs that abide
Upon the watery worlds still moving frames,
Tripping like summers Dear from place to place,
Upon the dancing waives fair gilded face.
For which contempt, the censuring Gods decree,
She should be changed to her deep disgrace
Into some stars: where for her misery
Here they appointed her abiding place:
And in the motion of the heavens still,
She's backward drawn as though against her will.
Next is her husband Perseus, Daneas son,
Whom Iupiter beguiled with golden shoes:
Dazzling her eyes (until the deed were done)
With present pleasures which breed after woes,
Raining into her lap so sweet a shower,
As would have won a thousand women more.
From that deceitful dalliance Perseus sprung,
Who after proved Heavens champion in their wars,
Against Medusa that durst offer wrong
To Gods and men with her disturbing dares:
Whose monstrous face orehung with snaky hair,
Made Heaven tremble and kept earth in fear.
This soldier armed with Mineruaes shield,
Plumed with swift Mercuries aire-beating wings,
And his bright sword now ready for the field:
Proud that the Gods would use him in these things,
Cuts through the empty air and unseen way,
That brought him down where fierce Medusa lay.
Where in that single combat she orecom'd,
Humbles her self unto his conquering hand:
He takes her head, and leaves her body numbed
With deaths cold comfort sprauling on the sand:
Then with that purchase back again he flies,
To be eternizde for his dear bought prize.
When as he towering in the empty air,
Sees in the sea a maiden weak and pale,
Whose semblance seemed that she had been fair:
Though fear had now oreshadowed in a veil
The fair vermillion tincture of her face,
And left her there the conquest of disgrace.
This was Andromeda, the Gods had bound
Upon a ruthless rock to be the pray
Of a fierce fish, by whom she must be found,
And for her mothers pride should there decay,
Proud Cassiopeia that durst hold plea
With the fair offspring of the foaming sea.
Whom Perseus from her painful prison frees,
And then at liberty he pleads his love:
For whose requital she straightwaies agrees,
Vowing her fancy never should remove,
Until diuorcing death to both their pain,
Should separate their united souls again.
Thus as these new met lovers homewards hies,
Proud Perseus to his sole commander tells
The hidden virtue of his hideous prize,
How with her looks all humane power she quels,
And metamorphizes her gazers on,
To an vnpenitrable senseless stone.
At length unto Sariphus I'll they come,
Where Perseus grandsire old Acrisus meets him:
Glad that his nephew had so happily won
This hopeless conquest, kindly comes and greetes him.
But looking wishly on the monsters face,
Turned to a stone he stands still in that place.
When Perseus grieving at his grandsires death,
Brought by his means to this unhappy end:
Casts down his conquest to the cursed earth,
And vows in sorrow his sad days to spend:
Whose hap to help the powerful Gods agree,
To take him up amongst this company.
Then comes Auriga or the Wagoner, ^

Whom Poets say is young Hypolitus,
Who fled his mothers lust: and for the care
The Gods requites his continence thus:
That sensual sinners by this means may see,
How heavens remunerats his chastity.
By him stands Capra Iupiters kind nurse,
Who by his mother Ops conueide away
From th'execution of his fathers curse:
To whom the Delphion Oracle did say,
That by his own son, Saturne should be driven
From his great kingdom of all-keeping heaven.
When Iupiter conueyed from his rage,
Was by this she-gote fostered in a down,
Until he came to strength and able age,
And had deprived his father of his crown:
Then he rewards his nurse to her content,
By placing of her in the firmament.
^
Next unto him a mans fair picture stands,
Composed of xxiiii. glorious stars,
Holding a wreathed Serpent in his hands,
Striving as though they two were still at jars.
This Esculapius is Apollos son,
That could bring life again when life was done.
He when Hippolytus was all to torn
By the foul flesh fed jade that drew his carre:
Setting his limbs again as they were borne,
Revives them all as erst before they were.
For such his cunning was in Phisicks skill,
He could expel deaths danger at his will.
Whereat the Destinies incensed with wrath,
Complains to Iupiter how they were wronged
By mortal men, whose might could conquer death,
A thing which solely to themselves belonged.
Telling him he must curb these forward men,
Or their aspiring minds would orereach them.
At which the angry God shaking his head,
Throws down a thunderbolt, that with his weight
Hits Esculapius, and so strikes him dead.
But Phoebus hardly brooking of that sight,
Takes up his son, and spite what Jove can do,
Sets him in heaven for to ease his woe.
Mynos the Cretane King had one sole heir
Named Glaucus, lovely like the Gnidian Dove, ^

Straight as the new sprung pine tree, and as fair
As fair Adonis Cythereos Love.
But hungry death that all things doth devour,
Cuts up this bud of beauty fore his flower.
Whom Esculapius for his former cure,
Was by constraint enjoined to regain:
And to that end the King did there immure
This Artist where he now must needs remain,
And either bring him back again his son,
Or let death glory in the deeds he had done.
When the poor scholar copte up with the course,
Brooking but badly his imprisonment:
Beguiles the tedious time with a discourse
Of wisdoms rule and wills fond government,
How wisdom this worlds soul should be combined,
With a fond wilful ouerruling mind.
At last he finds will stronger of the two,
But wisdom the director of his might:
For proof whereof, he sees how great beasts bow
And humbly casts themselves at wisemens feet.
Then thinks he to himself, it cannot be
Will should have now such conquest over me.
But then he found it how it came to pass,
Authority that will was sometimes in:
Jetting like Aesopes moralised Ass,
Under the covert of a Lyons skin:
This is the woeful thing (quoth he) that still
Must keep Gods wisdom subject to mans will.
When to break off his solitary muse,
A Serpent comes to him whereas he sits:
Which with a staff he commonly did use,
He strikes at, and his stroke so surely hits,
As piercing of the poisoned Serpents head,
His foe falls down and at his feet lies dead.
Then suddenly from forth another place,
A second Serpent brings in a fair green leaf:
With which, touching his fellow, straight doth chase
Triumphant death, and brings lost life relief.
Which done, the worms makes haste to get away,
And leaves the leaf where the dead Serpent lay.
At which strange sight the man now half amazed,
Takes up the leaf and lays it on his skin:
At whose soft touch the child again was raised,
By working of the like effect in him.
Which Serpent, Phoebus for this deed she had done,
Places in heaven with his happy son.
There is the strong steeled arrow that did kill ^

The Griph that fed upon Promethaeus hart,
Chained to the top of Caucasus cold hill,
Whom Hercules released from that smart
The Gods had cast upon him in their wrath,
For fetching fire from heaven down to earth.
The Eagle's next that Iupiter did send ^

To steal away the wanton smiling boy,
Whose never matched beauty still did lend
More means of pride to peacock plumed Troy,
That in the summer of her fair sprung flower,
Thought she had robbed the Gods of all their power.
He with abundance surfeiting his mind
Of woman's fading pleasure quickly spent:
Turns his affections to another kind
Of lasting love that was more permanent.
For such is the effect of too much store,
It makes them loathe that which they loved before.
This Eagle in the searching flight he made,
Sees this earths wonder by a bubbling well:
Wooing Narcissus like his own fair shade,
That in his own conceit did far excel
The mixture, which to women's foul disgrace
The Gods had shadowed in this wantons face.
Nature, when as this god-like boy was borne,
Taunted by Venus that he was too rare:
Said she had framed his face in heavens scorn,
Whose Angels sparkling eye-bals were so fair,
As they should draw men from their chief resort,
And make proud womenlose their best prized sport.
Thus at himself as wondering all alone,
The careful soole did softly take him up:
And to her master quickly gets her gone,
Who takes him for to wait upon his cup:
Where he for ever, as old writers say,
Served Jove with Nectar and Ambrosia.
Orion that did first of all invent
The silver Lutes sweet trembling harmony,
Stored with abundant riches, as he meant
To sail towards Lesbos from sweet Italie,
The Sailors, for the wealth he there had stored,
Determined for to drown him over board.
Whom he entreats to let him touch his strings,
Before they work their pitiles intent:
The which they grant, and then the Poet sings
The tragic tale of his disparagement,
Sighing (poor soul) it was his own mishap
Now in his age to dye in dangers lap.
A floating Dolphin that had hard all this,
Hovers about the ship to hear some more,
Orion straight leaps out upon the fish,
And the poor creature proud of that he bore,
Passes with pleasure through the surging maine,
And sets him safe in Italy again.
Which courteous deed the Gods do thus repay,
Placing this fish within the firmament:
Where his remembrance never shall decay,
As long as they keep in this Continent.
For with the Gods good deeds are so regarded,
As that they never perish unrewarded.
Young merry Bacchus when his idle head,
Encumbered amongst his cups, was out of frame:
Gets him a little casie paced steed,
That sofdy might convey him whence he came:
After whose death the pleasant God obtained,
His horse in heaven might be entertained.
After Medusaes conquest, of her blood
The engendering sun another monster breeds:
A flying horse that longtime stoutly stood,
Refusing to be curbed like other steeds:
Until Bellerephon devised a way
To bring this stubborn courser to his bay.
But he intending for to shape a course
With his winged Palfrey up unto the skies,
Amidst his journey tumbles from his horse,
And in the seas like Icarus he dies.
But up to heaven the horse still kept his way,
Where ever since he holds a certain stay.
Next that, Andromeda young Perseus wife,
To whom the heavens promisde at her birth,
They would extend her everlasting life,
After she' had run her mortal race on earth:
And careful for to keep their promise sure,
They plaste her there where she doth still endure.
Ceres in love with fruitful Cicilie, ^

Whose soil did every year affoord more corn,
Then from her neighbour countries treasury
Could in a long devouring time be worn:
Craves of the Gods, that with them still might stand,
The three squared form of this thrice lucky land.
All these abides within these Arctic climes,
And keeps continual motions with the spheres:
Now follows these diuiders of our times,
The Signs, through whom the sun makes up our years,
And in twelve months draws out his motion even,
Going through every several sign in heaven.
The first is Aries, the golden Ram, ^

That carried Phixius and his sister over
The surging Hellespont, from their cursed damme,
Ino old Athmas wife their second mother.
Whose dangerous journey Iupiter requites,
Turning this Rams rug'd shape to heavenly lights.
This was the Bull the God transformed him to, ^

When as he stole Eutropa by a wile,
Carrying her over where she would or no,
To dally with his Love in Candies I'll.
Whose loss old Agenor long time bewayl'd,
Till when he saw his wailing nought preuayl'd.
Within his form seven stars which Poets call
Old Atlas seven fair daughters, whom we read
The immortal Gods did company withal:
And to requite their Lemmans for this deed,
They liberally thus rewards their Love,
By placing of them with themselves above.
But fair Electra eldest of those seven,
That night when woeful Troy was overturned,
Plucked back her head, and would not see from heaven
The flames wherein that ancient city burned:
Since which time this seventh sister hath not been
Amongst her other sisters ever seen.
^
Next him the Twins which Iupiter begets
On lovely Leda in his Swans disguise,
Castor and Pollux, whom their father sets
In heaven as objects for our mortal eyes:
For the requital of his former escape
He made in compassing their mothers rape.
^
Then comes the backward creeping Crab that went
On Iunos message to that mass of men
Alcides, whom before her self had sent
To war with Hydra in foul Lernaes fen:
Where when she came as strongly as she might,
She bites his heel, thinking to cross his fight.
But Hercules when Hydras heads were done,
Looking about him who should do this deed:
Oretakes the sloe paste shell-fish as she run,
And beats her self borne-house about her head.
When Iuno pitying of her servants pains,
Takes her to heaven where she now remains.
The furious Lyon in Numeas grove, ^

Iuno inioyn'd her husbands son to kill:
With whom great Hercules a long time strove,
For he could bring the beast unto his will*
This Jove when as their weary wars were done,
Placed in heaven for to grace his son.
Then Justice comes the last of all the Gods, ^

That left her residence here on this earth:
For lack of whom the world grew all at ods,
And man to man curses each others birth:
For then usurping wrong succeeded straight,
That no man knew how long to hold his right.
Then calls the world for Justice back again,
Complaining how they now were overrun:
And they would suffer any scourging pain,
In penance for those sins themselves had done:
For that their wickedness did force this power,
To leave the seat whereas she sate before.
Whereas the Gods did in their court decree
Justice should be transformed to these stars,
Where foolish men might every minute see
Her, that should help these miseries of theirs.
But stand like Tantalus within those brinks,
Where he sees water, but yet never drinks.
Next her the Balance stands, wherein she had
The unequal deeds of men's unruly lives,
Which Iupiter there saw to be so bad,
As for their sakes for ever he deprives
The world of Justice, which they had before,
That spared no rich men, nor oppressed no poor.
Orion proudly boasting of his strength,
There was no monster that he could not kill:
The earth brought forth a Scorpion at the length,
To try what this proud bragger could fulfil,
Whom this impoysoned Serpent with her sting
Killed, before their combat could begin.
For recompense whereof, the Gods did take
This Serpent up again from of the earth,
And of his substance there a sign they make,
To let men know they should not deem their worth
More then the power of heaven: for they can
Quickly control the strongest stomached man.
Fair Epheme that nursde those sacred dames ^

The learned Muses authorises of Arts,
Whose wits all kinds of heavenly cunning frames,
And lives eternized for their great deserts
In many a golden line, that will preuaile
When all devouring time it self shall fail,
Had to her son fair Crocus, that did sup
The milk those learned sisters left behind:
Whom Iupiter at their requests takes up
To dwell amongst this metamorphiz'd kind:
And for his knowledge did exceed compare,
The Gods have thus determined of him there:
Like to a Horse they frame his hinder parts,
To show his knowledge in brave martial deeds:
His upper limbs tells us the skill in Arts,
Wherein all other men he far exceeds:
Framed like an Archer, that the world might know
His sharpe wit by his arrow and his bow.
The giant Tiphon, heavens greatest foe, ^

When as he menaced all the Gods with wars,
They for to plague him for disturbing so
Their quiet kingdom with his churlish dares,
Sets themselves ready all in battle ranks,
Upon the bordering plains to Nylus banks.
When subtillie by their foe entrapped there,
And no means left them for to escape away:
Disguised themselves in other shapes for fear,
Where Pan the shepherds God, as writers say,
Was glad by turning of his former coat,
To show like half a fish and half a goat.
Whereas the God setting himself to swim,
For fear his foe should circumvent his shape,
Jove by great chance in this sort seeing him,
Gins wonder at the strangeness of his shape:
And when the Gods were all come from these wars,
They place this shape of Pans amongst the stars.
This is young Ganimed the Trojan boy,
Whom Iupiter fetched for to be his page,
And ravished all his beating veins with joy,
Sucking the sweet taste of his tender age:
Whom afterwards the God did here set up,
Pouring in Nectar to a golden cup.
Venus and lovely Cupid on a day,
Seating themselves by Euphrates fair glide,
Spending the time in dallying wanton play,
Was by the giant Typhon there espied,
Compassed them about where they were set,
As once black Vulcan took her in his net.
For fear whereof the Goddess was constrained,
Clasping her young son in her silver arms,
To take the water, where they were sustained
By fishes that conveyed them from those harms:
Whom afterwards the Goddess thus requites,
By turning of these fishes to fair lights.
Thus have we run this Circle round about,
Wherein the daily Sun still keeps his course:
From whence his fiery team never broke out,
But wholly ruled young Phaeton by force.
Now to the Southern climates are we led,
To tell what stories there are chronicled.
Next to the Signs is plaste a mighty Whall, ^

By which Andromeda should have been slain:
Whom Perseus undertook to fight withal,
To free his Love Andromeda from pain.
For the remembrance of which victory,
She is recorded in this Registrie.
Iupiter, Neptune, and young Mercurie, ^

Travailing in humane likeness up and down,
Were by Hyreus welcomed courteously:
Which to requite, the bid him ask a boune:
Of whom the man desired he might have
A son before death brought him to his grave.
Then do the Gods command him bring the skin
Of a young ox that was but newly slain:
Wherein they pissed, and puts it straightwaies in
The earths cold womb, bidding him raise't gain
When as the term of ten full months were done,
And of that urine he should have a son.
Which charge he kept: and when the time was past
He takes it up, within whose folds he found
Orion, from the urine they there placed
Grown in the belly of the hard cold ground:
After whose death in memory of this thing,
Him and the hide to heaven they did bring.
Eridanus or Padus is the next,
Within whose streams young Phaeton was drenched:
At whose offence great Iupiter being vexed,
Strikes him straight down, whereat the fire was quenched.
And in remembrance of this Rivers name,
It stands in heaven for quenching of that flame.
And at his feet they plaste a fearful Hare,
For that he most delighted for to view it,
Whilst on this earth he was conversing here
With mortal creatures, and there would still pursue it
With two fierce dogs, that there do also stand
Ready attendants at their masters hands.
The ship in which proud Iason came from Greece, ^

Stoutly attended with a lucky train
To Colchos, for to win the golden fleece,
Which by Medeas love he did obtain:
For her success the Gods do dignify,
Next to Orion and his company.
Apollo on a time would needs inuit ^

Iupiter for to be his welcome guest,
And sends the Crow wherein he did delight,
To fetch him some fair water for his feast,
Sending him with a golden cup away, ^

And charged him straightly for to make no stay.
The Crow as he was flying to the spring,
Spies a fair fig* tree standing by the way,
And then forgetting what he was to bring,
Determins there a while to make his stay:
Wherefore he go this servant means to see
The yet green figs full ripened on their tree.
After long time when he had eat his fill,
He then too late remembers what was past:
And taking a dead Serpent in his bill,
Back to his angry master flies he fast: ^

To whom the silly foul begins to tell
How that foul Serpent kept him from the well.
At which the angry God chafing to see
Himself abused by a simple foul,
Means with an everlasting misery,
His too bold misdemeanour to control,
And into heaven to his shame takes up
Himself, the Serpent, and the golden cup.
^
Next them the man that was so famous,
Chiron the Centaur for his famous arts,
Chief schoolmaster to Esculapius,
Achilles, and Alcides, whose deserts
Won with the Gods such an exceeding favour,
As that they plaste him here to live for ever.
^
Next him a woolfe, which heavens to this end
Plaste there besides him, for he was devout:
The fame of his devotion should extend
Unto all times, and ne'er be blotted out:
Holding a sacrifice within his hands,
To offer on an Altar that there stands.
^
Next that, the Wheel that wrought Ixions pain,
For offering dalliance to the heavens Queen,
Whereon in hell long time he did remain,
Till pity moved the Gods for to redeem
This cursed creature from his punishment,
And place his rack within the firmament.
The last that's in this monument of fame, ^

Is a fair fish whom they term Venus daughter,
Transformed in the sea, and for her name
These stars continued there ever after:
Where she and all the rest are fixed fast,
As long as heaven moves and earth shall last.
Thus did the Gods with favours still regard
The dutiful demeans of earth-bred kinds,
And gave to every deed his due reward.
Such is their equal justice rendering minds,
That no affections draws away their favour,
But every thing's rewarded for his labour.
The weak they do not ouerpresse with weight,
Nor fear they what the mighty man can do:
The rich man with his close fist golden slight
Cannot corrupt their rightful judgements so.
Thus without hope of gain, or fear of might,
They rendered unto every man his right.
But when the world, orecloyed with this good,
Began to surfeit in enticing ill,
Then turned they down the wheel where Fortune stood,
And lets them reap the fruits of their own will:
So that these after times as Poets tell,
Are for their follies registered in hell.
Where now they show not in fair fixed stars,
But shadowed in foul mists and frying fire,
With fiends and furies keeps continual wars,
From which their weary souls shall ne'er retire*
So was the first world blessed with heavenly favours,
And the last cursed with painful hellish labours.
FINIS.

