A Pleasant Dialogue, concerning Physic and Physicians.



Imprinted at London, by Iohn Charlewood. 1580.

A Delectable Dialogue. Wherein is contained a Pleasant Disputation between
two Spanish Gentlemen, concerning Physic and Physicians, with sentence of a
learned Master given upon their argument.

Translated out of the Castlin tongue. By T. N.

To the woorshipfull Master Thomas Fowler Esquire. T. N. VVisheth hearts
desire.
THe Christians, (VVoorshypfull Sir) which use to travail toward Jerusalem.
And also the Mahomettes, which wander toward their holy place Mecha, which is
the burial plot of their Advocate and false Prophet Mahomet: Use to carry
with them Scrips for their provision of victuals, and other furniture. And
where those Pilgrymes carry severally but one: in my Perigrination, I carried
two, the one for my victuals, and the other to keep such books as were given
me b^ ^he way for charity.

And now of late I chanced to turn over my Papers, among the which I found
this little Dialogue, concerning Physic and Physicians, writ in the Castlyn
tongue by a learned Gentleman, called Pedro Mexia, who sometime was Chronicler
to the late Emperor Charles the fifth. And then calling to memory the variety
of mans inclynacion, how some are inclined and have delight to refresh
werinesse, in reading conferring with notable writers, other some have great
pleasure in comfortable Music, and others in the conversation of faithful and
loving friends.

And where I am certain that your recreation is often times among books, and
especially in reading of travellers woorks, as well by land as Sea. Yea and
your own person, having passed the Occean Sea. I may boldly say with no great
pleasure: yet your Worship doth not repent you thereof.

I therefore am now the more bolder to offer this little pamphlet unto you.
Praying your woorship to accept the small gift, and to remember the poor old
woman who offered two mites* her gift was small, but yet with an exceeding good
hart and will, and the Almighty grant your gentle hearts desire.

Your Woorships to command. T. N.

The Argument of the Dialogue.
TWo learned men Gentlemen, met by chance, the one of them speaks much evil
of Physicians: and holds opinio, that neither Physician, nor Art of medicine
ought to be, but yt men should be cured with use and experience. The other doth
commend also and defend, both Medicine Physicians. And last of all, the matter
is decided by a learned man, called Master Velasques, very notably.

FINIS.
Interlocutores. Jasper, Bernardo, Don Nunio, Master Velasques. Jasper. IT
should seem, that we espied the one the other, by our coming out, and meeting
at one season.


Bernardo. Now truly you say well. But whether wander you.


Jasper. If you command not other ways: I was determined to go visit Don
Nunio, and to keep him company for one howre, for as yet he is weak of his
infirmity past, and goes not out of his doors.


Bernardo. By my froth, and I came from home with the same intent.


Jasper. Many times it doth so happen, the will of two men to move unto one
thing, being a sunder in diverse places, yea the one to remember the other, at
one instant in such wise: that it should seem the minds to understand each
other.


Bernardo. By the spiritual parts, it is no marvel though in some thing we
are like Angels: who understand without speaking, and communicate their
conceits the one with the other.


Jasper. How so ever it be, since God moved us both at one time to meet, in a
good howre be it, and let us go together to make our visilation.


Bernardo. Let us go through the next street for this is pestered, with the
Merchants works.


Jasper. You say well, but look what a fair front he hath built to his
house, certenly of late the building in this City of Civil is greatly mended,
for within these ten years, their buildings are most beautiful toward the
street, with many fair wyndowes of diverse fashions.


Bernardo. Troth it is, ye and many ancient houses are reedified, and
although every one can not do as he would: yet truly ye amendment is great.
But in one thing I see it not, and that is, in their low buildings, for very
few build higher then one story, whereupon the houses remain moist and of
small majesty. And therefore strangers which come from Barselona, and other
Cities where their buildings are of three stories high: can not away with
ours, nor yet the buildings of this City content them.


Bernardo. You say troth, but it were not wisdom to comply with beauty and
bravery, and to commit notorious hurt, both to health and life, in this
country it is not convenient to build high, and it hath been both advise,
discretion, not to do so, for naturally the situation of this City is hot and
moist, and to resist ye heate is a principal remedy, the air is fresh, which
ordinarily runs in the Summer, it is therefore needful that ye houses be
open, not very high, to be visited with the air, and for this cause our
ancestors used this building, for certainly the high buildings are more hotter
than the low, and more vnholsome in Summer season for want of air, as we know
some that are troubled with this defect, also it is necessary in this place,
the Edifices to be lowe, for remedy of the great moisture, that both streets
and houses may be visited of the sun and the air, so that if the houses and
Edifices here in this City were high: they should be more cold moist in
winter, and more hotter in Summer. By mean whereof very vnholsome, for the
moisture is so great that always we must procure that the sun have
entrance into all places of our houses, if it were possible al day long, the
which could not be if the houses and lodgings were high. And also the cold here
is not so great to consume the moisture, as it is in Castillia other parts,
and where great cold is: yet the heate of the sun is necessary, although in
Summer it be great, to consume the over much moisture. And therefore I believe
that our forefathers used to this end, to make the streets broad, as now the
most are, yea and in our days, shades and penthouses were commanded to be
taken away for that purpose, where by a notorious commodity and health hath
followed:


Bernardo. Truly your reason is certain and natural, although some times I
have mused thereon, yet I was never so well satisfied as now I am: and I think
hitherto, the same respect hath been, and if it had not, it is just that it be
hereafter. But it seems unto me, that high Chabers are not good lodging, nor
yet needful for this place in the winter, which is not cold, and the heate of
Summer exceeding hot. As for experience, noble men which have high houses, do
seldom dwell in them, for those causes alleged: but rather keep them to lay
corn in, and for lodging of their servants, rather then for other purpose,
although in Castillia such high buildings are most wholesome: so yt our houses
being lowe: the cause was not for want of knowledge: but rather came of a good
foresight. Let us now see howe Don Nunio will build his house, which hath a
good beginning, here I see much stuff prepared for the work.


Jasper. Let us understand what he doth before we alight from our Moyles: for
sick persons may not be visited at all seasons.


Bernardo. No but yet it seems by yonder Moil that Master Velasques is with
him: therefore let us alight, and I will lead the way.


Jasper. God give your Woorship health. Entrance of the gentlemen.



Don Numo. I kiss your Maistershippes hand, and am very glad that ye are come
at such time, to find Master Doctor Velasques here, for if ye two will
speak Latin he will understand ye, or else if ye will argue any matter (as ye
were wont to do) ye have a good and present Judge.


Bernardo. No sir, for now we come very conformable like good neighbours, and
we have not whereupon to Dispute, if you throw not in a bone as you were wont
to do.


Master. Senor Don Nunio, Doth not evil therein. For always good fruit
proproceedes out of a good discord.


Bernardo. At the least sir you have small need thereof: for it is evident
that you teach us all. But notwithstanding our talk, sir, how do you feel
your self.


Don Nunio. Truly as yet I am very weak, for my disease principally hath
been of a long continuance, and also I was letten blood three times, therefore
I cannot so soon recover strength, and I have also an exceeding drines,
remaining in my mouth so that I cannot abstain from drinking, and thinking my
self never satisfied, and surely I believe that the Physicians hath not
understood the secretes of my disease, to cure it accordingly


Bernardo. Sir believe me I know a man that would not be offended with the
drines you speak of, for on a time the same man having an exceeding burning
fever and drynes. The Phisission would have given him certain things to
myttigate the heate and drought: unto whom he answered very gravely. A pretty
example.
Master Doctor, I pray you do what you can to ease my extreme heate. But as
for my thyrstinesse, I would be contented to remain with all.


Don Nunio. Yea, but I am not so great a friend of drink: for when I am in
health, I flee from the things that should cause thyrstinesse. But truly the
extreme dryness which I have now, came of a Purgation that was given me.


Jasper. Yea, and therefore I defy Physicians, for I promise you, if you had
not purged your self: you had been sooner whole, and not now so weak,


Master. Why sir, the Physicians know no better way to cure.


Jasper. Mary sir, and that way, I would they knew not, for it is not
convenient to be used.


Don Nunio. If ye had seen what a disputation here was, about what should be
give to purge me with all, and about the letting of me blood, ye would have
said somewhat.


Jasper. Sir, I needed not to see the thing, for I have other causes more
sufficient, to approve that which I mean to speak of: Long agone I knew
howe the Physicians very seldom agree in their opinios, yea, and I was about
to say, that fewer times they happen to do ye patient good.


Bernardo. Then must I say also, that you have for a custom, seldom times to
speak well, either of Advocates or Physicians. But say what you list, you
shall, will or nill, trust the one with your life, and the A pretty conclusion.
other with your goods.


Jasper. Then accursed be I, if I do so, at the least, to put my life in the
Physicians hands, for in all my life time hitherto, I was never let blood, nor
yet have had any Physicians counsel, as long as I have gone abroad in the
world. And I find my self better in health, and more sounder then you, who
always hath to do with such kind of men.


Bernardo. Yea and therefore you brag, but I promise you, if any disease should
take you vehemently: you would then cry out for the Physicians.


Jasper. It might so be, that ye infirmity might be such to deprive me of my
wit, and so to demand help of Physicians, but as long as my memory
serves, fear not that I commit any such madness: for since God be praised
I have lived 45. years without them, yea, and have been helped of some
infirmities, with holsom diet good regiment: I mean not now to prove new
inventions.


Dun Nunio. Now truly Signor Master, this fire begins to kindle, for these
Gentlemen are armed for the purpose.


Bernardo. I am not disposed to contend. But yet I will always defend the
truth.


Jasper. And the same shall never want unto me, therefore if you have any thing
to say, begin when you list, for I am ready to answer.


Bernardo. Truly Signor Jasper, it seems a merry toy, to call medicine a new
inuencio, being as you know the most ancient Art in the world, approved and
admitted by God himself, by men. Have you not read in Ecclesiastes, that God
created medicine of the earth, that the Wise man should not slay from it, for
the medicine doth exalt honour the Physician, for medicine he shall be praised
in presence of kings mighty men. Also our Authors and humane woorks, makes no
less account of medicine, although they differ in whom was the inuenter
thereof, yet all agrees to reverence honour all such. Some say hold opinio,
that Mercurie was the first, others say Apis, other affirm Aposto, some
Aesculapius: Homero was also honoured for a God, fountain of good writers, in
many places, he I say commends medicine: yea, did not let to show; name
medicinal herbs, how medicin hath ben esteemed of Emperors and kings, you
know better then I. You have also read what reward Alexander the great gave
unto Aristouolus Phisitio: and king Ptolome to Erasistrato. Yea, the incredible
stipend fees which they had in yt time of Emperors in Rome, whereof Plinie and
others make mention: In conclusion, look what a treasure health is, which
passes all worldly joys, the felicity of the soul excepted: yea, and
contrary wise, howe bitter is infirmity. So that these things considered, you
may see what honour is due to medicine, that conserveth us in the one, keeps
us from the other.


Master. Although it hath not been much which Signor Bernardo hath spoken, yet
his study hath not been small, as appears by his explication.


Jasper. You have played the good Retorician, and since you have taken the
payne, I will do the like. But I would first you should understand, that I
codempne not the good Medicine: for I told you that I had cured my self with
only good diet, and regunent, yea, and also with some herbs, and other
things whereof I have experience. But I condemn the evil Physicians, who
long agone made both Art and Merchandise, inventing and seeking strange and
violent medicaments, filling darkening, with their opinions and Cawtelles, the
faculties which most clear and simply ought to be, and of himself is and was
in his beginning, when men cured one another for charity, and not for interest,
and then they cured with herbs and virtuous symples experimented, and not
with venomous compositions that now are used, which you know not what they
be, nor from whence they come, nor to what use they serve, nor yet howe many
they be, because they are so many that they are out of number.

The Medicine which is commended in Ecclesiastes, is the same that was used in
those good days. But the Medicine invented by those which you say were holden
for Gods, because they discovered the virtue property of herbs, stones
fruits, and other things applied them, to the Passions, sores, and
infirmities, without making them Arts, rules, and precepts, as afterward
malice covetousness of men brought to pass, so that before that time, we
found nothing written of medicine. Hipocrates by aucthority of Marcus Varro,
according unto Plinie affirms: was the first that wrote the precepts of
medicine. The space of, 600. years, the Romaines defended them selves from
Physicians, and would in no wise suffer them in Rome: since which time they
never lived so sound. True it is, that in the time when Enullius, and Marcus
Libio were Consuls, which was after the foundation of Rome. 535 years: I know
not by whom persuaded, they admitted a Greek Physician Pelotones, called
Archagatus, unto whom they gave a house public stipend, and as a new thing
at the beginning, he pleased some men. But after they had experience of his
letting blood, and his Cauteries, with strange inuencions of curing: both he
and others that were newly come, were banished, by the authority and
counsel of the great Cato Censorinus, who lived, 85. years, because you may
consider what want he had of Archagatus, or of any other. After Cato his death,
the time running with covetousness, ambition, and other vices, then entered
Physicians into Rome.

So that it plainly appears, before that time the Romaines had, diet,
medicines, and a way to cure with all, according to experience, without using
any tyranny, for each neighbor showed unto other, the things that he had
proved: in those days I say, love and charity cured, and not covetousness
and poison.

The Romaines only used not this good order, but also the Babylonians, who were
learned. Estrabo, and Herodotus, write that, they had not known Physicians,
and therefore they used (when any happened to be sick) to bring him forth
into the open street, because his neighbours and friends (who had any
experience in such diseases) should give their council and advise.

The self same order was used among the Egiptians and Portyngalles, after
those golden days, Signor Bernardo, Physicians crept into the houses of
Emperors Kings, among whom, some were famous, as Hipocrates, who was the
fountain and father of them all, and after him came Aristogenes into service
with king Antigonus of Macedonia, and Asclepiades his familliar, who was froend
of great Pompetus. Antonius Muga was entertained of the Emperor Octauianus.
Also both the Appollodors, of whom Plinie writes: Cornelio Celso the
Romaine: the famous Erasistratus who by his singular knowledge, understood
howe the disease of Antiochus was indecent love, with his Mother in Law. Also
Galenus, who now is honoured, and called Prince of Physicians, with many other
which now I will not name. But this I know, notwithstanding, that after
Physicians began to multiply, mans life began to shorten. And in those days
the ancient Romaines, lived in more health then all these Princes, who
entertained the Physicians with wages, and other excessive rewards: And if you
will not believe me, let Alexander the great, who you brought for an example,
say his opinion, for he lived not full forty years. Let also the old gray
bearded men of the Mountains and Villages, which never knew Physicians,
speak their mind. And let the young men of the City, declare also their
opinions.

But do you know what was the cause to admit Physicians in Rome, the great
disorder whereof I spake, because men would not temper, and cure them selves
according to ye rule of their Ancestors, they would needs give the charge of
their health to them that knew it not. Whereupon, as Plinie affirms, great
hurt followed to the health of man: for why, they left the care of them selves,
and gave credit to Physicians for their health: and the Phisitios for their
part, cared no more but for the interest profit, exalting their Art, and
making there of Merchandise, yea, and to give a more comely visage to their new
Science, that none might know the secretes thereof: they began to flee from
common and true renredies, and to use compounds, mixtures, fruits, roots,
herbs, never before seen nor heard of, to deceive and bewitch the people,
with the names and hidden properties, and for the common remedies, they sought
strange, casting clean aside the true way, and sticked fast to their new
devises. Here also began the distylling of Waters, both of clean and filthy
things. Here began Syrrups, both sweet and sower, some clear, some darcke,
made of such conceits, that the Devil himself would scarcely imagine what
thing it were.

An other devise also, is to cause us to eat gold, stones, yea, and iron,
like unto Oystrages against all nature. Here also began your Mytradate, and
compound Treacle, made of above 54. things and some of them rank poison: if
every of them were good of himself, the incomportable company of the one with
the other, makes an horrible poison.

The which Plinie almost 1800. years past, saith, was made by ostentation and
appearance of his Art, for it is impossible Nature to be seen, nor experience
known, nor the temper and concordaunces of so many things dyscordant, no it
can not be. So that of these things and other like, they have made experience
in mans body, with such audacity, and at all adventures. So that in lieu of
giving health: they happen many-tymes to kill the patient, yea, and in
recompense thereof, to have his money for their labour: and that which wurst
is, there is no punishment for them. Tell me I pray you, what Physician have
you seen chastened, either for the death, or laming of any man?

Finally, Signor Bernardo, the malice of man hath spoiled the best thing in
the world, which is in making the thing natural, an obscure Artificer:
charity an interest, mercy, covetousness, darckening reason so much, as
though none could cure but Physicians.

Jesting at common experience, and extolling with persuasion their Art, or
Mystery, yea, even to the names of things, giving them new barbarous and
strange terms, saying, both the Greek and Latin names are well known.

Also in their writing they have invented Carraters and Signs, not to be
understood, but of whom they deal withal for their Drugs: so that they
procured by all means to darcken the thing which ought to be common, and
known of all men.

Then what shall I say of the diversity of their doctrine and opinions. The
Alarbes differ from the Greekes, so that among them selves, they are not
conformable, neither the one nor the other. The order and manner of curing
their Auicena, differs from Galenus, those of antiquity, even so much that
it seems an other thing: nor yet those of our time cure like Auicena, nor
like the other, for now all consists in inuencios and opinions. Yea, if you
call two or three together, you shall find each to be singular in his
judgment. But when they agree, iwis it is to the great peril of the Patient:
if you hear each of them by himself it is a miracle to find them
conformable, yea, their receytes shall be diverse and contrary each to other:
It shall not need that I make any further recytall thereof, for daily you see
it before your eyes, therefore I will not weary my self in the rehearsal.


Master Velasques. It should seem that these Gentlemen ^ame purposely to
debate this matter, herein to show their learning knowledge, because I see
them so earnest: therefore we may do well to cut of, and abreuiate their
communication.


Don Nunio. No Sir, that were not just, that Physicians should thus remain,
without defence. Yea, and for my part, I do greatly rejoice to hear this
talk. Therefore let the conclusion be, that since each of them hath had his
turn, although Signor Jasper; hath been somewhat long in his discourse, let
each of them have another course, and no more, which shall be as one that
writes his mind, and an other that replies in our judgment court. And then
I am to desire you Signor Master, to give sentence, who hath the right.


Jasper. I for my part am content, reserving the benefit of appellation, if
the sentence be not given in my favour.


Bernardo. And I for my part am also agreed having so great a confidence in my
Justice, and also in the judgment of Signor Master, by mean whereof I bind
myself to his judgment and sentence.


Master Velasques. A harde matter is commended unto me. But notwithstanding, I
will say what God shall give me to understand, to make an end of your
contention, seauing liberty to each of you to do what ye please.


Don Nunio. Me thinks Signor Bernardo, is ready for the purpose: begin on
Gods name.


Here follows the answer of Signor Bernardo.
Bernardo. AT the beginning of our talk, I thought Signor Jasper that you
jested. But when I heard you touch in Doctrine and Histories: then I knew that
your argument was in earnest. And therefore will I answer accordingly: that
which I understand of the things which you have spoken, is in conclusion, that
you think there should be no Phisions in the world: at the least, such as
were known to be, and live of that vocation.

But rather you would have us all to be Physicians, and to cure one an other:
also you would not have medicine by Art confounded, in Science nor Philosophy:
But only to follow experience and conference, and the voice of the people,
as though we should live in the Mountains where no policy nor discretion
should be used.

These two principal points I mean to overthrow, as a beginning to the
process, and then to answer some of the other mallices which you have spoken.
In the first point touching Physicians, it is a clear case that you have no
reason, for the name of a Physician is holy and amiable, and ought not to be
odious unto you: seeing Christ our redeemer did not despise both to be called
and holden for a Physician, when he was speaking of himself: saith he then,
for the whole folk needs not the Physician. And again, when he cured the
eyes with clay and spyttle: and when he appointed for medicine of the
Samaritan^ Oil Wine, yea, he let not to cure and heal infinite
infirmities: and the like commanded his Disciples, for S. Paule Doctor of the
people, took both person and office of a Physician, when he wrote to
Timothens, willing him to drink Wine to comfort his stomach. Saint Luke the
Euangelist did name himself a Physician, and let not to give this Office
unto the Apostles. The Angel Raphaell would also use this Office, when he gave
a receyt unto Tobias, wherewith he should cure and recover the sight of his
eyes. So that in this point you have no way to contend, because the name of a
Physician is profitable in the world. And if there have been some Physicians
both false and covetous, and also have used of such things whereof you have
enlarged, and I thereof ignorant, you ought not judge nor believe them. But
notwithstanding, the wise and good ought not to be cast of, it is a meet thing
that there should be particular and appointed persons of so high an Office and
mystery, and not rather, as you would to have all men Physicians, and so to
walk in confusion and inconstancy, with ignorance of the people. Truly this
way is not only unprofitable, but also a thing impossible.

The example also of the Romaines, wherewith you help your self, who were.
600. years without Physicians: I say with you, that it is true. But yet
through simplicity and want of knowledge, as they were at that time ignorant
of learning, and other Arts, so were they wanting of Medicine. But after they
understood what Doctrine Science was: and had received the same of the
Greekes, they then embraced also medicine, as one of the most necessary
things. And likewise the Masters, who had sight therein: and even so did the
other Nations of whom you spake of. And where in the second point, you will
not that we follow or observe precepts, nor yet to have Art nor foundation of
Science, nor you will us not to follow reason cause, but only experience which
you allow: and therefore you judge evil of the form and order which is
observed in medicines and their compound, whereof I do not little marvel.

First, you know how naked experience is in Science holden for doubtful, and
consideration judgment doth change in years, with complexion, with time,
place, and many other things. And therefore it is necessary for him that will
cure, to know these differences, the secrete cause and discovery of the
infirmity: for it is a thing unpossible the knowledge of curing unto him that
knows not whereof, and where the disease did spring. It is therefore
needful that he understand the composture and complexcions of humayne
bodies, their humours, which of them bears rule, and what disease thereof may
grow. For, without doubt, the cure must otherwise be handled, if you prevent
the infirmities of all four humours, as many Wise men affirm. And
contrariwise, if the cause be in only moisture, as Eropilus holds opinion:
according to the writing of Cornelius Celsor and others, or in the spirits, as
Hipocrates thought.

Yea, and also otherwise, if it be as Erasistratus judged, yt the blood turning
backwardes, to the arteries or veins of the spirits cause inflammation, and the
inflamatio causes the moving which we see in the Fever. So that he shall
know how to cure, which reaches to the original true cause. And therefore you
may consider, whether Art and study of Philosophy, be requisite or no: so that
of necessity, the causes of infirmities ought to be known. And also to
understand the quality and property of metals, stones, trees, fruits, herbs,
roots, and also of beasts, and all other things which may serve to ye use of
medicine, to avoid error in their application. I do not deny, but rather
affirm yt experience is profitable. But I presume and am bold to justify,
that there can be no experience without some reason or cause: nor yet I think
yt our Ancestors did use their simples at all adventures, without
consideration. But rather I judge that by speculations and foresight in things
convenient, they made their experience, the which first they conjectured to be
good. Therefore honour in this case ought not to be given to experience, but
rather to wisdom and counsel, which was the chiefest part. Nowbeit, daily are
discovered diverse kinds of infirmities, unto whom experience and use ca not
serve, because there can be no experience of a thing not known. So that of
necessity it is needful to know by Art and doctrine the obscure causes of
the vice and corruption, which the humours and members may suffer in a man,
besides these that are plain and open, as cold, heate, hunger, replexion, and
other like.

He also that will be a Physician, should understand what thing is actions, or
natural operations, and what are those by the which we give and take the
spirit of breath, we eat and drink, the place of digestion: and how the
substance of our food is divided to give strength to our bodies in all places.
Also it is needful to be understood, why our Pulses have continual moving,
and what is the reason and cause of sleep watching: without knowledge whereof,
it seems that he should not know how to preserve and cure infirmities.
Besides this, men suffer great pains and passions in the inward parts and
members of the body, which is a thing needful to be known, to have seen
Anothomyes of some dead bodies, to have marked considered the cullor, the
figure, the bigness, the order, and the hardness softness of them all. Also
the variety and division of the same members, among themselves, which do join
together, or how they give place receive: As we read that Erophilus and
Erafistratus did, requiring for the same purpose, men that were condemned to
death, to prove experience. For it is a plain case, that when any grief or
interior hurt happens, and not known, how or where it is, nor yet to apply
outward medicine, for the vncertayntie of the inward grief, nor the nature
reason thereof. And finally, for avoiding of (...), I say that there are many
necessary things appertaining to a good Physician, yea, and to declare them
only* it is requisite that such a one be a learned Philosopher. How much more to
know how to put them in ur, insomuch, that Hipocrates saith, that a good
Physician ought to know the disease past, to understand the cure present: and
also to pro^osticate the thing to come. So that Signor lasper, if you have
harkened well unto me, you will not let to confess that it is a thing
necessary for Physicians, to have both rules and precepts, and that they be
grounded on Sciences Arts. And as this is a thing, that can not be common: it
is therefore necessary to have particular men Physicians, who ought to be
honoured and esteemed as always they have been. And it is not sufficient that
you allege, that vices and disorders brought Physicians to Rome, for although
it had so been, it seemed a special gift of God, who having sent them
diseases, did also send them remedy: And again, contend and say what you list,
the Physicians doth not counsel any to distemper them selves: but when any
happens to be dystempered, then the strange is their own proper and true
names from their origin, which is not vulgarly understood. And where you
speak of their Letters receypt, it may be accounted a jest, a thing not
worthy of answer: because you know that such breuiations are used to avoid
perplexity, for every Science hath his terms, and breuiations in writing.

And again, where you touched their variety in judgment, the discharge is
evident, considering the wits iudgemets of men are diverse, so yt with a good
whole intencio, they may be contrary in their sentence, and with small peril in
medicine: considering that one disease may be cured by diverse ways. And by
this means Physicians may varry, and by sundry ways come to one end, which is
the cure health of the Patient. Now in this order, your evil suspicion opinio
is dashed and broken in pieces, by the sufficient reasons which I have declared.
And I think without any more contention, you ought to cease leave of your are
guing, and because I hope you will so do: I will not now proceed any further,
although I have matter enough.


Dun Nunio. By my faith Signor Master, although I understand little, yet me
thinks that Signor Bernardo hath showed himself a valiant Drator, so that I
am now on the Physicians side, I know not what Signor Jasper judges.


Master Velasques. What he thinks he will say: for as yet I ought not to
speak, because ye have made me Judge, his turn abides for him, he hath also
wit and years to answer for himself.


The second part of the Dialogue of Physicians, wherein the matter is concluded
and ended.
Jasper. I Am clean contrary to the opinion of Signor Bernardo, and will not
consent to any of his allegations: nay rather, I swear by my conscience, that
his own reason hath confirmed me more in my Physician remedies the same.

And where you murmure, of the invention of Syrruppes and distilled waters, and
of the compounds of medicines, you are the more to be blamed. For rather the
wit and advice of the inuentor is to be praised, and to receive the same as a
good gift, mercy of God, who daily gives us new remedies and medicines.

And if in old time they wanted knowledge to make Syrrups, and distyll wholesome
waters, both sweet pleasant, as now are used: I say therein, the advantage is
ours, and are therefore more bound to be thankful to Physicians, for so
profitable and sweet a thing: and because it is a new invention, it is not
therefore to be despised. For likewise in old time they knew not was Amber
Musk, nor Siuitte, which are most sweet and excellent Odors: And also the
Mytridate and compound Treacle, which you reprehend. The reason is, because you
understand not, neither the composition, nor the virtue of the things whereof it
is made, nor yet the effects thereof.

And where you say that Phisitios ought to be punished as mankyllers, you are
therefore worthy of great reprehension, to presume that they of malice would
kill any, no yet through ignorance they cannot do it. But for their straight
examinatio I do not mistike: but rather hold it for a thing convenient,
notwithstanding, the Physician using well his office in the observing of Rule
Art, and the Patient should happen to die: he ought not to be punished for his
death. And of the same opinion was Plato, appearing in the ninth Dialogue of
his Laws.

And also where Physicians procure to be paid for their pains, they ought not
therefore to be reprehended, since that by the Law of God and man, the laborer
ought to have his hire. God also comaudeth, that the Ox that freadeth out the
Corn, be not mustod. Moreover, I may say, that of too much sharpnes of wit,
nay rather of malice, where you presume that of industry they darcken their
Art, with strange names of things: for why, if you understood them: you would
say that those names which seemed unto you strange opinion. And before I had
heard him speak: I was not so great an enemy of Physicians, as now I am. But
whether I have reason or no, by mine answer ye shall hear.

First, I say you have well understood my desire, wherein I would have no
office of Physicians, in a common weal, at the least, such as should cure for
money. But that we should one counsel cure an other. And also we shall know
use such remedies, which are already known proved by ancient men of
experience, and to stick unto the same. If this thing might so be, although
there were some inconveniences: yet truly, they should be much less the those
which proceed from the good and evil Physicians. By means of their purges
repurges, bleedings and rebleedings: yea, and you should have as small a
diffyculty therein, if determynatly we should begin to dyspute, as to speak one
language, and to have one custom which are ancient in our Country, yea, and
the great use of old time, should be as easy to cure the diseased, as in these
our days.

So that here is proof and argument to see, that for the one part of
medicine, which according to their own opinion is the principal, which they
call ^suall: that is to say, to know of what the Patient ought to feed, howe,
what it should be, more or less, the experience, use and counsel which they
have among them selves, and now so common to men: whereby without either counsel
or receypt of the Physician, men know what to eat, how in what quantity. And
such rule wisemen dare use and observe. I speak not of such, who will
voluntarily be disordered. Why alas, if in this, which is the chiefest point, we
can live without tutors? why should we not then bring to pass, ye use of
curing should be as well known among us? for why, the difficulty or peryl
should be no greater, as I will show, after that I have made answer to your
argument.

And therefore will I change the form of answering, because we are contrary in
opinion. You mean to defend the Physicians; of time present, saying: that
Christ our redeemer, did compare himself to Physicians, and that truly is as
much, as to defend the cruelty of the Lyons, because they are also called
Lyons. Besides this, your argument is very weak, because your comparison of
Christ to a Physician doth not so well fit your purpose. So that I say, you
may make them more particular: yet you shall see ye Christ doth rather
approve my opinio then yours, for he did not appoint among his Disciples, one
nor two to heal and cure: but generally, commanded them all unto whom he gave
especial grace, to cure and make whole, as you your self affirm: so that
this allegation makes for me. And where you speak of the Angel Raphaell, and
S. Paule: truly those holy Persons, sent not the sick folk to the Physicians
of the City to be cured: but rather they themselves took ye cure in hand,
being none of that vocatio: and how I pray you? iwis not with Purgations, nor
blood letting, nor with your Diacatulicions, nor Skamonea: but the one with a
little Wine, whereof he had experience, the other with the virtue of a Fish,
which God gave him for that purpose. And therefore, Master mine, since that
this Office is common to Angles and to men: it is not just that two or three
should ingrate the same, like tyrants in the Town: because forsooth they are
learned men as you say, as I would to God they were: But if they be, in good
time be it, for I say not that learning hurts any. But I say that for the use
of curing, it is not needful, for I hold not such things necessary, but
only for the knowledge of clear and evident things. For why, it is not
greatly material to know the first and secrete origin of a disease, but
rather to know what doth help: But the inquisition and intelligence of
secrete and hidden causes, and the knowledge of their natural operations, and
ye rest which you say is necessary to be known, I hold for a vain thing, and
also impossible.

For besides, that the secrets of nature are incomprehensible, it is plain
that this is so, for why, those that presume to know this matter, are
Physicians and Philosophers, who are diverse and contrary in their opinions, and
can give no certain rule nor resolution.

For how would you that the Physician should know the radical cause, and first
origin of all infirmities, their opinions being so variable, as you your self
have declared.

And why should I more believe Hipocrates (who affirms the substance of the
matter to be in the spirits:) then Erasistratus, who attrybuteth it to the
turning backward of the blood to the arteries? And why should I credit more
these, then others, who assigned other prynciples? And howe will you know how
disguestion is made in the stomach. Truly, I for my part, dare no more credit
the one, then the other. Seeing there are so many opinions, upon the case, for
some say yt the food boils with heate, others say that it rots by way of
attrycion grynding, others denies them both, each gives such reasos, as
seem true: so yt following the opinion of any of them, the cure shall be
particular clean contrary the one to the other. So that seeing the causes
origin so diffycult, ye certeynty seems unpossible, I see no cause for a man
to weary himself therein. But only to content and serve our selves with the
remedy that experience hath taught us. And considering that it imports not to
know what caused the infirmity, but only the way to cure the same: Nor yet I
will not trouble my self to know how disgestio is made, but chiefly to know
what meat is soonest digested, what is good to help the same. Without vering
my self to know the cause why: nor yet I pass not to know what is the cause
of shortness of breath, but rather ye way to remedy it without payne: I will
neither know, who moves, nor how the artyres move: but only understand what
signifies the disordered moving. And also it makes not for your purpose,
that you allege for new diseases that may happen, for when any such thing do
happen, he that cures, ought not to imagine what ye origin was, seeing that of
common things he is ignorant, as before I have declared. For it is sufficient to
consider how the like infirmity hath been cured, without medicine, and so by
experience, we may hit on the certeynty. As for example, the disease of the
Pox, how ignorant were Physicians in the cure, as long as they went by Sciece
Art? But after experience had taught us ye use of the wood, called Lignum
Vite, or Lignu Sanctum: How notoriously were the diseases cured? without the
knowledge of the origin of the disease, nor yet the cause why the said medicine
doth help?

It seems also unto you a necessary thing, the Anathomy of dead bodies: and
in my judgment, it is a thing of small effect, yea, I rather hold it for a
kind of cruelty. For true it is, in such an Anathomy, there remains neither
the proper cullor, softness or hardness, or any other lively thing, which you say
was in the members of the dead and wounded bodies, which are abiding in the
live sound bodies: for if there be in a whole and lively man, cold, fear,
weariness, or any other mean affect, or alteration, which make exterior,
notorious chauges in the cullor and posture of the face: it is much more like
the interior members, which are more delicate to change and alter with a
strange air.

And truly I hold it for a mere madness to believe that the Armony and concert
which is in ye live body of a man, is to be found in one that lies a dying, or
is already dead. Now if the Anathomy were of any effect, or could give any
light for the health of man, there daily chances men to be slain in the
wars, and by other mischances: where without cruelty, but rather to cure
their wounds, they might make experience without the spoiling and breaking up
of man flesh, by him that hath professed rather to heal it.

And where you say that such men experimented, are Fallares, because they
change with age and time: I say that experience found out those chauges and
not Art, so that to experience all is due, and by the same, all is obtained.
Moreover, the answers which you make to my reasons are so weak, that they
need no reply at all. And where you say that Physicians are not the cause of
vices and diseases, because they counsel none to distemper them selves, but
rather cure their hurt, received by distemperance. But I say, because some men
have such confidence in them, they encorrage them selves to be gluttons, and
dysordered persons, yea, and some times they give them such counsel.

But since that Signor Master, is here present, mark what Saint Ambrose
saith, upon the. Cviij. Psalme, which is. The precepts of Medicine are
contrary to the divine counselles, because they forbid fasting, and permit no
Uigilles, yea, they will compel men in such sort, that he who gives himself
there unto, shall utterly deny himself.

And where again, you would defend Physicians from punishment, by the Laws of
Plato I answer: that it is first needful that you bring the approbation of
those Laws from the Emperor, for without that, your Laws are of small
effect: but although they were, Plato doth not salve, but only he that
cures well, by whom if any mischance happen, he is faultless. But I spake
unto you only of such as know not what they do, which is the cause that they
err in that which they take in hand, and where there is on the earth no
punishment for such: I beseech God to chasten them, for it is a hard case that
only Physicians are never ignorant of any thing. But if you go to an Advocate
or Counsellor in the Law, with any hard question, he will answer, that be will
study the cause. If you go to a Divine, he will oftentimes make their
answer, and so will men of other faculties. But the Physician will
incontinent make answer to a thousand diseased solke, if they demand any
thing. Yea, they judge it a lesser fault to err, then to confess that they
know not. Likewise their errors and evil success, they will not let to lay on
some body, either the disorder of the Patient, or the malice of the humour, and
whether I say true or no, I put you for witness.

And where you say, that I understand not ye properties virtues of medicines,
copounds: I answer that you say true, and I affirm the same, say, that
neither the Physicians, nor yet their Auicena, understood them: nor yet is it
possible to understand the Armony and temper of. 300. things together, and
therefore they are abominable. And for my part I will yield no thanks for
the invention of them, as you command.

Neither yet hold I for profitable, the Musk, Siuit, and Amber, although they
are of delectable sweetness in Odor, for we might well be without them: for they
profit not so much the health of the body, but in as many times they are
hurtful to the soul: And since you are so wholly judging, that those names
dark receypts are not made by industry malice, I pray you be a mean
hereafter, to keep me from occasio of sin: to induce them to Physicians, to
make their receyptes with a fair plain letter in our language, then I will
judge as you do. So that now Signor Bernardo, seeing that your arguments and
answers unto mine, are of no efficacy or strength, you ought to put them
clean from your opinion, and that you disturb not medicine to be commonly
known, and let us not permytte to be subject to two or three: Whereof Plinie
complains because we will not know what is good for us, and so we go upon
other men's seete, we eat with other men's appetite, whereupon our life and health
is an arbitrament. Be not so curious in this matter, as to spend in learning,
to study in the Uniuersitie all your life time, by mean of which pains, you
may get more disease, then by your study you might learn to cure. So to
conclude, it is sufficient what I have said, to approve, that Experience,
diet, good regiment, suffices principally for our health. Therefore, let us
not seek rational experience: but embrace the experimental. And think not
that medicine was found before reason, for the good Husbandman and the
Mariner, by use and practise, came to be Masters, and not by study and
learning to know the qualities of the heavens, nor the course of Planets and
Stars, nor yet the books of heaven, and world of Aristotle: for why, we
daily fall among natural infirmities, with our children, servant,
neighbours, therefore we ought not to be careless, for the use and disease do
make us Artistes, we have now no need of foundations: for the ancient and
common opinion, which experience we hold for Masters, without buying the same
for money: howe much more men ought not to be inferior to the Fowls of the
air, and Beasts of the Wilderness, among whom there are many that have
knowledge in medicine, necessary for their use: As the Heart knows howe to
draw out the arrow wherewith he is wounded, with an herb called Ditamo. The
Swallow gives sight to her young ones, with the herb Chilidonia: the wild
Boor cures with Organy. And many others likewise, of whom Plinie, and other
wryters make relation.

Then it should not seem much for man to do the like: and think not, yt it
should be a thing unmeet to live in such uniformity, although you think we
should err for want of Physicians: Howbeit, the greatest error is, in having
too many of them, and their medicines. Nature hath a care to heal the sick,
with very little help: for the Physicians them selves, say, that Nature is he
that works and cures, and that they be but mynisters.

In this sort lived the Romaines, the time yt I have declared, and all the
world accordingly, before Physicians were known, and the like at this day
among the people which dwell in the Moutaines and barren Countries, who live
longer and more in health, then the Citizens, where medicine Physicians
aboudeth.

Those men I say, would never suffer Physicians to come among them: but only
cure them selves with good regyment, herbs experience, among whom I could
name some notable persons. But one will be sufficient for all the rest, who is
the light, and honour of Spain, for his incomparable doctrine and learning, he
is called the Comendator, Hernam Nunes, master of Rethorike, other Arts, in
the famous University of Salamanca, who as yet would never put his health in
the hands of any Physician, and hath conserved ye same above, 70. years
without their help.

You know also that in yt time of great Pompeius was the top of the Mountain
is for power: and dellycate Romaine wits, as Plinie writes, and other
Authors. Howe Aesclepiades the famous Physician, condemned the Rules preceps
of all others, and cured only with diet rule, in eating, drinking, and rubbing
the joints and members, so that with these things of great experience, he
condemned utterly Purgations, Uomyts and such like: the fruit of his curing
did so much profit, that he only was praised and admytted, and infinite
people came unto him.

The same Plinie saith in his. 35. Chapter, that he happened to cure one that
was thought to be dead, and carried to burying, or to be burned, as the the use
was: so that Aesclepiades said, that his medicine was certain, which he
affirmed of himself, because his regiment kept them from sickness, or else he
required not to be taken for a Physician: and truly, be emplyed the thing which
he affyrmed, for he himself was never known to be at any time sick until
his death, although he lived very long, and with the fall from a Ladder, he
ended his life.

So that it appears manifestly by mine allegations and proofs, that my
opinion is not new, or singular, but common and of great antiquity, both
certain and true: and for such you ought to embrace it, and so I heartily pray
you. Wherewith all I conclude, although I leave much behind to avoid
prolixity.


Don Nunio. Truly Signor Jasper, you have said well, and I for my part am so
tender of condition, that every one having ended his tale, carries me with
him. But yet now I will stay a while to hear the determination of the Signor
Master.


Bernardo. If you will give me leave, I promise that my answer shall not
want. But since the Signor Master hath to give sentence in Justice so
manifest, being so just and wise a Judge: there needs no farther
information.


The Judgment and determination of the Master.
Master Velasques. TRuly Signor Dun Nunio, I would gladly be free from my
bond, because I see each of these Gentlemen so earnest in their opinions, yea,
and the cause so well treated and defended, that I take the Plea for doubtful:
But since the matter consists not in any Article of the faith: I may speak
what I think, and they shall have what they paid.


Don Nunio. Yet sir I pray you proceed, although they are so bent to their
opinions, they refer the determination to your learned judgment, so that
they cannot choose but humble themselves thereunto, whereas reason demands the
same.


Bernardo. That which Signor Don Nunio saith, is true, and therein we will both
receive courtesy, at the least I for my part exceeding great.


Jasper. And I much greater, for I believe assuredly, his worship will
approve my opinion.


Master Velasques. Because I hold it for a good exercise, I will fulfil your
requests, and give my vow in the matter, for I have no jurisdiction to
pronounce sentence, nor yet your maistershippes bound to pass or accept the
same. But if I speak any thing to purpose, each may accept what he please, for
I mean not to argue or dispute, but briefly in few words, I will speak what
I think. Your contention principally consists in two points, and all the
rest is accessory thereunto.

The first is, that the one saith, that for to cure human infirmities,
neither Art nor Science, is needful, but only suffices use and experience.

The other saith, that Art Rules are most needful, and he that should cure,
ought to be a Master, learned, both in Art Science, and to have great
foundation in learning, as largely the matter hath been communicated.

The second point which seems to come from the first, is, that Signor Jasper,
who holds the part of only experience, would yt there should be no known
Physician: but that generally all me ought to cure. And Signor Bernardo,
defedeth the cause saith, that it is convenient to have them.

The troth is, that the first principal question is not new, nor yet you the
first that have moved and disputed the same: but rather it is very ancient in
medicine and among Physicians. And we say that always have been the like
discord, for some do follow only experience, and therefore they were called
Experts. And other desirous to know the reason and causes, and therefore they
were named Rationalles. Cornelius Celso, and other Authors do write thereof at
large, and both the one the other, hath had great favourers, so yt of these two
first extremes ^f of force the one must be accepted, and the other to have
remedy.

The last peril and most reasonable, is to follow the first, as Aristotle
saith, that those of experience are most fit, and able to cure, then the
learned without experience. And speaking perticulerly, Plato of Physicians, in
his books of common weal, affirms that a good Physician needs to
communicate both with sick and whole men, yea, and that he himself have been
also sick, finally, the ought to be experimented: and also there is no doubt,
but that medicine and Art thereof had his origin of experience, and no
otherwise. So that in this case Signor Bernardo hath no reason to deny the same,
for certainly the experieces being known, men as amazed began thereby to
enter into Philosophy, and thereby to seek out both reasons and causes, and
so is this true in other acts, as well as in medicine, whereof is author
Aristotle in his books of high Philosophy, and also Marcus Manillius, and
Virgill, do testify the same, saying: by vatiable cases experience made Art.
And because I do not remember which of these Gentlemen alleged Saint Ambrose.

I do remember now that favouring and holding part with Medicine, he doth
say and affirm in the same, I will therefore declare his words, because his
aucthority is great, which are these. Where saith he, had Medicine origin, but
only of infirmity. And where in the first age, men would teach their
successors, and Decendentes, what things had done them good, and wherewith
they cured their diseases, whereby use made Art, and infirmity made
maisterie, and that is the first and sufficient medicine, which experience
made, and not the conjecture, and therefore they were called Expert, so that
out of this sort sprung the other, and from thence took his use force, so that
word for word, S. Ambrose affyrmes the same.

But to avoid weariness, I allege not other reasons and aucthorities, for
therein is no doubt at all: but that experience was origin to medicine, totally
necessary. But yet notwithstanding, those that were named expert, remain not
victors, who will not allow any other thing but only experience, nor yet are
overcome. The Rationalles, which follows Art, because betwixt these two
opinions there is a third, a mean which ought to be observed, and that is.
That although experience was, and is the origin, and without the same we can
not well crave this faculty: yet notwithstanding, after the expected precepts,
Art was profitable, and not only profitable, but also necessary, as well for
the inconstancy and changes which are in experience, as by reasons. Here
hath been touched, as well to choose and know the best, which without learning
were impossible to do. For it is a plain case, that without learning and
doctrine you can not make an intiere judgment and election.

And if this thing should not be reduced to Rules and Art: all should be
confusion, and forgetfulness, and discord would confound all: so that if only
experience should be admytted. Yet Art and Rules thereof, should be needful
to know and learn, howe and at what times, in what places, at what ages, in
what dispositions, to what infirmities, and to what occations the^ ^ofit to
some, and what unto others, and hereof perforce we can not be without Rules
and means, and this is the Art which may not be wanting: for although
experience hath been the origin, and knows howe to find, but not to keep.

But Art doth keep and conserve: also you have no leisure, every day to
make experience, nor all men can not make every proof, nor yet to carry in
mind the things that hath been done without Rule and artifice thereof. And for
proof of a thing so notorious, it shall not need many reasons, nor
aucthorities, for the experience we have before our eyes, that there is no
work nor occupation so base, which is not guided by Art and reason.

The Husbandman, and the Mariner of whom Signor Jasper spake, saying, use
makes maisterie. Although the same were so, yet they can not want their
Regimentes, grounded upon experience, whereby they were guided, and learned
their Art, to be a light to teach others the things, whereof experience never
wanted unto them.

The like doth the Mason, the Carpenter and other Artificers, who jointly with
use and experience, have their foundatio and Rules. And sithence medecin hath a
more precious and higher suiect: it is no reason that it should by them be
diminished, how much more many of the other causes, and knowledge of other
things, which already hath been argued, and although same will say that to know
such things: should not notoriously be necessary. Yet at the least they cannot
deny, but that it is profitable, also although the same should not make a
Physician more perfect: yet he should be made more discreet and advised, all
which things can not be brought to pass without the learning of Art and
Rules, if these things are difficult many, they are not therefore to be refused
nor yet the knowledge of them, as Signor Jasper affirms: we know well that
Art is long, but yet continual labour and goodwill overcomes And also if all
may not be known yet pass with the possible, and most necessary: and though
there be variety in oppinions, yet also their are determinations, and
resolucions, there are also Physicians and Counsel for all, whereof the good
Physician, ought to be replenished, more then an other, of this opinion are the
most of the wise and learned Authors. But cheefely Plato in his book of
Rhetoric, saith, for this cause is Art the medecin, for why: it is a faculty
that doth consider know the nature of him that cures, and the cause of the
thing that works, and can of those things give a sufficient reason. And that
which is alleged is not to be understood only necessary to cure the
infirmytie, but also, a way to sustain the health: for although Signor Jasper
say that we know how to eat and drink without counsel of the Physician, or
other Art by only experience: true it is, but he that so doth using
temperance: doth follow counsels and Rules, and also advises given by
Physicians and wise men, and not so doing commonly is caused infyrmitye.

And even so the most Sapient Cicero in his second book of Offices, affirms
that for to govern and sustain health, is needful for a man to know his
own complexion, and to abstain from such things that offend him, and to
use of other things which agree, and are profitable for him, and to follow
the counsel and Art of them who know the same, meaning the Physicians. So
that to conclude, for with men so grave and wise, I need not to enlarge.

The resolution and my vow is touching the first point, which was if only
experience were sufficient, or else if Art and learning were needful of
which two wants in a Physician: The want of learning is more to be suffered
than the want of experience, but also that the perfect Physician ought to be
expert and learned, so that the Medecin must appear on both sides, that is
as well in the experimented as rationales, and ought to have Art, precepts, and
foundation jointly with experience.

Now let us preceede to the second point, which is whether it be needful to
have particular Physicians, appointed ordained or no. I say that of my former
words doth follow the true conclusion: that it is necessary to have Physicians
and known masters, and that generally all men may not be of that vocation for
although that only experience were necessary: it were not possible that all men
should be experymented. How much more we have approved, and hold for certain
that Art, Rules, and variable doctrines are needful, the which cannot be
come. And sithence of all other Arts, and mecanycall Artifices, there are
workmen, and known Masters: Medecin ought not to be of less condition and to
have learned me therein, both to study and dispute if need require: then
coning to be experimented, may use and cure with holly medecin: And it is not
to hold for comparison, that Christ did command all the Apostles to cure and
heal infirmities, for that purpose was only to lay foundation of our holy
faith, and not principally for corporal health whereof we now treat: how
much more, both for the one, and for the other, he chose and appointed
several persons, and gave no power without distinction and election, the
office and names of ordained Physicians, Signor Jasper, are of more antiquity,
then as yet we have spoke, no nor yet your profaine writers make thereof no
proof, for before Aesculapius, or Ipocrates, above 500. years, were
Physicians in the world, we read Gen. chap. 50. that Ioseph commanded his
Phisitios in Egipt, to anoint the dead body of Iacob his father, and in Exo.
chap. 21. among the laws that God gave unto Moyses for his people is one, that
he who hurts his neighbour shall pay, what be loses in his work, for the
time spent, and also the cost and hyer of the Physician where manifestly
appears the wages and reward of the Physician is just and of great
antiquity, and in other places of holy Scripture, we find that Physicians
were ordained known, as appears in Peralipomenon 2. Chap. 16. where king
Assa was reprehended because he called not on God in his sickness, trusting
more in the Art of the Physicians, in which place it is plainly called Art
and not experience, which place makes for our purpose, and even so are there
many other more. The History and example of Asclepiades, which you aledge, who
was in ye time of great Pompeus, is true. And in that time began the sect, and
manner of curing. But it was a plain and a manifest deceit that he intended,
because he knew not how to cure by Science, as Plyny himself affirms: for he
was an Orator, and because he gained little by that office, he determined to
make himself a Physician, and there sprung that heresy in Medecin, as other
hath done in other Arts, but as a thing without foundation, it endured but a
while, how much more Esclepiades made not medicine common: but his meaning was
to invent a new Art, and to make himself Master thereof.

So that Gentlemen, let us understand that experience made the Art of
Medecin, and that it is necessary to have particular expert and learned
Physicians, and also I say another thing which as yet hath not been touched,
and is the most necessariest of all, which is that such men ought not only to
be learned, but virtuous faithful Christians, and fearful of God without the
which no good Art can be ministered, and for the abuses and defects which
Signor Jasper hath touched, I know well that some do pass in the world, and
I truly desire the remedy of them. But I say not what such Physicians are, but
I declare what they all ought to be. I also say and know some that synneth not
in their opinion in manifesting them of their dealing, as well in their malice
as in their medecynes, but the good Physician will cure Christianlye and
plainly, and apply according to wisdom the Medecines convenient, he also
knows what is needful, either in Medecin simple or compound, which is the
chiefest thing that Signor Jasper hath impugned, but not with reason, for
although the simples are excellent and do profit to mix one with another: I
say it is not hurtful, for some virtues and properties do help and temper
others and that which one force could not do: two or three do finish, for
seldom, one humour offends the patient, therefore it is to provide for a whole
compound infirmitye, and thereto to apply compound medecin, and even as we are
compoude of sundry complexions and elements, even so we stand in need of
compound medecines, as well as of simples as in all things we see plainly, in
hot Countries, we myxe strong wine with water, we compound things to make
them more profitable for us, we also join and mix our meates, to make them
more sauery and medicinal, to Vinegar we put oil, to Honey, Sugar, all things
do join, temper and resist, the which certainly is most necessary in
medicine, and is of great effect and profit. But if in these things and others
there be any indiscreet Physicians or evil woorkemen: we should not therefore
reprove ye good, nor yet the Art, which of itself is good, holy and
profitable: but rather to procure that every one be such as is convenient, and
to desire of God the same, unto whom this City of Civil in my judgment ought
to give most hearty thanks, for the plenty of good and learned Physicians,
which dwell in the same, of who truly I presume. But particulerly I have had
familiar conversation in my diseases with four or five of them, and assuredly
in them doth conteyne ye qualities of excellent men, both of experience,
learning and goodness, and I have the same opinion of many of the others, and
although Signor Jasper is not contented with only literature and precepts: let
him therefore love, and procure jointly with them experience, and also Signor
Jasper, condemn not the doctrine in Physicians, and trust not so little unto
them that you let to cure your self, when you are sick. But my meaning here is
not of such Phisitios as the Jester told ye Marquess Ferrara, of whom
Pontanus writes. But now here is no place to tel that tale, although it is not
evil to declare, for such as heretofore hath not harde thereof. But sithece it
is now late, I conclude for this day, the thing I was required to do: and the
rest shall remain for another day.


Don Nunio. Signor Master, I swear unto God, that I believe there is no more
to be said, sithence you have so singulerly well determined the cause, at the
least I for my part, am fully satisfied, and should finally profit in any
further disputation of these Gentlemen, to change me from your sentence,
howbeit I believe that now they are of your judgment, for always troth is of
great force being also helped by your authority and eloquence.


Bernardo. I for my part do hold myself satisfied, and do consent in the
determination of Signor Master, and I think Signor Jasper will do the like,
and so we may depart as we came.


Jasper. I cannot choose but keep silence to the thing that Signor Master hath
said, and the same ought to be most certain, sithence he hath so pronounced:
but yet in my judgment I think it not convenient to cure with Physicians, but
rather take diet and good Regiment to be sufficient, yea and I have heard them
their selves say, that to cure therewith is a most happy cure, so that still I
will follow experience and counsel and you not able to condemn me, and for
the other matters, let them pass in good time, as Signor Master hath
declared: and so we may depart, and God give unto your Worship entire health,
that you never need any Physician, but only that you may dye of age.


Don Nunio. Patience is good for aduersytie, but yet I will not that ye depart
until Signor Master hath told his tale, touching the Physicians of Ferrara.
And with his tale Disputation shall cease for this day, for it is not late,
and time there is for all.


Master Velasques. Because, Signor Jasper shall pacify his anger, I will
recite the tale, although he hath read the same as well as I: the History is.
That on a time, Nicholaus Marquess of Ferrara, sporting and jesting with his
Jester, he enquired of him of what Science or occupation were most number in
Ferrara? the Jester answered, saying sir, the most in number of any one trade
are Physicians, the Marquess hearing this answer, laughed him to scorn,
saying, thou idiot see you not that of yt faculty there is not in the City
above five or sire, and I am sure there is above 300. Shoemakers, and as many
of many other Occupacions? The Jester answered, sir, where your Lordship is
occupied in great matters you have no particular recknings, nor yet you know
what number of Massailes you have, but believe me sir I have told you troth, yt
of the Art of medecin is the greatest number in Ferrara, and I dare lay 200.
Ducats that you shall find it so.

The Marquess began to laugh again and to deny his opinion, and in conclusion
the wager was laid, although he judged it for simplicity and madness, and so he
soon forgot what he had laid. But the Jester who had great desire of the money
that was laid, having well considered the matter: The next day in the morning
he arose, being Sunday, and wrapped clouts about his head, Tow and Wool
bound to his cheeks, feigning that he was wonderfully vexed with the
tootheache, and in this order he sate him down at the door of the Cathedral
Church of the City, and had sitting by him a boy who was his son, that had
good skill in writing, this lad had his Pen, Inkehorne, and Paper, now the
Jester being a man so commonly known in the City, the people that entered
and came out of the Church asked of him the cause of his sickness, and he made
answer to every one that he had a marvelous pain in his teeth and Gummes,
desiring them for Gods sake to give him some remedy for the same, and where we
generally use to give counsel to those whom we see suffer any pain: as many as
passed by told him what to take, although some one thing, and some another. So
that his boy forth with wrote every mans name that had given any remedy, and
having abode there the time convenient, and his copy of names and medcines
full, and in the pickle that he sate at the Church door: he went to the
Marquess Palace, who had clean forgot his wager, as the Marquess espied
him, he as other had done, enquired the cause of his grief, and being
answered as the others were, he of gentleness told him of remedy wherewith he
should be whole. The Jester said sir kiss your Honours hands, and after a
while that he had abode there, he went his way home to his house, and caused
all his process to be writ fair, which amounted to near 500. persons, who
were all Physicians, and the Lord Marquis was placed for the first and
principallist in the copy, and every mans medecin joined with his name, the
next day he came to ye Lord Marquess Palace without his rags about his head,
as a whole man, saying, right Honourable sir, now I am whole, and I thank God
cured by the most honourablest Physician of all Italy, which is you, for with
your good counsel I obtained my health. Therefore I pray you command to pay
the wager: for assuredly for my disease I found all these Physicians in
Ferrara, that are here contained in this memorial, and if I would have fought
for more, iwis I had found more. The Marquess beholding the roll of names and
medecines, and seeing himself the first man, and many other principal persons
of the Cittye, he laughed, and confessed that he had lost his wager, and
commanded the same to be paid forth with, which truly was a merry jest. So
that if Signor Jasper be contented with such Physicians: I say he hath reason,
and shall find abundance.


Don Nunio. By my troth the tale is pretty, and to be laughed at with reason.
I will therefore stay you no longer, depart on Gods name.


Jasper. The Jester was pleasant, but I promise you on my faith, that if he
had the tootheache in deed, he mought have been cured with the counsels given
unto him. And I would rather trust the 500. Physicians contained in the
memorial, then the five or six, which the Lord Marquess spake of. And with
this conclusion Signor Bernardo let us depart, for although we have been
earnest in our Disputation, yet we will depart as good friends as we came
hither.


FINIS.
T. N.


