The practyse of Cyrurgyons of Mountpyller: and of other that never came there.



The causys why many a man doth dye: that be woundyd or hurt on the heed, or
else where by sword Conquission of staff Faule / Stone, or other like wounds
or bruses.
IN primus the Syrurgy on doth cut away the heer of the heed / And he cutteth
a cross the skin, the musculus flesh / with the Pannycles their Comyssuris
with the Pelicraniu. and he puts away all those parties from the Cranium.
(That is to say) the skulle of the heed with his instruments called after
some Cyrurgions a Spatter, Lever, Slyse, Chyssel or other like Instruments.
And then he puts and lays between those parties and the Skul Ronlettes,
stupes, or plagettes made of lynte, Cotton or other like stuped or dypped in
hot Oils / Mel Rosa{rum} or oyntmentes and players thereupon. And at the
next dressynge he will make more rome with his instrumetes. And thens the warden
or certain other parsons of the craft or faculty of Cyrurgery must be there
at that dressynge. To say that the Cyrurgyon works like a cunynge man if he
please to keep the syke party long under his hands / and to make him to
spend his money, and that he may crepulat him to prove masterys with his
instrumetes called after some Cirurgyon, Trapanes, Graters, Rapes, Files,
Chyssels, other like instruments, for to make the bone to scalifie and fall,
or to be taken away with their works / to blind the people, to make them to
believe that they have done a great cure where no cause nor need was so to
work. And so at the first or second or third dressing many men and women,
and specyally those that be full of gross humours they fall in to a febre
called Effymera, and so after that in to another febre called Febre putrida,
and so the pacyent doth dye. Then the Cirurgion doth say that the pacyet doth
dye of the wound or else ex visitacione diuina. And then he brings other
Syrurgions with him for his wytnesse to exscuse him of his noughty workemashyp.
And if any other Cyrurgion do fortune to dress the sick man or woman / he
shall lose a fine if he be one of their company. And if he be a strauger then
the Cirurgions will sue their statute on him of.v.li. for every month so
occupyeng of syrurgery to drive him out of the country, or to keep him in
prison till he dye. Forsooth the Cyrurgyons workemanshyp is the cause of the
death of the man or woman. Therefore it is necessary for every Cyrurgyon not to
cut the flesh of the heed a cross, nor none other membre of the body. Except
there happen any Arrow, Quarrel, Spereheade, Gonstone, or other like to enter
into craneu called the Scull, or in any other bone of the body. But no skin
nor flesh to be cut a cross but only the head and in all other places rome
must be made a length the members, not ouerthwarte for to take out the thing
that stycketh fast in the bone. But in all such causes take counsel of some
good expert Physician, or else study in Physyke your self by some good book and
noble auctours to know the febres, the causes, and the dangers of them, so
that the patient may escape from death to live lunge. For if there be any bone
or grystell hurt or bruised in any part of the body / surely there is
players and many other good and wholesome medycynes that will cause the bones
and grystels so hurt and bruised to scalifie and fall out by their self, or to
knyt again by nature within a short space with a little payne or none. And
without cause or danger of any febre or death. Therefore let every ma that will
take upon him to be a Cirurgion and to heal any man or woman wounded to follow
this rule and Regemie. And study well and seek for those good players
oyntementes, and other like medycynes / that may be to the health and
prosperity of the king our Soueraygne lords Subjects and liege people.

And you shall have much more money for your labours pains then you have had in
times past / better name and fame. And at your ending the glory of the
kingdom of God for your reward, to the which I pray God send us there to
remain. But many Cyrurgyons doth use to keep men and women lunge in their
hands that hath any vlcere, vlcus, pustyl, postume, or any other morbos
gendred of humours, falling into their leg or other members descended out of
the body into the skin musculous flesshes, veins, panyacles, or bones.

They do lay medycynes to them one while helyng, another while debating the
flesshes, so that it may not heal, saying that it is a proud or a dead
flesh. Then they lay corsyfe medycynes thereto / as vnguentum Ruptorum,
Mercuri sublime, Arsnike, sublimed, or such other malyng, and mortal
corrosyns, or else to caltrice the flesshes and bones with read hot caltrysyng
irons, which is a mortal payne to the patient to corrode, borne and mortyfye
the flesh bones. And then the bone must scalifie and a piece fall away after
the core or after of the flesh is taken away. And thus they do to make the
pacyent to spend their money.

Many men hath ben thus used that Cyrurgions many have a living. And they make
the people to believe that they have done a great cure that they may be called
great conynge men. Or else they do it upon ignorauce that they know not the
cause of this humours aforesaid nor the right cure of them. Therefore, I would
that every Cyrurgyon would leye a part all those works / and seek for some
noble medycyns / that will put away the causes of the humours that comes out
of the body. And those Empostumes or nodes that be engendered upon the
pany^les, over the bones and under the flesshes make your Insicio at length the
members into it, and then thrust out the Sania or corrupcion. For the flesh
and bone will heal alone by nature / then you shall be the workman of god to
whom let us all pray evermore for his mercy. Amen.

Finis pro tempore.
Imprinted by me Rycharde Banks. Cum priuilegio Regali. Ad imprimendum solum.




