A right excellent treatise of Astronomy, made in the Thuscane or Italian
tongue, by master Antonius De Montulmo, called in latin Facies coeli, the face
of the Heues wherein a man may see tofore hand the mutations of the air that
shall happen for this present year of our lord 1554, 1555, next following,
declaring also what diseases, wars, pestilence, dearth of victuals shall
happen to them that dwell in the eight climate under the elevation of the pole
Artike 52. degrees as the inhabitants of the most part of England do dwell.
Translated into English by Frederike van Brunswike.

Imprinted at London, by Thomas Marsh, dwelling in Fletestrete, at the sign
of the princes arms.

FOr as much, as God which is the beginning of all Creatures, (good gentle
reader) hath made man to his own similitude and likeness, whereby he is almost
comparable to the holy Angels of God, who is it then that will deny that man
may by the disposition of the stars prognosticate things to come, as
Berosus Chaldeus writes, that holy No did unto the Armenians Scithians after
the universal deluge or floude, wherefore they called him the partaker of the
mind of God. Moreover, S. Hierome writes, that what so ever can be comprehended
with humane understanding is ruled by the wheles of the sun. Wherefore in
as much as both the divine the prince of Philosophers Aristotle in his book de
generatione corruption confesses that propter accessum recessum solis in
curculo obliquo fiut generationes corruptiones i mudo sublunari: It follows
that knowing the disposition of the celestial bodies, by the which all
elementate bodies be ruled, that we men may by the science of Astronomy
(which science Petrus Caneracensis calls worthily natural theology
(prognosticatyng as is aforsayd things to come, as mutations of the air,
pestilences, and al other infirmities, war penury, peace, or plenty of
virtuals, which depend of the heavens as second causes of God, to such
effects, appointed wherefore (good gentill reader) the premises being well
pensed, I desire the not to take all things that shall be prognosticated in
this years prognostication and the next years prognostication as contigentes
of fatal necessity, but that it shall chance, if god do not forbid, thus I
bid thee well to fare.

The first Chapiter.
Considering first the enteryng of the Sun into the first minute of the head
of Aries, in ye ninth sphere which is the first beginning of our year
Astronomical, I find the twenty and four of Libra ascendent, theightene of
Scorpio, the beginning of the second house, the twenty and one of Sagitari
the beginning of the third house, the second of Aquarius the beginning of the
fowerth house, the eight of Pisces the beginning of the.v. house, the third of
Aries, the beginning of the sixth house, the twenty and four of Aries the
beginning of the seventh house, the eightene of Taurus, the beginning of the
eight house, the twenty and one of Gemini, the beginning of the ninth house,
the second of Leo the beginning of the tenth house, the eight of Virgo, the
beginning of the eleueth house, the third of Libra the beginning of the
twelueth house, Sull in the first of Aries, Luna in the eightene degree of
Gemini, Saturnus in the twenty and two degre of Pisces, Iupiter.xxix. of Virgo
retrograde. Mars the.xxvi. of Pisces, Venus in the xiii. of Pisces, Mercurius
in the eight of Pisces, I take upon this figure, Mercurius to be the lord of
the first quarter of the year, until the Sun entre unto the first of Cancer,
which shall be the.xii. of June this year, and I make Venus partaker with him.
Wherefore as for the disposition of the air, it shall be rainy and stormy,
specially the most part of all Marthe next, and great winds, and in April
next hail, specially about the ninth of April many days before and many
days after the day aforesaid. And in May rainy and windy, spcially the
first week before Whitsondaie. Thus I have generally touched the disposition of
the first quarter of this year.

The second Chapiter, of the disposition of the next quarter Astronomical,
beginning the.xiii. of June twenty and two minute after.vii. of the clock in
the Morning.
THE figure of the whole heaven, shall be thus, the degre ascendent, the fiueth
of Leo, the twenty and four of Leo, the seconde-house, the fowerteneth of
Virgo, the beginning of the third house, the thirtene of Libra, the beginning
of the fowerth house, the twenty and six of Scorpio, the beginning of the
fiueth house, the ninth of Capricorne, the beginnyg of the sixte house, the
fiueth of Aquarie, the beginning of the seventh house, the twenty and four of
Aquarie, the beginning of theight house, the fowertenth of Pisces, the
beginning of the ninth house, the thirtene of Aries, the beginning of the.x.
house, the.xxvi. of Taurus, the beginning of the eleventh house, the.ix. of
Cancer, the beginning of the twelueth house, Sol in the first minute of
Cancer, Luna in theightene of Scorpio, Saturnus in the first minute of Aries,
Iupiter in the.xxv. of Virgo, Mars the fowerth of Gemini, Venus theight of
Cancer, Mercurius in the fiftene of Gemini. And the lady of the hour shall be
Venus. Upon this figure I perceive that Sol is the chiefest dominatour of the
second quarter before mentioned, who commits his disposition by a quarter
aspert of Saturne, being lord of the eight house, the house of death, by the
which it is signified, that there that be this year great death, and
specially this quarter, which shall be very hot and dry.

The.iii. Chapiter of the third quarter of the year aforesaid, that is to say,
thentrie of the Sun into the first minute of Libra, the thirtene of
September, eight hours, fiuetene minutes, forty secondes after Noone.
THE site or figure shall be this of the heavens at the time and hour
aforesaid, the sixth of Gemini the ascendente, the third of Cancer, the
beginning of the second house, the third, the eightene of Cancer, the third of
Leo, the fowerth house, the twenty and five, of Leo the fifth house, the sixte
house the eleventh of Libra the sixte of Sagitari the seventh house, the third
of Capricorne theight house, the.xviii. of Capricorne the ninth house,
the.iii. of Aquarius the tenth house, the.xxv. of Aquarius the.xi. house
the.xi. of Aries the.xii. house, the sun in the first minute of Libra, the
moon in the.i. degree of Taurus, Saturnus in the 27. of Pisces retrogade, in
the xi. of Libra,, in the.v. of Leo, Venus in the ii. of Scorpio, in the.xix.
of Libra retrograde, upon this figure I see Venus to be lady of this quarter
and I find Sol to be Lord of the hour, and that Luna from Taurus with an
apposite aspect commits her disposition to Venus, and Venus over Mars by
aquarte aspect by the which it is signified that in that quarter about the
beginning shall be great thonder, and about the end rainy weather.

The fourth chapter of the.iiii. quarter of the year of our lord aforesaid,
that is to say, the entre of the sun in to the first minute of
Capricorne.xii. hours xlvii. minutes.xxxii. secodes after none in the xi. of
December the year aforesaid.
THe figure of the heavens thalbee thus as follows, the degree ascendente, the
ninth of Libra, the third of Scorpio the second house, the third house, the
fowerth of Sagitarie the xi. of Capricorne the beginning of the fourth house,
the 17. of Aquarie the fifth house, the.xv. of Pisces the.vi. house, the ix. of
Aries the seventh house the.iii. of Taurus the. viii, house, the fourth of
Gemini the ninth house, the eleventh of Cancer the tenth house. 17. of Leo the
eleventh house, the sixtene of Virgo the twelve house, the Sun in the first
Minute of Capricorne, the Moon in the third of Leo, Saturnus in the twenty
and four of Pisces, Iupiter in the twenty and nine of Libra, Mars in
theightene of Virgo, Venus in the seuentene of Aquarius, Mercurius in the
thirtene of Capricorne, upon this figure I perceive Venus to be lady and Mercuri
her parteiner, wherefore it shall be much inclined to Rain and wind most
part of this quarter.



The fyft Chapiter declaring the figure of the heavens at the eclipse of the
sun, which shall be the year above said, xxix. of June vii. hours.xxxi.
minu. after noone.
The first house which is called the ascedent the.iii. of Capricorne, the.ii.
house, the xiiii. of Aquarie, the third house, the viii. of Aries, the eight
of Taurus, the fourth house, the xxvi. of Taurus the.v. house, the eleventh of
Gemini, the vi. house, the third of Cancer the seventh house, the xiiii. of Leo
the eight house, the viii. of Libra the ninth house the tenth house, theight of
Scorpio, the xxvi. of Scorpio the eleventh house the xi of Sagittarius the xii.
house, the son in the xvii. of Cancer, ye moon also in the xvii. of Cancer.
Saturne in the first degree of Aries, Iupiter in ye xxvii. of Virgo, Mars in ye
xvi of Gemini, Venus in ye xxix. of Cancer, Mercurius in ye xxviii. of Gemini I
take upon this figure celestial Iupiter to be lord, who is in the eight house,
in the dominion of Mercurius, which signifies great death shall happen through
hot fevers subuertyng the memory of men, making them to rave to rage as mad
men without any reason, and this shall happen most among noble men and
amongst boys not passing.xiiij. years, and amongst yonge women.



The figure of the heavens at the time of the Eclipse of the moon, which shall be
theight of December xiiii. hours.xx. minutes after noone the year of our
Lord abouesayd, 1554.
The degree ascendet the 23. of Libra, the xvi. of Scorpio the second house:
the third house the.xix. of Sagittarie, the fourth house the first of Aquarius
the fifth house the vi. of Pisces, the second of Aries the vi. house, the
seventh house the xxiii. of Aries theight house, the xvi. of Taurus, the.xix. of
Gemini the ninth house, the teeth house the first of Leo, the eleventh the vi.
of Virgo, the xii. house the second of Libra, the sun in the.xxvii. of
Sagittary, the moon in the xxvii. of Gemini eclipsed in the ninth house of the
heaves Saturnus in the 24 of Pisces in the fiueth house, Iupiter in the.xxviii.
of Libra in the first house of the heavens, Mars in the xvii. of Virgo in the
xi. house of Venus in ye xiiii. of Aquari in ye fourth house, Mercurius in ye
nynth of Capricorne in the third house, I take upon this figure celestial
Mercurius to be Lord, and the moon to be the particular lady of the house
of henour and kingdoms, who being totally obscured and darkened in the nynth
house signifies that there shall be an occasion of universal morning.



The particular declaration of the whether for this present year. Anno. Domini.
1554.
January.
THE first day somewhat inclined to be cold and moiest, but the trinalle
aspect of Iupiter and Mars excityng and stirring up a Northeast wind will make
Snow: the second day more windy and cold then before. The third day fair
and whitishe ruddy clouds sparkelyng about the sky, and a strong North east
wind. The fowerth day very fair, the wind eastern. The.v. at morning very
windy, but at a.xi. of the clock, or else at midnight, it will thaw the snow
that fell before. The six, cloudy moist The seven day it shall be thaw. The
viii. somewhat fair in the morning, a small east wind, but about.xii. of the
clock, it will be fairer whether then before, and all the.ix. day windy.
The.x. day somewhat inclined to moisture, but that is to be thought that the
trinall aspect of Sol and Iupiter, being Oriental, will stir a North East
wind, that the effect of this moisture shall not appear. The eleventh in the
morning fair, but afterwards cold, and cloudy whether. The twelve day in the
Morning, somewhat windy. The thirtene day more windy then before, and
whitishe clouds sparkeled about the heaven, and all the day fair. The
fowertene day fair weather. The.xv. day windy, more then before: The
sixtene somewhat cold, and moiest. The seuentene, cold and moiest: The.xviii.
somewhat windy and fair weather. The nineteneth day fair and more windy:
the twenty day in the morning somewhat windy, and somewhat towards night
inclined to coldness and moisture: the like weather the.xxi. day, the.xxii.
day temperate whether: the. xxiii day somewhat windy weather: The xxiiii.
fair in the Morning, but a little before noone and after, cold and rain, but
it will break up, and be fair about four aclocke in the after noone, again
the five twenty day windy: the.xxvi. day cold and cloudy till night, but
then it will break up: The.xxvii. fair weather, and windy all that day. The
xxviii. day cloudy, and cold, but about one of the clock after Midnight,
this weather will change, and it will be fair the.xxix. day, in the after
noone wax windy: the thirty day somewhat inclined to cold and moiesture,
but I think the applicacio corporal betwixt Mars Mercurie, will cause winds,
taking away thesaied enclinacion of moiesture: the.xxxi. day fair, windy.

February.
THE first day of February very windy: the second a fair day: the iii. a
cold cloudy day: the.iiii. a cold, and somewhat a moiest day: the v.
windy: the.vi. fair: the.vii. somewhat cold and moist, and that shall
continue all the eight day: the.ix. day fair somewhat windy, but about.ix.
of the clock at night, this fair whether will change to a cold, and moist
whether: the.x. somewhat windy, and cloudy withal: the xi. day somewhat
windy, a fair day the.xii. day cold, and cloudy: the.xiii. somewhat
inclined to rain: The.xiiii. somewhat windy: the xv. more windy then before,
with showers the same day and some Hail withal, because of the Coniunccion
corporal of Venus and Mercurius, and Sol, and Mars, with an applicacio of Mars
unto Saturne, which will cause the whether abouesated. The sixtene day
somewhat temperatly cold. The seuentene day fair whether, and sunny. The
eightene day cloudy, and somewhat moiest. The. xix day fair whether. The.xx.
day wind, specially in the forenone, but in the after Noone, somewhat
inclined to drislyng rain. The.xxi. shall be inclined to moiesture. The.xxii.
fair whether. The xxiii. somewhat inclined to moiesture. The.xxiiii. somewhat
inclined to windinesse and fair whether. The.xxv. shall be cloudy, and somewhat
inclined to moiesture with Hail. The.xxvi. fair weather, and somewhat windy.
The xxvii. rain and Hail, and a cold day. The.xxviii. day rain, and Hail,
with great coldness.

Marche.
THE first day of Marche somewhat windy, and at night a cold driflyng Rain,
and therefore a manne might say very little, or none. The third day rain and
hail, and the same shall continue almost till eight of the clock in the
night, then it will break up. The.v. day altogether cold whether, rain, and
Hail. The sixth day in the after Noone somewhat windy. The seventh, Rain,
cold weather, and Hail. The same whether the eight day but towards night
somewhat fair, and disposed to wind, and small drislyng rain. The ninth day
great blasts of winds, keeping rain away, rain with some lightening and
thunder the tenth day. The eleventh day a little wind with rain. The twelueth
cloudy The. xiii, rain, and some Lightening before, and about Sun rising
that day, and in the after noone fair weather. The fowertenth day, because
of the opposition of Mars and Iupiter, there shall be rain, and lightening, or
thunder. The fiuetenth day somewhat inclined to moiesture. The sixteneth
somewhat Cloudy, cold, and windy with some showers the seueteneth day The
eighteneth day, because of the coiunccion of Saturnus, and Venus, very cold,
and great rain. The nineteth day because of the coniunccion of Saturnus and
Marcurius Rainy, and somewhat windy withal, the twenty and.xxi. day rain:
the.xxii. day fair weather, and very great wind with dark clouds: the
xxiii. fair weather. the xxiiii. cloudye and cold: the.xxv. day fair, and
somewhat wyndye: the xxvi. day all the morning till after noone, somewhat
cold, cloudy and wyndye: The xxvii. day fair, and a strong wind, because
of the conjunction of Mars and Mercurius, in a fyry sign, that is to say, in
Aries. the xxviii. fair: the xxix. a fair day. the.xxx. wyndy, and cloudye:
the xxxi. fair weather.

Apryll.
THe first of Apryl the year above said a very fair hot day: the second a
temperate day: the.iii. a fair day somewhat hot: the fourth day a fair
day: the.v. day a fair day: the.vi. day a fair day: the.vii. viii.ix. days
of April, showers shall happen with joined, or myxed with hayle, and temperate
wynd: the.x. day fair: the.xi. day somewhat disposed to be fair with reddyshe
clouds bringing* with them sometime an April shower. A fair day shall the
xii. be: the xiii. day windy. the xiiii. day colder then it was before, and
cloudy: the xv. day a fair day: the xvi. a fair day with white and red
Clouds, sparkeled about the sky: the xvii. day a fair day, and somewhat a
wyndye day: the.xviii. day more wynd, and that al the night following till
five a clock in the morning, in the xix. of April then colder then before and
cloudy: the. xx day wyndye: the.xxi. day more wyndy then before: the.xxii. day
cold drislyng rain, with a little wind: the xxiii. somewhat cloudy, but after
one howre after noone wyndye: the xxiiii. fair weather: the xxv. somewhat
wyndye and fair, and hot at night: the xxvi. day sweet shores, but after
toward night fair weather: the xxvii. wyndye, in the beginning, and cloudye
towards night: the xxviii. in the morning, and most part of the day, wyndy
and temperate weather: the xxix. temperate weather and the xxx. also, because
of the trinall aspect betwixt Sol, and Iupiter in terrestrial signs, which
causes temperate drought.

May.
THe first day fair whether with a temperate wind. The second day somewhat
Cloudy in the morning, but most part of the day, after fair, and hot.
The third day faie, and windy in the after none. The fowerth day cloudy,
and windy. The fiurth day, fair and hot. The sixth day fair whether. The
seventh day temperate whether. The eight day somewhat windy. The ninth day
rain, windy withal and hail. The tenth day fair and somewhat windy. The
eleventh windy, cold, and rain with hail. The twelueth day in the fore
Noone fair whether. The thirteneth day somewhat windy. The fowerteneth day a
fair day. The fifteneth sweet showers of Rain, with red and somewhat
whitishe clouds sparkeled about the heaven. The sixtene day cloudy, and
somewhat colder then before. The.xvii. day fair in the morning about Sun
rising, but within an hour or two, somewhat disposed to showers of mild Rain.
The eighteneth till it be noone and paste, windy and fair, but somewhat
cloudier then before, in the afternoon. The nineteneth fair weather. The
twenty day fair, but after none cloudy. The.xxi. fair, and a breaking up
of thesaied Clouds. The.xxii. fair and somewhat temperatly windy. The xxiii.
day fair, but about midnight somewhat inclined to moiesture. The xxiiii.
fair and somewhat windy all that day and night also, but the.xxv. about the
Sun rising cloudy. The xxvi. fair and clear whether, in the morning, and in
the after noone somewhat to wind inclined. The.xxvii. and. xxviii day inclined
to fair whether and dry, with lightning also. The.xxix. the whether shall be
fair and windy, but therewith cloudy. The.xxx. day very windy the.xxxi.
day windy with clouds like to bring showers, but it shall hold up.

June.
THE first of this month shall be fair and temperate whether. The second
windy and temperate. The third in the morning fair, but after noone cloudy.
The fowerth a teperate weather with some wind. The fiueth cloudy, as though
it would rain but the quart aspect betwixt Sol and Iupiter will take it away:
the sixte day great wyndes with rain and hayle: the seven th day wyndye:
the eight day in the morning fair, but about after noone rain and hayle: the
nynthe day dry and somewhat wyndy. the tenth fair, and somewhat hotter then
before: the eleventh shall be a cold and moyste day. And you shall have about
the xii. of June aforesaid rain and hayle: the xiii. of June aforesaid in the
morning cloudye, in the afternoon fair, but somewhat to hot, the xiiii. of
June aforesaid sommewhat wyndy in the morning, and the same wind is like to
continue all the same day, the xv. of June aforesaid cloudy in the forenoon,
but after noon fair and somewhat hot whether: The.xvi. of June aforesaid in the
morning there shall be a little sweet dew of rain, y xvii. of June in the morning
somewhat windye, but fair whether with white clouds, but at ten a clock
cloudye and close, and at after noon: and specially that night somewhat hotter
then it was before, the xviii. day about the after noone wyndye somewhat
hotter then before: The.xix. fair and at night very hot, the.xx. about.ii.
of the clock at after noone some sweet dew of rain shall fall, but very
little to speak of: all the rest of the day it shall be wyndye and all the
night also: The xxi. altogether cloudye. The xxii. fair and hot, but about
mydnyght a little sweet shower of rain. The xxiii. day fair weather and
sommewhat hoate. The xxiiii. a fair day. The xxv. day fair weather, but some
clouds, bringing with them some dew of rain. But the xxvi. day in the
morning cloudy, and al the night following very hoate: The xxvii. day in the
after noone wyndye, with whityshe clouds sparkeled about the heaven: The
xxviii. day windy and cloudy: The xxix. fairer weather, and sommewhat hotter
then before: The xxx. day wyndy whether, and temperate and fair.

July.
THe first of July shall be a cloudy and moist day, the second day fair and
very hoate. The third temperate. The fowerthe very hoate. The fiueth day
teperate, and at night cloudy and close whether. The sixth day cold and rain.
The seventh day hot whether fair. Theight to rain somewhat disposed, and
the same weather shall be the ninth day as the eight day The tenth fair and
temperatly hot, but in the after noone Cloudy. The eleventh day cold and
moist, but about six of the clock, the twelueth day before noone it will
break up, and be a fair and temperate hot day, till after three of the
Clock in the after Noone, then will be cloudy whether, the thirteneth day
somewhat inclined to moiesture, but it is to be feared least thesaied
enclinacion be annichilate through the applicacio of Mercurie to Iupiter,
being in a temperate mansion, the fowerteneth windy, and fair temperate
whether, but about the Sun setting cloudy, and so all that night, the
fiftene day somewhat disposed to moiesture, the sixteneth, the weather fair
and a hot after noone, the seuenteneth day windy and temperate, the
eighteneth fair whether, and more windy then before, the nineteneth temperate,
somewhat colder weather then before, the twenty day a temperate day,
the.xxi. day windy and red, and whitishe clouds, sparkeled about the
heavens, and at night lightening, the.xxii. inclined to moiest the.xxiii.
somewhat cloudy, the.xxiiii. a fair hot day, because of the corporal
coniunccion of Sol and Mercurius in the fire sign of Leo, the xxv. day
cloudy, and about nine of the clock at night, very hot, the.xxvi. day
fair, the.xxvii. day cloudy, the.xxviii. day temperatly fair, the.xxix.
windy, the thirty, a temperate day, the same whether the.xxxi. day.

August.
THE first day cloudy, the second a fair temperate day, and after Noone and
at night very hot, the third a fair hot day, the fowerth day a
temperate day, the.v. day fair and hot in the fore Noone, but afterwards
somewhat inclined to moisture the sixth day in the morning fair, and at after
noone cloudy, the seventh fair and temperate in the after Noone, and at
night somewhat inclined to moiesture, the eight day a fair morning, and all
day. The ninth very windy. And the tenth somewhat inclined to cold and
moiesture: the eleventh day, fair whether temperate: the twelueth some rain,
or else the thirteneth day: the fowerteneth day fair and somewhat windy: The
fifteneth day cloudy and windy in the after noone: The sixtene day fair:
the seuetene day cloudy and look as though it would Rain, and it shall not:
theightene fair whether, and somewhat windy: the nineteneth cloudy, and after
midnight fair and windy: the twenty day temperate dry whether: The one and
twenty, windy and cloudy: The two and twenty in the morning, fair and
pleasant: the three and twenty day hot and fair weather: the four and
twenty fair weather, and a pleasant still wind. The five and twenty, six
and twenty, seue and twenty, fair weather, and great winds: The eight and
twenty, more hot then before, and also more windy the nine and twenty day
fair whether, the same the thirty day also: the thirty and one, a fair and a
hot day.

September.
THE first day a fair day: the second day fair in the morning, but in the
after Noone cold and rain with some hail withal: the same weather with some
wind, and temperately cloudy, also the third day: the fowerth somewhat
inclined to moisture in the after noone, but in the morning it shall be
temperatly windy: The fiueth a cold cloudy before Noone, but in the after
noone temperatly windy, fair temperate whether. The six day somewhat windy,
but towards night, cloudy, and inclined to moiesture. The seventh day,
cloudy in the morning, and somewhat colder then before, but in the after
noone, it will not be so cold as before: the eight windy, the ninth a
temperate cloudy day. The tenth day cold and cloudy. The eleventh cloudy
and temperate, and towards night, clerer whether and fairer whether then before.
The twelueth day somewhat windy. The thirtene inclined to coldness and
moiesture, but about ten of the clock before midnight it will break up, and
be fair and dry the next day The fiftene cloudy cold, somewhat more then
before, but towards night, the clouds will break up, and it will be al
night fair, and sixtene windy, and the seuentene in the morning more windy,
but at after Noone cold and cloudy The eightene day fair weather. The
nineteneth day windy. The twenty cloudy in the fore Noone, but towards
night fair. The one and twenty, fair weather and dry in the morning, but
after Noone cold and moiest, and about the hour of five at after Noone
somewhat temperately windy, and so all night long. The two and twenty,
temperate whether. The three and twenty fair weather. The xxiiii. Cloudy. The
five and twenty, very windy The xxvi. fair and windy. The.xxvii. great
winds and fair weather. The eight and twenty fair weather. The nine and
twenty, somewhat inclined to rain. The.xxx. cloudy, and somewhat windy

October.
THe first day fair whether, and somewhat windy. The second day Rain in the
fore Noone, but I think the sixtile aspect of Mars and Iupiter, will make the
after noones whether fair. The third in the after noone wyndy. The fourth in
the after noone cloudye, and towards night inclined to drislynge rain. The
fifth in the after noon wyndy. The sixth fair in the forenoon, and at night
cloudye, and as though it would rain: the seventh day cold and moist, the
eight day cold and cloudy: the.ix. about.vii. a clock at night: and after
all the night wyndy and temperate weather, the.x. fair whether, the xi. fair,
and the xii. also: but about.x. a clock at night cloudy. The xiii. like to
rain, but it will hold up, the.xiiii. day wyndy: The xv. toward night fair:
The.xvi. towards night wyndy: but after mydnyght more windy then before: the
xvii. cloudy: the xviii. fair clear whether: the xix. very wyndy and fair
weather, the xx. fair whether, the.xxi. somewhat inclined to moisture: the xxii.
cloudy and cold, the xxiii. fair teperate whether, the xxiiii. ye same whether,
the xxv. fair whether, the xxvi. in thafter noon, towards night, the night
time very rainy: the xxvii. about after noon very fair. The xxviii. fair
meetly, the xxix. al day cloudy, and the night rain: the xxx. fair, the xxxi
somewhat fair and cloudy in the after none with inclination to moisture.

November.
THe first day somewhat fair, and red clouds with blackenesse in them,
bringing with them an inclination to moisture, but not withstanding it is
likely to hold up as is aforesaid. The.ii. day rain. The third day fair and
dry, and a frost in the morning, and about noone somewhat disposed to rain.
The fourth somewhat disposed to moisture, and cloudy withal, with some rain,
and hail, or else as they call it slete. The fifth day the same whether: The vi.
towards night fair: The vii. day fair till night, and about xii. of the
clock at night clouds like to bring us some rain: The.viii. somewhat rainy:
The ix. a fair and dry day, at night a frost: The x. day the same whether: The
xi. cloudy, and somewhat wyndy: The xii somewhat fair whether, but I fear that
there shall be rain because of the trinall aspect of Mercurius and Saturnus in
Scorpio Pisces being watery signs: The xiii. cloudye and wyndye: The xiiii.
sum what fair. The xv. day dry: The xvi. at after noone wyndye: The xvii.
fair weather: The xviii. day at one of the clock in the after noone somewhat
disposed to rain: The xix. somewhat fair: The xx about v. of the clock in
the morning cold and rain: But three hours before noone it will break up and
be a fair day: The xxi. a fair day: The xxii. day a very fair day: The xxiii.
about after noone inclined to coldenes and moisture: The xxiiii. in the after
noone fair: The xxv. cloudy: The xxvi. fair whether: The xxvii. towards night
cloudy: the xxviii. day about after noon a little dryslynge rain: The xxix.
day rain: The xxx. day rain.

Decembre.
THe first, day fair and wyndy: The.ii. day cloudy and wyndye: The iii. day
cold and cloudye: The fourth in the after noone after ii. of the clock wyndy:
The fifth day cold and rain with sleete or snow mingled withal: The syxte day
cold and moyste: The vii. clouds, and like to rain: but about v. of the
clock in the morning somewhat fair whether. The viii. at afternoon cloudy, but
after and about ii. a clock after mydnyght fair whether. The ix. at after noon
somewhat wyndy. The x. m^tely fair and dry temperate whether, but after.v. a
clock at night cloudye. The.xi. day temperate and fair. The xii. day
towards night great rain. The xiii. day fair weather and dry above head: a
fair day the the xiiii. The xv. a fair day, a great frost. The xvi. about
viii. of the clock at night fair whether. The xvii. cloudy: The xviii. cloudy,
cold, and rain: The xix after noone fair whether: The xx. fair: The xxi. and
xxii. wyndy: but the xxii. at night a great frost: The xxiii. cold and
moist. The xxiiii. day mild shores of rain. The xxv. all the forenoon
cloudy, but after mydnyght very wyndy. The xxvi. a fair day. The xxvii. about
after midnight, rain: The xxviii. fair, cold; and dry whether: The xxix. about
sun rising fair: but after xi. a clock before noon cloudy. The xxx. day in
the morning somewhat fair, and wyndy The xxxi. cloudye, and somewhat wyndy.

The.vii. Chapiter of the infirmities that shall be in the aforesaid year of
our Lord. M.D.liiii. and in every quarter thereof.
SHE standing of Soll in the first of Aries, and in the sixte house of the
heavens, signifies that the infirmities, which shall happen in the first
quarter of the year aforesaid, shall be in the heads of men, as madness, and
other hot infirmities about the brain, because that he is Lord of the sixth
house, which house signifies of his own nature, diseases, and infirmities.
More over Mars the sanguinolent planet, being in the sixte house, at the time
of the Eclipse of the Sun, signifies that there shall be many hot and dry
agues, as Tercians, which come of corrupt blood, and colour superaboundante,
in the second quarter of the year abouesaid, and many diseases, which shall
happen in means Necks also in thesaied quarter, which shall rise of corrupt
blood and choler superabundaunte in the second quarter of the year abouesaid,
and many diseases, which shall happen in means necks also in thesaied
Quarter, which shall arise of corrupt blood, and puscules, and antraces,
and peines in men ears also. And in the third Quarter of the year
abouesaied, there shall be many diseases raignyng in the rains, and in the
secret places, because of Venus, being impedite in the revolution figure in the
sixte house, and that in the sign of Scorpio. Finally in the fowerth quarter
of the year abouesaied there shall be many diseases in the yies, and in the
belies of men, and women and in their necks, shoulders, and arms, many
infirmities.

The.viii. Chapiter of wars, and contencions.
FIrst Soll in the sixth house, and in his exaltacion, signifies that the
Servile and ignoble people will hate their nobility, and will look to exalt
them selves against them, and that in the first Quarter of the year
abouesaied, and Saturnus in the sign of Pisces, ye princely planete Iupiters
house, mingled with the beams of the Sanguinolent signifies that there shall be
bloodshed among noble men, and great contencions, which shall at last be
pacified by noble men of religio in the next quarter of the year. Mars in
Gemini a mannely sign, signifies manslaughter, and in the third quarter,
Mars in Leo, and in the fowerth house, signifies contencions, and that many
shall in that revolution come to their end by the swore. Finally Mars in the
fowerth and last quarter, signifies bloodshed, and wars, because he is in
which is a Sign of human form, in the twelve house, the house of enemies
and contencions.

The.ix. Chapiter of Cattall, and all other things, which serve for
Victuals, as wheat, barley, Beans, such like.
FIrst in the first quarter, Mars being Lord of Aries, combust in Pisces, and
impedite with thenuious beams of Saturne signifies death of sheep in that
revolution aforesaid, and Mars in the face of Taurus, in ^ight Sphere Impedite,
signifies death of Rine in the second quarter of the year above said. Venus
also in the revolution of the third quarter of the year aforesaid, in the sixth
house vayng Lady of Taurus, signifies that Rine shall have many infirmities.

Moreover, in the fowerth quarter Venus the Lady of the sign of Taurus, being
in the fiueth house, which is her joy, signifies that Calves, Rine, and
oxen, shall prosper well that last quarter, wheat in th^ first quarter shall be
but of meetly lowe price, but in the end of the first quarter, about
Whitsontide, it shall arise up to a more higher price. Barleie shall be of a
vile price, to speak of, in the beginning of the first quarter, that is to
say, in Marche, but in April it shall arise in price more. Beans shall be of a
meetly reasonable price in the first quarter aforesaid. Wines shall be of a
mean price, and honey shall be of a lower price, then it hath wont to be. Many
apples this year shall be, specially of Sweetynges, and fuche like. Moreover in
the second quarter wheat shall be of mean price, and very little of it thesaied
quarter. Barleye in the secande quarter shall be of a great price, and this
Harvest thereof no great plenty. Beans shall be of a great price, this
second Quarter, and little store of them this Harvest. Much honey shall be this
Somer, and more good cheap then it hath been. Also there shall be nostore of
grapes this year, and there shall be very few Nuts this year.

The figure of the first quarter Astronomical, of the year of our Lord, a.
M.CCCCC.LV. beginning the tenth of Marche fowertene hours, four minutes after
Noone.
THE degree ascendente the xxvi. of Sagittarius, the second house the third of
Aquarius, the.xxvii. Pisces the third house, the first of Taurus five, the
fowerth house, the ninetene of Taurus the fiueth house, the fifth of Gemini: the
sixte house, the xxvi. of Gemini, the seventh house the third^ of Leo, the
eight house, the twenty and seven of Virgo, the ninth house, the tenth house,
the first of Scorpio, the.xix. of Scorpio the eleventh house, the.xii. house,
the fifth of Sagitarius, the sun in the first minute of the sign of Aries,
and in the third house of the heavens, Luna in the thirty of Libra, and in
the tenth house of the heaven, Saturnus in the third of Aries, in the third
house of the heaven, Iupiter in the second of Scorpio in the tenth house
retrograde, Mars in the tenth of Virgo, in theight house of the heaves. Venus
in the.xxiii. of Pisces, combust in the third house of the heavens, Mercurius
in the twenty of Pisces in the second house of the heavens combuste, I take
upon this figure, Luna to be Lady, and Mercurius partaker, who commits her
disposition to Iupiter, and thereby makes him Lord of the year, which
signifies that the whether shall be temperate, and the wind North and temperate,
notwithstanding sometime moisture withal.

The site, or figure of the heaven at the time of the Eclipse of the Moon, the
fowerth of June in the year of our Lord God, a M.D.l.v. and.xiiii. hours, and
xxxii. minutes at after noone.
The degree ascendent the second of Gemini, the degree of the second house,
the first of Cancer the third house, the fiftene of Cacer. The fiueth of Leo,
the fowerth house. The.xxi. of Leo the fiueth house, the fiueth of Libra the
sixth house, the seventh house, the second of Sagitarie, the eight house, the
first of Capricornus, the ninth house the fiftene of Capricornus, the tenth,
the first of Aquarius, the xi. the.xxi. of Aquarie, the twelve house the fifth
degre of Aries The Sun in the twenty and three of Gemini in the first house,
the Moan in the twenty and three of Sagittari, in the seventh house, the
Planete Saturnus in the thirten of Aries, in the twelf house, Iupiter the
twenty and four of Libra in the twenty and four of Libra in the sixth house:
Mars in the twenty and two of Virgo in the fifte house Venus in the ninth of
Taurus in the twelve house of the heavens. Mercurius in the first of Gemini in
the first house, and oriental, whom I perceive to be lord of this forsayde
Eclipse of the Moon, who goes to the Sextile aspect of Saturne, Lord of the
house of honour, who being impedite, and in the Sign of Aries his fall,
because it is apposite to Libra his exaltation signifies a marvelous
depression and fall of a great man of honour.

And as for diseases and inf^rmities there is none almost by this Eclipse
signified, but cold reumes and such like moisture in men's heads, which
diseases Iupiter in the syxt house will with his corporal presence much
mitigate.

The site of the heavens at the second quarter Astronomical of the year
above written beginning at the entering of the son into the first minute of
Cancer the xi. of June. M.D.Lv.
THe first degree ascendent, the viii. of Libra, the first of Scorpio the.ii.
house, the first of Sagit. the third house, the.x. of Capri. iiii. house, the
xviii. of Aquarius, the v. house, the xvi. of Pisces, the vi. house, the viii.
of Aries the vii. house, the first of Taurus the eight house, the first of the
ix. house, the x. of Cancer, the tenth house, the eleventh house the xviii. of
Leo, the xvi. of Virgo the xii. house, the son in the first minute of
Cancer, the Moon in the seventh degree of Aries, and in the vii. house of the
heaven. Saturnus in the xiii. degre of Aries in the vii. house also, Iupiter in
ye xxiiii. of Libra in the first house, Mars in the xxvi. of Virgo in the xii.
house. Venus in the xviii. of Taurus in theight house Mercur. in the xi. of in
the ix. house, whom I take to be Lord of this quarter: who commits his
disposition to Saturne by a sextile aspect: Wherefore I take that the air this
quarter shall be very cloudy, wyndye, and raynye, more then to such a hot time
of the year is convenient, because that Saturne is impedite, and his
declination meridian more then two degrees from the Ecliptike lyne. And because
there chances this Quarter a dreadful Conjunction of Iupiter and Mars, in
Libra I will the next Chapiter show the site, and figure of the heavens, and
the hour and minute of the said conjunction.

The site or figure of the heavens the.vi. of August at the Conjunction of
Iupiter and Mars in the sign of Libra in the* xxvii. degree.xlvi. min. at vii.
a clock at after noone, and.iiii. minutes past.
THe degree ascendente the xii. of Aquarius the second house, the xv. of
Aries, the.xx. of Taurus third house, the fourth house, the ix. of Gemini,
the xxiii. of Gemini, the v. house, the ix. of Cancer the vi. house, the seueth
house the xii. of Leo, theight house the xv. of Libra, the xx. of Scorpio the
ix. house, the ninth house of Sagittarie the x. house, the xxiii. of Sagittarie
the xi. house, the ix. of Capricorne the twelfth house, the sun in the xxiii.
of Leo in the seventh house, the xvi. of Aries the moon, and in the second
house, Saturne in the fourtenthe of Aries retrogradus, Iupiter and Mars in the
xxvii. of Libra, and xlvi. minut. coniuncte in the.viii. house of the heavens,
Venus in the.xxi. of Cancer in the sixte house of the heavens, Mercurius in
the.xvi. of Virgo in the seventh house, of this conjunction, Saturnus in the
xiiii. of Aries retrograde, and in the second house is Lord and chief
Dominatoure, who signifies to men that great loss shall happen to them by
death of their sheep. Moreover Iupiter lord of the house of honour, and Mars
lord of the nynthe house, which house signifies religion the ministers
thereof being coiunct in a humain sign in the ^yghte house, the house of death
sygnifieth that mortality shall fall upon Men: That is to say, by sudden
death and fever tertians, and impostumes rising of corrupt blood, and by
other like hot and choleryke diseases. Fynally after this conjunction shall
follow much wind, terrible lyghtnynge and fires in the air, and great
drithe and a great pestilence upon men also.



The site or figure of the heavens at the beginning of the third quarter
Astronomical, which shall be the.xiii. day of September fowertene hours
xxviii. minutes after noone, M.D.lv.
THe degree ascendent, the xxi. of Leo, the.x. of Virgo the second house: the
third of Libra the third house: the.vi. of Scorpio, the fourth house, the xix.
of Sagittarie the fifte house, the xxvi. of Capricorne the sixth house, the xxi.
of Aquari^ the seventh house, the tenth of Pisces theight house, the third of
Aries the ninth house the sixth of Taurus, the tenth house, the xix. of Gemini
the xi. house, the xii. house the xxvi. of Cacer, the sun in the first minute
of Libra in the third house, the moon in the xii. of Virgo in the second house,
the planette Saturne in the xi. of Aries retrograde in the nynthe house,
Iupiter in the v. of Scorpio direct in ye fourth house of Mars in the.xxiiii.
of Scorpio in the.iiii. house, Venus in the seueth of Virgo in the first house,
Mercurius in the.xxv. of Virgo in the second retrograde. I take upon this figure
celestial Sol to be chiefest dominatour and Venus his partner, because she is
Lady of the revolution hour, and so is with an opposite aspectiunct to Saturn
with a receptio one of an other, for Sol is in the exaltation of Saturn, and
Saturne in the exaltation of Sol, but Saturne being retrograde in the ix. house
signifies that men shall be irreligions and no pity or mercy almost amongst
men, and that there shall be no reverence to the ministers of religio. More
over the whether shall be cold and cloudy, and the air with blackenes almost
always covered.

The life or figure of the heavens at the fourth quarter Astronomical of the
year of our Lord M.D.Lv. beginning the.xi. of Decembre xviii. hours.xl.
minutes after Noone.
THe degree ascendent, the xi. of Sagittarie, the xi. of Capricorn the second
house, the first of Pisces the third house, the teeth of Aries, the fourth
house, the fourth of Taurus the fifth house, the xxi. of Taurus the sixte
house, the xi. of Gemini the seventh house, the xi. of Cancer the eight house,
the first of Virgo the ninth house, the tenth of Libra the tenth house: the
fourth of Scorpio, the xi, house, the twelve house the twenty and one of
Scorpio, the Sun in the first house, in the first minute of Capricorne the
Moon also the first house in the.x. degree of Sagitarie, the Planete Saturne
direct, but notwithstanding slow of course in the seventh of Aries in the
fowerth house, Iupiter in the twenty and four of Scorpio, in the twelueth
house, Mars in the second of Aquarius in the second house, Venus in the
twenty and eight degree of Sagitarie in the first house, Mercurius in the.xix.
of Capricorne in the second house, I take of this revolution, Luna to be the
chiefest lady, who commits her disposition to Venus, Lady of the sertile,
being in the ascendent, with a coniunccion corporal, which signifies that m^
shall have many infirmities in their this and arms in this reuolucio, and the
whether shall be teperate, with sometime mild driselyng rain.

The particular declaration of the whether for this present year. Anno. Domini.
1555.
January.
SHe first day in the after noone rain and windy, the second day rain all the
after noone, and at night also, the third day ruddy clouds, with blackness
mingled with all and rain, the fowerth day in the after Noone, and after
great Rain, and almost all the night long, Rain also, the fiueth day
towards Night fair weather, but the day aforesaid shall be Rainy, because
of the Sextile aspect of Soll to Saturne, they both being in most mansions,
the sixte day somewhat inclined to rain, the seventh day somewhat ruddy
clouds, blackness mingled with the, bringing some rain. The eight day fair
whether, and toward night windy, and rain. The ix. day rainy. The tenth day
in the after Noone fair, and somewhat windy. The eleventh day at after noone
rain. The twelueth in the morning fair whether. The thirtenth at after noone
rain The fowerteneth a temperate day, the fifteneth a fair day in the after
noone but about the fore noone, and the night before rain, and windy whether
shall be, the sixtene somewhat inclined to rain, the.xvii. in the morning
somewhat fair but red clouds covering the heavens, shall bring some rain after
noone. The xviii. day, because of the quart aspect of Iupiter and Mercurius,
shall be very windy. The.xix. day somewhat drisselyng and rainy, the.xx.
day white and read clouds, bringing with them showers of rain, the.xxi. the
same weather: The.xxii. day windy and fair, in the fore noone the.xxiii.
day cold and moist the.xxiiii. day black clouds, rain and winds also, the.
xxv day cold rainy, because of the corporal coniunccion of Saturnus and
Venus, in the sign of Pisces, the twenty and six day cold and moiest, the
twenty and seven day towards night rain, and some windinesse in the air,
the twenty and eight day windy and fair weather, the. xxix day fair
whether. The thirty day rain and black clouds, with cold weather.

February.
THE first day cold and moiest. The second day somewhat inclined to
moisture, the third day in the after noone somewhat fair, but at night, and
specially after midnight windy, and somewhat inclined to rain, the fowerth
before noone, somewhat inclined to moisture, but after none fair whether, the
fiueth day rain, specially about noone, and at one of the clock, because of a
Sextile aspect betwixt Saturne, and Mercurius, the sixth day, because of the
apposicion of Sol and Luna in Aquarius, and Leo, which be rainy signs rain,
the seueth day somewhat inclined to moiesture, the eight day a fair day,
because of the coiunccion Corporal, of Luna and Mars, in Virgo a dry sign,
the ninth day rain with wind, the tenth day very windy because of the
quart aspect of Mercurius to Iupiter retrograde, the eleueth rain with wind,
the twelueth windy and fair whitishe Clouds about the heavens, because of
the trinall aspect of Soll and Iupiter retrograde. The thirtene day in the
morning fair whether. The fowerteneth at noone somewhat inclined to moiesture,
and after noone more inclined to rain then before The fiftene day a fair day,
and readdishe clouds sparkled about the heavens, the sixtene day about after
none, rain, the seuentene day at after noone fair weather. The eightene at
after noone rainy. The ninetene windy and rain alitlle, the twenty towards
night windy, the twenty and one, about eleven of the clock before noone rain,
but towards night fair weather, the.xxii. towards night, cloudy and rain,
the xxiii. because of the apposicion of Soll, and Mars, fair whether, and red
clouds, bringing with the some rain some times, the.xxiiii. because of the
coniunccion of Saturne Venus, in the moist mansion cold whether, and rain,
the.xxv. day fair weather, the.xxvi. day rain and windy the after noone.
The.xxvii. day somewhat fair at the after noone and towards night,
ye.xxviii. day rain.

Marche.
THE first day windy with a little driselyng Rain, the.ii. day somewhat rainy
whether, the third day rainy whether, the fowerth and.v. rainy because of the
coniunccion corporal of Venus and Sol, in the watery sign of Pisces, ye.vi.
day towards night fair red clouds, and wind with alitlle rain the.vii. in
the after noone somewhat reperate whether, the.viii. cloudy moiest whether,
the.ix. temperate whether, the.x. day white clouds about the heavens
sparkled, the.xi. because of the coniunccion of Venus Mercurie in the watery
sign of Pisces, rainy and windy the xii. also the same whether, the.xiii.
cloudy, cold whether, rain and hail, because of the corporal coniunccion of
Sol, and Saturnus that day, the.xiiii. towards night, and at night rain.xv.
somewhat inclined to rain, the.xvi. in the morning somewhat fair whether,
the.xvii.. xviii rainy whether, because of the coniunccion of Saturne Mercuri,
the.xix. day, somewhat fair whether, the.xx. day fair whether, the.xxi. in the
morning rain, because of the coniunccion of Luna, and venus in Pisces a watery
sign, the. xxii at morning cloudy, but it will break up at after noone,
the.xxiii. day windy, specially at night, the.xxiiii. somewhat ruddy
clouds, bringing with the some rain, the.xxv. in the morning some drislyng
rain, the.xxvi. about noone, cold cloudy, the. 27. fair before noone, but in
thafter noone itis like to rain somewhat but alitlle, the.xxviii. day about
noone windy, but towards night therewith cloudy, the.xxix. after noone alitlle
rain, the.xxx. day about after none very windy, the.xxxi. day great winds,
because of thopposicion of Iupiter Mercuri.

April.
THe first day fair, the second day windy, and at after noone hot, the
third a fair day, but towards night somewhat inclined to rain, the fowerth
day fair, and temperate whether, because of the coniunccion corporal of
Iupiter Luna, in Libra, an airy sign, the.v. in the morning cloudy the.vi. a
fair day, specially in the after noone, the.vii. day a fair after none*
somewhat hotter then before, the eight day, and specially in the morning,
windy, after somewhat inclined to coldness, and moiesture in the after noone,
and the same night also, the ninth day somewhat a fair day and very windy
with white Clouds sparkeled about the heavens, because of thopposicion of
Soll, and Iupiter in a fiery and airy signs, the teeth in the morning cloudy
the eleventh somewhat inclined to rain, the: xii. day, a fair morning, but
afternoon cold and cloudy, the.xiii. day about after noone windy,
the.xiiii. about the rising of the sun fair, and temperate, the.xv. fair
and hotter then before because of the trinall aspect of Sol and Mars in
yearthly signs, the.xvi. in the morning windy, and after noone fair and
somewhat hotter then before, the xvii. somewhat driselyng rain, because of the
coiunccion of Venus and Luna, in Pisces, the.xviii. day cold, and cloudy the
most part of al the day night also, the.xix. day fair, and temperate
whether, the.xx. also fair, and somewhat inclined to sweet rain. The.xxii.
the same weather, the.xxiii. dry temperate whether, ye.xxiiii. day a meetly
fair day The.xxv. in the morning a fair day, but after colder and cloudy:
The xxvi. windy and fair whether the xxvii. cloudy and temperate weather: the
xxviii. fair whether, but somewhat wyndy and cloudy, because of the sextile
aspect of Saturnus, and Mercu. the xxix. a fair and hot weather all the
night lunge, because of the conjunction of Mars Luna in Virgo: The xxx. day in
the morning somewhat wyndye, and afternoon sommetyme sweet shores, but most
part fair weather.

May.
THe first day a fair teperate day the second day cloudy and somewhat
inclined to moisture, but it is like to hold up, not withstanding because the
significators of this rain be in temperate mansyons, and the moon also. The
third day fair whether and wyndy, because of the conjunction of Iupiter and
Luna in Libra an airy sign. The.iiii. somewhat ruddy sometime rain. The.v. day
cold, because of the conjunction of Saturnus Venus in the sign of Aries: The
vi. windy and raynye weather, because of the quart aspect of Mars and Mercurius
and the firtile aspect of Venus and Mercurius the said vi. day, The vii.
windy and cloudy till night, but in the night about.viii. of ye clock
somewhat fair whether, and about x. of the clock somewhat inclined to
moisture. The viii. day somewhat fair whether. the.ix. day cloudy whether, and
the tenth day in the morning somewhat inclined to moisture, but at after noone
specially towards night fair whether and somewhat windy. The xi. day sweet
showers of rain. The xii. day in the after none fair whether. The.xiii. fair
and windy The xiiii. day red white clouds, sometime some moisture. The.xv.
day wyndy with sometimes rain a little in a quantity, The xvi. day cold and
cloudy with clouds troubling the heaven like to bring some rain, but it will
hold up as it is before said. The xvii. a fair day the xviii. somewhat fair
whether. The xix. some wind and rain. The.xx. day fair whether, but towards
night cloudy. the xxi. day because of the opposition of Iupiter and Venus in
Aries libra a fair temperate day with white clouds sparkeled about the
heavens. The day cloudy. The xxiii. day cold and cloudy also, because of
the sextile aspect Saturne and Sol. The xxiiii. day cloudy and somewhat in
clined to moisture The.xxv. day cloudy, but about three of the clock at after
noone it will somewhat break up. The xxvi. in the afternoon wyndie and meetly
fair whether the xxvii a fair day, and the xxviii day also the xxix. cloudi.
The xxx. day a meetly fair day. The.xxxi. day fair whether and wyndie.

June.
THE first day a fair hoot day because of the quart aspect of Mars, and
Sol. The second also the same whether, the third day wyndie and cloudy.
The.iiii. day a fair day, the v. day a fair day windy, the sixth dai inclined
to moisture, the seventh day inclined to wind. ye viii day somewhat inclined
to rain, the nynth fair whether and somewhat wyndie. the tenth day in the fore
noone wyndie, the xi. in the after noone fair temperate whether The xii. wyndie
and cloudy. ye xiii. day fair whether and wind, the xiiii day cloudy: The
xv. day sweet showers of small rain: but towards night and al night long it
will be fair and break up: The xvi day cloudy, the xvii. windy because of the
conjunction of Luna Mercurius in Gemini: the xviii. a fair temperate day:
The.xix. a colder day then before, and cloudy also: the xx. in the morning
fair whether and also windy: The xxi. day cloudye: the xxii. towards night
windy: but al the most part of the day meetly fair: the xxiii. day somewhat
cloudy whether: the xxiiii. inclined to moisture, the xxv. day white and red
clouds sparkled about the sky with wind, bringing with them some rain: The
xxvi. cloudy and colder then before: The xxvii. a fair windy day, the xxviii.
also: The xxix. somewhat cloudy: The xxx. fair whether.

July.
THe first day cloudy, the second day cloudy, and that because of the quart
aspect of Saturnus Mercurius, the third day a fair day all the fore noone,
but in the after noon cloudye. The fourth in the after noone somewhat rainy,
and towards night fair whether, the v. a fair day, but because of the
sextile aspect of Saturnus and Venus the heaven shall be over cast with clouds
like to bring some rain, but notwithstanding it will be as is aforesaid a
fair days. The sixth a meetly fair whether. The seueth a meetly temperate
whether, the eight day a fair day with great wind and white clouds covering
almost the heavens, and this because of the quart aspect of Sol and IVPITER,
MARCVRIVS quart aspect to Iupiter also. The ix. a fair day and a hot but
that temperately, because of the application of Luna to Saturne. The tenth day
a meetly fair day in the afternoon. the xi somewhat inclined to moisture and
the xii. day also, the xiii. some rain is like to happen, but the most of the
whether shall be temperately cloudy the xiiii in the afternoon cloudy, the xv
temperate whether and clouds in the sky like unto the skales of iron, the xvi
day fair temperate whether, The. xvii somewhat fair whether, the xviii. day
cloudy, the.xix. day a fair day and somewhat wyndye, the.xx. day somewhat
moist weather, the.xxi. day temperate whether the xxiii. day temperate whether,
the xxiiii. a fair hot day, specially in the after noone: the xxv. in the
morning wyndy, the xxvi. fair whether: the.xxvii. a fair day, the xxviii.
somewhat cloudy but dry whether: the xxix. fair whether: the xxx. windy: The
xxxi. somewhat inclined to drislynge sweet rain.

August.
THe first day fair whether because of the application of Mars to Iupiter in
the sign of Libra, the second day cloudy all the most part of the day, but
at night fair clear whether, the nynth day fair in the morning specially, and
almost all day, the fowerth in the after noone inclined to some rain, the
fiueth somewhat inclined to moiesture: the sixte a fair day, and whitish red
clouds sparkeled about the heavens, and sometimes notwithstanding cloudy, and
that because of a quart aspect betwixt Luna and Mars, and of a corporal
coiunction of Saturnus and Luna, the seueth day fair whether, and wyndy, the
viii. day sommewhat fair whether: the nynth at after noone fair and hot: the
tenth cloudy: the xi. a meetly fair day: the xii. a fair temperate wyndy day,
because of the sextile aspect of Sol and Iupiter: the xiii. a temperate day:
the xiiii. in the morning about vii. a clock fair: but about ix. a clock
somewhat inclined to rain, and afternoon fair whether: the xv. somewhat
inclined to cloudines: the xvi. a temperate whether: the xvii. fair and hot
whether: the xviii. fair temperate whether: the xix. wyndy: the xx. cloudy: the
xxi. day fair and temperate weather: the xxii. a fair day: the xxiii. a fair
day, because the sextile aspect of Sol and Mars: the xxiiii. cloudy: like to
rain: the xxv. somewhat inclined to moisture: the xxvi. widy, the xxvii. cloudy,
but towards night, fair whether: the xxviii. somewhat inclined to wind: the
xxix. somewhat more cloudy then before: the xxx. meetly fair: the xxxi. fair
and hot.

September.
THe first day somewhat windy: the second day cloudy, and cold whether: the
third day a temperate day sommewhat cloudy like to rain, but it will hold
up as before said the.iiii. fair whether, but sometime red clouds bringing
with them some rain the v. day meetly fair whether, and temperate and dry, the
vi. cloudy, the. vii fair, and temperate, the viii. metelye fair, the. ix
fair, and that in a temperate mansion also the x. the same whether the xi.
cloudy, the xii. fair because of the quart aspect of Mars to Luna, and the
sertile of Venus to Iupiter, the xiii. a fair temperate day, the xiiii. fair
windy, and that because of a sextile betwixt Mars, and Mercurius. The xv.
fair, the xvi. cold and cloudy. the.xvii. sowhat eclined to moisture, ye
xviii. fair temperate whether, because of the coiunction of Luna, and Iupiter in
Scorpio ye house Mars, the xix. windy, ye xx. a fair dai because of the
corporal conjunction of Luna Mars in Scorpio, with sometimes red clouds
bringing with the some rain, the xxi. Cloudy, ye xxii. somewhat windy. ye
xxiii. till it be past iii. clock in the after none windy but afterward because
of the Suns opposition with Saturnus cold, cloudy: ye xxiiii. day somewhat
inclined to moiesture, ye xxv. fair whether, ye xxvi. cold, and cloudy the
twenty and seven meetly fair. The twenty and eight, teperate whether, the
xxix. temperate and windy, the.xxx. fair

October.
THe first day meetly fair whether the ii. day inclined to moiesture, The
iii. a temperate day, the.iiii. teperate, but somewhat cloudy, because of the
trinall aspect of Saturnus and Mars in fiery signs, the v a teperate day,
the sixte meetly fair weather, the seventh day a temperate weather, the eight
day some what temperate, and towards night windy, the* ninth day a
temperate day, and black clouds like to bring some rain, but it shall hold
up, because of Saturne and Venus, the.ii. significatours of this moiesture, be
both in the temperate Mansions, the tenth meetly temperate, the eleventh day
fair whether; the twelueth because of the sextile aspect of Mercurius and
Mars, one in an airy sign, an other being in a fiery sign, the thirtene day
cold and cloudy, the fowertenth temperate, with an inclination to moisture
the fiftenth fair in the after noone, the sixtene inclined to moisture.
The.xvii. somewhat inclined to drought about head, theightene toward evening,
fair white and red clouds, with whether also, the ninetene a fair day, the
twenty day meetly fair whether. The.xxi. day temperate whether, the.xxii.
temperatly windy. The.xxiii. fair, and somewhat windy, the.xxiiii. in the
morning fair, and in the evening clouds like to rain but it will hold up,
because Venus the significatrix of this rain, is a good teperate mansion,
the.xxv. fair and windy the. xxvi fair whether, till two a clock in the
after noone, but afterward very cold and cloudy, the.xxvii. a fair temperate
day, the.xxviii. great winds white clouds about the heavens, the xxix.
day towards night windy, the. xxx great winds, because of the coniunccio of
Mercuri Iupiter, the.xxxi. cloudy.

November.
THe first day fair whether, the.ii. cloudy about noone, till three a
clock, and then meetly fair whether, the.iii. day, because of the coniunccion
of Mercurius and Sol in a moist sign, and a moiest mansion also, signifies
rain with some wind, the.iiii. cloudy, the.v. and.vi. fair weather, the.vii.
fair and temperate, theight temperate, and in deed neither fair nor foul,
the ninth mild Rain, because of the coniunccion of Iupiter, Venus in Scorpio,
a moiest sign, and a moist mansio also, the.x. day rain hail, or else some
snow withal, because of the quart of Saturnus Mars in most mansios, ye same
whether most part of the next day, the.xii. day somewhat inclined to gentle small
rain The.xiii. day the same whether, the xiiii. cloudy. The.xv. inclined to
moiesture. The.xvi. cloudy in the after noone. The.xvii. fair weather and
frost. The.xviii. a fair dry day from rain. The.xix. cloudy, because of
the trinall aspect of Saturnus and Sol. The xx. in the after Noone like to
rain, but it will hold up. The.xxi. somewhat cloudy. The.xxii. fair in the
for noone but in thafter noone windy, the.xxiii. cloudy, the.xxiiii. fair
whether, the.xxv. cloudy, and as though it would rain, but it will hold up,
because Saturne Venus (whose trine aspect causes the whether aforesaid) be in
fiery signs, temperate mansios, the.xxvi. fair, the. xxvii cloudy,
the.xxviii. meetly fair, the.xxix. somewhat cloudy, the.xxx. meetly fair

Decembre.
THe first day cold and rain withal, because of the quart aspect of Saturnus
and Mercurius in a moiest mansion. The second day somewhat inclined to
moiesture, the thirds fair whether and white clouds spackled about the heaves,
the fowerth fair and temperate whether with some* wind the fiueth somewhat
inclined to moiesture, the sixth in the morning fair, and all the most part
of the day Cloudy and very cold, the seventh windy, the eight in thafter
noone meetly fair, the ninth somewhat windy, the teeth more windy, in
especially at afternoon, the eleueth a meetly fair day about noone but
afterward cloudy, the twelueth day somewhat inclined to moiesture, the
thirtenth day meetly fair whether, but somewhat to much inclined to moisture,
the fowertenth day cloudy. The fiuetenth windy in the after noone, the xvi.
a fair dry day, but towards night cold and cloudy, the xvii. day somewhat
fair whether, the.xviii. cold, cloudy and rain with some Snow, because of the
quart aspect of Sol to Saturnus, and a sextile of Mars to Saturnus, and a
quart of Saturnus to Venus. The. xix day meetly fair temperate weather, with
wind, about ten of the clock, the xx. day cold and cloudy, the.xxi.
somewhat windy, and some Rain, the.xxii. day fair temperate whether.
The.xxiii. somewhat windy, the.xxiiii. in the morning fair and windy, but
afterward cloudy weather, the.xxv. a fair cold day, the. xxvi, day
cloudy, the xxvii. day fair and temperate, the.xxviii. day meetly fair,
with often times sweet showers, and alitlle wind. The.xxix. day windy, but
after noone cloudy, the. xxx a fair day. The.xxxi. day inclined to
coldness and moiesture.

Of thinfirmities that shall be this present year.
FIrst Mercuri lord of the house of diseases, in ye first beginning of the
first quarter, being in the sign of Pisces his fall, and in the second
cadent from the ascendente, signifies that men shall have infirmities in their
shin bones, secrete places and Belies, and these diseases shall happen most
upon boys, and old women about the age of.lx. and upon the learned sort of
men also. Iupiter lord of the house of infirmities direct, and in the
ascendent of the second quarter of the year, signifies that there shall be no
infirmities in that quarter, but peines in the yies of men, and about their
knees also, which diseases shall hap most upon noble men, and upon young
noble maidens also. Moreover Saturnus, being Lord of the house of infirmities
in the third quarter, and impedite in Aries, and in the ninth house
signifies, there shall be quarterne agues, which shall be great, reumes stillyng
out of men heads into their Lights, and trembling of Sinews, and peines
in their knees and yies, through corrupt blood, because Mars in the sign of.
Finally, Venus in the fowerth quarter, is figured Lady of the sixth house,
being in Sagitarius in the ascendent also, signifies that men shall have no
infirmities, but such as happen through surfettes of drinking, and immoderate
venerious acts.

Of wars, and contencions.
MArs in a humain sign in theight house, signifies that mortal war shall
happen amongst men, and the more because of his retrogradacion this evil
effect and disposition shall be more vehement, and this shall appear more in
the Southe parts, and in the East parts, then in any other places. Mars also
in the second quarter of the year aforesaid, and in the.xxvii. of Virgo in
the.xii. house, the house of enemies signifies war and bloodshed Mars in the
sign of Scorp. in the.iiii. house of the heaves, signifies that many shall be
slain with the swore, and that in the iii. quarter of the year aforesaid.
Finally Mars in the. iiii quarter, and in the revolution thereof in the second
house, the house of substance, signifies that there shall be great spoil of
the ignoble people by soldiers, and men of war, because he is in Aquari,
which sign is the fall of the Sun, and the house of cloudy Saturne, which
planete signifies diggers, and deluers of the earth and such ignoble people
and persons.

Of Cattall, and all other things, which serve for victuals, as wheat,
barley, beans, and such like.
FIrst Mars being Lord of the eight house impedite, signifies that in the
first quarter of the year aforesaid, Sheep shall die much, and in the
second quarter also. More over in the third quarter. Mars in Scorpio,
signifies that Sheep shall not die in the Revolution of the said Quarter, and
in the fowerth and last Quarter, Mars in the second house, signifies that
Sheep shall not die, but very few. Venus in the first quarters Revolution, in
the second house Retrograde, signifies that Wolle shall be but of a meetly
lowe price in that quarter, and Venus in the second quarter, and in the eight
of Taurus, and in the eight house of enemies, signifies that Wolle shall be
higher of price much more then before it was in ye first quarter. And Venus in
the seventh of Virgo, and the first house of the heavens, at the revolution of
the second quarter signifies that wool shall be very dere, and higher of price
then before. Moreover in the iiii. quarter of the revolution of the year
aforesaid. Venus peregrine in the ascendent, signifies that there shall be
great plenty of woulle emogst men, and it shall not be dere. Venus Lady of
Taurus retrograde, signifies that Rine, or calves shall not prosper in the
first quarter but meetly so, but in the next quarter, Ryne and calves shall be
of a good, and high price, and so also in the third quarter of the year
aforesaid, but in the.iiii. quarter Venus in thascedent and impedite out of all
her dignities, signifies that the price of Oxen, Ryne, and Calves, shall fall
in the said quarter. Whet in the first Quarter lowe of price, and in the
second quarter within the which harvest falls no great abundance of
Wheat, and in that quarter it shall be but of a low price Moreover in the.iii.
quarter, specially ii. weeks before Michelmas, wheat shall be good cheap, and in
the fourth quarter lowe of price will wheat be. Barley shall be of a metelye
lowe price in the firsie quarter of the year. Barley also in the second
quarter of the year of a meetly lowe price: but in this second quarter in the
which harueste falls, there shall thereof be good pletie Barley in the third
quarter shall be good cheap.ii. weeks before Mighelmasse, but about fouretene
days before Hallontyde dear again: but that dear the shall not lunge
continue.

Barley in the fowerth quarter of the year meetely good cheap, and little of
it amongst men. Beans in the first quarter of the year aforsaid good
cheap, and of lowe price. Beans in the second quarter of meetly reasonable
price, and that somewhat of the highest, and of them great plenty in this
second quarter. Beans of a meetely good price in the third quarter. Beans
in the fourth quarter good cheap. And generally for most things necessary,
this year will be plentyfulle enough, specially all the Somer, for all the
chief fruit of the earth.

Finis.

