A Brief Collection and compendious extract of strange and memorable things,
gathered out of the Cosmographye of Sebastian Munster.

Where in is made a plain descrypsion of diverse and strange lavves Rites,
Manners, and properties of sundry nacios, and a short report of strange
histories of diverse men, and of the nature and properties of certain Fovvles,
Fishes, Beasts, Monsters, and sundry Countries and places.

Imprinted at London in Fleetstrete near Saint Dunstanes Churchs by Thomas
Marsh. Anno Domini^ 1572.

To the Reader.
IT is well noted of the wise Philosopher in his seueth book of moralls, our
nature to be such through the conbinacion of contrary things, that we cannot
take continual delectation or pleasure always in one kind of thing, but
naturally we are inclined and desire to be pertakers of news, of strange
and unaccustomed things, of variable and diverse matters which may breed
some admiration to any of our senses. And if we at any time hear or see any
thing that is egregiouslye dishonest, or syngulerly good, almost incredible or
moving delectable laughter: to t^e desire of such things most commonly we are
not only rapt and vehemently inclined, but also we take such pleasure in
them, that we do lunge remember them and recreate our^ minds with
oftenthinking of them. ^ if we see any things of small importace, or such as
com every dai in use, tho^e we do not^ so greatly esteem, but sodel^ ^uffer to
slide away with ob^uion. Whereof it may be well perceived that our minds take
the greatest pleasure, and are most earnestly moved with strange novelties
and marvelous things. And therefore when I for mine own recreatio^, had
gathered this brief^ extract of strange novelties out of the cosmography of
Sebastian Munster, being a work as yet, not heretofore showing it self in our
vulgar tong, and yet for the delectable varieties and famous histories and
examples therein, as mete as the best to show it self in english attire, I
could no less do for the satisfying of minds desirous to hear of strange
things, but needs I must communicate unto others the same kind of pleasure and
oblectacion, which I my self in the reading and traslating thereof have both
found and used, thinking it to be an ungrateful point even against nature
to keep secret and hidden to him self that commodity and pleasure^ which with
small pains he might distribute to others, being of no less natural motion,
then he h^ self vehemently declined to desire the same. The work of it self
is not great but the examples and varieties are mani so that in a short and
small time, the reader may wander through out the whole world, and fill his head
with many strange and memorable things, he may note the strange properties of
di^erse Beasts, Fowls, and Fishes, the descriptio of far countries, the
woderfull example of sundry men, and strange rytes and laws of far distant
nations. The wholle work of Munster I have abridged into this little manual,
because to have translated so large a volume, would have ben tedious to my
self, superfluouse to the reader, and very chargeable to the bier. Besides
that no great pleasure or commodity could have ensued by the reading of the
large and ample discourse thereof. Accept therefore my good will gentle reader in
good part, whose especial desire is to show thee the best commodities of so
great a work in few ly^es, in the abridgement whereof, as thou shal^ ^ynde
superfluous charges to be avoided, so shalt thou perceive tedious paynes^ of
reading lunge and weary some matt^rs to be easyed. And if thou fyndest herein
any good things or exampls worthy the imitation, refuse not to employ the to
some good use and purpose, taking this lesson with thee, whatsoever evil or
disloyal thing thou fyndest here setfoorth, the same to be examples and errors
to admonish and declare unto others, the open infamy and continual reproach
that always follows detestable acts and dishonest things. And thus I commit
this brief collection to t^y indifferent i^dgement. The 13. of Apryll 1572.

Of Gold and Silver.
Gold through heate and fire is resolved, but not consumed nor wasted. For of
al kind of metalles it leases nothing of his magnitude and substance, but
the more often and longer that it burns with heate, or is altered with fire,
the better more pure and excellent it is made. And therefore hath it always
been accounted the most precious kind of metal: the weight of it neither is
diminished, nor eaten away by sharpe things, as salt, vynegar, Nitru, and
the juice of vnrype grapes. It is not difformed, nor made worse by rust, nor
in handling of it, or hands do gather any filth, or vnclennes as in other
kinds of metalles, the which things may easily prove gold far to surmount
all other metalles. It is more flexible and soft then silver, whereby it is
less frail and not so soon broken: being beaten with a mallet, it may be
driven so thin and so much dilated, that of every denary of it may be made
fifty, or more thin leaves or rays of gold. It may be framed and wrought
as small as thread, as it appears in gold wyar, and gold twyste. And
sometimes it is woven and wrought with sylke, wolle, and sometimes without. Of
it many and goodly ornaments be made, and for many uses, as rings,
bracelettes, chains, crowns, tablettes, Jewels, and diverse kinds fashions
of plates and such like, yea (that which is scantly honest to be spoken) of
gold some have made vessels to receive the superfluous burden of the belly,
the which thing Heliogabalus the Emperor, Heliogabalus had his chamberpots of
Gold.
being a monster and spectacle of all beastlynes is reported of diverse authors
to have used. Silver will melt and be resolved withe fire, but if it remains
any long time therein, it leases some thing of his substance. Sharpe
things also have power to waste and eat yt, therefore it is not so precious
as Gold: but yet it is of an harder substance than gold. Silver.
And that kind of Silver which is more flexible and soft, is the better
because it is not so easy to be divided, and to be broken, it is less
ponderous then Gold, and cannot so well be dilated.

Of Spirits appearing in Mines.
IT is not unknown to such as have been occupied in deep digginges of
Mines, yt a kind of sprytes doth frequent and haunt in many Mines, whereof
some do no harm nor damage to the laborers in Mines, but wander in ye
dugeons, and where as they do nothing in deed, yet they seem to exercise
themselves in working, sometimes in razing and digging the mine, sometimes in
gatheringe together that which is dug up, many times they seem to turn
the instrument which draws up the mettle from the mine, and diverse times a
man would think they did urge and excite the laborers, and drive them to
work.

And this do they especially in such quarries and mines where in much Silver is
found, or else where some good hope is of finding it^ There be some of these
sprites very hurtful, as that which in the mine at Anneberg, was so noisome,
that he destroys a dozen laborers wherefore the said mine was utterly
forsaken and left notwithstanding the wealth of it.

Of Ireland.
THe earth in Ireland is so fruitful and so good of pasture, that there
cattle except they be restrained some times from pasture in Summer, are like
to be in danger through sacietie. There is no hurtful thing nor noisome beast:
No venomous beast i^ Ireland.
no spider, no toad nor such like either breeds there, or ells being
brought from other countries thither, continues or lives there. The earth
of this country cast in powder upon any dangerous beast or venemouse serpent
of any other country, destroys kills them. There be no Bees in this
country, the temparatenes of the air is marvelous, the fertility
fruitfulnes of the country is notable: the people of the country be void of
hospitality, they are uncivil and cruel, and there fore not unapt for warlike
affairs, they attribute great honour to martial acts, and knightly prowess.
The sea betwixe Ireland and Englande, do rage almost continually, so that
there is no safe passage but at certain times.

Of Englande and Scotlande.
IN England there be no Wolfes, and if any be brought thither they do not
continue, and therefore their herds of cattle kepeth well together, without any
great attendance of men. The sheep have horns contrary to those of other
countries.

In Scotland there be certain Trees which bring forth a fruit folded and
wrapped up in the leaves, Ba^nacles coming of a tree
and that fruit when in convenient time it falls into the water running by
the tree, it revives and takes life and is transformed into a living foul,
which some call a goose of the tree or a Barnacle. This tree also grows in
the ysle of Pomonia, which is not far from Scotlande towards the North. The
ancient Cosmographers and especially Saxo the Grammarian, makes mention of
this tree likewise, therefore it is not like to be any feigned or devised thing
of late writers.

Aeneas Siluius writes of this tree in this manner. We hard say there was a
tree in Scotland which growing upon a bank, and by the waters side brings
forth fruit much like in form to ducks, and the fruit of that tree when it is
ripe to fall of it self, some upon the land and some into the water, and those
that fall upon the earth, to putrifye and rot, but those that fall into the
water, straight ways with life to swym out of the water, and to fly in the
air with feathers wings, of the which thing when we made more diligent
search being in Scotland with king Iames, a wise sad and grave man, we learned
to fly from wondering and making such things miracles as were common, and that
this famous tree was not only to be found in Scotland, but also in the isles
called the Orchades.

Of an Isle in Spain named Gades.
THere is a little Isle in Spain called Gades or Erythrea, ye pastures whereof
do feed cattle so well that they can not draw or sever any whaye from milk,
but they must needs pour water, when they will have their milk to curd.
Their cattle also be like to dye at every thirty days end, except they be
let blood and so leese some quantitye of their blood. The grass whereon their
sheep feed, is somewhat dry, but yet it increases a marvelous fatness both
in their flesh, and also in their milk.

Seneca the schoolmaster of Nero the Emperor.
SAynct Hierome saith that he was a man of most continent life, and therefore
he accounts him in the number of holy men, but especially for the often
letters that he wrote to. S. Paule S. Paule to him. This Seneca being the
schoolmaster of Nero, was of great power and authority, he wished himself
to be in the like degree with his country men, that Paule had amongst the
christians^ amongst diverse of his excellent gifts and properties, he had so
singular and notable a memory, A singular memory.
that he could rehearse ii. thousand men's names in ye same order that they
were told him, and also he was able to rehearse ii. hundredth verses being
said of.ii. hundredth schollers, from the first to the last most perfectly.
It is written that Nero his cruel and cursed scholar, in recompense of his
pains and teachinge, put him to death.ii. years before the martyrdom of
Peter and Paule. When Seneca waxed old, Nero calling to remembrance the
punishment of the rod, wherewith Seneca corrected him in his childhode,
admonished and commanded him to chose what kind of death he would dye, An
easy kind of death.
whereby Seneca understanding the Emperors will and pleasure, desired that he
might be ^et in warm water, and that his veins might be cut and opened in it,
and so they were, and he bled until al his vital spirits issued out of his
body, and thus he desired to finish his life, because he thought it an easy
kind of death, to lose ^is life in cutting of his veins.

To diverse nations in ancient times were objected diverse vices and
deformities.
Envy to the Iewes. Disloyalty unfaithfulness to the Persians Craftines to the
Egiptians. Deceitfulnes to the Grecians. Cruelty to the Sarracens. Levity and
lightness to the Chaldeans. Variety and chaungeablenes to the Affricans.
Glottonie to the French men. Uayne glory to the Lombardes. Unmerciful
severity of the Hungarias. The vnclennes and filthines of the Sueuians. The
foolishnes of the Saxons. The hardiness of the Pictes. The luxurye of the Scots.
The drunkenness and violencie of the Spaniardes. The anger of ye Brittons. The
rapacitie and gredines of the Normans. And as those vices were noted in these
kinds of nations severally, so diverse virtues and honest properties were
attributed to them severally.

As prudence to the Hebricians. Stedfastnes to the Persians. Subtility and
wittines to the Egiptians- Wisdom to the Grecians, Gravity to the Romains.
^agacitie to the Chaldeans. Wit to the Assirians. Strength and fortitude to
the French men. Faithfulness to the Scots. Subtle sophistry to the
Spaniardes. Hospitality to the Brittons. Mutual participacion to the Normans.
These properties were of ancient writers, ascribed to diverse nations in old
time, the which now in these our days seem to be much changed, and to have
had great alteration.

Sugar grows in a part of Italye.
IN Calabria which is a part of Italye there growethe Sugare, which is a
kind of honey gathered out of great canes or reds. First of al it is like
unto a kind of marie resolved into liquor which some call white gum, a
thing easy to be seperate and divided, afterward this liquor being boiled and
sodden after the manner of Salt, is resolved into a spume or froth, until at
the length that which is good, falls to the bottom, then the corruption and
dregs may be clean taken away by the froth.

A Mountain always casting forth flames and smoke.
THE Mountain called Vesuuius Mons, being nigh unto the great water Sarnum
not far fro Naples, sends forth continually flames of fire and smoke like
unto Aetna in Sicily. This hill in the raygne of Titus ye Emperor, being
broken in the very top, di^ cast forth so great flames, that it set the
countries adioyninge on fire. The wrytere of Histories say, such abundance of
ashes and hot imbers to have been thrown out of this hill, that the fields
roud about have been filled with the said ashes, even to the tops of the trees.
It is also found in ancient wrytinges that Plinye the second, being a very
grave and wise man, in the raygne of Traianus the Emperor, was suffocate and
destroyed with the flames ashes of this hill, when that for the desire he had
to see and note the nature and motion of it, he presumed to go to near. This
mountayn also burned with flames of fire, when T. Vespa^ian and F. Domitian
were consuls, and breaking out in the top, first it cast for the stones aloft,
after that so great flames of fire followed, that through the fervent heate
thereof.ii. towns were consumed with fire ^ the smoke thereof was so thick that
it took away the light of the son, and in the day time made the darkness of
the night, casting forth both Pumice stones, and diverse other kind of black
stones. Last of all ashes sprang out so thick and in such a multitude that the
countries harde by, were covered therewith as it were with snow, and these
ashes were driven by the force of the wyndes, partly into Affricke and partly
into Egipt and Syria. The which outrageous burning as the elder Pliny did
contemplate and behold, the smoke did so obstructe and stop his wind pipe,
that in the restraint of respiracion, he was suffocate and strangled,

The properties of the Egle.
IN Italy there be many Egles, this foul is a rapaciouse, cruel, and a
devourer of flesh, she is so much given ^o greediness and to her pray, that
she ^oth not only seek for prays in necessi^ie of fode, but also when she
hath enough ^e seeks for superfluities, she doth gre^elye invade and set upon
Hares, Hearts ^eese, and Cranes: the eyes of the Egle ^e so sharpe and quick
of sight, that be^ng in the very highest part of the air, ^he can easly see
what falls on the land. A quick sight.
Amongeste all fowls only, the Egle ^an move her self straight upward and
^ownwarde, perpendiculerly with her ^yinge without any collateral declining.
The Egle is commended for his faithful ^es towards other birds, when he hath
^otten meat or feeding, for he doth fa^iliarly communicate the same unto
such ^owles as do accompany him, and when ^e hath no more to make distribution
of, ^hen he attacheth his gel^e, and dismeni^reth and devours him: All Fowls
^remble when they see the Egle, having ^s it were some understanding of his
ty^anny against them. He loves his yonge ^ith great affection, so that the Egle
put^eth his own body in danger for them, ^earing his yonge on his back when
he perceives them to be assaulted with arrows. When he laboreth to drive the
Heart headlong to ruin, he gathers much dust ^s he flies, and sitting
upon the Hearts horns, he shakes the dust into his eyes, and with his
wings beats him about the mouth, vntyl he brings him to fall down
headlong.

He hath great conflicts with the Dragon: the Dragon most gredely covets
the Egles eggs, for this cause they fight whersoeuer they meet. It is said
that the Egle of all kind of fowls, can keep the sharpness of his sight, and
his eyes ^edfaste against the son beams, and that he is never hurt by
lightninge.

A description of the Raven.
THe Raven is a foul geeuen to rapacitie and devouring of flesh, great of
body, slow in flight, shar^ in sight, and frequents much in Italy^ in the
Alps, in Spain and in Egipte. And this is to be understood of the great kind
of Ravens. The skin of the Raven is prepared, and dressed ar^ificially^ of
the white tawyers, with the feathers remaining upon yt, Stomach Digestion
and that so laid to a stomach not well or sickly doth meruelouslye help
digestion. This foul doth greatly above all other covet men's carcases, and by
a singular wit and natural gift it understands of mans death, presaging it
few days before. With his sharpe eye sight also it perceives a far of, his
most desired fode. There be some that writes marvelous things of this foul,
that in the time of war seven days before hand, it smells and perceives
by cente, the place where the battle shall be, and commonly doth associate it
self to that part, which it perceives shall perrishe with sword.

And therefore in ancient times, Princes had their Sothesayers, and beholders
of birds, that did most diligently look up on the eyes of the Ravens, and
mark to what part they turned their eyes, and which ^ide they did presage to
perish in battle. S. Ambrose writethe that a Raven conceives without the
seed of ye male, and to have generation without conjunction of males and
females, that they live exceeding long, so that their age is full complete with
an hundredth years, and when they come to extreme old age, that then the upper
part of their bylls, doth so overgrow the lower part, so y^ it hinders and
restrayneth it, that they cannot open their bylls to take fodde, therefore are
compelled to dye by famyn, for he doth not sharpen his bill against a stone as
the Egle is wont to do.

Certain rytes and laws of the old^ Romaynes.
ROmulus made a Law that the wife should be equal fellow with her husband,
in money and other things, in holynes and sacrifices, and yt she should live
according to the manner of her husband, and as he was Lord of the house, so
should she be Lady of the family, that she should succeed her husband dying
with out issue, and that with her children, she should have her equal
portion. If the wife were conuicte of adulterye, that then her husband
kinsfolk might punish her, with what kind of death they would. It was not
lawful for the women of Rome to drink wine, this was observed many years,
where of was invented an instrument of dower, in the which the Husband promised
the father of the wife, as often as she brought for the children, that he
should give her as much wine to drink the first viii. days as were decent
and conueniet, Wine forbidden to vvome.
and also so long as she was sick, that she should have wine by the counsel
of the physician, and that upon every solempe festival day, she might
lawfully recreate her self with one draught of wine.

Cato the Censor made a decree, that they which were of propinquity to the
wife might kiss her, whereby they might learn if she savoured of wine: and that
seemed to be done by thexample of Egnatius Metentinus, Kissing.
of whom it is said that he slew his wife with a club, because she drunk
wine from the barrel, and that Romulus pardoned him of her death: this grew
to such a custom amongest^ them, that when soever the husband returned home,
he would kiss his wife his daughters, marking by the odor cent of their
breath, if they had drunk wine or not. They were very severe against women
surcharged with wine, ^br^etie.
because they did perceive that drunkenness was the original cause of corporal
corruption, Romulus permitted and gave to the parents all power over their
children, yt by their own judgement they might compel them to any kind of
duty, whether they would restrain, beat, or keep them bound to rustical
worckes, or fell them, or kill them. Numa made a law yt prohibited any
lamentations or mournings to be made for a child, if that he dyed within
three years of age, but y^ he were past three years of age, that th^ he
should be lamented as many moneth^ as he had lived years, and many other
strange orders they had, the which be at large set forth in Munster.

The lively and quick wit of Adrianus the Emperor.
Adrianus was ye fiftene Emperor of Rome, of whom it is said that he would at
one time, both wryt^ and declare his mind, and hear others, and talk with
his friends.

M. Curius.
THere was in Rome about three hundred years before Christ's time, a strange
and horrible gaping of the earth, even about the midst of the market place,
with so vast a depth and infinite holownes, that it might well have been
compared to the gaping of Hell mouth, the spectacle continuing thus for a
time, made great terror amongst ye people, at the length the Sothsayers by
their interpretations, persuaded yt this horrible depth might be stopped, if
the most precious thing in the City were cast therein. Wheruppon diverse of
the Matrons of Rome, of their own free will cast in diverse goodly Jewels, but
al was in vain. Wherefore M. Curius a knight of Rome coming of a noble
house, being decked and adorned withe his warlike furniture and ornaments,
rid h^adlong into that horrible depth holownes of the earth, and so immediatli
it closed together again and was stopped. Some say that he demanded this one
thing before he would grant to ride and leap into that depth, Vnlavvful
demand.
that for a wholl years space it might be lawful for him every night to lye
with what woman he would choose, and that then of his own mind he caste him
self suddenly down headlong into that den, so the earth closed again.

Sardinia.
IN the country of Sardinia, there is a certain beast which they call Mufl^
the like whereof is not in all Europe beside. It has the skin and hears
like unto a dear or an Hart, horns like unto a Ram, not long but crooked
bending backward about the ears, in bygnes he may be compared to a Buck, y^
feeds upon grass only and herbs, kepeth most about mountains, very
swift in running, and his flesh is good to be eaten. There be no wolves in
this country, nor no hurtful kind of vermin, f^wle, or beast beside the Fox,
which of all four footed beasts there, is most hurtful, being of like bygnes
to other foxes of Italye. In Sardinia a Fox will kill a very strong Weather or
Ram, a Got, and a Calfe. Foxes.
Some write that in this country there is no serpent, nor any venomous thing,
but pestilent air which comes through corrupt puddels and waters. Also
there is found in this country a certain herb like unto Balm gentle,
whereof if any man shall eat much, he shall perish and dye laughing. Some say
that there is a fountain and spring in Sardinia whose waters doth reprove
thieves and robbers after this sort. If a thief swereth that he hath not
committed the theft, and washes his hands or ^yes with the water of that
fountain, by and by he is made blind and so he may be known, but if he
hath not done the felony, his eyes are made more bright and clearer then they
were before. The notice of this spring is grown out of memory in this our
age.

The making of Sugar at Palermo in Sicilye.
IN the fields about the city of Pale^mo, grows great plenty of sweet
reeds, of whose juice being well boiled Sugar is made. First they dung well
their fields being not much distant from the sea, and then do they make
forrowes and ranges somewhat high and eminent, afterward in the month of March
they take the highest knots of the sweet reds made bare and void of leaves and
rindes, the which they do so set and plant, tha^ they pearce through the
sides of the ranges with three or four having double knots even at one dynte,
and so do they fill all the ranges of the field, the earth is watered in
Summer and is kept from rancknes daily, about the Winter solstice, only the
rotes left for another plan^tinge (for it lasts two years) the rede^ are
broken and taken away, of whos^ ripe and sweet joints and knots deuide^ and
knit into small parts, by the same arti^ciouse means that oil is made, th^
joyce that comes thereof is purged an^ putrified in one cauldron of three
whych^ are ^et in a stew, and afterward is stra^ned through a course cloth,
the they tak^ a part of the juice so strained, put it in another cauldron (for
so they use to make it boyle again) and out of this straight ways they power
it again into the third cauldron and they beat it stir it boiling, whereof a
kind of Sugar somewhat black is drawn and made thereof, the same being
sodden again three times moore and after that once again boiled will be most
fine and white Sugar. The other harnessed which comes of the rotes o^ the
reeds, except the field be dunged in May month, will hardly come up to any
profit. This kind of reed^ is full of knots in the stalk as our common reds
be, but yet not so empty within as they are, for it is full of spungiouse
matter like unto a bulrushe^ it hath a thynne bark and is full of sweet juice,
which is pressed out in this manner. They cut the body stock of it into many
small parts and the put it in the pre,sse and the juice that is pressed there
out, they pour into a very clean caudron and set it up in earthen pots, and
so when it is waxen cold, it is congeled into a very commendable Sugar.

The mountain called Aetna in Sicily.
AEtna is a marvelous hill for continual burning with flames of fire, because
it is full of Brimstone matter. It hath been often times set on fire with
terrible flames as Muster makes mention: the flames of it are in the night
time horrible to be scene, because it ^hineth not as other fyers do. In the day
time it burns obscurely much like to the flame of brimstone whereof the Hill
hath great store. The ancient wryters have uttered many strange things of
this and especially Strabo who saith, yt he was in the top of the Hill, and
there m^rked all things diligently. In the very top they affirm to be
marvelous mutacions and changes, for some times it casts forth great
store of fire, and sometimes great flames obscure smoke And it is to be wondered
at the heate of ye fyar, because it cannot be tempered with any cold nor cold
be dissolved through that heate. The higher part of the moutayne is full of
ashes which in winter are covered with snow: the very top of the hill is
plain is in compass about.xx. furlongs. In the night time fire may plainly
be seen in the hill top, and in the day time a certain obscure smoke rises
up: Many times continual thundering is hard, being a terror to the people,
and black and burnt ashes are dispersed into diverse places, and the air is
made noisome with a most terrible smoke.

The philosophers assign a reason hereof because this Isle is in his inferior
parts full of caverns and brimstone, of Alum, fire and water, and such like,
that are able to feed and nourish fire. And fire cannot be without some vent
or respiracle but it will lift up it self, and therefore many hot bathes be
found in Sicily.

The air also entering into the pores and caverns of the earth, stirs up a
flame which seeking for issue and eruption, vomits and casts forth smoke
and fire, and in many places searches for ventinge holes and respiracles.
Sometimes in ye inward parts of the earth such is the violence of the fire,
that it expelle the and casts forth with flames, burnt stones sand and the
heat which is included doth marvelously shake and move every syd^ of the privy
holes and caverns.

Thus much out of Munster.

Election of a King.
THere be that writes the Gothes to have made this decre and caucion, that
none should be chosen a king ^mongest them, except he were gross ^at of
body. Contrary wise the Sarraces would not chose any to be their king except
he were of a tall lean body. The Carthaginian^ ^lwaies in the election of
their king, did attend only his virtue magnanimity and not his nobility nor
properues of body.

Fear and care hinders the growth.
FOr to be void of fear and care, it is a great help to mayntain the stature,
it doth corroborate the strength, and ^onfirmeth the sine was: for fear
vnquietnes of mind in youth doth much eneruate and weaken the strength of the
body, and a sad and heavy spirit dries ye bones to much, so that such a body
cannot take his just increase.

Munster in his third book fol. 283.

Printing first found out amongeste the Maguntines
FIrst this noble Art to Prynte with letters of Tynne, was invented and found
out almost in our age: a divine and heavenly invention truly, and a thing
memorable and worthy to be remembered, and no less worthy of great
admiration, Common things be not strange.
but truly i^ would have ben a great deal more merneilous, if it had not
chanced to be so common. It is strange and scantly credibe to be spoken but
yet more truer then truth it self, that one Printer may print so many letters
in one day, that the swifteste Scrivener, or writer is not able to do so much
in two years. This is an Almayne invention, which was at the beginning in
great admiration, and of no less lucre and profit. The inuentor first deuiser
of this, was one Iohn Gutenbergius, a man of worship equal with a knight at
Magunce The thing was first taken in hand with more boldness and confidence
then hope, about xvi. years before it began to be common in Italy. The first
beginning was at Magunce, the Germans being the authors, with small and
little principles and foundations, but shortly by the industry of mans wit, it
grew to that perfection, that now in our time it hath. Truly it had gone ill
with all good discipline in these later days (if it were now to have his
beginning) seeing that all are given to their bellies almost, and to vnsaciable
coueto^nes, for now they will scantly take up very good books in the high
ways, which in times paste they could scantly by for great sommes of money.
And of a truth before the invention of this art, when they began to abject
neglect good authors, all good discipline might have perished with the authors
thereof, if this art had not been found out in convenient and happy time. By
this all kind of learning hath increase, the noble acts of all nations are
manifest to all the world: In like manner the memory and remembrance of
ancient antiquity is restored hereby, and the divine wisdom of the
Philosophers, and what soever hath lain hidden in few written copies these many
ages in a few places, is now by this set forth to all immortality.

The inuentor of great Gunnes.
THe great Gunnes came first in use in the year of our Lord.354. and the first
author and inuentor there of was one Bertholdus Schwartus a Monk. Surely this
man found out a marvelous woorcke, and that so many sharpe wits could not
find out before in so many hundredth years: the which divine and necessary
invention, many have thought and judged it to be a deuelishe and most
perniciouse devise: the arguments on both sides be these. It is evident that
for covetousness, malice, and want of charity, in the end of the world, the
evil people cannot be kept down by laws, nor that a man may safely
travail without some danger of iniuriouse people: for before ye inuencions of
gunes, the seditiouse tumults factions of wicked and mischievous men, did
spoil and destroy the labours of good men in many places, and no man was able
to assault batter the fortes and holds of such rebels and robbers where they
did enclose them selves, without the healpe of such gunnes and great
ordinance: therefore they do not well that condemn the inuetor of these
Gunnes, without the which neither the good could live in safeguard, nor yet
cities could be of any force keep their riches, nor merchant could exer^ise
their merchandise and traffic, who are in deed the special parts of
mighty and great Cities. Wherefore let the enemies of bombards and great
Gunnes cease to contemn the gifts of God, except a man will imagine the
ga^ing mouth of the Dog, and his teeth made for to byte, and so to be
condemned, and the horns in a Bull, or an Ox, not to be the good work of the
creator.

But no wise man will condemn these parts of nature given in the stead of
weapons: let them reject the abuse as in an Ox and a mad Dog, it is better to
lack ^oth horns and teethe. For there is no ^inde of creature the which evil
men will ^ot abuse. Some detest this as a plain ^euilishe devise, and that
nothing could ^e more wickedly devised under heaven, because all flagitious
and wicked ^atios as the Turks and Tartarians, being the common plagues
scourges of the world, do occupie^ them for the destruction and consuming of
good men: in this case no manhood, no fortitude, nor strength of body, no
warlyke policy, no weapons nor instruments, no strong holds, nor ^owers of
stone, can profit or do good. For these torments which shot stones, and
iron pieces, and great flames of fire do wast, destroy, and overthrow all
things, and brings them to nothing. One shot destroys an hundredth, or
two hundredth men in an army be they never so well harnysed. Therbe ma^y
kinds of Bombards and great Gunnes which are to be learned nominately of
the that for warlike affairs have employed great pains in the use and
experience of such things.

A notable historic of a thing done at a town in Germanie called Bingi^m.
NIgh unto the town of Bingium, almost in the middle of the water of Rhene, a
certain turret called the Tower of Mice, the name whereof was attributed to it
upon this event.

In the year of our Lord.914. When Otto the great had the Empire rule, there
was a certain bishop of Magunce named Hatto, who was the Abbot of Fulden
before, in whose time there was great famine in that country: this Bishop when
he perceived the pore to be oppressed with great famine, did congregate and
gather together, a great number of the pore into one great barn, No humane
pol^icy canne withstand Gods just ^dgemet.
and ^et the barn on fire and so burnt them: For ^e said that they did not
differ from Mice, which consume and wast corn being profitable for nothing:
But God suffered (...) so great tyranny unrevenged for he commanded the mice
by great^ ^ockes ^ and with a multitude to invade this Bishop without pity,
and to afflict and vex him both day and night and to ^ue him quick. But
this Bishop fliynge into this tower (that I spake of before) for refuge,
thinking himself to be safe in the midst of the water of Rhene and free
from all gnawing and bytinges of mice, was much deceived, for all this profited
him nothing, because the Mice came without number, through the water of Rhene
swimming and ready to execute the just judgement of God: The which thing the
miserable Bishop perceiving, at the length yielded and gave up his life amongst
the Mice. There be some that writes more over of him, that the Mice did gnaw
and eat out and utterly extinguish his name fro the walls and banginges. The
like and more horrible history, you shall find in Polonia, where the King the
Queen and their children were consumed of Mice.

The Bathes called Badeses in Germany
THe waters of the bathes of Baden, have this property, that feathers of
fowls being boiled in this water, may be clean taken away from the skin,
a^d Swynes hears from their skins, whether that they be cast living into
this water or chafed with it being dead These waters have ye property of alum,
salt, brimston: therefore they be good for such as have hard fetching of their
breath and stopping of the breast, which things rise of cold fluxes of the
brain: they be medicinable for moist eyes, and hissing ringing of the ears,
for trembling parts and astonished, for the cramp, other dis^eases touching the
sinews, which com^ of cold humidities: they be good for such as have a cold
stomach, moist and ill o^ digestion, and those that suffer grief of y^ liver
and spleen through cold. Also fo^ such as are troubled with the dropsye, or
have any griping in the guts, they help^ such as be troubled with the stone,
wo^men barren and unfruitful, they take a^waye the grief of the mother, and
do re^presse the evils of the womb, and the in^flacion of the thighs, they
heal scabbs wheales, and scars, and have a very good property in helping
the got.

See the third book of Munsters cosm^graphie, for the nature, virtue, and
hol^some properties of the bathes in Valesi^

The Hernesewe.
THe Hernesewe is a Foul that lives of the water, and yet she doth abhor
rain and tempests, in so much that she seeks to anoyde them by flying on
high. She hath her nest in very high trees, and shows as it were a natural
hatred against the Gosse hawk and other kinds of hawk, as the hawk
contrary wise seekethe her destruction continually: when they fight above in
yt the air, they labour both especially for this one thing, that the one
might ascend and be above the other, if the hawk gets the upper place, he
overthrows vanquishethe the Hernesew with a marvelous earnest flight, but if
the Hernesewe get above the hawk, then with his dung he defiles the hawk and
so destroihim, for his dung is a poison to ye hawk and his feathers do
putrifye and rot after yt.

A monster borne nigh unto VVormes in Germany in the year.1495.
A Woman was delivered of two female children, whole and perfect in bodies,
but in the top of the forheade they were joined and grew together vnseperably
so that they must needs behold one the other. I my self saith Munster did se
them at Magunce in the year of our Lord.1501. and then were they almost six
years of age. They were compelled by force of this natural conjunction to go
both together, to sleep and rise together, and when one went forward the other
went backward: their noses did alnost touch together, their eyes did not loke
straight and forward but only sideways, because a little above their eyes
their forheads cleued did stick fast togethe^, they lived until they were ten
years of age, and then when the one of them dyed and that was cut a way from
the other living, she that lived dyed also within a little after, of a wound
that she took in the head, by cutting away of her fellow, or rather by a
corruption in the brain, which came of the stink of the wound putr^faction.

The occasion of this moster was thought to be this. Two women talked together
whereof the one was with child, the third woman coming suddenly upon them and
unloked for, thrust the heads of those ii. which were talking together, so
that they dashed and touched each other, whereof the woman that had conceived
already, being made afraid through strong imagination gave and printed the
sign of the rushing of their heads in her two children.

How scrupulous the Iewes be to do any thing on their Sabboth day.
IT chanced that at Magdeburge in Germany about the year of our Lord 1270. A
certain Jew upon the Saturday fell into a Iakes, out of the which he could
by no means deliver himself, he cried therefore pitifullye for the help of
his fellows, at the length some of his companions came, and they withe
lamentable voices showed yt it was their Sabboth day, therefore not to be
lawefull for them to use or exercise the labour o^ the hands. Whereupon they
exhorted him patiently to bear the thing until ye next day, that it might be
lawful for the to traueyle in the helping of him out.

This matter at the last came unto the eeares of the Bishop of that place,
who was nothing favourable to the Iewes.

The Bishop understanding that the stub horne Iewes for the scrupulous
observation of their Sabbothe day, would not help their brother out of the
Iakes, commanded upon payne of death that they which did so ^uriously observe
their own Sabb^th day, should in like manner as religiously observe and keep
with ye like solemnit^e the next day after, being the Christians Sabboth
day. This was an harde case: what should they now do? upon payne of death
they must obey. In the mean time the miserable Iewe in ye Iakes was enforces
to continue ^ii days and ii. nights in great filth and stink, danger of his
lyfe^ The like history you shall find in Fabians Chronicle.

How the Torneymentes and ^ustes began first in Saxony.
HEnry Duke of Saxony in the year of our Lord.934. being much assaulted and
incubred with infidels, The Tor^neymets ^er first invented in the^yme of Hery
auceps the ii Emperor of Germany in the year of our Lord 934.
and heathen nations, made an assemble of a great multitude of the nobility
to assist him in his wars against the Sarracens, wherein he had so good
success, that triumphantly he had the victory over the Thus after that he had
given the repulse to the Infidels, considering what a number of the nobility
he had, daily exercising themselves in martial acts, thought it meet that
after the end of his lunge and great wars, to recreat them with some honest
and pleasant exercise: He had compassion over them, because some of them
inhabitinge amongst Citizens should be occupied with civil business, not in
the exercise of noble and honorabie pastimes, meet for such personages as
they were, and therefore he prescribed certain articles according to the
which they sho^ld live, and if they did tran^gres them, that then they should
be punished in the open Tournament These articles were twelve in number.

The first whosoever of the Nobility should say or do any thing against the
holy faith, he should be restrained from y^ torneyment, and if under the
colour or excuse of the nobleness of any of his ancestors any doth presume to
enter the lists or the Torneyment, let him with shame be driven away.

The second, whosoever coming of noble blood, doth attempt any thing
against the Royal majesty of Cae^ar, let him be punished openly in the
Torneyment, and of this article was the author Conradus a prince of Palatyne.

The Duke of Franconia was the author of the third which is this. Whosoever
coming of a noble house betraieth his Lord or forsakes him, or exciteth to
fly away in an army, without any necessary cause or sleath his innocent
companions, let him have punishment in the open Torneyment.

The Duke of Sue^eland made the fowerth after this sort. Who so ever coming of
noble parentage, doth violate or diffame by words or deeds, virgins or women,
let him be openly corre^ted in ye Torneyment.

The fifte article the Duke of Bauaria made in this man^r. If any of the
nobility be apprehended or reproved, to to have corrupted or falsefyed the
seal, or to have violate his other or hath been noted of infamy, let him as
unworthy be kept from the torneyment.

The sixth is if any noble man did either secretly or openly slay his wife and
bedfellow, or had helped by his counsel or dede to the destroying of his
Lord, that the law of the Torneyment should take place against him.

The seventh, If any did spoil rob churches, chapples, widows or war^es, or
kept by force that which was ^heirs from them, where as they were ra^her to
be helped and maintained, that he should be duly corrected for it.

The eight If any noble man were be^ome an enemy to an other, and did not
^ayntayne his cause by lawful order^ or by martial law, but would hurt his
adversary by robberies, or by destroying of ^is goods, especially his wines
corn, ^herby the common wealth is endama^ed, let him be tormented in the
Torneymente. The ninth. If any did presume to make any alteration, or set
any heavy burden upon others, otherwise then of ancient times were used,
how so ever it were done. c. that he should have his correction in open
Torneyment.

The tenth, if any were canuicte of adulterye. c. in like manner let him be
amended.

The eleventh. What so ever Noble man, doth not live as a noble man should do
c. in like manner let him be punished.

The twelfe. He that will be at the torneyment not coming o^ noble parentage or
cannot prove his nobility in four descents, he may not enter into the exercise
of the Torneyment

Thus in a brief sum you may see ye manner of the Tor^eymente in Saxony, the
which Munster most largely doth set forth, with every article in his order.

Of wild Bulls in Prussia.
THere be wild Bulls in the woods of Prussia like unto the common sort of
Bulls, saving that they have shorter horns and a long beard under ye ^hinne.
They be cruel and spares ney^he man nor beast, and when any snares, or
disceite is prepared to take the or they ^e wounded with arrows in the woods,
they labour most vehemently to revenge their wounds upon him that gave them,
the which thing if they cannot do, rushing and stumbling on trees, they kill
the selves. They be of such bigness that two men may sit betwixt their horns.

Of Iselande.
IN this country from the.x. of June, for a month space or moore they have no
night at all, and about the tenth of December, they have no day at all. The
people lives in dens and holowe places in hills sides, with them mountains,
and ^illes are in steed of Towns, and spring waters for delicate drinks.

An happy nation whose poor estate none doth envy, and so much the more that
is ^at^ received christiannitie. The merchants of England and Denmark, do
not suffer the to be content with their own but by reason of the good
fishing^ there, they repair thither often times with their merchandise they
carry thy^ther their vices and enormities.

They have learned now of late, to brew with malt, and have left the drinking
of plain water. They have also gold and silver in admiration as well as other
nations. The king of Denmark that rules also Norway, makes a ruler amogest
them yearly, all things be common amongst them saving their wives: they
esteem their young cattle as much as their children, and of the pore sort you
may sooner obtain their child then their cattle. They honour their Bishop as a
king, to whose will and pleasure all the people hath great respect, whatsoever
he determines by law, scripture, or by custom of other nations, that they do
curiously observe: and yet now the king hath copel^ed them to take a ruler.
They have so great store of ^ishe in this isle that they make their ^ales of
them in piles as high as ^ouses: they live most commonly there by fish, for the
great penury of wheat and corn, which is brought unto them ^rom other
nations that with great lucre ^nd gains, cary away fysh for it.

There is a notable Hill or Mountayn ^alled Hecla not far fro which be mines of
brimstone ye singular merchandise of ^hat country: A strange hill.
for diverse merchant lo^eth their ships with it, when this hill ^oth rage,
it thundreth terrible noises, ^t casts forth stones, it belchethe out
^rimstone, it covers the earth so far ^ound about with the ashes cast
forth, ^hat unto the twenty stone it is vnhabi^ed: they that desire to
contemplate the nature of so great flames and therefore adventure more nigh unto
the Hill, are suddenly swalowed and consumed with some notable gulf or vorage,
for there be many such blasts so covered and hidden with ashes, that none can
sufficiently beware ^or take heed of them, and there comes out such a fire
from that hill that consumes water, but stubble or straw it doth ^ot burn.
This place is thought of some to be the prison of unclean souls: for the ^se
being divided and broken into many parts, swims about the ysle almost
eight months and being broken bruised with rushing upon the banks, with the
beatinges and noise of the cracking^ against the banks and rocks, gives so
horrible a sound almost representing^ the miserable lamentation of humayne
voice and weeping, that it makes the ruder sort the more simple, and unwise,
to believe that men's souls be tormented there in cold. The inhabitants use in
steed of bread where of they lack store, fyshe dried, made harde, and ground
to meal: and yet out of diverse conntryes wheat is brought unto them but not
so much as may suffice. There be spyrites commonly see^e, she winge them
selves manifestly in doing such things as belong to men, but especially they
appear^ in the forme^ of such as have been drowned or destroyed by some other
violent^ chance, and thus do they appear commonly in the company of such
men as have had familer acqueintance with the departed, and do use them so in
all points that they be taken many times for the living persons in deed, of
such as be ignorant of their deaths, offering their right ^andes for
acquaintance, and this falsehode and erroniouse sight cannot be perceived,
before the sprite it self vanishes out of sight and consumes away: being
required of their friends and familiars to come home, and to see their friends
again, with great sighs and weeping they answer that they must go to Hecla
the mountain, and so suddenly they vanish out of sight.

Of the country called Laponia.
IN Laponia the people be of a mean stature, but they have such agility of
body that being girded and prepared with a sheaf of arrows and bow, they
will suddenly pass through an houpe or circle, whose diameter is but half a
yearde. They be taught the art of shoting from their childhode, and a Boy
there shall have no meat before he can touche his mark with his arrow. When
the Son goes down after the Equinox in September, they have one continual
night for three months, almost al which time they have no other light, but
as it were a twiter light, when the Son comes to them before the Equinox in
Marche, they celebrate that day as a festival day with much solemnity.

VVhales.
THere be great Whales as big as hills almost nigh unto Iselande which are
sometimes openly seen and those will drown and overthrow shyps, except they
be made a feared with the sound of trumpets, and drums, or except some round
empty vessels be caste unto them, wherewith they may play and sporte them,
because they are delighted in playing with such things. Sometimes many ^ste
their anchors upon whales backs thinking them to be some is^es, ^o become in
great danger. Many in Iselande of the bones and ribs of such monstrous
whales, make posts spars for the building of their houses.

Munster saith this a good remedy against such dangerous whales, to take
that which the Apothecaries call Castoreum, and temper it with water, caste it
into the sea, for by this as by a poison they are utterly driven and banished
to the bottom of the Sea.

How a marueilouse horrible dragon was destroyed in Polonia.
IN Graccouia a city of Polony, there was a marvelous horrible and huge
Dragon, which consumed and devoured all things, and was the cause of great
damages, for when he came out of his den under the mountain, be dy^ rape
and snatch all kind of cattle, and men wandering vncircumspectly, devouring
them with his horrible jaws

Grac^hus being very sad and lamenting this matter, commanded three several
bodies to be cast unto him every day: for being contented with those he
would look for no more. The which thing although it was grievous, yet he
persuaded, that three either of Sheep or of some other cattle should be
offered him every day, wherein brimstone and some fyery powder or devise of
flame, should be included, bidden, and mingled with wax, and pitch ^riuelye,
for so that beast and dragon being prouoke^ with natural gredines, or with a
rapaciouse fammine and hunger, devouring without respect or choice the offered
pray, by little and little was weakened and extinguished. The like example is
read, in Daniell the prophet.

A ^traunge history of a king devoured of Mice.
THere was in Polony a king named Pompilius who was wont in all his
execracions and curses to say^ I pray God the Mice may devour me^ ^rulye with
evil luck and for speaking^ evil to ^imselfe ^nd to his, for the Myc^
devoured his son, who was also called Pompilius a^ter his father. This sonn^
after the death of his father being left^ in his childhood, his uncles
administre^ and governed the kingdom, until he came to mans years and was
married then suddenly as he was in the middeste o^ his feasts, overcharged with
wine, be^ing adorned with coronets and garlands daubed with his ointments,
oppr^ssed (...) luxury and surfeiting, a great number of mice coming from
the carcases of his uncles did invade him, the which he and his wife the
queen did destroy: but they came forth so fast, in such a multitude,
assaulted and set upon this tyrant in his banquets, and his wife his children
with most cruel gnawinges bytinges, so that a great band of soldiers and
harnised men could not drive them away, because mans help being defatygate
and made weary, yet the mice remained strong without any werynes both day and
night. There was therefore, devised and built burning and hot fornaces and
ouens, and in the midst of the this Pompilius was placed with his wife
children, but the mice came thither also passing through flames of fire, not
ceasing to gnaw and consume this paricide: at the length was devised another
means, by another element. This Pompilius a murderer of his own uncles, was
conueyed in ships, with his children and family into the midst of a deep
water, and yet the mice most earnestly without ceasing followed him, and did
gnaw and byte both those that were carried away, and their ships, insomuch that
the water entringe in at the holes gnawen by the Mice, did threaten ^ignifye
danger of drowning, and therefore the shipmen fearing suffocation in the water
and drowninge, brought the ship to the bank on the land, where a^other great
army of mice meeting wi^h the other, did moore vehemently ve^e him than the
first: these things being openly seen and known, they that before was
defenders of him and his children, perceiving this to be Gods punishment and
revenging fled away.

Now Pompilius being withoutal such as might comfort and help him, went into
an high tower in Crusnicza where the Mice ^liming up, with mose swift course,
did consume and devour his two sons, his wife and the flagitiouse body of
Pompilius. Behold and mark, there is no counsel or power can take place
against God the Lord of all: little small vermin, weak and timorous mice did
miserably destroy Pompilius, as Lice being a very little and small vermin, and
of lesser force then Mice did bring to ruin and de^ruction Arnolphus the
Emperor, eating and wasting his flesh, An emperor eat with lic^.
his mary, and guts, so that the physicians could do no good at all, the
whole substance of the body being so eaten, yt there was nothing but gri^tles,
and only bones left.

A Bear seking for honey, was the cause of delivering a man out of an hollow
tree.
IN Moscouia there is found great store of honey in hollow trees, and that
which is old honey, is left and forsaken of t he Bees, so that in the stocks
of marvelous great trees, the diligent searchers may find wonderful plenty
of honey combs. Demetrius, sent as Ambassador to Rome, declared there before
a company of learned men that a year or two before he came out of his coutrye
to Rome, a pore countryman being a Fermar in the next village by him searched
the woods and trees for the gain, and profit of honey, and espying at the
length a very great hollow tree, climbed up into the top of it; and leapt down
into the hollowness, so that he sunk and did stick fast in a great heap of
honey even to the breast and throat almost, and so remained fast in that
sweet poison that all hope af an ye deliverance was clean gone, when he had
continued two days and fed and maintained his life only by ^onye,
considering that with himself yt he was now so restraint from the liberty
and healpe of his hands and feet, yt with them he could make no shift to get
out, and if he should cry out with open mouth and full voice, that this could
nothing preuaile in such a solitude and vast place of wood and Trees, because
it was not possible that the sound of his voice cry, could go far out of that
hollow tree, so that it might come to the ears of traueilers and passers by,
all these things, when he had deliberated in his mind, now destitute of al
help and consolacio, he began utterly to despair: and yet by a marvelous and
incredible chance, he escaped, being delivered and drawn out by the benefit
of a great Bear, when yt by chance this Bear very desirous searching for
honey, most hastily scaled ye ^re, let her self down into ye holownes thereof,
with her hinder feet first downward after mans fashio, about ye reyns loins
of the which beast, the man clasping and taking fast hold, moved and stirred
the said Bear to leap out, and violently to enforce her self out of the
tree, being driven so to do for very sudden fear, and for the strange
handling and holding about her, and also through the great outcries and noises
that he made. And thus the bear by violence delivered herself and the man
also, from the hollow tree, and from great fear.

Of Bears.
IN the country of Muscouia there is^ great plenty of bears, seking praying
every where for honey and Bees, not altogether for the filling of their bellies,
but also for the helping of their eye sight, for their eye^ wax ^im and ill
often times, for the which cause they do especially desire the honey combs, and
that their mouths stung and wounded of bees might ease the heaviness of their
hedes in bleding. The head in Bears is very weak the which in Lyons
contrary wise is most strong. And therefore when necessity vrgethe that they
mu^te needs tumble from some high rock they tumble and roll down, with their
head covered between their claws, and often times by dustes and knocks, in
gravel and sand, they are almost exanimate and without life. They scale trees
backward They molest and vex Bulls, with their claws hanging about their
mouths horns. A Bear brings for the yonge according to Pliny, after
thirty days past and that commonly five. The young Bear at the first coming
forth as y^ were a white piece of flesh withe out form or shape, some
what bigger the^ a mouse, it is without eyes, or hear, only nails and claws
do appear outward. But the she Bear never leaves lyckyng this rude and
difformed young flesh, until by little and little, she bring^th it to some form
and shape: when she go^the to the den, that she hath chosen for her she
comes creping with her helly up ward least the place might be espied
through her steps, and there she being with young, remains fourtene days without
any motion as Aristotle says. But without meat, she continues.40 days, only
being sustained withe the lickinge of her left foot, then after this when she
chances upon any meat or food she is filled beyond measure, and this
satiety is helped by vomittinge with eating of antes, the young for fourtene
days space is oppressed with such heaviness or sleep that th^y cannot be
awaked or stirred up from their drowsy heaviness neither with pricking nor with
wounding, and in this mean space of sleeping, they wax fat marvelously,
after fourtene days space they awake from sleep, and begin to lick their
former paws, and so live they for a time, and it is not manifest with what
kind of meat they should live until the spring time, but then they begin to
run abroad, and feed of the young springes trees, and soft tender herbs,
meet for their mouths. In this country of Moscouia, there is great store of
the best furs and skins, and that is their chief merchandise in that
country.

Licurgus.
LIcurgus was a notable philosopher of Sparta in Greece, who erected a civil
estate of the ^ittie with his noble institutes and laws, whereas before times
of al the Grecians, the Lacedaemonians were worst nurtered. Licurgus taking the
matter boldly in hand, did abrogate al their laws, institutes and old ry^es of
living, and did erect a great deal more civil ordinances and more
commendable. First there was xxviii segniors elected, which should provide that
the po^uler estate should not grow out of frame altogether, and also that they
which had the rule, should not go about any tyranny. He took away utterly all
use of gold, ^iluer, and brought in money of Iron, and then was all occa^ion of
felonye and stealing taken away. The iron where of he made his money, being as
red as fire, he put out in vinegar, that it might be mete for nothing
afterward through his softenes. He cast out of the city all arts as
^profitable for that purpose, yet most part of artificers, when the use of
Gold was taken away departed from thence of their own accords, seeing that
iron money was not in use amongst other nacios Then that he might the better
take away all luxury and ryoting out of the city, he appointed common meetings
at banquets and feasts, that poor and rich indifferently might meet together
at their feasts, and feed all upon the same kind of baket. Hereby there was
inflamed great anger of those that were wealthy mighty, and they falling upon
Licurgus with great force, caused him to lose one of his eyes with the blow of
a staff. Wherefore a law was made that the Lacedaemonians should no more enter
into their feasts with a staff. Every one gave yearly to this feast, one
bushel of flower, viii. gallons of wine, five pound of cheese, five pound and
a half of figs. Children did frequent this as a school or exercise of all
temperancie and civil discipline, there they did learn to accustom
theimselues with civil talks, and to use honest pasttymes, and to jest and be
merry without knavery. Their virgins were exercise^ wi^h running, wrestling,
barriers, come^ly m^uing, and gesture, with quaytinge^ casting of the bowl,
hamer or such like^ so that idelnes and effeminate delicatnes taken away, they
waxed the stronger to tolerate and suffer the payne of childbearing. Children
after they were seven years of age, had their exercises with their equals,
and of necessity did learn let^ers, they were notted and shorn to the very
skin, they we^te barefoot at xii. years of age, they might put on one cote
after the country fashion, they neither knew bathes nor kometacions, they toke
their rest in beds made with reds, they might go to the feasts of their
elders, betters, and there if yt they did steal any thing and were taken with
the theft, they were corrected with whips, not because it was unlawful to
steal, but because they did it not privily enough with craft and subtility.
Licurgus removing al supersticion, permitted the dead bodies to be buried in
the City, and also to have their monuments about the temples It was not
lawful to engrave or wright the name of the man or woman upon any Grave, but
such as dyed manfully in war The time of lamentation for the dead was prescribed
about xi. days. It was not lawful for citizens to make peregrinations for
fear they should bring in strange manners into the city. Peregrinations.
But those which came from strange countries thith^r except they were
profitable and meet for the common wealth, were excluded the city least
that forreyn nations might taste of the Lacedemonian discipline.

Licurgus would not suffer young men to use one vesture all the whole year, nor
any to be more decked then an other, nor to have more delicate banquets the
others He commanded all things to be bought not for money, but for eschaunge
and recompense of wares. He commanded also children toward xviii years of Age,
to be brought into the field not into the market place or judgement haul,
that they might pass over the first years not in luxury but in all kind of
labour and pains, they must not lay any thing under them for to sleep the
easier. And their lives they were driven to pass without ease to come into the
City befoore they wer^ men in deed. Maids he would ha^ to be married
without any dower, or rewards given by their parents. Tha^ wives might not
be chosen for money sake and that the husbands should keep their wives more
straightly because they should receive nothing in marriage with them. He would
have the greatest honour and reverence to begeuen to old aged men not to rich
and noble men, he granted unto kings the power of the wars, to Magi^trates
judgements and yearly succession, to the Senate the custody of the Laws: to
the people the election of the Senate, or to create what officers they would.
These laws and new institutes because they seemed hard and straight in
comparison of their loose customs and laws before used, he feigned Apollo of
Delphos to be the author of them that he had them from thence. At the last to
geeue eternity and perpetuity to his laws, he bound the whole city with an
other that they should change none of those things which he had enacted
prescribed before that he did return again saying, that he would go to the
oracle at Delphos to ask counsel what might be changed or added to his
laws.

He took his journey to the ysle of Crete, and there lived in banishment. He
commanded also dying that his bones should ^e cast into the sea least that the
Lacedaemonians if they were brought to Sparta should think them selves
absolved and discharged of their other, that they made for the not changing of
his laws.

The ceremonies of the burialles, of the kings of Lacedemonia.
THe Kings of Sparta when they be dead, knights and purseuantes declares ye
death of ye prince, throughout all the wholle country, the women going round
about the city do beat and ring upon basins and pots. And when this
chances it is mete tha^ out of every house, two which are free, the male
one, the female the other, should make a show of lamentation and morning,
for the not doing thereof great punishment is appointed, and the lamenting and
cry^g out with miserable outcries, say that the last king ever was the best,
whatsoever king perrisheth in war, when they have set forth his picture and
image, thei^ b^ng it into a bed very fair well made and they consume ten days
in the funerralles of him^ and there is no meeting nor assemble of magistrates,
but continual weeping and lamentation, in this they agree with the Persians
that when ye king is dead he that succedeth, discharges fro all dets whosoever
owes any thing to ye king or to the common wealth. Amongst the Persians he
that was created king did remit to every city the tribute why^he was due.

The Laws of Draco.
AL the Laws which Draco made appointed death almost for a punishment to
every offence. He made a law yt they which were couict of idleness and
slothfulnes, should lose their lives. In like manner that they which stole
herbs or fruit out of other men's grouds, that they should dye for it. The
same law of paracides. Whereupon Demades was wont to say that the laws of
Draco were written with blood and not with yucke.

The laws of Solon.
SOlon made a law that those which were condemned of parricide, and of
affected tyranny, should never be received into any office, and not only these
^e excluded from all kind of dignity but such also as would follow neither
part when any tumult or sedition were in the City, thinking it to be the
part of an i'll Citizen when he had provided well for his own safety, to have
care or respect of common affairs. This also was a strange decree of his
making, that such women as had hus^andes nothing mee^e for vene re^use acts,
should take one who they would chose, of their husbands kins^ol^es without
d^unge^ ^ee forbad lamentation mourning in another mans funer^ll^ and that the
son should not give any help or refreshing to his father if so be y^ he
caused^ him not to be brought (...) in some art necessary for ye use of life,
and that there should be no care betwix^ the parents and therm that were borne
bastards, and in unlawful matrimonys. For he that doth not keep himself
chaste from the company of harlots, doth plainly declare that he hath no care
of the procreacio of children, but of libidiouse pleasures, and doth deprive
him self of his just reward. He would have a common adulterer taken in
adulterye to be slain scot free and without any danger. Who soever did
violently misuse any maids, or virgins, he would have them mul^ted or amer^ed
with ten grotes, the which was a great sum of money of his coin Who soever
had brought a wolf by him o^ercome, should have five grotes to be^ gathered of
the comminalty, if it wer^ a she wolf, he should have but one groat, It was a
custom amongst the Athenians, to persecute that beast which was as well
hurtful to their cattle as to their fields. He commanded that the children
of those which perished in wa^re, should be brought up and taught of the
common charge, wherewith many being encouraged, did stoutly and manfully fight
in battle. He would also that whosoever lost his eyes in battle, should be
brought up and kept of common charges. He made a Law also that he should not
have the wardeship of the child, to whom the inheritance might come after
the death of the child. And that whosoever thrust out another mans eye, that
he should lose both his own for it. Another law of his was, that no man should
take away that which he laid not there, and if any did ye contrary, it should
be judged a capital offence. If the Prince were taken or found drunken, that
he should dye for it. He permitted honey and wax to be carried in to other
countries. He thought no man meet to be free of a city, but the crafts man
which came with his wholl family to Athens or else was banished from his own
country.

Of the wars and manners of the Turks.
THe Turks have a marvelous celerity in doing, a constancy in dangers and
observation of the empire. They will swym over very deep and dangerous waters,
they pass over strange hills, and being commanded they go through thick
and thin headlog having no regard of their lives, but of ye empire. Most apt
and ready to suffer fasting and watching. There is no sedition amongst them,
no tumult. They use horrible sounds and not outcries in war, in their tents in
the night time, there is such diligent silence, that they had rather suffer
their prisonners to escape, then to move any tumul^e. The Turks of all kind
of people, are said at these days to use most lawful fighting, so that it is
no marvel why their common wealth cotinueth so long, and increases so much
that their nation is almost invincible, except they be destroyed by some plague
or pestilence, or civil discord. The soldiers have an honest kind of apparel.
In their saddles, and bridels, there is no curious superfluity. No man goes
armed but in the time of war. Their weapons are brought after them in
burdens, they use no banners nor standerds, but in the tops of their Javelins
they have certain threades of diverse colours hanging whereby one captain is
known from an other.

They use the drum the fluite to call and move them to fight. They pray for
their soldiers in every congregation solemn meeting, but rather for such as
have dyed for their country, calling them happy and blessed, that they dyed
not at home in the lamentation of their wives, and children, but abroad
amongst their enemies weapons, and terrible noises.

They wrighte and describe the victories of their ancestors, they sing and
extol them being written, for they think their soldiers minds to be much
encouraged by these means. They do so abhor pictures and engraved images,
that upon such causes they call the christians idolaters. They have no bells,
nor yet do suffer the christians abiding amongst them to have bells, They
never play for money or any other thing, but such as be found playing be
grievously staundred in every mans mou^h. No man of what state or degre soever
he be, desyrethe to sit on a bench, but they lye down and sit on the earth
like children, with a very comely folding of their garments under them.

The table whereon they feed for the most part is prepared of an ox hide, or
an hearts skin, undressed and rough with hear still, having the roundness of
four or five hand bredthes. No man enters in to any house, church, or other
place where in they must sit, unless his shoes be of, because it is accounted
an vnhoneste and indecent point for any man to sit withe his shoes on his
feet, and therefore they use a kind of shoes, that may easly be put on and
of. The place where they sit either at home or in the Churches, is strewed
covered either with tapestrye clothes, or broad clothe or rushes, and
sometimes for the moisture and vncleanes of ye place they have bourdes and
tables.

The garments both of men and women are large and lunge enough open in the
former part. They have great care in emptying the belly and making vryne, yt
they turn not their faces towards the South, which way they are always wot
to loke praying. They take also great heed least any man should see their
^ilthynes in discharging nature. They abstey^ from wine as their laws doth
command them because it is a provoker of al uncleanness vice, and yet may
they lawfully eat grapes. Thep absteyne also from swynes blood and flesh, and
from al flesh that dies of the murrayne. All other meates they do eat.

Howe the Turks do believe and how^ they worship God.
THe Turks confess one God which hath none like or equal to him whose
faithful Prophet they account Mahumet. Five times a day they pray with
their faces turned into ye South, and before they do this, they provide that
they have a most perfect cleanes of body, in every part: hands, arms,
mouth, ears, nosethrils, eyes, hears, washing their feet most decentlye,
especially after carnal copulation, and natural euacuatio, except they have
been sick or travailing abroad. If they want water to do this, which is
seldom seen, because in every city, they have bathes continually flowing,
then they wipe and rub them otherwise. Every year they fa^e a whole month and
a weke most straight lye, in the day time neither eating nor drinking any
thing, nor yet having any conjunction withe women, but after the Son set
until the Son rising ye next day, they fill them selves with meat, drink,
and venereouse pleasures, in the end of this solemn feast, they celebrate the
feast called the Pasch in remembrance of Abrahams Ram which appeared in
steed of his Son at the sacrifice, of a certain night wherein they suppose
the Alcorane was given from heaven.

Their priests do not much differ from ye laity, nor their churches from
common houses. It is sufficient to know ye book which is called Alcorane, and
such things as appertain to prayer obseruace of the Law. They lack not
their readinges and studies of arts and sciences. They have no care of
churches nor souls departed. They have no sacraments nor observation of
relics, holy vessels nor alters, but they are attente and diligent in looking
to their children, their wives family, to tillage of the ground, to
merchandise, to hunting, and like exercises, wherewith life is maintained. They
be free from seruitute and exactions, these priests be honoured of every body
as men that knows the ceremonies of the laws have the government of churches,
can instruct others. They have many schools and places of exercise, wherein such
polyticke Laws are taught, as have been made by their princes for the
administration of the common wealth, and defence of the country, wherein they
that pro^ite some of them are made rulers in eccle^iasticall matters, and some
be seculier magistrates, there be also in that sect many and diverse religious
sorts, whereof some living in woods, and solitude utterly refuse the company of
men, some keeping hospitality in cities, do relieve the pore strangers with
hospitality, if they have not to refresh them selves with all, for they
themselves also lives of begginge alms, many of them wandringe about cities
cary good and always fresh water in certain bottles, of the which they give
to every one demanding for the same, frely and gladly, for the which
dutiful good will and work of mercy, if any thing be given they take it,
they coue^ nothing, but they make so great a show and ostentation of religion
both in their deeds and sayings, and also in their manners and gesture, that
they rather seem angels then men, such is the disceite in men's eyes. The
Turks cease from all labour on the Friday, and keep it withe as much
religion and devotion, as we do the Sunday. But the Iewes do marvelously
observe the Saturday. In every City there is one principal Church, wherein
they meet together after noone every body, after their prayers solemplye done,
they have a sermon. They have large and sumptuouse temples, which are called
in their tongue Meschit, where in they have no Images at all, but it is found
written every where. There is no God but one and Mahumet his prophet one
creator and the prophets equal. And also There is none so strong as God.

There be in their churches a great number of burning lamps with oil. All the
church is white, the pavement is laid with mats and other things, and above
many clothes of tapestrye, and Arras be hanged. There is a great turret about
ye church, on the top whereof their minister when service time is, standethe
and putting his fingers in his Ears, withe an high voice in his own tongue,
he repeteth these words thrice. One true God. when this cry is harde, the
nobles and ye meaner forte comes to the temple, only intent to devotion, the
minister prays with them, and that he ought to do four times between day
and night by his office, they which come to the prayers, ought to wash their
hands and fete and secret parts. They must put of their shoes, and leave them
before the church gate, and thus some enter barefote into ye church, and some
withe very clean and fair shoes. The women fit together in a secrete place
from the men, so that ye men may neither see them nor hear them, albeit they
come not so often to ye church. In their prayers they cruciate and afflict
their bodies meruey^ously with continual agitation and vociferacions, so that
often times they sown and faint in mind and strength. They think it an
horrible ^hinge and most wicked, that a christian man should be present at
their ceremonies and Sacrifices, having this Opinion that their Temples are
contuminate and defiled of unclean and vnwashed men, their minister gets
him into the pulpit, and there about two hours, he preaches, when his sermon
is don, ii, children ascend, thither which singe their prayers sweetly, after
this the minister begins with all the people to sing in a low voice,
bending his body on every side, but his words are nothing but these There is
but one God. They keep thursday also as a festival day, albeit the Friday is
most devoutly and most religiously ^alowed of them, because they have an
opinion amongeste them that Mahumet was borne upon the Friday.

The opinion of the Turks upon the world to come.
THe Turks attribute so much to Mahumet and his laws that they assuredly
promise everlasting happiness to such as keep their laws, that is (...) say a
paradise of pleasures, a gardeyne having most pleasant and sweet waters set in
a pure and temperate air, wherein they should have whatsoever they wold, as
all kind of deintye dishes for satiety, silk and purple apparel, young and
beautiful maids, at their own will and pleasure, with golden and silver plate,
Angels serving and ministering unto them, like Butlers bringing milk in
golden plates, and red wine abundantly in silver cups. Contrary wise to those
yt break these laws, they threaten the danger of hell and everlasting
destruction. This also they believe, that how great offences soever a man hath
committed, if he will believe only in God and Mahumet when he dies, he shall be
^afe and happy.

Some of their religion have this opinio that the law profits nothing, but
the grace of God whereby a man must be saved, which without merit or law is
sufficient to get salvation. There be some as it were ^uccessors of the
prophets, and fathers, ale^ging and affirming the tradicions of the elders,
which teach that men by merit may be saved without the law and Gods grace, so
that they be earnest in prayers, in watching and meditations There be others
again that affirm every man to be saved in the law that is given of God,
because those Laws are equally good to those that keep them, and one ought
not to be preferred before another. So you may se where Christ is not how
inconstant minds waver in diverse ^rroes, the which thing also may appear
amongst some christians, as such as seek for salvation of any other then of
the Saui^ure o^elye.

Of the Fastinge and Meates of the Turks.
THe Turks are wont to fast one month and one week every year, bu^ they do
not always keep one prefixe^ time, for if this year they fast in ^mmary,
the next year they will do it i^ Fe^ruarye^ the third in Marche, and so
orderly of the rest, and when they do fa^, they taste and eat nothing all
the whole day not so much as bread or water (...) when ^errs appear it is
lawful for them to eat al things, saving things which are suffocate and
swynes flesh.

They have vineyards the fruit and commodity whereof they use diuerslye. The
Christians make wine, and the Turks do so prepare honey raysons, that they
appear always fresh both in tas^e and sight, they have three manner of
drinks, the first of Sugar or honey mixte with water. The second of raysons
sod in water the stones castaway, and then rose water is added unto them, and a
little of the best ^ony. The third is made of wine well sodden, and represents
a kind of honey both in taste and sight, this is tempered withe water and
geeuen to servant to drink. When they should eat any thing they strew their
floors and grounds with matts and other things, then they lay carpets and
tapestrye work or rushines, a^d some sit down upon the naked earth, their
table is of some skin, as I s^ide before^ it is draw at large and shit
^g^ther again as a purse, they sit not down after our manner, nor yet as
the people of old were wont to do leaning on their elbows, but with their
feet folde^ together in the forms of this letter. X. like unto the manner of
bo^hers, and before they take take any meat, they hau^ their prayers or thanks
geuinge. The^ ^te gredelye and hastelye with great silence, but al their wives
^epeth the in ^elues in secret. Those which are captive (...) never go abroad,
nor can get license, but with other Turkishe women when they go to wash them
in bathes, ^r in any other place ou^ of the city for recreation sake into
gardens or vineyar^, ^t always keep hoome at their work, and it is not
lawful for other women ^sant wit^ their captives

Of th^ (...) of the Turks.
THe ^ not in ^ the manner ^ as the ^ eight years, and can speak the (...)
^ell, the which ^ them for y^ (...) of (...) which are (...) before ^, and ^
for this ^ in to the ^ple, but is circumcised at home in his parents house
There be assembled at this notable feast al their friends, and commonly amongst
the richer sort, they kill an Ox and therein they include and put in a Sheep
exenterate and ready dressed, in the which Sheep there is a Hen, in the
which hen there is an Egg, which are all roasted together for the solemnity
of that day, then at supper time in their banquet the child which must be
circucised is brought in, whose yearde and privy member the physician opens
and apprehendethe the folded skinn with a fine pair of pinsons, then to take
al fear from the child, he ^aith that he will make the circumcision the next
day, and whileste he uses those words, he sodeyn^ye cutteth the prepuce
which is the skin that covers the head of the yearde, laying a little salt
on the wound. They do not give names to their children in the day of
circumcision, but in the day of their nativity, after three days space he that
is circumcised, is led withe great pomp unto the hath, when he comes home
again, he is led throughout all the gestes which offer unto him their
prepared gifts, some give silk garments some silver cups, others present him
money or horses. If any christian man of his own accorde confessing Mahumet,
will suffer himself to be circumcised, which thing chances often times for
the greuouse exaction and burden of the tribute, such one is ^e^ throughout all
the streets and lanes of the city, with great honour and triumph of the
people, for joy playing on the drums, and to him many gifts are
presented, and afterward he is made fre from their payment and tribute Yet the
Turks compel no man to the denial of his religion, although they be commanded
in the book of Alcoran to expulse the adversaries and gainsayers, whereof it
comes to pass that so many and diverse sectes of people are found amongst
the Turks, al which do reuerrence and honour God after their peculier rites
and customs. Their priests do little differ from the laity, and there is no
great learning to be required in them, it is enough if they can read the
book of Alcoran, but those which can interpret the book according to the
text, are esteemed as most cunning, because Mahumet gave his precepts not in
the vulgar turkishe tongue, but in the Arabicall tongue, they think it a wicked
unlawful thing to have them interpreted or set forth in the vulgar tongue,
these ministers have their stipend and reward of the prince for their pains,
they have wives and apparel even as secular men, if the stipend be not
sufficient for the multitude number of their children, then may they practise
and use al manner of arts, crafts and trades that other men do, but yet they
are free from exactions, and other imposicions, and are greatly esteemed of the
common sort. They have diverse living solitary like unto monks, which under
the colour of religion, inhabit the woods desert places, utterly renounsinge
men's company, and some of them have nothing of their own, but they go almost
naked saving that their privy parts be covered with Sheep skins, they
traueyle and wander through out countries asking alms as well of the
Christians as of the Turks. Some of them go seldom abroad, but continue in
temples having in the corners of churches little cottages, their heads
uncovered, their feet without shoes, their bodies without garments bearing
nothing about the but one shirt, they fast many days and pray that God would
reveal unto them things to com, and the prince of the Turks is wont to ask
counsel of them when soever he goes about any wars.

What execution of Justice the Turk^ have, what kind of marriages, what manner
of apparel, and living.
THe Turks do execute justice mo^ exquisitely, for, he that is guilty of
slaughter or bloodshed, is always punished with like vexation and torment He
that is taken withe a woman in adultrye, is stoned to death without mercy or
^arying. There is also a punishment appointed for those which are taken in
fornication, for who so ever is apprehended for it, he must suffer eight
hundred lashes with a whip: a thief for the first and second time, is so
many times scourged also, but if he be taken the third time he loses his
hand, at the fowerth time his foot. He that doth any damage to any body, ^s
compelled to make satisfaction according to the estimate of the loss.

They admit no witnesses but very mete and allowable persons, and such as may
be believed without any other. It is not lawful for any man that is of full
age to live out of matrimony, they may be married to f^ure lawful wives those
whosoever they will chose except their mother and sist^rs, having no respect at
all to the propinquity of blood, they may have as many illegitimate and
unlawful wives as they please and be able to keep, the children both of
lawefull and vnlawefull wives are equally heirs in their fathers goods, so
that they observe this order yt two daughters shall but match and be equal
with one son. They keep not.ii. or moore wives in one house or in one city
for fear of often contention and vnquietinge, but in every city they keep
one, the husbands have this liberty to put them away three times and to take
them again thrice, those wives which are put ^way may if it please them
continue and abide ^ith such men as receives them. The women are very descent
and honest in their apparel, they use on their heads a kind of linen like
unto youg damsels, and they have veyles over the same the folding whereof is
decent, that the top of it hangs over the left or right side, wherewith if
they go from home or come into their h^bads sight they may quickly cover all
their face ^auing the eyes, ye woman may never be scene in the company of men,
nor to go to market nor to bye or sell any thing, in the churches they have
their places seperate from the men so closely that no man may peep into the
nor by any means enter into them, and yet it is not lawful for every woman
to enter in thither, but for noble mes wives and never else but on Friday at xii
of the clock only, they use their prayers, the which is a solemn time with
them, the talking of man and woman together openly is so rare and against
common cu^tome, that if you should tarry a whole ye^re with the, you could
scantly se it once. It is thought a monstrous thing that a man should openly
talk with a woman, or ride in the company of any. They that are married
together do never use any wa^on toys in the sight of others, they never brawl
nor chide, because the men do never omit their gravity towards women nor
wives, their reverence towards their husbands: great Lords that cannot always
be with their wives, have Eunuchs deputed to the custody of them, which do so
diligently observe, mark and watch them, that it is unpossible for any other
then their husbands to speak with the, or for them to do a miss and
otherwise then well. They contract marriage without any other, they take no sommes
of money with their wives, but are almost enforced to bye them, contrary to
the Romaines fashion, where the son in Law was wont to be bought and not the
sons wife. The wife has no ornament nor decking upon her body but that she
is driven to get of her father. A cause of deuorce with them is either
barrennes, or intolerable manners, their judge is privy to these things. The
women use most simple apparel showing no kind of excess in the world, they
never come with open face into the sight of their husbands or other men. The
Turks deteste our hose and great breches, with their Cod-pieces because they
do to lively express and show the privy parts Their heads be covered with
linen, having a top like unto a turret, and comes near unto a pyramidate
form. They use bread not of the worst sort, both black white bread saving
they cast a certain kind of seed upon new bread, which brings a great
plesatnes i^ eating. They have diverse artificious wais in preparing meates,
variety of sauces, a solemn kind of meat with them is a kind of pottage,
made with ^yce, so thick that it can hardily be divided with hands, fro fish
they absteyn marvelously, they use all kind of flesh saving swines flesh.
There be no common taverns, nor Innes for gestes and strangers, nor common
vitaling houses, but in the streets diverse kinds of meats are to be sold and
other things necessary for lyfe^ The townsmen cause their fields to be
tilled by their servant, and they paye tithe to their Emperor and ruler
Crafts men mayntayn them with their sciences, they that do love idleness do
perish with famine, they exercise merchandise most diligently, they pass and
travel into Asia the less, Arabia Egipte, and they have their peregrinations
also to the Uenecians. If they make water, they wash their yard after it, if
they empty their bellies the make al clean afterward, in like manner do the
women, whom their servant and bond men do follow bearing vessels full of
water, the man seruaunt following the master, the maid the mistres. They have
one kind of Judge as well Christians as Turks. And this judge is bound to
minister equally right to every body.

Of dame Flora.
THe Lady which ye Poets call dame Flora, was a notable and common harlot, who
when she had gotten great riches by common ribaldry, made the people of Rome
her heir, and left a certain sum of money, with the yearlye use where of
the day of her nativity should be celebrate in the setting forth of goodly
plays, the which thing because it seemed detestable to attribute a certain
solemn dignity to a dishonest thing, they feigned and surmised her to be a
goddess that had the rule and governance o^ flowers, and that it was meet she
should be reconciled with cerimonies, yt through her help fruits and trees
might flourish and prosper.

Of the Ieate stone.
IN some part of Englande and Scotlande, there is great store of the best
kind of Jet stone. If any body drinks the powder of this stoone in water,
if the same party be contaminate with lybidiouse acts, the same body out of
hand shall be enforced to make urine, and shall have no hability to keep it
back. But if a virgin drinks of it, there is no power to make vryne follow.
Munster in the^ 2 book. fol. 45.

Of the Burialles of the Turks, and of diverse obseruacions and customs.
VVHan any dies amongst the Turks, they wash his carcass and cover it in
very fair linen clothes. Afterward they cary the body out of the city into
some place, for they think it an heynouse thing to bury one in the Temple.
Their monks go before the hearse with candels, the priests follow singing until
they come unto his sepulture and grave: if it be a poor man yt is dead, they
gather money in every street for the labours and pains of the religiouse, and
that they offer unto him. The friends of the dead comes often times to the
grave weeping and bewaylinge, they set the sacrifice of their meates for y^
dead upon the monument, as bread flesh these, eggs, milk, and the feast is of
nyne days space after the manner of the Ethnickes, and all this is eaten for
the soul of the dead, of the pore, or ells of the fowls of the air, or ants,
for they say it is as acceptable unto God, to geeue and offer alms to bruit
beasts, and fowls neding it as unto men, when it is offered for the love of
God. There be some that set birds at liberty to fly, which were restrained and
shit up, giving money according to ye v^lewe of the birds. Some cast bread to
fish in the waters for Gods sake, saying that they shall get of God a noble
reward for such ^ountye and pity towards those that need it. The Turks have
also three diverse manners of washing them, the first is a sprincbling of all the
whole body, with water, and that this should not be vain ^or frustrate, they
shave the hears from ^uery part of their body, saving only yt herds in
men, the hears upon women heads. And yet they wash them very curiously and
kembe them often, therefore in the more famous cities therbe baths which they
use continually. Where there be no such, they have some secret place prepared to
wash them in houses that they might be well clarified with water before they
go out of the house. They have another kind of washing nothing necessary as
when they ease nature of superf^uities For then in some secrete place they wash
their secret parts, there is none scene stading or upright when he delivers
Na^ure of superf^uous burdens. The third kind of washing is to purifye the
instruments of senses wherein they wash both hands and arms even to the
elbows, then their mouth, their nosethrils, and al their face. Both men women
do make a scraping of filthy places every month twice or thrice, but
especially when they frequent the Temples, otherwise they should be burnt as
violaters and prophaners of a sacred place. They use such severity in war,
that no soldier dares take away any thing unjustly, for if he doth he shall be
punished without mercy.

They have ordinary keepers and defenders of those things as be in soldiers
ways, the which are bound to mainteyn the orchards and gardeynes, with their
fruits, about high ways, so that they dare not take an apple or any such
like, with out the license of the owner. For if they did they should suffer death
for it.

Of this writes one Barthelmewe Giurgeuitus, that was captive thirtene years
in Turkie, after this sort. When I was in the Turks army in his expedition
against the Persians, I did see a certain horseman headd^d with his horse and
seruaunt also, because his horse being loose entered into the fields of
another man. None of the princes or Dukes possesses any province or city, as
rightful enheritance, nor they cannot leave any such thing after their death
to their children, or successors without the consent of the king and supreme
governor. But if any Duke desires to have any certain possessions, it is
granted to him upon this condition, there is a perfect note made of the price,
of the rents, and revenues of those possessions. The Turk knowethe also how
many soldiers may be kept, with that yearly revenue, and so many soldiers he
enjoins him to keep, the which ought always to be in a readiness at every
commandment, otherwise yt Lord shall lose his head, if he did not answer
his duty and office.

How the Christians taken of the Turks in war be handled, and tormented, and
how they are made fre.
THe Emperor of the Turks when he makes his expedition against ye Christians,
he has always waytinge upon him a company of butchers and sellers of Boys
to abominable uses, who cary with them a great number of long chains, in hope
of bondmen and captives, wherein they link and bind fifty or three score
easlye by order. The same men do bye also of such as have boties or prays, as
many as have not perished with sword, the which thing is permitted them
upon this condition if they give unto the prince the teeth or tithe of their
bondmen prisoners and capti^es The other it is lawful for them to keep to
their own use and merchandise, and there is no better nor moore plenteouse a
mart amongst them, then of bondmen. The Emperor doth so seperace the old
men and the youth of both kinds which comes to him in the name of the tenth
or tithes, that he sells them of ripe age, for the plough and husbandry.
Young maids and young men he sends away to a certain place, to be
instructed in certain arts, that he might use them after ward moore
commodiouslye, and first they go about this to make them deny their
christian faith, and then to have them circumcised, and when they are once
entered into their ceremonies, according to every mans disposition and wit, he
is appointed either to study the Laws of their nation, or else to practise
feats of war if more strength appears in the body than in his wit, they are
so instructed in the principles of warlike affairs, that for the weakness of
their strenght, first they use an easy bow, afterward as their strength
increases and they have moore exquisite knoweledge, they have a more strong
bow until they be meet for war. There is a master which calls seuerlye
upon daily exercise, as often as they swerve from the mark so oftetimes are
they whipped. Others are made meet and cunning to fight with staves. But they
in whom there is a greater grace of beautiful form are so magled that no
manlines appears in their bodies, they have been so abused with great danger
of life, and if they do escape they be mete for nothing else but ministers of
most flagitious voluptuousenes, and when their beauty waxes old, they are
deputed into the office of Eunuchs, to observe and keep matrons, or ells they
are addicted to the custody of Horses or Mules, or to kitchen drudgery.
Maidens that are very comely and beautiful, are chosen to be their
concubines, those of the meaner sort are given to matrons to wait upon them,
where they have some such filthy services and functions, that they cannot be
named with honesty, for they are compelled to follow them with a vessel of
water when they go to discharge the bellyr, and those parts. Other be kept at
maidens works, as spinning, and bakinge. When the Turks have gotten any young
prisoners, they urge them with threatenings, promises, and flateringes, that
their new bond men wold be circumcised and when any hath admitted that, he is
used with a little more humanity, but al hope of returning again into his
country is utterly taken away, and if he once goes about it, he is in danger
of burning. These because they are thought moore steadfast, and less given to
run away, they are preferred of their Lords to warlike affairs, their
liberty is then dew unto them, when they being unprofitable for years be
rather rejected of their Lords than dismissed, or ells where their Lord hath
given them liberty in war, for ye danger of death that he hath escaped by
them. Matrimony is permitted unto the but their children are taken from them
at the Lords will, the which causes the wiser sort to abhor fro marriages,
they use other extremely that refuse circumcision. They have a very hard life
that have not learned any art or craft: for such are in great estimation as are
cunning crafts men. Wherefore the noble men, the priests and the learned sort,
which pass over their lives in quietness and idleness, whenever they chance
into their hands, they are thought most miserable o^ all, for the merchant
seller of them can not abide when he sees no profit to com^ of them nor any
good sale to be made.

These go with their feet and head uncovered, and for the most part with
naked bodies, through the snow, and upon the stones, both winter and summer
they are enforced to travail, and there is no end of these miseries, before
that either they dye or ells they find a foolish Lord in the byinge of ill
merchandise. No man is so happy of what condition so ever he be, or of what
age, beauty or art he be yt they will lay him, being sick in his journey, at
any Inn or lodging house, for first he is compelled to go with stripes if he
cannot so do he is set upon some young beast, there if he cannot sit, he is boude
with his body flat even like unto a pack or a burden, if he dies they take
away his clothes and cast him into the next ditch or valley for dogs and
ravens. They keep their captives not only in chains, but also withe gyves
upon their hands, as they lead them, the distance between the is about a
yearde, least they should one spurn and hurt an other, and this do they for
fear their bondmen hurl stones at them. For where as every one that is a
common merchant and seller of men, leads a great number of bondmen, so that
ten of them oftentimes have five hundred in chains, they fear the force of
such a great multitude, if their hands should be at liberty to throw or
cast any thing. In the night time they make their feet sure with chains and
irons, and lay the upon their backs, open to the injury of the the air, the
women are used with moore humanity, they that are able do go upon their feet,
and they that are less able, be carried upon yonge cattle, and those that are
so weak that they may not suffer the shaking of the horses, or asses, or such
like are carried in hampers and paniers, like unto geese and swans. The night
is more heavy unto them, for then either they are shit up in strong holds, or
else are compelled to suffer the filthy lust of those that have bought them, and
great lamentation is hard in the night time both of young men young women,
suffering much violence, so that they spare not them of six or seven years of
age in this misery, such is the cruelnes of that filthy nation, against nature
in the rage of voluptuousnes. When the day commethe they are brought forth
into the market as sheep goats to be sold, when they that would bye them,
come, the price is made, if the captive pleases him, all his apparel is cast
of, that he might be seen of his master that shall be, all his parts and
members are viewed, touched, searched and tried, if there be any fault in his
joints or not, if he pleases not the bier, he is rejected again to the
seller, and this is as often done as any doth cheapen or go about to bye, if
the bier likes the bondsman, he is carried away to a most grievous seruiuitude,
as to be either plowman or sheep heard that he might not remember the more
grievous sciences. If any be taken with his wife and children, noble men will bye
him gladly, and make him ruler of his vilages, and geeue him charge of his
grounds, vineyards and pastures, but his children must be bondmen, if they
persevere and continue in christian faith they have a determinate time to serve,
yt which being paste, they are made free, yet their children except they be
redeemed continue in servitude and bodage at the will pleasure of the Lord.

With what burden and exactions the christian Princes are charged and
oppressed being overcome of the Turks.
VUhen the Turk hath taken any christian prince, he takes all their goods as
well moveable as vnmoue able as a pray and booty, he puts away nobility
clean, especially of the kings stock, the clerks and clergye he kills
not, he spoils them of all wealth and dignity and makes them very mocking
stocks in beggary. The Turks take also out of the christian churches all
bells, organes, and other instruments of music, and after they have profaned
the churches they consecrate the to Mahumet. They leave pore and small chapples
to the christians, where they may do their holy service, not openly but in
silence, the which if they fall by any earthquake, or be ruinous by any sodeyn
fire it is not lawful to repair them again, but through great sommes of
money given. They are forbidden to preach or teach the Gospel, and it is not
lawefull for any christian man, to bear any rule in ye common wealth, nor to
bear weapons or use like vesture with the Turks. If any contumelious words
be spoken of ye christian or of Christ, he must suffer it, ^olde his peace,
but if the Christian speaks any thing irreverently of their religion, he
shall be circumcised against his will, but if any whisper any thing against
Mahumet, he shall be burnt. The christians geeue the fowerth part of all their
fruit, and commodity both of the pro^it of their fields and cattle, and
also of ye gains of their arts, and crafts, there is another charge also
where they pay for ^uery one in their family a ducat, and if the parents be
notable to pay, they are compelled to sell their children to servile offices,
other bound in chains do beg from door to door to get their fees to
dyscharge the exaction, and if they cannot by these means pay it, they must be
content to suffer perpetual enprisonment. Those captives that go about to
fly away if they go into Europe, they have the easier flight, saying that
nothing is to hinder their passage, but certain waters which are passed over
easlye, and this do they most attempt in harueste time, because then they may
hide them in the corn and live thereby: in the night time they take their
flight, and in the day time they hide them selves in woods and puddles or in
the corn, and had rather be devoured of wolves, and other beasts then to be
sent again to their old masters. But they which into Asia take their flight,
go first to Hellesspont betwixt Callipolis and ye two towers which were of old
called Seston and Abydon, but now they are named Bogazassar the castells of the
Sea, mouth, and with them they cary both an axe and ropes to cut down wood
and to bind them together, whereof they make boats or little ships to pass
over the sea, carrying nothing but salt with them, and in the night time they
convey themselves into the ship in the water. If the wind and the sea favours
the, they pass over in three or four hours, but if the trouble some sea be
against them, either they perish in the water or else be cast again to the
coast of Asia.

When they are gotten over the Sea, they seek unto the mountayns, and
beholding the Pole, they take their journey towards the North. In their
hunger they refresh the selves with salted herbs. If many run away
together, in the night time they invade shepeheardes and flea them and take
away all such meat drink as they find, but yet many times they them selves
be slain of the sheepeheardes, or ells taken of them and so delivered to
their old masters, to all kind of seruitute: and the greater number is
consumed with dangers, for few escape free and safe, because they perish
either by shipwreck, or by devouring of beasts or by their enemies weapons, or
else by famine, when as it chauncethe that they after their running away make
any long abode in the woods. Many kinds of punishments are prepated, devised,
and appointed for fugitives, and such as run away, for same being hanged by the
feet are most cruelly tormented with whips, and they that commit homicide or
murder, have the soles of their feet cut withe a sharpe knife in many slyces
and cuttinges and after they are so cut the wounds be ^ubbed and sprincled
with salt, and some have a great iron collar with a gallows of iron, which they
must bear for a long ^yme both days and nights.

Of Tantalus.
TAntalus was a king of Phrygia e^ceding covetous, whom the Poets fain to
have bid the Gods to a baket, and he being desirous to make a trial of their
deity, when they appeared a^ his house in men likeness, did ^ea his own
son Pelops and set him before the to be eaten as meat, giving the flesh an
other name unto the, who understanding his horrible act, did not o^ely abstein
fro eating thereof, but also gathring the parts of the child together,
brought him to life again. For this offence Iupiter caste him into hell, and
enjoined him this punishment: that he should continue in most clear water,
and stand up in it eve to his nether lip, and that most goodly apple trees
bearing most sweet and redolent fruit, should hang over him and touche his
mouth almost, the which things as soon as he should go about to taste of they
should fly from him, and so they did, that, between the apples and the water,
^e consumed with famine, and thy^ (...) was tormented with great penury, even
in present plenty. Where of a proverb hath sprung, to cal it Tantalus
punishment, when as they which have goods enough, cannot use them.

Of the Temple of Ephesus.
IN the country called Ionia there is y^ noble city of Ephesus, which was
built in the 32 year of the raygne of king Dauid by Androchus the son of
Codrus king of Athens. The Amazons did erect in it in ye honour of Diana a
noble temple y^ like whereof was not then in al ye world, therefore it was
accouted amongst the vii. woders of ye world: it was. CC. and.xxv. years in
making that of al Asia, set in a miry ground, for the avoiding of earthquakes,
there were an hundred and xxvii. pillars in it made of their kings one by one,
which were in height iii. score foot whereof xxxvi. were carved with marvelous
workmanship. The length of the whole church was iiii. hundred and xxv feet
the breadth, ii. hundredth and xx.

All that took this church for sanctuary, (...) ^reate immunities and
privileges, (...) were also so many gifts and monuments given to this
church from all nations and Cities, that none in all the world might be
compared to it in wealth. S. Paule preached at Ephesus iii. years and converted
many to the faith. Saint Ihon also the Euangelist died in this city. But this
sumptuouse temple was destroyed and set on fire in the raygne of Galienus the
Emperor, by one Erostratus who doing many notable feats in war and
otherwise, when he perceived yt he got no reward nor renown there by, to leave
a continual remembrance of his flagitious and horrible act, did with great
fierce and monstrous flames, consume this fair church, and brought it ta
ashes, thinking there by to be remembered in perpetuity: and yet he was
deceived, for there were general edices and proclamacions made, that no man
upon payne of death should presume once to put his name in any writing or
chronicle, to the enten^ that he might have ben buried with ever lasting
oblivion.

Of Artemisia the wife of Mausolus.
IN the city called Halicarnassus, Artemisia the queen erected a sumptuous
tomb in the honour of her husband Mau^olus, which was done with such a
pomp and magnificecie, that it was nubred as one of the seven wonders of the
world. This woman marvelously lameting the death of her husband, and inflamed
with incredible desire and affection towards him, took his bones and ashes and
mingled them together and beat the to powder with swee^e spices, and put it in
water, and drunk it of, many other strange signs of incredible love are said
to have been in her, after this for the perpetual remembrance of her
hus^ande, she caused to be made a sepulchre of marvelous workmanship in
stone, which hath been famous and much spoken of al men till our days, and this
was in height xxv. cubits, and compassed withe xxxvi. goodly pillars. This
vayn comfort could not take away out of the quenes breast ye conceived grief
and sorrow of her husband, but that shortly after she her self yielded her
soul and life, as vnmete to tarry after his death.

Sardanapalus.
SArdanapalus was king of the Assirians, whose epitaph had these words in the
Assyrian tongue. Sardanapalus the son of Anecendarassis erected in one day
Anchiala and Tarsus ii goodly Cities. Eat, drink, and play.

These words as Cicero saith might have been written upon the sepulchre of an
ox, and not of a king. He was a most effeminate man given to all kind of
luxurye, and was not ashamed to spin amongst common harlots in women's vesture
and attire, to excel all others in laseiuiousnes. Wherefore the Assirians
disdaining to obey and subject them selves to such a feminine prince rebelled
and made war against him, who being overcome went into his palace, and there
making a great fire caste himself and all his riches into the fire and so
ended his life.

The people called Amazons.
PEntesilea the queen of ye Amazons which were women abhorring men and
practising all warlyke affairs did noble deeds af manlye prowess at the
destruction of Troye. Some say yt they had their beginning of the Scythians
after this sort. Certain Scythians being driven frome their country withe
their wives remaining in the coasts of Cappadocia using to rob and spoil the
borderers, were destroyed at the length by conspiracy and disceit. The wives
that followed their husbands and saying that they were left alone, took
weapons and defended their borders and also moved war against their
neighbours, they had nomynde at al to mary with their neighbours, calling it a
seruitute and not matrimony, a singular example of al ages, they increased
their common wealth without husbands, and that one might not seem more happy
then another they slew such husbands as remained at home.

At the length when they had got peace by force of arms, they used the
society of men in the countries by them, least their whole nation should
perish for lack of procreation, and if any men children were borne they
destroyed them, and their young women and maids did not use spinning nor
carding, but hunting and handling their weapons, so that every female childes
breast was sered and burnt away lest they might be hindered thereby in shoting,
whereof they toke that name were called Amazons. They conquered a great part
of Europe and did occupy many cities in Asia, they had.ii. quenes, Marthesia
and Lampedo, which deuidinge their army into two parts, kept their battles
with great wealth and strength, defending their borders stoutly. They did build
Ephesus and Smyrna in Asia the less, did inhabit the chief city in
Cappadocia. Some say that in some places amongst them they had husbands, and
that the women did bear all the rule and did al common business and that the
men did keep charge at home like women, obeying the women in all things.

Of Hearts in Cyprus.
IN the isle of Cyprus Hearts are commonly scene to swim in flocks over the sea
in a straight order laying their heads upon the buttocks of those that go
before, and this they go by course. They se no land but yet they swim in the
savour of it, the males have horns, and of all kind of beasts every year at
an accustomed time in the spring they lose the, therefore that day that they
lose them, they go into desert places and hide themselves as things that have
lost their weapons: in ^yght months the females bring for the young, they
exercise their yonge with running, and teach them to think upon flying away.
They lead them to harde vnaccessible places, and show them howe to skyppe, and
leap: but yet it is a simple beast and astonished at the meruaylinge at every
thing, so that when a Horse or a Stere comes near, they do not mark the man
that is hunting at hand, or else if they perceive a man, they wonder at his
bows and arrows. They bear signs of their age in their horns, and for
every year they have the increase of a branch in their horns, until they
be vi. years of age, and after that time the like doth ^pringe up again. And
after this their age can not be discerned, but old age is kno^en by the
(...): the horn^ do not fall away from su^h (...) a^e geld^ ^or do not spring
again if they be gone. The hearts ha^ a natural conflict with the serpent,
they search their ^uerns with the breath of their nosethrils draw them out
against their wills. And therefore the savour of hearts horne burnt, Hearts
horne against poison.
is good to drive away serpets, and against their bytings a si^guler remedy is
made of the ruyn of an hy^de slain in the dams be^ly. The harts live a lunge
time as an ^undred years and more, the end of the hearts tail hath poison in
i^, and therefore is it throwed away, pow^er ^aped of the harts hour and
drunk kills the wornies in the stomach, it is good also against the
Iaunders.

Of the Date tree.
THere is no country that brings forth more fruitful date trees then the
Holy land: there be date trees in Italy, but they are barren, about the the
sea coast of Spain there be fruitful trees, but it is an unpleasant date, in
Africa there is a sweet kind of date, but it lasts not, in the East part
of ye world they make wines of them, and some use them as bread, and some
geeue them as meat to their cattle. Hereof be the dry dates most plentiful
in juice and meat, and of them wines are made very hurtful for the head, and
as there is plenty of them in the East, so are they a great deal better in
Jury and especially in Hie^ico, It growethe in a light and sandye ground, it
is ^ushy altogether in the top and hath not the fruit as other trees amongst
ye leaves, but amongst his branches. The diligent searchers of Nature say^ that
there is both male and female, ye male hath flowers the female springethe
without flowers, much like unto a thorn See Munster for more.

Of the dead Sea.
THe dead Sea which is nigh unto water of Iordane, is so called because
nothing can live in it, the Lake of itself is smookye, and the air causes
rustines to brass and silver and all bryghte things. This lake receives not
the body of any living thing. Bulls and Camels swym in it, and men that have
no knowledge of swimming. if they go into it unto the navel, they are lift up.

There is no ship can sail on it. If you put any live thing into it, it
leaps out. A candle burning will swym above, the light being put out, it
will be drowned, ye water of this Lake is always standing still, and is not
stirred with the wind, it is marvelous dangerous and hard coming to it for
strangers, both for wild beasts, and serpentse, and also for a barbarous
nation that keeps there about, and troubles the places thereby with often
robberies. See Munster moore at large.

Of land transforming things into glass
IN Sydon there is a water that has Sand of easy alteration into glass.

This Sand what so ever metal it takes, it changes into glass, and that
which is made glass, if it be cast into the sand, retournes again to sand.
And this is a strau^ge thing at Sidon.

Of the Fish called a purple.
THere be that writes the Purple to have her colour by reason of the
propinquity of the son. Wherefore in Africa they have as it were a violet
colour, and at Tyrus a red colour.

This Purple is a fish of the kind of a shell fish, where of a juice is
gathered most necessary for the dying of garments This fish hath this juice to
colour and dye Garments, in the middeste of her mouth and jaws: it is gotten
and gathe^ed in the spring time, for at other times she is barren and lacks
this juice. She loses her life with the loss of this juice for she lives no
longer then she hath any of this juice, and therefore it is good to take them
alive. She is a great devourer of little shell fish, out of the which a
lytour is taken, wherewith Sylke is dyed purple. She hath a long tong, as it
were the length of a ^ingar the which she is always moving, by her tongue she
gets her pray that she desires. In Italye they discern true Purple from
counterfeit by pouring oil upon silk, for if it leaves any spots it is
counterfeit, but if the silk garment hath no fault after the oil, it is good
and allowable purple.

The City of Babilon.
SEmyramis a noble woman of great prowess, erected and built the pompous
City of Babilon, the walls whereof were made of brick, sand, pitch, and
plaster, of a marvelous length and grossenes. The walls were in compass three
hundred and three score furlongs, with many and great towers beautified. The
bredthe of the walls was such that six cartes might go to gether there on:
the height was thirty and two foot, the turrets in number were two hundred and
fifty. The breadth and length thereof was equal with the walls. She made a
bridge also of five furlongs in length, with pyllers in the depth by
marvelous art, of ^tone, iron, and leaded wyned together. When Ninus her
husband was dead she toke the administration of the kingdom and raygned xxiiii
years. For although she had a son called also Ninus, yet she considering
his yonge years unmeet for to rule feigned her self to be king Ninus son,
the which was easly credited, for ye great likeness of nature that was in them
This woman was of so noble a courage, that she had a singular emulacion to
excel her husband in glory: of whom it needs not now to speak any more,
because diverse authors have so largely renowned and set forth her noble
acts.

Of the Phoenix.
THe Phoenix is a noble bird and is but one in the world which is not much
seen. Cornelius saith that the Phoenix did fly into Egipt, when as Plaucius
and Paupinius were consuls. It is said that she is as byg as an Eagle, having a
glittering brightness like as gold about her neck, in other parts purple, and
Azured ^ayle withe Rose colours, her head with a plume top of feathers,
Manilius saith that no man hath scene her feeding. She lives six hundrethe
and three score years: when she waxes old, she makes her nest of Cassia and
branches of frankincense tree, to fill it with odours and so dies upon it,
then of her bones and mary, thereof there springs ^irst a little worm, which
afterward is a young Phoenix. This bird as Pliny saith is commonly in Arabia,
where are found goodly pearls and of great estimation. Cleopatra gave for one
pearl that was brought out of this country, Cleopatra.

Pearl.


ii. hundred and fifty thousand crowns. The goodness of pearl is judged by
the whitnes, greatness, roundness, playnnes, oriet brightness and weight.

Of the Unicorn.
SOme say yt Unicorn is like unto a colt of ii. years and a half old.

In his forehead there growethe an horne which is black, in the length of.ii.
or.iii. cubits, his colour is tawnye like ^ weasel, his head like an hart,
his neck not long, his mayne very thin hanging only upon the one side, his
shanckes be small and thin, his hooves of his formar feet is divided like an
ox, and almost representing a goats foot. Of his hinder feet his outward
part is hearye and rough. The king of Ethiope hath some store of these
beasts, this beast is not commonly taken alive.

Of Mahumet the false prophet of the Sarracens, of his original, and
perversity
MAhometes was the Prince of all impiety and ^upersticion. Wherefore it is not
to be marveled, if he hath set the seeds of all evil, and such as will not be
rooted out. Some saith that he was a Cyrenaic in nation, some, that he was an
Arabian, others that he was a Persian. He was borne in the year of our
Lord.597. A man of an obscure family, and of no great wealth nor strength nor
manhood: some say that his father was a worshipper of devils, that limaelita
his mother, was not ignorant of the laws of the Hebrewes. wherefore the chil^e
being distrace and made doubtful because whyleste that his father teached him
one kind of religion, his mother suggested another, so that he followed none
of them thoroughly. And thus being trained up in ii. several manners he
received and kept none of them at his full age, but he being brought up
amongst the good christians, being of a subtle and crafty wit, invented and
devised of both laws a most perniciouse and detestable sect for mankind.
After the death of his parents he was taken of the Sarracens which were accounted
notable amongst the Arabians in theft and robberies and was sold to a
merchant of the Ismael kind. He being a crafty fellow, rapaciouse,
dishonest, subject to all vice, a notable dissembler, deceiver, was at the
length mad^ ^he ruler of their merchandise and wares. He did drive camels
through out Egipt, Syria, Palestine, and other strange places, with the often
travail in which places, he using the company as well of the Iewes as of
christians, many times ^tudied and went about not to learn, but to deprave the
old and new Testament being taught diverse sects of his parents: to this he
added the gains that came by theft, and daily imagined how to deceue his
master. Wherefore being suspected of his maistar and hated of others, of an
obscure servant and slave he became a notorious theife and robber. And being
made more famous with his continual theft and robberies, he got daily a great
number of companions of his vnthriftye doings. These things were also a
great help unto him, his strange and horrible countenance, his terrible
voice, and his desperate ruffenly boldenes, greatly to be feared. Thus coming
by little and little in admyracion of a barbarous nation, he got unto him no
small authority, so that his master being dead, with out children he married
and toke to wife his mistress being a widow of yt Ismael stock and fifty
years of age, having great wealth and riches, who also brought him up This
pestilent man being puffed up with his wives goods, applied his mind to all
kind of detestable acts, through his corrupt and depraved wit, being of him
self otherwise prompt and geeuen to all kind of presumptuous boldness, his
cemeti^ie and malapertnes was also increased by the inconstancy and
unfaithfulness of one Sergius a pestilent monk, so that in a short space he
came to such estimation amongst the Arabians, that he was called and believed
to be the great messenger of God and the great Prophet, this in every mans
mouth. This Sergius being a Nestorian archeheritike banished from
Constantinople fled into Araby, and asociating him self unto Mahumets
familiarity, an ill master and governor with a most filthy and abominable
scholer was soon united together, he was a prater and full of words, bold,
rash, impudent, subtle, crafty, and in al things agreing with Mahumet, who
now was waxed mighty, and could help at a pinthe, and whose name began to be
famous and so at the length the runagate found a filthy privy and dungeon of
all wickedness. Whom his unhappy master taught Nestorians madness, and persuaded
him to expulse and remove the christians and their priests from Damascus,
Syria, Arabia, and so to corrupt the Iudaicall law and deprave the Christian
faith: it cannot well be rehearsed by howe many crafty and subtle means this
most vnfaythfull Apostata and runneagate hath deceived and seduced the people.
Now Mahumet being taught al kind of vngraciousnes of his detestable
Master, through intemperant living and continual drunkenness, Mahumet had
the falling evil,
fell at the length into the falling sickness, the which his wife could not
well suffer for the often coming thereof. Wherefore the old dissembling knave to
deliver himself from that infamy, doth hide and cloak his disease: sayeinge
it to be the marvelous brightness of Gabriell the angel messenger of God, of
whom he being put in that trauce did receive and learn most secret strange
things, and that he was not able to abide the presence of him: with a
manifest lye be affirmed it. O my dear and wel-beloued wife he saith, marvel
not that this comes to me when I conceive the spirit of God himself, who
suggestethe to me things to come, and to make me privy of many matters, he
comes often to me. The fame hereof was spread abroad immediately, and he was
openly called the prophet of God, the which opinion he increased with a new
art craft by the instruction of his master Sergius. For he accustomed and
taught a Dove to be fed, and fetch meat at his ears, the which dove his
most subtle and crafty master called the holy ghost. A Dove.
He preached openly and made his brags like a most lying vil^en that this
dove did show unto him the most secrete counsel of God, as often as the simple
foul did fly unto his dares for norishment. His wife being now dead left him
her heir and all that she had, so that he increased in wealth authority
daily, and began to make a ne^ Law by the healpe of his master S^g^s and
certain Iewes his companions, borowing s^me things of the Hebrewes, and some
things of the christias discipline, he did write in a certain vo^ume all the
laws of his new sect, yt which ^ookes name is Alcoran: that koke no^ many
years ag^e has come into p^int: A^d that he might the more craftily deceive
his people and nation geeuen ^o the bellyeane to sleep, he brought up ^nd fed
a certain Bull which was used ^nely to take food at the hands of Ma^met, he
bound a book betwyxte his ^ornes and the simple people lookynge a^oute, with
an high voice, A Bull.
he called the Bull out of a ^ecrete place, and when he with his bablyng tongue
had uttered madye things concerning his laws, suddenly the Bull start forth
and ouerthroweynge many in his hast ye comminges, he ^ayeth down the book in
the hands of Mahumet as it had been a gift sent from heaven. The which he
receiving withe much honour, did immediately interpret many things out of it
to the people, and with this forged and subtyle devise, he named him self a
Prince, and Sergius a prophet: For the dove brought a paper about her neck
written with golden letters, in this manner. Whosoever shall put ye yoke on the
bulls neck, let him be king. Sergius brought the yoke and gave it to Mahumet,
who did easly put it on ye bull, and by and by he was called king of the
simple people, thinking these things to be done by Gods providence, and that
he took the book no other wise. In this book they are commanded to be
circucysed not for any religyon, but for mere supersticion, or else as some
say that no filth should remain under the skyn of ye yearde when they did
wash and bath the There was also commanded abstinence of wine and flesh,
Wine.
that he might ye more easlye cloak his disease who felt himself oppressed
with wine of late, for wine taken more excessiuelye and intemperantly in
stopping the passages of the brain, yt no respiracion may be had, doth breed
norishe the falling sickness, and swynes flesh makes gross humours wherewith
obstruction of the brain comes quickelye, and many other diseases springethe
thereof. The Book of Alcoran commaunde^ also the fasting of one month wherein
a man may eat at the night log so ye daily abstinence is recopensed with
night surfeting. Mahumet appointed also because he would have his law to
disagree from the Christians and Hebrewes that the Frydaye should be consecrate
as holy day, because he was made king up on that ^aye and also would not agree
with any other sect. For the same cause do the Turks also turn them into the
south, at their prayers against the manners of other nations. He hath also
granted to every man four wives ^f his own kindred: but concubines and bond
women bought it is lawful for every man to have as many as he can keep, so
that they may forsake them and make a divorce as often as they list, and this
was done to draw the common sort and rude multitude unto him more easly. He
taught also that the pleasures of the body did not hinder the happy life to
come, and he promised to the ^bseruers of his law, a paradise gar^den of al
pleasures, wherein they should ^se their most desired joys and all kind of
pleasures, as maidens most beautiful adorned, and the embracinges of Angels and
al other kinds of pleasures that any man would desire, with the which subtle
^raftines, be led the people flexible of their own nature wither he
would, because he promised al kind of libidinous pleasures. He reprehended the
Iewes, for that they denied Christ to be borne of the virgin, seeing yt the
prophet through divine inspiracion did prophecy the same He reproved the
Christians of foolishnes because they did believe Iesus to be borne of the
virgin and to have suffered al contumely and punishment of the Iewes patiently:
for as much as that body conceived by Gods inspiracion, was made vnpassible,
and also seeing that Christ did ascend into the heavens, and Iudas was crucified
in his place.

The Turks admit only three prophets Mahumet their law geuer, Moyses the
prophet of the Hebrewes, Christ who they deny to be God. Mahumet made a ^rsed
law, that if any man should dispute against his mysteries, that he should
suffer death for it, in the which law he hath manifestly taught, that there
is no sin^ere or good thing in Alcoran, the which he goes about to defend
by the sword only. Thus withe Sergius he made this book full of wickedness
corrupted the true scriptures with counterfeit interpretacions, and that he
might be accounted the prophet and conseruatour of both Testamentes, he
flattered ye christians in this that he was baptised o^ Sergius, and commanded
his people to be washte often for the expiacion of their offences. He followed
also the Iewes, in that, that he appointed circumcision, and abstinence from
swynes flesh, and yet in deed he did disagree from both. For circumcision
which is commanded to be the eight day, extends to the very full complete
age, and baptism that takes away spyrytuall filthynes which ought not to be
reiterate, is daily of them reiterate.

The manners of the Assirians.
THe Assirians feed upon Dates, whereof they make both wine, and honey. They
keep their hear long and bind it up with hear laces and fyllets. They
annoynte them selves with fine ointments before they go abroad

Of their laws which they used this ^e is memorable, that their maidens and
virgins being ripe for men, were ^rought into some open place, there were set
to be sold yearly for them that wold mary any wives, and first of all the
most beautiful ware set to sale. They which had not so comely beauty so that
no man would bye them nor scantlye take them frelye, were bestowed in
matrimony with that sum of money which was gathered of the selling the fair
maids.

They had no use of physicians, but ther^ was a law amongst them that if
any^ did fall sick, he should ask counsel o^ those that had been visited
and trouble^ with the same sickness. Some say yt thei^ sick folks were carried
abroad, and tha^ by the law they which had been sike a^ any time, should
visit such as were no^ sick, and teach them by what means ^ remedies
especially they were delivered from their sickness. They had for thei^
priests, men of great knowledge in Astronomy, who could faithfully
interpret dreams, and monstruouse things, and these were not taught nor
learned abroad, but the children took their discipline and learning, as
inheritance from their parents. With long and ancient observation of the
sterres they did prognosticate to mortal men many things to come, they did
attribute great strength to the planets, but other especially to Saturne. They
therefore told many things to princes, as to Alexander his victo^ye which he
had against Darius, and to diverse other in like manner.

The manners of the Persians.
THe Persians would not wash them in any river, nor never make urine in the
water, nor caste any car casse therein, nor so much as spent in it, for they did
most religiously reverence the water. Their kings they always created of one
family, and he that did not obey the king lost his head and his arms, was
caste away vnburyed. They had many wyu^s for the increase of their stock, and
many concubines also, they gave great rewards to them that had gotten many
children in one year. The children after they were borne, came not into their
Fathers sight, for five years space, but were kept amongst women, for this
cause: if any dyed in the bringing up, the father should take no grief of the
loss. Their maryages were solemnised about the tenth day of Marche. From five
years of age vntyl they were xxiiii. they learned to ride to cast the dart, to
shot, and especially t^ speak well. They did practise to pass o^uer brookes
and waters, to suffer heate (...) cold. They continued in harness and i^
moist garments, they fed upon acornes field pears, after their exercise they
ha^ very hard bread, water for their drink^ Their beds and cups were adorned
am^gest the common sort with gold silue^ They never consulted of any great
ma^ters but in the myddest of their banquets thinking that to be a moore surer
consu^tacion, than that which was had of s^ber men. A dunken parlyamet
Familiers and such as were ^ acqueyntance when they met, they kiss together,
they which were of a baser ca^ling, did worship him that they met wit^ all.
They buried dead bodies in ye grou^ enclosing them in wax. They though^ it an
heinous offence to laugh or spent ^fore the prince. Some say that they ca^ryed
their dead bodies out of the city, there laid them in the fields to be
d^uoured of dogs, and fowls of the air. They would not have the bones of dea^
bodies to be buried or reserved: and when any dead body was not immediately
consumed of dogs or wild Beasts, they thought it an ill sign, and that he
was a man of an unclean mind, and therefore not to be worthy to be in Hell,
and his next friends did meruelouslye lament him, as one that had no hope of
happiness after this life, but if he were quickly de^oured of Beasts, they
thought him happy. The Emperor of the Persians is at this day called the
Sophy, who with his noble acts gets great Empire, and glory.

Of the Panther and Tiger.
THe Panther is a beast like unto ^ Lybarde, he hath variety of colours and is
very fierce and wild, so yt some cal him a dog wolf, and yet he is gentle
enough if he be filled. He sleeps three days, and after the third day, he
washes himself and cries out, and with a sweet cente that comes from him,
he gathers al wild beasts together which are led and moved with his
savour, and he is friendly to all wild beasts saving the Dragon and serpent.
The she Panther is said to be a beast differinge from the male, because she
is cruel and full of spots. Some say that al beasts are marvelously
delighted with the cent of them, but by their horrible looks they are made a
frayed, and therefore hydinge their heads, they take and catch other beasts
allured withe the pleasantnes of them, as gotes such like, which being taken
with a fond desire of their pleasatnes comes nearer and nearer, but the
Lybard leaping out of her den, flies up on them.

In Caria and Lybia the panthers be of a good length and some what timorous
not so full of agility in leaping, but they have so hard a skin, that you can
hardly pearse it, the female is more common to be found. The Tiger is a beast
of a wonderful swyftnes, it brings forth many young, the which many do
steal away upon horseback very swyft: But when the female sees her young
gone, for the males take no care of the yonge, she runs headlong searching
by smelling. The taker of her young hearing her coming near with raging,
casts down one of the young, the which she takes away with her mouth, and
after that she returns again with marvelous celeritye, so that she gets
another, and so the third time, and until that he has gotten into a ship,
and then she seeing her fierceness frustrate rages on the banks S. Augustine
says there was a Tiger made tame at Rome in a den. Strabo saith Megasthenes
writes that in India amongeste the people called Prasii, the Tiger is of
double bigness to the Lyon, of such strength, that one being led with four men,
if he should catch a mule with his hinder claw, he were able to draw the
mule unto him. Some say when she hath lost her young, she is deceived mocked in
the way with a glass, s^t there by the stealer of her young, for she folowinge
with her smelling and swift running, fyndinge the glass thinking her self
to have found her young, tarries so lunge in viewing the glass, that he which
toke her young, hath time enough to escape.

The conditions and nature of the Parthians.
THE Parthians have their armies commonly of the greater number of servant
and bondemen, as every man is more wealthy, so doth he find a greater
number of horsemen to ye king for his war. They have mauye wives for the
auoydinge of lecherye, and they punish no fault more grievously the adulterye:
wherefore the women may not come to the Feasts of men, nor in their sight. They
eat no other flesh then such as they get by hunting, they be always on
horseback, they ride to their banquets and to war, they do merchandise, they
common together, they do all common private affairs sitting on Horse back,
their dead bodies are open Prays for fowls or dogs, they have a special
care of worshipping the Gods, they have fear full wits, sediciouse, prattling,
and disceitful. Florus writethe that the third bat^ayle that the Romaines made
against ye Parthians, they sent a notable strong army, whereof M. Crassus
Consul was lieutenant, a man of wonderful avarice, and vnsaturable cupiditie
of Gold, who warring unfortunately against the Parthians, losing.xi. legions,
as he was flying was taken and slain, his head and right hand was cut of
and brought to ye king of the Parthians, where in contept and mockerye, gold
was melted into his mouth, because he being so desirous of booties and prays
refused peace being entreated. Some say the Parthians when they poured in the
melted gold into his mouth said: Now drink gold thou that hast always
thirsted for Gold, and as yet could never be filled with gold. The which
saying is also rehearsed of Tomyris the queen of the Massagets in Scythia,
Tomyris.
who warringe with Cyrus the mighty king of the Persians, Cyrus.
depriued him of life in the revenging of her sons death, whom he disceitfully
killed being sent before hand. Wherefore she being in a wonderful rage after the
victory had against Cy^us, caused his head to be cut of and putt in a vessel
full of blood, saying these words. Thou hast sucked the blud of my son, and
also thirsted after mine Cyrus, but I will fill the wyche blood. Drink now and
fill thy self therewith.

Of the people of Carmania, and those which are called Icthiophagi.
IN Carmania no man may have a wife before he hath brought the head of his
enemy cut of to the king. The king cutteth the tong thereof into small parts
and mingles it with bread, afterward gives it to be eaten to him that brought
it and to his familiers, and he is a notable fellow that brings many heads.

The Icthiophagi be so called because they eat fish most commonly and so do
their cattle, and they drink rainy and well water. They feed their Fyshe
with beasts flesh. They make their houses of whales boones and oyster shells,
of their fish being dried they make bread, putting a little wheat unto it,
for they have small store of wheat. It is read of this nation that many of
them going naked al their lives have their wives and children in common like
unto beasts, yt have no difference of honesty and dishonesty.

Of the property of suudrie Nations.
THE Tauroscithes be contenciouse people inhabiting ye woods, doing sacrifice
to the Devil. Such enemies as they take they cut of their heads and set
them upon an high pole in the tops of their houses. There be also in this
part of Asia certain people that have their women in common, ^and some so
rude and beastly, that they eat mans flesh obeying no laws. There be others
called Agrippaei which are bald from their nativity as well men as women.

And another kind of people also ^alled Issedones, with whom the use is, when
any mans father dies, al his kinsfolks brings cattle and kills them, and
cutteth and mingles the flesh of them, with the flesh of the father of him
that receives them to this banquet, so they make a feast with these sundry
kinds of flesh together, they scour and make clean ye head of him that is
dead, and use it as an image offringe sacrifice and ceremonies unto it yearly:
this doth the son to the father, and the father to the son.

Of the Tartarians.
THE Tartarians are most deforme^ of al men, their bodies are but small, their
eyes be gross and bolstringe out, their faces be broad and without hear,
saving that in their over lip and the chin they have thin and moisye hear,
they be commonly small in the middle, they shave their heads from one ear to
another, by the top of the crown to the hinder part and in the other part
keeping long hear like unto a woman, whereof they make ii. folds and windings,
and bind them both behind the ears: and so be al other shaven that tarry
amongst them. They be good horsemen and il fotemen, therefore none goes on
foot, but rides either on horseback or upon some ox. They have a glory to
hang good sounding bells about their horse necks. When they drink they power it
in until they be drunken, Drunkenness taken for a glory
the which is is a great praise amongst the. They have no bread nor use any
baking, nor table clothes nor towels, they use no handkirchiefs, nor never wash
their hands, body nor apparel. They eat no potherbes nor pulse, but only
the flesh of al kind of living things, as cats, dogs, horse, and al kind of
great mice. They roast the bodies of such as they take in war to show their
cruelty and desire of revenging, and where many metes together at the eating
of them, they tear the with their teeth like wolves, and drink the blood
thereof, which they reserved before in cups, otherwise they drink cowes milk.
One of the eats the lice from another head, saying: thus will we do to our
enemies. It is an heinous thing with them to suffer any drink to be lost or
any meat, and therefore they cave no bones to dogs before that the marie be
taken away, and many other things are reported of them which Munster sets
forth more at large. In war they have swords of a yard in length, their
horsemen are very skilful in shoting, their princes never enter into war but
standing a ^ar of, they cry unto their own company and exhort the if they se
any thing needful. They carry their wives and their children, because their
wives be attired like to men, and also images of men on horseback to their
wars that they might seem a great number and more terrible to their enemies.
They think no shame nor ignominy in flying, if it be necessary and expedient
so to do. If they get the victory they spare none, neither women, nor
children, nor old folks, they slay all saving crafts men and artificers whom
they reserve to their uses. They are very incontinet, and therefore they take as
many wives as they will, and may sustain, and they except none, but the mother,
the daughter, and sister, yet they be much given to the Sodomiticall sin

They do not make account of any woman as of their wife, nor yet think her
worthy of dower before that she has brought forth a child, and therefore
they may refu^e her which is barrayne and take another. They which are taken
in adultery both man and woman are put to death by the law. Every wife hate her
mansion, her own family and lives very chastely. This nation obserueth many
supersticios No man make the vryne in his mansion, but if he doth he is ^layne
without pity, if necessity compels him, then his ten and al things therein
are purged with fire after a curious sort. When they choose and elect their
prince, they mete together in a fair field, and then they set him in a golden
throne and chair, to whom the kingdom is due, either by succession or by
election, and falling down before him they cry all after this sort, with one
consent and a loud voice. We beseech, we will and command that thou bear
rule ^uer us. He answers: If you will have ^his done of me, it is necessary
that you ^e ready to do al that I shall command: when I cal, to come, and
wither soever I send to go, and to commit and put the whole rule into our
hands, When they ^aue answered we be ready. He says a^ayne: Therefore my
word shall be my ^worde, and al the people clap their han^es with great
rejoicing. Then the noble men take him from the regal seat, and make him to
sit softly upon a cushin or ^ cloth laid upon the ground, saying thus: Look
up and acknowledge God, loke ^ownwarde to the cushin where thou sit, if
thou doest well govern and rule, thou shalt have al things according to thy
desire: but if thou doeste i'll rule us, thou shalt be brought so low and so
bare, that this small cushin wherein thou sit shall not be left thee, at the
which saying they adioyne unto him his dearest best beloved wife, and lifting
them both up with the cushin, they salute him Emperor of al Tartarians and her
the Empress.

Then to such as be present of other nations, he commaunde^h gifts to be given
dute of hand. There is also al the treasure and Jewels which the late deceased
Emperor left, where withe this new Emperor rewards every noble man, and
that which remains he commands to be kept to his own use. In his hands
and power al things be, and no man dare say this is mine, or his. No man
ought to tarry in any part of the land but where he is assigned. His seal
that he uses hath those words engraved. God in heaven Chuithuth Cham on the
land the strenght of God and Emperor of men. He hath five great robust armies.
Five Dukes withe whose aid he inuadeth al that withstand him. He him self
speaks not to strange ambassadors, nor they come at any time into his
sight, except that they and their gifts be purged before hand of certain
women deputed to that purpose. He gives his answer by other mean persos to
whom, when and how long so ever he speaks, they ought to give ear upon
their knees bowed, and so atted that they err not in one word. It is not
lawful for any man to change the Emperors words, nor to go or do against
his mind and sentence by any means.

Of India.
IN the country of Inde, they have two Summers, their air is mos^e gentle and
pleasant temperate, great fruitfulnes of the soil and plenty of waters, and
therefore some live an hundred thirty years especially the Musitanes.

There be others whose life is longer, there be marvelous great beasts bred
in that country, and trees of such height that a man cannot shot to the top
of the, this comes by the fertility of the soyl^ temperatenes of the air,
and plenty of waters. Their reeds are of such bigness and length that the
space betwixt every knot, may bear three men, sometimes in a little river.
There be store of Parrots. It brings forth Narde, Cinam, Pepper, Calamus,
Aromaticus, other spices, and also diverse pearl and precious stones. Pliny
saith that in the country of Inde, al things are bred of a greater magnitude
then in any other country as men, beasts, and trees. The people have a bushy
hear, and a special decking with precious stones, they are very diverse in
apparel, some wear woollen garments, and some linen, many go naked some cover
their privy parts only. The colour of the body is commonly black, being
in their mothers womb, such through the disposition of their parents, they be
of a good tall statute and strong They be thriftye in living and very
continent from theft. They know no Letters but do all things by memory,
and for their simplicity and Thriftines al things have prosperous success,
they drink no wine but in sacrifice, they make drink of rice and harlye,
their me^te is commonly rice pottage, they give no perogatiue to old age except
they excel in wisdom. He that is reprehended as a false witness, hath the tops
of his fingers cut of, he that deprives any man of any member, hath the law
Talio, that is to lose the like member, and also his hand is cut of. And if
any man puts out the ^ye or cutteth away the hand of an artificer, he
loses his life for it. If any woman kills a drunken king, she hath her
reward to be conjoined with his successor. There be seven special orders
amongst the Indians,. The first is of philosophers, which being few in number
were preferred before the rest in honour and dignity, they are free from all
works, and neither serve any body, nor govern or rule, they take such
things of pryuate folks wherewith they do sacryfice, and they have a care of
the dead, especially kn^w what is done in hell, and therefore many gifts and
hono^rs are bestowed upon them, they profit much to the life of the Indians,
for they mete together in the beginning of the year, and fore tel drought
rain, winds, diseases, and other things y^ knowledge whereof is profitable,
that philosopher which forsheweth any thing that is false, hath no other
punishment, but to keep silence forever. The second order is of husbandmen,
which exceeding the rest in multitude being free fro wars and other works, do
only bestow their time in tilling the ground, no enemy offreth any injury
to them, because they are thought to be occupied about the common profit, they
live in the fields withe their wives and children, and come not in to the
city, they give tribut to the king, the ^ifte part of their profit. The
third order is shepeheards, which neither inhabit in cities nor towns, but
have their tabernacles and their nets and things for hunting, and these keep
the country fro the danger of beasts and fowls. The fourth degre is of
arti^cers, whereof some makethe weapons, some other things meet for the
countrye^ and other profitable things, these be free from tribute have their
corn frome the prince. The fifth order is of ^ouldiers exercised in warlike
affairs, and they and al their horses and Elephants be maintained by ye prince
The sixth is of superintendeutes, who seeing al things that be done in India,
make relation thereof to the king. In ye seventh order be those that have the
rule of common cousels being but a few in number and such as most excel in
nobility wisdom, for of these some be chosen to the kings counsel, and to
the administration of the common wealth, and to be judges in doubtful cases,
Dukes also captains be chosen of them.

Thus Inde being distribute into these parts it is not lawful for any order
to marry with the men's wives of an other order, nor to change his trade of
living, nor for the soldier to play the plowghman, nor the Artificer, to
meddle in the Philosophers office. And because Inde, is so great a country,
there be many nations discrepant in form and tongue, and manners, for some
inhabiting about rivers and lakes do eat raw fish, and others raw flesh,
and when any fal^eth sick, his friends kill him saying: that if he should
wither and pine away with sickness that his flesh would be corrupt,
although he denies him self to be sick yet they kill him and make a baket of
him so he that lives in perfect health to his old age is slain and devoured
in like manner. And therefore few of them come to extreme old age. There be
some of the Indians that never kill any living thing nor plant nor sow any
thing, nor erect any houses but lives only with herbs, amongst who when any
falls sick he goes into a desert place, there dies, no man taking care
either of him dying or being dead, they use natural conjunction together
openly like unto brute beasts.

Of the Bragmans.
THE people called Bragmani lead a simple life and are not led withe any
inticementes, they desire no more then very nature doth require, they have
plenty of al things for life the which their earth brings forth without
tillage. Their tables be furnished withe wholesome dishes. And therefore they
nether know diversities of names in sickness nor their kinds, but they have
good health very long. One desires no healpe of an other for they live in
common, amogest those that are equal, there is no place for envy seeing that
none is superior, they have no judgements because they do nothing worthy of
correction, their only law is not to do any thing against nature, which
nourishes labour, exercisethe no covetousness, and flies from filthy I^lenesse.
This nation hurts it self in ^he son, it gets moisture in the dew, ^t
extinguishes thirst with water. The ground is in steed of beds, carefulnes
breaks no sleep, nor pensiveness troubles not the mind, they dwell in
dug caves, upon mountains sides, they feel ^o rage of wyndes nor tempests,
they think them selves better defended in a cave then in an house, from the
injury of weather, because their cave hath two uses, one for a mansion place,
another for a sepulture or grave, when they dye. They have no precious
garments, but they cover their members with a thing like paper, rather for
shamefastness then otherwise. The women be not trimmed as they please but they
are ignorant how to incre^se beauty more then Nature geeueth, ^he man and the
woman use natural conjunction, not for libidinouse pleasures, but for love of
procreation. No parent follows the funerals of his child, the^ have no
sepultures in churches for the dead, but in vessels made of precious stones
they lay up the ashes of the dead. Their best remedy in Physic is
abstinence and sparing which doth not only cure their griefs, Abstinece
but also prevent those which might come, they have no common plays nor games,
but when they assemble together they read the monuments of things done, wherein
if they hear any^ thing to be laughed at, they weep, the^ are not delighted
in old fables, but in ye goodly disposition of natural things they learn no
eloquence, but have a sim^ple kind of speech, only commanding not to lye.

Of the Elephant.
THere be Elephants in Inde, whic^ be rery wild and fierce, but the^ are easly
made tame after this ma^ner. They compass some clean place, ^ ^eepe dische of
four or five furlongs, ^ey make the entry into it with a very ^eyght
bridge, then set they in three or ^re females Elephants, which are ^me, and
they them selves lye priuelye ^atchinge in cottages, in the day time ye ^ld
Elephants come not, but in ye night ^me they enter, the which place of the
en^ie the hunters shit and stop priuelye, af^er this they bring in of their
strongest ^me Elephants, to fight with them, be^des that, they do punish
them with fa^iue and lack of meat, and when they ^e weary with fighting,
they which are old carterly fellows, privily gets ^nder the belly of the
Elephant and so so^enly steals under the belly of the wild Elephant, and by
these means do chain ^d fetter them, and after this they move ^heir tame
Elephants to beat the wild ^ntil they fall to the ground, and when ^hey are
down, they bind their necks, ^ith the necks of the tame Elephants, ^ith such
thonges and bindinges as ox ^e bound with, and this do they that they ^uld not
cast of such as sit them ^they cut ^eir necks about with raysings scissures and
lay the c^aynes thereon that for p^ they should give place to their chaine^ go
quietly, of such as are take they ch^ ^ut such as are unprofitable, ether for ^
age or young age and the rest be led i^ the stables, and they being bound bo^
feet and necks to a pillar to be tante^ hunger. After that they be refreshe^
grass or green wedes, then they tear^ them to be obedient, some with word^
some with singing, and some with dru^ be made gentle. The Elephante is ^
greatest amongst al beasts, and co^meth nearest to humane sense, he hat^
some understanding as Pliny saith of h^ country talk, and especially a
reme^braunce an^ obedience of such duties ^ he hath learned. If ye Elephat by
chau^ kills any of their keepers in a rage, the^ have so great a desire of him
afterwar^ that some for sorrow abstain from mea^ and some do pine them selves to
death This bea^t is accustomed when he is (...) of feeding to go to sleep and
leaning a tree he sleeps, for he cannot bend hy^ knees as other beasts do,
the inhabita^ perceiving the tree which is worn a^ ^de filthy with the
Elephants leaning ^use the same tree to be cut harde by the ^ounde so that it
may not fall without ^usting and enforcinge, then they put a^y the signs of
their own sleps and so ^part quickly before the Elephant com^eth to ^epe. The
Elephant coming ^ the evening to his accustomed place of ^ste, and leaning
to the tree with al the ^eight of his body, falls down straight ^ay with the
tree even to the earth, so he ^th with his belly upward al night for ^ cannot
lift up him self, then comes ^e inhabitants in the morning and sle^ the
beast without danger.

^he Elephants have such a kind of sham^s^nes, that the male never covers the
^male but in secrete, and that when the ^le is five years old, and the female
^ years of age, they bring forth as ^ares do and most commonly about the
^ing, many of them live almost two hu^ed years, they have great pleasures in
^od waters, they be most impatient of ^lde, the two teeth which hang outward
^e so byg in the greater Elephats, that ^ey are used oftentimes as posts. And
many other things be written of thei^ which I thought good to leave oute^
tediousness.

Of the Dragons in India and Ethiop^
THE Dragon is the greatest of ^ serpents, and hath sharpe teeth ^ like a saw
fashion, he hath great^ strength in his tail then in his teeth^ hath not so
much poyso as other serpe^ have, if he winds his tail about an^ he s^ea^h
him, and the Elephant with ^ the bigness of his body is not safe fro^ him, for
the dragon lurkinge about co^mon paths where the Elephants use go, doth wind
and knot his tail abo^ the Elephants legs, and kills him^ suffocation. He
is bred in Inde and Et^ope. Plinye saith in Ethiope there b^ Dragons of.xx.
foot in length, they a^ wont xiiii or xv. together with their be^des erected
to fly over the sea and grea^ waters, forsome better food, the drag^ poison
is only in his tongue and gall. Wherefore the Ethiopes cut away ye to^ eat the
flesh. Pliny saith that throug^ ^he strength of poison his ^ong is always ^ift
up, and some times through the he^te of poison, he inflames the air so ^hat
he seems to breath fire out of his ^outh, and some times when he hisseth
^ith his contagiouse blast he infects y^ ^ire, so that the pestilence comes
ther^f many times. He is some times in the ^aters and lies often in his den,
he slea^eth seldom, but watches almost con^inually, he devours beasts and
fowls ^is eye sight is very sharpe, so that in the ^ountaines he sees his
pray a far of, of ^entimes. Betwixt the Elephants and Dragons there is
continual war, for the Dragon claspeth about the Elephant with ^er tail, and
the Elephant ouerthrow^th ^he Dragon with her feet and snout, the Dragon with
the folding of her tail ^wisteth her self about the Elephants ^egs and so
makes him to fall.

The Elephant saying a Dragon under a ^ree goes about to break ye tree to
give ^he Dragon a blow, the Dragon leaps ^ppon the Elephant and desirous to
bite ^etwene the nosethrills and to make him ^linde, sometimes the Dragon
gets be hind him bytinge and sucking his blou^ with ye loss of which blood
the Elephat being weakened, after long conflict falls upon ye dragon and so
dying sleeth his own murderer. The Dragon is very desirous of the Elephants
blood, for the coldness of it, wherewith she desires to be cooled. And many
other strange serpents are in India as scorpions with wings and such like, of
whose natures I omit to write, because their forms be not known unto us.

Of the Gryphin in India.
SOME say there is in India a Gryphin which is a kind of beast, with four fete
having wings and as mighty in strength as a lyon, with crooked tallants, black
on the back, and in ye fore-part Purple, his wings somewhat white, his bil and
mouth like an Egles bill, his eyes fiery, hard to be taken except he be young,
he makes his nest in high moutaines, and fights with every kind o^ beast
saving the Lyon and Elephant, he digs up gold in desert places, and gives
a repulse to those that come near him, he makes his nest of such gold as he
finds, and some say that it cannot be taken away without a thousand or two
thousand men, and that as well with danger as with gain. Thus much Aeli^nus
writes.

The notes of a good Horse.
THere be some that writes, that an horse should not be broken nor tamed
before two years of age. But that he is to be rubbed and chafed withe
flattering and gentle words, and that his ^table should be laid with stone,
and to use him by little and little to go on the stones, that his feet might
be made strong At the beginning let not him that shall sit him or break be to
rough, nor weary him with running: let him prove him with turning gently on
both sides, and not so much with spurs as with the stick he must touche
him: the horse should be of one colour, of a thick mayne and standing up, of
strong loins, of a short head, his neck must be erect and standing up, his
ears small according to the proporcion of his head, abroad breast, a mean
belly, short hips, a large tail and somewhat curled, straight legs, equal
knees, steadfast hooves and gross, not big nor small that they be not worn,
his legs must be well stuffed with bones and not with flesh, the notes and
signs of years, in horses, are changed with their bodies.

When a horse is two years and a half old, his middle teeth both above and
beneathe do fall, when he is three years old, he casts those that are like
unto dogs teeth, and brings forth new, before six years of age his upper
double teeth do fall, at the sixth year he supplyeth those yt he wants, at
the seventh year all are supplied equally, from that time he hath hollow
teeth, and therefore it is harde to discern their ages, at the tenth year the
temples begin to wax hollow, and the brows sometimes wax gray, and their
teeth stick out. Mares have their full increase in five years, but horses in
six years. Xenophon teaches these properties to be observed in an horse.
First to know his age, then if he will take a bry^l ^r no^ a^ter this if one
may sit him, then if he will cast him that sits on him and if he will fly or
run away being let lose, or if he may be soon taken, or if he being smitten
with a stick will go the swifter or not.

Of certain monstruouse people in India.
Many are found in India both men women and beasts full of hear, with leaves
and moss on them, which comes of the great heate that there is. Pliny
saith that the inhabitats of this country be coloured with the son, and there
by come to certain blacknes like unto the Ethiopes, not because they are
outwardly so black through the adustio of the son, but naturally in their
blood there is an inclination to blacknes, ye which the heate of the son doth
seem to double. Our ancestors have feigned many monsters in this country, as
people with heads like unto dogs armed only with ^ayles, clothed with hides
skins, having no kind of mans speech but only a kind of barking. There be
some that live at the fountain of Ganges, which take no benefit by meat but
live only by the savour of wild apples, and when they go far they carry them
for their maintenance, and live by the smell and savour of them. If they come
into any filthy or stin king air, they must needs dye, and it is said that
some of them were seen in the tents and army of Alexander.

We read also that there be certain people with one eye in India, and some to
have so great ears that they hang down even to the feet, and many to have
but one foot, and that so great that when they lye down on their backs and
would keep them from the son, the shadow of that only leg doth comfort
them. It is read also that there is a nation which hath gray hears in
youth, the which in age waxes black, and also men say there is an other kind
of women which conceive at five years of age, but they live not above eight
years, there be some yt lack necks and have eyes in their shoulders, there
be wild men also withe beads like unto dogs, with a rough and heary body
which make a terrible hissinge, but these and such like are not to be credited
and taken for truth, except great reason can persuade that such may be and
experience can prove the same. It is also thought that there is a certain people
called Pygmeis which be never in peace but when the cranes with whom they have
continual wars, Pigmeis.
fly into other countr^s, these Pygmeis are short men of stature inhabiting in
the extreme part of ye mountains of India, where is a wholesome good air, who
exceed not.xxvii. inches in stature. For Pygmeis as much to say as a cubit.
These Pygmeis fight withe Cra^es, but they have the foil, the report goes
that they sit upon the backs of rams or goats, and have arrows for their
weapons, and so in the spring time with a great army they come to the sea,
there consume the Cranes eggs and young ones, and that this expedition is made in
three months, for otherwise they were not able to resist ye cranes, their
cottages be made of clay, feathers, and egg shells But of the nature of Cranes
the authors write in this manner. Cranes^
When the Cranes take a flight, they consent together fly very high for to
mark and behold, they chose a captain and guide whom they follow, in the
later end of the company they have those that may cry, and may lead the whole
flock withe their voice, they have their watches every night by turn which
hold a stone in their feet which falling from those that are weary, for
lack of sleep argues reproves their negligence by sound, the other slea^e
with their bills and heads under their wings standing upon each feet by course,
the guide looks forth with his neck straight forward and forsheweth things to
come. When they are made tame they wax lasciuiouse, and run and fly in
round compasses with shaking their wings.

See more strange things in Munster concerning this matter.

Of the Antes of India.
MEga^thenes writes of the Antes in India after this sort, there is an hill of
three thousand furlongs in compass in India, and many gold mines therein, the
which are kept with ants as byg as foxes, getting their living with a
marvelous celerity in hunting, Antes as big as foxes.
they dig and s^rape the earth that brings forth gold, and heaps it up at
ye hole of their dens, the which merchant do priue lye steal away, laying
flesh for a bait to stay the ants if perhaps they should mark them. This is
thought of many to be a fable, and there fore I leave it at large to judge of
it as you think best.

Of Indian Apes.
ABout the mountains called Emodii there is a great wood full of great Apes,
the which as the Macedonians did se standing as it were thick together upon the
hills, and having weapons like men of war, for that kind of beast comes as
near to humane subtility as Elephants do, they would have set upon them as
ennemies, had not the inha^itantes of the country been present and showed unto
Alexander that it was nothing but an assemble of apes, which contend to
imitate such things as they see, so that battle was turned to laughing. Apes
are taken after this manner they that hunt apes, set dishes full of water in the
sight of the apes, and therewith they annointe and wash their eyes, and
suddenly with as privy speed as they can, they take away the water and set
pots with birdlime, and such like stuff in stead there of, the apes perceiving
them anointinge their eyes, being given to follow al things, come down
immediately from the trees, and thinking to do as the men did, they dawbe and
annoynte their eyes and mouths with birdlime, and so are they easy to be made
a pray and taken alive. They use also an other trade to take them They take
buskins and put them on in ye sight of the apes and so depart, leaving others
anointed inwardly with birdelyme and and such like, and some what heary that
the fraud might not appear the which the apes plucking upon their legs are
so snared and entangled with yt, that they cannot escape the hands of the
hunters. There is in India also dogs of such courage, that two of them can
master a Lyon.

Of the Diamond stone.
THe Diamonds be found amouge^ the metals of India, Ethiope, Araby, Macedony,
Cyprus, and m^ny other places. The Indian Diamond shines with a more
orientnes then the others. There is one kind of this stone yt is somewhat of
an iron colour, and differs not much from a crystal in colour, for commonly
it is somewhat white, but it is harder then crystal, so that if it be laid
upon the Smythes anvil and most ^ehemently beaten with an hammer, rather the
anvil and the hammer will bre^ke asunder then that will be divided into parts,
and it doth not only refist the blows of iron, but also the heate of fire, so
^hat it will not melt or give place thereto, for if we may geeue credit to
Pliny, it ^il never wax warm, and that because ^t cannot be more pure then it
is, for it is ^euer contaminate. But yet the strange ^ardnes of this stone, is
made so soft with ^he warm blood of a Lyon, or a Goat, ^hat it may be broken.
In scalding lead (...) takes such heate that it may be dissolved: but this
hardness is not in every Diamond, for that which is of Cyprus or called
Syderites, may be broken with a maitet, and pierced through with an other
Diamond. The Diamond doth deprehend and detect poison and makes ye working
thereof frustrate, and therefore it is be^tre^ of Princes, and had in great^
price and estimation.

Of Cal^chu^ the famou^e Mart of India.
THe compass of the city of Cale^chut is the space of six thousand
buildings, which be not joined together as our houses be, but are seperate a
good space a sunder, the length of the city is a thousand paces, their
houses be very lowe, so that they are not above the heighte of a man on horse
back from the ground, they be covered in the top with voughes and branches
of trees commolye. Their king is addict to the worshipping of devils. He
do^the not deni^ God to be the maker of heaven and eart^ and the first cause
and author of things, but the says that God appointed the office of judgment
to an ill spirit and to do right to mort^l men, and this spirit they call
Deumo. The king hath the picture of this devil in his chapel, sitting with a
diadem an his head, like unto the bishops of a Rome, but this diadem hath
four hor^es about, and this picture gapethe with a wide mouth shows four
teeth. It hath a deformed nose, grim and terrible eyes, a threatening
countenance, cro^ed fingers, with tallants and feet much like vn^o a cock,
they that loke upon this horrible monster, are suddenly a afraid, it is so
loathsome and terrible a thing to behold. About the church are painted
devils, and in every corner Satha is made of brass sitting, with such
workmanship that he seems to cast flames of fire for ye consuming of so^les
miserably, in his right hand the picture of the devil, puts a soul to his
mouth, and with his left hand it recheth another. Every morning their
priests do cleanse this Idol with rose water and other sweet waters, and they
perfume it with diverse sweet things falling down and worshipping (...).
They put the blood of a cock weekelye in a silver vessel filled wi^h burning
coals and a great number of sweet perfumes, and taking a cens^r they make it
redolent with frankincense, and have a little silver bell ringing all the while.
And the King eats no mea^e before that iiii. priests have offred unto the
devil somewhat of the kings dishes. The king at his dinner ^tteth on the
ground without any cloth under hint, and the priests stands round about him
as he sytteth, neue^ coming nearer him, their within four pa^s marking the
kings words most re^er^lye, when he hath done eating y^ ^ ^he relicques of
the kings meat to young crows and birds, to be eaten, which foul is an
^ey^ous thing to ^ll, and therefore they ^lye every wherein safety. When the
(...) m^rieth a wife ^e ^seth not to go to be^ unto her, before th^t this new
married wife hath been de^loure^ of the most worthy pryeste. For this who^edome
the king gives him as a reward five hundred crowns.

The pryestes are in the first order of estimation with them, then senators
which bear a sword and a buckler, a bow and a Javelin, when they go abroad.
Thirdly they esteem artificers. Fourthly fyshers. Fyftlye merchants for wine,
pepper, acornes, Last of al such as sow and gather rice. They have no great
respect of apparel but to cover their privy parts, they go barefoot and
bareheaded. When the king is dead, if there be any males aline etherchyldren,
brethren, or brothers children, they succeed not in ye kingdom but the siners
son by their law must have the sceptre, and if there be no such then he
succedeth in the crown which is nearest of consangninitie, and this is for
none other cause, but because the priests have deflowered their queen.

When the king goes forth into some strange country, or to hunt, the
priests keep the queen company at home, and nothing can be more acceptable to
the king then that they should be acqueynted with the queen, in venereouse
acts, and therefore the king knows for a certaintye yt those children which
he hath by his wife cannot be accounted his children, but he takes his sisters
children as most near unto him in lawful cons^guinitye, and takes them heirs
to the crown.

The merchants keep this order, such wives as they have, they may change them
in the colour of a better conjunction, and the ^e saith to the other, seeing
tha^ you have been my best friend let us change our wives, Change of wives.
upon that condition that you may have mine and I may have yours. Then saith
the other: say you so in earnest, yea: saith he by Pollux. Then ^ayth his
fellow let us go home to my house, whether when they are come the one claims
the others wife, saying: come hither woman and follow this man because from
hence forth he shall be thy husband, then the woman saith do you speak in
earne^t, to whom her first husband saith I do not mock, then the woman
says, gladly I will follow him. And this is ye way of changing their wives.
There be some women in this country that may mary seven husbands, and lye with
them every night by course, and where she is delivered of a child she may
choose to which of her husbands she will father her child, so that the man
may not refuse it by any means. Many other strange things is rehearsed of
this nation, the rehearsal whereof were very tedyouse here. There is much Pepper
growing in this country of Calechut, Pepper.
the stalk of pepper is but weak somewhat like to a vine stalk so yt it
cannot grow without a prop, it is not much unlike to yuie, for it wyndeth and
creeps as that doth, and with a more deep clasping it wyndeth about the
tree, this hath many branches three handful lunge. They gather it in October
and November being grene as yet and lay it on tiles in the son, to be dried
wherein iii. days space it waxes black even as we have it.

Ginger growethe in Calechut, but much is brought out of Crauonor, thither,
Spices.
Cynamon is in the Isle of Zaylon fifty Germaine miles beyond Calechut. Pepper
growethe in the fields of Calechut, but great store is brought out of
Corimucol xii. miles beyond Calechut Cloves are gathred in a place called Meluza
a little from Calechut. Nutmeggs grow in Melaccha which is a great way from
Calechut. Musk or Castoreu comes from the country of Pego which is an
hundred miles from Calechut. Pearl and precious stone are found about the
city of Ormus, and sent to Calechut the general mar^ of al the East parts.
And many other spices silks and strange things are brought from these
countries into ores.

Of the bridges in Singui and Quinsai.
THere be numbered in the City of Singui about six thousand bridges of stone,
having so large arches yt great ships may pass through without bending of
the mast. There is another cittye called Quinsay in Asia which contains in
the circuit of it above an hundred Italian miles which make.xxv. German
miles, it is thought to be the greatest and most notable city in ye world It
hath twelve thousand bridges of stone so high and large, that a ship may
pass upright through them.

Of certain illusions of Devils about Tangut.
THere is seen and heard about ye deserts of Tangut in the day time and
more commonly in the night diverse illusions of devils. Therefore trauelers that
way ought to take good heed that they saver not their companies, and least any
coming behind might hinder them, for, otherwise they shall soon loose the
sight of their companions for the hills and mountains. There be heard ye voices
of spirits and devils, which going solitarilye will call others by their names,
fayninge and counterf^yting the voices of their companions, the which, if they
can by any means, do lead men out of ye way to destruction There be hard some
times in the air the consents harmony of music instruments. There be many
worshippers of Idols, and they attribute much honour to the devils.

When their wives have a son, they commend him to some Idol, in the honour of
it that year, the father keeps up a ram, the which a year after the
nativity of the child, at the next feast of that ydoll, he offr^th with his
son, and ma^ye other ceremoni^s. When the sacry^ice is done, they bring the
flesh which was offred to some certain place, and al his kinsfolks gathered
together, do eat of that with great devotion, keeping the bones reverently in
some vessel. In this country is found a Serpent called Salamandra, Salamandra.
which lives in the fire without any damage, those serpents are used for the
making of such cloth as may suffer ye fire without any corruption or harm, or
else when any spot comes to any garment, made of the hears of a Salamander,
yt may be caste for an hour in the fire, Garments, that will not be consumed
with fire.
and all the spots will be gone, no otherwise then if they had been very clean
washed.

Of the Cocatrice.
THere is in Africa a kind of Serpet called a Cocatrice, which hath a white
spot in his head, having ye fashion of a Diadem. His head is very sharpe,
his mouth red, his eyes somewhat black in colour, as Pliny saith with his
hyssinge he drives away all kind of serpents. He destroys withe his breathe
young trees and plants, consumes herbs, break the stones, and infects the
air where he taryethe, so that a bird can not fly over that air or
through it without danger of death. Yet it is said that the poyso of a Weasel
is his destruc^ion. Achanus saith that he hath so sharp poison that excedinge
not in length a mans hand, yet he extinguishes every great serpent with his
only breath. There is not a more hurtful or more pestilent beast upon the
earth, for this lying in his den may destroy a wholl cittye by infection.

Of the Crocodile.
THe Crocodile is found commonly about ye water of Nilus Ganges in India, and
waxes of a little thig to a very great beast. For his eggs are much like unto
goose eggs, but the young which comes of them takes increase to sixtene or
eyghtene cubits in length he lives almost as long as a man, he lacks a tong,
his body is meruelouslye defended of nature, for al his back is full of scales
and wonderful harde, his tail is long, he hath many teeth on both sides of his
mouth, whereof two do especially hag out, he doth not only devour man, but
also other earthly beasts coming ne'er to the water, he dismembreth them with
his nails, which he has sharper the any weapon. His bytinge is cruel and
sharpe, and he so rends with his teeth, yt it can never be healed, there is
great store of them about Nilus, because they are very fruitful of themselves,
having yonge every year, and also they are seldom taken. It is a fearful
beast flying from those that persecute him, and persecuting those that fly
away from him. It is said that when he goes about to devour a man that he
begins to weep, where of hath sprung this proverb. The tears of a
Crocodile: that is when one doothe weep with his eyes without compassion, and
not with his heart and mind.

Plinye saith that this beast only in his ^yting doth move his upper jaw,
he lives in the day ty^e upon the land, and in the night time in the
water, his eyes be very dull in the water, and his sight is ^erueylous sharpe
out of the water.

^ome say that he grows and increases as long as he lives.

Young fowls hatched and brought forth without the dams, and females.
FOelix Vlmen^is and Britenbachius writethe in their books of common
peregrinacion and traueyle, that in Alexandria and in Egipt, there be Ouens
made full of holes, where in are laid three or four thousand eggs, some of geese
some of hens, some of pygeons, some of ducks, and that they are hidden and
covered in dung, and that whotte coals are set a far of about the dung, so ye
through the temperate heate of these things, the eggs by little and little wa^e
warm in the dung even as it were under the hen. And at leng^h the young are
hatched brought forth, so that they come by flocks out of the dung, and from
thence are taken and led a broad to be fed at lybertye.

The Rites and Manners of the Egiptians.
THere Egiptians were almost ye first in the world, whereof other nations
learned and took their laws, wisdom, manners, and living, and we read that
for learning sake Homer, Dedalus, Solo Plato, and many other went thither.

For although they were gentiles not believing on God, yet they studied much
for honesty and goodness, and with their honest conuers^cion did allu^e
strangers and good men to come unto them, and to learn that which they could
not find in other places. Their women in times past did use merchandise and
all things appertayni^ge to chapmen, the men did we^ue and spyn within the
house, and ca^ye burdens on their heads, the which the women did use to hear
on their should^s, the m^n did make ^ryne s^ttyng, but the women ^id contrary.
They did disc^arge their bellies at home, b^t their b^nkets they kept in high
ways, they moulded br^d with their feet, and stirred their clay with their
^andes. They did use to write after the Hebrew fashion begynni^g their letters
on the right hand. When any of them met together at dyn^er or supper, before
they departed, there came in one that brought a picture of a dead man, upon a
staff made of wood of a cubit length or somewhat more, and showed it to every
one of the gestes, saying: behold and loke upon this, drink and be refreshed
with pleasure, for such one shalt thou be after thy death. Their laws were
such, that perjured men lost their lives, as thought they had been giltye of
two offences: the one of violating pietye towards God, the other of breaking
faith and promise amongst men, which is the surest knot of humane society.
If any traueyler found any man beaten of thieves and would not help him if he
could he should be found culpable of death, if he were not able to help him,
he was bound to detect the thieves, and to follow the action against them: and
^e that did neglect to do this, was punished with certain strypes, and kept
without meat for three days. If any father killed his sonne^ there was no
punishment of death appointed but for three day^s and nights concti^ually he
was commanded to be about the dead body, for they thought it no just thing
to take away life from him that gave life to his children, but rathe^ that he
should be punished with continual payne and repentance of his fact, that
others might fear to do ye like. Parricides they ^aused to be burned upon an
heap of thorns, and such as uttered any secrets to their enemies, they caused
their tongues to be cut out. And they that did counterfeit or clyp money had
both their hands cut of so that with what part of the body the offence was
made, with the same he should tolerate punishment. If any had violated a free
woman, his natural parts were cut of, because in one fault he committed
three heinous things, that is an injury, corruption and confusion of
children. He that was take in voluntary adultrye had a thousand ^ripes with
rods, and the woman was magled upon the nose. The prie^ts could have but one
wife, but the laytye as many as they could keep.

The bringing up of their children was with small cost, for it came not unto
the charge of twenty gr^ates the (...) education to their full ^ge, and this
is not to be^ m^rueyled at, because Egipte is a hot country, and therefore
they live naked without any kind of garment, and they feed upon rotes, the
which they eat sometimes raw, and sometimes roasted, in imbers. The priests did
teach their children especially Geomatrie, and Arythmeticke. They did drive
away sickness either with fasting or with vomit, the which they used every
third day. Their opinion was that all diseases came of superfluity of
meates, and therefore that to be the best cure, which toke away the matter
and causes. Many other strange things are at large sei forth of this nation
by Munster.

Of the Ostrydge.
THE Oystridge found especially in Africa, his head is covered withe small
hears, his eyes be gross and black, his neck is long, his byl is short and
sharpe, his feet hath as it were a bypartite ^oofe. Plinie faith that he
exceeds the ^right of a man on ^orsebacke, that his wings help him little.
But with his nails which are like hooves, he takes stones and throwethe
against those which persecute him: he doothe digest whatsoever he devours
be it never so harde. He is of a marvelous folishnes, for if he hath once
hidden his head under a bush he thinks him self safe and not to be seen.
It is said to be a simple and forgetful thing, that as soon as it hath brought
forte eggs, it forgets them, until the young comes forth, which is
thought to be easlye done, because they leave the eggs in the warm sands,
so yt the yonge may soon be hatched, the which the males do feed and cherish
when they are brought forth.

When he sees that he cannot avoid taking, he casts stones against his
followers, and many times hurts them. His nest is commonly found in the
^and well made with bulwarks and banks, to keep away ray^e from the young.

Of the Empire of Cathay.
THe Empire of Cathay is ruled by the great Cham. With this nation one man may
have many wives, when the husband dies, every wife pledeth her own cause
before the judges, shows her merits, so that which of the so ever is adjudged
to have been the most officiouse and dearest wife to her husband, she in her
best apparel and with all her jewels, as though she had gotten the victory of
the other, goes willynglye and merely unto the heap of wood where her husband
shall be burnt, and lying down by his carcass and embracinge it the fire is
kindled, and so she is burnt with her husband: the other of his wives after
this live in great shame and obloquy. They match not together for wealth or
nobility, but for excellency of beauty and procreacio sake. The people of
Cathay have this opinion that they think no other nation to see with both eyes
but the selves, they are persuaded also that they excel all other in
subtilitye of arts and scyences. It is a white kind of people, without
beards, of small eyes, and lacking true piety and due obeisance to God: for
some of them worship the Son, some the moon, others certain immages of
mettalls, and other some an ox, so that they be full of monstrous
supersticion. The Emperor keeps his court at his city called Cambalu,
which is the noblest mart in that part of the world, for there is almost
never a day through out ye year, but that a thousand carte lodes of silk
almost are changed and brought there amongst merchants. The Emperor kepeth
in his court twelve thousand horsemen to keep his body. Their order of
watching is thus. One captain with three thousand gardeth the king within the
Palace for three days, and so doth another, other three days following, thus
they keep their courses. When the Emperor sittethe down to meat, he hath
his principal and greatest queen on his left hand, and his children which be
of royal blood on his right hand in a lower place. No man that sits down
in this halle, drinks or is served in any other vessel but of Gold, the
princes and noble men that serve the king at his meat, cover their mouths
with most fine silk clothes, least they should breath upon the kings meat
or drink, and when the Emperor takes the pot to drink, all the musicians
begin to make great melody, and the others ministers bend their knees. More
of this nation you shall find in the great book of Munsters Cosmographye.

Of the Canniballs.
THE Canniballs are wild people feeding upon mans flesh which is a very sweet
kind of flesh. If they get or find any chyldre within the age of fourtene
years, they feed them crame them as we do Capons, but those which are beyond
fourtene years of age, they kill them out of hand, devouring their what guts
immediately, and the other parts of their bodies they salt and lay up as we do
powdered flesh, they eat no women but keep them only for the bearing of
children, as we do hens for eggs.

If any for age is past child bearing, she doth all drudgery like unto a bond
woman they have no houses, but they erect many trees together, and so combine
them in ye top that it serves for lodging. Their beds be made of silk and
hay, they have no iron, but they use bones instede of yro they dress their
meates in earthen pots, mingling ye flesh of Parats, geese, ducks and mans
flesh together. They are now come to moore civility then they had in times
paste.

Of the Lyon.
LYons live in many countries, in Africa they have a cruel and terrible look,
and thyn hears. Pliny thinks that his especial valiencye is, when his mayne
covers his neck and shoulders^ In Africa for the scarcetie of waters many
wild beasts meet together at some one puddle, where, females and males of
diverse kinds use natural conjunction, whereof comes monstruouse young.
Ar^stotle saith that the she Lyon hath at her first generation five young and
that every year after she brings forth less by one^ until she wax barren
and that her yonge are without shape or fashion, about the bigness of a
weasel.

Herodotus and Gellius thinks the contrary, that she brings forth one
every year. Democritus saith that this beast only, is bred and brought forth
with open eyes, and that he is given to little sleep, as it may appear, because
h^s tail is often wagging as he sleeps. The male Lyo makes vryne like unto
a Dog, which is strong in savour. The Lyons drink seldom, they feed every
other day, after sacietie they be without meat for.iii. days, they devour
such things as they can whole, they live long. The Lyon only of al fierce
and cruel beasts, shows clemency towar^es the humble: for he spares the
prostra^e, and when he rages he uses his violence rather against men then
women. He never utters his force against infants and children, but being
driven with great famine there to. His tail is a note of his mind and
stomach, (as the ears be in a horse) for if his tail stirs not he is
gentle and peaceable, yt which is a rare thing, for he is most comonlye
angry. He keeps his desire of revenging long against any man or bea^ that
hath hurt him, being wounded he doth marvelously note and mark him yt gave
the would, and in a great multitude will invade him. His bones are sound not
holowe, whereof some wrytes that out of his bones fire may be stricken as out of
stones, and therefore sometimes he is so ragynge with anger, and in such burning
heate that he dies presently. He is never exasperate nor moved, but either by
famyn or hurt. This one thing is to be noted in so crnell a beast, that
wheels runned about, and empty carts, and the combs, and singinges of cocks
doothe make him a feared, but especially he is a feared of fire.

Of the People called the Nigrites and others.
THere is a kind of people nigh unto the confynes of the west Arabians
called Azaneg^, whose colour is betwixt black and ash colour, they live with
barlye, and dates, and Camel^ milk, and because they are near unto the
Nigrites, they feed sometimes upon diverse kind of pulse, they be no great
feeders, for the scarcity of victuals makes them to suffer and tolerate much
famine. The Portugalls use merchandise with them in these our days.

They cover their heads with a linen roller, whereof one part hangs down
by the forehead, so that they cover all their mouth there withe. For they are
almost as much ashamed to show their mouths as their privy parts,
therefore they keep their mouths close never opening them except it be to
take meat, and that because they would not let any fylthye air and vapoure
to slip out there by. They do greatly esteem fat and corpulent women, and
such as have large and fair breasts and dugs.

Within this country the traueyle of six days Journey will bring a man to a
place called Tagaza, frome whence is brought much plenty of Salt the which
is carried away upon Camels backs into diverse places and especially to the
kingdom called Melli. The people called Mellitae be some what beyond the
Equinoctial and have most fervent heates, and therefore at certain times in
ye year their blood is infected, so that if they had no remedy by salt,
they could not live by any means, their salt is divided into such lumps,
that one salt stone is enough to be borne upon one man shoulders. But when
they come to the country called Melli, they lode one Camel with two salt
stones, as for the po^rer sort that are not able to have Camels they cary their
salt upon their shoulders and some upon their heads, and that in such a
company, that they seem almost in multitude, like unto an army of men. This
salt they bring unto a great water where every one discharges his burden of
salt upon the land, and makes gre^te hylls thereof, leaving a certain sign
for the true knowledge of every manns he^pe, this done they depart: and then
^ommethe the Nigrites who will not be known, nor yet talk with any other kind
of people, they come near withe their ^hips, and where they see and perceive
ye he^pes of salt, they lay great store of Gold nigh unto every heap of
Salt, even as they think it convenient for the merchandise, and agreeable to
equity for the eschaunge, and then they depart leaning the gold and salt
together.

The Nigrites which went a far of return again, and every one looks upon
his own heap, and if the gold that was left by it pleases him, and seems
sufficient for the eschaunge, then he takes the said gold away, leaving the
salt behind him and not minding to return again. If the heap of gold
doothe not seem unto them sufficient for the eschaunge of the heap of salt,
then they leave both still, and depart again into some secret place minding
to come again within a little after. But those Nigrites which cannot abide to
be known, come again to the said place, and take away such heaps of salt
as they see the gold to be taken from, or else they add a little more gold
to the heap that was left before, or other wise they carry away their Gold,
leaving the salt still if the bargain please not them. And this do they use
their merchandise, so that the one sees not another, and that by an old
custom.

It is a great labour with these Nigrites to carry their salt upon their
shoulders because they lack all manner beasts, meet for that carriage
almost, the which comes through the v^fruitfulne^ of the earth, for they
have very little store of Gra^e, and that which they have, is pestilence also,
and therefore they daily ^rinke water, wherein a little Salt has been
resolved, and this is their greatest remedy and most especial medecin.

They never have no rain but in August September, and October.

But these men that come after this sort and eschaunge Gold for salt,
without any talk of bargain or sale, are thought to be meruailouse black,
having their lower lip hanging down to the breas^ somewhat red, and within
excoriate chapped so that blood comes out, but the upper lip is ^mall like
unto ores, and for this cause all their teeth may be seen, which are a
great deals bigger then ores, their lyppes are also thought to putrefy many
times for the heate of th^r country, for the remedy where of they use the
benefit of salt.

Of Preto Iohannes Land.
THe rule dominion of Preto Ihon is large and of great compass, this country
excells in riches, in gold s^luer, and precious stones Some say yt the
Ethiopes living under Presti Ihoan, are very good Christians, and that forty
kings do homage and obeizaunce to the Emperor Presti Ihoan, where of ^ome be
tributary also to him.

The great Almener of Presti Ihoan promises himself to fight for the Holy
land It is written that Thomas the Apostle, was buried in the kingdom of
Ethiopia There be beasts also in this country yt have seven horns, in their
fore heads. There be white Camels, and white Bears, and horses with two
horns. It is said also that there be birds or fowls in this country,
which with their talets and nails, will carry away an Ox, or an horse, to
feed their young. In some parts of this country, it is thought that there be
men withe horns, and such as have but one eye before them two eyes behind
them, and some people that fed ^ ^eir own paren^ ^ho^e which are aged. ^
kind of people yt hath feet ^se ^eete and very round. Th^ women dwell
severally and they have three kingdoms. The three queenes of the Amazons set
forth and make prepara^ion to wars with three h^ndred thousand soldiers of
women.

The Pigmeis in Africa be good christians. The king of the Pigmeis war the
against fowls which destroy fruit his people drives them away with their
voices. It is said also that there be certain monsters which above the
^oyne^ are scene formed like unto men, and beneathe the loins unto horses. The
Et^opians have an artificiouse way to take Lyons and unicorns. There have
been seen in times past Giantes of three score and ten cubits in compass,
and now in these days it is said that many great^ Gyantes be there seen of
thirty and five cubits in height. The bird which is ^alled a Phoenix, and
lives the hundred years and more, is said to be set on fire, and burnt
through the heate of the ^o^n^


