APPROOVED MEDIcines and Cordial Receiptes, with the natures, qualities, and
operations of sundry Simples.

Very Commodious and expedient for all that are studious of such knowledge.

IMPRINTED AT London in Fleetestreete by Thomas Marsh. 1580.

TO THE VVORshipful, the Master, wardens, and general Assistants of the
Fraternitye of Chyrurgians in London.
SENECA that noble Christian Ethnic (for so doth ERASMVS for his singularitye
of profound wisdom judgement term ^im) wills us in bestowing of any gift ^o
be careful, that it be both such, as ^s fit for the estate of the Gyuer, and
also meet for the Condition of the Recei^er. Else, in steed of expected
thanks, ^isgrace may grow: and what the Gyer means of goodwill, may
(perhaps) (...) the Receiver (either lymping in judge ^ent, or freezing in
delight) be little ^garded, less coutenanced. For my ^rt I have (as I thik)
not much swerued ^erein, fro the soud advise of the aforenamed Philosopher, in
makig you Patros of this little work, and that for two special respects: the
one, for that, it treats of such matter, as is peculierly appendant to your
worthy faculty, whereby you are in profession best able thereof to judge:
tother, because it was penned and gathered by one, whose name is to me
unknown, who nevertheless seems hereby to be a hearty embracer and well.
VViller of your excellent Art and function: and therefore in that respect, are
you the meetest, and in my opinion the fittest to defend his labours, to become
Guardias to this his poor mangled and forsaken Orphan. The faults which (in
deed) through negligence or ignorance of them that had the charge and oversight
of the Prynting thereof, are unhappily chanced, I am to request you being
shilfull, either gently to amend, or friendly a while to tolerate, till either
letter opportunity serve to reform them, or that the auther and compiler (if
he be living) may himself peruse and recognyze the same. The holy Ghost bless
you and your Labours in that your so noble an office profession, having so
excellent a Subject to work upon, as Man is, the perfectest and excelletest of
all Creatures, and for whom al others were made and created.

From Butley in Cheshire, the 19. of October. 1580. Your vnfaygned well willer
Thomas Newton.

To the friendly Reader.
Here haste thou Gentle Reader a brief and compendious collectio of many good
approved medicines with the operation, virtue of many simples. It was not meant
at the first to have the same published, which is the cause that the Book now
is not wholly without his blemishes, and some imperfections. But thy courteous
and friendly accep^aunce at this time may cause the same to be hereafter
better scoured over polished for thy further commodity.

Farewell.
THE TABLE OF this Book.
A
ACacia. Fol. 65 Adde^ 89 Agaricke. 20 Agnus casius. 41 Agalochus. 27 Alica. 20
Alkak^ngi 66 Almond 10 Alisaunders 38 Aloe 27 Allumme 80 Amber 1 Ambergryce 27
Ambrose 38 Amy 39 Anacardium 48 Anagallis 22 Anemone 19 Angelica 50 Anyse 34
Antimony 75 Arabian thorne 61 Aristolochia 25 Artichoke 36 Ashes 51. 81.
Aspalathus 15 Asphaltum 25 Assa foetida. 33
B
BAy tree. Folio. 45 Basil 23 Balm 12 Balaustium, see Pomgranade flowers.
B^ley 61 Bean 2 Bearbreeche. 30 Bearefoote 45 Bear barley 59 B^ellium 39
Beech 54 Bellragges 43 Ben^emin 33 Beete 71 Betony 43 Berberis 65 Be^erscodde
89 Bitumen, ^ee Asphaltu. Bitter fitche 15 Bole Armoniacke 81 Borage 52
Bloudstone 83 Blyte 71 Bran 13 Bread 14 Bryar 58. 59 Brine 30 Brionie 46
Britannica 64 Brymstone 79 Brasle 76 Brazen stone 84 Broth of a cock 88
Buglosse 21 Bulb^s or Scalions. 48 Bu^bast 19 Bushsage 58 Bushsage mushru.
Ibid.
C
CAlamus aromatic{us}. 28 Camomill 1^ Capers 38 Cantharides 89 Calamint 42
Camphyre 68 Caravvayes 37 Caret 24 Cassia fistula 1 Cassia Lignea 39 Castorium,
look, Beavers cod. Cataputia. 50 Celandine 40 Centorie 42 Cedre tree 51
Cerusse 75 Cetrake 26 Cicorie 70 Cichpease 20 Cinnamon 35 Cinoper 79 Citrull 72
Cheric 71 Chestnut 54 Christ's thorne 65 Cleauers 20 Clone 43 Cod tree 62
Colevvort 14 Colophonia 23 Coloquintida 37 Coltes foot 32 Comfrey 2 Coral 55
Coriander 15 Correcheruile 47 Costmarie 43 Cotton, see, Bombast. Coppevvebbe 89
Copper 76 Copperesse 77. 81 Crosses 49 Crovvfoote 52 Cubebes 37 Cuckovv pint.
16 Cucumber 72 Comyne 37 Curryers berries 65 Cuttle bone 95 Cyperus, see,
English Galingale. Cypress tree 16
D
DAffadill 31 Damsons 69 Darnel 40 Dates 19 Date tree 59 Dill 44 Ditan^e 42
Dock 57 Doder 15 Doggestones 52 Doggeberye, or Eglantine 60 Doronicum 46 Donge
87 Doves blood 85 Dregs of oil 22 Dragons 15 Dvvale 65. 66
E
EArth 81 Earthvvormes 89 Echion 14 Egg 87 Eglantine, see, Doggeberry Egle
stone 84 Egrimonie 20 Elder 36 El'campane 49 (...) 55 Emerald 85 Endine 70
English Galengale 26 Epythyme 34 Euphorbe 47
F
FEnell 44 Fenigreeke 25 Fern 17 Fetherfevv 33 Figvvort 40 Fig tree 28
Filbert 24 Flower deluce 33 Foales foot 34 Fox lunges 89 Fumetory 19
G
GAlangale 45 Galbanus 43 Gall 78 Garden Smallage 37 Garlic 48 Gentian 34
Germander 2^ Gladen 35 Glevve 62 Goats blood 86 Gold 80 Gold Soder 79 Gourd 73
Grape 7 Grains 19. 42 Greenevvort 54 Groundsell 64 Ground pine 26 Grummell 19
Guiacum 22 Gum Ammoniacke. 35 Gum Dragagant. 62 Gum Arabic ibid. Gynger
46 Gytt 44
H
Hearts horne 88 Hearts Pizill ibid. Hearts tongue 67 Havvthorne 55 Hebenu^,
See, Guiacum. Hemp 28 Hemlock 68 Henbane 67 Hipp 60 Hollyhocke 12 Hop 64
Horehound 27 Horsetayle 62 Houseleeke 74 Honey 27 Hysope 35
I
IAsperstone 83 Ieatte 84 Ievvish stone 84 Iesymyne 25 Incense 26 Iuye 15
Iuorle 88 Juniper 37 In^uba 71
K
KItkeyes 53 Knottegrasse 74
L
LAbdanum 15 Lark 90 Laserpitium, see, Beniemyne- Laurel 46 Lazule stone 84
Lead 78 Leaven 13 Leek 50 Lattice. 37 Lignum Aloes, see Agalochus. Lyneseede
12 Lyntespurge 51 Lilly 30 Liquirice 71 Liuervvort 58 Lote tree 59 Lou^ge 38
Loadestone 83 Lupine 19 Lycium 2 Lye 80 Lyme ibidem Lysimachia 64 Lytharge 71
M
MAce 1 Mader 17 Maioram gentle 39 Maioram 17 Maydenhaire ibide. Malobathron 16
Mallovv 71 Mandrake 67 Manna 16 Marchasite, Iooke. Brazen stone. Marovv 87
Medicines 91. 92. 93 94. 95. Meddlers 56 Mehlote 12 Mercurie 19 Melon 72 Mill 55
Mynte 39. 47 Mysseltoe 25 Myrobalane 36. 56 Molen 47 Moss 54 Mulberry 61 Mummy
32 Musk 29 Muskle shell 89 Mushroome (...) Mustard 52 Milk 86 Myrrh 32
Myrtle tree 53
N
NArde ^7 Nauevve 31 Neperyall 42 Neesevvort 45 Nettle 21 Nightshade 65 Nu^e of
India 53 Nut migge 24
O
OAde 16 Oats 60 Oak 54 Olyueberie 3 Onion 48 Organie 41 Orpiment 76 Olmund 17
Oils 4 Oyster shell 90
P
PAlma Christi, look, Tykeseede. Panax 41 Panic 55 Paper herb 55 Parietarie
63 Parselye 38 Paste 62 Patience 57 Peach 73 Pear tree 58 Peas 59 Pellitorie
of Spain 50 Penyroyall 41 Penyvvoit ^3 Peonie 18 Pepper 5^ Perilvvort 2
Pervincle 40 Phu, See, Valerian. Pipe edge tree, See, Berberies Pisticke nut
17 Pitch 31 Plane tree 70 Plaster of Paris 76 Plantayne 65 Poli^ll 24
Polipodie 34 Polygonaton 20 Pom cytron 3 Pomegranade 60 Pomegranade flowers,
61. 65. Pomegranade rind, ibi. Pompone, look, Melo. Popular tree ^3 Poppy 68,
69 Powder of a post 16 Priuet 57 Prunes 69 Pumyso 84 Purselane 74 Pine tree 18
Q
QVicksiluer 77 Quince 61 Quitche 59
R
RAdish 40 Raison 8 Rampion 31 Rhaponticke 42 Rheubarbe 28 Revve 39 Reed 60
Rocket 32 Rose 57 Rose of Hierusalem, 36 Rosemary 44 Runner 87 Rice 11
S
SAffron 25 Sage 22 Salt 82 Salt peeter ibide. Sarcocoll 12 Saint Iohas vvort
35 Saty^on 52 Sauerie 42 Sauyn 34 Saphyre 85 Scammonie 40 Saunders 68 Sebesten
2 Seahollie ibidem Seavvillovve ibidem Scene ^7 Seruis 57 Sesamum 10 Setvvall 25
Sicomore 30 Silk 13 Singreene, look, house leek. Soldanella 14 Soap 51
Sovvbread 34 Sovvfenell 37 Sorrel 57 Sheep greasy vvoolle 88 Sheepeskinne
ibidem Sovvthistell 64 Sothernevvood 43 Snakes skin 89 Snail 90 Sperage 2
Spikenard 17 Spinache 70 Spelt 59 Sponge 12 Spurge 49 Spodium 78 Squilla 31
Squinant 12 Starch 13 Stauefagre 36 Stechados 10 Storax 16 Storks bill 21
Sugar 11
T
TAllovv 86 Tamarix 13 Tamarindes 68 Tatre 32 Tartar 83 Tasill 56 Terra
sigi^lata 81 Thlaspi, or Tryacle mustard 49 Thapsia ibidem Tu^bith 44
Turmentill 11 Turneppe 30 Turpentine 23 Tykeseede 31 Time 37 Tutye 77
V
VErdegresse 76 Verinyce 66 Vernyce 17 Veruayne 47 Vine 63 Vineygre 61 Violet
70 Virgin vvaxe 22 Vomit Nut 24
W
VVAllnut 24 Wallgelofers 31 Wallsage 68 Wallvvort 36 Water lilly 67 Water
germander 44 Wax 1 Wertvvort 64 Wheat ^3 White Lead, see Cerusse Wine 8 Wine
lees 83 Wild Saffron 27 Wild oats 11 Wild smallage 38 Wild mynte 39 Wild
rocket 48 Wild Vine 46, 63 Wild Sage, or Tasey. 64 Wielding 60 Wild Buglosse
64 Winter cheri, see Alkakengi. Winter crosses 48 Wychwynde 20 Willovve 62
Woodbynde 2^ Wormevvoode 1^
Y
YEllovve Bottle, or Mayvveede 23 Yellovv carret or Wild carret 35 Iron 79
Z
Zizipha, see, Iuiuba.
FINIS.
Medicines of Medicines of temperate heate.
Cera. Wax.
WAX, is maturatiue, resolu^ue, Remedy to ye bloody flux.
mollificatiue. The material substance of Plasters, Oynte^e^ts. It is taken in
Gale. sim. Acti. li. Paul. li. Diosco. li.
wa^dly in brothes against the ^lousy flux, which is with vlcerations of ^e
Bowels. Wax well washed is more ^mperate than Wax vnwashed: for by ^e
washing the sharpness, and acrimony (...) it is taken away.

Cassia fistula, Black Cassia. Lax. 7

THis is a certain fruit, or ^odde brought Serapi. Simple A^icen. 20 Canonico
Mesue de simplo.
from Egypt, the pulpe of it is Laxa^ue, ^rgeth cholier, and tempers the
blood: ^e Tree thereof now grows in Italy.

Macer, Macis, Mace. Flux.

MACIS is the husk of the Nutmeg, Di^. li. 10. Gal. si. 0. Act^. li. 10. Pau.
li. 70.
it is contor^atiue unto the Stomach, ^o stays the flux of the body.

Adiantum, Politrithon, Maiden hair.
THis bear^ is of the kind of our maiden Stone. Dio ii. 40 Gal. si. 70 Acti.
li. 10 Pau. li. 70.
bayre: subtle in substance ins^ssiue of gresle vumours in the breast, and
(...). I^ breaks the Stone, and stays the flux of the Body.

Trichomanes, Capillus veneris. true Maiden hair.
THis is our true Maiden hair, and of the same virtue that Adiantum before
Dio-li 40.
spoken of is.

Succinum, Ambra, Amber.
AMber is thought to distill from the Popular Stop Blood Flux. Dio. li. 10
Auicen. 20 Canonico
^ee iuto the Ficud of Euridan^ and there to were hard. Beaten to poud and
drunk, it stays the Flux of the (...) macke and belly, and stops blood.

Symphiton Petrenum, unsavoury Marioram.
THis Herb is inscissyue and also bynding. Purge^ Breast. Flux Wounds Gal.
li. 80. Acti, li. 10 Pau. li. 70. Dio, li, 40.
Is purges the Breast, healpeth coughing of blood, stops all manner of
Fluxes, and heals wounds.

Symphiton magnum, Consolida mayor. Comfory the greater.
COmfory is of the same virtue that Symphiton Flux. Gal. si. 80. Pau. li. 70.
Dio. li. 40
Petrenum is: but something hotter in virtue.

Asparagus, Sperage.
BOth the Seed, Root of this herb Purges the Liver Dio. li. 20. Gal. si.
60. Acti. li. 10 Pau. li 70.
are abstersyue, apertiue, and do open both the Liver, and Kidneys.

Faba. The Bean.
THe substance of the Bean is abster sive, Bloody Flux purges Gout,
swelling.
the Rynde is bindinge and also abstersiue: therefore the whole Bean decocted,
and boiled in water and Vinegar is given for the flux of the Belly without
blood, and against vomits. If it be eaten it is Gal. si. 60. aliment. 10.
Acti. li. 10 Pau. li. 70. Dio. li. 20.
windy, and bard to be digested. It purges breast and loongs, it eases the
gout made in a Pla^ster with swynes grease: and also is good against
inflammations swellinges.

Lotus Pratensis. A kind of threeleaued grass. Handachocha. Eyes.
Perellworte.
THis herb is abstersiue, mixed with Dio-li 40. Gal. si. 60. Acu. li. 10 Pau.
li. 70.
Honny it purges cleanses the ties of gross humours.

Lycium, The Lycian liquor. Ulcers.

THe true Lycium is the juice of the root^ Fiuxe.
of a certain (...) Cappadocia, and In Dio. li. 10. Gal. si. 70. Acti. l. ^0
Pau. li. 70.
dia. It is resolutiue, austere sieve, restrictiue or ^ heats Ulcers, and ma^
ous Soars: ^t stateth all manner of flux^ (...) of men and women. In steed of
th^ the Chyrurgrans (...) use the Juice of Caprifolie, (...) (...) casted
Woodbynde.

Mexa, Sebesten, Nuts of Graecia.
THis fruit is Laratiue, good against the Lar. Worms Auicenna Canenico Serapi
de Simplici. Laxe. Dio. li. 20. Galen de alimet. 10. Sim. 60. Acti li. 10 Pau.
li 70.
cough: it doth mitigate and swag the burning of the dryne, kills the worms
that be in the belly.

The substance of this fruit stays and binds the belly, the lyc^ur
wherein it is decocted or boiled doth lare the belly, or is soluble: it
gendreth evil humours and melancolious.

Eringum: Seaholme.
THis herb grows by the Seasydes, Colic stone.
and is good against the Colic, and breaks tu Stone: provokes ye brine,
and Dio li. 30. Gal. si. 80. Acti. li. 10. Pau. li. 70.
the monthly course in women. The roots condite be uses to provoke lust
conrage, but of no authority, no yet to any great effect in that behalf.

Halimus, Sea Willow, or Prickwillowe. Increase of Milk seed.

THis plant grows by the Sea sides it is salt in taste, and samewhat bynding:
Gal simp. Paul. li. Diosco. li.
^t engenders milk and Seed^ the tender buds be eaten, for the same use
reserved. It grows much in Cycill.

Malum Citrinum: Malum medicum: The Pom Citron, or Citrine.
THe Rynde of the Pom Citrone is Sweet Breath. Poison. Gale. de aliment
Simplici. Acti. li. Paul. li. Diosco. li.
temperate in heate, but ^ry in the second degree. It comfort the Sinmacke,
and makes the Breath sweet. The middle substance which contey^th ye seed is
sharpt in taste, cold and dry in the third degree. The substance next v^t^
that towards the Rind is gross, and engenders Fleagme, cold in virtue: the
Seed is hoate and dry, and resolutiue in the second degree. The leaves of the
tree be dry, and resolutiue. The whole fruit drunk with Wine is comminded
against poison, and corrects the corrupt Appetites in Women with Child.
Orenges, and Lymons be much of the same kynoe, and of like virtue.

Oliua, The Olyue Berry.
THis Olyue Berry being ripe, is tempeperate Binding. Gale. sim Acti. li. Paul.
li. Diosco. li.
in heate: being unripe is tart cold in the first degree. But the Leaves
teuder croppes of the Olyue tree be bindinge, and cold.

Olyuae Conditae, the Olyue berries kept in Brine.
THe Olyue herries that be preserved in Appetite. B^ G^ de alimet. 60 Dio. li.
10. Acti. li. 70
brine comfort the stomach, and pro ^oke an Appetite. The brine wherein they
be kept preserves the Qumes from rhewmes superfluous moystures, if they be
washed with it, and fastens also the teeth.

Oleum, Oil.
Oil of the ripe Olyue is temperate in Dio. li 60. Gal. si. 10. Acti. li. Pau.
li. 70
heate, soluble and cesolutiue: but Oil of the baripe Olyue declyneth to
coldness, binds and comfort. Oil the older it is the more it exceeds in
heal. All Oil is good against Doyson often drunk, and often vomited. Oil
washed, is more gentle of taste, and of less mordacity, or sharpness then
that which is not washed. Oil is the material substance where with all
Paysters, and Oyntmeates be made and tempered.

All other Oils be referred for their virtues unto the Temperature and virtue
of the substance whereof they be made. As for cremple it is more largely
declared in these Oils after described.

Oleum Rosarum, Oil of Roses.
Oil of Ros^s is confortatiue of parts Burning.
Diosco. li. Acti. li. 10 Gal. si. 10. Mesue de Oleis.
that be resolved, resolutiue, repercussiue, and doth refrigerate such parts
as be inflamed.

Oleum Chamomelinum, Oil of Chamomill.
Oil of Camomill is resolutiue, and eases pains.

Oleum Violaceum, Oil of Violettes.
Oil of Uiolettes extinguishes Infla Dio. li. 10. Acti. li. 10 Gal. simp.
Mesue de Oleis.
mations, and hoate swellinges.

Oleum Cidoniorum, Oil of Quinces.
Oil of Quinces is cofortatiue of parts Rewmes Floxe Diosco. li. Gale. metho.
10. Acti. li. 11 Mesue de Oleis. 10.
that be relaxed. byndinge and staying all rhewmes and fluxes.

Oleum Amygdalarum dulcium, Oil of sweet Almondes.
Oil of sweet Almonds ^solueth hardness, Mollificatiue. Galen. li. Simpli.
60. Mesue de Oleis.
and doth smooth and lenigate ye asperite and roughness of the wind pipe: it
is good also for the Breast and loonges.

Oleum Amygdaelarum amararum, Oil of bitter Almondes.
Oil of bilter Almondes is a^stersiue, The ^ares. Dio. li. 10. Acti. li. 10
Gal. si. 60. Mesue de Oleis.
and aperti^. It disselurth wyndes and sounds in the Ears, kills the worms
also that oftentimes be in the same.

Oleum Lilliorum, Oil of Lyllies.
Oil of Lillies is mollitiue of hard swell Cold Breast. Acti. li. 10. Mesue
de Oleis. Auicen Cano. 10.
lines, caseth pains, is good against colds Diseases of all parts, and
specially of the Breast.

Oleum A^eth^, Oil of Dill.
Oil of Dill resolves, and eases Act^. li. 10 M^s^e de Oleis 50 Aui^enna
Canonico
pains.

Oleum Laurinum, Oil of Baize.
Oil of Baye^ is good aga^nst all cold Cold bu mou^s. Dio. l^. 10. Acti. li.
10 Me^e de Oleis.
Dis^ases, as Collick^s a^d pa^es in the S^ewes, and Joyntes that come of cold
humours.

Oleum Rutaceum, Oil of Few.
Oil of Few is good against Infla nations. Juflamations. Gale. metho* 120
Mesue de Oleis.
and wind, and all diseas^s that come of cold.

Oleum Spicatum, Oil of Spike.
Oil of Spike is good against all cold ^assions and diseases: and specially
of Cold in the Stomach. Gale. metho. 70. Mesue de Oleis.
the stomach and parts that do nourish: and with all it is comfortable.

Oleum Mastich^num, Oil of Masticke.
Oil of Masticke is confortatiue of the stomach and Liver, and of all parts
Confortattue.
that be needful to be comforted and warmed. Dio li. 10. Gale metho. 70 Mesue
de Oleis. 10 Acti. li.


Oleum Abs^thij, Oil of Wormewoode.
Oil of Worm wood r^solueth cold, Gale metho. 1^0 A^cen Cano. 50
and gr^sse bum^urs, and it is confortatiue of the member or part that is
diseased.

Oleum Mel^, Oil of Millelote
Oil of Millelote resolves swelliages Bruses. Mesue de Oleis.
and bruse^, ^nd eases the pains.

Oleum benedictu, vel de Lateribus,
THis Oil resolves, and doth mitigate Mesue de Oleis.
pains, and is good against all cold passions.

Oleum Costium, Oil of Costus,
THis Oil is apertiue and comfortatiue Mesue de Oleis. Auicen Cano. 50.
of the Sinews: good also against all cold diseases of the Liver and
stomach.

Oleum Euphorbij, Oil of Euphorbium. Palues Cramps Mesue de Oleis. Auicen
Cano. 50

THis Oil is special against all cold ^iseases of the Synewes and Joyntes:
as Palues, Cramps, and such other.

Oleum Castoreum, Oil of Beaver.
THis resolves cold nassions, and is special Gale. metho. 120 Auicen Cano.
50
good for coll^kes.

Oleum Uulpium, Oil of a Fox.
THis Oil of a Fox is good against all Back. Mesue de Oleis. Gal. si. 110
Acti li 20 Pau. li. 20
cold diseases and aches: as cold, gouts, aches in the Back, and Palsies.

Oleum de Scorpionibus, Oil of Scorpions.
THis Oil breaks the Stone in the Stone. Mesue de Oleis.
Ry^nies, if the Back be anointed therewith: cast in with a syringe it breaks
th^ Stone in the Bladder.

Oleum Nenupharis. Oil of the water Lyllie.
THis Oil is good against heates, and (...) hoate Swellings, and Inflammations.
Inflammations. Mesue de Oleis.


Oleum Papaueris, Oil of Popy.
THis Oil refrigerateth strongly, and Sleep. Mesue de Oleis.
^aseth the pains that come of heates, and provokes Sleep.

Oleum Mirtinum, Oil of Mirtes.
THis Oil doth refrigerate and comfort Heart. Mesue de Oleis.
the Stomach, the Heart, and all other parts that be resolved and weakened
by excess of heate.

Una, the Grape.
OF Grapes there be diverse Gale. de a liment. 20
kinds, some be sweet in taste, some^e ta^te, some be sharpe, Acti. li. 10
and some be of a mean quality or taste betwixt these, neither notab^e
sweet, n^yt^er sharpe, neither Pau. li. 70 Dio. li. 50.
sower, which be called Uinosae in Latin, that is to say, having the taste
of Wine, and this kind is temperate between ^oate and cold. The kind of them
that be sweet is hoate, and increases thirstinesse. The sharpe and sower be
cold, the sweet also be sol^ble, and specially while they b^t f^ll of
moys^nesse. The sharpe and sower do not only lack that property, but also
are neither conco^ted in the stomach, Galen de a^met. 20 Diosco. li. Acti. li
10 Pau. li. 10
neither well distributed into the body, ^e yet do well nourish^. The ryp^
Grape doth most nourish next to the figg^ of all fruits, and engenders none
evil humours if it be thoroughly ripe. Howbeit of^ the Grape comes no Juice
and stable nourishment, as doth of Flesh. The Grape (...) it be green and in
his moyst^s, doth in* flate the Stomach, and is soluble: if th^ Grape be long
retained within the body, it doth annoy and hurt, which fault doth not happen
to the Fig: for although th^ Fig be not down ward in short time avoided,
yet if it be well digested in the stomach it gives good nourishment: which
property and virtue the Grape lacks, fo^ in case they be over lunge retained
in the belly, they neither be digested nor altere^ in the stomach, neither
distributed to th^ Liver and veins, nor increase other th^ crude humours which
cannot be altered i^ to good blood. The Grape hath in it four^ substances, the
one is the stone, which (...) cold, dry, ^inding: the other three be th^ utter
skin, the substance adjoining an^ contained within the same, and the Liquor.
The ston^ and ^kyn do descend through the body in manner ^o. The other parts be
retained and do nourish.

Una Passa, The great Rayson.
THe Rayson is of like comparison to ye Grape, as the ory Fig Galen de
alimet. ^0 Gal. si. 60 Acti. li. ^0 Pa^. li. 70
unto the green. The Rayson is maturatiue, bynding, or stiptike, and
resolu^ue. The sweeter the Ra^ ye hoatter, the ^arter the colder, the ^r Rayson
doth strengthen and comfort the stomach, and bind the be^y: the sweet
rayson is in the mean, for it neither resolves the stomach, neither laxeth
the bel^y, neither yet binds g^ra^ly. The sweet sweet ra^son is a^ur, and
doth temper and vanquish frea^gs or bytinges of the of the stomach. The best
raison is yt which is most fatty and vn^ous, and ^ath a (...) skyn. The raison
doth not so laxe the ^elly, neither is so abstersiue as the ^ry Fig: Howbeit,
it is better to the stomach. The raison eaten is good for ye wind pipe, good
against ye Cough, good for the Kydnies and B^ou^.

Uinum, Wine.
Wine is hoate in the second degree G^l. (...). 80 (...). li. 10 P^. li. 70
Howbeit, if is (...) very (...), it is hoate in the third degree: But must or
new wine is hoate i^ the first: they be like in dries, as they Gal. ^li. 30
D^o. li. 50
be in heate. Of all Wynes Red and gross wine is most meetest and conu^ment to
(...) crease and eagender blood. Next to that Galen de bonis Succis
is wine that is black in colour, sweet, gross. Thirdly red or black wine
with grassinesse of substan^r ta^es in taste, D^o. li. 50
Wy^ wine gross substance with tartnes in taste are re^rued in the 4. place.
Whyt^ wine and thynne in Substance nourishes least of all. Sweet wine is
better concot* ted in the Stom^cke than ye tart or green wine, and better
di^ed into the body, and also is more soluble. Although gros^ Galen de ^ate
Tueda, 50
wynes be meetest for the (...) of blood, yet it is to be noted that ^y gross
wine is ^ardly concorted and altered in the Stomach, and slowly distributed,
unless th^ Stomach be good and st^onge, the gross^ wynes also be not
commended for making* and provoking of brine: and besides that some of them do
stop the Liver, the splen, Dio-li. 50. Gale metho. 70
and kyd^s, so that by the use of the, ^o^e men fall into Drop^es, some into the
stone: and specially old men. The most (...) somest wine for them that be in
recovery from sickness (so that they have no Fever) is wine red in colour,
thynne in substance, and somewhat tart in taste. Wine among all other things
doth moist, and soonest increase natural heate: and therefore wine that is
hoate of nature, and subtle in substaunte, yellow in co^er, old in age, of
good odor, and smelling is most special to revive and restore such persons
as fall into Hipocra, de vlceri.
soundinges or sayntings, for it is soonest distributed into all parts of the
body, not with standing such yellow strong wines do oftentimes trouble the
head. Waterish and thyn Wine doth little or nothing nourish, but doth only
provoke the brine. Wine is meet for the cold natures of complexions: wine
condite with honny is Hipocra. de vlceri.
good for those that fear the stone universally. As Wine is good for old men,
so it is evil for chi^oren: sweet wynes ^e good for them that need to be
restored, so they be subject to no ^becillity or weakness of the Liver, ^pleue,
or Rydnies. To them that have gross humours in their Uaynes subt^l wynes are
meet and good: to them that ^aien de ^e ^uenda. 50. 10.
have cold humours in their veins hoate wynes and old ve meet: but to them
that be not of this condition or state, Wynes that be pleasant and well
smelling be m^eter, so that they do not trouble and vn^ quiet the head Flee
fro gross evil smelling Hipocra. ^een.
wines, such as be of great tartenesse* or unpleasant taste. Also absteyne
from wine that is to old, or to new, special from all wynes till they be
fined. Wine in the utter parts of the body be good (...) wash and mudify
v^cers or saares Wine also be confected with diverse substances as with Honny,
^ater, U^eger, Tym^ G^len d^ ^tate Tu^n. 5^.
Squ^t^s, Roses, Wormewoode, Raison^ and many other things, which Wynes
confected and made, are to be esteemed a^ tet the nature of such substances
when with they vee confected. Wine thyone su^stance. yellow^ in colo^, heats
(...) parts of (...) body, provokes vryne, po^geth ^he blood. Wine doth ripe
matu^ (...) ^rs so ^uch as any thing els^ prouo^eth (...) e^tes, a^ ^ryne,
^isp^ to quietness and sleep. As wine is thought to vee unmeet for children,
so it is partly for young men which are hoate and dry, yet being in their
grouth. For such natures it shall dispose to I^e and volupeuousnes of body,
hastynes: and also shall trouble, and unquiet the mind and reason, if it be
not taken moderately.

Amygdala dulcis, Amarae. Amondes sweet, bitter.
THe sweet Almonde is temperate, but Purge ye Drea^a Liver Spl^ne. (...).
(...). 60 (...) l^. 20. Act. l^. ^0 Pau. Pau. li. 70. D^. (...). ^0
the better is suotill, and a^ster sieve, and ^oat^ in the second degree: it
purges the ^reast and Luonges of gross humours: o^ene^ op^ations of the
Lyuet. Spleen, Ryo^es, the sweet Almonde hath ye same ^reper^les, but much
weaker than the viter, and belyo^s that, the sweet nourishes ^e body, but the
the nourishing that it ge^ets is little.

Sesanij, Sesanum, Oily seed.
THe seed of this herb doth mollify, but Gal. si. 80. alimet. 20 Acti. li.
10 Pau. li. 70. Dio. li. 20.
by reason that it is some what oily vnctious, it fills the stomach anon if
it be eaten, it ouerturneth, and troubles the same: it causes the Breath to
stincke if (...) stick or remain between the Teethe the Oil of it also doth
mollsie, and so doth the decoction of the herb it self.

Stechas, Stichados.
THis herb is apertiue, abfter sieve, co^ Come in the Stomach. Dio li. 30
Gal. si. 30 Act. li. 10 Pau. li. 70.
fortatiue of all the inward parts ou^ ward pa^es of the body, which are
refrigrate: and specially good for the Breast if be decoc^ed or boiled, and so
received.

MEDICINES hot and dry in the first degree.
Absinthium, Seriphiu, Ponticum, Santon^ the kinds of Wormwood.
OUr common Wormewoode is of the Dio. li. 30. Gal. si. 60. Acti li. 20 Pau. li.
70.
of Ponticum: it is hot in the first degree, and dry in the third: it is
resolutine, abstersiue, and comfortatine: it purges choleric humours from
the stomach and from the veins by vryne: opens the Liver, and kills
Worms. The kinds of Wormwood called Seriphium, and Santonicum, be hot in
the second degree, more bitterer and not so comfortatiue, they kill Worms
more strongly.

Chamomelum, Chamomill.
CAmomill is of subtle substance, it resolves Sorrow Dio. li. 30. Gal. si.
60. Acti. li. 10 Pau. li. 70
swellings: opens the poares of the Body, and doth mitigate and cease pains
and dolours.

Aegilops, Wild barrayne Otes.
THis Herb is some part like to our Dio. li. 30 Gal. si. 60 alimet. 10 Acti.
li. 10 Pau. li 70.
wild Otes: it doth resolve hard swellinges, and heals the Fistula in the
corner of the Eyes.

Oriza, Rice.
RIce is of little nourishing, bynding, Dio. li. 20. Gal. si. 80. ali. 10.
Acti. li. 10 Pau. li. 70
hard to be digested.

Pentaphillon, Quinque foliu, Tormentilba, Tormentill,
TOrmentill is dry in the third degree* Tothach. Liver. Gal. si. 80. Acti. li.
10 Pau. li. 70. Dio. li. 40
of subtle substance: the decoction os it cease the Aothache, and bealeth
v^cerations of the Mouth: it is also good for the Loonges, and Liver.

Sacharum, Succharum, vulgo Sugar.
Sugar is lenitfue, abstersiue, mundifica* Cold stomach.
type, apertiue, good for the stomach tha^ is not hoate and collerike, for in
the hoate col^erike stomach it is soon turned to cho^ ler: ^t is good also
specially for the Breast Dio. li. 20. Gal. si. 70.
and Loonges. Of the Sugar which is ^ pressed out of certain Canes, or Reeds
speaks no old Au^thor, for the Sugar they speak of was brought out of
India, Arabia, and was a certaiue substance, whic^ was congealed upon the
Canes, or Reeds of that Country, and esteemed to be a kind of Honny, and was
of like complexion and virtue.

Althea, Ib^scus, Holihocke.
THe Root and Seed of Holihocke, do Stone. Dio. li. 30 Acti li. 10 Pau. li.
70
mollify, resolve, and mature or ripe: the Seed also breaks the stone.

Sarcocola, Sarcocoll.
THis is the Gum of a Tree in Persia: Woudes. Dio li. 30 Gal. si. 80. Acti.
li. 10 Pau. li. 70
it dries, and sic catrizeth wounds.

Spongia, the Spounge.
THe Spounge laid to a Wound with Stone. Dio. (...). 80. Gal. si. 50. Pau.
li. 70
water or wine bealeth it, and with honny heals old Ulcers and Soars: the
stones fonnde in the Spounge be abstersiue, and break the stone in the
Kydnies.

Mel^lotus, Melilote.
MEllilote is resolutiue, maturatiue of swelling. Dio. li. 30. Gal. si. 80.
Acti. li. 10 Pau. li. 70
Imposthumations and swellinges, and is confortatiue of the members. The
Mellilote that we now use, seems not by his description to be true
mellilote, howebest the virtue of it is not much unlike.

Schynanthas, squinantum, vulgo Squynante.
SQuynante is of subtle parts or substance, it provokes the vryne, and the
Liver. Dio. li. 10 Gal. si. 80. Acti. li. 10 Pau. li. 70
monthly course in Women: it is good against hoate swellinges of the Liver and
Stomach.

Semen lini, Lynseede.
THis resolves and mollisieth the instam marions and swellings, taken and
mixed swelling. Dio. li. 30 Gal. si. 70 Acti. li. 10 Pau. li. 70.
with Honny, Oil, and Water and make thereof in plaster: if it be taken
(...) wards it gendreth wind, and is harde t^ be digested, and evil for the
stomach.

Melissa, Apiastrum, Balm.
THis bearbe is resolutiue and abstersiue, Liver. Spleen. Dio. li. 30. Gal. si.
70. Acti. li. 10. Pau. li. 70
it munvifieth the Liver, the Spleen, ye Breast, and the Loonges.

Seta, Sericum, Silk.
Silk is Cordial, and good for the heart. Mesue de electuarijs Auicenna
Cano. 20 Serapi de Simpli.


Populus Alba The white Popular tree.
THis is abstersiue. The Juice of the leaves milk warm put into the Ears,
Diosco. Gal. simp. Acti. li. Paul. lib.
eases the pains of them.

Tamarix, Tamariscus.
THis tree is inscissiue, and abstersiue. The Dio. li. 10. Gal si. ^0 Acti. li.
10 Pau. li. 70
Root of it, the tender croppes, the leaves decocted or boiled in vyneger, or
wine, bealyeth the Spleen, that is endored or bard. Also boiled in wine and
drunk, they have ye same operation. Cups made of ye root of the same thee
are thought very wholesome for splenetike persons to drink in.

Triticum, Wheat.
Wheat is a nourishment not to (...) Galen de alimet. 10 Dio. li. 20
eaten alone without flesh, fish, or other food: for it is of it self very
Uiscous, opilatiue, which fault and lack in it is corrected, and redressed
Paul li. 70 Acti. li. 10. Gal. si. 80.
by the mixture of Leaven with it. Put to the outward parts as medicine, it
is hoate in the first degree, temperate in moisture and dryth. Wheat chawed
in the mouth is good against the biting of a mad Dog. The flower of it
decocted and boiled with water, doth mature and ripe.

Furfur, Bran.
Bran is of the least nourishment of any part of the Wheat, it is
abstersiue, Leper. Dio. li. 20
and mundificatyue: boiled in Uyneger it healpeth the Leper.

Fermentum, Leaven.
Leaven is resolutiue, and attractive fro Gal. si. 80 Acti. li. 10 Pau. li. 70
the deep parts of the body.

Amilon, Amidam, Uulgo, Sterche.
STerch is colder drier than the wheat, Rewmes Galen do alimet. 10 Dio. li.
20. Pau. li. 70
and nourishes less: it doth Lenigate smooth parts that ^e exasperated made
rough, as the wind Pipe or Throat: it is good also against sharpe
distillations, rhewmes into the Eyes.

Panis, Bread.
BRead is a nourishment most wholesome: Galen de alimet. 10 Acti. li. 10 Pau.
li. 70.
that which is made of ripe red wheat well kneded, well baked, and well
leauened, is as a medicine: it is resolutiue, by reason of the leaven.

Panis Furfuracnis, Course or browne Bread.
THe Bread that hath much bran is of Galen de alimet. 10 Pau. li. 10.
less nourishing then that which is of flower, but more soluble, for it is
laxative, scours, by reason of the husky substance remains in it.

Brassica, Caulis domestica. The Coleworte.
THe Coleworte is abstersiue, resolutiue Ulcers. Worms Gal. simp. Acti. Paul.
Dioscori.
of hot inflammations and swellinges, and heals ulcers and soars, the
decoction of it laxeth the body, the substance of the Herb binds. The
Seed kills woormes.

Brassica Sylue^ris. The wild Coleworte.
THis grows by the Sea sides, and is Gal. si. 70. Acti. li. 10. Paul li. 70
Dio. li. 20.
of the same virtue that the Gardeyn Colewortes is, but stronger and of more
efficacy.

Brassica marina, vulgo Soldonella.
THis grows also by the Sea sides, it Laxe. Gal. si. 70. Acti. li. 10 Pa^.
li. 70 Dio. li. 20
is salt and bitter in taste, and laxeth the belly.

Echium. A kind of buglosse.
THis herb drunk with wine doth no only heal them that be bitten with ve
stinging. Dio. li. 40 Pau. li. 40
nemous serpents, but also drunk before doth preserve such from hurt as hap
to be ^it of the same.

Orobus, Erui, Bitter Fitches.
THis corn is abstersiue, inscissiue, apertiue Dio. li. 10. Galen de alimet.
10 Simpli. 10 Acti. li. 10 Pau. li. 70
of op^lacious: it is dry in the second degree, provokes vryne: if it be take
excessively, it makes to peace blood, because it attereth and raseth in
passage.

Coriandrum, Coliander.
COliander seed is abstersiue, resolutiue Worms Gal si. 70. Dio. li. 30. Pau.
li. 70 Acti. li. 10
with a certain bynding: it increases seed or nature. The seed also taken
in a small quantity with must kills worms: received in a great quantity
brings to madness.

Aspalathos. The wood Rhodium.
THis tree decoct and gargarised heals Ulcers. Dio. li. 10. Gal. si. 60 Acti.
li. Pau. li. 10
corrupt ulcers in the mouth, it grows in Creta, an Island.

Cuscuta, Dodder.
THis Herb grows with flax, it is Spleen. Serapi. Simple
abstersiue, confortatiue, and apertiue of the opilations of the Liver, Spleen,
Kydnies, and purges Melancholy. Auicen. Cano. 20.


Hedera, Iuye.
THe grieve leaves of ye Juy boiled with Woudes. Dioscori. Gal. simp. Paul.
wine heal great wounds, and malicious Soars that come of burning. The
leaves boiled in vyneger profit the sp^eue: the flower is more vehement, and
heals brenuings: the Juice purges the head, and heals old ulcers of the
ears: the gum Stone.
of it kills Lise, and takes away hair: it is so hoate yt it burns, and
if it be drunk it healpeth them that have the stone.

Ladanum. Ladan
THis is a certain liquor that in ye spring Falling of ye hair Dio. li. 10
Gal. si. 70 Acti. li. 10 Pau. li. 70.
of the year falls upon a p^ante call^ Cischus: it is moistiue, resolutiue,
maturatiue, and comfortatiue: it stays the falling of the hair.

Dracunculus, Dragons.
IT is abstersiue, mundificatiue of op^a Spleen. Eyes. Dio. li. 20 Gal. si. 60
Acti. li. 10 Pau. li 70.
tions of the Liver, and Spleen, and t^ Loouges: it healpeth old ulcers and
snarethe fruit is of more strength then the leaves, or root. The Juice of the
same clean seth the Eyes.

Aron, wake Robin, or Cuckoo pintell.
DRagons is of y same virtue that wake Dio. li. (...). Gal. si. 60 Acti. li. 10
Pau. li. 70.
Robin is, but not so strong.

Tereniabin, Manna.
THis is a certain dew that falls upon Auicen Cano. 20, Mesue de Simpli.
Serapi Simpli. Galen de aliment.
the leaves trees in the East parts: also in Calabi ^a and certain per^es of
Italy, and other hoate countries: it is abstersiue, purges Choiler, and is
good for the Breast, and Loonges. Of this Galen seems to make mention in his
book de Alimentis under the name of Aer^meli, and Drosomeli.

St^rax calamita, Storax vulgo.
THis is a ^umine of a tree in Syria, it Cough. Dio. li. 10 Gal. si. 8. Acti.
li. (...) Pau. li. (...).
is mo^tiue, maturatiue, good for the Cough and catarris, and for the Br^aste:
it moves the mouethiy co^ in Mome.

St^rax liquida, Stacte.
THis is the fatty oy^ part of ye Mirre Dio. li. Acti. li.
when it is expressed The virtue of ^s like to the virtue of Mirre.

Isatis, Glaston. Woade.
VVOade, is resolutiue of all manner swelling. Dio. li. ^0 Gal. si. 60 Acti.
li. 10 Pau. li. 70
swellinges: it strauncheth the blood, it is good for persons that be
splenetik, and also heals green wounds.

Caries Lignorum. The powder of an old post.
IT mundifieth, and heals moist ulcers Ulcers. D^o. li. 10 Gal. si. 80 Acti.
li. 10 Pau. li. 70.
and Soars.

Folium, Malobathron. A rare spicie leaf.
THis leaf grows in India it is abster Uryne. Dio. li. 10 Gal. si. 70 Acti.
li. 10 Pau. li. 70
syue, and comfort the stomach, an^ Liver: and provokes dryne.

Cupressus. The Cypress tree.
THe fruiet and tender crop of ye braun Stauche Blood Dio. li. 10 Gal. si.
70 Acti. li. 10 Pau. li. 70.
ches heal green wounds: staunc^ blood: consume superfluous moystures dry
and comfort the meber or part, wh^ is with such moystures oppressed and w^
kened.

Filix, Femina, The Brakes, or Fern.
THe roots of Fern dry, and heal moist Dio. li. 1^ Gal. si. 70 Acti. li. 10
Pau. li. 70.
ulcers and soars.

Filix, Osmonde.
THe root kills Worms, and diminishes Spleen. Dio. li. 40. Gal. si. 80.
Pau. li. 70
the increase of the Spleen.

Nardus, Spicanardus. Spikenarde.
SPikenarde is hoate and biting in taste, Rewmes Dio. li. 10 Gal. si. 80 Acti.
li. 10 Pau. li. 70
dry in the second degree: it strengthens and comfort ye stomach, eaten
inwardly ^nd also outwardly in Plasters, it provokes dryne, and cures the
gnawing or frea^ing of the stomach: it dries the rhewmes of the belly, of the
bowels, or Guts, and of the head, and breast. The kinds called ^ndica, and
Siriaca be chief.

Nardus Celtica.
THis is of the same virtue and power ye Dio. li. 10 Gal. si. 80.
Nardus Indica and Siriaca is, but more weaker in all things, only except
that it Acti. li. 10. Pau. li. 70
provokes vryne more strongly.

Nardus montania.
THis is of the same kind and virtue yt Dio. li. Gal. simp. Paul. lib.
theother two before are, but not of like strength and efficacy.

Sandarocha, vernix, Vernice.
THis is a certain gum, the fumigation Rewmes Auicen Cano. 20. Serapi.
Simpli.
of it dries Catarres the wmes.

Sena, Colutea, Scene.
Scene is thought to be described of Theophrastes, Auicen. Cano. 20. Serapi.
Simpli. Theop. 30 de historia Plantarsi.
under the name of Colutea: it purges choler.

P^stacia, fistici vulgo, Pistickes.
THis fruit is good for the stomach, apertiue of opstations of the liver, and
good Liver Loonges. Dio. li. 10 Gal. si. 80 Pau. li. 70 Acti. li. 70
for the breast and loonges.

Rubea tinctorum, Rubea maiorum, Madder.
MAdder is abstersiue, mundificatiue of Liver. Dio. li. 30. Gal. si. 80. Acti.
li. 10 Pau. li. 70.
the liver and spleen: purges their op^lations: provokes vryne, the monthly
course in women.

Paeonia, Pionie.
BOth kinds of Piony be abstersiue, and Liver. Dio. li. 30. Gal. li. 60. Acti.
li. 10. Pau. li 70.
comfortatiue, mundifie opilations of the ^yuer and kydnies, provoke vryne and
the ^onethly course in women: it is written ^f old experience, that the root
hanged a^out the neck of Children, cures them of ^he falling Sickness.

Phu, Valleriana, The wild Valeriane.
THe wild Ualeriane is good and comfortab stomach and liver. Dio. li. 10 Gal.
li. 80 Acti. li. 10 Paul li. 70
c for the Stomach, and Liver: ^rouoketh vryne, and the monthly course (...)
women: i^ is of like virtue to the Spike^arde, but somewhat weaker:
neuerthe^sse it provokes vryne strongly.

Pini Cortex. The Ryne or Bark of the Pine tree.
IT doth so dry and bind that it heals excoriation Br^ning. Dio. li. 10 Gal.
si 80 Pau. li. 10 Acti. li. 10
that comes by burning of fire.

Pini folia. The leaves of the Pine tree.
THese Leaves heal wounds. Wofides. Dio. li. 10. Gal. li. 80 Acti. li. 10


Pini fructus, Nuclei pini. The Kernel of the Pine tree.
THe fruit of the Pine tree is good for the Breast and Loonges: and healpeth
Cough. Dio. li. 10 Gal. li. 80 Acti. li. 10 Paul li. 70
the cough.

Fuligo Ex pini cortice, ex fructu, ex folijs. The fume of the pine Bark,
fruit, leaves.
THe soot gendred made of these parts Falling of ye ha^re Gal. li. 80. Acti.
li. 10 Pau. li. 70.
of the Pine tree be good for falling or shedding of hair in the Brows, for
running Eyes, and Ulcerations in the same.

Cardamomum Arabum. Grains.
THis spice hath two kinds: it both comfort Serapi de Simpli. Auicen Cano.
20.
the stomach, and conduces to digestion: of this Cardamomum the Greek
Authors speak nothing.

Bombex, Gossipium, Cotton, Bombast.
THis is a certain kind of Cotton growing Cough. Se^de or Nature. Serapi.
Simpli. Auicen. Cano. 20.
upon trees, the seed is good for the Breast, and the cough: it increases
Seed or Nature in Man.

Millium folis, Lithospermon. Grumwell.
THis is subtle of substance: it breaks Stone. Dio. li. 70. Gal. li. ^0.
Acti. li. 10. Pau. li 70.
the stone, and provokes vryne.

Palmula, Dactylus. The Date.
THe Dates be comfortatiue of the Stomach, Dio. li. 10 Galen li.
and Liver, both inwardly received, and outwardly in plasters: but they Pau.
li. 70
engender ache and Rhewmes: they make great obstructions, and leaprosie, eaten
in great quantity.

Mercurialis, Mercury.
THis herb doth not only laske the belly, Laxe. Gal. li. 70. Acti. li. 10
Pau. li. 70 Dio. li. 40.
but also in plasters it is resolutiue.

Capnos, Fumus terrae, Fumaria. Fumitory.
ALbeit this Herb is hoate in the first Dio. li 40 Gal. si. 70 Acti. li. 10
Pau. li. 70.
degree, yet is it dry in the third: it opens the opilations of the liver,
comfort the mouth of the stomach, and laxeth the belly, and purges choler
by the vryne.

Anemone, Herba venti. Purge ye Head. Fleagme. Dio. li. 10. Gal. si. 60. Acti.
li. 10 Pau. li. 70

THis herb is attractive, apertiue, and purges the Nose, and the Head: if
the root be chawed mastichated in ye mouth, it purges fleagme.

Lupinus, Lupyne. Worms Dio. li. 20. Galen de alimet. 10 simp. 60 Acti. li. 10
Pau. li. 70.

THe Lupine is abstersiue, and resolutiue, it mundifieth the opilations of the
lyue^ and spleen, and kills worms.

Choudros, Alicia.
THis is a kind of corn: it is maturatiue, Dio. li. 20. Galen de alimet. 10
simp. 80 Acti. li. 10 Pau. li. 70
and doth nourish: it stays the belly, and is good for the stomach.

Eupatorium; Agrimonium, Egrymony.
THis Herb is apertiue, and abstersiue Dio. li. 40 Gal. si* 90 Acti. li. 10
Pau. li. 70.
of opilations of the Liver, and comfort the same. The herb that now is
called Eupatorium growing by the water sides is judged of experience to be of
the same virtue, but not mecioned of old Authors, as far as it is known.

Agaricus, Agaricke.
AGarike is inscissiue, abstersiue of the opilations Worms Dio li. 30 Gal. si.
60 Acti. li. 10 Pau. li. 70 Mesue de Simpli
of the Liver and Kydnies: it purges gross fleagme and choler: and kills
the Worms: also it purges from the breast gross and vicious humours.

Cicer, Chich peason.
THis kind of pulse is windye, soluble, Stone. Gal. si. 60. (...). 10. Acti.
li. 10. Pau. li. 70 Dio. li. 20.
provokes vryne, and gendreth seed, Milk. The decoction of it breaks the
stone.

Smilax hortensis, Garden withwinde.
THe fruit of this Plant provokes vryne, Dreams Dio. li. 30* Serapi.
Simpli. Auicenna Cano. 20
and the monthly course in Women: it is eaten and boiled with the Cod^ as our
common bearbes be: and it causes troublesome Dreams.

Poligonaton, Secacull. Scalacoeli.
THis herb is stiptike or binding in taste with sharpnes, and a certain
vitternes. Cleanse the Face. Gal. (...) (...). Paul. lib. Dio. li. Se^pi S^m^li
Auicen Cane. Mesue ^e Comidis.
The root heals wounds: the herb i^ self is used to mundifie and cleanse
the fac^ from syots. The Arabitanes seem by the description of it to call it
Secacull, and to attribute to the root of it power and vertu^ to provoke lust
or courage.

Philanthropos, Aparine* Cleauers.
THis is abstersiue of subtle substance: stinging. Gal. si. 60 Acti. li. 10
Pau. li. 70. Dio. li. 40.
the Juice of (...) drunk with Wine, is good agayuste the bytinge of venomous
Worms.

Circium. vulgo Buglossum magnu^, A kind of Buglosle.
THis is thought by the description of it Dio. li. 40
to be our Buglosse: it eases pains that come of great repletion of the
veins in every part.

Periclimenon, Caprifollium, Matrissilua* Woodbynde.
THe fruit and leaves of Woodbynde be Soare^ in the mouth. Dio-li 40. Gal. si.
80.
inscissiue, so that it provokes to peace blood, if it be much used: and also
it is good for the spleen: it is commonly used of experience to beale vleers
soars in ye mouth, parts of like temperature.

Geranion, Gruinalis, Storks bill.
THe first kind of Gruinalis is good for inflammations Dio. li. 30. Pau. li.
70*
in Women: the second kind is of no use, neither profitable in physic.

MEDICINES hot and dry in the second degree.
URTICA, The Nettell.
THe Leaf and Seed of the Nettle resolves swellings: purges Purge ye
Breast. Biting. Gal. si. 60 Acti. li. 10 Pau. li. 70. Dio-li. 40.
the Breast and Loongs of grosie humours. The Seed drunk with sweet Wine,
moves lust and courage. The Leaves made in Plaster with Salt, heal the
bitinges of the mad Dog, and also Ulcers, and Soars: they provoke the Uryne,
and the monthly course in Women.

Amurca, The Dregs of Oil.
THis heals wounds and ulcers Tothach. Dropsy. Gal. si 60. Acti. li. 20 Dio.
li. 70. Pau. li, 10.
in bodies that are of dry Complexion: for in tender bodies it doth rather
exasperatt the wound, liquify and consume the flesh: with vyneger, or Wine it
is good against the ache of the Teethe. Also spread upon Leather and put to the
Body, it represses watery swellinges in such bodies as have the Dropsy.

Propolis, Virgin Wax.
VIrgin Wax is a certain gummy Pricking of thorne. Cough. Gal. simp. Acti. li.
Pau. li. Dio. li.
substance, whereby the honny Combs in the Hyue, and ye Wax of the same be
joined fastened together: it is attractyue, in so much that it draws out of
the body stubells or thorns that are fastened in the same: the fume of it
healpeth old lunge Coughs.

Hebenus, Guaicum, Lignum vitae.
HEbenus is thought to be the tree th^ now is called Guaicum or Lignum v^ it
is abstersiue and of subtle substance, therefore it mudifieth and cleanses ye
Ey^ and dries the wmes ulcers in the sam^ At this time it is used of
experience onl^ and of no aucthority to extenuate the bod^ and dry ulcers and
the wmes of all parte^ as in ye sickness called the french Packe^ Goutes,
Melancholy passions, and ma^ other diseases.

Saluia, Sage.
THe leaves and croppes of sage prouo^ brine: it is good for wounds. staun^
^heth blood in them: it mundifieth also U^ cers and soars: besides that it is
hoate, ^ is also bynding temperately.

Anagallis, Pimpernell.
PImpernell is aftersiue, and attractive the Juice purges the head, as well ga^
garised, as instilled into the Nose: also (...) heals wounds corrupt ulcers
soars both kinds of Pimpernel be of one vertu^

Ocimum, Basilicum, Basile.
BAsile eaten gendreth superfluous Humours and moystures: wherefore taken
^wardes it is not wholesome: but used to ^e utter parts it is resolutiue, and
matuatiue. After Dioscorides it laxeth the bel^, dissolveth wind, provokes
dryne, en^reaseth Milk, purges the Eyes and the ^eade. It is esteemed good
against melanholy passions.

Buphthalmos, Cotula. Yealowe Bottle.
THis hearhe is more hoatter, and more resolutiue than Camomill: so that it
resolves consumes hard swellings, mixte with Oil and Wax.

Terebinthus, The Turpentyne tree.
THe Bark, Leaves, and fruit of this tree be strictiue and byndinge: but the
fruit dried moves the vryne, and healpeth splenetike persons.

Resina Terebinthina, Turpentyne.
TUrpentine is abstersiue, attractive, mollificatiue, and resolutiue: it is
good for the breast: it provokes vryne: laxeth the belly, and heals scabs.

Resina Pini. The Rosin of the Pyneaple tree.
THis resolves, and mollifies: and is more of efficacy than turpentyne, in
that behalf.

Colophonia, or pix Greca, A kind of blacker Rosin.
THis is resolutiue, and mollificatiue.

Balsamum Liquor, the liquor, Fructus. the fruit, Lignum. the wood. of Balm.
ALl parts of ye Balm tree, the wood, ye fruit, liquour also, be subtle,
abstersiue, of great efficacy against all could diseases no sickness: they
provoke vryne: are good or ulcers soars that be filthy corrupt: ^he liquour is
of greatest virtue next unto ^: the Fruit or seed least of all. The ly^uour
is called Opobalsamum: the Fruit Carpobalsamum: the wood Xilobalsamum.

Nux muscata, The Nutmegge.
THe Nutmegge is comfortatiue of the stomach, liver, and the spleen: it
stay^th vomittes, sweeteth the Breathe.

Nux Iuglans. The Walnut.
THe utter Rynde or husk of the fruit of the Walnut is very tart in taste,
and byndinge, the Juice of it is good for the mouth, and throats that be
inflamed: the Kernel is vnc^ous and evil for the Stomach, the Dyle of it is
resolutiue.

Nux vomica, The vomitting Nut
THis Fruit moves to vomittes, an^ laxeth the Belly.

Nux Auellana. The Filbert, or hasell Nut.
THe Filbert and hasell Nut be some^what colder than the Walnut, more
bynding: in other qualities like, but that (...) hasell Nut makes the head to
ache, and a^ so is not good for the stomach.

Polinum. Poliell mountain.
THis herb is abstersiue, and aperti^ of oppilations of all the inward parts^
it provokes urine, and the monthly cours^ in women: also it heals malicious
vlcer^ and soars.

Pascinaca, Baucia vulgo The Carret tame and wild.
THe G^rde in carret is the weaker, the the wild carret is the stronger in all
qualities: the whole herb provokes vryne, and the monthly course in women,
but specially ye root seed: the root provokes lust and courage.

Viscum, Misseltoe.
THe Misseltoe is subtle, attractive, and resolutiue: mixed with Incense it
healpeth malicious ulcers. That which grows upon ye Dake is preferred before
other.

Aristolochia vtra{que}, rotunda, longa, Astrology.
BOth kinds of this herb, and specially the roots, be abstersiue,
resolutiue, good for the Breast and Loonges: they be comfortable also for the
Synewes, and dry up ulcers.

Zeodaria, Setwall.
THis Root is comfortatiue of the Stomach that is cold: it cosumeth wind,
and resists poison: is very wholesome in time of the plague.

Crocus, Saffron.
SAffron is maturatiue, and comfortatyue after Auicen it is a Cordial: ^ow ve
it (...) it be used in excess, it is not without da^nger: after Dioscorides it
moves lust and courage.

Fenegrecum, Fenegreeke.
FEnegreeke is resolutiue, and mollitiue of swellings, and some thing
abstersiue: if it be taken inward, it troubles the Stomach.

Ieseminum, Iesemyne.
IEsemyne resolves cold swellings: eases pains and grief that comes of
cold Fleagme.

Aspalathus, Bitumen.
THis heals green wounds, and is good for all passions: and for all wounds
and soars that needs to be dried with mean^ ^eate.

Libanus, Thus. Incense.
^Ncense is dry in the first degree, and hath acertayne bynding or
strictiuenesse. The ^arke of the tree is dry in ye second degree: ^oth do
healpe the spitting of blood: com^rt the stomach, and stay the bloody flux:
^ey hyale also wounds, ulcers, soars.

Manna Thuris. Powder of Frankincense.
THis is the subtle powder of Incense, is of like virtue, but in some part of
^ore efficacy.

Fuligo Thuris. The Soot of Frankincense.
^He soot of all things doth dry and partakes the nature of the thing
burned. ^he soot of Incense is used for Inflama^ons, rhewmes, ulcers of the
eyes. The ^ote of Turpentine, and Myr^ be of like ^tue to the soot of
frakincense. The soot (...) Storax is stroger tha is ye soot of Asphal^s:
strongest of al is the soot of the Cedar (...).

Chamepitys, Aniga: Ground pine.
THis Herb called Commonly Chamepitys is abstersiue, and apertiue of
opilations of the Liver: it provokes ^ryne, and the monthly course in women.
This hear^ being green heals green wounds, corrupt ulcers and soars, and
resolves har^nes in the breasts of women.

Chamedrys. Tyxago. Germander.
THis herb opens opilations of the (...)uer and spleen, provokes ^ryne,
and (...) monthly course in women.

Cyperus, Iuncus Anglosus. English Galengale.
THe Root of this herb is incissiue, breaks the stone, provokes ^ryne,
the monthly course in women: it heal^ moist ulcers and soars.

Scolopendria, Asplenon. Ceterake.
THis Herb is inscissiue: it breaks the stone, and resolves the hardness
of the ^plen^.

Colchichon, Hermodactylus. wild Saffron.
THe Root of this herb is ^axatiue: it is given to them that have the gout,
^aynes in their Joyntes: but it hurts the stomach.

Mell, Honny.
HOnny is abstersiue, and mundificatiue: when it is boiled and scommed it doth
mudifie ye less: it is sanatiue and consolatiue of ulcers and soars: it is
good nourishment for old men and them that be of cold complexions: in young
persons and ^oa^e natures it increases choler.

Ambra, Ambergreace.
THis is confortatiue of the Brain, and of all the Senses: it comfort also
ye heart, and is good for cold complexions.

Agalloction, Lignum Aloes.
THis Tree consumes superfluous moystures of the stomach, comfort the
same, and the Liver also: and makes the mouth to smell sweet.

Marinbium, Prassin, Horehounde.
HOrebounde is abstersiue, and apertyue of the Liver and spleen: it mundifieth
the Loonges, and moou^th the monthly course in women.

Aloe. Aloes.
ALoes is abstersiue, ^axatiue of the belly, and purges choler: it is less
a^stersiue when it is washed: it is most comfortatiue to the Stomach of al
Medicines ^axatiue: it mundifieth and heals ulcers, and soars that be harde
to close, and specially in the Foundament, and secret Members: it dries and
heals also Wounds.

Cincus, Carthamus, Bastard Saffron.
^He seed of this herb ^axeth the ^elly, and purges fleagmo: howbeit it
^ut^th the stomach.

Cucumer Agrestis, wild Cucumbers.
THis herb is abstersiue, mollificatyue, resolutiue, and strongly moves the
monthly course in women: the Juice of the fruit called Elaterum purges
cholier and ^eagme.

Calamus odoratus, vel Aromaticus. A soot Reed.
THis root grows in India, and is of a subtle substance, as all other
things that ^e Aromaticall of pleasant savour: it provokes ^ryne, the
monthly course in Women, as well taken inwardly as outwardly in fomentations:
it is good comble in plasters both to ye liver stomach.

Rhabarbaru, Reubarbarum, Rubarbe.
Rubarbe is abstersiue, and purges Choler gently, and without danger: it is
a special remedy against all choleric diseases: it opens the obstructions
of the ^yuer, and provokes ^ryne, as experience doth daily show: the old
Au^thors both Greekes, and Arabikes wryre the same of Rubarbe, howbeit their
descriptions seem not to agree in all poynctes with out Rubarbe now used.

Canabis, Hemp.
Hemp seed cosumeth dries so much, that if it be eaten in great quantity, it
dries seed of Generation: it is hard to be digested, and makes ye head
ache.

Canabis Agrestis, wild Hemp.
THe Root of wild Hemp, doth resolve hard swellinges.

Ficus Arbor, The Fig tree.
THe liquor of the Fig tree, the Juice of the leaves be a^stersiue,
^lcerative, apertiue of the veins, and consume war^s. The Juice of the wild
Fig tree is stronger than of ye Fig of the Garden.

Ficus, Carica, The green Fig, and the dry.
Figs are nourishing amoge all fruits, and commended to be best:
notwtstanding yt they engeder evil humours, they have ye commodity of they do
soon pass down through the belly, and are shortly distributed into ye whole
body, they be abstersiue, and purge gravel from ye Kidneys: the nourishment
that they give is not firm and stable to body, as the nourishment of bread
and flesh, they be windy, but by reason of their short tarriance in the Belly
the wind hurts not much. The ripe Fig is of much more praise than the
fig that is not ripe, the dry fig is colder than the green, so that he
comes to the second degree, and is subtle, and inscissiue: of the great use
of them comes not very good blood: one discommodity of them is, that they
cause the body to be full of Lice: if the stomach be full of evil humours
they do much hurt, for shortly they be corrupted. Although the dry Fig be
subtle and inscissiue, yet it hurts the Liver and spleen that is inflamed,
and so doth the green fig also: therefore when the Liver or spleen is
abstructed or hath opilations, figs be eaten before other meates with Time,
Peniroiall, Sauery, Calamint, Pepper, or Ginger, and such like: who so eats
ye green or dry figs after gross meates, doth incur damage. The dry fig
is a medicine to the outward parts, and doth mature and ripe hard swellings,
and the same in short space doth resolve, and the decoction of them also: but
when ye will more mature or ripe than resolve, wheaten flower is to be mixed
with them. And when you will more resolve than mature, ye flower of Barley bread
mixed with them is of ye mean operation between ryping and resolving. The
fatter the fig is, the more it doth mature or ripe. The sharper and heatter,
the more it doth resolve. The green Fig, by reason of the superfluous
moystures, is weaker than the dry Fig, but both do laxe the belly. Figs
decocted to the thickness and substance of bonny are of the same virtue that
Honny is, the fig decocted with Isope purge the Breast, and is good against
lunge and cold coughs, and diseases of the Loonges.

Moscus, Musk.
Musk is pleasance in savour, it comfort both the brain, the heart.

Acanthus, Branca vrsina vulgo. Bears Breech.
THe leaves be resolutiue, the root is inscissiue and of subtle substance,
and provokes vryne.

Arcion, Personatia, Lappa vulgo.
the Bur.

THis is resolutiue dry with a certain bynding, wherefore it is good against
old ulcers and soars.

Sycomorus, The Sycamore.
THe fruit of this tree is of little nourishment, and evil for the stomach:
the liquor Juice of the tree is mollitiue and resolutiue of swellinges, heals
wouds: it consumes also the hardness of the spleen.

Muria, Brine.
THis is a kind of brine, which is abstersiue, is used against corrupt ulcers
of the bowels, ministered in clysters.

Mariscus, A kind of Bulrushes.
THis herb is abstersiue, and attractiue^ the root moves vomittes, and
heals great wounds of the synewes, and cords.

Lilium, the Lilly*
THe flouer of the Lilly is abstersiue, mollitiue, and sanatiue. The Oil of ye
said Lilly is resolutiue, and mollitiue. The leaf abstersiue, and sanatyue.
The root abstersiue, resolutiue, and consolidatiue.

Seseli massiliense, Siler montanum. Siler mountain.
THe root and seed of this herb provokes vryne, and the monthly course in
women: it is of such subtilty that it heals the falling sickness, and the
shortness and difficulty of wind or breathing.

Rapum The Turnip.
THe seed of the Turnip is very wholesome, and moves Just and courage: the
root is hard to be digested, windy, and increases seed or nature. eaten in
excess, it breeds crude and gross humours.

Rapum Agreste, Rampions.
THe seed of Rampions is abstersiue, and mixed with the flower of the Lupyne,
or Wheat, or Tare doth cleanse the Face and the rest of the body: the root is
commonly used in sallettes, more of use than of sufficient Aucthority.

Bounias Napum, the Rape, or nanese.
THe root boiled, doth inflate and nourish less than the Turnip: the seed
is is good against all venym and poison, for if it be drunk it makes the
venym to take none efficacy.

Lewcoyon, keiri, The wall Geloflouers.
OF these Geloflowers be three kinds: yellow, white, and blew: the yellow is
of more virtue, they be abstersiue, resolutyue, and subtle: they provoke the
monthly course in women, and resolve swellinges.

Asphodelus, Albucum, Daffadill.
THis herb is abstersiue, resolutyue, and provokes the monthly course in
Women. The ashes of this herb are hoarter and dryer than ye bearbe it self.
And therefore it heals a Disease in the head called Alopecia.

Scilla, Squilla, Squilles.
THe squill is inscissiue of gross humours, and specially in the Breast: it is
better boiled, or roasted, than raw.

Cici, Ricinus, Kerua, palma Christi, Tyke Seed.
THe seed leaves of this herb be abstersiue, and resolutiue. The Oil of
the Seed called Oleum Cicinum, or Oleum de Kerua, is more hoatter and more
subtle tha the oil Olyue, therefore more resolves: the seed purges choler
fleagme downward, provokes also to vomit.

Pix Sicca, Pitch.
Pitch is abstersiue, maturatyue, and resolutiue: it is more dry than hoate,
and heals wounds.

Pix liquida, Tar.
THis is also abstersiue, maturatiue, resolutiue of hard swellinges: it is more
^oate than dry, and is also subtle: good for ^hem that be short breathed, and
do void corrupt and matterishe humours out of the ^reaste.

Mirra, Mirre.
THis is the Gum of a tree that grows in Arabia: it is abstersiue, and
exicratiue: it heals wounds in the head, and ^illeth worms: provokes the
monthly ^ourse in women: is good for the Breast, ^gaynst the cough.

Mumia, Mumy.
MUmia is not much different from Bitumen Indaicum: For in Syria they En^aulme
the corses of dead persons with Bitu^en Indaicu, which Enbaulming with por^ions
of the dead Bodies is brought from ^ence, is called Mumia: it is used against
^uses, as well of the inward parts, as of (...) outward.

Eruca, Rocket.
ROcket is so hot that it is not commo^ eaten, without it be mingled with
L^tice leaves: it is thought to increase na^u^ or seed, and provoke just: it
makes ye (...) to ache, if it be eaten alone: the seed prou^keth vryne: the
wild Rocket is strong^ than the Rocket of the Garden.

Huscus, Bruscus,
Butchers broom.

THe leaves fruit be drunk to prouo^ urine, and the monthly course in wo^
and to break the stone. The root decoc^ is of the same virtue.

Tussilago, Farfara, Ungula caballina.
Coltes foot.

THe fume of the leaves and root of fol^ foot dried taken by the mouth,
heal^eth the cough, straightness of wind: th^ leaves green and made in
plasters beal^ hoate inflammations, and swellinges that (...) harde to mature
and ripe.

Artemisia, Motherworte.
BOth kinds of mother wort be of subtle substance: they break the stone in
the ^ydnies, used both in fomentations to the Belly, and taken by ye mouth,
they provoke ^he monthly course in Women.

MEDICINES hot and dry in the third degree.
IRIS. The Flower deluce.
THe flower deluce is subtle, abstersiue, maturatiue, and purges gross
humours that be in the breast: provokes ye monthly course in women: mundifieth
filthy unclean soars with water and honny: it laxeth the belly, and purges
gross and choleric humours, also humours thath be waterishe.

Meoum, Mew.
THe root of this hear be is dry in the second degree: it provokes urine, and
the monthly course in women: it is windy, therefore taken in excess, it
causes ye head to Ache.

Laserpitium, Assa, Assa faetida vulgo.
THis tree grows in Syria, Armenia, The liquor or gum of this tree which is
thought to be our Beniemin: it is attractive, abstersiue, and consumes
superfluous flesh: it is good for the breast and liver, provokes the
monthly course in women: the gum is sweet of odor. Assaf^d^ which is
described of the Arabikes, is unpleasant in smell, and not mentioned of ye
Greekes.

Parthenium, Amaracus, Matricaria,
Fetherfewe.

FEtherfewe purges Fleagme, and Melancholy: and is good for the shortness of
wind, and against the stone: and is used in Baynes fomentations against hard
swellinges, and in Posthumations in the secrete parts of Women Dioscorides
calls it Parthenium, Galen Amaracus, Serapion Matricaria.

Anisum, Anise.
ANise seed is resolutyue: it provokes vryne, and consumes wind in ye
belly: and provokes lust courage: and increases Milk.

Asarum, Assarabacca, Foales foot.
THe roots of Assarabacca be abstersiue, and resolutiue: they provoke vryne,
and the monthly course in women: healpe the spleen which is hard and endured:
are good against Dropsies and Sciatikaes: the leaves provoke to vomit.

Sauina, Sauen.
SAuen is subtle, resolutyue, and abstersiue: it provokes the monthly course
in in women, and vehement'y moves vryne, ^ifleth corrupted bicers and loares.

Epithinnum, Moss growing about Time.
EPithinuum purges fleagme and melancholy: it healpeth such persons as be
Melancholious, and windy: the quantity of it at the most is four drammes.

Polypodium. Fern of the Oak.
POlypodie purges fleagme, and Melancholy.

Panis porcinus, Malum terrae,
Sowebread.

THis herb is abstersiue, attractyue, inscissiue, resolutiue: it opens ye
veins that be in the fundamet called hemeroydes, and provokes the monthly
course in women.

Gentiana, Gentian.
GEntian is abstersiue, apertiue of the op^lations of the inward parts, with
much efficacy: it is also a remedy against ye stinging or biting of venomous
beasts, if it be drunk with Wine, Pepper, or Few.

Dancus, wild Carret.
THere be three kinds of this herb, the chief is Dancus Creticus: the Seed
of every of them provoke vryne, and the monthly course in women.

Cinamomum, Cinnamon.
Cinnamon is of subtle substance, comfortatiue of the stomach, consumes
superfluous humours in the same, and keeps it from putrefaction: provokes
vryne, and the monthly course in women: it is thought that we have not true
Cynamon: for that we have is called Cassia Lignea.

Hipericon, Herba perforata. Saint Iohns wort.
Saint Johns wort is subtle, provokes vryne, and the monthly course in
women: this Herb being green is sanatiue of wounds and burninges: dried it
heals moist ulcers and soars.

Ascyron, Androsaemon. Tutsan.
BOth these herbs be of the kind of Hi* pericon, in some things of like
virtue: drunken they be very good for the Sciatica, and purge Choler.

Acorus, Hoate Gladen.
BY diverse learned men's judgment the root called Galengale is the true
Acorus: it is subtle and resolutiue, provokes vryne, and healpeth the spleen
that is indurate, hard: in Baynes it is good for certain secret diseases in
women.

Hyssopus, Isope.
^Sope is subtle, and apertiue: good for old Coughs, and doth extenuate
gross humours in the breast, and provokes ye monthly course in women.

Ammoniacum, Gum Armoniake.
TH^s gum doth mollify, and resolve hard swellinges, in special the
hardness of ye spleen: also hard stony matters of substances in ye Joints,
other parts.

Carduus, Scolimos. The Prickled Artichoake.
THis herb boiled in wine, provokes stinking vryne abundantly: and thereof
it healpeth the strong savour or evil smelling under the Arms, in all the
body.

Chanelaea Alba, a kind of Spurge.
THis herb is received inward, the root thereof kills the worms: and
healpeth them that have Dropsies.

Chamelaea Nigra, A less kind of Spurge.
THis herb is not to be taken inwards: it is abstersiue, cures letters,
scabs, and morfewes.

Staphisagria, Stauesagre.
S^auesagre is abstersiue, attractive, vlceratiue: it heals scabs, purges
ye head: if it be chawed or holden in (...) mo^th, it draws fleagme by the
same.

Glans vnguentaria, Granum, Ben.
Mirobalane.

THis fruit grows in Ethyopia, and Egypt: it is inscissiue, abstersiue, and
bynding: it purges ye Skyn from tetters, morphewes, scabs, and such like
passions, provokes vomits, laxeth the belly, purges opilations of the Liver
spleen.

Sambucus, Elder.
ELder is resolutiue, and consolidatiue of ulcers and soars: the leaves purge
choler and Fleagme.

Ebulus, Wallworte.
VVAllworte is of the same virtue that Elder is.

Amomnium, The rose of Hierechus,
THis herb is subtle, resolutiue, provokes vryne: and in special resolves
the spleen indurated: and it provokes the monthly course in women.

Iuniperus, Juniper.
THe Juniper is hot and dry in the third degree: howbeit the fruit of the
same (...) but dry only in the first degree: it provokes vryne, it is good
for the stomach, ^reast: it healpeth the cough, and cosumeth ^inde.

Thymus, Time.
^Ime is inscissiue, and mundificatiue of the inward parts: it provokes
vryne, and the monthly course in women: cleanses the breast and loonges,
purges Fleag^metike humours downewardes.

Colocinthis, Coloquintida.
COloquintida purges strongely Crude fleagme, vndigested humours.

Tencedanum, Sow fenell.
THis herb is resolutiue, subtle, inscissiue: good against cold diseases of
the synewes, the breast, and loonges: healpeth the hardness of the spleen, and
the ^ote heals malicious ulcers.

Cyn^mum, Comyn.
COmyne is inscissiue: provokes vryne* consumes inflammations, and wind.

Carpesion, Cububi,
Cububbes, or Goordes.

CUbubbes be abstersiue, and mundificatiue of opilations of the inward parte^
provokes vryne, and break the stone in th^ Kydnies.

Caros, Carum,
Carowayes.

CArowayes ^ee inscissiue, subtle: goo^ against the stone, provoke urine,
cosum^ inflammations wind

A^ium Satinum, Garden Smaledge.
THis herb is inscissiue, and subtle: (...) provokes vryne, the monthly
cour^ in women: it dissolveth inflammations (...) wind, and specially the
seed of it.

Eleofelinon. Apium Palustre,
wild or water Smaledge.

THis is thought by some men to be wild smaledge, it is of the same virtue
that the other is.

Stachys, Ambrose.
THis Herb is abstersiue, inscissiue: it provokes vryne, the monthly course
in women.

Olusatrinum, Hipposolimon,
Alexanders.

THis root is eaten both raw and sod: the Leaves and Buds in like manner
with meat: it provokes vryne, the monthly course in women: and hath the
other properties of Parseley.

Ortoselmon, Straight Parsley.
THe kind of Parsley that grows upon hills and Cony places, provokes urine,
and the monthly course in Women, as Parsley doth.

Petroselinon, Parsley*
THe kind of Parsley that is properly c^ led Petroselinon, grows in the
bills (...) Macedony: it provokes vryne, the monthly course in women largely:
it consumes wind, inflations both of the St^macke, and gut called Colon,
taken wi^ drink: it eases pains of the Breast, th^ Kydnies, and Bladder.

Smyrinum, Black Lonage.
THis herb grows in a hill of Syci^ called Mons Amanus: it is commonl^
eaten both the leaf and stalk: it prouoket^ vryne, and the monthly course in
Wome^ it heals malicious ulcers and soars.

Capparis, Capers.
THe rynde of the Root of Capers is a^stersiue, mudificatiue, inscissiue,
resolutiue with a certain bynding astringe^cy, and therefore is good for the
spleen tha^ is indurate: it provokes urine, and the monthly course in women,
heals malitiou^ ulcers and soars: the fruit is of like virtue, but not of
such efficacy.

Bdellinum, Dellium.
THis gum is of a tree that grows in the country of India, and in Arabia:
it (...) mollitiue, and resolutyue of hard and en^ured swellinges it breaks
the stone: ^ouoketh vryne, and the monthly course (...) women.

Sampsuchus, Maiorana,
Marierome gentell.

MArierome is subtle, and resolutiue: it provokes urine, the monthly course
(...) women.

Ami, Ammeos, Amy.
AMmeos is abstersiue, resolutiue, subtle: it provokes vryne, and the
monthly course in women.

Menta, the Mynte.
THe Mynte is abstersiue, and bynding: it kills worms, stops the
spittinge of blood, comfort the stomach, stays ^omiting, provokes lust
and Conrage.

Mentastrum, the wild Mynte*
THe wild mynte is much of ye same virtue, but not so perfect and good to be
(...)sed in health.

Serpillum, Running Time.
RUnning Time is resolutiue, and provokes vryne, and the monthly course (...)
women: decocted with vynegre, and mixe^ with oil of Roses, it eases the
pains (...) the head.

Ruta, Few.
Few is resolutiue, inscissiue of gross^ humours: it provokes vryne, and th^
monthly course in women: dissolveth inflations wind: extinguishes and
debates lust and courage.

Cassia Lignea, Cynamon.
THis is judged to be our Cynamon tha^ we do use: it is inscissiue, and
resolutiue of gross humours of all parts of the body, and comfort the same:
it provokes monthly course in women which be stayed by excess and
grossenesse of super^uous humours.

Scamonium, Scamony.
^Camony laxeth the Belly, and purges choler Fleagme.

Sagapenum, Gum serapyne.
THis Gum is of an herb growing in Media: it is subtle, and abstersiue: it
^ndifieth and cleanses the sight that is ^rkened: it is good against the
Palsy, (...) cold diseases as come of cold gross ^mors.

Silybion, The common Eryngium, or Seaholme.
THe Juice of the root of this herb, with water and honey moves to vomit:
while ^e herb is young and tender, it is eaten ^yth salt and oil.

Lolium, Darnel.
Darnel is abstersiue of ye outward parts of the body, from letters, ring
worms, ^nd such like: also good for ^rabbes and vl^rations: taken inwards,
saith Galende ^limentis, it makes the head to ache be as (...) man were drunk
for the space: besides ye (...) increases evil humours

Chelidonium maius, Celondyne.
CElondyne is abstersiue: the Juice of th^ herb cleanses mudifieth the
sighte^ which is obscured darkened by gross h^mors: the root healpeth the
Jaundice, an^ opilations of the Liver.

Chelidonium minus, Figwort.
THis herb is hoatter and sharper tha^ Celondyne, in so much that it doth
exulterate the skyn in short space, and purges* head by the nose: it is
counted hoate in th^ fourth degree.

Raphanus, Radix, Radish.
Radish is resolutiue, and the wild R^dishe is of more strength than the Ga^
deyn radish: it is windy, and not good (...) the stomach: the seed is of
greater effic^cy than the herb: it provokes to vomi^ and also vryne: the
root is commonly ea^ for Sauce, more than for nourishing.

Panax Heraclium, Opoponax. Panax, and the Juice.

THe Juice of this herb is called Opoponax, it is resolutiue, mollitiue, good
against all cold dyleases: the ^e of the root is abstersiue, and heals
malicious ulcers, and ^oares. The Juice and Seed provokes the monthly course
in women: the Juice of it most commonly is called Opoponax.

Panax ascl^pium, The second kind of Panax
THis kind of Panax is not so hot as the kind called Heracl^: the whole
herb. the flower and seed mixed with honey, heals ulcers and soars.

Panax chironium, The third kind of Panax.
THis kind of Panax is of ye same virtue and strength, that Panax asclepium
last before spoken, is.

Agnus Castus, Uitex, Chaste tree.
THis tree is subtle, with a certain binding: the seed or fruit of it is
eaten: howbeit, it causes the headache, the said leaves and fruit do
consume wind, doth decay lust and courage, both taken inwards and laid
outwardes under the body: it opens opilations of the liver spleen.

Origanum Organ.
ALl kinds of this herb be subtle, and inscissiue, provoke the monthly
course in women: and with honey it healpeth the the cough: drunk with wine it
resists the biting of venomous beasts.

Tragagorinum, wild Marierome.
THis herb is of the same virtue tha^ Origanum is, and moreover:: t is good
for the stomach that refuses and abhors meat.

Pulegium, Penieroyall.
THis herb is subtle, it purges gro^ humours vicious of the breast loongs^
moves the monthly course in Women healpeth the bytinge of venomous beasts
drunk with wine.

Dictamnus, Dittany.
THis herb grows in Creete, and is of the same virtue that Pulegium before
spoken is: but of more efficacy strength.

Pseudodictamnus, Bastard Dittany.
THis is of the same virtue that Dictamnus is, but of less strength efficacy.

Calaminta, Nepeta,
The Calaminte, Neperiall.

BOth the Calamint Neperiall be subtle, inscissiue, and penetratyue: they
provoke sweats, dry ye whole body: they provoke the monthly course in women,
purge the breast, and the opilations of the Liver: healpe the Jaundice.

Thymbra, Satureia, Sauery.
SAuery provokes vryne, and the monthly course in women: it purges the
breast of gross humours, and is of the same virtue that time is, but not of
like strength.

Cent aurum maius, Rapontike.
This Herb provokes the mon ethly course in women: it doth heal a ud
incoryate wounds: strengthens comfort the Member also that is wounded: it
healpeth the spitting of blood. Some men judge the toote of this herb to be
yt which we call Ra Pon^cum.

Centaurum minus, Centory.
THe root of Centory is of no strength no virtue: the leaves and Flowers be
abstersiue, exiccatiue: they heal great woudes, soars, and ulcers: purge
opilations of the iyuer, healpe the spleen endured, provoke the monthly course
in women.

Cardamomum Graecorum, Cardumenum, Greekishe Grains.
THis seed is brought from India, Armenia: it is good against all cold
diseases of ye sinews, it kills worms, with vryne it heals scabs. This
Cardamomu is called of the Arabikes Cardamenum, is a thing much different from
that they call Cardamomum, which is hoate and dry in the first degree.

Abrotanum. Sothernewoode.
THere be two kinds of it, both be resolutiue, and inscissiue, in so much
that the Flowers boiled in oil and anointed on the body, take away the cold
and shyuering in fevers: they move the monthly course in women, and kill
worms.

Costus. Cost mary.
THis herb is abstersiue, and attractive: good accaynst the Palsy and cold
shiuerings in fevers, kills worms, provokes vryne the monthly course in
weome, mooneth to lust courage drunk and taken with wine and honey.

Gariophillon, The Clove.
Cloves be comfortatyue of the stomach and liver: do stay vomitting and cause
the body to smell sweet.

Galbanum, Galban.
THis gum is brought out of Syria, it is resolutiue and mollitiue: the smell
of it revives and stirs them that have ye falling evil: and women that be
in the passion called the mother.

Coccus, Granum tinctoru, Charms,
Grain to dye withal.

Grain is astringent binding: it heals great wouds, and pearsing of the
sinews, anointed with vinegar and honey.

Betonica, Betony
BEtony is inscissiue, abstersiue: it breaks the stone, purges the Breast,
the Loonges, and the Liver, provokes vryne, the monthly course in Women,
healpeth them that have the falling sickness: made in players, it healpeth
the biting of venomous beasts.

Ston, Berula,
Bilders, or Belragges.

BIlders is resolutiue, provokes vryne. the monthly course in women, and
breaks also the stone.

Feniculum, Fenell.
ALlthough Fenell be hot in the third degree, it is dry in the first, and
therefore ^encreaseth Milk: it is good for the eyes, ^ouoketh vryne, and the
monthly course (...) women.

Feniculum Agreste, wild Fenell.
THis fenell is of the same virtue power that the Garden fenell is, only
except ^hat it is much drier, and therefore it rather ^cayeth milk, than
increases it.

Anethum, Dill.
^Ill is resolutiue, and maturatiue: it cease pains, provokes vryne: burned
(...) bealeth moist ulcers and soars, speci^lly such as be in the secret
parts: decorted ^nd boiled in oil, it resolves, matureth, ^ypeth crude
swellinges, cease pains, ^rouoketh sleep.

Ros marinus, Libanotis,
Rosemary.

ROsemary is abstersiue, mollificative, inscissiue, resolutiue: ye decoctio of
it helps the Jaundice: moves vryne, and provokes the monthly course in
women.

Nigella, Melanthium, Herb Git.
NIgella is abstersiue, and inscissiue, and subtle: the smell of it healpeth
Catarres, and cold rhe^mes of the beade: it kills worms, and healpeth the
shortents of wind: provokes vryne, and the monthly course in women.

Turbith, Turpetum, Turbit.
THis root is laxative, purges fleagme that is gross, from the extreme
parts: howbeit if it be not corrected with Ginger and things Aromaticall,
which he comfortatiue of the Stomach, it purges painfully, and troubles the
stomach.

Scordium, T^ixago palustris. water Germander.
THis herb purges and mundifieth the inward parts: it provokes vryne, the
monthly course in Women, drunk it auayseth against all cold diseases. Being
green it heals great wounds: being dried it heals ulcers soars. Decocted
in wine it healpeth against the biting of venomous serpents.

Galanga, Galengale.
THis root is good for the stomach, consumes cold humours in the same: it
healpeth digestion: and increases se^e of generation. These properties be not
found in the root we call commonly Galengale, the which should have these
properties. Wherefore it is thought that we lack the true Galengale, that
which we do now call Galengale to be the Root of Acorus after this
description, as it is spoken of before in the Chapiter of Acorus.

Helleborus Niger, veratrum Nigrum,
Bearefoate.

THis herb is thought to be a common herb growing here in England called
setterworte, or lunge wort: it is abstersiue, purges melancholy down ward,
mudifieth the outward parts from scabs, ringwormes, tetters, and such like
infirmities of the Skyn.

Helleborus Albus, Ueratrum Albu,
White Neese woorte.

HElleborus albus, is much of the same virtue, and purges gross humours by
vomit, and downewardes also.

Laurus, the Bay tree.
THe Leaves and Berries of the Bay tree be resolueiue: but the Berry is of more
efficacy and strength: the rynde of the root doth break the stone, and is
good for the Liver, good for shortness of wind rhewmes that fall to the breast.

Laurus Alexandrina. The Bay of Alexandria.
THis herb provokes vryue, the mouethly course in women.

Laureola, Laurel.
^Aurell is of the some virtue ye Laurus Alexandrina is, besides that moves
(...) vomit, purges fleagme downwards,

Chamaedaphnis, Peruincle.
CHamaedaphnis is of the same power ye Laurus Alexandrina is.

Doronicum, Cummyne of Ethyope.
THis is a certain Root Aromaticall, good for the stomach and the heart: good
against pains griefs that come of gross ^yndes, and inflations.

Uitis Alba, Brionie.
THe Root and Fruit of Brionie is abstersiue, and resolutiue: it cleanses
the Skin from scabs, and Leaprosies, it provokes vryne, and helps the
Spleen that is endured: the tender croppes of it are ea^en in the spring of the
year in Sallets, ^ee good for the stomach.

Uitis Nigra, Downy vine.
This kind of vine is of the same vert^ ye Brionia before spoken is in all
things, but yt it is somewhat weaker in operation.

Uitis Siluestris. wild vine.
THis Uyne is different (...) nature much fro Labrusca, for it is hoate and
dry^ if it be decocted or boyle^ in wine, or condite with ^ter of ye Sea, it
purget^ waterish humours, and is given to them th^ have the Dropsy: the fruit
purges t^ skyn from sun burning, and other disco^ loring: the tender croppes
of it be reseru^ in salt and brine, and eaten.

Zinziber, Ginger.
GInger doth not heate so soone^ Pepper, by reason yt his substan^ is grosser:
it is good for the col^ stomach, healpeth concoction^ loses the belly: it
purges the eyes, and is almost of the same virtue that Pepper is: it provokes
lust courage after Auicen.

Uerbascum. Tapsus Barbatus.
Molen.

ALl kinds of Molen be abstersiue dry, and good for passions that be
rhewmatike.

Uerbenica, Veruayne.
BOth kinds of Ueruayne be so dryinge and byndinge, that they heal wounds,
and stay blood.

Sisimbrion vtrnnque. water Myntes, and red Myntes.
THere be two kinds of Sisimbrion, the one is a kind of wild Myntes, the
other is our water Cressis, which is hoate and provokes vryne.

Sandix, Corn Chervell.
THis Herb provokes vryne, open^ opilations of the inward parts.

MEDICINES hot and dry in the fourth degree.
Ruta agrestis, Harmell, wild Few.
THis Herb is subtle, inscissi^ and resolutiue of gross humor^ it provokes
vryne, and the m^nethly course in women.

Euphorbium, Euphorbe.
THis Gum is brought from Lybia: is very subtle, and is good against cold
diseases, as Palsies, and such like.

Cepa, The Onion.
THe Onion is abstersiue, and apertyue of the veins that be in the fundament
called Emeroides: if they be eaten they ingeder inflations and wind, and
increase evil humours: if they be boiled, they be of less hurt.

Bulbus Cibarius, The best Hyacinth.
THis Herb eaten engenders evil humours, and wind: how be it, it moves
appetite: purges the Breast, provokes lust and courage.

Bulbus vomitorius. The vomitinge Hyacinth.
THis kind of Bulbus is hoater than ye kind before spoken of, called Bulbus
^ibarius, and provokes vomit.

Anacardium. Hart berries.
THis fruit grows in Cycill, and Apulia: it sharpneth the sight, and
restores the memory.

Erysimon, Irio,
wild Rocket winter Crosses.

wild Rocket purges the breast, an^ the loonges of gross humours: if (...)
be steeped in water and then corified it (...) of more efficacy.

Allium, Garlic.
Garlic is inscissiue of gro^ humours, apertiue of opilatio^ it consumes
wind, and kyleth worms, how be it (...) much use of it engenders e^ humours,
and hurts them that be of ho^ Complexions: and hurts the eye sigh^

Nastur^ium, Crosses.
CRresses be inscissiue, and good against the Sciatica, and all disseases: for
they be in manner as hot as mustard seed: they help the shortness of the
wind that comes of gross humours: the herb dried is of like strength as ye
seed is, but green it is wea^er: it kills worms, provokes lust courage.

Elenium, Enula Campana. Elecampane.
THis herb purges the breast of gross humours: moves vryne, the monthly
course in women: it is good for the Scitica, and all cold diseases, for it is
rubificatyue, and exulceratiue.

Thapsia, Thapfene.
THis herb is resolutiue, and attractive from the deep parts of the body^it
purges the breast loongs of gross humours: and is good against all cold
diseases, as ^ciatica, the ache of the head that commet^ of cold humours, for
it is exulceratyue.

Thalspi, Triacle mustard.
THis hea^be is subtle, breaks swelling and Impostumations within the body
provokes the monthly course in women in glisters it healpeth the Sciatica: it
purges choler upwards, and down wards.

Arabis, Nasturtium Orientale, Crosses of India.
THe seed of this herb is used in Cappadocia with meat in stead of Peppe^*

Tithymall^ genera, Herbae! lactariae genera. Characias, Myrtites, Paralius,
Hetrosc^pius, Cyparissus, Dendroides, Platiphy^los, The kinds of Spurge.
There be vij kinds of Cithymall: (...) be avster sieve, inscissiue, of like
verta^ The liquor of them is strongest, next is the ^eede, then the leaves, of
less strength is ye ^oote: boiled in vyneger it doth healpe the ^oothache: and
so doth the liquor. The liquor also takes away hair: ^ut because it is
exulceratiue, it must be mixed with Oil, ye ^yquor also takes away Warts,
tetters: and purges choler and Fleagme downewardes: but with ^unny and water
it pro^oketh vomit.

Porrum, The Leek.
THe Leek is subtle and inscissiue: it provokes vryne, and the monthly
course in women. If it be much used for nourishing it increases evil humours:
provokes lust and Courage.

Ampel^ Prason, wild Leek.
THis wild leek that grows in vynebardes, is evil for the stomach,
inscissiue, and apertyue of opilations: it proud^oketh vryne, and the monthly
course in women.

Struthion, Condisi, Angelica.
THe root of this hea^he is a^ster sieve, inscissiue: it moves vryne, and is
goo^ for the breast, and provokes sweating.

Chamelaea. Theophrastus Rosemary.
CHamelaea is abstersiue, mundificati^ with honey of unclean filthy soars it
purges also choler and fleagme.

Lathyris, Cataputia vulg^: Spurge.
SPurge is inscissiue, abstersiue: the seed of it purges choler and fleagme,
provokes to vomit.

Pirethrum, Pellitory of Spain.
THe root of this herb is hot, dry, a^ burning: chawed masticated, it
dra^eth fleagme largely from the head: decoted or boiled in vinegar it
healpeth ye toothache that comes of cold humours: made into an Ointment with
Oil, it provokes sweat, and eases the coldenesse that comes with lunge
Feauers: healpeth also all ^olde dyseases, as Palsies, and such like.

Piper, Longum, The three kinds of Pepper. Album, Nigrum,
ALl kinds of Pepper be good for ye cold stomach, and help coc^tion: are
good against all cold Passions of all the inward and outward parts: the root
of the Pepper is abstersiue, and Attrac^yue.

Sapo, Soap,
SOye is abstersiue, attractyue, and vlceratyue.

Cedru^, Cedrea. The Gum of the Cedar tree.
THe Gum of the Cedar tree, is putrificatiue, and adustiue: it healpeth
eases the payues of the Teeth, if the Tooth be hollow it breaks the same:
it kills all vermin or worms within the body: the Oil and v^ciiouse part
of this Gum is more temperate than the Drags and gross part of it is, for
the gross part doth exalcerate, the other doth ory and heal. The tree is but
hoate in the third degree.

Cinis, Ashes.
THe substance of Ashes contains in it two parts, the one is subtle and
fiery, which whe^ the Ashes be steeped in water remains in the Lee: the other
is th^ earthly part which descends to the bottom. All Ashes be not of one
virtue: fo^ some be stiptike and bynding, some burning as the Ashes of the
Fig tree, and of th^ Tithymall.

Lepidium, Bastard Dittany.
THis Herb is of the same virtue tha^ Crosses are, and also doth vlcerate,
an^ therefore it is good for the sciatica.

Pi^ynsa, Esula vulgo. Lintspourge.
THis hear^e is of the same virtue that ye kinds of Cithymalles are, and it
lax^th the Belly.

Sinapium, Mustard.
Mustard is Attractyue: it provokes sneesinge, and purges the head: it is
good against all cold passions of the belly.

Batrachium, Rannuculus, Apium risus, Crowefoote.
ALI kinds of Crowfoote be so hot, that they exulcerate, and excoriate: they
be ^bstersine, and resolutyue: the root dried provokes sueesing.

MEDICINES hot and moist in the first degree.
Borago, Buglossa Graecorum, Borage.
BUrrage leaves in Wine incrase ^yrth: d^cocted in Honey, and Water healpe the
roughness asperity of the Chroate.

Satyrion, Testiculus vulpis vulg^. Lady Traces.
THis Herb is sweet, and hath a supersluous moystnesse in it, wherefore
(...) provokes lust, and courage: the root is (...) the same virtue.

Satyrion Rubeum, Another kind with red flowers.
OF this kind of Satyrion speaks Dioscorides, and Pliny: it hath the prop^ty
to provoke lust and courage, more stronger than the other before spoken of.

Orchis, Testiculus Ca^is. Dogstones.
This Herb hath two Roots, the bigger is hoate and moyste, and full of
h^midite, which provokes lust and courag^ more stronger than the other before
spoken of.

Orchis Serapia^. Three stoned Orchis.
THis Herb is dryer than Testiculus Canis before spoken of: and therefore
doth not a like provoke lust and courage: it is resolutiue, and mundificatiue
of filthy ulcers and soars. And the more effectually if it ^ee dried.

MEDICINES hot and moist in the second degree.
Beheu, Album, Herb Tunicle. Rubrum,
THere be two kinds of this root the one is red, the other is white: they be
brought from Armenia: they do Engender or increase Seed or Nature: they do
comfort the heart, and healpe trembling of the same. Serapion judges them to
be hot moyste, and Auicen hot and dry.

Lingua auis, Kitkeies.
THis is judged after the description of Serapion to be the A she keys: they
increase nature or seed, and provoke lust, and comfort the heart.

Nux Indica, The Nut of India.
THis fruit is of subtle nature and little nourishing, and heavy to the
stomach: it increases lust and Courage: the Oil of it is good for the
Emeroides, and kills little worms in the fundament.

MEDICINES Cold and Dry in the first degree.
Mirtus, Mirtidanum, The Myrtle tree.
THis tree, and every part of it is strictiue, and bynding: it stays all
fluxes both inwardly taken outwardly, of blood, as of other humours: Mirtidanum
is a certain substance that grows upon ye Myrtle tree, it is drier more
byndinge or strictiue than the Myrtle tree.

Muscus, Usnea, Moss.
THis is the Moss that grows upon the Cedar tree, the Pine tree, the white
Popler tree, and the Oak tree: but that which grows upon the Cedar tree is
of most efficacy, for it is strictiue, and with all resolutiue, and mollityue.

Aster Atticus, Herba Iuginalis, Grineworte.
THis herb is bynding, and resolutyue: it is specially good against swellings
in the Share or Gryne.

Quercus, The Oak tree.
ALl parts of the Oak tree be stryctiue and byndinge, but the Inner Bark and
Cup of the Acorn more than the other parts: it healpeth the spitting of
blood, the flut in women, and old rhewmes of the stomach: the Leaves green
heal green wounds. The Acorn is of great nourishing, but it is hard to be
digested, and engedreth gross humours: the Cup of the Acorn is very bynding
and strictiue.

Glans Castanea, The Chestnut.
THe Chestnut is of the same virtue that the Acorn is, but of better
nourishmet: both kinds do increase the headache.

Fagus, Ilex. The Beach, and the Ilex tree.
THese trees be of the same virtue yt the Oak tree is. The rynde of the Root
of the tree called Ilex, boiled in Water and mixed with an herb called Cimola
colours the hair black.

Spina Alba, Bedeguards, Hawthorn.
THe Root of this herb is Strictiue, bynding. Wherefore it healpeth weak
Stomachs: it stays also spitting of blood, and the increase of swellinges:
the decoction of it healpeth the toothathe: the Seed is subtle, and hoate,
and therefore drunk it healpeth the cramps, and the by^ing of venomous
serpents.

Coralium, Rubrum, All kinds of Coral. Album, N^grum,
ALl the kinds of Coral be abstersiue, bynding: good against the bloody flux,
and spitting of blood: the red Coral is of most efficacy.

Papyrus, Herb Paper.
PApyrus grows in the Water of Nyle, ten Cubits high: of this, Antiquity
made their Paper: the use in Physic of it was to keep Fistulas open: the
Ashes of it with vyneger or wine heals green ulcers and soars.

Milium, Milium Romanum vulgo. Millet.
THis kind of corn is of little nourishing: it stays the flux of the belly,
and provokes vryne: tor^ified and put into bags or Players, it eases
torsions and pains of gross humours and wind.

Panicum, Panike.
THis Corn is of the same virtue yt Milium is, but of less nourishing: it
stays rhewmes falling into the stomach: made in players, it doth dry cool
the outward parts.

Oxisthoemus, A kind of Bullrushe.
THis is a certain Junke or Rush which grows in waterish places. The seeds
of all kinds of it fried drunk with wine stop the flux of the Belly, and
the red Fiuxe in women. How be it they make th^ the Head to Ache, and procure
overmuch sleep.

Ulmus, The Elm tree.
THe leaves of the Elm tree be binding, abstersiue, so that they heal a
green wound. The Rynde is so abstersiue, that it heals purges with vyneger
the rough and Leaprouse Skin, and heals also wounds. The Root is of the
same virtue in so much that it is used to join and fasten bones that are
broken, Dioscorides saith, that the gross rynde of it with mint, purges
Fleagme.

Dipsacus, Labrum veneris, Tasill.
THe Tasill is dry in the second degree: it is also abstersiue, the root
boiled with wine, heals the fistula in the Fundamet, and choppes or ryuings
in the same part.

Mirobalani. Citrini, Indi, Kebuli, Eniblici, Bellirici. The kinds of
Mirobalans.
THese five kinds of Mirobalans be testringent, and something tart.
Wherefore they all comfort the stomach. The Citryue purge choler. The Indi
purge Melancholy, and Choler adust. Rebuli purg^ Melancholy. Enib^ci purge
fleagme, an^ refresh the Wit. Bellitici purge fleagm^ also, and refresh the
Wit and Brain Codite they be more delicate, and of no less virtue.

MEDICINES Cold and Dry in the first degree.
MESPILVS, Meddlers.
THis Fruit is tart and bynding, g^ for the Stomach, and stop the Fl^ of
the Belly.

Epimelis. Another kind of Meddlers.
THis kind of Medler is stiptike bynding: hard to be digested and good for
the stomach: it eugendreth also the head^che.

Rosa, Rosa Damascena. The Rose.
THe Rose is stiptike, and somewhat resolutyue, specially good against al hot
inflammations, and swellinges, in their beginning, and their augment or
increase. The yellow Flower of it is more bynding, and more dryer. The
Arabikes do ascribe to the Juice of the Rose, power and virtue to laxe the
Belly. The Damask rose is esteemed to be the more perfect and better smell.

Sorba, The seruis
Services be bynding, and good for ye flure of the Belly, and be not much to
be eaten, but rather as a medicine than a nourishment.

Ligustrum, Alcanna. Pryuet.
PRyuet is bynding, and resolutyue: good for burning of the fire, and hoate
^smations and swellinges: it heals vlcerations of the Mouth that often hap
i^ Children.

Lapathum satinum, Rumex, Patience.
THe root of this breaks the stone, and moves the monthly course in wome^
the hoate herb is resolutiue. The seed i^ bynding, and stays all manner of
fluxes.

Oxilapathum, Acetosa vulgo. Sorrel.
Sorrel is resolutyue, and repercussyue (...) the seed is tart and binding,
so that i^ heals the Flux of the belly more than th^ seed of Patience: the
Root breaks th^ stone: heals the Jaundice, and provokes the monthly
course in women.

Hippolapathum, Lapathumpalustre, The water Dock.
THe water dock, is of the same virtue (...) Patience and Sorrel be, but
mor^ weaker.

Lapathum Agresto The common Dock.
THe Dock root boiled in vyneger or wine, also the decoction of it warm
holden in the mouth, fastens the teeth, ^aseth the pains of the same. The
root heals the Jaundice, and moves the monthly course in women.

Tribulus, Terrestris, Aquaticus. The land, and water Briar.
BOth kinds of this are repercussiue, and good against hoate inflammations
swelling in the beginning, but the kind that is ^alled cerrestris, is more
bynding: and the seed of it breaks the stone.

Lychen, Epatica. Lyuerworte.
LYuerworte besides that it is cold dry, it is also abstersine: it avails is
good against hoate swellinges: heals Ryngwormes, and tetters, and stopeth
blood.

Pirus, The Pear tree.
THe Leaves and tender Branches be stiptike and bynding, the fruit with
^ar^nes or stipticknesse hath ^ certain waterishe sweetness, s^ that it is
of a compound nature: it is good fo^ the stomach, and stopeth the belly:
debareth the thyrlle: beaten to a Plaster ^ doth ory and refrigerate
temperately, in s^ much that it heals wounds. The wyld^ Pear is of the same
virtue.

Cisthos, Bushsage.
THis plant is Stiptike and byndinge the leaves heal wounds, the floure^ be
of more efficacy, in so much that drunk^ with wine they cure the bloody Flux,
an^ heal putrified ulcers and soars.

Hypocisthos, The Bushsagemushrum:
THis grows at the root of the plant called Cisthos, and of it is taken
gathered a certain liquor of the same name, which liquor is more stiptike and
byndinge than Cisthos: it stays all Fluxes rhewmatike Dispositions into all
parts, and strengthens the part that is with overmuch moystnesse resolved:
it is mixed with Players for the Liver and Stomach, for it comfort the
said parts.

Pisum, The Peas.
THe Peas doth nourish, and is of like substance to the Bean, but that i^ is
not so wyndy, neither so abstersiue: and therefore it remains longer in the
belly than the Bean.

Palma, The Date tree.
THe Date tree is cold, stiptike, bynding in all his parts: the fruit is
stiptike, and of temperate heate, comfortatyue to the utter parts in
players: and to the inner parts received with other medicines if it be eaten
alone it engenders gross and vicious humours: procures the opilations both of
the Liver and spleen: and makes the Head to ache.

Grameum. The grass called quytche.
THe root of this grass heals green wounds: and the decoction of it
breaks the stone.

Lotus Arbor. The Lote tree.
THis tree is stiptike or bynding, the decoction of the shaving of this tree
stays the flux of the belly, the bloody flux, the flux in women: and
fastens the hair that falls.

Trages, Spelta vulgo, Spelt.
THis kind of Corn is hard to be conco^ ted and altered, it makethe the belly
soluble.

Zea, Beerebarly.
THis kind of corn nourishes less tha^ wheat, and more than Barley.

Rubus, The Brier.
THe leaves huds o^ this brier are stiptike or binding, they heal ^lceration^
in the mouth, and also wounds. The fruit being type is not so tart and
stiptike, for it is some what sweet, and therefore it is eaten: howbeit before
that it is ripe, it is tart and stiptike, and so are the flowers: both stop
all kinds of fluxes: and the root breaks the stone.

Sentis, Cinosbatus, Rosa Canina. Hounds brier, or the hipp.
THe fruit and Canes be stiptike or bynding: the ^y^he of the fruit is to be
feared, for it hurts the Wind pipe if it be eaten.

Auena, Oats.
THe Ote after Galen is no nourishing for men, but for beasts: as a medicine
it is of the same virtue that Barley is: for in plasters it dries, and
resolves with a certain bynding, whereby it stays the flux of the belly:
after Dioscorides it healpeth the cough.

Arbutus, The Wilding, or Crab tree.
THis tree and the fruit of it be stiptike or bynding: the fruit is evil for
the Stomach, and the head.

Arundo, Carna vulgo. A Reed.
THere be diverse kinds of Canes or Reeds, only the kind called Phargnutes
or Uallaris is used in physic, where of the root is attractyue, and
abstersiue, the green leaves heal hot inflammations, and swellinges. The
Ashes of the Rynd^ be stiptike and ^oate in the third degree, ^eale the
disease of the Head called Alopecia.

Malum Punic^, Malum Granatum. The Pomegranate.
ALl kinds of the Pomegranate be good for the Stomach, although they be o^
little nourishment: but the sweet is to b^ for borne in Fevers: they that be
sharpe i^ taste be good for the whole Stomach: the mean betwixt the sweet
and the sharpe, which is of the taste of ^ine is of a mean virtue and nature
betwixt them both: the Juice that is expressed out of the grains, and
specially of that kind which is sharpe, mixed with honey, consumes
superfluous flesh in the nost^ils. The grain dries and beaten to powder,
stays and dries rhewmes failing into the stomach and belly.

Citimus Malicorium, The flower dried of the Pomegranate.
BOth the Flower and Rind of the Pomegranate be bynding, and of more efficacy
than the grains. The Flowers do glutinate and heal wounds.

Spina rociarrabica, Spina Aegyptia^a. The Arabian thorne.
THis kind of Thorne or Thistle stopeth the Flux in women: and heals ulcers
and Soars.

Ordeum, Barley.
BArley is resolutyue, and abstersiue, and of less nourishing than wheat, but
more soluble: the P^isane made of Barley, is moyste and abstersiue.

Morus, The Mulberry.
THe Mulberry being ripe, is laxative: being not ripe, retains and stopeth:
the Juice of the ripe is good against vlcerations of the mouth: the rynde of
the root kills the worms: the fruit is lightly corrupted in the stomach if
it be taken after meat, or if the stomach be not clean,

Malum Cotoneum, The Quince.
THe Quince is byndinge, and comfort both the stomach and Liver: it stopeth
the Flux of the belly, and all other Fluxes.

Acetum, Vyneger.
VYneger is cold in the first degree, but dry in the third: it is penetratiue
and inscissiue: it hath mixed a certain hoate substance with the cold: it
represses hoate inflammations swellinges: mixed with other convenient
medicines, heals ulcers, and soars.

Xyloracta, Ceratia, Cod tree, or Horne cod tree.
THis Fruit is tart with a certain sweetness: whiles the fruit is green
it laxe the Belly, when it is dried, it binds: the humours yt come of it be
evil.

Salix, The Willow or Sallowe.
THe Willow leaves dry be astringent, and heal green wounds: the Flower and
rynde be of the same virtue and power: but the rynde is of more efficacy: the
Ashes of ye rind steeped in sharp vyneger, consumes warts and Corns.

Hippuris, Equisetum, Horse tail.
THis herb is stiptike or byndiog, with bitterness: therefore it dries
strongly without sharpness or bytings, and heals great wounds and sinews
that be cut: it is good against ye coughing of blood. and all Fluxes.

Colla, Glutinum ^aurinum, Common Glue.
THis is much like to the painters Syse, but that it is made of ye heads of
bulls: if it be dissolved in vyneger it takes away ring worms, and
Leaprosies of the Skin: anointed with water upon any part that is burned, the
part shall not bladder: mixwith Honey vyneger it is good to heal wounds.

Colla, Glutinum ex Polline. Paste.
THis is our Paste, which is made of the finest Flower an^ Water boiled
together: it is emplastike or clea^ to the parts that it is put unto, and also
maturatyue.

Ich^hiocalla, Glutinum piscium. Mouth Glewe.
THis is made of the Bellies of certain great and clammy fishes: it is good
for players that be used to the head: it takes away the toughness of the
Skyn, and makes it fair and smooth.

Tragachantha, Dragagantum vulgo. Gum Dragagant.
THis g^mme is of very gummy and cleauinge substance: mixed with medicines that
be hoate and biting, it tempers the Actimony and sharpness of them: it is
good for the Cough, and asperity of the wind Pipe: it is also good against
vlcerations,

Gummi Arabicum. Gum Arbike.
Gum Arabike is much of ye same virtue, that gum Tragagante is: tempers
the sharpness and acrimony of hot medicines, and doth smooth parts that be
asperate.

Uitis vinifera, The vine tree.
THe Ieaues be stiptike or byuding: the Juice of them helps the bloody flux,
and spitting of blood, and are good for the stomach that doth not retain
meat, and also helps the corrupt Appetites and desires of strange diverse
things, that do happen to women with child. The gum of the vine tree is
hoate, inscissiue, and a^ersiue, and drunk with Wine breaks the stone:
anointed, it mudifieth the skyn from ring worms, ^etters, and such like.

Oenanthe, Labrusca. The flower of the wild vine.
THe wild Uyne differs in nothing from the Garden vine, but only in
Cultures: the leaves and branches be of like virtue that the garden vine is.
The Flower of this vine, called Denanthe, is cold and dry in the second
degree: it is stiptike or bynding, confortatiue of the stomach: good against
inflammations and hot swellinges in wounds, against fistulae; in the eyes, in
the beginning of them: and also against vlcerations in the mouth, the secrete
parts, mixed with Honey, Saffro, Myrre, and oil of Roses,

Helxine, Parietaria, Herba vitri. Perietary of the wall.
PErietary of the wall is abstersiue binding, with a certain cold moistnes:
and after Galen is good against hot sweilings, both in their beginning, and
increase. The late practicioners suppose it to be hot and dry, and use it to
resolve wind, in sackes, or bags to provoke vryne.

Lagopus, Pes Leporis. Harefoote.
THis herb dries thewmes of the belly, and stomach strongly.

Ambrosia, wild Sage.
THis herb is stiptike or byndinge, and repercussiue.

Centunclus, Wertworte, or codweede.
THis herb is stiptike and bynding: and therefore taken with some tart
binding wine, healpeth the bloody Flux.

Lupulus, Lupulus Salictarius, The Hop.
THe Hop, after the Arabikes declines to coldness: decocted it
extinguishes ye hoate inflammations: purges choler, and mundifieth the
blood: it is good against hoate inflammations of the stomach, and Liver.

Britannica, Astrology.
THis herb is not certainly known: i^ is stiptike or bynding, heals
wouds.

Lysimachia, Herb Willow.
THis herb is stiptike, heals wouds stopeth blood and the bloody Flux:
spitting of blood, and the Flux in women.

Anchusa, wild Buglosse.
THe root of this herb is stiptike, an^ somewhat abstersyue, wherefore it i^
good for them that be splenetike, and tha^ have diseases in the Rydneyes.

Sonchos, Rostrunum Porcinum. Sowthistell.
ALl kinds of Sowthistell do cool, wit^ a certain bynding, eaten used in
pla^sters to the stomach.

Senetio, Groundsell.
GRoundsell, besides that it cools, do meanly resolve: kills worms, an
helps them that have an hoate liver.

MEDICINES Cold and Dry in the second degree.
OXYCANTHA, Berberis vulgo. The Barbery, or Piperedge tree.
THe fruit of this tree is stiptike, betwixt moist dry. Although it be cold
in the second degree, it is not to be taken inwards but to the utter parts:
it doth mollify and is repercussiue: and is good against choleric swellinges
with oil of Roses or vyneger: it helps the ache of the Joyntes of hoate
humours.

Balaustium. The flower of the wild Pomegranate.
THis is very stiptike or bynding: dried to Powder it heals excoriations, and
vlcerations, and spitting of blood: and is good against the bloody Flux, and
all other Fluxes.

Plantage, Planteyne.
PLanteyne is astringent, and byndinge: good against putrified and malicious
ulcers and soars: against the bloody Flux, and all other Fluxes: the root the
seed be of the same virtue, and the seed is more subtle. The Leaves, Root,
and Fruit (...) good against o^ilations of the Liver and Kydneis, and
specially the Seed, for it is some what abstersiue.

Rhus, Simiake, Curriers berries.
This seed is very stiptike byndinge in taste, stays the bloody Flux, and
all (...) Fluxes.

Rhamnus, Christ's throne.
THis a certain kind of thorne why^ heals choleric inflammations,
swellinges, vlcerations called herpes which run from place to place.

Solam, Satinum, Solatrum v^lg^. Night shade, or Dawle.
THe Garden Nightshade is sometym taken with meaces: in Players it is good
against hoa^ and choleric swellings: and against ulcers that spread from
place to place called herpes.

Halicacabus, Uesicaria, Alkakenge, or winter Cherry.
ALkakenge is of the same virtue, and strength that Nightshade is: the fruit
of it provokes vryne.

Solanum Somniferum, Sleepy Dawle.
THis kind grows by the sea side: the weight of a dram of the rynde of it
^unke in wine provokes sleep: the seed of it provokes vryne greatly, and
therefore ^ij. berries of the fruit are given against ^opsies, more than xij.
given, make a man mad. Some think this to be the bearve ^ee call Dawle, but
the description seems not to agree.

Solanum furiosum, Mad Dawle.
THis kind is not to be taken in wards, for it makes a man mad, but in
plai^ers it heals ulcers.

Ribs, Gasell.
THis fruit doth refrigerate, and comfort the hot stomach: asswageth thirst:
stopeth ^omits, and the Flux of the belly.

Acacia, The fruit of the Egyptian thorne.
THis Tree grows in Egypt: the tree, the Leaves, and the Juice (...)
st^ptike and byndinge in taste: th^ Juice is the part most used in ph^ sick:
if it be washed it is cold in the second degree, vnwashed in the first: the
Juice (...) good for eyes that be inflamed, and agains^ hoate Choleric
inflammations: it healt^ vlcerations in the mouth, and stopeth a^ manner of
Fluxes: because we lack the (...) cacia, we use in steed of the Juice of it,
th^ Juice of Sloes or Bulleis.

Omphacium, Agresta vulgo, Verinice.
THis is the Juice of the wild grape, it cold in the second degree and, dry
in th^ third, vynding and stiptike: it is good (...) excorfations of the mouth
mixed with bun^ or'Must: mixed with Upneger, it is good against cold ulcers
and soars, that do ^te and run from place to place.

Nypmhaea, Nenuphar, The water Lilly.
BOth root and seed of the water Lilly do dry, and stay the rhewmes of the
stomach, and nature or seed that voydeth unwillingly in dreams or other
ways: and also velpe the bloody Flux. That kind which bath the white root
is more stronger: in so much that it stays the Flux in women: both kinds be
abstersiue, but the kind which hath the black root, is more abstersiue.

Phillitis, Lingua Ceruina. Harts tongue.
THis is thought to be out ^arts tongue: the leaves he druuke in Wine against
the biting of serpents: against the bloody Flux, and other Fluxes.

MEDICINES Cold and Dry in the third degree.
Herba Apollinaris, Iusquiamus vulgo, Henbane.
THe kynee of ^enbane that hath the white flower the white seed is used in
Physic, to cease vehement pains and dystillations of the head, and the eyes:
given in a convenient quantity it provokes sleep, the other kinds are not to
be used, for they be stupefactiue and perilous.

Mandragora, The Mandrake.
THe fruit of the Madrake hath in it a certain superfluous moystnesse, whereby
it provokes sleep: the rynde of the root is stronger, and also dries.

Caphura, Camphora, Camphor.
CAmphyre resists hot swellings: and is good against pains of the head that
come of Choleric humours, and abates lust and courage.

Sandali lutei, Albi, Rubri. The three kinds of Saunders.
SAunders is good for the stomach, head, and liver that be hot: all kinds be
cordials, but the yellow is of more virtue.

Cicuta, Hemlock.
THis Herb taken inwards is perilous: bowbeit with other medicines it is mixed
in players to the utter parts, and so used it extinguishes and debates
milk: also doth stay the increase of the breasts in virgins and maidens.

Tamarindi, Tamaryndes.
TAmarindes are thought to be a kind of wild Dates that grow in India: they
repress choler, and purge the same, and extinguish thirstynes.

Sideritis, Wall Sage.
ALl kinds of Sideritis be stiptike and bynding, they heal wounds, stop
blond, the bloody Flux, and the Flux in women.

MEDICINES Cold and dry in the fourth degree.
PAP AVER, Popy. These be the kinds of Popy. Satinum, Erraticum, Siluestre,
Corniculatum, sieve Ceralites, Spumeum, sieve Heracleum.
THe seed of ye guard in Popy provokes sleep meanly, and is good against
the cough, and distillations.

Pa^auer Erraticum, Redcorne Rose.
THis kind of Popy is so strong that no man can use it without danger.

Papauer Siluestre, wild Popy.
THe seed of this kind is medicinal, specially if it grow in Thebes: the
juice of it is called Opium, and taken in excess it doth refrigerate so much,
that it stupifieth, and makes the body without sense or freling: but taken in
a convenient quantity, it doth cease pains, and provokes sleep: stays and
engrosseth rhewmes and distillations, the deco^ion of the leaves, crops or
heads of all these kynds be employed for a fomentation to the head. The Juice
of this Poppy is called Opium.

Papauer Corniculatum, Yellow Poppy.
THis kind is inscissiue, and abstersiue: the root decocted helps diseases
of the Liver: the leaves and flowers do mundifie filthy, and unclean ulcers
and soars: it is hot in the fourth degree.

Papauer Spumeum, White, or froathy Poppy.
THE Seed of this kind purges Fleagme.

MEDICINES Cold and moist in the first degree.
PRVNA, Prunes, or Damsons.
Damask Prunes be the best: prunes of Spain be next: green Prunes be more
soluble than dried Prunes: the Prune of Spain is more soluble than the Damask
prune: the leaves Buds of the Prune tree have sensible tartnes, binding in
taste. Wherefore the decoction of them are good to gargarise for inflammations
of the Junla, and inward parts of the mouth: the wild Prune binds and
stays the belly: the gum of ye Prune tree drunk with wine breaks the
stone.

Spinachia, Spinache.
SPinache is abstersiue, and lenitive of the belly: it extinguishes choler,
and is good for the breast and loonges that be distempered with heate.

Uiola, the Violet.
THe leaves of the violet both alone, and with barley meal, be good against
heat swellings and inflammations: also they be good made in players, for the
heate of the stomach, and the Eyes, after Mesue: the Violet doth laxe and
purge choler: it extinguishes thrystinesse, is good in hot Fevers, against
ye cough, other passios of ye breast, that come with heate: the flower is used
both in syrupes and conserves, and it is of more efficacy than the herb.

Platanus, The Plane tree:
THe leaves of ye Plane tree, being green and made in players, beale
inflammations, and hot swellings in their beginning: the bark and the fruit
are dryer than the leaves: the bark boiled in vyneger, eases the pains of
the Teethe: the fruit mixed with Swynes grease, heals ulcers that come of
brenning.

Scariola, Intubus, Cychorea satiua, Scarill, or garden Endyue, Cychory of the
garden.
THe garden Endyue Sychory be cold, and moist: the wild be cold, and dry.
The garden Endyue and Sychory differ not much from the nature of Lattice, but
they be not so pleasant: they be good for ye hot stomach, and the hot
liver, against all hot inflammations.

Cerasus, The Cherry tree.
OF Cherries, some be sweet, and they be solutiue and not good for the
Stomach: some be tart in taste, and they be bynding and good for the
stomach: some be sharpe in taste, and good for the stomach that is
Fleagmatike and full of superfluous humours. The gum of the Cherry tree is
good for the roughness or asperity of the wind pipe, and drunk with wine,
breaks the stone.

Atriplex, Arrege.
ARrege is soluble, good against hoate inflammations and swellinges: the seed
purges and mundifieth optiations of the liver, and therefore cures the
Jaundice.

Glycbyriza, Liquirice.
LIquirice extinguishes thristinesse, le^ifieth and tempers the roughness
and asperity of the wind pipe, doth the sa^ in the Bladder which is
excoriated.

Beta, The Beete.
THe root is abstersiue, resolutiue. purges the head: it is soluble: but not
good for the stomach.

Malua, The Mallowe.
THe Mallowe is resolutyue, mollitiue, laxeth the belly: howbeit, it is not
commended for the stomach.

Iuiube, Zizipha, The fruit Iuiubeis.
THis fruit is of little nourishment: hard to digest, and evil for the
stomach.

Blitium, Bleete.
THis herb is commonly eaten: it laxeth the belly, and is of no other use.

MEDICINES Cold and moist in the second degree.
PEPON, The Millian.
THIS Fruit is abstersiue, and soluble: it provokes brine, and the sede of it
more specially: So that it breaks the stone: not wythstanding ye fruit
engenders evil humours, and chiefly if it be not well digested.

Melopepon, The sweet Millian.
THis seems to be of the same kind that the Pepon is, of less power: both
do provoke urine, laxe the belly: how be it this is of better nourishing.

Cucumis, The Cucumber.
THe Cucumber is abstersiue, inscissiue, (...) provokes vryne, but not so much
as th^ Pepon doth: it is soon corrupted in ye Stomach as ye Pepon is: if the
seed Root be dried, they be dry in the first degree, an^ therefore more
abstersiue: the seed wyt^ milk is good against the vlcerations o^ the
bladder.

Citrullus, Cucumis, Citrimus, The Citrull.
THe Citrull is colder than the Cucumber, and engenders crude and vittou^
humours in the veins, if it be not correcte^ with Ameos.

Lens Palustris, Ducks meat.
THis herb is good against inflamat^ens, and hoate Gowtes, and is repe^
cussyue.

Melon magnus, Melon Saracenicus. The great Millian.
THese seem to be the great Melons that be brought from the new fouo lands:
they be good for the stomach, ^nd against hot and burning teuers.

Cucurbita, The Gored.
THe Gored in Players, is good against all hoate inflammations. The Juice of
it with oil of Roses, help^th inflammations or pains of the Ears: being raw
or crude, it is evil for the Stomach, and hard to be digested: but boiled
and decocted, it is not so evil, howe be it, it nourishes but little.

Lactuca, Lettuce.
LEttuce is good for the hoate stomach: good against all hoate affects and
dyseases: it takes away thrystines, and moves to sleep, the seed drunk
retains stays the seed or nature of Men or Women, yt unwillingly avoids
either sleeping or waking: of all heat bes it engenders the best humours: yet
beware the excess o^ it: the wild Lettuce, which is our wyld^ Endyue, seems
to be cold and dry, and is abstetsiue, by reason of that it is bitter* and of
the same virtue that the garden lettuce is, but of less efficacy.

Malus Persica, The Peach.
THe leaves of the Peach made in plaster to the Navel, kills worms: th^
fruit is good for the stomach: taken before other meates they do not only
l^xe belly, and shortly descend themselves, (...) also give occasion to the
rest shortly to follow. As the ripe laxeth, so the unripe bi^deth.

Contyledon, Umbilicus veneris. Penyworte.
PEnyworte is cold moist, with a certi^ bynding, bitterness mixed: whereby is
repercussiue, abstersiue, and resolutyue: it is good against hot and
chollerike swellinges, and is also good for the heate of the stomach in
players.

MEDICINES Cold and moist in the third degree.
PORTVLACA, Purslane.
PUrslane is somewhat tance in taste, and therefore is repercussiue of hot
inflammations or swellings: it extinguishes intemperate and excessive heate of
the stomach, and chiefly in Fevers hectickes: it helps the teeth that be
edged with eating of sower Fruit: it is also good for the bloody Flux: the
coughing of blood, and specially the Juice of it.

Sedinum, Semperuiuum. Houselike, or Singreene.
BOth kinds be somewhat bynding and astringent: good against all hot and
choleric inflammations and swellinges in all parts of the body.

Poligonon, Herba sanguinalis, Centinodium vulgo. Knotgrasse.
KNotgrasse is byndinge: good against all hot diseases of the stomach: good
for ulcers, and soars, and green wounds it stays the bloody Flux, and the
cours^ in women.

Fungi, Musheromes.
THe Musheromes do breed moyste an^ Fleagmatike humours: all kinds are t^ be
feared: the best are thought to be thos^ that grow in sweet and temperate
Meadows and pastures: all other be dangerous poison: beware of those that
grow near to the Dens of Serpents, vnt^ Trees that bear dangerous
fruits, unto the rust of Iton, or where any corruption or putrefaction is.

MEDICINES Of Metalles.
STIBIVM, Antimony.
ANTIMOny is cold and dry in the second degree, found in the Mines of Silver:
if it be burned it savours like Brimstone: that is most chief that is
bryghtest: Besides the virtue and power of during, which is common to all
metalles, it is astringent (...) bynding: Wherefore it is mixed with m^l^ for
the eyes: it doth refrigerate, and prohibit the increase of superfluous
fl^she: it ^opeth the Flux of blood that comes from the raynes, and
paniculs that cover ye brain: that part that is burned shall not blister, if
it be anointed with Antimony, with freashe grease: and in case it be blistered,
and have gathered a skurfe, yet if it be anointed with Antimony, Wax, and
Cerusse, it will shortly be cicatrized, briefly, it is of the virtue that lead
burned is.

Cerussa, White lead.
WHite lead is cold dry in the ijdegree: taken inwards it is poison it is
made of Lead dissolved in vyneger: it is cold dry cleaving or abstrictiue of
the poares: it represses superfluous flesh, mixed with oyntmentes and
players that be lenityue, i^ doth cicatrize: if it be burned it is called
Sandix, of the old Authors commonly Minium or red Lead, and is of more
subtle substance than Cerusse is: howvei^ there is a kind of Minium that is
natural^ and not made by Act.

Gipsum, Plaster of Parys.
GIpsum is cold, dry, and bynding: with the white of Eggs, and Mile dust it
^asicheth blood: when it is burned it is not so cleaning or stopping of the
poares of the ^ody: but it is dryer, and of more subtility of substance, and
repercussyue, specially with water and vyneger.

Auripigmentum. Orpment.
Yellow Orpment is hot and dry in the third degree, and doth putrify the
member both burned and vnburned, but the burned is of more subtle substance:
it is ^sed to take away hair: if it remain long to the part it doth burn
the Skin, ^d is not to be taken inwards. That which now commonly is called
Realgar is of the kind of Auripigmentum, found with it in the same Mine, but
it is not so perfect. Also Arsenike which is white, is Judged to be of like
kind and virtue.

Sandaracha, Auripigmentum rubrum, Red Orpment.
THis is of the same power, virtue that the other Auripmentum is.

Erugo Aeris, Uiride Aeris, Verdegresse.
VErdegresse is hot and dry in the fourth degree: it resolves, and cosumeth
dead flesh: mixed with Oil and wax, it doth only mundify, and that without
any great sharpness or taste.

Aes vstum, Copper, or Brass burned.
COpper or brass burned is very hot, sharpe: how be it, it hath mixed a certain
bynding or stiptikenesse: if it be washed it is special to cicatrize soars
and ulcers in tender flesh: vnwashed also it doth ye same in hard flesh.

Flos Aeris, The skumme of Brass.
THis is subtler than is vstum or Squama Aeris: it is a^stersiue, and used to
consume mundifie, specially in a certain disease of the eye Lyddes which is
called Sycosis.

Squama Aeris ferri, The battering of Brass, or Iron, when it is beaten with
the Hammer.
THe batteringes both of brass and Iron do dry strongly: but they differ in
that the battring of Brass is more subtle: the battring of Iron is bynding,
and therefore it is meetest to heal corrupt ulcers and soars, more than the
battring of Brass: but the battering of Brass doth more consume and waste the
flesh: both kinds be sharpe and biting.

Atramentum sutorium, Calcanthos, Uitriolum vulgo. Copperesse.
COpperesse is hoate and dry in ye fourth degree, and with al hath a certain
binding and strictiuenesse, by reason of yt heat: it is a Corrosive, and
consumes flesh: by reason of the byndinge it both compact and strengthen the
substance of the part where unto it is put: the weight of a dram of it taken
inwards, kills the worms after Dioscorides.

Chalcitis. Vnslaked Copperesse.
THis is very hot and sharpe, and also astringent: it doth burn the flesh,
and gathers over it a skurse: it is used in medicines for the eyes: if it be
burned it is of less sharpnes, in substance more subtle.

Argentum viuum, Quick silver.
OF this there is both natural, and artificial: it is temperate in heat
cold, abstersiue without sharpness or biting: it is good for vlcerations in
the eyes, and for all moist soars and ulcers that be in tender bodies, as
Women and Children: for hard and dry bodies, it is of like efficacy.

Pompholix, Tutia vulgo, Tutty.
TUtty is cold in the first degree, and dry in the second: washed it doth dry
without payne or smart, and therefore it is vsen against cankers and like
malicious soars: it is good for rhewmatike eyes, and for all blisters and
vlcerations in them, and also for soars, and ulcers in the fundament and
secret members.

Spodium, Brent Ivory.
SPodium, after the description of ye greek Authors, is of the substance of
metals, and is good for ulcers, is much of the same virtue that Pompholix is:
but Spodium that Auicen describes, is made of ye roots of Canes or Reeds
burned: it is comfortatiue of the heart, as be writes, and sliptike: but
Spodium that we now use, is burned Juory, and taken to be of the same virtue:
for Juory of it self vnburned is strictyue and byndiuge.

Lythargiros, Spuma Argenti, Lytharge of Silver.
LYtharge is cold dry made of divers Substances, for there is of it of the
colour of Gold, and of the colour of silver: it is temperate in heate and cold
restrictive and abstersiue: it dries and heals, and is a meant betwixt all
other medicines of that Nature.

Plumbum, Lead.
Lead is cold and moist, and specially i^ it be washed: it is good against
^oat inflammations, and ulcers of the fundament, secret members: heaten as a
thin Plate it is good for the hoate bark, and for them that shed seed or
nature in dreams.

Plumbum vstum, Burned lead.
BUrned lead washed, is cold: vnwashed, it bath a certain heate and
sharpness mixed, remaining in it: it is good against malitions soars and
ulcers: if it be washed it increases flesh, and doth heal.

Plumbago, Lead Oar.
OF this there is natural, and artificial: the natural is found in a certain
vain, containing in it silver and lead: the artifi^ is made in the fyning of
Gold and silver: it is something cold: it increases flesh, and doth heal
ulcers and soars.

Scorio Metallorum, Recrementum, The dregs, or dross of Metalles.
THe dregs of metalls do dry, but the dregs of Iron most, which when they
be powdered finely, and mixed with vyneger, do heal mattering ears. The
dregs of lead are of the same virtue, that burned lead is. The dregs of
silver are mixed with players that do dry.

Ferrum, Iron.
IRon is cold and dry: fired and extinct in water, it leaves a certain
drying in it, which if it be drunk, healpeth them that be splenetike: if it be
extinct in wine, it is good for fluxes, and all weakness that coeth by
choler to the Stomach.

Sulphur, Brimstone.
BRimstone untried is best: it is hot ^ third degree: it is attractive, and
subtle: so that it is good against the stingig of venomous beasts: wych
turpentyne ^ heals Scabs, Leaprosies of the Skin, ^etters, Ringwormes: it
is good for the rough, voth taken inwards with a rer^ Egg, and also the
fumigation of it: also i^ is good for the shortness of wind, and for them
that wych coughtug void the matter and corruption from the lounges.

Cinnaberis, Cinopar.
CInopar is hot and sharpe, with a certain astringency, and bynding: it
helps blood, and aswageth burnings and blisters, mixed with wax.

Chrisocolla, Borax, The Soder of Gold.
OF this there is both Natural, Artificial: both kinds consume the flesh* it
is a medicine both alone, and also with other like things, for malicious
ulcers, and soars.

Aurum, Gold.
Gold is temperate of complexion, and among all medicines of metalls, is most
commended to cauterize with, for the cauterizacion of it is soonest healed: the
substance of it reduced to powder, comfort the heart, and puts away
melacholy fantasies: this is the judgment of the Arebikes only: but the great
Authors make no mention thereof.

Alumen, Alume.
OF Alume there be three kind, in especial Alumen Liquidum, which is our
Alume Plume, or Iching powder. The iij. is Alumen Rotundum, not well known in
this our time: all kinds be bynding, and of gross substance: the subtlest
is Aiulumen Plumeum, ye second Alumen Rotundum, grossest of all is Alumen
Liquidum: all kinds be hot dry in the third degree, bynding, abstersiue,
cleanse ye sight, colume superfluous flesh in ye Eye lids: all kinds be
burned, and do stay putrified ulcers: stop blood, dry the gumes that be
moyste: with Honey and vyneger stay and fasteu ye teeth that be loose, and are
good against vlcerations.

Calx, Lyme
Vnsleaked Lyme, is hoate and dry in the third degree, and doth burn so
strongly, that it doth make a skurfe. Lyme that is fleaked doth also gather a
skurfe: but by little, after a day or two: it burns less tha the other: if it
be washed it puts away his heat into the water, which is called Li^ and the
oftner it is washed, the less it doth smart or byte, for so it dries gently
without any pains or smarting.

Lixinium, Lye.
THe strength of Lye is after the nature and power of the Ashes whereof it is
made: for some is sharper than other some it is corrosive, and ^oth putrefy
burn.

Cinis Sarmentorum la, The Ashes of the vine.
THe Ashes of the vine, is causticke: and with Oil and grease it is good
against the browsing of sinews, and the fractures of the Joyntes: it consumes
superfluous flesh she, is good against the biting or stinging of venomous
Serpents, and mad Dogs.

Terra, Earth.
ALl Earth doth dry, if it be pure without any strange qualties, it dries
get^y: if there be in it any fiery or sharp quality, washinge takes it away:
earth burned is of more subtilty than earth vnburned, sharper: if the sharpnes
be put away with washing, it doth dry with more efficacy soars and ulcers that
be hard.

Sigillum Lemnium, Terra Sigillata.
TErra sigillata is cold, and dry: dissolved in vyneger it heals corrupt,
and malicious soars: dissolved in wine it heals wounds: ^peth the spitting
of blood is good against poison: infuled in (...) with the Juice of plantayne,
it heaieth v^cerations of the Bowels or guts: (...) have little or none of
this, but such as (...) counterfeit.

Bolus Armenus, Bolearmoniake.
BOlearmoniake is cold in the first, a^ dry in the second degree: it dries
m^ so that it is good for vicerations of ye mou^ all rhewmes of the stomach
breast: sp^ing of blood, and also the vlcerations of Loonges: and against all
soars and v^rations that need drying: it is also sp^all for the Pestilence.

Mys^, Sorry, Chalcitis, Kinds of vnsleaked Copperesse.
THese three M^neralls be found in o^ Mine in the Isle of Cyprus, in th^
veins: the lowest is Sorry, the second Chalcitis, the highest is Mysy, and
they judged to be of one virtue, but that Mysy more subtle than the other two:
Sorry is the grosest of ye three: Chalcitis of a mean nature betwixt both: when
they be burned, they be made more subtle, and less binding: they be so hoate
and sharpe, that they consume the flesh, and be causticke: they be used in
me^ycines for the Eyes: the one of them doth alter and change in process of
(...) to the other, as Sorry into Chalcitis, and Chalcitis into Mysy. Mysy is of
the colour of gold, Chalcitis is of brass, Sorry is black.

Sal Ammoniacus, Sal Gemonae. Saltes of diverse kinds.
THere is salt dug but of the earth, also salt that is made of the salt
water: all kinds of salt be abstersiue, and stiptike or bynding, but some
more, some less, after the diversity of the Grounds and Earth where they be
made. Salt is hoate dry in the second degree, it doth consume all indystures,
and condensate, and gather together the substance that doth remeyne, whereby
the bodies be preserved from putrifactio. Sal Armoniake among all salts that be
mineralles is chiefest, and doth consume superfluous humours in the eyeliddes,
whereby the hairs in them do prosper increase: all salt doth repress
extenuate superfluous flesh, is used in Clysters in bags or sackes to cease
paints. consume cold swellings, as in Dropsies: with oil and vyneger also
cures the Itch of the body: and is also good in players against ye stinging
or biting of venomous Beasts (...) and doth preserve fro the gout. Salt
burned is more subtle, and resolutiue, of iess^ bynding or restrictyuenesse,
than salt vnburned. Sal gemmae is of ye nature of salt and moreover purges
Fleagme, and Ch^ler: and helps medicines laxtiue in th^ operations.

Nitrum, Aphronitrum, Salt Niter, or Saltpetre.
BOth Nitrum, Aphronitrum have t^ power and virtue of Salt: they be a^
stersiue, and mundificatiue. Aphronitru^ is more subtle, and resolutyue.
Nitru^ burned doth dry, and resolve: taken into the body it is inscissiue and
extenuatyue of gross humours, much more thasalt. Aphronitrum is not taken
inwardely, without great necessity, for that it is evil for the stomach:
howbeit, it is good against ye poison of Musheromes, and so is Nitrum, both
burned, and vnburned.

Fex vini, Wine leyes, Tartarum vulgo. Tartar.
Wine Ieyes doth dry, and resolve: it is bynding and restrictiue, according to
the nature of ye wine whereof it is: It doth resolve swellinges, and dries
Milk put to the breast: burned it is causticke: with Rosen it takes away
Leaprosies, and makes the bayre yellow: washed it is abstersiue, and is used
with medycines for the Eyes: it is also used of certain Physicians to be
taken inwards, to laxe the belly: the leyes of vyneger is more bynding.

Lapis Haematites, The Blood stone.
THe blood stone doth dry, and is stipticke. and restrictiue: it heals the
roughnes and asperity of the Eye lids, if they be inflamed, mixed with the
white of Eggs: without inflammations mixed inflammations, mixed with water:
drunk, it helps the coughing of blood. It heals also ulcers, and soars:
and the powder represses superfluous and proud flesh.

Magnes, The Loadstone.
THis stone draws Iron to it, and is o^ the virtue and power, that the bloud^
stone is.

Iaspis viridis, The green Jasper.
THe green Jasper, both borne at the st^ macke and in the ringeworme,
comfort the mouth of ye stomach: also knit to th^ Thyghe of a Woman in
labour of Child^ doth Accelerate the birth.

Lapis Iudaicus, The Iewishe stone.
THis stone ground to powder, drunk with Water, breaks the stone in the
Kidneis: and after Dioscorides, the stone in the bladder.

Pyrites, Marchasita, The Copper, or Brasenstone.
THis stone is resolutiue of swellinges of gross matter, and blood gathered
and congealed within the flesh: there are of this diverse kinds: for Aetius
says this stone is like to silver: Dioscorides like to Cop^er, or Brass,
which burned is used to cleanse the sight, yt is offended by any gross humours.

Gagates, That is thought to be our Get stone.
THis stone is black, and cast into ye fire, savours like to Aspaltum: it is
resolutyue, and consumes old swellinges in the knees: the fume of it reuoketh
women out of their passions called the mother, and the felling sickness: it is
written that there is great store of this kind in Englande.

Pumex, the Pumishe stone.
THe Pumishe stone is abstersiue, scours the Teethe: vurned washed it doth
incarnate hollow and deep ulcers.

Lapides in spongi^s, The stones found in Sponges.
THe Stones that he found in Sponges be abstersiue, and break the Stone in
the Kydneies.

Lapis Aetites, Lapis Aquilae, The Egles stone.
THis stone bound to ye Arm of her that is with Child, doth stay all vntymely
byrthes: in the time of the birth labour bound to the Leage, it brings
forth the child without payne.

Lapis Cyaneus, Lapis Lazuli vulgo, The blew Lazule stone.
THis stone is sharpe, abstersiue, and resolutiue, more than Cinaberss is: and
is also stipticke or byndinge: it consumes flesh is causticke or burning.

Lapis Armenius, The Armenian stone.
THis stone is of the same virtue yt Cbrisocolla is, and increases hairs in
the Eye lidnes: taken inwards, it laxeth the belly, and purges melancholy.

Saphirus, The Sapphire.
THe Sapphire beat to powder drunk with milk, bealeth all inward vlcerations,
and in like case with milk anointed to the utter parts. The powder of it
laid upon cuts and choppes of the tongue, bealeth ye same: also drunk it
healpeth them that be bit with Scorpions.

Smaragdus, The Emerald.
THe Emerald burned, and beaten to Powder, helps the dimness of ye sight.
Anointed with water, and with gum Arabic, it belpeth the Leper: drunk
with water, it brings forth the same Disease again. Borne upon ye body, it
stays blood from what part soever it comes.

(...) Saphirus, Smaragdus, Hyacinthus, Rubinus, Granata, Sardius, Margaritae.
The Sapphire, The Garnet The Emerald, the Sardine, the Iacint, the Ruby,
Pearls.
THese precious stones of the Arabikes, of late practicioners in physic, are
esteemed used for things of great price virtue, to comfort the bearte. The
Greek Authors make no mention of them for ye purpose.

MEDICINES Of the parts of Beasts.
(...) Sanguis Columbarum, Palumharum, Turturum. Blood of all kinds of Doves.
THe blood of the Dooue, ye stockdooue, or Woodquist, and Cortle, is good
against blood sheding in the eye, that comes of a stroke: and also good in
wounds of the beade where the Skull is perished: with inflammations of the
Brain.

Sanguis Hirci. The blood of a Goat.
THe blood of the Goat breaks ye stone: and drunk with hunuy, is given
against the Dropsy.

Adens seuum. Grease, and tallow of Beasts.
BOth grease and sewet, be moist hoate, and do mollify and resolve: but some
more, some less, after the temperature of the beast: for Swynes grease is
moystest of all, near unto the temperature of Oil: Goats sewet is dryest, and
doth shortly cogeale and wax gross, therefore it is refused in Clysters, to
cease pains and freatinges in the lower Gut: Goose grease is hoater and more
subtle: the grease of the Cock Hen is of a mean betwixt swynes grease, Goose
grease. The Lyons grease is hoatest, most subtle. Bulls sewet is ye mean
betwixt Swynes grease, Lyons grease.

Lac, Milk.
Molke contains in it three substauces. The Curd, the Butter, the Why.
Milk of it self is a good nourishment, the why is abstersiue, and laxeth the
belly: the curd is gross and cleaving, or stopping of poares: and therefore it
tempers ye sharpness of other medycines. Butter is maturatyue, resolutiue of
swellinges: Milk with Peable stones or Iron fyered, and ertincte in the same,
is good for the bloody Flure, and sharpe rhewmes in the Belly: Milk is also
good against rhewmes of the Eyes, vlcerations of the Loonges, and of all
inward parts. The Asses milk is thynnest: the Cow milk grossest: the
goats milk of a mean substance: most temperate milk is woman's milk: next
to that goats milk, then follows Asses milk, sheep milk, cow milk.
Milk that hath most of why less of curd, is to all persons of less peril,
as the milk that hath most curd less why is most dangerous for them yt
have opilations of the liver, or spleen. Milk is not good for them yt have
weak heads wyndy stomachs. Much use of milk doth perish ye teeth, specially
that milk which hath most curdes: therefore after milk, ye teeth ought to be
washed with honey and water.

Ouum, the Egg.
THe Hen Egg, the Pheasant Egg be best for the nourishinge of the body: the
Egg of mean temperature or rearenesse is preserved: the Egg that is so
(...), that it may be supped, is of less nourishing doth lenify or smooth ye
aspetity roughnes of ye windepipe: take inwards with binding medicines it is
good against ye bloody Flux, other fluxes of the belly. Eggs yt be boiled,
be of hard digestion, and much more they yt be roasted in Ashes, but fried be
worst of all: the white of ye new laid egg is cold and of all medicines most
gentlest, of less bynding: and therefore good for vicerations in the secret
parts, yt should be dried without smart or bycing: the Yolke is of the same
virtue.

Medulla, Marowe.
Marow is a nourishment which doth move the stomach to voin^: but if it be well
dilgested, it doth nourish as a medicine: it doth al so moilify. The marow of
ye Hart is cheife^: next is ye marow of youge bullocks: for yt of the goat
Bull be sharpe and dry.

Coagulum, The Runnet.
THe Runnet is hot and dry, sharpe and resolutiue, the Runnet of the Har doth
cure (as it is written) the fa^ing sickness, and the Fluxes in women: and it
dissoiueth Milk that is curded in them.

Fell, The Gall.
THe Gallis the hoatest humour of the body, tor it is hot and dry in the rou^th
degree: and if it there is much diversity, according to the diversities of the
(...): the weakest is the gal: of Swyne, which is good for ulcerations of the
Ears: sharper than that be the Galls of the Sheep, of the Goat, of the
Bore, and Bull. The Gailes of birds be sharper dryer than the Galls of
fourefooted Beaues, and among them the Gall of the Cock, and (...) be
chief: the Galls of ^aukes be so sharpe, that they do exulcerate: Galies be
used in divers medicines, specta^y tor eyes.

Stercus, all manner of Dounge.
THe Dounge of all beasts is hot dry, and resolutyue: Goats dounge in
playfter, is good for hard swellings: Dx. (...) in players, is good for
dropsies: Pigeons dounge is good for lunge dileases, as Sc^as^caes, Megtimes,
Headache, aches in the the Back, the Fe^, the Joyntes, universally in all
passions, where need is of grease Attraction to the utter parts, for it is
attactyue.

Corium Ouis, The sheep Skyn.
THe skynnes of sheep newly slain, put to the body that is beaten and
bruised, helps, the same briefly within one day and a night, more than any
other thing, for it doth ripe and resolve.

Oesipus, Succida Lana, The sheep greasy Woolle.
THe fatness of the woolle of the sheep is good against all browsing, vy^nge
on any part howsoever it come, is much of like nature with Burter. Woolle
without fattinesse is a thing necessary often times to teteyne oil, and
oyntmentes to any parts, Woolle burned is sharpe and drying, and consumes
flesh in moist ulcers and soars.

Ius Gallorum, The broth of an old Cock.
THe broth of the old cock with Salt, applied to the utter most of the
flesh, laxeth the belly: the broth of the Hen tempers the sharpness of
blood.

Cornu Cerns, Capri.
THe borne of the Hart, of the goat burued skoureth the teeth, dries ye moist
gummes if they be washed with it: it helps the bloody flux, the spitting of
blood, the weakness of the stomach: and it is good also for the Jaundice, dries
rhewmes of the Eyes.

Genitale Cerui, The Pyzill of the Hart:
THe Pyzill of the Hart beat to powder, and drunk with wine, is good for the
biting or stinging of Adders.

Ebur, Ivory.
THe shauinge of Juory, helps Whitflowes, or hoate swellinges under the
Nail, for it is a stringent: it is used for the Jaundice by the common people.

Pulmo vulpis, The Loonges of the Fox.
THe Loonges of the Fox oryed, made in powder, and drunk, helps them yt
have shortness of mind.

Castorium, The Beavers cod.
CAstorium is heate and dry in the second degree, and subtle of substance:
good against al. cold passions that come to the live was by repletion: drunk
it provokes the monthly course in women.

Scincus, The Loins of the Scinkes.
THe parts of this beast, that be near to to the Kydneis, drunk with wine,
are thought good to proueke lust, and courage.

Senectus serpentis, The slought or skyn of a Snake or Serpent.
THe skyn of the Serpent boiled in byneger, (as it is written) helps the
toothache.

Caro viperae, The flesh of the Adder.
THe flesh of the Adder is hoate and dry, and purges the whole body by ye
Skyn from the Leapry, and such other passions: wherefore it is mix o with
triacle.

Tela Aranearum, the Copwebbe.
THe Copwebbe s^yetd bl^ud, preserured for wound from Inflammation.

CAntharides, Green flies beyond Sea.
CAntharides be heat and dry in the third degree, do ^i^ster the skyn: and
mixed with other convenient medicines do take away skabbed, and sk^uy Nails:
they provoke vryne, but taken in too great quantity, do excoriate the Bladder.

Lumbrici terrestes, Earthwormes.
THese worms made into a plaster, help the sinews that be bruised, and but:
besides yt, if they be drunk with sweet wine. they provoke vryne.

Conchula Indica, Blattae Bizantiae vulgo, The Indian Muskleshell.
THis kind of shell burned, and taken for a fume, revives women that have the
passion called the mother: and them that have the falling disease.

Ostreorum testae Oyster shells.
THe shells of Oysters burned, and dried, be abstersiue: washed they increase
flesh, and do replenishe hollow ulcers, soates, without smart or dyting.

Sepiae Testa, O^ Sepiae, The Cuttle bone.
THe Cuttle above is cold, dry, abstersiue: burned, it takes away scabs
spots from the skyn: ^burned, it cleanses the teeth, and mundifieth skarres
in ye ^yes, and takes away roughnes growing in the Eye li^des.

Ala^da, Galerita, The Lark.
THis Bryde roasted and eaten, helps the cyollicke.

Cochlea Terrestris, Limaces vulgo, The Snail.
THe whole Snail, with ye shells burned, mixed with pepper, Galls, stop the
bloody Flute: they must be beaten to powder with the shells, made in a
plaster to the belly: they help ye dropsy, and swellinges in the Joyntes of
them that have the Gaw^e.

MEDICINES Approved, and Tried.
For the Colic, stone, and Strangury, an excellent perfect medicine.
TAke five, or stre leaves o ye Heart called La^re^ and stamp strain th^ in
Ale, or if they be (...) beat them to Powder, (...) put them in Ale, and l^
the Patient drink it first the morning and all that day keep him warm in
to^ chamber: for after the receipt thereof th^ Patient shall be prouoken to d.
or ^j. store s^ or more. This ^a^ (...) Laurel, is growing in Gardeyns, and
(...) like to M^den, (...) hath Leaves like to the (...) called (...) sell
which grows out of (...) (...) and bears a Berry ^yke toe bygi^sse (...) of
Werttes, and is commonly grieved to Bullocks for medicines.

THe next day, make a powder of these thinns following, Filipendula, and
Sarifrage, of each an ounce: Coriander seed, Gromell seen, Alexander seed,
of each half an ounce: Juie Berries, ye seed of Brom, of every an ounce:
the B^othe of Elder flowers, and the Berries of smothe Holme, of every an
ounce: Annise Seen, Fenell Seed, of every an ounce: a quarter of an ounce of
an Or^ Gall: The Rome of ready berring, half an ounce: The Rounds of a
Thorne^ fish, which is a round nut, which you shall find within the dryckes
which stand upon the Fyshes back, half an ounce: Polinonium, which is a
Fern growing one of an Oak, dried in powder, half an ounce: beat all these
in powder, and mire them together, and by the space of four, or five Days
following, take every Day fastinge a Spoonful of the said Powder in Ale,
and drink thereof, and eat, nor drink in four, or v. hours after.

For a child or man that is burned, or scalded with fire, or water.
TAke an Hen Egg, and roast it until it be very hard: and then take out ye
yolke, and bruise it with fresh buter, and anoynte your grief there with.

For a Copperesle Face, to wash it.
TAke green and white Copueresse put a quantity in a sancer of water, warm it
over the Coals, and as hoate as you can suffer it, anoynte ye pim^les of your
Face therewith, or such parts as are red and this use till they be whole.

For an akinge Head.
TAke a Rose cake, wet him with Uyneger, and put thereunto the powder o^ a
Nutmegge, the powder of Cloves, and bind them to the temples.

For bleeding at the nose, a singular Medicine.
TAke a Lynaen clothe, and wet it in vynyger, and wrap it about the pri^
members of the patient, and he shall ^ase bleading: {que} probatum est per
Ioannen Lynsell, clericum Magestri Anthony Brown in Essex.

For the tertian Agewe.
TAke nyne leaves of white stock Geloflouts, five or six crops of rosemary,
and stamp them together, take the Juice thereof, and drink it in Ale luke
warm, a little before your fit.

For an Agewe.
TAke a toste of bread, and spread it over with Triacle, let the Patient care
it before the fit comes, three times several, at three days. per Guill^elmu
Le^hell, Oxon. Armigerum. c.

For a Bruise.
TAke Brooke lime, Smaledge Bruise wor^r, and fry them in Sheep sewer, then
strain it through a lynnen clothe, and it wild an O^le, put thereunto the
powder of Spermaceti, and anoynte the grief therewith.

For to destroy fleagme, to avoid it.
TAke Pa^s^y roots, Fenell roots, Peritorie, Isope, se^th them with good Ale,
and Lycoris, with a quantity of cl^ H^, and use to drink it first last c.
Mistress Castelyne.

For the Chyne cough.
Take a mouse flea him, dry him to pou der in an Oven, drink him in ale: the
same is also good for them (...) cannot hold their water. Probatu per magistru
lerueies.

To break the stone.
TAke the she'll of a Snail, and dry it leisurely, and beat it to powder,
drink it with white wine, note ye Snails be very good for a consumption, if
they be first laid a day in bra^, and then st^wed.

For the Plague.
TAke an Onion, make a hole in him, take out the inner core: then take water of
Dragon, Triatle, Pepper, and bruise them a l^tle, and put them into the Onion,
and roast the Onion in the Imbers, afterwards bruise the Onion, and stranne him
with Malm^s^y, ^ue it unto ye Patient to drink: and if it be taken before the
heart be infected, it is a present remedy. Per doctor em Uardenorte.

For the Canker in the Mouth both White and Red, the Red will break out, and
the White will not: and for scare Legs, and soar Lips, or any other
Soars.

TAke ij. handfuls of the leaves of woodbynde, and one handful of Sage,
shred them fine, brate the very small in a mortar: then take ij. spoonefulles
of Honey, a piece of Roche alume of the quantity of half an egg: then take a
quart of fair runninning water, and s^ethe all these together, until it be
thick: then take it, and strain it in a fair cloth, and put the liquor into
a fair earthen pot, cover it close: the anoynte the Gumes th^rewyth, within on
the soar side, or ells your whole mouth: and if it he a white Canker, then
anoint the v^ter side: and then wet a clothe in the Liquor, lay it thereunto on
the out side of ye soar: and use this iij. times in a day, and when you are
dressed, then lay your face to a warm chafingdishe of coals, the water will
tun out of your mouth in great quantity. And if the Canker be in the nose, or
in any place where it cannot be touched, then spout in this liquor with a
Quill, and this this will beale you within short space. And this liquor will be
kept well xxi. days in his virtue, and no more. The good wife Baldwin of
Wimbledon besides Fulham.

For a Mole in a woman's body, otherwise called a wheston, or a moon Calfe.
TAke water Cressies, and eat them with Potage sodden with Mutton, morning and
eveninge, and use none other Potage: then take Oil of Roses, every evening
anoynte your body, breast, and belly there with. Per Ioannem Bell.

For the Piles.
TAke Diaculum, Oil of Spike, a little, melt them in a Saucer, spread it on a
lynnen clothe, and lay it very warm to the Piles, and within two days
fanabitur: and it must be new dressed daily. Per Ioannem Bell.

For a Corn in your Toe.
TAke a Knife, pare the Corn hard to the Quick, and then take the inner part
of a Fig, a quantity of Uerdegrease, mire them together, lay it to the Corn,
bind it fast with a linen cloth, and this will eat out the root. Per
Ioannem Bell.

A Plaster for worms in a childes belly.
TAke a handful of feather few, another of Few, one of wormwood, another of
^set lyekes, and the leaven of Browne bread, and a vynte of white wine vinegar,
and boyle them all in the vyneger, until it be thick, like a s^l^e: and the
put it into a double clothe, and bind it to the Navel as hot as it may be
suffered, and let it remain ^j ^wers Per Ioannen Bell.

To purge a soar from dead flesh.
TAke Sorrel, and roast it in the Embers (...) within ^ro^ or white Paper. and
make a (...) thereof, lay it as hoate ^in three dressinges sanabitur Per (...)
Bell

For the Colic, and stone.
TAke Black berries. ^awe^. Arorns, and dry them upon tiles, then take the
(...) of them severally, of each a sponefull, (...) it ^e, and give it to the
Patient in Malmosey

For the Gowte.
TAke S^e dried half a day, or 1 whole day, lay it to the soar, and it will
^ase your payne in one night. Per Sergeant Waters.

Another for the same.
TAke Aquanitae, and wash rub the soar therewith: and then take a linen
clothe, and wet it in. Aquanitae, and lay it to the soar, and it will heal
you within one hour or two at the most. Per Robert. Westo.

For the Plague.
TAke Mit^um a drame, gene it hetimes to the Patient with dragon water, white
wine, or with any other liquor.

For the got, or any ache.
TAke a Quarter of a pound of R^ asm^ of ^itch, a ^uantity of Frankins^ce a^
m^ as a ^e, ^smuch of ^e: then take D^ere s^wet* or s^ (...) (...) al^o ^ether
in a ^t, (...) t^en (...) it in clean ^ter was^ it as (...) (...) (...) ^me,
and then s^d it v^ a (...) of L^t^er, and la^ it to t^ soar, let it remain
there until it fa^l of.

For a green wound, wherein is no dead flesh.
TAke (...), w^ic^ ^mith (...) ^only vs^, (...) it i^ ^ik^ A^ (...) ye ^ou^
t^er^of v^n the s^* t^n s^r^d t^^ v^ a ly^ cloth^, la^ it to the s^, let it
rem^ ^s* a^ chau^e it once a day with ^ewe powder, it will heal your wound
without any other thing. Per Dauid Denewe of Brainford.

For the plague, a present remedy.
TAke five spoonefulles of Dragon water, (...). spoonefulles of strong ^y^ger
half a spoonful of ^ac^e of I^ne, a qua^ of a spoon^full of Bole a^moniak^
in (...) powder, and the quanti^y of a piece of Bry^sto^e beaten into fine
powder, as^uch and some what more of the ^oote of S^twa^e of Venyce be^ten in
powder: drink this wh^n you ^e g^d wy^ ^fec^on an^ ^ot ^ls, and take no other
meat nor ^rynke in twelve hours af^, vu^s it (...) a^e of the same. Per
^stris Kn^ght de Andouer.

For your defence from the plague, a special preservative.
TAke five spoonefulles of vyneger, three spoonefulles of r^nning Water, half
a spoonful of ^a^l^* as much of Bol^ ^^on^ake as a (...) N^t made in fine
powder, and drink this last to bed, and first in the morning. Per predictam
mistress Knight.

To make a salve for a tent.
TAke the Yolke of an Eggt, Hun^y as much as a Walnut, T^pentyne as much: beat
these, and use it to the soar with lynte.

To kill the Ringworme.
TAke an ounce of ver degrece, d. ounces of vyneger, and grind them in a
morcer, and ado three ounces of Hu^y, and sees them all v^on the fire t^l
they be as thick as Hu^y.

At London in fleetstreete by Thomas Marsh. 1580.


