The Governance and preservation of them that fear the Plage.

Set forth by Iohn Vandernote, Phisicion and Surgeon, admitted by the King his
highness. Now newly set forth at the request of William Barnard, of London
Draper. 1569.

JMPRINTED at London, by Wyllyam How, for Abraham Veale, in Paules churchyeard
at the sign of the Lamb.

The preface.
TO THE honour of Almighty GOD, and profit of al Christen people, and to
maintain health in the hole bodies, and to remedy them that are corrupt and
infect with the infections of the Pestilence, I Iohn Vandernote, Phisicion and
Surgeon admitted by the King his highness: and sworn unto my Lord of Suffolke
his grace, now abiding at the late gray Friars in London do think it mete to
wright certain things cocerning the pestilence, as well drawn out of diverse
autentique doctors and experimenters, as of mine own experience being
conversant and a minister (under God) in the said infection, in Rome, Italy,
Lomberdy, Naples, Poelles, and Iowe countries, by the space of many years.

And because gentle Reader that the great and long sermons and prolixite of
sentences are often occasion of tediousness and small frutefulnes to the Reader,
because so many circumstances are comprised in one matter wherefore gentle
reader, I thought it mete and expedient, briefly without any ambiguite to
wright chiefly the most substance and effect of this pestiferous disease, and
to declare it shortly, to the intent it may be borne by hart away of them that
shall have need of it, as I pray God no person after this have, as grant us
the holy Trinite.

The contents of this book are these.
The first. Of the Pronostication of the Pestilence. The second. Of the
causes whereof the plage does engendre and come. The third. Of the remedies
against the Pestilence. The fourth. Of the comfortinge and strengthening of the
heart and other the spiritual parts. The fyfte. Of the Fleobothomie or
letting of blood in the time of Pestilence. The sixte. Of meates, drinks,
sauces to be used in the time of the Pestilence.
The tokens and Signs which do Pronostyque the Plage or Pestilence to come
are seven.
i. The first token is, when the day in somer often does change: as in the
morning inclining to rain, after to darkness and after to wind, specially
winds coming fourth of the Southe.

ij. The second when the days in somer are dark, and like often to rain and
do not rain.

iij. The third, when upon the ground are many Flies fliynge ne'er the
ground, that is a token that the air is corrupt.

iiij. The fourth, when ye stars are like oft to fall or slip, this is a
token that the air is inflamed, and full of venomous vapours.

v. The fifte, when there doth appear in the air a Comet or a sliding Star,
as Aristotle says in Mytauris. It signifies great war, shedding of
blood, and the death of a great multitude of people, the destruction of many
Towns, drownynge of ships thorough great tempests of the Sea. And the
darkness of the Sun, signifies changing of Regions. And that the common
people shall have dearth and Pestilence.

vi. The sixte figure is, when it does often lighten and thundre, and
specially when it comes out of the South.

vij. The seventh, when many winds blow or come forth of the South, for they
corrupt the air.

When these for said signs do appear, then it is to be feared of a great
Plage, or Pestilence for to come, without the great mercy of almighty God do
it withstand.

The cause of the Pestilence.
The cause of Pestilence are three manners.
i. Sometimes it doth engender thorough ye vapors and corruptions upon the
earth.

ii. Sometimes it doth engender thorough the vapors and corruption of the Sky
and Elements, or bodies above.

iii. Sometimes it doth engender throw the mixting of them both.

i. The plage is sometime engendered, thorough the vapours and corruptions coming
of the earth, as we do daily se out of Priues, Dikes, filthy Canels, standing
muddy waters, being near ye place where the people doth rest and sleep a
nights, thorough this the air becomes infect in her substance and quality,
and that only in some places. And this particular corruption comes every
day. And thorough the same comes often Pestilent Fevers, which often do
deceive the Physician, which do not take them for to be the fever
pestilenticall. The Plage or Pestilence comes likewise sometimes thorough the
stink of dead bodies, as well of mankind as of beasts. Also it comes thorough
standing Mud, stinking Pooles and waters, and this does corrupt the air,
and this pestilence is sometimes universal, and sometimes particular.

ij. Secondarely, the Plage is sometime engendered thorough the vapours and
corruptions of the Skies and Elements or Bodies above, and that thorough ye
virtues of the Sterres and Bodies above, and thorough the same the spiritual
living spirits and bodies beneth are infect. And of the same Auicen saith in
his fourth book saying: that the bodies are often inflamed corrupt thorough the
infections of the bodies above, for the corrupt air doth infect the sprites
beneth, and so the living spirits in mankind is often infect.

iij. Thirdly, the Plage doth engender thorough the mixynge of them both: yt is
when thorough the impression or influence of the bodies above, the air being
corrupt, and thorough the putrefaction of caryon liynge upon the earth and
stinking air, a syckenesse is engendered in mankind. And the same sickness is
often caled Febris Pestilenci alias and sometimes often an apostemacion, for
sumtimes the air that we do draw in our bodies is corrupt and venomous. And so
infects the hart, where thorough it is aggravate strongly, in so much yt she doth
eat gnaw filthy infection: then the vryne the digestion is then often like
for to be good, notwithstanding that ye pacyent is still declining toward
death. And thorough the same many Phisycions are often deceuid. And therefore it
is needful that every body provide him self of a good and expert Phisicion:
not only seen in learning, but also well and better in practyse, concerning
the premises.

A question.
Wherefore doth the one dye and the other not, being both infect? likewise more
in one place then an other.

Aunsvver
This may be thorough the means of two causes.
i. First thorough it, that is working.

ii. Secondarely thorough it that is suffering.

i. First thorough it that is working, that when the heuenly influences regard
more the one person then the other, and the one place more then the other.

ij. Secondarely, thorough it that is suffering, that is as when the one body is
more inclined and disposed to the Plage then the other is.

Nota.
These bodies are most inclined or disposed to the Plage or Pestilence. First
all those yt are hot or warm, and those that have great sweating issues: and
bodies that are corrupt. All those that hath their sweating issues stopped. And
therefore are the bodies fore inclined unto the plage, wherein be come great
resolucyons: like as in them that are great meddlers in Lechery, and them that
serve in hot houses: and all they that do lightly sweat thorough small labour
or travail, or wax hot, and all they that lightly wax angry, hot and
fumous, al such are inclined unto the plage.

An other question.
Whether such infectyon of the Pestylence be contagious or infectiue or not?

Answer.
Such infection is infectiue and contagyous. For through the bodies of the
infect persons, comes such venomous vapours and humours that do not only
corrupt the other hole bodies: but also the air where thorough comes
infectyon. And therefore ought every person to eschew the infect persons. And
moreover when ye plage raynes, you shall not stand among many people for
fear if any of them should be infect unknown. And therefore stands the wise
Phisycyons (which do viset such in the Plage time) a far of from the
patients, beholding with their face the window or door. Also they shall do
likewise, that do serve them.

Nota.
It is very good for the patient that he do often change his chamber, and
that his windows stand and open toward ye east, and north east, but the
windows which open toward ye south, shall ever be closed or locked, for the
south wind hath in him two causes of corruption.

i. First he debiliteth and weakens nature, as well of whole people as of
sick.

ii. Secondarely, like as it is written in tertio Aphrorismorum, the southwinde
aggrauate the hearing, hurts the heart, for he opens the sweating issues of
mankind and so enters into the heart. And therefore every hole person shall in
the time of pestilence, when the south wind doth blow, tarry in the house the
hole day. And he needs must goo forth, yet shall he tarry within so long till
the sun be hie and lunge risen or up.

The remedies against the Pestilence.
Here shall be said how every body shall preserve keep him from ye infection of
the plage or Pestilence.

i. And first for the same every christian creature shall be advertised by the
word of Ieremy the prophet, which commands that every creature shall eschew
the evil and follow the good ways, and that he repentantly with a meke heart
shall confess him of his offences and this is the most surest medecin in the
plage time.

ii. The second, that every person fly the places infect if it be possible.
And they that can not avoid the place, let them abstain of all things causing
putrefaction, as much as is possible, like as is overmuch copulation between man
woman, and the south wind which naturally is infectiue. And therefore shall
every person keep the windows locked in the morning till eight of the clock
standing against the southe.

Also they shall avoid all manner of stinkyng savours, as of stables, streets,
kanels wells, standing mud waters, and specially of all manner of foul
stinking carrion, or dead bodies. And most of all of all manner of old stinking
Vrines and waters, for in some houses, they do keep it two or three days
lunge, and in some houses are some kanels running under or above ye ground:
where great stink engenders remains, and all this doth ingendre great
putrefaction. And that is the cause that more people be infected diseased more
in those places where such are, then in other places where none such is.
Likewise do the people more die and be infect where places are where they do
sell cabushe wurtes, for that engenders a dangerous humour which doth infect
mankind, when they be rotten or perished. And as thorough odours aromatic or
good savours are the hertes and other the spiritual parts recreated, renewed,
comforted and strengthened: Likewise thorough euell foul savours, are they
debelitated and infected.

Therefore every person shall so use their houses, that no such air or savour
come in being corrupt as is aforesaid, for the corrupt air is moist, and
engenders thorough his own nature a putrefaction in the house and in the places
where they do sleep. And therefore shall you air and cleanse the houses and
chaumbers with light flames of fire, being made with Oken wood. Also you shall
after that perfume the place with these herbs following, as Baize, Juniper
buries, Organum, wormwood, Ysope, Rue, and Moogworte. Lignum Aloes perfumed is
best of all, were it not so costly or dere. Al these airs and perfumes
conforte and strengthen the inward part of the body, when the air enters
thorough the mouth or nostrils.

You shall also cleanse and abstain of all manner of fulsumnesse or replecion of
humours. For the bodies that are replete with humours are soon infected and
inflamed. For Auicen says in quarto canone. That people which will be often
filled with meat and drink do shorten their life. Also you shall avoid
much bathinge or sweating in baumes or hot houses. Also for to be conversant
among great congregacion of people to the intent other being corrupt and
infect: do not corrupt and infect you, you being clean. And when you come
not among the congregacion or company of people, then shall you use this
following.

i. First in the morning, when you do rise, you shall eat a quantity of
hearbegrace or rue, well washed with a little salt and one or two cornels of
nuts well cleansed. And when you can get none of this, then shall you take a
crumb of bread depped in good vineagre and eat next your heart, and specially
when the air is dark, misty and not clear. And it is not good in the plage
time for to walk in the towns or vilages, but rather to tarry at home with in
the house, then to goo forth.

ii. Secondarelye, you shall spread or sprinkle the house (and specialy in
summer) with vinegre, with roses, with vine leues. And it is good that you do
often wash your hands in water and vineagre, and then often to smell the
hands when they be dried. Also al sour and sharpe sauoures are then wholesome
for to be smelled on, as well in winter as in summer. And it was for bodden me
to show it unto the commons in Rome, where I was constrained for to go from
house to house I being a student and prentes there, where I went daily to
minister and dress the people, and took but only a crumb of bread, or a
piece of a spounge being depped in strong vyneagre and the same held I before
my mouth nose for to smell. For all sour savours stop the flux of humours, and
do not suffer the venemosite or corrupcion to entre the body. And this
doing I was (thorough the help of God) the premises, saved from the said
infection, at which my companions did marvel.

All these premises have I my self experimented and found true, in diverse
regions and countrees, as in Rome, Italie, Lumbardye, Naples, Poyelles,
Calabers, Almanye, Flaunders, and likewise in Englande this.xvij. years. I
being sworn unto the noble late French Quenes grace my Lady Mary, and my
Lord of Suffolke his grace.

Here follows of the confortinge and strengthening of the heart, and the other
spiritual and special members of the body.
THe comforters of the Heart are Safferon, Camphir, and Plantaine with other
herbs, which do cleanse the living spirits within, and conforte. And these
are good for ye common people, which are lightly infected one of an other. And
therefore shall every one beware that they do not receue the breath coming out
of the mouth or nostrils of an other, Also the sight is darkened thorough the
infect air, when they do not bear such like herbs in their hands.

It is very good that you do wash your face, mouth, eyes, hands with
rosewater myxt with vyneagre. And when you have none of the premysses, must
needs go among the people, then take use good vineagre, then boldly go among
the people. Also solubelnesse of the womb is a great help in this case. And
when you can not have by the way of nature solubelnesse, then provoke him with
suppositories: or after the counsel of learned and expert Phisicions. And
likewise shall you find at ye Apotecaries Pillule Pestilenci ales, which are
very good. And you shall always keep your houses good fire, for that lets
the impression of the sky, clarifies the air,

Item fine triacle is best for the same, as well for them that are in health as
for them that are infect, of this shall you take twice a day in clear wine, or
with rosewater, or with clear ale or bear. And every time that you take
Triacle, you shall not exceed the quantite of a common peas at ones, and of
the water ale or bear, the quantitee of two sponefulles. The Triacle shall be
first dissolved in a cup with the wine, water, ale or bear, and then shall you
not eat after by the space of four or five hours, to the intent the Triacle
may have her due operation within the body.

Then you shall eat good meates drink good drinks, as good clear Wine, Ale or
Bear, and that shall be soberly, for superfluity causes corruption and
putrefaction of the humours. Also you shall abstain from all manner of thing
engendering heate, as Pepper, Garlic. And yet notwithstanding that Pepper doth
pourge the flewme of the brains, and the other members of viscose humours, yet
it doth to much inflame and cause heate. And to much heate gendreth
putrefaction. And therefore is the bitterness better then the heate, smelling
or sauoringe of the Pepper, and Garlic pourgeth the Flegmata and euel humours,
and provokes appetite to eat, and suffer not the dry air to entre into the
body. Notwithstanding, because the Garlic perturbeth the eyes and the head
with heate, to them that do often eat or use it, therefore it shall be in this
time abhorred and abstained.

The Plage is oftentimes augmented and increased thorough hot causes.
Such meates as are soonest digested are best, the sooner the better, in the
morning and at none shall they eat sodden meates, and at nights roasted. All
manner of pape meates and caudels shall be abstained and eschued, except they
be acetouse, or somewhat sower. For sower or sharpe things are better in this
season of pestilence, then any other medecines. Also you shall abstain of all
manner of fruits being not sharpe, nor having no soreness in them, except
Cherries, Pomegranates, Orrenges and few pears or appels dressed in stead of a
medecin, for all manner of fruits doth ingendre putrefaction.

Spices being apt good in this time, are Gynger, Cynamon, Commyn, Macis,
Saffron, and of the same are made good preseruatiues for the rich people. And
the poor shall occupy Rue, Salge, Nuts, Parcely, and this shall they mix
with salt and vineagre. And ye mean people of substance, shall take Come
and Saffron mix them with vyneagre. This is marvelous good for to be taken
inward, for it defends inward the putrefaction.

Mirth of heart is a great comfort and help of health in the body. And
therefore fear of death is a dangerous case in this time, but only to be
merry, and set the hole hope and confidence upon God, and to comende him to his
godly pleasure.

Here follows of the blood letting in the Plage time.
ONes in a month you must be letten blood, when age, strength, or any other
cause doth not let, like pilgrims, sick and extenuated people, and such as are
very solubel, or laxe. And the Fleobothomi should be done in the left or
right arm, in the Liver vain, Baselica, in the arm before meat. And when
the Liver vain is stricken then shall you be merry, drink good drink, as good
Wine, Bear or Ale, temperatly, and that same day shall you not sleep, and
specially when the Liver vain is let blood.

Item, when any doth feel himself infect or any curnell or Apostumations
appear or prick, then shall he wholly abstain from sleep. But go walking
abroad, for the sleep leads the venomous hotenesse to the heart: and to the
other special members, in so much that no Herbs can resolve the same, and
bring it to the first estate, which would not be so, if the body were
walking and stirring.

A question.
What shall a man do, that hath his natural sleep after he be infect?

Answer.
In the time when plage does raygne when you will sleep after your meat,
you shall prolong it with walking in the Feilde or Gardeins, and then sleep
an hour after meat. And therefore Auicen saith: when you be disposed for to
sleep, it shall be wholesome then after the sleep, to drink a good draught of
drink. For that person that is sleaping draws unto him many humours, and
such evil humours are let thorough a good draught of drink.

A question.
How shall you know whether any be infect or no?

Answer.
He that is infect doth eat that day but little, for he is full of euell
humours. And when he doth eat he doth covet sleep and doth feel great
hotnesse with cold and hath a great payne in the forparte of the head thus
shall he bring away by walking and going abroad. And that person that is infect
doth holy abhore walking, or to ride a horseback, or otherwise, thorough
slouthfulnesse and heaviness.

Every person that is infect, doth require, desire, and covet sleep every
hour for that inward venom perturbeth the living sprites, in such wise that
they ever require rest. And of the same signs may every person know whether
they be infected or not. And when any doth not believe this, let him tarry
half a day after, and then shall he feel an impostome in his arm holes, in
his gruinde or behind his ears. And the best remedy is when they do feel
any of these in the time of Pestilence, not for to sleep. For in the sleep do
the living spirits rest, as is aforesaid, and then all the infections spredeth
thorough the whole members of the body. All these premises have I proved before.

When any man or person feels himself infect that same day shall he
immediately after, be letten blood plenteously till swoninge, so soon as it be
possible, or else till he wax faint, for a small voydynge of blood doth
stir and move the blood. And when the person will open but one vain, and not
many, so shall he let her blood so lunge as she will, for a small voydyng doth
stir the venomous infection, as is aforesaid.

Item every person that is letten blood: infect or whole person, shall beware
that he do not sleep that day till midnight. And the said lettinge of blood
shall ever be done, in the same side where the apostemacion doth appear. And
when the apostemacion doth appear under the right arm then shall they be
letten blood in the same arm, in the mediane. And when the apostemacion doth
appear under the left arm, then shall the lettinge of blood be in the said
left arm, in the mediane, or liver vain, upon the hand next the ear finger.

And when the apostemacion doth appear by the grind or privy members, then shall
they be letten blood in the same side under the ankle or nearer the heal. And
when then the letting of blood shall be done in the head vain, near the thumb,
in the same side where the Apostemacion appears, or in the Mediane of the
same arm, or else by the ear finger. And when the Apostemacion doth appear
by the ears, then the letting of blood shall be done in the head vain in the
same side, or else in the vain between the thombe and the next finger, to the
intent that the venomous infection do not desturbe the brains, or in the vain
by the ear finger, or else in the vain, Basilica named.

And when the Apostemacion doth appear in the shoulders, then shall the blood
be taken forth, with Boxyng and Sacrification, howbeit before shall the Mediane
be opened: or the Heart vain. And when the Apostemation doth appear upon the
back then ye letting of blood shall be by the great Toe, called Sugar pedica
magnam, all the foresaid Fleobothomyes or lettinge of blood shall be done before
the infect person hath slept, or before the appearing in the pricking of the
Apostemacions.

When any doth feel the Apostemacion after that they have sleapte, then shall
the Fleobothomies be in the contrary side, in the side where the Apostemacion
doth not appear, like as here, if the Apostemacion doth appear after the
sleeping in ye right arm, then the letting of blood shall be in ye left arm,
in the Liver vain, or Mediane, or else in the hand in the vain called
Basilica.

And when the Apostemacion doth appear under the left arm, then shall the
letting of blood be in the right arm, like as is said of the left arm. And
likewise shall you do of all other Apostemacions; in what places they do appear,
all times in the contrary side, if it do appear after sleep.

When the patient is very faint weak which is letten blood, then he may
sleep somewhat, or else half a day, but every space of a half day must the
patient be stirring, softly riding or walking. And when the apostemacion doth
wax big and great, that is a good sign, the nature doth expel the
venemosite outward, and makes the body whole.

And to the intent the Apostemacion may be the sooner ripened, matured and
opened you shall make this medecin: Stamp the leaves of Elder, and do to it
powder of Musterd seed, and make of this a plaster, and lay it upon the
apostemacion. Some Surgeons do mix unto this triacle, which I do not like, for
the Triacle will repercusse inward again the said risynge and venemosite,
howbeit I do counsel that they shall drink it, to the intent the venemosite
may be driven outward.

An other remedy, take Barbam Iouis or Houseleke, or Senegren, scerpillum
plantaine a little Rye flower, and rub all these together till you perceive
water coming forth, then mix that water with woman's milk, give it him to
drink that hath the apostemacion, but this must he done before they have
slept, in an empty stomach or fasting, for then it doth work better in the
body.

As soon as any doth perceive the curnels or apostemacions, they shall take
hasel nuts, Figs and Rue, and stamp them together and eat it, or lay it
upon it.

And every person that doth govern him after the premises, shall well enough
avoid the dangers of the Plage or Pestilence with the help and aid of God,
without whom nothing can be.

Here follows a governance or preservation for all them that fear the Plage,
in using them selves in meates and drinks.
First, the substance of their bread shall be white, one or two days old,
well leauened, and of pure wheat, well bulted from the Bran. In this bread
shall be baken the Annisseede salt, and shall be well baken.

Your drink shall be white Wine, clear shining, of good savour, not to red
nor to hot, nor to fumous, to the intent that the quick spirits and the
humours wax not to hot, the wine likewise shall not be to small. And if it be
possible, drink old Wine, for that is best, for he cleanses and dries best.
And is not so waterishe as the new wine is, and this wine shall be mixte with
sothen water, and that more in summer then in winter.

Item it is good that you shall take and drink a draught of Malmesey, or of
other strong Wine, before you go into the air for by the mean of this, many
euell airs vapours be dried up, the sprites be quickened and conforted.

Item your sothen water, shall be running water, or else that comes from the
rocks or sandy ground, or Well water, and the savour of this water shall be
sweet.

The governance of sauoures and sauces.
ALl manner of Sauces in this time shall be made with Lemans, Orynges, with sour
garnate Appels, mixed with this powder: Take the best Cynamon that can be had,
Gynger, Cloves, of each half a dagma, Be white and red of each a dragma
Coral white and red of each a dragma, Cardamomi two dragmas, Saffron half a
dragma, and as much fine Sugar, as of al the first, of al this shall you make a
subtel powder, and of this powder shall you use in your meates, and more in
Summer then in Winter.

And when there is no lettinge or impediment, that do hyndre, as coldenesse of
the stomach, then shall you use Orynges, Pomegranates, and Sitrins. And the
seeds of the aforesaid have a special property in the premises. And
therefore in the Pestilent time shall you often occupy the powder of these
seeds with Sugar like a dredge, or else sees the seeds with flesh or other
meat or suppynge, when the stomach is not hindered by the same, thorough
coldenesse.

Of Vyneager.
When there is no impediment, then shall you use good vyneager, and with that
season your meat. And this vyneager shall be best, when it is made of good
white wine or Malmesey. Save those that have impediment in the Breast, or
Lunges, or Throat or Cough, or short wind, and those that have cold
stomachs, shall not so much occupy of the vineager, but moderately.

Of Potage in this time.
The Potage which shall be eaten in this time shall be made with wheat flower, or
rise, or of lenttes. Howbeit, the first water shall be cast away. Or else you
shall eat aleberies made with bear bread or with red Cicers with ye shells. The
root of Fenel of Smallach are good in pottage, eaten, and all manner of meat
made with eggs, Save potaige made with dough or other common potaiges are not
good, save potaige of Spiniage, of Percele, of Burrage, harttestonge, are very
good. And all manner of herbs that have a sondry virtue, as Rue, Scabiousse,
Isop, Marubin, such like.

Of Fruit and other meates that shall be eaten in the pestilent time.
Capers made with vinegar, are good to eat at the beginning of the meal. But in
winter shall you myxt to it some of the spices beforesaide. A small quantity
of Onions with vinegar eaten likewise is very good, for the Onio doth engender
certe humores which do corrode the poiso, consume. Auicen says in secundo
canone yt all other scharp meates save Onions in the pestilet time, shall be
abhorred, and forborne. The yolke of eggs potched in fair water, are very
good.

You shall abstain from all manner of fish thorough their moystnesse, and
specially those that have great scales. You may sometime use small fishes of
rivers, or small sea fishes, how be it you must scrape of the scales and cast
forth their intraelles, and they shall be well washed, and rubbed with anisseed
and vinegar. And then shall they be roasted and not fried in butter or oil, and
and after that they shall be eaten with the foresaid spices, and in ye winter
shall be put more spices to it then in somer. And when you have eaten of this
fish, then shall you drink thereupon good strong wine, and like wise you shall
eat with it almondes or hasell nuts.

You shall abstine of all manner of milk for thorough her comes soon
corruption.

After the meat or drink you may eat these, for he comfort the disgestiue
strength. All manner of fruits are euell yt time in the stead of fruit: it is
good to to take confits of Coriader Auicen says in secundo canone, that this
is specially good and profitable.

In the beginning of the meal, yt is to wet diner or supper, it is good to
eat.iii. leaves of Rue two dry figs one nut together for this is a special
medecin for the plage, and against al poison. And therefore all they that fear
poison or pestilence let them use it.

Of the superfluity of meates and drynkes.
EVery one shall be ware of to much meat or drink in the time of Plage, but
shall be sober in meat or drink, more then you be used unto in other times,
for many superfluities are engendered thorough much eating and drinking.

Many and sundry meates in one meal is not good, every one shall be content with
one dish. And if you be where many dishes are, yet feed upon one which is
light of digestion, you shall keep your self solubel, when nature will not,
with glisters Suppositories, or Pylles, which are said in this present book.
Also you shall hold open the veins of urine with drinks or opening
medecines.

Also you shall fastinig rub your skin to open the sweat holes in the
skin, or with clawing.

Also you shall pourge your brains thorough the nostrils and mouth.

Also you shall pourge your body of all superfluity, as far as possible
shall be.

Of the Fleobothomy.
When the blood is superfluous in the body, then shall you be letten blood, to
the intent it be to the better complexion, and specially you shall be let blood
in the pestilent time once in a month, and that but little, and that is good
and helthfull. And when the other humours of the body are superfluous, like as
is Melancholy adust of the color, which is mixte with the blood. So shall you
be diligent in driynge, in euacuacion or pourginge the same, and all such
patients shall beware of such things as do ingendre the same.

The first medecin.
THe first shall be a certain of Pills written by Auicen, in the fourth Canon de
preseruatione a Pestilentia, and are made thus. Take Aloe Epitacum two dragmes,
of Myrre and Saffron, of each a dragma, and make of this foresaid Pills with
the juice of Myntes.

Take of these pills every morning fasting, for they do resolve and dry up
the evil humours, and lets the putrifiyng.

Item when any that doth use those pylles, is inclined or apt to take the
syckenesse, in summer shall take and put to the said confection of pylles,
sealed clay, called terra sigillata one dragma, and those Pills shall be made
with Rosewater.

In other seasons the Pills shall be made as is aforesaid.

The second medecin.
Shall be good and fine Triacle, at the least.x. years old, of this shall be
taken one dragma every week in summer with Rose water, and in Winter with good
strong Wine, or with the juice of Roses, or with water of Citrie. And this
shall be done six hours before meat fasting in an empty stomach.

The third medecin.
Shall be Mythridatum a confection so named and of this shall you take more in
quatitie then of ye Triacle, every week shall you take of it a dragma, howbeit
you must fast after it five hours, and it must be taken in an empty stomach,
this Mithridatum or confection so called, must at ye least be a year old.

The fourth medecin.
Shall be Coriander confittes, and of this shall be taken every morning a small
sponefull fasting, and thereupon, or after immediately shall be drunken the third
part of a Goblet of good wine. And also when any great heate is or great
warm whether, then shall they take Sugar of Roses.

The fifte medecin.
Shall be against the worms, wherefore al they that are inclined toward the
breeding of worms, shall sees wormwood in good Wine, till half be sothen
in.

The syxte medecin.
Shall be a precious syroupe, allowed and made by diverse Authors and experimeters
in the said sickenesses, I my self have found this true, for she doth cleanse
the body of all superfluitee, and dries likewyse the body, conforting the
heart, the brains and liver, and all other interior parts of the body,
howbeit of this syrup shall be take but an ounce and an half at ones.

And this is the syrup, and is made thus Recipe cortici citri, Radicu Caparis,
Berbaris, Sandalorum vtrius{que} Spodij of each two dragmus, Gariofilate
Buglosse, Melisse, Boraginis, Cicorie, of each one ownce Acetose, Epatice,
Marubij, of each half an ounce, Lactucesyluestris two dragmus, seminum
Communim, Violarum, of each.i. ounce, Thimi epithimi, Scene Polipodij, of each a
dragma, Succi Absinthij, succi Fumiterre, succi Rebuloru, of each one ounce
Diagredij, two dragmas, Succare albe.ii. pound. Of this shall you make a
Syrup, and this shall you cleanse with the juice Citoniorum or Quinshes till it
be enough, and this shall you occupy.

The using of these foresaid six medecines.
The first day early in the morning shall you take of the Syrop, after sleep
upon it one hour or twain.

The second day shall you take a dragma of the Triacle.

The third day shall you take a sponeful of Corianders confite.

The fourth day, shall you take the decoction against worms.

The fifth day shall you take a dragma of the Pylles.

The syxt day shall you rest.

The seventh day shall you take any of these.

And it is very good, for to take ones in a week one dragma of these Pills.

When soever you do take any of these Pills, that day you shall take none
other medecin.

Of sleaping and watching.
Beware of to much sleep and specially in the day, also you shall not sleep
immediately after you have taken your meat before the meat be digested, or
before the first digestion is done or passed. It is very euell to sleep upon
your back. In the first sleep lye upon the right side, and there after two
hours upon ye left side. And then again the whole night upon the right side
Also you shall lie hie with your head, and be well covered with clothes. It is
good that you keep you waking two or three hours after your meat before you
sleep.

Of resting, or waking, or moving.
When the pestilence strongly reigns, then must you beware of great travail
and labour, and specially in the open air. And when you will labour, so shall
you do it fasting and in a close air. And in time of Pestilence shall you
keep you temporate in labour, for to much quietness, and to much labour is
nought.

Of the accidents.
Every man shall be ware of anger, of sorowfulnesse, of dredefulnesse, and of
such like, but you shall be merry, glad, be among minstrels Harps, Lutes, and
other melodies, read fond and merry stories and songs.

A medecin of King Henry for the Plage or Pestilence.
TAke Marigolds, Sorrel, and Burnet, of every of them a handful, Few and
Fetherfew of every of them an other half handful, and of Dragons a quantite
of the crop or of the root, and wash them in running water all clean, and
sees all them softly in a pot, with a pottell of running water, till it come
to a quart of licker, and then set it back till it be cold, and then strain
it in a fair linen cloth, and then drink it, if you cannot drink it for
bitterness, put thereto Sugar Candy. And if this drink be taken before the
marks of God be upon them, he shall be whole by the grace of God.

FJNIS.

