The Book of measuring of Land as well of Woodland as Plowland, pasture in the
field: to count the true nombre of Acres of the same. Newly corrected,
compiled by Sir Richarde de Benese.

Impynted at London, by Thomas Colwell.

The Contents of this book.
IT shows the maer of dividing of one acre or mo, of woodland fro many other
acres, lying i one piece together Also it shows the diuersytie prices of al
the parts of an acre of wodlande, after ye rate diversity of the price of the
same, from the price of.iii s.iiii. d. for an acre to the price of.vi li. xiii.
s. iiii. d. Also it shows the manner of mesurynge of timbre or stone, by the
foot square, in timbre measure of what quantity soever the timber or stone be,
fro one inch in square to xxxvi. inches square. Also it shows ye maer of
measurynge sawene bordes, tables, or panes of glass by the foot square, what
breadth soever the bordes, tables, orpanes of Glass be, from one inch
breadthe, to xxxvi. inches in breadth.

It shows also the manner of measuring of a Chambre flore or of a Pavement, to
know howe many Foot of Board or stone will board or pave it, of what length
and breadthe so ever the floor or Pavement be, to. iv. foot in length, and.
xl. foot in breadth.

Finis.
The Preface of Thomas Paynell. Chanon of Marton to the gentell Reader.
IT is most comonlie scene, that every ma doth most comende ye thing that he is
best expert scene in. And therefore some there are ye exfoll diuin letters, some
the law, some Philosophy, with such other liberal sciences, in the which they
are learned and exercysed.

Other there are ye do not only extol the, but after they have so done, they
dispute whither of them are most laudable, and most worthy to be preferred
above other There are likewise ye after lunge disputation do not only assygne
every sience his peculier laud praise, but all so ye discuss whether that of
such noble sciences are most for thy common weal supposing (and will) that
thing to be most excellent, that is for every man profit, and that
common vtylytye and prosyte doth none other wise ercede private gain profyt
than gold all other metals.

These men (after my sentence) gre in a very good opinion, for the divine Plato
saith: that man is not borne only to profit him self, or any synguler
person, but to profit the common wealth also The which doth then prosper
floryshe, when governors and rulers do tenderly and intierlye abiectynge all
synguler affection, look and take heed unto it.

My diligence and study is (saith Scipio Africanus) not only to beware howe
rome be now in my time ruled: but how I may invent fashions means, that it may
increase, be well governed hereafter. O what an excellent word and saying was
that.

What other thing but only ye wealth publyke moved M. Curius to say thus to
the Samnites, offering him great sumes of money, I desire none of your gold
(quoth he) but I desire that ye and your riches may be under the dominien of
the Romaynes. O. was not that an excellent answer.

And that O. M^i^s conspired to murder Porcenna enemy to the Romanes without
any hope or safeguard of his life was it for the common wealth of Rome.

And did not the only wealth public in force M. Regulus to persuade the
Senators of Rome that they should not restore the yonge galauntes of Cartago
to prolong his life withal. They are lusty (quoth he,) and in their flowers,
and apt to do us much sorrow, and so her re turned again to Cartago well
assured that he should never escape their hands alive. O what synguler
affection and love had this man to the common wele, yt preferred it above his
own life of all thing the most esteemed, and best beloved. Are not such men
worthy to be governors and rulres of cities and of the common weal.

As lunge as Rome Cartago, with other like cities, had such regentes
governors, they prospe red and had abundance of all thing. But after that
synguler affection, synguler comodytie and profit, ambycion, Idleness
voluptuous pleasure toke their enter, then all that (wisdom, diligence, study
great labour had augmented) decayed. Then these most excellent and rich
Cities fell in ruin, and were easily subdued. The which thing doth declare and
open their great laud, by whose gubernacion, rule and policy, they came to
such high renown fame. By this it doth now appear follow yt such politic
Rulers are worthy of much laud great comedacion. But what comendadion laud,
praise shall we esteem and judge them worthy of, ye ingeniouflie have invented
cloquently described, how and by what subtle and politic fasshions, such
places should be governed ascended to high honour. And again how Governors of
a common wealth shulde use them selves in their offices. And not withstanding
there be that do elevate extol the doer the inuenter of thinngs above the
writer, yet after my mind, the inuenter, writer, or expositer of other means
writings are worthy of no little praise, what reason should defend him, yt
would say, that the executer of the Law (by whose aid all common weals are
ordained and ruled) to be of more excellency then Moyses, the first of all
lawyers. Should any Philosopher prefer him self above Pytagoras the first
Philosopher, or any Astronomer above ye children of Seth, the very inueters
foundacio there of, or any Musician above Tuball, Lameths son, ye first yt ever
gave any study to Musycke, or any Physycia above Apollo or any Arithmeticia,
above ^aminus, Pytagoras, Pallas, or Algus (of who Arythmetike is called Agrym,
(the inuenter of nombres. Or any Geometrician above Cain, the which taught the
Hebrici ans the manner and craft of weightes measures? Is it not (tr^w ye) more
to invent and find, than to add unto that, that is found al ready. And as
Agrym was found for ye course of marchandyse the accomptes thereof, so was
Geometry upon the excursions and overflowing of the flood Nilus whose
insidacios and surges were such that they confounded and so troubled the
lymytes and bonds of the land of Egypt, that they knew not their own Land
from other means. Of this toke Geometrye his Oryginall beginning the which
includes the measuring both of land water, the use of weyghtes and knowledge
of the universal ordre of the bodies above, the distance and greatness of
stars, mocyons, and reflections.

Carpenters and Masons, withe such other Artyficers do use Geometrye, by the
which all manner of ingynes and crafty ordynaunces of war, and other
apperteynynge unto their art do depend as hanging roofs, and Galaryes,
walls, ships, Gallayes, Brydges, Milles Cartes, and wheels, with the
which, things of great weight, are very eas^lye drawn and hoised up.

Also what soever goes by weight, water or wind, or by cords, as Clocks,
the which goes by weygtes, and Organes, the which sounds by the vehemence
and force of the wind, doth lunge unto this noble Science. The artificial
craft also of war, of casting of Belles, and Bomberdes, or Gonnes with
such other Artylery, whither they be of tymbre or metal do for the most
part depend of Geometrye.

And did not the noble Archytas make ^ Dove of wood, to lift her self up,
and to fly by Geometry.

Did not Archimenides, make an Instrument of Brass, wherein men might easily
perceive the mocyons of the Plants, withe other things comprysed in the
material Spear, howe to measure the altitude and height of all such things
as man may see and not come unto? And those things also that lye plain,
deep, round, cornerwise, in length, or in breadthe be longethe unto
Geometrye, the which conteyneth. iii. divers kinds of measuringe.

The first is named Altemetria to me asure a quantytie after his lenghte only.

The second is named Planimetrya, that is, to measure a quantitye after his
length and breadth.

The third is called Tercometria, that is to measure a quantytie after his
length, breadth, and deepenesse.

In this Sense, are certain quantyties, called famous quantities, as a
Finger, a Palm, a Foot a Cubit, a Pace, a Perch, a stake a ^yse, withe such
other, much necessary to be known

It were very ^edyous to expound all the Terms, Parts, Properties, and
Vtylities of Geometrye. For notwythstandynge that God may, and can do althyng
without nobre, measure, weight or any point of Geometrye, yet when he gave
the firmament the Plants, and stars, their mocions, the earth, form and
fashion, the Sea, withe other rivers, their banks, he did it by nombre,
weight, and measure.

Wherefore I may well extol this most noble Science conteinynge these three,
withe the knowledge of many other liberal and manual arts, right necesary
for the common weal of man, Considerig the this liberal Science called
Geometry to be in every thig much convenient for the use common profit of all
men. A Friend and a lover of mine, a Chanon of Marton, named Sir Rycharde
Benese, not willing to hyde the treasure, that god hath enryched him withal.
But evermore myndinge labouringe (as the fore said Romaynes did) to increase
the common wealth, having also this saying of the Philosopher in memory. The
more profytable a thing is, the more it shulde be common, he hath, (I say)
compiled this ingenyous and profytable Book, for the common profit, and use
of every man

Wherein is sufficiently breiflie centeyned the perfect form rule of
measuring of woodlande, hills mountains? whersoeuer, how soever or in what
form or quantity soever they lye.

Also of deuidinge of one acre of woodlande or mo from many other acres.

And of measuring of Timbre, square or round? Boards, Tables, Panes of
Glass, by the foot square.

He hath furthermore so expressed these intricate and harde points of Geometrye
by figures, rules, such open examples, that every man, applyenge his mind
thereunto, may without any great labour attain unto the perfect knowledge
thereof. Vale.

Thus ends the Preface.


Here follows the Book to measure all Lands.



The manner of measurynge of Land, and co^ptynge the nombre of acres of the
same.
BY cause in measuringe of Land, meny men sometime the sellers, sell more
measure than right, sometime the byets by less measure tha right be greatly
deceived, by ye m^aters thereof, the which be not expert and conning, both in
true measurynge of Land, and also in true compting and summyage the number of
acts of the same. Therefore in this little book, ye shall reed certain rules
much necessary for ye perfect knowledge both of true measurynge of Land, and
also of true comptynge and sumynge the number of acts of the same.

Of divers quantytyes of measures, and of divers names of the same.
But first for the playner and redyer knowledge of these rules following, ye
shall diligently note, that there be divers quantityes dyuersly named in
measuring of land that is to say: an inch, a foot, a perch, a dayworke,
quarter of an acre (most commonly called a rood,) an half acre, and an acre.

To make a true inch.
THe length of an inch after some men opinion, is made by the length of
three barley corns, ye which rule is not at all times true. for ye length of a
barley corn of some tillage is lodger, some shorter, after the fatness and
leanesse of the land, where it was sown upon. Therefore i making of an inch
after this rule It shulde be sometimes longer, and sometimes shorter after the
length and shortness of the barley corns: the which shulde make great
difference in measuring. Therefore ye shall take the length of any inch more
truly upon an artificers rule made of two foot in length, after the standerde
of London, the which rule doth conteyne. xxiiii. inches in length.

To make a true foot in length and in sq^re.
A foot contains xii. inches in length, a foot square in measurynge of
land, or any other thing by the length and breadth only, co teineth in it. c.
xliiii. inches di. A foot square contains in it. lxxii. inches. A quarter of
a foot square conteyneth in it. xxxvi. inches. But in measurynge of tymbre or
stone, or any other thing by the length, breadth, and depth, a foot square
toteineth in it. xvii.. and. xxviii inches.

Of two manner of perches, the woodlande perch, and the fylde land perch.
Because Woodlande, and fyldeland be not measured with perches of like and
equal length. therefore ye shall understand, that land in the field is
measured most commonly with a perch or a pole of xvi. foot di, in length. But
in some places the land perch is l^nger and in some places shorter, after ye
custom there used. The woodland perch is commonly. xviii. foot in length.
But in some places it is longer, after the custom there used. The woodland
perch of. xviii. foot in length square co teineth in it. iii.. xxiiii. foot,
half of this perch square contains in it.. xlii. foot, a quarter of this
perch square contains in it. lxxxi. foot.

Of an acre both of woodlande field land.
AN acre both of woodlande, and also of fylde land, is always. xl. perches in
length, and iiii. perches in breadth, although an acre of wood land be more in
quatitie, than is an acre of feldelande. Because the perch of woodlande is
longer, than is the perch of fyldelande, as it is before expressed, An acre can
not lightly be reduced brought into a true square, except ye shulde add to
some part above the true quantytie of an acre, or else take away some part
from the true quantytie of an acre. Nevertheless, after mine accomptyng (as
nyghe as I can search the true the, in this behalf (an acre of woodland
square is on every side. xii. perches di. ii. foot. viii. inches, and a quarter
of an inch. An acre conteyneth in it. lx perches. An half acre coteieth in
it. ^xxx. perches. The quarter of an acre (otherwise called a rood) contey neth
in it. xl. dayworkes. A daiworke coteyneth in it. iiii. perches. For likewise
as a Mark of money conteyneth in it.. lx. pence, so doth an acre coteyne in
it.. lx. perches. And likewise as a Mark of money doth conteyne in it. lx.
grotes, so doth an acre conteyne in it. xl. dayeworkes. And as a groat doth
conteyne in it four pence, so doth a dayworke conteyne in it. iiii. perches.

Of two manner of Instruments to measure land withal.
MEters of Land, for the most part do use to mete land with a pole made of
wood, conteynyng in it the length only of one perch. The which is a very
true and a perfyte way of metynge. But it is much laborious not spedefull to
mete therewith a great quantytie of Land in short time. And also it is very
tedious to mark truly a great nombre of perches in meting of them one after
another. Therefore some men do use (and best) for ye more expedytion and speed,
to mete with a corde or a lyne containing in it. v. perches in length, which
lyne four times laid in length, doth make. xx. perches.

This manner of metynge with a lyne hath ben used long time before. For the
Prophet Zachary saith in the. ii chapter. that when he lifted up his eyes, he
saw a ma bering a metynge lyne in his hand. And when the prophet asked the
question of him, why there he went, this ma answered the prophet, that he went
to mete Ierusale, to know how much the length and breadth of it was. But by
cause a corde or a lyne by drawing it upon the ground will sometime shrynke,
and wax shorter, if it take wet, and sotyme stretch lodger by long dryeng
therefore it shall be necessary, to sere it in hot wax an rosyn, that it may
keep at all times his true length.

Howe ye shall ^ewe a piece of land, mark the fasshyon there of to measure it.
When ye shall measure a piece of any manner of land, ye shall go about the
bounds of it ones or twice and consydre well by vewynge of it, whether ye may
mesure it in one parcel hole together, or else in two or many parcels. For
some manner land, lies in such divers fasshions, that it must needs be
mesured in divers parcels, each one by them self.

Therefore when it may be mesured in one parcel together, then shall ye loke
wisely, which way ye may cast it in to. iiii. sides, then ye must measure every
side by it self. And mark diligently in writing or else score upon a square
slycke the nobre of perches of every one of the same sides by them self, and
then sum them together, as ye shall se hereafter. But when a piece of land
must be divided into divers parcels, and must be meat ted each one by them
self, then ye shall consydre well in how many parcels, and in what manner
fasshions they must be best divided into, that ye may measure every one of
them after their divers fashion. For divers fasshions of land be dyuerslye
measured, as ye shall plainly perceive by divers figures following.

Of dyuersytie of lines and angles.
BY cause all manner of figures be made of lines and angles, therefore it shall be
expedient first to know the diversity of them. For they make great dyfferences
in the making of measures. Therefore ye shall diligently note that there be
three manner of lines, three manner of angles. Of lines, one is a straight lyne
hanging, the second is a straight line overthwart, the third and last is a
crooked line hagig, or else overthwart Of angles, one is a plain angle, like to
one of the angles of a. iiii. square, the second is a flat angle, like to one
of the angles of. v. or. vi. square or mo The third and last is a sharpe
angle, like to one of the angels of a tryangle or. iii. square. The which lines
and angles be these that hereafter follow.





Hereafter follow divers figures, of divers fasshions of land, and first of a
piece of land equally square in all the. iiii. sides, with. iiii. plain agles.

If a piece of land be euuallye square in all his. iiii. sides having. iiii.
plain angles, like this preset figure, and perches upon every side of equal
nombre as in this example. The upper side is. xx. perches in length, the nether
side is. xx. perches, the right side is. xx. perches, the lift side is also.
xx. perches, the ye must take. xx. perches for the length, and. xx. perches
for the breadth, because all ye sides be equal in length. The which. xx. in
length and. xx. in breadth multiplied the one by the other, doth make two acres
and di. in the whole sum, as ye shall se by diverse rules of suminge of
measures following hereafter.

Of a piece of land equal in breadth at both the ends and equal in length on
both sides.
If a piece of land be equalle in breadth at both ends and equal i length on
both sides with. iiii. plain angles, like to this present figure, As in this
example, the upper side is xx. perches in length, the nether side is. xx.
perches in length, the right end is. x. perches in breath, and the lift end
is. x. perches in breadth, then ye must take. xx. perches for the length, and.
x. perches for the breadth of this land, the which. xx. multyplyed by. x. make
one acre, one rood. Like wise in all other manner of forms fasshions of Land,
whither they be in three sides equally trianguled, or else partly tryanguled,
or else diuerslye in manner of an Harp trianguled or else in. iiii. sides
partly square, or else in all. iiii. sides dyuerslye square, or else in. v. or.
vi. or mo sides equally square, or else round, or else pertelye round, like to
a fashion of a ^owe, or else in two sides partly round, like to the fashion
of an egg, or else it be mountyng up in the mydle, like to a mountain or an
hill, or else descendynge downward, like to a valey, as hereafter shall
appear by divers examples of diverse figures, yet that manner of land, must
needs by some manner of reason be brought to one rertayne length, one certain
breadth, or else it can not be sumed to the true nombre of acres, and other odd
quatities as hereafter shall appear. But some men that be ygnoraunt, and not
expert in this manner of mesurynge co^tynge, they will mete a piece of land
roude about of what form or fashion so ever it be, and will caste the whole
nombre of perches of all the sides together.

And then they will divide that whole nombre of perches, into. iiii. equal
parts, of the which they will take one part, for the length, and one other
of the for the breadth. But in this manner of comptynge, they be greatly
deceived, as it shall be proved by this last example before, where the right
and the left ends, every one be. x. perches in breadth, ye higher and the
lower sides be every one. xx. perches in the length. These. iiii. sides laid
all together, do make. ix. perches in the whole sum. Then if ye deuyde this
whole nombre in to. iiii. equal parts, every part is. xv. perches in
length. Therefore if ye take. xv. perches for the length, and. xv. al so for the
breadth of that piece of land after this manner of comptinge, they do make in the
whole sum one act, one rood. vi. dayeworkes, and one perch. But this sum is
false, for it is more the the true content of it, as doth appear by the length,
breadth, (as they do stand) in this foresaid figure. For. xx. perches in length,
and x. perches in breadth, do make but an acre, on eroode. Another example the
higher side is. xl. perches i length the lower side is. xxx. perches, the right
side is. xx. and the lift side is. x. perches. All these nombres of perches
laid together, do make an. C. perchers. Divide them into four equal parts,
and every part makes. xxv. perches. The take. xxv. perches for the length,
and. xxv. for the breadth, and this length breadth of perches doth make in ye
whole sum (after this comptynge (.iii. acres. iii. roods. vi. day works,
and one perch. The which sum is false, as ye shall prove by casting of
every two cotrarye sides together. The which divided into two halfes doth make
xxxv. perches for the length, and. xv. for the breadth. For these nombres of
perches in length breadth do make but. iii. acres, one rood, one dayworke and
one perch. Therefore ye shall not use that manner of comptynge by casting the
whole nombre of all the sides into. iiii. equal parts, and by taking one
part of them for the length, one other for the breadth because it is false.
But ye shall caste every two contrary sides together, and then take the half
part of two of them for the length, and the half of other two of them for the
breadth of the land: as ye shall se plaiely here after in the figure dyuersly
square.

Or else in such manner figures dyuerslye square, ye shall use another way
better, as in the same place doth plainly follow.

Of a piece of land tryanguled in all three sides equally.
But when ye can not cast a piece of land into. iiii. sides, because it is
trianguled having all three sides of equal length, like to this present figure,
the ye shall mesure from on of the angeles to the mydle of the contrary side as
doth appear by the lyne through ye mydle of ye same figure. And take the nobre
of perches of yt measure for the length And the take half the nombre of perches
of a whole side, for the breadth as in this example. The three sides every one is.
xx. perches, the mydle lyne from the mydle of the lower side to the higher
angle, is. xvii. perches di. Then take the nombre of perches of ye middle line
for the length, the which is. xvii. perches di. Afterward take half the
nombre of perches of the longer side, the which is. x. for the breadth. Then
multyply. xvii. and di. by. x. it makes. C. lxxv. perches, the which makes
one acre. iii. dayworkes, and. iii. perches.

Of a piece of land partly tryanguled.
ANd when a piece of land is partly tryanguled, having the. ii. sides of like
length, the head shorter in breadth like to this present figure. The ye shall
measure from the foot to the middle of ye head, as doth appear by ye middle lyne
ithys same figure. And take the nubre of perches of that mesure for the length.
And the take half ye number of perches of ye head for the breadth, as in this
example. The higher side is. xvi. perches ye right the lift sides every on is.
xxx. perches, and the lyne in the myddest from the foot to the middle of ye
head is. xxix. perches. The take the half nombre of perches of the head, the
which is. viii. for the breadth and the nombre of perches from the foot to the
myddest of the head The which is. xxix. for ye length, and then multiply. xxix.
by. viii. and it makes one acre, one rood, and. viii. day works.

Of an other piece of land partly tryanguled.
AND if a piece of la de be partly tryaguled having ye one side lodger, the. ii.
other sides shorter of like lengthes, like to this present figure, then ye shall
measure fro the mydle of the longer side to the flat angle on the contrary side,
as doth appear by ye middle lyne in ye same figure. And take the nombre of
perches of yt measure for the length, and than take half ye nombre of perches
of the longer side for the breadth as in this example. The longer side is. xl.
perches in length, and the two other shorter sides every one is. xxx perches
in length, and the distance between the mydde of the lodger side and the flat
angle, is. xx perches in length. The take the nombre of perches between the
midst of the longer side, and the flat angle, the which is, xx. for the
leght, and the half nombre of perches of the longer side the which is also.
xx. for the breadth. Then multiply. xx. by. xx. and it makes two acres and a
half.

Of a piece of land diuerslye tryanguled, in manner of the half part of a
quadraunte.
Also when a piece of land is dyuerslye tryanguled, in manner of the half part
of a quadraunte having one plain angle, and the other two sharp angles, like
to this present figure. The ye shall measure from the plain angle on the lift
side, to the sharpe angle on the right side, take the nobre of perches of yt
measure for the length, afterward ye shall mesure fro the plain angle to ye
sharpe angle on ye left side, take ye half part of ye measure for the breadth,
as in this example. The higher side between the ii. sharpe angles, is, rxv.
perches, the lower side fro the plain angle to ye sharpe angle on the right
side, is, xx. perches, the head on the left side is xv. perches. The take the
nombre of perches for the head on ye left side, the which is. vii. di. for ye
breadth. Then multiply. xx. by. vii. di. it makes. iii. rodes. vii. daiworkes.
ii. perches

Of another piece of land dynersly tryanguled like to the fashion of an harp.
And when a piece of land is dyuetslye tryangled in manner of an harp, having
one flat angle, the other two sharpe angles like to this present figure, the ye
shall measure from ye sharpe angle on the lift side to the sharpe angle on the
right side, take the nombre of perthes of that measure for ye length
afterward, ye shall measure from the flat angle on the higher side with a
straight hanging lyne to the nether side making there a plain angle, as doth
appear by ye mindle line in ye same fygute, and take the half part of the
measure of the hanging lyne for the breadth, as in this example,

The right side, from the flat angle above, to ye sharpe angle on ye right side
is, xx. perches, the left side from the flat angle above to the sharpe angle
beneth is xviii. perches, ye lower side between the two sharpe angles is.
xxviii. perches, and the hanging lyne between the flat angle above, the nether
side is. viii. perches. The take ye nobre of perches of the lower side, the
which is, xviii. for the length and the half nobre of perches of the hanging
lyne, the which is. iiii. for the breadth. The multyply. xxviii. by. iiii. and
it makes di. an acre, and. vii dayeworkes.

Of a piece of land in all. iiii. sides equally square with two flat angles,
and. ii. sharpe angles.
YFa piece of land be in all. iiii. sides equally square, with two half angles
above beneth, two sharpe on the right left sides, like to this present figure.
The ye shall measure from the sharpe angle on the right side, to the sharpe
angle of the lift side, and take the nombre of perches of that measure, for
the length. After ward ye shall measure from the flat angle above to the flat
angle beneth and take the half part of that measure for ye breadth, as in this
example The dystaunce between the. ii. sharpe angles is. xvi. perches, and the
dystannce between ye. ii. flat angles is. xii. perches. Then take. xvi. for the
length, the half part of the other measure, the which is. vi. for the
breadth. Afterward multyply. xvi. by. vi. and it comes to half an acre,.
iiii. day works.

Of a piece of land in. iiii. sides partly square.
AND when a piece of land is partly square with two plain agles on the lift
side, and one flat one other sharpe angle, on ye right side, like to this
present figure, the which is of like breadth between the flat angle above and
the contrary side of ye same figure beneth, as is the breadth between the two
plain angles on the lift side of the same figure. Then in the example of this
figure, ye shall take the nombre of perches, yt be between the two plain
angles on the lift side for the breadth, the which is. x. and afterward ye
shall lay the upper and the nether sides together, the which make. xxx. perches
in ye whole nombre. Of the which take the half nombre of perches the which is.
xv. for the length, and then multiply. xv. perches, by the nombre of. x. and
that nombre so multiplied makes. iii. ro^des. vi. dayeworkes and two perches.

Of another piece of land in the. iiii. sides partly square.
Also when a piece of land is partly square, like to this present figure
with. ii flat angles on the higher side,. ii. sharpe angles on the longer side,
having like dystaunce from both the flat angles about, to the contrary side
beneth* the ye shall take the nombre of perches between the higher the lower
sides for ye breadth, as doth appear by the lines i the same. After ward ye
shall lay the higher the lower sides together, take of. the nombre of perches,
of these. ii. sides for the length as in this example. The dystaunce between
the flat angles at both ends, and the contrary side of the figure is. xv.
perches, therefore take. xv* for the breadth. The lay the higher side, the which
is. xx. perches, and the nether side, the which is. xxx. perches in one sum
both together* and these both sides make in the whole sum. l. perches. Of
the which take the one half, the which is* xxv. for the length, and. xv. for
the breadth, the which length multyplyed by the breadth, makes in the whole sum
two acres, one rood. iii. dayworkes, and. iii. perches.

Of another piece of land in the. iiii. sides partly square.
And when a piece of land is i. iiii. sides partly square Like to this present
figure, having. ii. flat angles on ye right side, and. ii. sharpe angles on
the lift side, having like dystaunce from both the flat ongles to the right
side, to the lyne an the lift side, then ye shall take the nombre of perches
between ye lines on the right and lift sides of the figure for ye length, as
doth apeer by the mydle lyne in the same figure. Afterward ye shall lay both
ye right and the lift sides together, in one nombre of perches, and then deuyd
out half the nombre of perches, of those. ii. sides for ye breadth, as in this
example. The distance between the right and the lift side is. xx. perches in
length, therefore take. xx. perches for the length. The lay ye right side, the
which is. x. perches, and the lift side, the which is. xvi. perches in one
sum, both together and these both sides make in the whole sum. xxvi. perches,
of the which take the one half, the which is. xiii. for the breadth, and. xx.
for the length. Then multyplye. xx by. xiii. and it makes in the whole sum
one acre di, and v. day works.

Of another piece of land in the. iiii. sides partly square.
ALso when a piece of land is in. iiii sides partly square, with one flat angle
on sharpe angle on the right side, one sharpe angle, on flat angle one the
lift side, like to this present figure having like distauce at both ends
from the flat angles, the lines on ye contrary sides, than ye shall take the
nobre of perches between either of the flat angles, and ye lyne on the
contrary side for the breadthe, as it appears by the two lines in it.

Afterward ye shall lay both ye hier and the lower sides together in one
nombre of perches. And then divide out half the nobre of perches of that two
sides, as for the length in this examples. The dystaunce fro either of the flat
angles, to the lyne on the contrary side is. x. perches the which is the
shorter side. Therefore take. x. perches for the breadth.

Then lay the upper side, the which is. xx. perches, and the nether side ye
which is also. xx. perches in one sum both together. And these both sides make
in the whole sum. xl. perches. Of the which sum, take the one half, the
which is. xx. perches for the length. x. for the breadth. Then multyply. xx.
by. x. it makes in ye whole sum one acre, and one rood.

Of a piece of land in all. iiii. sides dyuersly square.
But when a piece of land is in all iiii. sides dyuersly square, with one flat
angle, and one plain angle on the right side, one sharpe angle, and one plain
angle on the lift side, like to this present figure, having like distance
between the flat angle on the right side to the line on the left side, as is
between the two plain angles on the netherside Then ye shall take the nombre of
perches between ye flat angle on ye right side, and ye lyne on the left side
this figure for the length, as doth appear by the lyne in it. Afterward ye
shall lay both the right and the lift sides to gyther in one nombre of
perches, and than deuyde out half the nombre of perches of that two sides for
the breadth as in this example.

The distauce from the flat angle on the right side, to the lyne on the left
side is. xx. perches, the which is the longer side, therefore take the nombre
of perches of that measure, the which is. xx. for the length. Afterward lay
the right side, the which is. x. perches, and the lift side, the which is.
xvi. perches i one sum both together and these both sides make in ye whole
sum. xxvi. perches, of the which take the one half, the which is xiii. for
the breadth. xx. for the length

Then multyply. xx. by. xiii. and it makes in the whole sum one acre. ii.
roods, and v. dayeworkes.

Of an other piece of land in all. iiii. sides dyuersly square.
Also when the. iiii. sides of a piece of land every one of the be of divers
nobre of perches, with one flat and one sharpe angle on the right side, and
also one flat another sharpe angle on the life side, like to this present
figure, kepinge no like distance between any of the contrary sides, as in
this example, higher side is. xx. perches in length, ye, lower side is. xxiiii.
perches, the right side is. xiiii. perches, and the lift side is. viii.
perches in length. Then some men would lay both the contrary sides each two
together, and take the one half of every two, the more for the length, and
the less for ye breadth, as in this example. Lay ye higher the lower sides
together, and they make in the whole sum. xliiii. perches. Than divide out the
half of this nombre, the which is. xxii. for the length. Afterward lay the
right the left sides together, and they make. xxii. perches in the whole sum.
And divide out also the half part of the nombre, the which is. xi. for the
breadth. Then take the more nombre of these two the which is. xxii. for the
length and the less nombre the which is. xi for the breadth Then multiply.
xxii. by. xi. and it makes one acre and di.. ii. perches. But this manner of
measurynge of such a piece of land pleases me not, for it makes more land
than is contained in this manner of figure. Therefore ye shall divide such a piece
of Land from the two contrary angles, into two parts, like to the division,
as doth appear by the lyne in the same figure.

And take the nobre of perches of ye line for ye length. And thenne ye shall
measure from the two other angles to the mydle lyne with plain angles, and
lay the two halues of these two lines together for the breadth, as i this
example. The dystaunce between ye two sharpe angles of this said figure is.
xxx. perches in length, and the lyne from the flat angle on the right side, to
the mydle lyne plain anguled is. viii. perches, and ye lyne from the flat
angle on the left side to the said longer lyne plain anguled is. vi.
perches. The take the nombre of perches of the mydle lyne, the which is. xxx.
perches for the length and the half part of the other two lines, the which is
vii. perches for the breadth. Then multyplye. xxx. by. vii. and it makes one
acre, one rood ii. day works, two perches. Whereby ye may perceive well that
in such a piece of land that is diversely square in all. iiii. sides without any
plain angle, or in any other like, ye shall never lay both the two contrary
sides together, and take the halfes of the, one for the length, and the other
for the breadth, for that manner of summing of any piece of land is not true but
in some manner of square land, specially where there is any plain angle, ye
shall lay one, but not both of the two contrary sides together, and take the
half nombre of them sometime for the breadth, and somty me for the length, as
the fasshyon quantytie of the land shall require, the whythe ye have seen in
divers square figures before, in this manner of figures diversely. iiii. square
is to be noted great dyuersytie of quantities of measures. For the flatter that
the flat angles, and the sharper that the sharpe angles be, the less quantytie
must needs be in such manner figures. And on the contrary wise, the sharper
that the flat angles be, and the flatter that the sharpe angles be the more
quantytie must needs be in the same figures. For although the. iiii. sides do
always con^ing and keep every one their legthes, yet the more or less
distance that is between ye contrary angles, the more or less measure doth
it cause to be within the same figure. Therefore ye may not caste the
contrary sides by the halfes, as most common meters do use But ye shall deuyde
such manner figures into two feldes in manner of tryagles, as is before
expressed. And measure the as doth appear by the lines in their foresaid
figure. This is a specyall rule, well to be noted

Of divers other square perches of land in all. iiii. sides dyuersly square.


ALso when there is any other piece of land in all. iiii. sides dyuersly square
with sharp flat angles like to any of these present figures, or any other like,
then ye shall never take the halues of any of both the cotrarye sides of them
for their length or breadth, because ye can not measure truly any of them in
one piece wholly together. But ye must divide every one of the into two parties
in such manner of division as doth appear by the lines within the same. And
then measure every parcel thereof after his fasshyon, as ye have scene plainly
before in the figures of tryangles.

Of a piece of land in many sides diversely square.


AND when a piece of land is in many sides, dyuerslye square like to any of
these present figures or any other like, then ye shall deuyd it into many
parts by such like deuisions as doth appear by the lines in the same figure,
because none of the may be metted in one piece all together. And then ye shall
measure every parcel thereof by it self, after the manner of tryangles of that
fashion, equally, partly, or else diversely trianguled, as ye have scene in
divers figures before.

Of a piece of land in divers sides square, and in some sides indented.
IF a piece of land be in divers sides square, and some of them be indented,
like to this present figure then ye shall deuyde out one square part of it,
the which ye may do most conveniently like to such manner of deuysyon, so as it
doth appear in the mydle lyne with in the same figure. And then measure that one
piece by it self, and cast the length and the breadth of it, as ye did of other
such square pieces before Afterward ye shall measure the three straight sides of
the other piece every one by them self, and they shall diligently view the
fourth side mounted, and ye shall leave as much by estimation without the
measure of that side, as doth lack within, and then also measure that second
piece, as ye did such other like pieces before Or else make four sides of this
second piece (as large as ye may) as doth appear by the lyne in this present
figure.

And then measure yt piece by it self, in such maer, as it is before expressed
afterward ye shall measure the other part indented by perches, half perches,
quarter perches. And the sum it by pence, half pence and farthynges.

Of other figures to be divided partly into tryangles and partly into other
fasshyons.
Also when there is any other piece of land like to any of these present figures,
then ye shall deuyde every one of the in so many parts as ye shall consydre
necessary, by such manner of deuysyon, as doth appear by the lines in the same
figure, and afterward cast every parcel of these deuysyons by them selfes,
into the length and in breadth, as ye have done other like pieces square or
tryaguled in the examples before written, and then sum every one of the, by
their lengthes and breadthes, as ye have done before other square pieces, or
triangled.

Of a piece of land lyenge in divers fasshions.


Sometime if a piece of land doth lye divers fasshions as doth these present
figures, as do many other, the which ye can not mete in one piece whole
together by it self.

Therefore then ye must view it diligently and deuyde it in so many parts as ye
shall perceive necessary, like to these deuysions made with lines in these
said figures. And afterward ye must mete them every one by them self in
squares or triangles after such manner of fasshions, as they be of, and then
caste them every one by them self in lengthes bredthes, likewise sum the
length breadth of every one of them, as ye do of other pieces, that ye do
measure, wholly together. For it were to sedyous, ye impossible, to put
partyculer examples for all fasshyons of land, the which be infinyte, and ever
newly found.

Of a piece of woodlande growing having many sides dyuersly anguled.


When there is a piece ofwoodland growing, like in fashion to this first
figure, having many sides diversely anguled, the which ye can not view every
way from side to side, for the standing of the wood, then ye shall enlarge
that manner piece of wodland into. iiii. square sides, in like manner, as doth
appear by the lines of these ronde figure. And then measure all that whole
square together in one field, compteit all together in one sum, and afterward
ye shall mesure every parcel so enlarged with lines by them self. And then
caste all the same parcels into one sum together, and take away all them
from the first whole sum, and that quantytie yt remains of the first whole
measure (the said parcels enlarged with lines, taken away) shall be the true
quantytie of this manner piece of woodlande, as in this example.

The whole figure enlarged into. iiii. square conteyneth in it. lxxx. acres of
the whole sum, the parcels enlarged with lines, laid in one sum to gither
coteyne. xxvi. acres. The take away. xxvi. from. lxxx. and there doth remain
but. liiii. acres, the which sum of. liiii. so remaining is the cotet of
this figure. Note well this rule for it is very profitable and often times
necessary for the measuring of woodlande growing.

Of a piece of land in. v. sides equally square, with. v. flat angles.


And when a piece of land is in. v. sides equally square with. v. flat angles
like to this present figures then ye shall measure all the. v. sides together,
and take the half part of that mesure for the length. Afterward ye shall
measure from the mydle point wfthin the same figure to one mydle place between
two angles of one side of the circuit, take the nombre of perches of that
measure for ye breadth, as it his example. Every one to the. v. sides is. x.
perches i length, the which. v. sides laid all together make. l. perches in
the whole nobre. Then take half this nombre of perches ye which is. xxv. for
ye length and the distance between ye middle point and the middle place between
two angles of on side is. vii. perches Then take the half nombre of all ye v.
sides, the which is. xxv. perches for ye length, and the number of perches
between ye middle point and the middle place between two angles, ye which is.
vii. for ye breadth. Then multiply. xxv. by. vii. it makes one act iii. day
works, and. iii. perches.

Of a piece of land in. vi. sides equally square, with. vi. flat angles.


ALso when a piece of land is in. vi. sides equally square with. vi. flat
angles, like to this present figure. Then ye shall measure likewise all the.
vi. sides together, take the half part of that measure for ye length.
Afterward ye shall measure from the mydle point within the same figure to ye
mydle place between ^woangles of one side of the cyrcuyt and take the nombre of
perches of that measure for the breadth as in this example. Every one of the.
vi. sides is. xii. perches in length, ye which. vi. sides laid altogether
make lxxii. perches in the whole sum, the take half this nombre of perches ye
which is. xxxvi. for the length. And the distaute between ye middle point and
the middle place between two angles, of one side is. x. perches and di The take
the half nombre of al the. vi. side, the which is. xxxvi. perches for the
length, and the nombre of perches between the middle point, and the middle place
between two angles the which is. x. perches and di. for the breadth. Then
multiply. xxxvi. by x. and a half, and it makes two acres one roods. iiii.
day work. and two perches.

Of a piece of land in. vii. viii. ix. or. x. sides equally square.


AND also when a piece of land is in vii. viii. ix. or x. sides equally square
like to any of these present figures. The in like manner as ye did. in these two
figures last before, ye shall take ye half nobre of perches of al the whole
sides for the length, the nombre of perches of the dystaunce between the middle
point with in the same figures, and the middle place be. twene two angles of one
side for the breadth, as ye have scene expressed in the two first figures of
five, and. vi. square, as it doth appear plainly by examples of the same.
iiii. present figures.

Of a piece of land, all round without any square side.


But when a piece of land is roude without any square side like to this plesent
figure. Then (leuyng all other untrue reasons and opynions of meters of land
in this behalf ye shall measure roud about al ye whole cyrcuyte of this figure,
and take the one half of the nombre of perches of that measure for the
length. Afterward ye shall measure fro the middle point within the figure, to
the utter side of the cyrcuyte, and take the nobre of perches of that measure
for ye breadth, as in this example. The whole cyrcuyte round about is. xiiiii.
perches, of the which take the one half the which is. xxii. perches for the
length, and the distauce between the mydle point and the vtterside of the
cyrcuyt is. vii. perches. Then take ye half nombre of perches of the whole
cyccuyte, the which is. xxii. for thee length, and the nobre of perches
between the mydle point, and the utter side of the cyrcuyte, the which is.
vii. for the breadth. Then multyply. xxii. by. vii. and it makes. iii. roods.
viii. dayworkes and two perches.

Of a piece of land half round, like to the fashion of a bowl.


ANd when a piece of land is half round, like to the fashion of a bowl as is
this present figure.

The ye shall measure the whole half cyrcute, and take the half part of that
measure for the length. Afterward ye shall measure fro the middle of the half
cyrcuyte above, and take the nombre of perches of that measure for ye breadth,
as in this example. The half cyrcuite is. xxii. perches in length, of the
which take the half nombre of perches, the which is. xi. for the length, and
the dystaunce between the mydle of the nether live, and the mydle of the half
cyrcuyte is vii. Then take the half nombre of perches of the half cyrcuyte,
the which is. xi. for the length, and the nombre of perches between the mydle
of the nether lyne and the mydle of the half cyrcuyte, the which is. vii. for
the breadth. Then multiply. xi. by. vi. and it makes one rood. ix. dayworkes,
and one perch.

Of a piece of land more than half round
ANd when a piece of land is more than half roude like to this present figure
the which is in the circumference, or cyrcuyte about. xxv, perches, the nether
side is. vt. perches, the dyameter or overthwart lyne is. x. perches, the
hanging lyne is. ix. perches. The ye shall deuyde it into two feldes, as it
appears by the deuisions of ye lines within ye same figure. After that for
mesuryng of the higher part in the lyne deuysion, ye shall multiply the half
nobre of perches of the diameter or overthwart line, the which be. v. by ye
half nombre of perches of the cyrcute of the figure, the which be. xii. and
di. and they will come to. lxii. perches and di. Afterward for the measurynge
of the triangle in the deuysyon, ye shall take again the half of the
ouertwarte line. the which be v. from the. ix. the which the hanging lyne
doth conteyne, and then there doth remain but. ii. the which iiii. ye shall
multyplye by. iii. the which is the half nombre of the nether lyne, and it
comes to. xii. the which xii. ye shall join with the foresaid. lxii. and di.
and these. ii. sumes laid both together make. lxxvii. perches and di. the
which nombre of perches makes one rood. ix. dayworkes, one perch and di.
Note well this rule, for it is very subtle, and much profytable.

Of a piece of land less than the half part of a whole round.
But when a piece of land is less than is the half part of a wholeroud like to
this present figure, tha ye shall add to it ye residue of the whole cyrcuyte,
as doth appear by this second figure, and note well the nombre of perches of
the cyrcuference, ye which is. xliiii. perches also of the diameter, ye which
is. xiiii. the ye shall mete al the same whole figure in on measure together,
takig the half of the cyrcuference, the which is. xxii. for the length and the
halfof the diameter, the which is. vii. for the breadth, then multiply. xxii.
by. vii. and it makes. C. liiii. perches. After that ye shall deuyde the same
whole figure in to two parts, like to these two deuisions made within these
lines in this third figure, of the which the latter deuysyon is the figure
less tha half round. And then ye shall measure the first deuysion of this
figure as ye did the figure last before, that is more than half round. And
that quantity yt lacks of ye whole round beside the measure of ye first
deuysion shall be the quantyty of the latter deuysyon, the which is the figure
less than half round, as in this example. The cyrcumference of the first
deuysion is. xxx. perches, the diameter is. xiiii. perches, then the half of
that circumference, ye which is. xv. multyplyed by the half of the dyameter,
the which is. vii. makes. C. v. perches. After that ye shall take again the
half of the dyameter (the which is. vii.) from the. x. di. and a quarter, the
which the hagig lyne of the first deuysion doethe conteyne, and then there
doth remain but three di. and a quarter, the which iii. di. and a quarter, ye
shall multyply by. vi. the which is the half nombre of perches of ye nether
lyne of the first division, it makes. xxii. perches and di ye shall join
this with the foresaid. C. v. perches. And these two sumes laid both together
make C. xxvii. perches and di. And this is the sum of the first deuysyon the
which lacks of the content of the whole roude. xxvi. perches di. And sum
this so lacking shall be thy measure of the letter deuysion, the which is the
figure less tha half round Note well this Rule, for it is very subtyle.

Of a piece of land less than half round on both sides
And when a piece of Land is less the half roud on both sides like to the
fashion of an egg, as is this preset figure. The ye shall divide it into two
parts by such like deuysions as doth appear by the lyne ouertwarte in the
mydle of the same figure. And than ye shall measure one of the same two parts
likewise, as ye did measure before the figure less than half round.
Afterward join the sum of yt side to the other side, and then these. ii. sum
mes laid both together, make the whole content of this figure, as in this
example. The ouerthwarte line in the mydle is. xii. perches, and the hanging
lyne of one side is three perches and a quarter, then the cyrcufe renc of the
whole roude added there to (as it is before proved) shall be. xliiii perches, and
the dyameter. xiiii. the which whole round meted all together cotaineth. C.
liiii. perches of the which the higher part added to ye figure less then
half round is. C. xxvii, perches and di. And the sum lacking of the whole
nombre before said, the which. xxvi and di. is the cotente of the nether part,
the which. xxvi. and di. doubled for both the sides of this figure makethe.
liii. perches. And this is the true content of this present figure.

Of a piece of land, that is plain on both sides, and half round at both
ends.
ANd when a piece of land is plain on both sides and half roude at both ends
like to this preset figure, then ye shall divide it into three parts by such
like deuysio, as doth appear by the lines within ye same figure. And then ye
shall measure ye middle square part by it self, afterward ye shall measure one
of the half rounds of one end, and join it in one sum with the other half
round of the other end, then join all these three parts in one sum
together. And that whole sum shows the content of this maer figure, as in
this example The dyameter of one half round in this figure is. xliii. and the
cyrcumference of the same is. xxii. then multyply the half of the
cyrcumference, the which is. xi. by the half of the diameter, the which is.
vii. and it makes. lxxvii. Then join that. lxxvii. to the other half roude of
the other side, and it makes. C. liiii. After yt ye shall multyplye. xiiii.
the which is the length of the square part in the mydle of the figure by. vii,
the which is the breadth of the same part, and it makes in the whole sum. CC.
lii. the which is the whole content of this figure.

To measure a mountain or an hill, having the two ascences, on both sides
from the foot to the top of equal dystaunce and measure.
WHen a piece of Land is not plain but is mouting in the mydle, like to these
present figure of a mountain, having the. ii. sides from the foot to the
top of equal distance, and measure. Then ye shall mete diligently the nombre
of perches of the cyrcuyt, and compass of the top of the hill, and also of
the foot and of the ascence or going up from the foot to the top. Afterward
ye shall lay together the nombre of perches of the cyrcuyte of the foot and
of the top of the hill, and take the half part of both these measures for
the breadth. Also take ye whole nombre of perches of the ascence fro the foot
to the top of the hill for the length as in this example. The crycuyte of the
top of the hill is. lxxx. perches, and the cyrcute of the root of the hylis.
CC. xl. perches, the which two sums make. CCC. xx. perches, and the ascence
from the foot of the hill to the top is. CC. perches. Then take the half
nombre of perches of the cyrcuites of the foot and top of the hill, the
which is. C. lx. for the breadth, the whole nombre of perches of the ascence the
which is. CC. for the length. Then multyply. CC. by. C. lx. and it makes.
xxxii M. perches, and this sum makes. CC. acres.

Of an hill or a mountain having the head, the mydle, the foot of divers
cyrcuytes of measures.
And when the circuy tes of the top of the moutaine of ye middle and of the foot
do diffre much, one fro another in their measure, like to this present figure.
They shall lay the three nobres of the top, the middle, and the foot in one
sum together. And take the third part of yt sum for the breadth. Afterward
ye shall meet the ascence or going up from the foot to the top of the hill,
and take the whole nombre of petches of that measure for the length. As in
this example. The cyrcute of the foot is. cc. perches, the cyrcuite of ye middle
is. c. percges, the cyrcuyte of ye top is. xxx. perches, the which three sums
laid all together makes. ccc. xxx. perches. And ye ascence from the foot to
the top of the hylis C. lx. perches. The take ye third part of the said sum
of. CCC. xxx. the which is C. x. for the breadth. And the whole sum of the
ascece, the which i. C. lx. for the length, then multyplye. C. li. by. C. x.
and it makes. xvii. M vi. C. perches, and this sum of perches makes. C. l.
acres.

Of an hill or a mountain that is not of equal measure in the ascences,
netber in the cyrcuytes.
But when an hill, or a mountain is not of equal measure asceces, neither in ye
nether i the cyrcuites, like to this present figure. The ye shall lay the
measures of the cyrcuytes of the top and foot of the hill together, and take
the half part of these two crycuytes for the breadth Afterward ye shall lay
the measures of the longer, and the shorter ascences both together, take the
half part of that measure, for the length as in this example. The cyrcuyte of
the top of the mountain is. xx. perches and the cyrcuyte of the foot is CCC.
perches, ye which two sumes laid both together makes. CCC. xx. perches, and
the half part of it is. C. lx. Also ye longer as^nce is. CC perches, and the
shorter is. C. xx. the which ii. sumes laid both together make. CCC.. xx.
perches, the half part of it makes. C. lx. Then take. C. lx. for ye length,.
C. lx. also for the breadth, and afterward multyply on of the same two sumes by
the other, and it makes. xxv. M. vi. C. perches the which sum of perches
makes C. and. lx. acres.

Of the mesuryng of a piece of land lying i a valley, enclosed roud about with a
mountain or an hill.


ANd when there is a piece of land lieng in a valley, enclosed roud about with a
mountain or an hill like to this present figure, then ye shall use contrary
wise of measurig of such manner of land, as ye did of measurynge of hills
mountains For in meetynge of an hill, ye measured the ascence and going up
fro the foot to the top. But in meeting of a valley ye shall measure the
descene and going down from the top of the hill to the depth of the valley.
And where ye measure the cyrcute compass of the top of an hill, so contrary
wise ye shall measure the cyrcuite and compass of the depth of the valley. And
where ye measured the cyrcuite and compass of the foot of ye hill, so contrary
wise ye shall measure round about the cyrcuyte and compass of the height of
the valley. And then ye shall lay ye cyrcuite of the height, and the depth of
the valley in one same together, and take ye half part of that whole sum for
the breadth. Afterward ye shall take the nobre of perches of descence and
going down from the height of the hill to the depth of the valley for the
length of the measure. And then sum it by multiplyeg the length by the
breadthe, as in this example. The circuit of the depth of the valley is. lxxx.
perches, ye cyrcuyt of the heyghte of the valley is. CC. perches. And the
descence from the height of the hill to the depth of the valley is. CC.
perches. The take the nobre of perches of the descence, the which is. CC. for
the length, half the nobre of perches of the circuites of the which is. C. lx.
for the bretdth. Then multiply. CC. by. C. lx. and it makes. CC. acres.

Of a valley, yt is nether of equal measure in the descences nether in the
Cyrcuytes.


But when a valley is not of equal measure nether in the desceces, nether in
the cyrcuytes, like to this pesent figure, then ye shall lay the cyrcuytes of
the height and depth of the valey together and take the half part of these two
cyrcuytes for the breadth. Afterward ye shall lay the measures of the longer,
and shorter desences both together, and take ye half part of those measures
for the length, as in this example. The circuit of the depth of the valley is.
xx. perches, and the cyrcuyte of the heygth of the valley is. ccc. perches the
which two sumes laid both together make. ccc. xx. perches* ye half part of it
is. c. lx. perches. Also the longer descence is. cc. perches, and the shorter
is. c. xx. the which two sumes laid both together, make in ye whole sum ccc.
xx. perches, and the ha^e part of it is. c. lx. The take. c. lx. for the
length. c. lx. also for ye breadth, afterward multyply. c. lx. by. c. lx. and it
makes. xxv. M. and. vi. C. perches, ye which sum of perches makes. c. lx.
acres.

Of one manner way to count some the nomre of acres conteyued within any
measure.
WHen ye shall count and sum the nombre of acres contained within any measue
of land, the ye shall lay so many times the nombre of perches in the length,
as be in the nobre of petches in the breadth, or else contrary, as many times
the nombre of perches in the breadth, as be in the length. But ye must turn the
perches into pence. For like nombre of perches will make an acre, as of pens
will make a mark, the which doth sygnyfy an acre in this manner comptynge, as
in this example. The length of the measure is. xl. perches, and the breadth of it
is. xx. perches. The copt xl. times. xx. pence, or else. xx. times. xl. pence,
the which makes. v. Mark and so likewise. xx. times. xl. perches makes. v.
acres. Another example. lx. perches in the length, and. l, in the breadth. The ye
shall count. l. times, lx. pence, the which is in the whole sum. xii, li. x,
s, the which sum makes, xviii, acres, and, iii* rood, Another example. xlv,
perches in the length and. xxv, perches in the breadth, The ye shall count, xxv,
times, xiv, pence the which is in the whole sum, iiii, li, xiii, s, ix, pence,
the which sum makes. vii. acres, one dayworke, one perch. But when ye have
half a perch or a quarter of a perch in any side of ye measure, ye shall not
count them with ye perches, but after that ye have cast the sum of perches in
the length breadth in manner beforesaide. Then, ye shall count the half perches
by them self, and the quarter perches by them self, and sum them in the
contrary side, as in the example. The piece of land is. xl. perches and di. in
length,. xxx. perches in breadth. Then because the half perches do stand in the
length, therefore ye must count them in the breadth and sum them (as in this
last example.) xxx. half perches, after the nobre of the breadth* and not. xl.
half perches after the nobre of the length, the which. xxx. half perches do
make iii. dayeworkes, and. iii. perches.

Likewise if ye have half perches, or quarter perches, or else half perches
quarter perches both in ye length, and also in ye bredthe of the measure Then
ye must always sum every one of them by them self in the length, that
stand in that breadth.

And sum them in the breadth, that stand in the length. Therefore in all other
like manner of comptynge the sum of acres by money, ye shall understand
always, that a mark of money doth sygnyfy an acre, a royal doth sygnyfye
three quarters of an acre, or three rood, a noble doth sygnyfye an half acre, a
crown doth sygnyfye one rood and. v. dayeworkes. xl. d. doth sygnyfye a
quarter of an acre, or a rood. xii. d. doth sygnify. iii. dayeworkes, a groat
doth sygnyfy a dayewoke, a penny doth sygnyfye a perch, an half penny doth
sygnyfye an half perch, and a farthyng doth sygnyfye a quarter of a perch.

Of the turnynge of pounds into marks or acres.
BY cause in coumptyng of money it is not much used to count any sums in
marks, but most comonlye in pounds. Thefore because Marks do sygnyfye acres
in comptynge the measures of land, pounds be not lightly turned into Marks
by them that be not expert in reakenynge, and casting of a count. Therefore in
these sumes following ye shall se pence turned into perches grotes turned into
day works. xl. d into a rood, a noble in to di. acre, a Royal into. iii.
roods: a mark into an acre, pounds turned into Marks, the which there be
named acres And this rule doth extend fro. i. d. to. xl. d. and from. xl. d.
to. xx. s. from xx. s. to an. C. li. and fro an hundred pound, to a. M.
pound.

This Rule following, is very plain, and easy to be understanded: if it be
well marked.
Pence. Dayeworkes And perches. i. d. i. perch. ii. d. ii. perches iii. d.
iii. perches iiii. d. i. dayworke v. d. i. dayworke and. i. perch vi. d. i.
dayworke and. ii. perches vii. d. i. dayworke and. iii. perches viii. d. ii.
dayworkes ix. d. ii dayworkes and. i. perch x. d. ii. dayworkes and, ii,
perches xi. d. ii. dayworkes and. iii. perches xii. d. iii. dayworkes xiii. d.
iii. dayworkes and. i. perch xiiii. d. iii. dayworkes and, ii. perches xv. d.
iii, dayworkes,, iii. perches xvi. d. iiii. dayworkes xvii. d. iiii. dayworkes
and. i. perch xviii. d. iiii. dayworkes and. ii, perches xix. d. iiii.
dayworkes. iiii. perches xx. d. v. dayworkes xxi. d. v. dayworkes and. i.
perch xxii. d. v. dayworkes and. ii. perches xxiii. d. v. dayworkes and, iii.
perches ii. s. vi. dayworkes ii. s i. d vi. dayworkes and. i, perch ii s. ii.
d. vi. dayworkes. ii. perches ii. s. iii. d. vi. dayworkes,, iii. perches ii.
s. iiii d. vii. dayworkes ii. s. v. d. vii. dayworkes and, i. perch ii. s. vi.
d. vii. dayworkes. ii. perches ii. s. vii. d. vii, dayworkes, iii. perches ii.
s. viii, d. viii, dayworkes. ii. s. ix. d. viii, dayworkes and, i, perch ii.
s, x. d. viii. dayworkes. ii, derches ii. s, xi. d. viii, dayworkes, iii,
perches iii, s ix, dayworkes iii, s. i. d, ix. dayworkes and, i, perch iii. s.
ii, d, ix, dayworkes, ii. perches iii. s. ii. d. ix dayworkey and. iii. perches
xl, d, A quart. of an acre, or a rood v, s. i, rood and. v, dayworkes vi. s,
viii, half an acre x, s, iii. roods or. iii, quarters of an acre xiii. s.
iiii. d i. acre xvi, s, viii, d i, acre and one rood xx, s, i, acre and di.
xxx, s, ii, acres, and one rood xl, s, iii, acres l, s, iii. acres and, iii.
rood iii. li, iiii. acres and di, iiii. li. vi. acres v, li. vii, acres and di
vi, li, ix, acres vii, li, x, acres and di viii, li xii, acres ix, li xiii,
acres, and di x. li. xv. acres xi. li. xvi. acres and di. xii. li. xviii. acres
xiii, li. xix. acres and di. xiiii. li. xxi. acres. xv. li. xxii acres and di
xvi. li. xxiiii. acres. xvii. li. xxv. acres and di xviii. li, xxvii. acres
xix, li, xxviii. acres and di xx. li. xxx. acres xxi. li. xxxi acres and d.
xxii, li. xxxiii, acres xxiii. li. xxxiiii. acres and d. xxxiiii, li. xxxvi.
acres xxv, li. xxxvii. acres and di. xxvill, xxxix. acres xxvii. li. xl. acres
and di xxviii, li xlv. acres xxix. li xlvi, acres and di xxx. li. xlviii, acres
xxxi. li. xlix, acres and di xxxii, li li, acres xxxiii, li, lii, acrers and d.
xxxiiii. li. liiii. acres xxxv. li. lv. acres and di xxxvi. li. lvii. acres
xxxvii. li. lviii. acres and di, xxxviii. li. lx. acres xxxix. li. lxi. acres
and di. xl. li. lxiii. acres xli. li. lxiiii. acres and di. xlii. li. lxvi.
acres xliii. li. lxvii. acres and di xliiii. li. lxix. acres xlv. li. lxx.
acres and di. xlvi. li. lxxii. acres. xlvii. li. lxxiii acres and di. xlviii.
li. lxxv. acres. xlix. li. lxxvi. acres and di. l. li. lxxviii. acres li. li.
lxxix. acres and di. lii. li. lxxx. acres liii. li. lxxxi. acres, and di liiii.
li. lxxxii. acres lv. li. lxxxiii. acres and di lvi. li. lxxxiiii. acres lvii.
li. lxxxv, acres and di. lviii. li. lxxxvii, acres lix, li, lxxxviii, acres and
di lx, li, lxxxx, acres lxi, li, lxxxxi. acres and di lxii. li, lxxxxiii. acres
lxiii. li. lxxxxiiii, acres and d. lxiiii, li. lxxxxvi. acres. lxv. li.
lxxxxvii, acres and di lxvi. li, lxxxxix, acres lxvii. li. C. acres and di
lxviii. li. C. ii. acres lxix. li, C, iii. acres and di. lxx. li. C, v acres
lxxi, li. C. vi. acres and d. lxxii* li. C. viii. acres lxxiii. li. C. ix.
acres and d. lxxiii. li, C, xi, acres lxxv, li, C, xii, acres and d. lxxvi, li,
C, xiiii, acres lxxvii, li, C, xv, acres and d. lxxviii, li, C, xvii, acres
lxxix. li, C, xviii, acres and d. lxxx, li, C, xx, acres lxxxi. li, C, xxi,
acres and d. lxxxii. li, C, xxiii, acres lxxxiii. li, C. xxiiii, acres and d.
lxxxiii, li C, xxvi, acres lxxxv. li, C, xxvii, acres and d. lxxxvi, li. C,
xxix, acers lxxxvii. li. C. xxx, acres and d. lxxxviii, li, C, xxxii, acres
lxxxix, C, xxxiii, and d. lxxxx, li, C, xxxv, acres lxxxxi. li. C. xxxvi. acres
and di lxxxxii, li, C. xxxviii acres lxxxxiii. li. C. xxxix. acers and di
lxxxxiiii. li. C, xli. acres lxxxxv, li. C. xlii. acres and di lxxxxvi. li. C.
llxiiii. acres lxxxxvii. li. C. xlv, acres and d, lxxxxviii. li. C, xlvii.
acres lxxxxix, li C, xlviii, acres and d, C, li, C, l, acres, CC, li, CCC,
acres CCC, li, iiii, C, l, acres CCCC, li, v. C, acres v. C, li, vii, C, l,
acres vi, C, li, ix* C, l, acres vii, C, li, M, l, acres viii. C, li, M, CC,
acrers ix. C. li, M. CCC, l* acres M. li, M. CCCCC. acres.

Thus ends this way of turnynge of pounds into Marks or Acres.
Of another way of sumynge of measures in to acars.
BEcause this Rule of summynge of acars beforesayde is very harde and tedious
to them, that be not expert and ready in casting of a count, and many times
they be deceived in true summynge of measures after this way. Therefore ye
shall have hereafter a Rule following more playner, and ready to all men, for
the true knowledge of this thing. Therefore when ye have caste out the length
and bredthe of your land, by such ways and reason as ye have seen before in
divers fasshyon of figures, by divers examples. Then ye shall seek out the
nombre of perpches of the length of your land in the higher margent, and the
nombre of perches of the bredthe of your land, in the side of the margent. And
then ye shall seek out benethe upon the same side, that place, the which
doth answer dyrectlye to both of these nombres, of the length and of the
breadthe together.

And theare ye shall find the nombre of acres, roods, dayeworkes, and perches
contained within the length and breadth of the same measure.

Explicit.
To know the reason of this rule following.
But first for the perfect knowledge of this Rule following, ye shall
understand, that the nombres set above in the higher margent, do sygnifie the
nombre of perches in the length of the measure. And the nombres set in the
side margent, do signyfye the nombre of perches in the breadth of the measure.
The first nombre set to every square place beneth upon the sides, do betoken
the nombre of acres. The figure of. 1. set above, in the lift of the said
places, doth betoken a rood, or a quarter of di. acre. The figure of. 2. set
there signyfieth an acre. The figure of. 3. set there signyfieth three quarters
of an acre. The first figure set in the ledger part of every place, betokens
the nombre of day works, and the figure that follows next after that, be
tokenethe the nombre of perches. Also ye shall note, yt this rule doth extend
from the nombre of one perch, to the nombre of. vi. score perches in length.
And from the nobre of one perch to the nober of an. C. perches in breadthe,
and no further. This rule should be written altogether upon one side of a
table that ye might see all together, the whole length and breadth of al these
nombres before said. But because this manner of table, shulde be very large
tedious to bear about. Therefore it is divided in this little Book, in to the.
x. parts as it doth playnelie appear hereafter.

1. The first part is from i perch to. vi score perches, in length, and from
one to. x. in breadth. 2. The second part is from. xi. to. vi. score in
length, and from. xi to. xx. in breadth. 3. The third part is from. xxi. to.
vi. score in length, and from xxi. to. xxx. in breadth. 4. The fourth part is
from. xxxi. to. v. score in length, from. xxxi. to. xl. in breadth. 5. The. v.
part is from. xli. to. vi. score in length, and from. xli. to. l. in breadth.
6. The. vi. part is from, li. to. vi. score in length, and from. li. to. lx.
in breadth. 7. The. vii. part is from. lxi. in to six score in length, and from
three score and one, to three score and ten in breadth. 8. The. viii. part is
from. lxx. to. vi. score in length, and from. lxxi. to. lxxx. in breadth. 9.
The. ix. part is from. lxxxi. to. vi. score in length and from. lxxxi. to.
lxxxx. in breadth. 10. The. x. part is from. lxxxxi. to vi. score in length.
from. lxxxxi. to an. C. in breadth.
Here ends the measurynge of Lands. And hereafter follows the measurynge of
Timber.
To measure Timber or Stone, in length, breadth and depth by the foot square.


IN measurynge Timber. Stone, or any other like thing in length, breadth,
depth, by the foot square ye must diligently mark, whither it be equaly. iiii.
square, or partly. iiii. square, or else in. iii. sides equally, or partly
square, or else in. v. vi. vii. or more sides square. Or else all round, with
out any square side. And if a piece of timber be equally in. iiii. sides square
like to this present figure, then ye may take in dyfferently one of them to
the breadthe of the true square of that manner piece of timber. And the set forth
the length thereto for a foot square, as doth apere by the mesure that follows
after that square in the figure of Timber measure, as in this example. The.
iiii. square sides be every one. xii. inches broad, then ye must lay out to
that breadth. xii. inches in length, the which doth make one foot square in
timber me asure, as doth appear in the figure of timber, measure folowig.
Another example. The square sides, be every one. x. inches broad, the lay out.
vii. inches. qr. inch thereto in length for one foot square, as doth appear in
the same rule following, and so like wise of all other pieces of Timber
equally. iiii. square.

Of a piece of timber in. iiii. sides partly square.


But because al pieces of Timber, be not in all. iiii. sides equally square,
like to this foresaid figure, but some be in. iiii. sides partly square, like
to this present figure. Therefore in such pieces of timber ye shall lay one
brother one narrower side in one whole sum together, and deuyde them equally
into two parts, and then take one of them for the breadth of the square of
such manner timber, as many artificers do commonly use, the which be greatly
deceived thereby, because by such deuy sio, they make ye square thereof much
more then the truth, and by reason of the more square, they set forth the
less length thereto, for a foot square in Timber measure, But ye shall take
the square of such a piece of Timber, as is set forth in the table of squares
folowinge, according to one of his brother narrower sides of what divers
quantityes so ever they be. And the ye shall measure the length thereto, for a
foot square in Timber measure, as it is plaiely set forth in the figure of
Timber mesure next after that rule following, as in this example. The piece of
timber is on one side. xii. inches broad, and on the other side. xvi. inches
broad, the take. xiii. inches di. inch quarter inch, quarter quarter inch of.
quarter quarter inch, for the square of these two bredthes, as doth appear in
the figure of squares following. After ward ye shall lay to this square. x.
inches, quarter inches in length for one foot square in tymbre measure as doth
appear in the figure of timber measure folowige. But because ye squares do not
always tyse to any inches, but sotymes to odd parts of any inch, ^s in this
example before said. Therefore the odd quantytes after your dyserescyon
considered, ye shall add to, or take away, sum part more or less in setting
forth the foot square in Timber measure, beside the quatyties expressed in the
figure of timber measure here. For it were very hard, yet imposiyble to set
forth true quantities of timber mea^sure, to all odd quantyties of squares.

Of a piece of timber in. iii. sides equally square.


AND when a piece of Timber is in. iii. sides equally square, like to this
present figure, then ye shall take ye distance between one of the angles to
the mydie of the contrary side for the square, and the half of one whole side
for another square. Thenne search out in the figure of timber, as it is set
forth there according to the brother and narrower sides thereof, as i this
example. The dystaunce between the one angle to the contrary side is. x.
inches, the half one whole side is. vi. inches, the take. vii. inches di.
inch, quarter in che, for the square of this length, and breadth, as doth appear
in the figure afterward ye shall lay to this. ii. fore xi. inches, quarter
inch, in length, for one foot square in Timber measure, as doth appear in
the figure of timber measure. Always considered the od quantytes of the square
above the. vii. inches.

Of a piece of Timber in. iii. sides partly, or dyuersly square with one plain
Angle.


ALso when a piece of timber is in iii. sides partly or dyuerslye square with
one plain angle, like to this present figure. Then ye shall measure from the
plain angle to the sharpe angle on the one side for one square, and measure
from the plain angle, to the sharpe angle on ye other side, and take half of
that measure for the other square. Then take the square of that piece of timber,
as it is set forth in the Figure according to the one border, and one
narrower sides thereof, as in this example, the one side from the plain angle to
the sharpe angle is. xii. inches in breadth And the other side from the plain
angle to ye other sharp angle is. viii. inches in breadth. Then take. xii. for
the breadth of one side of the timber and half of the other side of. viii. the
which is. iiii. for the breadth of another side. Then take. vi. inches half
inch, quarter inch. di. qr. inch. qr quarter inch, di. quarter inch, for
the square of this length breadth, as doth appear in the figure, afterward ye
shall lay to this square sum part less than the. iiii. foot in length, for
one foot square in timber measure as doth appear in the figure of timber
mesure in consideration of ye odd quantyties above the. vi. inches in the
square aforesaid.

Of a piece of timber in. v. sides equally square.


IF a piece of timber be in. v. sides equally square like to this preset figure,
then ye shall measure all the square sides of it round about and take half
the nombre of inches of that measure for one square side. And the ye shall
measure the distauce from the mydie of the end of the timber, to the mydle of
one square side between the two angles, as it appears by the lyne in the same
figure. And take the measure of ye dystauce for another square side, as in this
example, in this figure of. v. square every side is. x. inches, the which. v.
times multiplied makes. l. then take half. l. the which is. xxv. for one
square ye distauce between ye middle paint to the middle of one square side the
which is. vii. for another square side. Tha take. xiii. inches di. quar. inch,
quarter qr. inch. di. quarter qr inch, for the square of this length, and
breadth. Afterward ye shall lay to this square, some part less than x.
inches, quarter inch, in length for one foot square in timber measure, as doth
appear in the figure of timber measure, by reason of ye odd qua tyties above
the. xiii. inches to the square aforesaid. This last rule ye shall follow
generally in measuring of all other pieces of timber in. vi. vii. viii. or more
sides equally square.

Of a piece of round timber without any square sides.


ANd when a piece of timber is all roude without any square side like to this
present figure, then artyficers most comonely do gyrde it roude about with a
lyne, deuyde ye measure of that gyrdynge into. iiii. equal parts, and the
they take one of them for the square of such a roud piece of timber. But they be
greatly deceived by such manner of measuring, for they make the square thereof
much less than the truth, and by setting forth the more length thereto for a
foot square in timber measure much more (...) her for a foot square in such
round pieces, than is right. Therefore when ye have girded it roude about with a
lyne, ye shall divide the length thereof into. ii. equal parties, and take one
part of them for one square side of such a roude piece of timber. Afterward ye
shall divide again the same whole length in to. iii. parties, and take half
one of them for another square side of this piece of timber. The take. viii.
inches di. inch di. quarter inch di. qr. quarter inch, for the true square of
this length and breadth as doth appear in the figure. Afterward ye shall lay to
this square some part less than two foot. iii. inches in length for one foot
square in timber measure, as doth appear in the figure of timber measure next
after that following, with allowance of some part less for the odd
quatities above the. viii inches of the square before said.

Explicit.

