A hundred and fourteen Experiments and Cures of the famous Physician
Philippus Aureolus Theophrastus Paracelsus; Translated out of the Germane
tongue into the Latin.

Whereunto is added certain excellent and profitable Works by B. G. a Portu
Aquitano.

Also certain Secrets of Isacke Hollandus concerning the Vegetall and Animal
work.

Also the Spagericke Antidotarie for Gunne-shot of Iosephus Quirsitanus.

Collected by Iohn Hecter.



LONDON Printed by Vallentine Sims dwelling on Adling hill at the sign of the
white Swan.

1596

(...) that the inquisition of some one part is the occasion of searching out
of an other, so ^finitely, that the bluniest wit cannot (...) of (...) to
train him on, (...) the deepest head of want of variety to entertai^ him
still, so large occasion of subject, or circumstance is (...) offred to ^n^der
of. Of these writers I have made choice of two or three such as in their
country (by their deserts) are held very de^re: these, not for their
methode, which I middle not with, but for their medicines, which I ^sually
make, I have translated, for the benefit (I hope) of my (...), and as
heretofore in some of the translations Printed, I have (...) held to cover my
r^denesse with the authoriti^ of other men's counte^nces, so here I presume
(right Worshipful) under the comfortable shield of your favour, to shadow the
slenderness of this my simple work, beseeching you of your bountiful ^tesie,
for the which you are commended of the most, to pardon my rashness, and to
accept of this enterprise, proceeding from him that amongst your bound^ well
willers is not the least.

Your Worships in all dutiful service. Iohn Hecter.

An Apologeticall Preface of Master Barnard G. Londrada A Portu Aquitanus unto
the Book of Experiments of Paracelsus, wherein is proved, that sick bodies
stuffed and filled with the seeds of diseases, can hardly be cured without
metalline medicines: contrary to the writings of some which deny that Metals
(after what sort or manner soever they be prepared) may profit or help the
nature of man.
IN sacred Scripture (gentle Reader) among others we find this law full of
Christian Love and Charity: Thou shalt restore again the wandering or
straying* Ox or Deuteron. 22. (...).
Ass of thy neighbours unto him: By which law the eternal God would as by an
evident argument confirm and establish amongst us mutual love and amity.
For if in this sort Gods laws do command us to take care of the straieng
cattle of our enemies: how much more then do they will us to help the
miserable ease and great dangers of the bodies of our friends, and to restore
their health? Wherefore when as I (together with Theophrastus Paracelsus and
other excellent men) understood the errors of many Physicians of our time, I
began to devise with my self by what means I might attain to the knowledge
of true physic, which is derived out of the light of nature, not out of the
dark writings of the heathen. And I judged it to be necessary to travel, and
to go unto far places, to seek out learning and knowledge, and not to hope or
look for it, sitting at home idlelie. I prepared my self therefore to my
(...), and with long travel and labour have searched out and learned those
things, which for christian love sake I can no longer keep silent, that I
might call back the wandering children into the path of true doctrine, and
having declared my journey and labours, they also being excused and defended,
which are laid open unto al manner of slanders, by those which so greatly
commend the heathenish physic, whose deceits in some part I will endeavour to
disclose; I will afterward declare what those that are desirous of true and
natural physic, are to look for at my hands, and what Books of true
physic I have gathered together in sundry places, being moved with
compassion towards those that go astray, I will communicate and set forth for
their public profit and commodity. But first the matter so requires, that to
avoid the hatred of the common sort, as well from my self, as from al other
favourers of the Art of Separation, I should duly answer unto the
adversaries, whose frowardness and malice is such, that they will with proud
words annihilate, reject, and condemn others inventions, which they
themselves see and perceive they may use with great success and profit. And
yet they in the mean season arrogate unto themselves the commendations due
unto the Authors, and with a lying kind of st^alth rob the inuenters of
Arts of their due honour; which is a subtle kind of craft, springing out of
the deceits of the old serpent. For when as reports are spread of the strange
cures of sundry grievous diseases, which are wrought by the benefit of
tinctures and vegetall and mineral spirits, by the cunning and labour of
those whom the common sort at this day cal Chemists or Alchimists: by and by on
the contrary part they cry out that those colliar physicians can do no good
but kill al men that put themselves into their hands with their venomous
medicines, so that they ought to be driven out of the commonwealth, and that
they are deceivers, and that their extractions and preparations, their subtle
and thin spirit will profit nothing, and that the spirit of Vitriol is poison,
the essence of Antimony and Mercurie is nothing, the extraction of Sulphur is
nothing worth, neither the liquor of gold: and to be brief, that al things are
contrary to the nature of man, and more to be avoided then the eyes of a
basilisk. And yet they in the mean time like cunning and crastie thieves
privily, and with fair promises pick out from the poor Chemists the secrets
of Physic, and secretly learn those things that they forbid the common
people as poisons, afterwards challenging them for their own practises. And
by this wicked injury they derive unto themselves the favour, friendship,
praise, gifts and rewards of men, which by good right are altogether due unto
those that by their labour, sweat, watching, and diligent search in natural
things by Vulcans art have found out such things, and published them for the
common commodity of man. And yet not contented therewith, they also publish
great volumes filled with toys, lies, sophistications; going about as much as
in them is, to suppress, overthrow, and utterly to extinguish the light with
darkness, and the truth with lies, practise (the most plain and manifest
workemistresse established even by truth it self) with a vain fained
theoricke, devised by their own subtle brain. I say to thee (thou notable
Doctor, that so backebitest Paracelsus) how can thou by any means with thy
trifling words deface the work it self, or with thy theoricke revel the
practise? Art thou so great a doctor and know not, that thou hast profited
so much, as by thy work thou can bring aught to effect? Paracelsus teaches
that the falling sickness is to be cured with the spirit of Vitrioll, and
performed it, and the work it self declares it daily: prove thou the
contrary, and cure the same disease with thy pills, sirropes, and
electuaries, then shalt thou have the victory. It is not sufficient for thee
by bringing thy reasons, to prove that metalline medicines are not agreeing for
mans nature, neither that metals may be so prepared that they may heal. Why?
Thou deny that which indeed is performed, and openly seen with eyes. It is
a foul thing to be ignorant in that that every man knows. For out of all
doubt you have all heard, that most dangerous diseases have bin cured with
metaline tinctures, yea, with such as have not been rightly prepared by
counterfeit Paracelsians, as with Vitrum Antimonij, which doth pluck up
suddenly at once by the roots the impurities of the fever, although not
without great weakening of the powers, yet it heals: And yet we allow not such
perilous cures. And so likewise of others. N^ Mineralles work this, not being
rightly prepared, what think you will they do being rightly prepared and
purged from their venom and poison?

And how can you with a safe conscience reject those things whereof you have no
knowledge? It is not sufficient to affirm an^e thing except it be confirmed by
probable and grounded reasons. Every man will play the Censor of Paracelsus,
whom it is more easy to reprehend, then to follow. And whilst every man
desires to seem, or to be thought more learned then other, no man will learn
of another. I say every Paracelsian which doth but only carry coals unto the
work, can show you by eye three principles of Theophrastus physic. Have you
tasted the most sharp salt? or the most sweet o^le? or the balm that most
delicate li^uor? All those being hidden in every thing that is created, you
have not once perceived. The metalline spirits, in whom physi^ke doth
consist, by no means can be found out, neither what force they have or
fellowship with mans nature, but only by fire, for as fire did first show that
the smoke of Mercurie was poison to mans nature without an^e subtle
speculation, but thou did never handle coals, neither can draw any so small
a balm out of the Vegetals therefore being ignorant in metalline physic,
thou can not so much as once guess what it is* and therefore doest judge of
things unknown, as the blind man doth of colours. Is it not a great folli^
to write against a thing, and not to understand it well before? Such as are
addicted to Paracelsus doctrine, when they perceive you have no stronger
weapons then those you have hitherto gathered, they will conclude that you
rather confirm and establish Paracelsus physic, then confute it. It is not
enough to say a thing is false, except there be more probable and better
showed. Hereby it appears that ye nourish a secret ignorance of natural
things in your selves.

What, (...) you those great physicians and excellent philosophers? How comes
it then to pass that the force of drugs are hidden and unknown unto you? Do
you not in this point come ^eere unto the empericks, whom you with great pride
and brag of knowledge r^iect, when as you say; the Chemist, be he never so
excellent, is no physician, but he that with judgment and reason hath learned
to make and v^e all r^dies for diseases: For in those points consists the
chiefest glory and commendation of a Physician, and the only safety of the
sick. Howe vain is this reasonable physician, which prepares his medicines
with reason and not with the hand? He is the very physician that with his own
hand purges his medicines from their venom, and being so prepared, with
sharpe judgment doth apply them to their proper diseases, that the seed of
the disease may be pulled up by the roots, and so must the speculation and
practise, reason and the work concur and join together, because judgment
without practise is barren. Tell me, howe comes it to pass that mercurie
heals the French pox and the filthy scabbe? Why do you command the
miserable sick persons to anoint themselves with quickesiluer as shepherds
grease their sheep? How happens it (I say) that mercurie is the special
best remedy against these diseases* Do you d^ that met^als ^o an^ (...), y^
and the greatest p^e cures? Why do you co^ such as (...) infected with
leprosy to swallow gold* ^hi^ do you boil it in bro^ with cap^? Why do you
mingle (...) gold in your (...) and ^ries? You know that the force of the
^epro^ is of^ delayed that it break^ not out into the upper part of the skin
by taking of crude gold^ into the stomach: Then if gold that is compact and
not resolved do^ work this effect, w^at will not the spirit of gold work
being ^oosed from his gross substance?

If you will not believe Paracelsus, that the cure of m^st dangerous discases
^eth hidden in mettalles, at the least, (...) those that lived long before him,
amongst whom Arnoldus de villa (...) is chief, who in his book of the
prese^ation of youth saith th^: Pearls (...) into liquor, comfort the natural
heate, help the ^embling of the heart, and those that are fearful, and
properly they clarify the blood of the heart* and many diseases are cured by
them. For i^ is a salt of the (...) which the wise call their Animal stone,
and some the Mineral C^, and all the maisterie in the preparation of it, is,
that it may be resolved into a most pure and potable water with such things as
do not destroy his nature. This saith Ar^, who speaks (...) of stamping, but
of solution: but to what purpose d^l all^dge thi^ Verily, that you may see how
with your own swords you cut your own throats, you use pearls, corals, and
pr^ (...) in your elect^aries and broathes, and those you bea^e into powder.
You (...) as it were a certain medicinal virtue in precious stones, but you
deal as naughty cooks and rude country wo^ do, that when pa^ges o^ ha^s come
to their hands, they (...) the^ (...) the po^tage pot, or else ^eethe them in
water: even so stamp and break your pearls which should rather be dissolved.
Alb^it you should make powder as subtle as the air, you should nothing
profit: for as you put it into the stomach, so shall you see it pass away
again, and hereupon of very necessity were the rules of Chy^ preparations
brought into physic, which you do hate worse (...) (...) serpent^r a dog,
with the practisers of their.

What ^ll need many words? If you will not yet gra^nt that (...) special
(...) of diseases consists in minerals, hearken what (...) Math^lu^ says in
the fourth book of his Epistles: the bodies of (...) sick being (...) of
seeds of diseases, will hardly be healed without m^ ^alline medicines. And in
his treatise of Antymonie he saith: A^tymonie doth no less purge the diseas^s
of the bodies, then metals, from super^uities. This did that learned ^an
understand when as yet he (...) not the true prepration of Antymony. Likewise
he greatly esteems the potable ^olde, the preparation whereof, as the sa^e
M^ used it, I will de^a^e unto you. because you shall not be ignorant. Take
gold twice or thrice purged with Antymony, make it into thin plates and in a
^it vessel, hang the plates that they touch not one another, and let i^ be
burned and calci^ed in a ^rnace duly (...) by the space of half ^ out and
laid open in the air, they do dissolve, and there flow from it a certain
oilie humour red of colour, and of taste sw^ish. He drew out two ounces of oil
of gold, but out of that which was not so well bu^nt, the liquor did not so
readily run out. Sometimes he used to pour on the spirit of wine rectified,
that so long, and so much, until the whole red colour was drawn out. You shall
rectify those spirits or essence of wine very subtly, if you put it into a
glass cucurbite under a limbecke with a receiver, and set it in most cold or
snowy water, and cover the head round about with a linen cloth stieped in
warm water, for then the subtiler parts will rise up, leaving the watery
substance in the bottom. Gold calcined and often infused with the spirit of
wine with many imbibitions, and again distilled by a Limbecke, leaves in the
bottom behind a reddish liquor. That Physician used first to purge the body,
and then to shave and heate the crown of the head, and them to pour on a
dram of that oil, and to give so much also to be drunk (...) maluesey. The
like is to be wrought with fine silver for the diseases of the head, and so
likewise of other mettalles, for being duly prepared, they do dissolve,
because they are saltes.

This man hath many other mineral medicines, which were never known, either
to Galene, or to Hypocrates, but brought to light by our Theophra^tus
Paracelsus, of whom you great Philosophers and Phy^itions only in name do
vndis^reetely write. Do you think all things utterly unpossible unto other men
which you your self know not, or can not do, or that you cannot compass with
your divine knowledge? What will you say to this? I know a man that within
three, or at the most six days, can heal the French pox with his Turp^tum
minerale, not with that which is made with oil of vitrioll, but with another
far more excellent which shall not come to your hands or knowledge except
you lay aside your frowardness, and cease to bring the Paracelsians in suspicion
with the common people and noble men, and to defraud them of the fruit of their
just labours. You say, What have you brought to pass? what have you found out
whereby you should look for praise or profit? Then do we demand of you, What
have you found out whereby phy^icke is the better furnished? We have brought
into physic, essences, oils, balms, and saltes, all which the Alchemists
schools have found out. And how great light is come unto physic only by
true distillation, it is known unto all men, and daily experience teaches,
how great commodity hath redounded thereby unto the sick. In the mean time,
if you so much detest the labour, yet at the least spare our good name. But it
is no marvel, doth it not so always happen, that the best labour is worst
accepted and recompensed? Every good man ^clined to virtue, wisdom, and
fidelity can witness the same, what reward they have often received for their
fidelity and opening of the truth. So so^e men when they can say no more, they
object unto the searchers of nature, their poverty, filling the ears of the
common people with glorious lies, always chanting upon th^se things which
follow upon the abuse and ^ungerous cu^es of the cou^terfeit Paracelsians,
judging all things by their contempt poverty, vile estate, and baseness, but
they will quickly avoid that d^spised poverty, which willingly they sustain,
that the nature of things might daily more more be known unto men, whereby the
unaccustomed cures of most grievous diseases, might at length be found out,
with the which such as are diseased, might through your sluggishness all die, if
God having compassion upon them now at the end of the world had not provided
wholesome medicines, even by most contemned men. The lepers and gowty, the
infected with the physic, falling sickness, and French poxes, devoured with
the canker, fistula, gteedy woolfe, with the dropsy, and palsy, and that with
the plague other diseases, are thrust into their graves. These (I say) and many
other more, whom you through ignorance with your naughty and corrupt potions
and purgations, like butchers have buried alive, will rise up against you.
These (I say) will call you to answer, and accuse you, even the poor, whom you
have robbed of their goods, will require your blood for the loss of their
bodies, and consuming of their money. Then what a madness and cruel foolishnes is
this, that in the time of any great plague, such as are infected, you shut up
in houses, set marks ^ppon them, keep them in prison, strangle them with
cares and solitariness, and kill them for hunger: Is the plague so to be cured?
Or whether do you not think that all men may be infected from whence the
first man was infected? why do you not preserve the whole with your antidotes
or defensiues being so famous physicians as you are? but you have tried almost
all your medicines to be of no force in this disease. Do you in this sort love
your neighbour as your self? or thus spend your life for your fellow, when as
at no time (if help be required) there is greater need of fellowship,
company, comfort and help than in the time of plague? O what great punishment
have you deserved that refuse those that are forsaken of their friends, far
from their kindred, and as it were thrust into exile, whose solitariness hath
been more violent unto them then the disease, and grief of mind hath killed
rather then the sickness? what I pray you is true and christian friendship?
doth not this complaint of the sick stir up unto pity? When I was in
health thou wer^ my friend, thou did visit me, and help me, but now that I
am sick, thou doest abhor^e (...), and lie from me, when fortune laughed
upon me, thou did also laugh: but now that with grief and tears I ^raue
comfort, thou doest deny it. What do you call visiting and helping? You will
not only not help your selves, but will persuade princes to stop the passages,
that no travellers shall pass unto those places, when as you ought with
courage to relieve them of their grief, and willingly to go thither to try
your cunning. But when any plague begins, you are the first that tremble,
are afraid and despair. The sick are committed unto you as children and
infants which lack diligent cure, you ought to help them as the father doth
his children, and not to rob them of their money. Then would the sick man
smile upon you, if you would refresh his languishing life with some gentle
balm: then would he rejoice in the sight of you, and call you his father.
Every natural physician of necessity ought to make his medicines with his own
hands, and not to commit them unto an unskilful Cooke, not to fill great
volumes with receipts, with the which I see those that are studious in physic
are in a manner overwhelmed, that they be ready almost to fall down and die
under so heavy a burden of receipts, physic is not so learned but with the
labour of the hands, practise being workemistre^e where Vulcan day by day doth
show new and pleasant remedies which nature teaches the good steward her
workman, daily to purge better and better from their superfluities. Do you
look for a rich harvest, and do not first plow nor sow? Look for knowledge
of the secret natural powers, and do not first seek it out by labour with the
fire? for the most part of you all are dainty and slothful, and he that is
slack in his works, goes like a blind man unto his practise. If you did not
so much abhor the Chemical Art you would learn to separate the pure from
the impure (which is the cause of the corruption of things) by long digestions,
distillations, and imbibitions, whereby you should make your medicines pure and
clean before you minister it to the sick, so upon the sudden receiving, the
sick nature should be refreshed, whereas the weak stomach cannot concoct,
digest, and separate gross matters. But these great doctors will not be
schollers, or young soldiers, no more then an old dog will be brought to hunting
with whips, and g^aw his line and show his grinning teeth to him that leads
him, rather then he will be ruled: even so you will rather openly gainsay the
truth, and like dogs bark and bite at it, then you will confess your
errors. What, ought this to be a reproach unto the Chemists, that for the true
preparations of medicines whereof you are ignorant, and for their great labour
and pain which you do eschew, they should be accounted beggars, poor, and
ragged? do you not think that the common people will at length find out your
deceits? You have been sufficiently warned of many doctors of physic, who
truly have not allowed your childish cures. Amongst whom Conr^de Gesner is one,
and many other ^o, which if they were living most certainly would deny your
fained Art. Likewise Iohn Woz of Cullen which flourished 1510. doth sharply
reprove the Physicians of his time, who in his writings upon the plague and
labyrinth of Physicians most plainly and excellently entreats of metaline
medicines and quintessences, and shows their use. What will you answer to
those things which that doctor Gorreus hath written in the fifth book of the
extraction of the Quintessence out of herbs, where in his comments he so
excellently extols metalline medicines, and did use them, little esteeming
your medicines: for he says the distillations of waters out of herbs and
other such like things, wherein the Apothecaries do boast, are almost of no
force, for it is nothing else but the sleame of the thing, whose principal
liquor consists in the oil of salt.

But that I may stir up in you an earnest desire to know the marvelous
property of things, I will repeat unto you the judgment of Fernelius Ambian^
in his second book and eighteenth chapter De Abdi^ (...) causis. When first
(saith he) I gave my self unto the study of that sensible and metalline
philosophie called Chymia, through long travel (as many other had,) I getting
a most perfect master or teacher, did draw out of every plant and other
living things very diverse and sundry substances: First water, and that very
plentiful if the plant were green^, more scarce if it were dry: then oil,
but not that fat and filthy substance, which by press is drawn of our men,
but the workmanship of a more excellent Art, which neither easily
corrupts nor ^owreth by age, and that of two sorts, one thin and white, an
other drier and red, c. Then it follows I will tell you by your leave, not
uttering this whole secret, but teaching you upon what true grounds it doth
consist. But lest the strange obscurity of the name might offend you, which
the fathers have covered under a shadow or dark kind of speech, I will most
plainly and openly show it i^ his place. And yet you can not away with them
that give you good counsel, as also you will not suffer learned and excellent
men, neither Gerard Dorne Doctor of Physic, whom, no doubt, God hath raised
up unto us. This most excellent man is worthy of eternal memory, because
that he by no injury, neither perils could be te^ified, but that by his last
writings he hath made ^aracelsus more famous, who doth excel with a most
ancient granitie and authority, that at the least he might help the children
or learning, fo^ whose defence as a valiant soldier he contends by word and
deed even to the death, the fellow and companio^ of that learned physician
I^se^hus Quirs^tan^ famous in physic, who hath excellently deserved for
physic: and in his books hath uttered many excellent philosophical secrets
unto the posterity, and opened many hidden spagyricall medicines, and would
have brought to light greater things, if the ingratitude of some had not
stopped his willing mind, and specially of a perfumer, which goes about to
reprove many things, and to allow but few in his writing, and yet not able to
show better. Whereby it comes to pass, that through one mans ingratitude, al
feel loss and lack. Proceed therefore with courage, drive away those drones
and sluggish beasts from the ^acke, so shall your head be crowned with
perpetual praise. In the mean time, whatsoever we have gotten by many travels,
and found out and learned with labour, we will here annex, praying out
adversaries, that if they need them not, they will not contemn or ^launder
them, or terrify others, which with willing mind would embrace these our
labours: or else, to teach them some better things; considering yet that
something in the mean time ought to be given and granted unto him, which for
physickes sake hath put himself in so many dangers.

After the great murder and fury of our countrie^en the French men, when I
went with D. Charles of Chambray, D. of Pansay into Italie, travelling through
^ria, Ragusium, Sclauonia. Macedonia and Bizantium, ^i^cessantly applied my
whole study to understand and know some certainty touching the philosophers
stone or chy^ical matters. But I could find no true philosophers, only false
Physicians and Chemists every where, which had either altogether none, or else
very little knowledge of natural Arts and preparations. At the length (by Gods
good will) I happened upon a very learned man Daniel Bishop of Dalmatia. Unto
this most excellent man I directed my letters, the which together with his
answer, a little after sent to me, I will hereafter publish, wherein you shall
see many philosophical points delectable to be read and understood.

At the length, when I had sufficiently searched over the East countries, and
could gather no certain point in natural sciences, I determined to take my
journey towards Germanie with the most courteous prince Cabaneus Vydam of
Ch^rtres, still employing my mind to the earnest study of Chemical physic.
And there I understood that Kings and Princes were deceived by unskilful
practisers, which did utter and sell their sophisticate Chemical arts, which
they had begged and scratched together out of all corners, with a pompous show
deceiving the princes of their money, whereby it comes to pass, that daily
a great number of sophisters, and sophisticators do daily rise and spring up,
through which, not only the most commendable art of Alchemy receives great
detriment, is oppressed, and adulterate, and the Chymistes themselves made
hateful unto all men, consuming their life, time, and goods upon vain works
and practises: but also there redounds most great hurt and damage unto the
common wealth. For there are many deceivers so crafty, that with a dissembled
experience in the Chemical art, and with fained friendship and great promises
they do craftily learn of others their cunning, which they challenge for
their own, esteem of great value, and carry them about to be sold. As upon
a time certain knaves by craft got from me certain written books, and
sold them for a great sum of money. Common wealths and the Chemical art
should be very well provided for, if that such knaves might be punished and
restrained by the magistrate, so should the studious of the Art be less
deceived, and in short space the true and pure Art would appear from those
shadows and sophistications. Wherefore to the end that such as be desirous of
the Art may have some pledge from me, wherewith they may make this science
more plain, I will shortly (God willing) set forth three books of the
philosophers stone, written by diverse Authors, whereof the first was drawn
out of certain characters by a noble Brytaine, wherein all the dark speeches
of the philosophers are most plainly expounded, whereunto I will annex two
hundred certain infallible and true philosophical rules, whereby those that
do err and doubt touching the matter of the stone, shall be confirmed. The
second book is, I^hannes de ^ouill^sco Pedomonta^, which treats of the
philosophers mercurie, and how it is drawn, together with an Epistle of Iohn
P^anus of the same argument. But there is a more certain excellent Treati^e of
an uncertain Author, which doth explain many doubts in that sacred Phy^icke.

And because that all nations, specially the Germanes, have written books in
their own language, I will also write two books in the french tongue for the
help of such as are studious of Philosophie, wherein I will intre^te of many
preparations and special medicines tried by me, and others, also of diverse
elyxirs of the philosophers, extractions of mercuries and mercuriall waters, of
many and diverse dissolutions, I will also add the interpretations of sundry
Characters wherewith the books both of the old and new writers are written
to cover and hide the Art. Also the exposition of a certain Alphabet, without
the which the work can hardly be understood. And two treatises, the one of
the virtues of the vegetall and mineral oils, the other of the saltes and
properties of many vegetals and minerals: whereunto I will also join two
treatises of philosophical mines, and of making of vinegers, the which my
labour and study, if I see it acceptable unto those that are studious of that
Art, I will shortly set forth greater things, which many with their whole
hearts do wish and desire. In the mean time, take in good part this little
work. That which we have hitherto spoken, is spoken only unto those that do
so deadly hate the Chemical physic, which think nothing can be well or
profitably taught in Physic that the old harp ^oundeth not. As though that
nature were not more then Galen, or that all the learning of Physic were to
be drawn from the heathen, or that they alone had published the art, and
established it with such sound arguments. Why do you not out of those authors
confute those excellent men which are folowers of Paracelsus, amongst whom that
great Doctor Petrus Seueri^us a Dane is chief, who in his Idea hath opened the
invincible foundation of Paracelsus Physic. Why do you not answer to the
monarchy of the Trinity of that learned doctor and Physician Gerard Dorne?
Why do you not confute the volumes of that famous Physician Turnesser, being
confirmed with the truth of practise. But for your sakes which daily cal Galens
doctrine unto examination, and with exact judgment do consider of it, giving
place unto Paracelsus, acknowledging and exercising his preparations and
practise, I do rejoice, and shortly more shall come out against the
adversaries, which shall bite them better. In the mean time with your word,
deed, and w^iting, defend the truth from injury.

Farewell.
B. G. Londrada A Portu Aquitanus unto the gentle Reader, health.
THis treatise of Paracelsus (friendly reader) came unto my hands by the gift
of a certain nobls Prince of Germanie, and because it is sufficiently evident
to be Paracelsus work, I thought it not good to reserve it to my self, but to
publish it abroad, seeing there comes no commodity or profit of hidden
treasure. This therefore such as it is (loving Reader) embrace: and shortly,
God willing, look for more and greater matters. But this one thing I would
have you understand, that when you do minister those exalted essences of
Paracelsus and his precious oils, think not that they are to be ministered by
themselves, but with some other mixture to cary or lead them: and they must be
used, the stomach first being purged with some special medicine of Paracelsus:
as for example, if you will minister oil of Vitrioll, mingle five or six
drops with an ounce of conscrue of Roses, so shall you safely give it; the
like you must judge of other things; use these happily.

Farewell.
An hundred and fourteen Experiments and Cures of Phillip Theophrastus
Paracelsus a great Philosopher, and a most excellent doctor of the one and the
other Physic, Written With his own hand in the Germane tongue, which Conrad
Steinberge his servant found among other loose papers and scrolles of
Paracelsus.
A Certain Baron being diseased with a wonted grief, By drinking our Quinta
essentia Mercuriale, cast out a stone downward, and became whole.

2 A certain woman was long sick of the Passion of the heart which she called
Cardiaca, who was cured by taking twice our Mercurial vomit, which caused her
to cast out a worm commonly called Theniam, that was four cubits long.

3 One Bartholomew, had for two years space a pain in his side, whom I cured
by giving him the oil of Vitrial, in a drink comforting the stomach.

4 A man that had his Nauill standing out like to a mans yard, was healed with
a third dipped in the oil of Uitriol, by tying the thread hard about it every
day. After the same sort I healed a great swelling or ouergrowing of the flesh
called Parotis, which grew out of a woman's thigh weighing five pound.

5 A soldier was shot through in the breast to the left shoulder with a two
forked arrow, so that the head stuck fast in the bone, the which I drew forth
with my two fingers, and powered Kissed into the wound and so he was healed.

6 A Physician being astonished with a clap of thunder and Lightning, so that he
seemed to be sick of the (Apoplexia) or of the disease which they call
Syderacio, and of us, blastings or taking, was restored to his former health
with Oleum auri in aqua Melissae.

7 A young man which for three year had on his chin a great outward
swelling or apostume, with the often chawing of the herb called Persicarie,
was cured.

8 I cured hard apostumes, swellings, and crusty ulcers, and stinking in the
nostrils, with our Medicamentum mu^dificatiuum, and with our Emplastrum
Stipticum.

9 A woman who was in manner consumed with the French Pox, was cured with a
drink or potion of Essenti^ Melissae, and she lived eight years after.

10 One had his stomach swollen and standing out bigger then a Pomegranad, and
that without any pain, whom I cured with a drink or potion of the oil of
Vitriol.

11 A boy of fifteen years old falling down a stone stairs had his arm
and leg benumbed and void of moving, whose neck with the hinder part of the
head, and all the back bone I anointed with this Unguent, R. of the fat of
a Fox, ij. oil of the earth wo^mes, j. Oleum Philosophorum ss. I mixed them
together and anointed therewith, and in short space no wound nor swelling
appeared in him so hurt.

12 One after an agew fell into such a dead sleep that he felt not himself
being pricked, nor could open his eyes, nor speak any thing; he was sick of
the Leth^rgi, whom I cured with the oil of Salt.

13 a woman that gave a child suck, having her terms stayed long before, at
the length the menstruous blood ran a pace out of her breasts, whereupon when
she felt no grief or pain, I healed her by extracting blood out of the vain
of the foot called S^phen^.

14 A boy having his finger eaten to the bone with a disease called Impetigo or
Lichen, I cured in short time with the oil of Lead.

15 In a place where the bones wrere cankered and consumed, with good success I
used Quinta esse^tia serpentum.

16 A young man had his thigh made filthy with red Pushes of the bigness of
Grommell seed, which I cured with the water of Tartar and Theriacle.

17 The growing out of the flesh in the Fundement, as also Any Rhagades, which
are certain cleftes or chaps in the flesh, I cured by the taking away of those
fleshly parts by incision with Filum Arcenicale, and by the unction of Oleum
Saturni.

18 One that spit blood I cured by giving him one scruple of Laudanum
Precipitatum in the water of Plantaine, and outwardly I applied a linen cloth
to his breast, dipped in the decoction of the bark of the roots of Henbane.

19 One had two Pushes as it were wartes upon the yard, which he got by
dealing with an unclean woman, so that for six months he was forsaken of all
Physicians, as uncurable, the which I cured by giving him Essentia Mercuriale,
and then mixed the oil of vitriol, with Aqua sophiae, and laid it on warm
with a supositorie or ten four days.

20 One fifty years old after he was healed of the French pox, had every
month the flux of the Hemeroides breaking and flowing out as fast as the
terms do in a woman, whom I cured by purging him first with Pillule
Pestilentiales Ruffi mixed with our Essentia Mercurial^s, afterward he drunk
oftentimes, Aurum Diaphoreticum, but last of all, by giving him Crocus martis
in drink he was perfectly cured.

21 A Goldsmith of Stuburg had his skull perished until the innermost skin, or
pellicle, which they call, Meniux tenuis: which also swelled up, whom I
cured by opening the skull, and by purging the skin or pelliele, as it
commonly falls out in the wounds of the head with Unguentum Fuscum, and
afterward with Bl^samum Hiperici, and with the flowers of herbs a propriate
for the head applied to the place painted inform of a plaster. But in the
mean time he drank thrice every day of the oil of Vitrioll with the water
of Basell and Lauerder: Note that this disease is called Talparia, or Talpa.

22 A girl of the age of fifteen years before she had her flowers, was very
sore sick, whom I cured with the Oil of Camomell, in the water of Melissa
and Ualenian.

23 I cured a woman that for thirty years had a canker in her breast, by
giving her Essentia Mercurialis, with the water of Plantaine.

24 A boy had his face and stones swolen whom I cured with the extraction of
Rhabarb^.

25 One Ionas falling in love with one Sabian, fell besides himself, whom I
help by giving him in drink Lapidem sieve calculum microcosmi.

26 The daughter of one Oliuer being very pale did greedily eat small stones,
chauke, lime, dust, and such like, (as they commonly do which have the longing
sickness called Pica or Mal^chia) thorough the loathing of the stomach, whom I
cured by purging her with Essentia Mercurialis for the first vomit, afterward
for certain days I gave her oil of Uitrioll to drink with the water of
mint.

27 One was sick of the Lousy evil called (Pthiriasis) whom I cured with
these pills. R. Essentia mercurialis, ss. Aloes Hepatice and Mirha ana. ss.
Saffrana half a scruple, make thereof pills with the oil of Staphisaegriae,
afterward he drank a draught of wine of Centuarie or Perficaria.

28 A boy of eighteen, years old had a tooth drawn, and three months after a
certain black blather appeared in the place of the tooth. The which I daily
anointed with oil of Vitrioll, and so the blather was taken away, and the
new tooth remained.

29 A young Gentlewoman, called Ascania had great pain in her head, and was
clean over all her body, because she had not the due course of her terms,
who after she had often vomited, the pain abated: but when she could not
abide any longer to vomit, I cured her by drawing blood out of the vain which
is under the ball of the foot, and afterward the terms had their natural
course, and she was helped.

30 I oftentimes cured the falling sickness with Essentia Ueratri Nigri
prepared after our order.

31 One that had the Flux of blood by means of an Arter that was cut, I help
with Kissed Stipticum.

32 A Knight being in an assembly was sodenlie astonished and diseased over all
his body, as if he had had the Apoplexy, whom I cured by anointing the
hinder part of his head with Balsamum Helenij, and Essentia Mercurialis.

33 A man of the country being stung with a Viper or adder, fell presently into
a cold sweat, to the great danger of his life, who was restored to his health
presently by drinking Theriaca Nostra with strong wine.

34 A woman who had not her natural courses, was troubled with a very sore
cough: the which I cured by opening the vain beneath the ball of the foot.

35 A fat drunken Taverner was in danger of his life by a surfeit, who was
restored to his health by letting of blood.

36 A woman called Sabina had a long time the flixe of the belly, by reason of
the looseness of the stomach, the which I cured by giving her oil of
Uitrioll, with conserve of Anthos.

37 A man that was wounded in the pellicle or tunicle of the heart, was cured
with Essentia Solis.

38 A young man being vexed with a continual and violent cough, I cured by
giving him oftentimes the juice of Horehound with our Oximell, and after that
he voided a worm upward and was helped.

39 A young child had after a sickness a swelling in his breast by reason of
the abundance of humours, the which I cured only with Theriaca Nostra.

40 A certain man had a disease called Carcinomate, or ^angrena, the which was
cured with Oleum Ueneris.

41 A certain woman was so troubled with a disease in her secret parts, that
what moist or liquid meat she did eat, presently she vomited again, the
which was cured with Oleum Margaritarum.

42 One Eligus had a great pain in his stomach, the which was help with
Essentia Mercurialis Uomitoria, the which shortly after vomited a piece of
flesh wherein was h^d a worm.

43 One Vermundus, was so troubled in his head and brain, that he stagered
hither and thither, as though he had been drunk, whom ^holpe by giving him
Pillulas Pestilentiales, with the which I mixed Essentiam Mercurialem, that
caused him to vomit a hundred and fifty worms.

44 A certain man was sick of the spleen, whom I cured with Crocus martis, in
the water of Tamaris and Enul^ Campane, and by outwardly applying Balsamum
gummi ^moniaci.

45 One was troubled with a corosion or gnavving of the intralles, whom I
cured by ministering unto him Flores Veneris in wormevvood wine.

46 One was troubled with pains in the stomach thorough weakness, who took
Oleum salis in his drink, and caused him to have many sedges or stools, and
so was restored to his health, as we have written in our book called
Parastenasticon.

47 A man that was troubled with the head-ach I purged by the nostrils,
casting in the juice of Ciclaminus with a siring.

48 Against the falling sickness I gave often to drink the juice of the herb
called Lanceola, the which is called Herba Uernalis, or the less plantaine
with an empty stomach for the space of thirty days, mixing it with the
extraction of the shauings of ivory, and the blood of a pigion, for the man,
the male, and for the woman, the female, in the Essence or oil of Craneum
Humanum.

49 In diseases of the eyes termed Catharacta or stili^idium and (called in the
Greek Epiphora) and in swellings and pains of the eyes, I have used
Medicamentum sieve Collirium nostrum made of Tutia Magistralis, wherewith we
did not only cure watering eyes, but also the great pain of the eye lids,
and also where there was flesh grovving over the sight of the eye, that it
seemed to be past the cure of those common Physicians that profess to be
skilful in theeies.

50 A certain disease called Palipus the which is a stinkng in the nose, I
cured with oil of Uitrioll and the water of wax.

51 One falling from a hie place pissed blood, the which is short space I
cured, giving him to drink j of a powder of our invention with iij. of the
flowers of Tiliae.

52 In the great scab I have often used ths Huguenot, made of Mercurie mortified
ij. Ceruse i. Euphorbium j Staphisagre, Lita^ge, Sanders, ana ss. mix them all
together with as much grease of a red hog as will suffice.

53 A certain man being long sick of the pox had two rumou^s and an ulcer in
his nose, at the which every day there came footth great quantity of stinking
and filchie matter, in whose nose I cast this decoction with a siring. R. Honey
iiij. the juice of Calendine, Common salt prepared ij. Aloes washed ss. mix
them together. Inwardly he was purged with Oleum Mercurij.

54 In hard and knotty impostumes of the govvte, I used Amoniacum dissolved in
vinegar mixed with the oil of Turpentine, also oil of Crystal, only
disperceth and consumes those knots, as I have oftentimes proved, or
Crystal calcined with the oil of Turpentine, also the oil of salt doth the
same.

55 In curing of pains in the mouth of the stomach, entralles, and belly, I
used the water of the flowers of Camomel iii. honey of Roses i.

56 One Ioannes Babtista a fair young man was infected with the pox two years
through the filthy sin of Sodomites, so that there grew a piece of flesh in the
invvard part of the neck of the great gut with such extreme pain that he was
almost dead, whom I cured by sweating many days, with a Malgamie made of
Mercurie and Iupiter, and opening his fundament with an instrument called
Specillum Ossicularium, and laying on oil of Uitrioll, upon the said
superfluous flesh, and afterward I cured that flesh eaten away, with a
suppositorie Incarnatiue.

57 One called Gallenus had lost his speech by means of a hole that he had in
the palate of his mouth coming of the pox, the which I cured with Mercurius
Dulcis diaphoreticus cast in by a siring, and so the flesh grew again and was
made whole.

58 One was troubled with great burning of the urine the which I help in this
order R. dry Roses, Pug, semis, Linseede, the seed of Coucumbers, Gourdes,
Melons, Mallowes, Purcelane, Populeon, ana two of the fruit of Alkekengi,
numero x. fair water l. i. fs. make thereof a decoction according to Art: then
strain it, and put thereto Troshiscorum Alkekengi ss. white sugar ij. Camphor
j. mix them and cast it into the yard with a siring or other instrument.

59 One being sick of a thisicke, which is an vlceration of the lunges, with a
consumtion of all the whole body, the which he took by the infection of his
own wife. I cured with the oil of Perrelles.

60 A certain woman had the course of her terms so long, that many times she
was ready to give up the ghost, whom I cured with the oil of Vitrioll, in
Plantane water, and j. of Carniola.

61 Pustules or Wheles in all parts of the body, and especially in the head
coming of the Pox, I cured only with the potion of Lignum Vitae or Gu^icum,
and his purgatiue Salt, without any other outward medicine.

62 A Fistula being between the testicules and fundament of a certain man
troubled with the pox, I healed by applying Oleum Arsenicale fixum.

63 A Hernia or Rupter which some call Ramex, in the with the bowels fall
into the coddes, I cured by the extraction of white sanicle, digested in bread,
and afterward taken in drink, keeping up the gut or entralles with a truss
made fit for the purpose, and laying upon the place offended, the Fesses
that remained of the extraction.

64 Intolerable pains in the legs, Ex morbo Venere^, I cured with the oil
of Lignum Vitae, mixed with old Theriacle.

65 A certain maiden through want of her monthly sickness was so vexed, that
sometime thrice a day she seemed to be haunted with an evil spirit, whom I
presently cured with the extraction of Rhabarbe, with the spirit of Tartar in
drink, with the water of Melissa arthemisiae and pulegi, in Oleo Uitrioli.

66 Pains in the teeth I cured by the juice of the nightshade and Persicariae
made warm in a Gargarisme burying the herbs afterward in a dunghill.

67 I prepared a powder of the ashes of Rosemarie, the which makes the yellow
teeth white, and heals tumours in the Gummes very quickly without blood.

68 In tumors of the vuule Gummes and jaws, I have used Oleum Uitriolli in
water of Persicariae.

69 In tumors of Scrophules, or hard impostumes of the breasts, I have used
the oil of Terpentine mixed with Misselto of the Oak in form of a huguenot.

70 At Ingoistad a city of Germanie, a certain man had the consumption of
the lungs, whom I cured with the extractiou of Consolida mayor in bread.

71 A certain woman the which after childbirth was not well purged of her
terms, presently fell beside her self, with other grievous pains in her
breast and reins of the back, whom I help only with the Essence of
An-timoni.

72 A maiden of ten years old after bathing her self fell into an Apoplexia,
which proceeded of the Flux of gross humours into the vessels and into the
parts of the head wherein consists the feeling and moving of the whole body
yet she snorted much in her sleep and trembled over all her body whom I
cured with Oleum cranij Humani, giving it with the spirit of Vitrioll in water
of Lavender.

73 A young sucking child had his palate and lips full of Pustules or wheles
called Aphtas, whom I cured by bathing them with a linen cloth wet in this
water. R. Consolidae maioris minoris, ana one handful, white wine ^j ss. boyle
them together and put thereto Sal Gemae, (...) ij. clarified honey l ij. and
make thereof a mixture.

74 A certain woman who wanted her natural courses, was thereby so tormented
that she abhorred all men, yea her very companions, whom I cured by opening
the inward vain of the arm, because I could not find the vain of the leg
called Saphena.

75 A man of three score years being full of Melancholy humours, had
crusty scabs over all his body, the which I cured with the medicine, R. the
juice of Plantane, Semperuiui, and nyteshad ana Oleum Lithargirij, as much as
will suffice, make thereof an huguenot wherewith thou shalt anoint all the
parts of the body.

76 One was troubled with a distillation or Cataract of the eyes, whom I cured
in this order. R. Tuti^ prepared and put into a fine linen cloth, and dip or
wet it well in Vino cretico, wherewith wash the eyes oftentimes and they shall
be help.

77 A certain woman after childbirth was troubled with great pain and chops
in her breast, which I cured washing them often with wine mixed with Oleum
saturn^ and afterward the child did suck.

78 A young maiden being troubled with a grreuous vomiting that she could
neither retain meat nor drink that she took, the entrails moreover swelled
exceedingly, whom I cured by applying a plaster of the leven of bread with
the juice of mint.

79 A certain woman that three months after she was conceived, feared
abortion or birth of her child before the time, whom I cured with the
Extraction of Rhabarbe with the spirit of Tartar, and afterward she drunk
oftentimes Essentia Melissae with Oleum Solis.

80 One Gotius, had a bone out of joint for three days, which afterward
swelled marvelously, the which swelling I help with Oleo Uerbasci and
Prunella, otherwise Primule with the juice of Camomilla, and Agrimonie, and
Oleum Petroleum, these being mixed together warm, I anointed the place being
grieved, and so the bone was restored to his place again: then afterward to
strengthen and comfort the joints, I used the said huguenot mixed with M^sselto
of the Oak, and Consolida Mayor, until the cure was perfectly done.

81 A woman being almost dead of the Colic, I cured with the red oil of
Vitrioll, drunk in Aniscede water, and a while after that potion, she voided a
worm and was cured.

82 A certain man called Barthelmew, having carnal company with his wife,
could void no sperm at his yard but only wind, the which by often using of
Oleum Vitrioli with the spirit of Tartar in distilled wine, and afterward the
Extraction of Satirion he performed the act very well.

83 A child of ten years old was troubled with a stone in the bottom of his
yard, the which I cured by giving him Oleum Vitrioli to drink in Aqua
Aqualiae, and then I applied outwardly oleo cancrorum with the oil of
Turpentine, and so within one hours space the stone came forth and he was
help.

84 A woman of twenty years old being married could have no children, who by
the use of taking the extraction of Satirion she conceived, and within nine
months she had a strong child, but lest that after her childbirth she
should become barren again and dried away with a leanenesse, I gave her to
drink Oleum Margaritarum with Romaine coleworts.

85 A certain woman being troubled with great abundance of her natural
sickness had great swelling and pains in her hands and feet, and fell many
times into a sound, whom I cured by taking often the Extraction of Rhabarbe.

86 To cause nurses to have abundance of milk, I have taken the fresh branches
or tops of fenell and boiled in water or wine, and given it to drink at
dinner, or supper, and at all times, for it greatly augments the milk.

87 One had in the a^mepit a sanguine impostume, upon the which impostume I
a^plied a linen cloth wet in mans blood, being warm, and so in short time he
recovered his health, not without great admiration.

88 One called Ambrose, while he yawned, suddenly the lower law remained with
great grief and pain, whom I cured with the decoction of Camomel, Uerbascum
Perforata, and such like, as before in Number. 80.

89 One was troubled three years with a disinesse in the head, whom I cured
within a month by drinking Oleum Uitrioli, in Betoni water.

90 A man being vehemently troubled a years space with pains in the head, I
cured only by opening of the skull, and in the same manner I cured the
trembling of the brain, taking therewithal, Oleum saltis in water of Basell.

91 A certain maid for want of her monthly sickness, was svvollen all the
body over, and had red Pustules, which always at certain hours of the day
appeared seven times, and vanished away with great pain of the stomach, and
sounding, whom I ^ured giving her in drink Essentia Splenis, extracted out of
the Spleen of an ox in the water of Melisse and Artemisiae.

92 I help one of the plurifie by drawing away blood of the inward vain of
the arm on that side, giving him also in drink Spiritus Tartari, in A^
Melissae and anoin^ing the outward par^ the mouse of th^ mountain.

93 A certain woman having a coroding ulcer in the left breast with great
pains, by means that she had not her natural sickness, she had also in the
right breast, neck, and arm^pit, certain kernels, and hard tumors, and
chiefly the left arm was astonished or taken, to whom I gave fundrie times a
purgation of the extraction of Rhabarbe, and the oil of Gold by the space of
a month, outwardly I washed the breast with the decoction of the roots of
Celandine in wine: also I laid thereon plegetes wet with Oleum Veneris, mixed
with honey and rooled it, and afterward I laid it on our common Opodeltoche,
and so she was perfectly cured.

94 One Rosina, was troubled with a quartain Agevv the space of tvvelue months,
with induration and swelling of the Spleen, whereof she fell into a kind of
dropsy which is called Ascitem, the which I purged first with Essentiae, and
Trochiscis Alhandali Serapionis. The second day I commanded her that she
should like in Diacubebe for the space of a month.

95 One had a hard svvelling in the flesh of his leg caused of (Morbus
Hispanicus) whom I cured with Oleum Antimoni, (...). Mercurie mortified
according to our order i. mixed into an vngent.

96 A noble woman was troubled with Empiema the which is a spitting forth of
filthy matter, whom I cured with Oleum Sulfuris drunk in water of
Ciclaminus M^lissa and Betonie.

97 in grievous pains of the joints I have used, Oleum Uitriolli in water of
turpentine, or water of vvormvvood.

98 A priest was troubled with the running govvte and with great pains in
his Kidneis, whom I cured only with oil of turpentine according to our
order.

99 A certain Queen through the Retention of her menstrues, had her tongue so
inflamed and svvollen that she could not speak, and had a lameness
throughout the whole body, and also fell besides her self, whom I cured by
drawing blood from the urine called Saphena.

100 A child of twelve years old had suddenly a great swelling in his head the
which was soft, whom I cured in four days with this medicine, R. oil of
Camomil, Tapsi Barbati, Hipericon, and mix them, and therewith anoint the
tumor.

101 A young man that was troubled with Spasmus Caninus, so that his mouth was
drawn awry, I cured by anointing the reins of the back with Balsamum
Helenij Hederae, and by little and little drawing the place being avvrie to his
form with the gentle rubbing of my hand: Moreover, I gave him in his drink
Oleum salis.

102 One had an impostume behind his ear, the which I cured in purging him
with our Essentia Mercurialis, and applying our Apodeliae.

103 I cured the inflation and hardness of the spleen, with my plaster made
of gummes, and oleum Philosophorum, with the juice of Ciclaminus.

104 A certain woman being avvake was vexed with Litargia, so that her eyes
were always shut, and if any had called her, she could scarce open her eyes,
and no man could understand what she said, not yet ansvver any man, the
which woman was brought to her perfect health only by the use of oleum
vitrioli.

105 A noble man in Carinthia was sick of the plague whom I cured by giving
him every morning electuariu^ i^niperorum, wherewith I mixed one sc^uple of
oil of vitrioll.

106 A Prince in Germanie that was troubled with the frenzy, by reason of a
sharpe fever, whom I cured with giving him five grains of Laudanum nostrum
which expelled the fever, and caused him to sleep six hours aftervvard.

107 A Gentlewoman of name was troubled with the suffocation of the matrix,
whom I cured with specifico nostro corticis ficus, being laid upon hot
coals, and taking the sum thereof at the lower parts, and presently she was
help.

108 A Lawyer of Augusta was long sick of the colic, and was forsaker of
other Physicians, whom I cured by giving him Laudanum nostrum.

109 A Barber of Argentine was greatly troubled with the head-ach, to whom I
gave the oil of sweet margerome to smell, and put a drop thereof into both
ears, and as soon as it was done he was help.

110 A certain woman at Colmaria, was troubled with the falling sickness, in
whose nose I put the oil of Gargates, and within a little while after she
recovered again; then I purged her with Elle^oro nostro, and the next day I
gave her certain drops of the oil of Cranei humanae, who afterward was
troubled no more.

111 A certain Baron was sore infected with Morbus Hispanicus and miserably
anointed with Vigoes huguenot, and left off the school doctors, whom I first
purged with our Specificum Torpetum, and then I gave him oleum solis
Margaritarum, in aqua guaici rectificate, and so he was perfectly cured.

112 Many that were troubled with the quartain fever I have cured with our
Turpeto, and also those that had the pestilence and pleurisy.

113 A certain man of fifty years old was vexed with a cramp that his head
and neck was drawn down to his breast, and could not lift nor stir it,
unto whom I applied Arcanum magnetis oleum salis, and so he was cured.

114 One was troubled with a palsy, whom I cured only with the essence of
Cheri drawn with the spirit of wine.

The end of the Experiments of Philip Theophrastus Paraselsus a most excellent
Doctor of the one and the other Physic: enjoin thereto the praise of Iesus
Christ, and farewell.
B. G. L P. Penotus Londrada a portu santae Mariae Aquitanus, greeting.
I Thought good (gentle Reader) to publish and make thee partaker of these
four particular things, which, if at the first fight they shall not seem to
agree with thy work and practise, thou must remember to impute that unto thine
error and ignorance; for, a light error doth mar a whole work, which thou
must amend by reading of Philosophers books. For which cause the sayings of
Philosophers are much and long to be searched, examined, and thought upon
before thou can get out the hidden meanings of them. If then in reading
Philosophers Books thou play the sluggard, thou can never be perfect in
preparing thy matters, and therefore I might not by the authority of the laws
of Philosophie, interpret all things openly, word for word to thee. Something
are to be left for industrious wits, wherein to exercise themselves by
studying and searching. Notwithstanding if thou be not unthankful, all these
things shall be opened and declared unto thee in my Galliae portu; where very
many workings hitherto known of few, shall faithfully be set forth. In the
mean season know thou, that I am not the deuiser of these particular things;
for some of them I had of gift, and some other for money and rewards came to my
hands. To thee I give them freely, which use well. Farewell.

A Treatise of certain particulars, whereof the first entreats of the
preparation of the Markasite of lead, as well for the transmutation of metals,
as for the alteration of mans body, c.
THe philosophers Saturne, is properly the markasite of lead, and in deed
doth excel Sol and Luna, in so much that Raymond saith, that in this inferior
world, there is no greater secret, then that which consists in the Markasite
of Lead, insomuch that they which have thoroughly sought out the force and
nature of it, have bound themselves together by other never to utter those
secrets of nature unto the end of ^heir lives. For so much as his operation is
of such kind, as truly it hath many and sundry uses, which being duly
prepared, doth not only alter and change the filthy and corrupt humours of our
bodies, but also can change and transmute by sundry experiments, Luna into
Sol.

Take of the Mineral markasite of lead xii. pound and grind it into sine
powder upon a Marbell stone, as they grind colours with vinegar: being well
ground and tempered, put it into a strong glass, and put thereon a good
quantity of distilled vinegar, and stir it well with a stick. and so let it
stand in Balneo Mariae: then set thereon a blind head, and there let it stand
eight days together, stirring and moving it every day six or seven times:
then let it cool: and the vinegar will be of a yellow colour, the which ye shall
power forth into another glass, taking heed that ye stir not the pheces:
then put thereon more vinegar, stir it well with a stick, and s^t on the
blind head and set it in Balneo Mariae other viii. days, as ye did before, then
power forth that vinegar being coloured into the other glass. And this order
ye shall use so long until you see the vinegar no more coloured, for at the last
the pheces will remain in a white mass, like white earth.

Distillation of the coloured Uenigar.
THen take all that vinigar being coloured, and distill it in Balneo until it
will drop no more, and there let thy cucurbit stand three days with the pheces
that it may dry well, then take it fourth, and thou shalt find in the bottom
of the glass a white matter, the which take out, for in that whiteness, the
rednes of the Markasite is hidden, which being prepared, avails much to make
aquam philosophorum that they call ardentem.

The preparation of the Pheces.
Take the white pheces or matter, and put it into a distilling vessel with a
great recipient very well luted, that the spirits go not forth, and set it
in the hot ashes, and give it a gentle fire, and then increase it according to
art a day or two, and there will come forth first a white water, and then a
red or golden yellow oil, the which is to be kept close with great care.

The pheces to be taken again.
Then take those pheses and set them in a calcining furnace eight days, then
take them forth and grind them finely, and put them in a glass with a good
quantity of distilled vinegar, and stir them well together; that being
done, set it again in Balneo for eight days together, and stir it every
day seven or eight times, the more the better, then let it wax cold and
settle, and power away the clear part from the pheces, but take heed that ye
stir not the dregs or bottom. Then power on fresh vinegar, and set it in
Balneo again, and do as ye did before, and then power away the vinegar again,
and cast away the pheses, for they are nothing worth.

The distillation of the vinegar.
Then take the vinegar which you reserved, and distill it with a gentle fire,
and in the bottom thou shalt find a salt, in the which remains all the
force and strength. Then calcine the said salt again in a reuerberatorie lour
and twenty hours with a great fire, then take it forth and put it in the
glass wherein it was before, and put thereon fresh viueger and set it in
Balneo. And this thou shalt do so often until the salt leave no pheces in the
bottom: that being done, distil thy vinegar as at the first, and thou shalt
find thy self prepared liquid and clear as Crystal.

Coniunctio spiritus corporis, scilicet olei salis.
Take the aforesaid salt, and grind it upon a stone dropping thereon his red
oil by little and little: that being do one, put it into a cucurbit luted with
Hermes seal, and so set it upon a treuet in an Athanor twenty days, and it
will be fixed into a red stone, so that ye have the true government of the
fire. Then take it forth and grind it upon a stone, and according to the
weight put thereunto as many Letones of the Calex offine gold, and upon all
these put on as much of the white water which ye distilled before the red oil as
all the whole doth weigh, and close it up with Hermes seal, and set it in
ashes in an Athanor with a soft fire until it be fixed, but after it be fixed
there will appear many colours, the which will turn into perfect oil and true
Elixer. Rejoice in this, but before ye begin the work, consider of it and
pray.

The second particular that is called Torpetum sieve diaphoreticum minerale,
purgiug without loathsomeness or difficulty, helping the pleurisy, the plague,
and especially the French pox.
Take Leonis a dracone repurgatissimi one part, aquilae mineralis
repurgatissimae twelve parts, mix them together according to Art, then put
them into a cucurbit of glass, and put thereon twice so much of the liquor of
red Colc^thor without fleme, as the matter weyeth, and then nourish it in warm
sand with a gentle fire three days taking heed that the matter ascend not
into the head. That being done, distill it that the pheces may remain dry,
then increase thy fire that the sand and glass may be red hot the space of
three hours: then let it wax cold, and take out the matter and beat i^ finely,
and wash it with fair distilled water, until it have lost his sharpness,
and that thou shalt do diverse times till it be well purged: then dry it and
put it into a glass, and put thereunto the spirit of wine that it may be
covered three fingers hie, and set it on fire, and thus thou shalt do three
times, and th^ ^t thou without any doubt a greater secret to heal his proper
disease, so that within six da^es he shall be quite whole. The dose is about
five grains in conserve of roses drunk with wine or Sacc^ro Ros^to as well in
the morning as at night when he goes to bed, and let the patient sweat
thereon two hours at each time. It is a most sovereign medicine against all
contractions, and you use it (as before) according to the nature of the disease.
But the patient must use it six days. If there appear any pustules ye shall
cure them by touching them with oil of Sulphur. Moreover those that have the
dropsy or such like moist diseases in the body are cured by giving them six
grains in water of Cardus Benedictus, letting them sweat thereon as is
aforesaid and keeping the order before set down. Against the Plu^isie, ye
shall give four grains in the said water. And against the plague in rose
vinegar. Against the falling sickness with water of black che^ies or Pionie.
Furthermore, if any have had the same disease by nature, ye shall give them
every day a little pill in Aqua Pionia, putting thereon six drops of the
spirit of Vitrioll. If I would show or express all the virtues, I should write
a book there of, but that which remains I will show more at large in my
book called Portus G^sconicus with the order to draw the spirit of wine.

The third particular called Laudanum. Anodinum, the which is most excellent of
all other secrets in as^ging griefs and pains in diverse disease^.
TAke Liquor is aquae inexpert^ inspissati ij put thereto the spirit of wine,
and set it in Balneo to digest, until it have drawn away the Tincture: then
power it forth into a clea^e vessel, and put on more, and so set it to digest
again so long as it will give any Tincture or colour. Then take the gum of
Henbane dried in the ^unn^ j. and draw away his Tincture with the spirit of
wine, as thou did out of the liquor aforesaid, then take Di^mber ij. and
likewise draw away his Tincture with the spirit of wine, and keep it very
close until such time as I shall show thee: then take momia ss. and draw away
his Tincture with the spirit of wine, and when thou hast done mix it with the
other, then take Crocus Orientalis iij. and draw forth his tincture and mix
it with the rest, and every day sti^re it, and keep it in a warm place close
stopped fifteen days; that being done, distil it in Balneo, and there will
remain a little matter in the bottom, then put thereto a little of the
Tincture of Di^mbrae, the which ye reserved before, and so let it stand in
digestion until it be thick, stirring it 3. or 4. times a day until the
smell of the liquor be in a manner consumed, the which will be in six weeks.
Then take these that follow, the liquor of Currall, clear Ambre o^ Succinum of
each j. Unicorns horne 6. grains, Magisterium Perlarum one scr^ple* Ossis de
Corde C^rui half a scrupple, Aurum Potabile, or his Tincture ss. All these
being finely beaten and mixed in a stone or glass mortar, with the spirit of
Diamber, put in with the residue being thick, and so stirring it sundry days
afterward distill al the spirit of wine away, then put thereon the residue of
the spirit of Diambrae, and when it is almost dry, put thereto Olei succini,
olei masi Cinamoni of each about one scruple. Then take one part and reserve it
for women without musk, for it hurts them. But to the other part for men,
put in half a scruple of the extraction of musk made with the spirit of wine,
and set it in a warm place that it may dry, and so keep it to thy use. Ye
may give it in form of pills or dissolve it in some convenient liquor,
inconvenient Dose, as iij. grains or fix grains, for those that are of
strong nature. It comfort much against the colic, the frenzy hot
Fevers, Arthritide P^dagra, the weakness of the stomach, the yex, and
comfort against vomiting, provokes sleep. Against the falling ficknes ye
shall give iij. grains with the spirit of Vitrioll and Essentia Camphora that
is drawn with oil of sweet Almondes, the which is made in this order.

The order to draw the Essence of Campher.
Take Campher (...) oil of sweet Almondes ss. macerate them in the sun or
in Balneo, or in a dry warm furnace four and twenty hours, then draw
forth his Tincture or essence with the spirit of wine, and put thereto j of
Laudanum, and ii of the spirit of vitrioll, and six of the water of pionie
flowers, and stir them together, and give thereof one spoonful at the time of
the fit. It is a most excellent remedy against all uncurable diseases.

The fourth specificum called Panchimagogon, the which doth purge in small dose
all noisome spirits that are mingled with the humours.
Take Specierum Di^rhodon abbatis ii. and draw forth the tincture with the
spirit of wine, and keep it by it self. Afterward take the Pulpe of
Colocinthides vii. Turbit v. Agariei i ss. Heleborinigri vii. Dyagredi vi.
Foliorum scene iiii. Rhabarbari ii. El^teri ss. beat them and mix them
together, and put thereon Sinamon water, the which is made in this order. The
Sinamond ^i. and stamp it grossly, then infuse it in white wine four and
twenty hours close stopped, then distil it with a gentle fire being close
luted, for with this sinamond water or spirit of wine, thou may draw forth
the tincture of all the aforesaid drugs. Always provided, that ye keep
them a month in a warm place to macerate, stirring them three or four times
in a day, and at the end of the month power forth the liquor, and put the
pheses into a Retort, and distill forth the oil and water, the oil ye shall
rectify, and reserve. The pheses that remain ye shall calcine, and make
thereof a salt, the which ye shall put to the oil that ye rectified. Then take
that liquor which ye reserved first, and distill it in Balneo, and in the
bottom there will remain a matter thick like honey. Then take the tincture
of Di^trodiou Abbatis, and power it upon that thick matter, and stop well thy
glass, and set it in a warm place eight days, stirring it every day. That
being done, draw it away the spirit in Balne^, until it remain thick like
honey, unto the which ye shall put his oil that ye distilled, mix them and let
them digest-vntil it be so thick that ye may make thereof pills, the which ye
may do so soon as it feels the cold: for in the cold it will wax hard, and
in heate it will wax liquid: the dose is from one scruple to two scruples
where there shall be need of purging in the powder of Licores, for so it works
without pain.

Four principal diseases whereunto almost all other diseases may be referred.
THe Leprosy is the first, whose badges all manner of ulcers do bear, as
itch, seabs, Alopecia, scurffes, scabs, choppes in the skin, foulness, the
dead evil, and such like diseases.

To the got doth belong the colic, pain in the reins, Orexes pain in
the teeth, running gowtes, painful flixes* pain of the head Cephalea and
Himecrania.

To the dropsy are referred all manner of fevers, appostumes, the iaunders,
and evil digestion.

To the falling sickness belongs Cathares, beating of the heart, cramps,
giddines of the head, Apoplexis and suffocation of the matrix.

If any of the principal of those diseases be healed, al the other inferior be
also cured.

For the cure of the got three things are required, that is, resolving,
mitigating and strengthening.

Wherefore, if thou be of any quick judgment, the four particulars before set
down are sufficient for thee.

The chiefest point of health consists in this, not to fill thy self with
meat, nor to be slow in labour.

Barnardus G. Penotus Landrad^ a Portu S. Mariae Aquitanu^ ^nto the singular
learned man Iohn Aquill^ the hammer of the Ethnickes, wishes much health.
NOt only in these our days (friend Iohn) but also in the old time amongst
the learned, this proverb hath taken place, that ignorance is the mother of
marvelling. Who in these days would not marvel to see men utterly void of al
manner of learning to be preferred before learned men and such as are most
skilful in the Latin and Greek tongues, and those are to be embraced of kings
and princes, and rewarded with most liberal gifts, most famous and learned
men expert in all the tongues to be rejected and contemned? You which excel in
judgment and learning will ansvver that every perfect gift comes down from
the Father of light. Therefore God doth in these latter days stir up these
Idiots and Empericks, to stir up every physician that he should rightly
prepare his own medicines with his own hands, and being so prepared, with
sharp judgment apply them to their proper diseases, that the seed of the
disease may be pulled up by the roots, and not to commit it to an unskilful
cooke. And therefore of necessity from hence must both the theorike and the
practise, the reason and the work concur and join together, because
judgment without practise is barren. The greatest number of them will ansvver,
we know not your works and preparations which require so great and hard
labour, we are now old and doctors, we will not be made yonglings and
schollers again. If this ansvver might take place, the Jew, the Pope the Tu^
would not change their superstitions. which notwith^anding we know to be most
contrary to the sacred scripture. But we sufficiently and daily prove by
calcining, subliming, dissolving, putrefying, distilling, congealing and fixing
by this most laudable art of Al^himie, how the pure may be separated from the
impure, and the corruptible from the incorruptible, and that which is venomous
and deadly be changed and made wholesome and good, and as Paracelsus saith
concerning this art, we shall first consider that al things are created of god,
for he created of nothing something, and that something is the seed of all
things, and that seed works that effect hereunto ordained and appointed. Al
things notwithstanding are so created that they shall come unto our hands, and
begin to be in our power, but so, as things not perfect, but to be made
perfect: as things not finished, but to be finished. The matter in them truly
is perfect, but the middle and last matters remain to be made perfect. As for
example, God created iron, earth, and clay, but not such as they should be,
for the clay grows, yet not like a pot or other earthen vessel: so he
created iron lying in a rude mass, and hath given it so rude unto us:
therefore we with our labour must make thereof shoes for horses, sithes, and
spears. Even so is it in Physic, for that is also created of God, but not so
that it should be utterly perfect, but as yet hidden under the earth, not
purged from his unclean matter, but that which remains to be made perfect in
it, is committed to the Chimist, that is, to the physician to be purged and
cleansed. For herbs, trees, stones, and iron, and whatsoever is seen with the
eyes, is not true medicine, but is rude and impure, wherein as yet the pure
part lies hid. And therefore Alchimie teaches to purge the medicine to
dissolve it, and to separate things of contrary kind from things of the same
kind, otherwise rotten things would be mingled with rotten, and the corrupt
with the corrupt, and so conspire to one effect, so that of one disease many
other should spring or arise. Briefly, every man loves not that whereof he hath
no understanding or knowledge, but flies from it, contemns it, and thinks
it not meet to be learned. The body only cares for that which is outward,
but the mind worshippeth his God. By how much more the knowledge or
understanding of any thing doth increase or grow, so much the more is the love
of the fame augmented. For all things consist in the true knowledge of them,
and out of that springs all the good fruits that redound to knowledge.
Knowledge also brings faith, for he that knows God, begins straitway to
put his trust in him. For such as every mans faith is, such is also his
knowledge.

And contrariwise he that doth otherwise work about nature, works like a
Painter that paints an image, in the which is neither life nor strength:
wherefore those which you call Emperickes shall rise even before your faces,
and take in hand and help grievous diseases, the cures whereof are unpossible
unto you: and you together with your consolations and reasonings shall be made
laughing stocks. As lately B. in Germanie it happened of a certain noble and
famous woman which was vexed with the pain of the matrix. Some physicians
said it was the gravel and the stone; but an Empiric passing by affirmed
that it was neither the gravel nor the stone, wherefore he commanded a remedy
to be prepared for the matrix, the which being done, she was straitwayes
healed. Oh what a rumour was raised by and by of him! stirring up others also
to rumours and tales, saying, that her husband doth contemn us that will
rather use the advise and counsel of an Empiric, then ours. Yea and others
that seemed wiser did finally regard him that would every hour use the help of
an Empiric man most unlearned. Mark I pray you (my friend Aquilla) how the
enemies inflamed with envy go about to oppress the truth: but at the last,
will they, nill they, they shall be enforced to confess that that cannot be
denied. But you may object unto me; He that speaks all, excludes nothing.
For there be many worthy learned men masters and professors of Physic, that
do not deny or refuse this art. In the which number are those most excellent
and singular masters and doctors Petrus Seuerynus Danus which hath written
marvelous things of this Chemical Art, that worthy and godly man Michael
Neander professor of humanity, Theodorus Zuingerus of Basil a man practised
in this Art, and also Theodorus Brickmannus a physician of Cullein, which both
by word deed daily excells with most deep judgment in these matters, whom I
wilneuer overpass with silence.

Hereafter follows three particular treatises, the first of the sulphur of
gold and other metals, then of stones, and the extraction of Coral.
R. Purged and fine gold made in plates j. the powder of pomise stone iiij. lay
them Stratum Superstratum, and reuerberate it with dry wood five days and
nights together, then take the powder and keep it in a glass. Then melt the
gold again, and make it in plates and lay it Stratum Superstratum as ye did
before, and that ye must do until the gold have lost his yellow colour, after
take al thy powders together, and put it in a glass with distilled vinegar,
and there let it remain until the vinegar be coloured yellow, then power it
forth and put in more, and that thou shalt do so often, until the vinegar be
no more coloured, then vapour away the vinegar, and thou shalt find an
inpalpable powder in the bottom. If thou be wise, look where thou made
an end, there begin; the like is of other mettalles. But they are not to be
reuerberated so long; you shall have of silver a bluish colour, ofyron a
reddish colour, of copper a darkish colour. There is drawn out of Coral a red
tincture. All which things are to be corrected with the spirit of wine being
often powered thereon, there cannot be a shorter or profitabler way found out for
this. Iron plates for one time are of force, but after the first Cimentacion
they serve no more. His tincture being rightly prepared is used in stead of
gold. If it be drawn out of the best steel, it will fix the mercurie of
Saturne.

The second particular is of the marvelous preparation of the markasite of
Lead, tincting water or other liquor into his red colour.
R. Salt common prepared vitrioll Roman of each i vi. set them in a fire of
calcination ten hours, then take it forth and beat it to powder, then put it
into a stone pot vnglased, and give it fire 15 hours according to Art, then
will distil forth both the oil and the spirit together, the which ye shall
rectify in a pelican, then being rectified put thereunto the markasite of lead
in powder, being in a strong cucurbit well luted, and then set it in ashes in
a fornace, under the which ye shall set a burning lamp for the space of a
month, and then the Markasite will dissolve into a red matter: afterward take
common foun^aine water and power thereon, then set it to dissolve in a moist
place or cellar, and the flower of the Markasite will turn like to a red
crystal: the which take to thy work. It purges the leprouse blood in
plurisies, the plague, Contractures, the lungs and liver the quantity of one
piece in greatness, doth serve to dissolve the same.

The third particular, and the sum of the whole work.
R. Album. Albius, Albo as much as ye will, Aqua Soluens vi. times as much, and
set them in Balneo three days, then take it forth, filter it, and dry it:
then again dissolve it, and that do three times: being dry, dissolve it by it
self, of the which solution, take three parts olei permanentis incombustibile
one part, Aeris four parts, shut thy vessel, and in that heate nourish it,
and in few days thou shalt have a universal medicine to expel all diseases.
Rejoice, and give praise unto Iesus Christ.

A Fragment out of the Theorickes of (...). Iscaacus Hollandus.
Amongst all things that were created of God, water was the first, whereunto
God joined his proper earth, and of earth, whatsoever hath essence or life hath
his original. Therefore there are two manifest elements, that is, water and
earth; in which the two other lie hid, the fire in the earth, and the air in
the water: and they are so knit together, that they cannot be separated. Two of
them are fixed, as the earth and fire. two are flying, as water and air.
Therefore every element doth participate within other elements. Moreover, in
every element are two other elements, one decaying, putrefying and combustible,
the other eternal and incorruptible as the heaven: besides in these natures
lies hid an other nature which is called by the name of stinking Pheces, which
hinder and take away the strength of the rest, so as they have very little force
or none, and thereby make the other elements stinking and subject to
putrefaction. There is also two kinds of waters, the one elemental, the other
of rain and river waters; as there is also two kinds of earths, one
elemental, clear, shining, and white, the other black, stinking, and
combustible. Like as also there be two fires, one elemental and natural, the
other stinking and combustible: the like is also to be said of the air. The
base things are so mingled with the rest, that by and by they corrupt al
things, so that nothing can continue long, for they bring death and weaken all
nature be it never so noble. This is to be understood of all things both
vegetall, animal, and mineral. Therefore it is necessary by Art to seperate
the elemental nature from the corruptible, that the matter may be brought to a
medicinal quality. There be three most subtle spirits in all things, that
is, colour, taste, and smell, these fly away invisibly, the Philosophers call
them wild spirits, because they are not fixible, yet the industry of the
artificer may fix them. They always grow in the bodily substance until they
come to perfection and end. The herb therefore is to be taken when it is fully
grown, and take heed that you loose none of those three spirits, as the
ignorant use to do, with their putrifactions and separations of elements. For
none of those spirits consists of the three elemental elements: but God
hath adorned elements with those three spirits, and of them the fire is
animal, the water air elemental, and no man but God can seperate them
asunder. But the water of the clouds may be separated from them. Also all the
pheces may be separated from them which are mingled with them, which are the
stinking and corruptible elements, and the four elemental elements may be
brought to a christalline shining: but these three elements, fire, air, and
earth are inseparable. My son, know this, that Mercurie is the first of all
things, for before time there was water, and the spirit of the Lord rested upon
the water, but what was that water, the water of the clouds, or a moisture
which might be powered out? No: but it was a dry dusty water, God had joined
his earth unto it which is his sulphur, and so the earth congeals the water,
and thereof sprung the four elements included in these two by the will of God.
Therefore Mercurie congeals sulphur, and sulphur Mercurie; neither can one
of these be without the other, as also they cannot be without their salt, which
is the chiefest mean by whose help nature engenders and brings forth all
vegetals, minerals, and animals. Wherefore these three, mercurie, salt, and
sulphur can not be one without another, for where the one is found, there the
other are found also, neither is there any thing in nature wherein these three
are not found* and of these three whatsoever is in nature hath his original,
and are so mingled with the four elements, that they make one body, and the
salt is drowned in the bottom of the elements, for it is necessary that the
salt should keep them united by his sharpness and d^inesse, notwithstanding
it is a flying spirit, but because it sticks in the botome of the mixture,
and is overcome of the fatness and combustible oil, in which it is found, as
the yolke within the white of the egg, and the combustible oil lives of the
earth with the ^alt and pheces, and the salt is buried in the bottom of the
pheces of the combustible oil and earth, therefore it cannot fly away from
the earth, but by great force of fire. These three spirits whereof we have
spoken, are said first to be separated from the mixture of the elements which
is the soul of all things, or their quintaessence, which holds together the
whole mixture of the elements, for when the spirits are gone cut, then the
mixture is dissolved by it self and divided, neither is there need of fire to
expel the salt from the earth, when the elements are separated from the pheces,
then is the salt also separated with it. This salt is unknown to the
ignorant. Therefore salt is the mean between the gross earthly parts, and
the three flying spirits resting in the natural heat, that is, the taste,
moist smell, and colour: which three are the life, soul, and quintaessence of
every thing, neither can these three spirits be one without the other, as the
Father, the Son, and the Holie-ghost are one, yet three persons, and one is
not without the other. The ignorant laugh, neither understand they these three
spirits, when as they are tied to the gross earthly fixed parts, and are made
subtle, and their salt is joined and mingled with them, it must transform
them all together, and fix them into a cristalline body Diaphanes and red of
colour, whereof we will speak hereafter; he that knows not this salt, shall
never bring any to pass in Art. The philosophers call this salt a dry water
and a lively salt, but the ignorant thought they meant mercurie, but the
Philosophers called the three spirits Mercurie, and the earth Sulphur, which
the ignorant understand not. Either of them can not be without the other,
neither is there any thing in nature, in which these three are not, and they
are so mixed with the four elements that they make one body and mixture.
Whatsoever God hath created is in these three stones, wherefore all may be
reduced into a cristalline cleernesse by Art, given by God unto the
Philosophers, for in the latter days God will seperate all the unclean pheces
and corruption that is in the elements, and bring them to a cristalline
cleerenesse and redness of a carbuncle. Afterward there shall be no more
corruption, but they shall endure for ever. Do you think that all things
which God hath created in these lower parts, should utterly perish in the
latter day? No, not the least hair of those things which God hath created no
more then the incorruptible heaven, but God by his will will change all things,
and make them christalline, and the four elements shall be perfect, simple,
and fixed in themselves, and they shall be all a quintaessence. Demonstration
of these things may be made here on earth by Art, for whatsoever God hath
created may be brought to a cristalline cleerenesse, and the elements gathered
together into a simple fixed substance, which being done, no man can alter
them, neither the fire it self burn or change them, but they shall continue
perpetually as those things which have attained eternity.

The order to draw forth the Quint^essence of Sugar, collected out of the
vegitable and animal works of Isacke Holander.
Here will I show thee a great secret, howe thou shalt draw forth the
quintaessence of Sugar, the which truly excells all vegitable works, by
mean of his temperature like unto the incorruptible heaven, the which is
neither hot, cold, nor dry, but most temperate, nevertheless compounded of the
four elements, but they strive not one with another, for if they are so joined
together, that they can never be separated one from an other, but for ever
remain simple and fixed in unity. But this heaven doth distribute and give
unto the earth whatsoever is necessary for it, although that it self be
neither hot nor cold, moist nor dry, the which like effects hath the
quintaessence of sugar, the which in it self hath the four elements, as gold
hath: as gold is pure, so sugar is impure, gold outwardly is hot and moist,
inwardly cold, and dry, and white: sugar is the contrary, for it is
outwardly cold and dry; and inwardly hot and moist and red, and fixed both
outward and inward. Neither is there any thing wanting, but that the inward
quality may be brought, that his redness may appear outwardly, and that his
pheses be separated, then is it prepared, and shall not need to be fixed, for
it is fixed already, and doth retain with it self al outward and inward
spirits, and whatsoever is volatill, it doth retain. Now what his kind is I
will tell thee, and from whence he hath his original, that is, even out of the
red, but if thou wilt be further satisfied, read the three and thirty chapter
of the generation of those things that grow in the seas, and other waters,
where we write largely of the nature thereof. Here it shall be sufficient for
us to show the order how to prepare it, and in what order it should be used
in medicine, and also to other things where it may be applied. His nature is to
retain or hold all flying spirits, and to fix them into a stone, as shall be
showed hereafter. First ye shall understand that ye cannot seperate the pheces,
except ye bring the inward parts outward, that is to say, that his inward dark
golden colour do appear, the which when it is so di^d, his redness is seen,
and this fire passing the yellowness of his air, or his in^obustible oil,
then may thou first seperate the pheces from the Quintaessence. Take
therefore hard and white Sugar, for it is not needful that ye travel much
in dissolving and congealing of it, although there be much impurity therein,
that hinders not, but that the inward part may be brought forth, for it
must be purged when as the rednes doth show it self outward. Take therefore
ten or twenty pounds of sugar more or less, as ye shall think good, that
being beaten, put it into a cucurbit^ of hard stone, and put thereon Aqu^
vitae, that it may stand covered viii. fingers, then distil it in Balueo with a
strong fire until it will distil no more, then let it wax cold, and power on
the said Aqua vitae again and distill it again, and this shalt thou do six
or seven times: at the last open the head and take forth the sugar, which thou
shalt put in a strong glass, and set it in fine ^ifted ashes, and put thereon
the Aqua vitae, and distill it until the half be come forth, then power on
again the Aqua vitae which thou distilledst away, first being made warm lest
the glass should break: ye shall note that the head would have a hole in the
top, by the which ye may power in the Aqua vitae with a funnel; this thou shalt
repeat often with a strong fire, that the wine and the sugar may boyle in, and
because the half part of the wine will come away quickly, ye shall presently
put on the other part, for if ye should distill forth all the wine, the sugar
would burn through too much heate, because it must continually be boiling in
the glass, and it would smell of the burning, for it hath always his
combustible sulfure, wherefore ye must always have half the wine in the
vessel, and when thou see the half is distilled forth, make the same warm
and put it in again with a funnell, and that thou shalt so often repeat,
until the sugar remain as red as blood, the which thou shalt perceive through
the glass. Thou may bring that to pass in viii or ten days according as
thou rulest thy fire. Note, that when thou perceives the matter to be red let
it cool, and take away the vessel with ashes, and set the vessel in Balneo,
and with a strong fire distill away the Aqua vite until the Sugar remain dry,
and when it will distill no more, yet shalt thou let it stand 4. or 5. days
very hot in the said Balneo that the sugar may be perfectly congealed, then let
it cool and take out the matter or stone, the which will be black like pich,
that is to be understood when it is congealed, then take the said stone and
put it into a great quantity of common water twice distilled and set it in
Balneo five or six days, with a great heate slightly covered, stirring it
every day five (...) six times with a wooden ladle, then let it cool* and
^ake it forth and let it settle three or four days, then power of that which
is clear into another vessel, and keep it close, then power on those pheces
the sublimed water as a fore, and set it in Balneo to digest three days,
stirring it with a ladle as ye did before, then let it cool and settle, and
power of the clearest part, as ye did before and put it to the roast, then power
on more water upon the Pheces and digest it in Balneo as before, and this ye
must so often repeat until the water be no more coloured, then thou may
cast away the pheces for they are nothing worth, for the Element of the earth
is with the Element of fire and water, neither can they be separated any more
but are fixed together. Make thereof a trial, for there will remain nothing
but a light ashes. It will burn like oil or fat, neither doth there any thing
remain more then of oil or fat. Take the glass wherein is all the red of the
solution and distill it in Balneo, or let it vapour away if ye have store of
distilled water until it be dry, then let it cool take off the head, and power
thereon more sublimed water, and set it in Balneo again, and stir it about
with a wooden ladell as ye did before, then let it settle as before power out
of the clearest part, and that thou shalt do so long until there remain no
more pheces, at the length put it in a glass that may abide the fire and boyle
or vapour it away so long until there appear a certain scum thereon, then
take it forth and set it in a cold and dry, or hot and dry place, and it
will grow into a great red mass or lump and transpirant like a ruby or other
philosophers stone, the which if thou wile bring to powder, set it in a warm
dunghill in a large wide glass open and let it vapour away, until it be come
into a yellow powder like unto gold, and so thou shalt have the Quintaessence
of Sugar fixed, the which will retain al flying spirits. Neither is it sweet
but a heavenly taste, the which if ye put it in your mouth it will melt
without any feeling. If it be winter or cold thou shalt seem to feel a
certain natural heate throughout the whole body and shalt seem so temperate
and light as though thou could fly. If thou be ouerhot, swallow a little,
presently thou shalt cole easily as though thou went into a cold bath, and
thus it works in heate, moist, cold, and dry, by an incredible miracle, when
ye will use it, drink it with rectified aqua vitae, or rose water, Endiue or
Scabiowes, or by it self if ye will* and thou shalt see marvels: if any be
diseased outwardly with scabs or ulcers, let him drink of this, and wash the
^ores with wine wherein this Quintaesse^ is dissolved, and he shall presently
wax whole, most miraculously. If any be wounded or thrust in with any weapon
so that it be not deadly, let him drink j of this Essence with warmed wine,
and wash the wound with wine wherein the Quintaessence is dissolved he shall
be presently cured, so that those which shall hear or see it shall be amassed
thereat. It helps also the falling sickness, pestilence, and all such
diseases as may happen, unto man: if ye have Aurum Potabile ye shall mix lij,
with lj^ of this Quintaessence in a glass, and set it on a treuet or in a dry
Balneo 30. days in an Athanor and they will be s^ together, and then it will
work miracles in mans bod^ ye may also when ye have drawn the Quintaessence
of any herb, Coagulate and fix it with the same as I said before with Aurum
Potabile, and thou shalt see thereof ^les. Furthermore if ye will have it to
pass the helm ye must put thereon as much vinegar or aqua vitae and distil
it, and again power on fresh vinegar or aqua vitae draw it away again vnti^l
the Quintaessence doth ascend in a red golden colour, as we have showed in many
places how to distil those matters that are fixed by vinegar or aqua vit^, for
when it is distilled by the Limbecke, his virtues are angmented a thousand
times, will work strange cures: keep this as a secret, for it is a great mystery
in nature.

Here begins a manuel or handy work, how the Quintaessence may be drawn
out of honey.
NOw will I open unto you a great secret in the vegetall work of honey, to wit,
a marvelous nature, for it is drawn out of the most noble pure part of the
flowers. The nature of Bees is such, that they draw out the best of every
thing, as in the Animal work is more at large described, wherein there is
taught how to extract the nature of al beasts, and specially in the 84.
Chapter. Wherefore (my son) know this, that al that God hath created good in
the upper part of the world, are perfect and vncorruptible, as the heaven: but
whatsoever in these lower parts, whether it be in beasts, fishes, and all
manner of sensible creatures, herbs, or plants, it is endued with a double
nature, that is to say, perfect, and imperfect: the perfect nature is called
the Quintaessence, the imperfect the Pheces or dregs, or the vene^ous or
combustible oil. Therefore you shall seperate the dregs and combustible
oil, and then that which remains is perfect, and is called the
Quintaessence, which will endure continually even as the heaven, neither can it
be dissolved with fire or any other thing. For when God had created all
things, and looked upon them, they were all perfect good, there was nothing
lacking to any, and therefore for loves sake, I say unto thee, that God hath
put a secret nature or influence in every creature, and that to every nature of
one sort or kind he hath given one common influence, and to every one of
several kinds their several influence, and virtue, whether it be on
Physic, or other secret works, which partly are found out by natural work
manship. And yet more things are unknown then are apparent to our senses:
what, do you not think that an herb that is appointed for one disease which
it will cure, doth not contain in it many more virtues then are known unto
us? Yes truly many more. This also Iadde, that if the pheces and combustible
oil be taken away from this thing or herb, which in all things is the poison,
that should be taken away that brings death unto us, and the elements should be
purified, and so burned together by Art, that they shall pass together by a
Limbecke, and be joined together, as it were coupled in marriage, that it may
root out al manner of disease from every thing, be it herb or living thing, or
be drawn from his venom, as in the 14. chapter of the Prologue of this book
is declared, and also in the Prologue of the Animal work, whereas the manner
of drawing the Quintaessence out of all venomous beasts, birds, worms, and
flies, is plainly declared, that it may help all the griefs of man, but that
specially is drawn out of the blood of man, and there is likewise declared,
that there is no need of things without man or beast to help such as are
infected. For every creature contains in himself the remedy of his disease,
which remedy may be drawn without the hurt of man or beast, that the disease
may be miraculously cured, as is there most excellently taught in the
the^ricke and in the practise. Therefore I would write this, that thou soon
might understand what marvelous force is in honey, which is taken out of
all flowers, and gathered into one mass, which truly is endued with sundry
virtues. For if GOD hath given unto other things the gift of healing, what then
is there not in honey, which is gathered out of so many flowers, and every
herb endued with his own proper virtue? Truly if it be brought to his height
and excellency, it will work marvelously. Now consider what lies hidden in
this Quintaessence, and esteem it not lightly, but keep it secret as the most
excellent thing of al the animal work, the which being obtained, you shall
need no other medicines to put away al the accidents of the body.

The second Chapter.
NOw I will set in hand with the practise. Take twelve quarts of the best
virgin Honey, and put it in a great earthen vessel with a Limbecke well luted,
and set it in Ealneo, lute a recipient to the neck of it, and distil that
which will distil of it in your Balneo boiling. My son know this, that there
is no common water in honey but only Philosophical and Elemental, for the
Element of air doth first pass with the Element of fire, in the which the
air is contained, and the air when it rises resembles the savour of aqua
vitae distilled, and at the first can not be known from aqua vitae, neither by
sight, neither savour: distill it until there will no more arise. Then leave
the vessel in Balneo five days with a Limbecke and receiver, let it boyle
night and day that the matter may be dried, then let it cool and take it out
and take away the receiver and Limbecke, and that which is in the receiver
power into the vessel again upon the d^ie matter and set it in Balneo and
cover the mouth of the vessel with a clean dish well luted, and let your
Balneum be only luke warm. My son understand that it may thus be done, for
it is good that the fire be drawn with his proper air, so as a ma would stay
so long, for it wold be of the greater force. The ancient Philosophers wrought
in this sort, but the danger is when the vessels shall be opened lest the
water fly away, for it is as su^till as wine. For every time the air is to
be drawn away and again to be powered on, making putrefaction in a warm
Balneo, but first it must be well luted, and a Limbecke being set on with a
receiver, you must reiterate the work until the fire rise like unto red
blood. There is another methode or rule of working found out in these our days
which is in this sort.

The third Chapter.
THey are thus drawn out and the matter dried, as is aforesaid, then take
common water twice distilled in Balneo and power on as much as is sufficient,
and set it in Balneo, cover the mouth of the vessel: but let not the Balne^
boil, and so let it stand three days and three nights, moving it day and
night* with a spattle of wood: let it cool be poured out and strained. Then
take a clean vessel and pour out that which is clear, and power upon the
pheces fresh distilled water as you did before, set the vessel in Balneo, and
do as you did before: let it be cleared and put aside with the first water,
and put on again fresh water distilled and set it in Balneo as aforesaid, and
do this so often until the water be no more coloured, for then have you the
fire separated from the earth, but reserve the earth or Pheces until I tell
you further what you shall do with it, for there is yet a combustible oil in
it.

The fourth Chapter.
TAke the vessel wherein is the coloured water, and set it in Balneo with a
Limbecke and receiver well luted, and distill al the water with a boiling
Balneo let the matter be well dried and cool, then take away the Alimbicke let
the vessel remain in Balneo and power on the water again upon the matter and
make a fire and set a dish upon the mouth of the vessel and let it stand so
in Balneo three days, every day moving it with a spattell of wood 3. or 4.
times, then let it cool and be taken out and strained. Then take a clean
vessel and softly power out that which is clear into it, and upon the pheces
straightwaies pour on fresh distilled water stirring it about with a woden
ladle, and let it stand to clear one day, the Pheces which remain put unto
the first Pheces. Then take a vessel and set it in a boiling Balneo until it
be dry and reiterate this work until there remain no Pheces in the bottom
of the vessel, so shall you have the pure Element of fire: and the Element of
the air also must be so often distilled until there remain nothing in the
bottom: and in this sort you shall have the pure Element. Seperate then the
water from the fire, and let it dry, so shall you have a clear shining matter
like to Camphere: keep the fire well in a glass, and the air with the water
in another glass^ well closed until you have your earth prepared.

The fifth Chapter.
TAke all the earth with the Pheces, and draw out the combustible oil by a
discensorie that is with two vessels joined and luted together until the
combustible oil do pass, which is profitable for all cold diseases and other
passions which were too long to rehearse: if you desire not the combustible
oil, suffer it to fly away. Then tak^ your earth, and calcine it in a furnace
of reverberation gently, until it be al white as snow, then take a great
earthen or stone vessel, and put your white calcined earth into it, and power
out a good quantity of common water distilled, and stir it with a wooden
ladle, and set it three days in a boiling bath, and cover it with a dish, and
stir it every day ten or twelve times. Let it cool, and the vessel take
out, and let it clear one whole day: then take an other clean vessel, and
softly pour out that which is clear, and upon the pheces power again fresh
distilled water, and set it in Bal^, and do as you did before. Take it out
again, and let it clear one day and night, and that which is uppermost clear
power out to the first water: Then put to fresh distilled water the third time
unto the pheces, and set it in Balneo, and do as you did before, and power out
the clear the third time unto the first water, then cast away the pheces of
the third water, for they are of no value. Then take the vessel into which the
water was put, set it in Balneo with a lembecke, and a receiver: and with a
boiling Balneo draw out the water until the matter be made dry. Let it
cool, take away the Limbecke and pour in the water again upon the earth, or
salt. and set it one day in boiling Balneo. Let it dissolve and clear, and
take out that which is clear. And put in a little distilled water upon the
pheces, and let it stand two or three hours in a warm bath: take it out, let
it clear by the space of one hour or two, and power out the upper part to the
first water, and cast away the Pheces, for there is nothing in them. Let the
vessel be set again in Balneo with the earth or salt, and distill away the
water until all be dry, and do as before reiterating the work, until that no
pheces remain in the bottom, then drain away the water from the earth, and
you shall find a fair earthlike Crystal: and so you shall have pure elements.

The sixth Chapter.
TAke a great glass that will bear the fire, and put into it your earth and
your fire, and power your air upon it, and set it to distill in a furnace, in
pot or with sand or ashes, with a Limbecke well luted, having a hole in the
uppermost knotty part, that a funnell may be put in when there shall be
need of infusion: when as the humidity that it hath received be half
consumed, then fortify your fire by little and little increasing it until you
see the water boyle, and keep the fire in that state still, until it be
consumed even to a pint. Take away the fire, let it cool, take away your
receauer and open the hole of the Limbeck and put in your glass funnell, and
pour in all the distilled water in the recipient upon the earth, and stop
the hole of the Limbeck, and set the receauer unto the neck thereof well luted
and distill again, observe the manner aforesaid of drawing and making infusion,
and do thus ten times. The tenth distillation finished, let all pass
together: for then the earth is made flying. So the air, the water, the fire,
and the earth will ascend together by the Limbeck, and be brought into one
substance which were in four. One together in nature and now simple as the
incorruptible heaven, yet are they not fixed: but notwithstanding they are so
coupled together between themselves, that by no means they can be separated,
but will continue one simple body for ever: even as the christalline and
vncorruptible heaven which notwithstanding is compounded of the four elements.
What think you of this my son? Can not this quintaessence help every
disease that doth infect man through his most excellent temperature whether it
be in heate, cold, moist, or dry, for all are in it that he may distribute
unto every one that which is necessary, even as the heaven, when need
requires, gives unto the earth all things, as coldness, heate, or moisture:
And yet is neither hot, cold, moist, nor dry, but of one simple essence, and
that endued with such a nature that is gives unto every thing that which is
necessary? In like manner doth this quintaessence. Therefore my son rejoice,
and give the almighty God thanks which hath opened these things unto the
Philosophers.

The vii. Chapter.
NOw my son, if thou wilt bring this quintaessence yet to a greater
perfection. Take a great circulatory, or Pelican, that is a glass that hath a
great head like to a Limbeck, and in the top of the head a hole by the which
the matter may be powered in by a funnell. Let the hole be stopped, out of the
head comes forth ij. arms bending round unto the belly, by the which that
which doth ascend up may fall down again, by those arms of glass into the
belly of the Pel^cane. This is the form of the vessels that distill one into
an other, or Pelican. Take then your quintaessence and put it in a Pelican in
ashes, but better in salt prepared and dried, and make your fire like unto the
extreme heate in Summer, and the quintaessence will rise like unto a red oil,
and fall down again by the arms of the Pelican: and by often ascention, the
quintaessence will wax thick that it will tarry in the bottom and rise no
more, then fortify the fire that it may ascend and descend again. Then keep
the fire in that heate until it ascend no more, but rest in the bottom. Then
make your fire stronger that it may ascend descend again, and keep the heate
in the same degree until it rise no more. Observe this manner in augmenting
your fire until the water be fixed, and the glass be red hot four and
twenty hours together: if the quintaessence do not then ascend, it is fixed
and brought unto his highest virtue, take it out of the glass being yet hot,
for if it be cold it will wax hard that you must break the glass. For at the
fire it doth wax liquid, and being set open in the air, it doth congeal and
pierces every hard thing, as oil doth any dry leather, and in colour is
like unto a rubine, and through shining like a crystal, it gives light in the
dark sufficient to read by. What doest thou think of this my son? are
there not many strange bodies created of God? Truly he hath endued the
Philosophers with no less gifts: For they that can look into the secrets of
nature, shall see it to be of an incredible operation, for this is gathered by
the Bees of the subtilest part of all plants, trees, flowers, and fruits, and
at that time when flowers break out and trees bud. It is worthily called the
Philosophers stone. for it is fixed and lyquable as wax, and as the mineral
stone transmuteth the impure mettle, so doth this alter diseases. Hereby it
doth appear that this doth bear the bell amongst all vegetals. Whereas it
being yet in his grosenesse and impure, it is but of small value for any use in
Physic by what mean soever it be boiled or scummed, but doth always retain
his nature. For it consists of all the fruits of the earth, plants and
trees. Whereof one herb is hot, another cold, another dry, another moist,
one astringent, another laxative, some corrosive, others venomous: and so
diverse herbs have their diverse qualities. Thirdly it comes to pass if it
help one disease, by and by it hinders an other. For every thing works
according to his property when as there is separation made in the body. And of
this separation it engenders blood and other humours. And they are likened unto
gunnepouder, which so long as it lies still there comes no hurt of it, but if
it be brought unto the fire, it straight utters his secret nature, and is
kindled with a venomous fire which cannot be quenched with water. For the cold
and dry, hot and moist, do strive amongst themselves, a wind is stirred up
that breaks al things that is near unto it. The like happens unto honey,
that when it comes to the region of the liver that it should be there
separated, then it shows his nature to pass up and swell with wind, that it
is no marvel if that through contention the veins of the liver be broken, as
oftetimes it happens, whereupon Apostomes are caused in diverse places, and
brings forth such inflammations, that the veins are easily broken. Although
many do greatly commend honey: but they are not the children of philosophie,
neither do they understand the nature of it. But when it is brought to a simple
fixed as wine, then is it the chiefest medicine amongst al the vegetables,
neither is the like unto this found in al the world. Give God thanks, and be
liberal unto the poor. The dose of this is one grain, and it must be taken
every morning with an empty stomach, likewise in the evening, until the end
of the disease. For every disease will be cured in short time, even after the
same manner, as the Mineral stone makes his proiection upon metals, Praise
God and labour diligently.

The manner and order how to draw the Quintaessence out of the herb called
Rose solis.
NOw my son, I will teach thee the greatest mystery or secret amongst all
vegetable things, whose force and strength hath been kept secret amongst all
the ancient workmen, and they have bound themselves one to another by oath,
that they should not utter in their books or writings the strength of this
herb, which is caled Rose solis, and in the Germane tongue Sindawe. Whosoever
therefore hath not the whole vegetable work, he cannot attain to the strength
of this herb. For in that work is comprehended al the force of medicinal
things, And this work of vegetables is not come to the hands, but only of
the ancient sworn artificers which were skilful in the liberal arts. But
now my son, I will open it unto thee with ad^ration, that thou shalt keep
this hidden knowledge secret. First, my son, you must understand, that this
herb is the herb of the sun, upon the which the sun spreads his beams
and influences as he doth upon gold in the veins of the mines. And he powers
out his influences more upon this herb then upon any other which is created of
God, as it is evidently known of the ancient philosophers, and this herb doth
so far surmount al other herbs which spring out of the earth, as the sun
doth all other planets in the heaven, and hath greater force and power of
influence then any other thing created of God in the firmament. So this herb
doth excel al others in virtue, and therefore this herb is decked with
another colour, other leaves, and stranger shape then all other herbs. And his
nature is such, that the hotter and d^ier the country is in the time of the
year, and the heat of the sun, and the more that the sun doth heate and
burn him, this herb is the more moist and filled with dew, insomuch that
upon one branch will hang above a thousand drops. Make a trial and strike this
herb with a slender twig, that the drops which fall from it may fall into a
large glass vessel, and you shall see the vessel filled with a marvelous
dew, and if the sun be vehement hot, those branches in short space, that is,
within the space of half an hour will be more full of dew then before, and if
you strike the dew twenty times with a rod, yet will it again be laden with
drops; it were enough if we did see no other miracle then from whence this
dewy humour should rise, which in so short space doth so abundantly flow
from it, and how much the more the burning sun doth scorch up the other
herbs so much the more is this moist and filled with drops even as though it
had been sprinkled over with water, hereupon may we gather his marvelous
qualities, and judge that there is some secret operation hidden in it; if thou
do keep this water thus gathered in a glass, therewith thou shalt cure all
the diseases of the eyes, whether they come of ru^es or of inflammation, it
helps moreover all the pains and diseases of the heart, it cools the liver
and stomach that is inflamed doth mitigate all the pain of the head that
comes of heart and drives away all dreams and fantasies, it is good also to
kill the canker the woolfe, against the biting of venomous beasts, against
poison drunk, if it be taken by the mouth, it helps also the pestilence, it
is good for many other diseases which were too long here to rehearse. This herb
hath the colour of the sun for his colour is red dark divided with yellow
lines, and his shape is like a star and his proportion like a heavenly planet
and consists of seven branches, in the utter part broad, near the ground
narrow, it is as though it were heavy, of a tender substance, outwardly hot
and moist, inwardly cold and dry. The left side of it is cold and moist, the
right side hot and dry, and it is most temperate as gold. Wherefore his
elements cannot be separated one from another as in other herbs, but it may be
purged from his pheces, for his fixing lets that the Elements cannot be
separated, for the fire will ascend with the air by the Balneum as we will
hereafter teach. The earth may be separated from his Pheces and the Pheces
likewise from the fire and air, although it hath not many dregs. Some latin
writers call it Lingua auis or Birds tongue, some call it Solaria of the
sun, of Lunaria is called the moon; the Flemming calls it Sindow. But the old
Philosophers have kept secret the qualities as yet for the marvelous effect it
works. And it is marvel saith Arnold de Villa nou^ that a man should die
that eats every day some of it in his gross substance, what will it then
work when it is brought unto his fineness and cleansed from his pheces? It
hath this great virtue in it, that if it be put into a glass wherein there is
poiso mingled with wine or any other cup that is poisoned, straightwaies the
glass will fly in pieces, but if it be a stone pot of aleblaster or such like,
the wine will so boil as though there were a violent fire under it al the wine
will run out until there be nothing left in the vessel: also if any man carry
this herb about him happen on his enemies, they shall have no power to hurt, but
contrariwise, to show him all kind of duty. Also if any man be bewitched
either in body or in his art, that is, in Cookery, Brewing, or Baking, or by
any other means, this herb carried about him makes him free from the
witchcraft. If it be also tied upon the belly of a woman with child, she
shall straightwayes be delivered although the child were dead and rotten
within as it hath been oftentimes proved by experience. This herb carried
about one or a little thereof every day eaten as long as it is used,
preserves man from the falling sickness. Moreover, if a man be taken with
the Apoplexy, that his mouth be drawn aside, and his speech and senses taken
from him, they shall be all restored again if the sick drink the juice of
this herb strained, as hath been oftentimes proved. Moreover if it be hanged
about the neck of one that is possessed of a spirit, so long as he carries that
about him, he shall be quiet as a Lamb, and the power of the spirit shall be
taken away. Make a proof, and you shall find it true. The bleeding at the
nose is by and by stayed, if you hold that herb in your mouth. They that are
wearied with travel, if they drink the juice thereof in wine, they are by and
by so refreshed, as if they had not laboured or gone no journey, it doth
comfort the synowes, muscles, tendons, and all the whole nature. Wounds are
also cured therewith, if it be drunk ten days together in wine or ale, if
the wound be washed with the same drink, and bound up with a cloth wet in
the same. The pain of the teeth is by and by apeased if that herb be laid
unto it. All these things have been often proved and found true. If it will
do such things whilst it is yet hindered with his gross matter, what will it
work when it is brought to his perfection? My son, know this for a truth,
that there is no herb that grows upon the earth to be compared unto this in
strength and goodness, therefore take heed that you do not neglect it, but
diligently remember and keep the secret close from them that are not of the
nature of our children, and from the ignorant. For if this herb did not grow
so plentifully and the properties thereof were known, it would be more
esteemed then gold or precious stones, for the effects of the quintaessence
are marvelous, as hereafter shall appear. Now there remains that we must
teach howe to bring this herb to his highest degree, and to his
quintaessence. First it is to be gathered the same having his course in his
own house, that is, in the lion, and the moon behold him with a sinister
quadrate aspect. It is to be gathered whole with roots, leaves and flowers, so
that there be neither earth, dirt, nor other herbs mingled withal. Neither
must it by any mean touch any water or be made moist. Therefore you must take
heed that you gather it not in rainy whether, or moist whether: but rather when
the sun doth shine hottest upon it, gather great store of it, and stamp it
well in a mortar of Marble, and put it in a Cucurbite of stone with a head and
receauer luted, and set it in balneo, and distill away al the water until it
be so dry like powder, and there will rise together with the water of the
color of most fine gold, which only happens in this herb, and in none
other: and when there remains no more liquor, yet leave the cucurbite for
three or four days in Balneo, and boyle it night and day that all the
moisture may be perfectly separated and drawn away, then let it cool and take
away the receauer and stop it diligently, then take off the head and take out
the matter and beat it in a Marble mortar into most fine powder that it may
pass through a thick sieve, put this powder again into an earthen cucurbite,
and pour on your water and air, and stir it with a wooden ladle, and cover
the mouth of the cucurbite close with a tyle, and set it in a warm bath by the
space of nine days to putrefy, every day stirring it with a wooden ladle
four or five times, and cover the cucurbite again with a tyle, setting a
weight of lead upon it; at the nine days end take your vessel out of the
Balneo, and that which is in it strain it into an earthen vessel glased, and
strain it hard until the matter dry. Then take this dry powder and put into
his cucurbite and cover it with a tyle, and keep it in a warm place until I
teach you what you shall do with it. The moist liquor which is drawn from it
will be red, for the element of fire is there present with the air the water,
put that liquor into a cucurbite of stone and put on a head and lute it well,
and set it in Balneo with a receauer well luted, and distill away all the water
with the air severally from the fire in a boiling bath, until there will no
more distill, and the fire will pass away in the bottom, then take away the
vessel out of the bath stop it well until I teach thee what is further to be
done. Then take again the stone cucurbite wherein your powder is contained,
which I bad you before to keep, and pour on the fire and the air, and stir
it well with a woden ladle, and set it in a warm bath nine days more, and
cover it with a tyle, and stir it four or five times every day with a ^adle
as you did before. And when the nine days are past, strain our that which is
in the vessel, and pour the liquor in a glased vessel, the residue of the
powder put into another vessel as you did before, and keep it so long until
I teach thee how to draw out the combustible oil. Then take again the vessel
wherein your fire is, and mingle your liquor with it which you keep in your
glased vessel, where your fire and air is, and set a head upon the vessel
wherein your matter is, and lute it, and set it in Balneo, and set a receauer
to the bill of the head, then distill out the water and air with a boiling
bath until no more will distill, and you shall have in the receauer water and
air, take them away, and take the vessel out of Balneo, and you shall find
remaining in the bottom like thick Turpentine, and that is the element of
fire mingled with many Pheces. Now the fire is to be separated from the Pheces
on this manner, pour on your water and air upon that from whence you draw it,
and stir it with a spoon, and cover it with a tyle, and let it settle four
days, and the Pheces will fall into the bottom, and pour out softly that
that is clear into a clean^ cucu^^it, that no pheses pass with all stop the
vessel wherein the pheces are, and set it by. But that vessel that contemet^
the water, fire and air, set it in balneo with a head and re^auer fitted and
well luted, and distill the water and air in that same degree. And when it
will distil no more take away the receauer. Let the vessel cool, and you shall
find in the bottom^ your fire, which keep in his vessel well stopped and
p^ure in your water and air again upon the pheces from whence you did draw
them^ and stir them with a spoon, and let it settle four days, then pour
it out softly from his pheces into the vessel that holds your fire so that
no pheces be mingled withal, cover your vessel wherein your pheces remain
and set it up. But your vessel wherein your water air and fire is, set again
in B^lneo as I showed you, and distill away the water and air, for they two
do always pass away together and the ^ire remains in the bottom. Pour on
the water and air again upon the Pheces, and stir it with a spoon, then
let it settle four days, (this is now the third repetition, whereby you have
separated the water and air from the pheces,) and that which is clear pour
out into the vessel that holds you^ fire. Then put your Pheces unto the
first which I bad you keep, in the which your combustible oil is. For now
yo^ have drawn your fire out of your Pheces: therefore distil your water with
the air, and when it will distill no more take away your vessel, and you
shall find in the bottom the element of fire not yet pure, but foul and full
of dregs, pour on therefore the water and air again, and stir^e it well
with a spoon or ladle, cover it, and let it stand and settle sour days, then
pour out that which is clear into another clean vessel, and set aside the
vessel wherein your pheces are. But the vessel where in your fire water and
oil are, set in Balneo to distill as long as it will di^ll then take it out,
and pour the liquor distilled into the vessel where your Pheces are, and do
as (...) taught you to work with the pheces, until you have your element of
fire without any feculent or gross substance. When you have distilled away the
water and a^re from the fire, and suffered it to settle four days, and that
all be clear without any Pheces, then shall you have your pure fire.
Therefore put all your Pheces together unto your first pheces where your
combustible oil is. Afterward take a great cucurbite of glass and put all
your three elements into it, and set it in ashes with a Limbecke and a receauer
fitted and luted, and kindle a gentle fire, first in your furnace, and increase
it more and more, until the fire and air be passed, and that your Limbeck
begin to wax red within. Then make the heate of your fire moderate, until all
your element of fire be passed, the head red like blood, and the water and air
shall swim upon like oil. By this means these three elements shall be brought
to their highest essence, and be perfectly rectified. Take away the receauer
and stop it diligently, until your earth be prepared, and know that in the
dust and pheces there remains yet a combustible oil which you may extract by
a discensory if you will. It is good against the cold gout, for members
benommed, and si^owes too much mollified. If thou be weary of this labour, put
this powder or pheces into a reuerberatory that they may be mingled with a
gentle fire until it be as white as snow: which being done, put it into a
large cucurbite of stone o^ pour on a great quantity of water twice distilled,
it is not material how much water you pour on, and sti^ it well with a wooden
ladle or spoon sieve or six times, always cover it diligently with a tyle,
after four days suffer it to cool and let it stand four days settle, then
pour out the clear from the pheces warily into another ^leane vessel, and
pour on fresh distilled water as before, stir it with your spoon, and keep
it two days in Balneo as before, then suffer it to cool and settle, and pour
out the clear from the Pheces, and put it to the first water: Do this the
third time, and then cast away the Pheces for they are good for nothing. All
your waters that you have drawn, distill by Balueum, or for the more speed,
by ashes that al the water may rise, and that there remain in the bottom a
dusty matter, pour on distilled water again, stir it, and keep it in
balneo, by the space of four and twenty hours, then let it cool and settle,
and pour out that which is clear gently from the Pheces. Pour on again
more common water upon them, and stir it, set it in balueo ten or twelve
hours, take it out, let it settle, pour the clear unto the first water, and
cast away the Pheces, they are nothing worth. Repeat this work so often
until there remain no pheces after it hath set ed. Then shall you have your
earth rectified from all his pheces which you shall congele and dry, that it
may be like powder or dust. Then join that with your other elements in the
glass, and it will straight resolve into his element, for the element of water
is there present. Set them all together in a furnace upon ashes, put on a head
with a receauer well luted, the head must have a hole in the top, that with a
funnel the liquor may be poured in always stopped safely. Make your fire in
your furnas, first gentle, afterward greater, until that that is fermented do
pass. But all is not to be drawn out, but about half a sextary of the liquor
with the water, that the matter may remain moist. For if you should drive out
all, it would congele into an hard mass and break the glass in the furnace.
Then open the hole which is in the top of the head, and with a funnell pour in
that which is in the receauer. But first it must be made warm, lest by pouring
in the cold liquor the glass do break, but if you suffer the glass to
cool, you may pour it in without any danger. Repeat this inbibition ten or
twenue times, afterward distil out whatsoever will be distilled so long as any
thing will pass by the neck of the Limbecke. For after this tenth
distillation, the earth will be no more congeled but will rest in the bottom
like a red golden oil. Inbibe it again, pouring on the liquor, and distilling
it until al the elements pass together by the Limbecke, and that nothing at
all do remain in the bottom of the vessel. Then give thanks to God for his
maruelons gifts which he hath distributed unto his Philosophers, hath given
them so great knowledge of things as they uttered in this work which is
altogether heavenly, rather divine then humane. For it is a great marvel in
this life that mans understanding can bring these inferior things to so great
perfection, that they have a^tained even to the highest degree of virtue.
Truly it is the work of the holy ghost which hath put it into the minds of
men. For I do affirm, that whosoever hath this hear^ so prepared, that he may
help all the infirmities of mans body, whether they be curable or uncurable,
except natural death which is ordained before unto every man of God. Yea this
dare I be bold to say, that if a man do use daily the weight of one scruple of
this quintaessence, or the quintaessence of sugar and potable gold wherein
pearls are dissolved, or the quintaessence of Selandine. That ma by Gods help
shall not die before the day of the great judgement. For the humours in mans body
can by no means predominate one over another, as in the thirty six chapter of
Uegetales is taught, where is entreated of the quintaessence of al medicinal
things, and there it is showed, that by Gods help the life of man may be
prolonged even until that day, void and free from all diseases sickness. And
further, that man may be preferued in the state he was in at thirty years of
age, and in the same strength and force of wit. And upon that do all the
Philosophers agree, that a man may continue in the same state as long as in an
earthly paradise. This is so plainly and at large showed in that chapter, that
will you, nill you, you shall be enforced to conceive it in your mind, to
believe it, and to confess it to be true. Therefore it is not needful to
reason much of the force and qualities of this quintaessence: but whatsoever
disease ma be infected withal, give him to drink with wine so much of this
quintaessence as a nut shell will hold, in short space he shall be healed as
it were miraculously, according as the disease is violent or gentle. But if you
give this quintaessence to drink mixed with the quintaessence of ^gar with
potable gold wherein pearls are dissolved and with the Quintaessence of
Selandine, within one day you shall cure all the diseases whatsoever they be.
Hereby it doth appear, that it is rather a divine work then humane. Therefore
give god the praise, and take heed that you do not utter this secret. For
tyrants would by that mean; prolong their lives that they might bring to pass
their wicked purposes, whereof both you and I should be the occasion.
Therefore keep it secret, for it is one of the greatest secrets amongst all
the vegetals, whereunto no treasure may be compared. Work therefore and
distribute liberally unto the poor, and God shall give thee eternal
felicity.

Oft times great force lies hid in bodies low,
Of book in few lines, not much, but apt doth show.
Virtue increases by exercise.
The Spagericke Antidotarie of the preparation and making of medicines against
Gunneshot, taken out of the Chir^gerie of Iosephus Quirsitanus.
IT is an old and true saying of the poer; that there is nothing more
imperious than an ignorant man, which thinks nothing well done, but that he
doth himself, which thing as it may be seen in many other arts, yet most
specially in this, which is called the Spagericke art. For we see every where
certain men, I know not what they be, puffed up with a certain barbarous and
foolish pride, which with great scorn inuey against those medicines which are
drawn out of the metalline mines. Which notwithstanding it is apparent were in
use and had in great estimation with the chief ancient Physicians, as we have
declared in that book which we have set forth of the Spagericke preparation of
medicines. And what, I pray you, is the cause of this anger, or rather madness,
but that (as they themselves confess) they know not the preparation of them? O
happy arts, if only artificers might judge of them, as Fabius is reported
sometime to have said. Then are they unhappy of whom the ignorant and
unlearned fear not so rashly to give judgment, which never yet understood from
whence or why, this is called the Spagericke art, which learned men of two
greek words have so named, because by that art a certain subtle and
spiritual nature is drawn, gathered, and pressed out, wherein the force and
effect of the medicine doth chiefly consist. The great and incomparable
commodity whereof, as it appears in many other diseases, so shall it chiefly
be known in curing wounds by gunshot. As I trust (God willing) it shall much
more happily be tried and found out by the preparations of medicines animal:
vegetable, and mineral, by other essences drawn out of (...), sulphur,
vitriol, arsenicke, iron, copper, lead and (...), and also out of antimony,
and such other min^alles, as also out of the gross and fat bodies of simple
metals, of whom it is far off, that the force should be so great (although
the ancient Physicians have used the (...) cure wounds and vleers, as their
writings do testifi^) (...) the force of their spirits, which may be called, as
it were their souls. But peradventure some of those backebiters will say, why
are not we content with those medicines o^ remedies which the learned
antiquity hath delivered unto us, and that Hypocrates and Gallen the ancient
pillars of our art others have set forth in their monuments? why seek we new
ways never heard of before, specially unknown to the Apotheearie^ But some of
us will answer that the only remedy of Mercurie precipitate, is the only
remedy (to pass over other) which very lately they have begun to use, in
curing of wounds by gunshot, and other malig^e vulcers, were sufficient to
answer this their question, yea and to reprove their folly joined with
intolerable pride. But if authority be asked for. I think Gesner, Guinter,
Andernacke, Seuerine (to pass over a great many other) will be for us great
authority with the learned: as these standerers. Specially because the
learning of these famous men is confirmed by their learned writings monuments,
that those tongues might count it a great honour unto them to confess
themselves their schollers. It were easy for me to bring forth many other
arguments, if I did not see the folly of these ^ckbiters to be so great,
whereof truly I am ashmed, specially when I behold some of their hooks lately
set forth, wherein contrary to the purpose of the treatise, strange things
are enforced, that (as the old proverb saith) the ointment seems to consist
in nothing, as though they pertain to the purposed entreating of curing the
gowte, certain invective digressions I know not what, of the beginning of
things, of the original of metals and Philosophers stone (which of them is
called Morosophocus) or did in any point seem to agree with it. Therefore
again again I am enforced to cry out, O happy ar^s, if only artificers
might judge of them. How far unlike was the purpose of many old men, the
which if they were ignorant of any thing which they understood, was known of
other, even in far distant countries they spared no labour to go see them.
Pl^to inflamed with desire to learn those things which he knew not, went into
Egypt, and after to Tarentum to Architas, and over al Italie to hear the other
Pythagoricall philosophers, Apollonius Tyanius travelled through the kingdom of
Persia, and passed over the mountain Caucasus, and visited the Albanes,
Scythithians Massagetes, and all the rich kingdoms of India. Afterwards was
carried unto the Brachmanes, and heard Iarehas in his chair of gold disputing
of the hidden causes of things, and of the hidden mysteries of nature. From
thence by the Elamites, Babylonians, Chaldees, Meedes, Assyrians, Arabians, and
Palestines, he returned to Alexandria, and from thence went into Ethiopia to
hear the Gymnosophists, and to learn their secret and hidden arts. This
virtue is truly to be followed, and not the sluggishness of those slothful
followers, which having scarce once moved their foot from their country
fires, yet will d^sallow this Spagericke art, and think no ^ther labour to be
taken in searching of the truth, when notwithstanding that art doth make open
unto us the marvelous and hidden secrets of nature: neither in my judgment are
they unworthily co^ (...) of those which with their mamfold perils and
trauel^ have (...) out those secrets of nature. But I pray you, what foolishnes
is this, to forbid us to use any other medicines then those which were known
in old time? As though (...), then which (...) more in use this day, the were
known to the old physicians. Further, to what purpose is it that they object
unto us the sulphurie (...), vene^ mou^stinckes (a^ they (...) them) by whose
(...) drawn breath (for these are their contume house words) they be almost ^
cophants, that the old Physicians made very many medicines of most filthy
things, as of the filth of the ears, sweat of the body, of women's menstrues
(and that which is horrible to be spoken) of the dung of man and other beasts,
spi^tle, urine, fl^es, mice: the ashes of an owls head, the hou^s of goats and
asses, the wonnes of a io^ten tree, and the scurfe of mules, as may be
gathered out of the writings of Galen, Aetij, Aeginet^, Dioscor. Marcel. Plin.
Serap. Gal. simpl. 10. cap. 18. 9, 10, 12, 13. Act. Tetr. 1. ser. 2. cap. 110.
Aegin. libr. 7. Dioscorid. libr. 2. cap. 90. Marcel. cap. 4. 26. Plin. libr.
28. 4. 15. Serap. simpl. (...). 453. 466.
to pass the metallines which it is evident they did also use. Truly, when I
consider with my self the pride of these fools which disdain this metalline
part of Ph^sicke (which after their manner contumeliously they call (...), and
therefore can neither help their own nor many other diseases. I call to min^e
a storle, peradventure known unto them, of Herachto Ephesio, which being sick
of a drop^, ^ the help of Phy^ons, anointing himself over with cow-dung, set
(...) in the sun to dry, and falling asleep was torn in pieces of dogs:
but these are more then sufficiently answered ^. Now I will declare what is my
purpose and scope in the (...): ve^ly to prescribe plainly hereaf^er, not
those things which are already common, or (as it is commonly said) known to
blind men and barbe^s. lest I might seem to imitate those that use to write
^hapsodias and heaps, but the methode and way of preparing medicines by
Spagericke a^e, that pertain unto Gunneshot, which I know are yet unknown
unto many Physicians and Surgeons. And this I can truly confess, that I am
induced for two causes to do it: first to provoke those that are better
learned, if they have any better medicines to utter them, as also that I might
specially help my country and mankind: unto the which (the more is the
grief) the^e is too much need of those kind of medicines in these most
lam^ble and cruel times wherein it hath so long been bloodied with
domestic and civil wars* but to encounter with their ^aunders which cry
out, that these kind of medicines do not only require long diffic^l^
preparation, but also that they are so dear that every one cannot easily use
them. I have thought good therefore first to set down common medicines, and
then to come to those which I do far more esteem, as indeed they are far
more excellent then the other, as by their preparation you may know. Albeit
also I have, determined to have consideration of the poor and common soldier
and to set down them apart that shall help the rich.

THerefore the Surgeons are to be admonished that when they go into the
wars, that they take with them these things ready prepared which are to be
had at most Apothecaries.

Supp^rantia.
(...) ^sili^um* of ^oth s^rt^*
(...) (...).
Tetraphramac^m Galen^.
(...) Resumptiuum.
The emplaster of Mucilages which may be dissolved with oil Olive if need
be.

Deterg^nti^*
U^guentum diap^mpholyg^s Nicolal.
Unguen^ ^iride Andr^:
Empla^ disolued with oil of Roses,
V^gue^um Apo^olicum A^.
U^gu^tum Egyp^iacum of the same.
Sarcotica.
Unguentum Aureum.
Ung^ c^r^seos Mes^ vtrun{que}.
Empla^ Grati^ De^ de Ia^.
C^catricem inducentia.
U^ de Minio.
Desiccatiuum rubrum.
Emplastrum de cerusa.
^ res extran^.
^ntum (...) Nicolai.
Vnguenta Magistralia of the Physicians of Florence described by (...).
Vnguentum de calce viva.
Rep^llentia aringentia.
Vuguentum de bolo co^e.
Vuguentum ^osatum Mesu^.
OR for the said intentions medicines may be made which need no other then
common preparations.

Suppurantia.
Take of new Butter and oil Olive, anna, ii. ounces, where meal cleansed from
his bran, half an ounce, fair water iiii. ounces, boyle all together.

Or take the leaves of Tussilage Mallowes, ana. M. ii. ^ost them under ashes
and mingle them with butter.

Or take of the juice of the roots of Lillies first roasted under a^es, iiii.
ounces, of the grease of a hen^ goose or swine, ii. ounces, with oil of
Linseed or olives, the yolke of an egg and a little wax, make an ointment.

Detergentia.
Take of honey iii. ounces, of bean meal* and barley meal ana, ii. drams,
boyle them with wine to the height of an ointment.

Or take of Plantaine leaves and Smalege ana, M. i. red Roses p. ii red wine
^ces, boyle it to half: strain ^solue (...) ii. ounces, Turpentine, i. ounce.
Meal of (...) and O^obus, ana, i. dram, Alloes and Mirre, ana, half a dram,
boyle it again, putting to so much wax as shall suffice to bring it into the
form of an ointment.

Or take of the juice of plantaine and Agrimonie ana, ii. ounces, Rose ho^*
iiii. ounces, of the root of ^os and Bean meal, ana, half an ounce, mingle
them toward the end with Turpentine i. ounce, make thereof* an ointment.

Sarcotica.
Take of Manna; of Frankinsens ana, ij. drammes of Meal of Fenegreke and
Orobus ana, ^j. dram let them be wrought with honey and the yolke of an egg.

Or take of Sarcocollae dissolved in milk, iii dramm^, Mastick, Olibanum, ana,
i dram, Liquid pitch, and Turpentine ana, i. ounce^le them and make an
ointment.

Epo^
Take of white chalk ij. ounces, of ashes of burned leather iij. drammes,
work them with oil of Roses.

Or take of quick Lime so often washed in water until it have lost, all his
^nesse ij. ounces, of Ter^ae Armeniae i. ounce, boyle them with oil of
Mirtilles.

Of (...) Lead, burnt Stibium (...) Pompholyge may also be made medicines most
fit for that purpose.

Ad ven^nata vulnera.
Take of the juice of A^agallidis p^rpure^, of Cyclaminis, ana, i. (...), (...)
Vi^e mingled with mans spitle, half a ounce, ^em.

Or take of ^ge, ii. ounces* Ga^um half a ounce, G^h and Turpentine, ana ^i.
ounces, oil as much as shall su^ice.

Or take of oil iiii. ounces* of Sagapenum, Mumiae and Amber, ana, ^i. dra^s,
Frankinsens, Mastick* ana, ii. drams of th^ best Terrae Sigillatae and red
Coral, ana, i. dram, pitch. ii. ounces, wax as much as shall suffice to make
an ^ment.

Or take ii. onions, of the leaves of Unicae peruince scabiosae Risini of each
a handful, roast them under the ashes, and put thereto of Treacle half an
ounce, and with Turpentine make an ointment.

Ad ambusta.
Take of the juice of Onions roasted under ashes, ii, ounces, oil of Nuts i.
ounce mingle them together.

Or take of the leaves of black juice stamped with plan^ine water M. ii. of
oil i. pound, boil them together with iiii. ounces of white wine until the
wine be consumed, the put to wax as much as shall suffice to make it a salve:

Or take of Lard molten in the flame ii, ounces, and pour it into the juice
of Beetes and Rue, the cream of milk i. ounce, Mucilege of the seed of
condonioru^ and Tragacanthae ana, half a ounce, mingle them.

Repellentia, sanguinem cohibentia.
Take of the juice of the leaves of Woodbine and of Oken leaves, ana, i. ounce,
red Roses i. dram, Boli Armenae Sanguis Draconis, ana, ii. drams, oil of Roses
iii. ounces, wax as much as shall suffice*

Or take of the Pulpe of Apples boiled in milk iii. ounces, of Mucilage, of
the seeds of Psillij and Cydones, ana, half a ounce, of the juice of Bursae
Pastoris and Poligonum ana, i. ounce, of Acaciae and Sanguinis Dr^conis, ana,
iii. drams, of Terra Sigillate half an ounce* oil of Mirtils, iiii. ounces,
white wax as much as shall suffice to make an ointment.

But these medicines following are not so much used among the Apothecaries
neither known unto the Surons, yet most profitable for wounds by shot and all
other whose fit preparation the Spagericke art doth partly declare.

Suppurantia:
Take of the root of holy Oak, and Lillies, ana, iiii. ounces, Beetes with the
roots. M i. fresh Butter half a pound, worms prepared in wine, iii. ounces,
yolks of eggs 12. the marie of a Calfe, of Turpentine, ana, v. ounces, oil
Olive cleansed from the Phe^s i. pound stamp those that are to be stamped,
mingle al well together and digest them in warm doung, one month after press
it out, and with a fire on ashes boil it to the substance of a salve.

Or take of the juice of the herb Tus^ilage and Oxalidis ana, iij. ounces, fat
dry figs, 20. Frankasence, ii. ounces Rosen of the La^ixtre, i. ounce and a
half, grease of a Goose and a hen, ana, ii. ounces, fresh Butter half a
pound* Olei visci pom^rum compose. i. pound al mingled toge there, let them boyle
in a double vessel luted with Luto Sapientiae for the space of six hours and
strain it warm set again in the sun or boyle it to a fit substance, these
medicines do quickly move matter and are anodina very commodious for wounds
by shot.

Det^rgentia.
Take of the Juice of Centari^ and Selandine, ana, iiii. ounces, of honey iii.
ounces, of flowers of Uerbascum p. ii. of Frankincense, Myrre and Masticke, ana
half an ounce, oil of Turpentine vi. ounces, good white wine i. pound,
putrefy them al in warm dongue and boyle them as before with a fire of ashes
until the wine and juice be consumed and it be brought to the form of an
ointment, then put to i. ounce of this ointment, i. dram of mercurie
precipitate dulcified. If there be need of greater clensing.

Or take Visci herbarum s^niculae Pirolae, Aristoloch, and Vincae peruincae,
ana, ii. ounces, of turpentine washed iiii. ounces, Crocus Veneris half a
ounce, Balsami Taertari, ii. drams. Sulphuris Antimoni, i. dram and a half,
set them upon a fire of ashes until it have the substance of a salve.

Saercotica.
Take of the Mucilage of the seed^ of F^rnigreeke ii, ounces, of the juice of
hounds tongue Perscicaria and the great Comferie ana, i. ounce and a half,
oil of Frankincense and mirre, ana, iii. drams* oil of Hipericon simple ii.
ounces, Turpentine washed with white wine, ii. ounces, let them stand in the
sun or at a soft fire until they wax thick.

Unguentum depaet^.
Take of the juice of P^um, i* pound. Turpentine v. ounces, of common oil of
Hipericon viii. ounces, good white wine half (...) pound, digest all viii.
days, after sees them until the wine be consumed, then put to Colopho^iae
and wax, ana, iii. c^nces: Muni^ and Amber ana, ii. drammes, melt them again
at the fire and make an ointment according to art.

Take of the juice of the Petum and Comferie, ana, iiii. Another of (...)
description.
ounces, oil of Turpentine i. pound, flowers of Hipericon and Verbascus, ana*
M. ii. apples of an elm tree iii. ounces, the buds of the Popla^trec, iiii.
ounces, the spirit of wine i. pound a half, digest al these in horse dongue or
in a warm bath in a glass vessel well stopped one whole month, then wring
it out and strain it and put to it of Frankincense, Masticke, and Mirre ana,
i^* ounces, Sanguis Draconis, half a ounce, Muniae, vi. drams, Turpentine
half a pound, Benioini j. ounce, circulate them together in a Pellicane viii.
days, after with a moderate heat distill away the spirit of wine and there will
remain in the bottom a most precious balm.

Cicatricem inducentia.
Take of burnt Alum i. ounce, Crete Vitrioli iii. drams, Crocus martis, Crocus
U^ncris, ana* ii. drams, mingle them and make a powder which you may use by it
self, or mingled with honey.

Or take of Bole A^menae prepared after our manner, ii. drams, c^lex of egshels
half an ounce, the juice of unripe. Damascens, iii. ounces. boil them with a
soft fire to a perfect substance.

Ad V^en^.
Take of oil of Amber and Turpentine* ana, i. ounc^ oil of Juniper, ii.
drams, ^ettle seed and the root of Gentian, ana, ii. drams, oil of Sulphur
Vitriolat, i. dram and a half, red. Coral, i. dram, mingle them together.

Or take of the juice of Pentaphillon, Scabious and Ru^ ana, ii. ounces. Olei
sulphuris Rubei i. ounce, oil of mi^re, (...) drams, Colophoni and gum of
juice, ana, vi. drammes, mingle them,

Adambusta.
Take of lard molten and washed in water of nightshad ii. ounces, Olei Saturni
half an ounce, mingle th^*

Or take the juice of the roots of Henbane and flowers of red popie, ana, i.
ounce, Salt Peter. i. dram, Mucilage of Seminis Cidoniorum, iii. drams, and
with oil of Champhire make an ointment.

Repellenti^ sanguinem cohibenti^.
Take of Bole Armenae prepared after the Spag^ manner ii. ounces, Crocus Martis
and Crocus Veneris, ana, i. ounce, mix them with oil of Roses.

Or take of Colcotharis Dulsifieati, ashes of frogs burned, ana, half a
ounce, mingle them with the white of an egg.

There be made other remedies for the fore said intents, the making whereof
we have described in their proper places which I commit to the judgment of
the skilful Surgeons to use wisely as the disease and party affected dotis
require. Now there remains to speak of drinks for wounds before we teach
the preparations of medicines.

De potionibus vulnerarijs.
THese potions for wounds, although they drive not out the humours downwards,
yet preuaile they very much to cleanse wounds, because they cleanse superfluous
humours and the blood from all filth, and by a certain mar^eious quality where
with they excel, they knit the broken bones and help the sinews that are hurt
by wounds, helping nature, they at the last fill the wound with flesh and close
them up without using any other remedy: when as I saw in Germanie the
marvelous and almost incredible effect which came by the use of these potios
even in curing desperate Ulcers, I thought it not meet to pass over the
mention of them, and that so much the rather, because I knew the use of them in
time past was allowed, but now through the necligence of Physicians to be
almost grown out of use. Also I have experieced those potions to be taken, not
only as medicines, but also as norrishments, and to help all the passions and
incommodities whereunto wounds are subject. The simples whereof the medicines
are made, are these:

Cyclaminus. Consolida mayor. Consolida mediae, quam Sophiam nonnulli la.
Sabinae. Galangae. Vinca peruinc^. Centaur^um. Ophioglosson. Betonica.
Aristolochia. Ueronica. Agrimoniae. Uerbenae. Serp^n^ariae. Persicariae.
Arthemisiae. Lilium conuallium, Zedoariae. Pyrola. Sperma ceti. Cancri
fluniatiles. Nux vomica, Astaci. Mumiae. Macis. Bolus Armena.
You shall much better draw out the strength of those simples then the common
sort, if you put them into a tun of white must, and digest them there ii.
months, or if you cut the green bearbes very small and wring out the juice
of them into a Pelicane or blind Limbeck, or circulate them three or four
days in Balne^ Mariae. This last way is most convenient for them that are
forbidden the use of wine, specially if they be wounded in the head. The
distilled waters of the be also good if they be taken driely by themselves
morning and evening with dose and manner convenient: Or if white wine be
delayed with them (if it be granted to the wounded) here follows the
composition of the vulnerarie potions.

A Vulnerarie potion to be given the first seven dais.
Take of both Conferies Veronica, S^wbread, ana, M. i. Astacos purged number,
iiii. white wine two measures, circulate them in Balneo, three days, strain
it, and give every morning one spoonful.

Or take of the eyes of Crabs in powder half a ounce, Mumia, ii. drams Bole
Armenae, i. dram and a half, the herbs of Agrimoni Ophioglosson. Ueronica,
Sowbread ana, M. (...) Sperma Ceti, i. dram, infuse them in white wine (...) a
night in Balneo, take of this ii. spoonefulles morning and evening if need be,
it puts away the inflammations very much, and helps the burning.

Take of Macis, the eyes of Crabs, Zedoarie ana, iii Potions to be given
other timer of the grief.
drams, Mumia, Ga'ingale the less, ana ii. drammes, Nucis vomicae, i. dram and
a half, beat them grossly, and put them in a glass vessel pouring thereto
of white wine i. measure and a half, macerate them in a soft heate ii. days.
The dose is one spoonful in the morning and as much at night. The force of
this potion is so great that it cannot be sufficiently commended.

Take of the flowers of Uinca Peruinca Lilium Co^alium, A potion apt for
poisoned wounds by Gunshot.
ana, p. i. Galanga Zedoariae ana ii. dams. Mumia and Bole Armenia ana, i.
dram, Sperma Ce^, half a dram, white wine i. measures, digest and circulate
them in Balneo 4. days the dose is one spoonful morning and evening.

A potion vulnerary where the bone is broken with gunshot.
Take of Aristolochi, Sowbread, Adders grass, both conferies, Geranii ana, M.
i Sauin* M. ss. maces, Zedoariae, the eyes of Crabs ana, half a ounce, Mumia
Galingale the less, ana, i. dram and a half, being cut small and bruised and
the other things brought into a gross powder boyle all in a double vessel
four hours with one measure of wine use it morning and evening. This medicine
is much better then so many splents wherewith many are tormented.

R. of flowers of Lilium Conualium, Betonie ana, p. i. (...) potion f^r the
wounds of the he^d.
Galingale Macis, ana, iii. drams, Persica^ia, Selandine, Vinca Peruinca,
Veronica Centauri, ana, M. ^s. macerate themas before, and referue them to your
use.

A potion for wounds of the breast.
Take of the ^ice of Veruen, Betonie Veronica, ana, ii. ounces, cinnamon water
i. pound macerate them.

Take of Bole armeniae half an ounce of both the Comferies For wounds of the
^macke.
ana, M. i. Galingale ii. drams, temper them with wine as aforesaid reserve
them to use. Diverse discriptions of ^otions may be made of the foresaid simples
which I have to the judgment of the expert physician notwithstanding this one
thing I will add, that the use of them hath many opportunities to cure wounds by
gunshot as also the Canker and al maligne desperate and eating ulcers, of al
which the Physician shall take very great profit if he prepare the potions with
the essence of the vulnerarie simples spagetically extract as we have taught
in another.

A brief declaration of Spagericall medicines.
FOr as much as now remains to declare the Spagerick preparation of those
simples which pertain to the cure of wounds by gun shot, we will use the
same method we have before used whereby this our treatise may be the plainer.

Superantia sunt igitur Anodyna Oleum ouorum. Oleum butyri. Oleum refinae. Ol.
visci pomorum compose. Oleum hyperisi simpl. Olea omnium axung.

Detergentia Oleum myrrhae. Oleum mastiches. Oleum terebinthinae. Oleum mellis.
Viscus centaurij. Viscus vincoe petuincoe. Viscus aristolochioe. Sal foecum
aceti. Balsamus martis. Crocus veneris. Mercur. praecipitat. vulgaris Mercur
praecipit. dulcific. Oleum guaiaci. Balsamus veneris. Balsamus Saturni.
Balsamus tartari.

Sarcotica Balsamus hyperici. Oleum thuris. Oleum sarcocollae. Ol mannae.
Viscus consolidae vtriusque Viscus cynoglossi.

Epul^tica Calx testarum ouorum. Calx testarum limacum. Bolus armena
praeparata. Alume adustum praepar. Crocus Martis. Creta vitrioli flaua. Ol.
salis tartari. Ol. talci. quae etia cicatrices decorant.

Repellentia sangui^ cohibentia. Ol. visci pomorum simplex. Oleum Martis.
Crocus Veneris. Colcothar simplex. Colcothar dulcisicarum. Bolus armena
praeparata. Calx testarum ouorum. Calx testarum limacum.

Ad venena Butyrum arsenici fixum. Praecipitatus dulcificatus. Balsamus
tartari. Ol. Mercur. corporale. Oleum antimonij. Oleum sulphuris vitriolatu.

Ad ambusta Oleum ouorum. Oleum lardi. Oleum butyri. Aqua gammarorum. Aqua
spermatis ranarum. Aqua florum papauer. rubri Viscus rad. hyoscyami. Oleum
Saturni, eius{que} Sal. Oleum Lithargyri.

Attrahentia Viscus aristolochiae. Viscus corticis med. tiliae Succinum
praeparatum. Magnes praeparatus.

Sunt rursus illorum simplicium singula, quae singulis partibus vulneratis
conducunt, vt Ossibus corruptis. Oleum myrrhae. Oleum caryophyllorum. Oleum
tartari foetens. Oleum vitrioli. Oleum sulphuris simplex. Oleum sulph.
vitriolatum. Oleum antimonij. Sulphur rubjcudum antim. Oleum salis. Oleum
Mercur sublimati.

Neruis vulneratis. Oleum cerae. Oleum iuneperi. Oleum euphorbij. Oleum ouorum.
Oleum terebinthinae. Oleum sulphuris terebinth.

Carni putridae ac corrupta. Sal fuliginis. Sal vrinae. Sal tartari. Sal
mellis. Oleum frumenti. Oleum mellis. Oleum sulph. acidunt. Phlegma vitrioli
acidum. Phlegma aluminis acidum. Balsamus Martis. Balsamus Veneris. Balsamus
Mercurij* Balsamus tartari.



But because regard is always to be had of the noble part in whose action the
life doth consist, there be certain medicines, which being given can defend
them.

Roborant enim. C^rebrum. Oleum succini. Oleum saluiae. Oleum caryophyllorum.
Spiritus vitrioli.

Cor. Aurum vitae. Tinctura auri. Essentia margaritarum.

Hepar. Tinctura Balls. natural. Tinctura corallorum. Oleum Martis.



The Spagericall preparation of medicines before rehearsed.
THe dregs of wine or crude Tartar brought into Oleum Tartar^ (...).
powder, put into a Retort of glass or earth with his recipient, make fire by
degrees as is done to the making of strong water, there will rise great
plenty of white spirits which will turn into water and thick stinking oil,
separate the oil by a funnel and keep it to your use.

But the salt of Tartar you shall draw out of the Pheces The Salto Tartar.
(which they call the dead head) which are left in the Retort. Those you shall
dissolve in warm water, and after filter that which is dissolved twice or
thrice, coagulate it at the fire by vapouring away the water, and the salt will
remain in the bottom of the vessel, which if you again dissolve and
coagulate diverse times, you shall purge it clear like Crystal.

This Cristaline salt if you put it into a glass and set it Oil of Tartar.
in a wine seller or other moist place, within few days it will resolve into a
clear oil very excellent to cleanse the spots and ulcers of the face.

Take crude Tartar ii. pound, salt Peter. Salt of Soot, The balm of Tartar.
of the Pheces of vinegar, ana, iiii. ounces, Calcis V^uae, vi. ounces, all
broken very small put into a vessel, not glased, but well stopped. Calcine it
xii. hours, dissolve that is calcined in warm water, distil it by filter,
after coagulate it, and clen^e it again, repeating three times your
calcinations, dissolutions, and coagulations: then put all into a Limbecke and
put on distilled vinegar, that it be ^uered iiii. fingers. Distil the vinegar
in balneo M. and there will come forth a sweet liquor, then pour on the
vinegar again to distill, this do so long until it be no more sweet but
sower, as when you poured it on first and so rise in the Limbecke. Then distill
all in a strong fire by a Retort, and there will come forth a hot oil, the
commodities whereof can scarcely be declared.

After the same manner if you will you may distil al the salt of Tartar by a
Limbecke: whereof you shall make a most excellent and wholesome oil.

Vinegar being distilled by a Limbecke, the pheces remain Oil of Vintg^.
in the bottom of the vessel which first dried, afterward with a violent fire
if they be driven out by a Retort, there come forth a very red and sharpe
oil. Then if you do again dissolve the dead head or Pheces in Salt of
Vinegar
warm water, filter, and coagulate it, the salt of Vinegar will rest in the
bottom, the which is very profitable for all eating ulcers.

Soot brought into fine powder, dissolve it in distilled Sal^ and oil of S^.
Vinegar in Balneo, and separating all the mensture, that which remains in
the bottom dissolve and coagulate again so long till it come to white salt
which in a moist place will dissolve into oil, very apt to cure the Gangraenam
and all maligne ulcers.

Bole Armonack made into fine powder, dissolve it in the The preparation of
B^ls Arm^.
sower fleam of Alum, then separate the fleam by Balneum and pour on other.
Do this three times, and then the Bole will be turned into a very fat oil
which with a very soft fire is dried and brought into powder most apt to
staunch blood wheresoever it break out.

Take of Cloves beaten in powder one pound, simple Oils of spices (...), (...)
and (...).
water, or Aqua Vitae which is better, vi. pound, infuse them to digest in
Balneo or dung four days, then put them in Limbecke with his refrigatorie,
distill it according to art, and seperate the oil from the water by a funnel,
and keep it for your use. After the same manner shall you draw the oils of
Sage, Juniper, Amber, Turpentine, Mirre, Frankinsens, Sarcocolla, Masticke and
Euphorbium. We have written another better way to draw oils out of the
foresaid things in the Spagericke preparation of medicines.

Wheat being put into a retort with the spirit of wine, digest it viii. days,
then distill it with a violent fire, that Oil of wheat^*
which is distilled power again upon the dead head, digest it again and
distill it again, if you reiterate this iii. times there will come forth a
most excellent oil of the Gangraena and Carcinomat^.

Take of the flowers of Hipericon small ^utij. pound The s^ple Bal^e of
Hipericon.
oil of Turpentine i. pound, yolks of eggs, 20. Aqua Vitae half a pound,
mingle them all together and let it putrefy in hot dung one whole month, then
wring it out and set it in the sun two months.

After the same manner is the Balm of Visci pomorum Bals^ vised pomorum. The
compound b^l^e of hyp^^icon.
made or with oil Olive, first purified in Balneo.

Take of the flowers of Hipericon, i. pound of the Muslage of the root of the
great Conferie, iiii. ounces, flowers of Camomil, Verbascum, ana* pug ii* oil
of eggs and turpentine, ana, half a pound, Aqua Vitae one pound, Mirre,
Frankincense, Mastick, Mu^iae, ana, ii ounces, red sugar vi. ounces, putrif^e
all in dung one month in a vessel diligently stopped, then wring it out and
circulate it in Balneo three days, afterward with a soft fire boyle it to the
substance of a Balm.

Take of the leaves of the Mysselto of the Apple tree The (...) balm of (...)
pomorum.
cut small, ii. pound, put them into a vessel of gla^le, putting thereto buds of
the Popler tree half a pound, oil of the grease of a Badger and of Butter,
ana, iiii. ounces, turpentine vi. ounces, oil of worms ii. pound and a half,
good white wine, ii. pound, digest all well stopped in very hot dung, ii.
months, then press it and circulate it, and with a soft fire boil it until
the liquors be consumed, there can not be found a more excellent medicine to
assuage ache^ and pains.

The juice of the leaves and roots of herbs you shall How the flime or
^uslege is drawn out of herbs.
purify until it be clear: pouring to it so much Aqua Vitae and digest it
in Balneo in a glass xv, days, then separate that water by distillation, and
there remains in the bottom the slyme or muslage of the herbs.

Steep the leaves and roots of herbs in common Another methode.
water filtred or that which is better, in white wine eight days, then let
them boyle iii. days with a soft fire under them. Then w^ing them out and
purify it, then boyle them with a softfire, until they come to the thickness
of honey which we cal the slime of muslage. By this rule you shall draw out of
both Comferies Cynoglosso, Centaurie, Vinca peiuinca, Aristolochie, the root
of henbane the middle bark of Tillia their muslage very profitable for the
foresaid medicines.

Out of the flowers of red Poppy or their juice you shall draw a water by a
Limbeck very profitable to cool,

The salt of mans urine hath an excellent quality to Salt of ^ine.
cleanse. It is made thus. First the urine is to be filtred, then, coagulated,
after with distilled vinegar dissolved, again coagulated, these must be
reiterated 3. or 4. times.

Melt wax at the fire and boyle it with wine till it be consumed: do it so
long until it crack no more. Take i. Oil of Wax.
pound of wax thus prepared, Alum calcined half a pound, Sage leaves M. i. put
al into a Limbeck, with his receauer and distill it with a mean fire. First
there will come forth a gross oil, thick, hard, white, which must be distilled
again as before, and iii. times reiterated, and so you shall make an excellent
oil of wax for all griefs of the synowes. In like manner is the oil of Rosen
and pitch made.

Out of honey you shall first draw an excellent water The water and oil of
honey.
by Balneum, afterward you shall put unto the dead head or pheces that are
left, sand or flint stones calcined that the matter boyle not up, which you
shall drive out by a (...) of glass giving fire by degrees, and so you shall
distil a yellowish clear oil, together with a gross impure oil. Let all
digest again 4. or 5. days, after distill it again by a Limbecke in sand,
and there will come out a pure red oil swimming upon the water. This water is
sower almost like vinegar distilled, and is very good against the Gangrena: but
the oil which burns like Aqua Vitae hath maruai^ous qualities, specially if
it be circulated certain days with the spirit of wine: for the spirit being
after separated there remains a sweet oil of pleasant savour, good for
wounds by gunshot and eating ulcers.

Out of the pheces which remains is drawn a salt, first The salt of honey
being calcined with a fire of reverberation, dissolving it with his proper
menstrua or common water distilled, filtering and coagulating it three times.
It is good for al* rotten ulcers. This salt you shall mingle with his proper
burning oil according to art, and you shall reap greater commodity thereof,
then is lawful to be spoken.

Take of honey not separated from his wax ii pound, Tartar made into powder
i* pound, let them putrefy together Another oil of honey more precious.
in dung xv. days and distill it by a retort, and there will first come a
clear water, then a yellowish. Put these again upon the dead head, and
putrefy it again other xv. days, after distill it again, and this do three
times, and you shall have an excellent oil of honey.

Take butter first molten in white wine, and then distil Oil of butter (...)
lard.
it with a mean fire, and there will distil out a oil greatly swaging pains
and supplying. So shall you make oil of Lard and all greases.

Take 100 yolks of eggs first sodden hard, put them into a Cucurbite and make
fire by degrees, first there will ^yle of y^lks of Eggs.
come out a water, after a yellowish oil swimming upon the water* last a
thick oil. The water is good for al spots in the face, the oil to appease
all griefs and aches.

Boyle C^eue^es in water of Orphine in a double vessel Water of^* ^eses.
well stopped one whole day. After distil it, pouring the water 3. times upon
the pheces, then let it be kept, it is ve^ie good for inflammations, burnings,
the Carcynomata Water of the sperm of frog^


The sperm of eede of frogs is gathered in the month of March, and i^
distilled by a glass Limbecke, and thereof is drawn a water very commodious
for inflammations and burnings.

Eggeshels or the shells of snails are reuerberated in a ^al^ of ^gs^el^ ^nd
s^iles.
sharpe fire three days until they be brought into a ve^ie white Calce. But
if they be sprinkled with vinegar whilst they are calcined, the Calce will be
the lighter and apter to work his force.

Mercurie first washed and prepared, according to Gebers The common Mercurie
precipitate.
prescription dissolve with the duble weight of common strong water, then
distill it (...) times and pour it so often again upon the pheces; and so it
is brought into a very red powder, cut of the which being ^eue^berate at the
fire and drawn away, the spirits of the strong water which otherwise would
move geeat pain. But it were better if it were washed with the sleame of
Alum and vinegar distilled, and the water of Eggs, for by that mean the
sharpness is taken away.

But it is better to prepare Mercurie with often sublimations, Mercurie
precipiat fixi d^lci^ied most profitable for the ^re of ^ds.
and to fix it being quickened again and purged from his filthy earth and
superfluous humidity with the water which we have described in the book by
me published of the Sp^gerick preparation. But if al men do not understand that
disc^ption for the dark words of Art, it shall not be incommodious to fix
the Mercurie with common strong water three times powered on and drawn away,
and to bring it into a red powder, and that with a sufficient violent fire that
al the sharpnes and venom of the menstrew may be drawn away, which shall much
the better be done of this water following be min^led with it, and by often
distillation sep^ated.

Take of distilled vinegar (...) pound a half, the fleam (...) Alum, i. pound
and a half, calce of eggeshels vi. oun^es, distill al till it be dry. Take of
this water (...) pound, of Mercurie precipitate as ^fore i. pound, mingle all
well according to art, distil it by a Limbeck, pouring the water again unto the
p^eces three times. Last of al drive al out until it be d^ and there will
remain a powder in the bottom, which grind upon a marble and put it into a
Limbeck, pouring on the water aforesaid, which you shall three times distill
from the pheces as before, Lastly the Mercurie precipitate must be circulated
with a alcool of wine 24. hours. Then distill away the spirit of wine that the
matter may dry, then pour on new again and circulate it and distill, as
before and that do 4. or 5. times, and then you have attained the perfect
preparation of Mercurie, whose qualities cannot be sufficiently commended in
curing of sundry diseases, specially of the Pox, whether it be take by mouth,
or applied to the place grieved.

Make Amalgam with iiii. ounces of Mercurie, c^ude, oil of Mercurie corpo^
and i. ounce of the best tin. Spread this upon a plate of Iron, and set it
in a moist place, and all will dissolve into oil, it is also made with
Mercurie alone, and a plate of Tynne.

Mercurie, as the manner is, three times sublimed with Oil of mercurie
subblimed
Salt of Vitrioll, at the last is mingled with the like portion of sal^*
Armoniack, again subblimed three or four times, al that subblimat is
dissolved into oil, out of which the spirit of the salt Armoniack is to be
drawn away, circulate all with the essence of wine and distil it so long until
the oil have lost his heate and sharpness and the Armoniacke be separated.

It is also reduced by it self into an oil with a very soft heate of an
Athanor by long distance of time.

Sublime Mercurie so often with the simple Calce of The balm of Mercurie.
eggs well prepared until it be utterly extinct. To this mixture power
vinegar distilled alcoole sated that it may cover it 4 fingers, distil the
liquor from the pheces 4. or 5 times until the Mercurie be come into a very red
powder which you shall circulate with a alcoole of wine in a pelican 8. days,
separate the alcool by a limbeck there will remain in the bottom the most
precious sweet balm of Mercury. It heals al desperate ulcers also ^r^ucula
i^ ^sica, greatly helps these wounds by gunshot. Al other preparations of
Mercurie and the manner of using it you shall gather out of the book which we
lately set forth.

Upon the filings of Iron often washed with salt water, (...) martis
pour sharpe vinegar that it may cover it four fingers, set it upon warm
ashes 8. days, every day moving the matter and separating the vinegar which
will be coloured, pouring on again new, and that so long till the vinegar be no
more coloured, which being vapoured away take the powder that remains in the
bottom, and subblime it with like portion of Armoniacke: the same sublimate
you shall return again so often upon his pheces, and subblime again until
there appear the color of a Rubin: then cast al into scalding water, that the
salt may dissolve them, by by put to cold water, the balm of Mars will rest in
the bottom like the calx of gold. Pour away the water and put to fresh again
that the balm may be made sweet.

Of this with the spirit a wine alcolizat by circulations, Oil of Mars.
you shall make a red oil most excellent for all inward Hemerodes or issues
of blood, and to strengthen the bowels, if one drop be mixed with conserve of
Roses or Conferie or given with wine.

The filings of Iron first well washed, you shall calci^ ^ro^us marti^.
with the flower of Sulphur or dissolve with strong water, then pour on very
sharpe vinegar, and set it in a warm place certain days, then reuerberate it
with an open fire, as Art commands one whole^ day, gathering always the
flowers which remain above, until all be converted into a ver^e red and light
powder.

After the same manner you shall make the balm, oil The balm oil, Crocus
Vi^rio^ium Ven^^is.
Crocus of copper, out of the which with the sour flame of Vitrioll,
circulating all artificially, you shall draw a bleweshing Vitriol whose
qualities we have described in another place.

Out of Saturne calcined is drawn a sweetish salt in balneo with distilled
vinegar, pouring it so often upon the ^alt of saturn.
Pheces until it draw no more. The menstrew evaporated, the salt remains in
the botome, which by often dissolutions and coagulations is made Cristaline:
and afterward easily dissolved into oil being set in a moist place. But if
(...) (...).
you circulate this cristaline salt in a Pelicane with the alcool of wine 15.
days, and after take away the menstrew by distillation, put to new wine
circulate it, putting to a fit dose of cristaline salt of Tartar, you shall
make a Balm sweeter then sugar which will marvelously preuaile Balsamu^
Saturni.
against all maligne ulcers and diseases of the eyes.

Decoct Antimony made in powder with a capital lie Sulphur of antimoni.
prepared of Tartar calcined, and Soap ashes and quickelime the space of one
hour, then let it cool, pouring upon it a little Vinegar, and there will appear
a certain rednes swimming upon, which you shall gather: then again let it
boil for one hour or two, again let it cool and gather that which swims
up. Do this so often until there appear no more rednes. For it is the sulphur
of antimony which dried at a soft fire, you shall keep it to good uses.

Mingle Antimony with Sugar and Alum, and put all Oil of antimony.
into a Retort of glass, make a soft fire for 4. or 5. hours, afterward
increase it, and there will come out an oil red like blood: It is also done
with mercurie sublimate, but great ^eede is to be taken lest any error be
committed in the degree of fire.

Boyle Sulphur prepared with oil of Linseede with a very soft fire, and it
will be like blood congealed. Let the oil of Sulphur
matter cool, put it into a retort and give it fire, and there will distill
out a very red oil of Sulphur. It is also done, if you mingle bran with your
Sulphur and distill it.

Take of Sulphur Vinae P. i. with which mingle with a oil of Sulph^
vitriolate.
soft fire so much pure v^trioll molten that it may be one body. Distill this
by a discentorie and there will descend a red oil into the receauer.

If i. pound of the flower of sulphur be mixed with ii. or iii. pound of oil
of turpentine in a dry heate, the flowers oil of Sulphur terebinthina^.
will dissolve into a red oil. Then the menstrew rightly artificially separate,
circulate the rubin of Sulphur, with the Alcoll of wine eight days, and you
shall have oil of Sulphur that hath the qualities of the natural Balm.

The sower oil of Sulphur is made by Sulphur, by setting it on fire, and
hanging over it a bell or a large glass Sour oil of Sulphur.
head to (...) the (...) which (...) (...) into that ^.

Put* Vi^ioll bea^en into powder into a Cucurbite, giving The (...) of V^ioll.
it a fire of the second degree, and there will issue a sower water which is
called the ^leame of Vitrioll.

Take the Pheces which remains in the bottom of (...) of Vitrioll.
the vessel which is called Colcothar, stamp^ that, and if you mingle flyntes
withal with a violent fire, there will come out a red oil.

It is also made with the simple Colcothar driven out Another (...).
with a violent fire three days space, and there will come forth a very hot
oil, which is made sweet by circulation with spirit of wine Tartarizated.

But if the Colcothar be dissolved in warm water and (...) dulcifi^ (...)
(...) of (...).
the redness in it separated and the water evaporated, the Colcothar will
remain sweetish, that which remains the redness being taken away is called
Creta Uitrioli.

But if Vitrioll be drawn by the ninth, a limbeck pouring on always the
liquor upon the dead head, and after Spirit of Vi^i^ll.
circulating all by the space of eight days, you shall have the spirit of
Vitrioll very profitable for many things.

The ^leame of Alum is made like the fleam of Vitrioll.

But Alum is prepared if the ^leame be 5. times powered Tled^ of al^ and the
preparation.
upon the pheces out of which it was drawn and distilled, last of all dry out
all the fleam until it be dry.

Make brine of salt, into which cast hot burning stones that they may be
imbybed, those stones so imbybed put (...) of salt.
into a retort, giving fire by degrees, there will come forth a very hot oil of
salt.

I said before that there was great force in Butyro Arse^ici fixo, to cure al
v^n^mon^ and maligne vlce^s, it is made ^
in this manner. Mingle cristaline Arsenick first subblimed with only colcothar
(which doth keep back his poison) with like weight of salt of Tartar and salt
Peter, put al into two glasses fix it, giving fire the space of xxiiii. hour^*
first very gentle, then of the highest degree. You shall find the matter very
white fixed, resembling the color of pearls* which dissolve in war^ water, ^
may draw the A^ly from it. And the powder which ^emaineth imbybe with oil of
Tartar or of Talcum which is better, and dry it at the fire, and do this
thrice. Again dissolve the matter in warm water that you may take away his
salt and there will remain a very white powder and fixed, which will dissolve
in a moist place into a fat oil which is (...) like Butter.

Out of Talcum rightly and artificially calcined is oil of (...)
drawn the spirit with distilled vinegar. This is dissolved into a precious
oil being set in a moist place.

Take of the juice of Aristolochia Rotundae, and Sauin, The (...) (...) of Mag^
ana, iii. ounces, Serpe^, ii. ounces, spirit of (...) i. pound* circulate them
first the space of xxiiii. hou^ then distil them, of this water take i. pound
of elect Magnes made into powder iiii. ounces* circulate them together, distil
away the water from the Ph^ces, (...) this three times, and by this means you
shall obtain the preparation of Mag^.

But because (^s we have said) the noblest (...) are to Cordiall^
be strengthened, and the heart the principal ^gan of life, must always be
defended, these preparatio^ following are to be used.

Take of The^incae of Alex^ (...) ounces and a half, The (...) on of (...)
c^ll (...) (...)
the best M^rre i. ounce and a half, Saffron ii. drams, the spirit of wine vi.
ounces, mingle al these, and in ashes with a very soft fire distill it,
circulate that which is distilled in Ba^o eight days, and then distill it
again. The water hath a most excellent quality against the plague and all
venomous things, and doth marvelously strengthen the heart.

We have she^ed the ^ ^ncture of gold Corals, natural Balm, and the es^ence,
of P^rle in the book which I wrote of preparation now rests for (...) to
speak of the gold of life, which (...) ^hall know to be the most excellent
and extreme (...) in curing ^ do but consider ^ excellency ^


