THE Widows treasure, plentifully furnished with sundry precious and approved
secretes in Physic, and Surgery for the health and pleasure of mankind.

Hereunto are adjoined, sundry pretty practises and conclusions of Cookery:
with many profitable and wholesome medicines for sundry diseases in Cattle.

At London, Printed by Edward Alde, for Edward White, 1588.

To the Courteous Reader,
THis Pamphlet being written (not many years past as it should seem) at the
earnest request and suite of a Gentle woman in the Cuntrye for her private
use, which by these singular practises hath obtained such fame, that her name
shall be remembered for ever to the posterity. The original Copy (by great
chance) was lent me by an especial friend of mine, in the perusing whereof I
found it so furnished with such rare experiments and pritie conceits as t^e
like are not to my knowledge extant in the English tongue. I thought it my duty
for the health and pleasure of many my friends, to set them forth to the view
of the world, to be practised especially of those that take delight in such
matter, or hath any occasion through their defects to use them for their
healths sake. This I dare presume to report of the work, that there are
herein included very many secrets, that I know by the Widows own practise,
to be most singular and approved, and though perhaps they are not orderly set
down as many of better skill might have done, I desire you to consider that
this was of the collectione of such a one as never once thought to have made
the common: but only to his good friend M*R. This caveat she also gives by
the way, to read them advisedly and practise with discretion, and as you
find commend: and so wi^h all humility concluding, I dedicate unto you this
her Treasure and chief Jewel: desiring you to be a defence as well for her as
for me, from all such as shall in your hearing scorn her, or me for
disclosinge such profitable experiments.

Fareyou well.
FINIS.
The Widows Treasure.
To make Syrup of Roses or Violettes.
TAKE of Violettes or Roses a pound, steep them in three pints of warm water
put it in an earthen pot with a narow mouth the space of wig. hours* or more,
after strain it and warm the water again: put in it a gain so many Roses or
Violets, likewise let them lye in steep eight hours, thus do at the least
five times, the oftner the better, in especial the roses, and after take to
every pint: half a pound of Sugar, and steep them together till the Sugar be
molten, then seethe them together with a soft sweet fire to the heith of a
Sirrup: If you have more Roses or Violettes, or Fewer, let so much be the
proportion of the water according to the proportion before.

To make Diatreon Piperion the best.
TAKE white Pepper, black Pepper and long Pepper, of each six dragmes and
eighteen grains, Time, Ginger, Anneseedes of each a dragme: beat the lunge
Pepper, Anneseedes, Ginger, and Time into* fine powder, bruise the other two
Peppers as gross as may be: then take Sugar clarified with Hissop water,
eighteen. seethe the Sugar, and take so much of the water above said as will
cover it. To know when it is enough, drop a drop on a saucer, and if it will
come from the saucer without cleaving: it is enough. Then after cooling, put in
your powder and stir them altogether, and after put all into a Pot. c.

Virtutes huius confectionis sequuntur.
THis decoction is good to eat,
always before and after meat.
For it will make digestion good,
and turn your meat to puer blood.
Besides all this it doth excel,
all windines to expel.
And all gross humours cold and raw,
that are in belly, stomach or maw.
It will dissolve without pain,
and keep ill vapors from the brain.
Besides all this it will restore,
your memory though lost before.
Use it therefore when you please,
fortherin rests mighty ease.
To make Rosa solis.
TAKE first a quart of the best Aqua vitae that you can get, and put it
into a Glass or Pot of earth, then put into it five handfuls of Rosa Solis
clean picked, and the Roots and dead leaves clean clipped off, a quarterne
of Sugar beaten to powder, nine Dates opened and the white skin within pilled
or plucked off, then shred the Dates in small pieces, and one. Ginger, di..
Nutmegs, i. Anniseedes, iiii. Liquorice, beating all these last rehearsed
into fine powder: Then put them altogether in the said glass or pot, letting
them stand very close stopped the space of three or four days, then take them
al strain the foresaid things into some clean vessel as hard as you may,
so that you may have as much of the strength as is possible to have of it:
then take and put the liquor into the glass or vessel that you mean to
preserve it in, and stop it very close that no strength pass out of it in any
manner.

Doctor Hatchers powder against the Stone.
TAKE the Roots of Ireos, Liquorice, calamus aromaticus, the hair of the
Harts skin burnt, of each.s. the Roots of Enula campana, Fillependula,
Ginger, lunge Pepper, Anniseedes, Fenell seed, Saxifrage seed, Ana. ii.
Sinamon, Maces, Ciperus, Spicknarde, Saffron, Betonye, Ana i. Sugar s. scene of
Alexandria iii. Rhabarke, i. Of all these premises make a powder fine and
small, and take thereof the weight of viii d. in the morning fasting with white
Wine, twice or thrice a week leuke warm. It cleanses the Bladder, Back,
Reins and Kidneies from the Stone, it remedies belly ache, and provokes a
laxe.

Master Stranges plaster against the stone.
TAKE Plantaine, Featherfewe, Garden Tansie, and Houflike, of each alike
quantitye, and stamp all these together and strain them, then take the juice
and put to it Bean flower as much as shall make it thick, and then take
three or four spoonefulles of Honey, and clarify them in the fire: which
done put the juice and the flower into the Honey, and boyle them on the fire
together until they be stiff like a plaster. When you will use this
medicine, you must take a double cloth that shall be a quarter of a yard
broad, and as long as will go round about you, and as hot as you can sow it
round about you, and this must you wear two days and a night or else two
nights and a day before you take it off.

To provoke sleep.
TAke a spoonful of Woman's milk, a spoonful of Rosewater, and a Spoonful
of the juice of Lattice boyle them in a dish, then take some fine Flax, and
make your plaster as broad as you will have it lye on your forehead, and then
moyste it with the same Liquor, ad grate a little Nutmegge to straw over it,
and lay it to your temples and it will provoke sleep.

A sovereign medicine for the Colic.
MAKE a toste of Household bread of clean Wheat, and ever as you toste it
cast Malmesie on it, then take dried Lavender Flowers, and caste it on the
Toste then lay it on a thin cloth, and as hot as you can suffer it lay it
to your Navel as close as you can.

To make Aqua composita.
TAKE a handful of Rosemary, a good root of Enula-campana, a handful of
Hissop. di handful of Time, di. handful of sage, six croppes of mints as
many of Peniriall, as many of Marierum, di. handful of Horehound, two vnces
of Liquorice, two vnces of Anniseedes bruised, then take three Gallons of good
Ale, and put therein all these things aforesaid, and cover the pot close till
it boyle, and then set on your Limbecke, and keep under it but a soft easy
fire. And if a man have the Stone, these Herbs be good to put into the said
water, viz. di. handful of Sarifrage, one handful of Parcelye, di. handful
of Philependula, and di. handful of Fennel.

For Cough and Flew me in the stomach.
TAKE a quart of stale Ale, and a handful of Goosemeate which is named
Hayrefe, and a quantitye of pared Liquorice, and a quatity of small Raisons,
and boyle altogether unto a pint, and drink thereof first and last.

For the Sciatica.
TAKE Sauery and mix the juice thereof with Wheat Flower, and make a plaster
thereof, and lay it where you feel the pain.

A sovereign Ointment for weakness in the back.
TAKE a handful of Dasse roots, and as much of Planten, Bursa pasto^s,
centumnodi, and the croppes of Acorns, Ana i, handful of Bole Armoniacke and
the powder of Hearts horne, then take a Buck Cony that is fat, and boyle all
these together in white Wine and water, as much water as Wine till the said
Cony be consumed the flesh from the bones, and after take the Cony and the
other geere forth of the broth, and strain the broth into a clean vessel,
and let it stand till it turn into a Iellye, and when you be in bed cause the
back therewith to be anointed by a chasingdishe of Coals three nights
together: and lay thereon a Linen cloth warm and softly lay it on, and in
no wise chase your back.

For Flewme or stopping in the Stomach.
TAKE two handefulles of Honisuckle leaves, and an ounce of Anniseedes: and
three Sticks of Liquorice, boyle all these together in a quart of water till
they be boiled from a quart to a pint, then drink thereof in the morning
fasting.

For Strangury or Stone in the Reins of the back.
TAKE Water of Camomill Stilled, and drink thereof when you feel pain, one
ounce fasting until the pain be alaid: and eat a little Sugar after: because
the water is bitter.

To make Oil of Camomill.
TAKE Oil a pint and a half, and three ounces of Camomill flowers dried one
day after they be gathered in the shadow then put the vile and the flowers in
a glass and stop the mouth close, and set it into the Sun by the space of
forty days.

To make oil of Roses.
TAKE Oil washed eighteen ounces, the buds of Roses the white ends of
them: cut away three ounces, lay the Roses abroad in the shadow four and
twenty hours, then put them in a Glass to the Oil, and stop the glass
close: and set it in the Sun at least forty days.

The manner how to wash the Oil.
TAKE and put it into a Basin of fair Water, and beat it well with your hand
that the dross may fall down, then take of that part which remains above
on the Water with a Spoon, and put the same Oil into an other basin of fair
water and wash it as you did before: and so purify it three or four times.

To make the Ointment of Roses.
TAKE Oil of Roses four ounces, white Wax one ounce, melt them together
over seething Water, then chase them together with Rosewater and a little white
Vinegar.

To make a Tysande.
TAKE Borage, Langdebeefe, Sorrel Endife, Cinquefoyle, two or three handfuls
of Barlye well picked, and both the ends taken off, then take half a
handful of red Fennel Roots, and a quantitye of Liquorice, sugar Candy,
Figs, Dates, great Raisons, boyle all together from a gallon to three
pintes.

For the strangurye.
TAKE a pound of Guiacum, otherwise called Lignum vitae, and let it be beaten
to powder as the Apothicary informs you then put the substance thereof in a
pot with three quarts of pure water, and close the mouth of the pot surely,
that in no wise the air thereof go out, then make but a soft fire under the
Pot that it doth not seethe or boyle, and to remain so hot (but not boiling
the space of four and twenty hours, and at the end of four and twenty hours
open the head of the pot, and take the whole substance and liquor, and put it
in a stillitorye, and put thereto a Pottle of white Wine, and when you have
stilled the same drink thereof in the Morning fasting, or any time else when
you feel pain, and if you will have but half a pound of Guiacum, then
according to the proportion of that quantity, use the ingredience as is above
written: and because many can not come by white Wine if you have a pound of
Guiacum, after the rate put to the pound a gallon of clear water to be
ordered the space of four and twenty hours as is aforesaid: then strain it
through a Cloth: and drink of it at your pleasure, but the virtue thereof will
not last past three or four days.

A Clister for the Strangury.
TAKE Camomill Flowers and Mellons of each one handful, seethe them in a
quart of water to a pint: then strain the liquor and put thereto three
ounces of oil of Camomill: the waighte of two grotes or less of sal^d so
prepare the Clister.

For the swelling of the Yearde or Coddes.
TAKE Egrimonye of the Water thereof stilled: and put thereto a quantity of
Allome and set them over the fire till they almost boyle: then with a rag of
Linen cloth annoynt the Yard under the skin with the water well and warm:
and it will abate the payne of the Yearde and of the Cods also if they be washed
with the same. Also to incarnate the skin of the Yearde within, take the
water of Fumitary, lay Liquorice pared therein one night, and put of the same
water into the Yearde with a sponge, or else with a tent of linen cloth.

Doctor Bartlets Medicine for Aches with swelling.
TAKE flowers of Camomill and Rose leaves, seethe them in white Wine, making a
plaster thereof, lay it to the place where any pain, ache or swelling is.

To make one to peace.
TAke the powder of the berries of Ivy, and drink it with white Wine, or else
with stale Ale hot.

THe worthy Doctor and excellent practicioner Rasis writes, that whosoever
oftentimes snuffs up into his nostrils the juice of great Margerum shall
never be diseased in the head.

A singular remedy for all diseases in the head of what cause soever.
TAke a handful of Camomill, a handful of Betonye, a handful of Veruaine
leaves clean picked, stamp them and sees them in Ale woorte, and when it
hath sod, put thereunto a little Commin seed finely beaten, with a little
powder of Harts horne, three spoonefulles of Vinegar, the yolks of two Eggs
and a little Saffron, stir them about, and lay a plaster hot over all his
forehead. It is an approved medicine for the Megrim.

Chestwoormes that are found between the Bark of Trees, which will be round
like a Peas sodden in Oil it makes a singular ointement for the Megrim: and
the same Oil dropped into the ears swageth the pain.

An approved remedy for the Toothache
The Roots of Henbane sodden in Vinegar and Rosewater, put the decoction in
your mouth.

A worthy purgation to avoid Choler.
TAKE half an uncle of Cassia newly drawn, a dragme of good Rubarbe, infused a
night with water of Endife, with a little Spicknarde, and an uncle of Syrup of
Violets: mix all the said things with three ounces of Ptisan or Why, and
drink it warm.

Against unkindly heate of the Liver.
TAke a good handful of Liver woorte that grows upon the stones, and an
other of Fumitorye, with as much of Hearts tunge, and seethe them in Why
clarified, and drink them every day twice. Also seethe Barberies in Why
and drink it.

THe Liver of a Hare dried and made in powder, is approved for all diseases of
the Liver.

Mythridates medicine against corrupt airs.
Twenty leaves of Few, two fat Figs, two Walnuts, and a little salt,
whosoever eats of this composition, shall be sure from all kind of venom
that day.

To increace Milk in Women's Breasts.
PArsney Roots and Fenell Roots sodden in broth of Chickens, and afterwards
eaten with a little fresh Butter, makes your milk increace.

RIce sodden in Cow milk with crumbs of white bread. Fenell seed in powder
and a little Sugar is exceeding good.

Crystal made in fine powder, and mix it with as much Fenell seed and
Sugar, and use to drink it warm with a little Wine.

An excellent soap for Scabs and Itch.
TAke white Soap half a di. and steep it in sufficient Rose water, till it be
well soked, then take two dragmes of Mercury Subblimed, disolue it in a little
Rose water, labour the Soap and the Rose Water well together, and afterward
put in it a little Musk or Civet, and keep it. This is singular to cure a
great Scabbe or Itch without peril.

An approved medicine to drive away Lice.
TAke the Dregs of Oil, or fresh Swines Grease a sufficient quantitye
wherein you shall chase an uncle of Quick Silver till it be all suricke into the
grease, then take powder of Staues-acre fearced and mingle all together, make
a Girdle of a woollen list meet for the middle of the patient, and all to
anoint it over with the said medicine, then let him wear it continually next
his skin, for it is a singular remedy to chase them away. The only odour of
Quick silver kills Lice.

For to stop the Flixe.
TAke Scene croppes and stamp it, and drink it with stale ale, and it will
amend by Gods help.

For the blooddye Flixe.
TAke an Apple and roast it, and put therein as much Wax as a Bean, and let
the Patient eat it, and by Gods help it will amend.

For any bruise.
TAke an Ore Gall and Onyons, and fry them with Sheep Tallow, and it will
help presently.

An ointment for the back.
TAke four ounces of Vnguentum, Frigidum Galeni, an ounce of the juice of
Houslike, two dragmes of Mirt^e, and as much of Lead burned, one dragme of
Camphier, half a dragme of red Rose leaves, as much red Currall, and according
to Art make all these an Oyntmente in a Mortar of Lead.

For an Ague.
TAKE a handful of Hearts horne that grows in the field, and a handful of
bay Salt, and lay it to your wristes.

For the Tooth ache.
TAKE Bytonye, Sage, and Allome, seethe them in Vinegar, and let it lye in your
Tooth.

To keep Venison fresh a long time.
Press out the blood clean, and put it into an earthen pot, and fill it with
clarified Honey two fingers above the flesh, and bind a Leather close about
the mouth that no air enter.

To keep it from rotting after it is new flaine.
Cover it close from the Sun or Air with Fearne, and lay it in a cold
place, then wash it clean and let it lye in Water half a day, and then lay
it on the Floor to dry, then set the Water and Salt together, and let it
cool till it be leuke warm, and then wash the Venison therein, and let it lye
in that pickle three days and three nights, then take it out and powder it
with dry Salt, and barrel it and stop it fast.

To keep Pears.
PVt them in a vesse;ll that they touche not each other, and make a bed of
pears and an other of fine white Salt, and cover them close.

To kill Lice.
MAke a fire and put quick silver therein, and hang the clothes over it in the
smoke and no vermin will come in them.

Against drunkenness,
Drink the juice of Yarowe fasting, or else the Marrow of Pork fasting.

To make Linen cloth or Yearn white.
TAke a Herring Barrel, and fill it full of Ale dregs, and stop it fast,
but first you must have a good dishefull of parthed Beans, and put them in a
Linen bag, and being hot, put them to the Dregs till they cool, and
shut it fast the space of one quarter of an hour, then take a paunde of Allome
ground to powder, and cast it therein, and let it lye so four days well
closed, then wash it.

To remedy the feet that are sore with Travailing.
TAke Plantaine and stamp it well, and anoint your feet with the juice
thereof, and the grief will swag.

A notable experiment against the Phitiske of the Lunges.
TAKE of the Pimpernell brought into very fine powder two ounces, of new
Pimpernell water, and of Sugar as much as shall suffice, making thereof an
Clectuarie, of which take daily two dragmes.

Parsley with crumbs of Breode applied in the steed of a plaster, doth heal
the Shingles, but the decoction of the same drunk doth break the Stone,
Florenti.

MIntes put into Milk, it neither suffers the same to curd, nor to become
thick, in so much that laid into curded milk, this would bring the same
thin again, so that by the same virtue and property he saith to resist and
abate the generation as well in man as woman. Florentinus.

A good drink for the pestilence.
TAke a Lilly root and wash it clean and boyle it in white Wine till the
one half be wasted, and then give it the sick to drink, and he shall break
out full of bladders as if he were burnt of scalded, which of them selves will
dry and wax whole. Pastor.

CHestnuts eaten with Honey fasting, do help a man of the Cough.

To make a perfect black Ink to write or limb withal.
TAke one pound of Galls, one pound of Gum Arabic, of Vitrioll an ounce,
bruise your Galls and Vitriall, and put them into a vessel fit for your
purpose, fill it with white Wine, that all your stuff may be covered above a
hand breadth: then set it in the Sun and stir it daily.

A very good Green.
TAke the juice of Few, Verdegres, and Saffron, bray them, and when you will
use it, mingle it with Gum water.

An other Green.
TAke green Baize, steep it alone in vinegar, then strain it through a
Linen cloth, and grind it with a little Honey and Gum water.

An Emerald Green.
TAke Verdegres, Litarge, Quick Silver brayed to powder, and ground with the
peace of a young child.

For to make a colour like Gold.
TAke an uncle of Orpiment, one uncle of fine Crystal, bray them severally, and
mingle with them the white of an Egg.

TAke Saffron dried, beaten into powder, and put to it as much glistering
Orpiment that is scalye not earthy, then with the gall of an Hare or a Pike,
bray them together, put them in some viol under a dong-hill five days, then
take it out and keep it, for it is the colour of Gold.

A notable receipt to make Ipocras.
TAke of Ginger two dragmes, of Sinamon i., of Cloves, Nutmegs Galanga, of
each a quarter of an uncle, stamp them, and put them in a Bag or Strainer.
Then take a pint of the best red or white Wine that you can get: or a pint of
good Malmesie, and mix them all together, then take a pound of Sugar fined,
and having stamped it, put it into the other Wine, and so pour it upon the
strainer wherein you did put the said Wine with Spices, then having taken it
out, you must power it on again, so often until it become as clear as it
was before, stirring it sometime in the strayner or bag, with this special
note, that that is but to make a Flagon full: therefore as you will have it in
quantitye, take the more store of the said things: you may bind a little
Musk in a fine Linen cloth at the end of a Strayner, so that all the
substance may run over it: so that it shall have the odour of Musk.

A proper device to make lights of an excellent savour.
TAke two ounces of white Encence, of Camphor an uncle, beat it in powder, and
make thereof little round pellets adding there unto some white Wax, then put
them in a platter full of sweet Water, and fire the pellettes with a Candle,
and you shall have an excellent light and sweet savour.

To destroy Lice.
TAke Frankincense beaten to powder, and a quantitye of Bores Grease, and boyle
them together in an earthen pan and herewith annoynte the places where the
Lice are.

To make red Ink.
TAke two vnces of Brasill, and a pint of Water, and put the Brasill into it,
and let it remain there six or seven hours, then sees it until the third
part be diminished, and it is a perfect red.

Whether the Wine be mingled with Water or no.
TAke ripe Mulberies and put them into your Wine, if they swim the Wine is
pure, but if they sink there is water mingled. Also a Pear clean pared
causes the same effect.

To heal lips that are chapt with wind or cold.
NEw Wax, Masticke, and Frankincense, with oil of Roses, al this made in an
ointment, and there with anoint the chappes, and they will heal presently.

For kybed heals.
TAke Gum Dragant and galbanum, of each a like, and make thereof a powder,
then take Ox Tallow, and a little Oil of Violets, and melt them on the fire
and therein put the said powders, and make hereof an oyntement, and herewith
dress your heals.

For scabs in Children.
Oil of Roses, the weight of six pence in common salt, and a little fresh
Butter stirred altogether until it become an ointment, heals them.

To destroy Crablice.
AShes laid in Oil, or take of Aloes, Olibanum, and Ceruse, of each four
ounces, beating them all into powder, and mingled with Oil of Roses, or fresh
barrownes grease.

An order to make Wormwood water of the best sort as follows.
TAke six gallons of old and strong Ale, and take a voyder full of Woormewood
clean picked and washed, the Water well wrong out of it, or shaken, half an
uncle of large Mace, half an uncle of Cinnamon, two vnces of Nutmegs, a quarter
of a pound of Anniseedes, and as much Liquorice, and bruise all those Spices
together, but not too small, and cut the Woormewood betwixt your hands, and
then set all these together in the pot, and still them as you still Aqua vitae
together, and so you shall have two quarts of the best, besides the smaller
or weaker.

To make a good Posset Curd.
First take the Milk and seethe it on the fire, and before it sees put in
your Eggs according to the quantitye of your Milk, but see that your Eggs be
tempered with some of your Milk that stands on the fire, and you must stir
it still until it seethe, and begins to rise, then take it from the fire,
and have your drink ready in a fair Basin on a chasingdishe of coals, and
put your Milk into the basin as it stands, and cover it, and let it stand a
while, then take it up, and cast on ginger and sinamon.

A medicine for the mother.
TAke nep royal, and stamp it, then take two spoonefulls of the same juice,
and a spoonful of sallet oil, and let it sees away two parts, thest unto
that remains but the quantitye of the Oil only, and annoynte the place
where the Mother rises.

To make sirrope of Roses or flowers.
First have a glass with fair Water, and make it warm in a Pot of
seething Water, and when your water in the glass is warm, then put to it rose
leaves and let it stand till it be cold, then wring out your Roses, make the
foresaid water warm again as before, and then put in other Roses, and so do
nine days: and then put in Ginger, and seethe it until it be syrup.

To take away the Cough or Stitch.
TAke a pint or a quart of Malmesie one handefull of Annyseede, one handefull
of vnset Hissoppe: one Licorice stick bruised, half a dish of sweet Butter,
sees all these things together till they be thick: and after spread it
upon a toste of wheat bread and lay them within a linen Cloth as warm as
you may suffer it to your Stomach. But if you will take this for a Stitch
leave out the Butter.

The Head anointed with the juice of Leekes, preserves the hair from
falling.

To make Iellye.
FOR a Pottle of Iellye, take of Sinamon a quarter of a pound, of Ginger two
ounces and di. of Grains two Peniwoorthe, of lunge Pepper two Peniwoorthe,
Cloves half an ounce, of Sugar two pounds, di. of Turnesoles two ounces and
di. and ten Nutmegs, look that the Spice be good and well made clean, then
take six Calves feet, or an old Cock and three quarts of Claret Wine, and
a pint of Water, and let them boyle so long together until you may see the
sodliquor clammishe between your fingers, then take it from the Fire and
strain it through a strayner, and so let it stand till it be cold, that the
filth may discende to the bottom and when you will finnishe your Ielly, take
the best of the said liquor and put into an other Pot with the proportion of
Spices, and boyle them together by the space of half an hour, and in the
mean time make clean your Turnesole and dust it well, then take a Ladle full
of the said liquor and put your Turnesole in it, and when it is a little well
soked, then wring out so oft as it shall be needful, until your Ielly be
fair coloured. Then take the whites of eight Eggs, and beat them together a
good while and skimme of the froth, and a little before you shall think it time
to draw your Iellye, put the said whites into the Iellye with three
spoonefulles of Vinegar, and forthwith draw your Iellye through a woollen bag,
and put in a branch of rosemary in the end of it, and so dish it.

How to dress Orrenges.
TAKE Oringes and shave them with a Knife, and quarter them like an Apple and
take out all the meat out of them, and lay them in Water, and shift them
twice a day: then when you think they be enough, take them out, then set on
fair Water on the fire: then put your Oringes in and parboyle them: then take
them out and set their mouths downewardes in a Flasket that the Water may
run out, then set on fair water over the fire to parboyle them again: and
if they be not well parboyled, boyle them again till you may pinch them
through: then take them out and put them in a fair cloth, and lay them in a
Flasket that it may drain out of them: then take a gallon of running Water and
put them into it, at every four Orenges you must put in a pound of Sugar, when
you have done so: set it on the fire, but before you set it on the fire, take
an Egg and break it take out the white of it and lay it in water, take your
hand and beat it in yt water: then set it on the fire and let it burn clear
under it: and look that no smoke arise: and when it doth, seethe skimme of
the top of it very clean, then take it off the fire and with a strainer
strain it into another pot, then put in your Oringes, then make the fire good
and temperate, so that it seethe not too fast, then you must take a spoon and
skimme of the some: so that you touche not the Oringes, and as the syrup doth
seethe, so with a spoon turn them, and always lay the syrup upon the
Oringes, when they have sod half an howre take them out and let your syrup
seethe a good space, then take some of the syrup and cool it, and if you see
it any thing stiff, then put the oringes into it again.

To preserve Damsons.
TAke a glass that hath a wide mouth, and strew some Sugar in the bottom,
then lay a row of Damsons and a row of Sugar, thus do till your glass be
almost full, then put to it Rosewater and a few Cloves and a little
Sinamonne, then stop your glass with paste: then have a pot with hot water
ready on the fire, and put some hay in the bottom of the Pot for saving
the Glass from breaking, and let not your pot boyle too fast, then take up the
Glass and like whether your Sugar be consumed, and in the mean space make
ready your Sirrup, then when it is cold, put in your Damsons. The Sirrup must
be made of sugar, and Wine, Rosewater, and whole Sinamon, or half fair water:
provided that the glass must boyle till the Sugar be consumed.

To make dry Pears.
TAke fair water and Rosewater according to the quantity of your pears, then
take Honey as much as you think good and put in your Pears, then let them
seethe very softly that they break not, then take them out and put them in a
Collander and let them drain, then when you draw your bread put them into the
Oven in some earthen pan, and if they be not dry at the first, put them in
again until they be dry, then barrel them.

For the shaking of the hand.
Wash your hands in the Water that is in a Lauor, and put therein some Sage,
let your hands dry of them selves without wiping.

To stay the bloody Flixe.
TAKE and cut out a piece of a piece of Beef of a new killed Ox about the
Brisket, eat it raw, and this helps it.

To restore the blood again.
TAke half a pint of Muskadell, and a peniwoorth of sallet Oil, and put them
together and drink it in the morning, and walk an hour after.

For running of the Rains.
TAke pellitorye of the wall a good handful, wild Time and Parslie, boyle
them in a quart of strong Ale, until it come to a pint, and drink thereof
morning and evening nine or ten days half a pint at a time, and warm it.

For the Ague.
TAKE a handful of Smalledge, and a handful of bay Salt, and a handful of
white Frankincense, and six Plantaine leaves, beat all these finely in a
Mortar then divide them into four parts, and lay two parts to your breasts,
and the other two parts to the bought of your arms. An howre before your fit
come, you must have a pint of Ale sod to the half, and when it rises
skimme it, then put in a white bread crust, and let it seethe with the Ale,
and when your Ague begins to come drink it and eat the crust of bread.

A drink for the ague.
TAKE Bay leaves and Sage leaves and seethe them in white Wine, after strain
the wine from the leaves, then take baye-berries bruise them, somewhat grocelye
and put them in the Wine, and a little before your fit comes drink it.

A medicine for the Woormes in a childes belly or any other.
TAKE a pound of May Butter, and clarify it in the Sun, then take two
pounds of Woormwood stamped, and then weigh it after it be stamped, the
Woormewood must be gathered green, then mingle them together with your hands
after they be put together, and set them in the Sun nine days in a pot or
Glass, and let it boyle an howre and a half, then strain it, so put it up in a
Gally pot or in a double glass and always at the full of the moon anoint
the belly of the party against the fire, at no time else, and the medicine made
in May.

A medicine for to get the Beetelwigges out of a mans ear.
TAke Hearbgrace, stamp it and strain it with Aqua Composita, and put the
juice into the ear that is pained, after lye down on that side, and bind a
cloth fast about the head and it will come out.

For a Leg that is swollen with a fall.
TAke Hemlockes, and heate them hot between Tiles and lay them to it: and
it will aswage the pain.

For a when when it begins.
TAke an old ladle and hold it against the fire until it doth fry, and
annoynt the When with that that fries out of the Ladle three or four times
in a day, and it will help it.

For the Colic.
TAke a quart of white Wine and make a Posset, then take the Posset drink and
put therein a handful of Mother of Time and a handful of young Parslye, and
sees it in the Posset drink, and take half a penywoorth of long Pepper, and
put in the posset and give it to the patient to drink.

For the canker in the mouth or throat, or to wash your teeth that be hollow
and stinks.
TAke a quantitye of Red Sage, and xij. croppes of Rosemarye, and Honysuccles,
and wild Daisies, and Sinckfoyle boyle them all in a pint of fair water till
it be sodden the half pint, and then take a little Roch Allome and burn it
to powder and then take half a spoonful of Honey, then put them into a fair
cloth and strain it, and when it is cold put it into little glasses.

For the Got.
TAke Camomill, Balm, Hollyhockes, Lattice, Mallowes, Grounsell, Chickweede,
of each a handful, boyle them in fair Water till it be tender, then take a
quantitye of great Otemeale and beat it small, then put it into those Herbs
that you have boiled, with two spoonefulles of Capons grease, and then boyle
them all together until it be so thick as it may be spread upon a Cloth, and
as you seethe it, stir it that it burn not too, then being sod: spread
it on a cloth, that it may be laid to the grieved place as hot as may be,
and it shall help in twice dressing.

IF you have any payne in the soale of your foot, take half a dossen of the
leaves of ground Iuye, and prick them and wrap them to the soale of your
foot, and so continue until you find ease.

To preserve Quinces.
FIrst pare your Quinces, and core them then take to every pound of Quinces a
pint of Rose water and a pound of Sugar, then take the Rose water and Sugar,
boyle them together with some of the cores of the Quinces, then clarify the
Liquor with the whites of Eggs, and set it over the fire again, and when it
seetheth put in the Quinces, and cast in a stick or two of Sinamon, and if
they cast not colour quickly, cover them and let it seethe until you may put
a rush through them then let it stand until it be cold, and so set it up.

Marmalade of Quinces.
TAKE your Quinces and coare them, and pare them: then put to them so much
Water as shall suffice to boyle them so tender that they may be strained, when
they be sodden, put out as much of the Liquor as you leave when that you have
sufficient to strain it, and let it stand until the next day morning, then
measure with a pound dish how many pounds of substance you have: then take
to every eight pound of Quinces six pound of Sugar: then put it to the
Liquor that you kept before that your Quinces were first sodden in and then set
it on the fire and let it seethe a while: and clarify it with white of Eggs:
then strain the said liquor, and put it to the substance of the Quinces
aforesaid: and so set it on the fire, and let it boyle until it have a fair
colour, that it may cut at the sides of a dish: then put it into boxes. If you
will put in any Musk, take Rose water in a Saucer, and put in your Musk and
when you have taken your Marmelade from the fire: immediately put in the same
Rosewater and Musk, and stir it together and box it.

A Borage Tart or Spinach.
PArboyle your Spinach, then stamp it and strain it with half a dossen
yolks of Eggs, season it as your Cream Tart.

A medicine for the Plague
when you suspect your self to be infected, go to bed, and cause a pint of
Malmesie to be put in a Pot, and half a Penywoorthe of Grains beaten small
to put in the same Pot, boyle them together, and drink thereof as hot as
you can and sweat.

A Whaye for Itch or breaking out.
Clarify Whaye with the Leaves of Succorye, Endiue, Borage, of each an ounce
of Fumitorye flowers, of Hoppes an ounce, one Fennel and Succorye Root
bruised, of great Raisons an ounce, let these be clarified with a quantitye of
Whaye, drink thereof every Morning a draught Warm five or six Mornings,
then take a handefull of Scene sodden in a Pot closely stopped from a Pint to
a quarter of a Pint with a few Anniseedes bruised, then strain it and drink
it in the morning fasting, and by and by a little Aleburye, and some thin
broth.

Against the felon and Vncomes.
TAKE an ounce of Sage, of Few the waighte of the Sage in Senegreene, wash
these together and shake out the water, dry them clean with a cloth, and chop
them very small, then take sower Leaven the bigness of a Tennis ball, black
Soap a spoonful, two spoonefulles of Tar, stamp it in a wooden dish with
a pestell of Wood, lay the same morning and Evening unto it an inch thick.

SIrrope of Fumitorye, opens and takes away all obstructions of the Liver
and stomach, and fortifies all the members, it cures all the sores about the
in ward parts, which come of Salt and burnt water, as Scabs, Leper, and
French paxe.

Syrup of Rosa solis good for swooning or any other diseases in the stomach.
TAke a quart of the best Aqua Composita, Aqua vitae a quart, a quantitye of
the Roses of Solis clean picked: and some what dried in the Sun, put all
these in a glass, set it in the Sun four or five days: then take di*. of
case Ginger, di.. of Nutmegs, di.. of Cloves, white Pepper, of Grains,
Anniseedes: Colianderseede, Ana a quarter of an ounce of Scene, a Stick of
Licorice, four corns of lunge Pepper, di.. of Sinamonne, then put all these
Spices being well chosen, finely fried somewhat bruised into the pot, then take
a quarter of a pound of Red Currants, di. a quarter of a pound of dates, a
quarter of a pound of Raisons at the Sun, eight Figs of Algarye, viii.
grains of Musk, as much of Ambergrice, white and red Corrall, Ana. of
Pearls, all these infused together in the said Liquor: and set in the Sun
forty days, and closely covered that no air may come unto it.

Aqua Rosa Solis.
TAKE a pint of Aqua vitae, a Gallon of the flowers of Rosa Solis well picked,
a piece of Angel Gold, of Rosemary flowers or the herb it self, and a
quantitye of fine Sugar, styll them in a Stillatorye and keep the Water close,
and occupy it by a spoonful at once.

To make fine Cakes.
TAke a quantitye of fine wheat flower, and put it in an Earthen Pot stop it
close and set it in an Oven, and bake it as lunge as you would a Pastye of
Venison, and when it is baked it will be full of clods, then serce your flower
through a fine Serser, then take Clouted Cream or sweet Butter, but Cream is
best: then take Sugar, Cloves, Mace, Saffron and yolks of Eggs, so much as
will seem to season your Flower, then put these things into the Cream,
temper all together, then put thereto your flower, so make your Cakes the paste
will be very short, therefore make them very little, lay paper under them.

To make an excellent Pomander.
TAke of Storax Calamita.ss. of Beniemin two ounces, of Labdanum.ss. of Cloves,
white Saunders, of each three dragmes, Margerum two dragmes: mingle with these
powders Musk and Ambergrice of each a scruple: make your ball with the
infusion of Rosewater and Civet in a mortar somewhat warm.

A precious ointment for all manner of Aches.
TAke a pound weight of Sage, as much of Few, half a pound of Woormewood, and
as much of Croppes of Baize, and beat them very small in a Mortar: then take
two pound and a half of sheep Tallow, and temper it with the Herbs that be
beaten: and beat them again together new and then put them in a pan, and
set them upon hot Embers, and put thereto a pottle of Oil of Olife, and let
it stand upon the hot Embers two hours and a half at the least, then strain
it through a course cloth, and put it in an earthen Pot, and so occupy it.
This would be made in May or in June.

For the canker in the mouth.
TAke white Vinegar a quantitye, with as much Honey: and then set them on the
fire to boyle with a little Allom: and wash your mouth therewith as oft as
shall need.

TAke the juice of Plantaine, and Vinegar, and Water of Roses, and wash your
mouth.

TAke the juice of Woodbin, and the juice of Solseque, that is Marigoldes: and
Honey, and powder of Canell, and powder of Copporis, and the powder of wild
Sage, burnt and meddled all together, and lay it thereon where the Canker is,
and it shall dry it. But to slay the Canker take a Red Onion and lay it thereon.

CArduus eaten or drunk in powder provokes sweat.

A Mouce roasted and given to Children to eat, remedies pissing a bed.

A precious drink for the Pestilence, approved.
TAKE Fetherfew, Matfelon, Mogwort, Solsequi, Scabions, and Mallowes, wash
them and stamp them: and temper them with Ale: and give the sick to drink
six spoonefulles at once, if he have it betimes it will destroy the corruption,
and save the sick patient.

A singular medicine to resist the pestilence.
TAke powder of Saffron ten grains, Wallnutes twenty grains, Figs.ij.
and six Sage Leaves stamped together with i. of Pimpernell water, and iij.
Grains of Mithridatum, keep this in a close Glass, and eat thereof in the
Morning twelve Grains, and this will defend the receiver from the Pestilence.

THe great Garden Dock drunk in Wine, purges Phlegm, Cholour, and water
downwards.

The virtue of Motherwoorte.
IT grows by the high ways and Stony Walls, bushing with many stalks
leaved like a Nettle, but more ragged: and towards the bottom like Crow foot.
It is of wonderful force against any sickness of the hart: whereof the chief
name is derived, it helps Cramps and Palsies, it kills Woormes in the
body, it cleanses the breast from Phlegm, it doth open cold obstructions, it
provokes Urine. Moves Women's flowers the juice drunk, or the herb in
decoction, and a spoonful of the powder of this herb given in Wine, helps
the hard labours of Women.

An excellent medicine against Impostumes Plurifie, Coughs, and all diseases
in the Breast.
TAKE a handful of Scabions the herb^ dried, of Liquorice cut small an ounce,
twelve Figs, Fenell seed an ounce, Anniseede as much, Erius half an ounce
lay these in water or white Wine a night, the next day boyle them till it be
consumed to yt third part, then sweeten it with sugar.

A medicine for the Colic.
TAKE Otes and bren them in a pan, as ye do parched Peason, and as hot as ye
may suffer it, lay them to the Navel in a Linen cloth.

For the same.
TAke a fair flat stone, and make it red in the fire, and then take it out,
and let it cool till the redness be passed, and then take a halfpeniwoorth of
Saffron, and lay it upon the stone, and turn it thither and hither, until it
be turned almost to powder and take a spoonful of Malmesie, and put the
Saffron there unto and so drink, it will soon pass away.

A present remedy against the plague.
TAke a great red Onion, and make a hole in the midst, and put a spoonful
of Triacle, roast him in the fire: take a spoonful of Vinegar, a spoonful
of Aqua composita: bruise them all together, strain them through a cloth and
give it to drink.

For the cough.
TAke three Figs and roast them, and put them in a Cup of Beer, and a little
Liquorice and Anniseedes beaten, then let it stand by the fire till it be
warm, then take out the Figs and eat them, then drink up the drink and
go to bed warm and in iiij. nights it breaks the Cough.

To delay heate.
TAke of Vinegar one part, fine Sugar two parts, running water four parts
boyle them all together to the one half or more: and when you shall occupy
it, take a spoonful and a half of the said syrup, and eight or nine
sponefulles of Barlye water drink it.

To break Phlegm.
TAke a quart of Muskadel, a pint of Hisoppe water, three good Rases of cased
Ginger, and as much of Liquorice clean pared, then take two peniwoorth of
Sugar candy bruised, put all these in a glass, shake them together: cover your
glass four and twenty hours, drink thereof Morning and Evening.

A preparative before you purge the Stomach.
TAKE Scene three ounces, of Polipodye three ounces, of Anniseedes three ounces,
seethe all these in a quart of water to a pint: and strain them through a
fair cloth put in Sugar to make them pleasant.

To purge the stomach.
TAke a handful of Mercurye, as much of young Mallowes, an ounce of Scene,
three spoonfulles of Anniseedes, put them in a pint of white Wine, and as much
Ale all night, the next day sees them together till half be consumed, then
drink a good draught thereof in the Morning, sleep upon it.

An excellent purger from all parts of the body.
TAKE an ounce or two of perfect Turpentine of the chiefest, bruise it and
disolue it in a Mortar with a Pestell, with half the yolke of an Egg, put
thereto three ounces of smalledge water, beat them together till it be like
milk, and sup it up but first wash your Turpentine in Fenell water.

To make the hair of the beard to grow.
TAKE Cane Roots, Brionye Roots, Beetes, Radish, Flower de Luce, Onions, of
each a like the quantity of four ounces, six fat Figs bruised and stamped
very small, Maidenhayre, Sothernwood, Dill of each a handful, seethe all
these in good Wine: then wring out the liquor and strain it through a
Strainer, then put to it fresh Butter never Salted, pure honey two vnces, Oil
of Almondes sweet and sower, Oil of Sefania an ounce, Oximell squillicke
half an ounce, the powder of Meal, Nigella, Fenegreeke well sifted and
thoroughly bolted in a Boulter, one handful of Grass, Labdanum an uncle: set
these upon the fire and stir them well till it be thick. This Linament being
applied to the Chin and Cheeks, will become hear: The body first purged
from all filth inwardly proved by experience.

Oil of Myrrh heals all kibes, Burninges, Pimples, Cliftes, about the
Fundament.

Oil of Tartar mingled with Camphor, the face being therewith anointed, it
makes it fair and smooth.

For a cut or sore bruise.
TAke Roots of Louage, Alehofe, Parselye, Ana.ss. beat them in a Mortar very
fine, then take Barrowes grease and boyle them together, then strain forth the
Juice: then take as much unwrought Wax as a Walnut, half as much Rosin and
let them boyle together: and after you have thus done let it pass through a
strainer into a little pan of water, then let it stand until it be cold,
then labour it in your hands until it be somewhat short, and then wrap it
in a piece of Leather, and so use it.

For a weak Back.
TAKE six Croppes of red Neppe, two spoonefulles of Archangell flowers, and
shread them fine, and take two new laid Eggs and stir it together, make
three or four Fritters with a morsel of sweet Butter, fry them in a little
earthen pan and let them be eaten without bread or salt but with fine Sugar.

The plaster for the back.
TAke white Archangell flowers and leaves, Chumphrye leaves and roots i..
Plaintaine and Bursa pastoris, Ana. i.. beaten very fine, and put to them a
spoonful of Honey, and fry them in a frying pan, and divide it into four
parts, and make of every part a plaster, and so lay it to the Patients back
every night a plaster.

Master Roses medicine against the stone, and to cause one to make water.
TAke a new laid egg and in the great end thereof make a hole and take out
the yolke and white of it: and lay the hole of the same Egg downewardes upon a
hot Brickstone until it be purged, so that you may make powder thereof, then
take it and drink it with white wine first in the morning and last in the
evening and it helps.

For the heate in the Rains, and to avoid the blistering of the mouth.
TAKE Liuerwoorte, Sorrel, Succory, Balm, Ana i. and seethe these in a Quart
of Whaye well clarified half an hour, and drink thereof every morning a good
draught of half a pint at once.

For one that is deaf.
TAke sweet Sallet Oil half a pound, add to it Woormewood, Sorrel,
Anniseedes, Perwincle, Ana di.. and dry all this to powder. Take powder of
old Roses, an uncle of Colloquintida being boiled in Oil a good while, then
strain it through a cloth a good while, and put hereof three drops into the
ears of the party that is grieved being warm, and use this every day twice:
this hath been proved

Against the Piles
TAke a great silver Cele, flea him, draw him, and let him touche no water nor
salt, cut him in gobbittes and roast him: the first dropping being cast out:
take the next dropping, and with a fine Linen cloth being dipped in it, the
dropping of the Cele being heate, and so with the cloth soak it upon the
places grieved: this will help be they never so sore.

For the passion of the heart.
TAke red Rose leaves, the powder of Saffron, the Oil of Mace, and melt
them together, quilt the same in a little thin Silk, and draw it over with
a little thin Civet, and apply it to the region of the hart.

For the Itch.
TAKE twelve of the yellowest Dock roots, scrape them as you will scrape pars
nippes, cut them small and stamp them vevery fine, set them over a Chasing dish
of coals, and put therein half a dish of sweet Butter, and let them boyle
together till your Roots be ready to strain, and when they be thoroughly
boiled strain them, and when you have so done, put thereto a spoonful of
Brimstone beaten to powder, then stir them both together, and set them in a
cold place and it will be a salve, and so let the patient anoint his body
before the fire and let it soak into the skin, use it morning and evening.

For a Felon.
TAke Leven very sour, and crumb it into a little Pipkin, then take a quarter
of a penny dish of Butter and four spoonfulles of Rose Vinegar leaves and
all, and so boyle all together, and lay it to the place as hot as may be: this
is proved.

To destroy an Impostume.
TAke the Roots of Hollihocke and wash it very pure, seethe it till it be
tender; then put that water that you sod it in into a clean vessel then take
Linseede, Fenegreeke of each the like quantity: and look that you have as
much of them both as of the root, then sees it in the same water until it
doth rope as birdlime then stamp the Roots, and put thereto barley Meal: then
mingle all together and fry them with Bores Grease and lay it to the fore
plaster wise.

For the Room and Cough of the Lunges.
TAke young Elicampane roots a pound, of Setrarch, of Maiden hair Ana i..al
being new gathered: scrape the Elecampane roots and cut it into small
slices: sees them altogether into five pintes of running water till they come
to a pint and a half: then strain them and put thereto fine Sugar three
quarters of a pound, then boyle it till it come unto three quarters of a
pint, then take two yolks of new laid Eggs and beat them: and let them
boil together while you may say yt Psalm Miserere, and take hereof at night a
spoonful, and an other in the morning, lying on their backs an hour after
they have received it: in four days keeping them warm, it will rid the
greatest Cough that is.

For a Canker or disease of the Gummes or Throat.
TAKE a handful of Plaintaine, a handful of Honey-succles, an ounce of Daisy
leaves, half a handful of Sage, a quart of running Water, these things
being boiled therein until it come to a pint then strain them and put
therein five spoonfulles of sharpe Vinegar, five spoonefulls of stone Honey, as
much Rochallom as a Wallnutte: this is proved to heal a Canker.

A Gargell for a furred mouth.
TAKE Barley water, strawberye leaves, and Sinkioyle, Ana di..a stick of
Liquorice di. pint of white Vinegar, let it run through a two fold linen
cloth; it is good for a surred mouth or throat.

To heal the Canker upon the Yard.
TAke an uncle of Roche Allom, and half an uncle of Verdegres, with Smiths
water: and put all in some vessel of glass and seethe it two hours; strain
it and use it as you think good.

PIllute Aeliphauge, helps the stinking of the mouth, being taken every
day nipped betwixt your teeth.

For a Stitch or wind Colic.
TAKE Capillus veneris, Parslye roots, Fennel roots, of each a quarter of
an uncle, bruise these herbs and drink that juice with white Wine.

Hair to grow.
A Corns burnt and mixed with Bears grease.

Against Spots and Pimples in the Face.
NIgella brayed and mixed with Flower and Honey, and make thereof an ointment,
and annoynt here-with the spots at night, and in the morning wash them with
Parslie water.

For a hot burning in the stomach grown of Choler, which causes the Fever.
TAKE Borrage, Mallowes, Fumitorye Violet leaves, Beetes, great Raisins the
Stones taken out: Prunes, Polipody with a little Dill: seethe these in pottage
and eat hereof.

For a saustem face.
TAKE the juice of houslike, and the juice of Tansye, and seethe them in a
pint of white Wine to half a pint, and when it is cold, lay it to the face
with a Flaxen cloth dipped in the same, and so let it lye al night, and when it
is dry, then you may wet it so often as you list.

For an Ache.
TAke Oil de Bay, and Aqua vitae, a spoonful and mix them together, and
anoint it.

For heate in the face.
TAke a pound of Almondes, a pint of warm Water, strain them, then put
thereto half an ounce of white Campher, a pint of white Wine, beat them
together, and strain it with a pint of Margerame water, and put it in a
glass, and wash therewith.

For the same.
TAke Vinegar half a pint, Deers suet as much as you can hold in your hand
Brimstone so much as will go into an Egg being finely bruised, seethe them
altogether till they be almost dry, being made in a ball, take a little
thereof, and put it into a Saucer and melt it with a few Coals, then take a
fine cloth and dip therein, and rub softly the place where the corruption is,
until it be taken away.

If this help not within a month, then drink every morning a Cup of
Beer, put into it fine English Madder finely picked, bruised, and searsed and
drink it.

For the same.
TAke Capons Grease melt it and strain it through a cloth, and let it stand to
cool a a quarter of an howre, then put in Brimstone finelye bruised, and mingle
it with the Capons grease, and anoint the face therewith when you go to bed
where the pimples be or rednes, and in the Morning wash it with Rosewater luke
warm Remember you pick not your Nose, if you will have it stronger: put in
Ginger finely beaten, a peniwoorth of each will serve, but of Capons grease
y.d.

To vomit up Cholor.
TAke six Dock Roots clean washed and the pith taken out, a few tops of
Red Mintes and a little Woormwood being steeped in a quart of Ale, or white
Wine all night, and drink thereof half a pint at one draft: It is good to
cleanse the body in all parts, as before is said, perhaps with a froole or
two, this is approved being taken between Marche and June.

For a Felon.
TAke twelve Snails in the garden, and beat them shells and all until that
it come to a salve and apply it, and when it waxes dry, take fresh still,
and it will kill heal, and draw.

To stop the whites in women.
Pomegranate Flowers, the kirnelles of Pine apples bruised together, with two or
three branches of S. Iohns woorte, being boiled in a quart of red Wine from a
quart to a pint and a half: and drink morning and evening.

For the stuffing of the Lights and Lunges.
TAKE Arthemesia, Epithimum, red Sage, Rosemarye tops, red Fenell of
each a handful, a Galingale root half. of green Ginger, half. of Manus
Christi, a stick of Liquorice, seethe it from a quart to a pint.

For the heate in the back approved, D. Huicke.
TAKE the water of Plantaine distilled or the juice thereof put to the leaves,
the leaves of red Roses distilled, and the Water of red roses, and the water of
red Rose Vinegar, then put all these together in an earthen pot, put it into
the water as Linen cloth: and the same steep there, then after a while take
it out, and with a few leaves of red Rose cake, lay it to the back and when
it waxes ^ot use another cloth dipped therein.

To dry up the Room.
TAke Nutmegs, Cloves and Mace, beaten to powder with the powder of Rosemary:
boyle these together in sweet Sallet Oil until it be somewhat thick: spread
it upon a cloth and lay it to the crown of the head: this is approved to help
it.

To keep the eyes clear, cool, and from rednes and to kill the Itch.
TAke of P^a^ne two handful, Housleek one handful, stamp them and strain
them and let it settle, then power out the clear juice from the drosie, put
thereto half as much red Rosewater, and a quarter of a Spoonful of white
Sugar Candy in powder, then take Lapis Caluminaris a piece as big as your
thumb, and slake it 12 times in the same water, and hereof put 4 drops
morning and evening lying upon your back. Approved.

Against the Colic and Stone in manner of a plaster.
TAKE Parslye and Smalage, Ana. two spooneful of Capons Grease, put this in an
earthen vessel, putting the one spoonful in the bottom, and the other in the
top upon the herbs, set these on the Embers to boyle from Morn to night,
then stamp them and strain them: and spread the ointment upon a linen cloth,
and lay it hot to the Navel and bottom of the belly.

A Clister to be given to a Child or woman in child bed.
TAke a pint of new Milk, three vnces of red Sugar candied, boyle your
Milk well, then take it of: and let it stand till it be no warmer then you can
abide it on your cheek, and with a Clister pipe put it up.

A Clister.
TAKE a Hen pullet, draw it very clean and break all the bones thereof, then
seethe it with a quart of liquor, until that it come to a pint, then take a
handful of Spinach, one handefull of Marche Mallowes or other Mallowes, and a
handful of Violet leaves, seethe these herbs in the liquor of the pullet very
well, with as much salt as will season an Egg, then put thereto a Saucer full
of pure Sallet Oil, and warm it.

To break the Stone.
TAke a Cock of a year old, and open him, and you shall find in his Maw
small white stones, take them and beat them in a brason Mortar very fine, and
put it in good white Wine, and drink it: and it will break the stone.

Against toothache.
TAke a little burnt roche Allome, and in the burning put a little fine Linte
into it, and put it into your teeth that is hollow this will ease the pain.

A medicine to strengthen the back.
TAke a quart of good Ale, three or four whole Maces and as many Dates, the
stones taken out, and pith also: then take the tops of Rosemarye a good
handful and boyle all together from a quart to a pint, then take the oil of
two or three new laid Eggs, and take off the rind about the yolke: then put
the yolke into the Ale, and boyle them together, and stir them well, and so
drink it morning and evening.

For the heate in the back.
TAke Vng. frigidum Galeni.iij. you must take the ointment and spread it upon a
fine Linen cloth, being first dipped in red Rose water, then warm it
against the fire and so lay it upon the Kidneis, when it waxes hot take it
off, and lay to an other

For the Colic and Stone.
TAKE the Cuttinges of a Vine and dry them thoroughly, when you will make your
Medicine: burn them, then take the Ashes that doth come thereof: and put it
into a pint of Renishe wine or white Wine and let it stand in it all night,
and in the morning drink thereof: thus using the quantity of the vine to the
quantity of the wine Probatum est.

To stanch blood.
TAke the best Vinegar that you can get, Plantine Water, of each two pounds:
and therein wet diverse linen clothes, and lay them to the soles of the
feet, the palm of the hand, and against the Liver: and the blood shall
forthwith stanch.

To take away spots from the hands or sunburninges.
TAKE the in^e of a Lemon with a little Bay Salt, wash your hands with it
and let it dry, then wash them with cundit water, and you shall find all
spots gon: it is good against scurffe or such like.

Against stuffing of the Lunges.
TAKE and make a Posset of Sack and Ale, with Anniseedes and Licorice beaten
to powder, and let it seethe with the drink, put in it a good piece of Sugar,
and Dredge, if you have any, and drink thereof every morning, it helps.

A water to wash the yard, for one that had the running lately of the Reins.
TAKE Daisies, Plantine leaves, and woodbinde, of each three handfuls, of
the best English honey, and a piece of Roche Allom as big as a Walnut, boyle
al these in a quart of fair water with a prittye quantitye of red RoseWater
in an Earthen Pot close covered, so long as you will seethe an Egg until it
be hard, then strain it: and with this water with your sering, squirte it into
the yard, the water being luke warm: so that the pipe thereof be put an inch
or more, and spout it strongly that the water may come behind the sore place,
and so use it every day three times for a months space.

For Sinews that be shrunk, in manner of an ointment.
TAke twelve young swallows out of the nest: take also vnset Time, the leaves
and strings of Strawberies, and Lavender Cotton of each a handful, and
stamp them together, and the Swallows, with their feathers Guts and all:
then stamp them in a mortar, and so boyle it in May Butter, and then let it be
put into an earthen Pot, stopped close the space of nine days, then sees it
again with some more May butter, and strain it: and when need is chase it
against the fire.

For sore eyes that smart or Itch.
TAKE Lapis Caluminaris, and make it hot in the Fire, quench it in a pint of
white wine three or four times: then take the srane and stamp it to fine
powder, and strain the wine with the powder, and put it in a glass, and when
you have need use it. Remember to shake the glass till it be thick, and with
a feather drop two or three drops in your eyes the party lying on his back.

Against the Sciatica.
TAKE four or five great Onyons and roast them very soft, then pil and stamp
them in a Mortar, and put thereto half a pint of Aqua vitae, three spoonfuls
of Neats feet Oil, and boyle them together till it wax very thick, then
strain them, and therewith annoynte the grief, chasing it in before the fire a
quarter of an howre: evening morning, then lay a wild Cats skin thereto: the
hairye side next your flesh, and within xv. days you shall have ease.

An ointment for Aches, bruses, Lamenes, Stitches, Gowtes hardness of the
Spleen, Ague, Cankers, and for pain in the ears.
TAKE of Sage and Few of each a pound, of Woormewood of Bay leaves, of
each half a pound, of Sheep Sewet clean picked from the Skin three
pound, of sweet Oil Olife a pottle, chop the herbs very small and then
stamp them as small as may be, the shred the sewet very fine and put them all
together: and then stamp them altogether until the sewet be not seen: then
take it forth and put it into a fair Pan and put the Oil into the Pan
and cover it close, and so let it stand for the space of ten days: then take
it forth and break it into a brass pan, and set it on a soft fire, and
always stir it until the herbs be crackinge, then take it off and strain
it through a wide Canvas Cloth into a fair Earthen pot and so keep it. For
those vehement aches when you shall lay of this ointment upon it, you must take
the Wool that grows between the Sheep Legs or the longest of the wool
and card it in broad flakes and baste it upon a linen cloth and keep that
always to it.

To cause one to peace.
TAke horsedunge of the Stable, new May Butter and Aqua vitae, of each like
portions, fry them together and make thereof a plaster and apply it to the
patient from the Navel to the Fundament as hot as you may suffer it, and
fear not though it cause to make blood issue, for such is the woorkinge of the
medicine; it causes the stone to avoid: approved.

A sovereign medicine for an ache in the shoulder.
TAke Figs and Raisons of the Sun of each a like quantitye, and half
as much Musterde seed, and beat them very small; grind them with the best
Vinegar in a pair of Mustard Quernes, that done spread it upon a Lambs skin
and lay it to the ache.

To stanch blood at the nose.
TAKE an Egg and break it and put out the meat: and then receive so much
blood as will fill the shell of the party bleeding: that done set the same in
the fire until it be hard, then burn the ^a^ie to ashes and it will stanch
the bleeding.

Idem.
TAke an Inkell and bind the person so bleeding about the temples of the head,
and knit the knot thereof in the neck, and it stauncheth.

For an Ague.
TAKE three pintes of Ale, an ounce of red Sage, the like quantitye of Bay
leaves, three ounces of fine Sugar, with a spoonful of Pepper, sees all these
together in the Ale until it be sodden to a pint: then strain it through a
fairecloth, and drink this before the fit comes.

To bind to the hands being parcel of the same Medicine.
TAke as much green glass as will fill a spoon being beaten to powder,
take three spoonefulles of stone Honey, with a handful of Red Sage: mingle
these with a head of Garlic, putting thereto as many Cobwebbes as will temper
the same, being an Egg shell full, then take them all together and use this a
quarter of an hour before the ^itte: this must be used round about the
wrestes.

For one that consumes, to be eaten in the morning.
TAKE a new laid Egg let it be rear roasted, and put thereto a Cake of Manus
Christi, and let it dissolve in it: and eat the same evening and morning.

For a cold stomach.
TAKE a new laid Egg being rear roasted, and put thereto a pretty quantitye
of gross Pepper: let him eat it next his hart to dissolve cold humours.

For the swelling of the hart, and breaking of Phlegm.
TAKE a quarter of a pint of Damask Rosewater, three spoonefulles of white
Wine, with a few soppes of white Bread a pretty quantitye of Butter and
Sugar, this being boiled upon a Chafingdishe of coals, let the party eat
thereof three or four spoonfulles after meat.

TAke a small quantity of Malmesie, butter and Vinegar, of Roses, boyle them in
a Chafindish, and put thereto a rose cake to heate in it until it be through
soked, and lay it to the stomach, and let the party be rolled.

Against an Ague, the Plague, and good to comfort nature.
TAke a pint of Malmesie, and a handful of May Weed bruised, and the juice
thereof put into Malmesie, and let the party drink thereof.

For the wind Colic.
TAKE of Sack and Aqua vitae, of each a quarter of an ounce, put thereto a
piece of Sugar and let the party drink thereof.

To skoure the inward parts, and for the rising of the Lunges.
TAke a pint of Sack and burn it, for to delay the heate thereof, put
therein a peniwoorthe of Treacle, a little Ginger, a Nutmeg grated, Sinamon a
good quantity with Sugar, and after it is boiled put thereto a peniwoorthe of
Sallet Oil, and drink thereof morning and evening: it will cleanse the body.

For an Ague.
TAKE a pretty quantitye of Daffadondillies the blades, and bruise them and
seethe them in a pint of Ale or wine, with a spoonful of Grains bruised: let
the party drink thereof before his fit come.

For one that is deaf.
TAke a red Onion and cut out the Core being in the midst thereof, putting
therein the Oil of roasted Almondes, the Onion being something warm: the next
morning when it is cold, let the party grieved cause one to drop three
drops thereof in the ear of the party in the morning or evening, stopping
his ear with black wool that grows under the sheeps ear: and let him lye
on the same side.

Idem.
TAke ground Ivy the juice thereof and white Copper is being burnt, and lay
the same in the juice of the Ivy till it be dissolved, and so use three drops
morning and evening.

For the bloody Flixe.
TAKE Iurden Almondes and blanch them, and let them boyle in English Honey
till they be black, and so eat them with a little of the best English honey.

AMber Beads beaten to powder and put into a Chafingdishe of Coals, the party
grieved must sit over them, as he would ease him self.

An excellent medicine for the green Sickness.
TAKE a gallon of Morning Milk after it be settled Cream and all, take also
breast of the yungest Veale, and the fattest you can get, and wash it
fair, and dry it with a Cloth, so that no water remain in it, bruise the
same Bones and all, and put it into the Milk, take twelve Dates or more, and
cut them in the midst, and take also a quarter of an ounce of whole Mace, and
half a pound of Currants, two handfuls of mintes, a handful of wild Time,
and put all these into the Milk with the Veale, and let the liquor sees until
half be consumed in seething, and when it is well sodden, it will be as a
Ielly: when it is cold the patient may either drink it being warm, as a
broth, and may be eaten as Iellye being cold. If the patients stomach will
bear it make a toste of wheaten bread, and soak it in Malmesie, and strew
upon it the powder of Mintes, the party must use this five or six weeks, or as
long as you think good, being towards Spring time, with some exercise.

To provoke Urine speedily.
TAKE Wood Betonye both Roots and Leaves, wash them, and put them to dry in
a Sin in an Oven where brown bread hath been newly drawn, use half a
spoonful of this powder in white Wine Posset drink, potage or in your drink.

For heate in the Liver.
TAKE a quart of Strawberies, wild Tansie, three pintes of new Milk, still
all these together, and drink it in the morning next your hart, and wash your
face therewith.

To preserve nature to eat a mornings.
THE yolke of an Egg with Manus Christi.

To make a Clister.
TAke a fat Sheep head, or a Capon, a handful of Beetes, a handful of
Mallowes, a handful of Violets, and if the patient be hot, take three
spoonful of Oil of Roses, if cold: take the like quantity of oil of
Violets, boyle all these together until it come to a pint, then strain it,
and let the patient drink.

For one that is weak, and to comfort the stomach.
TAKE a pint of sack, and burn it with a top or two of Vnset Hisope and
Rosemary, take three Dates beaten in a mortar to pay, and let it burn with the
wine, also with a new laid Egg beaten, a spoonful of Damask Rosewater, and
a spoonful of Sallet Oil, drink this morning first, and night last.

Idem.
MAlmesie burnt with a halfepeniwoorth of Saffron, being dried to powder, with
Sallet Oil and Triacle, of each a halfepeniwoorth, use it morning evening.

Idem.
NEttle seeds dried and beaten to powder, and drunk with Malmsie every
morning.

To restore nature, and helps a weak back.
TAke a quart of Sack, a top of Rose mary, Winter Succorye, Peniriall, of
each a like, Ginger and Nutmegs, as will burn the Wine. Then take a new
laid Egg or two yolks and all, and beat it with three spoonefulls of red
Rosewater, and put thereto a piece of Sugar, then take the burnt Sack, and
burn it with the Egg a good while, and put in it a Mace, and it will be in
manner of a Caudle, use to drink of this warm three times a day, morning,
after dinner, and when you go to bed: put therein some Sallet Oil.

To stay running of the rains.
TAke a pint of Milk, and a good quantitye of Otemeale, being well bruised,
and seethe it with the Milk, and put therein a good piece of Sugar, and eat
the Milk thereof being strained.

A precious ointment or Oil.
For Swelling or aching in Feet, Legs or in Knees, taken with cold,
excellent to heal a Wound, far better then any Balm, for old bruses and
shrinking of Sinews, marvelous good: an Oil for all manner of sores passing
all other. Thus it is noted in an old Regester book.

TAKE a Gallon or a Pottell of Sallet Oil of the best: then take Sage,
Lavender, Southernewood, Woormewoode, and a quantitye of Camomell, after the
quantitye of the Oil, and cut the herbs small, then put them in that oil in
a far basin of Latin or other mettle, and stir it well together: and put
in so many herbs that it may be thick standing, and so let them stand and
rot a month full: then make a fair fire of Coals, and putting to a quantity
of the same Oil, let it on the fire in the same Basin, and let it boyle three
hours or more. Then take it from the Fire and let it fry, and when it is
Milk warm or somewhat hotter, then take a bag of great Canvas, and with a
staff strain out all the matter as clean as you may and then put it in a
Glass or other fair thing and keep it well closed, and it will continue in
his virtue twenty years after.

Probatum est. For stewed Mutton.
PVT your Mutton into a Pot with fair water, and let it seethe and scum it
fair then put in Salt, make not too much broth then take Hissop, Time and
Parselye, and chop them small and put them into the pot with a little Pepper:
and serve it out with soppes, and if it be in Winter put in some Carret roots.

To dress a Hare or Cunny in broth with a pudding in their bellies.
YOur Hare or Cunnye being fleaed and the Ears left on, let it be washed in
two Waters, having before prepapared in a readiness Grated Bread, Currants,
sweet Mutton sewet or Beef sewet finely minsed with pleasant and wholesome
herbs, as Winter Sauerye and Peniriall, with sweet Margerome, these also
very finely chopped, and seasoned with pepper and Salt: Cloves and Mace, the
yolks of three Eggs, with sweet Cream, and Sugar with two or three Dates,
all these mingled together, put into the belly of the Hare or Cunnye, and so
sow it up Then take Mutton broth of the best and fattest, put it in such a
Kettle where your Hare may lye compass, or Cunnye long ways, after it hath
boiled a little put it in, and put thereto Grapes or Gooseberries, sweet
Butter, Salt, Veriuice, Currants, grated Bread and Sugar, and when it is boiled
serve it forth with soppes.

Mutton.
PVT your Mutton in a Pot with fair Water and let it be well scummed, then
take some Tostes of Bread and toste them browne, and then cast them into cold
water, but take them up again quickly: and let them lye and dry a while,
then strain them with Wine and Vinegar, and so put it into the pot and let it
boyle: But in some Pepper, whole Cloves, and Sinamon, and let all this be well
stewed, but forget not Salt*Serve it out upon soppes: and boyle some Onions in
it cut into pieces. And likewise this will serve for Venison, Mallardes and
Teles.

To boyle chickins with Endiue and Succorye or Lattice, or any other cold
herbs.
PRepare a Loyne or a rack of good Mutton with a marow bone or two, and being
chopped, put it in a Pipkin with fair Water over the fire, and let them seethe
a pretty while together, then take half of it out of the Pipkin, and strain
it with a strayner, then put in your Chickins, afterwards having prepared your
cold herbs clean washed put them in: Also having steeped your white bread
ready to strain thorough a Strayner, let your Broth be therewith thickened: So
take Pepper, salt Vergis and Sugar, and season your broth: then upon Soppes
serve it forth with the marrow upon it.

For small Lampernes.
LET your Lampernes be cut in small pieces: then take a frying Pan with
Butter and Onnions minced, and so fry them together. And when they be well
fried put them in a Pot, then take two tostes of browne bread and toste them
well then strain them with a quantitye of Vinegar, Wine and Water: and put
thereto a little Pepper, and Cloves and Maces, and boyle all this together with
your Lampernes upon the coals: and so serve the out with soppes.

To potche Eggs in broth.
TAke Vergies and fair water, and a dish of new Yest: and put therein Cloves,
Mace, Currants, Sugar, sweet Butter, a handful of Spinach: and let them boyle
a good while: then having potched your eggs in fair Water that is seething:
then lay your Eggs in broth and serve them forth with herbs laid over
them.

To bake Breme, Trout, Mullets, Pike or any fish.
LEt them be well seasoned with Cloves and Mace, Salt and pepper, and so bake
them with small Currants Vergis and butter, great raisons and prunes.

For soppes on the fish days.
TAKE some Onions and fry them with Butter a while: then take Water Pepper and
Salt, and put altogether into a pot with the Butter and Onions, and let them
simper upon the fire. And so serve them out upon soppes, and cast a few small
Raisins upon the soppes, and put the broth upon them.

For Spinach.
TAKE Spinach and wash it well, then lay it upon a board and give it five or
six choppes with a knife, then put it into a frying pan with a little fair
water and seethe it well, then take Butter, Vergis and Salt, and put it to the
Spinach, and so boyle it together in a pot or between two Platters: and so
serve them out with Soppes.

Sod Eggs.
SEethe your Eggs almost harde, then peel them and cut them in quarters,
then take a little Butter in a frying pan and melt it a little brown, then
put to it in to the Pan a little Vinegar, Mustard Pepper and Salt, and then
put it into a platter upon your Eggs.

For Ox tunges boiled.
WHen your Ox Tunges be boiled take them and peel them, then cut them
overthwart in small pieces, then fry them with Butter, and put them in a Pot
with Tostes strained with Wine vinegar and Water, and let them boil: put
thereto Salt, Onions quartered, Pepper Sinamon, and whole Cloves, and so serve
them with Soppes.

Spinach.
TAKE Spinach and parboyle it well, then wring the liquor clean from it then
chop it very small, and put it into a Platter and break some Eggs into it:
then take a handful of grated bread and put into it and sugar with a little
salt, and beat all this together but let it not be too thick nor too thin,
but better thick then thin: then take a frying pan with some Butter, and
when the Butter is a little more then melted, take a spoon and lay your
spinach in the Frying pan every spoonful by him self, and so fry it as you
would fry Fritters, and put it in a dish and cast sugar on it.

for Eggs.
TAKE some Eggs and beat them well with a little fair water and salt: then
take a frying Pan and melt your butter and then put in your Eggs: then take
a knife and lift up the Eggs, that the raw may go all to the bottom of the
Pan, then turn it up with your Knife on every side that it may be square,
then lay a dish upon the pan, and turn the pan upside down upon the
dish and so serve in your Eggs with Vergis or Vinegar, as you will.

A drench to plume up a horse, and to expel cold, to clear him of the
Glaunders and to open the pipes.
TAKE ground Willis, alias Groundsell, Enulacampane of each a handefull,
stamp them and strain them in Ale, seethe them all together: then take of
Fenicreke, of Turmericke, Aniseedes, of Cumminseedes, of Garlic, of long
Pepper, of Licorice: of Grains, and if he have the Bottes or woormes give him
Sauine. Give him this drink luke warm a quart at a time, then ride him till
he be hot, then bring him into the Stable, and litter him well, and corie him
till he be thorough cold, then let him after stand upon the bit, and turn him
to grass.

TO a Horse that hath eaten a Feather, give a branch or two of Sauin dry.

A drench for a cough.
A Quart of Vinegar Fenicreke a peniwoorth, Turmerick i. d, Enula-capana i. d.
long Pepper i. d. Barberies i. d. Liquorice y.d four Eggs, Anniseedes, lay
the Eggs in Urine all night, and after in these drugs beaten and so give it
the beast.

To make a good powder to give a Horse in his provender, or to give him to
drink for the cough, and other diseases.
TAKE of Liquorice i. d. cut it in pieces, and beat it into powder, then take
Anniseedes i d. of grains i. d. of ^mericke i. d. of Fenicreke i. d. one
Nutmeg, ^e a pint of oil Olive a quart of Milk.

To cause a horse to have a good hoof.
TAKE Cow dung or Ore dung, and let it be mingled with strong Vinegar, and
in the evening apply it being made very hot upon his feet, and wrap upon the
hoof a piece of Leather, or some old rags to keep in the heate, and within
two dressinges it shall be remedied.

For a horse that is stung with an Adder or Snake, a present remedy.
TAKE three handfules of Sanicle (it is a weed commonly known) and stamp it,
and put it in new Milk, and with a Horne drinche him. Or take Honey and Salt,
and two Onions: then stamp them and apply it to the sore place, and drinche
him with this composition as follows: Wine a quart, and put into it white
Pepper, Herbegrace, and Time with a little Triacle.

AND if he be prickte with a Nail this is a sure remedy, search well to
find out the Nail, his hoof being clean pared, specialiye the corrupted
place or hole where the nail had fettered, then take Rosin and Wax to fill
the same place, and with an hot Iron let stone Pitch be melted upon it, and
lay thereupon some Cotton then being well shooed again you may travail: him at
your pleasure.

IF your Horse by hap drink a Horseleech he is in great danger: for by their
succking they will kill him, but presently take sweet Oil and power into his
mouth the quantitye of a quarter of a pint, and it will destroy them quickly.

IF your Horse swallow down Hens dung in his Hay it will so fret his guts,
that he will void at his Fundaurent, very foul excrementes, which being
perceived make him a drench with Parsley seed, Smallage seed, Honey and Wine,
and walk him at least after it two hours.

IF your horse have the Bottes, give him every Morning two handfuls of Agrimo
ny without any other meat in his rack, till six hours after, and within
four or five days it shall destroy them.

IF your Horse be Lousy about the ears, neck or tail or any other part of
his body: take the best Soap you may have a pound, and half a pound of
quick Silver, mortified with Aqua vitae, and with this ointment you shall
destroy them.

IF he cannot peace, give him a quart of Chalk water somewhat warm, if
broken-winded, take Longwoort dried, or Dwarse Gentian and mingle it with his
water that he drinks till he amend.

IF he be scabbye let him be let blood, and afterward with this ointement let
him be anointed where the scabs are. Take Soot of the Chimneye, soft Soap,
the juice of Hemlockes and Vinegar, Quickesiluer, liquid Pitch and honey, and
mingle them till they come to be an Ointment. Kill the Mercurie with fasting
Spittle.

IF his back be galled: take the powder of two old Shoes being burnt, with
a prittye quantitye of Butter molten, and power it upon your horse back very
hot, after that, put the powder thereon. This is approved.

An excellent medicine for a sore horseback, if he be never so sore bruised, if
there be a Fistula it heals it or any dead Flesh.
TAKE a quantitye of Allome and burn it, and also take a handful or more of
Barlye and burn it, and take the powder thereof and mix it with the roche
Allome being both mingled together: power it upon the sore morning and
evening, but if the sore be corrupt and full of dead flesh, then use more of
the roche Allome, then of the power of Barlye, and when it begins to heal,
use them both together, but more of the Barlye then of the roche Allome: this
is a most excellent remedy, if you have no Allome presently, let him take a
good quantitye of Butter and Vergis and put it upon the fire, and make it very
hot, and so power it upon the sore morning and Evening, laying a little Hay
and a cloth, bind it close all night. If the horse be pinched and swollen then
keep it warm and dip a pad of Hay in water, and lay it upon it and keep the
saddle or somewhat else upon it all night, and it will delay the swelling
Proved.

A present remdeye for the Cow-flixe.
TAKE a pottle or gallon of fair water, and put therein so many Hedge floes
as will suffice to be steeped in the said water and set it over the fire to
sees, and therewith mingle the powder of Chalk Eggs: which you may have at
the Keele, because it is the best and finest in medicine: give it your Cattle.

For faint cattle as well Cow, Ox, Bull or steer.
Only Vergis is the remedy given them to drink, and presently turned to
good Pasture.

OR else thus: take for every one a pint of Vergis, and put thereto a little
handful of Bay Salt, and therewith rub their tunges, and afterwards let them
drink the rest, as we have above declared.

AND also, sometimes by euell feeding or bruising, their teethe are so loose
that they feed not, which you shall remedy thus. Take the tail of the beast
thus diseased, and with your hand feel for soft places, which being found,
slit it a long and bind it up again with soot and Garlic mingled
together, and it helps presently.

BUT the most perfecteste medicine that may be given, is to have this special
care that they want no water.

An excellent drenche for cattle to be given them, either at the spring time
or fall of the Leaf.
TAKE hard soot that commonly is upon the post of a house or roof where the
smoke hath his issue, which being beaten into powder with Bay salt, sees
the same in running water and give it them to drink, Rank Ivy with the
soot and salt, and when the ivy is soft, wring out the juice and strain it
through a Strayner, and let your Cattle drink thereof blood warm. Often
proved.

IF they be hidebounde, take the leaves of Flowredeluce, strain them and let
them drink the juice thereof. It is approved.

IF they be swollen of the Taint, give them to drink presently mans Urine
mingled with Salt and Treacle. Approved.

IF your Cattle viz. Horses, Milchekine, or Oxen happen to be bruised or
wounded by any misfortune, presently give them to drink the juice of Sanicle,
and also apply the herb to the outward part where the grief may happen*
Comphrye is of the same virtue: especially for a fall, squat or bruise,

Snails stamped with sour Leaven and Comphrye, and applied to any part of the
Beast that is pricked with thorne, it will draw it forth soon.

For Cattes that are sick or hurt.
THe blood of a Gray mixed with Salt, and instilled into the horns of
Beasts is approved for to preserve them from the Murren.

IF you suspect them to be infected, apply to their nostrils the herb
Peniroyall somewhat bruised.

OR cut the beast in some part and put into the wound powder of black
Helebor, which is of this singular virtue to draw unto it any poisoned
humour, and it yields present remedy.

A souerain drink for all manner of Cattle that you suspect to be Lung sick.
TAKE me the Herb that is called Cowslip or Lungwoort, it grows under
every hedge, and stamp it: and put thereto Fenegreeke and madder with good Ale,
and with a Horne or prittye Tunnel drenche either your horse Ox, Cow or
Swine, and it shall yield present remedy if there be any disease in the
Lunges.

DVarfe Gentian of some called Mock Gillofer, small chopte and given to Swine
and all other Cattle: it preserves them wonderfully from the Murren, and all
such contagious diseases as happen to Cattle in corrupt times.

THE bitter Vetche is most profitable to be given to oxen or other Kine, that
you are desirous to have soon fatted.

THe water which stands in the hollowes of Beeches, doth perfectly cure the
naughty scurfe and wild Tetters or scabs of men, horses, Kine and sheep, if
they be washed therewithal.

THE leaves of black Elder are very good Fodder and feeding for Kine, and
causes them to yield store of Milk.

PRicktimber or Spindletree is hurtful for all Cattle, especially Gotes, for
it kills them if they purge not presently upwards and downwards.

Hogs and Swine are very quick of hearing, and are given much to sleep,
and will eat their own Pigs and feed upon vile Carrion: which causes them
many diseases, as Botch, Bile, and sore throat: But the best remedy that I
know is to let them blood under the tunge, and give them Madder with Pances,
called herb Trinity, sod in Whaye: and it shall heal them presently.

Most precious and approved drinches for all cattle, but specially Kine and
Oxen.
TAKE two handfuls of Lungewoorte of both kinds, of Few, of the inner
rind of Elder, these being small chopte, let it be put in a gallon of good
Ale, which being set over the Fire in a Skillet, let it sees till a quart be
consumed, then stirring it, put thereto of long pepper, of grains, of
Licorice, of Anisseedes, of Cominseedes, of turmericke of each an uncle: of
Madder a quarter of a pound, and while these sees, take me a great Boule
dish, and put therein a handful of Bay Salt, half a handful of Garlic,
three or four new laid Eggs shells al: two balls of Orlament, grind all
these things with a Pestel in the boule, then take the liquor aforesaid from
the fire till it be half cold, and put the warm liquor into the boule, with
the garlic salt, Eggs, and Orlament, brew them together well, and let
beasts drink of this blood warm.

OFten times by many occasions, Oxen will peace blood, which may be helped
thus: Take two ounces of Broomeseeds two ounces of Pepper, three vnces of red
Phasioli made all in powder, and mingle it with a pottle of white wine, and
when you give it them, stir it well together, and drenche them twice or
thrice a day.

An other excellent drench.
TAke Bay beries a handful, of Cominseedes two ounces, a handful of Madder,
a boule of Orlamente, of Fenegreeke, Turmericke and Triacle of each an uncle, of
Anniseedes and Grains, of each two vnces, these being well pouned, put them
into a gallon of good Ale, and set them over the fire till they be blood warm,
and suffer not your beasts to drink till noone in the Summer, and in the
Winter not till night.

The virtue of Angelica or Healeall.
IF any person be suddenly infected with ye Pestilence, fever or immoderat
sweat: let him take this Root in powder the waighte of a groat, and put there
a dram of Treacle, and then compound them with four spoonefulles of the water
of the said Root, and then after he hath drunk: let him lye and sweat
fasting for the space of four hours. It is approved.

THE Rootte steeped in Vinegar and smelt unto: and the same Vinegar sometimes
drunk fasting, is an excellent preservative.

THE Root and water thereof is excellent against all inward diseases, it
scours the gatheringes of a Pleurisy when it begins: it helps corrupted
Lunges, good against the Colic, Strangurie and provokes terms:
menstruall in women, helps inflammations and swellinges. The juice of the
Root asswageth the pain of the teeth being put into it, and works
excellently against the pain in the eyes, the juice of the Root dropped into
the eye quickneth the sight, and purges it from all filth, and the water or
powder of leaf or root, hath an excellent virtue or healing of rotten Ulcers,
and Cankrous Sores, for it cleanses them and covers the bone with good
flesh.

THE Herb Carduus Benedictus, or blessed Thistell, is most excellent
against the headache, being eaten or drunk it is good against the giddines
of the head, and comfort the memory, and restores hearing: the leaf,
juice, seed and water, heals all kind of poisons: for the water hath healed
a woman, whose breast was eaten with a Canker in the very ribs.

Balm sodden in white wine and drunk^ three or four mornings together,
purges the breast, healpes the short winded, comfort the hart, drives
away dumpishe heaviness, helps the falling sickness and all other
diseases. If you will distill Balm, chop the herb small and steep it in
white Wine a night: it is of sovereign virtue, for it delivers Women from
their pangs and grief of the Mother: also it cures the pains of the heart
it restores the memory, and causes sweet and pleasant sleep.

BEtonye hath the like virtues, it is of Sovereign virtue to break wind, and
comfort a weak Stomach, either the herb or Flower boiled, or the water
distilled, the dry herb in powder works all the effects, and then alone
or with Honey, women that are troubled with the Mother let them use it: to be
short, the leaf, flower, or root of Betonye sodden or drink in Conserve,
Electuarye, Syrup, potion, or powder, is singular for all diseases of the
Stomach, Liver, Spleen, Kidneyes and Bladder. It frets the Matrix from
obstruction, and draws from thence all hurtful moystures, for consumption of
the Lunges, Coughs, Dropstes, continual Feauers coming from the stomach,
boil the leaves and flowers of Betony in Homed water, and you shall have preset
remedy.

To dry and heal up all sores.
TAke of common Sallet Oil a pound, of Ceruce 4. ounces, of Litarge three
ounces, Myrrh half an ounce, make these like a Sere cloth which is made of
Wax.

Approved against the Plague.
TAke Aqua vitae three ounces, Rosewater an ounce and a half, wherein lay in
steep three dragmes of Sinamon, yellow Saunders one dragme: strain it
through a hearen strainer, and sweeten it with conserve of Roses, then take an
ounce thereof every morning, either in a spoon or upon a Toste of bread.

FINIS.

