The precepts of the excellent clerk grave philosopher Plutarche for the
preservation of good Health.

LONDINI.

In officina Richardi Graftoni. 1543.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

To the right honourable lord, the lord Audeley of Walden, lord Chaucellour
of Englade, Ihon Hales heartily wishes most prosperous health with increase
of honour.
THe custom to give new years gifts grounded upon benevolence, cofirmed by
ye consent of people, calls and wills, yea rather commands me (right
honourable lord) at this time to redre unto your honour my duty: which my
good will is ready veraie desirous to observe, not minding ye breach of a
custom that hath a foundation so charitable, a continuauce so lauda^le* and an
end so honest and profitable. Musing therefore in what thing both for this
time grateful, and herafter fruitful, I might chiefly declare the same, no
thing in my mind could be wished, nothing could be devised, nothing could
be provided, so requisite, so meet, so necessary for your good lordeship, who
is continually occupied either in ye high affairs of ye come wealth, or in
hearing determining causes of controversy, causing peace ye most coumfortable
nourissher of people to reign every where: as some brief thing to advertise
your goodness of the preservation of your health, how ye may long to Gods
pleasure continue in your vocation, how ye may ma^ ^eres execute your office
according to the godly zeal and love, yt ye bear to justice, which ye have
and do daily declare and express to the world. And sith it hath pleased
almighty God, and the kings most gracious majesty, to constitute and depute
you in the chiefest authorite and office under his highness in this realm, to
be to his majesty in ye stead and lieu that Aaron was to Moyses (the chief
minister of God over the children of Israel) which is to be his graces mouth,
to utter to us his most humble subjects, yt his highness shall receive of God,
to be to yt come laws of this his realm a lifely equytee, hauig power by your
cosciece to ordeine remedy, where it hath provided none, to mytigate the same,
where it shall seem to be rigorous: we ought daily not only to give praise
thakes to his most excellent goodness for the same, but we be also bound to
study deuyse to our power, howe so just and virtuous an offycer may lunge
continue among us. For as they that bear good will, and love to the come
wealth most rejoice and be glad, when justice and the laws be justly executed
and mynistred, and heartily desire that they may be so maintained and kept as
pyllers without the which no public weal can stade, no, nor any little
famyly ca endure. So ought they to be joyful, when the rulers and mynisters
thereof be in health prosperitee hable to execute the same: and besides to
study and endeavour how they may so cotynue. For as a woman that has no head
nor governor is little hable to govern and rule her seruautes, if they be
froward: so can justice law little do in a come wealth, where people be evil
disposed, if those lack yt should support, maynteyne and put them in
execution. On tother part they that be in autorite office, as they be
bound not to be remyf^e and negligent in executing their duty, so ought
they not overmuch vex, molest, weary, and consume their bodies, but so preserve
their health, as they may longeserue God, and their prince in their vocation.
And as Iethro seeing Moyses overmuch troubled in hearing the peoples suites
and causes, said: It is not well done thus to consume and waste your self:
So may (...) be justly said to such as be in authoritee and office, having
their mind so fixed to the expedition of causes, that they regard not their
health: Ye do not well, thus to consume your selfes. For as in a camp or
army, no soldier may depart without licence and pasporte of his Captain,
but must so use him self while he is there, as he may be at all times ready
and hable to serve at commandment, so ought every christen man to lead his
life in this world, not to seek or labour to be out of it, not to shorten his
days, but to tarry unto such time as he shall have licence and pasporte of the
Lord almighty, and not in the mean season to make his body feeble and weak,
that he shall not be hable to do that he is elected and called unto.

Plato says that Aesculapius (who for his excellent knowlage in phisyk is
called God thereof) would not that such as professed yt faculty and science,
should enterprise or take in hand to cure such as were of nature subject to
disseases, or had gotten sickness willingly by inteperaunce, although they were
never so rich. The one, because they engendered begat children like them
selfes, that is feeble, weak, syckely, not hable to serve in the common
wealth. And the other, for yt they willingly vnhabled them selfes to serve
therein, and yet besides consumed that others lacked, who were both hable
willing. But men sometime willingly must bring their bodies out of temper,
soonest of all such as be great rulers and Counselors, who for ye safete of
the whole come wealth be enforced upon present occasion, to provide present
remedy, to do things out of hand, which without great danger will not
tarry time, whom neither Aesculapius nor any man that hath reason, would to be
without redress. For the which cause many excellent clerks as well in other
sciences as in phisycke, have devised how to restore such mene to their
pristyne state and health of body, among others the exellent clerk grave
Philosopher Plutarchus Chaeronensis both Schoolmaster and Counsailour unto
the most virtuously disposed Emperor of all Gentiles ^ra^anus, in a book
entytled Precepts to pserue good health wherein not like a botcher with
poticarye ware, but naturally he teaches those that be in authoritee office
in the public weal, and such as be give to the study of good letters, howe
to preserve maintain their health. And because it is not only his, but also
all other learned wise men opinion, yt there is none so great enemy to
health, as surfaicting distemperaunce, whereby more men hath do daily dye,
then by y^ sweord or plague: he first teaches how the appetite and sensual
lusts of the body may be restrained and brydeled, that they shall not
procure and cause intemperance, then if it chance a manne to fall therein, how
he shall come out again, afterward being in health what diet he shall keep,
what exercises he shall use to preserve and keep the same. Which I have
translated into our English tongue, do preset unto ^our honourable lordship
for a new years gyfte, most heartily desiring praying God the father almighty,
that his most godly minister the Kings most royal majesty may many years
more reign over us in most prosperitee, and felicitee: and your good
Lordeship long to serve and rule under his highness in honour and health.

At London the first day of Ianuarye, in the year of Christ's incarnacyon.
1543.
The precepts of PLVTARCHE for the conservation of good health, made in
form of a dialogue.
The speakers. MOSCHION. ZEVSIPPVS.
GLAVCVS the Physician was yesterday desirous fred Zeusippus to have disputed
with us philosophically, if ye had not put him in fear. ZEVSIPPVS. That is
not so friend Moschion, neither I did dyscourage him, neither he was minded to
confer with us. But rather I did escheue his company because I would not
provoke him to strife, that was desirous of it. ^aucus a ^yng phy^an.
For without doubt, in Physike he alone may compare with a great many. But he
is not well affected and minded toward Philosophie: he hath always in his talk
some bitter overthwart and wayward toys, ^lacu{us} not ^ll affected ^ward
phi^ophie.
and at that time he was purposelye set and disposed to be out with us, crying
with a load voice yt he had enterprised a very naughty part, that dysputyng
howe men should live to preserve their health did cofound myngle together the
lymytes of faculties.

He said that the professyon of Philosophers and Physicians were two things
and several, even as the borders of Misia and Phrigia be divers. And many
things that we spake (in dede I confess) not very cyrcumspectly, another as we
mente, but yet not without some profit, he repetyng did check, taunt, and
shake in pieces. MOSCHION. Yet Zeusipdus, I would very fain have heard both
those, and the reast. ZEVSIPPVS. You Moschion being a Phylosophier natural
are displeased with a Phylosophier that doth not study Phisike: The offi^
part of ^ philosoph^
take it for a non decet if he should think it his part and office rather to
seem to be occupied in the study of Geometry, Logic, and Musyke, then to
search out desire to know what things good or evil be done in his own
house, that is, in his body. And yet a man shall see more resort of people
there, where money is delte to the comers to allure them, as is used in
Athens. ^he praise ^ comme^io of phi^e
But Physike is so to be esteemed among liberal Sciences, that for finesse,
clerenesse, pleasautnesse, it may be compared wytb the rest. And it draws and
entices men to the study love thereof with a boutifull and large reward
gift, which is, holsomenesse of body, and prosperous health. Wherefore men
may not be displeased with philosophiers as though they exceeded their boudes,
^hilosophie ^tural and ^isik be an^red either ^ other.
if they dyspute of those things, that be mete profitable for good health,
but rather Philosophiers ought to be challenged accused, if they mingle not
together sciences, The stu^ of philo^phiers
if they thought it not their very duty to be scene generally in all things
that be honest, appliyng the selfes both to that yt in argumet may delight,
and that for man life is necessary. MOSCHION. I pray the Zeusippus leat us
leave talking of Glaucus: who is so proud, and so much stands in his own
coceipt, that he thinks he hath no need of Philosophie, yet of good feloship
repeat you to me all the dysputacyon: and first, if ye think good, what Glaucus
did reprove, which ye say ye spake not in earnest. ZEVSIPPVS. That same ioyle
friend of ours said that he heard a man say that it was very profytable for
bodily helthe to keep always the hands warm, and not to suffer them to be
cold. And that the cold of the extreme parts of the body, while it did drive
the heate inward, did induce a famylyaritee custom of the fever. On the other
part in case those things, that come outewardely unto ye extreme parts do
bring and bestow the matter together with the heate through all the body, ^v
the bo^is to be ^ed for ^or heate
it is very wholesome. And therefore, when we do any thing whereby our hades be
occupied, the the heate of it self by the moving of the body is brought into
the members and there kept. But when we do nothing, then ought the extreme
parts to be kept from cold. This was one of the things that he had in
derision. An other was (as I remember,) of meates that be used to be mynistred
to the sick, he would that men should receive and take them long before,
to use them in the time of helthe, that afterward as children do, we do
not abhor and loathe that diet, but he would we should make them by little
and little acqueynted familiar with the stomach so that in syckenesse we should
not therewyth as with medicines be offended. Mene m^ use in hea^ some part^
diet y^ mu^ be had i^ time of si^nesse.
And that we should not be grieved if necessytee should compel us, to take ye
that were sodden without spices other ingredience. His mind was also that
sometime we should alter our diet, meates ^ee exhibit^in sycke^e.
and take our meat although we were not washed before in the bayne, and that
we should now and then drink water when we had wine present, and an other
while warm drink albeit we had snow to alaye the heate (as in some places it
is used) despising them that for ostentation and under the colour of
temperance, ^w the sto^ke is to ^ accusto^.
bostyng and crakyng do absteyn from such thiges. But rather leat us of our
selfes by little little so accustom the stomach, that when need shall be it may
without grefe take that that is profytable.

And leat us put clear out of memory when we be sick over much scrupelous
superstitious care of such things, that we may not lament with those that
howl and cry that they be brought from their old delicate and pleasant
life, to that fylthye and base kind of diet.

Certes that goodly saying Choose the best kind of living, Use shall make it
plesaut, The best kind o^ living to be chose^
is very {pro}fitable in what soever ye shall go about, and chiefly in those
things that concern the diet of ye body, and the manner of living. Use of
things.
By use of those things that be wholesome, ye shall make them friends acquainted
and familiar with nature, remembering what many in their syckenesse both suffer
and do, how grievously they take it, how they can scace suffer to receive
warm water, a supping, or a sop of breed, calling not only those things
detestable and vnsauerye: but also those that compel them to receive ye same
detestable and lothesom. Moreover, baynes have destroyed many mene, ^any men
^roied by ^nes.
used at ye first, not when they were very sick, but because they could not
nor were able to receive sustenauce onlesse they had been first washed, whereof
Titus theperour was one, as they report, that waited on him whilst he was
sick. He did also besides reprehend this, ^e and ^er bo^ are the ^e heal^.
that sclender and lean bodies were ever more healthier, that ingurgitacion,
fyllyng of ye pauche, drunkenness, vnmesurable use of delicates were chiefly to
be take heed of and eschewed of them that entende to make solemn
banquets, or do prepare to receive their friends with feasts: or yt be
invited by some rich manne or prince to a set dinner, appoyntyng on the come
guise of {pro}uyng masteries i quaffyng, which at such time may not be
refused, whereby doubtless they make ye body then quiet, pressed, and light, even
as it were, a yenst a great storm of wyndes fludde of waters toward. For
verily the entisementes prouocacions, laws of good fellowship (as they call)
be such, The sav^ of good f^lowship e^mies to health.
yt it shall be very harde if ye chance to come among them, not to do as they
do, to keep your self within a mean to observe your accustomed diet: but yt
either ye shall be thought disdeignfull and not contented with ye compaignie, or
they shall be weary of you. Therefore to thentent that fire may not be put to
fire, as the proverb is, yt is, Gluttony ^st not ^ laid on ^ttonie. ^nerie
con^pte and ^ of Phi^pus.
that glottony be not laid on glottony, intemperauce couched on intemperauce,
it shall behove you to remember diligently that Philippus king of Macedonie did
merrily in sporte. The matter was this. One had desired him to supper, as he was
going thither, he met with divers whom he took with him for his geastes. The
good mane of ye house saying him bring so many, having made but little provision,
was moved troubled. Philippus {per}ceiuyng the same caused a seruaunt to warn
all his friends, yt they should not eat to much, but yt they should reserve a
place, and keep a corner for a delicate dish yt was to come. They trusting
thereunto, eat little of that yt was before them. By this means the prouysion
yt of it self was very scleder, was made sufficient for them all. After this
sort ought we to prepare our selfes ayest inevitable quaffyng: reserving a
place in our bodies for meates, junkets, To feasting we must bry^ a perfec^
appetite.
yea drunkenesse, and to bring with us to such feasts a perfect appetite. If
when we be full already have surfaicted, we shall soodenly for the compaignie of
our betters, or by confluence of strangers, for shame be forced to come to
drink with such as be hable to bear it, there must the saying of Creon that
he speaks in the tragedy be our chief buckler and defense ayenst shame, a
thing very noysom to men, and ayenst vncomly blusshyng.

Your boune o friend, frendeship doothe not savour,
But malice rather, and hatred great,
That to your friend so vnfrendely doth labour.
His no small hurt, and your self no profete
Adieu therefore friend, welcome foo,
Better it is in time to depart
Then thus to continue, at length in woo
To lament our folly when we smart.
Good ma^er vama^erly.
Verily, he that for fear to be reputed without good manner, will willingly cast
him self into apleuresis or the dissease of ye reins, may be in deed
accoupted without good manner: yea without wit and reason, which things who so
has, knows how to keep compaignie with men, with out eating and drinking
out of season and such good manners. For he that iently curteisly refuses,
shall have as much thake for refusing as for drinking. Besides, How both to
keep te^perauce a^ to please copaigni^
he that deyntely doth carve and distribute the meat, tasting nothing himself
but absteinyng, and in the mean seaso at their eating drinking doothe provoke
them to mirth and pastime with some plesaut talk of him se;lf, shall be
reputed for more meryer, then if he did both drink drunk fill the paunch
with meat. I had alleged for my pourpose one example out of antiquite,
Alexand^ dyed of v^ measura^ quaffyng
how Alexander ye great conqueror after he was well whitteled, being
{pro}uoked of fresshe to quaff with Medius, and fearing ye by his refusing the
other should win the victory, sank under ye board, and lost his life for
his labour. And of our own time I brought forth an other exaumple how one
Riglus a great wrestler called into the bayne early in ye morning by Titus
the emperor, ^iglus*
went thither and washed with him, when he had drouke but ones (as the come
voice is) being taken with an universal palsy, he died soodely. The things
before rehearsed did Glaucus in ye way of derisio object unto us like a
schoolmaster as priciples rudimetes of his sciece. Of other maters the
{pro}pouned, neither he was willing to hear, neither we disposed to declare:
for he regarded nothing yt was spoke Socrates therefore first of all aduisyng us
to forbear meates that provoke to eat of fresh when we be not hugrye,
Socrates
drink yt calls come drink me when we be not thurstie, doth not utterly
forbid us to use them, but teaches us to use them when need shall require,
that we should apply the delectation and pleasure of those things to profet
necessity, as they do, that in a come wealth do convert the money that
was given to be bestowed in come plays disguysynges, to thuses of war.
For what thing soever of nature deliteth as log as it is part of that that
nourissheth her it is her own good. And they yt be hungry, ought rather to
eat that is necessary then yt is sweet, specially not to provoke a fresh
stomach a new appetite when they have done with their accustomed diet of
fedyng. For in like manner as leapyng was to Socrates no vnplesaut exercise, ^e
when ^ee well.
so he yt uses to fed on junkets, fruits, and deyntie dishes, takes
less hurt of them. But who so already hath received that is copetent for
nature, hath filled himself, leat him specially beware yt he be not greedy on
such things. And herein lack of knoweledge ambicio be as much to be
exchued, as voluptuousnes glottonye because these things many times provoke a
mane to eat when he is not hungry, to drink when he thristeth not, whilst
they minister unto him vnclenly and unquiet ymagynacions, even as though it
were a great shame to leave at any time a delicate morsel uneaten, as a fat
tripe, mushroms of Italie, a marche pain or such like deintie meat.
Ignorance and pride, many times do entice and draw a mane by the train and
savour of vain glory to use strange and deintie meates, when the body has
no need to eat, Many ^ surfaict^ vain gl^
to the intent he may make vaut thereof to other, who shall water at him,
think him happy that may have the sruicion of such delicate fine dishes. In
like sort be some mene disposed toward women. The in^peraunc^ voluptu^
persone^
It happens sometime that when they be with their own wives being both
beautiful loving they have no phasie nor courage, but with money obteinyng ye
l^ue of Phryne, Lais, Iulian of Rumfo^d or such like abominable harlottes
they stiere and {pro}cure theimselfes through wantonness to folly when they be
weak and feeble of body and not apt thereto, to the intent they may crake and
boste yt they have had to do with so notable an harlott, that only for vain
glories sake: witness hereof Phrine her self, who when youth had taken her
leave, when beauty had bid her farewell, and age with deformite were come to
associate her abominable couersacio, would then say, that many bought the
dregs or lies for the name and glory of ye wine, undoubtedly it were a thing
much to be marveled at, if we shu^d escape hurt yielding to ye body all
such pleasures as nature either desires, or is able to bear, yea to take no
harm, where for our business, we should so strive with her desires, as we
would differ the use of veraie necessary pleasures, when nature required
them, or then to avoid danger, when (as Plato says,) we should, as oft as
appetite incensed or moved us, utterly yield to all kind of lusts. Neither
may it by any reason be, The so^ taill of ^ luptuo^nesse pr^dyng of mind.
that desires and lusts of nature which out of kind do break out of the
mind into the body, forcing the same to obeye follow her lusts shall so clean
return, but that they shall leave behind in ye same very grievous great
incomodities of her fode, vain, feeble pleasures. It is in no wise coueniet to
provoke and stiere ye body to pleasure through the desire of ye mind. For it
is against nature ye pleasure should fro thens proceed. For likewyse as ye
tickling of ye armepittes do not minister to the heart cause of hertie nor
earnest laughing, but displeasant like to a cramp, which causes a manne to
seem to laugh when he doth not. ^sures ^asaunt
So whatsoever pleasures the body stirred and troubled receives of the mind,
^e glory ^th of ^nyng of ea^
they be like hardes, soon set on fire, and soon out, troublyng the nature
and contrary thereto. Wherefore whenever any notable or dentie dish shall be set
before us to be eaten, we ought rather to seek glory by absteinyng, then by
eating: remebryng yt (as the philosophier Simonides said) it never repented
him that he held his peace, The saiy^ of Simo^des.
but oft that he spake: so leat it not repent us at any time, yt we have
refused eating, neither yt we have drouke water in ye stead of strong wine: but
rather on the cotrarye part not only nature ought not to be enforced to
these things, but also if any thing be set before us yt she desires, The
app^tite mus^ sometym be restr^gned.
it shall be rather convenient for use exercise oftentimes to call back, and
turn her from her appetites to light things, such as she is used with. For if
we shall break ye law (saith the Thehane although not rightly) let us break it
to rule govern. But leat us mend that saying, and say: If we shall needs
desire glory, leat us desire it for ye love of health by abstynence fro such
delycacies. Yet there is a great noumbre in whom nygardenesse and gluttonye
be joined together, that in their own houses can restrain their appetites,
^ny that ^ytle ea^ at home ^luttons ^de.
and be lords over them: but when they are at others tables, lay their
hands about them on every side, their teeth cease not gryndyng as long as
the belie will hold, even as they do that come to the sacking of a town in
time of war, snatchyng and ryflyng as though no more such prays should
chance. ^ guar^ of gur^ndyng.
But their reward is at hand, soon after their bodies weaxe vnlusty, their
heads heavy dull, the next day they faill not of cruditie of stomach. The
saiy^ of Crates ^gainst sup^fluitee in fare.
Crates therefore thinking that sedicions tyrannyes grew in come wealths
through detie meates and superfluitee, by a merry word gave this taunt unto a
certain manne: Syrha ({quod} he) make no sedition in the come wealth by
enlargyng thy dishes, when little meat will serve. But let every manne dispose
and enjoin him self to a competent rate, not utterly contempnyng, crosses,
olives, Surfaicty^ reiseth se^cion wit^ the body.
and other comme fare, and in steed thereof fall to delicate made meates,
deyntie fish, and costelye dishes, and so through surfaityng reyse within his
body sedition, trouble and a flixe. For ye come meates cause ye appetite shall
not desire more the serves nature. Diuersitee sauces ^oe corrupt ^ holsom ^s
of the eat.
But the cunning of those that be deuysers and dressers of dyuersytee of
meates, their subtle dyshes, their sweet sauces always do set forward,
and increase the lymytes of appetite and corrupt the virtue and holsomnesse of
the meat.

But yet I can not see how it hangs together, that we should abhor and have
in disdain women that seek to have the love of men with drynkes and charms,
when we hire Cooks, pastelers, and such others, to corrupt our meates with
their confectyons. I had almost forgot my self, and called it Sorceries and
Juglynges. The saying of Arces^laus ayenst lecherous persons.


Therefore that Arcesilaus saith sowhat bitterly against aduoutecers and
lecherous persons.

It forces not whether the act be done naturally or unnaturally: Yet it
agrees well with that whereof we now speak. For what difference is there (to
be plain) between these two, whether ye move and stiere intemperance to
sensualitee with plays and gestes, or provoke the taste with sweet odours and
deintyes, so that always we should need clawynge and rubbing as scabbed
members do? But an other season perchance we will speak ayenst sensualitee,
and set forth how honest a thing of it self temperance is: our purpose now
is to treat of the diuersite and greatness of s^nsuall pleasures.

We be not hindered nor do we lose so many matters, so many hopes, so many
journeys, so many exercises through disseases as we do pleasures. Who would
^aue plea^ure must ^ot neglect ^ealthe.
And therefore is it not expediet for him yt most seeks for pleasure to
neglect the health of his body. Many there be in deed, to whom sycknesse
is none impedimet, but yt they may apply their study, no to others, but that
they may be in ye wars, Sickness ^oste cotra^ie unto plea^ures.
no to some but that they may do their duty in the come weal: but the
bodyly pleasure is such, that in sickness no manne can have the very
fruicion thereof. ^leasures ^n sickness ^ke to son shining in stor^e.
Yet the delectacios that come thereof, being of their very nature short, be
not pure but very much mixed and enterlarded with hurts, may be compared to
a little fair whether or son shining that happens in ye midst of a great
tempest or storm.

And verily Venus bears no rule when the belly is glutted, but rather when the
belly is quiet and at rest. For the end and perfection of love is pleasure, as
it is of meat drink. And pleasure receives no less comoditee of health of
the body, then sea gulles take of the calmness of the whether, yt suffers
them to lay their eggs, and to hatche forth their birds. The saty^ of
Prodic^
Prodicus said very feately, that the fire was the best sauce. And so may a
manne say very truly, Health th^ best sauce all.
that health is ye most heavily and most pleasant sauce of all. For if a
manne be sick, or have eaten to much, or have an evil stomach, meates
though they be sod, roasted, or broiled, be neither sauerie no pleasant.
But if he be in perfect health and have a good and pure appetite, there is
nothing that comes amiss, ^ealth ma^th al thing ^uerye
every thing is sweet touthsome, wholesome, and such as he will be desyreeus to
have a snatch at.

But as Demades said of the Atheniense, that they would begin war ever
out of season, and that they would never make any decree to have peace,
^emades ^iyng of the ^theniens
but in morning weeds sorowyng the loss of their mene so we never remember
moderate and mean fare, but when we lye bournyng in the fever as hootte as
coals, and be driven to our Poticarie ware and sloubber-sawces.

And yet when we be fallen in to them, The fals^ clooke of o^ folly in ty^ of
^yckene^
it is to be woondered howe we can cloak and cover our folly, leaning over
much to fame and opinion, as the common sort of people does, that turn the
fault sometime to the alteration of the air, sometime to the vnholsomenesse of
the country, or to over much labour, because it should not be known that
superfluitee, and immoderate eating and drinking was ye cause thereof.

But even as Lysimachus being emonge the barbarous. The saiy^ of Lisimachus
Scithyans for lack of drink constrained to yield him self to his enemies,
after he had received a syppe of could water to quench his thirst withal,
said, good lord howe great felicitee have I forsake and put away for a short
pleasure, ^ we^emea^s have oft ^mes sour ^uce.
eve so ought we in our syckenesse to call to remembrance that for a draught
of water taken out of due time, or by going to ye bayne out of seaso, and by
quaffyng for good fellowship, we have forgon many pleasures of ye same things,
a great many notable businesses have remained undone, and besides we have
lost not a few merry pastimes and pleasant exercises. For the continual
thinking thereon shall cause sorrow to byte us by the stomach, leave in y^
memory s^che a scarre and mark, that we shall be the more chare and
circumspect, when we be hole to chose and observe good diet. For then the
body being restored to health will not bread veraie great lusts and
appetites such as cannot be brydeled and restrained, nor strange, nor such
as cannot be subdued, but it shall be requysite if any such greedy appetite
happen to break out, The app^tites mu^ be resiste^
and to leap at such things as it covets, that we be of valiant and bold
courage to resist. For ye appetite can do nothing but weep and sobbe for a
while like a child, Appetite compared to a child.
and afterward by and by doth hold her peace, when the meat is out of sight
and will neither complain nor be angry, but on the contrary part, rather
being clean and lusty, and not heavy nor fulsome endures till the next day.
^ow Ti^theus did ^ise Pla^is fare.
As Timotheus after he had fared meanly and soberly at supper with Plato in
the university, said, yt those which used to sup with Plato, were the better
in health the next day after for that supper. The report gooeth also that
Alexander after he had rejected out of his service his cooks and belly
mynistres, ^exanders ^kes and ^ce.
used to say that he had retained better in their place, that is, stirring of
the body early in the morning before day, and putting it to labour to make
his dinner fauerye, and small fare at dinner, Labour^ or cold sotyme ^ sickenes^
to make his supper pleasant and touthesome. And yet I know it right often to
chance, that labour, heate, and cold, do caste a manne in a fever, but as
the savour of flowers of them self not very strong, being mingled with oil
have a more vehement sent, The bo^ replenish with humo^ is apt q^kely to
r^ceiue sick^nesse.
in like manner does abundance of humours before gathered, make apt and
dispose the body to receive such disseases as proceed of the external causes
aforesaid. If exterior causes find the body empty, the blood pure and
subtle, and the spirits clean, there is no danger of them, they be easily
and soon dispeched. but if the body be full and replete with humours, the as
mud makes the water foul when it is stiered, so it infects all parts, and
brings them in case that they cannot be easily cured. ^ier char^g ye sto^ke
must diligently ^yded.
Therefore we must take heed that we do not as shipmen do, who for gredynes
to carry much in their ship do cause it to take in waters, and be
constrained by ladyng it out to labour still at the pump. So we ouerladyng and
charging the stomach be forced to pourge and empty it with purgacions and
clysters. But it shall be requysite to preserve it pressed and light, ^ow ye
sto^acke must ^ preserved.
that if so be it fortune to be overwhelmed, it may for the lightness rise up
and appear as a cork does in the water. Disseas^ the beg^nyng m^ be look^
unto.
And we must be chary and circumspect at the first in any wise, when
sickness is toward and felt. For not all disseases steal on a manne
suddenly without warning, but they have messagers posts that run before,
Most p^ of dissea^ give wa^nyng ere (...) come.
and declare their coming, as cruditee of stomach, slougth, and dullness of
body. Heuynesse of the body (says Hippocrates) and werynesse growing
without cause, be tokens that sickness is at hand: Foresign^ of sickene^
and the cause thereof seems to be by reason of aboundauce of humours and
the puffyng out, swelling, the grossenesse of the spirits, Hippoc^tes lesson
(...) sickness ^warde.
that hang on the synowes. And yet there be some that when the body self in
a manner strives ^e foolish ^erdyng ^ome per^es in dietyng ^m selfes.
and would be fain laid at rest, will forthwith into the baynes, fall to
drinking, and furnyshyng the body with vytayles, even as though a long
assault and obsession should follow, and as though they feared least the
fever should take them ere they had dined. Other again much estemyng them
selfes, follow not this trade, ^de shame dissebling ^enesse.
but while they be ashamed to confess overmuch eating and crudite of the
stomach, to keep theimselfes all day in their clothes, will forthwith their
compaignios to practise feactes, and put of their clothes, to do as they do
that be in perfect health. Hope ma^th some to ^de in sick^s.
Many there be whom in defense of their intemperance and delycacie hope
pricks and persuades, that forsaking their beds they may boldelye
return to their pristinate diet, to taste a hear of the mad doggue that
has byten them, even as though they might expel wine with wine, surfeit with
surfeit. Thereme of Cato ^gainst ho^
Against this hope Cato his remedy must be used: Hope (says he) makes
those things yt be great little, and those that be little it makes nothing.
And it shall be also necessary to remember, yt it is better to absteyne fro
eating when a mane needs it not, to be at rest, Better it to abstey^ with
healt^ then to ea^ and be sick^
then to eat, afterward to be drawn allured to y^ baynes, to eating and
drinking, there to synke down, to be in ieoperdie. For if there be any
danger, he may fortun^ to have his part thereof if he be not wise, have not
prevented the matier and absteyned from it. If there be no danger, yet shall
it be no hurt to have rectif^ed and pur^fied the body. But that childish
person that fears to disclose to his friends servants, that his sickness
came of ingurgytacion and superflu^tee, that fool that for shame will not at
the beginning confess crudite of stomach, shall shortly after maugre his
teeth be compelled with shame to declare yt he has a flixe, a fever, or
frettyng grypyng in ye belly. Mene take it for a great shame to be a houngred,
but they may well think it a greater reproach, if any go to ye baynes with a
raw stomach overladen or puffed out with meat, The proche gluttoni^
eue^ as they should bring to ye sea an old rot ship yt leaketh. Vereli in
like manner as some Mariners be ashamed to keep the shore in a great tempest,
but after not able to brooke the seas be with more shame cast on land crying
out and vomiting: so those that perceive their body disposed to sickness,
while they think it a reproach to keep their bed, or to forbear meat for a
day, Pl^e^ be geu^ sickene^
are afterward to their great shame constrained to keep it many days,
whylest they be pourged, rubbed, emplaistred, enointed: while they must be
at all comaundementes of the Phisicyas, while they desire to drink wine or
cold water, being compelled in the mean season partly for fear not only to
say but also to do many things both contrary to reason and also vncomlye.

But it shall be requisyte to enstructe and warn those that being drowned in
sensualite be not lords of their selfes, but disposed and given to affects
lusts be rapt headlong into the same, how the greatest part of pleasures
delectacions come of the body self, and as the Lacedaemonians when they gave
their cooks vineagre and salt, willed them to seek out other sauce in the
meat it self: ^he best ^e for ^e is to ^eceiued a whole ^e.
so the best sauce for any kind of meat is to be received into a lusty,
whole, and clean body, for a thing may be sweet and deintye of it self
without confectyons. How meates are ma^ delectable.
It is made after this sort pleasant, if it be received into a body that
hath delyte and pleasure thereto, that lives according unto nature. But on the
contrary part if they chance to come into a body that has no fancy
thereunto, being crude and evil disposed, they lose their relyse and virtue.

Therefore this is not to be pondered wehther the fish be new, or the bread
fine and pure, whether the bayne be warm, More r^pecte mu^ be had t^ body
felf^ then to th^ meates.
but a manne must consider in what case he him self is, whether his stomach
stands ayenste it, or whether he be out of quiet, whether his body be
corrupted or thoroughly distempered, which thing if he do not, this shall
follow, yt as if a sort of revellers and droukardes come into a place whe^e
people be morning and sorrowful, they shall cause no pleasure nor mirth, but
rather make them to cry out: so if Venus, meates, baines, wynes be mingled
in a body that is euell disposed, and unnaturally affected, they breed and
make no pleasure: but the humours which as yet be not perfectely corrupted,
they stiere and trouble, and more and more provoke phleugme choler. Moreover,
there is no delectacyon in them greatly to be esteemed, neither the pleasure
of the fruicio of them doth answer to the expectation. Therefore the precise
diet observed to the vttermust point, both makes the body fearful and
subject to perils, Over pr^cise diet i^ not best.
and breaks the strength and courage of the mind, while it refuses all
busynesse, while yt dare not be occupied neither in pleasure nor in labour,
while it has in suspiction the doing of every thing lest it should hurt,
and gooeth about nothing courageously and boldly. But ye body must be
ordered as the shypmen do their sails in a calm weather, who neither take
them in, nor utterly strike them down, nor suffer their sheates to be lose,
them selfes being neglygent or slothful when they thyncke a storm toward.
So it is convenient to take heed, to make the body light pressed when we look
not for crudite, flixe, burning or dullness, which things be messagers tokes
yt the fever is at hand, ^ckes that ^e fever is hand
yet some there be yt when they perceive the selfes already distempered, do
scacely then fall to good diet. But rather before sykenesse come, we ought to
prevent provide for it as shipme do against a tempest when they se the north
wynd doth sheuer wherle the top of the water of the seas. ^nes must provided
before it no.
Forverely it is a thing repugnaut to al reason, a very fondness diligently to
observe mark the alteration of the wetherby crying of crows, the crowing of
cocks, the hogs towsyng the straw about their eres as though they were mad
(as Democritus was wot to say) and not to note and perceive the motios storms
of the body and other prognosticatios of diseases, to be ignorant in ye tokens
whereby ye shall perceive a tempest toward in your self. By wha^ things state
of ye die may gathered perceived
Wherefore it shall be requisite and expedient to observe and note the body, not
only in his meates and exercises, whether it be offended or do grudge at the,
more the he was wont, or whether it be more thirsty, or desirous of meat the
it used to be, but also ye must mark if ye sleep not soudly, if ye be troubled
or vexed therein, if ye make many slepes. It shall be also well done to note ye
absurdites of dremes For if ye have any foul or unaccustomed visios, it
betokens yt the body is replenished with gross humours, or the spirits vital
of the body be distempered within. By the affections and dispositios of the
mind a manne may also gather whether ye body be disposed to a disease. For
oft times it happens, that a manne shall be sad and pensive without just cause
and be put suddenly in fear.

Some be also mad angry, and will be offended and displeased quickly. Other
will be sad, weep, and morn for a trifle, and this happens as oft as euell
vapours sower and gross exhalacios do stop or occupy the cyrcuites of
the mind. Wherefore those persons to who such things do chance, must
consider and remember that if ye occasion proceed not of the mind, it must come
of the body, which requires to be kept more temperate abated. It shall do
good, also that a manne having his friends disseased do ask ye cause thereof,
Sophistic^ bablyng stead of g^ counsaile^
not to thetet to chattre sophistically nothing to yt purpose of desitees,
incidecies, and comutacions, and such like foolish terms, and to show and
ostete how cunyng and well seen he is in doctors names: but when he shall not
negligetly hear this light and come things, yt is of surfaictyng, emptines,
werynes, dreams, he ought chiefly to enquire what diet he kept when he fell
into the fever, and afterward to say, A marine ought to be warne^ by others
faults.
(as Plato was wont to say, saying other men faults,) that I herafter be
not in yt case. Thus of his friends sickness and evils it is requisite yt a
manne provide for himself, and take heed and remember that he come not to the
like, that he like wise kept in his bed, have not cause to praise and desire
yt most precious jewel of health. ^ltha pre^is jewel ^ so to be ^t.
But when an other is sick, he will note with himself what a jewel it is to
be in health, and be diligent, that having that treasure he preserve it well,
regard it, and favour it. ^e must ^e mane himself ^ember ^ diet.
It shall not be unprofitable also, if we remember by our selfes what our diet
is, for if it shall chance that we shall be at drinking, or feasting, or at
great labours, and other intemperate busynesse, the body in the mean season
not suspecting no feeling any dissease: yet it shall be best for us of our own
minds to take heed and prevent, that after venereal acts or werines we keep
y^ body in quiet and rest, that after surfaictyng and quaffyng we drink water.
What i^ be done ^ter surfa^tyng or m^tes heaui^ digestion*
And specially if we have eat meates heavy of digestio, as of flesh or other
meates of diverse sorts: the it shall be requisite to eat little, and to leave
nothing superfluous in ye body. For as these things of them selfes are the
cause of many disseases: so they breed matter give strength to other. And
therefore it is notably said yt to eat without saturite, to be lusty to
labour, What thy^ges are m^ wholesome.
to conserve natural seed, be things most wholesome. For verily immoderat
cogressio with women, because it pulls out chiefly yt strength whereby the
meat is digested, Venus hu^tefull to t^ health.
bredeth very much su{per}fluitie, therefore leat us repeat our communication
setting every thing in his place order, first leat us talk of such exercises
as be meet for those yt be given to ye study of good lettres. But as he
which said yt it was nothing needful to write unto them yt dwell by ye sea
costs any medicines for the touthe ache, did in yt words teach them to use
saltwater: so may a manne say, we ought not to prescribe to students
precepts of exercisyng their bodies, ^utuall di^tacios of ^udentes a
^eruaillous ^oo exerci^e ^ the body.
forasmuch as the daily use of disputacions (if it be used by mouth) is a
marvelous exercise, and profitable, not only for ye health, but also to ye
strength of the body. I mean not such strength as wrestlers have, nor yt
retcheth ye skin fro ye flesh, or does make a scurfe on it stops it
without as masons do a wall of a house, what stre^ studetes ^quire by ^sputacion^
but such as does in the lively vital parts (which vital parts we may
most aptely call ours) give and increase an inward strength, and a perfect
lustynesse. Breath^ much increases th^ strength ^ the body.
And to prove that the breathe much increases the strength of the body, the
masters teachers of wrestlers do declare, comaudyng them to rub one
another, to be always pattyng, iently beating ye skin, to preserve ye
parts of the body with enoyntyng continual handling. The voice stiereth the
breathe.
And for as much as y^ voice is a moving and stirring of the breath, which
works not lightly nor on the outsyde, but in the inward parts at ye veraie
founteyn, encreasyng heate, making the blood subtle pure, pourgyng the
veins, opening the sinews, it suffers not ye superfluous humours to weaxe
gross, nor to congele, which like dregs remain in ye place where the meat
is received and digested. Therefore they must endeavour chiefly to use make
theimselfes famylyar with this kind of exercise continually disputyng, talking,
reading or repetig, ^eadyng ^o loud voice kind of ex^cise.
if they suspect their body to be any thing weary or weak. For what
{pro}portion riding on horseback or in a wago, or like being carried hath to ye
violent labour of wrastlyng, rennyng such like strong exercises: the same
{pro}portio copariso hath reading with a load voice to disputation. For reading
doth as it were in the wagon of an other mas talk ietly move us, Disput^ a
stroge^ ^ercise th^ readyn^
after a quiet sort coueigheth carries our voice. But disputation hath annexed
unto it straining of the voice, a kind of enforcemet, when ye labour of ye mind
with ye labour of ye body be clapsed together. Clamour streigny of the br^is
hurt
Howbeit we must refrain fro to load noise brallyng clamour. For unmeasurable
straining violence of ye breath do induce and cause crapes rupturs. But when your
repeticios disputacios be ended, before ye walk, After d^tacios ^ be used
rubbing fore walking.
it shall be coueniet to use warm, ietle, soft smooth fricacios or rubbig with oil
to make soft ye fleashe, so fair to wipe it, as (ye skyn fleashe being
opened) ye inward humours may have the more free course to come out, and yt
the spirit may in due proporcion ientely sprede abroad into thextreme parts
of the body. Leat this be your proporcion, yt ye use it so long, till ye
perceive your body pleasant lusty. Whosoever after this sort quiets
recreateth the motion or trouble grown within, and ye intencio streinyng of yt
breaeth, shall neither feel grief no heaviness of su{per}fluitee. ^hole na^ of
h^r correc^ t^at is ^sse in y^ ^ye.
And although the time will not serve, or his busynesse will not suffer him to
use walking, yet there shall be no danger, for nature self hath corrected and
emended yt belonged to her. Neither let to do this while ye be on shipbourd, ^e
of the ^th mu^t be neg^d.
or being in yt come inn, no nor although every ma laugh at you. Verily where
it is no dyshonestie to eat, there it is no shame to walk* but rather it is
more dyshonestye to fear shipme, horsekepers, hostelers, tapsters mocking you,
not because ye play at ye sphere, wherlegyg, or tables, or do not exercise to
fight with your own shadow, but because in your exercise ye do dyspute,
teach, demand questions, learn, or exercise the memory, The sai^ of Socra^
for exerci^ the body
wherefore Socrates used to say that he yt would leap, needs a large room to
exercise him self: but he yt would occupy him self in singing or speaking,
every place would serve both to stand sit. One thing also in that must be
forseen, Hauig al^dy surfai^ we must f^beare ^e^.
that knowing our selfes to have surfaicted, or to have exercised ye body over
much with woman, or yt we be weary, ^loudes ^kyng.
we be not to vehement of spirit, nor cry out over loud, which is a come
practise among lawyers schoolmen crying out and exclaming more the needs,
some for glory and ambicyon, and some hired to be at a bar, ^iger the
^phiste ^ he died.
or at come disputacions. Our friend Niger professyng sophistry in Galatia by
chance had swalowed in, the back bone of a fyshe. In the mean season while
an other Sophiste being a strauger had begun to exercise his feat, Niger
fearing to be prevented by him, to be defrauded of his glory and praise, if he
should g^ place, the bone sticking styll in his throat he began also to cry
out. But the place beginnig to ^w^ll and to be harde, and he not hable to
abide the pain, was forced to be lauced and cut to be searched very deep
with an instrument of iron: ye bo^e was t^ken out, but ye wound being made
very dangerous, renning dispeched ye man of his life. Cold ^nes afte^ ^bour
of ^ body a^ hurteful^
Some man will remember this an other time when he sees cause. But it is rather
ambityon and ye part of a youg fool, then a thig healthful to use cold
baines after labour of the body, for the evil disposition and hardness which
it seems to make in thexteriour parts, bredeth much more mischief inward
lye, stopping the pipes, congeling humours, letting exhalations yt always covet
to be lose at libertee. And besides this, they yt use cold baynes must of
necessyte fall to the precise and prescripte diet, (which we utterly forbed)
ever careful and doubteful lest if they omit any jot prescribed, every
fault forthwith may be sharply laid to their charge. But in using hot
baynes is much perdo and libertee. ^e vtilitee ^tte bat^.
For yt decreases not so much ye lustines strength of the body, as it
increases health, because it minystreth such things as be profytable
frendely to digestion. Those things that cannot be digested it doth without
great grief sprede abroad and dissipate, onlesse they be crude stick in the
top of ye stomach, it recreateth and refreshes ye privy werinesse, ^nd with
the heate doth mitigate the same. Yet when ye shall perceive by nature
declaring the same, Enoynt in stead baynes
that the body is in good tempere and well desposed, it is better to leave
baynes, and to be enoynted by the fire, if the body shall need heate, for
because that doth convey bestow the heat through all parts of the body. In
the soon ye may use it neither to much nor to little, but after such measure
as the temperatenesse of the air will suffer. Hitherto have we sufficiently
spoken of exercises, now leat us come to diet. If y^ that we have said before
concerning the restreynt and mytigation of appetite, The pau^ hath no e^res
said ^ to.
do anything avail, what shall we need any further to give precepts rules?
If it be peinful to entreat and handle the belly as one set at lybertee and
out of prison, and to contend with the paunch that lacks ears, ^he order
^tet
as Cato said, then must we goo about to fed it with meates lighter of
digestio. That shall be thus, if we fed charely on gross meates, of much
nutriment being set before us, as gross flesh, ^osse vian ^.
cruddy meates, dry figs, hard eggs. Utterly to forbear the it will be hard
Leat us tede well of such as be fine light, ^e mea^.
of which sort be diverse herbs, wild foul, such fish as is not fat. It may
so be, that taking these ye shall content your appetite, and yet not hurt
your body. But chiefly we must take heed of that crudite which comes of
eating flesh, ^dite^ of ^yng flesh ^efely to be ^ewed.
because it doothe not only make the body forthw^th very heavy, but also
their hurtful leauinges do afterward remain. Much e^tyng of fl^^s to be
^ steined
And it shall be best so to accustom the body, yt it desire not to eat flesh.
For the ground doth bring forth many things, which be not only for the
sustenauce of man, but also for delicacy and pleasur sufficient: whereof some
it so gives, The gro^ brigeth fo^ enough t^ fed o^.
that ye may use them forthwith without any business. Other again being
mingled with other things do sauce and make them very pleasaut. Now forasmuch
as use and custom so little doth differ frome nature, that in a manner it is
turned thereunto, Custom next cos^ to nature
we may not use the eating of fleash to fill the gredye appetite as woulfes and
Lyons do: but when we have made a foundation and ground thereof, Fedyng
flesh mu^ be moder^
it shall be requisite then to fed on other meates, those that shall most agree
with the nature of the body, ^he using things ^uide.
and that lest shall dull the reasonable part of the mind, which then
appears and shines as out of a fine and light matter. ^ilke must ^ used for
^eate and ^t for a ^nke
Concerning those things that be lyquyde, ye may not use milk for a drink
but for a meat, for that it causes heaviness, and it is of much nutrymente.
To wine we may say as Euripides said to Venus God send me to have enough of
the, he saying Euripides Venus.
but not to much nor to little. Truly wine is a drink much profitable, a
medicine most pleasant, ^yne.
a meat least of all hurting, if it be used temperately, ^ater
and received by little and little at ones, rather by it self, then allayed with
water. Water not only if it be mixte with wine but also a draught thereof alone
now and then among wine allayed, makes that that is allayed less hable to
hurt. And therefore we must daily use beside our general diet to drink two
or three cups of water, whereby the strength and force of the wine maiebe
abated. And the body used to drink water, Water da^ to be dro^ken.
shall not be offended with the strangeness and novelty thereof, nor refuse
it when necessity shall require. Many men sometime desire wine, and then
especially, when water were most convenient, as when they burn in the soon,
or contrarily when they be veraie cold, or when they have been much occupied
with talking, or have fixed their mind on a thing earnestly, to be short
they think that wine ought to be drounken after labours and werynesse, as
though nature desired some coumforte to be give to the body to refresshe it
after labour. But nature desire the no coumforte, ^ature re^ireth no ^licacie.
if ye call dilicacie coumforte. But it lokethe for such recreation as is
mean between pleasure and labour.

Wherefore at such time ye must eat little, and drink no wine, or at the
least it must be allayed and tepered with drinking water now and then.

Wine must ^ee allayed with ^ater.
For wine being vehement and subtle in efficacy and virtue, does make the
body that is already out of temper, more out of temper. And it does exasperat
and stiere more, that that already is moved: when it ought rather to be
assuaged and quieted: for the which purpose water serves. Experience teaches
that if we drink hot water, not when we be thirsty, but after werinesse,
or vehement commotion, or heate, we shall by and by perceive inwardly a locyng
or mollifiyng: because the humour of the water is gentle and does not bind.
Water loceth mo^fieth inw^dely
On the contrary part, drinking of wine hath a great violence and a strength,
nothing frendely no pleasant when disseases begin to grow.

But because there be that say that hunger breeds a dryness and
bytturnesse in the body, if any manne fear that, or if any (like children)
think it harde to forbear meat till the fever come which he mistrusts
will come in deed, it shall be convenient for him to drink water.

For oftentimes when we honour and celebrate the feast of Bachus the god of
wynes, yet we live soberly and absteyne from drinking wine, taking up a good
use that we do not allwaies desire wine, by it self vnmixed. But Minos king
of Creta among other his laws ordained that pipyng should not be used at the
feasts of gods, ^we made Minos ^ of Cre^
nor dancing when they mourned, and yet we know yt the pensive mind is not
offended nor can be hurt with melody or mirth, The p^ mind is hurt ^
melody.
but no body is so strong but it wylbee hurt if when it is moved and
inflamed, wine be put into it. Men say, that certain people called the
Lydes, The c^stome of Lydes i^ time of scarcitee.
would eat but ones in two days, if any famyn or scarcitee of vitailles
happened emog them: the rest of the time they spent at dice other games. But
he yt is a student loves learning, if he shall have occasion to sup late,
will look on a Map, or a book, or play at the lute, striving fighting with
the belly, Studen^ have m^ means ^ restreign^ appetite.
and by dyligentlye calling the mind from meat, and turning it to study,
will with learning soon shake of his appetite For if the rude Scythian be not
ashamed in ye myddest of his drinking oftentimes to draw his bow, and when it
is vubent, to sing, by this means keeping him self from droukenesse, shall a
Greek fear to be mocked, that with letters and his books doth by little and
little shake of importune and the vnrulye appetites? The young men of whom
the famous Poet Menander in his comedies treats: (whom while they were
banqueting, an old Bawd thought to trappe in a snare with bringing in divers
fair and gorgeous harlottes,) did caste down their heads, and fell to their
delicates, not so hardy as ones to caste their iyes on them. But those that
love good learning have many honest and pleasant ways to withdraw and
pluck back the mind, if they ca by none other means restreigne the gredye
and beastely appetite when it sees meat.

And where those ye be teachers of feactes do cry out, the masters of games
do oft inculke into their scholars, that dysputyng of learning at meals
corrupts the sustenance, and causes heaviness of the head. It is not
always to be feared, but when we goo about to defyne weighty matters, or to
dispute for the victory who shall bear the bell. The brain of a Phoenix is
very pleasant and delicate, yet it is said, that it causes the head ache.

Disputation at meat, as it is no pleasant susteinaunce, ^gainst ^m that
^llowe ^utyng reaso^g at ^les.
so it bredeth very much ache and heaviness of head: Thus say they. But
if they will not suffer us at meals to demand or oppose, dispute, or read
any other thing then that shall delight and help pleasure: and if they reken
that to be a part of honesty and profit, we will give them warning that
they trouble not no molest us, leat them piycke them from us, teach it their
fellows and scholars. Whom while they discourage from good lettres, and use to
spend their life in mocking and rayllyng, they make like to the pyllers of
their school, gross in body, and dull in wit, like a stone, as Aristo.
very featly said. And yet theself same men being counsailled and persuaded by
Physicias do always command, A pause t^ be made ^twene sup^ and gooi^ to
bed.
not to gooe to bed immediately after supper. But suffer a pause to be between
supper and gooyng to bed, not heaping together ye meat, troubling and
oppressing the spirits, lest they ouerlaye concoction, ye meat being raw
and boiling in ye stomach, as they be wont that entende after supper to move
y^ body, who do it not with renning nor with extreme, but with soft gentle
exercise, as walking, The min^ after mea^ must be ^ quiet as^ as the bod^
or moderate dancing: even so ought we to think yt the mind after supster
must not be troubled, neither with business, nor with cares, nor with subtle
contentions, which commenly grow into an ambitious conflict tumult:
^xercise of ^detes af^ supper.
but there be many questions of the nature of thiges, which as they be not
weighty, so be they probable, many narracions also that concern good manners,
wherein some thing is worthy to be considered and weighed, void from all
contention and strife, and yet mixed with such pleasures as may coumforte and
delight the mind. And some there be, that for pleasure have called such
exercises in questyons of histories of Poets, the secound course of students
learned men. There be narracions beside that be easy, and wherein is no
tediousness, there be also fables. To hear of ye conceits of ye lute or
other istrumet it is more easy the to hear ye harp or shalme gooing. There is
also a {pro}portion of time herin to be regarded, yt is, Aristotle ^ opinion o^
walking ^ter supper
when by the soft gentle settling of the meat ye digestion is temperate, such
as we would have. But forasmucheas Aristotle is of this opinion, yt he thinks
walking after supper doth stiere the heate, sleep incotinetly doth suffocate
the same, other think the contrary, that digestio is furthered with quiet, and
yt it is hindered with motion: some folowig Aristoteles mind, do walk
immediately after supper, other inclinig to tother part do rest. Mine opinion
is, that ye follow a peculiar way made of both, yt may coufort the body after
supper, and keep it, not vexing the mind, nor yet suffering it to be idle, but
(as before is said) ientely moving the spirits, and making them more pure
fine by telling or hearing some pleasaut and merry coceipte, that neither may
fret the mind nor cast it in dumps. ^omites ^rgacious ^t to be v^ but in
no ^ytee.
Ye shall besides not practise vomits nor laxes or losing of ye belly made with
medicines, except great necessytee requires, because they be euell
coumfortes solaces of surfaicting. And yet the come sort of people use it,
who to thentet to pourge evacuate their bodies, do purposely fill ye belly and
ayen do pourge empty the body to fill it, booth ayenst nature, no less in
ye mean seaso troubled with replecion, then with emptiness, yea, rather by
all means avoiding repletion as a let to delicacy, prepare and make ready
emptines as a place and space for pleasures. It is evidently known, The
hurtfulnes of v^mite.
that either of those things troublyng and shrinkyng the body hurts the
same. Vomit hath a peculiar mischefe, in yt it increases and nourishes
insacyabilitee, and is never satysfied. There comes of it vehement hounger
and troublesome, as it were flouddes at diverse times, which by violence pulls
a mane to meat being always tormented, not by reason of appetite desiring
meat convenient, but by the inflamacions and exulcerations of medicines,
playstres. By reason whereof of when they have pleasures, the same are nothing
pleasaut no profitable, but ye parties have much trouble in the fruicion of
the, and beside, the retchynges and violet comocions of the pores and spirits,
do impress leave behind them certain remains, that will not tarry and
look for a purgation, but so redound and flow into all the body, as the
filth doth in a ship when the pump is full, which has need rather of
casting out, ^urga^yos ^d medyci^s do of^n times ^ore harm ^en good.
then to have more lode laid on. And the comotions that through medycines be
made in the botome of the belly, do corrupt and make moist the parts
subject thereunto, increase more superfluitee then they bring out. And
therefore, even as one being displeased with the multitude and great
compaignie of Greeks dwelling in a cytee doth banyshe the replenysh the same
with Arabians and Scythes being strangers: so, many being out of ye way, when
they have emptied their bodies of those things that it was used with, and
superfluitees, they put therein strangers, as for exaumple, ye grains which
the Potecaries call grana Cnidia, and Samonie, an houge quantitee of such like
things that can so little pourge nature, yt they them selfes have more need to
be pourged. Wherefore it shall be best to keep the body by moderate sobre diet
in such case concerning emptiness and replecions, that it shall not need of
it.

^ow the ho^ may be ^ewed, if ^de shal^e*
And if it shall be requisite at any time to renew the state of the body, then
use a vomyte without medicines and without torment such as may nothing
trouble you. For in like manner as clothes washed in a buck and scoured with
ashes and salt peter, be more freted and wasted then when they be washed in
fair water: so vomytes that be forced with medicynes, do more hurt, corrupt,
and consume the body. When a man is bound there is no better medicine, the to
use such meates that will easily move and stir and gently lose the belly.
Whereof, when ye have familiar experience, ^he way to ^e the belly ^hen it is
^unde.
the use thereof is without grief. If it will not be losed with those meates,
ye must drink water many days, or keep abstinence, Clisters better (...)
purgacio^
and afterward receive a clister rather then any medicines, because they both
trouble and corrupt the body. And yet the come people very gredyly lightly
desire them: Why the men sort^ people t^ purgacio^
but for none other purpose then harlottes use sorcery to make aborsions, and
to destroy that they have in their wobes, to thetent they may quickly fall
ayen to lechery, but leat us pass these things. Those yt be to much
diligent and prescribe to them selfes abstinence fast^ng at certain times,
do not well. For they when nature nedethe not, do teach it to need
scarcitee of meat, and by use makes abatement, and minisshyng of meat
necessary, which ought to be given in time. It is better to add such
correccions frely when need shall be, then to use prescribed times. But when ye
feel not, nor suspect any dissease toward you, it shall be requysite to prepare
so for all the other rate and order of your diet, that upon occasion given, it
may easily and for the profit of the body suffer novelty and be obedient,
not to serve and to be bound to that trade of living, so taught and used,
that it must of necessite be reduced unto certain times, quatitees, and
courses.

For that is neither sure, nor easy, nor good manner, and it appears rather to
be the life of an oyster that gapes at certain tides, or of a stock rather
then of a manne. For they that so tie theimselfes at all times to one trade in
meates, abstynences, exercises, or rest, do bring them selfes to a vain
and vile life, fantastical, that no manne vsethe, clean contrary to amytie,
glory and ciuilytee. And that I said I commended not.

Verily good health is not made nor ordained to be idle and at rest, which
be the two greatest mischiefs that be annexed we sickness. Idleness a^
rest be t^ of ye chief^ eiuilles th^ be toyn^ we sickenes^
And there is no difference between him that preserves the sight of his eyes
by that means that he may see nothing, and his voice that yt may not speak,
and between him that thinks that good health cannot be preserved but by not
using and not exercisyng the same. And although he fare well, yet he nothing the
more profits himself to do divers things yt belong to humanite, ientlenes.
The^fore we may not think that idleness is wholesome, Idleness destroieth health
pleasures.
for it destroieth yt, wherefore health is desired. And it is not true that they
fare better yt live in quiet. For Xenocrates that lived in most quiet, fared
no better then Phocio, who was still occupied: nor Theophrastus better then
Demetrius. And the fleing of administration of things and ambition, nothing
availed Epicure, or his Epicurians, to that state of the body that they so
much commended. But the natural habit state of the body must be preserved
by other means, so that in all kinds of living we ought to remebre, that
there is in the body of man one place for sickness, an other for health. And
yet those yt have to do in matters of ye come wealth, Plato h^ admonic^ to
his sc^lars at hi^ going ou^ of ye schoo^
(I said) must be otherwise admonished, then Plato used to teach his
scholars: Departing out of the school, he used to say to them: Take heed my
children, that ye bestow this idle time in some honest thing. Wherein r^lers of
ye ^ men wea^ shall exercise their b^dies wh^
But we will exhort such as have to do in the come wealth, to exercise
them selfes in honest and necessary labours, and that they stiere not ye
body for light mean maters. Many troublyng them selfes for every matier,
watching, taking journeys, riding up and down fall into sickness, whein ye
mean season they do nothing profitatable or for thaduauncement of a come
wealth, but lye in await to hurt, do envy hate others, and hunt for a little
vain unprofitable glory. That that Democritus said agrees chieflye against
them (if I be not deceived) If ye body should sue his tenaut, ^e mind tenaut
to body.
the mind, it could not be avoided but he should be found guilty for evil
using his offyce. Perchance Theophrastus said true, when by a metaphore he
said, that ye mind gave the body a great reward and fine, to admit him to
be his tenant. For verily the body receives more hurt then ye mind, not
using his lord as is convenient, nor regarding him as he ought. For as oft as
the mind is occupied in his affeccicions, labours, and cares, he favours
not the body. I meruaill therefore what Jason meant when he said, the law must
be broken in trifles, to thentent that justice may be executed in great
matiers, When ru^ shall take creation.
We will upon a good ground warn him yt is a minister in the comme wealth, to be
remiss and quiet, to take his ease when he hath but trifles to do, to
coumforte recreat him self in them, if he will have his body hable to suffer
pains in notable and harde matiers, not sick, dull or weak, to hinder him:
but as it were healed and renewed in an idleness and rest whilst he were on
shipbourde, so that when the mind shall call him again to his necessary
affairs, he may follow his trade as the colt used to suck runs with the
dame. Wherefore when they may for their busynesse, leat them couforte and
cherish them selfes, leat them defraud the body neither of sleep neither of
meat, nor of such ease and recreation, as is mean between pleasure and
payne, and doth not observe prescripte time. For as burning ^ro wastes being
quenched in water after it is driven out and beaten together with vehement
labour: ^ten alte^ions co^e the bo^.
so is the body of mane consumed by alteracios, sometime overcharged laden with
busynesse, another while drowned overwhelmed in pleasures, and when after
being made dissolute and feeble through bodelye pleasure and drinking wine it
is forced to come to hear causes, or to exercise some like funccion which
requires sore labour, effectual diligence, Heraclit^ called ye dr^sie a
cotiral shower rain, an^ sought to cured the but the m^ part of n^ do so
the selfes though t^ sought to^ have sick^ rather t^ health.
and earnest study. Heraclitus being sick of the dropsy willed his
physician to turn the shower into dries: a great many go clean out of
the right way, who after they have been long occupied tossed and tourmoiled
in labours werinesse, when they have kept the body long without meat and sleep,
then chiefly go about, and give them selfes to make the body weak and feeble
with wantonness and pleasures. And by and by upon the same do eftsons put
it to as much payne as it is able to bear. For nature desires not such
patching and botching of the body, but the folysh mind rather being inteperate
and unnatural. For in like manner as shypmen and mariners when they come to the
land give them selfes to pleasures and wantonness and theruppon incontinently
be called to the sea again to their former painful labours: so the mind
sequystred from business, is rapt with pleasurs immediately upon the same
returns to his accustomed labours will not suffer nature to have yt she hath
most need of, y^ is quyetnes reast: but ever oft changing from contrary to
contrary doothe trouble it, and brings her out of her own state and course.
Those that have wit will not apply their bodies to pleasure when it is wearied.
They do not desire it, no they remember no such thing, because the wit is given
to honest busynesse, and ye part of the mind yt should desire pleasur, is over
whelmed and occupied with other desires. Truly that which Epaminondas said
merrily when an honest man died in the time of the wars between the Thebans and
a town in Boeoti^ called Leuctrum, Student have no me to sper^ in dyssol^
living.
good lord what lesure had this man to dye at this time in this great
busynesse it may be truly said of him that 'is occupied in matters of the
common wealth, or in study of good learning, what time hath this man to be
balkyng, to be drouken, or to play the wanton? Yet when they have time to
couforte refresh and recreat the body, let them beware and eschew both
labours vnprofytable and chiefly pleasures not necessary, as enemies to
nature. For I heard Tiberius Caesar ones say, yt he was a very lobcoke that
after he passed ye age of.lx. years did desire a physician to feel his hand.

But it was somewhat arrogantlye spoken. Nevertheless, I think this to be
true that it is requisite that a manne be not ignorant in his own pulses:
^ery man ^ht to ^we ^ own pull ^and what ^ng is ^d or euell his body.
every man hath a diuersitee therein, yet nomanne ought to be ignorant in his
own temperature, how hot, how dry his body is: neither what things do
it good or hurt. For he lacks the knowlage of him self, a blind and brute
mind dwells in that body, yt must learn these thiges of a Physician,
whether he be more in health in somer then in winter, and whether he may use
things yt be moist easlyer then dry, and whether he have a dull or fast
beating pulse. To know these things it is not only profitable but also easy:
because we be daily in experience therwt, be parties thereto. But in the
diuersytee of meates drinks it is more requisyte to know what is good, what
is evil, and to be expert in those that be friends to the stomach, rather
then enemies: to know what furthers digestion, then what is pleasant and
delicate to the mouth.

^s a shame ^ske of a ^ysician at mea^ be good digestion ^ what co^rye.
To demand of a Physician what is easy to be digested, and what is harde,
what provokes a laxe, what binds: is as much shame, as to ask what is
sweet, what is bittur, what is sour, what is sharpe. Ye shall see some that
will check and correct their cooks, subtly discerninge if there be to
much sweetness, salt, or tartness in their meat. ^y pot^e is seldoe ^l
seaso^, and the ^y come ^ceinpe^.
And yet they know not what thing, if it be received into y^ body is light,
vnnoysome, or profytable: whereof this follows yt their pottage is seldom
euell seasoned, yet tempering and seasoning them self very evil out of
course, they cause ye Physicias daily to have much business. And such
mouthed me take not their pottage to be best, when it is most delicate but
they put thereto many thiges that be sharpe: yet into the body they pour i
many pleasures yt fill provoke it to vomit, partly because they know not,
partly for yt they do not rememebre, ye nature hath joined with things y^ be
holsom profitable such pleasur as is without hurt still endures. This also
makes to y^ purpose, to remebre what be friendly, apt, for the body, and what
otherwise: to know in sudden affeccios y^ do daily hourly chance other
circumstauces how tapply to every thig his {pro}pre peculiar diet. For ye
scrupulosite frowardness of ye come people yt find theimselfes grieved with
alteration of the palm of y^ hand, and who by other displeasant tokens
growing of lack of sleep and swimming in the head, gather and coniecte that ye
body within is corrupted and infected, is not to be feared nor regarded of
studetes, or such as be occupied in affairs of the come wealth, to whom
we speak. But they must avoid an other more vehement doubt in learning,
whereby it happens that they be forced not to favour or spare the body, nor to
regard it, oftentimes when it is almost done, still constraining it to make
mortal war with immortal things, ^ery tale ^ust stu^tes that ^our not ^r
bodies.
earthly conflicts with heuely matiers. But at length it chances to them as
it did to the camele, whom his fellow the ox desired to ease him of his
burden, to help him being wearied to bear it, the camele refused it: well
said the ox, it will not be long, but thou shalt both carry me and all my
burden. The ox was a south sayer, for being ded, the camele was compelled to
do it in dede. Even so it hapeneth to the mind, who deniyng for a while to
give ye body being werired time to be recreated and refreshed, not long after
falling into a fever, or into head ache is compelled to be sick, and to be
pained with the body, plato wo^ that y^ bo^ should ^ be exerc^ without mind
n^ mind w^out the b^
leaving books dysputacions, and all other exercises of learning. Wherefore
Plato did give a good lesson, that we should neither exercise the body without
the mind, nor the mind without the body, but that we should indyfferently
preserve the body as married to the mind, specially when it attends on the
mind, and makes it self partaker of the labours thereof, ^othyng so
^c^ll^nt as ^lth.
then should we again bestow on it care and solicitude, geuyng to it for
reward that noble and desired health, thinking y^ of al things that proceed
from the mind, no gift more excellent may be given to the body, then that it
may be without all impediment and hynderaunce either to the knowledge of
virtue, or to ye profit of speaking and doyng {inverted }

printer's device of Richard Grafton


