OF THE NOBILITY AND EXCELLENCY OF VVOMANKYNDE.
ALMIGHTY God the maker nourisher of all things, the Father and goodness of
both male and female, of his great bountyfulnes, hath create mankynde like unto
him self, he made them man and woman. Gen. 1.
The diversity of which two kinds, stands only in the sondry situation of
the bodily parts, in which the use of generation requires a necessary
difference, He hath given but one similitude and likeness of the soul, to both
male and female, between whose sowles there is no manner difference of kind.
The woman has that same mind that a man hath, that same reason and speech,
she gothe to the same end of blysfulnes, where shall be no exception of
kind. Luc. 20.
For after the evangelical truth, Marc. 12.
they that rise in their own proper kind, Matt. 22.
shall not use the offyce of their kind, but the likeness of angles is
promised unto them. And thus between man and woman by substance of the soul,
one hath no higher preemynence of nobylytye above the other, but both of them
naturally have equal liberty of dignity and worthiness. But all other
things, the which be in man, besides the dyuyne substance of the soul, in
those things the excellent and noble womanheed in a manner infynytely doth
excel the rude gross kind of men, the which thing we shall plainly prove to
be true, not with counterfeit and fair flattering words, nor also with the
subtle sophimes of Logic, wherewith many sophisters were wont to blind and
deceive men, but by the auctorytye of most excellent auctours, and true
writers of histories, and with manifest reasons, yea with the testimonies of
holy scrypture, and by the ordynances and constitutions of laws.

First to enter into this matter the woman is made so much more excellent than
man, in howe much the name that she has received, is more excellent than
his. For Adam sounds Earth, but Eua is interpretate life: and as much as the
life doth excel earth. so much the woman is to be preferred above the man. Nor
there is no cause why this shulde be called a feeble argumet, to give iugement
of things by the names.

For we know, that the high artyficer and maker of things and names, first
did know the things, before he named them, which for as much as he could not
be deceived, for this purpose he made the names, that it might express the
nature, property, and use of the thing. For the truth of antyque names is
such, as the very Romayne laws testyfye, that the self names are consonat
to the things, and manifest significations of them. Therefore an argument of
the names of things amongst dyuynes and lawyars, is of great weight. As we
rede written of Nabal, after his name is a foal, and folyshenes is with him. Of
this Paule in his Epistle to the Hebrewes, Hebr. 1.
purposynge to show the excellency of Christ uses this argument, saying:
that he is made as much more excellent than the angels, as he hath enherited a
name more excellent than they. And in an other place, God hath given him a
name, Phil. 2.
the which is above al names, that in the name of Iesu, every knee shall bow
both of things in heaven, of things upon earth of things under theearth.
Further (this thing to approve) there is no small strength of laws,
comprehended and contained in the bonds of words, in signification of words,
in conditions and demonstrations, in conditions annexed, and such other kinds
of disputations, and high points, and tytles of the law, as in the same
tytles, and other like, a man may perceive. For so we make argument and
reasons in the law of the interpretation of the name, also of the strength of
the word and vocable. Moreover, of the interpretation of the name, and also of
the dyfynytion, and composition and order of the word. For the laws them
selfes do quyckelye and sharply consider the significations of the names, that
of the they might some thing interpretate.

Also Cyprian against the Iewes argues, Cyprl. de montibus Syna et Syon
that the first man, Adam, received his name of the iiii. princypal parts of
the world, that is, East, weast, North, and Southe, and in the same book he
doth expound the same name, Adam, because earth was made flesh, although such
exposition doth differ from the tradition and teaching of Moses, sens among
the Hebrewes it is not written with four but with.iii. letters. Yet for all
that, this exposition in so holy a man is not to be dyspraysed, for as much as
he was not learned in the Hebrewe tongue, the which very many saynctes and
exposytours of holy scrypture, to their small blame knew not. But if I can
not have like leave and liber tie for the praise of womanheed, after my mind
and iugement, to use like etymology and declaration of the word and name of
Eve, at the least let me be suffered to speak this one thing out of the
mystical decrees, and agreeable wills of the Cabalistis, the very name of a
woman to have more affinity with the ineffable and in enarrable name of the
divine power almighty, called Tetragrammaton, than the name of man, the which
with the name of god, neither in letters nor in figure, nor in nombre doth
agree.

But now we will leave these things, for they be red of few, and of fewer
understand they require a longer process than is mete to be spoken of here.
In the mean season, we wol search out the excellency of womanheed, not of
the name only, but of the very things, duties, and merits.

Therefore let us (as they say) search the scriptures and taking our ground at
the first creation, let us dispute and reason, what dignity woman obtained
above ma, when she was first made. We know, that whatso ever god almighty
made, do chiefly differ in this point, that certain of them should abide and
remain for ever more incorruptible and without putrefaction, and certain
should be subject unto corruption, mutability and change. And in creatynge
those things, god proceeded forward, after this order he began at the more
noble and excellent of one thing, and ended at the most noble of an other.
And thus he created incorruptible angels and souls: for so doth saint
Augustyne dispute reason, Aug. sup. Gen. li. 7.
that the souls of our first parents, were created with angels, before the
bodies were made. Furthermore he created incorruptible bodies, as the heues,
the sterres and the elements incorruptible, but subject to divers mutations:
of the which he made al other things that be subject unto corruption. From
the more viler by several degrees and orders of dignity, again ascendynge
and going up unto the perfection of the hole world. First he made minerals:
than things vegetable plants and trees: after that things lyuinges, Gen.
2.
than brute beasts, some crepynge, some swymmyng, some fleing. Fynally he
created two creatures like to him self, first the male, and last the female:
in which female, the heuens, the earth, and al the goodly ornament of the
same, were perfeyted and fully finished. For the maker coming to the creation
of woman; rested at her, as having before his hands nothing more honourable
to be made, and in her al the wisdom and power of the creator came to
conclusion and end: after the which there can no creature be found or
imagined. Than seeing a woman is the last of creatures, the full end, most
perfect of all goddis works, and of the same the very perfection: who woldeny
a woman to be the most worthy most excellent of all creatures? without whom ye
very world, now being finished, and in all things most perfectely
accomplished, shulde have ben vnperfecte, the which could none other wise be
perfyted, than with the most perfectest of al creatures. For it were
against reason and a thing, unseemly to think, that god wold finish sogret a
work in any imperfect thing. But because the world it self, as the absolute,
hole, and most perfect circle, was created of god, the same circle must needs
be ended in that little part, which might couple and join within it self
the first of all things with the last of all things with one knot. So a
woman, when the world was made, was the last in time, and last made: and
the same woman partly in auctoryty, but chefely in dignity, was the first of
all things, conceived in the mind of god as it is written of her by the
prophet: Before the heuens were made, god did chose her, and he chose her,
before all other creatures. For this is a common conclusion among philosophers
(if I may use their words) Arist. vl. 8. de auditu.
The end always is in the first entetion, and in the dede is the last. So a
woman was the last work of god, formed into this world as queen of the same,
into her prepared palayce, garnished with all pleasures plentyfully. Therefore
every creature worthily loves reverences serves her, and worthily is
subject, and obeys unto her, which is of al creatures the absolute queen,
end, perfeccion, glory by al ways and means. Wherefore the wise man says,
Sapi. 8.
Who so hath god with him, rejoices, and in heart comendeth the gentil nature
of woman, ye and the lord of all things him self loves her.

By reason of the place also, in which the woman was created, howe far she
passes man in nobleness, holy writ doth witness unto us most
plentifullye. For where the woman was made in Paradyse, a place most noble
and pleasant, among angles: the man was made without Paradyse, in the
wyelde field among brute beasts. Afterward, to the intent, that woman should be
created, he was brought into Paradyse. And therefore the woman, endowed with the
peculyar gyfte of Nature, as she were accustomed to be in the highest place of
her creatio, though she loke down ward from never so high a place, yet she
neither suffers nor feleth any whitling or swimming in her heed, no her eyes
dafyl not, like as it is wont to chance to men.

Furthermore, if it chance a woman to be in like peril of drownynge with a
man, she without any outward help, swymmeth a loft longer than the man,
which sooner synketh, and goth down to the bottom.

And that the dygnytie of the place makes much to the nobylitie of manne, the
civil law and human constitutions do plainly affirm, and the custom of
all nations doth chyefly observe this thing, not only in men, but also in
other beasts, yea and in the estimation of things having no life: For the
more worthy place, that any thing is born or brought up in, the more noble it
is judged. Wherefore Isaac commanded his son Iacob, that he should not take a
wife of the land of Canaan, but of Mesopotamie in Syria, being of better
estymation. And unto this, is not much unlike, which is spoken in the gospel
of Iohn, Io. 1.
where Philip said: We have found Iesus the son of Ioseph of Nazareth. And
Nathanael said to him: What good can come out of Nazareth? But now let us
speak of other matters A woman doth pass a man in the material substance of
her creation. For she was not made of any creature wanting life soul, or of
the vile clay or dyrte, as the man was, but of a matter purified and lively,
having a reasonable soul, and a godly mind. Furthermore, god made manne of
the earth, which naturally brings forth all kinds of beasts and lively
creatures, by the working together of the heuenloy influence: but the woman,
above al heuenly influence and promptues of nature, and without any other
operation power, was only made of god, full steadfast and perfect in all
things, the man in the mean season losing one of his rybbes, of the which
she was made, that is to say, Eve of Adam sleping, and that so soundly, that he
could not feel his rib plucked away. And thus, man is the work of nature,
and woman the work of god. And therefore the woman is many times more apt and
mete then the man, to receive the heuenly light and bryghtnes, and is oft
replenyshed thet with: which thing is easy to be scene, by her clenlynesse,
marvelous fair beauty. For saying that beauty it self is none other thing,
but the clear brightness of gods visage naturally set in things, right
fair shynynge in the beautiful bodies of creatures: he therefore hath chosen
women before men, to be far more endowed, and most abundantly replenished
therewith. The propre body of a woman in sight and feeling, is most delicate
and pleasant: her flesh soft and tender: her colour fair and clear: her skin
soft and slyke, her head comely, and decked with hear soft like sylke,
long, and shynyng like the gold wyre: her countenance sobre: her loke and
chere merry and pleasant: her face most fair of all creatures, her neck
white as milk: her forhed large and high: her eyes rolling and shining like
crystal, very amiable gladsome and gracious: her brows above them, well set
together in propre thyn circles, with a comely playnnesse, divided equally with
a feat distance, between the which, out of the midst, descends the nose
strayghte and treatise: under the which is her ruddy mouth, with soft and
tender lyppes, full proprely proporcioned: within the which, when she smyleth,
her teeth do shyne forth, being but little ones, and set in eagle order,
as white as the yuory, and not so many in number as a man hath, for she is
another great eater, bytar, nor gnawer: And round about them rise up her
jaws, chekes, with tender softness, as ruddy as rose, and replenyshed with
shamfastnes: her chynne round, with a pretty pyt therein. Under this she hath a
small neck, somewhat long and straight upright frome her round shulders, with
a delicate wesande, whytely, and meanlye thick and big: her voice small and
shrylle: her speech lowe and sweet: her breast broad and well set out,
clothed with even flesh and hardness of her paps, which are round and even
as her belly is: her sides are soft and tender: her back plain and straight
her arms long and full: her hands white and soft, with fingers lunge and
small, stretched forth a length from the joints, and proprely set and knit
to gither: her hyppes, thyes, and legs, well brawned fleshy and full: her
fingers ends and toos are propre round, like a little circle, and al the
parts of her body well furnished with humour. More over, her pace and going is
right comely: her mouynge honest: her port and chere very commendable: and in
the order of al the body, in shap figure proportion and disposition above al
other she is far the fairest creature. In al the hole heap of creatures,
there is no thing so wonderful to see, no no miracle so maruaylouse to
behold. In so much, that there is no man, except he be stark blind, but he
may see, that god him self coniested and heaped together in woman, what so
ever was beautiful in all the hole world: which causes every creature to be
astonished and amassed at her: yea and many ways they louen and worship her: in
so much that we se it chance oft times, that the bodiles spirits and devils
are ardently taken and rauyshed with the beauty of women, out of al measure:
which opinion is not false, but the truth by many experyences is notably
known. And to pass over those things, that the poets have left to us in
writing, of the love of the gods, and of their lovers coneubines, as of
Apollo, Daphnes, Neptunus, Salmonea, Hercules, Hebe, Iole, Omphale, and of the
other goddis lovers, ye and many of Iupiters him self: This gyfte of beauty so
divine, so beloved of god and man, holy writ in many places doth highly
commend and praise, above al other gifts and qualities. Gen. 9.
For it is red in Genesis, That the children of god, saying the daughters of
men that they were fair, did chose and toke unto them wives, such as they
liked. We rede also of Sara, the wife of Abraham, Gen. 12.
that she was fair, yea the fairest of al women on the earth. So when the
servant of Abraham, Gen 24.
had scene Rebecca, a maid of excellent beauty, he said secretly to him self,
This is she, which god hath prepared for Isaac the son of Abraham. And
Abigail, the wife of the wicked churl Naball, was prudent wise and fair:
whereby she saved the life and goods of her husband from the fury of king
Dauid. 1. Reg. 15.
and the yuell man was saved by the fair woman, for Dauid said to her these
words: Go peasably into thy house: loo, I have harde thy voice, and honoured
thy face. For saying that all beauty is, either spiritual, vocal, or
corporal, Abigail was all fair, in prudency of spirit, in eloquece of speech,
and beauty of body: which caused Dauid, after the death of Naball her
husband, to take her to his wife. 2. Reg. 11.
And Bathsaba, was a woman of so excellent beauty, that Dauid, being
ravished and taken with her love, after the death of her husband, exalted her
above all other, to be his wife queen. Also Abisag, 3. Reg. 1.
a Sunamite, by reason she was a maiden most fair, was chosen out, to lye with
king Dauid, waxing very old, to restore his natural hete. Wherefore the aged
kings will was, highly to advance her in honour. And also after the death of
this mighty king, she was enterteyned as a queen. Hester. 1. et. 2,
We rede of the excellent beauty of queen Vasti and also of Nester, which was
preferrid before the other, because she was more goodly and fair of face. We
rede of Iudith, In. 8. et. 10.
whose fayrenesse god so much increased, that all that beheld her, were
wonderfully amassed. Dan, 13.
And shortly to speak we rede that Susanna was very delicate goodly and
beautiful. We rede also, Iob vlt. in fine.
that after Iobs divers temptations, vexations, and grievous troubles finyshed,
besides all other things, which his great patience deserved, god gave unto him
three daughters fairer than the three Charites, yea there were found no where
so fair women. More over, we may rede histories of holy virgins, doubtless to
our great wonder, howe far, howe beautiful they were above al other the children
of men, whose laud and praise the catholyke church doth solempnely singe:
but specially the praise of the immaculate and undefiled princess, the mother
of god, the virgin Marie: whose fair beauty the son and moon water at,
from whose most fair visage, so great clerenes of beauty, with chastity and
holynes did shyne, that although she moved the minds, and likewise the eyes of
all men, yet for al that, no mortal man at any time, was allured or enticed by
her beauty, ones to think amysse.

Those things (all though some what at length) I have rehearsed unto you, and
that almost the very self same words out of holy scripture, where mention of
beauty is so oft made: to the intent we shulde plainly perceive, that the
beauty of women is not only among men, but also of god highly esteemed and
honoured.

In an other place of holy scripture we like wise rede, Number. 31.
that god commanded all the men, and men children, to be slain: but the fair
women to be saved. Deuteronomy. 21.
In the book of Deuteronomy it was permytted to the children of Israell, each
to chose him a fair woman to wife, of those that were taken prisoners.

And besides this wounderfull beauty, woman is endowed with a certain
dignity and worthiness of honesty, which is not given to man: for the hear
of her head hangs down so lowe, that yt will cover and hyde all the pryuy
parts of her body. Farther, it is not needful for a woman, to handle these
parts of her body, in the works of Nature, which man customably uses to
do. Finally Nature has so wounderfullye wrought for the comelynes of woman,
that her privy parts nr not so apparent as mans, but set in a place more
secretly. And nature hath given more shamfasines to woman than to man.
Wherefore it hath oft chanced, that a woman, greuousely diseased in her prime
parts, hath chosen rather to dye, than to abide the sight and hand ling of
the surgian, to be cured and healed. And this shamefaste honesty they observe
and keep, both in dyenge, and after they be dead: as it appears by them that
be drowned. For as Plinie and experience witnessen, a woman lies grovelling
when she is dead by the favour that nature bears to her shamefaste honesty:
but a man swymmeth vpryghte on his back. Farther, the most worthy part of
man, whereby we chiefly differ from other brute beasts, and do represent
the dyuine nature, is the head, and in it chiefly the countinauce. Truly a
mans head is deformed with baldnes, and contrary, a woman by the great
pryuilege of nature, is not bald. Moreover, the countinauce and face of man is
(by the beard to him hateful) so oft defiled and hyd with filthy hears, that
scarce from brute beasts he may be discerned, in woman contrary wise, the face
doth always remain pure and comely. Wherefore it was decreed in the law of
the.xii. tables, that women should not scrape nor shave their chekes, least at
any time the beard should grow out, and shamfastenes be hyd. Alsoo of the
clennes and purity of woman, this may be to all men the most evident
argument and token: That a woman ones washed clean over, as oft as she is
washed afterward in clean water, that water receives no spot of
vnclennesse: but a man, be he never so clean washed, as oft as he washethe
again, troubles and fouleth the water. Furthermore, Nature hath so ordained,
that women avoid superfluous humours by secrete parts, that men avoid by the
face, the most worthy part of man body. And where it is granted to man
above all other beasts to have the face and continaunce lokynge up to heaven:
Nature and fortune have provided so wonderly for woman, and showed so great
favour, that if she chance to fall, she seldom or never falls on her head or
face.

Shall we over pass, the preferrement of nature to woman above man, in the
procreation of mankynde? Which thing is thus very well perceived. For only
the woman's seed (as wytnessen Galen and Auicen) is the matter and nourishment
of the child, Gale. 2. de Sparmate. 14. de vtilitate particularum. Aui doc. S
Fen. 1. primi.
and not the mans, which is but an accident to the substance. For as the law
saith, the greatest chiefest offyce and duty of woman, is to conceive, and
to save that is conceived. For which consideration we se very many to be like
their mothers, by reason they be begotten of their blood: and this likeness is
very oft well perceived in the proportion and making of their bodies, but it is
always in their manners. For if the mothers be foolish, the children prove
foolysshe also. If the mothers be wise, the children shall have a sent thereof.
But contrary wise it is in the fathers. For though they be wise, ye many
times they get folyshe children. and foolysshe fathers get wise children,
so that the mothers be wise. And there is none other reason. why mothers more
than the fathers, should love their children, but that the mothers perceive,
that their children have, and so they have in dede, in them more of their
mothers substance, than of their fathers. For this cause, that I have showed
you: I suppose it naturally graft in us, to be more kind and loving to our
mothers, than to our fathers. In so much, that we seem to love our father
meanly, and to love our mother heartily. And for this cause, Nature has
given unto women, milk of so great strength and virtue, that it not only
nourissheth infantes and babes, but also restores such as are brought lowe by
sycknes, and is a sufficient food, to preserve the life of those, that are of
perfect age.

As we rede an example in Valerius Maximus, Val. li. 5. cap. 4.
of a certain young woman, which with the mylk of her breasts nourished her
mother in prison, that otherwise should have famished for hunger. For the
which pietifull dede, her mother was delivered out of prison, and unto them
both a perpetual living was given. And of that prison, they made a Temple,
and called it, The temple of Pity.

It is well known, that for the more part, a woman hath always more pit and
mercy than a man. Which thing Aristotle doth attribute to womakynd, Arist. de
anima.
as a thing appropried thereunto. Eccle. 36.
Wherefore Salomon saith: Where as is no woman, there the sick man waileth:
either because, that in serving and helping the sick, she is full diligent,
orels by reason of her merry chere, she is full comfortable: or else because that
womans milk is the chief and principal relief for such as be feeble weke, yea
being brought to deaths door, they are thereby restored again unto helthe.
And the physicians say: That the heat of a woman's breasts and paps, laid
and joined to the breastis of feeble old men, consumed a way by age styrreth up
increases, and conserveth in them lively heate.

Which thing was well known to Dauid, that in his old aege chose the maiden
Abisag, a Sunamite, with her collynges clippinges to hete keep him warm. Also
woman is rather ready and more prompt to the holy offyce of generation, than
man, as it is well known.

Further it is a wonderful miracle of Nature, that a woman bredynge child,
sore longing for it, has eaten raw flesh, raw fyshe, coals, earth, stones,
metals, poisons, many such other like things, which without hurt she doth
digest, convert, and turn into the wholesome nutrimente and substance of the
body. Now great miracles and maruailes, that nature has endowed woman with,
shall he find, that redeth thoroughly the volumes and books of philosophers and
physicians: which for brefenes we here overpass.

Now let us speak of speech and langage, which is the gyfte of god, and by
which one thing we pass and are better than all other brute beasts:
Trismegistus Mercurius judges it to be of as great price, as much worth, and
as good a thing, as immortality. And Hesiodus names it the chiefest treasure
of Mankynde. And is not a woman better spoke, more eloquent, more copious and
plentyfull of words than a man? Do not all we, that be men, learn first to
speak of our mothers, or of our nources? Truly nature her self, the former of
things, sagely providing for mankynde, gave this gyfte to womankind, that
scarce in any place ye shall find a dumme woman. Is it not right fair and
commendable, that women shulde excelle men in that thing, in which men chiefly
pass all other beasts? But from profane mattiers, let us return home
agein to holy scripture, and begin at the very fountains of our relygion.

We know surely, that god blessed man for woman's sake which blessing the
unworthy man deserved not to have, till the woman was created and made,
wherewith Salomon in his proverbs agrees: Pro. 18.
Who so finds a good woman, finds a good thing, and receives an wholesome
benefit of the lord. And it is written Ecclesiastici. 26. Happy is the man,
that has a virtuous wife: Eccle. 26.
For the number of his years shall be double. And no man may be compared to him
in dignity, that for his worthynes has a good woman. For as Ecclesiasticus
says: Ibidem.
A good woman is a gyfte above all other gifts. And therefore Salomon in his
proverbs calls her, Pro. 12.
the crown of her husband: and Paul, 1. Cor. 11.
the glory of man. For glory is defined to be the accomplishment and
perfection of a thing, resting and delytyng in his end: that is to say, when
nothing more may be added, to encreace or amed the perfection thereof. A woman
therefore is the end, perfection, felicity, benediction, and glory of the
man: and as Augustin saith: the first society and company of mankynde in this
moral life. Wherefore of necessity every man loves her, whom who so ever
will not love, but hate, is a stranger not only to all humanity and
gentylnesse, but also to all virtue and grace. And to speak again of the
Cabalisticall mysteries, Gene. 17.
Abraam was blessed of god by the woman Sarah, and taking the letter H, from
the woman's name and putting it to the mans, called him Abraham. Gene. 17.. 28.
Also the blessing of Iacob was gotten him, by a woman, his mother. There be
many such examples in holy Scripture: but not to be showed in this place.

Thus blessing was given for the woman, and law for the man: The law I say,
Gen. 2.
of anger and of curlynge. For why, the fruit of the tree was forbydden to the
ma. but not to the woman: which was not than created. For god would her to be
fre from the beginning. Therefore the manne sinned in eating, not the woman.
The man gave us death, not the woman. And all we synned in Adam, not in Eua.
And we toke orygynalle sin of our father the man, not of our mother the
woman. And therefore the old law commanded all the malekynde to be circumcised,
but the females to remain vncircumcised: that is to wit, he ordained the
original sin to be punyshed only in that kind, which had trespassed.
Furthermore, god rebuked not the woman, for that she had eat, but because she
gave occasion of yuelle unto the man, and that did she vnwarely, intyced thereto
by the devil. The man knew well he did amiss: but the woman being deceived,
erred ignoratly. For she was first tempted of the devil, whom he knew to be
most excellent of all creatures. And as Bernarde saith: The devil, seeing her
wonderful beauty, and perceiving her to be such one, as he had known before
in the godly light, which above all angels, should rejoice with the speech
of god: conceived envy only against the woman for her excellency. Wherefore
Christ borne into this world most humble and lowe, to the end he would with
his great humilite make satisfaction for the sin of pride, committed by our
forfather: he toke upon him manhood, as the more humble and lower kind, and
not womankind, the more higher noble. Furthermore, because we were condemned
for the sin of the man, and not of the woman, god would, that in what kind
the sin was committed, in the same shulde be the purgation of sin: and by
the same kind, which ignorantly was deceived, we should also be reuengid.
Therefore it was said unto the serpent, that the woman, or more truly, the sede
of the woman, should break his head, and not the man, nor the seed of the
man. And perchance, hereof it came, that the order of priestehode is of the
church rather committed to the man, tha to the woman, because every priest
doth represent Christ, and Christ, the first man, that is to wit, the
synner Adam. To this purpose, we understand the Canon, that begins, Haec
imago, which saith that a woman was not made to ye image of god, but to the
simylitude of Christ. Yet for all that I say, that he being very god) I
speak of Christ (wold not be the son of man, but of a woman, the which he
so highly honoured, that of a woman only he toke flesh and blood. For
only for the woman, Christ was called the son of man, and not for the ma.

This is that great miracle, Hier. 31.
at the which the prophet so much marveled: that a woman comprehended
manne, when a virgin conceived mankynde, and bare Christ in her body.

Also Christ risynge up ageyn from death to life, Ioan. 20.
appeared first unto women, not to me. And it is not unknown, Mat. 16.
that after the death of Christ, men fell from the faith: but it was never
know, that women slypte and fell from Christen faith and religion. Farther,
there was no persecution of the faith at any time, no heresye, no error in
the faith, that arose and came by women, but by men. Christ was bought and
sold, accused, condemned, scourged, hanged on the Cross, and at the last
put to cruel death only by men. Yea, he was denied of his own Peter,
forsake of his other disciples, Luc. 24.
and only accompanied waited upon and followed of women unto the cross and
grave. Matt. 27.
Also the very wife of Pylate, an hethen woman, went about, and laboured more
to save Iesus than any ma, yea any of these men, that believed in him.
Furthermore almost the hole school of divines afferme say, that the church
did than remain only with the woman, that is to say, with the virgin Mary.
And therefore woman kind is worthily called relygyous, devout, and holy. But
yet if any man wolsay with Aristotle, Arist. de anima.
that among al beasts and living creatures, the male kind is more valiant,
strong, wise, and noble: Unto him, a more excellent man, the great doctor, the
holy apostel saint Paule woll answer and say: 1. Cor. 1.
Those things that be folyishe before the world, god has chosen, that he
might confound wise men: and those things that be feeble and weak in this
world, he has chosen to confound the mighty: the vile and despised before
the world god hath chosen: yea those things, which be nothing, of no
reputation: that he might destroy those things, which be in price much set by.
Gene. 2.
For who among men, in all gifts of nature and of grace was higher than Adam?
yet a woman brought him low. Iudic. 14.. 16.
Who was stronger than Sampson? A woman overcame his strength. Gene. 19.
Who was more chaste than Loath? A woman enticed him to inceste. Who was more
religious than Dauid A woman disturbed his holynes..2. Reg. 11 3. Reg. 11.
Who was more wiser than Salomon? a woman deceived him. Who was more paciet
than Iob. whom the devil stryped out of al his goods, killed all his family,
and children, and filled al his body full of boils and soores, and yet for all
that he could not provoke him from the old symplicitie of his mind: but the
woman intyced him (and in that she was more higher and constant than the
devil) and so vexed him, that he cursed god. And if it might be leful to make
any comparison with Christ, who is most myghtyfull and most wise, for he is
the eternal and everlasting wisdom and power of god: Matt. 15.
did he not suffer him self to be overcome of that poor woman of Chanaan?
saying him self. It is not good to take the chyldernes bread, and cast it to
dogs. She answered and said, Truth lord, never the less, the dogs eat
of the crommes, which fall frome their masters table. Now when Christ
perceived, that he could not over come her with that reasonne, he blessed her,
saying: Be it unto the as thou desyrest.

Who was more hot and fervent in the faith of Christ, Ioan. 18.
than Peter? Matt. 20.
A woman made him, Marc. 14.
so great a Mynyster of Chrystis Church, Luc. 22.
to deny Christ.

Let the Canonistes crake what they will, Plaut. 8.
that their Church can not err, a woman pope moked her by a goodly imposture
and deceyre.

But now some men will say, that those things redound rather to the
dysprayse than praise of women. Unto whom women shall make this answer: If
it were so, that one of us two, must needs lose either goods or life, I had
leaver to lose the, than to be lost my self: And that by the example of
Innocetius the third, which in a certain pistle decretall, written unto a
cardinal ambassatour, sent frome the See of Rome, saith: If one of us twain
must needs be confounded, I wold rather chose to have the confounded.

Moreover, it was provided by the Cyuile laws, that women might lawfully loke
to their own profit, to other men's hinderance. And in holy writ, is not the
iniquity of a woman praised more then a mans well doing? is not Rachel preised,
Gene. 31.
which by a proper slight deceived her father seeking unto ydols? Gene. 27.
Was not Rebecca lauded, which by craft got her son Iacob the blessing of
his father? And afterward by polycie caused him to escape the anger of his
brother. The harlot Raab deceived those, Iosue. 2
which sought for the searchers and spies of Iosue: and it was imputed unto
her for ryghtuousnes. Iahel went out to mete Sisar, Iudic. 4.
and said unto him: My lord, come into me. And asking water, she gave him to
drink of the bottle of milk, and covered him, as he lay sleapynge. And
while Sisara lay and slept, she entered in priuyly, struck a nail in his
head, and slew him, which had put his trust in her promise and fidelity, to
be saved. And for this notable treason, the Scripture saith: Blessed is Iahel
among women, and Iahel shall be blessed in her tabernacle.

Rede the story of Iudith, and mark her words unto Holofernes. She said: Sir
take and understand the words of thy hand maid. For if thou will follow do
after these words, the lord shall make the perfect, and shall bring thy
mattier to prosperous effect. I shall come and show althynges unto the, so
that I shall lead the through the midst of Hierusalem, and thou shalt have
all the people of Israell, like as sheep without a shepeherde, and not so
much as one dog shall bark against the. For those things are showed me by
the wisdom and providence of god. And thus by her flattering she stroke of
Holofernes head, as he lay and slept. I pray you, what wyckedder counsel, what
crueller deceits, Pro. 18.
what craftier treason could be invented? And yet holy Scripture blesses,
praises, and extols her, and the iniquite of the woman is reputed far
better, than a mans well doing. But now let us return to our pourpose.

Of the excellency of so happy a kind of women, this also may be to every man
an argumet most evident, that the most excellent of all creatures, than which
never was, nor never shall be a more worthy, I mean the most blessed virgyn
Mayre, was conceived with out original sin: and she was not inferior to
Christ, touching his humanity.

This is a strong argument of Aristotle: Of what kind the best is nobler
than the best of an other kind, that kind must needs be nobler than
the other. In the Femynyne kind, the best is the vyrgyn Mary, in the
Masculyne, there arose none greatter than Iohn Baptist: but howe far
doothe the holy vyrgyn excelle him, which (as every Catholyke man knows)
was exalted above all the orders of angles. Likewise a man may reasounc. Of
what kind the worst is wars than the worst of an another kind, that kind is
lower than the other.

Now we know, that the most vyciouse and worst of all creatures, is a man,
whether it be Iudas, that betrayed Christ, of whom Christ saith: It had been
good for that man, if he had not been borne: or whether any Antechrist shall
come herafter, wars than he, which shall be endowed with all the power of
Satan. More over, holy writ shows many men to be condemned to everlasting
turment: but we rede in no place, of any woman so condemned. Farther, as a
witness to our purpose, there is a certain pretogatiue given to the brutalle
nature. For the queen of all birds, and the most noble, is the Egle, which
is always found of the female kind, and not of the masculyne. Also this is
clear, that the bird of Egypt, calid Foenix, whereof there is never but one at
oones, is a female. But contrary wise, the serpent Regulus, called also
Basiliscus the most pestilent of al venomous beasts, is only masculine, of
which kind it is not possible to find female. Farther the excellency of this
kind, the virtue innocecy, is by these arguments and reasons abundantly enough
declared. For the beginning of all yuelle comes by men, and not by women.
Certaynely the first man Adam, Gene. 3.
boldly breaking the commandment of god, did shut up the gates of heaven,
Gene. 4.
and made us all subjects to sin and death. For al we have synned (and must
dye) in Adam, not in Eua. Whose first begotten son opened hell gates. Man
was first envious, first a murderer, first the slear of his parents, the
first dispayrer of the mercy of god: Gene. 9.
the first that had two wives, Lamech: the first drunkard Nohe: the first
that discovered the fylthynesse of his father, Gene. 10.
Nohes son Cham: the first tyrant and idolater Nembroth: the first
aduouterer: the first defouler of his kynswomen: Men also first made
confederacyes with finds, and invented cursed wytchcraftes.

Certain men, Gene. 37.
the sons of Iacob, first sold their own brother Ioseph: Exod. 1.
Pharao, the Egyptian, first slew children. Men first synned against
Nature, as wytnessen Sodoma and Gomora, Gene. 18.
the which sonke for the sins of men, sum time being most famous and
noble cities. We rede in every place, that men, for their tasshe voluptuouse
pleasure, had two wives, many wives, many lemmans: they were aduouterers and
fornicatours. Of this sort, that had many wives, many concubynes, were
Lamech, Abraham, Iacob, Esau, Ioseph, Moses, Sanson, Helcana, Saul, Dauid,
Salomon, Assure, Roboam, Abia, Caleph, Assuerus, and innumerable other, the
which had every oone, many wives, harlottes, and concubines. Nor being
content to mary many, to fulfull their lust pleasure, but also meddled with
their maidens. And we rede not, that any woman (except only Batsabea) was
content to have any mo, but always one husband. Nor ye shall not find, that
any woman married two husbands. if she had a child by her first husband. For
women in clennesse of living and chastity, are far more continct than men:
the which (as we rede) because they were bareyne, have abstyned from lyenge
with their husbands, have brought in other, to lye with their husbands, as
Sara, Rachel, and many other unapt to generation, which brought in their hand
maidens, that their husbands might get children to succeed the. But what man
I pray you, were he never so old, cold, bareyn, and unapt for generation, was
ever of so great pity or mild stomach toward his wife, that he would
substitute another manne in his place, to sow fruitful sede in his wives
plentiful gardeyne? And although we rede, that king Lieurgus and Solon made
laws in old time, that is to wit, if any man being over aged, unmeet for
marriage, or otherwise vnlusty to do the deeds of Venus, had married a maiden, it
should be laufull for his wife, to chose a goodly, and a tall young manne, to
dalye and play with her, and the child gotten between them, should be
ascribed to her husband, and not to be called a bastard: and though those
laws were made and established, yet we rede not, that they were kept, not so
much through the sturdynesse of the men, as by the chastity of the women
refusing those laws.

There be innumerable excellent women, Arist. de anima.
which with notable clennesse of life, and perfet wifely love, have far
passed al men: as Abigail, the wife of Naball: Arthemisia, the wife of
Nausoleus: Argia, 1. Cor. 1.
the wife of Policinis, a Chebane. Iulia, the wife of Pompeius: Portia, the
wife of Cato: Cornelia the wife of Gracchus: Messalina, the wife of Sulpice:
Alceste, the wife of Admetus: Hypsicratea, the wife of Mithridates, king of
Pontus: and also Dido, the buylder of Carthage, and the Romayn Lucrece: and
Sulpitia, the wife of Lentulus. There be innumerable other, whose hearts were
so fixed on vyrgynitie and chastity, that the very death could not remove
them: of whom thexamples are manifest and plain: as Athlanta, Calidonia,
Camilla, Volsca, Iphigenia of Greece, Cassandra, and Crise. With these gone the
Vyrgynes of Lacedemonye, of Spartane, of Milesia, of Thebes, with other
innumerable, of whom the stories of the Hebrewes, of the Greeks, and of other
Macyons, do make mention, the which esteemed vyrginite above kingdoms, yea
and above their very lives.

If the examples also of pity and loving kyndnes be required, among al other
Claudia Vestalis toward her father, and that poor yonge woman (of the which
we spake before) towards her mother, are wonderful.

But here some envious fellow will object against those things, the deadely
marriages of Sampson, of Iason, of Deiphebus, of Agamemnon, and such other
tragedies, on which (as says the proverb) if a man loke thoroughly, with
clear eyes, he shall find, that their wives are falsely blamed, of the which
never chanced unto a good man one ill. For ill wives never chance, but to
ylle husbands: unto whom all though the good sometime chase, yet their
husbands vices make them nought.

If it had been laufull for women to make laws, too write histories, how great
tragedies (trowye) would they have written of the inestimable malice of men,
among whom many ben murderers, thieves, ravishers of virgins, periurers,
robbers, burners of houses, traitors: Iusue. 7.
of whom also, 2. Reg. 19.
in the time of Iosue, 3. Reg. 4.
Dauid the king so great a multitude were murderers robbers, that they were
able to make princes capytaynes over their companies. Yea and at this day there
is an infinite number of them. For all prisons be filled with men, and al the
galowes in every place be loded with the carcases of men. But contrary wise,
women were the first inuentours of all honest crafts, of all virtue and
benefittes. Which thing the very names of sciences and virtues, being of the
feminine gender, do plainly specifye. Whereof this is a notable proof, that the
circuit of the hole world is called by the names of women: that is to say of
the Nymph, Asia. of Europa, the daughter of Agenor, of Libia, the daughter of
Epaphus, the which is also callid Aphrica. And finally to recite all kinds of
virtue, a woman shall every where obtain the hygheste place. For the virgin
Mary was a woman, the which first did vow her virginity to god, and
thereby deserved to be the mother of god. The women prophets were euermoore
inspired with a more divine spyrite, than the men, Which thing is well
known, by that Lactatius, Lacta. lib. insti. Eus de pp. Euangel. August de ci.
dei.
Eusebius, and Augustine wytnessen of the Sibylles.

So Mary, the sister of Moses prophesied: And when Ieremye was taken prisoner,
his uncles daughter Olda, Exod. 15.
rose up and prophesied beyond mans reach, 4. reg. 22.
to the people of Israell, 2. Para. 34
att the point ready to peryshe. Let us search holy scripture, and we shall
find, that women in constancy, in feythe, and in other virtues are commended
far above men, as in Iudith, Ruth, Hester, the which with so great glory and
praise were celebrate and honoured, that holy books bear their names. Rom. 4.


And all though Abraham, Genes. 15.. 21.
for the stedfastnes of his faith, is called in scripture a just man, by cause
he surely believed in god: yet for al that, he must submyt him self to his
wife Sara. Gene. 25.
For by ye voice of the lord he was commanded thus: What so ever Sara says to
the here her voice. So Rebecca, beleuyng steadfastly, went to ask god certain
questions, and she being reputed worthy, harde this oracle or answer of god.
Two manner of folk are in thy bealy: and two manner of people shall be divided
from thy bealy. And the widow Sareptana gave credence to Helias, all though
it were harde to believe that he told her. So zachary, Luc. 1.
rebuked of the angel for his incredulity, was dumme: and his wife
Elizabeth, with her wobe and voice prophesied: is praised, because she believed
faithfully. and she afterward, praised the most blessed virgin Mary, Luc. 2.
saying: Blessed art thou, which did believe those things, that were
spoken to the of the lord. So Anna the prophetess, after the revelation of
Simeon confessed god, spake of him to al that wold here, which looked for the
redemption of Israel. Act. 21.
And Phylip had four virgins to his daughters, Ioan.. 4.
which did prophecy. Matt. 15.
What shall I say of her the samaritan, Marc. 7.
with whom Christ spake at the well: Mat. 9.
and being fed with the faith of this believing woman, Mar. 5.
refused the meat that the apostelles brought? Luc. 8.
To these may be joined the faithefull woman of Chananee, Ioan. 11.
and the woman Matt. 16.
diseased with the blouddye Luce. 7.
flyxe. Ioan 19.
Was not also the faith and confession of Martha, Matt. 27.
like the Mar. 16. 17.
confession of Peter? Luc. 23. 24.
The Gospel wytnesseth, Act. 18.
howe great constacy of faith was in Mary Magdaleyn. For while the pristes and
Iewes crucified Christ, she wepeth, she brings oyntmentes unto the Cross,
she seeks in the Tomb, she asks the gardyner for him, she aknowledgeth
god, she gothe to the apostles, and shows them, that he is risen. They were
in doubt thereof, but she believed it verily. Ageyn, what shall I say, of that
holy woman Priscilla, the which instructed Apollo, apostolycke man, perfitely
learned in the law, and bishop of the Corinthians? Nor it was no shame for a
postell, to learn of a woman, what he shulde teach in the church.

Moreover, they that have showed the stedfastnes of their faith by suffering of
Martyrdom, and by the dispisynge of death, be no fewer in number than men. 2.
Match. 7.
Nor that wonderful mother should be left unspoken of, so worthy to be
remembered, the which not only beheld her.vii. sons put to death, by
most cruel martyrdom but also she boldly exhorted them steadfastly to dye. And
she above all things trusting in god, was after her chylderne cruelly put to
death, for the maintenance of the laws of her country.

Did not also Theodelina, the daughter of the king of Bauarians, convert the
Lumbardes to the faith? And Greisilla, the sysrer of Henry the first Emperor,
convert the Hungarians? Clotildis, the daughter of the king of Burgundia,
convert the French men? And a certain woman called Apostola, of a lowe degree,
converted the Hiberians.

Each of them turned innumerable people unto Christis faith. And fynally, this
is the only and special relygious kind, in whom unto this day the catholic
faith, and the continual works of virtue and goodness do flourysshe and
shyne.

But to the end that no man should doubt women to be as able to do all those
things that men can, let us handle the matter with examples: and we shall find,
that there was never noble nor worthy act, in any kind of virtue, done by
men, but that as noble hath ben done by women. In doing sacrifyce, as the
paynims in old time used, Melyssa Cibeles was the Mynyster, after whose name,
the other Goddesses, that used the priests offyce, were called Melyssae. Also
Hypeccaustria was Mineruas mynyster, Mera of Venus, Iphiginia of Diana. And the
mynysters of Bacchus, were very notable, as Thyades, Menades, Bacche, Eliades,
Mimallonides, Eonides, Eubiades, Bassarides, Triaterides. Also among the
Iewes, Mary Moses sister, entered with Aaron into the Sanctuary, Sanctuary, a
place consecrate or halowed.
and was taken as a mynyster or priest. And although women be forbydden in our
religion, to use the order of presthod yet it appears by histories, that a
woman on a time by counterfaitynge her kind, was bishop of Rome. There have
been in Christis church, many abbasses and nuns, which in old time men
disdained not to call holy mynisters. There have been among all nations, that
excelled in prophecienge, as Cassandra, the Sybilles, Mary Moyses sister,
Delbora, Holda, Anna, Elyzabeth, the four daughters of Philip, many other holy
women of later time, as Brigida and Heldegardis.

Furthermore, in the inuyncible art magyke, whether it came of good spirytes
or bad. Circes and Medea wrought far greatter wonders than Zoroastes him
self which as many suppose, was the first fynder of the said science. More
over in phylosophye, many have ben very excellent, as Theano the wife of
Pythagoras, and Dama his daughter was right famous, in opening and declaring
her fathers obscure dark sentences. Also Aspasia and Diotima, Socrates
scholars, Mantinea and Philesia Axiochia, both scholars to Plato. Finally
Plotinus highly praises Gemina and Amphiclea, Lactantius Themisten. Christis
church rejoices in saint Caterine, which being but a little maid, did far
pass in learning, the wise men of that time.

Let us not forget in this place the queen Zenobia, scholer to the philosopher
Longinus, which for her great virtue and cunning was called Ephenissa, whose
holy workis Nichomachus translated into Greek.

Let us speak of the orators art, and of poetry, Behold here comes
Armesia, surna med Androgenea, Hortentia, Lacera, Valeria, Copiola, Sapho,
Corinna, Cornificia the Romayne, Erymna, Telia, or Thesbia, which was named an
Epigrammatist, in Saluste Sempronia, in the law ciuyl Calphurnia: And were it
not, that women in our time are forbydden, to give them to good lernynges, we
shulde even now, have women more excellent in wit and learning than men. What
shulde we hereof say, that women only by nature are scene to excelle the very
artificers in all sciences? Do not the Grammarians take upon them, to be the
masters of eloquence? And that do we far better learn of our nources and
mothers, than of the Grammarians. Did not Cornelia form and fasshyon the
tongues of her most eloquent sons Gracchi? Did not Istrineus mother, teach
Syles the son of Aripithus, king of Scythia, the Greek tongue? Did not
the children borne of them that were sent to inhabyte in strange countries,
always observe and keep their mothers tongue, among strangers? Surely for none
other cause Plato and Quintilian so diligently ordained a mete and convenient
nource for chylderne to be chosen, but that the chyldernes tongue speech might
be ryghtlye and discretely formed.

But now, be not the poets in their trifles fables, the logitians in their
cotentious talking overcome of women? There was never orator so good or so
happy, that in perswasyon could get the upper hand of an harlot? What
arithmetrician by false recknyng, could deceive a woman in payement of her
det? or what musician can compare with a woman in singynge and sweetness of
breast? Be not these Philosophers, these astrologians, in their diuynatios
forknowleges many times inferiors to the country wives? yea very ofttymes a
sely old woman excells the physician: Socrates him self (above all other
reckned the most wise man) being very aged, did not disdain to be taught of the
woman Aspasia. Like as Apollo, a man so well learned in Christis doctrine, was not
ashamed to be taught of the woman Priscilla.

Now for prudency, you may take for examples those women. Opis for her
wisdom counted a goddess: Plotina wife of Troianus the emperor: Amalasuntha,
the queen of Ostrogottes: Emilia the wife of Scipio: with who reckon Delbora,
the wife of Labidoth, Iudic. 4.
a meruaylouse wise woman, which (as we rede in Iudicum) was a certain time
Judge over the people of Israel, and the chylderne of Israell came up to her
for judgment in all causes.

And when Barach refused to go against their ennemies, except she would go
with him, Delbora was chosen captain of the host of Israell: and sleynge and
dyscomfytynge their foes, she returned home with vyctorie.

More over, 4. Reg. 2. 2. Par. 22.
it is red in the fourth book of kingis, that queen Attalia reigned, was
sovereign Judge in Jerusalem seven years space. And Semiramis, after the death
of king Ninus, judged the people.xl. years. And all the quenes of Ethiope,
called Candaces, were most wise, and reigned most myghtely: of whomit is
written in the acts of the apostels. Act. 8.
And meruaylouse things of them speaks the faithful writer of antyquytie
Iosephus. 3. Reg. 10.
Also Nicania, 2. Paral. 9.
the queen of Saba, Matt. 12.
cam from the end of the world, Luce. 11.
to here the wisdom of Salomon, and as Christ witnesses, she shall condemn
all the people of Hierusalem. And there was a certain wise woman of Thecoa, 2.
Reg. 14.
which concluded king Dauids demand with a question, 1, Reg 25.
with a ryddle she taught him, 3. Reg. 1.
and by the example of god, swagged his wrath. Nor here we shulde not forget
Abigail and Bathsaba, of which two Abigail delivered her husband, from the
wrath of Dauid, and after the death of her husband she was queen and wife
of Dauid. The other, the mother of Salomon, by her prudecy opteyned, that her
son was king.

More over, in the Invention of things, Isis, Minerua, Nicostrata, be
examples. In ruling of realms, and building of cities women excelle:
Semiramis was the sovereign governor of the universal world: Dido was the
buylder and queen of Carthage: the Amazons were most worthy in war and
polytyke in peace. In the bold byckerynges of battle, what a woman was
Thomiris the queen of Massagetaries? She overcame Cyrus the great conqueror
and puissant king of Persians. Also Camilla, of the Volscians, and Valisca of
Boheme, were two most mighty queenes. We rede of many other most noble women,
which by their wonderfulle power and polycie, in most extremytie, and when
there was no hope of help looked for, recovered their country, and restored
it to wealth again. Among whom is Iudith, which saint Ierome highly
praises with these words: Take Iudith the widow, the example of chastity,
declare her with triumphant praise and perpetual commendation. For god gave her
to be an example, not only for women, but also for men to follow, which for a
reward of her chastity, armed her with such virtue, that she vanquished him
that was inuyncible to all men, and subdued him, that no man could overcome.

Further, 1. Reg. 20
we read, that a certain wise woman called unto her Ioab the captain, and
delivered into his hands the head of Siba, the ennemye of Dauid, to the
intent to save the city Abela, from destruction, which was the chief city
of Israell. Iudic. 9.
And a certain woman, threw a piece of a myl stone upon Abimelechs head and
brake his brain pan, executynge the vengeance of god upon Abimelech, because
he had done ill before god against his father, in sleinge.lxx. of his
brether upon one stone.

So Hester, Hest. 7. 8.
the wife of king Assure, not only delivered her people from the most
shameful death but also made them right honourable.

When Coriolanus with the Volscians, had besieged Rome, so sharply assailed
it, that the Romaynes were not able to defend them selves against him: an
ancient woman Veturia his mother, so handled the mattier, that she overcame
his rage and fury, and reconcyled him ageyn to the Romaynes. Arthemisia, when
the Rhodians came fiersly upon her, both disapoynted them of their nauye of
ships, and conquered that Land, and set up her Image within the city of
Rhodes, as a perpetual note of infamy unto them.

Howe much do the French men praise a yonge damsel, Anno dni 1428.
which being descended of a lowe linage, toke upon her after the manner of the
Amazons, to lead the forward of the army: she fought so valiantly, and had
so good chance, that the French men believed verily, that by her prowess,
they recovered the relme of Frace out of the English men's hands: And
therefore, to the perpetual remembrance of her, they made an image of a maiden
to be set up in Orliaunce on the bridge over the river of Liger or Loier. I
could yet reherce out of the histories of the Greeks, of the Latines, and
other barbarous natios innumerable most excellent women, but to the end this
work shulde not be to great a volume, I studied to be brief. For Plutarche,
Valerius, Bocatius, and many other have writ the praise of noble women: And
therefore I have spoke but little of their praises, but over passed very many
things. For why, I am not so presumptuous, to think my self able, to
comprehend in few words, ye infynite nobylities virtues of women. For who is
able thoroughly and perfectly to recyte the infinite praises of women, of whom
we take all our life and substance, and in whom is all the conservation of
mankynde, the which else shulde peryshe and decay in short time: on whom also
every family and common welthe depends? This thing was well known to the
buylder of Rome, which because he lacked women, rauy shed and carried away the
Sabines daughters, not doubting the cruel war that should follow thereupon.
For he knew, that such an empire would in short time perisshe, if they wanted
women. And at last, when the Capytoll was taken by the Sabynes, and that in
the midst of the market place, they fought most cruelly hand to hand,
with the sudden runnynge of the women between both the hostess, the battle
cessed: and at the last a peace being made, and a truce taken, they concluded
a perpetual amity. For the which cause Romulus regestred these women's names in
the courts and court rolls. And it was by the Romaynes assent decreed and
written in the common tables, that women should not grind at the quyrne, nor
drudge in the kitchen: nor the husband shulde not say: Wife, I give the this:
nor the wife: Husband, I give you this: because they shulde know, that every
thing between them was common. And hereof at length grew a custom, that when
ye new wedded wife was brought home, she would say: vbi tu, ego, that is where
you be lord, I am lady: where you be master, I am mistress. Moreover,
great honours tokens of high reverence and dignity were done to women by
decree of the Senators, as these: that in the way they shulde go on the upper
hane: and that men should rise on their fete unto them give them place.
Furthermore, it was granted them, to wear purple garments, embrowdred about
with gold, ornaments deeked with precious stones, rings at their ears,
chains of gold about their necks. And it was at the last decreed by the
emperors laws, that as oft as any statute was made in any place, forbydding
ornaments or apparayle to be worn, women should not be comprehended under
that law. Also it was granted them, to receive heritage and succession of
goods, the funerals of women to be celebrate and honourably kept, as the
funerals of noble men were. For why on a time when a gyfte should be sent to
Apollo Delphicus, as Camillus had vowed, and that there was not so much gold
in the city: the women of their own good wills, brought in the jewels and
ornaments of their bodies.

And in the war that Cyrus made against Astiages, the Persians army was by
the castygation of women reprehended, and being newly restored again,
opteyned a right worthy victory. For the which dede Cyrus made a law, that
kings of the Persians entering into the city. should paye to every woman a
piece of gold. The which thing also king Alexander, entering twyse into
that city paid twyse. Ye and more over, he commanded the gift to be doubled
to women with child. So from the most ancient kings of the Persyans and
Romaynes, yea from the very beginning of the city of Rome and empire, women
were had in all high honour and reverence: and the very emperors them
selves esteemed them most highly. For Iustynian the emperor, in making of
lames, thought it convenient, to have the counsaylle and advise of his wife.
And in an other place, the law saith, that the wife shines in the honour of
her husband, and the brightness of his dignity beautifies her, for the higher
the husband is advanced in honour, the higher is his wife. So the Emperors
wife is callid empress, the kingis wife queen, the princis wife, the
princess: and is thereby ennobled, howe lowe so ever she be of birth. And
Vlpian the lawyer saith. A prince that is to say, the Emperor or king, is
above the laws, and although the empress is bond by the laws, yet the
emperor frely grants her as great privileges as he hath him self. Wherefore
it is permitted unto noble women, to judge, to arbytrate and decide matters, to
do and take homage and fealty, to keep courts, and mynyster Justice among
their tenants. And for this pourpose, the woman may have covenant servants
of her own, as well as the man may: and a woman may be judge, yea among
strangers. She may also give name to her family and kynred: so that the
children shall be named after their mother, and not after their father. And in
diverse places of the law cyuyle, women have, touching their doweries, many
great privileges granted them. Where among other things it is ordained, that
a woman of good name and fame, shall not be imprisoned for debt, and the
Judge, that commytteth her to prison, shall lose his heed. If she be suspected
of any fault, she shall be put into a monasterye or secrete place, or else be
delyuerid to women, to be imprysonde by them. For the law says, A woman is of
better state and condition than a man: and also in one self kind of offence,
the manne trespasseth more than the woman. Wherefore the man taken in auoutrie,
loses his head: but the woman aduouterer is put into a monasterye.

Azo the Lawyer gethereth mo privileges for the women in his Sum and
brief Annotation upon the title named, Ad Senatus consultum uelleianum,
Speculator upon the title De renuntiationibus.

Also the auncyente law makers and stablyshers of common wealths, the most
grave, wise, and prudent men, Licurgus I say, and Plato, knowing very well
by the secretes of Philosophy, that women were not inferiors to men, neither
in excellency of mind, nor in strength of body, nor in dygnitie of Nature,
but like able unto all things, decreed and made laws, that women should
exercise such maystries as men used, yea all feats perteynynge to the war,
in the bow, in the slynge, in hurlynge of stones, in shotynge, in fighting in
armour, as well on horse back as on foot, in pytchyng of tents, in setting
men in array, and couductynge of an host: and to be brief, they ordained,
that women should as commonly as men use all manner exercises. Let us rede
writers of antiquity, worthy to be believed, and we shall find, that in
Getulia, Bactris, and Galletia, the manner was, that men gave them selfes to
ease and delicacy, and the women to plow and till the fields, to build, to
bye and sell, to ride, to go on warfare, and to do all other things, which
now among us the men do. Among the Cantabrians, men gave dowerye to the
women, bretherne were given to marriage by their systers, daughters were
appointed to be heirs. Among the Scythians, the Thracians, and French men,
all worthy deeds were as commonly done by women as by men, and in matters
concerning war and peace, women were called to councelle, to give their
advise and sentence. Which thing the Truce that the Celtes made with
Hanniball, doth well declare to be true, by these words: If any of the
Celtes complain, to have had wrong of any of the Carthaginences: of that
thing let the rulers officers of ye Carthaginences, or else the capytaynes which
shall be in Spain, be judges: If any of the Cartha ginences hath had any
wrong done him, by any of the Celtes, let the women of the Celtes be iuges,
and determine that thing. But by the great tyranny of men, preuaylynge against
the laws of god and nature, such liberty was given to women.

Thou will say, that is now forbydden by laws, abolished by custom,
extincted by education. For anon as a woman is borne even from her infancy, she
is kept at home in ydelnes, as though she were vnmete for any higher
busynesse, she is pmitted to know no farther, than her nedle and her thread.
And than when she comes to age, able to be married, she is delivered to the
rule and governance of aielous husband, orels she is perpetually shut up in a
close nounrye. And all offyces belonging to the common weal, be forbydden
them by the laws. Nor it is not permitted to a woman, though she be very wise
and prudent, to plead a cause before a Jug. Furthermore, they be repelled in
jurisdiction, in arbitrament, in adoption, in intercession, in procuration, or
to be gardeyns or tutors, in causes testametary and criminal. Also they be
repelled frome preaching of gods word, against express and plain
scripture, in which the holy gost promised unto them by Iohel the prophet,
Iohel. 8.
saieng: And your daughters shall prophecy and preach: like as they taught
openly in the time of the apostles: as it is well known, that Anna the widow
of Symeon, the daughters of Philyp, and Priscilla, the wife of Aquila did.
But the unworthy dealing of the later law makers is so great, that breaking
gods commandment, to stablysshe their own traditions, they have
pronounced openly, that women otherwise in excellency of nature, dignity, and
honour most noble, be in condition more vile than all men: And thus by these
laws, the women being subewed as it were by force of arms, are constrained to
give place to men, and to obeye their subdewers, not by no natural, no diuyne
necessity or reason, but by custom, education, fortune, and a certain
tyrannical occasion.

Furthermore, there be sum men, which by relygion, claim authority over
women, and they prove their tyranny by holy scripture: the which have this
cursed saying, spoken to Eve, continually in their mouth: Genes. 2.
Thou shalt be under the power of man, and he shall have lordeshyp over the.
But if it be answered unto them, that Christ toke away that cursed saying:
they will object again the words of Peter, ^. Pet. 3.
with whom Paule agrees, Ad col. 3.
saying: Ad eph. 5^
Let women be in subjection of their husoandes. Let women in the church
keep sylence. But he that knows the divers figures of Scripture, and the
effects of the same, shall soon se, that these things be not repugnant but
in the rynde. Rom. 2.
For this is the order in the church, Act. 10.
that men in ministration shall be preferred before women: like as the Iewes in
promyssion are before the Greekes: yet nevertheless God is not accepter of
persons. For in Christ neither male nor female is of value, but a new
creature. And many things were permitted unto me, for the hardenesse and
cruelty of their hearts against women: as in times past diuorces were granted
unto the Iewes, which for al that nothing hurts the dignity of women: But
when men commytte offence and err, the women have power of Judgment over
them, to the great shame and rebuke of men. And that quiene Saba shall judge
the men of Jerusalem. Therefore they, which being iustifyed by faith: are
become the sons of Abraham, the chylderne I say of promyssion, be subdued to
a woman, and bounden by the commandment of god, saying to Abraham: what so
ever Sara saith unto the, follow it.

Now at last, Gene. 21.
brefely to recollect, First, I have showed the great excellency of
womankynd, by her name, order, place, and matter, and what great dignity she
hath obtained of god above man: Farther I have declared it by relygion, nature,
humayne laws, by diverse authorities, reason and examples, mingling one with an
other. And yet have I not so much said, but that I have left much more
unspoken. For neither Ambition, nor the cause of mine own commendation, but my
duty and the very truth moved me to write: lest that I, as one committing
sacrilege (holding my peace) should seem priuyly to steal and bribe away by a
certain wicked silence, from so noble a kind, the laudes and preyses due to
it, as it were, burienge in the ground the talent that god has given me. But
if any man more curious than I, shall find any argument or reason, that hath
escaped me, which he thinks worthy to be added to this my book, I woll not
reckon my self blamed, but rather helped thereby, in that this my work, by
his wit and counnynge, he wolle make better. Therefore lest this work should
grow to over great a volume, here I make an end

FINIS.
A Londini in aedibus Thomae Bertheleti typis impress Cum pri. nilegio ad
imprimendum solum.

ANNO. M.D.XLII.




