THE ENGLISHMAN'S DOCTOR. OR, The School of Salerne. OR, Physical Observations
for the perfect Preserving of the body of Man in continual health.

LONDON Printed for Iohn Helm, and Iohn Busby Junior, and are to be sold at
the little shop next Cliffords Inn gate, in Fleetstreet. 1607.

THE PRINTER to the Reader.
REader, the care that I have of thy health, appears in bestowing these
Physical rules upon thee: neither need thou be a^iamed to take Lessons out
of this school, for our best Doctors scorn not to read the instructions. It is
a little Academa, where every man may be a Graduate, and proceed Doctor in the
ordering of his own body. It is a Garden, where al things grow that are
necessary for thy health. This medicinable Tree grew first in S^lerne, f^om
thence it was removed and hath born both fruit and blossoms a long time in
England. It is now replanted in a wholesome ground, and new earth cast about it,
by the hand of a cunning Gardiner, to keep it still in flourishing. Much good
husbandry is bestowed upon it: yet what soever the cost be, thou reapest the
sweetness of it for a small value. It came to me by chance as a Jewel that is
found, where of notwithstanding I am not covetous, but part the Treasure
amongst my contrymen. The Author of the pains, is to me unknown, and I put
this child of his into the open world without his consent: bring it up therefore
well I beseech thee, and hope (as I do) that he will not be angry, finding this
a traveler abroad, when by his travel, so many of his own country, are so
manifoldly benefited.

Farewell.
Ad Librum.
GO book, and (like a Merchant) new arrived,
Tel in how strange a traffic thou hast thriu'd
Upon the Country which the Sea-god saves,
And loves so dere, he binds it round with waives:
Cast Anchor thou, and impost pay to him
Whose Swans upon the breast of ISIS swim;
But to the people that do love to buy,
(It skils not for how much) each Novelty,
Proclaim an open Mart, and sell good cheap,
What thou by travel and much cost doest reap.
Bid the Gay Courtier, and coy-Ladie come,
The Lawyer, Townsman, the country-groom,
Tis ware for all: yet thus much let them know,
There are no drugs here fetched from Mexico.
Nor gold from India, nor that stinking smoke,
Which English gallants buy, themselves to choke.
Nor Silks of Turkie, nor of Barbary,
Those luscious Canes, where our rich Sugars lie:
Nor those hot drinks that make our wits to dance
The wild Canaries: nor those Grapes of France
which make us clip our English: nor those wares
Of fertile Belgia, whose (...) compares
With all the world for fruit, tho now with scars
Her body be all ore defaced by wars:
Go, tel them what thou bring, exceeds the wealth
Of all these Contries, for thou btingst them health.
In Librum.
WIt, Learning, Order, Elegance of Phrase,
Health, and the Art to lengthen out our days,
Philosophy, Physic, and Poesy,
And that skill which death loves not, ( Surgery)
Walks to refresh us, Airs most sweet and clear,
A thrifty Table, and the wholsom'st cheer,
All sorts of grain, all sorts of Flesh, of Fish,
Of foul^, and (last of all) of fruits a several dish:
Good Breakefasts, Dinners, Suppers, after-meales,
The herb for Sallards, and the herb that heales,
Physicians Counsel, Pottecaries pills,
(Without the Summing up of costly bills.)
Wines that the brain shall ne'er intoxicate,
Strong Ale and Beer at a more easy rate
Than Water from the Fountain: cloths (not dear)
For the four several quarters of the year.
Meats both for Protestant and Puritan,
With means sufficient to maintain a man,
If all these things thou want, no farther look,
All this, and more than this, lies in this book.
Anonimus.
In Laudem Operis.
THe Gods upon a time in counsel sitting,
(To rule the world) what Creature was most fitting
At length from God to God this sentence ran,
To form a creature like themselves (called Man,)
Being made, the world was given him, (built so rarely,)
No workmen can come near it: hung so fairly*
that the Gods viewing it, were over-ioyed,
Yet grieved, that it should one day be destroyed.
Gardens had Man to walk in, set with trees
That still were bearing: But (neglecting these)
He longed for fruits unlawful, fell to riots,
Wasted his goodly body by ill dye^s,
Spent (wha^ was left him) like a prodigal heir,
And had of earth, of hell, or heaven no care*
For which the earth was c^rst, and brought forth weeds
Poison (...) in our ^yrest seeds,
Half (...) hid, and did in darkness mourn,
Whilst hell kept fires (...) that should b^rne
His very (...), if still it went ^wry,
And ^ that should never di^,
Yet lo? How blessed is man? the Deities,
B^ilt ^p this School of Health, to make him wise.
THE SALERNE SCHOOL.
THe Salerne School doth by these lines impart,
All health to Englands King, and doth advise
From care his head to keep, from wrath his hart.
Drink not much wine, ^uplight, and soon arise,
When meat is gone long sitting breeds smart:
And after noone (...) waking keep your eyes,
When moved you find your self to Natures Noed
Forbear them not, for that much danger breeds,
Use three Physicians still, first Doctor Quiet,
Next Doctor Mery-man, and Doctor Diet.
Rise early in the morn, and straight remember
With water cold to wash your hands and Eyes,
In gentle fashion retching every member,
And to refresh your brain when as you rise,
In hear, in cold, in July, and December,
Both comb your head, rub your teeth likewise:
If bled you have, keep cool, if bathed keep warm,
If dined, to stand or walk will do no harm.
3. things preserve ^ sight, Glass, Grass, Fountains
At Eue'n springs, at morning visit-monntaines.
If R: be i^ t^e mouth, their ^udgen^ents err,
That th^nke tha^ sleep in afternoon is good,
If R: be not therein, some men there are,
That think a little nap breeds no ill b^ood,
But if you shall herein exceed too far,
It hurts ^our health, it cannot be withstood:
Long sleep at afternoones by stirring fumes.
Breeds Slowth and Agewes, Aching head^ Rheums
The moisture brcd^n Breast, in Jaws, and Nose,
All called Catarrs or Tysique, or the Pose.
Great harms have grown, Maladies exceeding
By keeping in a little blast of wind,
So Cramps, Propsies, Collicks have their breeding,
And Mazed Brains ^or want of vent behind.
Besides we find in stories worth the readiug,
A certain Roman Emperor was so kind,
Claudius by name, he made a Proclamation,
A Escape to be no loss of reputation,
Great suppers do the stomach much offend,
Sup light if quiet you to sleep intend.
To keep good d^er, you should never feed,
Vn^ll you find your stomach clean and void,
O^ ^ormer eaten meats, for they do breed
Repletion, and will cause you soon be cloid,
No^e other rule but appetite should need,
When from your mouth a moisture clear doth void
All Pears and Apples, Feaches, Milk, Cheese,
Salt meats, red Dear, Hare, Beef and Goat: al these
A^e meats that breed ill blood, and Melancholy,
I^ sick you be, to feed on them were folly.
Eggs newly laid, are nutritiue to eat,
A^d roasted Reere are easy to digest.
Fresh Gascoign wine is good to drink with meat
Broth strengthens nature above all the rest,
(...) broth prepared with flower of finest wheat:
Well bo^ld, and full of fat for such are best.
The Priests rule is (a Priests rule should be true,)
Those Eggs are best, are long, and white, new,
Remember eating new laid ^gges and soft,
For every Egg you eat you drink as oft.
Fine Manchet feeds to fat, Milk fills the veins,
New Cheese doth nourish, so doth flesh of swine,
The Dowcets of some beast^, the marrow, brains,
And all sweet-tasting-flesh, and pleasant wine,
Soft Eggs (a cleanly dish in house of Swains,)
Ripe Figs and Raysins, late come from the Vine:
Choose wine you mean shall serve you all the year,
Well-sauour'd, tasting well, and color'd clear.
Fiues qualities there are, wines praise advancing,
Strong, Beawtyfull, and Fragrant, cool, and dancing.
White Muskadell and Candy wine, and Greek,
Do make men's wits and bodies gross and fat:
Red wine doth make the voice oft time to seek,
And hath a binding quality to that,
Canary and Madera, both are like
To make one Lean indeed, (but wot you what,)
Who say they make one lean wold make one laffe
They mean, they make one lean upon a staff.
Wine, women, Baths, by Art or Nature warm,
Used or abused, do men much good or harm.
Six things that here in order shall ensue,
Against all poisons have a secret pour,
Pears, Garlic, Reddish-roots, Nuts, Rape, Few,
But Garlic chief, for they that it devour,
May drink, and care not who their drink do brew
May walk in airs infected every hour:
Since Garlic then hath pour to save from death,
Bear with it though it make vnsauoury breath:
And scorn not Garlic like to some, that think
It only makes men wink, and drink, and stink.
Though all ill savours do not breed infection,
Yet sure infection comes most by smelling,
Who smells still perfumed, his complexion
Is not perfumed by Poet Martials telling,
Yet for your lodging rooms give this direction,
In houses where you mind to make your dwelling
That ne'er the same there be no evil scents
Of Puddle-waters, or of excrements.
Let air be clear and light, free from faults,
That come of secret passages and vaults.
If wine have over night a surfeit brought,
A thing we wish to yon should happen seeld
Then early in the morning drink ^ draught,
And that a kind of remedy shall yield,
But against all surfeits virtues school hath taught,
To make the gift of temperance a shield:
The better wines do breed the better humours,
The worse, are causes of unwholesome tumors:
In measure drink, let wine be ripe, not thick,
But clear and well alaid, and fresh, and quick.
The like advice we gi^e you for your beer,
We will it be not sour, and yet be stale,
Well boiled, of hearty grain, and old, and clear,
Nor drink too much, nor let it be to stale:
And as there be four seasons in the year,
In each a several order keep you ^all.
In Spring, your dinner must not much exceed,
In Summers heat, but little meat shall need:
In Autumn, wa^e you eat not too much fruit,
With Winters cold, full meals do fittest su^e.
If in your drink you mingle Few with Sage,
All poison is expelled by power of those,
And if you would withal lusts heat assuage,
Add to them two the Gentle-floure of Rose:
Who would not be Sea-sick when seas do rage.
Sage-water drink with Wine before he goes.
Salt, Garlic, Parsely, Pepper, Sage, and Wine,
Make sauces for all meats both course and fine,
Of washing of your hands much good doth rise,
Tis wholesome, cleanly, and releeues your eyes.
Eat not your bread too stale, nor eat it hot,
A little Leuend, hollow-bak't and light:
Not fresh, of purest grain that can be got,
The crust breeds choler both of brown white,
Yet let it be well baked or eat it not,
How ere your taste therein may take delight.
Pork without wine it not so good to eat
As Sheep, with wine, it medicine is and meat,
Tho Entrails of a beast be not the best,
Yet are some entrails better then the rest.
Some love to drink new wine not fully find,
But for your health we wish that you drink none,
For such to dangerous Fluxes are inclined,
Besides the Lees of wine doth breed the stone.
Some to drink only water are assigned:
But such by our consent shall drink alone,
For water and small beer we make no question
Are enemies to health and good digestio^:
And Horace in a verse of his rehearses,
That Water-drinkers never made good verses.
The choice of meats to health doth much avail,
First Veale is holsom meat, breeds good blood
So Capon, Hen, and Chicken, Patridge, Quail,
The Pheasant, woodcock, Lark Thrush be good
The Heath-cock wholesome is, the Dove, the Rail,
And all that do not much delight in mud,
Fair swans, such love your beauties make me bear you,
That in the dish I easily could forbear you,
Good sport it is to see a Mallard killed,
But with their flesh your flesh should not be filled.
As choice you make of Foul, so make of Fish,
If so that kind be soft, the great be best,
If firm, then small, and many in a dish:
I need not name, al kinds are in request,
P^ke, Trowt, and Perch from water fresh I wish,
From Sea, Base, Mullet, Brean, Souls are best:
The Pike a ravening Tyrant is in water,
yet he on Land good meat yields near the later.
If Eeeles and Cheese you eat, they make you hoarse
But drink apace thereto, and then no force.
Some love at meals to drink small draughts oft,
But fancy may herein, and custom guide,
If Eggs you eat they must be new and soft,
In peaze good qualities, and bad are tried,
To take them with the skin that grows aloft,
They vvindie be, but good without their hide.
In great consumptions learned Physicians think,
Tis good a Goat or Camels milk to drink,
Cowes-milke and Sheep do well, but yet an Asses,
Is best of all, and all the other passes.
Milk is for Agues and for Headache nought,
Yet if from Agues fit you feel you free,
Sweet-Butter wholesome is, as some have taught,
To cleanse and purge some pains that inward be:
Why though it be contemned, yet it is thought,
To scour, and cleanse, and purge in due degree:
For healthy men may cheese be wholesome food,
But for the weak and sickly tis not good,
Cheese is an heavy meat, and gross, and cold,
And breeds Costiuenesse both new and old.
Cheese makes complaint that men on wrong suspicions
Do slander it, and say it doth such harm,
That they conceal his many good conditions,
How oft it helps a stomach cold to warm,
How fasting tis prescribed by some Physicians,
To those to whom the flux doth give Alarm:
We see the better sort thereof doth eat,
To make as twere a period of their meat,
The poorer sort when other meat is scant,
For hunger eat it to relieve their want.
Although you may drink often while you dine,
Yet aster dinner touch not once the cup,
I know that some Physicians do assign
To take some liquor straight before they sup:
But whether this be meant by Broth or wine,
A controversy, it is not yet taken up:
To close your stomach well, this order sures,
Cheese after Flesh, Nuts after Fish or Fruits.
Yet some have said, (believe them as you will)
One Nut doth good, two hurt, the third doth kill.
Some Nut, against poison is preservative,
Fears wanting Wine, are poison from the tree,
But baked Pears coun^d are restonatiue,
Raw-Peares a poison, Baked a Medicine^be:
Baked Pears, a Weak-dead-stomacke do revive,
Kaw-Peares are heavy to digest we see,
Drink after Pears, take after Apples order
To have a place to purge your self of ordure.
Ripe Cherries breed good blood, help the stone,
If Cherry you do eat, and Cherry-stone.
Cool, Damsens are, and good for health by reason
They make your entrails soluble and slack,
Let Pea^hes steep in wine of newest season,
Nu^s hurt their teeth, ^ with their teeth the c^acke
With every Nut tis good to eat a Reason,
For though they hurt the spleen they help the back
A plaster made of Figs by some men's telling,
Is good against all kirnels, Boils, and swelling,
With Poppy joined, it draws out bones are broke
By Figs are lice engendered, Lust prouoken.
Eat Meddlers if you have a looseness gotten,
They bind, and yet your urine they augment,
They have one name more fit to be forgotten,
While hard and sound they be they be not spent,
Good Meddlers are not ripe till seeming rotten.
For meddling much with Meddlers some are shent.
New Rhe^nish-wine stirs urine, doth not bind
But rather loose the Belly, breeding wind,
Ale, humours breeds, it adds both flesh force,
Tis loosing, cool, and urine doth enforce.
Sharpe Vinegar doth cool, withal it dries,
And gives to some ill humour good correction:
It makes one melancholy, hurts their eyes,
Nor making fat, nor mending their complexion:
It lessens sperm, makes appetite to rise,
Both taste and scent is good against infection.
The Turnip hurts the stomach, wind it breeds
Stirs urine, hurts his teeth thereon that feeds:
Who much thereof will feed, may wish our Nation
Would well allow of Claudius proclamation.
It sollowes now what part of every beast
Is best to eat: first, know the Hart is ill,
It is both hard, and heavy to digest,
The Tripe, with no good juice our flesh doth fill:
The Lites, are light, yet but in small request:
But outer parts are best in Physickes skill.
If any brains be good, (which is a question,)
Hens brain is best, and lightest of digestion:
In Fennell-see^ this virtue you shall find,
Forth of your lower parts to drive the wind.
Of Fennel virtues four they do recite,
First, it hath power some poisons to expel,
Next burning Agues it will put to flight,
The stomach it doth cleanse, and comfort well:
And fourthly it doth keep and cleanse the sight,
And thus the Seed and Herb doth both excel.
Yet for the two last told; if any seed
With Fennel may compare, tis Annis-seed:
Some Anny-seeds be sweet, and some more bitter,
For pleasure these, for medicine those are fitter.
Dame Natures reason, far surmounts our reading,
We feel effects, the causes oft unknown,
who knows ye cause why Spodi^ stacheth bleeding,
( Sp^dium, but ashes of an Oxes bone.)
We learn herein to praise his power exceeding,
That virtue gave to wood, to herbs, to stone.
The Liver, Spodium: Mace, the hart delights,
The brain likes Musk, and Lyc^ras the Lites,
The spleen is thought much comforted with Ca^ers
In stomach, Gallingal^ allayes ill Vapors.
Sauce would be set with meat upon the Table,
Salt is good sauce, and had with great facility:
Salt makes unsavoury viands, manducable,
To drive some poisons out, Salt hath ability,
yet things too salt are ne'er commendable:
They hurt the sight, in nature cause debility,
The scab and itch on them are ever breeding,
The which on meats too salt, are often feeding:
Salt should be first removed, and first set down,
At Table of the Knight, and of the Clown.
As Tastes are diverse, so physicians hold
They have as sundry qualities and power,
Some burning are, some temperate, some cold,
Cold are these three: the Tart, the sharpe, the sour:
Salt, bitter, biting, burn as hath bin told,
Sweet, fat, and fresh, are temprate every hour.
Four special virtues hath a sop in wine,
It makes the teeth white, it clears the eyne,
It adds unto an empty stomach fulness,
And from a stomach filled, it takes the dullness.
If to an use you have your self betaken,
Of any diet, make no sudden change,
A custom is not easily forsaken,
yea though it better were, yet seems it strang^,
Long use is as a second nature taken.
With nature custom walks in equal range.
Good diet is a perfect way of curing,
And worthy much regard and health assuring.
A King that cannot rule him in his diet,
Will hardly rule his Realm in peace and quiet.
They that in Physic will prescribe you food,
Six things must note we here in order touch,
First: What it is: and then, for what tis good,
And When; and Where; How often; and how much,
Who note not this, it cannot be withstood,
They hurt, not heal, yet are too many such.
Coleworts broth doth loose, the substance bind,
Thus play they, fast and loose, and all behind.
But yet if at one time you take them both,
The substance shall give place unto the broth.
In Physic Mallowes hath much reputation,
Their very name of Mellow seems to sound,
The root thereof will give a kind purgation,
By them both men and women good have found.
To women's monthly flowers they give laxation,
They make men soluble that have bin bound,
And least we seem in Mallowes praises partial.
Long since hath Horace praised them Martial.
The worms that gnaw the womb never stint
Are killed, and purged, drive away with Mint.
But who can write thy worth (o sovereign sage,)
Some ask how men can die, where thou dost grow
Oh that there were a Medicine curing age,
Death comes at last, tho death come ne'er so slow:
sage strengths the sinews, Feauers heat doth swag,
The Palsy helps, and rids of mickle woe,
In Latin ( Salui^) takes the name of safety,
In English ( Sage) is rather-wise then crafty:
Since then the name betokens wise, and saving,
We count it natures friend, and worth the having.
Take sage and Primrose, Lavender, and Crosses,
With Walwort that doth grow twixt lime stone
For he that of these herbs the juice expresses,
And mix with povvder of a Castor-stone,
May breed their ease whom Palsy much opresses
Or if this breed not help, then look for none.
Few is a Noble herb to give it right,
To chew it fasting it will purge the sight,
O^e quality thereof yet blame I must,
It makes men chaste, and women fills with lust.
Fair Ladies if these Physic rules be true,
That Few hath such strange qualities as these,
Eat little Few, least your good husbands (REVV)
And breed between you both a shrow'd disease.
Few, vvhets the wit, and more to pleasure you,
In water boiled, it rids a room of fleas.
I would not to you Ladies, Onyons praise,
Save that they make one fair ( Aesclapius says)
yet taking them requires some good direction,
They are not good alike for each complexion.
If unto Choler men be much inclined,
Tis thought that Onyons are not good for those,
But if a man be Phlegmatic (by kind)
It does his stomach good, as some suppose,
For Ointment Juice of Onyons is assigned
To heads whose hair falls faster then it grows:
If Onyons cannot help in such mishap,
A man must get him a Gregorian cap.
And if your hound by hap should bite his master,
With Honey, Few, and Onions make a plaster.
The seed of Mustard is the smallest grain,
And yet the force thereof is very great,
It hath a present power to purge the brain,
It adds unto the stomach force and heat:
All poison it expels, and it is plain,
With sugar tis a passing sauce for meat.
She that hath hap a husband bad to bury,
And is therefore in hart not sad but merry:
yet if in show good manners she will keep,
Onions and Mustardseed will make her weep.
Though Violets smell sweet, Nettles offensive,
yet each in several kind much good procure,
The first doth purge the heavy head and pensive
Recovers surfeits, Falling sickness cures:
Tho Nettles stink, yet make they recompense,
If your belly by the Colic pain endures:
Against the Colic Nettle-seed and Honey,
Is Physic: better none is had for money,
It breeds sleep, stays vomits, fleams doth sofie,
It helps him of the Got that eats it often.
Clean Hysop is an Herb to purge and cleanse,
Raw Flegmes, hu^tfull humours from the breast,
The same unto the Lungs great comfort lends,
With Honey boiled: but far above the rest,
It gives good colour, and complexion mends,
And is therefore with women in request:
With Honey mixed, Cinquefoyle cures the Canker,
That eats our inward parts with cruel ranker,
But mixed with Wine, it helps a grieved side,
And stays the vomit, and the Laske beside.
Ellecompane strengthens each inward part,
A little looseness is thereby prouoken:
It swageth grief of mind, it cheers the heart,
Allayeth wrath, and makes a man fair spoken:
And drunk with Few in Wine, it doth impart,
Great help to those that have their bellies broke,
Let them that unto choler much incline,
Drink Penny-royall steeped in their wine,
And some affirm, that they have found by trial
The pain of Got is cured by Penny-royall.
To tell all Crosses virtues long it were,
But diverse patients unto that are debtor,
It helps the teeth, it gives to bald men hair,
With Honey mixed, it Ring-worme kills Tettar:
But let not women that would children bear,
Feed much thereof, for they to fast were better.
An herb there is takes of the swallows name,
And by the Swallows gets no little fame,
For Pliny writes, (tho some thereof make doubt)
It helps young Swallows eyes, when they are out.
Green Willow though in scorn it oft is used,
yet some there are in it not scornful parts,
It kills worms, the juice in ears infused,
With Vinegar: the bark destroys Warts.
But at one quality I much have mused,
That adds and bates much of his good deserts*
For writers old and new, both ours and foreign,
Affirm the seed make women chaste and barren.
Take Saffron if your hart make glad you will,
But not to much, for that the heart may kill.
Green Leekes are good as some Physicians say,
yet would I choose, how ere I them believe,
To wear Leekes rather on Saint Dauids day,
Then eat the Leekes upon Saint Dauids Eve,
The bleeding at the nose Leekes juice will stay,
And women bearing children, much relieve,
Black Pepper beaten gross you good shall find
If cold your stomach be, or full of wind:
white Pepper helps the cough, fleam it riddeth,
And Agues Fit to come it oft forbids.
Our Hearing is a choice and dainty sense,
And hard to mend, yet soon it may be mard,
These are the things that breed it most offence,
To sleep on stomach full, and drinking hard:
Blows, falls, and noise, and fasting, violence,
Great heat, and sudden cooling afterward:
All these as is by sundry proofs appearing,
Breed tingling in our ears, and hurt our hearing:
Then think it good advice, not idle talk,
That after supper bids us stand or walk.
You heard before what is for hearing nought,
Now shall you see what hurtful is for sight:
Wine, women, bathes, by art or nature wrought,
Leeks, Onions, Garlic* Mustard seed fire light:
Smoke* Bruises, dust, Pepper to powder brought,
Be^, Le^tils strains, Wind, Tears, Phoebus bright,
And all sharpe things our eie-sight do molest:
Yet watching hurts them more then all the rest.
Of Fennel, Veruin, Kellidon, Roses, Few,
Is water made, that will the sight renew.
If in your teeth you hap to be tormented*
By mean some little worms therein do breed,
Which pain (if heed be taken) may be prevented,
By keeping clean your teeth, when as you feed:
Burn Francomsence, (a gum not evil scented)
Put Hen-bane unto this, and Onyon-seed,
And with a Tunnel to the tooth that's hollow,
Convey the smoke thereof, and ease shall follow.
By Nuts, Oil, Eels, and cold in head,
By Apples and raw fruits, is hoarsnes bred.
To show you how to shun raw running Rheumes,
Exceed not much in meat, in drink, and sleep,
For all excess is cause of hurtful fumes,
Eat warm, broth warm, strive in your breath to keep
Use exercise, that Vapors ill consumes,
In Notherne winds abroad do never peep.
If Fistula do rise in any part,
And so procure your danger, and your smart,
Take Arsnicke, Brimstone, mixed with lime soap
And make a Tent, and then of cure there's hope.
If so your head do p^ine you oft with aching,
Fair water, or small beer drink then or never,
So may you escape the burning fits and shaking,
That wonted are to company the Fever:
If with much heat your head be in ill taking,
To rub your head and Temples still persevere,
And make a bath of Morrell (boiled warm)
And it shall keep your head from further harm.
A Flix a dangerous evil is, and common,
In it shun cold, much drink; strains of women.
To fast in Summer doth the body dry,
Yet doth it good, if you thereto invre it,
Against a surfeit, vomitting to try,
Is remedy, but some cannot endure it:
yet some so much themselves found help thereby,
They go to sea a purpose to procure it.
Four seasons of the year there are in al,
The Summer, and the Winter, Spring and F^ll:
In every one of these, the rule of season,
Bids keep good diet, suiting every season.
The Spring is moist, of temper good and warm,
Then best it is to bath, to sweat, and purge,
Then may one open a vain in either arm,
If boiling blood or fear of Agues urge,
Then Venus recreation doth no harm,
Yet may too much thereof turn to ^ scourge.
In Summers heat (when choler hath dominion)
Cool meats and moist are best in some opinion
The Fall is like the Spring, but ends colder,
With wines and spice the winter may be bolde^
Now if perhaps some have desire to know,
The number of our bones, our teeth, our veyne^
This verse ensuing plainly doth it show,
To him that to observe it takes pains:
The Teeth thrice ten, and two twice eight a row
Eleuenscore bones save one in us remains:
For veins that all may vain in us appear,
A vain we have for each day in the year:
All these are like in number and connexion,
The difference grows in bigness and complexio^
Four Humours reign within our bodies wholly,
And these compared to four Elements,
The Sanguine, Choler, Phlegm, and Melancholy,
The later two are heavy, dull offence,
The the other are more Jovial, quick, and Jolly,
And may be likened thus (without offence)
Like air both warm and moist, is Sangui^ clear,
Like fi^e doth Choler hot and dry appear,
Like water, cold and moist (is Fleg matique)
The Melancholy cold, dry earth is like.
Complexions cannot virtue breed or vice,
Yet may they unto both give inclination,
The Sang^in gamesome is, and nothing nice,
Loves wine, and women, and all recreation*
Likes pleasant tales, and news, plays cards and ^ice,
Fit for all company, and every fashion:
Though bold, not apt to take offence, not i^ full,
But bountiful and kind, and looking cheerful:
Inclining to be fat, and prove to lafter,
Loves mirth, and Music, cares not what comes after,
Sharpe Choler is an humour most pernicious,
All violent, and fierce, and full of fire,
Of quick conceit, and therewithal ambitious,
Their thoughts to greater fortunes still aspire,
Proud, bountiful enough, yet oft malicious,
A right bold speaker, and as bold a liar.
On little cause to anger great inclined,
Much eating still, yet ever looking pined,
In younger years they use to grow apace,
In Elder hairy on their breast and face.
The Fl^gmatique are most of no great growth,
Inclining rather to be fat and square,
Given much unto their ease, to rest and sloth,
Content in knowledge to take little share,
To put themselves to any pain most loath,
So dead their spirits, so dull their senses are:
Still either sitting like to folk that dream,
Or else still spitting, to avoid the phlegm,
One quality doth yet these harms repair,
That for most partthe Fl^gmatique are fair.
The Melancholy from the rest do var^y,
Both sport, and ease, and company refusing,
Exceeding studious, ever solitary,
Inclining pensive still to be, and musing,
A secret hate to others apt to carry:
Most constant in his choice, tho long a choosing*
Extreme in love sometime, yet seldom lustful,
Suspicious in his nature, and mistrustful.
A wary wit, a hand much given to sparing,
A heavy look, a spirit little daring.
Now though we give these humours several names,
yet all men are of all participant,
But all have not in quantity the same,
For som^ ( in some) are more predominant,
The colour shows from whence it lightly came*
Or whether they have blood too much or want.
The watery Phlegmatic are fair and white,
The Sanguine, Roses joined to Lillies bright,
The Choleric more red: The Melancholy,
Alluding to their name are swart and colly.
If Sanguine humour do too much abound,
These signs will be thereof appearing chief,
The face will swell, the cheeks grow red round
With staring (...), the pulse bear soft and brief,
The veins exceed, the belly will be bound,
The Temples, and the fore-head full of grief,
Unquiet sleeps, that so strange dreams will make
To cause one blush to tell when he doth wake:
Besides the moisture of the mouth and spittle,
Will taste too sweet, and seem the throat to tickle
If Choler do exceed, as may sometime,
your ears will ring and make you to be wakeful,
your tongue will seem all rough, and oftentimes
Cause vomits, unaccustomed and hateful,
Great thirst, your excrements are full of slime,
Tho stomach squeamish, sustenance ungrateful,
your appetite will seem in nought delighting,
your hart still grieved with continual by ^ing,
The pulse beat hard and swift, all hot, extreme,
your spittle sour, of fire-worke oft your dream.
If Phlegm abundance have due limits past,
These signs are here set down will plainly show,
The mouth will seem to you quite out of taste,
And apt with moisture still to overflow;
your sides will seem all sore down to the wast,
your meat wax loathsome, you^ digestion slow,
your head and stomach both in so ill taking,
One seeming ever griping the other aching:
With empty veins, the pulse beat slow and soft,
In sleep, of Seas and Ryuers dreaming oft.
But if that dangerous humour ouer-raigne,
Of Melancholy, sometime making mad,
These tokens then will be appearing plain,
The pulse beat hard, the colour dark and bad:
The water thin, a weak fantastic brain*
False-grounded-ioy, or else perpetual fa^,
Affrighted oftentimes with dreams like visions,
Presenting to the thought ill apparitions,
Of bitter belches from the stomach coming,
His ear (the left especial) ever humming.
Against these feuerall humours overflowing,
As several kinds of Physic may be good,
As diet-drink, hot baths, whence sweat is growing
With purging, vomiting, and letting blood:
Which taken in due time, nor overflowing,
Each Malladies infection is withstood,
The last of these is best, if skill and reason.
Respect age, strength, quantity, and season,
Of seventy from seventeen, if blood abound,
The opening of a vain is healthful found.
Of Bleeding many profits grow, and great,
The spirits and senses are renewed thereby,
Though these mend slowly by the strength of meat
But these with wine restored are by and by:
By bleeding, to the Marrow comes heat,
It makes clean your brain, releeues your eye,
It mends your appetite, restores sleep,
Correcting humours that do waking keep:
All inward parts and senses also clearing,
It mends the voice, touch, smell, taste, hearing
Three special Months, September, April, May,
There are in which tis good to open a vain,
In these 3. months the Moon bears greatest sway,
Then old or young, that store of blood contain,
May bleed now, though some elder wizards say,
Some days are ill in these, I hold it vain:
September, April, May, have days a piece,
That bleeding do forbid, and eating Geese,
And those are they forsooth of May the fi^st,
Of ^other two, the last of each are worst.
But yet those da^es I grant, and all the rest,
Have in some cases just impediment,
As first, if nature be with cold oppressed,
Or if the Region, I'll, or Continent
Do scorch or freeze, if stomach meat detest;
If Baths, or Venus, late you did frequent,
Nor old, nor young, nor drinkers great, are fit,
Nor in long sickness, nor in raging fit.
Or in this case if you will venture bleeding,
The quantity must then be most exceeding.
When you to bleed intend, you must prepare
Some needful things both after and before,
Warm water, and sweet oil, both needful are,
And wine the fainting spirits to restore,
Fine binding cloths of Linen, and beware,
That all that morning you do sleep no more,
Some gentle motion helps after bleeding,
And on light meats a spare and temperate feeding
To bleed, doth ^heare the pensive, and remove
The raging furies bred by burning love.
Make your incision large, and not to deep,
That blood have speedy issue with the sum,
So that from sinews you all hurt do keep,
Nor may you (as I touched before presume)
In six ensuing^houres at all to sleep,
Lest some slight bruise in sleep cause an apostume
Eat not of milk* not ought of milk compounded;
Nor let your brain with much drink be cofouded
Eat no cold meats, for such the strength impair,
And shun all mis^y and unwholesome air.
Besides the former rules for such as pleases,
Of letting blood to take more observation,
Know in beginning of all sharpe diseases,
Tis counted best to make evacuation:
To old, to young, both letting blood displeases,
By years and sickness make your computation,
First in the Spring for quantity, you shall,
Of blood take twice as much as in the fall:
In Spring and Summer, let the right arm bl^od,
The Fall and Winter for the left are good.
The Hart, and Liver, spring summers bleeding
The Fall and winter hand and foot doth mend,
One vain cut in the hand doth help exceeding,
Unto the Spleen, voice, breast, and Entrails lend:
And swages grieses that in the hart are breeding,
But here the Salerne School doth make an end:
And here I cease to write, but will not cease
To wish you live in health, and die in peace:*
And ye our Physic rules that friendly read,
God grant that Physic you may never need.
FINIS.

