The garden of wisdom wherein ye may gather most pleasant flowers, that is to
say, proper witty and quycke sayenges of princes, philosophers, and divers
other sorts of men. Drawn forth of good authors, as well Greeks as Latyns,
by Richard Taverner. 1539

Sold in Lomberdstrete at the sign of the Lamb by Iohn Haruye.

Richarde Taverner to the gentle readers.
YE have here (good readers) a gardeyn or a paradyse rather of net, propre,
quick, and grave sayenges of renowned persons, in which to recreate your
selfes, it shall be as I judge no les profytable, then pleasant unto you. I had
purposed to have made the book much longer, but being otherwise let, I was
compelled to cloose up my work. Howe be it, if I shall hereafter perceive,
that ye have any delyte and pleasure in this kind of studies, I woll not
stycke, when I shall have opportunity, to enlarge my garden, and add hereunto
the second book, If not, at lest ye have a token significatio of my good zele
holly bent to do you such pleasur profit, as in my little power lies. Fare
you well. At London the third day of Apryll. Anno. 1539.

The garden of wisdom, conteynyng witty and plesaut sayenges of kings,
philosophers, and divers sorts of men.
Agasicles.
AGasicles king of Lacedemon being demanded by what means a prince or ruler,
may saufly rule without any guard of men, to de fend his body, Answered: If
the prince so rules his subiettes, as a father his children. What thing
could be spoken of a panym more ehrystianly? Certes this saying to be true
pueth thexperience at this day of the most excellent prince our sovereign lord
King Henrie the eight. Lord god with what inward joy, with what hearty love,
reverence do al his liege subiettes embrace the majesty of his gracis person,
and not only his liege subiettes, but also even the very rank traitors,
which intended nothing else but sedition, yet the incomparable majesty of
his own person they could not, but have in wondrous reverence? Whereof should
this come, but by reason that his grace bears him so benignely, so gentilly,
so lovingly to all his subiettes, that he may very well be called pater
patriae, the father of the country, or (to use the term of the prophet
Esaye) the noursynge father. Do ye not think, that this so excellent a prince,
so entier lie beloved of his subiettes, if it were not rather for fear of
foreyn enmies, then of his own subiettes, might ride go, whereso ever his
hyghnes would, without any guard?

Agesilaus.
AGesilaus that great king of the Lacedaemonians, when he was asked, by what
means a manne might attain to have an honest name amongst men, Answered:
If he speak that is best, and do that is most honest. What thing could be
spoken more briefly? and again, what more absolutely?

He was accustomed to say, that the office of a capytayne is against rebeiles
to use hardiness, and against his liege subiettes gentylnes,

When a certain vnshame fast suitor heng styll upon him craving and saying
evermore unto him: Sir ye have promised me, ye have promised me. In dede,
{quod} the king, I have promised the, if the thing be lawful that thou ask,
but if not, I said it, but I promised the not. With this propre answer he
shoke of, the malapettnes of the suitor: But when the fellow wold not yet cease
craving, but answered again: It becomes kings to per form what so ever
they grant even with a beck of their head. Never a whyt more ({quod} the
king) then it become meth such as come to kings, to ask and speak that is
lawful.

One praised a rhetoricien, because he made tryuynge matiers and things of
small importauce to seem weigh tie great matters. I, {quod} Agesilaus, would not
judge him a good shoemaker, which for a little foot makes a great pair of
shoes. Undoubtedly in speaking, the troth is most allowed, and he speaks
best, whose tale is agreeable to the matier.

Agesilaus was wont very often to warn his sowldiours, that they torment not
their prisoners as felos, but save them as men. Also for children ta ken in the
wars he provided, that they shulde be brought together into one place, to
the intent that they perisshed not at the removing of the oost. The same
provision and care he had for the decrepit very aged persons, which were
taken prisoners, lest (because they were not hable to follow) they might be
torn in pecis of dogs and wild beastis. And this humanity gatt him a
wonderful benevolence, not only of others, but also even of captives and
prisoners. It is to be feared lest this Panym king shall rise at the great
day, codemne a great nombre of christian princes capitayns, which spare
neither virgyn, widow, sucking infantes, no decrepit persos, but rauysh, kill
all, bren all, more like Turks then christians.

Agis.
AGis king of the Lacedemonias was wont to say, that the Lacedaemonians ought
not to ask, how many the ennemies be, but where they be. Signifieng, that the
victory hangs not upon the nombre of sowl diours, but upon their
hardynesse, courage, readynes and celerity in setting upon their ennemies. I
trust in like wise that Englyshemen, when so ever the defence of our country
shall call us to war against our enemies, woll not cowardely ask, howe many
they be, but like fierce hardy champions, where be they that dare maynteyne any
false quarrel against our most dread sovereign lord, and his people? in
full a readiness at a beck to run, whether so ever his majesty shall
command.

When a certain rhetoricien praised his science of rhetoryke with high words,
saying, that nothing is more excellent, then an eloquent oration. Then, {quod}
Agis, when thou hold thy peace, thou art nothing worth. Meaning that it
is much more excel lent gloriouse for a man to do worthy things, then to have
a tongue ready and swyfte to talk of worthy thyn ges.

Lycurgus.
Lycurgus, he that made laws for the Lacedemonias, when he was very desirous
to bring his coutreymen from their corrupt and vicyouse manners, unto a more
temperate fascion of living, brought up. u. whel pes of one kind, of which
the one he suffered at home to eat deyntye meates, the other he used to led
out in to the fyldes, and to exercise him in hun ring. Afterward he brought
them both forth into the Gyldhall before all the citizens, and caused to be
laid there certain delicate meates, also by them thorns and breres:
forthwith he put forth an hare. So when either of the whelps ran to that he
was accustomed unto, the one ot the meat, the other upon the hare: Se ye not,
o friends, {quod} Lycurgus, these two whelps, that where as they be of one
kind, yet because of their divers bringing up, they be now waxen and are become
far unlike one an other, and howe exercise is of much more strength un to
honesty, then is nature? Assuredly, the thing that Lycurgus did in his city,
is of every howsholder to be done in his house, and of every governor in his
flock. Nature (I woll well) is a thing of great might and efficacye, but
surely institution or brin gynge up, is much mightier, which is hable to
amend, reform streyghten a crooked and evil nature, and to turn the same
into a good nature. What manner children shall be borne, lie eth in no mas power,
but that by right bringing up, they may prove good, lies in our power.

Such citizens as abhorred marriage, and had lever live as bachelers,
Lycurgus forbad to be present ta sights and interludes, and added also other
shames and reproaches unto them, by this craft diligently prouydynge, that the
citizens should employ them selfes to beget children. For where as it was an
usage and law amongst the Lacedaemonians, that the yongers should give much
honour and reverence to their elders, this honour he plukt from them, which
by wedlock would not encreace the nombre of the citizens.

Lycurg{us} being demanded, why he made a law yt nothing should be given with a
maid in marriage, answered: Bi cause neither for poverty none might be left
unmarried, nor for riches any desired, but yt every young ma having respect to ye
manners of ye maid, might chose her only by her vtuous coditios For this same
cause he remeued out of the city all painted colours and or namentes,
wherewith other women be wont either to set forth or to fashion their beauty.

The same Lycurgus, where as he appointed a certain age for maidens and also
for young men to mary at, being demanded, why he did so, answered: To the
intent that the issue born of full grown parents, which be of perfyte age,
may be strong and tall.

Demanded also why he forbad the man to sleep all night with his wife, but
ordained that either of them shulde the most part of the day keep company
with their like, the manne with men, and the woman with women and with them also
shulde rest all the hole nyghtes, but with his spouse he shulde not have to
do, but by steithe, and shamefastly. First, {quod} he, that they might be
strong in bodies, accompa nyenge together but seldom. Second lie, that love
between them may alweys abide fresh and new. Thyrdly that they may engendre
the stonger issue.

Furthermore in those times ye chastity of married women was so great and they
so far of, frome the lite demeanour, which afterward they fell to, that at
beginning the sin of aduoutrie was thougth impossible ever to have chased
amongst them. And therefore when a certain auncyent Lacedemonian named Geradas,
was asked of a stranger, what punyshment aduoutrers should have amoges them,
for he could se no law made by Lycurgus in this behalf: He answered: O
friend there is none aduowtrer amongst us. When the other went fur there asked,
what if there were any? Then, {quod} he, he shall give so great an ore, as shall
streache his neck over the mountaygne of Taygette, and drink of the floude of
Eurota. When the other smiled and said, it was impossible to find so great an
ox, And is it not, {quod} Geradas, as much impossible that in our city
shulde be found any aduowterer, wherein riches, delytes, pleasures, and all
curious deckynges of the body be had in high reproach: and again
shamefastness, de murenes, and due obedyence to public officers in high
estimation and worship? This Geradas full prudently understood, that vices
could not there grow, where no beds to so we vices in, were suffered no
admytted, and that those things lye as ded despyced, which in stead of honour
be had in despite and scorn.

When one required him, that he would make and ordeyne in the city a
Democracy, that is to say, a governance of the people or commons, in stead
of the gouernauce of the lords: Ordeyne thou, {quod} he, first a Demoracie in
thy house. In few words he taught, that that fascyon of common weal is not
profytable to the city, which no man wold have in his own family. Certes, a
city or a realm is nothing else, then in effect a great hows.

Demanded why he inacted a law that in times of wars, they shulde oftentimes
change their tents and pauylyons: To the intent, {quod} he, we may hurt
our ennemies the more. The Lacedaemonians because they were nymble and lite,
remeued with no great busynes their oost: where as their enemies could not do
the same, without their great incomoditie, and also with longer respyte: for as
much as they carried about with them so ma my baggages and burdens.

Demanded why he ordained that the Lacedaemonians should make their sacryfyce
and oblation with small and chepe things. Because, {quod} he, we should never
want wherewith to honour god. Who would not say, but that in solemn
worshyppynges of god, all royalty and sumptuouse magnyficence is little
enough? But this prudent panym understood that god delyteth rather in
frugalytie, then in fat sacryfices, lest under pretence of religio (as in our
days it was come to pass) all abomination shulde be maintained.

The same Lycurgus being asked why he forbad that the city shulde be fensed
with walls, Answered: Because that city wants no walls, which is fensed
not with stones but with men.

Socrates.
SOcrates the Atheniense a great philosopher, and of most pure living, was
wont to teach, yt men ought to absteyne from meates that would provoke the
man not hungry to eat, from drynkes that wold allure, the not thurstye to
dryncke.

He said, the vest sauce is hungre, for as much as it both best sweteneth all
things, and is of no cost. And therefore he him self did ever eat and
dryncke with swetnes, because he bid neither of them, but when he hungered and
thursted.

Moreover he accustomed him self to bear hungre and thurste. For at what
times other men coveted most to dryncke, then wold he never drink of the
first cup that was filled. And when he was demanded, why he did so, he
answered, because he wold not accustom him self to follow his affec tions and
Justs. He said, those that excercysed them selfes to chastnes of living, and
sobre diette, had both far more pleasure less sorrow, then they that with
most a do sought all the pleasures of the world: for as much as the
pleasures of intemperate persons, besides the torment of their conscience,
besides their evil name and poverty, where unto they be at length brought,
do bring for the most part even to their bodies also more peyne then pleasure.
On the contrary part, the things that be best, ye same be made also most
pleasant, if thou acquayntest thy self with them.

He said, it was an high reproach for a man by serving and obeynge wylfully
his inordinate pleasures, to make him self such one as no man would be glad
to have for the drudge or slave of his house.

When he was admonished by his friend, yt for the feasting of his gestes, he
made very sklender prouysyon: he answered, if they be good men, it shall be
enough, if not, more then enough.

The same Socrates when he was asked, why he him self did not govern the
common wealth, sith he knew best howe to govern it, answered, that he is more
profytable to his country that makes many good governors of the same, then he
which governs it well him self.

Demanded by what means a man might attain to an honest fame, If, {quod} he,
thou study to be such one in dede as thou would be counted in name.

He said it was far vnfyttynge, that where as no man professes or
practyseth any handy craft with out his great shame, onles he hath learned it
before, yet to the gouernauce of a common weal, men be admytted appointed which
never employed their wits to lernyng.

He was accustomed to say, that no possession is more precyouse, then a true
and good friend to a man, nor that no greatter fruit or pleasure can be any
other where taken. And therefore he said, that many men do ouerthwartly and
clean out of ordre, which bear more grievously the loss of money, then the
loss of their friend, and which cry they have lost the benefit that they
have conferred and given for nothing, where as in dede they have with the same
gotten them a friend better than any gold.

He was wont to say, that he most resembles god, which needs fewest
things, for as much as god needs nothing at all.

He said, many lived to eat and drink, but he contrarily did eat and drink
to live, for as much as he used these things not for pleasure, but for the
necessity of nature.

Such as bought dearly things over timely ripe, he said despaired, that they
shulde not live till the accustomed time of ye rypenes of things were come.
Else it were great folly to bye things both worse, and also dearer, where as
shortly after, a man may bye the same both better and for less price. Thus he
evermore called back again ye desires of men void of reason, unto sobre
iugement.

Also he used to say, he that hath begone a thing hath half done: meaning
half the work is done of him, that hath ones set upon it. For there be many
that in taryenge and taking a breath, what is best to do, spend all their life
vainly.

Demanded of a certain yonge man, whether he judged it better for him to
mary a wife, or not to mary. He answered: Whether so ever thou dost, thou
shalt surely repent. Sygnifieng, that both single life and also wedlock
have their incommodities and displeasures, which to bear a manne, must
first arm and prepare him self. Single life has these incommodyties,
solitariness, lack of children, extinguyshement of blood, a stranger to be
thine heir. Wedlock again hath these, continual care, daily complaints,
vpbraydynge of that she brought, the heavy looks of her kynsfolke, the
pratlyng tongue of thy mother in law, Cukkoldemakynge, the uncertain proof of
thy children, and other innu merable incomodities. Wherefore here is no such
choice, as is between good and evil, but such as is between the heuyer and
the lyter incomodities.

He would have men crave of god nothing but good things without further
addition, where as the people commonly crave rich maryages, treasures,
honours, kingdoms, lunge life, as though they would appoynte god what he
ought to do. But god knows best what is good for us, what not.

He would that men sacryfices, shulde stand them in very little or no
thing, because god as he needs not men things, so he weighs rather the
minds of the offerers, then the ry ches. For else where as the naughtyeste
persons do most flow in riches, it were very evil with mankynde, if god
delyted more in the sacryfyces of the evil personnes, then in the sacryfyces
of good men.

Like as we commytte the making of pyctures or images, said Socrates, unto
them whom already we know to have made very godly pyctures, so we ought to
admit none into our amity familiar acquaintance, but such as we have
espied to have borne them selves faithful profytable friends towards other.

Walking about through the mar ket, when he espied the great multitude of
merchaundyse, and things yt there were sold / he thus was wont to say with
him self. Oh how many things be here, that I have no need of, but other men
be vexed in mind, thinking thus: howe many things do I lack. Socrates
rejoiced with him self, that living according to nature, and accustomynge
him self to few things, he neither coveted nor yet needed gold, purpull,
precyouse stones, gorgyouse hangings, and the rest of rich men's delytes,
which, he was wont to say, were more necessary for the playenge of tragedies
or interludes, then for the behoufe of mans life.

He said, knowledge was the best thing a man could have, again ignorance
the worst thing, for as much as who so ever doth any vnryghtuose thing,
doth the same because he knows not what his duytie is toward every man. And
they that be strong of heart, be therefore so, because they know that such
things ought to be done, which the common sort of people jug to be eschued,
and they that be intemperate personnes, are herein deceived, that they think
those things to be sweet, pleasant, and combly, which be nothing so in
dede. Wherefore the best thing in the world (he said) is the knowledge what
things ought be desired, and what to be eschued.

To such as marveled, why he disputed of good manners ever, never of the
planetes and heuenly bodies, as the other philosophers were accustomed, he
answered. Those things that be above us, perteyne nothing unto us.

When on a time as he went in the streets, a lewd fellow gave him a blow on
the cheke, he answered nothing else but that men knew not, when they shulde
come out with their salettes on their heads.

The same Socrates, when a verlet spurned him on the shynnes as he walked, his
friends that were with him marveled he suffered the injury so pacyently. What
would ye have me do {quod} he, they mouynge him to have the fellow to the law.
It were a mad ness {quod} he, if when an ass should hytte me on the shynnes,
ye would say unto me, have him unto the law. He put no difference between an
ass and a brutyshe man furnysshed with no virtue, and he thought it a great
shame, man not to suffer that thing of man which he would suffer of abrute
beast.

He was wont to monishe his friend Eschines, which was pressed with po uertie,
that he shulde borrow of his own self, and showed him the way how, by
withdrawing from him self superfluouse meates and other things, according to
the common proverb Magnum uectigal parsimonia, Sparing is great rentes or
revenues. Certes, the most ready way to increase a man substance is, to
abate his expenses.

Socrates when he had suffered his wife Xantippa a lunge season skowldynge
within the house, and at last for werynesse went and sat him before the
door, she being more out of pacyence by his quyetnes and gentle sufferance,
streyghte out of the window powered down a pyssebowle upon his head. At
which thing, when the neighbours and the passers by had good game,
Socrates also him self smiled, saying. I easily guessed that after so great
thunderynges, we shulde have rain.

When his friend Alcibiades marveled yt he could suffer in his house so
shrewed and skouldynge a woman, as was his wife, Xantippa, I {quod} he, am
lunge since so accustomed herewith all, that I am no more grieved; than when
I hear the noise of the whele, that draws the water up out of the well. For
this noise is very painful to such as be not used there unto, but he yt is
wont daily to hear the same, is so little dysquyeted therewith, that he
knows not whether he herd it or not.

Demanded the same questyon at an other time, he answered: She teaches me at
home pacyence, that I may use when I come abroad. For being well practised
and used to her manners, I shall be the meeter, to suffer other men's fascyons.

Socrates met Xenophon in a cer tayne lane, and when he beheld the yonge
man to be of a very good natu rall disposition and wit, he held out his
staff and stopped him, that he could not pass / whereat when ye young man
steyed, he asked him where sundry merchaundyse were made sold, which commonly
men do use. Where unto when Xenophon had readily answered, he demanded, where
men were made good. When the young man made answer, that he knew not. Follow
me then {quod} Socrates, that thou may learn this. From that time Xenophon
began to be the heater of Socrates.

Socrates rebukynge very sharply his familiar friend at the table, Pla to
grieved her with, said to his master Socrates. Sir had it not ben better to
have challenged him of this between you and him secretly? To whom answered
Socrates. And had it not ben better Plato, that thou also had deste showed me
of this, between the and me secretly? Thus most wittyly he reprieved him of the
same fault in him self, that he found in an other.

Demanded what was the pryncypall virtue of yonge men. Truly {quod} he, that
they attempt nothing over much. Signifieng that the heate of youth can
vnnethes suffer them to keep measure in things.

Lettres which comenly men think were invented to help the memory, he said,
by occasyon did much hurt the memory. For in old time men when they harde
a thing worthy to be known wrote it not in books, but in the mind, by
reason of which exercise, their memory being established and confermed,
they casyly held fast, what so ever they would, and what so ever any man
knew, he had it in a redynesse. But after that the use of lettres was found
out, while they trust to their books, they have not so greattely studied to
imprynte the things in their mind, which they have lerued. Thus it comes
to pass, that the exercise of the memory set apart, the knowledge of things
is not so fresshe and ready, as it hath ben, and every man knows now much
less then in the old time they did, since that so much we know, as we bear
in mind.

He said, that men ought to obey the laws of the realm or cytte, but women
ought too obey the rytes, usages and manners of their husbands with whom they
live. Certes, the rule of the wedded woman is the husband, and she lives
ryghtly if he be obedyent to the public laws.

Unto Euclides who was very stu dyouse of sophistical subtilties, he fayde. O
Euclides, thou may well use the company of Sophisters, but the company of
men thou can not use. Meaning that sophistry is vnprofytable unto public
affairs to the come felawshyppe of man, in which who so ever desires to be
con uersaunt must not play with his sophemes and quyddities, but fascyon him
self to the manners of men.

It was informed him of a certain person that spake evil of him behind his
back. By lyklyhode, {quod} Socrates the man hath not learned to speak well.
Imputynge the vice of his tongue not to malice, but to rudeness, neither iud general
he that it perteyned any thing unto him what other men spake of him, which
spake not of judgment but of ignorance.

ARISTIPPVS.
ARistippus disciple unto Socrates, a man surely of a very sharp judgment and
pleasant wit, when he was demanded what profit he toke by the study of
wisdom, This profit, {quod} he, that with all sorts of men I can frankly and
boldly speak. For he neither feared the mighty, ney there yet thought scorn
of the basest sort. Because he bare a mind indyfferently free, as well from
hope as fro fear: for he served noman, no yet flat tered any person otherwise,
then his heart gave him.

Dionisius king of Sicill in whose court this Aristippus was of lunge season,
asked him how it chased, that philosophers do hawnt the houses of rich men,
but the rich men hawnte not ye philosophers houses: To whom Aristipp{us} made
answer in this wise. Because philosophers know what they lack, and rich men
know not. The learned men know they can not live without money, and therefore
they seek upon the rich men, which be able to give them the thing that they
have need of. But if the rich men knew as well yt they needed wisdom, they would
much rather hawnt ye houses of learned men, For the poverty of the mind is much
more wretched then is the pouer tie necessity of the body, so much the more
beggarly be the rich men, by cause they understand not, how preci ous how
necessary a thig they want.

When on a time a certain person railed upon him, he said never a word, but
went his way. But when the ray ler styll poursued him, saying, Why dost thou
flee? Because, {quod} he, thou hast power to speak evil, I have power not to
hear the. Most wyttyly he noted the mans vnshamfastnes, which where as he
toke liberty unto him self to rail upon others, he would not yet grant this
liberty unto them to withdraw them selfs, to thentet they might not hear
such shamfull raylynges.

Demanded, wherein the wise man differs from the vnlerned: Send them both,
{quod} he, naked unto men un known, thou shalt se. Signifienge that the wise
man carries about with him in his breast the thing that shall commend him where
so ever he goes. Wherefore if ye send ye learned the un learned togithers naked
into a strange country where either of them be a like unknown, the wise man
vtterynge his treasures shall find forthwith both livings and friends, the
other naked person shall be scorned for a mad man, and shall be in ieopardye to
peryshe for hungre.

It is skase credyble that Bion reports of him, when his servant bearing a
great sum of money in his journey, was sore pressed with the but then: Cast
away, {quod} he, that is to much, and bear that thou cannest.

On a time as this Aristippus sailed in the sees, and perceived that the ship
wherein he was carried was a pirates ship, he drew forth his gold, and began
to tell it, and forth with threw it in to the see, and grievously sighed making
as though it had fall from him unawares, and against his will. By this deuyse he
saved his life taking from the pirates the occasyo of sleynge or byndynge him.

When Aristippus and Eschines were fallen out, one asked Aristippus Where is
now your frendshyp? Truly it sleeps, {quod} he, but I will awake it. So
espyenge a convenient time, he came of his own mind to Elchines and said:
Shall we not incontinent be friends again, and leave our tryfelyng? Or shall
we rather abide that we may give men occasyon to speak of us two at alchouses
taverners? To whom when Eschines made answer, that with all his heart he was
contented to be at one again. Remebre then, {quod} Aristippus, that where as I
am elder then thou, yet I came first to the. Then said Eschines: Surely, thou
art a man far better thenne I am. For of me began our falling out, and of
the our falling in again. By this means amity was renewed between them.

On a time when he sailed upon the sees with certain of his own countrymen,
the ship brake they were caste upon land. And when he espied upon the shoore
certain mathematical figures drawn forth in the sand. Friends, {quod} he, be
of good comfort I see the steppes of men, and entering into the next city,
he enquired out what learned men were there abiding, with whom after he had
there a little while talked, they perceiving his excellent learning and wisdom,
with all courtesy entreated not him only but his company also, and moreover
vitayled them for their return. At last when they that came with Aristippus
dressed them selfes homeward, and asked him whether he wold any thing to his
friends and citizens: Bid them, {quod} he, that they study to get them
such riches, as can not peryshe by shypwrecke, but escapes all haser des with
the owner.

Philip king of Macedonie.
PHilip king of Macedonie, father to Alexander the great, a manne of no small
wit, and a great conqueror, When on a time he had purposed to take a
strong castle and hold, and his espies had showed him that it was very hard
for him to bring to pass, yea and impos syble: He asked them whether it were
so harde, that an ass laden with gold might not come unto it. Meaning that
there is nothing so strong, but with gold it may be won.

There were some of his foreyn sub giettes whom he had found not ve ry
trusty, which complained and toke the matier heuely, that his seruautes called
them traitors. To whom Phi lip made this answer. Truly my cou try men the
Macedonians be very homly men and rudely brought up, which can call a mattok
nothing else but a mattoke, and a spade a spade. Meaning that in very dede they
were traitors. Uplandyshe and homely persons can not qualify, but call every
thing by the proper name.

He counsayled his son Alexander, that such as were of any authoryte in the
common weal, as well the good as the evil, he should make them his fren des,
and that he shulde use the good, and abuse the evil. Certes, the chief feat
of kings is to reject none, but to apply all men's seruyces to the common
profit.

Sinicythus accused Nicanor to ye king, that without end he continued
raylynge upon him, when the kings friends moved him to send for the fellow,
and to punyshe him in example of other, Philyp thus answered: Nicanor is not
the worst of the Macedonians. It is good therefore to se, whether we have done
our duty in all things or not. So when he had searched out, that Nicanor was
greatly impoverished, and yet not rewarded for the service he had done him in
times past, he commanded a certain gift to be borne him home. This done, when
again Smicythus informed the king, that Nicanor now without ceasynge praised
him above all measure, ye se therefore, {quod} the king, that it lies in us to
be well spoken of, or evil spoken of.

He oftentimes exhorted his son Alexandre to give good ear to Aristotle his
scholemayster, to employ him self to learning and wisdom, lest, {quod} he,
thou myghtest chance to do many things, which that I have done, now
repents me. The noble prince perceived, that no man without learning is mete
to govern a realm, and he was not ashamed to confess, that through error he
did many things a miss, because from his chyldhode he was not ryghtly
instructed with learning.

Sitting in iugement he had the hearing of one Machetas matter, but being
somewhat heuie of sleep, he was not very attentyfe to the equity of the law,
and so gave sentence against Macheta. But when Macheta cried out and said, I
appel from this iugemet. The king angrily (for it was strange to appeal
frome a king) said, to whom doest thou appeal? Truly {quod} Macheta, even
unto thy self o king, if thou wolt awake and hear the matter more attentifly.
Then the king arose, and after he had weighed better with him self the matter,
and understood that Macheta had wrong, the iugemente which was given he would
not reverse, but the money that Macheta was condemned in, he him self payed.

When on a time he was at debate with his wife and with his son, a certain
Corynthiane came unto him, whom he asked how the Greeks agreed together. In
dede, {quod} the Corinthian, thou care much how the Greeks agree together,
when those persons that be most ne'er unto the, hear such minds towards the.
Here the king being nothing offended with the Corynthians free tongue, framed
him self to his sharpe check, and layeng down his anger, fell in again
with his wife and son.

Alexander the great.
ALexander the great, king of Ma cedony, and son to the foresaid Philip
being demanded, where he laid up his treasures, With my fre des, {quod} he:
Signifieng that a manne can lay up his goods no where so sauely, as with his
friends: for when need reqyreth, he is sure to have them again with gains.

When he was informed that a cer tayne person had railed upon him. Truly,
{quod} he, it is kyngly, when a ma doth well, to be reported evil.

Porus a king being vaynguished by Alexander, when Alexander after the fylde
won, said unto him. How shall I entreat the, Porus? kyngly, {quod} he.
Again Alexander demaudyng him whether he desired any thing else. All
tohyther, {quod} Porus, is comprysed in this word kyngly. Alexander
marueylynge both at the wisdom and at the noble stomach of the man, enlarged
his dominion over that it was before.

A certain Indian which was noised to be so cunning an archer, that he
could shot thorough a ring, was taken prisoner in ye wars, brought to
Alexander. Alexader bad him show a proof of his conning before him. Which
thing because he refused to do, the king being angry, comaun ded he shulde
be put to death. As he was led away, he say de to such as led hun, that he
had not used his feat of shotynge many days, and therefore he feared lest he
shulde have failed. When Alexander was informed hereof, that he refused not for
spite, but for fear of disworshyp, wondering at the mans wit so desirous of
glory, he let him goo not without a great reward, because he would rather
have dyed, then to have lost his rename.

The same Alexader, when at the be gynnynge he sat as judge in causes
concerning life and death, stopped one of his ears against the accuser,
Demanded why he did so, The other ear {quod} he, I keep hole for the party
defendant.

ANTIGONVS KING
ANtigonus king of Macedonie, when one said that unto kings all things be
honest and just, Troth, {quod} he, unto Barbarouse kings, but unto us those
things be only honest which be honest, and those only ryghtefull which be
rightful. He gravely reproved the flaterours saying, which would that all
things should be lefull for kings. For undoubtedly the king is not the rule
of honesty and justice, but the ministre of honesty and justice. And wold god
the ears of christian rulers were not tykled with like tales, and if they be,
that they would with like severity reject them. For what other thing say
they, which singe them this note, Quod principi placuit legis, habet uigorem:
that is to say: That likes the prince hath the strength of law? Which say
that the prince is not bound to laws, which give him two manner powers, an
ordinary power, and an absolute power, whereof the one can do what the laws,
pactes, and leages demand, the other what so ever it lusts.

When he harde say, that certain kings conspired to muade him and put him
to deeth: He answered, that he would drive them all away, as birds that
pycke up seeds in the fylde with one stone, and one shout. So little the
valiant prince esteemed the malice of his enemies.

Thrasyllus a philosopher of the sect of Cynikes (which were not much unlike
to the fryers of our time) asked an halfepenny of the king. That were not
gyfte for a king, {quod} Antigonus. Then give me an hundred pownde, {quod} the
Cynike. Nay, {quod} the king, it is not for a Cynike to take such a gyfte.
Thus both ways he shoke him of, whom he esteemed worthy of no benefyte.

After he was recovered of a grievous syckenesse, we are never a whyt the worse,
{quod} he, now. For this sycknes hath monyshed us that we be mortal. How
taught the Panym king this phylosophye worthy for a chrystyane heart?

Marsyas the kings brother had an action at the law. He required the king
that the matier might be hard secretly at home. To whom Antigonus gave answer
in this wise. If we do nothing beside the law, it shall be done much better in
open court, and in the face of all the world, than in hugger mugger. For if
thou knew thy matter to be naught, why seweste thou? if thou know it to
be good, why fleest thou the hearing of the people, and would bring a matter
of open court into a secrete chambre.

Augustus.
OCtauius Caesar Augustus emperor of Rome, when he herd say, that king
Alexander, being of the age of. xxxii. when he had conquered the most part of
the countries of the world, doubted what he shulde do all the rest of his
life, Won dered if Alexander judged it not a grea la work, well to govern an
empire or lordshyd that is gotten, then to get a great lordship. He ryghtly
noted the insacyable ambicyon of Alexander, which esteemed nont other function
worthy for a king, then to enlarge the limits of his dominion, where as it is
far, both better and harder to fur nyshe the kingdom that is fallen to a
man, with right laws and good manners, tha by force of arms to join kingdom
unto kingdom.

When the rumour of Herodes cruelte cam to Augustus ear, that he had commanded
all the children of Jewrie of thage of two years and under, to be slain, and
amongst them that his own son was slain. It is better, {quod} Augustus, to be
Herodes swyne then son. Herode was a Jewe, and Jewes absteyne from eating of
swyne flesh.

When one Paci^us asked a reward of Augustus and said it was reapported of
every man that the emperor had given him money. But thou, {quod} the emperor,
believe it not. With a merry jest signifienge that he would give him nothing.
The other waited that the emperor would remedy his shame, lest if it were
known yt the reapport were vntrew, he should be lawghed to scorn. But Augustus
showed an other remedy.

Augustus made a law for aduowtrers, how they shulde be judged. After ward
when a young man was accused and brought before him, that he should have to do
with Julia themperours daughter, he was in such fume that he ran upon the
yonge man, to have beaten him. But when the young man cyed out, Thou haste made
a law, o Caesar, the emperor was so sorry, for that he had done, that he
would eat no meat that day. So sorry he was that he obeyed not in all points
the law, which he had made to other.

Aeertayne Greek was wont thus to seek the favour of the emperor Augustus,
when he cam down of his palace, he wold present unto him some excellent verses.
Which thing when he had oftentimes done in vain, and the emperor saw he
would not leave him, him self wrote with his own hand, very neat verses in
greake: and when he esyyed ye Greek coming against him, he sent it unto him by
one of his seruautes. The Greek toke and red it, and not only with voice, but
also with countenance and gesture of body, praised the verses with great
admiracyon. And forthwith approchynge ne'er unto the emperor, did put his hand
into his purse, and plucked out a few grotes, offred them unto the emperor with
these words: It is no reward for your estate, O emperor, but if I had more,
more wold I give. At which words, when all themperours company lawghed ex
cedyngly, the emperor called his purse bearer, and commanded a thousand marks
forthwith to be diliuered him.

One which was master of the horse, whom the emperor had put out of office,
begged a great fee of him under this colour: not for the lucre of the money,
{quod} he, I desire this, but that it may be thought I gave over the office
of mine own mind, you being other ways my good and gracyouse lord. Tell
every man, {quod} Augustus, that thou hast received this fee of me, and I will
not deny it. Thus pratily he could shake of, such worldly shames children.

Herennius a ryottouse young man, soldier in his wars, he commanded to depart
the tents. The young man besought him with much lamentation and weeping saying:
How shall I dare go home again, what shall I say to my father? Show thy
father {quod} the emperor, that I have displeased the. Because the young man was
ashamed to confess, that themperoure was displeased with him, he gave him leave
to turn the tale and lay ali the blame on him.

When Augustus was now forty and above, Cinna a young man of noble birth and
nephue to Pompey, was appeached of high treason, yt he lay in a wait with
his accomplices to kylle the emperor. It was told where, when, and howe they
would have executed their felonye. For they purposed to have murdered him, as
he shulde have sacryficed. The sentence of condemnation was made ready: but in
the mean season, while Augustus the emperor {per}plexly spake now this now
that, his wife Liuia, coming in, saying the case, Do, {quod} she, that the
physicians be wont to do, which when ye accustomed remedies wol not help, do
assay the cotraries. With sharpe ex ecution, thou hast hitherunto done no good,
forgive, Cinna now bewreyed, can not hurt thy lief, thy fame he may help.
Forthwith he sent for Cinna alone to come speak with him, when he was come, he
commanded an other chair to be set for him. Cinna (said ye emperor) this
first I require of the, that you interruptest me not in my tale, a time shall be
given ye to speak. Here when Augustus the emperor had rehearsed his manifold
benefits towards Cinna, how he had saved his life, when at his conquest he was
found amongst his enmies, how he had give him again al his enheritauce
patrimony, how moreover he had promoted him to an high rowine. he demau ded
of him, why he purposed to have slain him. Cinna being therwt sore troubled,
the emperor thus ended his comunicatio. I give the thy life, Cinna, again, before
mine enemy, now a co spirour of my death a traitor. From this day let amity
begin between us, let us cotende whether I more faithfully have given the thy
life, or thou dost owe it me. And he offred him the consulshyp of Rome. Woll ye
know the end of this matter? Cinna euet af la loved Augustus best of al men:
he made him his sole heir executour. Never after that time any man conspired
his death.

Phocion.
PHocio a noble cytizen of Athens was of such constancy and per fection, that
he never was seen of any man, either to lawghe or weep. When Demosthenes on a
time said unto him: The men of Athens, o Pho cion wol surely kill the, if they
begin ones to rage: He answered in this wise In dede, they woll kill me, if
they begin to rage, but the, they woll kill, if they ones become sage, and in
their right wits. For Demosthenes spake for the most part to currye favour
of the people, and his words were more sugared then salted, more delectable
then profytable.

Alexander the worthy conqueror demanded of the Athens men, certain ships
to be given him. Forthwith they asked Phocion his advise and counsel in this
behalf: Surely, {quod} Phocion, my counsel is, that either by force of arms
ye vaynquyshe him, or be the friends of the vaynquysher. Brefly he advised them
to deny nothing unto Alexander, unless they trusted to withstand his malice
with force of arms.

Demosthenes.
DEmosthenes the renowned orator of Athens, when he was spitefully railed
upon of a certain fellow: Loo, {quod} he, I am put in to a contention and
strife; in which he that is superior is inferior, and he that ouercometh is
ouercommen. Undoutedly in knavery he that hath the upper hand declares him
self the worst man.

A pore woman had received of two strangers money to keep with this condition,
that she should not deliver it again to the one without the other. One of them
within a while after fay nynge his fellow to be dead, came in mourning clothes
to the woman, required the money. She thinking his fellow to have ben dead in
dede, delivered it. Forthwith comes the other fellow and begins to sue the
woman at the law. She being now put in utter despair, Demosthenes comes to
the bar, and thus defends the woman's cause against the demaundant. This
woman, good fellow, is ready to deliver the money that ye delivered her to keep,
but oneles thou bring thy fellow, she can not do it, for as thou alledgest thy
self, this condition was agreed upon between you, that the money shulde not be
rebayled to the one without the other. By this witty answer he saved ye sely
woman, eluded the conspiracy of the falls harlottes, whose purpose was to
receive the same money twyse.

Demosthenes on a time sailed to Corinthe, where was Lais the fairest harlot
then couted of al women in the world. He desired to lye with her a night But when
she demanded an exceeding great some of money for one nyghtes lodging, he
being thereat astonished changed his mind, saying: I bye not repentance so
dere. Signifieng, that after dishonest pleasures, repentance follows at
hand.

Dionisius.
DIonisius king of the Syracusans, when he perceived that his son, whom he
intended to leave king after him, had defiled a citizens wife: Being therewith
sore angry, asked his son, whether cuer he found any such thing in his
father. Troth, {quod} the yonge manne, for thou haddeste not a king to thy
father: Neither thou {quod} Dionisius, shalt have a king to thy son, onles
thou leave these pagiauntes.

When he perceived that his mother well stricken in age, coveted to mary again,
He said: The laws of a realm, o mother, may be broken, but the laws of
nature can not. Signifienge, it is against nature an old woman past child
berynge to mary again.

A certain stranger came to his court, and said, he would secretly common
with Dionisius, for he could show him, how he might know before, when any
went about to conspire treason against him. The king toke the man unto him, and
(all the company voided) bad him say on. Now, {quod} the fellow, give me sir
king an hundredth pound, that thou may be thought to have learned the feat
of me. He gave the money and made as though he had learned it: meruaylyng at the
mans subtle deuyse. For this faynynge was not a little profytable to fear his
subgettes from conspyrynge his death.

Demanded of a certain person whether he were idle. God forbid, {quod} he,
that this thing should ever chance unto me: Meaning that it was a right foul
thing for heads and mi nisters of common weals, not to execute diligently
their office. But assuredly herin our most dread soueraygn lord king Henry
the eight, may be a mirror and spectacle to all princes and other inferior
officers. For who ever either more prudently, or more vigilauntly hath governed
a common weal?

When he harde that one of his sub gettes had hyd his gold in the ground, he
commanded, it shulde be brought unto him. But after that the man un beselyng a
little porcyon of the gold went and dwelt in an other city and there had
bought a piece of ground, the king called him home again, and restored unto
him al his gold by cause now he began to use his riches and left to make a
thing profytable vnprofytable.

An excellent player upon instruments he allured with great promyses unto
him, bad him sing and play in the best wise he could, For the more coningly he
played and sang, the greater reward he should have. When he had played before
the king a good sort of days very curyously, and the king gave him nothing, he
began to ask his reward. Why {quod} Dionisius, the reward that I promised
the, I have faithfully paid. How so, {quod} the fellow? there was not one penny
given me. yes I have given the, {quod} the king, pleasur for pleasur, For I
have no les delighted the with hope, then thou me with syngyng.

The same Dionisius wonderynge at the exceeding faythfulnes of Damon and
Pithias: I pray you, {quod} he, receive me also in to your frendshyp. For
Dionisius had set unto the one a day of death, and when he desired leave for
a few days to goo home to his house to set all things in ordre, the other
became his pledge upon this coditio, if he returned not at the day set, his
felaw shulde dye for him. He cam again, desyryng rather to dye, then to
deceive his friend. The king not only pardoned the man whom before he had
condemned, but also with great wonder desired to be the third friend amongst
them. Dionisius this mans son was expul sed his realm: So when one said un to
him: What doth thy learning now help the? Truly, {quod} he, thus much it
helps me, that I can easily bear so great a change of fortune. He dyed not
for thought, he killed not him self, as other men be wont in this case but went
to Corynth, there taught a grammar school.

Agathocles.
AGathocles had a potter to his father. Now when he had conquered Sicile, and
was proclaimed king: he was wont upon his table by his golden pots to set
erthen pot tes, and showing them unto the young men, to say: Where before I
made such pots (showing the erthen) now by my vigilaunce prowess, I make
such pots, poyntyng to the golden. He was not ashamed of his former state,
but thought it more gloriouse, by virtue to win a kingdom, then by
inheritauce to receive that is least.

Archelaus.
KIng Archelaus, when at a feast one of his familiars, but somewhat
unshamefast, begged a cer tayne cup of him, commanded his seruaunt forthwith,
to give it to Euripides, which also was there present. When the other wodered
at this dede Thou, {quod} the king, art worthy to ask, and not to receive:
but this man is worthy to receive without asking.

Themistocles.
THemistocles that noble capitain of the Athenienses, being required of
Simonides the poet, that in a certain matter he wold give for his sake a false
iugement, answered. Neither thou shalt be a good poet, if beside the measures
of musyke thou make thy verses, neither I a good ruler, if I pronounce any
thing against the laws.

His daughter had sundry wooers, but he preferred an honest man of small
substance before a great rich young ma. His friends meruelyng why he did so: I
had rather have, {quod} he, a man without money, then money without a man.

Aristides.
ARistides for his just and true dea lyng surnamed the rightuouse, administered
the common weal, always trusting to him self only, not sekyug either
counsel or aid of any other. He much abhorred felaushyps, lest he might
be at any time inuegled by the force and power of friends to do any thing
otherwise, then the tenor of justice and honesty required. Lord god howe
greatly did this man flee all parcyalytie and factions, which for none other
thing eshued frendshyps, but because he would not by them be enforced to do
any thing that were not right, or be constrained to absteyne from that which he
judged available to the common wealth.

He was at variance with Themistocles, with whom on a time when he was coupled
to go in embassage in to a strange country, as they were going: Will thou, o
Themistocles, {quod} he, that in these moutaynes we lay down our malice
displeasure? For if thou will, at our return we shall take it again. He
preferred the com mon utility before his private affeccyons. For of theyse
commonly spryn geth all the destruction of mans life.

When the men of Athens, were so sore styred against him, yt they went about
to banyshe him, by a certain kind of codemnation, which they cal led
Ostracismus, because every man shulde write in a shell, the name of him, whom
they would have exiled (for so commonly were men of great au thorytie amongst
them banished) a certain man of the country unlettered brought him his
shelle, and desy red him to write Aristides name in it: To whom Aristides said:
Why good fellow, know thou Aristides? When he answered no, but that it
grieved him, yt he should be called rightuouse, Aristides held his peace, and
wrote his name in the shell, and so delivered it the fellow again. So myldly
he bare his imuste codemnation. Certes, it was a right grave testimony of an
innocent life, that of so great a multitude, there was none, which could lay
to his charge, any other thing, then the surname of a rightuouse ma, which
name yet he gave not him self, but his friends, yea the people them selfes gave
him it.

When he shulde go into exile, he held up his hands to the gods, besought
them that they would so pro sphere the maters of the men of Athens that
Aristides shulde never come in their minds. For in things afflict and
troublesome, the people be wont to flee, unto excellent wise and renou med men:
which thing came to pass. For the third year after his outlawrie, when
Xerxes went about to invade Athens, Aristides was called home again from his
exile.

At a certain assemble, wherein Aristides withstode, but in vain, the rea sons
of Themistocles, departing away, with an open and clear voice he testyfied,
that the matiers and affairs of the Athenienses shulde never well prosper, no
go forward, onles both he and Chemistocles were cast in to preson. He desired
rather to go to preson, then that for the debate and strife of two, the common
weal shulde be hindered.

What time he sat as judge to determyn a certain matter, between par tie and
party, and the one party to the enten he would kindle Aristides against his
adversary, made rehearsal beside his matier of many things, which tother had
spoken against Aristides, Aristides interrupting him said, Good fellow, let
these matiers alone now, if he hath any thing her ted the, speak: For at this
present time I sit as judge to the and not to my self.

Chemistocles said in a certain as semble where the citizens were gathered
together, that he had found out a counsel, which highly perteyned to the
honour dignity of the city, but the thing was of such sort that it might not
be published and declared before them all. Here ye people agreed, that he
shulde disclose it to Aristides, and if he allowed it, they all would allow it.
Now when Chemistocles had declared unto Aristides that he thought of
burning the place where the Greeks ships stood (for so should it come to
pass, that the Athenienses shulde be rulers and lords over all Greece)
Aristides coming forth to the people, said, Undoubtedly nothing is more
profitable, then the cousayle of Chemistocles, but again, nothing is more
dishonest then the same. Which voice when the people harde, they forbad
Chemistocles to make any mo words hereof. Assuredly here the citizens of Athens
(for in them then was the governance of the same) showed them selfes to be of
a wonderful noble courage, in that they abandoned, and utterly refused profit
joined with disworshvp, and therewithal declared also, howe great the
authority of renowned virtue is in that they doubted not to commytte the
fortune of the hole come weal, to the iugement of one man.

Aristides was choson on a time, to be tresaurour of the city, which office
when he had executed very purely and vncorruptly, yet he was accused of
Themistocles, and condemned of extortion. But through favour of the most
worshipful and honest citizens, he was not only released of the amer ciament,
which was assesed upon him, but was appointed also again to the same office.
Which by simulation even for the nones, he so administered that omyttynge his
former severity and rowghnes, he showed him self gentle and facyle, to such
as loved to wax rich with the detriment of the common wealth. By whose labour
it came to pass, that the people ye third time with high favours assigned left
sons the same office to Aristides.

Then spake he and said: For the well executing of mine office ye condemned me,
and now because contrary to equite I have granted many things to the
spoilers of the city, ye have judged me worthy of honour. Certes, this man
knew, by what means he might grow in favour with the people, save yt he had
rather be ryghtu ouse, then gloriouse.

When Aristides being wrongful lie condemned to dye, was led to exe cution,
one of his enemies spat on his face: He did nothing else but wyped his face,
and smiling said to the officer that went with him. Admonish this person,
that hereafter he gape not so vnmanetly.

Pericles.
PEricles the Atheniense, to his friend requyrynge him to bear false witness
for him, whereunto was knit an other, that is to say, a perturye, answered:
he would be his friend but unto the aultre. Signifieng, that so far forth a
man may do pleasure to his friend, as he go not beyond the bounds of religion
and honesty.

When the eclyps of the son suddenly chased, Pericles saying other very many,
but in especial the gouer nour of the navy dismayed and sore astomed thereat,
with his cloak covered the governors face, and asked him, wither he thought
this to be a strange token: when he answered no. what difference then is there,
{quod} he, save that the thing that now causes this dat kenesse is greatter
then my clooke. Meaning full prudently, that by the coming between of the
moon, the son is hid frome us, even as the clooke being caste between,
let the other men's syghte, and that the thing which naturally is done, is
no strange token, or such monstruouse thing, as men should fear.

Diogenes.
DIogenes a philosopher of the sect of Cynickes, unto one which counsayled
him, that now in his age he shulde repose him self, and cease from labour,
answered: If I ran in a runnynge place for the maystrie, shulde I when I
were now ne'er the gowle, flacke my runnynge, or rather increase it? Rightly he
judged that the study of virtue the nearer one draws to his end, is so much
the more to be enforced and hasted, because it is a great shame, then to ware
faint and cold from an honest purpose.

He dysalowed the madness of men, that would bye and sell things precyouse for
least, and again the vilest things for most: For an image or picture, he
said, which was a very vile thing, was sold for much money, where as a
busshel of meal, which was a right precyouse thing, was bowght for very little
money. The image is nothing necessary to mans life, but without meal we can
not live. Wherefore, {quod} he, it were more convenient that meal were much
derer the images or pyctures. The philoso pher esteemed the pryses of things by
their natural use, where as the people esteems them by folyshe persuasyon.

Alexader the great on a time came to Diogenes to se him, and thus he spake
unto him: I am come, o Diogenes, to help the, because I se thou lackest many
things. To whom Dio genes made answer: Whether of us two is more nedye, I
which beside my scryppe and clooke desire nothing, or thou which not contented
with thyn own realm, that thy father left the, casteste thy self in to so
many hasardes, to get the a larger dominion, in so much that the hole world
semethe skase enough for thy insacyable cove tyse?

The superstytion of men that were feared with dreams, he thus mocked: The
things, {quod} he, that ye do waking ye nothing regard, but the things that
slepynge ye dream, ye carefully and busyly search out.

A certain rich man vnlerned, but royally clad, he called a sheep with a
golden flees.

When Diogenes saw the officers led one, taken for stelynge a cup, out of
the treasorie: Lo, {quod} he, the great thieves lead the little thief. Would
god this could not be truly spoken upon some christen officers, by whom
otherwyles he is brought to the galowes, which have stolen the value of
twenty pens, where they wax rich with great theftes or pyllages rather and
extortions, without punishment.

What time Philyp king of the Macedonians had an army lying at Cheronia,
Diogenes came thither, anon he was take of the sowldiours, brought to the
king, which as soon as he saw Diogenes (who was unknown unto him) cried out
angrily a spy, a spy. To whom Diogenes forthwith answered: In dede Phylyp,
I am a spy, for I am come hither to espy thy madness, which not being
contented with the realm of Macedonie, by thy incrochynge of other men's realms,
put thy self in danger to lose both thyn own king dome also thy life.
The king wonderynge at the mans frank speech, bold language, commanded he
shulde escape without any hurt to be done unto him.

He said, love is the busynes of idol personnes: forasmoche as this affection
commonly assails those that be given to ydelnes and ease. So it comes to
pass, that while they loiter in ydelnesse, they fall in to a thing most
full of busynes, and yet in the mean season they do no good thing at all.

He said, good men be the images of god: For as god is best, so it is his
{pro}pertie to do well to all men, to hurt no man. This image shines and is
espted much better in wise good men then in carved or graven stocks and
stones. For as much as god is without body.

He said couetyse is the mother city, and head of all evils. Not much
swaruynge from Salomon which calls it the rote of all evils.

Demanded, what beast hath the most venemouse bytyng. If of wyld beasts,
{quod} he, thy questyon be, a backbyter, if of tame beasts, a flaterer. For a
backbyter outwardly pretedeth hatred, but the flatterer inwardly under the
personage of a friend, hurts much more grievously.

Demanded, what countryman he was, he answered, a worldly man. Signyfienge
that a wise man, where so ever in the world he be, lives in his own
country.

Diogenes was asked how he wold be buried, Cast my dead body, {quod} he, in
the fyldes without pomp of buryalles. What, {quod} his friends, to the fowls
of the air and to wild beasts? No not so, {quod} Diogenes, but lay my staff
by me, wherewith I may dry ue them away. Howe can that be? {quod} they, thou
shalt have no feeling A, nd how, {quod} he, then shall their pyckynge and
tearing hurt me, if I feel them not?

To the redress of man life he said, be requysite either feythfull friends
or sharpe enemies, because the one do aduertyse, and the other re preue us: So
either of them by diverse ways but a like be profytable, while we learn by
them our defaults and vices.

Aristotle.
ARistotle the philosopher master to Alexader the great, was wont to say,
that the rotes of lernyng were bitter, but the fruits sweet very pleasant.

Demanded, what thing waxes soon old, he answered, thank. Meaning that the
remembrance of injury sticks very fast, but the memory of a good turn is
gone anon.

He was accustomed to say, that three things be most necessary for the
obteynynge of wisdom, nature, doctrine, and exercise.

When Aristotle was informed that certain lewd felawes had railed upon him.
As lunge, {quod} he, as I am not with them, let them beat me with whyppes, if
that can do them good. Signifienge yt those things ought utterly to be
despised of a wise man, which do nothing hurt him at all, onles he thinks
him self hurt.

Demanded, what a friend is, One soul, {quod} he, in two bodies.

He said that some men so spare, as though they should live ever, again, other
some so spend and lash out, as though they should dye within an hour after.

When Aristotle was asked howe much the wise and learned do differ from the
vnlerned ydiotes, he answered, so much as the quycke dyffre from the dead.
Meaning that a man without knowledge is a block rather then a man.

He said, beauty is of more strength efficacy then any epystle or letters to
set forth or commend a person.

He had this often in his mouth. O friends, there is no friend. Meaning that
there be many friends in name, but few or none in dede.

He said, noma should either praise him self or dysprayse him self, because
the one utters a mans vain glory, the other bewreyeth his folly.

The same Aristotle aducrtysed me to consydre and mark pleasours not coming
but departing, that is to say, not before, but behind. For when pleasures be
coming, with their peynted faces they flatter us, but when they depart, they
leave behind them repentance and sorrow.

When one blamed him because he gave his almoyse to an evil man. I pytyed,
{quod} he, not the manners, but the man. Assuredly a good man succourreth also
the wicked in necessity: For this duty we owe, though not to the merits of
him that is helped, yet to nature. Also it is possible he may be good, which
now is evil.

Thales.
THales being demanded what is oldest of all, answered, God, why so? because
he was without beginning. Demanded what is fairest of all, he answered, the
world, for it is the work of god, and nothing can be fairer than it. What
greatest? place, for it receives al: what swiftest? the mind, for it runs
through all the thoughts of ma: what strongest? necessity or destyney, for it
passes all: what wisest? time, for it finds out al.

He said there is no difference between life and death, because they be both
natural alike, and death is no more evil then is the birth of man. And when
one asked him, why he then dyed not? he answered again, even because there is
no difference. For if I shulde rather desire the one then the other, so shulde
I make a difference.

Demanded what thing were harde, He answered, a man to know him self.
Undoubtedly the people iud geth nothing easier then this. For we see other
men things better then our own, every man is a flatterer of him self.
Again when Thales was demanded what thing is easy, he answered, to give
good counsel to an other man.

When he was asked howe a man might most easily bear his misfortune. If,
{quod} he, he would behold his en myes pressed with greater mysfortunes. For
many men by the contempla cyon of other men's felicite and wealth make their
calamytie more greuouse unto them.

When Thales was demanded how a ma might best and most justly live: If, {quod}
he, the things which he rebukes in others, he commytteth not the same
himself.

Solon.
SOlon the sage was wont to say that tyrants friends be very like unto
casting counters, which be set at the pleasure of the caster of accoptes,
otherwhyles worth many thousands, otherwhyles very little, other while
nothing.

Demanded how it might be that least wrong might be done amongst men: If,
{quod} he, they that suffer not the wrong woll be as sore grieved therewith, as
they that suffered it in ded for undoubtedly who so ever transgresses the
laws, hurts not one co moner nor subject, but the commone weal, as much as
in him is. But now while when other be hurt, we (though we be common officers
appointed to se due corretion for vices) either sit styll or rejoice also
thereat, without doubt we give audacity and boldness to very many to commytte
all kind of myschyef, because either for folysh pity or for lack of
christyan charity thinking the matter appertains nothing to us, we woll not
see the good laws of good princes executed upon offenders.

Pittacus.
PIttacus made a law, that they which committed any crime in their
dronckenesse, shulde have double punishment.

He allowed victories gotten without shedynge of blood. For such as were
gotten with much blood of the citesens he judged no victories.

He was wont to say to such as went about to be married. Equalem tibi ducito,
Marie thy match or fellow. For he had learned by experience what incommodities
commonly chance by over high marriages.

Antisthenes.
ANtisthenes the Atheniense being demanded what manner lernyng is most
necessary, answered, to vnlerne evils. For that thing is not only first,
but also most harde.

He said that virtue is a thing of works and that it needs not many words
nor much learning.

He said a wise man lived not after the laws ordained of men, but after the
rule of virtue. Meaning that things be not therefore to be done or eschued,
because the laws bid or forbydde the same, but because the self rayson
tells, that this is honest, this dishonest. Again the laws pre scrybe not
all things, but the rule of virtue teaches everywhere what is ho nest, and
what otherwise. Certes, a co strained virtue is no virtue.

Anacharsis.
ANathacsis the Scythian said, that a vine bears three cloisters, one of
pleasure, an other of dronkenes, the third of displeasure. Signifyenge, that a
moderate vsynge of wine is pleasant, because it slakes the thyrste, a larger
vsynge gendreth dronkennes, most large use of wine causes strife, murder, and
dyseases.

A certain man of Athens vpbray ded him, because he was a Scythian borne. My
country, {quod} he, is to me a reproach, but thou art a reproach to thy
country.

Demanded what in a man is the worst thing, and what the best, he answered,
the tongue. Meaning that the self same part of a man brings most utility,
if it be with right reason governed, and again is most peryllouse and
hurtful, if otherwise.

This Anacharsis was accustomed to say, that it were better for a man to have
one friend much worth, then ma ny friends nothing worth.

He was also wont to say, that laws be like spyders webs, wherein the weakest
and most feeble beasts be chat ched and stycke fast, but the strongest break
out. So laws do by nde the poor and mean persons, but the rich cobs
escape vnpunysshed.

zeno.
ZEno Cittieus to a certain young ma which was always pratlyng, said, I trow
(good fellow) thy ears be fallen into thy tongue. Declaring hereby, that it
shulde be a young mans property to hear much speak little.

Demanded what is a friend, he answered an other I. Signifyenge that an
entier and hearty friend no les loves his friend then him self.

King Antigonus to such as won dered why he made so much of zeno, answered,
because where as he hath received much of me, yet he lives never the softer a
life. When he harde that he was dead, he sighed, saying: What a loker and
examiner of my life have I now lost? Forzeno was a man of most sharpe tugement,
most far from all flattery. Zeno was a man of most sharpe judgment, and
most far from all flat rye.

Zeno had a bond man which imbeseled away certain things from him: he
commanded he shulde be whipped: When the bond man excused him self under this
colour saying, It was his destiney that he shulde steal: which destyney it
lay not in him to withstand. It is also, {quod} zeno, thy destiney to be
whipped. The seruaunt alleged the necessity of destyney to the excuse of his
fault, zeno returned that necessity also to his punishment, that that was
also his destyney.

A yonge man whose tongue never stinted babblyng, he toke up with this propre
saying: For this purpose we have two ears but one tongue, that we should hear
very much, and speak very little.

Cleanthes.
CLeanthes was so desirous of ler nyng, being a very poor man that he was
glad to draw wa la carry tankerdes at nights and marninges, to the intent he
might get wherewith to find him self to school in the days. In so much that
on a time he said to his familiars, when he had gotten a little money, by
such occupations, and throwynge it down. Loo Cleanthes is hable to find at
school an other Cleanthes, if him lusts.

When one did hytte in his teeth, that he was very fearful. Therefore, {quod}
he, I sin very little. Undoubted lie such fearfulness is good, which
frayeth men from foul things, and makes them ware and circumspect.

When he reasoned with a certain yonge man, whom he saw, was not very attent,
no ready to hear him: He asked, whether he perceived what he said, when the
yonge man said, yea, why then, {quod} he, perceive not I howe thou dost
perceive.

Isocrates.
ISocrates the Rhetoricien, who was so fearful and tymorouse of nature, yt he
dared never make oration openly in presence of the people, being demanded
why, since he him self was not able to make air oration in an assemble of
people, he yet taught other: Because whetstones, {quod} he, them selfes can not
cut, yet they make knyfes and weapons sharpe able to cut other things.

Demanded, what manner thing is rhetoric, he answered, To make of little
things great, and of great things little.

When Isocrates saw one Sopho cles the writer of Tragedies following after a
very fair person, with whose beutye he was taken in love: he said. O
Sophocles, a man ought not only to keep his hands cotinet, but also his
eyes. A saying, truly, not unworthy for a christen man.

Philoxenus.
PHiloxenus on a time being at supper with king Dionisius, when he espied
that a Mullette fyshe of an excedynge bygnes, was set at the kings mease,
where as a very little mullette was set before him, he toke the little mullet and
laid it to his ears. At which dede when Dionisius the king had great
marvel, and demanded the cause, why he so did: In my hands, {quod} he, is
Galatea, concerning whom, I fain would have asked certain quetyons of this
fyshe. And he saith, he knows as yet little or nothing, by reason of his
tender age, but he hath a great grandfather he saith, which lies now in
your dysche, who can tell very much of the matter, if I might talk with him.
The king being herwith delyted, and made merry, sent him his Mullet.

Here ends the first book.
Londini in aedibus Richardi Tauerneri. Cum priuilegio, ad imprimendum solum.

The second book of the Garden of wisdom, wherein are contained witty,
pieasaunt, and net sayenges of renowned personages collected by Rycharde
Taverner

Anno. M. D. XXXIX.

Cum priuilegio adimprimendum solum.


