The second book of the Garden of wisdom, wherein are contained witty,
pleasant, and net sayenges of renowned personages collected by Rycharde
Taverner

Anno. M. D. XXXIX. Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

Rycharde Taverner to the gentle readers.
I Confess my self a debtor unto you, gentle readers, in yt I promised in my
for mer book to add the second Assuredly, although I have marked that this
argument of writing is not ingrate unto you, as well for the variety of the
matter, as for the sharpness of the sentencies (for which consideration they
were called of the Greeks Apophthegmata, that is to say, short and quycke
speakynges) yet for my sondry occupations where with I am dyuersly interrupted,
I shall not be able to make my promise good, namely, in such sort as I may
satisfy, either your expectation, or mine own. Wherefore I must desire you,
not only to pardon mine incondite and gross phrase, on which ye shall happen to
stomble, but also to wynke at the cofuse order herin. For ordre in this book, I
protest, I keep none, but according to the proverb that first comes to the
hand that I write. And thus fare you well, and se ye favour mine honest
endeavours.

Here follows the second book of the guard of wisdom conteynyng witty and
pleasaut saienges of renowned persons, select by Richard Taverner.
Of Achilles.
A Chilles was asked of Aiax which were ye greatest hardest labours yt ever he
toke upon him. He answered, those yt he sustained for his friends. Again Aiax
asked him, which were the most pleasant labours, yt ever he suffered, He
answered even those same. Meaning hereby, that a noble and worthy personage
adorned in dede with heroical virtues, brenneth with a certain wonderful
desire and lust, to further ye common weal, with which desire being pricked
and inwardly, tickeled he valiantly ventures upon most high and ieoperdous
maters, nought regarding his own private weal, but his countries utility and
benefit. When with this noble courage with this ardet zele and stomach he is
thus rapt, doubtless no thing is sweater, then upon things most diffycile and
weyghtye to enter pryse and to go through in, even as unto a musicien nothing
can be more pleasant, then the most conning exercises of his art

Alfonsus king of Aragon.
A Certain knight had ryottously prodigally wasted al his patrimony lades
which were very great, and moreover had indebteh him self excedyngly much.
His friends in the court were suitors to ye king for him, yt at least his
body might not be imprisoned for his debts. Alfonsus makes them this
answer. If he had bestowed this so great riches either in ye service of me
his prince or upon the comune weal of his country, or in releuynge of his
kynsfolkes, I could hear your suit. Now sith he hath spent so great substance
upon his body, it is mete, that his body suffer for it. Let this be a lesson to
all prodigalities children to pluck back their fete betimes ere all be
wasted, least if they do not, they hap to be served as this wise gentleman
was.

When he herd say, that a certain king in Spain shulde say, that learning
was not comely for princes and noble men, he made an exclamation and said, this
was never no mans voice but an oxes. Assuredly although perchaunche all kind
of letters be not mete for princes: yet the study of Gods laws, the
political sciences, moral letters, and the reading of Cronicles be so
necessary unto them, that without these, it shall be very hard for them, to
furnysh and dyscharge the offyces whereunto they be appointed.

He was accustomed to say, that wedded persons may thus pass over their lives
quietly and without complaynynges, if the husband become deaf, and the wife
blind. Signifyenge, that womankind is much subject to the sycknes of
gelousie, whereof undoubtedly springs great variauce plaints. Again, that
the husband is very sore noyed and greuen with the iangelyng and unquiet
tongue of the wife, which greuaunce he shulde lack, if he were deaf, nether
should she be vexed with the suspicion to be made Cokequen, if she wanted her
eye syghte. But to this commodity may wise me women without detrimet blemish of
their body very well attain, if the husband will not hear that he hears,
nor the woman see that she sees.

This king Alfonse was wonderful courteous and familiar with all that resorted
to his court. Wherefore on a time certain his specyall friends cousailled him
to beware, least his overmuch familiarity might bread him cotempte, of
cotempte might ensue great peril, and consequently destruction to his person.
He answers. Nay, it is more to befeared, least severity and roughnes get
us the envy grudge of our commons whereupon hangs a greater peril of
destruction, than upon gentle behaviour.

When one of his knights was always crauynge somewhat of him nevertheless
forthwith lasshed out again what soever he received at the kings hand: Verily
{quod} the king, if I wold continue to give ye such things as thou ask, I
should sooner beggar my self than enrich the. For he that gives ye, doth
nothing else but pour water into a botoles tubbe.

Demanded whom of his subjects he had most dear unto him, he answered,
those that fear rather for me tha me. He meant, that those only be the hearty
friends, which rather love their prince, then fear him.

Also when he was asked whether he was more bound to his books tha to his
weapons or arms, he answered: Out of my books I have learned both arms and
the laws of arms knowlegyng by this saying that he might impute all
together unto learning.

This King Alfonse delighted much in his cognisauce, which was a Pelecane
diggyng her breast with her bill and launchinge out her own blood to fed
therwyth her yonge. To this picture he added this inscriptio Pro leg pro
grege, that is to say, for the law and for the flock. Signifyenge, that a
prince ought with a noble courage to veture upon al dangers, as well for the
defence of his people as for ye auaucemet of true godlines religio.

Of Athanasius.
AThanasius was an invincible defendour of ye catholyke troth, who because ye
most pestilet sect of the Arries could not overcome with scriptures argumetes,
they had conspired to lay feloniouse crimes to his charge, so to put him down.
Wherefore through their maliciouse suggestios they had so kindled ye emperor
Constacius against this most godly bishop, yt he straight awarded out his
commission unto such as they them selves named, to sit upon him. Two
principal crimes were laid to his charge, the one was, that he had rauyshed a
woman, the other, that he had cut of, a dead masarme to serve for
enchantment. For the proof of ye first, they had hired a woman, to give
evidence against him yt he had ravished her. For the probation of the other
crime, they had gotten one Arsenius sometime Athanasius lcctour, which for
fear of the bishops chastenynge, whom he had offended was fled away from him.
This fugitive Arsenius the Arrians had hyd out of men's syghtes for a good space
to the intent it might be the better believed that he were dead. Nevertheless
this Arsenius when he had learned througly what they had in hand against his
old master, whether he abhorred their detestable cospiracye, or whether he
was desyrouse by this occasyon to come in favour again with his bishop,
pryuily by night sted his way out of the secrete place where he was hidden, and
arriving at Tyre came to Athanasius, unto whom he opened all the matter. Here
this noble prelate as he was passing holy, so also being of a right sharpe wit
(for according to the Lords commandment he had joined the simplicite of the
dove with the prudence of the serpent) he gave Arsenius in commandment to hyd
him self, till time he shulde be called forth for the purpose. To be short,
the council is assembled, the commissyonred, the woman appears, the bier of
a dead man to the terrible sight of all that were present is brought in, a
dead mans arm cut of being laid upon the bier, is showed forth. Men's minds
were stricken at the sight hereof with indignation and hatred. For who wold have
thought that these things had been feigned, namely of prestes? The woman which
had her lesso ready taught her before, begins to tel, how on a time she
harboured this bishop athanasius in her house, and how in ye night season when
she suspected nothing les then any such matter, she was by him rauyshed
perforce. Athanasyus was brought forth to make answer to this accusatio. Here
Athanasius of an exceeding pregnaut wit, secretly warned Timothie his pressed to
couterfeyt him make answer in his stead to the woman. For he perceived full
well yt the woman knew him not so much as by sight. When she had ended her
accusatio, the thus begins Timothie in his masters name Say thou, woman,
I had ever carnally to do with the that also by force? Yea even thou, {quod}
the woman, thou I say if thou remember in such a place at such a time
did forcybly rauyshe me. Some of them were ashamed saying ye woman's sklander
thus so easily detected and auoyeded. Yet nevertheless they did not acquit
Athanasius neither punyshe ye woman for her sklaunder, because the self same
were his judges and his accusers. They came tha to tother crime loo, say they,
this matter is to plain, here ye se ye arm of Arsenius, which to what purpose
it was by the, cut of, declare thou Athanasius unto us. Here with like
sharpnes of wit the prudent bishop asks the, whether they ever well knew
Arsenius. Some of them make answer they knew his face very well. Athanasyus
desires leave to send for one that he shulde have need offor this matter. They
granted him. To make short tale, Arsenius is brought forth, his face
discovered, Loo {quod} ye bishop here is Arsenius a live, behold his right
arm, behold his left, hole sownd, now howe yonder arm comes cut of,
declare you. Let this exemple of this most holy liver admonyshe us to fense
our selfes ayenst the wyly and crastye foxes with columbyne prudencie, for all
hasardes and chances.

Sigismund The emperor.
THe emperor Sigismud had in his court many years a servant, upon who he
never bestowed any notable benefyte for all the service he did him. On a time
as the emperor rode through a water it chanced his horse to stale. At which
thing his old servant lawghed said to his companions riding with him before
theperour, yt theperours horse had like property with his master. The emperor by
chance hearing this, asked what he meant, Mary, {quod} the seruaunt. As your
horse by his stalyng adds more water to the rywer where is already abundance
of water, even so doth your Majesty. For to such as be wealthy already flow
in riches ye give more riches. Here theperour perceiving he was closely
touched of illiberatye, in that he never rewarded his old seruaunt with any
worthy benefyte, answered in this wise. Assuredly, I never wated a good will to
further advance my friends and trusty servants, but ye must consider that
gifts of princes happen not always to them that have deserved them, but to
such only as the fatal providence of God appoints. And this God willing,
shall I euidentlye declare unto the, so soon as, my busynes dyspetched, I
shall have gotten any opportunity and leyser. A while after, leyser to his
desire obtained, he comaundeth two boxes of like fascion and proporcion to be
brought forth, he fylleth the one with gold, tother with lead of like weight,
he byddeth his said servant to chose whether box he wold. The servant peysyng
now this, now that box, stricken with great perplexity which he might best
take, at last chase that which contained the lead which when he opened saw yt
lead, thou see now, {quod} The emperor, that the fault is not in me that thou
were not amongst other promoted of me, but in thy own misfortune. Declarynge
hereby very prudently, that the happy success of things only chances unto
men from God above.

This Emperor being much praise worthy for other things, in this one thing
was excedynglye to be commended, that like as his self loved the knowledge of
tongues and of good letters, so he always studied to advance and promote men
that excelled other in learning. For which thing when he was blamed of certain
princes of Almayne which hated good letters, that he so exalted men of lowe
birth for the commendation of learning: Why, {quod} he, shulde I not love
such as nature would have excel the rest of men? The Almaynes do attribute
very much to nobility of blood. But ye prudent Emperor observed, that in
learned personages was a thing of much more worthynes nobleness, then in
stocks. They have the walls of their houses portered with arms, with
conisaunces, and with the images of their ancestors, learned me have their
mind furnished and decked with good disciplines. Wherefore, as by nature the
mind is more excellent, then ye body, so the ornametes of ye wit be far
fairer, then the badges of outward nobility. He that hath nothing else, then
the arms and images of his ancestors, in opinion is noble rather the in
dede. But who so is adorned decked with virtue, fro whens flows also that
vulgar nobility, hath the true and unfeigned nobility. The truth of this
matter declares to al the world the most noble king Henry the eight, who to ye
most royal nobility of stock hath also joined the most true very nobility
that is to say renown of learning, of prudence, of grave iugement mete for so
noble magnifycent a prince. Would god al other noble me of birth would take
exemple of his Majesty to purchase unto them this renown.

Plotinus.
PLotinus a philosopher was desired by a certain painter named Amelius yt he
would suffer him to porture draw out the form pycture of his body. The
philosopher wold in no wise suffer him saying: Is it not enough for men to
carry about with them these images (pointynge to their bodies) but they must
also leave behind them to their ofsprynge and posterity the images of their
images to be looked and gazed upon? This panym philosopher judged with
Pithagoras, that mans body is but a sheathe or case as it were of the mind,
which after a manner it expresses and resembles, and that he sees ye least
part of man, which sees and makes nothing else but the body. Assuredly
though pyctures, as well of the living as of the dead do offentymes stir and
move the dull mind of man, yet it can not be denied, but that pyctures or
images of the body without records and monumetes of the mind to put men in
remembrance of the noble virtues of such as be represented by ye images, be
much more hurtful, then profytable. Images of sayn tes be lay mes books I
grant, so that lay men be taught and instructed, what great faith in Christ,
what exemple of good living, what patience what bearing of Christ's cross,
they had, that be resembled by those images, while they were conuersaunts here
in earth.

Cyrus the elder.
CYrus king of Persia was wont to say yt no man ought to take upon him to rule
other onles he were better, the those whom he toke upon him to govern.
Meaning, that this is the principal offyce and function of a prince, to force
for others, and to counsel for the publyke profytes and commodities, but this
can not be done, oneles he surmount excel the rest of men in wise dome, in
vigilauncie, in honesty, holy nes of mind in godlynes. Now it is not the
birth of man that brings this to pass, but right institution, good letters,
experience of things.

When ye Persians, because their country was hylly and rough, coveted to
change it with a champion more gentle soil, their king wold not suffer them,
saying, that even as graftes sedes be, so be the manners of men changed
according to the nature of the country. Meaning hereby that he would have hard
men, painful and such as shulde be given to labour. For a delicate and
fyrtyle region gendreth delicate and slothful persons.

Cyrus absteyned his eyes fro beholding of the fair lady Panthea. And when
Araspus said unto him, that the woman was of an excellent beauty, and worthy
for the eye sight of a prince, the king answered: Even for this self cause O
Araspus we ought the rather to abstain from lokynge upon her. For if now I
obeyeng thy counsel shulde resort unto her while I am as yet at leyser,
perchance she mought so persuade me yt I shulde repare oft unto her yea eve
when I shulde have no leyser, and so be fain to sit styll by her side, my
seriouse busynes and affairs neglected. Featly he shyfted away the argument
that seemed lasciuiouslye to entice a king or ruler to love a bewtyfull woman,
from loving such. Let Chrystiane magistrates and rulers take here an holsom
document and lesson of a pamym prince, sensuality set a part, earnestly to
remember their functio and offyce whereunto they be called of god almighty, unto
who for the same they shall rendre just accomptes, be they now never so halt
and careless.

Artoxerxes.
ARtoxerxes King of Persia surnamed the mindful, when a certain pore ma
presented him with a very great apple, he received it excedynge thankfully,
and said: Now in faith this fellow seems to me to be such a person that if
a man would commytte a city to his keeping, he could make it of a little a
great one.

At an other time a certain other vplandyshe man perceiving that diverse men
brought diverse presents unto the king, having none other thing to present
him with, he toke out of ye next river both his hands full of water with a
cherefull countenance offered it unto the King. The king herwith being
delyted, commanded a pot of gold to be given him rewarded him furthermore
with a great sum of money. Let other nations wonder at this Artoxerxes.
English men which have king Henry theygt to their Sovereign Lord think this
but a tryfle to his incomparable humanity.

When Adides Japson had railed all at large very despitefully upon the king
with vnfyttyng and opprobriouse words, ye king thus farforth revenged him, he
pronounced by the Captain of his guard, that it was lefull for Japson to
speak upon the king what he would, but again it was lefull for the king upon
Japson both to speak and to do what he would. Truly we are very straightly
charged by gods comaundemet in no wise to rail nor gest upon our rulers
forasmoch as they represent unto us the parson even of god him self. Yea he
adourneth them with the honora ble title of his own name calling the Gods.

When Artoxerxes being on a time put to flyghte, all his provision of vittayles
taken away, was fain to eat dry figs barley bread, O Lord, {quod} he, fro
howe great pleasure have I hitherto been kept back? Here ye king proved it
true that Socrates the witty Philosopher was wont to say. Optimum condimentum,
fames, that is to say, hungre is the best sauce. Assuredly nothing better
savours meates drynkes, than hungre and thrust, beside that it is both most
holsom to the body and most profitable to the soul. For surfeit and
dronkenes not only cast the body in to sundry maladies and sickenesses, but
also do distempere the mind, make man no man, but worse then a brute beast, and
(that is worst of all) bring gods most terrible curse and displeasure upon him.

The same Artoxerxes being on a time very sore pressed with thirst in manner
lost for lack of drink, Peribarzenes his chamberlain sekyng about for drink
and not finding any other, brought at last fro a shepherd a greasye botel of
water not all of the clearest. This water when the king had drunk quyte and
clean up, being asked whether that drink liked him well, he called God to
wytnesse, yt he never drancke wine more pleasant, then was this water, nor
never water, were it never so pure, more sweet then this seemed. And afterward,
the king espyenge the sheparde in his court, which had given him this
water, made him of a pore sheparde a rich gentleman. Such a thing it is to
give a benefyte in time.

Orontes.
ORontes son in law to king Artaxerxes, when the king was grievously
displeased angry against him, he was not only utterly rejected thrust out of ye
court, but also condened. Which exceeding vnkyndnes did not a little vex him. At
last considering the mutability and vnstablenes of men's things in the
world uttered these words to such as stood about him. O friends take heed of
the brykylnes and slyppery change offortune, trust not the flattery of the
world, name lie of the court. For like as the fyngers of auditors when they
cast accomptes can lay otherwhyles an in fynite nombre, otherwhyles again but
one, even so the friends of kings now can do all, and now nothing. Here ye
shall note that in old time they made their accomptes with their fyngers, as now
with counters.

Duke Memnon.
WHat time the valiant capitayn Memnon held wars against ye great Alexander
on the behalf of Darius king of Persia, it chanced that a certain hired
sowldiour in the army of Memnon made very much raylynge upon king Alexander.
Memnon hearing him, laid him on the pate with his spear and thus rebukes
him. I give the wages, sir knave, and meat and drink to fight with Alexander
and not to rail upon him. Let Christen men at lest way take example hereby, to
leave their foul and detestable raylynges far unworthy for such as
profess Chrystes doctrine, that forbyddeth us to call our brother but foal.
Some we call Pharisees, we beknaue, we defy as naughty papists with other like
opprobriouse words, vnmete for Christen men's ears, but as for to fight
against them, and to confound them with pure doctrine and good living, that
we woll not. Again other some, we beheretike, we call Lutheranes, and all that
nought is, but to show them charitably where they err, rightly to instruct
them, we woll not.

The Egyptians.
THe Kings of Egypt, according to the custom of their country were wont to
take an other of such as were made judges, that although the king him self
wold command the to judge any thing that shulde be against right equytie, they
shulde not judge it. So greatly they thought it expedient for the common
wealth, that the people shulde have just judges. But howe can that people
have just and incorrupt iuges, where (as is reported) ye prince sells the
offyce and power of iugyng for a great some of money.

In Englande thanked be God, in the iuges of the law there is as little
corruption as in any other regyon. And if any default in this behalf be, it is
sooner in inferior courts, where the iuges be appointed not by ye Kings
Majesty, but by others, amongst whom if any corruption were found I wold
wish, for ye terrible exemple of other they might be served as a certain jug
of whom I shall now make relation.

Of Cambyses.
CAmbyses King of Persia was otherwise a very wicked and cruel tyrant.

Yet there is no prince of so disperat an hope of so naughty a life, but that
at the lest way otherwhyles doth some ho nest act. For gods property is, to
garnyshe exornate the offyce of the magistrat rulers, he causes, that for the
coseruatio of civil gouernauce in the common weal, sometime excellent and
profytable works be of necessity done of the that bear rule. But to my
purpose, Cambyses in al histories is commended for this one fact, for which no
doubt he deserves praise. In the former part of Asia he had a deputy named
Sisam nes, now he was credibly informed that this Sisamnes being corrupted
with bribes rewards, had falsely judged against the kings laws against good
right cosciece. The matter being examined food true, sorthwyth he commanded he
shulde be put to death, and yt the skin of his body should be plucked of, laid
over the judgement seat, where he gave the false judgement, in his rowme he did
set Dtane the said judges son to succeed his father in office which was
admonished by cotemplacion of his fathers skin, yt he should succeed him also
in like kind of punyshmet if he followed his fathers steppes.

This exemple teaches them yt bear offyce rule to remember, yt god suffers
not injustice nor injury unrevenged. But for as much as I have entered to speak
of Cambyses, which otherwise as I have said, lived a very tyranouse wicked
life: I think it here good to report certain his notoriouse crimes and his
end, to thyntent all rulers, what so ever they be, may take exemple at him,
to fear God, to preserve the common weal, to execute justice and judgement, to
use their subjects as men and not as beasts. This Cambyses began to raygne,
after that Cyrus his father had made his viage against the Scithians. And
albeit at the beginning he subdued conquered Egypt, yet anon he forgot all
goodness and degendred quyte clean fro the renowned excellent virtues of his
father Wherefore when Prexaspes one of his chosen counselors aduertysed him
very freely and said unto him, that the Persians praised him very much, but
this one thing displeased them, that he was so subject to the vice of
dronkenes, anon he commanded the chyefe estates lords of thepyre to be called
together, and asked of the, whether in any thing he were worthy to be
repreheded? They espyeng how thankful plausible a thing flattery is, answered,
no, but yt in virtue prowess, he also excells his father Cyrus, forasmuch
as unto his empire and dominion he had gotten by way of conquest the kingdom
of Egypt. But contrary wise Cresus a worthy lord, unto whose cure and
governance Cyrus had tomytted his son Cambyses to be instructed and brought
up in honesty and virtue, by cause he would merylye, as much as might be
borne, abate the kings pride, answered, said, that Cambyses might not be yet
compared to his father Cyrus, forasmuch as there is not yet begotten such a
son of him, as Cyrus left Cambyses. This thing then, as featly spoken,
pleased the king welynough. Thus the cousayle being parted, when none of the
lords had blamed any thing in him, he commanded Prexaspes to be called before
him, bad him bring unto him his younger son. For he wold declare, how well he
could seem sobre even when he had most of al drunken for he said he wold eve
when he were drunk with his bow shot at Prexaspes son, if he might with his
arowe stryke through his heart, the it might be judged, that in the midst of
his cups he wateth not the practyse of cousaylle, judgment of reason. If
not, yt he were worthy to be called a drokard. To be short, when Cahyses had
thoroughly washed his brains with wine, he shot at the child as at an
appointed mark, and strykynge him through the heart, he commanded it should be
cut out, and so he showed it to ye father Prexaspes, saying, that the chyldes
heart was well hit, wherefore he mought esteem full well hereby, yt he was no
drokard. So barbarouse, so savage, and so tyrannical manners, doth dronkennes
bring upon the minds of men, although they were before ryghtly institute and
brought up, like as it is no doubt, but that king Cambyses was at the
beginning in his youth brought up in most honest manners. And albeit this
drokarde was not ignorant of the feat of shotyng, yet in the mean season he
could not use the right cousaylles of reason, but lacked those virtues which be
wont to allure men unto gentle sobriete to the study of honest renown. Such
manner exemples must be propowned unto yonge men, which for ye most part be give
to the foul vice of dronkenes for what end followed of these manners, a little
herafter shall be dedared. He murdered also his own brother smerdis, who he
privily caused to be put to death, lest he might at any time be king.
Furthermore he toke to wife his own suster germayne, whereas nature abhors
from such kind of copulation. Now it befell so, that when king Cambyses sat
at a feast with his sister the queen, for their sporte and pleasure he set a
yonge lyon and a very eager dog together by the ears, so when the lyon in
strength and fyercenes had prevailed, an other dog no les fyerce, brastyng
his bands wherwyth he was bound did help the dog his brother vanquished the
lyon. The king was excedyngly delyted with this sight for the faythfulnes of
ye dogs between themselves. But by the same fact the queen being moved
began very largelye to weep and pour out tears and to water her tender
chekes. The king toke this her weeping very heuely and demanded of her the
cause of her sorrow, she answered in this wise. Certes, my dere husband and
brother, even so great a feythfulnes might have chanced unto us of our brother
as we se here between these two dogs that be of all one litter. The king
grievously taking this answer, commanded she should forthwith be taken out of
his sight and put to death. But such manners could not long have success. For
God speaks in the scripture. Blowdy men and wylye shall not fynyshe half
their days upon the earth.

Wherefore not long after, with a greuouse vengeance, God plaged him. For as he
was coming out of Egypt in to Persia, when he shulde mownt on horseback, his
swerd fell out of the skaberd and sore wounded him in such wise that he dyed
of it. This exeple testifies, that god woll not lunge suffer tyrants to
reygne. For not loge after ye death of Cyrus above ye space of one year lived
Cambyses, neither left he any heir of his kingdom.

Of Darius king of the Persians.
After the death of Cambyses, the chief lords assembled together and began to
consulte, whom they might best make their head king. Seven were appointed to
deliberat upon this most weyghtye matter. First, stood up Otanes, cousayled,
that no mo kings shulde be chosen, but that by leage and sure confederacy made
between them, all the lords might rule alike, so should liberty be maintained
and kept one every side and every ma at freedom. For before, it was well proved
by examples, that where one man is Lord of so many, and so great things, he
may easily be to proud and hawtye, and soon grow out of kind and degendre
unto tyranny, even as now of late it was seen of Cambyses.

After him stood up Megabysus, which disalowynge this counsel of Otanes,
affyrmed, that such liberty was much more hurtful and pestiferous to the
common weal, then tyranny should be. For noble men and cities if they lack a
lord and head they can not but abuse this liberty unto private offection and
lust. But to thentent no such thing shulde ensue, his counsel and advise
was, not to chose some one King, but to appoint certain noble men, with whom
might always remain the title, prerogatyue, and right of the Imperial
power.

The sentences of these both, the third lord named Darius disalowed cousayled
to chose one king. For albeit in this kind of governance like as in al
other humane things, many and great incomodities may chance, yet no rule,
no governance is so stable, so sure, as is a monarchy that is to say, where
one rules in whose hands is put the charge of the hole kingdom. Verily albeit
these three counsayles be all both honest and good, yet if they be compared
together, sure it is, that nothing can be found either fairer or more
profytable then the governance of one person called a Monarchy, for as much
as it most resembles the divine and heuenly kingdom of God. Furthermore it
can not be, that concorde can lunge be kept amongst free princes cities, or
there, where to the administration of a most ample and mighty empire, be a
sort of lords chosen in lieu of one King, and that because of the diversity
of most grave and wyghtye affairs, which ever among, in so large a dominion
shulde chance, upon which ye princes shulde not ever agree within them selfes.
Besides all this, there shulde not want also amongst these self princes an
inordinat study and desire of dignity dominion above the rest, over whom
some one wold labour to have power as over his subjects or iferiours. And
these were in effect the causes, which Darius brought forth for the prove of
his purpose, unto which the other four princes subscribed, and so at last it
was determined after the old usage to chose a king. But least any dissentio
might arise between ye seue princes, they thought it best, to commit the lot
of the election unto God. It was a greed upon, that upon a morning very early
the princes on horseback shulde mete together at a certain place, that he
whose horse first neyghed, should be forthwith proclaimed king. The princes
returned every one to his home. Darius showed the counsel and determination
of the princes unto the Stuard of his hows, who forthwith toke the matter upon
him, to bring his lords purpose to good pass. Wherefore the evening before
the day appointed, he brings his lords horse and a mare unto the place
appointed, and there committed the horse and mare together, to thentent, that
the next morning, the place know, the horse might for desire of the mare,
which then shulde be absent, neyghe according to his property.

The morning ensuynge, according to thappoyntmet, at the howre prescribed, yt
said princes do marche forward on horseback unto the said place. They were not
sooner there, but loo forthwith Darius horse begins to neyghe, and that they
shulde not doubt, but it was the divine providence of God to have Darius to
their king, incontinent in an open and clear whether without any manner tempest,
it both lyghtened and thondered while the horse neyghed. By and by the other
princes leaping of from their horses exhibited unto Darius kyngly honours, and
saluted him king. Thus by this accasyon was Darius advanced to the kingdom
and empire of the Perssans, which he afterward with high praise administered.

King Darius was wont in praise of him self to say, that by wars
adversities, he was made the wiser and more prudent. Certeynlye, though this be
comoly true, for experience is mother of prudence, yet such prudence wysedom
cost the common weal much. Wars for defence of ye country be necessary much
to be preferred before cowardly peax quiet. And again, I grant, such
troubles and storms do engendre wisdom and experience of things. But
doubtless, out of the case of necessity far better it were and also much
more godly, to fetch wisdom out of wise men's books, then to gather wretched
prudence with experiments and such hasardes as put the hole country in
danger.

The same Darius, when he had imposed laid a tribute upon his subjects, he sent
suddenly for his collectours, and asked them, whether the tribute which he had
assesed, seemed to greuouse and ouerchargeable to the commons. When they
answered that it seemed mean and indyfferent, he commanded they shulde
demand but the half of yt which was assessed. The prudent king in dede
intended at the beginning to have had nomore. But if he should have taxed the
forthwith at nomore, he perceived they shulde not have been so well willing to
have paid it, as they were now, when he assesed them at the double and after
released them of the one half.

When this king had cut a very great pom granite, one asked him, of what
thing he would wish to have so great a nobre as there were grains or
kernels, he answered, of zopyres. This zopyre was the son of Megabyses,
which was one of the said seven princes, a very good man, a right trusty and
assured friend to king Darius. Signifyeng by this, that to a king nothing ought
to be dearer nor more precious, the good faithful friends. This zopire did cut
of his own nose ears, so, not be yng aknowen whom he was, fled away, like a
fugitive person, unto the Babilonias, which at yt time were at mortal war with
king Darius, faynynge that he was most cruelly hand led of Darius. The
Babilonias beleuyng him, being persuaded by his colorable words, that his tale
was true, espyeng him a very wise hardy ma, made him one of their chief
captains. He sekyng his occasion, delivered up ye hole city of Babylo unto
Darius. After which feat, Darius was accustomed oftetimes to say yt he had
rather have one zopyre hole soud, the to coquere an hundred Babylones Babylon
at that time was a city most floryshyng, flowynge full of all riches, yet
preferred he one friend, before an hundred Babylones.

Of queen Semiramis.
SEmiramis queen of ye Carias which is cronicled to have builded Babylon,
caused to be written upon her tobe this saying: What king so ever shall have
need of money, let him open my grave take so much, as he woll desire. Darius
after he had won the city, gyuynge credit to the title, with much ado at
last remouyug away ye great stone, wherwyth the grave was covered, money he
food none at all, but on the other side of ye stone, he found this
inscripciou. Onles thou had been an euell man with money vnsatisfyable,
thou would never have moved the graves of the dead.

Of king Xerxes.
Between Xerxes ye soon of Darius and Arimenes his elder brother but borne
before Darius was chosen king, was great strife, who shulde be king. So when
Xerxes had knowledge, that his brother was coming from the country of the
Bactrians, he sent unto him rich presents and to them that bare them he gave
in commandment that they should say in his name thus unto his brother. With
these rewards thy brother Xerxes at this time honoreth the, but if he may be
onesproclaimed king, thou shalt be with him ye chyfest of all other. Arimenes
assuaged with this exceeding humanite, left his cotention, his brother being now
pro claimed king, forthwith he saluted honoured him as king and moreover did
set the crown upon his head Again Xerxes ye king for his part gave him
the next place unto him. Ye shall rede a like thing of Jacob Esau in the book
of Genesis.

This king being sore agreued with the Babilonias, because they traytorously
shronke fro him, renouced him for their lord: after he ones had brought them
under again, forbad them to bear any more weapes, and further commanded they
shulde singe at the lute shalmes, keep harlottes, haunt taverns alehouses and
use wide lunge garments, to the intent that being molifyed made effeminate with
pleasures, they moughte nomore study to fall away fro their lord. By this
prudet fact of a panim hethen prince we be taught, what is the success of
delicate and voluptuouse living.

When he saw al Hellesponte full of ships, and all the see coostes and
plains of Abydon, filled with men, he boasted himself to be blessed and
fortunate, yt he had so great power at his commandment, and anon he wept
a good pace. Artabamus ye kings uncle woderyng at so sudden change, asked the
cause. Then xerxes the king thus answers.

Oh uncle, a right deep thought enters my mind, how short mas life is, sith
of so passing great a multitude of men that I now see, within an hundred
years not one shall be left a live. Undoubtedly if ma wold thus consydre ye
shortness of his time, and in what state God hath set him here in earth, he
would not run so headlonge to all kinds of myschyefes. This Xerxes what time
he purposed to give battle to Greece, called to gether all the princes of Asya
thus said unto them. Lest I mough^ seem to enterprise this thing of my own
private counsel, I have gathered you together, but I woll ye remember that ye
must obeye me rather, then counsel me. This oration of Xerxes is not here
recounted, to thintente it should be followed. For without doubt it is
tyrannical, and that two manner ways, first because he abused the assembly
of his lords for a colour, to cast a myste before men's eyes, making them
believe that al he did was done by thaduyse and counsel of his lords, second,
that he would venture upon a matter so dangerous to the hole people, being
enforced rather of his own sensual lust, then induced by sage and wise
counsel.

When this king was vexed and almost put to the worse but of. iii. hu^
Lacedaemonians where as he himself had with him a very great multytuue of
soldiers: He confessed himself deceived in this, that he toke with him many
me, but few soldiers. He perceived well that it forces not so much howe many
there be, as howe well assayed, pyked, and tried men there be.

When the espies of the Greeks were taken in his host, he would do the no
manner harm at al, but moreover bad them mark and view diligently his hole
army, which thing when they had done, he licenced them to depart without
hurt of any person. An example of a synguler confidence and affyaunce in him
self and in his power.

Of King Artoxerxes with the lunge hand.
ARtoxerxes the son of Xerxes surnamed with the lunge hand because his one hand
was longer then tother, was wont to say that it is more Kynglyke to put to,
than to take away. Regalius est adder quam adimere. Meaning that it is more
worthy for a prince and ruler of the people, to augment the honour and riches
of such as he hath rule over, rather then to diminyshe the same.

When Saubarzenes his chamberlain begged a thing of him, which was skarse
lawful, and the king parceyued yt he was provoked unto it by one that promised
him. xxx. thousand coygnes of that country money for thobteyning of the suit,
the King commanded his treasauroure to bring him thyrtie thousand coins called
Darikes, which so soon as they were brought him, he gave the al to
Satibarzanes, saying. Hold here o Satibarzanes. For while I give the this I
shall not be the porer, but I shulde be the worser and the vnrightuouser man,
if I shulde have granted the thing that thou demaundedst. The most noble and
excellent king, had devised, howe he might, neither make sad his friend,
nor deflecte from right and equytie.

Cyrus the younger.
CYrus ye younger, what time he should pitch hisfeld ayenst his enemies, his
friend Clearchus cousailled him to kepehim self behind the Macedonians, not
to cast himself in to the danger of ye wars. What says thou clearchus
{quod} the king? Dost thou connsaille me that where as I covett a kingdom, I
shulde show my self unworthy for a kingdom?

Of Cresus.
IN ye time of Cyrus ye great which was the first king monarch of ye
Persians, of whom we have hertofore sum what spoken, reigned the rich Cresus
over the Lydians, in ye first part of Asia he warred ayenst king Cyrus, but
Cyrus vaynquished him, conquered his land, toke him prisoner. Now, when Cresus
saw the soldiers of Cyrus spoylyng, brennyng, and making havoc of all
that was in the city which they had taken, he asked Cyrus what they died.
Cyrus answered, mary they destroy thy city, and spoil thy goods: No no,
{quod} Cresus, Nothing here is now mine, it is thine that they destroy,
These words wyttyly spoken moved Cyrus to call back his sowldiours from
spoil.

But when by the commandment of King Cyrus he shulde be burnt, even when he
shulde now goo to the fire, he cried out with a very lamentable and weeping
voice, O Solon, Solon. King Cyrus wonderynge what these words should mean,
bad one of his servants ask him, for what cause with so great sorrow, he
cried thus and named Solon. Then Cresus drawing a great syghe even from the
botome of his hart answered in this wise. Solon, sumtyme amongst the Athenians
was a very wise man, unto whom Jones when he was with me did show and exhibit
much kyndnes and worship. I showed him all my power and treasures, which done
I asked him whether he thought that ever any adversity or misfortune cowld
hap unto me, being furnished and fensed with such power and riches ayenst al
chauces of fortune, or force of enemies. But to this, answered Solon, rebukyng
me for my security and careless mind said: No man in the world o king Cresus
is so happy and fortunate in this lief, that he can be called thoroughly in
every part blessed, before he dye, neither is there any ma I assure the, be he
never so mighty, but some adversity may come upon him overthrow him or he be
aware. But at that time trusting alas reche lesly upon my happy luck success
of things, I despised his words, neither cowlde I fere this so excedynge a
fall, as now I find. Wherefore because now first I understood the sentence of
Solon, therefore now before my death I named him. And I do wysshe all me in
prosperity not to be vnmyndful of misfortunes and calamities that may
chance, lest they become over hawlty by reason of their present felicity,
gready to attempt things headyly yt by occasyon may be their utter cofusio.
These things when Cyrus ye king herd, he was not a little touched with pity
clemency towards Cresus, said, he would not herafter show him self to hard
upon Cresus, which was sometime a right mighty king, for he remembers that
he himself also is a man, and that it mought chance him to have need of other
men's aid and mercy. After that, he commanded Also Cresus to be brought unto
him whom he enterteyned like a noble prince and used his advise and cousaille
in al his affairs proceedings

This Cresus after he was taken prisoner of Cyrus, by this argument preferred
peax before wars, that in time of peax, the sons be wont to bury the
fathers, but in wars contrary wise the fathers bury the sons.

Of Amyntas and Alexander his soon.
While ye Persians were a loft had the chief empire and ye monarchy of the
world they went about also to subdue all Greece Macedonye. But because god hath
prefixed the certain limits to every kingdom which can not be passed over,
therefore ye kings of ye Persias could never subdue unto their dominions
neither the Macedonyans nor the Greeks. Nevertheless on a time the Persyans sent
their ambassadors unto Amyntas then king of Macedony and required him to yield
him unto them. King Amyntas fearing the power of the Persians, voluntarily in
manner submittyng himself, promised to do what so ever they would have him, and
interteyned the Ambassadors with al kind of humanity. Now, when to the
ambassadors desire a solemn feast was ordained, they required that for the
furniture of the feast certain noble matrons their daughters might be
brought thither. Amyntas dared deny them no thing but commanded they shulde
be brought to the feast. So when the Persians had well fauoredly washed their
throats with wine, forgetting all honest sobriety they began to dally with the
Ladies so vnshamefastsly, that Amyntas and the younger king Alexander his son
were not a little abashed and weary to se their shameful demenours. Alexander
desired his father for the reverence of his age, that he wold depart from the
banquet, and go to his rest, saying, that he would keep thembassadours
company. When he had thus conveyed away his father, he pretended great
mirth, and suffered the Persians to dally sporte with the ladies at their
pleasure. At last he desired them they would rise for a while, and license the
ladies to depart a little, for they shulde come in again forthwith much more
gorgi ously arrayed. The lords of the Persians were very well content herwith In
the mean season the young king caused a pyked sort of yonge men that had
good faces, to be decked like ladies, and to return to the banquet, to whom he
had given in commandment, that every one shulde have under his clothes a
swore, wherwyth in the midst of the dalyaunce they shulde kill the Persians,
which thing was done in dede. For of these yonge men the Persias were slain
every one, and by this means was their knavery grievously punyshed. Chys
Alexander is nombred among the ancestors of Alexander the great.

Of king Scilurus.
SCilurus king of the Scythias having four score sons, when he lay on his
deadebed, called them all before him. A^ended a bounche of rods to be brought
unto him, which forthwith he delivered first to one and then to an other to
break. When every one of them refused it, because it seemed impossible,
himself toke in his own hand rod by rod and so easily brake them al,
monyshynge his sons with these words: If ye shall continue together in love
concorde, so shall ye remain strong and invincible, but contrary wise if ye
dysseuer your selves by debate sedition, so shall you be weak and easy to be
vaynqueshed.

Gelo.
GElo king of Sicile at a certain banquet when according to ye guise of the
country the lute was carried about and al the rest did singe at the lute in
order, for that was among ^es counted a thing of great comendacion and
honesty, when it came to the Kings course to play upon the lute, he
commanded his horse to be brought into the bankettynge house and forthwith he
easily and lyghtelye leapt upon him. Signifyenge by this his doing, that
chyualrye is much more princely and mete for a king, then to singe at the
lute, albeit in very dede lutynge is an honest pastime and mete for getylmen,
so that it be moderately used and be no impediment to thexercyses of chyualrye.

This king on a time exacted money of his commons, whom when he perceived in a
hurly turly for the same, and ready to make an insurrection, he thus suddenly
appeased, he sent them word that he would but borrow the money that he
required of them, for he wold restore it them again within a certain time.
Tha they wyllyngly gave their money. By this gentle sufferance and pollecie he
brought about, that he wanted not money necessary to his wars, and
nevertheless he had his commons hearts fast unto him. Which thing brought to
pass, yt he anon had the victory over his enemies, where as peradventure if
in that sudden tumult and roar, he had continued to exacted of his obstinate
commons vnexpedyetly the thing yt had been nevertheless leful, he might have
chased sooner in yt rage fury of the people, to have been destroyed of his
own comos, then by his comens to have vanquished his enemies. Such a thing
it is, otherwhyles to give place to a multitude, by wise dome to compass that
thing, which by dyrecte means could not else be brought about. Albeit in
dede, this king, when the wars were finished, considering the
grea^ueryshynge of his subjects (...) by continual wars and gre^e exactios
they had sustained, he repayed them their lone. Paule wills us to rendre unto
all men that is due, to whom tribute, tribute, to whom custom, custom, to
whom fear, fear, to whom honour, honour. He byddeth us be subject to our
prince not only for fear of the princes indignation, but even for
conscience.

And for this cause he says we paye trybutes. This I write to the intent we
should paye our duties wyllyngly to our prince and obey him as gods ministre,
for so Paule calls him, to the terrible damnacion of the most cursed
Anabaptystes, which at this day go about to pluck men frome their
allegiance and due obedience unto their prince.

Of Hieron.
HIeron which succeaded the for said Gelon in the kingdom of Sicile, said
that noman that freely spake his mind unto him was either importune or
greuouse. But such as blabbed out men's secretes: those he thought hurt them
also unto whom they blabbed them, for as much as we hate not only the that
disclose our cousayles, but also them that have herd such things as we would
not have known.

One vbrayded him, yt his breath did stink. He conuneth home and chydeth his
wife, because she never showed him, that his mouth sauered Verily, {quod} she,
I thought that al men had sauered in like wise. These words declared an
exceadynge great chastity of the woman, which never in all her life, had
approached so ne'er unto any man that she ^de feale the breath of his mouth,
save only her husband.

This king also because in the queen his wife's presence the poet Epicharmus
spake certain rybawdouse words, set a fine on the poets head. If hethen
princes thus punyshe knavery and wanton words, what ought christians do, which
be expressly by Christ's mouth threat ned to yield accomptes for every idle
word that proceeds forth of their mouths?

Demetrius the son of Antigonus.
King demetrius was of such excedynge clemency, that when he had reconquered
the Athe nians which sediciously had shrunk from him and perceived they were
welnere famyshed for default of corn he calling them together, in an open
assemble granted them frely a great quantity of grain. And when in his
speaking of these things to the people, he chanced to commit a barbarysme,
pronouncing a certayneword otherwise, then it ought to have ben pronounced, and
one of thassemble interrupted him in his speaking and showed him howe to
pronounce that word ryghtly: Truly, {quod} he, for this correction, I grant
you other fifty thousand busihelles. I doubt in this fact whether we may
marvel at the greath benignity of this prince towards them which alytle
tofore were his enemies, or rather at his excedynge courtesy and ciuylitie
which not only toke in good part that one of his subjects corrected him in
his words, but also esteemed the same worthy of so great a reward.

When this king Demetrius had won the city of Megara, and his men of war
had despoiled made havoc of all together, according to their manner, it was
showed him that an excellent philosopher named Stiibon was amongst them. The
king which ever had learning in high price and admiration, bad that ye
philosopher shulde be brought forth unto him. He came, the king him lovingly
received after he had awhile with gentle communication interteyned him, he
asked him if his soldiers had taken any of his goods from him. Noma, {quod}
the philosopher, hath take away our goods For I could espy noma that
despoiled us of our lernyng and knowledge. Meaning, that only the goods of the
mind (which be the true goods) be not subject to ye violence of wars.

Demosthenes.
DEmosthenes ye most famous and excellent Dratour amongst the Athenias, of
who in my former book I have made mention, on a certain time while he was
making an oration in the parlyament house amongst the commons of Athens, of
most weyghtye things belonging to the common wealth perceived that the people
gave no ear unto him, but rather murmured ayenst him to make him hold his peax
he stynted of his oration and said he wold brefely tell the a new pleasaut
and pratie tale. The people now beginning to lift up their ears attentifely
unto him: There was, {quod} he a certain young ma, which had hired an ass,
upon whose back he might carry certain stuff from Athens to Megara. In his
journey the heate of the day being very fervent (for it was in the midst of
somer) because he could find no shade under which he might defend him self
frome the breunynge heate of the son, he toke the fardelle down of the asses
back and sittynge under the Ass, by this means covered himself with the
shadow. Which thing when the Hakeney man which did let him his Ass, espied,
(for he went with him to bring home his ass again) he wold in no wise suffer
him, but pushed him away from under the shadow, sayng he hired not of him his
asses shadow, but his ass only. The other contented on the contrary side, that
forasmoche as the shadow is a thing so annexed knyt to the body that it can
not be severed frome it, he ought by his bargain to have also the shadow. Thus
between these two arose a very sharpe and bitter strife, in so much that at
length the matter came to strokes giving, ye one stiffly affirming that the
asses shadow was not hired, the other as styffely aunswerynge that the shadow
also was hired. At last they go to law together. When Demosthenes had spoke
this and had perceived that the people now gave good ear unto him, suddenly he
began to depart out of the parliamet house. The Athenians holding him still
and desyering him to tel up the rest of his tale, he smiled and makes the this
answer. And are ye so desyerouse to hear of an asses shadow, and when I
speak of ernest maters ye woll give no ear? Cruly I wold wysihe that Christen
men might not be likened to these Athenias. The tales of Robyn hod, of Beues
of Hampton, of sire Guy of warwyke with such other fables are gredily red
and red again. But the holy Bible of God, which treats of ernest maters,
that is to wit, of our belief in Christ, of true repentance, of the worthy
fruit of the same, of the difference between Gods law, and mans tradition,
and of such other things touching our ghostly health and salvation, we set little
by, yea we discouragemen and weme from reading of it. If we begin a little to
talk of scripture, anon we be heretics. But ^long as we common De as^i
vmbra, of Robin good fellow, or of the Fayrye we be good Christians.

When it was laid to his charge that he studied eloquece immeasurably, he thus
avoided the. In yt I study eloquence I declare yt I am under awe law, yt I wol
use no extort power Contrariwyse they yt despice ye study of eloquece be
commonly such as loke to rule ye people perforce, which go about not to
persuade me with words but to copelle the with swords. Assuredly, I am afraid,
lest amongst Christen men there be not a few which in Councelles assembles
seek rather to enforce with threttes and power tha with approved reasons to
parsuade other to agree unto them.

The commons of Athens on a time required Demosthenes that he would accuse a
certain person, which thing to do when he refused, the people began to
cry out (as their custom is) ayenste him as though they would have killed
him. Then Demosthenes rysynge up, thus began to speak unto them. A counsailour
ye shall have of me (o ye men of Athens) whether ye woll or not, but a
sklaunderour ye shall not make me, though ye would. Here is to be noted the
exceeding great stomach honest hart of Demosthenes whom the Commens of Athens
(for in them at that time was the governance) could not bow fro the path of
justice for all their manacies. And shall Christen men's mouths then be stopped
fro professyng the truth or be enforced to speak vntrouthes for heavy looks?

When King Alexander of Macedonye offered peax under this condition unto the
Athenians, if they would yield unto him. viij. cititens, amongst whom was
Demosthenes, Demosthenes began to tell them a fable of the wolf, which upon
this condition offered peax to the sheep, if they wold yield up the dogs, by
the wolf he understood Alexander, by the dogs those that then had charge
of the peoples maters, by the sheep the commons of Athens. This tale of
Demosthenes very witty steyed the Athenians to deliver up from them their
wisest cousailours, which with their vigilaucye and prudence might chase away
their enemies. Let this fable monysh comonalties what so ever they be, to keep
ever amongst the some witty sage Counselors against all cyaunces and storms.

This most eloquent Dratour in his youth, when he first shulde begin to
exercise the offyce of a common counsaylour, was wont to say to his
familiares, that knowing within him self howe great envy, grudge, fear,
sdaunder and danger hangs over his head now approchynge to the ministracion
of the common wealth, if it were in his election to choose the one of the two, he
would rather run to his death, then go to speak in the parliament house or
in judicial matters.

Demosthenes for his high eloquence and wit was I said, chosen of the people
to be one of their Cousaylours, which offyce, considering the nature of the
people, he said he had lever forbear then bear. The respect of God, the
love of a man country may work much. But surely else, this regard taken
away, what man onles he were worse then mad, wold be a Counsaylour to a
comonaltye or chief ruler, if he might choose? If he bear him self a good man
and upright in al things, his counsaylle and proceadynge can not please the
blind ignorant multitude, whose judgement is ever overthwart and crooked. If
he be an euell disposed man and cares neither for god nor man (as many be) he
shall be hated abhorred both of god man And truly it is very harde to please a
multitude, either with godlynes or with worldly policy wit, which thing
they know well enough that have had thexperience. I speak not this to
dyscourage Christen officers and rulers from doing their mynistration, which
is both godly and gods own ordinance, as Paule testifies, but rather to
comfort them in their calling, remembrynge, that the more troublesome a charge
it is subject to dyspleasures, enuyes, and grudgynges of the people, the more
thank it deserves of him that at length rewards all things done with a
simple and pure eye.

Of Cato the sage.
CAto ye elder was wot to say, that he had lever for a good turn have no
reward: tha for an euel turn have no punishment. Signifyenge, that nothing
is more perilouse to a common wealth, then impunity, which always allures me
to do worse and worse.

The same Cato also said, that he forgave al me that offended save him self.
Now that man doth pardon and forgive himself which repeteth not him self of
that he hath mysdone And again he takes punyshmente of him self, which with
diligence redresses the thing that by negligece was committed.

Adhortyng offycers and rulers to punysh offenders, malefactors, he said,
such as might restrain wicked doers and wolle not: ought to be stoned to
death.

He said, he hated that souldyour which in walking moved his hades and in
fighting his fete, and which louder routed in tent, then cried in field. And
that Captain or Ruler was stark nought which could not rule him self.

He said he loved rather those yongmen that blushed then yt waxed pale,
because blusshynge is token of an honest nature, but paleness not so.

He said that every man ought most to stand in awe of himself, because no
man can at any time depart from himself. So shulde it come to pass, that what
so ever we durst not do in presence of other, we would be abashed to do the
same, when we be alone.

When he saw other Senators and lords of Rome set up gorgiouse images in
memory of them selves: I had lever, says he, that men should ask and
marvel at me, why Cato has no image set up for his memorialle, then why he
hath one. Sygnifyenge, that he had rather do worthy acts to thyntent in time
coming, men knowing, that he deserved an image to be erected in memory of
him, mought wonder why he hath none set up in his commendation and memory.

He admonished, such as be of great power to use skantly their power, that they
may use it ever. Meaning that power by clemeneye and gentylnesse is made
lunge, by roughnes, short.

Such as defrauded virtue of her due honour, he said, take away virtue from
youth. Meaning, by rewards and promocion yonge mes minds be kindled unto
virtue which if ye pluck away: anon virtue wol ware faint and qual.

He said, a Magistrate or judge ought neither to be prayed for good men, nor
entreated for euell men. By thyshe meant, that it is a great lack in the
judges if they must be prayed to be indyfferente unto good men since they
ought of their own mere motion favour honest persons Now for vnryghteous
persons a man to be a suitor, it is a token perchance of humanity, but a
judge to be entreated for such, surely is a part of a shrynker of justice.

He said that injury although it brings no danger to the worker of it, yet
is it dangerous vniuersaily to all men. Meaning, that thexemple of injury
vnpunyshed threatens injury to every man. For if it were lawful to do hurt
without punyshement there shulde be no man sure fro the violence of the wicked
and deuelyshe personnes.

He said an angry body doth nothing differ from a mad ma but in the
tarriance of time. Signifyeng that wrath is (as Horace the poet says) a
short frensye.

Such he said as moderately soberly could use the auauncemente of fortune:
be nothing at all assaulted with the grudge or envy of the people. For he
said me envy not us but our gods wherwyth they se us adorned and flowynge.
Outward goods be out of ma, but the vice of vsynge them proudly, is within
ma.

Such as accustom them selves to be ernest in tryfles, he said shall be in
ernest matiers, trifelynge.

He blamed the citizens, because they committed their offyces ever to all one
personnes. For me think, said Cato, ye either little esteem the offycies of
your city, or else ye jug few worthy to have the. Whereof the one was to jug
amiss of the public power, the other to have an evil opinyon of the citizens.

He exhorted young men, that those which were come up to dignity and promotion
by indifferency, good demenours, prowess virtue: shulde not now fowly grow
out of kind degedre unto worse, but if they were come to worship by ambition
and extorcions, they shulde now yet frame them selfes to a better kind of
life. For so, said he, should it come to pass, that both they shulde increase
their glory, these abolish and wear out their blots with their well doings.

This prudent Senator Cato, the more he studied and travelled for the weal of
the city of Rome, the more the vnthanfull Romanes hated and spyted him. Which
thing when he espied, he said openly to the people, that of his enemies he
was therefore envied because he continually rysynge every night, and setting
aside his own private affairs, travelled in the maters of the common weal,
noting the ingratitude and vnthankfullnes of the people. Assuredly this is the
nature of that beast af many heads I mean of the people, for so the Poet
Horace calls them not without cause. England has at this day a Prince
incomparable Henry the eight, she hath upon his majesty Counselors attendant
not a few even the most prudent and grave parsonagies that could be pyked out
of the realm to give holsom counsel, she has bishops, she has teachers
a great many, both learned and godly, yet her ingrate chyldern have not
refrained from treasons, from sedicions, from both preuie and aperte grudges
and furies, fro sklaunderouse reapportes, from blowing abroad and brutynge of
most shameful and detestable lesynges things never done, spoke, nor yet ones
thought upon, as they were imagined to have been. O ingrate England. O eroked
paruerse generation. But I return to my purpose.

This Cato very wyttyly also said that fools bring more utility profette unto
wise men, than wise men to fools. For the prudent and wise personnes, while
they soon espy the errors and misedemenors of fools and eschew the same:
they become the warer, but fools not so, for the things that they se well done
of wiseme, they have not the wit to follow.

A certain person which studied for nothing else but to fare well, coveted
much to be familiar with Cato. But Cato refused him utterly, saying he could
not live with him that sauered better in his palate the in his hart.

A lovers mind, he said, lived in an others body, agreynge to the eomo
proverb that says. Anima illie potius est, vbi amat qua vbi animat. The
soul or mind of man is rather there where it loves, then where it lives.

Of three things done in all his lyef he said he repented him, first, if he
committed any his secreates to a woman, second, if to onye place he were carried
by water, wither he moughte have goon by land. The third, if any day had
eskaped him by negligence without fruit.

This Cato for all he was one of the chiefest lords of Rome, yet his chief
delight and pleasure was in husbandry, in so much that he wrote also books of
husbandry. For he said that of husband men be engendered most strong men,
most hardy soldiers parsonnes least replete with gyle malice. And when he was
demanded what gains was most certain best, he answered, to grease or pasture
well, what next, to pasture meetly well, what third, to clothe well what fourth,
tyllage. Why, {quod} one that stood by, what is it to gain by usance or lone
of money? what is it {quod} Cato, to kill a man?

A certain person which rose early in the mormynge and found his hose knawn and
eaten of the rats being troubled with this sight, thinking it a pronosticatio
toke of some misfortune: He comes to Cato to ask his cousaile to know of him
what evil this thing portended and sygnified. Cato makes him this answer.
Certes my friend, it is no mostruouse sight to se rats eat mes hoses, but if
thy hose had eaten the rats that had been a monstrucuse sight.

The Table of the first book of the gardeyn of wisdom.
Agasicles Fo. ij Ageselaus Fo. iij Agis Fo. iiij Lycurgus Fo. v Socrates Fo.
ix Aristippus Fo. xvij Philip king of Macedonie Fo. xix Aleaudre the great
Fo. xxij Antigonus Fo. xxiij Augustus Lesar Fo. xxv Phocion Fo. xxviij
Demosthenes Fo. xxix Dionysius Fo. xxx Agathocles Fo. xxxij Archclaus Fo.
xxxiij Themistocles Fo. xxxiij Aristides Fo. xxxiij Diogenes Fo. xxxviij
Aristotle Fo. xli Thales Fo. xlij Solon Fo. xliij Pittacus Fo. xliiij
Antistherres Fo. xliiij Anacharsis Fo. xlv Seno Fo. xlvi Cleanthes Fo. xlvij
Isocrates Fo. xlvij Philoxenus. Fo. xlviij

The Table of the second book.
Achilles Fo. ij Alphonsus king of Aragone Fo. iij Athanasius Fo. vi Sigismuno
Temperour. Fo. viij Plotinus. Fo. x Cyrus the elder Fo. xi Artoxerxes Fo. xiij
Orontes Fo. xv Duke Memnon Fo. xv The Egyptians Fo. xvi Cambyses Fo. xvij
Darius King of the Persians Fo. xxi Semiramis Fo. xxvi Serxes Fo. xxvi
Artoxerxes with the long hand Fo. xxix Cyrus the younger Fo. xxix Cresus Fo. xxx
Amyntas Alexander his son Fo. xxxij Scilurus Fo. xxxiij Belo Fo. xxxiiij Dieron
Fo. xxxv Demetrius the son of Antigon{us} Fo. xxxvi Demosthenes Fo. xxxviij
Cato Fo. xlij

FINIS.
Prynted at London by Richard Banks.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


