A MUCH PROFITABLE TREATISE AGAINST THE pestilence, translated into eglyshe by
Thomas Paynel Chanon of Martin Abbey. 1534.

REMEDY AGAINST THE PESTILENCE.
FOr the conseruatyon of these that are in health, reformation and amendmente of
these that are sick. I intende under ye correction of my auncyente masters
and doctors, to write and declare certain profitable things for the common
weal, and against pestilence, the which doth very often invade, trouble, vex
men's bodies. And against these things after my poor learning, I will ordinatly
write, as here after doth follow.

Of the pronosticate signs of pestilence. cap.i.
THe signs, by the which a ma may pronosticate, speak, and know the
pestilence, are after this work but.vii.

The first is, when that in the self same sumers and come of the south wind.











The seventh is, when there blows much

The causes of pestilence. cap.ii.
THe causes of pestylence are diuyded in three. For at sometimes they proceed fro
beneth, and sometime fro above, other while from both. Pestilence may be caused
come from beneth, when there is nyghe unto our chambre some priuey, or
stynkynge sink, by the which the air may be corrupt and infectyd: this
pestilence is called a particular pestilence: the which may chance happen
daily. And of this procedethe a pestilent fever, by the which many a physician
is deceyuyd, not knowing the said fever to be pestiferous. And sumtymes such
pestilence chancethe by the corruption of deed carreyne, the which doth
fortune oftentimes in corrupt places. This pestilece comes very often fro
above, and that through the virtue and operation of the celestial bodies, by
the which the lively spirit of ma is corruptyd. Of this speaks Auicenna in
his fourth book saying, By the air and influence of the celestial bodies
above, the bodies benethe are oftentimes and very soon corrupted and infectyd.
For the celestial impression doth corrupt the air, and by such corruption
the lively spirit of man is corrupted as well by the inferior rote as by the
superior: that is to say, that the pestilence is caused as well by the
inferior bodies, as by the superior impression, when the air is through deed
careyn so corrupted that it infects man, and ingendrethe siknes, as fevers
and impostumes. For why, the air is then open, whose attraction is often
venemons and corrupt, the which is right grievous for the heart, and nature is
there with diverse manners of ways feblysshed and sore grieved.

Upon these things before declared, two questions may be asked. First why that
some do die and peryshe of the foresaid sycknesse, and some not: and being in
the said same city or hows, why one doth dye, and a another dies not?

Unto this first question I answer and say, that hit may so fortune and
chance by two diverse reasones. And first because that the action and
operation of the bodis above, have more respect to one place then to a another.

The second reason and cause comes of the patient. For saying it is so, that
every man is not of like complexion, one may be disposed to that infirmity
and sickness, whereunto an other is nothing inclined or disposed. And ye shall
note, that all such as be disposed to the pestilences, are of a whotte
complexion, and their conduits are wide and large, their poores open, and
replenisshed with divers humours.

Item all such bodies as be much resoluyd, as these that do often times
company with women, and these that use much baynynge, and these which by
great labour and vehement anger are chased and hot: al such are much more
disposed to have the pestylence than any other.

The second question is, whether such pestilent sickness be contagious or no.

To this question I answer and say, that such pestylente sickness is
contagious. For from such infected bodies commethe infectious and venomous
fumes and vapours, the which do infect and corrupt the air. And therefore it
is very necessary to avoid and eschew all such as be infected with any
such infirmite: and also in time of pestilence to avoid great multitude and
congregation of people. For in a great multitude may be some one infectyd,
the which may infect many other. And therefore the wise and expert physicians,
when they vyset any such infect persons, stand far from them, turnynge
holding their facys toward the door, or some other window: and so shulde their
servants do, and also they that keep them.

Ye shall also note, that yt is very good profitable to recover helthe, al
sumtymes to change chambers, and to open the north and este wyndowes of the
sickemas chambre, and to keep the southe wyndowes thereof close shit. For the
southe wind has two causes of infection and putrefaction.

The first is, that it feblyssheth as well the hole and sound bodies, as the
sick.

Secondely it is written in the third book of the Aphorismie, that it
inflatethe and can sethe a man to swell, and noyeth the hearing, and doth hurt
the heart. For it doth open the pipes and conduits of man, and persethe unto
the heart. And therefore it is very convenient and mete for a hole man, in time
of pestilence, and when the southe wind doth blow, to keep him self within:
or else (if a man must needs go forth) that he depart not from his house,
till the son be hot, and of a good heyghte.

The remedies against the foresaid pestilence. Cap.iii.
FOr asmoche as we have scene the causes of the pestilence, it is now
convenient to declare certain remedies to withstade it. Wherefore ye shall note
after the mind of the supernatural physician, speaking by the mouth of
Iheremie, that if a man will be surely cured, and have a sure medecin, he
must leave his sins, and confess him self with humility and great
repentance. For in time of sykenes confession and penance shulde be preferred
above al other medecines. But to keep and conserve the body, the most
soueraynste thing is to avoid and fl such places and persons as be
infected. But yet for as much as there be many that can not conuenientely, nor
with their ease or profit change their habitation, I would counseyll them as
much as shall be possible, to eschew and fl al such things as may ingendre
or cause putrefaction, and to absteyne from much bodily frequentation and
company of women.

Also in such dangerous season and time of sickness, we shulde avoid the
southe winds, for naturally they cause much infection and dangerous
putrefaction. And therefore we have told you before, that the south windows of
your house should be shut, till it were prime, and that they should be open
northward. Also we have said, that all manner of infection and stynch should be
anoyded and fled, as the infection of stables, pryueys, and above all other the
infection of deed carein, and of lunge standing waters, the infection of old
sinks, that cause such corruptions, that the inhabitours of such houses do
die, their neighbours continuing in health prosperite. In like wise we shulde
flee those places, where that putrified ware is sold: for such putrified
things do engender infection and savers much contrary unto helthe. For as
aromatike sweet odours and savours do comfort the heart, so doth ill and
infectious savours grieve the heart, and cause it to be weke and feeble, wherefore
it is right necessary to withstand such infections, and to beware, that they
do not pierce and entre in to our chambers, and that we have good and clear
fierce, and that these herbs here following be not to seek, Bayberies, Ieneper,
Vbery, Organy, wormwod, Isope, Rue, Muggeworte, and specially this wodde Aloes,
the which is very dere, whose fumygations must be receyuyd by the mouth and
nose, for they do strength, fortify, and comfort the hart, and the interyour
parties of man.

Also ye must eschew and fl the excess of meates and drynkes: for such
repletion doth cause and engender ylle humours, the which are easily and soon
corrupted infectid. And therefore Aui. saith in his.iiii. canon, that all such
as use great repletion, do abrige shorten their days the end of their life.
In like wise a man shulde not bayne nor wasshe him among much company, for
the breath of one infectid person may infect a hole. Farthermore all manner of
multitude and congregation of people is to be sled and auoidyd. But for asmoche
as it is very harde for many a man to avoid and absteyne fro company, let all
such receive and use these medicines that here after follow.

In the morning at your vprysyng, ye shall eat a little Rue well wet depte
in clear water, with a little salt, and one or two walnuts well pylde. If so
be yt ye can not have these forsaid things, take a tofte wet in vinegar,
specially when the whether is cloudy. Also ye must se and take heed, that your
house be over sprincled with vinegar of losis, that in somer it be strewed with
vine leues. Item it is very good for a man to wash his hands in water
vinegre, and than to smell to his hands.

Also it is helthsome to smell to such things, as be sharpe tart, whereof I
had experience provide it my self at Moutpeller. For through poverty I was
enforced constraynyd to be among them, and to goo frome hows to hows to
help the sick and dysesyd, and so toke a sponge in my hand deped and well
wet in vinegre, or else a toste, the which I held unto my mouth. For all
that is sharpe and sower, doth replenyshe the pypes and conduits of the body,
and lettethe the ylle air to entre into the body, and so it is excluded.

The confortation of the heart and other principal members of man. Capi.iiii.
THe things which do comfort the hart, are Saffron, Cherfile, and plantayne,
the which do solide and confirm the interior spirits.

Also ye shall understand, that the eyes through the infection of the air
do wax obscure and dim, except a man carry about him these foresaid
things. It is a right wholesome thing for a ma to wash his hades, eyes, his
mouth with rose water and wine. But if all these forsayde things can not be
had, take aysel: for so ye may both dwell and haute the more surely amoge
much company: the which medicine is laxatyue, and much profytable for the
belly. Or else ye may take pylles named pestiletions, the which ye shall
find at the potycaris. And as considering metes, I say that Triacle is very
good: and therefore it is not i'll to use thereof twyse a day the quantity of.ii.
sponfulles well mynglyd with clear wine, or rose water, or ale. And after it is
well mingled beten together, and that ye have received it, ye must absteyne
from all other meates till it be none. Also it shall be very good ons in the day
to eat good meates, and moderately to drink good wine, or else it should
putrefy and corrupt the humours. Men must beware of hot meates, as pepper, and
garlyke, notwithstanding that the pepper doth purge the brain of fleme, and
other principal members of al superfluous and vicious humours, nor that is not
through his heate, the which hete ingendrethe putrefaction, whose bytternes
plesythe me much more than his savour.

And garlyke in like manner, doth purge avoid fleme, provoking mans appetite,
and chaceth away ill ayers. Yet for as much as it troublythe the eyes, and
doth hete their heads that do much use it, I think it therefore another
wholesome, nor the use thereof very pleasant. For the pestilence through natural
heate, is often times incresyd and augmentyd. All meates of light digestion are
most wholesome. And it is good to use boylde meat in the morning, and roast at
night. Suppynges and cawdelles, if they be tart and sharpe, aare profitable.
For in time of pestylence such eager and sower meates are better for mans body,
then any other medicine.

Item all fruits at hurtful, except they be sour sharpe, as cheris,
poumgarnades, or in stead and place of a medicine, a little piece of a naple, or
of a pere. For all manner of fruit engender putrification. The most
profitablest spice in time of pestilence are these, Cmamum, Gynger, Comyn,
Nutmegs, and Saffron: of the which men do make sawses for rich men: But if
so be poverty will not suffer you to bye these foresaid spices, make your sauce
of rue, sage, walnuts, and parcely, depte in vinegar. If so be they be of
mean estate, let them take for their sauce saffron and cummyne, the which
must be put in vinegre.

This sauce is a very good sauce avoiding all corruption, and with all this a
man must be merry and nothing melaneolyous: For that is cause of good helthe.
And therefore in time of pestilence a manne should not fear to dye, but rather
trust and hope to live lunge.

Of lettynge of blood.
FLeubothomye, that is lettynge of blud, may be done and used ones in a
month, if it so be that iorneinge or no another thing do let it: as in
pylgrymmes, and other feeble personnes, or they that are laxative. And whether
that this fleubothomia be in the right Basilyke, or in the list it must be
done fasting. And after the incisyon, he that is let blood must be merry,
and use moderatelye good wine, or else good ale, and keep him self frome
sleep that day that his basilyke is cut.

And if a manne feel him self to be grieved with any impostume, he must avoid
sleep, And seek for good merry company, or else walk: for by sleep the
interyour and inward heate drawethe the poison so unto the heart and the other
pryncypalle members of the body, that hardly a man shall either by herbs, or
any other medicine restore the body to his first condytyon and estate again,
the which thing should not chance, if he would eschew sleep. And therefore
sleep must be differred for a while by walking in to some plesaunte feldes or
gardeynes.

After such walking a manne may sleep the space of a good hour. And to this
purpose Auicen says, that when we purpose to sleep, we shulde before drink
some good wine, or else some other good drynkes for by sleep a man gethereth
i'll humours, the which good drink do expel.

Here it may be inquired, howe one shulde know, when he is smitten with the
pestilence, where to I aunsere and say, that who so ever be infected, that day
he shall eat very little meat: for he is fulle of ylle humours, and a none
after he has eaten, he shall desire to sleep, and under a spyce of cold, he
shall feel a vehement heate, in the fore part of his head. The which thing
may be avoided and helped by mean mouinge of him self, or walking. For the
pondorosite of the body, will not suffer him to walk, or to ride much at that
time: for he shall covett to sleep at every howre. For the poison that is in
his body doth so trouble the lively spirits, yt he shall require nothing else
but sleep. And by these foresaid signs a manne shall well perceive when he is
infectyd with the sycknes. And he that will not believe it, may tarry the space
of half a day, and know it to be so by experience. For he shall feel the
sores under his arms, or about his eres, his neck. and shulders, or else
above his reins.

Therefore the most souereynste remedy is in time of pestilence, to fl and
refrain sleep.

For when the spirits of man be at rest, the venym and poison doth extend
and sprede it self throughout all the body: of the which thing I have had
experience and provide it by my self. And therefore when any man doth feel him
self smitten and infectid with the pestilence, he shulde be let blood in
great quantite. For the evacuation of a little blud doth only move and
stir the venym. And who so will not let him self blood by many veins,
must be let blood by one, and that abundantly. But whether he that is let
blood be sick or hole, he must needs (for the reasones before rehersyd)
eschew and avoid sleep. And if he have a sore, he must be let blood upon
he self same side that he hath his sore, and not upon the contrary side, for
such causes as here after shall follow. And therefore it the sore be upon the
right arm, he must be let blud upon the vein in the midst of the self
same arm: and like wise it must be done, if it be upon the left arm. And
if the postume be benethe toward the priuey members, he must be let blood
on the left side, toward his great too: But if the sore be in the neck, he
must be let blud in the hand upon the self same side, nyghe unto the thumme,
and nyghe unto the little finger. But if the sore do appear nyghe unto the
ears of Cephalica, then he must be let blud upon that side where he doth
feel his grefe in the vain yt is betwyxt the thume and the next finger, which
is called Basilica. If ye sore do appear upon the shulders, he must be let
blud with vetosities, first in the veyn called mediane. If it appear on the
back, he must be let blud in the vein called perdica magna. And let al these
things be done, if the patient slept not before he knew of the sore, for if
he feel hit after that he has slept, then he must be let blood clean
contrary: that is to say, if the sore do appear upon the right arm, he must
be let blood upon the left arm, in the vein of the liver, or in the veyn
named Basilica mediana. And if hit appear upon the left arm, ye must do as
ye did when it appeared upon the right arm, and so consequently where so ever
it doth appear.

If the patient after such diminution of blood be weyke and seble, then he
may sleep and take his rest at after none: for until it be none he must needs
be in continual and moderate motion. And if the sore do increce, yet a man
shulde not fear it, for the soore is the cause of helthe. And to ripe and to
break the sore, make this medicine that here after folowethe.

Bruise the leaves of Ellerne with a little mustard, and make a plaster thereof,
to lay upon the sore. Some Surgiens will put triacle unto it, the which
thing in no manner of wise I would ye shulde do: for the nature of triacle, is
to repell poison, and therefore it were better that the patient shulde drink
it to avoid out the poison.

Another medicine to ripe a pestilence sore. Take an herb called herbaiouis,
pellytory, plantayne, and a lyttellrye, and stamp them together, until there
come water from it: after that wet it in woman's milk, drink thereof
fastinge, before ye go to your rest: for so it shall have the better
operation.

Also he that hath a soore, may take hasell nuts, figs, and rue, and make a
plaster to lay to his sore.

To know vrines.
IF ye will know vrines, ye must first of all mark, whether the urine be
scummye, ye shall see a cercle about it, and thereby ye shall know, that there
are great ventosyties in the guts and reygnes.

When ye se that the urine is as though it were full of blood, it
betokenethe grefe peyne through out all the body, and if it be in the botum of
the water, yt sygnyfiethe peyne in the reygnes.

When ye se that there is much vryne, and that it is as clear as water, it
signifies the virginity of a maid.

When ye se in any vryne little bryghte and flamynge sparkles, as appear in the
son beams, in a man it signifies ill humours: in a woman it betokens that
she is with child, and if those sparkles be red, it is a shrewd token.

When ye se the vryne red, and in colour like unto wine, as there were small
bubles in the botome, it signifies yt the patient doth suffer great peyne
through out all his body. When ye se the vryne discoloured, dark in the
midst, it signifies that the patient is full of fleme, but yet without any
fever: and that he hath a swelling in the belie, and that he is peyned in the
raynes, in the side, and in the heed. And if it be a woman's water, she is
peyned in the nauyll, in the raynes, and in her knees, and that the suffers
cold in her hands, and in her feet.

To all such persons, ye may give good strong wine, well mengled with hoot
water: in the which water ye must put sodden sage, whereof ye must give them
every morning half a nouce. Also ye must make them a bathe of Penny real,
Camamyll, and bay leues: and whether it be men or women, they must be therein a
lunge season, and anoynte their raynes their bellies with the same, and with
oil of baize.

A remedy for the french pockes.
I Find that this sickness began in the year of the creation of the
world.MM.ccccxxxvi. And now I say, that the unfortunate coiuction of Saturne
and Mars (in the which this disease had his beginning and course) the
conjunction ill respect of those planets was the beginning thereof. In the year
a.M.cccc.xcvi. re.vi. of Ianuer, in the third face called Piscis: the which
infortune and ill respect of the forsayde plants impressyd in man body,
disposed to corruption, this forsayde disease. For Saturne is the cause of the
passion and peynefulnes of the legs and other members: and Mars is the cause
of the ingendryng thereof, as it is noted in the book entitled Initium
sapientie. cap.4. of the nature and sygnification of planets. And therefore I
say, that the dede of the forsayde coiunction, is the cause of this sikenes:
the which conjunction is paste, and shall come no more. For in the
year.M.cccc. xc.vii. the forsayde plants did holly conjoin them self all
in their contrary sign. And therefore if any ma chance to be infected again
with this syckenes, it is not by the influence of any constellation, nor by the
influence of any ill respect of the forsayde coniuction: but because it is of
his propre nature very contagious. And therefore yet such as keep good diet,
may be soon eased.

This malady is cronique, lunge sense, and extendyd through the nature of
Saturne, whose scabs, pusshes, and inward outward goutes, which are of ye
nature of Mars shall be shortly in Aries. But as touching this matter, there are
four things to be cosiderid. First that they, which be infected with this
sycknes, must use no great abstinece in meates nor drynkes. For abstinence
causes great debility of nature, feblenes of body. They must ete such
meates as be light of digestion, and drink sweet wynes with rain water.

Secondarily they must be purged ones or twyse in the weke with pylles
convenient and mete to purge the heed: because that this malady, which is of
Saturnus, proceeds from the heed. Thyrdly to remove this sycknes and the
peynes thereof, ye must anoynte him with oil made of sweet almandes, and with
terpentine: the which two must be mengled well together. Fourthly he must
drink every morning woman's milk, and suck it from the dug, for that is
most convenient: or else he must take asses or gotes milk, and that the foresaid
bestes be nourished after the use and form of physic. The manner of receyuynge
of this milk, is by the dug: and the cause is this. In this sickness there
are three things, sores, bledyng, and consumtion. Vlceration must be healed,
bledynge must be modified, consuption recovered restored. There is a medicine,
i the which are these three, that is milk, the which naturally doth cleanse,
the chese doth fasten, the butter doth nouryshe, and restore the forsayde
consolidation. And therefore I say, that who so will use this thing every
morning fasting, shall by the grace of god recover his helthe, and so I pray
god he may.

To the redder.
It may be, that this remedy for the freche pockes before written, was at the
beginning the best that men had by experience proved: but I think it is
nothing now comparable to that that Hutten writes de ligno guaiaco, yet not
withstanding we have put it to, that men may se what things are good, if the
other could not be had.

Finis.
LONDINI IN AEDIBVS THOMAE BERTHELET REGII IMPRESSORIS.

CUM PRIVILEGIO.


