A short and pithy Discourse, concerning the engendering, tokens, and effects
of all Earthquakes in General: Particularly applied and conferred with that
most strange and terrible work of the Lord in shaking the Earth, not only
within the City of London, but also in most parts of all Englande: Which
happened upon VVensday in Easter week last past, which was the sixth day of
April, almost at six a clock in the evening, in the year of our Lord GOD.
1580. Written by T.T. the 13. of April. 1580.



AT LONDON, Printed by Richarde Iohnes. 1580.

To the right honourable my very good Lord, Philip Howard Earl of Arundell, c.
the testimony of a good conscience to Godward, continuance of bodily health,
and increase of worldly honour.
I Am not a little sorry, Right Honourable, that bearing a desirous mind of
long time to present unto your view some argument of my good meaning towards
you, the hap hath so fall out, that nothing hath yet happened unto me that
way, either worthy your honourable inspection, or answerable unto my desired
expectation. Nevertheless, not through negligence to omit such opportunity as
hath bin offered, least I might seem slow in performance, or careless in
duty: and taking in hand by the importune motion of some friends, not now to
hold my pen in silence in respect of so rare matter as hath happened of very
late: such as it is, so small, and so slender, in most humble wise I present
unto your honour. My right honourable good Lord, it is a short discourse of
all Earthquakes in general, and also my poor judgment touching the
marvelous visitation of God in the terrible Earthquake which was felt of
late days amongst us. Which as I acknowledge to be but extemporal and weak,
so do I submit it unto the controlment of better learned, leaving unto them
both matter and liberty to judge and write thereof much more at large. And
craving at your honours hands some manner friendly enterteyning of the same, if
I may obtain it, I shall not only think my travel well employed, but that
of duty I am farther indebted to make your honour, in respect of many great
virtues that rest in the same, patron of some better labour hereafter. As
knows God, to whom I commend you, and pray for you, to your best contentment
and liking. Written at London this thirteenth of April 1580. By him that
remains your honours evermore at commandment:

T.T.

A pithy discourse of the late Earthquake, on vvensday in Easter week, being
the sixth of April. 1580.
AMong the manifold signs and tokens, whereby it hath pleased our most gracious
God, and merciful Father, in these the later times of the world, and very
ripeness of our sins, to call us to repentance, we may not account as
least this most dreadful dangerous Earthquake, which unto the great terror
of all good consciences befell of late unto the City of London, and as I
suppose to the most part of this Realm, upon wensday in Easter week, Yea, and
out of ye Realm to, in some Countries lying Easterly.
which was the sixth day of April. 1580. about six of the clock in the after
noone. Whereof, to the intent so marvelous a judgment of the Lords may be
known, to such as personally were not touched with the same, and also so
wonderful a work may not want it due effect, where it shall be heard: I am
resolved by his power, without whom we are able to do nothing: and by your
patience, to whom perhaps this knowledge may be aueyleable, to set down
somewhat briefly concerning the same in writing.

2. But before we enter any further into the bare betraying of the matter, it
is expedient that I discover unto you the causes, and substance of every
Earthquake, Causes, and substance of Earthquakes, as they be naturally
assigned.
which I must be fain to borrow from the Profane wryters, who have most
dilligently laboured in the search of natural causes, whereunto doubtless they
could not so clearly have atteyned without the finger of God, which hath led
men as well into the true contemplation of these matters, as of any other
knowledge. And therefore following Aristotle as thief in this behalf: we must
understand, that the efficient causes of an Earthquake are three, to wit, the
Sun, the other six Planets, and a spirit or breath included within the
vowelles of the earth: and the material cause one, which is an Exhalation,
that is to say, a certain air, breath, or smoke drawn out of the earth,
which of nature is hot and dry.

Howe Earthquakes are engendered.
3. Thus it is not hard then, to describe the engendering of an Earthquake. For
the earth is a dry body of it own nature, and as daily experience teaches,
it conteyneth within it great plenty of water. And when it is thoroughly heated
by the beams of the Sun, and also by bodies of fiery substance, whereof it
embraces many: as Brimstone, and such like, partly by resolving the water into
air, and partly by receiving the like into the empty hollowness thereof, it
comprehends within it great slore of spirit and windy matter, which being
very subtle, swyft, and vehement, wanders here and there under the earth,
striking the sides thereof with great force, and most times causes the earth to
quake and tremble, for that it seeks issue continually to depart into it own
place.

4. At sometimes therefore this spirit or Exhalation issues wholly forth
together: sometime by laboring it conceaueth fire, and breaks out in flames:
otherwhiles, some part of it remains behind, and is shut up again within
the earth, and ministers matter for a new effect. And farther, as the
searchers of nature have reported of this kind of accident, Earthquakes comoly
happen at night, or in the morning
the Earthquake happens (for the most part) at a calm season, when as none or
very small winds blow, specially in the night, and at the dawning of the day:
for that accustomably winds use to rise at that time: or if in the day time it
happen, then most at high noone, the Sun being then in greatest force, and
driving down the Exhalations into the earth.

5. Moreover, the places most convenient and likely for Earthquakes, are
cauernous and hollow places, where the earth is loose and false under foot,
by reason of undermining or digging for Metal, Stone, Cole, or such like stuff,
as upon Mendeepe, Newcastle, and sundry other places within this Realm. Also
the hollow cliffs by the Sea side, where the water sometime freatteth holes in
the banks, causing great pieces of the earth to fall in: As of late days it
happened between Dover, and Folstone, most grievously may be seen every day
in experience, at the poor Town of Whytstable in Kent. And again, the
Countries that are very full of great Hills and mountains: Wales acquainted
with particular Earthquakes.
so that (perhaps) the vplandishe people of Wales are better acquainted with
such effects than we are, as it stands with good reason, and I have heard
also some to report by trial and knowledge.

6 It chances also many times, that by reason of repressing this Exhaltation,
which is the material cause of the Earthquake, within the earth, there is
heard a noise like the working of the Sea a far of, which, nevertheless,
doth not always import an Earthquake: for that peradventure the Exhalation is
not sufficient in quantity, or qualytie to shake the earth, but only it
belloweth, or barks at the departure: as a Gun being discharged gives the
bigger or lesser crack according to the quantity or ramminge, more or less of
the powder, yet makes some noise when it is discharged although the powder
were not of sufficient force to make the piece shake, or recoil.

7. As touching other Accidents, that are noted over and above, to accompany
and follow Earthquakes: Eclipses of the Moon import defect of heat.
one is eclipses, of the Moon, another Exhalatiue impressions in the air.
Whereof the one may import some defectt of heat, and then the cold binds up
the poares of the earth, causes the winds most times to blow fiercely at
such seasons: and the other gives a taste of the plenty of hot and dry
matter, which by probability is concluded within ye earth, whereof that was
some part which appeared, both which may minister great cause thereunto, as is
already declared. And it is a thing specially and above all thing noted, that a
little before, and even at the time of the Earthquake, the Sun is darkened
without a cloud, which is long of the spirit that breaks forth, which
filling the air: takes away the bright beams of the Sun from our sight,
after the manner of a thin mist.

8. The morning is calm and cold before an Earthquake happen, by reason of
the hot spirit or breath which is included within the earth: and also after
the Sun set, the Sky is clear, for that the matter is soon dispearsed: and
often times there is seen in the Element a long narrow cloud stretched
forth, which is the forerunner of an Earthquake. Some report that they saw
this Cloud, although it were not generally marked.
But to speak of some consequentes that do follow them for the most part,
although God have his special work according to his good providence in them,
yet are these such as the natural Philosophers have observed most often to
ensue, may not conveniently be omitted by me in this recital, for special
purpose.

9. Sometimes therefore, after an Earthquake great sloare of water hath broken
forth of the earth, as being driven out by the Exhalation, Strange effects
of Earthquakes.
in so much that the Sea, and other Rivers have overflowed their banks, and
procured certain particular Dilugies or drowninges of Towns and Countries.
And many times by reason of the forcible bursting out of the spirit, mighty
heaps of Stones have been thrown out of the earth, to the great admiration of
the beholders. The Sea likewise hath been seen to rage wonderfully, as if it
had been moved by very foul weather, and Lands have been lifted up whereas
were never any before, and mayne Lands divided where before was never Sea. And
moreover, it hath been known, that an Earthquake hath continued the space of
forty days, almost without intermission: yea, of two years, more or less
about one place, which happens by reason of the multitude of the spirit, and
strong resistance of the sides of the tauernous places wherein the spirit is
contained.

10. To be short, the manner of the shaking of every Earthquake is of three
sorts. Earthquakes shake in three sorts.
For either it shakes towards one side, and is like a certain trembling or
rocking, this is a token of great store of ye Exhalatio: or else it lyfteth
right up in the midst, lets fall again, after the manner of the Pulse, or
other beating veins of ye body, and this kind shakes more, and is most
dangerous, and testifies that there was much more plenty of the spirit or
Exhalation lying deep beneathe in the bottom: or else it seems to be
compouded of them twain, and at the same instant doth both rock and lift up
the earth together, and with the diversity of motion dancing, as it were, it
ratleth, and butts the houses buildings together, yet in such sort that none
falls, but the one is rather a stay unto the other, this discovers pletie
of the substance after both the sorts placed, moving.

11. Yet the end that any of these, yea the best, The best kind is bad
enough.
doth bring where there is store of the matter, continuance of the action and
conflict between the contained the containing, is most dreadful quaking of
the earth, trebling of houses, shaking of bu^ldings, amazing of the people,
doubt of farther harms. But where it pleases God, that they rage with greater
vehemence: there follows far more outrageous miseries, as suddein
overthrowing of houses buildings, subversion of whole Towns Cities,
unprepared death of thousands of people, sometime the utter subversion of whole
Kingdoms Nations. And this much suffices to be spoken of them in general.

A conferece of al the tokens aforesaid with our Earthquake.
12. Now therefore, if by your patience it may be grouted, let us a while
compare some part of these general tokens and Accidents, with this our
particular Earthquake: since these for the most part, as I have said, are in
sum, the observations of the learned in Philosophie concerning such matter:
and so shall we be the better able to discern of this wonderful work of
God, whether it be mere natural, or no: and also take the better occasion to
report of every point thereof, according as I have been informed by persons of
credit. For why? for mine own part, I must thus protest before the living
God, whose matter we have in hand: that being not much past a pair of Butte
lengthes without the liberty bars of the City of London, walking with
honest godly company, and to my liking, even at the instant of the quaking,
as it should seem, neither they, nor I perceived any such thing at all. But
the Lord hath his providence, and his works are marvelous.

God works evermore by second causes unless he work miracles which are
against the common course of nature.
13 But that the Sun, the Planets, and other Stars are the efficient cause,
as well of an Earthquake, as of the raising of a Comet, or any other fiery
impression or Meteor considering ye evident force of those heavenly bodies in
daily experience, it is no marvel. For that he which is the cause of al
causes, in al his works of nature hath made them his under Deputies, remaining
nevertheless at his check, without any absolute authority of their own*
These therefore (but especially the Sun) because of his great heate about and
since the feast of Easter last past, and chiefly since Wensday and Thursday
before Palm sunday in Lent, might somewhat seem to be of force to hasten the
drying up of some small moisture. Howbeit, neither the one, nor the other can
appear to be of such valor in reason, considering the great wet that hath
fallen this winter, as to consume so great plenty of water, without some other
natural cause be assigned, are the special provision of God admitted.

14. Nevertheless, touching the plenty of water, that to the generation of an
Earthquake is required, to be contained within the bowels of the earth:
Matter left for another Earthquak unless the Lords mercy be greater
it cannot be denied, but there hath been great cause to think there was, and
is yet sufficient for this or a far greater one yet to come, from which the
Lord in mercy deliver us, if so be other causes also concur, and the Lord
do consent thereunto. But indeed, I am rather induced to fear some
unseasonable effects of the other smoke, or spirit which comes from waters
and moystie earth, and is called a vapour, and of nature is warm moist, least
when we little fear, we find the distemperaunce thereof to our hurt in our
fruits and Corn, and other necessary provision of the earth. Whereof if a
man would set down an example, they may be frosts, or sleete in May, and
hayle in Summer, and towards Harvest, with such like.

15. But to proceed farther in our conference, whether this efficient spirit
be wholly issued forth with the Earthquake, or be in part left behind to
procure a news effect, or not, it rests in Gods knowledge, and I trust not
(...). But I hear not yet of any fury flames that were seen to issue forth
of the earth, the Lord be praised the more, for withholding that terror from
us. And for mine own part, I am able to testify of the calmness of that
time wherein the earth is said to have trembled, Some say that the earth was
shaken again at midnight following.
that if there blew any wind at all, surely it was but very little. Mary, in
this point it differed from ^ecustomable time of the like Accidents, in that it
happened not in ye night time, which doubtless, would have been right grievous
and terrible, although in deed it were in the evening and towards night, when
as the Sun was past his force of heat, as going then to glade: which is also a
point worthy the noting.

16. And as for any holes, caves, or hollow places which might minister
occasion of conveyance or lurking of the matter of an Earthquake under the
ground hereabouts, as yet I do not know, specially of any notable depth, such
as are above mentioned or else are found in the parts of Italy, These are the
causes of their hot bathes, and medicinable waters in those Coutreyes.
or Sicile, and elsewhere, upon like occasio, or by the continual burning of
the veins of Sulphur, Naptha, Bitumen, and Sea coals which are a kind of
Bitumen: so that the air possessing the unsearchable hollow rooms, might in
expectatio bring forth this effect. Neither are ye banks of the Thames so
clyfty, thereby hollow, that it might be that way feared. And as for Hills,
Moutaines, and Dales, The situation of the city of Lodo in a most, rytch,
pleasant and fertile Leauell.
the situation of London is so free from them: that I have heard some
traueylers say, that there is not a City in all Europe, that stadeth upon a
more rytch, pleasant, and fertile leauell than it doth.

17. It may appear also, that the Philosophers admit the earth to bellowe,
roar, crack and make a noise, sometime without an Earthquake when as the
Exhalation breaks ^oorth, and yet is not of force to shake the earth. How
chances it then we heard no such matter, when as it appears, the efficient
was of power to bring forth the effect? It must be answered, Gods will was
otherwise. For I hear no report of any such thing. Which if it had happened,
would have added great terror to the fear that was otherwise procured by the
shaking. Unless we should understand it to be verified by cracking rattling of
timber, poas^s, walls, and wenscots, which I suppose wanted not, but we may
not so take their meaning, but rather of a voice like the roaring of the Sea,
or stroke of a Gun, when as the Exhalation issues out of the earth.

18. And as for other accidets, true indeed it is, that not long since we had
an Eclipse of the Moon, to wit, In Eclipse of the Moon, the last of January.
1580.
the one and thirteth day of Januarie last past, about eight a clock at night,
at what time, to speak more Mathematically, the furious planet Mars being
found in the sign of Capricornus, in the fourth house, evermore fore shows
and procures Earthquakes within the time of that revolution, as the learned in
those most excellent sciences do affirm. And touching the appearance of
Exhalatiue impressions, which I term by that name, for that the substance of
them is hot dry, although they be not carried so high where they might be set
on fire, which is to the top of the uppermost region of the Earth, and so take
the name of fi^ie impressions.

19. Concerning such, I say, and other Meteors, Of the strange exhalation
seen in the air, the 5. of March 1580.
I need not stand upon the recital of some that have bin seen of late, which
as I am credibly informed, have bin many, and oftentimes seen by sundry. And
I my self also, upon the fifth day of March last past, being Satersday,
almost at nine a clock at night, in the company of certain Worshipful
Gentlemen, beheld a strange, and great exhalatiue impression in the Air,
which in mine opinion was not fired, but very thin and clear, for I might
very perfectly behold the fixed Stars through it. The situation thereof was
stretching endlong from the East to the Weast, over the City of London, or
somewhat more Southerlie, and the form thereof was as the shape of the lath of
a Crossebow without a string, whose back bedded towards the North, and the
belly towards the South. At what time I saw it, it was in my judgement in ye
tenth house, raised specially by Venus, or Mercurie, or by some fixed Stars
of their nature, and as I remember, the Lyra was not the far off, but by nine
a clock or a little past, it was quite vanished.

20. Truly, I must needs confess, the sight thereof was rare, and which
woorthelie drew the eyes of many into admiration of the spectacle, and from
thence to lift their minds with thanks unto the wonderful Creator of all
things. And for yt I was known to have bin sometime in place where learning is
professed, some yt stood by demanded mine opinion what it might be, what also
signify? unto whom I answered, yt in my judgment, of nature it was an
exhalation, that otherwhiles it foreshewed ye following of an Earthquake, The
pre^age of this Erthquake by the Author.
but most comoly of fierce winds and drought, which howsoever they be
presignified, the effect must be acknowledged to rest in Gods hands only.

21. Another adjunct token likewise, which is the darkening of the Sun, The
Sun darkened at the instant of the Erthquake.
without any cloud, or Eclipse at the instant of the Earthquake, was evident
to be discerned, and is commonly reported by as many as made any observation
thereof. And for my part, I durst also affirm the same to be true, although I
acknowledge, as before, mine inexperience of the strange accident.
Notwithstanding, I remember that the Sun shined not as we were walking, which
was the time that the Earthquake happened. And to confer yet farther, indeed the
mornings before were cold and nipping, and afterwards at night the Sky was
fair and clear: but whether there appeared in the Element any long and
narrow Cloud stretched forth in length, either before or after, I can not
say.

22. Moreover, I hear as yet of no great and new eruptions of water by land
or Sea, but it is certainly told, of the strange unquietness and working of
the Thames at that time, without enforcement of wind or weather, Pherecydes.
The Ilads Thereon, Therea, and Egypt, cast up by Erthquakes out of the Sea. The
Island Atlantis drowned by an Earthquake.
even unto the hazarding of the lives of some, who, God be praised for it,
escaped in safety. But I heard none complain of the thickness of their pump
or conduit waters, by which means Pherecydes once foretold of an Earthquake to
come. No is there any speech of heaps of stones lately thrown out of the
Earth and discovered, nor of the rising of any newfound Lands out of the Sea,
or fresh waters, as of the two Lands of Thereon, and Therea, in the time of
Seneca: and before that of all Egypt, as grave Authors do insinuate: nor yet
of the drowning of any Island or Maine, as it is written of Atlantis, in the Sea
Atlanticum, which Sea afterward for a space was turned al into mud: nor yet
of maine lands rent asunder, as Europe was quite torn from Asia, saving for a
little neck or portion whereby they hang together.

23. But for the shortness of the continuance of the Earthquake, we are of
duty to yield most hearty thanks unto the Majesty of our most gracious God,
who, contrary to the natural custom that some Earthquakes do bring, hath
preserved us from so great dread and danger. The City of Constantinople was so
wonderfully shaken with an Earthquake an whole year together, The City of
Constantinople shaken with an Erthquake.
that the Emperor thereof, and all his people, were constrained to dwell
abroad in the fields under tents and pavilions, for fear their houses
buildings would fall on their heads. But I can not yet hear otherwise reported
by any, to make me conjecture that our shaking continued above the space of one
minute, which is the 60. part of an hour.

24. And yet farther to follow a while mine own probable collectio. I am
induced to think, that this quaking was not at one instant in all places
whereas it was fealt, but rather came by degrees, and distance of time, after
the manner of the beating of the pulse, which the Physicians call Serratilis, or
Vermicularis. Doubtless the reports show this to be true.
For coming from ye East parts where it seemed to begin, to rage most
fiercely, as with the in Kent, so proceeding to ye West, it was felt at
Rochester Grauesend about v. a clock, at London almost at vj. at Stones
Windsore almost half an hour after that, so, by likelyhoode it proceeded
farther yt way, perhaps according to ye stretching forth of ye strange
exhalatiue impression, whereof I made metion before, so bended Northerly
according to the proportio of the belly of the same.

25. But to determine of the three sorts of quakings felt commonly at the
trembling of an Earthquake, and to say precisely which of them this ours should
be, Earthequakes God be thaked, rare in England.
perhaps had it pleased the Lord to have made me as well partaker thereof in
sense, as doubtless I must be in signification, I might somewhat have
coiectured. Although this Accident be rare, I pray God may be rarer, happening
scarcely with us in an hundred, yea, in a thousand year. But as I may probably
guess by others relation, surely it seemed to be the mixed kind, for that it was
perceived to rock and lift up both at one instant, and yet God be thanked, no
houses nor buildings know to have fallen, which may ye better be so, for that
in this mixed kind, as the expert in those Sciences write, the one part is a
stay unto the other.

26. And although by our former reasons it may apeere, that the matter of the
Earthquake was but small that caused but so short a motion, yet am I persuaded
that the same was general unto all England and Scotland to, so to the whole
Island of Britain, This Erthquake at the least general to all Britain.
with no more hurt doing, I trust, or rather less, than with us here. But
where in former times and foreign Lands it pleased God to let the rage with
greater fury, there what grievous outragies have ensued, ancient Histories
make mention. The City of Rhodes was wonderfully shaken with an horrible
Earthquake. Rhodes, xii. Cities in Asia, Capania, Naples, Basil, Castles
almost an hundred, the Alps and Rome, some shaken, some overthrown with
Earthquakes.
Twelve ancient Cities in Asia were overthrown, some also swallowed up into
the earth. Campania, and Naples in Italy were sore affrighted, and molested.
The City of Basile in Germany was mightelie shaken, and Castles and fortresses
to the number almost of an hundred, were upon the shore of the Rhine utterly
overthrown. The huge Alps have trembled with the like, and Rome hath not
once nor twice assayed, and escaped that danger.

27. Indeed the suddenness and strangeness of the thing was such, that it
took diverse men in diverse actions, and brought them into sundry
considerations of the matter. Some doubtless at their prayers, and hearing
godly Sermons, Happy are they whom the Lord shall find weldooing.
whom, as men, it must needs amaze, or bring into a muse. Some at the
Tavern, and upon their Alebench, and therefore might well suspect that it was
long of their liquour. Some in earnest conference of worldly affairs, and so
peradventure they took small or no regard at all of it. Some in idleness
alone, and those of likelyhoode it might sorely abash. Some at game, and
therefore not much moved. Some at common Plays, who as I understand, were
horribly troubled. Some in wanton talk and disport, whom it might well
affright. Some perhaps worse occupied, whom I would counsel to be more
careful of the Lords sudden visitation. Some fast a sleep, and therefore
senseless: and some walking the streets and fields, or carried on Horseback,
or in Couches, and therefore not able to discern of any such matter.

28. Some that were above in their Chambers, Conjectures of those things that
happen most commonly.
judged that some violence had bin done to their houses beneath. Some that
remained below, found fault with tumbling and trampling above. Some imputed the
rattling of wainescots to Rats and Weesels: the shaking of the beds, tables,
and stools, to Dogs: the quaking of their walls to their neighbours rushing
on the the other side. And as their opinions were sundry, so were their speeches
thereupon diverse, until a common conference being had, they were resolved
upon their common case danger. For many not trusting to their own judgment,
and partly also moved with fear, ran out into the streets to know if the
like had happened unto others.

29. I am assuredly informed, Belles knowling alone.
that as well elsewhere as in London, the very shaking caused the Belles in
some Steeples to knoll a stroke or twain. The tops of half a dozen
chimneys in London were cast down: many stone works and buildings, for that
they would not yield, are shrewdly shaken. And to ad also the most grievous
chance of all, I trust, that have yet happened, or by Gods grace are like to be
heard of, Alack therewhile, Two children sore hurt, whereof one died presently.
was ye fore hurting of two poor Children, by the fall of a stone from the
roufe of Christ's Hospital Church in London: whereof the one being a Boy of
the years of sixteen, was slain presently, and the other being a Girl
about the same age, and dangerously bruised, is yet living and like to recover
who were both servants in one house, unto Iohn Spurlinge a shoemaker,
dwelling in S. Botulphes parish without Aldersgate nigh London.

30. Now, perhaps some would expect at my hands, that I should set down my
judgment farther concerning the efficient causes, also the consequents of this
Earthquake by the position of the Heavens and aspects of the Planets, and
fixed Stars, for that present time: which now I must needs omit for
brevity sake, till some other time more convenient. And if likewise I were
farther demanded, what mine opinion is concerning this Earthquake, This
Erthquake not altogether natural.
whither I think it altogether natural, or not? Surely, I am otherwise
persuaded, and so I judge many other to be, that have entered into ye deep
consideration thereof. But let it be, as it is, surely it cannot be without ye
special finger of God, whither it be for our comfort, or terror, as every
mans conscience shall bear him record, although I am sure there be none that
can excuse them selves of sin.

31. But whether the Angel of the Lord in passing by us in visitation, The
Angel of the Lord thought to pass by in visitation.
hath shaken our habitations with his presence, as some have reverently judged:
or in respect of the ripeness of our sins, our most merciful God hath
caused the earth to tremble, to the intent to move us to repentance, as it
may well be conjectured: Let us not stay, I beeseeche you in the bowels of his
dear Son Jesus Christ, every one to power out his complaint before the
fountain of mercy, and to call upon him to turn from us those plagues of
Pestilence, Sword, Famine, which by such quakinges are evermore foreshewed, and
our sins do worthily deserve. For to admit that it proceeded but of a mere
natural cause, so great and so many are the poisons, The corruption of metals
able to infect man, beast, and foul.
corruptions, cankers, and rustes of mettalles and mineral bodies within the
earth, that the venomous air that issues forth from them by the eruption of
the exhalation in an Earthquake, is of sufficient force, without the special
providence of God to the contrary, to infect and suffocate both Man, Beast, and
Foul, immediately.

A comfortable conjecture of the Lords mercy and love towards us
32. But shall we now again conjecture somewhat unto our own comfort, and
not altogether vnprobably? Since at all times these one and twenty years and
upward, during the reign of our most dear and dread Sovereign, and most
gracious Queen Elizabeth, the Gospel hath been sincerely and truly preached
unto us, and that now during this time of Lent last past, and since Easter,
not only in her Majesties Court, but also in her imperial City of London,
as also in all other places of her dominions, most choice men for godlines and
learning have been appointed to sow the seed of life, and to open the way
unto the kingdom of Heaven: what if in token of consent, good liking, and
conclusion of that which hath been so manifoldly spoken, the Lord would
vouchsafe to give a nod with his head, whereat, as the holy Ghost speaks by
the mouth of the Prophet Dauid: All the earth doth shake, and the hills do
smoke, and the whole frame of the world is moved?

33. Nevertheless, if the giltinesse of our own consciences cannot so content
us, but that, as rightly we ought, Conscientia mill teste^.
we be put in mind of most just punishment for our offences: doubtless I am
most inclined unto that persuasion, which with al my hart I wish we al
followed, that with speed. And herein I pray you let no man flatter or falsely
persuade himself with a natural cause, or with the mischance of two poor
childrens death, for that shall not serve when the time comes. For, was their
death casual think you? I know it was not, The Eirle died the Monday after,
being the eleventh of April.
since there falls not a poor Sparrow to the earth without ye providence of
God. Or were they the greatest sinners in ye copany? God knows, their years
may somewhat answer for the, I think they were not, more than they upon whom
the Tower fell in Siloa. But surely if we repent not, we shall all likewise
perish.

34. The judgment, if we perceive it, Gods judgements already begun.
is already begun at ye house of God, what favour then shall others look for?
If it have ha^ned thus in the green tree, what shall become of the dry? Good
brethren, let us look to this gear, yt the Lords mighty hand light not upon
us unlooked for. The Axe is not only set to the root of the tree, but it hath
now hewn many strokes, and some of the branches are fallen already. The Lord
is coming in majesty to judge the Earth, and to avenge himself upon his
enemies, and doubtless he is not far of. Our strange and hot and dry tokens
seen of late time, as the wonderful blazing Star, and the rare
exhalations, show that he w^l come shortly to consume all with fire. But how
unprovided he shall find us: the sudden coming upon us of this Earthquake
doth declare.

All people exhorted to amend their excesses.
35. Now I beseech you again, let every man call himself to an account, and
look narrowly into his own life. Let the Blasphemer cease to abuse the Lords
name and power, to his damnation: Let the Adulterer leave of and sin no more:
Let the Usurer take heed how he can answer the Lord for his Brothers hurt:
Let the Murderer remember that Abels blood cries for vengeance: Let the
malicious man know that the Lord searches the heart and reins: Let the
Glutton learn that the holy Ghost forbids him to make his belly his God:
Let the Drunckard begin to abhor the danger and abomination of intemperance:
Let the covetous person perceive that the rust of his money shall consume his
flesh: Let the hollow hearted Christian and subject, unto God, and his Prince,
understand, that as the hollowness was the cause of the shaking of the Earth,
even so for his false and hollow hearts sake, the Lord will shake him from out
his beloved flock of Israell, and cast him into that woeful place, Iudas and
Iulian, great Masters to Traitors and Atheistes.
where he shall receive his reward with Dissemblers and Hipocrites, and with
Traitors and Atheistes, together with their great Masters, Iudas and Iulian,
that lye perpetually tormented in unquenchable Hell fire.

36. And last of all, let the worldly man consider, what certentie he hath in
his riches, or assurance in any thing upon the earth, when as even that also
is subject to shaking and moving, whereon he reposes his felicity. And
although the wit of man have devised remedies against the threatenings of
Heaven: yet when the earth quakes, where shall he repose himself in safety?
Augustus Caesar had a Den made under the ground to shroud himself in from
the rage of thunder, Augustus Caesars den against thunder and lightning.
which remains yet to be seen nigh Rome. But indeed, there is no fleeinge
from the face of the Lord, who, as the holy Psalmist says, where ever we
go to hide our selves, is present with us: whether we ascend into Heaven, or
go down into Hell, or take the wings of the morning, or dwell in the
uttermost parts of the Sea, or cover our selves in the darkness: for light
and darkness are all one before him.

37. To conclude, I would wish that men lived not altogether in security, as
though it were no strange thing that had happened. But first, that they remained
in assurance of Gods good will if they be thankful as well for the free
gift of his lively word and Gospel, as for the life, reign, and welfare of
our natural Sovereign Queen Elizabeth, whose days the Lord for his mercy
continue lunge time over us in all happiness. Secondly, I would exhort that
Sermons were diligently resorted unto, and public prayers made for all
persons, specially for our virtuous Prince, as S. Paule wills us, her
honourable Counsel, Bishops, Nobility, all Magistrates, and the whole
Clergy. Thirdly, I counsel that there be special care had unto bodily
health, cheefely being now the most seasonable time of the year, wherein the
Physicians counsel may be taken and presently executed, for the avoiding of
farther peril impendinge. And last of all, under God I assure us, that if we
live in his fear, Unto them that live in the fear of God, all things happen
for the best.
and in the love of his word, and in duetifulnesse to our good Queen, and in
loyalty to our Country, and in charity one with another, we shall not need
to fear the force of any foreign foes, nor the terror of any Earthquake, nor
the infection of any pestilence, nor stand in dread of any thing that the
enemy can devise against us, but the Lord abiding always on our side, surely
there is nothing shall, or can hurt us. Which he grant for his mercy sake,
to whom be all honour and glory, now and ever more. Amen.

Revelation. Cap. 22.20. and 16.15. Come Lord Iesus. I come quickly. Behold, I
come as a thief. Happy is he that watches, and keeps his garments, least
he walk naked, and men see his filthiness.
FINIS.

