A BRIEF AND ACCVRATE TREATISE, CONCERNING, The taking of the fume of TOBACCO,
which very many, in these days, do too too licentiously use.

In which, the immoderate, irregular, and unseasonable use thereof is
reprehended, and the true nature and best manner of using it, perspicuously
demonstrated.

By TOBIAS VENNER, Doctor of Physic in Bath, in the Spring and Fall, and at
other times, in the Borough of North Petherton near to the ancient Haven town
of Bridge-water in Somersetshire.



AT LONDOON, Printed by W. I. for Richard Moore, and are to be sold at his
Shop in S. Dunstons Churchyard in Fleet-street. 1621.

ILLVSTRISSIMIS VEREQVE GENEROSIS VIRIS, DOMINO FRANCISCO HEAL, ET DOMINO
FRANCISCO ROGERS, MILITIBVS.

Hoc de Tobacci fumo opusculum,

In Deuoti animi testimonium, offert, dedicat, consecrat

Tobias Vennerus, Medic. Doctor.

it, The nature of Tobacco.
it is hot and dry in the third degree, and hath a deleteriall, or venomous
quality, as I suppose: for it being any way taken into the body, it tortureth
disturbs the same with violent eiections both upward and downward,
astonisheth the spirits, stupifieth and benummeth the senses and all the
members. This noisome faculty of Tobacco proceeds not from the temperature
of it, but from the very essence of its substance. As for the stupifiing or
benumbing quality thereof, it is best perceived upon the taking of the fume at
the mouth: for thereupon follows a drunken-like lightness of the head, and
especially if it be much taken at once, a benumbing sleepiness of the limbs
and senses. Wherefore Tobacco, though it be in taste, biting, and in
temperature, hot, hath notwithstanding a benumbing quality; which, because it
cannot depend of an extreme cold quality, the herb being very evidently
hot, it follows, that it is hot and benumbing, not benumbing by reason of its
temperature, but through the property of its substance. There is in the juice
of this herb an excellent digesting, mundifying, and consolidating faculty;
by means whereof, it is of ineffable force for the speedy curing of any wound
or cut in the flesh, or soars, ulcers, scabs, c. for which it is worthy of
very great esteem, and not much for any other property to be magnified and
respected (as I conceive.) And thus much briefly concerning the nature of
Tobacco.

Before I pass to deliver mine opinion concerning the use and faculties of the
fume, An objection of our vulgar Tobacconists.
I must clear an objection of our vulgar Tobacconists, which I seem to hear
them make against the noisome qualities that I have averred to be in Tobacco,
saying; that upon the taking thereof they find no tortures and violent
eiections, or stupifyings of their members and senses. To whom I may answer,
Solution.
that the immoderate use of Tobacco hath made them Insensiles, without sense.
But let it be admitted, that upon taking of the fume, they find not those
malignant effects; yet it convinces not my assertion, because that by long use
and custom, it becomes familiar to their bodies. And thus much by the way to
our licentious Tobacconists, who spend and consume, not only their time, but
also their health, wealth, and wits, in taking of this loathsome and
unsavoury fume. Now I come to speak of the smokey fume and faculties
thereof, which is taken through a pipe, for that purpose, into the mouth, and
thrust forth again at the nostrills, and is of some also sucked into the
stomach and breast, against all diseases, especially such as are gotten by
cold, or that proceed from a cold and moist cause.

The Indians, Sleep and vain dreams, two effects of Tobacco for which the
Indians used it.
from whom we received this manner of taking Tobacco, were (at the first)
only wont to take it at such times, as they felt their bodies wearied with
much labour and exercise, or would presage of things to come: for the fume
procuring first a drunken-like lightness of the head, and thereupon sleep, with
sundry phantalmes or visions, was the cause that upon their awaking they found
themselves (through their sleep) greatly eased, and refreshed, and could, by
reason of the somnorine visions which this fume doth greatly occasion, presage
(as they fondly conceived) the event of any business, or matter of importance,
that they desired to know, or were delighted in.

First they took the dried leaves of Tobacco, and cast them on the coals, then
they received the smoke of them at their mouth and nose with a kane, and
continued the taking thereof so long, till that they fell into a drunken
trance and sleep, wherein they continued as dead three or four hours,
according to the quantity of smoke that they had taken. The fume having done
his work, they awakened out of their sleep, and found themselves eased and
lightened, in such sort, as that they were able to return to their labour or
exercises, as lustily as before: and this they did always when they found
themselves wearied, or were (as I have said) desirous to fore-know, what might
be the success of their business, by means of the vain dreams and visious,
which this fume suggests.

But this custom of taking the fume, hath so far bewitched them (as also it
hath and daily doth many of our people) as that they also often-times, take it
for wantonness and delight, wherein they have so great a pleasure, as that
they desire nothing more then to make themselves drunken and drowsy with
Tobacco. And thus much for the original of the fume. I will now leave the
Americans, and come to our Europeans, who (well-neare) use the fume of Tobacco
with as much excess as they do.

Many of our people, and that of all sorts, do greatly affect the taking of
Tobacco; but few of them respect whether it be profitable to their bodies: for
most take it, rather for custom and delight, to entertain and pass away the
time, then for any such necessity or utility that they have of it: whereby it
comes to pass, that some judge very hardly of Tobaccoes fume, and utterly
disclaim the use thereof. In consideration whereof, I was moved to publish
this Treatise, showing therein the faculties and right use of the fume of some
(as I know) greatly desired, and withal, taxing the ignorance, or rather
petulance of many, that in these days do take it without any respect had of
the time, age, or constitution. A work (I hope) no less pleasing, then
profitable.

For mine own part, I confess, that though I am in no wise delighted with the
fume of Tobacco, partly for the malignity of its nature, but especially,
because of the detestable savour or smack that it leauerh behind upon the
taking of it: yet I do not altogether condemn the use thereof (for I
sometimes in case of necessity, as when I am afflicted with rheumes, take it
my self, especially prepared, as I will hereafter show) but rather approve
it as necessary and profitable for the rheumaticke, and such as are by
temperature, cold, so as it be taken in congruent manner, that is, both
moderately and seasonsbly, as shall be hereafter showed, for it helps the
brain that is over cold and moist, The virtues o^ Tobaccoes fume.
reducing it by its heating and drying faculty unto a temperuture: it takes
away rheumes and windinesse of the head, and is profitable for all cold
effects of the brain and sinews, by resolving and consuming the crude and
windy superfluities of those parts: it doth (for the time) expel
melancholy, and excite lumpish spirits: it helps pains of the teeth,
swellings of the gummes, and aches of the joints: it prevents putrefaction of
humours, by drying up the crudities of the body, and is very profitable upon
taking of cold, and for all cold and moist effects of the stomach, breast and
lungs. It is a speedy remedy upon a surfeit, Imbibitus, that is, taken down.
by making a sudden evacuation both upward and downward of such things as are
contained in the stomach, and by the like reason it doth, in an instant,
remove windy torments of the stomach, and bowel's, that proceed of crude
humours, and helps the fits of the mother: in a word, it is (being rightly
used) available against all cold and moist distemperatures. But to such as
are not of a cold and moist constitution, nor affected with rheumes, it is
not, though it be only retained in the mouth, and powered forth at the
nostrills, but by way of precaution, and that with good advisement to be
permitted, as I will by and by show, and the reason is, because this fume which
is hot and dry in the third degree, ascending to the brain, doth not only
greatly heate and distemper it, but also the animal spirits, whereupon
oftentimes the senses are confounded, and the understanding perverted.

As touching the taking of the fume down into the stomach and lungs, This
custom of taking the fume down
I utterly disclaim as pernicious, into the stomach lungs very pernicious
except it be done by way of Physic, one or another of the aforesaid
affects, impensiuely requiring it, both by reason that it is of a very
turbulent and sickly operation, and also, because it being excessively hot,
over heats, and dries the liver, mars the concoction of the meats, and
deturbeth them vndigested from the stomach, if it be taken before they are
concocted. Moreover, the lungs which are the flabell of the heart, being by
nature (in regard of their great use and continual motion, of soft and
spongy substance, are by the immoderate heate and sircitie of this fume,
quickly dried and coarctated, and consequently become unapt for motion, to the
great offence of the heart, and ruin at length of the whole body. Hence it may
appear, in how great an error they persist, that usually, or for every light
occasion, imbibe or take down this fume.

Now that which hath been spoken concerning the use of this fume, is not so
precisely to be taken, as that it is at no time lawful or convenient for such
as are not by nature rheumaticke, or cold by constitution to use it: for it is
sometimes allowable for every one, except for him that hath a dry
distemperature of the brain, to take this fume by way of prevention. For
example sake, if any one having not a dry constitution of the brain, shall
travel, or take a journey in misty, stormy, and rainy weather, especially
in the winter season, I say, that it is expedient for him, although he be not
rheumaticke, or of a cold temperature to take three or four draughts of this
fume so soon as he shall be entered into his house or Inn, for the preventing
of rheumes, or other harms that may chance to him by means of the
grossenesse or impurity of the air.

But me thinks I hear many that are not by nature rheumaticke, An objection
of our vulgar Tobacconists.
nor of a cold temperature of body, lovers of this fume, or that I may more
rightly speak, abusers, and luxuriating in this kind of evil, for cloking of
their vicious custom, to object against me after this manner. We find by daily
experience, that the fume of Tobacco doth draw from us very many rheumaticke
humours: wherefore the use thereof is not only allowable and good for the
rheumaticke, and such as are of cold temperature. I do deny the argument; and
also reject their experience: Solution.
for their lewd and preposterous custom in taking this fume is convenient for
no constitution or state of body: for, one while they take the fume, another
they drink, and so continue by turn, until they fall asleep, vomit, or be
drunk: wherefore it is no marvel that upon the use of the fume they excrete
very many rheumaticke superfluities, seeing that by this their preposterous and
unreasonable mingle-mangle of smoke and drink, far more crudities and
superfluities are bred, then can by virtue of the fume be consumed or excreted,
as it is to be seen in them that are given to Tobacco, the Pot, whom you may
see to have tumide and smoky faces, with turgide and flatulent bellies.

Here also some, I know, which are delighted with the drinking down of this
fume, that I may so speak, Another objection.
will object against that which hath bin spoken against that manner of taking
it, namely, that upon the taking of it down after meat, they find no
perturbation or offence, but rather, very great commodity, by furthering the
concoction. I must tell them, that in this they are grosely deceived: First,
because their daily custom of imbibing the fume takes away the sense of
perturbation; for by use and custom, any thing (though contrary) is made
familiar unto Nature, as I before have touched: Secondly, they are no less
deceived, thinking by imbibing the fume, that the concoction is furthered,
being not able to distinguish between concoction and distribution: for it is
the worst thing, and most pernicious to the body, to occasion the distribution
of the meates before they are concocted in the stomach; which they do, that
imbibe or drink down the fume after meat. And verily, the cause of this
their error, is some emptiness of the stomach, or provocation to stool,
which they feel upon the receiving of the fume, not considering, that this
their emptiness and ill distribution of the meates, and consequently,
provocation to stool, proceed from the purgatiue faculty of the fume.
Wherefore I would have them to understand, that though they seem to be well
for the time, either by reason of their youth, or of a strong constitution of
body, that this preposterous taking of the fume, will upon the sudden, ruin
the state of their body, by spoiling the stomach, destroying the concoction,
and filling the whole body with crude and noisome sup^ities..

I^ shall again urge to shun these disco^ities, and maintain another
custom no less pernicious, that they will take the fume about three or four
hours after meat, when the concoction is effected, for deturbing or driving
down the relics of the meates, and crudities that shall be in the stomach,
I would have them to know, that the hurt will be far greater then the
profit: for besides that, in this they pervert the operation of Nature, they
greatly also annoy the lungs, disturb and infringe the spirits, corrupt the
breath, and destroy the languifying faculty of the liver. I marvel verily at
the madness of these men. For, what is there in the fume that should so
greatly occasion delight? Not the smell, because it is unpleasant, much less
the savour, for it is stinking and fuliginous.

Besides these idle affectors of Tobacco, there are also some who are grave and
seemingly wise and judicious, that take it moderately, and most commonly at
fixed times; but with its proper adjunct, which (as they do suppose) is a
cup of Sack, and this they think to be no bad physic; nay, they so rely
upon this sacred medicine, as the most of them become detractors both of
physic and Physicians, for which cause they shall not pass without my tax.
As for Sack, it is without all controversy, very helpefull, comfortable and
agreeable to mans nature, as I have showed in my Book which is entitled, Via
recta ad vitam long am, of this years Impression: Tobacco is not so, but
rather oftentimes hurtful, especially if it be no judiciously used. But,
whether Sack be good to be taken upon Tobacco, I will hereafter
(notwithstanding these detractors, for the good of others) demonstrate.

As for these Cynic detractors (for such you shall find most of them to be)
There is also no other reason why very many of our people, in their sickness,
expose their bodies to be corrupted, I cannot say cured, to ignorant usurping
Po^icaries, and other base illiterated Emperickes, who are (contrary to the
Laws) every where permitted to exercise Physic, to the dishonour of God,
disgrace to the Faculty, hurt of our People, and shame of our Nation,
I must tell them, that this their absurdity proceeds from their ignorance
of the great and admirable mysteries of the noble Art of Physic; or for that
they are slaves to their purses, and therefore seek not in their necessities,
physicke-helpes, and counsel from such as are learned in that faculty; or
else, it is because they deem all expense lost, besides that which adorns the
back, or oblectate the palate and throat. And so I leave these to their
physic, and the common Tobacconists to their sleeping between the Pot and
the Pipe, and come now again to show the right use of Tobacco.

Although it be apparent, by that which hath been hitherto delivered, that the
taking of Tobacco is only convenient for cold and moist bodies, that the
often and daily use thereof is only allowable for them that have their
stomach, breast, brain and sinewy parts exceedingly cold, and stuffed with
crude and rheumaticke humours, and also that it is sometimes tolerable for
others, by way of prevention; yet the knowledge of these things, without the
true use and application of the fume, as namely, when to use it, how often, in
what manner and measure, and what to observe after the taking of it, is of
small purpose: for it may (being taken without respect had of these
circumstances) prove more hurtful, then beneficial unto him that takes it.
Wherefore I wish him that desires to have the true use of Tobacco, to receive
from me, and carefully observe ten precepts in the use thereof.

The first is, Ten precepts to be observed in the use of Tobacco.
that it be most commonly taken mornings fasting, after a little stirring of
the body, and also sometimes about half an hour before dinner and supper, but
especially at the time of going to bed, in whom the condition of the body, as
a cold and moist constitution; and some accidences, as rheumes, catarrhes,
heaviness of the head, and cruditie of the stomach; or circumstances, as a
moist, foggy, and waterish season, shall for the preservation of the health,
require the use thereof.

2 The second is, that the taking thereof be chiefly observed after travelling
in misty foggy and rainy weather, because it prevents catarhes, and rheumes,
and takes away all hurts that are wont, by rcason of the humidity and (...)
of the air, to happen to the head and other parts. For the taking thereof at
such time, is convenient for every state of body, except where there is a dry
constitution of the brain, as hath been formerly showed.

3 The third is, that it be taken with moderation, not (at the most) exceeding
the quantity of a pipe full at a time; for every thing which is superfluous,
is very adverse to Nature, and nothing more then Tobacco.

4 The fourth is, that at meals between the eating, it be at no hand taken,
as many very foolishly do, because it utterly interrupts and marrerh the
concoction.

5 The fifth is, that it be not taken within four or five hours after meal,
except a peculiar state of the body shall necessarily require the taking
thereof presently upon the meal, and that only in two respects: The first
is, for the imbecility of the native and digestiue heate in some, which may
not be a little comforted by the translation of the heate of this fume,
mediantibus nervis, from the brain to the stomach: The second is, for the
consuming of vapours, and preventing of their hurts, which in others are (by
reason of an ill disposition of the stomach) immoderately wont to ascend
after meal: for by means of the fume detained in the mouth and cavities of
the brain, those superfluous vapours are in part consumed, the brain, which
by nature is over cold, and moist, heated and dried, and consequently, not so
soon annoyed by the vapours which do ascend unto it.

6 The sixth is, that you drink not between the taking of the fumes, as our
smokey Tobacconists are wont, because thereby the operations of the fume are
hindered, and more superfluities commonly bred, then can by the efficacy of it
be consumed.

7 The seventh is, that you eat not, nor drink any thing within a quarter of
an hour after the taking of the fume, but allowing that space for the
operation of it, you may then wash your mouth with Beer or Wine, to take away
the fuligiuous savour of the fume, and also drink a draught of Sack, if the
stomach shall be cold, or abound with crude and flatulent humours, and so go
to your meal, if it shall be the time of your repast. For, to wash your mouth,
or drink presently upon the taking of the fume, doth much hinder the
operation of it: or, in stead of washing your mouth, you may presently, upon
the taking of the fume, rub your tongue, palate, and gummes, (which I
always hold fit to be observed) with a dry napkin, and if it be also heated,
the better, especially in cold and rheumaticke seasons, and afterwards chew in
your mouth something of an aromaticall savour, as cloves, or the roots of
Galingall, or the flowers of Rosemarie, and Sage when they may be had, c. or
the conserves of them: for these, and such like, do not only take away the
fuliginous and stinking savour of the fume, but also give comfort to the brain
and spirits. And upon the doing hereof, if it be not before meals, it is
specially good to swallow down abo^t the quantity of a prune or two of the
conserve of red Roses. Tabulae Dianisi, which you may have from the
Apothecaries, are also very good to be eaten upon the taking of Tobacco, the
mouth being first washed as aforesaid, for they correct the evil savour and
smell of the fume, make the breath sweet, and also resolve windinesse of the
stomach. I commonly use, upon the taking of Tobacco, to swallow down a
spoonful of a pectorall and cephalicke syrupe made for the purpose, which
doth forthwith remove the offensive savour of the fume, and is withal, very
profitable unto the stomach, breast, and head, thereupon also, a quantity of
the conserve of red Roses, especially at the time of going to bed.

8 The eight is, that in drawing of the fume, you suffer it not externally to
affect the eyes: for it is unto them, by reason of its smoky drying, and
fuliginous nature, very offensive.

9 The ninth is, that you warily draw the fume out of the pipe, not sucking it
into your wind-pipe and throat with a sudden or strong attraction; for then
it will exasperate the winde-pipe, and much offend and disquiet the mouth of
the stomach.

10 The tenth and last is, that you go not abroad into the air, presently
upon the taking of the fume, but rather refrain there-from the space of half
an hour or more, especially if the season be cold, or moist, because the
poares of the body being open, by means of the strong working of the fume,
even to the uttermost and superficiarie parts of the body, ineffable hurts may
happen, by the sudden access of the air. Hence you may observe how idle and
foolish they are, that can not travel without a Tobacco pipe at their mouth;
but such (I must tell you) are no base Tobacchians: for this manner of taking
the fume, they suppose to be generous: Let these fume-gallants enjoy their
vanity, and for their better grace, it were good they were also attended with
chimney-sweeping Lackeys.

Now from that which hath been said, you may collect a two-folde manner of
taking of Tobacco, which ought to be altered and observed, according as
occasion and the particular state of him that takes it, shall require. The
first is, a detaining of the fume only in the mouth, and thrusting of it
forth again at the nostrils, for heating and drying of the brain, and for
dissolving and dissipating of cold humours and superfluous vapours that reside
in it. The other is a receiving of it into the stomach and lungs, The fume of
Tobacco ought not to be taken down upon every light occasion.
for consuming deturbing of crudities and windinesse, that shall offend in
those parts. But I advise, that the fume be suddenly taken down, and then
neither, but some great necessity or extremity urging it, both because it
offends the body with its violent operation, and also for that it may, by
reason of its exiccating nature, be very hurtful to the lungs, liver, and
melt, as I will by and by show. Wherefore my counsel is, that some safer
remedy (if time shall permit) be used for consuming and deturbing of the
flatulent crudities of the stomach and bowels.

Whosoever therefore thou be that desire to know whether the fume of Tobacco
may be profitable or hurtful to thy body; thou ought first to consider,
whether it be convenient for thy head: for if thy brain be over cold and
moist, or abound with superfluous matter, then the detaining of the fume only
in the mouth, and forcing it out at the nostrills, may be profitable unto thee:
for by this means the fume ascending to the brain, doth not only by its
heating, attracting and exiccating faculty evacuate and consume the
superfluities in it, but also, in some measure, reduces the same to its native
temperament.

But here by the way it is to be noted, Such as are affected with a dry
distemperature of the brain, must very warily (when they are annoyed with
rheumes) use Tobaccoes fume.
that it may sometimes happen, that some may have their heads accidentally
stuffed with rheumatike matter, although the brain it self be not in its
native temperature excessively cold and moist, but is rather affected with a
dry distemperature. Wherefore I aduuise such, to take the fume with very great
caution moderation, as at one time not to exceed the quantity of six or seven
draughts at the most, lest it should cause greater hurt to the brain and
spirits, by increasing the dry distemperature of the brain, and incensing the
spirits, then commodity in discussing and consuming the cold and waterish
humours, wherewith the brain was accidentally oppressed, which in some I have
observed to come to pass, that have without measure and judgment used this
fume.

Secondly, you must diligently consider whether the fume of Tobacco be
convenient for the stomach, lungs, and liver. For, if crude and windy humours
abound in the stomach and bowels thorough a cold imbecility of the liver; or
if a cold distemperature, and thin, crude, and flatulent humours dominiere
in the lungs, then the imbibing also or taking down of the fume into those
parts, may, so the stomach be empty of meates, be sometimes tolerable, yea
profitable, especially for strong bodies, in case of extremity, and when no
better remedy, at the instant, can be had: for by its heating, exiccating, and
purging faculty, it somewhat corrects the distemperature, consumes wind,
and forthwith expurgeth the offensive humours. But by reason of its turbulent
and sickly operation, I cannot commend the often use thereof, nor at any time
approve it to them that are of a weak and valetudinarie state of body.

Here two cautions do offer themselves to be observed concerning the
imbibing, Two cautions to be observed in taking the fume of Tobacco down.
or taking down the fume: the one, in respect of the lungs, the other, in
respect of the lungs and liver too. For if the lungs be obstructed of a thick
and clammie humour, or subject to such obstruction, then the taking down of
the fume is very pernicious, because it doth by reason of its heate and
siccitie, more harden and condense the humour, by means whereof, it is
altogether unfit to be excreted. From hence it is manifest, with how great
prudence, Cautio practica
caution and providence, we are to use heating and drying remedies in
affections of the lungs. In like manner also the taking down of the fume, is
very pernicious to them that are affected with a dry distemperature of the
liver, or lungs, although the stomach and intestines shall sometimes be annoyed
with crude and flateous humours, because it will cause greater hurt by
increasing the distemperature of those parts, then commodity in discussing and
purging forth the crudities of the stomach and bowels: and therefore (in
mine opinion) it is far better, in such case, altogether to abstain from
taking down the fume, and to use a more safe and easier remedy.

The like caution must also be observed in respect of the melt that is
obstructed, Tobacco most pernicious to dr^like bo^ies.
or subject to obstruction, especially in them that are of a dry melancholic
temperature, because the fume, by reason of its heate and siccitie, doth not
only greatly distemper them, but also causes their blood to grow more
melancholic, and to be adusted, and the melancholy humour that resides in
the spleen, as in its proper receptacle, to be indurated from whence diverse
calamitous miseries do commonly arise. Wherefore I advise all such as are of a
melancholericke constitution, utterly to shun the taking of Tobacco.

But, that Tobaccoes fume may more effectually perform all the aforesaid
commodities, and with less detriment, I advise that the rules of Tobacco be
macerated or steeped two or three days in sack abundantly edulcated or
sweetened with sugar, The preparatio of Tobacco.
wherein Nutmegs, Cloves, Saffron, the roots of Sassafras, Calamus aromaticus,
and of Galingale, Lignum aloes, knaps of Stickadoue, the Flowers of Rosemarie,
Sage, and Lavender-spike, together with their knaps, Fennel seeds, and the
excellent grains called Cubebe have been infused four and twenty hours, and
afterwards strained from the liquor with a strong expression. All these things
must be bruised a little, saving the Saffron, but the roots and Lignum aloes
more then the rest, or sliced very thin, and for the quantities of them, and
of the wine, it must be according to the quantity of Tobacco that you will
infuse, wherein you can commit no error, so you take not above half a dram of
Saffron to a quart of Wine: when the Tobacco shall be infused as aforesaid,
take it out of the liquor, and reserve it for your use. If any shall also
sprinckle it with a few drops of oil of Annise or Fennel seeds, or rather,
of Cloves, I will not gainsay it. For the fume, by reason of an Aromaticall
savour, which it acquires by means of this artificial preparation, is more
agreeable to the spirits, doth, besides the aforesaid commodities, which it
more excellently performs, far less offend with its benumbing quality,
ill smell, and fuliginous savour.

Now, The discommodities of Tobacco, being immoderately and untimely received.
that I may impose an end to this business, I will summarily rehearse the hurts
that Tobacco infers, if it be used contrary to the order and way I have set
down. It dries the brain, dims the sight, vitiateth the smell, hurts
the stomach, destroys the concoction, disturbs the humours, and spirities,
induces a trembling of the limbs, corrupts the breath, exiccateth the
winde-pipe, lungs, and liver, annoys the melt, scorches the heart, and
causes the blood to be adusted: Moreover, it eliquateth the pingui-substance
of the kidneys, and absumeth the geniture. In a word, it overthrows the
spirits, perverteth the understanding, and confounds the senses with a
sudden astonishment and stupidity of the whole body. All which hurts I
affirm, that the immoderate and intempestiue use of Tobacco doth effect, both
by reason of its temperament, but especially through the property of its
substance: wherefore the use of it is only tolerable by way of physic, not
for pleasure, or an idle custom.

To conclude therefore, I wish them that desire to have mentem sanam in corpore
sano, altogether to abandon insanam praeposterumque Tobacci vsum. This is all
which seemed good unto me to be written of Tobaccoes fume, partly for showing
the right manner of using it, but especially for reproouing the too too
licentious liberal, and intempestiue taking of it, which very many, in these
days) do to their own ruin lewdly, and for want of better employment,
foolishly affect.

FINIS.

