The book of secretes of Albertus Magnus, of the virtues of Herbs, stones, and
certain beasts. Also, a book of the same author, of the marvelous things of
the world: and of certain effects, caused of certain beasts.

Anno. M. D. LX.

To the reader.
Sith it is manifestly known, that this book of Albertus Magnus, is in the
Italyon, Spanysh, French, and Duche tounges, it was thought if it were
traslated into English tongue, it would be received with like good will and
frendshyp, as it is in those parts. Wherefore use thou this book, to mitigate,
and alacreate, thy heavy troublesome mind, as thou hast ben wont to do, with
the book commonly called the book of Fortune: for believe me, whatsoever is
promised in ^ther of the both, this, or that, is lonely to ye end.

The first book of the virtues of certain Herbs.
ARistotell, the Prince of Philosophers, says in many places, that every
science is of the kind of good things. But notwithstanding, the operation
sometime is good sometime euell: as the science is changed to a good, or to an
euel end, to which it works. Of the which saying, two things be
concluded: the one, and the first is, that the science of magic is not euell,
for by the knowledge of it, euel may be eschued, good followed. The second thing
is also concluded for as much as the effect is praised for the end, and also
the end of science is dispraised, when it is not ordained to good, or to
virtue. It folo we^h then, that every science, or operation, is sometime good,
sometime evil, Therefore, because the sciece of Magic, is as a good knowledge
(as it is presupposed) and is somewhat evil in beholding of causes, and
natural things, as I have considered, perceived in ancient authors: yes and
I my self, Alberte have found the troth in many things, I suppose the truth to
be in some part of the book of Chirander, of the book of Alchorat.

First therefore, I will declare of certain herbs. Secondly, of certain
stones. And thyrdely, of certain beasts, the virtues of them.

Elitropia Marygolde. Urtica Nettell. Virga pastoris Wild tasyl. Celidonia
Celendyne. Prouinca Perwynke. Mepeta Calamit or peniroyal Lingua canis Hondes
touge. Jusquianus Henbane. Lilium Lylye. Viscus querci Misseltoe. Centaurea
Centorye. Saluia Sauge. Verbena Veruin. Melysophylos Smallage. Rosa Rose.
Serpentina Snakes grass
The first herb is called with the men of Chaldea, Elios with the Greeks,
Matuchiol, with ye Latynes, Elitropium, with English men, Marygolde, whose
interpretation, is of Elios, that is the Son, and Tropos, that is alteration,
or change, because it is turned according to ^ sun The virtue of this herb
is marvelous: for if it be gathered, the Sun being in the sign Leo, in
August, and be wrapped in the leaf of a Laurel, or bay tree, a wolves to the
be added thereto, no ma shall be able to have a word to speak against the bearer
thereof, but words of peace. And if any thing be stolen, if the bearer of the
things before named, lay them under his head in ye night, he shall see the
thief, all his coditios. And moreover, yt the foresaid herb be put in any
church, where women be, which have broken Matrymonye on their part, they
shall never be able to go forth of the church, except it be put away. And
this last point hath been proved, and is very true.

The second herb is called of the men of Chaldea Roybra, of ^ Greeks
Olieribus, of the Latynes, or Frenchemen Vrtica, of English men, a nettell. He
that holsteth this herb in his hade, with an herb called Mylfoyle, or yarowe,
or noseblede, is sure from all fear, fantasy, or vision. And if it be put
with the juice of houselyke, and the bearers hand be anointed with it, and the
residue be put in water, if he entre in ye water where fish be, they will
gather together to his hands, and also ad piscellum. And if his hand be draw
forth, they will leap again to their own places, where they were before.

The third herb is named of the Chaldeis Lorumboror, of the Greeks Allamor,
of the Latines Uirga pastoris, of English men, Dylde tasyll. Take this herb,
tempre it with the juice of Mandrake, give it to a bytche, or to another beast,
it shall be great with a yonge one in the own kind, and shall bring forth
the birth in the own kind, of the which young one, if the gome to the be
taken, deped in meat, or drink, every one that shall drink thereof, shall
begin anon battle, and when thou would put it away, give to him y^ juice of
Ualeria, peace shall be anon among them, as before.

The fourth herb, is named Aquilaris, of Chaldeis: because it sprigeth in
the time, in which the Egles build their nestes: It is named of Greeks Ualis,
of La tines Celidonia, and of Englishmen Celendyne. This herb springs in
the time, in yt which the swallo was, and also y^ Egles makes their nestes. If
any man shall have this herb, with y^ hart of a molle, he shall overcome all
his enemies, and all matters in suit, shall put a way all debate. And if the
before named herb, be put upon the headde of a sick man, if he should dye,
he shall sing anon with a loud boyce, if not, he shall weep.

The fyfte herb is named of y^ Chaldeis Iterisi, of the Greeks, Uorax, of the
Latynes Prouetalis, or Prouinsa, of English men Perwynke, when it is heate unto
powder with worms of y^ earth, wrapped about it, and with an herb called
Semperuina, in En glyshe houslyke, it induces love between man and wife, if it
be used in their meates. And if it shall be put too the mouth of the beast,
called the Bugill, he shall breahe anon in the midst. And this was proved of
late time.

If the said confection be put in the fire, it shall be turned anon, vnt blue
colour.

The sixth herb is named of the Chaldeis Bieith, of the Brekes Retus, of the
Latines Nepeta, of English men Calamynt, otherwise Penyroyal. Take this herb
and myxe it with the stoone, found in the nest of the bird called a lapwyng,
or black poluev, and rub the bealy of any beast, and it shall be with birth,
it shall have a young one, very black in the own kind. And if it be put to
their nosethrylles, they shall fall to the ground anon as dead, but a little
space after they shall be healed. Also if the foresaid cofectio be put in a
vessel of bees y^ bees will never fl a wai, but the^ shall gather together
there. And if the bees be drowned and like as they were dead, if they be put
in the aforesaid confection, they shall recover their life after a little time,
as by y^ space of one thou re, for it is proporcioned to y^ qua litie lost. And
for a sure proof, if drowned fl yes be put in warm ashes, they will recover
their life aftev a little space.

The seuenthe herb is named of y^ Chaldeis Algeil, of y^ Greeks Dru, of y^
Latins Lingua canis, of English men, Hondes tongue, put thou this herb with y^
hart of a yonge frog, her matrice, and put them where thou wilt, and a fter
a little time, all y^ dogs of the whole town shall be gathered together: And if
you shalt have the before named herb under thy formest toe, al the dogs shall
keep silence, shall not have power to bark. And if thou shalt put the aforesaid
thing in the neck of any dog, so y^ he may not touche it with his mouth,
he shall be turned always round about like a turning whele, until he fall unto
the ground as dead, and this hath been proved in our time.

The eyghte herb is named of Chaldeis Mansesa, of y^ Greekes Uentosin, of the
Latines Jusquianus, of English men Henbane. Take thou this herb, mix it Cum
realgalis and Hermoda talis, and put them in the meat of a mad dog, he
will dye anon. And if thou shalt put the juice of it with the aforesaid
things in a silver cup, it shall be broken very small. And if thou shalt mix
the aforesaid thing, with the blood of a young hare and keep it in y^ skin
of a hare all y^ hares will be gathered there until it be removed.

The nynth herb, is named of the Chaldeis Ango, of y^ Greekes Amala, of the
Latines Liliu, of the English men a Lyly. If thou wilt gather this herb, the
son being in the sign of the Lyon, wilt myxe it with the juice of y^ Laurel,
or bay tree, afterward thou shalt put that juice under y^ dung of cattle, a
certain time, it shall be turned unto worms, of the which, if poulder be made,
be put about the neck of any ma or in his clothes, he shall never sleep, nor
shall not be able to sleep until it be put a way. And if you shalt put the
aforesaid thing under the dung of cattle, and wilt anoynte any man with the
worms bredinge thereof, he shall be brought anon unto a fenex. And if the
aforesaid thing be put in any vessel, where there is comes milk, and be
covered with the skin of any cow of one colour, all the kye shall loose
their milk.

The tenth herb is called of y^ Chaldeis Luperax, of the Greeks A^ifena, of
the Latines Uiscus querci, of English men Myssell toe. And it grows in
trees, being holed through. This herb with a certai other herb, which is
named Martegon, that is Silphion or Laserpitiu, as it is written in the
Almaynes language, it opens all locks. And if the aforesaid things, being
put together, be put in the mouth of any man, if he think of any thing, if
it should happen, it is set on his heart, if not, it lepeth back from his
hart. If the before said thing be hagged up to a tree with ye wyng of a swallow,
there the brides shall be gathered together wrihin the space of five miles. And
this last was proved in my time.

The eleventh herb is named of the Chaldeis Isiphilon, of the Greeks Orgelon,
of the Latines Centaurea, of English men Centory, which saith that ths herb
hath a marvelous virtue, for if it be joined with the blood of a female
lapwyng, or black plouer and be put with oil in a lamp, all they that
compass it about, shall believe them selfes to be witches, so that one shall
believe of an other, that his head is in heaven and his fete in the earth. And
if the aforefayd thing be put in the fire when the stars shyne it shall
appear, y^ the stars run one against an other, and fight. And if the
aforesaid plaster be put to the nostrils of any ma, he shall flee away
sharply, through fear that he shall have, this hath ben proud*

The twelft herb is named of the Chaldeis Colorio, or Coloricon, of the Greeks
Clamour, of the Latines commonly Saluia, of English me Sauge. This herb being
putrified under dung of cattle, in a glasyn vessel, brings forth a
certain worm or bird, having a tail after the fashion of the bird, called
a black macke or owsyll, with whose blood, if any man be touched in ye breast, he
shall lose his sense or feeling the space of.xv. days and more. And if the
aforesaid Serpent be burned, the ashes of it put in ye fire, anon shall there
be a rain bow, with an horrible thunder. And if the aforesaid ashes be put
in a lamp, and be kindled, it shall appear yt al the house is full of
serpents, this hath ben proved of men of late time.

The.xiii. herb, is named of ye Chaldeis Olphanas, of ye Greeks Hiliorion, of
ye Latines Verbena of the English me Veruyn. This herb (as witches say)
gathered, the Sun being in the sign of the Ram, put with grain or corn of
pyonie of one year old heals them y^ be sick of ye falling sykenes. And if
it be put in a fat ground, after.viii. weeks worms shall be engendered, which
if they shall touche any man, he shall dye anon. And if the aforesaid thing be
put in a dove house or a cvluer house, al the doves or cvluers shall be gathered
together there. And if the poulder of them be put in ye sun, it shall appear
that the sun is blue. If ye poulder be put in a place where men dwell or lye
between two lovers, anon there is made strife or malice between them.

The.xiiii. herb is named of ye Chaldeis Celayos, of ye Greekes Casini. of ye
Latines Melisopholos, of English men Smalage: of the which herb Macer floridus
makes mention. This herb gathered grene, and tasten with the juice of the
Cypress tree of one year, put in gruell, makes the gruell to appear full of
worms, and makes ye bearer to be gentle gracious, to vanquish his adversaries.
And if the aforesaid herb be bouden to an oxes neck, he will follow the whether
soever thou wilt goo.

The.xv. herb is named of the Chaldeis Glerisa, of the Greeks Isaphinus, of ye
Latines Rosa, of English me a Rose. And it is an herb, whose flower is very
well knowell. Take the grain or corn of it, the corn of musterd seed and the
foot of a Wesel, hanged up these in a tree, and it will not bear fruit
after. And if the aforesaid thing be put about a net, fish will gather
together there. And if Magaris shall be dead be put in the aforesaid commixtion
half a day, it shall recover the life, although it be not forth with yet
gotten.

And if the aforesaid poulder be put in a lamp* and after be kind led, all
men shall appear black as the deuell. And if y^ aforesaid poulder be myxed
with oil of y^ Olyue tree, with quycke brymstone, the house ano^nted with it,
the Sun shining, it shall appear all inflamed.

The.xvi. herb is called of the Chaldeis Carturlin, of the Greeks
Pentaphyllon, of the Latynes Serpentina, in English snakes grass. This herb
is well enough known with us. This herb put in the ground, with the leaf of
the three leafed grass engenders read grene serpents, of which if poulder be
made, and put in a burning lamp, there shall appear aboundauce of serpents.
And if it be put under the head of any man, fro thence forth he shall not dream
of him self.

The manner of work^g all these aforenamed things, that y^ effect may be good
in their planets is, in their hours, and days.
THere be.vii. herbs, y^ have great virtues, after y^ mind of Alexander the
Emperor, and they had these virtues of the influence of the planets. And
therefore, every one of them takes their virtue from the higher natural
powers.

The first is the herb of y^ planet Saturnus, which is called Affodillus,
Affodilly, the juice of it is good against the payne of y^ reins, and legs:
let them that suffer payne of the bladder, eat it the root of it being a
little boiled. And if me possessed with euel spirits, or mad men bear it, in
a clean napkyn, they be delivered from their disease. And it suffer th not a
deuel in y^ house. And if chyldre that breed their teeth, bear it about
them, they shall breed them without pain. And it is good that a man bear with
him a root of it in y^ night for he shall not fear, nor be hurt of other.

The second is y^ herb of the Sun, which is called Poligonia, or
Coraligiola. This herb takes the name of the Sanne: for it engedreth greatly,
so this herb works many ways.

Other hath called this herb Alchone, which is the house of the Sun. This
herb heals the passyons, and grief of the heart and the sto macke.

He that touches this herb, has a virtue of his sign, or Planete. If any
man drink the juice of it, it makes him to do often, the act of generation.
And if any ma bear ye rote of it, it heals the grief of the eyes. And if he
bear it with him before he have any grief, there shall come to him no grief
of his eyes. It helps also them yt be vexed with the phrenesy, if they bear
it with them in their breast.

It helps also them* that are diseased with an impostume in ye lunges,
makes them to have a good breath, and it avails also too the flyxe of
melancholyous blood.

The third is the herb of the Moon, which is called Chynostates. The juice
of it purges the pains of the stomach, bre^ plates, the virtue of it
declares that it is the herb of ye Moon. The flower of this herb purges
great splenes, healeath them, because this herb increases decreases as the
Moon. It is good against the sickness of the eyes, makes a sharp sight. And
it is good against the blood of ye eyes. If thou put the root of it brayed
upon the eye, it will make thy eye marvelous clear, because the light of the
eyes Propinquatum mystion, is of the substance of the Moon. It is also good to
them that have an euell stomach or which can not disgeste their meat, by
drinking the juice of it moreover it is good to them that have the swyne
pockes.

The fourth herb is called Arnoglossa, plantayne. The rote of this herb is
marvelous good against the payne of the headde, because the sign of the Ram
is supposed to be the house of the planete Mars, which is the head of the whole
world. It is good also against euell customs of mans stones, and rotten
fylthy boils, because his house is yt sign Scorpio, because a part of it
holds Sparma, that is the seed, which comes against the stones whereof all
living things be engendered, and formed. Also the juice of it is good too them
that be sick of ye pery^ous flyxe, with excoriation or raysyng of the bowels,
continual tourmentes, some blood yssuyng forth. And it purges them that
drink it, fro the syckenesses of y^ flyx of blood, or emoraudes, of the
disease of the stomach.

The fyft is the herb of the planete mercurius, which is named Pentaphillo, in
English cinquefoyle or the.v. leued herb* of others Pentadactilus, of others
Sepe declinans, of certain Calipe^olo. The root of this herb brayed made in a
plaster, hea^eth woudes hardenes. Moreover, it puts away quickly ye swyne
pockes, if the juice of it be droken with water. It heals also the passios or
griefs of the breast, if the juice of it be broke. It puts away also y^ to
the ache. And if the juice of it be holden in the mouth, it heals al ye
griefs of ye mouth. And if any ma bear it with him, it gives wark help.
Moreover if any man will ask any thing of a king or price, it gives aboudace
of eloquece, if he have it with him, he shall optayn it yt he shall desire. It is
also good to have ye juice of it, for the grief of the stone, the syckenes
which lets a ma that he ca not pysse.

The.vi. is the herb of ye planet Jupiter, it is named Acharon, of certain
Jusquianus, Hebane. The root of it, put upon botches, heals the, and kepeth
the place from an inflammation of blood. If any man shall bear it before the
grefe come upon him he shall never have a botch.

The root of it also is profitable against the gout in the fete when it is
brayed, and put upon the place that suffers the pain or grief. And it works
by virtue of those signs, which have ^ete, and loke upon the fete. And if the
juice of it be drunken with honey, or with wine honey sod together, it is
profitable against the griefs of the liver, all his passios, because Jupiter
holds the liver.

Likewise* it is profitable to the that would do often the act of generation,
and to them yt desire to be loved of women, it is good that they bear it with
them, for it makes the bearers pleasant and delectable.

The.vii. is the herb of y^ planet Venus, and is called Pisterio of some
Hierobotane, id est, Herbo colubaria verbena, veruen.

The root of this herb put upon the neck, heals ye swyne pockes,
apostumes behind ye ears, and botches of the neck, and such as can not keep
their water,

It heals also cuts, swellig of the euell, or foundament, proceeding of an
inflammation, which grows in the foundamet, and the Emauraudes. If the juice
of it be drunken with honey water sodden, it dissolveth those things which are
in lunges or lights. And it makes a good breath, for it saves kepeth the
luges and the lights. It is also of great strength in venerial pastimes, ye
is the act of generation. If any man put it in his house or vyneyarde, or in
the ground, he shall have abundantly revenues, or yearly profytes, moreover the
rote of it is good to all them which will plant vynyardes or trees. And
infantes bearing it, shall be very apt to learn, loving learning, and they
shall be glad and joyous. It is also profitable, being put in purgations, it
puts aback deuels. Yet this is to be marked, that these herbs he gathered
fro the.xxiii. day of the Moon until the.xxx. day, beginnyg the gathering
of them frome the sign Mercurius, by the space of a whole hour, and in
gatherynge make mention of the passion or grief, and the name of the thing,
for the which thou doest gather it, and the self herb, notwithstanding, lay
the herb upon wheat, or barleye, and use it afterward too thy need.

Here begins the second book of the virtues of certain stones.
BEcause I have spoke now before of ye virtues of certain herbs, now in this
present chapter, I will speak of certain stones, their effects and marvelous
operations.

Magnes, the lode stone. Ophthalmus Onyx. Feripendamus Sylonites. Topazion
Medoria, Memphitis, lapis iuxta mephim vrbem in Egypto. Abaston Adamas, diamod.
Agathes Alectoria. Esmundus Amaristus. Berillus Celonites. Corallus Cristallus.
Elotropia Epistrites. Calcedonius Celidonius. Bagates Bena. Istmos Tabrices.
Chrysolitus Gerattides. Nichomai Quirim. Radianus Luperius. Vnces Lazuli.
Smaragdus Iris Gallasia Galerites. Draconites Echites. Tepristites Hyaciuthus.
Orithes Saphyrus. Saunus.
If thou wilt know wither thy wife is chaste, or no.
Take the stone, which is called Magnes in English, the lode stone, it is of
sad bl^w colour, and it is food in the sea of Inde sometime in parts of
Almaine, in the province, which is called East France. Lay this stone under
the head of a wife, if she be chaste, she will embrace her husband, if she be
not chaste, she will fall anon forth of the bed.

Moreover, if this stone be put brayed, and scattered upon coals, in four
corners of the house, they that be sleapynge, shall flee the house, and leave
all.

If thou wilt be made invisible.

Take the stone, which is called Ophethalmius, and wrap it in the leaf of
the Laurel, or Bay tree, it is called Lapis obtelmicus, whose colour is not
named, ^or it is of many colours, and it is of such virtue, that it blinds the
sights of them that stand about. Constantinus carrying this in his hand, was
made inuisyble by it.

If thou wilt provoke sorrow, fear, terrible fantasies, debate.
Take the stone, which is called Onyz, which is of black colour. And the kind
is best which is full of white veins. And it comes from Inde, unto Araby, and
if it be hanged upon the neck, or finger, it styrreth up anon sorrow or
heaviness in a man, and terroures, and also debate, and this hath been proved
by men of late time.

If thou wilt burn any mans hands without fire.
Take the stone, which is called Fet^pedamus, which is of yelow colour, which
if it be hanged upon the neck of any man, it heals Areticu, and also if this
stone be greped straightly, it burns ye had anon, therefore it must be touched
lightly, and gently.

If thou wilt kindle the mind of any man too joys, and make his wit sharpe.
Take the stone, which is called Sylonites, it grows in y^ bosom of a
snail of Inde, called Corcuses, and there is of divers kinds of it, of white,
read, and purple colour. Other say, that it is grene, and found in the parts
of Parsia. And also old Philosophers say, if it be tasted, it gives
knowledge of certain things to come. If it be put under the tongue, specially
in ye first moan, it hath a virtue only for an hour. Therefore being in the x.
moon, it hath this virtue in the first, or teeth hour. But there is moving of
the order, because, when it is under the tongue, if our thought be of any
busynes, whether it ought too be or no, if it ought to be, it is fixed
steadfastly to the hart, so that it may not be plucked away, if not, the heart
leaps aback from it. Also Philosophers have said, that it heals Ptificos,
and weak men.

If thou wilt that seething water come furth anon, after thou hast put in thy
hand.
Take the stone, which is called Topazion, fro the I'll Topasis, or because it
shesheth a similitude of gold. And there be two kinds of it: one is utterly
like gold, and this is more precious The other kind is of the colour of
saffron, of brighter colour tha gold is, and this is more profitable. It hath
ben proved in our time, that if it be put in seething water* it makes it to
rune over but if thou put thy* hand in it, the water is drawn out anon, and
one of our brethren did this at Paryse. It is good also against Emothoicam et
stimaticam, or lunatyke, passion or grief.

If thou wilt pluck of ye skin of thine, or an other mans hand.
Take the stone, which is called Medora, of the region Media in the which the
people dwelling are called Medi. And there be two kinds of it, black grene.
It is said of old Philosophers and also of Philosophers, being in this time,
if the black be broken, and resolved in hot water, if any man wathe his
hands in that water, the skin of his hades shall be plucked of anon.

Philosophers say also, that it is good against the gout, and blyndnes of the
eyes* and it nourishes hurt and weak eyes.

If thou wilt that a man suffer no payne, nor be tourmented.

Take the stone, which is called Memphitis, of ye city which is called
Memphis, it is a stone of such virtue, as Aaron Hermes say: if it be broken,
and mixed with water, and given to him to drink, which should be burned, or
suffer any tormetes, that drink induces so great unableness too feel, that
he that suffers, feels neither pain nor tormentynge.

If thou wilt make a fire continually unable to be queshed or put out.
Take the stone, which is called Abaston, it is of the colour of iron; and
there is found very much of it in Arabia. If that stoone be kyndeled or
inflamed, it may never be put out, or quenched, because it hath the nature
of the first feathers of the Salamandre, by reason of moystye fatness, which
nourissheth y^ fire, kindled in it.

If thou wilt overcome thy enemies.
Take the stone, which is called Adamas, in English speech, a Diamond, and
it is of shining colour, very harde, in so much that it can not be broken, but
by the blood of a got, it grows in Arabia, or in Cypres. And if it be
bounden to the left side, it is good against enemies, madness, wyld beasts,
venomouse beasts and cruel men, and against chydyng brawling* against
venom, and inuaston of fantasies, and some call it Diamas.

If thou wilt eschew all peri^ and all terrible things, have a strong heart.
Take the stone, which is called Agathes, it is black, and hath white veins.
There is another of the same kind, like to white colour. And the third
grows in a certain I'll, having black veins, that makes too overcome
peryls, give strength to y^ hart. makes a man mighty, pleasant, delectable,
helps against adversities.

If thou desire to optayne any thing from any man.
Take the stone, which is called Alectoria, it is a stone of a cock, it is
white as the Crystal, and it is drawn out of the cocks gysar, or maw, after
that he has ben gelded more th a four years and it is of y^ greatness of a
bean It makes the bealy pleasant and stedfaste, and put under the tunge, it
quenches thyrste. And this last has been proved in our time, and I
perceived it quickly.

If thou wilt overcome beasts and interpret, or expound all dreams and
prophe cye of things to come.
Take the stone, which is called Esmundus or Asmadus, it is of diverse colours,
it puts out all poison, and makes a man to overcome his adversaries, gives
Prophesieng, and the interpretation of all dreams, makes a man to understand
dark questions, harde to be understand or assoyled.

If thou wilt have good under standing of things that may be felt, and that
thou may not be made dronked.
Take the stone, whithe is called Amaristus, and it is of purple colour, and
the best is found in Inde, and it is good against drukennes, and gives good
understanding in things that may be understand.

If thou wilt overcome thy enemies, and slay debate.
Take the stone, which is called Berillus, it is of pale colour and may be
scene through as water, bear it about with thee, and thou shalt overcome all
debate, shalt drive a way thy enemies and it makes thy enemy meke. It
causes a manne too be well manuered, as Aaron sayethe, it gives also good
vnderstadinge.

If thou wilt foreiudge, or conjecture of things to come.
Take the stone, which is called Celonites, it is of purple, diverse other
colours, it is food in the head of the snail. If any man will bear this
stone under his tunge, he shall foreiudge, and propheci of things to come. But
notwithstanding, it hath no virtue, but shynynge, Prima cufuerit accensa, et
crescens monoytes in vltima descendente, so means Aaron, in the book of
virtues of herbs, and stones.

If thou wilt pacify tempests and go over fluddes.
Take the stone, which is called Corallus, Coral, some be read and some white*
And it hath ben proves that it stemmeth anon blood, and puts away the
folishnes of him that bears it, gives wysedom. And this hath ben proved of
certain me in our time. And it is good against tempests, and perils of
fluddes.

If thou wilt kendle fire.
Take the Crystal stone, put it nygh under the cirkle of ye Sun, that is to
sai, against ye sun and put it nygh any thing yt may be burned, incontinently,
ye heat of the Sun shining, will set it a fire. And if it be drunk with
honey, it encreseth milk.

If thou wilt that ye Sun appear of bloody colour.
Take the stone, which is called Elitropia. It is grene like to the precious
stone called the Emeraude. And it is sprynkled with bloody drops. The
necromancers call it Gemma Babylonica, the precious stone of Babylo, by the
propre name. But if it be anointed with the juice of an her be of the same
name, and be put in a vesselful of water, it makes the Sun to seem of bloody
colour: as if the Eclipse were scene. The cause of this is, for it makes al the
water to bubble up unto a little cloud, which making the air thycke: lets
the Sun to be scene, but as it were read, in a thick color, a little after: ye
cloud goes away, by dropping down like dew, as it were by drops of rain.
This also borne about makes a ma of good fame, hole: and of lunge life.

It is said of old Philosophers: that a man an ointed with an herb of this name,
as we have said before: excells with virtue, Elitropia is found oftetymes in
Cypres and Inde.

If thou wilt make seething water too be cold, which stands upon the fire.
Take the stone, which is called Epibretes, which put in water against the eye
of the Sun, puts forth fyery beams of ye Sun. And it is said of old, and
new Philosophers, if it be put in seethyng water, the bublyng up, or seethyng
will soon cease, and a little after, it will wax cold* and it is a shynynge
and ruddy stoone.

If thou wilt eschew illusions and fantasies overcome all causes or matters.
Take the stone, which is called Calcedonius, it is pale, brown of colour,
somewhat dark, if this be pierced, hanged about ye neck, with ye stone which
is called Sinerip, it is good against al fantastical illusions, it makes to
overcome all causes, or matters in suit, kepeth thy body against thy
adversaries.

If thou wilt be acceptable, and pleasant.
Take the stone, which is called Celidonius, of it there is some black, some
some what read, it is drawn out of the bealye of swallows. If that which is
somewhat read, be wrapped in a lynnen cloth, or in a calves skyn, and borne
under ye left arm hole it is good against madness, and old syckenesses
diseases, the sleping, or forgetful sickness, and Contra epidimiam, which is a
scabbe that runs thorough y^ hole body.

Euax saith, that this stone makes a man eloquent, acceptable and pleasant.
The black stone is good against wild beasts, wrath, brings the busynes
begone to an end. And if it be wrapped in the leaves of Celydo, it is said
that it makes the sight dull. And they should be drawn out in the month of
August, and two stones are found oftentimes in one swallow.

If thou wilt be victorious against thy adversaries.
Take the stone, which is called Bagates, it is of diverse colours The ancient
philosophers say that it has been proved in the prince Alcides, which how
lunge he did bear it, he had always victory: and it is a stoone of diverse
colours, like the skin of a kydde.

If thou wilt know before any thing to come.
Take the stone, which is called Bena, which is like a beasts to the, and put
it under thy tongue. And as Aaron and the old Philosophers saith, how lunge thou
wilt hold it so always conjecturing, thou shalt prophecy things to come, and
thou shalt not err in any wise for iudgyng.

If thou wilt that thy garmete be unable to be burned.

Take the stone, which is called Histmos, which as Isidorus says, is like to
saffron. And it is found in a part of Spain. This stone blows like a pair
of bellows, by reason of y^ wyndinesse in it, it is found nygh the Gades of
Hercules, that is two Isles, by the further parts of Spayn beyond Garnade, and
if this stone be set in a garment, it can be burned in no wise, but it shines
like fire.

And some men say: that y^ white Carbunkle stone, is this kind.

If thou wilt have favour and honour.
Take the stone, which is called Tabrices, and it is like too the Crystal
stoone. The ancient Philosophers, as Euax, and Aaron, say of it, that it
gives eloquence, favour and honour, and it is said moreover, that it
heals every dropsye.

If thou wilt drive away fantasies and folishnes.
Take the stone, which is called Chrysolitus, and it is of the same virtue with
Attemicus, as Aaro Euax say, in the book of the natures of herbs, stones: this
stone set in gold, borne, drives away folishnes, expels fantasies. It is
affyrmed to give wisdom, and it is good against fear.

If thou wilt judge the opynions and thoughts of others.
Take the stone, which is called Geratides, it is of black colour let one hold
it in his mouth, it makes him that bears it merry and in savour, well
esteemed with all men.

If thou wilt have victory and amity.
Take the stone, which is called Nichomai, it is the same yt is called
Alabaster, and it is of a kind of Marble, it is white, and shynynge. And
oyntmentes are made of it to the buryenge of the dead.

If thou wilt that a man sleapyng tel to y^ what he hath done.
Take the stone, which is called Duirim, this stone is found in the nest of
the lap wynke or black plouer.

If thou would optayne any thing of any man.
Take the stone, which is called Radianus, it is black, shining through, which
when the head of a Cock is given to Emotes, or Pysmeres to eat, it is found
a lunge time after, in the head of the Cock. And the same stone is also called
Conatides.

If thou would make, that nether dogs, nor hunters may hurt any beast,
which they hute.
Put before them the stoone, which is called Luperius, and it will run soon
to the stoone. This stone is found in Lybia, all beasts run to it, as to
their defender. It lets that neither dogs, nor hunters may hurt them.

If thou wilt burn any mas hand without fire.
Take the stone, which is called Unces, which we called before Principe apti,
which is fire, it is as fire. If any ma strayn hard this stone, it burns
soon his hand, like as it ware burned with a material fire, which is a
marvelous thing.

If thou wilt cure melancholy, or a fever quartaine, in any ma.
Take the stone, which is called Lapis lazuli. It is like to the colour of the
heaven, and there is within it little bodies of gold. And it is sure and
proved, that it cures melacholye, and y^ fever quartayne.

If thou would make any m^ wit sharpe and quick, and augment his riches,
and also prophecy things to come.
Take the stone, which is called Smaragdus, in English sp^ache an Emeraude. And
^s very clear, shynynge through and plain, but it that is yerowe is better.

It is taken out of the nestes of gripes or grystons, it doth both comfort
and save, and being borne, it makes a man to understand well, and gives to
him a good memory, augmeteth the riches of him that bears it, if any man
shall hold it under his tongue, he shall prophecy anon.

If thou wilt make a rain bow to appear.
Take the stone, which is called Iris, it is white like the Crystal, four
square or having horns. If this stone be put in the beam of the Sun, by
turning back it makes a rain bow soon to appear in the wall.

If y^ wilt make a stone, which may never be made hot.
Take the stone which is called Gallasia it hath ye figure of hayl* the colour
and hardness of the Dyamonde, If this stone be put in a very great fire, it
will never be hot* And the cause is, for it hath the holes so strat together,
that the heate may not enter in the body of the stone. Also Aaron Euax say,
that this stone borne mitigateth, wrath, lecherye and other hot passions.

If thou wilt know whether thy wife lies with any other married man, or no.
Take the stone called Galeritis which is the same that is called Catabres, it
is food in Lybia Brytannia, the most noble yle of the world, wherein is
contained both countries, Englande Scotland. It is of double colour black, of
the colour of Saffro, it is found gray coloured, turnynge to paleness. It
heals y^ dropsey, it binds the bealyes that have a laske. And Auicena
saith, that if this stone be broke and washed, or be give to a woman to be
washed, if she be not a vyrgyn, she will pysse soon, if she be a birgyn, she
will not pysse.

If thou wilt overcome thy enemies.
Take the stone, which is called ^raconites, fro the Dragons head, and if the
stone be drawn out from him alive, it is good against all poisons, and he
that bears it in his left arm, shall overcome all his enemies.

If thou wilt ingeder love between any two.
Take the stone, which is called Echites, it is called of some Aquileus,
because the Egles put these in their nestes. It is of purple color, and it is
found nygh ye banks of the Ocean sea, sometime in Persia, and it coteyneth
always an other stoone in it, which sounds in it, when it is named. It is
said of aunciet Philosophers, that this stoone hagged up in the left shoulder,
gets love between the husband and his wife. It is profitable to women great
with child, it lets vntymely birth, it mitigateth the peril of making a
feared it is said to be good to the that hath the falling syckenes. And as the
me of Chaldea say, if poison be in thy meat^, if the aforesaid stone be put
in, it lets y^ that meat may be swallowed down. And if it be taken out,
the meat is soon swallowed down, I did see that this last was examined
sensibly of one of our brethren.

If thou wilt make a ma sure.
Take the stone which is called Tepistites. It is found in ye sea it is
shyninge ruddy. And it is said in the book of Alchorath, yt if it be borne
before the heart, it makes a man sure, refrains mitigateth all seditions,
discords. It is said also, that it mitigateth the flies, with log hinder
legs, which bourneth corn with touching of it, devours ye residew, souls,
clouds, hayle, and such as have power of ye fruits of the earth. And it hath
ben proved of philophers of lat time and of certain of our brethren, that it
being put against ye beam of the sun puts furth fiery beams. Also if this
stone be put in seething water, the seethinge will soon cease, and the water
will be cold a little after.

If thou wilt that strangers walk sure and safe.
Take the stone, which is called Hyacinthus, in English a Jacinct, it is of
many colours. The grene is best, it hath read veins, should be set in silver,
and it is said in certain lectures, that there is two kinds of it, of ye water,
of ye Saphyre. The Jacinct of ye water, is yelow, white The iacinct of ye
Saphyrs, is very shining yelowe, having no watrishnesse, this is better, it is
written of this, in lecturs of philosophers, that it being borne on the finger,
or neck, makes strangers sure, acceptable, to their ghestes. And it
provokes sleep, for the coldness of it, y^ Jacinct of Saphyre hath properly
this.

If thou wilt be saved from diverse chauces and pestilet bittes.
Take the stone, which is called Orithes, of which there be.iii. kinds, one
black, an other grene and the third, of the which, one part is rough, and
the other plain, and the colour of it is like the colour of plate of iron, but
y^ grene hath white spots. This stone borne, preserves from diverse
chances, and perils of death.

If thou wilt make peace.
Take the stone, which is called a Saphyre, which comes fro the East unto
Inde, it that is of yelowe colour is best, which is not very bright, it
makes peace and concorde, it makes ye myndepure and devote toward God, it
strengthens the mind in good things, makes a ma to cole from inward
heate.

If thou wilt cure a vyrgyn.
Take the stone, which is called Saunus, fro the I'll Sauna It doth make firm
or cosolidate the mind of the bearer of it. And being bound to the hand of a
woman, travailing with chydel it lets the birth, and kepeth it in bealye.
Therefore it is forbidden in such a busynes, that this stone touche a woman.

Thou shalt find many other like things: in the book of Mines, of Aaron and
Euar.
The manner of doing these things, consists in this, that ye bearer for a
good effect, be clears from all pollution, or defylynge of the body.

Explicit.
ISidorus seems to say, ye Licania hath in ye head (...) a stone of most
noble virtue, is of white colour, which brayed, given to them that have the
strangulion, to drink, it louseth perfectly the vryne* shortly heals, it
puts awai the fever quartayne. Also it takes away a white spot or perle in
the eye. Also if a woman with child, bear it on her she shall not loose her
birth. Also the flesh of them sodden, and eaten, is good to the that have an
exulceratio, or sore in the lunges, with a consumption of all the body, and
spitting of blood.

Also the poulder of the beasts, with the rynde, or bark of trees with some
greynes of pepper, is profitable against the Emerodes and growing out of flesh
about the buttocks. Likewise they being raw, brayed with ryndes or barks of
trees, break ripe impostumes.

The third book of Albertus Magnus, of the virtues of certain beasts.
Forasmuch as it hath ben spoken in the book before, of certain effects,
caused by the virtue of certain stones, and of their marvelous virtue or
operation: now we will speak in this Chapter of certain effects, caused of
certain beasts.

Aquila An Eagle Casso Bubo A shricke owl Hircus A got buck Camelus A camel
Lepus An hare Expetiolus Leo A lyon Foca A purpays Anguilla An eel Mustela A
wesel Upupa A lapwig, or black plouer Pellicanus A pellicane Cornus A crow
Miluus A kite or gleyde. Turtur A turtell Talpa A molle Merula A black macke,
or owsel
Aquila, the Eagle is a bird known enough of men of Chaldea, it is called
Vorax, and of the Greeks Rimbicus. Aaro Euax say, that it has a marvelous
nature or virtue. For if the brain of it be turned into poulder, be myxed with
the juice of the hem locke, they that eat of it, shall take themselves by the
hear, and they shall not leave the hold, as long as they bear, that they have
received. The cause of this effect is, for that brain is very cold, in so
much that it engenders a fantastical virtue, shutting the powers by smoke.

Casso is a beast known well enough, it is called Rapa, of the Chaldeis, and
of the Greeks Orgalo. Aaron says of this. If the feet of it be borne of any
man, he shall never be vexed, but he shall desire always to go for the. Also
he that bears the feet of it, shall always overcome, and shall be feared of
his enemies. And he said that his right eye, wrapped in a wolves skin,
makes a man pleasaut, acceptable and gentle. And if meat be made of the
aforesaid things, or poulder given to any man in meat, the geuer shall be
greatly loved of him that receives it. This last was proved in our time.

Bubo, a shricke owl, is a bird well enough known, which is called Magis of
the Chaldeis, Hysopus of the Greekes. There be marvelous virtues of this
foul, for if the hart and right foot of it, be put upon a man sleapyng, he
shall say anon to y^ whatsoever thou shalt ask of him. And this hath ben
proved a late time of our brethren. And if any man put this under his arm
hole, no dog will bark at him, but keep silence. And if these things
aforesaid, joined together with a wing of it, he hanged up to a tree, birds
will gather together to that tree.

Hircus, ye got buck is a beast well enough known, it is called of the
Chaldeis Erbichi, of y^ Ere kes Massai. If the blood of it be taken warm with
vinegar, and the juice of fenyll, sodden together with a glass, it makes the
glass soft as dow, it may be caste against a wall, and not be broken. And
if the aforesaid confection be put in a vessel, the face of any man be
anointed with it, marvelous horrible things shall appear, and it shall seem to
(...) that he must dye. And if the aforesaid thing be put in y^ fire and there
be there any man that hath the falling sycknes, by put tyng to the lode stone,
he falls anon to the ground as dead, if the water of eels be given to him
to drink, he shall be cured anon.

Camelus, the Camel is a beast known well enough. It is called of the Chaldeis
Ciboi, of the Greeks Iphim. If the blood of it be put into the skyn of y^
beast called Stellio, then set on any mas head, which is like a lysard, having
on his back spots like stetres, it shall seem that he is a giant, that his
head is in heaven. And this is said in the book of Alchorath, of Mercury, And
if a lantern anointed with y^ blood of it, be lyghtenned, it shall (...) that
all men standing about have Camelles headdes, so that there be no outward
light of an other candeil.

Lepus, the hare is a beast well enough known, of the Chaldeis it is called
Ueterellu, and of the Greeks Onollosa, the virtue of it is showed to be
marvelous, for Euax and Aaron said that y^, fete of it joined with a stone or
with the head of a black owsell, moves a man to hardiness, so that he fear
not death.

And if it be bounden to his left arm, he may go whether he will and he shall
return sauf without peril. And if it be given to a dog to eat, with the
hart of a Mesell, fro thens, forth he shall not cry out, although he should
be killed.

Experiolus, is a beast welly. nough known, if the clove of it be burned
consolidated, be given in meat to any horse, he will not eat for y^ space of
three days. And if the aforesaid thing be put with a little turpentyme it
shall be clear, secondly it shall be maid as a cloud blood, and if it be cast
a little in water, an horrible thunder shall be made.

Leo, a Lyon is a beast well enough known, of the Chaldeis called Balamus, of
the Greekes Beruth. If thonges of leather be made of the skin of him, a man
girded with them, he shall not fear his enemies. And if any man will eat of
the flesh of him, will drink of his water for three days, he shall be cured
from the fever quartaine. And if any part of his eyes be put under a mans arm
hole borne, al beasts shall flee away, bowynge down their hade unto their low
belyes.

Foca, purpays is a fysh well enough known, of the Chaldeis it is called
Daulaubur, of y^ grecias Labour, this fysh is of diverse nature. If the tongue of
it be take, and be put with a little of y^ heart of it in water, for a suerty
fyshes will gather there together. And if thou wilt bear it under thy arm
hole, no man shall be able to have victory against the, thou shalt have a
gentle pleasant judge.

Auguilla, an eel, it is a fysshe sufficiently know. The virtues of it are
marvelous, as Euar Aaron say, for if it dye for fault of water, the heart
remaining hole, and strong vyneger to take and it be myxed to the blood of
the foul, called in Latin Uultur, which some call in English a Grype, and
some a rauyn, and be put under duge in any place, they shall all how many
soever they be, recover their life, as they had before. And if the worm of
this eel be drawn out, and put in y^ aforesaid confection, the space of one
month, the worm shall be changed into a very black eel of which, if any man
shall eat, he shall dye.

Mustela, the Wesell is a beast sufficiently known. If the hart of this beast
be eat yet quaking it meketh a man to know things to come, and if any dog
eat of the heart with the eyes and tuge of it, he shall soon lose his voice.

Upupa, y^ Lapwynke or black plouer, is a bird sufficiently known, of the
Chaldeis it is called Boridicta, of the Greeks I son, y^ eyes of it born, make
a ma gross or great. And if the eyes of it be borne before a mas breast, all
his enemies shall be pacefied. And if thou shalt have the head of it in thy
purse, thou can not be deceived of any merchant. This hath ben proved this
day of our brethren.

Pellicianus, the Pellicane is a bird sufficiently known, it is called of the
Chaldeis Uoltri, of the Greeks Iphalari. The virtue of it is marvelous. If
yonge birds be killed and their heart not be broken, if a part of her blood
be taken and be put warm in the mouth of the young birds, they will receive
soon again life as before. If it be hanged up to the neck of any bird, it
shall fly always, until it fall dead. And the right foot of it under an hot
thing, after three months shall be engendered quycke, and shall move it self of
the humour and heate, which ye bird hath. And Hermes in the book of
Alchorath, Plinius doth witness this.

Coruus, called of some a rave, and of others a crow, the virtue of this foul
is marvelous, as Euax and Aaron rehearse. If her eggs be sodden, be put again
in the nest, the raven goes soon to the read sea, in a certain I'll where
Aldoricus or Alodrius is buried, and she brings a stone where with she
touches her eggs, and the eggs be soon raw as they ware before. It is a
marvelous thing to stir up sodden eggs. If this stoone be put in a ring,
the leaf of the laurel tree put under it, a man being bounden in chains, or a
door shut, be touches therewith, he that is bound shall soon be lowsed, and
the door shall be opened. And if this stone be put in a mas mouth, it gives too
him understanding of all birds. The stone is of Inde, because it is food in
Inde, after certain wise men, sometime in the read sea. It is of diverse
colours, it makes a man to forget all wrath, as we have said above in the
same stone Miluus, a Kite or gleyde is a bird sufficiently known, of the
Chaldeis it is called Bysicus, of the Greeks Melos. If the head of it be
taken, and borne before a mans breast, it gives to h^ love and favour of all
men women. If it be hanged too the neck of an hen, she will never cease to
run, until it be put away. And if a cocks comb be anointed with the
blood of it, he will not crow frome thens forth. There is a certain stone
found in the knees of this bird, if it be looked craftily, which if it be put
in the meat of two enemies, they shall be made friends, and there shall be made
very good peace among them.

Turtur, a Turtel is a bird well enough known, it is called Mulon of the
Chaldeis, of the Greekes Pilax. If ye hart of this foul be borne in a wolves
skin, he that bears it, shall never have an appetite to commit lechery
from thence forth. If the heart of it be burned, and be put above ye eggs of
any foul, there can never young birds be engendered of them from thenceforth.
And if ye feet of this foul be hanged to a tree, it shall not bear fruit fro
thenceforth. And if an hearye place, and an horse be anointed with the blood
of it, and with water where in a Molle was sodden, the black hears will fall
of.

Talpa, a molle is a beast well enough known. The virtue of this beast is
marvelous, as it is rehearsed of Philosophers. If the fore of it be wrapped in
ye leaf of a Laurel tree, be put in the mouth of an horse, he will flee for
fear. And if it be put in the nest of any foul, there shall never come forth
young birds of these eggs. And if thou wilt drive awai molles, put it in a
pot, quycke brymstone kindled, all the other molles shall come together there.
And the water of that decoction makes a black horse white.

Merula, a black macke or ow sell, is a foul well enough known, and the
virtue of it is mernaylous. For if the feathers of the right wing of it be
hanged up in the midst of an house, with a read leaf, which was never
occupied, no man shall be able too s^epe in that house, until it be put away.
And if the heart of it be put under the head of a man slepyng, he be inquired,
he will say all that he hath done with an hye voice.

The manner of doyng all these beforesayd things, that the effect may be good
profitable is that it be done under a favourable planet, as Jupiter and Venus,
this is in their days hours. If any ma therefore will do these things truly,
without doubt he shall find truth, very great effect or virtue, in the before
said things as I have proved, scene oftentimes together with our brethren in
our time. Therefore let him consider here, which shall find plenty of the
beforesayde things, that he possesses a lordship and virtues. For if they be
done in their contraries, as a good effect in a maliciouse sign, his virtue
and effect should be let for his contrary, so good and true things
should be despised. We see very many to be deceived, in sure true things, which
if they had known, and kept the qualities of signs or times they should
have obtained their will and effect, in the aforesaid things.

Isidorus seems to say, that the ashes of a great frog, born at a woman's
girdle, restrains greatly the coming of a woman's natural purgation,

And in a probatio, if it be bost den too an hens neck, there shall come
forth no blood of her or of an other beast.

Also if it be tempered with water, the head or an other place be anointed
with it, hear will no more grow there.

If any man bear a dogs hart on his left side, all yt dogs shall hold
their peace, and not bark at him.

If any man will bind yt right eye of an Wolf on his right sleue neither men
nor dogs may hurt him.

Here are ended some secretes of Albertus Magnus of Colone upon natures,
virtues, and effects of certain herbs, stones and beasts, and here follows
in what hour every planet hath his dominion.
ANd that al things which hath ben said before, and also shall be said after,
may be applied more easily, to the effects of their desire, which have not
^nning of the sterres. First thou shalt note, that an hour is take two ways,
that is equal unequal. The equal hour is the hour of the dial or clock,
which is always equal. The unequal hour is considered, after that ye days
be langer or shorter. For ye Astrologie^s consider always the time, in the
which ye Sun stands upon his half sphere, and they call it the day or ye
bow of the day, and by the contrary the might. They divide that time which
they cal the day, in. xii equal parts, which be the hours of the same dai,
whatsoever is said of the day, thou must understand cotrariwyse of ye night.
And that thou may vnderstade more clearly, let us put the case, the Sun
comes out fro his half sphere, at.viii. of the dial* we have unto the
going down of the Sun.xvii. hours of the dial, which we may multiply
by.lx. as there be.lx. minutes of every hour of the dyal, we shall have nyne
hundredth, three score minutes, which we may deuyde by.xii. as there be.xii.
hours of the day, applying to every hour his portion, we have.lxxx. minutes
in an hour. Therefore every hour of a day shall have. lxxx minutes, which shall
conteyn.i. hour one third of an hour of the dial. And in all that time y^
dominion of the planete of that hour shall be considered, as the table beneth
written shall show. Every hour of his night shall not have but.xl. minutes,
which thou shalt understand likewise of others, according to the rising of the
Sun upon the ground, because that hour which is in ye midst between night
and day, which is called the dauning of ye day is not called the day, but the
day is properlye understand, when the Sun may be scene.

Therefore thou willing too consider the dominion of every Planet, for in
every hour, every Planete has his dominion, thou shalt consider the hours
themselves, after the way above written, and so thou may come to the end of
thy purpose. Also the beginning of the day is considered from one of the
clock of the day, going before after noone. So let the Sunday be divided into
two equal parts, and it is of.xii. hours, divide it into two, then the half
day shall be.xviii. and ye first hour following shall be the beginning of
Monday.

Wherefore, thou shalt consider that Sunday hath his sign under the Sun.

Monday hath his sign under the Moon.

Tuesdaye has his sign under Mars.

Wednisday hath his sign under Mercurius.

Thursdaye hath his sign under Jupiter.

Friday hath his sign under Venus.

Saturday hath his sign under Saturnus.

It is too be noted that every true act must be done under his planete. And
it is better, if it be done in the propre day of yt planete, in his own
proprie hour as for an example.

Under Saturnus, life, building doctrine, mutation.

Under Jupiter, houor, thing desired, riches, apparel.

Under Mars, war, prison, matrimony, enemy.

Under the Sun, hope, lucre, for tune, he ire.

Under Venus, friend or feloweshyp, way, lover, stranger.

Under Mercury, loss, det, fear.

Under the Moan, polayse, dream marchaundyse, theft.

Of the hours of the days and nyghtes.
And first of the hours of So day, in his first hour, the Sun in the second
Venus, in y^ third Mercurius, in the fourth y^ Moan, in the fyfte Saturnus, in
the vi, Jupiter, in the.vii. Mars, in ye viii. the Sun, in the.ix. Venus, in
the.x. Mercurius, in the.xi. the Moon, in the.xii. Saturnus.

But in the first hour of the night Jupiter, in the second Mars, in the
third the Sun, in the fourth Venus, in the fifte Mercurius, in the.vi. ye
Moon, in the.vii. Saturnus, in the. viii Jupiter, in the.ix. Mars, in the x.
the Sun, in the.xi. Venus, in the.xii. Mercurius.

In the first hour of Monday the moon, in the second Saturnus, in the third
Jupiter, in the fourth Mars: in the fyft ye Sun in the.vi. Venus: in the.vii.
mercurius, in the.viii. the moon, in the.ix. Saturnus, in the.x. Jupiter, in
the.xi. mars, in the.xii. the Sun.

But in the first hour of Mondayes night Venus, in ye second mercurius, in
the third y^ moan, in the fourth Saturnus, in the fifte Jupiter, in the.vi.
Mars, in the.vii. the Sun: in the.viii. Venus: in the.ix. Mercurius: in
the.x. the Moon: in the.xi. Saturnus: in the.xii. Jupiter.

In the first hour of Tuesday Mars, in the second the Sun, in the third
Venus, in the.iiii. Mercurius, in the fifth the moan in the.vi. Saturnus, in
the.vii. Jupiter, in the.viii. Mars, in y^ ix. the Sun, in the.x. Venus, in
the.xi. Mercurius, in the.xii. the Moon.

But of Tuesdays night in the first hour Saturnus, in the second Jupiter:
in the third Mars, in y^.iiii. the Sun: in the fyfte Venus: in the sy^te
Mercurius: in the seuenthe the Moan: in the.viii. Saturnus, in in the.ix.
Jupiter: in the tenth Mars: in the.xi. the Sun, in the, xii. Venus.

Of the Wednisday, in his first hour Mercurius, in the second the Moon, in
the third Saturnus, in the fourth Jupiter, in fifth Mars, in the sixth the
Sun in the seuenthe Venus, in the eyghte Mercurius, in the nynth the Moon:
in the.x. Saturnus in the.xi. Jupiter, inye.xii. Mars.

But on Wednisday at night, in the first hour the Sun, in the second
Venus, in ye.iii. Mercurius, in the.iiii. the Moon, in the.v. Saturnus, in
the.vi. Jupiter, in the.vii. Mars, in the.viii. the Moon, in the.ix. Venus, in
the.x. Mercurius, in the.xi. the Moon, in the.xii. Saturnus.

On Thursdai in the first hour Jupite, in the second Mars, in y^ iii. the
Sun, in the.iiii. Venus in the.v. Mercurius, in the.vi. ye Moan, in the.vii.
Saturnus, in the.viii. Jupiter, in ye.ix. Mars, in the.x. the Sun, in the.xi.
Venus, in the, xii. Mercurius.

But on Thursday night in ye first hour the Moon, in ye second Saturnus, in
the. iii, Jupiter: in the.iiii. Mars: in ye* v. the Sun: in the.vi. Venus: in
the.vii. Mercurius: in the.viii. the Moon: in the.ix. Saturnus: in ye.x.
Jupiter: in the.xi. Mars: in the.xii. the Sun.

On Friday at one of the clock Venus: at.ii. Mercurius: at.iii. the Moon:
at.iiii. Saturnus: at.v. Jupiter: at.vi. mars: at.vii. the Sun: at.viii.
Venus: at. ix Mercurius: at.x. the Moon: at xi. Saturnus: at.xii. Jupiter.

But on Fridays night at one of the clock Mars: at.ii. ye Sun at.iii. Venus:
at.iiii. mercurius at.v. the Moon: at.vi. Saturnus: at.vii. iupiter: at.viii.
mars at.ix. the Sun: at.x. Venus: at. xi, Mercurius: at twelfe the Moon.

On Saturday at one of ye clock Saturnus: at, ii. Jupiter: at.iii. Mars:
at.iiii. the Sun, at.v. Venus: at.vi. Mercurius at.vii. the Moon: at.viii.
Saturnus, at.ix. Jupiter: at.i. Mars, at.xi. the Sun: at.xii. Venus:

But on Saturdays night at one of the clock Mercurius, at ii. the moon, at
three Saturnus at.iiii. Jupiter, at. v, mars. at. vi the Sun, at.vii. Venus,
at viii Mercurius, at.ix. the Moon, at.x. Saturnus, at.xi. Jupiter, at.xii.
Mars.

And not that Jupiter and Venus be good, Saturnus Mars, euell, but the Sun
and the Moon in a mean, and Mercurius is good with good and euell with euell.
(*)

Here begins the book of ye marvels of the world, set forth by Albertus
Magnus.
AFter it was know of Philosophers, that all kinds of things move and
incline to them self, because an active and rationable virtue is in them,
which they guide, and move as well to them selfes as to others, as fire moves
to fire, water to water.

Also Auicenna said, when a thing stadeth lunge in salt, it is salt, if any
thing stand in a stynkynge place, it is made stynkynge. And if any thing
stands with a bold man, it is made bold, if it stand with a fearful man,
it is made fearful. And if a beast companieth with me, it is made tractable
familiar. And generally, it is verified of them by reasons, and diverse
experience, that every nature month to his kind, and their vere fyenge, is
known in the first qualities, and likewise in the second and the same
chances in the third. And there is nothing in all dispositios, which moves
to it self, according to his whole power. And this was the rote, the second
beginning of ye works of secretes, and turn thou not a way the eyes of thy
mind.

After that this was graffed in the minds of the Philosophers and they found
the disposition of natural things. For they knew surely that great cold is
graffed in some, in some great boldenes, shulde not deny any marvelous thing
although he hath no reason, but he ought to prove by experience, for the cause
of marvelous things are hid, and of so diverse causes going before, that
mans understanding after Plato, may not aprehende them.

Therefore the lode stone draws iron to it, and a certain other stone draws
glass. So marvelous things are declared of philosophers to be in things by
experience, which no man ought to deny. And that is not proved after the
fashion of philosophers which found that, for the philosophers saith, that the
palm is a tree, and it hath the male and the female, therefore when the female
is nygh the male, thou see that the female, bow down to the male, and the
leaf branches of it are made soft, and bow down to the male.

Therefore when they see that, they bind ropes fro the male to the female,
Reddit ergo erecta, super seipsam quasi adepta sit Masculo per continuationem
^umis Virtutem masculi. Not withstadinge many of the ancient authors, hath
showed marvelous things, received now of the common people, and take for a
truth. Therefore I shall show to the certain things, that thou may stablish
thy mind upon them, to know it for a certain truth, which reason can not
stablish by feeling, because the foresaid help in them. And therefore it is,
that the son of Messias said in the book of the beasts. It a woman great
with child, put on the apparel of a man, a man put it on after, before he
wasshe it, if he have the fever quartayne, it will depart from him.

And it is said in the book of beasts, that the Lybarde ^eeth ye pryuy
members of a man, and in an other place it is said ^t Carneum, if an old man
be buried in a dove or cvluer house, or be put where doves or cvluers inhabit
or rest, there they are multiplied, until it be full of them.

And in the book De cyriaca of Galene, it is said that the Serpent which is
called Regulus in Latin, a cokatryce in English, is some what white, upon whose
head there be three hairs, when any ma sees them he dies soon And when any ma
or any other living thing hears his whist ling, he dies. And every beast
that eats* of it being dead, dies also. And aristotel said, where there
is summer.vi. Months and likewise winter, there is a flood in the which
adders are found, whose property is, that they never se them selves but they
dye, but when they be dead, they hurt not. And aristotele put craftily in the
mind of Alexander, that he should take a great glass, and walk with it
toward them, when they did behold them selves in the glass they dyed* This
sayng of Aristotel was not believed of some men For Auicenna said against
Aristotel, if any man did see it, he dyed, wherefore there is no truth in his
speech. And they said, if any man would take of the milk of a woman, giving
souke to her own daughter of two year old, and let it be put in a glasen
bessel, or hanged up in a dove or cvluer house where they go in and forth,
doves will abide be multiplied there, until they be innumerable. And they
said, when the mouth of a dead man is put upon him which complains of his
beallye, his beally is healed.

And Alexander said, when anything is taken out of the nauyl^ of an infant,
which comes forth if it be cut, and be put under the stone, of a ring of
silver or gold than the passion or grief of the ^o like comes not in any wise
too him that bears it.

And Galen saith, when ye leafes of Sorrel be eaten, they louse the beally. And
when the sede of it is drunken, it louseth the beally. And it is said, that
the root of Sorrel hanged upon him that hath the swyn pockes, it helps him.

And Philosophers say, when thou wilt that a beast return to his lodging,
anoint his forehead with Sepesquilla, and it will return.

And Aristotel said in the book of ye beasts. If any ma put wrought wax upon
the horns of cowes calfe, it will goo with him whersoeuer he will without labour
And if any man anointe the horne of kye with wax and oil or pitch ye payne
of their fete goes away.

And if any shall anoynte ye tunges of, ox with any talowe, they neither taste
nor eat meat, but they shall die for huger, except it be wyped away with salt
vyneger.

And if any man anoynte ye nether parts of a cock with oil, he nether will,
nor may tread an hen.

if thou desire that a cock ^rowe not, anoynte his head fore head with oil.

It is said in ye book of Archige nis quando cam illa, of ye hare is hanged
upon him that suffers the colike, it profits him.

And Aristotel said ye Emeraudes goes away fro him, which sits upon the
skin of a Lyo.

And if the dung of an hare be broken unto poulder and caste abroad upon a
place of Emotes or Pismeres, than the Pismeres leave there place.

Philosophers said, if the head of a goote be hanged upon him which suffers
swyne pockes, he is healed by it. If thou will that a woman be not viciate nor
desire men, take the priue member of a wolf, and the hears which do grow on
the chekes or eye bright of him, and the hears which be under his berde, and
burn it all, give it to her in a dryncke when she knows not, and she shall
desire no other man. And they said, when a women adesyreth not her husband, then
let her husband take a little of the talowe of a buck got, mean between
little and great, and let him anoynte his privy member with it, and do the act
of generation she shall love him and shall not do the act of generation
afterward with any

And they said yt when the snail is poysened, it eats the herb called organy,
and is healed, and therefore they know that the herb called organny, hath lain
under poison. Also it is said when the wesel is poynsoned of a serpent it
eats few, they know by this, that few is contrary to the vemyne of
serpents.

And a mouse put under the prickynge of scorpyons, delyuereth a man because she
is contrary and fears not him.

And philosophers have invented, that if any woman is barrayne when there is put
to her a thig that makes a woman barrain, the woman is not barayne, but
fruteful, and contrariwyse.

And it is said that when a sponge is caste in wine mixed with water and after
drawn forth strained and wrynged, the water comes sorth of it, the wine
remains, if it be not mixed, nothing comes forth.

Taberencis said, if a stone be hanged upon a sponge, on the neck of a
child, which cougheth with a vehement or great cough, his cough is mitigated
restrained. And when it is put on the head of an ass, or in to his
foundamente, Scarabeus, that is a fly with a black shelle, y^ breads in
coweshardes and is black, called a bitel, cutteth him and he turns, until
it be drawn from him.

It is said also, that if any stone be bounden to the tail of an ass, he
will not bray nor roar.

If the hairs of an ass be taken, which are nyghe his privy membre, and be
give to any ma, broke in with any kind of wine in a dryncke, he begins anon
to fart. Like wise if any man takes the eggs of Pysmeres and breaks them,
and casts them into water, and give the to any man in a drink, he cease
not anon to fart, they do like wise with wine.

And it is said, if thou wilt make a ring of a rod of a fresh myrte tree,
put it on thy ring finger, it mitigateth or extineteth the impostume under the
arm holes.

In the book of Aristotel, it is said that the root of white henbane, when it
is hanged upon a man suffering the colyke, it is profytable to him. And when,
salt Peter is put in a vessel, and by neger upon it, it will boil or sees
mightily without fire.

It is said also in the book of hermes, when leek sede is caste upon vinegar,
the eigrenes or sowrenesse of it goes away

Belhinus said, when thou take the white of an egg, alume anoyntest a
clothe with it, and washest it of with water of the sea: being dry, it lets
the dire to burn.

An other said, when red Arsenicum, and alume are taken, broken, and
confected, or made with the juice of the herb called houslyke, and the gall
of a bull, and a man anoyteth his hands with it, and after takes hot
quyckened. And when thou buryest the fly called a bytel among roses, it dies,
if thou bury it in dung, it quyckeneth.

And philosphers said that when the feathers of Eagles be put with y^ feathers
of other fowls, they burn and mortefye the for as he ouercometh in his life
all byrds, hath rule over them so y^ feathers of Eagles are deadly to all
feathers.

And Philosophers say, if the skin of a sheep be put in any place with the
skin of Adib, it gnaws and consumes it. And he that puts on him clothe
of the wolle of a sheep which hath eaten Adib, itchyng cease not from him,
until he put it of.

And if thou parfume an house or place with the lunges or lights of an Ass,
thou clengest it fro every Serpent and Scorpion. And of this Philosophers know
that it is good against poison.

Tabariences saith: if the tug of the Lapwynge or black plouer be hanged upon
a wall Obliuionem reddit eum memore et alienationes.

And it is said in the book of Cleopatra. If a woman have no delectation with
her husbade take the marro we of a wolf, of his left foot, and bear it, and
she will love no manne but him. And it is said, when the left hyppe or
haunche of a male ostriche is taken and boiled, or seethed with oil, and after
the beginning or ground of hairs are anointed with it, they grow never
again.

Architas said, if the hart of a serpent be taken, when he lives and be hagged
upon a man, being sick of the fever quartayne, it plucks it utterly away.
And ye Adders skin, when it is strayt bounded upon the ankle of a woman, it
haisteth the birth, but after the birth, it must be removed away anon.

The teeth of all serpetes, when thou pluckest them furthe by the roots, as
lunge as the serpent lives, if they be hanged upon a man, sick of the fever
quartain they take away the fever quartayne from him, and if the Serpent be
hagged upon a roth aching it profits. And if a serpet mete with a woman with
child, she brings furth her child before it be perfect. And if it meet
with her when she trauayleth of child, it hastes her birth.

And they sai, if thou wilt take the eye tothe of the beast called Crocodilus
in Latin, in english a Crocodile out of ye vppermore palase of the left side
of his mouth, and hang it on a ma being sick of ye fevers, it heals him,
and the fevers will not return again to him. And they have said, that the
Lyon is afraid of a white cock. And again that he fears the fire. And he
that is anointed with the talowe of the reins of the talowe of y^ rey nes of
the Lyon, fears not too go among beasts, all beasts are afraid of the
Lyon. And he that anoynteth his body with hares dung, wolfes be farayde of
him.

Et si teritur atsenicum citrinum, and be myxed with milk if a fly fall upon
it, it dies not. If thou wilt take y^ right foot of a snayll, and hang it upon
the right foot of a diseased ma with the gout, it profits it: like wise if
thou hang up the left foot of a snayll to thy left foot, diseased with the
gout. And so the hade of it is profitable to the hand the finger, to the
finger.

And if a fire be kendled before a man yt is brosten of grene wood of fig
trees, his stones will make a noise or bounsinge.

And it is said in the book of hermes, when both the eyes of the Ber^ be
bounden in lynen cloth, upon Sinistrum adiutorium, they put away the fever
quartayne. And it is said, if the wolf se a man and the ma se not him, the
man is astonished fears, and is hoorse. And therefore if any man bears the
eye of a wolf, it helps to victory, too boldenes, vanquyshing and fear of
his adversary.

And it is said, if a ring be made of the white houfes of an Ass, he that
hath the falling syckenes puts it on, suffers not the falling syckenes.

And they said, when y^ will that flies come not nyghe thy house, than put
Condicim et oppium, in white lyme, and after make thy house white with it,
than flies shall in no wise enter.

When thou wilt that thy wife or wench, show to the al that she hath done,
take the hart of a dove and the head of a frog, and dry them both, and bray
them unto poulder, and lay them upon the breast of her sleping, and she shall
show to y^ all that she hath done, but when she shall wake, wipe it away from
her breast, that it be not lifted up.

And they say, if any man put a Diamond under the head of a woman sleeping,
she manifests, if she be an aduoutrer, for if it be so, she leaps back out
of y^ bed afraid, and if not, she embraces her husband with great love.

And they say, that an Ass skyn when it is hanged upon chyldre, it lets
them to be afraid.

Architas saith, if the wax of the left ear of a dog be take n, and be
hanged upon men sick in the fevers that come by course or fyttes, it is very
profitable, and specially to the fever quartayne.

And Philosophers say, that some kind or singular, which never had
sickness, is profitable to every sickness, and he that had never pain,
helps and heals a man from it.

And when the house is perfumed with y^ left houfe of a mule, flies remain
not in it.

And if the heart, eye or brain of a lap wing or black plouer, be hanged
upon a mans neck, it is profitable against forgetfulness, and sharpeth mas
understanding.

If a woman may not conceive take an hearts horne, turned into poulder, let it
be myxed with a cowes gall, let a woman keep it about her, and let her do y^
act of generation, and she shall conceive anon.

A gross and styffe hair of a mares tayll, put upon a door suffers not
zauzales to enter.

The tothe of a foal or colt of one year old, put in the neck of a child,
makes his teeth to breed without payne.

The tothe of a mare put upon the head of a man, being mad, delivers him
anon from his fury.

If a woman may not conceive let a mares milk be give to her, not knowing, let
her do the act of generation in that hour, and she shall conceive anon.

The houfe of an horse perfumed in a house, drives away myse. The same
chances also by the houfe of a Mule.

That all the hot water come furth of a caldro. Take or blache, that is Terra
francisca, with pitch caste it in water, and it shall come forth all. That*fire
may come forth of water, take the shell of an egg and put in it quycke
brymstone lyme, shit the hole put it into water and it will kendle. And it is
said, if the herb Caphere, be put upon water, it is ked led and burns in the
water.

That thou may take birds with thy hands, take any corn very well steped in
the dregs of wine and in the juice of helocke and caste it too the birds,
every bird that tastes of it, is made droncken, and loses her strength.

And they say, if any man be anointed with y^ milk of an Ass, all the flyese
of the house will gather to him.

To write letters or bills, which be not read but in the night, take the gall
of a snail or mylk of a so we, and put it too the fire, or with water of a
worm shynyng late.

If ye myngell together many whites of henes eggs, a month after they are
made glass, hard as a stoone, and of this being after this fashion is maid
a Sophistical precious stone, called Topasius, if it be conjoined before with
Saffron or read earth.

Like wise, if the some which is found about the stones of a hart, or horse, or
ass, being weary, be myxed with wine, and ye wine be given to any man to
drink, he shall abhor wine for a mooneth.

And if any manne shall have many eels in a wine vessel, and they be suffered
to dye in it, if any man drink of it, he shall abhor wine for a year, and by
chance evermore.

And it is said, if a rope be taken, with which a thief is or hath ben
hanged up with, and a little chafe, which a whyrle wind lifted up in the air,
and let them be put in a pot, and set among other pots, that pot shall
break all the other pots.

Also take thou a little of the aforesaid rope, and put it on the instrument,
with which y^ bread is put in the oven, when he that should put it in the
oven, should put it in, he shall not be able too put it in, but it shall leap
out.

That men may seem without heads.
TAke an Adders skin and Auri pigmetum, and greek pitch of Reuponticum, and
the wax of new bees, and the fat or grease of an Ass, and break the al, and
put them in a dull seething pot full of water, and make it to sethe at a slow
fire, and after let it wax cold, and make a taper, and every man that shall
see light of it, shall seem headless.

That men may seem to have the visage or countenance of a dog. Take the
fat out of the ear of a dog, anoynte with it a little new sylke, put it in
a new lamp of green glass, and put ye lamp among men, they shall see the
visage of a dog.

That men may seem to have three headdes.

Take of the hayr of a dead ass, and make a rope, dry it, take the mary of
the principal bone of his right shoulder, and myxe it with virgyns wax,
anoynte the corde, and put it upon ye thras sholdes of the house, they yt come
into the house shall seem to have three headdes, and they that be in the house
shall seem Asses to the that enter in.

If thou wilt that a mans head seem an Ass head.

Take up of the covering of an Ass anoynte y^ ma on his head.

If thou wilt that a chicken, or other thing leap in the dyshe.

Take quycke silver and y^ poul der of Calamite, and put it in a bottle of
glass well spotted, put it with in a hot thing. For saying quycke silver is
hot, it moves it self, makes it to leap or dance.

If thou wilt se that other me can not.

Take of the gall of a male cat, and the fat of an hen al white and myxe
them together, and anoint thy eyes, and thou shalt se it that others can not
see.

If thou wilt understand the voices of birds.
Associate with the two felows in the.xxviii. day of October, go in to a
certain wood with dogs as too hunt, and carry home with that beast,
which thou shalt find first, and prepare it with the heart of a Fox, and thou
shalt understand anon the voice of birds or beasts. And if thou wilt that
any other likewise understand, kiss him, and he shall understand.

If thou wilt louse bonds.
Go into the wood, and loke where ye Pie hath her nest with her birds, and
when thou shalt be there, clymme up the tree, and bind about the hole of it
whersoeuer thou wilt. For when she sees the, she goes for a certain herb,
which she will put to the binding, and it is broken anon, and that herb
falls to ye ground upon the cloth, which thou should have put under the tree,
and be y^ present, and take it.

In the nest of the lap wyng or black under the earth within, al which be in
the lodgene, shall seem as they ware great men in the shape of horses and
Elephants, and it is a very marvelous thing.

An other perfuming, which when thou make, thou see outwardly grene men, and
men of many shapes and infinite marvels, which are not discerned for their
multitude.

Take Timar, that is vermilion, and the stoone Lazulus and Peneroyall of the
moutains and beat it all to poulder, and syfte it, myxe it with the fat of a
Dolphyn fyshe, horse or Elephat make grains or corns after ye fashion of
rise and dry them in a shado we, perfume in it when thou wilt and it shall be
don, that is said.

A perfumynge too see in our s^eape what thing is to come of good and euell.

Take the blood of an Ass congeled, and the fat Lupi cerini, and a sweet
incese or gum called Storax and also Storax, also styrax, gather it
altogether by equal weyghtes, and let the be mixed, and grains or corns be
made thereof, and let the house be perfumed with the, than thou shalt se him in
thy sleep, yt shall show to the all things.

A manner of making a match of a candle, or cadel weke, which when thou shalt
kendle, you shalt see men, in what shape soever thou wilt.

Take the eyes of an shriche owl, the eyes of a fyshe, which is called
Affures, and the eyes of a fyshe, which is called Libinitis, and the gall of
wolfes, break them with thy hands, myxe them together, and put them in a
vessel of glass, than when thou wilt warke it, take ye fat of any beast
thou wilt, that this may be made in the shape of it, melt it, and myxe it
perfitely with that medicine, and anoynte ye match or candel weke, whatsoever
thou wilt with it. After kedle it in ye midst of the house, and the me shall
seem in the shape of that beast, whose fat thou did take.

An other match of a candle or a candle weke, that men may appear in the
shape of angels.

Take the eyes of a fyshe, the eyes of Filoe, that is of a breaker of bones,
and break them with thy hands, and make them soft, and put them in a vessel of
glass vii. days After put some oil in them, and lighten it in a green
lamp, and put it before men, which be in the house, they shall see them
selfes in the shape of augels by the light of the fire.

An other match or weke of a candle, making men to appear with black faces.

Take a black lamp, and pour in it oil of the elder or alder tree or quycke
silver, and pour in that oil or quycke silver a part of the blood of them
that be in lettynge blood, and put in that blood oil of the elder or alder
tree (some saith of the bur tree) or quycke silver.

A marvelous lap, in which appears a thing of terrible quantite, having
in the hand a rod and afrayeth a man.

Take a grene frog, stryke of the headde of it upon a grene clothe, make it
wet with ye oil of burtree or elder tree, and put in the weke and lighten it
in the grene lamp, than shalt thou see a black man standing, between whose
hands there shall be a lap and a marvelous thing.

An other weke which when it is kendled, water is poured on it, waxes strong,
and when the oil is put in, it is put out.

Take lyme which water hath not touched and put it with an weight, equal to
it of wax the half of it of the oil of baulm Napta citrina, with equal to
it of brymstone, and make a weke of it, drop down like dew upon the water and
it shall be kendled, and drop down oil upon it, and it shall be put out.

In other weke, which when it is kedled, all things seem white and of silver.

Take a Lyzarde, and cut away the tail of it, and take that which comes out,
for it is like quycke silver. After take a weke and make it wet with oil,
put it in a new lamp and kendle it, and y^ house shall seem bright and white,
or gilted with stluer.

A marvelous operation of a lamp, which if any man shall hold, he cease
not to fart, until he shall leave it.

Take the blood of a snayl, dry it up in a linen cloth, make of it a weke,
and lighten it in a lamp, give it to any man thou wilt, say lighten this, he
shall not cease to fart, until he let it depart, and it is a marvelous
thing.

A weke which when it is lightened, women cease not to dance and be glad and
too play as they ware mad for great joy.

Take the blood of an hare and the blood of a certain fo wl which is called
Solon, is like a turtell dove, and of the blood of the turtell male, equale to
the half of it. Than put in it a weke, and lighten it in the midst of the
house, in which are syngers and wenches, and a marvelous thing shall be
proved.

If thou wilt make that lice may appear running abroad in a mans bed that
he my not sleep, than cast in his bed the weight of one or half uncle of
Alcakengi, and if thou shall take pilos asturis, thereof shall be made a weke,
which when it is lightened, every sick man sees other by the vehemence of
the syckenesse, and mynyshinge or extenuation.

When thou wilt that you seem al inflamed, or set on fire fro thy head unto thy
fete not be hurt.

Take white great malowes or holy hocke, myxe them with the white of eggs,
after anoint thy body with it, and let it be until it be dried up, and after
anoint the with alume, and afterward caste on it small brymstone beat unto
poulder, for the fire is inflamed on it, hurts not, and if thou make upon the
palm of thy hade thou shalt be able to hold y^ fire without hurt.

If thou wilt that a thing be cast in the fire and not burn.

Take one part of glue of fish an egual quantity to it of alume, let it be
perfitely myxed, let vyneger be poured upon it, let whatsoever thing that
wilt be confected with it, cast it in y^ fire, anoint it with this anoyntemet
it shall not be burned.

If thou wilt make a contrary, that is any image or other thing and when it is
put in the water it is kendled, and if thou shalt draw it out, it shall be put
out or quenched.

Take lyme not quenched, and mix it perfitely with a little wax and the oil of
Sesanum, napta, that is white earth and brimstoone, and make of it an image,
when thou shalt put it in water, the fire shall be kendled.

If thou wilt make that when thou openest thy hands upon a lamp, the light of
it is put out, and when thou closest them upon it, it kedled, and it cease not
to do that.

Take a spice, which is called Spuma, after bray it, and after make it with
water of Caphere, and anoynte thy hands with it, after open them in the mouth
of the lamp, the lyghte of it shall be put out, and close the, it shall be kendled
again.

If thou wilt see a thing drowned, or se deep in the wa^r in the night, and
that it shall not be more hyd to the than in the day and read books in a
darcke night.

Anoynte thy face with the blood


