A compendious or short Treatise, gathered out of the chyefe and principal
Authors of Phisycke, containing certain precepts necessary to the
preservation of health, and lunge continuance of the same: very pleasant
and profitable to read. ()

To the right honourable mastie Wylliam Cicyll Esquier, one of the two
principal Secretaries to the king his most excellent majesty Henry Wyngfield
wishes long cotinuaunce of true welfare, and like prosperouse success.
H^uyng without any my desert enjoyed the commodity of your benevolence and
good will, I have often devised, ben desirous ^accomplyshe some thing which I
might exhibit unto you, as a testimony and pledge of my pore earnest zeal
entier affection. And knowing by late proof, that if my power were to declare ye
same by some gift of price, ye wold not well take it: being so sincere and
upright, rather to esteem the good will, then the value. The consideration of
the which thing has moved me at this my present being here, to take in
hand this small and simple treatise, presenting it unto you for a new years
gyfte, that it might openly appear how inwardly I bear you (according to my
bounden duty) my pore heart and service. And albeit that lack of time, and
let of business as it is well known, hath withdrawn from me leisure
requisite to the absolute finyshynge here of. Yet I trust well in your wonted
gentleness that you will both in good part take my simple labour here employed
(until some worcester thyer thing may happen,) and also for lack of power ^accepte
my poor good will, heartily wyshyng that such profit may proceed unto you by
this process, as you may evermore enjoy a healthful mind in a whole and
sound body, being worthy for your excellen^e deserts lunge continuance of
the same.

At London the first of January. An 1551.
Who so will have his days in health long endure,
And without payne or grief to live and fare well.
These precepts let him practise, or faithfully put in ^re,
And of health he may be siker, sickness so expel.
The preface to the gentle Reader.
THe sharpness and quick Ingeni^.
capacity of man wit (which is the best gyfte, greatest treasure, grouted
memoria.
to mankynd:) The memory, trusty, firm, strong in retaining keeping things
committed to her custodi: are not so much necessary or expediente to the
having of a perfect and exact knowledge of the tongues and liberal
faculties (wherein all treasures of science wisdom are comprehended,) as
Juditi^*
is a pure and sincere judgement. Furthermore, to have so incorrupt or upright
judgment, truly to judge esteem every thing to be as it is, is a thing very
hard and difficult: Not only for because of the great variety and dissention
in opinions, but also for the vain and vncerteine confectures which be in many
sciences, as Palmestry, Pyromancie, and Astrology, and other faculties un leful
by the laws o^ God man. Wherefore onles man know such secrete mysteries and hyd
operacions Experientia.
of nature bi experience, he can never come to the knowledge there Longa vi ta
ad scientie cognitionem necessaria
of, the judgment is so amassed, opressed, and overwhelmed with darkness.

Moreover, experience also is oftentimes vncerteine and fallible, both for the
imbecility of our judgment, and also for that our life time is feeble,
frail, and of short continuance.

Wherefore of these premises the noble Physician Hippocrates of most worthy
memory did plainly gather, that no man can come to the perfect and exact
knoweledge of learning in short continuance, so that it is requisite that life
be prolonged, And there is no man so dull, no such lack wit, but that knows
well enough, yt this thing may be easily performed if he use wisdom and
diligent provision in the ordryng thereof, Which thing to be true, not only
experience, but also the diligent and expert cure of phisycke is a sure witness
and testimony. For it is daily scene, that feeble and weak bo^ies by this
providence and moderacion in living, live as lunge as those which be valiant,
lusty, and strong. To the confirmacio where of, Plato and Aristotle bear me
witness, that a man of excellent lernyng and wisdom named He ^odicus, which
was in all his life as feeble and syckely as any man living at that time, by
such providence and order in diet, to have iyued until he was an hundred
years old. I let pass many other, of whom Plutarche makes mention, which
although they were very feeble and weak, yet they by observing these
precepts of living, and using great diligence to preserve the same, have lived
long time without any grievous or painful syckenes. Which things considered
and kept in remembrance, causes many not a little to marvel what should be
the cause of so sudden a change alteration in our bodies at this time fro
their nature which have ben before us. For now adays if a man live to fyfty
or. lx. year, it is thought a great age. And the most part of men ere this
time even in their flourishing youth are attached with fearful death which
shakes of their fresh colour, their beauty, and their strength. And yet the
case is plain, that mans life might continue as lunge now as it hath done
before time, if we in leading forth thereof would use such diligence and
circuspectio as did our progenitors. Which thing I speak not as any
derogatio unto gods honour, as who say, that we can appoint or constitute any
time, excepting always ye power of God which is wonderful also merciful above
mans reason or counsel, preserving, or striking, who, when, or where it shall like
his divine power. For oftentimes as holy scripture doth record, horrible syn
hath ben ye cause of short life. And as it Gen. xvi.
is writ ye first book of Moses in ye first age, one ma lived as long as. v.
or. vi. do now, but shortly after, like as men, so did sin increase on the
earth. Wherefore the Lord said: my spirit shall not always strive in ma
because he is flesh, and his days shall be a. C.. xx. years, but none at all,
or very few doth approach ne'er unto this age: And truly to speak as I think
our imtemperance, continual bankettyng, and dayely ingurgitacions of meates
and drinks, is great occasion of short life now adays. The spirit of
glotonie so triumphing among us in his glorious chariot called welfare,
driuynge all smelfeastes and bealye guts as his prisoners before him into the
dungeon of surfeit, where they be tormented with sundry painful diseases,
driven, drawn, and finally drowned. Such miserable nature remains in some
me, that to live idel^y and voluptuously, they will chose rather to be sick
then to be whole: rather to have payne then pleasure, rather to dye then to
live. For this is not a rare thing, but in daily experience, that by such
revel, gourmandise, and daily surfetyng, many cruelly are put to death,
oftentimes in floryshynge youth, in the most pleasant time of their life.
Wherefore the saying of the wise man Salomon is truly on them verified, mo dye
saith he by surfeit and inteperance, then doth by battle and outward
bostilitie. For the reformation whereof, and to restrain their prompt
disposition from such beastly nature, and wanto appetire: I have gathered of
the most principal writers of physic, this compendious extract, wherein are
contained certain obseruacions and precepts very necessary and profitable to
the prologing of life: which being well observed, put in due execution, and
discretelye ordered, doth conserve and keep our life lunge in health, without
the whythe all pleasures be painful, riches unprofitable, yet few consider
this (the more pity it is) but this omittyng, I have proceeded in this place
with over far circumstance, and also with somewhat to much liberty of
words, more then in a preface is requisite, for that it grieves me that men's
minds be taken prisoners, and subdued to glotonie and intemperance. And now
will I come to my matter purposed and first enterprise begone (which except I
be much deceived) shall m^nister to the diligent readers, both commodity, and
profit. ()

The heat in our bodies which is called vital, because as lunge as it endures
the body is living and quick, and all the powers thereof, which be three in
number: natural, vital, animal, do perform their operacions, is noryshed
and sed with moystnes, by the superfluous increase or diminution whereof, over
or under his natural assignment, the life runs on hasard, the body is
dissoluid, death immediately follows, which many men have in extreme hate, and
most fearfully abhor.

The first Chapter.
THat same quick and lively power in our bodies which is called life,
supported by natural heat and moisture, lives and dwells in the body,
which two so together are conglutinate or knyt, that the one can not be
seperate fro the other, the humidity or moystnes is a very noryce to this
natural heat, which by power digestiue for her sustentacion receives of her
noryce such inyce as is coformable to her appetite. These two qualities be the
material causes of our living. For a more plain declaration whereof, I will
use a familiar example daily represented before our eyes. As the lyghte and
bryghtenesse of the lamp comes of the oil and the weke, semblably this
vital power comenly called life, proceeds of natural heate moisture: and when
the oil is consumed and wasted, the light of the lamp is extinguyshed and
quenched: also when there is to much excess or abundance thereof being
wateryshe or corrupt, the light is in danger to be drowned, Likewise it fares
by the increase and diminucio of humidity in our bodies. For if moisture be
wanting or superfluous, if it be more or less then is convenient to the
natural proporcio and temperature of the body: it doth shortly debilitate,
make feeble and weak natural heate, which so weakened in short continuance is
clean extinct and so the body is dissolved, and life destroyed.

Moriedi necessitas obduas causas
Ob humoris resolutionem cuinullis modis resisti potest. Ob humoris
p^trefactiout de qua quomodo vitari potest, est nobis hoc loco explicandum.
If for lack of moystnes natural heate be destroyed, the body dies by
resolution or consumpcion. If the natural heate be drowned by superfluouse
moisture, or else by moisture viciate and unnatural, the body dies by
suffocacion, putrefaction, or corruption. This suffocacion comes unto the
body, when any of the four humours (which every man is composed and made of)
doth exceade their proportion that nature hath limited, or else when any of
them be putrified and rotten, specially when there is either great abundance
of flewme in the body, or else when it doth approach to putrefaction or
rottennes, whereof is the fever quotidiane engendered: wherefore pituita is so
called (as some men think) quia petit vitam.

This necessary therefore and coueniente form or discipline of living, which to
the prolongation of man life, is requisite and profitable, doth as well
instruct us how to be vigilant and circuspect, least natural moisture in our
bobodies be not lightly consumed and wasted, as also to avoid the danger of
death, which comes by putrefaction of humours. And that every man may wyselye
and discretelye order these precepts, to the prolongation of his life, with
long continuance of health: it is expedient and necessary that every man
know the natural habit and disposition of his own body. For if the body be
hot and dry, and the conduits thereof open, and his humours subtle or
thin: then he must use those things which do resist consumption or wasting,
for because his body lacking natural moisture is lightly thereunto disposed.
And to satisfy the desire of such, which per adventure by these general words
hot and dry, do not yet perceive what I mean thereby, here for the plain
understanding thereof, it shall be declared by sensible tokens Such as have
bodies hot dry, their pore^, which be little holes in the skyn, dispersed
thorough out all the body be great and open, wherefore the skyn in feeling is
rough, the vulgar people ignorant of letters do cal such as be of that
disposition or natural habit, goose skynned. Also their veins be so little
that by the outward seses they can not well be perceived. And a contrary
disposition hath contrary totokens, as a smooth or soft skin, large and ample
veins, and such as be of this constitution must use such things which
specially do resist putrefaction and corrupcion of ye humours which shall be
declared hereafter. But such persons which by aptitude of their nature be given
only to studious meditation, which with vigilant and constant study abandon al
pleasures, and give them selves wholely to the exercise of the wit: These most
of all other have need to be provident, wise, and circuspecte in these things,
for as much as their bodies be disposed as well to consuption and wasting of
humidity, as to putrefaction by to much abundance and excess of humours. To
the evident proof whereof it is to be noted that their brain always declines
to drynes and horns by reason of the continual motion of the wyrte which is
always occupied, and the fantasy always conceiving things, and committynge
them to memory, and also because the bodies of these men M. fici^. lib. i de
stud* ca* tu^nd. ca* tercio*
be always in rest and idleness, for lack of competent exercise they be
full of flewme melancholy. Wherefore the first cause doth threten consumpcion
of humidity, the later putrefactio of humours: therefore they must use things
which resist the one as well as the other, of the which hereafter in place
convenient shall be spoken abundantly.

Howe it is necessary to the prolongation of life to have equal and just
portion of natural heate and moisture called radical. For if inequality be
thereof, the body shortly dies.

The second chapter.
IN ministringe of oil to a lamp, every man is circumspect: for they perceive
well if they put in to much at one time, they drown the lyghte, or else if by
negligence they forget to putce any oil in, for lack of humidity the light
is extingwyshed goth forth. By example whereof we may learn discretelye to
temper heate and moisture in our bodies, by virtue and power of the which,
life time may de prolonged.

First therefore because this life is enclosed in a mortal body, a vessel
frail, bryckle, and of short cotinuaunce, we may not refuse and caste away
all regard or respect thereof, or neglect our duties in attending of it, for
as much as it coteineth in it precious treasures. but with vigilat custody
entreat and order it, not in much cherysheyng or pamperyng of it, not
suffering it to be subdued to all joys, pleasures, delicacy, and
voluptuousenes. For by such belie chere all the powers are weakened, the
goodly beauty of the visage, and shape of mankynde, also strength of the
body decays and vanishes away in short time. Wherefore we must accustume
our self to a moderacion in diet which may comfort nature, and not fill
the belie. It is written that Galene the prince of all Physicians, which in
his time was had in wonderful reverence, did never in all his Life eat so
much, but that he left with a great appetite and desire to eat more. Neither
did he use to eat by and by after he had risen, which we call breakefastes,
that be given to assuage the guawyng and complaints of a yonge stomach (and
yet he lived Celius auti-lecti lib. xvi,
as Celius writes. xx. years, or as some other affirm a hundred and forty,)
albeit breakefastes to be necessary in this Realm, a certain worshipful and
well learned man deserving notable remebrauce, hath proved by good reason, for
as much as choler being fervent in the stomach sedeth up fumosities unto the
head, and causes headache, or sometime becomes adust, whereby happens
perilous syckenes if the heate enclosed in the stomach have not convenient
matter to work on Wherefore they be necessary in this Realm, specially to
yonge men or choleric. But to return to our purpose, it is to be remembered
that the lamp burns long, the light whereof is tempered according to the
oil, so that it do not hastelye, but by little and little burn and waste up the
same.

Likewise we in all our life time, specially in youth, must be advertised
that this heat naturally graffed in us, be not superfluous or abundant, then
very like shortly to consume all humiditye called radical, which oftentimes
is great occasion of short life.

Furthermore by our outward senses we perceive the lamp not to burn clearly
if the oil be not pure and clear but thycke, turbulent and full of dregs.
For shortly bubbels which rise on the dregs drown and extinct the light.
But we in the time of our nativity have received of nature oil, I mean
moisture radical, pure, aerie. Wherefore that which is daily engendered in our
body in the place of that which is consumed by heate, wherwyth this heate is
fed and noryshed, ought not only to be of just and equal portion and
quantity to that which was before, but also in all conditions like unto it,
and that it may be so conformable unto it, it must not only be pure and
aerie, but also not having any part of fece or dregs.) Which if you will
escape and avoid, you must beware of cruditie which is a vicious concoction of
things received, they not being wholly or perfectly alterid. Remedies
convenient fit therefore shall be expressed in the chapter following.

Also much rest, idleness, or slug gyshenes, wherefore we must not neglect
competente exercise, and that in due and coueniente time, which surely is a
thing so necessary to the preservation of health, that without it no man may
long be without syckenesse, which is affirmed bi Cornelius Celsus saying Corn.
Celsus. lib. x.
that sluggyshnes dulls the body, labour doth strength it: the first
brings the incomodties of age shortly, the last makes a ma lunge time
lusty, and most of all to absteyne frome such meates which engender dregs,
making ill juice, and norishyng, and such as engender melancholy, as beef
very old, flesh or fyshe very salt, chese hard old, wine thick and black,
gose, duck swanue, also fruits not ripe much used. There be also many mo like
kinds of meates which I purposely pas oue^, forasmuch as I desire to be in
this treatise copedious. But he that will know more abundantly of these such
other, let him read the book of Galene, where he entreats of the nature and
operacions of meates, and he shall be therein fully satisfied.

What things diminy she or consume natural moisture, and what super fluoufly
increas^ the same. Also that good digestion is very necessary to the
prolongation of life.

The third chapter.
THese things following in short continuance exhaus^e and dri up natural
moisture Great and abundante esfusion of blood, either by fighting or by other
chance of fortune, violent l^ws^es of the belie being long soluble.
Immoderate sweating the p^res conduits of the body ^o^uch opened. Overmuch
^amili^ acquaintance with ^s, of wanton delight the gods patrones, great
thyrst or honger, ^mmoderat watch, overmuch use of thiges hot dry. Also
affects passions of the myud, as ire wrath, also sorrow, heuines, daily lan
guishyng in torments incurable, then the which there is nothing more enemy
to life, for it cosumeth both natural heate, moisture of the body, also it doth
extenuate or make the body lean, dulls the wit, darkens spirits,
lets the use and judgement of reason, and oppresses memory. Which things
be ratified by the authority and witness of Salomo Sorrow says he, dries up
the Prou. xv.
bones. For like as the mouth in the garment, and the worm in the tree, so
doth heaviness annoy the herce of manne.

Things contrary to these which went before, make moisture unnatural and
superfluous to redound in the body: as often drun kennes, which doth both
exhaust heate, and makes abundance of evil moisture, and also causes
cruditie. For when the meat is not well concocte or boiled in the stomach,
then there is tomuche evil and corrupt juice where by natural heate is
drowned, oppressed, and overwhelmed. Foresene therefore that good digestion is
so necessary to the prolongation of life, let us if affectionately we covet the
preservation thereof with all our endeavour and ^udye use diligence and
circumspection, that we run not into this cruditie. But considering that it
is great occasion both of consumption of humidity, and also of suffocation of
heat diligently to avoid it in vsynge a moderation both in meat and drink.

For over much ingurgitacion of meates and drynkes, or the vicious quality
thereof, or the receiving of them out of order, greedy and hasty fedynge without
mastication or good chewing, or much and very oft drinking at meals or
between meals be the chief causes of this affect or dissease. Let us
therefore give good attendance that the meat be not hard to concoc^, or that
it be not over sweet, as bankettynge dyshes or ^lles that they be not of
diverse qualities, which do specially corrupt digest^o. Nature teaches us
things necessary which be but few and soon prepared, folishnes has
invented things superfluous which are without number hard to comby. If thou
give necessaries unto nature, she is delighted and made strong as with things
fi^te for her appetite. But if thou give her superfluous, she is weakened and
afflicted as with gobbets not agreing unto her dyete.

Last of al let us beware of sleep at after nonnes, of long watching and
sitting up of nyghtes, which al with many other mo do greatly let digestion.
When I speak of digestio, I do not mean that only which is in the stomach,
but the second also which is in the liver, and the third in the veins, and
the fourth or last which is finished in al the members which, surely to their
perfeccion have need of good space and continuance which in nyne hours
space, as some me think is brought to pas. And if the least of the al be in
any wise let or troubled, noryshment is not dueli ministered. Moreover as it
is necessary to the prolongation of life to help digestion and make it perfect:
So likewise ^urgynge of exc^emetes is as necessary. Also to keep the skin
clean from any filth, and those places would be oft cleansed, out of the
which filthines comes from the inward parts, as the head, the ears, the
nosethi^les, the eyes, ye armeholes and ye other secret places yt nature
hydeth, honesty scase wold have named. The. iii. thing which doth make strong
lus^y the lively and quick power of ye body is exercise and labour, which thing
to be no cessarye is known by this, that those original things corruptible,
whereof all living creatures are composed and made, be ever more in continual
motion as the air, the fire, and the water.

But in this place it seems expediente, saying I did promise the same before,
to declare some remedies against this cruditie where with many be affected and
troubeled, and therewyth to make a perfect conclusion of this chapter. Galene
and all other do agree in this case, that pepper bruised and eaten with meat is
very expediente. And where there is much wynd in the stomach, then to eat
all times of the day the medicine made of three kinds of pepper* time, anise
seed, and honey clarified, which is called diatrion piperi on, and if flewme be
abundant, then oximel, that is to say, honey and water soden together with
the roots and seeds of fen^l and persley, and a quantity of vinegre put
thereto in the boylyng is very commendable. The rest are fully handled and set
forth of Galene in his books de Cacoclymia.

By what tokens one may know whether the blood in bys body b^ good or ^o if it
be vi^ate or ill, how to rectify it: For nothing is more necessary to the
producing of life, then good blood,

The fourth Chapter
THe most famous and expert Physicians, among all other precepts which
specially apperteme to the prolongation of man life do advise and counsel
us to eat such meat as makes good juice, and such we cal fine and wholesome
meates which engender good norishment, yt is to wit good laudable blud, which
causes above all things the life log to continue in health. And good blood is
known by this, it is not cold, not dry, not dark ^urbulet, nor of ye colour
of a beasts liver, but it is hot, moist cler^. Yet it is not of feruet burning
hot^s as is fire, nor yet of thyn humidity or moisture as is water. For if ye
blood approach nygh to ye nature condition of fire, it makes natural heate
overmuch to surmout in the body, by the superfluous increase whereof humour
radical is lightly consumed. And if ye blud aproch ne^er to ye nature of water,
it doth extenuat, abate, diminyshe natural heate, and with overmuch thynne and
wa^ry moisture doth drown and opresse it. Wherefore such evil blood makes both
heat and moisture to exceade their boudes and transcend their limits appointed
by nature, whereby life is like to fall in ruin. And verily if natural
moisture be mingled with wa^ry and thyn blood, it soon receives putrefaction,
which is oft cause occasion of fevers agues called putrid. And for this cause
it is not holesom to eat fruit or herbs cold, for they much abundantly eaten
do shortly fill ye veins with juice crude raw, which soon will receive
putrefactio. Of these premises it follows therefore yt the blud in our bodies
be nether very hot like fire, neither very thin moyste like water, but in
keeping ye golden mean between both.

Hitherto ye quality of good blood is declared, and now like wise the
substance thereof shall be sufficiently expressed. Good blood is neither over
thycke nor over thynne, But as in his quality, semblably in his substance
doth keep and retain the mean, and in all conditions is correspondet to the
quality of the air.

If the substance of the blood be thin, it ngendreth humidity, ill,
vncerteine, and not lunge continuing, and makes the spirits apt to be
dissolved and consumed whereby nature is mortified.

Spiritus,
Naturalis in hepate, Uitalis in corde, Animalis in cerebro,
If it be over thycke, it doth debilitate and obfuscate the wit, stops the
pores, and gives occasion of suffocation of the life, and the spirits which
by thycke blood be condensat and made tucbulent because of their thyckenes be
nothing fytte or convenient for life, for they put out and suffocate natural
heate, upon the which the f^ndacion of life is builded. Like as a great thick
smoke doth over whelm the flame of the fire, and will not suffer it to burn
out clearly. I let pas that it is so dark that it makes mans life heavy, sad,
and full of pensiveness, such as for the most part those that are of a
melancholic constitution be.

Good and pure blood is as necessary to the noryshing of the life, as good
oils be for a lamp. Wherefore such meates must be pycked out and chosen,
which engender pure and good blood. Rayses in a place showing us how to reteyne
and keep styll lunge time the freshness of youth, keep back crooked, feeble and
withered age, advertises us to use such meates as engender good blood, which
be precordiall confortatiues of the heart, also other like which wold be known
of such as write of the nature operation of meates, for this short treatise
can not receive them.

Howe that he which desires the course of his life lunge to continue must
have diligent respect or regard to the election of his mansion or dwelling
place.

The fyft Chapter.
THe place where a man purposes to dwell is diligently to be considered of the
which desire to live long in health, for as much as the air which is
according to the diversity of places good or evil, is special cause of long
life or short. Wherefore of all other things air is chiefly to be observed,
because it doth both enclose us, and also enter into our bodies, specially the
most noble member the heart. For this cause we must chose a dwelling place
where the air is pure and clear, and fly far from those places where the
air is evil, stynking, and corrupt, and corruption of the air is either
impured unto influences of sundry stars, or else to great standing waters
which never be refreshed, or else to carrion lying lunge above the ground, or
else to a great multitude of people in small rome living vnclenly or
sluttishely. Marcilius Ficinus remembers Libr. ^. cap. vii.
two things which most of all are to be observed in election of places.
Never think (saith he) yt you can live lunge in those places where either
fruit can not be kept lunge from rottennes and corrupcion, or else where men,
as you may see, be but of short time and continuance of life. And these
places be best which be high, where the air is subtle and pure, not moist,
nor cold. Lowe places in valeyes, or among fens and maryshe grounds be
worse.

The same author says in the place before alleged that it is unwholesome to
use dungynge of the ground, as ploughmen be accustomed to do, to the^tent the
ground may be more batryll and fertile, and also unwholesome for the
inhabitaunies to make standing waters in pastures for beasts to drink of. For
in such places all things be soon corrupted, wherefore saith he, I can not
allow or approve their judgment, which did find fault with Hesiode the
Hesiodus (...). 2. ^gou ca^ eme^on.
greek poet, for that he in his bokede re rustica, did purposelye pass over
these two things before remembered, for he very wisely did more regard the
holesomnes of the air, then the rankenes of the ground.

But to return to the election of places most convenient for habitacio. High
places on mounteines and hills be best, which have their situation against
the east or the, north, and it is to be kept in remembrance (as some men
think) necessary that all the doors and wyndowes of the house be situate
either against the east or the north. For this cause (as I think) the winds
that come from thence be more laudable then the other two* be: In bringing
wholesome air, and in prolongynge of life by expulsyng of evil vapours. But
if we be of necessity compelled to dwell in those places which be lowe,
watery, and vnclenly, Marcilius doth advertise us to use hot and sweet fragrant
sauoures, and to temper our meates with saunders, cinamome, and safron, also to
use moderate and competent exercise of the body, and not to suffer extreme
cold, but oft sitting in such whether by a fire side.

How wyue is necessary to the prolon gation of life by reason it helps
dige^ion, and conforteth natur al heate, also the incommodities which proceed
of dronkennes.

The syxte Chapter.
PLato the wisest of all philophers doth affirm yt wine moderatelye drunk
norysheth and conforteth as well the body as the spirits of manne, and
therefore god did ordeine it for makind as a necessari remedy against the
incomodities of age, that thereby they should seem to return unto youth forget
heuines, for by his qualities which be heate moisture, nature is chieflye
conserved. Also Galene saith that wine is of good norishmet for the body, and
doth preserve health, that there is no other kinds of meat or drink that doth
so much coforte natural heate, so helps digestion. The profit that comes by
moderate drinking of wine is that it doth clarify the thick and troublesome
blood, it doth cleanse open the passages and pores of the body, and specially
the veins it doth take away stopping of the liver, it doth expel fro the
heart dark fumositie which doth ingeder heaviness so row, it causes a man to
forget all care, makes him merry joyful. Wherefore it is wholesome for all ages,
for all times, and al regions so that it be taken moderately and as he yt
drynketh it hath ben accustumed to it, if he drink no more then his nature may
well sustain bear. Albeit concerning ages, touching the regimente of wine,
A^icene says: to give children wine to drink, is as one would lay fire to
fire made of dry wood, but he saith that one may give an old man as much wine
to drink as he can bear without detrimet or hurt. Old folks are cold, and
wine heats, their spirits are heavy, and wine makes them light and clear,
and comenly old folks sleep ill, but wine makes Rayses li bro. iii, al
mansoris
them to sleep well. Also Rayses says: wine universally doth comfort the
stomach and the liver, and it causes the meates to pass down easily, it
doth quycken the corporal might and wit. But over much ingurgitacion of wine,
wine drunk superfluouse doth hurt the liver, the brain, and the senewes, it
doth ingeder cramps, palseies, apaplexies, oftentimes daily experience
teaches, sudden death. Drunkenness is engendered of a gross and thycke fume,
which ascending up to the brain, doth there cover the places where reason and
memory lies, no otherwise then the clouds do cover the light of the sun,
where by all the senses as well internal as external be so troubled that they
can not execute their offices and duties appointed of nature, the
inconveniences which come by drunkenes be these that follow.

The first is corruption of the livers complexion, for it resolves the heate
thereof, whereby the liver loses his natural generation of blood, in place of
blud ingedreth a watrishnes causes ye dropsye.

The second is corruption of the brains coplection. It doth dispose a hot
brain to a woodnes fransie, the cold to the falling evil, forgetfulness and
palsy. The. iii. is weakness of senewes and disseases thereof as the cramp,
palseis, gout, dropsies. Which things well considered and kept in
remembrance should (except I be much deceived) refrain something their prompt
disposition from such wanton appetites. But truly there is no man knowing the
duties belonging to an honest he^t but will sorowfully bewail, piteously lament
the folyshe perversity of many, which by their negliget dissolute living
wylfully commit their by dies to be tormented with grievous and painful
sickenesses, the dolor whereof, if by counsel practise of physycke at the
first brunt be not apeased pacified, for which the art of phisycke is rated,
accused, put in blame. And thus the patients transpose and lay away the fault
which in them self is culpable: Unto the imbecility or feblenes of the art.
But if effectual report were made unto such by the informatio of honest
approved physicians how such disseases by their negligence procured can not
easily be expel'ed onles the original occasions thereof be something diminished,
so by aduisemente good order in diet preceding to prevent ye special causes
thereof: then not only of their maladies they should be ye sooner cured, but
also physicians should avoid ye reprocheful rebukes ^uyl reports which of
lunge time they have sustained, consequently the noble science of Phisycke
should be eftsoon restored to her pristinat honour dignity. And verelye that
part of physycke surmounts all the other, Diatetici
which do the tract and deuyse necessary and convenient form of living
which we shulde diligently and circumspectly observe in time of our health
and welfare, if affectionately we covet the preservation long cotinuaunce
thereof.

A diet prescribed for old men, with certain medicines against the
incommodities of age.

The seventh Chapter.
THey which are past the daugerous passage of youth, now approach to old
age, which is about fifty year, what time both natural heate and strength
begin to decay, must diligently have respect and regard to.ii. of the seven
planets: Uenus and Saturnus. The first doth signify storyshyng youth, the
later withered and teble age. They therefore which ve under Saturne, as old
men, must use circumspection that they be not entangled with the blandime^es of
Uenus, of wanton appetites chief patroness. Also they must beware that they
suffer not extreme cold, nor use not to be out of their houses in the air
of the night time, which things are known to bring damage to that age. Also
they must use such meats as engender good and pure blood, as the yolks of rier
eggs new laid. Also wine fragrant and something sweet, which ingenderith
good spirits. They must not use much honger or thyrst, and specially avoid
much watching of the nyghtes. Remedies for the provocation of sleep shall be
remembered in the next Chapter.

Exercise of the body wold not be much used in age, also heauynes and sorrow
of the mind wold be above all things expelled. For the body can not seem
yonge and lusty, onles the mind bequiet, merry and pleasant. If old men be
very cold, let them lay this fomente or applicacion to their stomachs
which is of wonderful efficacy and power in prolonging life. R. all the
inward part of a hot new baked loaf sieped a little space in good
maluissye, and then rolled in poulder of mintes, and so laid to the stomach
or holden to the nose, is to old men wonderful profitable, for as Diogenes
Laertius writes: By virtue of this fomente did the renowned and famous
philosopher Democritus (belong sickness at deaths door) keep and retain the
lively spirits within his body, and lived a good space after.

Furthermore lyghte frications and baynes be very good and necessari for aged
men. Also the juice of good licorice is supposed of many to increase natural
heate and moisture. Almond milk, sugar, and raysynes would be also used. Rasis
doth greatly commend mirabolanes called kebuly, condite in India, and doth
command old men against the incomodities of age dayely to eat of them.

Remedies for old men, or any other that can not sleep.

The eight Chapter,
Lack of sleep comes of great drives of ye brayn, which makes short ye
course of life, and nothing so much ecreseth melacholy, so that men hereby be
oftentimes disposed to frensies and madness the vest remedies to resyste this
evil be these that follow. After supper to eat raw lets with a little bread,
to drink after, a little good and pure wine. For lets eaten in the evening,
as Diascorides records, provokes sleep marvelously. Wherefore Galene the
most noble phisicion, for this intent and purpose was accustumed to have his
poryge made with lets.

Moreover vehement provocations shall be to take a confectio at night made on
this wise. ^.ii. vnces of white poppy seed and.i. uncle of lets seed, half
a drame of safron.vi. vnces of white sugar, and sethe all together in the
sirupe of poppy, and eat of this confection.ii. drames at one time and also
by itself a little of the syrupe of popie. For the same purpose it is good to
anoint the forehead and temples with oil of violets, with the oil of the
herb called nymphea, in englyshe called a water rose, and with oil of
almondes, and to hold at their nose a little vynegre or rose water, Also it is
good to beset the bed and straw the chamber with cold herbs as endiue,
purslane mallowes, camomile, vinetree leaves, and such other. Marcilius
Ficinus approves oft whashyng of the head with water wherein poppy, lets,
purslan, malowes, roses, camomile, the leaves of wyllowes and vine trees be
sodden, of each a like quantity also with this water not only to wash the
head, but also the arms, legs, and al the body.

And here I have purposely left out many other more vehement provocations
which be not used but when great need doth require and they be only used when
phisicious caste their patients into sleep to the entente to cut them
without pain or grief. They be called of the Grecianes Narcotica, and
Anodoyna, of the Latines Stupefaciencia, indolorifica, or molestia vacatia. And
here I conclude to speak of remedies against immoderate watching, whereby the
incommodities of age may be something mitigate, also life time prolonged.

Of the golden drink Auxum potabile, and something of the virtue thereof.

The nynth Chapter.
THere is no man having the fre use of reason that will deny man life
chiefly to be conserved by the strength and power of that which is
extracted as well forth of the virtue o^ herbs as other metalles called the
quint essence, Foreseing that not only the opinions of sage and wise
Philosophers have in this thing concluded, but also we may see the experience
of it in our own bodies: For forth of the meates being gross of substance
which we receive daily to the sustentation of nature, is extract by power
digestiue the quinte essence of those same meates where doyth nature is fed
and noryshed, that which is gross and evil being seperate away, by power
e^pu^siue, as gobbettes not agreynge to her dyer. Wherefore she abhorring them,
desires to have them expelled by sundry kinds of excrementes: but now to my
purpose.

Of al other that quint eisece is the best and most precious, which is
extract forth of the precious metal gold, for it of al other is most
temperate, not object to corruption, and as Astronomers aflirme, for the goodly
and shynyng colour and also for his temperature it is resembled to two of the
most worthy plants having supremitie over the rest: that is to wit Sol,
and Jupiter. Of this is made a golden drink called aurnm potabile, which is of
great strength virtue in producinge of our life. Of this aurum potabile is a
book entitled Celu philosophicu, unto the which book for the more ample and
plain declaration hereof, I remitte the studious reader, for this little
treatise can not receive it.

Of the opinio of the which say mans life by degrees of seven years to be in
danger of death or misfortune.

The tenth Chapter.
FOr as much as shortness of time and business otherwise takes from me labour
and study requisite to the exact and perfect finyshyng of this my purpose and
enterprise begone, whereby I am constrained to leave many things unspoken
concerning certain precepts of Astronomy, by the healpe whereof Astronomers
promise preservation of health and cotinuance of the same, which things omitted
I purpose only to remember their opinion which affirm ourelyfe evermore at
seven years end to be in danger of death or misfortune, which years the
Astronomers call Auuos c^nactericos, they are called also An ^ sca^ar^s
^tadatii or dectetorii, which they prove to be by this reason: Foreseing that
all the Plants do reign by order of successio and course. Every hour of
the day semblably they raygne in order, every day in the week, also every
planet in order gives influence and constellation for the space of a month to
the child conceived in the womb, and brought forth vi generation. Whereby
wise Astrologers casting the day and hour of the chyldes nativity, do indge
his natural inclination, and to what things he is of nature aptly disposed.
And consequently they say that every planet in order for a years space
gives influence and constellation unto mans life. For a more evident
declaration whereof it is to be noted that Saturne the highest planet in the
first month after the child is conceived, has supremitie and chief rule
over the child lying in the womb, not having perfect shape of manne or
woman, and so by dissention unto the loweste. In the seueth month, Luna hath
rule and governance, and so after the child is borne and brought forth by
ascention again (...) first year of the childes age, the Moon hath
sovereignty and gives her influence. In the second Mercuri, in the third,
Uenus, in the fourth Sol, in the fifte Mars, in the syxt Jupiter, in the
seventh Saturne, so in order returning again, that such course there is in
all mans life which causes in our bodies every seven year a great
alteration and change.

Wherefore every seven year is thought dangerous and ieoperdous for the
causes before mentioned.

For this cause by ye aduertisemet of ancient writers at every seven years
end we shulde consult with phisicions, wise and well learned, to know how to
escape the danger then imminent. For by certain remedies Ptolomeus affirms
that the menaces and threatenings of the plants may be repressed. Also he
affirms that mans life may be prolonged by virtue and power of certain
Images made of precious stones or other metal, if they be made at time
oportunate and convenient, according to the raygne of the plants, as
Philost^atus tells of a manne named Appolonius, which by the virtue of seven
rings which he made, geuyng every one of them a name according to the names
of the plants, and using daily to put the rings on his fingers as the
plants raygned in the days of the week: ly^ed an hundred years reteinyng
styll the young and goodly beauty of the visage, the lively power and quick
vigour of the mind, and strength of the body. Albeit I let pas to write of
such astrological Images, for because such witchcraft and sorcerye is
superstitious and deuyllishe, unlawful by the laws of god and man. Wherefore
all trust and confidence taken from such detestable practise, these medicines
only may be lawefully used to drive away the in commodities of age, which on
the earth God has created for man necessity.

A confutation of the exoniouse opinion of certain philosophers which thought
phisycke to be of such efficacy and power to make the body immortal. with the
causes of bodily death, and the necessity thereof.

The eleventh Chapter.
THere were in time paste certain philosophers, which supposed that by such
craft and other like as is before hearted, the body of ma might be made
immortal. Which opinion to be folyshe, perverse, and erronions it may soon
appear to al them which will either follow daily experience or natural
reason, to leave of that I should first have named, and that is the most true
and substantial reason: verelye the determinate sentence of almighty god.
Albeit not only philosophers, but also phisicions by overmuch affiance and
trust had in their science supposed that this thing might be brought to pass
against whose presumption arrogance the noble phisicion Auicene, the chief of
the Arabians, in form following replies, saying: The science of phisytke doth
not make a manim mortal, nor doth not defend surely out bodies from outward
hurtful things, no nor can not assure every man to life, to the last term
and day of his life. But of two things it makes us sure: that is from
putrefaction and corruption and also defends that natural moisture be not
lightly dissolved or consumed. Wherefore that cruel Lady of destiny named
A^ropos whom we call comenlye death assails and pursues our bodies to
destroy and kill them by two sundry manner of ways. Whereof the first is
called resolution or consumption of natural moisture which in continuance and
precesse of time must of necessity be consumed and wasted, and can by no
phisycke be avoided.

And all the precepts which here be gathered together if they be discretelye
used, and put in due execution, serve specially for this purpose, that it be
not lightly, as in floryshyng youth or child age consumed or wasted, but be
deferred to old age as lunge as nature will permit and suffer.

The latter cause by the which death assails the body is called
putrefaction or corruption of natural humidity, which may be easily
avoided if man be circumspect in using the counsels before written, and to
keep the body in safety and health. From the danger hereof doth belong the
diligent consideration and right use of those things which be called in
physic not natural, which be six in number. Air, meat and drink, sleep
and watch, moving and rest, emptines and repletion, and affects of the
mind. Of the use whereof is some thing spoken in master Eliots Castle, and
there fore here omitted.

But now to return to this necessity of our dying, to the which by force and
constraynt we are driven, and comes by this reason. Natural heate in our
bodies by continuance and process of time is a necessatie cause of her own
de struction. For if it shulde always continue in our bodies, then should we
live, but the thing is contrary, for at the length it doth consume and wast
her own matter whereof she is made, that is natural moisture. For a more
evident and plain declaration whereof, it is to be considered that like as
the light of the lamp doth by continuance of time consume the oil which is
cause of the light, and so is at length extingwyshed: Likewise it fares by
natural heate in our bodies, and the more it approaches to age, the more it
becomes drier, whereby heat is diminished, which diminution of natural heat is
caused of two things, the one is overmuch drynes in al the mebers, the other
is lack of moisture, which of necessity, immediately after causes death to
come, and the body to be dissolved. This I think sufficient to the confutacion
of the opinion before remembered. One thing I had almost forgotten, which
although it be but a feigning of the poets, yet it is necessary to the
amplifiyng of our purpose, and doth contain in it things delectable, worthy
knowledge.

The poets fain there to be. iii. fatal Ladies, or Ladies of destiny in
whose will it stands to prolong and shorten mans life, and they be called of
the Latines Parce, because as I suppose they favour no manne. The first named
Clotho, is feigned to hold a rock or distafe in her hand. The second named
Lachesis to pluck forth the thread, and the third called Athrop^s, to
pluck asunder and break the same, whereby they understand that the first of
these Ladies has power of our life at the beginning of it, and the second
lady to stretch forth and draw along man life, the third lady at her
pleasure, and when she will to shorten it, so as it run not his full course.

An Epiloge or brief rehearsal of the pr^misses.
This is sufficient for the declaration of those things which be necessary
and expediente to be known to the preservation of the health, and lunge
continuance of the same, which specialye doth consyst in reducing natural
heate and moisture to an equal and just temperature in making digestion good
and perfect, in rectifieng of blood viciate or corrupt, in consideration to be
had concerning, a mansion or dwelling place, in ordinary diet to be
observed, in preparing necessary remedies against inordinate watching finallye
in the power and strength of that which being extract out of herbs and other
metalles is called a quine essence, which being studiousely read, and put in
due execution, I trust shall be to the readers, both commodious and profitable:
o^ whom I pray ^hat my small and simple ^abo^es hece^ bestowed at vacant time
from other lets and business, may be favourably accepted, and hereafter when I
shall perceive where ^her my little power, or poor ^beuoure may better
accomplish the thing for their commodity, there shall no labour let me from
doyng of it. Thus fare ye well gentle Readers.

FINIS.
Uiue, vale Lector, si quid scis rectius istis Candidus imperti, si non scis
viere gratus.
Imprinted at London by Robert Stough ten, dwelling within Ludgate at the
sign of the Bishoppes Myter.


