Certain Secrete wonders of Nature, containing a descriptio of sundry strange
things, seming monstrous in our eyes and judgment, because we are not privy
to the reasons of them.

Gathered out of diverse learned authors as well Greek as Latin, sacred as
profane. By E. Fenton.

Apres fortune espoir.

Seen and allowed according to the order appointed.

Imprinted at London, by Henry Bynneman dwelling in Knightrider street, at the
sign of the Mermaid. ANNO. 1569.

CUM PRIVILEGIO AD IMPRIMENDVM SOLVM.

To the right Honourable and his singular good Lord, the Lord Lumley, Edward
Fenton wishes a happy life, with much increase of honour and continuance of
the same.
THe most ancient and famous Philosophers (right honourable) albeit they never
had any certain knowledge of God, yet nature by her instinct of reason, dealt so
beneficially with them, that beholding the wonderful power of God in all his
creatures, they doubted not to confess that there was one who had made these
things, and with all had a special care over them: Besides this, after the
dissolution of this life, they aimed very near at the immortality of the
soul: who in the end being overcome with the depth of so divine a Mystery,
as a matter not to be measured by man reason, were constrained to leave of
to be curious in the enquiry after such questions, and fell to the study of
such things as they thought would serve best to stay their appetite from the
attempting of any vncomelinesse, and stir their minds to the attaining of
most commendable virtues. Wherein as they have left behind them so great store
of necessary precepts, as we can not (so long as we direct our doings by their
good discipline) but of necessity we must tread the path that leads to
perfect happiness. So besides this (as men reputing it a shame to be ignorant
in any thing that by travail they might attain unto) they have found out to
their great praise and our singular profit and pleasure, the secrete and
hidden reason of many things, which nature hath kept unknown from us (as it
should seem of set purpose) to the end we might the rather find our selves
occupied in the search and knowledge of the same. And like as some of them by
reason they are ordinary and common, the cause thereof being also natural,
together with the familiarity and acquaintance we have with them, and that
they happen as it were of custom, do move us the less or nothing at all to
have them in admiration when they chance or happen: Even so on the contrary
part there are other effects of nature, which when we behold, they do the
more amaze us, because we be not able to comprehend the causes and reasons
thereof, but imagine straight way that nature is abused, or at least hath lost
her rule who in dede is always one and uniform, and cannot be but one cause
working diversely, according to the diversity of her subjects. Touching things
supernatural or above nature, we are to think they are not so called in respect
of nature, as though she had made ought by chance, whereof she was not able to
yield a reason, but rather having regard to us, whose weak understanding cannot
conceive her secrete means in working. And therefore we must think they have
their proceeding from God or some divine inspiration, either directly or
indirectly, immediately or by a mean, seeing that God oftentimes both to warn
us of his justice and to punish our offences, lays his hand and rod upon us
in diverse sorts, as when we feel the raging whirlewindes and tempests by sea,
the terrible earthquakes by land* the fearful flames of lightning, and cracks
of thunder in the air, and all these things without us. But to come nigher
unto our selves when we feel any distemperature in our bodies, whereupon do
grow some grievous diseases: All which albeit they have their being and motion
by natural means, yet seem they the rather prodigious because they be rare
and happen but seldom. But those things which are called supernatural because
the reason is hidden from us, they come by the permission or special
appointment of God, as when we be troubled with wicked spirits offering to
abuse our simplicity with false mi^acles, fained visions, and other such
devilish illusions. Whereof as I shall not need to speak either particularly or
in general, so seeing that besides the reasons and aucthorities which are
gathered together in this slender volume, the writers of Histories in both
kinds have given out sufficient matter touching an absolute resolution that
way, which as I hope may suff^ to discharge me of a s^cond travail, with a
particular d^scription of such things as the book it self doth amply and more
at large contain: So leaving to deal in the offences of some such persons
as use and abuse their bodies through an inordinate lust against the prescripte
of nature, whereupon happens oftentimes both a superabundace and default in the
creatures brought into the world: As I hope also it is nedelesse for me to
mention in this place the generation of precious stones with their sundry
properties, the force and virtues which by experience we find to be in plants
and herbs proceeding out of the sap and substance of the earth, with sundry
other qualities, serving against the incoveniences that come by the air, by
fire, by scalding lead^ or other m^ttals molten burning, because the volume
following discribes them sufficiently in their several places. The judgment
whereof with their several reasons, I humbly submit to the censure of your
wisdom, the which if it shall in any part be to your liking, I have the
chiefest part of my desire, and shall the less need to regard the variable
fantasies and opinions of the multitude: For as much as my travail bestowed
herein hath been only in respect of your Lordship, to whom as well for my
self as diverse of my friends, I am very much bound. Notwithstanding I would be
glad that my private travail might universally either profit or pleasure all.
For the book it self I am of opinion that neither the description of many
things therein ^ is so commonly known, that the strangeness thereof is not able
to delight a great many, neither yet the matter ^ that ^t shall not yield much
fruit that may be applied to sundry purposes. We see in daily experience, with
howe great earnestness and delight the unlearned sort run over the
fruitless History of king Arthur and his round table Knights, and what
pleasure they take in the trifeling tales of Gawin and Gargantua: the which
besides that they pass all likelihode of truth, are utterly without either
grave precept or good example. Whereby I am in better hope that this book
containing such variety of matter both pleasant to read and necessary to
know, being sprinkled throughout with great wisdom and morality, shall be the
rather embraced and allowed of all. And in the mean time trusting that as I
have taken upon me the translation of this small book, only upon consideration
both to acknowledge the duty I owe your Lordship, and signify the good
meaning I bear towards you, so you will vouchesafe to undertake the patronage
thereof, and when your weightier affairs shall give you leave to have recourse
thereunto and read it for your recreation. I leave your good Lordship until
such time as my better knowledge shall embolden me to present you with a
greater matter and more worthy your reding: wishing unto you and the whole race
of your noble house, increase and continuance of honour, with the attainment of
perfect felicity.

Your Lordships most bounden, Edward Fenton.

The Authors Preface.
MY Lord, amongst all the things which may be viewed under the coape of
heaven, there is nothing to be seen, which more stirs the spirit of man,
which ravishes more his senses, which doth more amaze him, or engenders a
greater terror or admiration in al creatures, than the mosters, wonders and
abominations, wherein we see the works of Nature, not only turned arsiuersie,
misseshapen and deformed, but (which is more) they do for the most part
discover unto us the secret judgement and scourge of the ire of God, by the
things that they present, which makes us to feel his marvelous justice so
sharpe, that we be constrained to enter into our selves, to knock with the
hammer of our conscience, to examine our offeces, and have in horror our
misdeeds, specially when we read in Histories sacred and profane, that
oftentimes, the elements have been harolds, trumpetters, ministers and
executioners of the Justice of God. As when we see the waters overflow their
chanells, and that the veins of heaven open by such outrage, that they
surpass.xv. cubits, the highest mountains of the earth. And the fire in like
manner, obeying the comaudement of his Creator, consumed five famous Cities,
committing them presently into cinders. The air also hath been found so
corrupt, venomous and infectiue in diverse provinces, that piercing from one to
an other it hath in effect smoothered and choked the most part of humain kind,
leaving the earth inhabitable. The earth likewise opening her throat, hath
swalowed up an infinite number of proud Cities, with their citizens. And albeit
these woders he but small, yet if we consider, y^ when the furor of God is
inflamed against our sins, he doth not so much respect us, as to chastise us
by his elemets, But the better to bridle and correct us, he makes the most
weak and a^iect creatures of the earth, the executioners and punishers of our
offences: As that great Monarch Pharao proved at such time as the Frogs,
Flies, and Grasshoppers did assail him even in his bed. Wherefore like as we
have showed you before these fearful and strange chastisements, even so we
could bring to memory others no less marvelous, tha worthy to be noted of
those specially which have felt some apprehension of the judgements of God: as
when we s^e living creatures borne amongst us, who have had two heads knit and
fastened together in one only body, like two bows in the trunk of a tree.
Others so well conjoined and glued the one to the other, that by no Art of ma
they were to be separated. Others be so abominable and deformed, that they
seem to be brought into the world as well in contempt of nature, as to the
perpetual infamy and grief of their parents. These things being very lively
apprehended by the Prophet Oseas in his.ix. Chapiter: where he writes, these be
the deeds of their abominable loves, and when they have nourished their
children, I will destroy them in such sort that they never shall become men. I
will give them an over timely birth, and their paps shall be dry, and their
root withered, so that they shall be barren: but if they fortune to engender,
I will then destroy the fruit of their body. The like is confirmed by the
Prophet Esdras the.v. Chapiter, where amongst other cruel cursings, wherewith
Babylon was threatened by the Angel, it is expressly said, that women defiled
with blood, shall bring forth monsters. But for yt the mystery of these
secretes is somewhat to hard, and therefore requires a further leisure, I will
leave the rest to the discourse that I have made in my Histories, which be
enterlarded with no other things, than these strange accidents and woderfull
chances, wherewith all the provinces of the world have ben astonished since the
nativity of Iesus Christ, unto this our time. But now (my Lord) having fought
with Labour, and in mine opinion become thereof victorious, there rests in me
none other thing for the final accomplishment of the same, than to tender,
consecrate and give the fruit sprung of my Muses and just tribute of my
pains, being drawn thereunto not only by sundry particular bonds, which I
will keep secrete for this present, but also for the merit of an infinite
number of Heroical virtues, which makes you so marvelous, that you deserve
to be celebrated of all those which have written. For besides the Noble blood
of the ancient house de Rieux, where you toke your first beginning, you are
endued with such excellent gifts of the mind and of Nature, a singular
knowledge in diverse arts and disciplines, bearing an earnest frendshyp to such
as makes those their profession, yet have you besides these, so noble a desire
to martial affairs, such affection and devotion to the service of your
Prince, as there hath been no assembly made or addressed in your time to any
assault of town or City, skirmish or other Sail into Italy, or else where,
where you have not been found the first in rank with such assurance and little
regard of your life, that those which knew you, expected no less in you,
than of that great Marshall de Rieux, your grandfather, to whose fame the
Chroniclers and writers have sowned so many praises. Neither ought I in this
place to pass over with silence the worthy exploits and valiant acts of
Monsieur de Gue de Lisle your brother, who hath accompanied you in all your
perils and travails of Fortune, and even in this his young age, hath given such
sufficient witness of the same, by so often shedding of his blood in the
service of his prince, that for his magnanimity and virtue he merits never
to be buried in the grave of oblivion: Albeit having reserved to make a more
ample description thereof in an other work which I have prepared, so this (my
Lord) may suffice for the present, beseeching you not only to take this work
in good part which I offer unto you, but also serve to the same as a defence
and safe conduct: To the end that it being fortified by the shadow and
brightness of your nobleness and virtue, it may the rather pass assured
thorough the perilous straightes of our Country of France.

A Table of the principal matters contained in this Book.
IN the first history are cotained sundry abuses and wonders of Satan. Fol. 1.
In the second, the woders and aduertisements of God sent upon the City of
Jerusalem, to provoke them to repentance. 4. In the third, mention is made of
the death of sundry Kings, Bishoppes, Emperors, and Monarchs, with the
wonderful death of a king of Poloigne, and an Archbishop of Maience. 5. In
the fourth, is described the history of Nabuchodonozer, wherein is shed in what
peril they be which command, and have the government of public weals. 10
In the fifth, is declared the causes of the bringing forth of monsters, and
other histories to that purpose. 12. In the sixth, is recouted a notable
history of two maidens engendered in our time, the which were knit together by
the forheads. 14 In the seventh, a wonderful and horrible monster of our time,
upon the discourse of whom, the question is asked whether Devils can engender
and use the works of nature. 16. In the eight, sundry sorts of Lightnings,
with wonderful thunders and tempests happening in our time, with the peril
harms proceeding of the same, and certain defensible means against their
fury. 19. In the ninth a wonderful history of a man in our time, which washed
his hands face in scalding lead. 24. In the tenth, wonderful and strange
histories of the Iewes. 26. In theleuenth, Floods and wonderful inundations of
waters which (...) happened in our time. 29. In the twelfth, the wonderful
death of Plinie, with a brief description of the causes of fire, which come
of certain openings of the earth. 30 In the thirtenth, wonders of certain
horrible Earthquakes chancing in diverse provinces, with a deceit of Satan,
who by his craft and subtlety made a Romaine knight to throw himself
headlong into a gulffe. 33 In the fourtenth, wonders of two bodies knit
together like two grafts in the trunk of a tree. 35 In the fiftenth, a
history of a monster, who appeared to S. Anthonye in the desert. 37 In the
sixtenth, a wonderful discourse of precious stones, their nature and property,
which reasons of their procreation, and other strange things breding in the
bowels of the earth. 38 In the seuententh, a wonderful history of two
Princesses, being committed to the flames, unjustly accused, who were delivered
by the virtue of their innocence. 45 In the eightenth, a wonderful history of
sundry strange fishes, Monster^ Mermaids, and other huge creatures, found and
bred in the Sea. 47 In the ninetenth, wonders of Dogs which did eat
Christians. 54 In the twentieth, a wonderful history of diverse figures, Comets,
Dragones and flames, which appeared in heaven to the terror of the people, and
whereunto the causes and reasons of them be assigned. 56. In the.21. Flames of
fire which have sprung out of the heads of diverse (...) 61. ^ 22. A history
very notable, of ^ loves, with a description of the dissolute life of three
renowned Curtisanes. 62 In the.23. A wonderful history of a monster, out of
whose belly issued an other man, all whole reserving the head. 69. In the.24.
Notable histories of many plants, with their properties and virtues, together
with a wonderful rote of Baata, written of by Iosephus the Hebrew author. 70.
In the.25. Wonderful and excessive Banquets. 76. In the.26. Certain wonderful
discourses worthy of memory touching Visions, Figures and Illusions, appearing
as well in the day as in the night and sleeping as waking. 82. In the.27. A
wonderful history of a monster, seen by Celius Rhodigenus. 98 In the.28. A
monster on live, whose entrails and interior parts, were to be scene naked and
uncovered. 100 In the.29. Of a prodigeous Dog which engendered of a Bear and
a mastiff bitch in England, seen by the Author at London, with the
discourses of the nature of this beast. 101. In the.29. A wonderful history
of certain women which have brought forth a great number of children: and an
other which bare her fruit v. years dead within her belly. 108 In the.31. A
wonderful history of a moster having the shape of the face of a man, who was
taken in the Forest of Haueberg, in the year.1531. whose purtraicte Georgius
Fabritius sent to Gesnerus, naturally drawn. 110 In the.32. Of wonderful and
strange famines. 112 In the.33. Of a Bird which hath no fete, and lives
continually in the air, being never found upon the earth, or in the sea, but
dead. 114 In the.34. Of a certain monstrous Serpent, having.vij. heads, bought
by the Venetians, and sent into France embalmed. 117. In the.35. A strange
and wonderful history of two maids knit and conjoined back to back, scene in
diverse places, the one at Rome, the other at Verona. 123 In the.36. Of
wonderful cruelty, in the which is a discourse of As^iages who caused Arpalus
to eat the flesh of his own son. 125 In the.37. Of a moster brought forth
into the world alive, having the shape of a man from the navel upward, and
the rest like a dog. 128 In the.38. A notable complaint made by a monstrous
man to the Senate of Rome, against the tyrannies of a Cesour, which oppressed
the pore people of the river of Danubie with rigorous exactions. 130 In the.39.
Of a monstrous child having.iiij. fete and.iiij. arms brought into the world
the same day that the Geneuois and Venetians were recociled. 136 In the.40. A
wonderful discourse of covetousness, with many examples touching that matter
worthy of memory. 137 In the.41. A monster having the. wings fete of a bird,
brought forth at Rauenna, in the time of Pope July the second, and king Lewes
the twelfth. 139 Of a strange monster take up in the river of Tybre, in the
year.1496. Fol. 140 Of a strange child borne in Almain in the year.1548.
having but one leg and no arms, with a crevice or chink where his mouth
should be. 140 Of a child borne in Englande in the year.155^. which had two
bodies, two heads, four hands, and three legs, and but one belly. 141. Of a
wonderful and strange monster borne in the year.1554. eod. Of two woderfull
monsters brought forth into the world in the year 1555. the one in Germanie,
the other in Sauoye. 142 Of a monstrous Calfe brought forth in Germanie, in
the year.1556. 143 A monstrous child borne in Germanie in the year.1556. 144
Of a mostrous calfe having the head, beard and breast of a man. eod. Of three
Suns scene at one time. 145 Of a shining Cross with a star at the top,
and a Moan at the lower end, seen in the year.1567. eod. Of two monsters. 146
A wonderful Dance. 147
The end of the Table.
SVNDRY ABVSES and wonders of Satan. CHAPITER. j.
ALbeit Satan since the creation of the world hath performed his tyrannous
reign in most provinces and places of the earth, with sundry subtilties and
sophistical sleights to draw unto him an honour of the people, under a form
of diverse beasts other creatures, yet it is affirmed both by sacred profane
authority, that the sovereign and omnipotent God hath given him more scope
and liberty of rage against his people, in two places, than in all the world
besides, whereof the first was in the Oracle of Apollo (a place very famous by
report of histories) where he kept his school open shop of villainous cruelty,
for the space of 1000. or 1200. years, drawing the people not only to fall
down worship him, but also (according to his bloody disposition) he toke upon
him to give answer to their demauds, with constraint for ye most part, that
before he performed resolution of their questions, they should honour perfume
his house with incense and quick sacrifice of men, maids, sometimes the
fathers became murderers of their simple and innocent children, such was the
blindness of the people, and such the slight of this subtle serpent to
enchant and charm their understanding: wherewith notwithstanding not
satisfied, he kept a common storehouse of filthy gain ravenous covetousness,
that under the pretence of religion, in such sort, that the most part of
Kings Monarchs of the earth came to worship him in that place, enriching his
temple with infinite treasures, and gifts of precious value, besides a number
of stately Images formed of massive Gold, the same so enlarging his
territory, that of a little cave or hollow vault, wherein he kept residence at
the beginning, within a small time he raised it up to a huge proud City,
wherein he so trafficked and practised his abominable trade with Pilgrims and
strangers that came from far, setting such price of the pelf wherewith he
abused the simplicity of the people, that (as Diodorus writes) there was
found at that time of his treasure above ten thousand talentes, amounting
(according to the order of our account) to six Millions of gold. And now
touching the description of the site or situation of the place where this
monstrous enemy to the life of man, performed his oracles, it was a desert and
traggie mountain planted in Grecia, upon the breach or tip of a high and hard
Rock (out of the which issued a sulphur or strong breath) whereupon was hong on
high a cold spirit or figure wavering as the wind, and the mouth of this
infernal cell did bestride certain grand paunches or big belied priests,
cowering one close by an other, as though they would hatch young fry like them
selves, who receiving the air or breath of the wind, and participating with
the spirit and power of the devil, became as men enraged and without sense,
braying out answer to the people upon their demands. This also gave further
cause of wonder, touching the place, that he was so carefully guarded by devils,
that no mortal man durst assail either him or his treasure amassed from so
many parts of the world, the same moving cause of fear to Princes of the
greatest power, and also to the mighty conqueror Xerxes, who notwithstanding
being upon his conquest of Greece, following his covetous inclination to enrich
himself with the spoil of Satan, attempted to pill his Temple, which as he
was striving to bring to pass, that part of the Rock where Satan sate in
his throne, upon a sudden overwhelmed and fell down upon his soldiers, the
Elamente began to open and cast forth flames of fire, with such terrible
threats of thunder and lightning, that those which were upon the mountain fell
down, some schortched to death by the vehemence of the fire, and some torn
in pieces by other violence, that (as Trogus affirms) that assault was the
bane of.iiij. thousand of his soldiers, which happened not only to him, for that
the Frenchmen undertaking the like enterprise under the conduct of Brenus, who
vowing to scale the mountain and sack the temple of Delphos* was resisted
with a horrible quaking of the earth, which so shaked and disordered the hill,
that the greatest part fell upon his army, and smotheryng who so ever was
found either upon or under it, whereupon followed such terrible motios in the
Elament, with storms, tempests, wind hail mixed with sulphur and fume of
fatal fire, that the most part of the army was consumed, Brenus himself so
sore wooded, that what with the anguish of his hurt, impacience of his repulse,
he sacrificed himself upon the point of his sword. The other special place
where Satan kepes his majesty, usurping upon the people with a reverence as
to a God, is yet in being in Calycut, one of the most rich and famous cities
of the Indyans, but after a more strange and hideous fashion than in the Oracle
of Apollo, for that there he was rather masked than seen openly, where now
(jealous belike of the honour of his creator) he is seen and worshipped under
the most terrible and mostrous form that ever we see him drawn and painted in
any place. And here he hath so surely seeled the eyes of this miserable people
of Calycut, that although they acknowledge God, yet do they worship and
reverence the Devil with Sacrifice, incense, perfume and erection of Images, as
if he were one of the Deity in deed. And albeit all that Province, which is
of great circuit, together with their Kings Rulers of the same, are resolved
of the unity of one God, maker of heaven earth, with other Elamentes and the
whole World besides, yet Satan the father and first founder of all untruths,
hath so prevailed amongst them with such subtle and sinister persuasions, that
they believe that God being weary to debate the causes and controversies
happening among men, hath committed unto him the charge of judgment upon
earth, the same inducing this pore and ignorant people to think that God hath
sent down that spirit of torment with power to do justice and reason to every
cause and question amongst them: they cal him by the name of Deumo, whose
portrait the King kepes with great devotion in his Chapel, as a sanctuary or
holy relike, placed in a stately chair with a Crown upon his head after the
form of a Meetre, with a garnish of four horns, four huge teeth growing out
of a monstrous mouth, a nose and eyes of the like proportion, his hands like
to the paws of an Ape, and feet fashioned like a Cock, whose form (as you
see) is both fearful and monstrous: so it agrees with the furniture of the
chapel wherein it is enclosed, being garnished with no other tables or pictures,
than figures of little devils of the like regard. And yet is not this all: for
their priests which they call Bramynes, have express charge to wash this Idol
with sweet water and odoriferous balms: and then upon the sound of a bell to
fall prostrate, and do sacrifice: neither doth the King eat any meat which
is not offered before by iiij. of those Priests to the mouth of the Idol,
wherewith not satisfied with this ambitious abuse and usurpation of reverence
in the Oratory of the King, is content (in more derogation of the honour of
God) to suffer them to build him a stately Temple in the midst of an Land,
formed after the ancient manner, with.ij. rows of Pillars, like to S. Iohns
Church in Rome, wherein is placed with great ceremony, a huge Altar of
stone, upon the which (by an ordinary custom is offered the.xx. of December,
being Christmasse day, yearly by al the Gentlemen and priests within.xxv.
days journey about, sacrifice and incense, with great assistance of al degrees
of common people, who coming thither to get pardon and remission of their
sins, are first anointed in the head with a certain oil, and then (by
commandment of the Priests) they fall down before the said Image set in great
pomp upon the Alter, whom having worshipped in this extreme devotion, every
man returns to his place of abode: besides (during the time of these
ceremonies, which lasts.iij. days, there is free liberty proclaimed thorough
all the land, that all murderers and heinous offenders whatsoever, shall come
with assurance to this general remission, the same making the assembly so great,
that (according to the witness of such as write of it) there are found
yearly during that time above an hundredth thousand persons, whom this enemy
to mankind hath so enchanted, with illusions, that they believe their
sacrifice is done to God, merits pardon at his hand, where in deed they
honour the chief enemy to their own salvation: which ought to serve for example
to such as participate with the light of God his Gospel, to the end they
labour to make appear their talent, and make a special treasure of the grace
wherewith he hath endued them, seeing that the servant which knows the will of
his Lord, and doth it not, stands in more danger of blame before God, than
he that is ignorant of it. And now to prevent al doubts and suspicion in such
as may think these wonderful discourses to be made in the air, or matters of
vain devise above the sun, I commend them to the authority of Paulus
Venetus, Ludouicus Patricius Romanus, and of Vartomanus, in their Chronicles of
ye Indyans, by whom is set out a more large description of those wonders, not
as understanded by others, or red in any author, but as things seen and
assisted by themselves, and in their presence, assuring (for mine own part)
all such as shall peruse my translation, not to commend thorowout this whole
book, any thing which is not confirmed with sufficient credit by some notable
author, either Greek or Latin, Sacred or Profane. Some late writers affirm
that this people of Calycut have been reduced of late years to our true
Religion, by the great and charitable travail of certain Ambassadors which
the Kings of Portingall did send to discover those countries.

Wonders and aduertisements of God sent upon the City of Jerusalem, to provoke
them to repentance. CHAP. ij.
LEt us a little consider, Christians, how much this Oracle and wonder divine is
differing from that going before: the one habitable, the other decayed: the one
lost, dyspoyled and sacked: the other kept, repaired and dwelt in. And
although we have proved howe great and wonderful is the bounty and clemency
of our God, whom albeit we have offended by an infinite multitude of
abominable sins, yet notwithstanding he holds us his hand, calls us,
warns and wills us to return to him, showing by sickness and particular
afflictions, sometimes by signs and wonders, which for the most part be
messengers, trumpets, and forerunners of his justice, as it is euidentely
showed upon this miserable City of Jerusalem, which remained still so drowned
in her sin, that for any strange advertisement sent to her by God, she would
not at any time be withdrawn from those vices. The signs and wonders by which
the Lord foretold of the destruction of their City, be those which follow,
written by Ioseph in the.vij. book of the Wars of the Iewes, and by Eusebe
in his history Ecclesiastical. The first message which was sent them from
heaven, was a Comet or blazing Star, in the fashion of a sword, which
continued the space of a year, casting hovering his beams over their City.
The second chanced the.xviij. day of April, even when the people were
assembled to solemnize the feast of the Azimes, at what time was seen so
great a light about the Altar of the Temple, at the ninth hour of the night,
that it seemed to them as if it had been plain day, and continued so clear
the space of half an hour. The same day of the said feast an Ox (which they
had sent to be sacrificed) calved in the midst of the Temple: and besides
that, a door of the temple of brass, which was so heavy that there must be.xx.
men to make it fast at night, being tied with bars and locks of iron, opened
the same time of it self, about the sixth hour of the night: Besides, the said
Ioseph affirms further, which peradventure might seem a fable or dream, if
those that saw them were not at this day living, and that these calamities
were not come upon them, as worthy of so unhappy messages. It came to pass
that a certain time, before the Sun set, they perceived in the air
Chariots running through all the regions of Heaven, the armies which traversed
the clouds, environed certain cities. And the day of the feast, which they
call Penticost, the Priests, having done the service divine, heard a certain
brute, and incontinent heard a voice which said: Let us go from hence. But the
last wonder is most fearful of all, that is: A simple man of the country, of
base condition, the son of a peasant, called Nanus, the city being in peace,
and full of al wealth, being ^ome to this feast, began at one instant to cry: A
voice from the coast of the Orient, a voice from the coast of the Occident, and
a voice from the four quarters of the wyndes: a voice against Jerusalem and
the Temple, a voice against the new married men and new married women, a voice
against all that people: and howling and crying in this sort, went through al
the streets of the City: whereof certain of the chief not brooking this
sommons of their City, made him to be beaten: but he would not answer any
word to those that whipped him, but continued the same cry with extreme
obstinacy: whereof the Magistrates astonished, knowing well enough that the
same proceeded of some divine inspiration, made him to be carried to him which
had the government of the Romaines, the which made him to be so tormented, that
his flesh was pluckte from the bones: which notwithstanding, he continued so
firm and constat that he would not let fall a simple tear, nor require them
to stay their punishment: but to every blow of the whip which they gave him,
he exclaimed the more, evil Fortune evil Fortune upon Jerusalem: and being
asked of Albyn which was Judge, where he was borne, and wherefore he so
lamented, he made no answer, not ceasing to bewail according to his
accustomed manner the desolation of that miserable City. Which was the cause
that Albyn judging him mad, suffered him to pass. And that which is most
strange, he continued in this sort the space of seven years and five
months, until the very destruction of ye said City, without ceasing to use
his accustomed cries, or making himself hoarce, not yielding thanks to those
which gave him meat or drink. But rehearsing this doleful song to al such
as came unto him, until the very time the City was besieged, and that Titus
had given the assault encamped before it: and then turning himself to the
walls, began a fresh his noise, crying with a horrible voice: Evil Fortune
upon the City, temple and all the people: after he had made an end of these
words, and evil hap upon my self, a great stone caste by the enemies,
suddenly slew him: and incontinent the Emperor Titus sacked and burnt the
City, where ye slaughter was so great (as Ioseph writes) that during that
siege there died eleauen hundred thousand persons. And the ire of God was so
fervent upon the poor Jewish people, that after they had eaten al the filthy,
sluttish and unclean meates they could get, in the end they were constrained,
not only to eat the latchets of their shoes, but also their shoe soles dipped
and stieped in water: and also the filthy Rats have served them for meat,
and that which was most horrible, the mothers forced to make meat of the flesh
of their children: so much was the fury of God kindled against this miserable
City.

The wonderful death of sundry Kings, Princes, Bishops, Emperors and
Monarchs. CHAP. iij.
AS amongst all the dignities of the world, there is not any to be found more
excellent or wonderful than the magnificence of Kings, nor wherein is figured
in more perfect form the very Image of divinity. Even so there is no state
more perilous and subject to eclipse or mutation, nor that finds more sharpe
th^ ^rrowes and judgements of God, than those which degenerate from the
excellent degree of honour, whereunto the voice of God hath called them. The
which is sufficiently verified by a number of examples both sacred and
profane. Wherein Croesus that great King of Lydie, (if he were risen from
death) knew well what to say, the which publishing himself in all places to be
the most fortunate King of the world, was in the end vanquished, overcome and
burned by Cirus. Policrates the renowned King of the Samiens, (as Valerius
witnesses) did not feel at any time so much the pricks of Fortune, being
vanquished by Darius, as when he was betrayed and killed by his own Provost
upon the height of a mountain. Valerius Emperor of the Romains overcome by
Sapor king of the Perses, ended his life in such servitude, that the said Sapor
made him not only his fot^stoole, but also used him as a stiroppe to alighte
upon his horse. Also the Emperor Diocletian, having left the Empire, died of
the poison which he himself had prepared. But where is now that great King
Xerxes, whose Navies and Sails of war overspread the whole Occean? Or where
is that invincible Hannibal, who by his extreme labour trenching the mountains,
and making great hills equal with the valleys of the earth, and forced also the
frozen Alps to yield passage to his army? In like sort Paulus Emilius,
Iulius Caesar, Pompey, with others of infinite number amongst the Greekes and
Romaines, what is become of them, or what other pomp remains of their aucient
glory and former Majesty, if not a simple fame to feed the succession of
their age? yea, what other remembrance have we of them and their doings, if
not a monument or register of report, for the which also they are bound to the
Historians, in leaving to their posterity so large a pawn witness of their
painful life. Their bodies alas clothed with Purple, their Diademes, Perfumes,
and other such vanities be (...) consumed to bones ashes, leaving worms as
heirs to the rest of their glory, the which in the end shows her self so
vain slippery, that those which accounted their lives most fortunate, judged
even now to have raught the height of their prosperity, do feel them selves
most sharply wounded by their malice. Hercules, albeit he passed so many perils
both by sea and land, with the mortal encounters of huge monsters, yet did he
embrace his bane in the arms of his delicate Deianyra. Alexander the great,
who was of force to make a general conquest of the whole East world, passing
each straight and danger of war without any mortal hurt to his person,
was not able to shun the fatal cup of poison presented unto him. After
Iulius Caesar had triumphed in.52. batailes, with intent to sound the last
retreat of war, with expectation to retire his bones fro further toil, was
killed in the Senate. Zeno, the.xij. Emperor of Constantinople (albeit the
sundry famous victories which he obtained) died not in his bed, but by the
cruel and unnatural commandment of his wife was buried quick, not able to
be succoured of any. Asclepius, the brother of Pompey, having ben a continual
pirate on the seas, the space of.22. years, and escaping the surging waives and
terrible tempests of the same was in the end drowned by drawing water at a
Well. Mempricius, a King of Englande, being on hunting, and lost of his
company, was by the cruel fate of Fortune, denied other harbour of princely
sepulture, than the bellies of the ravening Wolves. Drusus, having vanquished
by valiant courage the Perthes, albeit he died not by any wounds gotten in
those conflicts, but received with great pope and triumph upon a Chariot at
Rome, was in the end killed with a tyle stone. Bazileus, the.xxv. Emperor of
Constantinople, did not end his life in the cruel wars he had with the
Saracens, but having taken truce with worldly vanities* was in hunting killed
by a Hart. Charles king of Nauerre, albeit he died not in performing sundry
noble and valiant acts, yet being troubled and tormented with the pain of the
gowte: for whose help it was devised by the counsel of all his Physicians, to
wrap the said King in a linen cloth dipped in Aqua vitae, which being
kindled, in stead of present succour of his disease, he received his fatal
bane, by being burned quick in the same. Otho, the third Emperor of that name,
not so well able to foresee the subtle deceipts of the wife of Crescentius, as
to withstand the force and cruel assaults of war he endured at Rome against
Crescetius, was poisoned by a pair of gloves which he received of her. Neither
was the fearful and dangerous storms of wars, which Henry the.vij.
Emperor proved during his life, such an impediment to the state of his health,
as the cruel and subtle disposition of an abominable Monk, who gave end to
his days, by the impoisoning of an host he ministered to him. Iohn the.xj.
Pope, ended not his days by the painful reading of the holy scripture or
preaching Gods word to his flock and charge, but he finished his term in a
cruel prison, smoothered with a pillow. Pope Benet the sixte, died not in
papering himself with sundry delicious and dainty banquets, as the most part
of those Romish prelates do at this day: but he ended his days in prison by
the pinching and gnawing pain of extreme famine. Pope Victor the third,
deceased not from this vain and transitory life, as summoned by the messanger
of old age, but celebrating the Mass, was compelled to yield up his vital
breath by an infectious poison given him in the Chalice. Then if so many
Monarchs and renowned princes have ended their lives by so sundry and strange
kinds of death, it is needful for those which follow, exactly to consider of
the warnings judgements of God, and especially such, by whose vile and
detestable order of living, may be scene as in a glass, the due reward
appointed for the same: for as ye noble Marcus Aurelius saith, that after every
evil fortune follows a good hap, and after every ignominy ensues great
glory: even so I assure you (saith he) that for my self, I had rather my life
were less glorious and my death more honourable: for as by an unfortunate death
grows great suspicion of a good life: so a good death often times excuses
an evil life. Wherein if so many kinds of deaths both of Kings and
Emperors by us written, seem strange and fearful unto you, then those
following will deserve more admiration, the same agreeing with our intent, for
they be wonders, by y^ which we are instructed, that when the Justice of God is
inflamed against us, and that he shoots his arowes as a sharpe punishment for
our offences, he makes his ministers and executers of his just anger, the
little and insensible worms of the earth, neither doth his wrath fall
altogether upon the vulgar or people of mean condition, but hath also like
force upon Princes and degrees of great callings, whereof appears a familiar
experience in the monstrous death of a King Bishop, recorded already under the
seal and authority of 40. or 50. Historians, of no less credit than
undoubted truth, all which agree in one, that King Popeil reigning in
Poloniae, 246. years after Christ, was wont amongst his particular curssyngs to
use this blasphemous other: If this be not true, I would the Rats might gnaw
me: wherein he received the just hier of so execrable an oath, for in the end he
was devoured as you shall read hereafter. The father of King Popeill feeling
himself to decline from the vanities of this miserable and uncertain
pilgrimage, left the government and state of the Realm to the disposition of
the two uncles of his son, men no less honoured of al the country for the
nobleness of their hearts, than well liked for their sincerity of life towards
God. Popeill being come to his full age, his father deceased, and the young man
having caught betwixt his teeth the bit of the bridell, began to give him
self unto all wantonness and riottous living, in such sort that in few
days he became so shameless in evil and abominable doings, that he left
no kind of vice unassayed, in so much that in the end he cruelly poisoned his
two uncles: which wicked and unnatural fact performed, caused himself to be
crouned with a cap of flowers perfumed with precious ointments: the more to
solemnize the first entry of his reign, he caused to be prepared a sumptuous
delicate banquet, whereunto all the Princes and nobles of his Realm were
summoned: And as they were banqueting, behold, an infinite multitude of Rats
rising from the dead and putrified corpses of his two uncles, the which he with
his wife had impoysoned, began to assail that cruel tyrat amidst his delights:
the Archers of his Guard offering to resist the same with maine hand,
travailed in vain, for they encountered him day and night, that the poor men
cried alas, being altogether unable to defend their master from the rage of
these beasts, by reason whereof, it was thought good by the advise of his
counsel to environ the Prince with fire, not knowing that the power of man is
any way able to resist Gods appointment, they performed their devise, which was
no impediment or let to the rats, who passing the hot flames of fire without
any let, to the admiration of al men, ceased not to gnaw devour this
miserable murderer of his uncles. His counsel seeing their first intent
frustrate of none effect, caused him to be carried in a boat into the midst
of a river. But these beasts not fearing the rage of the water, assailed the
boat on every side with such rage and impetuosity, that the boatemen
defending the same in vain, understanding it to proceed of some divine fury,
were constrained to thrust the boat to land, committing the king to the mercy
of these beasts, and he seeing himself abandoned of al human succour, not
knowing what to do, he and his wife fled into a tower, where in the end by the
fury of these little creatures they received the just guerdon of their
unnatural malicious murder. In like manner the Almain^ in al their Chronicles
and reports, make mention of the like history of one Hato. the.xxxij.
Archbishop of Magence, at what time there was a cruel famine in the land, this
Bishop or ravening Wolf, seeing the poor people surpressed with the gnawing
rage of famine (and especially those of his province) determined (I can not
tell by what instinct of the devil) to gather together a great number of them
into a grange, where in stead of relief in this their great and miserable
dearth and hunger, he committed them to the mercy of the furious and raging
flames of fire, whereupon he being asked, why he had showed so vile and
execrable tyranny on these miserable and innocent creatures, he answered: That
he burned them, for that they differed little or nothing from Rats, which
served for no other use than to consume corn. Albeit God (as witnesses the
Prophet, having care of the little sparow) wold not suffer this great tyranny
unpunished, for immediately he stirred up an infinite number of Rats to the
utter destruction and ruin of this vile murderer, who fleeing for his more
safeguard into a tower built in a water, was by the express commandment of
God eaten by these rats to the very bones, which remain at this day, enterred
in the monastery of S. Albyn, in Magence, and the Tower where this abominable
pastor ended his days, is yet in being, and is called Rats tower. Whereof
Munster, amongst many others, makes mention in his universal Cosmography, to
be the place where he was borne. This needs not seem strange to those which
have red histories: for Lice (which be much less than Rats) could not be
prevented by no kind of physike or medicines, from devouring and consuming the
Emperor Arnoull, leaving him nothing but synewes and bones. In like sort, the
great Monarch Antiochus, willing to blot out of memory the name of God forth
of the ^inagoge, and bring in the worshyppyng of Idols, saw issue out of
himself a great number of worms, and thereby not only plunged in great dolor,
but also his whole army infected with the stink of that corruption which
issued from him. You may also read in the second book of the Machabees and
the.xix. chapter, of a King who being full of pride and ambition (took upon
him not only to staye the waives of the Sea, and peyse in balance great
mountains, but also thought him self able to touch the Stars of Heaven) is
now by the just judgment of God so much imbased, that there is no man able
to endure the stink and corruption of his body.

A wonder of a monstrous King, wherein is showed in what peril they be which
command, and others that have the government of the public weal. CHAP.
iiij.
ARistotle, Xenophon, Plato, and generally all those which have treated or
written of the policy of man, affirm by their writings, that there is
nothing more harde and difficult, than to govern well or command a public
weal, for (say they) the abundance of goods and honours into the which most
Princes be customably converted, liberty to do evil without controlment,
together with the corrupt counsel of those which assist the, be the true
matches to light them to al vices: so that if we would but diligently search in
order the discourses and histories of both kinds, we shall find the number of
evil Kings, Emperors and Monarchs given to sedition and wickedness, exceed
far the proportion of such as have governed and lived well: for being once
invested with the robes of authority, and supping the pleasant juice
distilling from the grape of Regal state, they seldom or never bridle their
affections, but suffer themselves so to be overwhelmed and fall headlong into
the Laberynth of sundry vices. For an experience whereof we may be bold to
prefer the example of S. Paule, whose life and virtue remains of great fame by
the sacred records, until the Lord made a trial of him, by calling him to the
government of his elected people of Israel, when he fell fro the path of his
ancient virtue, and became an enemy to his maker, and a contemner of his
laws. Salomon in the beginning of his reign, how wonderful was he? whose
rename, remembrance and wisdom is spread through al the parts of the world,
and being once stalled in the theatre of glory, gave himself over to the
delights of women, by which means he became depriued and void of the happy
blessing and grace of God. Calygula, Mitredates and Neron, gave not they
sufficient shows at their first entry or beginning, of much nobleness and
bounty? but the sequel and issue was such that al the earth was infected with
their detestable tyrannies and abominable cruelties: and of.xxij. Kings of
Iuda there were scarcely to be found above five or six which followed the true
path of godly living and virtue: wherein who so list carefully to read the
lives of the Kings of Israel from Jeroboam the son of Naboth, until the very
last, which were in number but.xix. shall find that they were evil ministers
and husbands of the public weal. In like sort the Romaines, whose common
wealth hath been accounted to flourish most of all the world with good
governors, have found amongst them Augustus, Vespasian, Titus, Antonius Pius,
Antonius Verus and Alexander Seuerus: but as their lives make just declaration
of their noble and virtuous living and politic government, even so the rest as
far surmounts them for wicked and abominable kinds of living. And if you
will behold with due regard and judgement, the lives and renoumes of the
Greekes, Assirians, Persians, Medes and Egiptians, you shall find more evil
spoken for their wickedness, than honour for their virtuous living. All which
matters be sufficiently proved and avouched by the great king Antiochus, who the
first time he was presented with the Regal sceptre, and before he was therewith
crowned (as Valerius writes) he beheld it with good judgment, crying with a
loud voice, said: O Diadem more noble than fortunate, if the most part of the
Princes of the earth which by sword and fire seek to obtain thee, were as
willing to search with good advise due regard to shun ye miseries calamities,
which (as companions) be annexed unto thee, they would the scarce vouchsafe to
lift thee from the earth: not without cause, for if any ambitious man will
measure according to right, and weigh in just balance the delights and
honours with the dangers and perils which follow the crown, he will find for
one pound of Honey, ten pounds of Wormwood, not compting the peril incident
to the poor people wherewith he is charged: for if it chance the Prince be
dysordred and of wanton life, the people most commonly frame themselves to
imitate his doings, who (as Herodianus writes) be but the badges of Princes,
and do nothing but what they see their Princes do before. Wherefore seeing that
Princes Kings and Monarchs be the common fountains whereunto al men should
resort and drink, and they be theatres whereupon al the world ought to loke
for pureness of life, and further serve as torches to give light to all men
walking in the dark cave of wicked doings, if these sin (as Plato saith) the
example is no less hurtful to all their subjects, than to be abhorred in
themselves. Let them therefore use such regard and moderation in their doings,
with such respect to an integrity of life, that they be found perfect in the
account which they have to yield to the Lord, least he set abroche the vessel
of his anger, and rain the shower of revenge as he did upon the miserable King
Nabuchodonosor the.iiij. King of the Babylonians, who (as Daniel witnesses in
his first chapter) felt so sharply the heavy hand and justice of God, that
he was exiled and banished from his kingdom the space of.vij. years, wandering
and living in the deserts with brute beasts, and being naked, remained in that
estate beaten not only with heate and cold, but also with hayle and dew, until
he was covered with hair like unto the Eagle, his nailes like to birds. Here
all men may see as in a glass, an example, spectacle and wonder worthy to be
noted, that he having at commandment a whole kingdom, and served as a King
with al delicat viands, was taken into the deserts, and there fed and
banqueted with wild beasts. Yea, he which had ben invested with purple and
decked with precious Jewels, was by the hand of God so much imbased, that he
was covered with no other garment than with hair, a clothing natural to all
brute beasts.

Of the bringing forth of Monsters, and the cause of their generations. CHAP.
v.
Having showed in order in these Chapiters before, how Kings, Emperors, Bishops
and Monarchs be no more exempted from the wonderful judgement of God, than the
common or vulgar sort: It rests now according to our purpose, to search and
sift those matters more near a truth, to the end we may bring to lyghte the
horrible monsters and fearful wonders found amongst the common people. And that
the philosophie and contemplation of those things might be made more manifest,
and painted in their true colours, it is needful before we pass any
further, to declare the causes whereupon they proceed and are borne. It is
most certain, that these monstrous creatures, for the most part do proceed
of the judgment, justice, chastisement and curse of God, which suffers that
the fathers and mothers bring forth these abominations, as a horror of their
sin, suffering themselves to run headlong, as do brute beasts without guide
to the puddle or sink of their filthy appetites, having no respect or
regard to the age, place, time or other laws ordained of Nature, wherein S.
Gregorie amongst diverse other examples taught us in his Dialogues, shows
the incontinency and abominable desire of a Nurse, who made her self with
child, by an Infant of the age only of.ix. years: And for a proof herein, S.
Hierom affirms by other, that there was an other infant of the age of ten
years, the which was so inflamed by the wanton regards and amorous countenances
of his Nurse, that she made him to lie with her, being of the age as before,
and got her with child. These be the matters that Osee cries out of in
his.ix. chapter, saying: These abominable doings, according to their loves,
even when they have nourssed their children, I will destroy, in such sort that
they shall never become men, yea I will plague the womb where they took their
beginning, the breasts that gave the suck, and dry up the very root, that it
bring forth no more fruit: and if they c^aunce to engender, I will also commit to
death the fruit of their belly. Al which is confirmed by the prophet Esdras
in his.v. Chapter, where amongst other cruel cursings, wherewith the Angel
threatened Babylon, it is expressly said: That women performing the desire of
the flesh being in their Sanguine menstruali, bring forth these monsters. And
although this monstrous fruit be very often a witness of the incontinency
sin of the parents: yet it is not always true, nor happens in one place: for
there be many fathers and mothers chaste and continent, which bring forth
their children defective, as S. Iohn shows in his.ix. chapter, of a poor man
which was blind from his nativity, who having received his sight by the
merciful goodness and grace of Iesus Christ, was asked of his disciples,
whether his own sin, or his parents, were the cause that he was borne
blind. But Christ willing to declare to them, that they ought not to accuse
the parents for the defaults of their children, answered, that it was
neither the sin of him, his father or mother, but to the end to show in him
the wonderful and marvelous works of God. The ancient Philosophers amongst
others, which have searched the secrets of Nature, have declared other great
causes of this wonderful and monstrous childbearing, which Aristotle,
Hypocrates, Empedocles, Galene, and Plinie, have referred to an ardent and
obstinate imagination, which the Woman hath, whylest she conceives the child,
which hath such power over the fruit, that the beams and Charrecters,
continue upon the rock of the infant, whereupon they find an infinite number
of examples to prove the same, worthy of memory, the which albeit may seem
but jests or fables, if the authority and truth of those which write them,
were not their sufficient warrant. And for a further certainty thereof,
Damascenus a grave* author doth assure this to be true, that being present with
Charles, the.iiij. Emperor and king of Boeme, there was brought to him a
maid, rough and covered with hair like a bear, the which the mother had
brought forth in so hideous and deformed a shape, by having too much regard to
the picture of S. Iohn clothed with a beasts skin, the which was tied or
made fast continually during her conception at her beds feet. By the like
means Hippocrates saved a princess accused of adultery, for that she was
delivered of a child black like an Ethiopian, her husband being of a fair
and white complexion, which by the persuasion of Hippocrates, was absolved and
pardoned, for that the child was like unto a Moore, accustomably tied at her
bed. Read of this in Genesis upon S. Hieroms questions, without musing or
being curious to bring in the testimonies of Philosophers other doctors,
verifying the same by the authority of Moyses the great prophet and
secretary of GOD in the thirtith Chapter of Genesis, where he plainly
shows, howe Iacob deceived Laban his father in law, and thereby enriched
himself with his cattayle, having pilled a rod, and put the beasts to
drink, to the end the Goats and Sheep, beholding the diversity of the
colours of this rod, might bring forth their little ones, marked with sundry
several marks. Besides these causes spoken of before of the generation of
Monsters, the best learned in the secretes of Nature, have yet assigned us
others: for Empedocleus and Dephilus do attribute the same to come of the
superabundance or default and corruption of the seed and womb, whereof they
prefer diverse similes by the disposition of sundry metals and other things,
which melts and yields with the heate of fire or sun, for if the matter or
substance which a man goes about to melt, be not well boiled, purified and
confected, or the mold be not well cast, the image or effect of such work
will appear imperfect, hideous and deformed. The Astrologians (as Alcabitius)
have referred these monsters to the influece of the stars, judging that if
the Moon be in certain degrees and coniunctions when the woman conceives,
her fruit shall be monstrous. Even so Iulius Maternus writes, after him very
learnedly the lawyer Alciates, upon the title and signification of these words
and matters, that sometimes these monsters be engendered of the corruption and
filthy unsavoury meates, as burning coals, man flesh, and other like
things that women desire after they have conceived, the which is very
contagious and hurtful to their fruit: whereof we have a notable example in
Leuinius Lemnius in his first book of the hidden Secrets of Nature, in a
certain Matron of Belges great with child of two infants, who lusting to
eat the flesh of a fair boy, whom she beheld at unawares, and fearing he wold
refuse her demand, being pressed without measure of that unruly appetite, fell
upon him, tearing the flesh of his hand with her teeth, and devoured the same
suddenly: Al which the infant abode in respect to satisfy her longing. And as
she returned to play the like part again, the child grieving at her
cruelty, withstode her. Whereof being ashamed and full of despite, after she
had lived certain days in cotinual melancholy, she brought forth two twins,
the one alive, and the other dead. Whereupon the physicians called together, to
argue upon the cause of this child bearing, found that the denial of the
second morsel of the boys flesh was the occasion thereof. Behold in effect the
causes most frequented, touching ye bringing forth of monsters, gathered
according to the opinion of the best learned authors, both Greekes and Latins.
Resting yet over above al those kind of artificial monsters, who be most
familiar to these vacabunds vncerten people, travelling through al provinces,
with diverse abuses and deceiptful legerdemains, wherewith they abuse the
simplicity of the people, in getting their money. These masked pilgrims, or
rather absolute hypocrites, studying nothing but the philosophie of Satan, as
soon as their children be borne, whilst their sinews bones be tender
flexible, with small force, will not stick to break their arms, crush their legs,
puff up their belly with some artificial powder, defacing their noses with
other parts of the face: sometime pecking out their eyes, al to make them appear
monstrous, whereof besides the familiar examples of our miserable time, there
was great experience in Asia, in the time of Hippocrates, as apereth in his
book, de aere locis.

The general causes of the generation of Mosters, with many notable Histories
touching the same. CHAP. vj.
THe Ancients of old time had these monstrous creatures in so great horror,
that if they fortuned to meet any of them by chance in their way, they judged
it to be a foreknowledge of their misfortune: and to bel^eue it ye more, the
Emperor Adryan, chancing to see a Moore at unawares, assured himself to die
immediately. The soldiers of Brutus, being ready to join battle with the
army of Octauus Caesar, having encoutred an Ethiopian in their way,
prognosticated that they should lose the battle, which happened according to
their imagination. In like manner, the ancient Romains had these deformed
creatures in such disdain, that they straightly charged, that the misshapen,
or having any other vice upon their body, should not be received amongst the
virgins Vestales, Gellius lib. j. cap. 12.
as Fenestellus teaches in his book of the Magistrates and worthy men of
Rome. But that which is most to be marvelled at, is that God forbad Moyses, not
to receive them to do sacrifice amongst his people, as you may read more at
large in the first chapter of Malachy, the.xxj. of Leuit. Wherein S. Hierom
having fully considered these abuses, in an Epistle written to a virgin called
Demetriade, complains of those Christians which offer unto God those
children, or put them into religious houses, being crooked, lame, deformed,
having yet a matter more strange, which Iulius Obsequius, and other authors
have written of among the Romaine wonders, wherein they credibly report, that
the ancient Romaines had these little monstrous creatures in such abomination,
that as soon as they were borne, they were immediately committed to the river
of Tyber, there to be nourished. But we being better brought up, and fostered in
a school of more humanity, knowing them to be the creatures of GOD, suffer
them to be brought to the church, there to receive the holy sacrament of
Baptism, as may be seen in the figure of these two Maids, embracing each
other, joined together by a strange infirmity of nature, who were seen to
live in our age of many thousand persons, in form or shape such as you see
them portraicted. And to the end the history of their nativity might be the
better understanded, I will declare that which Sebastian Munster writes, who
saw them, and beheld their unnatural order at large, in the year, as he
said, a thousand four hundred fourscore.xv. and in the month of September,
A woman brought forth a monster nigh to the city of Worms, upon the right side
of the river of Rhine, in a village called Bristante, which was two maids,
having their bodies entier and knit together by the forheade, so that there
was not any artificial or human policy to divide them asunder, as mine
author saw them at Magence, in the year.1501. and being six years of age were
constrained to go together, which was pitiful to behold: for as the one
marched forwards, the other of force reculed backwards: they rose together, and
slept together, their noses touching so nigh, that they could not turn their
eyes but one way, their forheades joining together, hanged over their eyes,
letting thereby the just course of their sight: and living till they were ten
years of age, the one of them died, who being separated and taken from the
other, the hurt she received in the separation from her dead sister, was the
only cause she died immediately. Behold here (saith he) the cause of this
monstrous birth, two women talking together, the one of them being great with
child, there came a third woman (not knowing that either of them were with
child) and suddenly thrust their heads togithers as they talked, wherewith she
with child was astonished, whereupon grew this monstrous child bearing. And to
confirm the same to be of more troth, Cardan affirms in his books de
Subtilitate, saying: That the astoonishment was some help to tie these.ij.
infants togithers: albeit he alleged further cause of this unnatural birth.

A wonderful and horrible monster of our time, upon the discourse of whom, the
question is asked, whether Devils can engender and use the works of Nature.
CHAP. vij.
THis hideous moster, whose portraict is here set out, was born in base
Pologne, in the noble city of Cracouie, in ye month of February and year of
grace.1543. or as some write) 1547. and upon the even of the conversion of S.
Paule: who although he were begotten of honourable parents, yet was he most
horrible, deformed and fearful, having his eyes of the colour of fire, his
mouth and nose like to the snout of an Ox, with an horne annexed thereunto
like the trump of an Elephant, all his back shag hairde like a dog, and
in place where other men be accustomed to have breasts, he had two heads of an
Ape, having above his navel marked the eyes of a cat, and joined to his knee
and arms four heads of a dog, with a grenning and fierce countenance: the
palms of his feet and hands were like to those of an ape: and amongst the
rest, he had a tail turning up so hie, that the height thereof was half an
elle: who after he had lived four hours died, saying only: Watch, the Lord
comes. And although this creature were monstrous, yet have not sundry learned
authors failed to deck him with their pens, as Gasparus Pucerus in his
books of Teratoscopia, of Hieronymus Cardanus, of Munsterus, and amongst all
the rest very excellently written of in the Latin tongue by Gasparus Bruchius.
But albeit Egidius Facius, having made mention of this monster in his book de
Cometa, saith that he can not be persuaded, that a creature so horrible and
monstrous should be begotten of a human creature, but rather of some wicked
spirit. Me seems that in searching and canuasing this matter, the most
excellent and learned Philosophers since the creation of the world, till
our time, have greatly molested and troubled them selves, in deciding the
doubts of this question, which is, Whether devils can engender, conceive, and
use the works of nature as other creatures do. Some thought they could: and
for a more testimony therein, do assure us by their writings, that Plato was
begot of a maid, by one in the likeness of Apollo, wherein the ancient
Annatists and Chroniclers, which have committed to memory the sundry acts of
Almayne, have thereby showed, that the women of the Goathes as they were
wandering by the deserts of Scythie, were got with child of Devils, whereupon
one of them brought forth a monster. And others, as Pisellus, were not content
only to say, that devils could engender, and that the most part of the
beasts of the earth were by them brought forth and engendered. Wherefore
Lactantius Firmian a grave author, whom S. Hierom before exalts, believes yt
these devils were capable of generation, and that they have engendered, as he
shows in the.x. chapter of the second book of his divine institutions.
Agrippus in every of his books, and Hieronymus Cardanus in his treatise De
rebus contra naturam, seames to have followed this opinion: and the more to
confirm his saying, he recites one history of a young damsel of Scotland
which was got with child of an enchanting devil, thinking that he had ben a
fair young man which had lain with her, whereupon she brought forth so horrible
a monster, that he feared all those which assisted her in her travail, in such
sort that the midwife and all the rest of the sage and grave women, were
constrained incotinet to cast him in the fire: the said Cardanus recites yet an
other like example, rehearsed by Thomas Liermont, of an other woman which was
got with child of a wicked sprite, and for confirmation of the matters
heretofore rehearsed, all the writers of the Cronicles of Englande, marvel not
so much at any thing, as at the strange nativity of the prophet Marlin, who
persuade absolutely that he was begotten of a devil: which with many other
like matters although many notable persons have assured to be things of truth,
yet truly they be altogether false, deceitful, and not only repugnant to
nature, but also to our religion, by the which we are taught to believe that
there was never any man begotten without human seed, saving ye son of God.
But as Cassianus saith, what an absurdity, repugnancy and confusion would it
be to nature, if it were lawful for devils incube and succube, to conceive
men, or men to be conceived and brought forth of them: and although that
since the creation of the world, even till our time, devils have begotten
monsters through out al makynd, casting therein the intrailles of beasts,
believing that by the perturbations of their seed, they have brought forth a
great number of monsters and wonders, confessing very well: (such as S.
Augustine hath not denied) that these devils transforming them selves very
often into the shapes of men and women, may use the works of nature, and have
to do with women men, for to entice stir them to the filthy lust of the
flesh, the rather by that means to beguile and deceive them, as the ancients
heretofore have not only proved, but it is also experimented at this day, in
diverse provinces and places, that devils by transforming them into the shapes
as before is rehearsed, have to do with diverse persons: whereof Iames Ruffus in
his books De conceptu generatione hominis, testifies, that in his time there
was a wicked sprite had to do by night with a common woman, being transformed
into the likeness of a man, whereupon she became immediately with child, which
when she perceived, she fell into so strange a kind of disease, that her
entrails fell from her belly, which could not be help or made sound by any
device of physic. He writes an other like unto this of the seruaunt of a
butcher, who being extremely plunged in the vain cogitations of filthy and
wicked lust, and thereby astonnished, he saw incontinent before his eyes a
devil in the shape or figure of a fair woman, with whom he had to do,
immediately his privy part mebers were in such sort inflamed, that he judged
there was burning within his body a cotinual fire, whereof as I have brought
forth these two examples, so could I justify the same with diverse others,
written not only by Philosophers, but also by the Ecclesiastical writers, who
confess that devils by the permission of God, or rather for a punishment of
our sins, might so abuse both men and women: but to say, that any such
conjunction could engendre any such matter as we have aforesaid, that is not
only false, but altogether repugnant and contrary to our law.

And as concerning the Prophet Marlin, and many other like examples, whose
nativity hath abused very many, steadfastly believing that he was begotten of a
devil, we confess therein as we have done before, that his mother might have
the company of a devil, but that she could engendre is no less unlikely than
impossible, albeit it may be presumed and believed that she was with child,
considering the authorities of diverse histories, approving therein chiefly
the legerdemain and subtlety of the devil, to whom they allow a certain
possibility with the assistance of his Charms to make the belly swell,
troubling and corrupting the humours of the body, which women taste in the time
of child bearing, and at the instant of delivery he may so enchaunte the
eyes of the wives and company assistant, having also a strange child stolen
from some other place, to exchange for the creature new borne, that the
simple mother may also be persuaded that such conception and generation
proceeded of the devil: whereof, besides the confirmation of antiquities, we
have a familiar example remaining yet within memory and view, in a young
Damsel of Constance called Magdaleine, in service with one of the richest
magistrates of the town, who, reporting to all men in common, that the devil
one night had lain with her and gotten her with child, was by and by put in
prison by the officers, to see an effect and end of her big belly, the
painful hour whereof being come, after she was pinched with every pang,
which do happen to women in that torment, and the women in expectation to
receive the fruit of nature, her womb opened, and yielded into the hands of
the Midwife certain iron nailes, thick tronchions, or ends of knotted
staves, glass, bone locks of hair, hardes of flax, hemp stones, with other
trumpery of lothsom hideous regard, whereof the devil by his conjuration and
other hellish art, had made an assembly in that place, to abuse the
simplicity of such as are apt to repose certainty in such vain and
deceitful charms: all which is aduouched by Licostenes Amberlachius, Iacob.
Ruffus, a notable physician of Zurick in his book de hominis generatione.
Neither need it seem either strange or incredible to such as have noted the
epistles and records of S. Paule, where he did only change his shape into the
likeness of an Angel of light, to deceive the people, but also in diverse
places addressed himself to our saviour Christ, with intent to seduce him. But
because we have better occasion to discourse at large of such villainies in an
other part of this work, where we mean to move question whether they have
bodies or no, we will end for this time, with this resolution that albeit such
wicked sprites may comunicat with the lusts and provocations of the flesh, yet
are they both void of seed, and without mean of generation: for that as
there is no difference nor division of kind between them, so they can not be
neither man nor woman.

Sundry sorts of lightnings, with wonderful thunders and tempests happening
in our time, with the peril and harms proceeding of the same, and certain
defensible means against their fury. CHAP. viij.
WHo goes about to make particular description of the desolation and
destruction of diverse ancient and rich Cities, Theatres, Castles, towers,
piles, pillars, churches, of sumptuous and of stately regard, overthrown and
defaced by the violence of lightening, thunder, and other raging fury and
tempests of the air, had need of the assistance of long time, and a large
volume to pack up such great and strange matters, which makes me leave all
antiquities records of ancient date to a long leisure, and touch only in this
treatise such things as hapnyng amongst our selves, are also confirmed by our
own view and memory, the same being of familiar experience, may also stir
up in us speedy remorse of conscience, with a more dutiful regard fear of the
marvelous effects of the infallible justice of god. At such time then as the
french garrison was within Milan, which according to the chronicles was anno.
1521. the said town was so assailed with sundry strange storms of lightning,
that ye citizens despairing of longer life, yielded to ye mercy of God, with
expectation to be presently consumed with the flame of that torment, which
amongst other places of the town, seemed to thuder his most force upon ye
castle, wherein was kept both ye treasure of the town, munitio, other furniture
of war, with great store of Canon powder commonly called Gunpouder, which, being
of it self rather apt to yield to ye least spark of fire that is, tha able to
cotend with any thing that is hot, was immediately al in a flame by force of
such flashes as came from the opening of the element, so raged upon the tower
wherein it was laid, that in one instate it was razed and made flat with ye
earth, burning blowing up sundry lodgings bulwarks of the Castle, in such
sort, that what with the strength of the powder and fury of the fire, there
were forced up into the air stones of an vnresonable bigness, whereof certain
of them fell redounded upon the.ij. chief Provosts, whom they bruised and burned
to ashes: other brake in pieces the arms, legs, and other parts of al such as
unhappily were within their power, the same performing such effects of
mortality upon the garrison there, that of two hundred soldiers, were
scarcely (...) on live a dozen, being also of no less marvel to behold the
number of huge corner stones caste out into several places of the city and
fields therabout, the space of.v. or.vj.C. passes, of such weight and
greatness, that the strength of.xx. Oxen were scarce able to remove them from
the earth: and yet is there not such cause of wonder in these terrible
messengers and tokens of Gods wrath, as we read fell upon the late miserable
and desolate city of Malynes* parcel of the dominion of the Spanish King,
within his Duchy of Brabant, the.vij. of August.1521. about.xj. of the clock
in the night, which was afflicted with such horrible calamity that way for the
time, that the like hath not ben remembered by any report, nor seen in any age
before. For the thuder made tremble and shake in such sort this miserable city,
that the townsmen looked when the earth should open and swalow them into her
entrails: After which fearful brute and horrible noise in the clouds, began
to appear in the bottom of the Element, a flame resembling a burning torch,
casting a stink or loathsome smell like unto sulphur and brimstone, driving
the people into such indifferent fear amaze, that they were neither able to
take counsel of the case, and much less judge the cause of so tragical a
view, until at last the cry was thorough the whole town, that the fire of heaven
was fallen upon the strong tower and gate of brass, wherein did lie.viij.
or.ix. barrels of gunpouder: which immediately grew to such a mortal confusion
of all degrees of people within the walls, that the very remembrance of so
monstrous a slaughter, may move terror to any heart with what mettle of
hardness soever it be stamped: for ye noise was no sooner begoon, but the
tower was couerted into ashes, the gate divided into 10000. pieces, with like
fury upon ye walls next adjoining, who were so thoroughly defaced turned up, yt
the very fudation was disclosed, their greatest stones conueyed furthest fro
the City, their diches and ponds full of water drained and made dry by the
extreme heate of the fire: the day after were found (according to the authority
of ye chronicle) about the said tower gate above.400. dead bodies, besides.140.
mortally wounded and almost torn in pieces, amongst which was found a big
bellied woman stricken dead, whose womb being ripped, did yield a child on
live, and after baptised, whose picture or figure appears in the portraicte.
Some had their heads taken from their bodies, as cunningly as it had ben carved
with a sword or sharpe axe for the nonce: other some as they were playing at
cards in a Tavern or tippling house, were all destroyed with the lightning,
and converted into cinders, except the hostess or her maid that was gone into
the cellar for wine. Amongst such as were reserved on live in this horrible
slaughter, was one man, who hiding himself in a stony vault during the
extremity of the storm, durst not come out for any persuasion, for three
days after the tempest, when he demanded with great fear whether the world
stood still or not. To conclude, there was neither temple, chapel, nor other
place of sanctuary free fro the fury of this tempest, nor any corner of the
town dispensed withal for his malice, the same raging indifferently upon the
whole city, leaving it so tottered and defaced, that if there were pain in
enduring the afflictions, there is no less cause of pity now to remember so
great a desolation. Neither is it enough for the contentment of the reader,
nor sufficient to the discharge of my intent, to prefer (as it were) paterns
and familiar experience of these monstrous quarrels (skirmishes of the air and
Element above (if in some sor^e I make you not privy to the causes and motions
of the same* Whereof for a first authority, Aristotle in his Metheors and
books of the world, gives this reason: There be.ij. sorts of vapors (saith
he) which ascend continually from the earth into the air, whereof the one is hot
moist, and withal very massy and heavy, which makes a stay of the in the middle
region of the air, where they are converted into a heavy thickness or gross
corruption, and in the end dissolved into watery humours, as rain, hail,
snow, and other like: the other exhalations derived of the humours of the
earth, and drawn up by the violence of the air, be of a more dry and hot
disposition, which makes the lighter in weight, y^ same procuring them to a
higher Mout, even to ye uttermost regio, where the extremity of the heate
forces them to a fiery flame, whereof proceed those blazing Cometes, dragons,
and other like wonders in the Element, which stir up an amaze in the people
being ignorant of the cause. And if it happen that those dry vapours get
place within any cloud, they do so pierce and penetrate the most subtle part
of it, that there is forced a present vent, which is the lightning and
trembling of the heaven, from the vehemence of which conflict within the
clouds, do proceed the thunders and rattling of the skies, in such sort,
that it seems most often that the noise is in the air and the trembling in
the earth. And yet be not all tempests and storms of whether, referred
altogether to causes natural (albeit it be the opinion of Aristotle, and by
him very diligently searched: for that at certain times, devils and evil
spirits) (whose dominion and power (as S. Paule writes) is chiefly in the
air* do stir up and breed such monstrous motions, when God is contented to
give them that liberty, which is very well approved by diverse examples* as
well of profane as sacred record. And first of all in Iob, where Satan having
obtained (as it were) a licence or sauf conduict of the Lord, consumed by
tempest and fire, the servants and cattail of the Prophet: the like being
also in experience amongst the Ethnikes, for that (according to diverse of
their records of credit) at such time as the temple of Hamon, of so great
estimation among the Lybians, flourished, Satan abused the people by many
false miracles and slights of slender substance, making them worship him
under the form and figure of a Belier, or by which means having heaped
together an infinite treasure, and Cambyses king of Persia, sending his army
to spoil it, and sack the temple: the Devil stirred up such storms and
angry motions in the Element of thunder and lightnings, that the fury and
flame thereof, consumed and smoothered above Fifty Thousand persons. Plinie
also, with diverse others of the ancients affirm, that the Hetrurians did so
curiously observe and mark the signs and motions in the Thunders, that they
did not only calculate of the success, but also gave judgment of the effect
of diverse things, and seemed able (as it were by a predestination and
forewarnyng appearing in these mystical influences of the Heavens) to
determine and appoint the very day of the death and life of sundry great
estates: for example whereof, not long before the fatal day of the Emperor
Augustus Caesar, the thunder had defaced the first letter of his name, as it
stood engraved upon a pillar within the wall, which the Augurers construed to
a speedy destruction of the emperor, and that he had but a hundred days to
live, the rather because C being taken away, there rested but Esar, which
signifies in the Hetrurian tong God, and the Romains by the letter C, account
an hundred, so that they both agreed, that by the stroke of that thunder taking
away C, was figured the death of Caesar, that within the hundredth day he should
be with the Gods. Which chanced accordingly, for that the day of his death
agreed with the sentence of their prediction. A thing sure of great wonder, the
rather for that therein appears a marvelous power and subtlety of the
Devil, who by his Art seems to discover, and prognosticate the death of so
great an Emperor. Aristotle, with divers others of exquisite skill in the
study and revelation of such mysteries, have divided the effects and
operations of those Lightnings and Thunders into three degrees: the one
burns and consumes all that comes within his power: the other scorches
and makes black every thing it touches: the third exceeds them all in
na^ure and quality, and is almost utterly unknown to all the Philosophers,
for that it drayneth and dries up the Wine or other lycour, without hurting
the vessel, or gyuyng it any vent, howe close so ever it be, it is of such
subtle force that it pierces thorough every thing: it melts Gold and
Silver in the bag without hurting the purse: it burns and consumes the
apparel, without touche of harm to any part of the body that wears them:
it smoothereth also the child unborn within the womb, without doyng harm to
the mother: whereof the chiefest reason we have of Record, is brought in by
Cardanus, in his first Book de Subtilitate, and his fourth book de Varietate
rerum, wherein are described at large certain causes and occasions of those
things.

And touching the examples I have alleged, albeit they seem strange and
wonderful for the effect of Thunder, yet are they of undoubted truth. Besides
we have read and also seen in our time many valiant men put in fear with
Thunder, and divers great personages broken in pieces, murdered and slain by
such kind of death. The Pope Alexander, celebratyng his Mass on Easter day at
Syenna, and the devil belike pronouncing the passion, or rather communicatyng
with his Papisticall ceremonies, as he was upon this word or clause of
Consumatum est, behold such a sudden noise in the clouds, and opening of
the Element, began to hover and pierce into the Temple, with such terror,
that the Pope being driven to take day in performing the residue of his
prayers, habandoned the Church, left his book vnshutte for haste, and
forsook his Cope and surplice to make him self lighter to flee away, the
same being also done by his Cardinals, and every other assistant. Zoroastes,
king of the Bractiens, was killed by the fury of a Tempest. Capanus by like
means dyed at the war of Thebes, the emperor Anastasius, after he had
reigned.27. years, did end his days by semblable stroke, like as also Carius,
and diverse other Emperors were subject and consumed by the like force. Marcus
Claudius Praetor was burned within his ship by the thunder that fell upon it.
Iulius Obsequens recites a wonderful example (as here under appears) in the
stock of Pompeius Liuius, a Romain knight, who returning with his daughter
from certain plays which had ben performed at Rome, saw his daughter being
on horseback suddenly smothered stricken to death with thunder lightning, making
her be turned naked to the view of all men, saw her tong come forth at her
secret parts, as if the fire had entered in at her mouth, and forced a vent for
it self below: which shall suffice for this time both for examples and causes
of these terrible motions of the Elamet: and let us now make the ignorant
sort privy to some principal means to deliver and defend them selves from
such furies. The Ancients amongst their secret experiences, have made prouf of
diverse things resisting both thunder and lightnings, as amongst the foul and
flying Creatures certain feathers of an Eagle, but chiefly such as she bears
in her panche are ready defenses against the blast or bolt of thunder. Plinie
and other writers more familiar, describing the disposition of diverse great
fishes affirm diverse to have been saved from the violence of lightning and
thunder, by wearing a girdle made of the skin of a Seacalf. The Laurel or bay
leaf amongst trees, hath his privilege of special defence against such
assaults, for which respect the ancients have used to plant it as an assured
porter of sauetie at the entry or door of their houses. Augustus Caesar was
always crowned with it: using also to carry certain branches in his hand,
for continual fear he had of that fury. Albeit certain Latins write, that
since his time, one wearing Laurel was stricken with thunder at Rome, which
they put amongst their wonders or matters of admiration. Tarcon Etruscus
witnesses that by a certain secret property the white vine defendes from the
thunder, affirming that for the same cause in diverse countries subject to such
terrible effects, men use to enuiro their houses with the branches and bows
of the same: yet are not all these in deed of such virtue against such fury
of the heavens as the true Hiacinthe, which according to the opinion of Serapio
other old physicians, is of force not only to defend men from peril that
way, but also gives assurance by diverse proves that the Wax stamped or graved
with the same, withstandes the thunder: which they agree to have been proved in
the countries where many perished by such accident, seeing that no man hath
ever been touched which hath carried the true stone called Hiacynthe. And now
to put to the last seal to our beadroll of these injuries and angry
influences of the heavens, I have to prefer certain monstrouse stones
falling from the Element, of the colour of iron, singed and burned, not much
unlike that which the Auncientes affirm to fall in Thracia, being by
estimation of the thickness of a chariot, whereof the great Philosopher
Anaxagoras prognosticated many years before. Besides, within our age and
memory, and also in a country sufficiently known to sundry travellers. I
mean in Sugolye confynyng upon the borders of Hungarie, the seventh day of
September in the year a Thousand five hundred and fourtene, in a horrible
clap of Thunder and lightening, there fell down from Heaven, a huge Stone,
of the weight of two hundredth and fifty pounds, the which the Citizens have
made fast with a great chain of iron within their Temple, using to show it,
as a thing of great wonder to strangers visityng their province in sort of
perigrination. And to make an end, Cardanus in his fourth book De varietate
rerum, saith that he hath seen in a field in Italie, a number of harde stones
of the colour of iron, casting a smell of Sulphur fallen out of the Air,
whereof some of them weighed a Hundred and twenty pound the piece, others
three score, the which being showed to the French King (as a thing of great
wonder) in his Royal voyage to Naples, put him into a great marvel how the
Heavens could sustain so great a waighte the space of two hours, seeing
that the noise ceased not, nor the flames to flash out of the Sky from
three of the clock until five, when the fall of the stones appeased the brute
and horrible Rumbling which was in the Air.

A wonderful History of a man in our time, which washed his face and hands
in scalding Lead. CHAP. ix.
HIeronymus Cardanus writes a woderful History in his sixth book De
subtilitate, as I might say, repugnant to nature, saving that the same was
done in the presence and sight of the whole company of a City, which makes
it of more faith and credit. When (saith he) I wrote my works of subtle
inventions, I saw a certain man at Millan which washte his face hands with
scalding lead, having washte them before with some other water: wherefore
Cardanus, (as he was accustomed with great diligence enforcing himself to search
try out that secret in nature) was of opinio y^ of necessity it must be, yt
ye water wherewith he first washed was extreme cold, withal, had a certain
obscure hidden virtue, the which did with stand the heate of the lead, not
suffering ye same to cleave or stick to his body: some (saith he) affirm
that the water wherein he washed, was made of the sap of Pourpie and
Mercuriall, for because of the sliminesse and lightness thereof, which to me
seems not to be true, for that he used the same water very often to wash his
whole body, putting but a little on the place where he poured the hoate lead,
taking a crown for the sight thereof, of all such as came to see his doing
therein. And surely if ye water had been made of these two herbs, which be of
small estimation, in respect of such goodness and virtue, he would have cast
a far more quantity on his body than he did. But to conclude it, is thought
that the water which he used was metical as that of Stybium. Coferring ye
particularities thereof with ye saying of Carda other authors which I have
read, I find that in times passed, these doings were not had in so great
admiration as they be at this day, seeing we see by common experience, that
there be diverse things which of nature have not only power to resist the force
of fire, but also will not be consumed thereof, as the poulse of Pirrhus, which
when his body was broiled, it could not be consumed by the fire, men teeth
and the diamont cannot be executed by fire. And there springs a certain gum
of the Pine male, the which as Theophrastus writes, being rubbed upon the
tables of would, defendes them from the force of the fire, whereof there was
sufficient proof made by Silla with his army brought against Archelaus, who
having environed on all sides a tower of would of the said Archelaus with the
burning flames of fire, was not thereby hable to endomage the same, which Silla
much marvelled at. Isidorus and many others writes that there was brought
into the presence of Pope Alexander a white linen shirt, the which for
pleasure admiration, he caused to be caste into the fire, at such time as the
strange Ambassadors came to see him, sometimes leaving the said shirt in the
fire the space of a day, without any hurt to it, but that the same taken from
the fire, was become thereby more fairer: whereof some affirm, that the cloth
of this shirt was made of the worm, Silemander, a worm living in the fire.
which men name Salemander, who (as Aristotle teaches) lives in the fire, but
whether it be true or no, I leave that to the judgment of those which have
waded further in searching the hid mysteries secretes of nature, than I.
Albeit I know that S. Augustin hath made mentio in his.xxj. book, named the
City of God, in the.v. chapter, of a Lamp, which was in the Temple of Venus,
the which although it were exposed and brought into the wind, A Lamp burning
without the aide of oil or match.
rain or other weather coming from heaven, yet it burned with so much the
more efficacy, without consuming, having neither aid of oil or match. But
after the said S. Augustin had by diligent search, sought the marvelous
cause of that fire, which did not consume, he resolved in the end in this
sort, either it must be (says he) that there is in the said Lamp some
peace of the stone called Abseste, growing in Arcadie, the which being lighted,
cannot be quenched, or it must be (saith he) that the same Lamp was forged by
magical art, or else that this wonder was devised by some devil under the name
of Venus, to the end not only thereby to make him self worshipped, but still
to keep and entertain the people in the same error, whereof, as Ludouicus
Viues upon the expositio of the same chapter, which hath heretofore added
learned commentes to S. Augustins books De ciuitate Dei, affirms in the same
to have seen in the time of his study at Paris, matches which the fire could
not consume. And for a more proof thereof, it hath been told recounted in the
time of our fathers yt there was opened a sepulcher enclosed in the earth,
wherein was found a burning Lap, which had remained light without going out y^
space of four or v. hundredth years (as it appeared by inscription or
authority of time, engraved upon the stone) the same, dissolving into powder
as soon as it was toutched, which I could confirm by diverse like examples and
authorities of proof, as well ancient as familiar, who have left sundry
experiences of diverse things of virtue and force able to resist the fire, like
as who dippes or rubs his hands in the juice of Mauue or Mercurial, shall
never be endomaged with the fury of any flame or fire.

Wonderful Histories of the Iewes. CHAP. x.
THis wicked sect of the Iewes hath from time to time so much disquieted and
molested our Christian public weal, that the Historians of our time have
attainted the in their writing of sundry misdemeanours and abuses in living,
that whosoever shall read their cruel blasphemies abominable execrations
which they continually publish and set forth against Iesus Christ the Saviour
of all the world, in a certain book common in their Sinagoges) which they
cal Talmud, will judge the same a cause sufficient, to exile abandon them out
of all the Provinces and places where Christ is to be honoured. For like as
these poor people blinded and led in the mist of error, have not only gone
about to defame the name of our Saviour by their writings, but also that which
is worse, they have most shamefully travailed to extirpe and blot out the
remembrance of him for ever. Even so in the year a thousand, a hundred and
four score, and in the reign of king Philip, these wicked people in the
despite of the passion of Iesus Christ, upon good Friday, when they judged
that the Christians were most occupied in celebrating that day, they enclosed
them selves yearly in a cave, where having stolen a young child, they whipped
him, crounyng him with thorns, making him to drink gall, and in the end
crucified him upon a cross, continuing in this sort of cruel doings, till the
Lord grudging greatly with the death of so many poor innocents, suffered them
as thieves to be taken with the deed, and after he had caused them to be
examined and tormented for the same, they confessed that they had used this
many years before, murdering a great number of infantes in this sort, whereof
king Philip being ascertained, caused them not only to be chased from his
realm, but also broiled of them, to the number of.lxxx. in a hot burning
caudron. After that king Philip seeing him self oppressed with wars, and
wanting money to maintain the same, for a better supply of his necessity, he
(for a sum of money paid to him in hand by the said Iewes, for their
outrageous living) licenced them to return travail into France. But even as
vices be chained together, drawing one another, so these wicked people yet
smelling of this first injury which they had received, determined and fully
resolved amongst them selves, to extirp at one instant the name of Christians,
destroying the all by poison: And for a further help in these their wicked
practises, they allied them selves in consort with diverse Lepres, by whose
succours and means they made an ointment, with a confection of the blood of
mans urine composed with certain venomous herbs, wrapped within a little
lynnen cloth, tying a stone to the same to make it sink to the bottom: they
nightly cast in the said infection into all the fountains and wells of the
Christians. Whereupon this corruption engendered such cotagious diseases in all
Europe, A great infection thro^ghout all Europe by reason the water in their
wells was ympoysoned.
that there died well nigh the third person throughout the same: for this
plague passing suddenly from city to city, by the contagiousnesse thereof
destroyed and smoothered al things bearing life, encountering it. But after the
Lord had suffered to reign for a time, the tyranny of these wicked and evil
disposed persons, he stopped so their cruel enterprises, that they passed no
further therein. And like as in time diverse of those wells and fountains became
dry, by which means the empoisoned bags were found in the bottom of the
water: Even so by conjecture and suspicion, diverse of these malefactors were
apprehended: and being grievously tormented, confessed the fact, whereupon grew
such sharp severe punishment, as well to al the Iewes, as Lepres, thorough out
all the province of Europe, being found culpable thereof, that their
posterities smell thereof till this day: for they having proved so many kinds of
torments and martirdoms, that upon their imprisonments, they had greater desire
to kill and broil one an other, than become subject to the mercy of the
Christians. And as Conradus of Memdember, of equal fame in the study of
Philosophie and arts Mathematical writes, that there died in Almayn for this
cause above xij. thousand Iewes. Wherefore as it was strange to behold their
afflictions: Even so it was as extreme to see the poor Christians have in
horror abomination the water of their wells and fountains, that they rather
choosed to die of the drought, than to receive any drop thereof into their
bodies, but having recourse to rain water, or to rivers, whereof they had
greater want than any store or plenty at all, finding not at al times to serve
their turns, they prevented sundry times the peril of the poison. And as
these false deceivers were of all nations much detested, so they often times
proved diverse kinds of calamities (as the Historians testify:) the same
Coradus Licostenes amongst others, recites a strange device hapening in the
year.434. about which time he found by fortune in the Isle of Cre^e, a seducer
and false prophet, or rather a wicked spirit* as they might coiecture by the
issue of his enterprises. This prophet preached openly through al the Isle, that
he was the same Moyses which brought the Israelites from the servitude of
Pharao, and that he was sent again from God to deliver the Iewes fro the
bondage servitude of the Christians: wherein having thus planted the roots of
his pestilent doctrine, he thereby won the people by false miracles and other
diabolical illusions, that they began to forsake their houses, lands,
possessions, and al the goods they had, to follow him, in such sort, that they
found no other matter in that country, but a great troupe of Iewes,
accompanied with their wives and children, which followed this holy man as their
chief. And after he had well led the in this miserable error, he made them mount
in the end to the height of a rock, joining to the sea, and there told them,
that he would make the pass through the sea on foot, as he had tofore brought
the people of God thorough the floude of Iordain, which he coloured so finely
by his deceyuable art, that he persuaded them very easily, and in such sort,
that the pore people gathered together on a heap, did caste them selves
headlongs into the sea. Whereby the greatest part of them were drowned, and
the rest saved by certain christen Fishermen, which were then in the sea.
Whereof the Iewes perceiving the great deceit whereby he had abused them,
could not by any human Art hear any news, nor discover where was become
their prophet, which gave occasion to many of them, not only to think, but
also write, that he was a Devil under the shape and figure of a man, which had
so deceived them. Sebastian Muster writes in his book of universal
Cosmography an other history of them set out in a more gay and brave fashion,
saying: That in the year of health.1270. when the County of Steruembergh was
bishop of Mandeburgh, one of the chief Priests of the Synagoges of the Iewes,
fell by chance upon their Saboth day into a deep Iakes, out of which he
could not get, and thereby constrained to call for the aide of his companions,
who being arrived, said unto him with grievous complaints, that it was their
Saboth day, and that it was not lawful for them as that day to yield him the
benefit of their hands, but willing him to use patience till the next day
following, which was sunday. The bishop of Mandeburgh advertised of this, being
a very wise man, gave commandment to the Iewes by the sound of a Trumpet,
that upon pain of death they should fro henceforth keep holy and solemnise as
their Saboth day the Sunday. By means whereof, this poor martyr remained
parfumed till the Monday.

Floods and wonderful Inundations of Waters. CHAP. xj.
THe antiquities of forain times have sufficiently proved the horrible rage of
waters, that if I should go about to declare them in order, I should rather
want Eloquence to describe them, than matter whereupon to entreat. The first
and most worthy of memory, is sufficiently showed by Moyses, in the.vij.
chapiter of the book of Genesis, at what time God opened the veins of heaven,
and sent down such abundance of water upon all the earth for the purifying and
clensyng of the sins of men, that the same overflowed the highest mountains
above.xv. cubits. And in the reign of king Henry the fourth, the waters raged
with such impetuosity within the provinces of Italie, that there was not
only thereby drowned many thousand men, but that which was more strange (as
the Historians make metion) the tame household beasts, as hens, geese, Pehens,
such like, were by the terror thereof so frighted, that they became savage,
watering in the deserts and forests, and never after to be reclaimed. Whereof S.
Augustine in the third book called, the City of God, makes mention, that in
the year of health 1446. and on the.xvij. day of April, in the time of
Federike the.iij. Emperor, at what time printing was first found out) there
was in Hollande, so great an inundation of water, and the sea overflowed the
banks with such fury, that it brake the causeys running behind Dordrech,
covering al the land, as well cities as villages, in such sort that there were
drowned not only xvj. parishes, but also.100000. men with their wives,
children, and beasts. And in ye year 1530. in Hollande, Flaunders, and
Brabant, the sea so swelled, that it brake not only bulwarks and rampires, but
also violently carried away both cities and villages together with the creatures
in them: besides made all the haven towns no less navigable, than the open
and main sea: which not only chanced in Flaunders, but also the same year the
river of Tyber so flowed in Rome, that it mounted above the highest towers and
estages of the city, and withal not only breaking down the bridges, but
endamaging their goods, as gold, silver, corn, wine, cloth of silk, flower,
oils woull, and other riches, to the value of three millions of gold, besides
the loss of three thousand persons, as well men as women and little children,
which were thereby smoothered and drowned. Wherein as all these matters were
marvelous: so the auncientes and writers at this day, have not made proof of
one more strange since the universal flood of No, than this which chanced
in Phrygia, in the year of grace.1230. For even as when they thought them
selves most happy, and were banqueting, drinking, and giving them selves over
to all kinds of pleasure, behold all the land, nigh to the sea of Phrygia
and Halderich, were in one moment so covered with water, and the sea so peopled
with men and beasts, crying with pitiful vehemence, that it seemed by them,
that God had forgotten his vow made to No, wherein he promised never to
destroy mankind by water again. Albeit the rage was so cruel that men were
forced to climb trees like birds, others ramped upon the mountains, the
mothers caste their children upon the ground, to the end they might with
more speed flee and shun the fury of the element. And to be short, the
desolation was such, that there was not only an infinite multitude of men,
women, children, and beasts drowned: but that which was more to be lamented,
the corruption which sprang of the putrified bodies, after the waters were
retired to their old chanel, so infected the air with a sudden plague, that
the rest which were saved from drowning, were destroyed by the miserable
infection thereof, in such sort that the Province remained almost desert and
inhabitable. Wherein who list to behold Floods more fresh in memory,
wherewith other Cities have been tormented, let him read Carrion in the
Abridgement of his Chronicles, and all those of Gasparde Contarenus, in his
learned book of Philosophie, which he made of the four Elements.

The wonderful death of Plinie, with a brief description of the causes of
fire, which come of certain openyngs of the earth.
LIke as it is strange that the fire falling from heaven should burn those
places which it touches: Even so it is more monstrous to see the same issue
from the earth, without knowing where it first took her nurture, beginning
and birth, as this, whereof Titus Liuius and Orseus make mention, which sprang
of the entrails of the earth, in the territory of Calene, which ceased not
burning by the space of three days three nights, until it had committed to
cinders about five acres of ground, drying so much the moisture and humour of
the ground, that not only the Corn and other fruit, but also the trees with
all their roots were burnt and consumed. Diverse Historians write, that in the
old time the most part of the Realm of Scotland was by the like violent
irruption of fire springing from an unknown opening and cave of the earth,
quite consumed and burned. The cause whereof, the Philosophers have searched
with great diligence, and in the end found that Sulphur, Allom, Pitch and
Water be the cause of the entertaining of that fire, together with the very
fatness of the ground, and that fire after it hath found a vent, can not
long continue without issuing with a wonderful violent force. And for the most
part these flames have been diverse times seen of the people (with great wonder
terror to them) commonly about the Sepulchers and Churchyards, and other fat
moyste places, which was engendered of the fertility and moistness of the
dead bodies, who were there buried: for men amongst all other creatures, be
of a very subtle and fat substance, as is plainly showed by that which is
discovered in our time of the Sepulcher of Alexander Duke of Florence, which,
although it were made of white Marble both massy heavy, yet notwithstanding,
the fatness of ye body pierced distilled through the said Sepulcher, piercing
the bottom of the pillours thereof. In like manner the moisture of the body of
Alphonsus Aualus, albeit the Physicians had dried the same with salt and
sand, and inwrapped his body in lead, yet the fatness thereof spotted and
spoiled not only the stones above the Tomb, but dropped through every part
of the lead. And there is also a mountain called Hecla in the Isle of
Island, whereof one George Agricola, a man amongst others of our time worthy
of memory, hath made mention reporting the same to caste such flames, and
making so great a a noise, that it seems to be made, the same casting and
darting great stones withal vomitteth Sulphur, smothering, as in a gulf,
all those which approach to behold the nature of that fire: whereby the common
people of that country be brought in such an error, that they believe that
place to be ye prison of the damned. Besides also many Historias write, that
there appeared in that place visions, which show themselves visible, and make
their service to men: they appear for the most part in the shape and figure
of those which by some violent adventure have been either killed or drowned:
and when those which they know makes their return to their houses, they
answer them with marvelous complaint weepingins, willing them to return to
the mount Hecla, so suddenly pass vanish away. But for my part, I have
always thought, that they be certain disciples of the devil, which have
vowed them obedience in that place, to deceive the people, being by nature of a
Barbarous gross capacity: whereof, as we have declared before yt the cause of
these hideous and pepetuall flames is natural, so it also comes of the
fertility of the ground, together with the plenty of Sulphur wherewith the
merchants load so many ships, carrying them into strange countries. And
moreover, the fatness of the groude of this Island, as the Ancients and
Historians at these days write, is such (and especially in the lowe country)
that they are constrained to feed their cattle but a small time, least they
should surfeit of the sweetness thereof, so die, as is daily proved. Neither
let us muse or be to curious in searching the cause of these flames of the
mountains so far from us, for we have the mount Vesuue near to Naples,
whereof Martial, Strabo, and Xiphilnius in the life of Seuerus the Emperor
have very often in their writing made mention to be in times pastmost fertile,
is now by the continual embraces of the fire utterly ruinous and consumed,
and in the time of Titus Caesar, it caste forth such plenty of fire, that it
burned two Cities, and the smoke thereof rose so thick and high, that it had
well-nigh darkened the Sun, making the days like to the night, and all the
fields thereabouts were so full of cinders, that they seemed in heighte equal
with the trees. Wherein Plinie (who reigned in the time of Vespasian the
Emperor) desiring to know the cause of the continual burning of this
mountain, went to see it, and approaching too near the same, was at the sight
thereof so astonished, that he was immediately surprised with the flame, and his
body thereby committed to ashes, as you may behold in the pourtraite before:
that which is yet fresh in memory, in the year 1538. where it began again to
make so great an irruption, that it feared al the people bordering upon it. We
can in like manner bring in amongst these wonderful mountayns, the mount Aetna,
otherwise called the mount Gibell, in Sicile, whereof S. Augustine hath made so
often mention in his works, and which Strabo witnesses, as one that hath not
feared to mount to the very heighte to behold and consider the marvelous
effects thereof, whereof Sueton affirms, that Caius Caesar, Caligula Emperor of
the Romains, having beheld this great store of fire, that the mount vomited
forth, was therewith so feared, that he fled by night to Messane, and not
without cause, for after the winds had gotten within the events of this
mountain, it darted forth mighty stones, and great flakes of burning fire,
which consumed all things it encountered. Thucidide makes mention of three
notable embracementes of this mount Aetna, which was after the Greekes had
gotten to Sicile. And Orose recites, that in the time that Marcus Aemilius and
Lucius Oresteus were Consuls, the same mount suddenly threw out such a
quantity of flames of sulphur, that al the country theraboutes was
destroyed: by means whereof, the Romains remitted the ordinary tribute which
they received of those of Casine for the space of ten years. And the men at
those days thought that the matter wherewith the fire was nourished, was quite
consumed, for that ye same ceased for a time: but in the year.1570. they very
well proved the contrary: for as they were astoonished at the great mass of
fire, with the light darkened. Even so that light of the sulphur fell from the
height of the said mountain to the lowest part thereof, the which by a certain
coldenesse could not be so well governed, but that running here and there, it
burned not only fields, stones, forrestes, but also two villages, and all that
it encountered, and the fire being at this time extinguished, the ground by
that means brings forth much good fruit, and withal is become fertile.

Wonders of certain horrible earthquakes, chancing in diverse provinces, with a
deceit of Satan, who by his craft and subtlety made a Romaine Knight to
throw him self headlong into a gulf. CHAP. xiij.
THe Histories years of Romains, Greekes, Parthains, Medians, Persians, and
others like, have so often made mention of the ruinous chance of many Cities
and Provinces, by the trembling of the earth, that I could bring to memory,
very near the number of five hundredth greatly renowned, which perished and
were destroyed by this kind of torment, as Epheseus, Magnesus, Sardos, Cesaree,
Philadelphius, Mirimneus, Apolonius, Nicomedius, Antiocheus and many others, in
such sort, that in one night in the time of Tibereus the Emperor under whom
ye saviour of the world was crucified, twelve of the most proud Cities of Asia
were made ruinous in one night by the sudden trembling of the earth, as
Plinius and Cornelius write. In like sort at what time Flaminius warred
against Hanibal, and as their hostess were ready to join battle ye one
against the other, the earth began so vehemently to event shake, that many of
the strongest parts of the Cities, and diverse of the highest mountains were
battered and made flat with the earth: and yet (as says Titus Liuius) these
two armies were so enraged the one against the other, that they forbear not to
continue their fury, making no account of these wonders: whereof who lists
to read Dion Niceus and Xiphilinus, in the life of Anthonie the Emperor,
shall find so strange earthquakes happening in Hellespont and Bithinie, that
it cannot seem otherwise, but yt those provinces should be devoured swallowed
up. The Isle of the Rhodes so much renowned by writings, hath been very often
decayed by earthquakes, in so much that the great Idol and Image of the Sun,
which shone so greatly in Rhodes, made by Chares Lindius scholer of Lisippus,
when he was twelve years of age, the which was in heyghte three score and six
cubits, was defaced and broken by trembling of the earth, the.lv. year after
the setting up thereof, which was once again laid on the earth in the time of
Plinie, to the great marvel of those which went to see it, in such sort that
the very thombe of that Image, surpasses in bigness ye greatest Image which
they could find, and the riches of that Image was so marvelous, that when the
Sultan of Egipte invaded Rhodes, he loaded with the fragmentes relics of
Brass of that Image which he found battered, nine hundredth Camels, which he
sent by land into Alexandria. And moreover Iosephus in his first book of the
wars of the Iewes, makes metion of an earthquake which chanced in Iudee, by
the violence whereof there was killed a thousand men, wherein as the Ancients
under the government of Eudoxius, willing to celebrate a second Council at Nice,
to undo the articles agreed upon by ye general council, were suddenly
astonished even when their Bishops Prelats were assembled, with the sudden
moving shaking of the City of Nice, wherein many building sounke, and many
thousands of men were devoured and choked, who perceiving that god was not
cotente with their enterprise, were forced to desist from their purpose, and
return to their Provinces, (as Fuctius writes.) Also in the year.1345. the
day of the conversion of S. Paul, was so horrible an earthquake in Venise (as
Sabellique writes) that by ye space of five days together, they saw no other
thing but houses building decay, and besides that, all the women being with
child during that time, were delivered before their times, their fruit lost.
But to the end we should not consume much time in committing to memory the
hurts received in ye old time by those shakings of ye earth, we have in our
age proved ye like in ye year of our Saviour.1538. the.xxvj. day of January,
where the Realm of Portugal was so shaked, by the thrusting together of ye
earth, yt there fell at Lisbone (as the writers at this day report) very near
a thousand or.xij. hundredth buildings, besides more than.ij. hundredth others
which where half decayed, that torment cotinuing.viij. days, ye assaults
thereof renewed.v or.vj. times a day, by means whereof al ye poor inhabitats
were so frighted, yt they abandoned their houses lodged in ye fields. Tit{us}
Liuius in his vij. book.j. decade, Oroseus in his.ij. book.v. chap. Iulius
Obsequens, Polidorus Virgilius many others, have made mention of a strange
earthquake in Rome, which me seames worthy of memory in this place for the
novelty of an act so strangely happening. They write that in the time of
Seruilius Hala, and Lutius Genutius being Consulles, the City of Rome was
besieged with a sudden shaking of the earth, which being ceased, left a
certain cave or depth in the midst of a place of the City, which by no means
could be closed or shut up with all the earth or other matter they could
caste into it besides: there issued out thereof such a stink of diverse
pestilent and infectiue vapours, that the most part of the Citizens of the
City were therewith infected: and after they had searched all the means they
could to remedy their evil, they determined (as their last refuge) to
demand council therein of their divines and soothsaiers, who after they had
done to them their accustomed ceremonies, they answered that it was not
possible by any artificial means to close it up, unless the most precious
Jewel in all the City were caste into it: wherefore, after that the Ladies
and other Romain Citizens had liberally caste into it the most precious
Jewels that they had in their closets, without profiting or appeasing the fury
of that gulf, Marcus Curtius an excellent and valiant Romain Knight, armed
at all points, and mounted upon the best horse in his stable, cast himself
headlong into that depth, the which immediately closed up, and so ceased to
rage. So much is the deceit of the devil in this world, that men thinking to do
sacrifice to their Gods, to deliver their country from captivity, make their
souls a willing sacrifice to the devil. Wherewith ending these earthquakes, it
rests now to show y^ causes of their beginning. Aristotle, Plinie, and
generally all those who have treated of the motion of the earth, attribute the
causes of that evil fortune to the vapours and exhalations which be enclosed in
ye intrailles of ye earth, by whose force searching to event and to come
forth, the earth is moved and stirred, which is of power in some places to
dissunder strong walls and buyldyngs, and make them fall into the earth: and
in some place it leaves a hollow hole or cave, like to that in Rome, whereof
we made mention: sometimes these fires issue before any assault or warning
given, where diverse times at the very same instant, may be heard an horrible
sound and murmure, like to the mutterings or clamours of men, according to the
quantity of the matter which is shaken, or the forume of the cave by the which
the vapour passes, leaving sometimes a cave which shows the thing swallowed:
and sometimes the earth is made so firm suddenly, that they can find no token
thereof, and at other times devours whole villages, swallowyng sometimes the
most part of a country. And that which is to be noted, these earthquakes
happen for the most part, rather in the Spring time, and in Autumn, than in
any other season of the year.

Wonders of two bodies knit together, like two graftes in the tronke of a
tree, whereof S. Augustine in a book of the City of God makes mention. CHAP.
xiiij.
Such need not to be astonnied at all of the figure of this monster, which
have read the eight Chapiter of S. Augustine, in his.xvj. book written of the
City of God, where a little before his time was borne an infant in the east
parties, which was double above, and single below, having two heads, two
breasts, four hands, and the rest of the body in the shape of one, that is
to say, two thighs, two feet, one belly, and the rest from the navel
downward, had not but the figure of one ma (as he witnesses in a place
before) and living so, many went to see it for the rename and fame thereof.
And that whereof also I thought somewhat to speak, for that this whose portraict
is presented, is like unto that which S. Augustine writes of, saving that
that had the figure of a man, and this the form of a woman, who was engendered
upon the confines of Normandie, and Englande, at what time Henry the third
there reigned. Whereof, if you will well consider, you shall find the same to
be a strange spectacle in Nature: for behold, these two bodies were knit
together from the top of their heads to their navel, like.ij. graftes in the
trunk of a tree, having two heads, two mouths, two noses, with their faces
fair, well formed and made in every point requisite in nature even to the
navel, and from the navel downwards, it had but the figure and shape of one
only, that is to say, two legs, two thighs, one nature, and one only conduict
whereby the excrements were discharged. And that which was more pitiful, is
that they differed in all the actions of nature: for sometimes when the one
wept, the other laughed, if the one talked, the other held her peace, as the
one eat, the other drank: Living thus a long season, till one of them died,
the other being constrained to trail the dead body after her for certain
years after, where by the stink and corruption of her who was dead, in the
end she was infected, and died also. The Authors of this be Cuylerinus,
Mattheus Palmerius, Vincentius in his.xxvj. book and xxxviij. Chapiter.
Hieronymus Cardan, an excellent Millanois Physician, searching greatly the
secretes of Nature, which at this day is living, affirms in his.xiiij. book
of his books of diverse histories, that in the year.1544. in the month of
January, the like monster was engedred in Italie, which he describes in points
like unto this, and the mother brought it forth in the end of the.ix. month,
very well formed in all respects, and withal corpulente, notwithstanding it
died immediately after the mother was brought to bed, by means that the sage
women had used to much force and violence in taking the same from the body of
the mother. And further he describes afterwards a thing worthy to be noted:
which is, that there was a surgeon named Gabriel Cuneus, a man very expert in
his art, who heretofore had ben his disciple, made an Anatomy of this
monstrous maid, committing her into pieces: and after he had opened the
interior parts, he found a double womb, all the intestines double, saving
that which they cal rectu, besides he found two livers, and so almost all the
other parts, reserving the heart, which was single: the which moves us to
think (saith Cardan) that Nature wold have created two, saving that by some
defect she imperfected the whole.

A History of a Monster, whereof S. Hierome makes mention, who appeared to S.
Anthonie in the desert. CHAP. xv.
SAint Hierom, Licostenes, and Isidorus make mention of a monster, who upon a
sudden appeared to S. Anthonie, whilst he did penance in the desert, having
(as it is written) the form of a man, his nose hideous hauked, two horns on
his head, and his feet like to a goat, according to his figure appearing in
this portraict, whereof that holy man being afraid to behold so wonderful a
creature in the desert, he conjured him in the name of God to tell him what he
was, who answered him, I am a mortal man as thou art, appointed to dwell in
this wilderness, which the common people (deceived) are persuaded to be one of
these hurtful Satyrs, wandering by the deserts, or else some enchanting
devil: whereof also the holy man S. Augustine in his first book and third
question of Genesis makes mention, in that he reports so diversely of certain
devils (hurtful specially to women) that it is neither easy nor seeming to
pronounce a resolution, albeit in the.xxv. chapiter and.xv. book of the city
of God, he speaks more frankly, affirming by the authority of scripture,
that angels have appeared to certain men with mortal shape, and have not only
been seen of them, but suffered them selves to be touched by such as they have
appeared unto. Bysides there be many of opinion now a days by report of others,
and thousands who have proved it true by experien^e in themselves, that there
be certain imps and gliding spirits in the woods and savage places, which the
common sort call Nymphs, who desire the company of women, have had to do with
them, deliting chiefly in such unclean and filthy exercise: which albeit is
sufficiently and absolutely approved by so many, that it is not almost to be
denied, yet for my part I dare not affirm, and much less assure, that the
spirits that have their bodies of the air, participate with that element, can
either desire or perform effects of such unclean pleasure: wherein
notwithstanding, who seeks to be more largely resolved, let him read
Guilielmus Parisiensis, in ye third part of his treatise de succubis and
Incubis, who albeit he hath gathered the opinio of most of the Theologians, yet
Lodouicus Viues in the.xxiij. chapter of his fifte book de ciuitate Dei,
despising such vanity, makes them of the I'll of Cypres, a mocking stock,
because they glorify their original, as moving first from the Dyuels succubi
and incubi, whereof you have heard a large description before.

A wonderful discourse of precious stones, their nature and propretie, which
resoneth of their procreation, and other strange things, breeding in the
bowels of the earth. CHAP. xvj.
Amongst all and every cause of wonder in Nature, there is none that more
moves marvel in men, nor half so meritorious of philosophical contemplation,
than the excellent propretle of precious stones, who being once drawn out of
the entrails and womb of their mother and nurse the earth, do so amaze our
sight and ravish our senses, that they seem to contain some charm or new
mystery sent by nature to dazzle our eyes* Ludouicus Vartomanus a Romain
writes, that he hath seen the king of P^g^, a famous city in India, have
Carbuncles, which the Gretians call Pyropi, so great shining, that who beheld
them in any dark or shaded place, seemed to have his body distempered, and
almost transformed by imagination: such was the light and piercing glimmers
of these stones, seeming of no less force to penetrate than if they had been
assisted with the most hoate and vehement reflection of the Sun. The most
part of the Greek and Latin philosophers, as Theophrastes, Mutianus, Plinie,
Ruffus, with other of no less credit than they, have so precisely searched
the propretie and procreation of stones, that they affirmed, that they do not
only engender, but also do suffer diseases, old Age, and Death. And touching
the procreation, they are of diverse opinions. For some say, they engender
between rocks, when the sap or juice of other stones distilles within the
creuices or hollow places of she same, even as the child takes his beginning
of his mother: some affirm, that they conceive of the sap mary of precious
metals, like as oftetimes is found the reason in diverse mines of gold silver:
some again, who take upon them to sift more narrowly the secretes of Nature,
are of opinion, that they come and grow in the earth, as knots in wood,
waxkernels in men, or seed in herbs: whereunto as there may be credit given
according to reason that moves it, so there be other Philosophers, either more
ignorant of the truth, or more precise than stands either with learning or
natural persuasion, The Adamant smells and ^eleth.
who doubt not to assure absolutely, that they have sense motion, whereof they
prove the first by the Adamant, which smells iron, draws it to him, whose
virtue shall follow at full hereafter. And for the second, they make good their
opinion by a common experience in a little stone not rare in France Italye
called by them Astroites, which being put within either vinegar or wine, moves
of himself, with crooked pace not unlike to an Ox or Cow reeling here and
there: and yet I think these several opinions, intede rather to advance the
estimation and property of stones, than to persuade a credit that they have
either motion or feeling, albeit touching this stone called Astroites, it is
most certain that it stirs being put in wine: whereof notwithstanding mine
eyes have been often witnesses, yet is it not sufficient to assure, albeit it
is not altogether void of cause reason in nature to prove his moving, seeing
it is not clear nor shining, but covered with spots or staines like ashes
preseting a duskish hue or coplexion, ye same being made of an humour very
subtle, which may be converted into vapour by force of the wine, which vapour
searching ways to go out and can find no issue, thrusts (as it were and
gives motion to the stone which is light,) like as the true sign and argumet
of the subtle vapour is proved chiefly in that ye stone is full of little
knobs which persuades it to be corrupt or rotten, and to have both hoales
and conduits* Here as it may be that some have a precise opinion of my
diligence in searching so narrowly the cause of moving in this stone, (which
notwithstanding), as I accopte such Philosophie neither unnecessary, nor
unprofitable, seeing it gives cause of wonder to such as see it stir alone,
without understanding the reason. So, were it not that tediousness would take
away the delight of the readers, and peradventure include some discredit
touching the thing it self, I could prefer matters of more wonder in stones,
and such as have passed by proof and familiar experience. Hector Boethius makes
mention of a sponging stone in Scotlande, which being dipped in the Sea,
alters the taste thereof, and makes it pleasant. Other historias bring in a
kind of stone which is piercing and somewhat pale, which they call Nicolaus,
the same making him that wears, it sad and melancholic, and so wrestes the
sprites and inward parts that it stirs up wonderful passions in the mind:
they have left also remembrance of a wonderful virtue in the Jewel hanging
about the neck of Hermion, which makes as many perish as wear it: it is most
certain that in Archadie a country in Scotland, there is a kind of stone,
which being laid any small time upon straw or other like dry substance, it
kindles and grows to flame without the assistance of fire: all which because
thy seem wonders exceeding our reason, things rather mystical than agreeing
with our capacity, I will now stay to comitte them any more to the judgment
or contemplation of the reader, and enter into the search and discourse of the
being and property of those that be both familiar with our selves common in our
use. Amongst the most rich precious treasures which the earth bred in her
intrailles, or caste up for the use of man, the Diamont deserves most
estimation, who besides his violent clearness which of it self hath power to
dim our eyes as if it were the sudden flash of a thunder, is of a hardness
so infringible, that it resistes not only the hammer or stroke of other
mettle, but it is also invincible against fire or flame. Plinie in his last
book of his natural histories writes, that in his time, the Diamot was not
found but in the Courts of Princes, and that very rarely: but now nature,
which since his age is become more bountiful, doth yield us such plenty of
it, that there is not so mean a merchant mans wife at this day, whose fingers
are not decked with that Jewel. Ezechiel and Zacharie, two of the most
famous Prophets in the Church of GOD, have given great honour to this stone,
and not without cause, for besides his common properties to withstand venom,
poison, charms, dreams, enchauntementes, and visions of the night, yet hath
he a most wonderful virtue to resist fire, according to the opinion of some
Philosophers, whose experience warrantes it to be of force to endure amyds the
most hot burning coals that be, for nine days continually, without
diminushing any part of it: such is the excellency of this stone that way,
albeit in this place it cannot seem impertinent to my intent of true
descriptions of stones, to impart to the readers, wherein both the Aunciet and
late writers have erred touching the reservation of the properties of this
stone. Plinie, with most that were before him, and Francisce Ruell professor
of Phisike, with Morbodeus a latter Poet, (writers not long since) have
greatly abused the simplicity of a number of people, in persuading, that the
Adamant hath no power over the iron, neither to smell nor draw it, if the
Diamont be in place, seeing the contrary is proved by common and daily
experience, even so they have erred no less in that they assure the Diamont
not to be vanished either by fire, iron or other mean, except only by the
blood of a^ he goat, for it is most certain that the hammer is of force to
bruise and bring him in pieces, being stricken with a strong hand. I will not
deny but that it exceeds all other stones in hardness, and that it deuides
and confounds all other precious stones by his solidity, neither is he with
ease to be polished or framed with other thing tha with his own lime, powder
or dust, with this further argumet of his subtlety hardness, which ye
Ancients did practise with great marvel, that ye point of a dart, dagger or
other instrument cutting, being dipped in the powder or forge of Diamont, doth
penetrat or pierce any armour, for ye iron steel being chafed or stirred with
the blow, with the vehement hardness of the forge, makes it of power to pierce
easily whatsoever resistes it. Nature hath yet given to the Diamot another
secret singular property, no less marvelous than the other, which is, that
being cha^ed it draws a rush or light straw, as the Jet doth, but not with
such vehemence. Many other strange condicios in a diamont could I prefer,
and the same approved both by foreign and familiar writers: but because they
bring with them a suspicion of lightness or discredit, I will reserve them for
an other use time, and note unto you in this last discourse of the diamont, how
nature in counterpaise of the sundry graces and good gifts bestowed upon it,
hath infected it with one special and mortal vice, for that it is most
venemouse, and of such fatal operation, that it stoppes breath as soon as it
is drunk in powder, which some affirm to proceed of his extreme coldness,
and other hold it to move by a violent gnawing in the bowels. The greatest
diamot that ever was seen, exceeds not in greatness an Almonde, which as I
have heard, remains amongst the Jewels of Solyman, late Emperor of the
Turks. The nature of the Emeraud.
Most writers have given the second place of honour for stones to ye Emeraud,
because that by his lively verdure he doth not only solace the eye more than
any other stone, but also for delight and flourishing view, it so surmountes
both forests, trees, and herbs, that nature seems to contend with the
earth, to whom the price of greenness is due, either to the Emeraud or ye
plants. Touching the exellencie of this stone, they write that it abhors all
unclean and filthy livers, The Emeraud enemy to vncleanesse.
and is a special friend to chastity: the which they make good by an example
experience in the King of Hungarie, who lying with his wife, and having an
Emeraud on his finger, marvelled to see it break and convert to many pieces,
which might also happen as well by chance, as come of any virtue in the stone,
seeing that (of all other stones) it is most frail tender. The most true and
credible properties attributed to this stone by most learned men be these.
First Aristotle gives council to hang it at the head of him that hath the
falling sickness. Rabie persuades that if a man drink ix. grains of it, it
dries up evil humours. Sana Verola affirms that if it be laid to the thigh
of a woman feeling the pain of child bearing, it procures delivery. Rasis
Dioscorides will such as be infected with leprosye to drink the powder of an
Emeraud, whereunto as are diverse other singularities, so because they be not
grounded upon good substance, let them persuade credit, according to the
wisdom of such as can judge of them: for my part in such causes of
difference and doubt, I had rather be careful than curious: but for a familiar
example of the estimation and value of the Emeraud, I may boldly commend and
bring in the honour of King Edward, who having received a book from Erasmus,
presented him with an Emeraud, valued after his death at three thousand
crowns, whereof that famous clerk made so dear account, that he had it on
his finger even at the instant of his death. Suetonius writes that Nero was
wont to discern the eyes and looks of ruffians and dashebucklers within an
Emeraud. Good Emeraudes do prove them selves by the touch stone called Lidia,
which if they be natural and true, they leave a mark like the touche of
brass. Saint Iohn in his Apocalipse hath given great honour to this stone.
That which the Ancients called a Carbuncle, is no other thing than that which
we commonly call a Ruby, which takes his name by the similitude he hath in
light with the burning coal: the same being committed to the flames doth not
only resist their force, but exceeds them in clearness: touching his
gifts and properties, the Philosophers most commonly commend it of a virtue
to chase away melancholy, defend dreams and illusions of the night, and to
serve for a counterpoison against all corrupt air. There be of them diverse
kinds, as the Grenat, and such other, whereof I will speak particularly
hereafter. The Sapphire gyves no place at all to the Ruby, seeing that as the
one representes unto us fire when he is in his most vehement and penetrant
heate: so in the other we discern a likeness of the azured Sky being most
calm and clear. Besides, there was no stone of more price amongst the
Auncientes for the use of P^sike tha the true Sapphire. For Auicenne witnesses
that it is of a virtue so binding, by reason of his coldness, that it
staunches presently bleeding at the nose. Galene and Dioscorides assure it to
restrain webs, pushes or boils, and other things yt else would offend the
eyes. The Physicians of late time have put it with great effect under the
tongues of such as have suffered hot and burning fevers, finding that the
great cold in the stone hath mortified the heate of the disease. It serves as
a country poison against all venoms, and defendes all infections of air from
such as wear it in pestilent times, as Isodorus and Rufus write: some say
they have read in Dioscorides, that the Saphyre enclosed in a box with a
spider, kills her suddenly, such is his power over her poison. The Amatist
in Aristotles time (as it is written) was not commended, for any thing, saving
that it resisted drunkenness. The Hiacintha, withstandes thunders, as is
already showed in the History of thunders, for a more proof whereof,
Serapius affirms that no man hath been ever offended with thunder which
carried the Hiacinthe about him. The Turquise (according to the most
Philosophers) is of no singular property, but to chase away thoughts and
troubles of the brain. The best of them come from a town in Persia, called
Balascha, where there is great store. For the Agate, this is the most wonder
and virtue that I find in it, that the Arabians used to try the maydenheade
of their wives before they married them, by giving them of the powder of the Agate
in wine, which according to their lightenesse I pass over for this time, like
as also I forbear to enterlarde my treatise with descriptions of pearls, the
stones of Aquilin, Alectre with many other, because God willing, many years
shall not pass before I set before your eyes an universal description of all
the ^cious stones whereof the Arabians, Egiptians, Hebrewes, Greekes and Latins
have left memory in their writings, together with the secretes in making
artificial stones, which I doubt not will be of profit to the common wealth,
seeing that by that means shall be cut of every mean and way to the fine
Italiens and others, whose study tends not but to corrupt, counterfaicte and
abuse that which is sent unto us by Nature, both perfect, sincere and without
spot. Besides the peculiar pleasure redounding to noble men and Gentlemen,
who in their private houses may discern the devises in artificial stones,
and practise the like if they list, and that at small charges by the aid of
my endeavour only, which according to my talent, I will frankly impart
amongst them: wherewith leaving to treat further of the virtues in stones,
till their time agree to bring them to light, it is now necessary to
distribute (in manner of a counterpoyson) their several faults and vices, with
means to discern the true from the false. The most common faults which are
found in stones, consiste for the most part, in fumes shadows or clouds,
which do so darken them, that in some part they do diminish their beauty
clearness: some again be thick, formed with a sharpe point, enterlarded
with certain veins strokes, wihich do some way take away the estimation of
their value. You may discern the true perfect from the false corrupt, by the
judgement of the eye, lime, substance touch: by the view, because the clerenesse
of ye true stone is more shining, constant, of greater contentmet to the eye, and
not so dim or dull by the light of the candle, as that which is formed of
artificial matter, the same in deed being the best mean to try a perfect
stone. They are also known by their lyme, being of force to resist the
lively temper, so that, that hardness cannot be counterfeited by any
artificial imitation. The third judgment of stones is by their substance
touche, because they be more light and cold than those that be imperfect:
which is a direct experience amongst the Indians, who being the most excellent
Lapidaries of the world, do prove them by the touch of the tong, buying such
for the best as they find most cold. There be also certain precious stones
found in the bellies of beasts, which Georgius Agricola witnesses by a stone
called Alectorius, found in the intralles of old capons, whereof also Plinie
makes mention, speaking of the conquest of Milo Crotoniatos. In an other
country of the Indians is found a stone in the heads of old and great
toads, which they call Borax or Stelon, which Brasauolus approves, is most
commonly found in the head of a he toad, and yet is of opinion that it is
rather a boane than a stone, which some affirm to be of power to repulse
poisons, and that it is a most sovereign medecin for the stone. There is a
certain stone found within the gall of an ox, and the same in ordinary
practise of phisike at this day in Turkie: some such be found in France, but
not so common. There is a late writer of phisike who affirms that not long
since there was a stone found in the bladder of a mans gall, infected with
leprosy: which I may boldly affirm with the like, for that I saw in Paris,
an Anatomy of a mans body, dead upon the disease of the stone, which had in
his bladder a stone as big as a pigeons egg. There be stones engendered in
the heads of fishes, as Aristotle writes of the Maigre and many other, which I
reserve (as I said before) to describe more plentiful hereafter, treating
lastlye and for end of our disputation, of stones of the virtue of the
Adamant, which hath so amazed many of our late Philosophers, that they doubt
not to believe, that it hath both vital motion and feeling. The anciets for want
of knowledge of the true property and condition of this stone, have been so
troubled in their navigation, that they have not been able to discover either
country or company on the sea, whether it were in peace or war, but by
judgement of the Sun or stars: but now that God hath more plentifully set
abroache the vessel of his grace by the benefit of the Adamant, navigation is
both so easy and so plain, that a man of mean courage or skill may be bold
to prove the peril of the sea, and hazard him self and goods in a little
pinnysse against all assaults and dangers of storms, which the Elders durst
not do, because their needle and quadrante was not tipped or wrought with the
Adamant stone: in whom also are found two virtues of a contrary disposition,
for one of the ends makes the needle behold always the north, and the other
the south. He that first found out the use of this stone was named Flauius,
but the first that wrote of his virtue was Albertus Magnus. Aristotle knew
well that it was of a nature attractive, and could draw iron unto it, but yet
he was ignorant to use it in the Art of Navigation: for if he had understood
so far of it, he had prevented a number of miserable shipwrecks and dangers
of sea, which overwhelmed his countreyme, for want of direction by virtue of
this stone. Neither was it without cause that Plinie (giving singular
estimation to this stone) did form his cruel complaints against nature in
that she was not only content to give a voice unto rocks to send or return
certain cries and calls in manner of an Echo, but also to give feeling,
motion, and hands to stones, as to the Adamant, wherewith he smells and
holds iron, and seems to be jealous when any offers to take it from him:
he not only allures iron, and holds it when he hath it, but also is
contented to impart and transfer his virtue to any thing that touches it,
which hath not been only an experience among the profane, but Saint Augustine
him self confesses to have seen the Adamant draw unto it a ring of iron,
which being rubbed or touched with the Adamant, drew another ring, and so the
third drew the fourth, and so consequently, in such number, as he made a
large collar of rings in the form of a chain, by the only aid and touche of
this stone, such is his propretie and such his wonderful virtue, which also
hath been verified by many familiar experiences, and chiefly by a late trial,
which I saw in France in this sort: There was a knife laid upon a square
thick table, and underneath the board was held in a mans hand, a piece of an
excellent good Adamant, whose virtue piercing thorough the table that was
between it and the mettle, made the knife move turn alone, to the great
wonder of the assistants. These propreties of the Adamant be common, therefore
we will syft out of it a more secrete wonder, which with the profit may also
bring pleasure to the Reader. There is now a days a kind of Adamant which
draws unto it flesh, and the same so strongly, that it hath power to knit
and tie together two mouths of contrary persons, and draw the heart of a man
out of his body without offending any part of him, with this further
propretie, that if the point of a needle be touched or tempered with it, it
pierces thorough all the parts of the body, without doyng any harm, which
would not seem credible, were it not that Experience did warrant it with
great wonder. Hieronymus Cardanus writes, that a Physician of Tours called
Laurentius Crascus, had of this stone promised by the mean of the same to
penetrate any flesh without grief or sorrow: which Cardanus did either
doubt or lightly believe till the experience assured the effect, for he rubbed
a needle with this Adamant, then put it thorough his arm, where he let it
remain without any sorrow many days after, but that which makes this
experience and virtue of the Adamant more famous, is, that he respected neither
veins nor sinews, but thrust in his needles or yros indifferently without
sparing any place. This Adamant which he had, exceeded not the bigness of a
bean, and was of colour like iron, distinct of veins, and peysing about the
weight of.xij. grains of corn. By this Admant many people were deceived, like
as also it was the occasion to entertain an error amongst many persons, which
mine author confesses to have seen by experience about.xv or xvj. years past,
being in the university of Poyctiers, whether came in great pomp a stranger,
naming him self to be a Greek borne, who in the presence of the people, gave
him self many and great blows with a dagger, both upon his thighs, arms,
almost every part of his body, which being rubbed with a certain oil, which he
called the oil of Balsamyn, it did so refresh consolidate his hurts, as if the
iron had never touched the. There is also at this day in Italy one Alexander of
Verona, who practised the like artificial experience with his servants, who
pinched them in the presence of the people, with pinsers, tongs, daggers, and
other tormenting instruments, and that with such horror, that it grieved the
eyes of the assistants, and then rubbing their wounds with a certain oil, he
made them hole again presently, which so abused the simplicity of the
assistants, that they bought of his oil, which he assured to be as profitable
to all kind of diseases what soever, which was such a gain to him, that
there escaped no day wherein he gat not ten or twelve crowns above his hire
for the cure of those that were sick. The mystery whereof, did drive Cardanus
into such a wonder, that he was very curious to search the cause: and falling
for that matter into an intricate Labyrinth of Philosophie, he could not find
nor give any other reason of it, than that the people were enchanted: touching
the oil which he sold, and wherewith he fained to heal his servant being
hurt, he confessed it was a fiction and a thing nothing worth, for that those
that bought it of him, could do no cure on themselves, or any other. And now
to draw to end and resolution of al these things, it is most like, that this
Greek and Alexander of Verona, and all the rest that have been seen to cut
and tear their flesh in pieces in sundry parts of the world, did not heal them
by either their oils or balms (as they fain) but it is more likely they
rub their daggers, pinsers, and instruments wherewith they hurt them with
this second kind of Adamant, the same having a certain secrete and hidden
virtue to consolidate that part that is hurt, and to resist all sorrow and
grief in the wound: wherein for a more credit I commend you to the
authority of Plaudanus in his second Book De Secretis orb^, rerum miraculis.

Wonders of certain Princesses, being committed to the flames unjustly
accused, who were delivered by virtue of their innocence. CHAP. xvij.
IT is no new thing, neither chances it often, that the innocent creatures
could not be endomaged by the flames of fire, as it is verified in many noble
persons found and spoken of in the holy Scriptures. But it is a strange thing
at these days, wherein sin so abounds, and we seldom see such miracles,
that such like should happen amongst us. For as Polydorus Vergilius witnesses
in the eight book of his histories of England and as others write before his
time, making mention of one Goodwyn prince of Englande, who accused unjustly of
many vices, Emnia mother to Edward the second, King of England, and wrought
therein so much by his false suggestions accusations, that the King her son
despoiled her not only of all her goods, but in process of time, as one sin
draws another, he so continuing his wicked enterprise, would not be satisfied
with her goods, but sought to deuest her of her honour, accusing her a fresh
that she had committed adultery with the bishop of Winchester: whereof king
Edward storming out of measure to hear her accused of such execrable vices,
who had given him suck within her entrails, resolved to put her to death, and
in the mean time whilst all the court was molested with the inquisition of
this offence, he committed her and the bishop into several prisons, where she
being grieved, demanded one day amongst others, to talk with the king her
son, in whose presence she cast her self headlong into the burning flames,
crying with a loud voice, yt those hot burning flames might consume her body*
if she were culpable of the faults whereof she was wrongfully accused: and
having ended this talk, she issued out of the fire in good safety, without
diminishing any part of her body. Whereat ye king was much astonished. Crantius
in his chronicles of Almayn and many others which have written of their
Histories, report the like of lame Henry the.xv. Emperor of the Romains, a ma
very religious, who married with the daughter of Sigeroy, Palatin of Rheyn,
called Gunegonde, a woman chaste, and of good life, if ever there were any, with
who the emperor lived in marvelous continence and chastity, loving her
only. Albeit, a certain Gentlewoman of his house, persuaded by some wicked
spirit, repinyng to see their cotinecies, determined to sow some ielousy
betwixt them: who finding the Emperor at convenient leisure, told him that
she did behold the Empress using the company of a knight in dishonest manner.
Whereof the Queen being advertised, commanded there should be made ready
secretly, six great Culters of iron, and to bring them into the presence of
the Emperor, who ignorant of the occasion, was suddenly amazed to see his
wife marche so hardly barefooted, and without any fear at all, and stand upon
those burning irons: Whom she beholding attentively, said unto him: Behold
Emperor, as I am not hurt with this fire, even so am I clear from all
immundicitie. Whereof the Emperor was astonished, and began to think of the
vain superstition, the which he had believed, prostrating him self suddenly
upon the earth, and required pardon at Gods hands for his rash judgment in
the same. Wherein as these innocent doings proved by those flames seem
strange, so do the lives of these two persons, whereof the Historians write,
seem to me no less wonderful, for that they lived together like maids,
without knowing one the other, during al their lives, in such sort, that the
Emperor feeling death to approach, caused her parents to be sent for, said to
them: Like as ye first day ye gave me your daughter in marriage she was a maid,
eve so I render her unto you again a maid, with commandment to use her in
faithful trusty manner. The Emperor with his maidelike wife were buried in the
cathedral church of Bambergh, which heretofore was subject to the archbishop of
Maiencey. Preferring further as of good right into ye number of.ij. virtuous
princesses, ye history recited by Eusebius Cesariesis, in his ecclesiastical
history of Policarpus, Volateranus writes a like example in his geography
which during the great butchery and persecution of the christians which they
made under ye emperor Verus, were brought to ye fire to be burned quick: and
after they had lifted their eyes to heaven, and made their prayers to god, they
were cast headlong into a great hot burning fire: albeit in the place where ye
flame ought to have consumed the, brought the to cinders, it began (with great
marvel) to revolt: flying far off fro the bodies of ye martirs in manner like
the sail of a ship, which is tossed and carried by the winds in the midst
of the sea, which appeared as evidently as the gold or silver which they melt
in the fornace. And when these wicked monsters saw that their bodies consumed
not, they commanded the tormentor or hangman to thrust them thorough with a
sword, when behold (saith he) there issued out of their bodies such
quantity of blood, in such great abundance, A wonderful providence of God.
that the fire was clean extinct, giving to the lookers on, such a grievous
remorse of conscience, that they fled altogethers: whereof you may read more
at large in the fourth book of the History Ecclesiastical of Eusebius, and
the.xlj. chapter.

A wonderful history of sundry strange Fishes, monsters, Mermaids, and
other huge creatures, found and bred in the sea. CHAP. xviij.
Amongst most of those things which merit Philosophical contemplation,
touching the universal subject of creatures without reason, I think such are
most wonderful, whose nature is furthest from our understanding and judgement,
as especially huge fishes and other monsters of the water, who being shrined in
the bottom and belly of the Sea, and buried in the depth of diverse lakes, do
exceed most commonly the opinion and iudgemeat of such as be most curious to
search and fifte their manners and conditions, the same being so rare and
strange, and specially in the exercise of their natural actions, that I think
they be of force to move equal delight desire to many men to participate for a
time with their society in the Elament where they dwell, to the end they
might come to a more free and perfect knowledge of their virtues, which was
plentifully approved by the Emperor Antonine, who having received a certain
work of Opian, treating of the order of fishing and disposition of fyshe, gave
him as many Crowns as there were verses in his books. Conradus Celtis and
after him, Gesnerus showing the desire and affection that the Ancient
Emperors had to be privy to the property, age, manners, and condition of
fishes, write, that in the year.1497. was taken in a poole near to Haelyprum
the Imperial City of Sweura, a Brochet, which had a hoop or ring of leather
tied to his ears, wherein was written in Characters of Greek this which
follows. I am the first fyshe that was put into this River, by the hands of
Federike, second Emperor of the World, the fifte of October, a thousand
two hundred and thirty, which proved by the witness of those letters, that
the said Brochet had lived in that water 297. years. Wherein also it seems
that this good Emperor Federik observed in fishes, that which Alexander used
in Hearts or dear, who (according to Plinie) would cause very often chains
of gold with inscriptions to be tied about their necks, then gave them the
liberty of the wild forestes the same being found a hundred or two hundred
years after, keeping the same collar letters about their necks. The Romains
for the estimation they had of fishes pleasure to behold them, would sometime
caste condemned men all quick into their rivers Lakes, to the end that those
little creatures might be the executioners of their offices, others for delight
sake would make the so tame, that at the sound of a whistle they would leave
the water, and come and take meat at their hands upon the banks of their
rivers, having them in such delight, that Lucius Crassius Censor, lamented no
less the death of one of his little fishes dying out of his ponds, than if it
had been for one of his daughters. It is not unknown also that the Romain
Emperors held fyshes in such honour and affection, that in their most
Royal and pompous banquets, they made more dainty dear account of fish,
than of any kind of foul or other flesh, reserving such reverend
observation to some of them, and specially the Sturgeon, that (as some say) he
that brought it to the board used to do it bareheaded, saving a Cornet or
garland of flowers, and for a more honour of the thing, the Trumpets and
dr^mes ceased not to sound blow, so long as that dish stood on the table.
At this day in Greece Turkie, ye people for ye most part be more desirous of
fish than of flesh, which was also the custom of ye Auncientes, whereupon both
the Greek Latin Physicians do most comoly in all their treatises prefer the
nouritures sovereign goodness of fish before flesh, have given also the
inferior place of estimation to flesh. Like as at this time also the Egiptians
do abstain all their life from eating of fish, observing the order of our
Mokes in their abstinece from eating of flesh, which shall suffice for this
time for the dignity commendation of fishes, following in order to describe how
ye Seas bring forth their woders with more marvel tha ye land, whereof I will
lay before you in this place only the principal, such as have moved cause of
astonishmet in ye most precise Philosophers of ye world. Amogest the most
woders of ye Sea, it may seem miraculous almost incredible, that fishes do
fly, and that those dume creatures do lift themselves fro out of their moyste
Element to pierce and break the air, as birds do with their wings: whereof
although there be diverse kinds according to the experience of the Sea, yet I
have not figured the portrait of any in this chapter, save only the Arundel
or swallow of the Sea, that as Gesnerus and Rondelet in their histories of
fishes have drawn it. Who desires to have a more large description of this
fish, let him read Rondelet in his first chapter of his vj. book, where he
affirms this fish to be so called by reason of his colour, greatness in
proporcio, pinions like to a bald Mouse, yet (saith he) who cosidereth
thoroughly of this fish, and manner of his flying, he may seem rather to
resemble a swallow than a bald Mouse. Opianus saith he flies out of the water
for fear he be devoured of the great fishes. Plinius writes that there is a
fish flying called Arundelle, which is very like the bird which we commonly
cal a swallow, which as he is rare, and shows himself by great wonder with
his great wings, so being taken, they use commonly to dry him and hang him up
in their houses: which I think was more rare in the time of Plinie than now,
because there be diverse found in sundry houses in Spain, Italie, France,
and elsewhere. Claudius Campensius, Physician to the Lord Marquis of Trans,
said, yt not many years past, the Lord Admiral of Englad, made him a banquet,
where he presented him with a flying fish. And in our time those that have
sailed by the pillars of Hercules, affirm that there is such store of flying
fishes thereabout, that they seem rather birds with wings than fishes of the
Sea. Besides it is not inconvenient to set forth in this place the portrait of
a fish flying, or rather a water monster, which is the chief cause that I
have undertaken this treatise of fishes. This fish or rather monster of the
Sea, I have considered with long view judgment, and have caused him to be
drawn as near as I can according to his natural proportion, wherein I may
boldly prefer as witnesses above two hundredth personnes who saw him in
Paris, as well as I.


Amongst the things of water to be seen in this beast, it hath chiefly a
hideous head, resembling rather in figure a horrible Serpent than a fish,
with wings, resembling rather the pynions of a bald mouse, saving they be
far more thick and massive: he contains near a foot and a half in
length, neither is he so well dried, but he yields some savour or smell of a
fish: the rest is to be discerned in his figure. Many learned men of the,
university who considered largely of him and his form, assured me, that it
was a kind of flying Fish, the same notwithstanding agreeing in nothing with
the description of the Auncientes touching the Arun^elle of the Sea, nor of the
Mugilatus, nor of other flying fish, which makes me think that it is a sort
of monstrous fish unknown to the elders. Neither am I ignorant that there be
that can counterfaict by art diverse forms of fishes, Dragons, Serpents and
other like things, wherewith many are abused: like as master Gesnerus hath
acknowledged by his writings to have been circumuented with the like. Yet of
all those which beheld this fish, argued upon his condition, there was not one
that could discern other artificial sleyght than as Nature brought him forth,
formed him.

The Sea hath also other monsters, which be more wonderful than these, as the
fish which they call in Latin Torpedo, most common in Haven towns, and is
accounted to resemble most of all those fishes that be harde skinned: and she
hath a hidden property, which is very strange, for being hidden within the
sand, or moudde, she sleeps by a secret virtue, and making also al the fish
that be near her immovable and without sense, she feeds upon them, and
devours them, neither doth her charm of sleep extend only against
fishes, but also against men, for if a man touch her with his Anglerod, she
enchants forthwith his arm. And if she feel her self taken with the lyne
and hooke, she hath this policy, to embrace the lyne with her wings, and so
making her poison mount all along the lyne and the rode, so torments the
arm of the fisher, that often times he is constrained to abandon his prize.
The authors hereof be Aristotle in his ninth book and xxxvij. chapter, De
historia animalium. Plinie in the.xxxij. book and second chapter: Theophrastus
in libro De his quae hyeme latent: Galen, Opianus, Plutarch in libro vtrum
anima c. Plato also makes like mention in Mem^o, where Socrates is compared to
the Torpedo, in that by the violence and subtlety of his arguments, he so
gravelled those against whom he maintained disputation, that they seemed to
participate with the enchantment of the Torpedo, of whose properties although
the authors had made no mention, yet the common experience of every fisher
makes good no less of him: It is defended to sell him in the open market at
Venise, because of his poison. Most part of our Physicians now a days
write, that his flesh is moist, soft, and of an unpleasant taste. Yet Galen
in his third book, de Alimentorum facultatibus, and in his book de
Attenuante Victu, and in the eyghte of his Methodes doth allow it: only there
hath been great cotrouersie amongst the Ancients, to know in what part of
his body consists the venom of his charm, that casts both fish and the
parts of men into a sleep: some give out that it lies in one part, some say
in an other, but most agree that it is divided throughout even unto the gall,
which they confirm by the witness of Plinie, which saith, that the gall of a
Torpedo on live, being applied to the genitors or privy parts, represses the
desire of the flesh: wherein we will end the discourse of that fish and his
property, and visit other marvels found in other fishes.

Although the water is the proper Element, mansion house and place of abode
for fishes, where they feed, live, disport, increase and exercise all their
other functions, yet is there of them which leave the Sea, floods and rivers,
and leap upon the land, eat and feed upon herbs, use recreation in the
fields, and sleep there now and then. Theophrastes affirms, that near unto
Babylon, when the rivers retire within their bakes, there be certain fishes
left within caves and hollow places, which issue out to feed, marching upon
their wings, or with their often moving of their tail, when any offreth to
offend or assault them, they fly forthwith into their caves as their refuge.
The ancient Philosophers affirm, that there have been found fiishes under
the earth, who (for that cause) they called Focilles, whereof Aristotle makes
mention, and Theophraste speaking of Paphlilagonia, where men draw fish (and
they be very good to eat) out of deep diches, and other places wherein no
water doth remain. Polybe writes in like sort, that near to Narbone hath
been found fishes under the earth. We may also bring in amongst other
wonders of the Sea, a kind of fish called Stella, or Sea star, because it
hath the figure of a painted star: this fish is of a Nature so hot that he
endures as soon as he hath devoured, which Aristotle approves in his.v. book
De Historia anima. where he gives such hotnesse to this fish, that she boils
what she takes. Plinie, and Plutarch do likewise affirm that the star by
her only touche, doth melt, boyle and burn whatsoever she touches, and
knowing her virtue, she suffers her self to be touched with other fish, to
the end she may burn them. Monsieur Rondelet, a man living at this day, and
as well worthy of credit as the best that write, in his histostorie de piscibus,
affirms that he hath seen many stars of the Sea, but one amongst the
rest containing almost a foot in length, which he opened in manner of
Anatomy, and found in his belly three Coquylles whole, and two Remollies
half digested, such is the great furious heate of this little creature, all
which may seem wonderful examples of the wonders of the Sea, yet are they
nothing in respect of those which we mean to treat hereafter, the same
moving both fear and amaze to such as have most nearly sifted the secretes
of the Sea. For this little beast which so amazes ye world, is called in Greek
Ethneis, and of the Latins Remora, to whom is given that name, because she
doth stay Ships, as hereafter you shall hear more at large. Opyanus and Aelian
write that he delights most in the high sea: he is of the length of a cubit,
of a browne colour like unto an Eel. Plinie makes him like to a great
Limace, which he proves by the witness of such as saw one of them that
stayed the Galey of the prince Caius Caesar. In his.ix. book he brings in
diverse opinions of sundry authors touching this fish, who although they differ
in his description: yet they agree all that such one there is, and is of power
to stay ships. Whereof also many Philosophers of late days, which have
travailed by many ports and havens in Asia and Africa, bear witness, in that
they have seen him made an Anatomy, and proved his virtues with wonderful
effects. It is sure a marvelous and monstrous thing in Nature to find a fish
or creature in the water of ye gretnesse of a Limace, which is of force by a
secrete propretie of nature to stay immediately what she touches, be it the
most huge and tal ship or galey that uses to scum the sea, which made
Plinie cry out in this sort: Oh strange and wonderful thing (saith he) that
all the winds blowing from all parts of the world, and the most furious
tempests raging upon and over the waives, and contendyng with extreme violence
against the vessels that sail thereupon, stand in awe of a little fish of the
greatness of a Limace, whose power prevails over their fury, can restrain
and bridle their rage, and is of more force to stay the strongest ship that
is, than all their anchors, cables, tackles, or any other engine employed or
used about the same. This fish encountered Anthonie in his wars, and
restrained his ship. Adamus Louicerus Lib. de Aquatilibus, cofirming Plinies
opinion, ravished (as it were) with such strange conditions in a fish, hath
travailed with great pains to search out the cause in nature, whereof being
not able to give any reason by any learning or diligence he used, gave it over
with this exclamation: Who is he of so dumb and gross judgment, which will
not enter into admiration, if he behold at leisure the propreties and power of
this little fish: I know (saith he) that the Adamant has power to smell and
draw iron, The natures of sundry stoues.
the Diamont sweateth, and distills poison, the Turkeys doth move when there
is any peril prepared to him that wears it, the Torpille infects and makes
sleep the hand and arm of the Fisher, and I know that the Basilicke is so
venomous, that with his only view and regard he poisons man: of all which
notwithstanding their strangeness, a man may yield some reason, but of the
virtue of this fish we may not argue, because it is supernatural: for he
lives in the water, takes his nurture in the water as other fishes do, and
doth no exercise but in the water: his little stature approves, that he can do
no great violence, and yet is there no power equal with his, nor force able to
resist him, there is neither storm nor engine by hand, of power to move a ship
after he hath once plied him self to it, were it that the whole winds and
violence of the Element were assembled in one, and blew with maine force
against the sail: and yet after he hath left off to hold the ship, she moves
and saileth as before: biside, in this little fish is discerned a fatal
prognostication, wherein she seems to give us some forewarnyng of the evils
that are like to befall us. For did she not stay the Ambassadors ship of
Periander? and also the bark of Caius Caesar, who soon after was killed at
Rome, seeming thereby in her kind to take pity of the mishap whereunto
she saw him predestinate: the which is all in effect, that Adamus Louicerus
writes of this fyshe. I know again, that Aristotle, Plinie, and others, do
give unto her sundry other propreties, as to serve in special use in matters
of love, to draw children from the wombs of their mothers, with other like
qualities, which according unto their small credit, I do pass over for this
time. Plutarch in Symposiacis.2. problem.7. searches the reason why that this
fyshe doth stay ships, which shall also give end unto the description of
his Wonders. And because the Reader may be fully satisfied touching the
maruelles of the Waters, we will now enter into the treaty of a chief
membre thereof, the same since the creation of the World until this age,
having much troubled the Philosophers and other learned men by the curious
search, to know whether there have been in the sea Seamen, Tritons, Nereides,
and other like Monsters, carrying the figure of man, which in times paste the
Auncientes do witness to have seen in Floods, Ryuers, Fountains, Rocks,
and Lakes. Those which have persuaded them selves, that there is none such,
justify their opinyon by the authority of the Scripture, which making no
mention of such things, affirms absolutely, that the earth is the only house
and tabernacle of man, wherein he is to remain and keep his residence until
that it please the Lord to call him home, as the Prince or Captain doth by
the Soldier that he puts in his Garrison. Those which defend the
contrary, do prefer the Experience and wytnesse of so many learned persons,
whose gravity and wisdom would not leave to a general posterity, their
books full of such vanities and dreams, to entertain the children,
parents, friends, and universally all such as should come after them, in
error. Besides (say they) it is no less impertinent to believe, that there
be Men monsters in the sea, than to give faith to those that write, that there
be woody Nymphs, Satyrs, and other savage Monsters, approved for truth by
some of our Ecclesiastical writers, like as also the other is given out for
a matter of faith by sundry men of credit, who have seen them with their
eyes. Pausanias amongst other of the auncientes doth affirm, that he has
seen at Rome, a Triton. And those which have recorded the chronicles of
Constantinople, whereof one part concerns the state of Europe, write that in
the.29. year of the Emperor Mauritius, the provost of Delta in Egipt, walking
amongst other people against the rising of the Sun, was astonished when he
saw upon the bank of the flood of Nile two creatures, bearing the figure of
humanam figuram, whereof the one that did most resemble a man, seemed of fierce
and stout regard, with a curled hair standing right an end, and oftentimes
in their presence would show him self above the water, to the secrete
parts, and then suddenly sink again into the water unto the navel, giving
(as it were) to know unto the people, that for a duty and reverence to
nature, he sought to cover the rest. Which moving such indifferent marvel and
fear to the Provost and rest of his company, that they adiured him in the
name of God, that if he were any wicked spirit, he should retire to the place
ordained for him by his creator: but of the contrary, if he were one of those
which were created for the glory of his name, that he would make some abode
there for the contentment of that poor people so desirous of such a strange
sight. This creature bound (as it were) by the virtue of this conjuration,
remained long amongst them. Immediately after which time, chanced a sight no
less strange than this: it was an other creature representing the form and
shape of a Woman, who began to cut the waives, and approach the bank of the
River, having a great bush of hairs dispersed, a white face, and of pleasant
regard, her fingers and arms well proporcioned her dugs somewhat round and
big, showing her self in this order, namely until the navel, the rest
(with a like reverence to nature as the other) she concealed within the waives.
And after these two creatures had long delighted the eyes of the people with
their sight, they gave place to the darkness of the night, and vanished away,
without ever being seen afterward. Whereof after the Provost had taken
witness of the assistants, he dispatched immediately a messanger to the
Emperor Mauritius with the news. Baptist Fulgose, writes a like history of
a Sea monster, which was seen of a number of men, in a certain port or haven
of the sea, in the time of Eugenius the fourth. This monster (saith he) was a
man of the sea, who having left the water, made a road upon the land, and
caught a child as he disported him self upon the bank, which being desirous
to cary with him into the sea, he was so speedily pursued with men, and hurt
with stones, that he was not only forced to leave his pray, but also had much
to do to recover the water: his figure resembled the form of a man, saving
that his skin was like the sloughe of an Eel, and had two little horns on
his head: he had on either hand but two fyngers, and his feet did end like
two little tails, and on his arms he had two little wings, as a bald Mouse
hath. Conradus Gesnerus writes that there was seen at Rome in the great
river, a sea man, or monster of the sea. Theodorus Gaza, a man learned, and as
well studied as any of our time, writes, that on a time when he was in Greece
upon a certain coast of the sea, after the rage of a wonderful tempest,
having taken upon the shore a good quantity of fish, he saw amongst
certain other wonderful things, a Mermaid or fyshe, having the face of a
woman, fully perfect in every thing requisite in Nature unto the wast, from
which part dounward she carried the form of a fish, finishing in the tail
like an Eel, even as we see them ordinarily drawn by the painter. This
Mermayd (as it is written) was upon the gravel or sand, and showed by her
jests and countenances to suffer such passions, as the said Theodore Gaze
moved to pity, considering that she had a desire to return to the sea, took
her, and conueyed her into the water. Plinie likewise writes, that in the time
of the Emperor Tyberius, the inhabitants of Lysbona, a town in Portingal, sent
Ambassadors to the Emperor to certify him that they had seen many times a
Tryton, or man of the Sea, hyde and wythdrawe him self into a cave, near unto
the Sea. There was also advertisement sent to the Emperor Octauian Augustus,
that upon the coast of France were found certain Mermaids dead upon the
bank of the river. In like sort Georgius Trapezuntius, a man very famous in
learning, affirms to have seen upon the border of the River, appearing out
of the water in the form of a Woman until the nauill, whereof seeming to
marvel, and beholding her somewhat nearly, she retired into the water.
Alexander ab Alexandro, a great civilian Philosopher in the.viij. Chapter of
his third book assures for certainty, that in Epyre, now named Romain, is a
certain fountain near the Sea, from whence young Maids for the necessity of
their houses, did draw water, and that harde by issued a Triton or Sea man,
and caught a little damsel, whom he carried oftentimes into the sea, and
after set her on land again: whereof the inhabitants being advertised,
used such watch and guarde, that they took him, and brought him before the
Justice of the place, before whom being searched and examined, found in him
all parts and members of a man, for which they committed him to certain
guard and keeping, offering him meat, the which he refused with sorrowful
lamentations after his kind, not tasting any thing that was offered him, and
lastly dyed of hunger, seeing him self restrained from the Element wherein he
was wont to dwell. Many writers now a days do witness a thing more strange
than any of these, if it be true, which is, that the Archduke of Austriche,
third son of the Emperor Ferdinando, made to be carried with him to Gennes, in
the year.1548. a Mermayd dead, the same so astonishing the people, that the
most learned men in Italie came to visit and see him. I could yet make of
more Watermonsters seen in our time, as that which was figured like a Monk,
an other like a Bishop with other of like resemblance: which import the more
faith, because they are preferred by three of the most notable Fishers in
Europe, being also figured so amply in the universal History of Fyshes, that
I need not to enlarge their descriptions, for they have so lernedly discoursed
of the propreties of the same, that they have cut of all hope to such as
shall come after them, to advance it with further addition.

Wonders of Dogs which did eat Christians. CHAP. xix.
IF the bones ashes of all those which have been persecuted for the name of
Iesus Christ, Damascen writes, that in the time of Maximinian there were
killed and martyred in.xxx. days.xvij. thousand christians.
were at this day in being, and to be seen with our corporal eyes, we might
then confess, that they were able to build a great and proud City: and
withal, if all the blood which hath been shed for his name, were gathered
together into one certain place, it were sufficient to make a great flood. For
who soever will read in Eusebius, and S. Augustine, the ^rsecutions, burnings,
butcheries and slaughters which were made of the poor flock of Iesus Christ,
in the time of the Emperor Domitian, Traian, Antonius, Seuerus, Maximinian,
Decius, Valerian, Aurelian, Diocletian Maximian with many others, he shall not
find so many thousands slain in the cruel wars of the Tirauts, as he shall
read to have shed their blood for ye name of Iesus Christ: neither is the
sacrifices of so many Martirs and companies of the good, so amply spoken of by
Saint Augustin in his.xviij. book.lij. chap. of the City of God, or by
Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical history, or that Orseus writes, so much to
be wondered at or strange, Cornelius Tacitus lib. 15.
as this whereof Cornelius Tacitus makes mention is wonderful and worthy to
be put in memory amongst the most celebrate pourtraicts monsters of this
world. For it did not only suffice the infamous Tyrant Nero, to make to be
burned the bodies of the poor Christians, making them serve as torches and
blazing links to give light to the Citizens of Rome, but also made the to be
wrapped quick in the skins of certain savage beasts, to the end that the
dogs, thinking they had been beasts in deed, might tear and commit their
bodies to pieces. Which you may now see by the furious assaults that Satan,
and his accomplices have builded against the members of Iesus Christ: for
there is no Religion which he hath not so furiously persecuted since the
beginning of the world, as this of ours, wherein although he hath set abroche
all his subtilties, frauds, malices and inventions to undermine it, yet
notwithstanding it remains whole and sound, by the virtue and aid of the
Son of God: who hath can bridle repress the envious rage of his enemies. And
although he hath procured the death of many members of the Church, as Able,
Esaie, Ieremie, Zacharie, Policarpius, Ignatius, and many thousand Martirs and
Apostles: yet notwithstanding he could never deface any jot thereof: for it is
written in like manner, that the gates of hell could not by any means preuaile
against her, albeit that for a certain time she was put in some peril, and
was shaken and tossed like a little bark, by the rage tepestes of the Sea: yet
surely Iesus Christ did not forsake at any time his espouse, but always
assisted her, as the head of his body, watched her, guarded her, and maintained
her, as is witnessed in the promises made unto her: when he said, I will not
leave you, my Orpheus, I will be with you to the very last consummation of
the world. And further he says in Esaie, I will put my word into your
mouth, and defend you with the shadow of my hand, and those words which I
put into your mouth, shall not be taken from your seed, now nor never. Wherein
seeing then that our only religion is true and purified, and that it is signed
by the blood of so many Prophets, Apostles and Martirs, and confirmed besides
with the blood of Iesus Christ, whereof he hath left to us the true Character
and witness of his death, that all others be unlawful bastards, and invented
by the Devils, and men their ministers, to the utter confusion of ours:
wherefore if it be so pure and holy, let us then endeavour our selves to
conserve and kep^ the same, to the end we may say in the last day to God,
as the good king Dauid said, Lord, I hate them that hate thee, I am angry
with them that rise against thee, and I hate them with a perfect hate, and
hold them for mine enemies.

A wonderful history of diverse figures, Comets, Dragons, and flames, which
appeared in heaven to the terror of the people, and whereunto the causes and
reasons of them be assigned. CHAP. xx.
THe face of Heaven hath been at diverse times so much disfigured by blazing
stars, torches, fireforkes, pillours, Lances, bucklers, Dragons, two Moons
two Suns at one instant, with other like things, that whosoever would
recompte by order, those which only have appeared (since the nativity of
Iesus Christ,) together, searching the causes of their beginning births, the
life of a man would not perform the same: albeit the most notable worthy to
be celebrated, of al others, is the star which conducted the.iij. sage Kings
of Perse, to the place where Christ was borne, the which feared not only the
common people, but the sight thereof ravished and brought into admiration the
most learned of the world, for that it, against the Nature of all other
stars (which draw them selves from the Orient to the Occident,) addressed
her course into Palestine, which is situated towards ye North, causing S. Iohn
Chrisostome to think, that that star was none of them which we see in
heaven, but rather a virtue invisible, figured under the form of a star.
Notwithstanding let us leave of to discourse of this star, and come to other
strange things, which have appeared fro heaven, whereof Gaguin in his sixte
book of ye gestes of the Kings of France, makes mention of a very marvelous
blazing star, which appeared in the Septentrion in the time of Charles
the.vj. In the year.597. which was in the year of the nativity of the false
impostour Mahomet, at Constantinople was seen a hearie Comet, so hideous and
fearful, that they thought the end of the world approached. An other like
president was seen a little space before the death of the Emperor Constantin,
whereof Orseus in his.vij. book and.ix. Chapter, and Eutropeus in his second
book makes mention: that in the year that Mitrydates was borne, and in the
year wherein he received the Sceptre Royal, there appeared a Comet from
heaven, as Iustin and Vincentius write, which for the space of xxiiij. days,
occupied so well the fourth part of heaven, casting such a clear light, that
the brighnesse of the Sun was thereby darkened. And also in the year that
Tamburlan the Tyrant killed so many men and women in one overthrow of the
Turks, that of their heads only he made a great wall (as Matheolus writes)
there appeared a marvelous blazing star in the Occident, A wall of dead men's
head.
whereof Pontanus and Ioachinus Camerarius in his book de ostentis, learnedly
writes. Herodian a Greek author, in the life of the Emperors makes mention
that in the reign of Commodeus the Emperor, they saw by the space of a whole
day, a number of stars shining as though it had been night: likewise in the
year that Lewes the stutting French King died, they beheld fro heaven
shining a great number of stars at nyne of the clock in the morning, wherein
as Hieronimus Cardanus in his.xiiij. book De veritate rerum, assures to have
seen in the year 1532. the.xj. day of April, being at Venise, three suns
together, clear, bright shining. Even so in the year that Francis Sforce died
(after whose deceasse grew great wars in Italie) there was in like manner
seen at Rome three suns, which did so frighte the people, that they fell
immediately to prayer, thinking the malice and ire of God were kindled against
them for their sins. Also the Pope Pius, second of that name, who was called
before he received that dignity, Aeneas Siluius, who died in the year 460.
writes in his description of Europe the.liiij. chap. that in the sixth year
after the Iubile, there was seen amongst them of Sienne and Florence, twenty
clouds in the air, who being stirred of the wyndes, fought one against
another, every one in his rank, reculing and approaching according to the order
and manner of battle, and during the conflict of these clouds, the wind was
not unoccupied in dispoiling, battering, bruising and breaking trees, houses,
and rocks, besides lifting of men and beasts into the air. The antiquity of
time cannot report or make mention of a more wonder in the air, than of a
horrible Comet of the colour of blood, which appeared in the West, the
eleventh day of October in the year 1527. being so wonderful and fearful,
that it engendered so great terror to the common sort, that diverse not only
died with the sight, but others fell into strange and miserable maladies. This
strange Comet was seen of many thousand, continuing the space of an hour and
a quarter, and in the end began to bring her self to the side of the sun,
after drawing towards the Midy, the Occident, and the Septentrion, appearing to
be of an excessive length, and of the colour of blood, there was seen in ye
height of the Comet the Character and figure of the stump of an arm, holding
a great sword in his hand, as he would have stricken: about the point of
the said sword, were three stars, but that which was right upon the point,
was more clear and bright than the others: on the other two sides of the
beams of this Comet, they saw a great number of hatchettes, knives, swords
of the colour of blood, about the which were a great number of human faces
very hideous, with their beards and hair stirring, as may be seen before
figured. Shortly after ye view of this hideous wonderful Planet, all the
parties of Europe were well-nigh bathed in human blood* so much prevailed the
invasion of the Turckes, besides other hurts which Italie received by the Lord
of Bourbon, when he committed Rome to sack, dying at the same instant: like as
Petrus Creuserus Iohn Litchber excellent Astrologians interpret by writing the
signification of this wonderful Planet. Even so for that we have promised in
the induction of our work, to show the causes beginnings of these wonders, it
is therefore now requisite to search more narrowly the matter, and to decide the
question so often debated amongst the Ancients and learned Philosophers.
These fantastical figures, as dragons, flames, Comets, other like of diverse
forms, which are seen so often in the Element according to the opinios of
many wise men, do give to understand, foretell or show many things that shall
and do happen, as Albumazar, Dorotheus, Paulus Alexadrinus, Ephestion Maternus*
Aomar, Thebith, Alkindus, Paulus Manlius, Alberanger, and generally the most
part of the anciet Greekes, Hebrues, Caldees, Arabec and Egiptians, who have
written and attributed so much to the stars, and their influence, that they
have assured the most part of the human actions, to depend of the
celestial constellations. Whereof Cicero in his first book De fato^, seems
to favour them much, when he affirms darckely* that those which are borne
under the Planet De Canis, shall not be drowned. In like manner Faber
Stapulensis in his Paraphrase of Metheores, makes mention that the Commettes,
which appeared from heaven, signified scarsitie of goods, abundance of
great winds, wars, effusion of blood and the death of Princes, Hieronimus
Cardanus a late Philosopher, writes in his fourth book De subtilitate,
and.xiiij. book De veritate rerum, that the hearie and bearded Comets and
other like monstrous figures which appear from heaven, be as foretellers and
messengers of famine, pestilence, wars, mutations of Realms, and other such
like hurts which happen to the generation of man. And he further beleues, that
the greater and hideous these figures appear, they purport and show the
greater evils. Whereof, Proculus one of the most excellent Astrologians which
Greece at any time nourished, follows the interpretations of such predictions,
by all the signs of heaven, recompting by order the marvelous powers which
these stars have upon the actions human. And there be others as Ptolome,
which have written, that if any infant in his nativity be borne under
certain constellations, he shall have power over devils: there be also others
of opinio, but they be most shameless full of blasphemies, who have so much
referred themselves to the disposition of stars, that they have not feared to
write, that if any from their nativity were borne under the aspect of certain
stars, that they should have the gyfte of prophecy, and should foretell
things to come. And that Iesus Christ the saviour of al the world, was borne
under certain fortunate costellations, being ye cause yt he was so perfect
wrought so many miracles. Here you may see the cruel horrible blasphemies,
which these detestable infamous Astrologians judicial bring forth, which is ye
cause yt S. Augustin hath banished the fro the City of God. Basil and S.
Ciprian deteste the. Chrisostome, Eusebius, Lactantius, and S. Ambrose abhor
them. The council of Tollete reject them. the civil laws punish them by
death. And the Ethniques also, as Varro, Cornelius Celsus, and many other,
defame them. But far more diversely amongst Princes than any other, hath Picus
Mirandula showed him self, who hath so very well brought to light, and
discovered the Labyrinth of their dreams in a Latin work, which he made
against them, that they scarcely dare once lift up their horns. Wherefore
let us now return to our purpose and show so near as we can, whether these
strange figures and Comets which we see from heaven, be foretellers of things
which shall happen, or that they be natural: wherein as Aristotle in his
first book of Metheores, treating very learnedly of the nature of Cometes, and
of these other impressions, Characters, and figures which be made from heaven,
saith, that they be made only by nature, without making mention that they
either foretell or appoint any thing which shall happen: even so it is to be
presupposed, that if Aristotle, who is the first and most excellent of all
those which have written at any time in this Art, had found never so little
conjecture or reason in nature, that they were appointers of any thing which
should come to pass, he would have kept them no more secrete or hidden, than
he hath done the other secretes of philosophie, which he hath left to us by
his writings. Wherefore it is then certain, that these fantastical flames and
other figures, which we see from heaven, be natural and grow upon this
occasion following. There be three regions in heaven, one which is most high,
who receives into her a marvelous heate, for that she is next neighbour to
the Element of fire: the other which is lower, receives the beams of the
Sun beaten back of the earth, whereof I have made mention in my description
of the cause of thunders. The third is in the midst of these two, to the which
do come the force of the heate, which comes from the uppermost part, like to
the heate of the beams of the Sun, beaten back when it comes from the
lowest or inferior region. For as Plinie witnesses, the stars be continually
nourished of the humour proceeding of the ground, which be the chiefest causes of
these celestial flames: for the earth as Aristotle shows in his first book
of Metheores, being chafed of the Sun, renders double ayrely substance, the
one vapour which we may proprely name exhalation hot and dry, the other is
hot and moyste: and because the first vapour is most light, she is suffered
to come to the highest region of the air, where she is set on fire: whereof
proceeds these fires and flames from heaven, which in the forms of divers
strange shinyngs appear in the Clouds in sundry figures, as in the shape of
burning torches, of ships, heads, lances, bucklers, swords, bearded and
hairy Comets, with other like things, whereof we have made mention here
before: The cause of the flames of fire from heaven.
the which engenders great terror and astonishement to those, who be ignorant
of the causes, wherein as it happened oftentimes amongst the Romains, in the
wars of the Macedons, who being brought into such fear and terror, The
Romains fearful of the Eclipse of the Moon.
by the sudden appering of the Eclipse of the Moon, that their hearts began to
fail them: Even so Cneius Sulpitius seeing the continuing in this fear (by a
wonderful eloquece) showed unto them by probable reasons, that such mutation in
the air was natural, and that the Eclipse proceeded of no other thing, The
cause of the Eclipse of the Moon.
than of an interposition of the Moon betwixt the Sun and us, and of the
earth betwixt us and the Moon, by which means they were delivered of their
error, not knowing till that hour, the cause of the said Eclipse. The like may
be said of the raining of blood, the which hath so much frighted the people in
the years passed, for because they were ignorant whereupon it proceeded, as that
which fell from heaven, in the year of health 570. in the time that the
Lumbards were under the conduct of Albuyn, travelling through Italy. And also
there fell the like yet fresh in memory near Fribourgh, in the year.1555. the
which stained and made the garments and trees which it touched, of the
colour of red, and notwithstanding although that this seems wonderful,
yet oftentimes it is natural. For like as the earth gives diverse colours to
many bodies: even so she colours the water of the rain, for if the earth be
red, she renders those vapours and exhalations red, the which being
converted into rain, the heaven in like manner sends them to us red, and
coloured as they were attired and lifted in height: and falling so upon
certain habits, she makes them of the colour and die of red. Wherefore many
Historians, as well Greekes as Latines, amongst their great marvels and rare
wonders from heaven, have made mention of these bloody shores. It rests now
to put to the last seal this chapiter, and to appoynte the causes of the
number of Suns and Moons, which appear oftentimes from heaven, as the three
Suns, iij suns scene by Cardanus.
the which Cardanus reports to have seen in our time, being at Venice. And
like as we have said, that these figures which appear from heaven be natural,
even so we must speak of the multitude of Moons and Suns, the which
appear, for that oftentimes, and specially when a certain thick cloud is
ready to rain, The causes of the shows of so many suns and moons.
being found on the side of the Sun, the same by a like reflection on her
beams, imprints her image in the same cloud: by the which means we judge
to see diverse suns. We may also see the like in a table well painted and
polished, which when we behold, there appears to us the shape of two or.iij.
being but one in dede, and as much we may say of ye Moon. Thus have we
declared the very true causes wherefore appear so often.ij. or.iij Suns
Moons: let us therefore now from henceforth search in nature the cause and
beings of these things, and stay no more at these fripperies, deceiptes, and
dreams of the Astrologians iudicials, who thereby have so oftentimes deceived
begiled us, that they ought and deserve to be banished exiled from all common
wealths well governed: for what trouble, perplexity and terror have they
engendered in the consciences of a number of poor people. As for example, in
the year 1514. when they feared not with obstination to publish openly in all
places, that there should be in the month of February well nigh an universal
flood, for that the conjunction of all the planets were in the sign of Pisces,
and notwithstanding the day which should have brought forth these waters, was
one of the most fair and temperate days of the year: albeit many great
personages, fearful of their prophecies, made provision of biscuit, flower,
ships and other like things propre to sail withal, fearing to be surprised
and drowned with the great abundance of water, which they before had told
of. Let us further from henceforth learn with Henry the.vij. king of
Englande, who reigned in our time, making no account of their deceits, but
chastised their dream, who upon the sudden being made to understand, that
one of the most famous Astrologians of Englande had published in all places,
that he had found amongst the most hidden secretes of Astrology, that the King
should die before the next feast of Christmas, commanded that he should be
brought before him, who after he had asked him whether this talk were true,
and that the prognosticator had answered him that it was certain, and that he
had found this infallible in his constellation and nativity, I pray thee then
said the King, tell me where the stars tell thee thou shalt keep thy
Christmas this year? To whom he answered, he should be in his own house with
his family: but I know very well said the King, that thy stars be liars: for
thou shalt neither see Moon, Sun, Stars, heaven, nor thy family this
Christmasse, putting him presentely in the most straight dark prison, in the
great tower of London, where he continued till the feast was past. Here you may
see how this true Astrologian was used, remaining prisoner in extreme misery,
until after the feast kept of the nativity of Iesus Christ.

A wonderful History of Flames of fire, which have sprung out of the heads
of diverse men. CHAP. xxj.
IF there were but one only Author which had made mention of the History
following, although the truth thereof be sufficiently proved, for which cause
I have the rather at this time placed it in these my woders, as a chief
argument or conjecture in nature, whereupon may be founded the cause:
notwithstanding, seeing so many learned men have busied themselves to write
thereof, together with so great a number of faithful authors witnessing the
same in their works, we ought the rather upon their credit to believe that
which they have said therein. Titus Liuius in his third book and third
Decade, Cicero in his second book De diuinatione, Valerius the great in his
first book and.vj. chapiter, Frontinus in his second book and.x. chapiter,
write, that after the Scipions were surprised by their enemies, and overthrow
and killed by the Spaniards, and that Lucius Martius, a Romaine knight, making
an oration to his soldiers, exhorting to reuegement, they became astonished to
see a great flame of fire issuing from his head, without doing to him any
hurt, which caused the armed men, being moved with the sight of this wonderful
flame, to take heart and run so furiously upon their enemies, that they not
only killed xxvij. thousand, but also had a pray of a great number of
captives, besides an inestimable riches they toke from the Carthaginiens.
Neither have such fantastical fires sprung from the bodies of certain men, or
appeared in one only, but in many. Whereof the same author Titus Liuius writes
(in his first book of things worthy of memory since the foundation of Rome)
the like to happen to Seruius Tullius, who succeeded in the imperial seat
Tarquinius Priscus from whose head (being yet but young) and as he slept, they
saw issue a flame of fire: whereupon the Queen Tanaquil, wife to the foresaid
Priscus, affirmed to her husband, that this flame promised to him great good,
honour and prosperity, which afterwards chanced: for he married not only her
daughter, but after the death of her husband, he was King of the Romaines. And
Plutarche and others have written the like of Alexander, when he fought
against the Barbariens, being in the most heate of the skirmish, they saw him
all on fire, which caused a marvelous fear and terror to his enemies. Even
so I know a certain Physician at this day, who writes of the like in diverse
of his histories, chancing in our time to a ne'er friend of his in Italy, not
only at one time, but at many. Whereof, as Plinius not only in an other
place, makes mention of the river Trasimenus, which was seen all on fire,
but also makes a certain discourse of these wonderful flames, which be seen
about the bodies of men. Also Aristotle in his first book of Metheores,
treats in like manner. But to tell you mine opinion therein, I can not any
ways gather the cause or foundation either of the one or other, although I
have promised to show the causes and reasons, whereupon these wonders proceed
and take their beginning. For if we will say they be made by Art: As we have
seen very often in our time certain Ruffians vomit and caste forth of their
mouths, certain flames of burning Fire, which Atheneus in the first book of
the Dipnosophistes and fouretenth Chapiter doth witness, which could not
happen (as I think) to the Histories before mentioned, for that it hath
chanced to great lords, upon whom these wonders have been most proved, by
which means, they being attended upon with a great number and multitude of
persons, the fraud thereof was easlyer discovered. Wherefore it is most
expediente then to believe, that they be wonders and deceits of Satan, who
was so familiar in the world passed, that he invented daily new wonders, as
is wytnessed in Exodus of the Magitiens of Pharao, which converted Maids into
Serpents, and floods of water into blood, which be matters as difficult, as
to make flames of fire issue or come from the bodies of men.

A History very notable of Prodigeous Loves. CHAP. xxij.
I Am ashamed and almost confused in my self, that I must declare the
wonderful love of three of the most renowned Philosophers that ever were at
any time in the world. Whereof the one of them so well studied in the
perfectness of the soul, Plato.
and of the nature divine, with a wonderful diligence in giving wholesome laws
for a common wealth, that S. Augustin dare write affirm of him, saving in some
respects, to be a perfect Christian. The second so well seen in the Element,
Aristotl^.
treating also very learnedly of the secretes of Nature, and other sensible
things, that he shone amongst the rest of the Philosophers, as the sun
amongst the stars. The third as he was nothing inferior in learning to the
other two, so had he besides such a kind of holiness, Socrates.
and other ornaments of Civility, that he was nubred amongst the seven fages
of Greece, which notwithstanding although they had curiously searched the
secrets of the heavens, of Nature, the being and resort of all things cotained
within the compass of the earth, yet were they not so finely studied nor so
well armed in the secretes of their sciences, as either they understand the
Nature of so fair and delicate a creature, as a woman is, or other ways be
able to defend them selves from their cruel assaults. All the great Mass
of Philosophie, wherein Aristotle was so deeply plunged and greatly studied from
his birth to his sepulture, was not of sufficient force to subdue in him the
motions of the flesh, for he became in love with a common woman named Hermie,
the love of whom had so much inflamed him, that he not only consumed in the
sight of all men, but that which more was, he became not only a stranger for her
sake to Philosophie, which deserves to be noted amongst these wonders, but
also worshipped her made to her sacrifices, as Origene writes, whereof being
accus^d by Demophilus, he was constrained to abandon Athens, where he had
remained and written xxx. years, and saved him self by flight. Plato (who
only amongst the Philosophers merited the name of divine) was not so
superstitious, but he would as well know what was humanity, as he had been
diligent to search the secretes of the heavens, that he would often times
behold and remain with human bodies, as is well notified of him by keeping
company with A^chenasse, who although she had given her self over to a number
in her youth, notwithstanding when she was abandoned of others, Plato received
her, being so much assotted in her, that he not only loved her, but made
certain verses in her praise, lamenting that he should so much in the sight of
al men embrace the love of so many old wrinkels, as Atheneus ye Greek author
writes in his.xiij. book de ses Dipnosophistes. Socrates whose majesty and
gravity was so much renowned celebrated by ye Aunciets, yt they write this
wonder of him, that he was always one man, in sort that for any Eclips of
fortune, prosperity or adversity, they never at any time found mutation in
him, notwithstanding he was not so sterne or severe in his actions, but the
love of his Aspasie did at all times mollify the same, as Clearchus makes
report unto us by writing, in the first book of his Amours. And like as I
have brought these three to light, so could I rehearse a great number of
others, as Demosthenes, Isocrates, Pericles many others, whose amorous and
lascivious loves the Greek Historians have sufficiently discovered, that in
reading of them, I have much marvel that the greatness of their study,
science wisdom, could not moderate such motions flames, but that the smoke
of their wanto dealings remains to their posterity. Wherefore Lays, so much
renowned amongst the lost women, was one day in a great collar against
diverse which praised very earnestly the life manners of all the learned wise
Philosophers of Athenes, said unto some of them, I know not (saith she) what
is their knowledge, neither what is their science, neither what books your
Philosophers study, whom you so much comende, but I know this very well, yt
I being but a woman, besides yt I never red in ye schools at Athenes, yet have
I seen very often the wise men come here to my school, where, of grave
Philosophers they became foolish lovers. Let us therefore leave these
Philosophers at rest, and search out others: for whosoever would make a
Callender of al those, who have made them selves subject to love, should
rather make a whole book thereof, than a chapter. Menetor (as Atheneus
recites) makes mention of an amorous history, worthy to be noted in our
wonders, for that there is nothing more rare in Nature, than to see her which
loves well, willing to make partition to an other of that, which was so dear
unto her, the which some times chanced in a notable history that we have to
write of. Atheneus makes mention of a common woman, greatly renowned for her
beauty, whose name was Plangon Milesienne, as she was beautiful, so was she
desired of many great Lords: But amongst others, she had a young man called
Colophomen, a man exquisite in beauty, whom she commonly plaid withal, who
above all others enjoyed the best part in her. Notwithstanding, as these
lascivious loves be for the most part grounded on tickle uncertain foundatios,
yt all the building comes in ye end to utter decay ruin: even so there
happened such a Jealousy betwixt Plagon her friend, for yt she understood he
loved an other called Bachide Samienne, one nothing inferior to her for
beauty other douries of Nature. Wherein being assailed with this new Jealousy,
she determined to make truce with her love, to give ye farewell to this young
gentleman. Whereupon this young ma, who wished rather to die tha to become a stranger
to her, in whom consisted ye comfort solace of his life began to embrace cherish
her as he was wont to do, but she as cold as ye ise of ye mountaigne, made no
accopte of al his plaints, sighs lametatios, requesting yt he wold shun al
places of her repair, without making him further to vnderstade the cause of
her displeasure: ye young man touched more near ye quick with her new refusal,
prostrated him self at her feet all bedewed with tears, exclaming that if
she deferred to give him remedy, or otherwise relieve him by the influence of
some gracious beam of pity, he should presentely perish. Plangon moved with
rage, pity, and love, said unto him, let me not find thee during thy life
in my presence, unless thou present me with the chain of gold, so much
celebrated of Bacchide Samienne: wherefore the young man without other reply
went to Bacchide, to whom having made understand from point to point the
fury of the flames and ardent amity which he bare to Plangon, vanquished of
pity love, gave unto him her chain, with charge that he should forthwith
present it unto her, who had so grievously tormented him: wherein she showed her
self very liberal and bountiful, seeing that the Historians write, that all
the treasures which she had gathered by little and little during all her life
of those which loved her, was melted and put into that Chain, which was of
monstrous greatness, and also kept of her with great care for the only relief
of her in her old age, if fortune suffered her to be pinched with poverty. The
young man having thus caught the pray he most desired, went to find out
Plangon, to whom he offered the chain, making her to understand the
liberality of his aucient friend, between who neither time nor distance of
place, nor other sinister accident could extinguish their friendship:
wherewith Plangon, marvelling of the love and liberality of her companion,
having a noble heart, and not willing to give place to Bacchide, neither in
good will nor bounty, sent to her again her chain, loving then more fervently
the young man, tha she had done at any time before: and that which is most
wonderful, imparted her love to Bacchide, being content the young man should
be common to them both. Which made the Greekes with great admiration to name
her after Pasiphyle. Wherein being now so ancred in maters of woderfull loves,
we must search the most rare marvelous histories, amongst whom I do not
remember, there have been any dames in all the world, which have demeaned
their love with more great wonder, neither which have ^te a more eternal
witness to their posterity of their wanton and lascivious lives, than Lamie,
Flora and Lays, of whom I will write the life according as Pausanias the
Greek, and Manilius the Latin, have written in their books entreating of noble
loving women. But above all others I will follow Anthonius of Gueuare, Bishop of
Mon^demo, in a learned treatise which he hath made of this matter. These three
Dames have been three of ye most fair most famous women of the world, which
at any time were either borne in Asia or nourished in Europe, and of whom the
Historiographers have most talked, and by whom most Princes have come to
ruin and perdition. It is written of them for a wonder, that they so well
charmed those which loved them, that they were never left of any Prince which
loved them, nor denied at any time, any thing they required: further it is
written that these.iij. women as they never mocked any man, so they were not
mocked of any. The Historians write that these.iij. Courtesans during their
life, were.iij. of the most rich Courtesans of the world, after their
decease left most great memory of them, for every of them where they dyed,
did erecte a great pillour of stones, to continue a remembrance of them: and
besides that every one of them were by Nature beautiful, yet had they a further
particular gyfte to allure entice their lovers to love the. The engine wherewith
Lamie entrapped her lovers, proceeded of regard, for by the drawing of her
eyes she inflamed the beholders. Flora wanne hers by her wonderful eloquence.
And Lays allured by her sweet pleasant hermony. Wherefore the King Demetrius,
suddenly receiving ye glance of the eye of Lamie, was taken in the net, and
that new fire in process of time gained so much over him, yt he lived not but
in her, not only gave her all he had, but also abandoned his wife Euxonie to
follow his Lamie. Wherefore Plutarke recites in the life of Demetrius, that
the Athenians having given unto him.xj. talents of silver to aid and paye his
great army, he made a present of all the said sum to his Lamie, whereat ye
Athenians were marvelously grieved, to see their money so evil employed. This
miserable King Demetrius doted so extremely in the love of his Lamie, that he
honoured her as a God, swering by her, as he accustomed to do by his Gods, till
death fortune which cuts asunder the fillet of those delights, sends end to all
such enterprises, suffered Lamie to die, whereupon that poor King, felt himself
so griped, that as some write of him, he kissed her, and embraced her after her
death: and not content with this Idolatry, he made her be buried before one of
ye windows of his house, and when any of his friends asked the occasion
wherefore he buried her in that place, he answered them, sighing dipely: the
law of friendship of Lamie is so strogly graffed in my heart, that I know not
wherein to satisfy the love she bare me, the bond which I owe to her for ye
same, if not to put her in such a place, that by view thereof my poor eyes may
bewail daily the death of her, and my sorrowful heart continually think
thereof. Whereby the dolor sorrow that Demetrius had for ye death of Lamie, was
so great and extreme, that all the Philosophers of Athens were to dispute
thereof, whether of these two things were most to be esteemed, either the
tears sorrow which he suffered for her, or the riches which he spent in the
obsequies pomps of her burial. Within a year.ij. months after the death of
Lamie, died King Demetrius. The second amorous Dame, named Lays, spoken of
before, was the daughter of a great Sacrificatour of the Temple of Apollo, a ma
so expert in the art Magical, that he prophesied the perdition of his
daughter incontinent after her nativity. This Lays (as her companion) had a
King for her friend, who was the renowned Pirrhus, with whom she went into
Italie, in the expedition and wars he made against the Romains, remaining
there a long time in his camp, after returned with him from the wars:
notwithstanding it is written of her, that she never gave her self to one man
alone. This Lays was so sufficiently furnished with al perfections of beauty,
and ornaments of Nature, that if she would have been continent, and not common
in her love, there had not been so constant a Prince in ye world, which would
not have desired her, and not denied to perform what she had demanded of
him. Being returned from Italie into Greece* she remained at Corinthe as Aulus
Gelius writes, and there was sought unto of many Kings and noble men, whom
she courted and dandled with such dissimuled slights in love, that if her
lovers were unfeignedly passioned and burned extremely in the desire of her
beauty, she took a singular pleasure to smile and jest at their simplicity
and folly, being besides, noted for one of the women of the world, who
exceeded the rest in making gain proffit of her love I have red one wonder of
her, which I never heard of in any but in her, that is, that she never showed
affection to any man, neither was she in love with any man, which could be
known. This Lays died in ye City of Corinthe, being of the age of lxxij.
years: the death of whom, as it was much desired of many honest Matrons,
so was it as much lamented of many wanton lovers. The third Dame of the world,
was named Flora, which was an Italian, far surmounting the two others in
generosity noble discet: for she was issued of a certain Romain Knight,
greatly renowned in the feats of war, who deceased with his wife, leaving
this young maid of the age of xv. years, no less charged with riches than
endowed with great beauty, the only daughter of her parents: In such sort
that as the young Damsel was young, rich, beautiful, enjoying a liberty
without controlment, which be the greatest bawds of the world, and chief
means to make a woman glide in such slippery paths ^ seeing all these
means, she did determine to go unto the wars of Affrique, where she made
sale both of her person and honour: and so flourished in the time of the first
wars of Punique, when the Consul Manileus was sent to Carthage, who spent
more money in making love to Flora, than in the conquest of his enemies. And
like as this Damsel was issued of a more gentle and noble race, than the other
two before recited: even so she showed her greatness in the choice of her
lovers, for I never red that she gave her self over to mean and petty
Companions, as Lays or Lamie did, but caused to be set up a^scrol over her
gate, which said: King, Prince Dictatour, Consul, Censour, Bishop and Questour
may knock and enter, not speaking of Emperor or Caesar, for these two famous
names, were not of long time after created by the Romaines, in such sort,
that she never committed her self, but to men of high degree, dignity and
great riches, saying always that a woman of great beauty should be
as much esteemed, as she values and accomptes of her self: Albeit Lays and Flora
were contrary in doings, for Lays would be paid her hire before she had
performed her work. But Flora, without making account either of gold or
silver, would be governed of her lover. And being one day asked the cause of
that, she answered. I commit my person to Princes and noble men, to the end
they may deal with me, as noble men ought to do, for I swear by all our
Gods, that there was never man gave me so little, but that I had more than I
looked for, double to that I demanded: saying that a sage woman ought not to
make price of her love, for the amorous pleasure she doth to any man, but
rather for the love she bears to him, for that al things in the world be
priced at a certain rate, except Love, which can not be payed but with love.
Wherefore all the Ambassadors of the world which came into Italy, carried back
as great and several reports of the beauty and nobleness of Flora, as of the
Public weal of Rome, for that it seemed as mostrous a thing to see the riches
of her house, her beauty, the princes noble men who daily required her, as
also to behold the great presents they made unto her: for look what day she
passed on horseback in Rome, the view of her her attire, gave sufficient
occasion to all the Citizens to talk thereof one month after. She dyed at the
age of.lx. years, leaving her wealth and riches to the people of Rome, as her
only heirs, which was esteemed not only sufficient to have edified the
walls of Rome, if they had been utterly in ruin and decay, but also to have
redeemed the common wealth. Wherewith giving end to the discourses of these
Women, there rests to search out some other cause more strange and rare in
our wonderful loves. Cornelius and Suetonius write, that the abominable
tyrant Nero, did not only offend grievously in the abuse of a number of honest
and chaste virgins, but also causing to be gelded a fair young boy, whom he
named Sporus, with intent to transform him into the use of a woman, he married
him with open solemnity, using him in the place of his wife, touching the
exercise of marriage, and assigned dowry and portion according to the order.
And whether may we term it an act of wonderful love or effect of doting
folly? Herodotus reports of the daughter of Cheopes King of Egypt, who having
consumed his treasure and revenue in the supply of a hundred thousand
workmen, labouring upon a most sumptuous Pile which he made, and being as
destitute of money, as void of means to get it, commanded his daughter to
commit her self to sensual prostitution, and that with charge, that she
should not only rack her honour to a high price, but also refuse none, whose
company brought commodity, which she performed accordingly, demanding of
every one that dealt with her, a stone, by whose gain was raised so much as
builded the Pyramides, or hill which carries in the front a hundredth and
fifty foot. Ludouicus Vartomanus writes, that there is an other manner of
making of love at this day in use in a certain province of Indie, named
Tarnasseri, which is no less wonderful tha the precedent before recited, if ye
experience were to be seen: he declares, that when a young ma is enamoured of
any dame, desiring to make her understand the flames of his love, he takes a
piece of woullen cloth dipped in oil, and putting thereto fire, couches the
same upon his naked arm, enduring that flame until the cloth be clean
consumed, without showing any kind of dolor, testifying by this, that he is
so strongly embraced with the love of his lady, that there is no kind of
torment or martyrdom under the heavens, which he would not taste or be
partaker of for her sake. But to the end we should not taste too much of these
filthy and stinking loves, I will show you, that there is to be found as great
wonders in chaste and virtuous love, which is sufficientely proved by sundry
examples, of late written by my brother G. Fenton, in his book of Tragical
Discourses. For what is more strange in Nature than to see a man sacrifice him
self to accompany to death the person whom he loves? And notwithstanding they
have found a number of exaples of women, which be more tender fearful tha men.
The chaste Porcia, daughter of Cato, loved so entierly her husband Brutus, yt
after she understood he was slain in Thessaly, in ye fields Phillipiques,
V^serius Max. lib. 4.
for yt she could not presently get a knife to kill her self, she devoured
burning coals. Cleopatra, late queen of Egipt, nothing inferior in friendship
to ye party aforesaid, having heard of ye death of her husband Anthonie,
although she was warily guarded by Octauius Caesar, who would not she should kill
her self, yet notwithstanding their great care to prevent such a mischief, as
Apianus Alexadrinus writes, she was destroyed by a cruel kind of torment, for
she made her self to be devoured of serpents. Neither let us forget Arthemise
queen of Carry in Greece, who after she knew ye king Mausol{us} her husband was
dead, she dreyned well nigh al ye watrishe powers of her body by tears: after
she had sufficiently lameted, she caused to be made so excellent a sepulchre, yt
it was put amongst the marvels of the world: not content with this, esteming ye
body of him that had ben ye organ of her life, not sufficiently honoured with so
sumptuous a tobe, unless she served him as a sepulchre her self, caused al ye
bones of her husband to be subtly beat to powder, which she ordinarily used
in her meat drink till they were consumed. We should not marvel of these
woderful flames of love, which enchaut charm so well ye humain sense, yt they do
not only walk incurable by al ye most sensible parts of our friends, but ye
more is, they make us very oft to become mad, fratike, without reason, as
appeared by a young gentleman, issued of ye best house of Athens, who of extreme
sorrow died, for that they wold not suffer him to cherish love an image of
Venus, of which he was greatly enamoured. And besides, it is most strange, yt
the cotagious tickling of this amorous venom, doth not only touch ye humain
creatures reasonable, but also ye infection thereof corrupt's brute beasts.
Which Plutarch witnesses in an experience of an elephat, who with Aristophanes
of Alexadrie, ^oued a maid, to whom ye beast did as liberally and frankly
impart his amorous desire and zeal by secrete and simple signs, as
Aristophanes by all the eloquece he could devise: neither is it so strange
altogether, that brute beasts do love creatures reasonable, seeing they are
oftenti^ so pressed and pricked forward with their amorous (...), that they
are seen in diverse sorts kinds to use force against women. Whereof Edouart in
his histories of beasts, gives an example of a certain kind of rough or
shaghaired apes in some countries of India, against whom, the people use a
special defence to keep them from their towns and houses, for that when they
feel any motion of nature, or rather provoked with desire of filthy lust, they
neither spare maid, widow nor wife, nor regard estate, condition, or degree
of women. Whereof have ben found diverse proves in sundry unhappy women that
stand not upon their gar^ against the fury of such beasts. Saxonius in his
tenth book of the history of the Danes, writes (as of most credit and truth)
that a Bear in Swetya, searching his pray upon the Mountains, met by chance a
Shepherds wife, whom he carried to his den, where in place to devour her,
he converted his hunger into pleasure and use of her body. And it is more
marvelous, that the fury and violence of Love is so great, that the wild,
brutal and cruel beasts do not only feel the same: but (which more is) the
Trees and lively Plants of the earth, the which we see, show a certain
likeness and affinity of love: in such sort that as Theophrastus and Plinie
have written, there be diverse Trees and Plants, which if you take away the
males, and place them far from the females, they presently wither, and
continue in perpetual barennesse. As we may see of the Vine, who embraces the
Elm, joying and rejoicing much at his presence. In like sort the Ivy, which
is so great a lover of certain Trees, that it accompanies them after their
death: Which gave occasion to the Ancients, that when they took upon them to
depaint perfect friendship, they expressed the same by the trunk of a dead
tree, environed about with Ivy. Wherefore to put end to these most wonderful
things, the secretaries of nature do acknowledge, that there is also a secret
amity amongst metals stones: for proof of ye Adamat loving iron draws it
to him, having caught it, holds it in such sort, that it seems to be
grieved and touched with a certain ielousy, when they offer to take it from
him. There is also showed marvelous puissance of friendship in metals, which
discovered, show wonderful effects of amity, the which is sufficiently
experimented in gold which we see so manifestly affected to quicksiluer, that
being plunged therein, seems incontinent ravished captive thereunto, by force
of some furious flame of Love.

A wonderful History of a Monster, out of whose belly issued an other man,
all whole, reserving the head. CHAP. xxiij.
OCellus Lucianus, a Greek Philosopher, in a certain little work which he
made, treating as well of the nature of all things, as of generation, showing
unto us, that we ought not to go to the holy state of matrimony for
voluptuousness pleasure (which oftentimes is not absent) but yt our principal
intent ought only to be for procreation, which is not ordained of ye Almighty
for pleasure only, but for ye perpetual conseruatio permanecy of humain society:
wherefore being impossible, yt a mortal ma should live always, God supplied that
default by continual and perpetual generation, to the end yt the earth might
be multiplied, the common weals peopled, the humain societies coserued. In
consideration whereof, we must cut of al these generatios, which be made against
ye ordinace of nature: for by ye means it often happens, that ye fruit
springing thereby is unclean, miserable, monstrous, vicious, odious detestable,
as well to spirits devils, as to men families. And of these vnlauful copulatios
licentious dealing, oftentimes were borne mostrous infantes: As we may see in
beholding this before figured, out of whose belly issued an other man, well
formed in al proportions members, reserving the head. Like as this man was of
the age of.xl. years when he was seen in France, in the year 1530. Eve so he
bare ye body betwixt his arms with great marvel to al ye world, which
assembled in great troupes to see him. Whereupon they said, he was begot of
some common woman, who had given her self indifferently to al comers. Min^
author seems to have seen him at Valece, in ye very same form you see him
here pictured, at such time as mosier de Coras red ye Civil laws there:
afterwards they saw him nigh Paris, in a town called Montlehery, as many have
witnessed: besides yt the good ma Iohn Longis, printer in that university,
assured me, yt having with others take the said person at ye said Montlehery,
devoid of the said monster, ^nquired of him what was become of ye deformed
creature which they had scene in times past spring out of his body.

Notable histories of many Plants, with their propreties and virtues, together
with a wonderful root of Baara, written of by Iosephus the Hebrue author.
CHAP. xxiiij.
IF there be any thing worthy to be considered of in all the principal parts
of physike, certainly it is that which brings us to the knowledge and searching
forth of the nature and propretie of Plants: for besides the common utility
which they bring to mankind, yet shall we discover therein an antiquity so
great, as we can not learn or attain unto, without extreme admiration: for like
as every art was inueted almost as soon as God had created man, afterward
augmented by the industry of man: Even so the herbs plants immediately after
the creation of the elements at such time as there lived no ma upon the earth,
sprung (following the commandment of the Lord) from the caves and entrails of
the earth, garnished with their propre and divine virtues. Which besides that
Moses the great Lawyer of God, sufficiently proves in Exodus, we may also
allege the opinion and witness of the ancient Greek poets, as Orpheus
Museus, and Hesiodus, who have treated of the praise of Penyroyal, as also hath
done Homerus of Alisier, and others, as in like manner Pithagoras, hath commended
the Eschallottus, Crisippus, Chou, and Zeno the Caprier: besides it is a thing
most strange, that Salomon king of the Iewes, Euax, king of the Arabians, Iuba
king of the Mauritans, were so curious, not only to know the names and
propreties of plants, but also the most part of them have diligently written
thereof. Others have entertained great philosophers, and A^borists in diverse
deserts of Asia, Europe, and Affrike, for to discover the secrets of herbs and
plants. Further it is a thing most marvelous, that a great number of plants
much renowned, have taken their names of many kings, as Gentiane toke the name
of Gentius king of the Illyrians, Lymachie of Lyzimachus king of the
Macedonians, Teucriu was invented by Teucer, Achilea of Achilles, Arthemisia,
of Arthemise queen of Carry. But now it rests for us as me seems, having
searched very narrowely the Antiquity and praises of Plants, to be as
diligent, following our custom, in seeking forth if we can find amongst
herbs, any thing monstrous, wonderful or strange, as we have ^one in the
most part of other things contained under the concauitie of Heaven. The
Ancients have reknowleged, I know not by what means, ye marvelous efficaci^
of a plant, which they called Agnus castus, whose leaves are like unto the
Olives: for all those, who have written of the Nature and property of this
plant, say that it resists the sin of the flesh, and that those which
either carry the same about them, or drink the juice thereof, be never tempted
at any time to incontinency: for which occasion the maids in old time, bare
the branches and bows of that herb in their hand, and made garlands
thereof to wear upon their heads, thinking thereby to make die estinguish the
heates of the flesh. Wherefore Discorides in the.xv. chapter of his first
book, treating of ye Nature of plants, says that the Greeks named this tree
Agnos, that is to say chaste, for by that the Ladies sometime in the City of
Athens, guarded their chastity, by making their beads thereof, and doing
sacrifice therewith to Ceres. Even as we have described the singularity of
Agnus Castus which defends the chastity of such persons as use the same: so
are we now to make mentio of an other herb altogether contrary to the
Nature of Agnus Castus, and as who would say his mortal enemy, for it makes
such as use the same, lascivious, prompt and ready to the Uenerian acts:
The Ancients have named this herb Satirium, for that the Satires and savage
Gods, were the inuentours of this plant, for the better satisfying of their
lusts and concupiscence when they went to play by the forests caves with the
Nymphs. Albeit the Greeks cal it Orchis or Cmo^orchis, for that, that this
root is like the two genitories of a dog, in such sort that it seems that
Nature would have left some mark and token in this root, for to show the
marvelous effects or works natural. Wherefore those then, says Discorides in
his third book and.xxij. chapter which he writes of plants, which desire to
have the company of women, ought to use this root, for that it makes men
prompt ready to the exercise and work of Venus, and as they say, this root
being holden in the hand, provokes a man to desire the pleasure of a woman.
Besides, there is one thing worthi^ to be considered of in this root, as who
would say wonderful, that is, that as one of these two roots, which
resebleth (as we have said before) the genitories of a dog, excites stirs a
man vnmeasurablie to the wanton acts of Venus, so the other root which is a
little lesser, extinguishes hinders the desire of the flesh, in such sort,
that as one of these roots provokes the evil, so the other gives remedy.
Plinius, Dioscorides and Galen be authors of this, and Dioscorides writes,
that the women in Thessalie, gave to men to drink of that most fleshly root,
the rather to provoke and stir them to the lusts abominable desires of the
flesh. Wherefore reader, I will not forget to declare that thou shalt not need
to doubt of me in all this treatise of the wonders of plants, the
descriptions, faculties, temperaments and divisions of them, for that this
work would be excessive exceed the limits of my meaning: Wherein Dioscorides,
Theophrastus, Galen, Plinie, Matheolus Fuscheus, Ruel and many others have so
well spoken in that, that there is nothing to be desired more than they have
written thereof, which I would gladly have told before unto those which
think that I had here confounded the diverse kinds of Satirium, like this that
the Greekes have called Orchis Serapias, whereof Paulus Aegineta, and Aetius
have made mention, which others say to have received that name of Serapius,
God of the Alexandrians, by reason of the great impudent lasciuitie, for which
cause they worshipped him in a place called Canope, there where he had his
Temple of great reverence, Religio, as Strabo recites in his.xvij. book of
his Geographies. Wherefore it suffices me in this chapter to write simply,
that there is more cause of marvel and wonder in some particular plant, than
in every plant. The Ancients as Chrisippus, have found cause of wonder, I can
not tell by what means, in the plant which we commonly call Basil, who were
of opinion that it makes a man, senseless and mad: the goats refuse to eat
thereof, which gives just occasion to man to fly the rather from it. They
add further, that bruising it and putting the same under a stone, it engenders
a Scorpion, or if they chawe it and set it in the Sun, it brings forth
worms. Furthermore, some say, that if a man be stoung of Scorpion the day
that he eats of Basil, he shall never be hoale, likewise some assure, that
bruising a handefull of Basil with Cancres marins, or of the River, that all
the Scorpions far or near will come unto him.

Wherefore I am not ignorant, that those which came after Crysippus, did so
abhor Basil, that they never used the same. The herb called of the Latins,
Herbae pulicaris, has such a cold virtue, that being cast into hot boiling
water, it will kill the heate thereof. In like manner, as Chameleon albus,
serves unto men in stead of Treacle against poison and all venims: Even so
notwithstanding it kills and destroys Rats and dogs eating thereof. It is
in like manner a little Thistle growing by the ground, without any stalk,
putting up pricks like an Hedgehog, having in the middle a knap full of
pricks, in which do appear purple flowers, that grow into plumes, fleeing away
with the wind, like as of other thistles, having a white root sweet, grows
on old lands and bare hills. Also Dioscorides, Plinie, and Pithagoras write,
that the herb called Scylla, and of the Apothecaries Squillae, being hanged in
a house, delivers men from charms, sorceries, and enchantments, the root
whereof is like a onion. Wherefore the good searchers out of the secrets of
plants have found by experience that our Persley, which the Latins call Apium
^ortense, and the Greekes Selinon, by a certain se^ret propretie engenders in
us the falling sickness, in such sort that Simeon Sethy writes that it is
necessary for such as be subject to that evil, to take heed they use not
ye same, for it often happens that those which he delivered from that disease,
by using of Persley, fall a fresh into the same again. In like manner Plinie
writes, that nurses ought not to eat thereof, for ye infant (says he) by
sucking the milk of her breast which eats thereof, very often is persecuted
with that disease. Furthermore the Consyre, which the Apoticaries (commending
with so many barbarous words) do call Consolida mayor, hath so great a virtue
to knit, and make to grow and join together fresh hurts, for as Plinie and
Discorides witness, being put in a pot with sundry pieces of flesh, it will
knit and join them together: for which cause the Greeks called it Symphiton
for the great virtue it hath in knitting joining together. Even so the Greeks
and Romains celebrated always amongst their excellent plants, that which is
called in Greek Peristereon, in Latin Verbenaca, and in French Veruaine, it
hath been named anciently Hierabotane, and Sacra herba, that is to say, a
holy herb, for that at Rome in times paste, it served them not only to
purify their houses, but also their family was dressed with it, and for a
more superstitious estimation of this herb, they hong the altar of Iupiter
with it before they performed their sacrifice. Their ambassadors that went
upon holy messages were crowned with it, because as Discorides writes, it was
very proper to withstand wicked spirits, and purge the houses, hong or
garnished with it. Dioscorides and Plinie be of opinion that the house
sprinkled with the water of Veruaine makes the people joyful, and those which
assist the baquet where is either d^awe or mentio of this water, shall be
replenished with mirth and gla^nesse. The plant which the Apoticaries call
Ne^uphar, and the Greeks and Latins Nymphea growing most commonly in Pooles
and rivers, bearing a great green leaf, hath so great virtue against the
hot and wanton motions of youth, that being taken in broth once a day by the
space of xl. days, it mortifies altogether the appetite of sensuality, and
eating it fasting among other meat, it defend^s you from unchaste thoughts
and dreams of Venery: provided always that this must be wrought of the first
kind of Neniu^r which hath a yelowe flower like to a Flowerdelice, whereof
besides the authority of Plinie and Dioscorides (first authors hereof)
experience makes it of faith and credit. For in the old time it was applied to
Monks and Nuns, and other people of devotion in Religious houses, to pull
down and mortify their flesh. The Ancients named it Nimphea, because the
virgin Nympha being ielouse of Hercules, became lean, pale and so full of
mortal passions, that death gave end to her sorrows, and afterward (as they
believed) she was changed into this marrishe and watery herb to delay her
heates: It is common in every place and of.ij. sorts, the one hath a white
flower, and the other carries a yealowe flower. Iuye called in Latin Hedera,
and in Greek Cysses, is a common herb, yet it contains in it many things
worthy of commendation, first it troubles the mind if a man take too much
of it: it brings forth an humour or gum, which as Galen saith, burns
secretly as a hoate plaster, without being perceived: besides it serves for a
depilatour to make fall the hair in every place about man and woman: the
little grains or seeds of Iuye taken in broth make men become barreine.
Plinie adds besides to the virtue of this herb, that men that be
melancholic and subject to diseases of the Spleen, are easily healed if they
do but drink in cups or goblets made of the wood of this Iuye. The Mandrake
hath moved great cause of wonder to such as have written of his properties
and power, Pithagoras calls it Antropomorphen, by reason it hath a root
which resembles the form of a man, others have named it Ciroea* as of Circes,
persuading that the root was good to make men love, and that there was in it a
certain amorous charm. I saw in a fair at Saincte Germains in Paris, a
root of a Mandrake, so well counterfeited by art, with roots and branches
one linked within another, that it resembled properly the form and shape of a
man, which brought such value and estimation to his practise of deceit,
that he sold of them for twenty crowns a piece, by which unreasonable gain,
his abuse was discovered, and he constrained in the end to carry his root
into Italy, from whence he said it first came, which may suffice for the
deceits in this root, and now let us return to his singularities and
virtues. Dioscorides writes that it is of force to mollify the Ivory and make
it apt to ply and turn, and fashion in any work or form that a man will,
boiling it with the Ivory the space of six hours. It is most certain that
it is of a marvelous virtue to caste men on sleep, and so to entrance such
as are to be opened or cut in any member, that they shall not feel the pain,
if first they taste of the juice of this Mandrake: some do use it in parfume
for the same purpose. There be.ij. kinds of Mandrake, which grow in many
places on the mountains in Italie, but specially in Powylla. Whereof diverse
grafters and setters of plants have brought away both Apples and roots. It
is as strange, which the Philosophers attribute unto the plant which the
Latins call Nerion, the Greekes Rhododendros, the Frenchemen Bosage, and we
Roselaurel, it hath the flowers of a Rose, and leaves of a Laurel: but that
which is most wonderful, those leaves kill Dogs, Asses, Moyles, and many
other four footed beasts: and to men or women, if it be taken in br^ath with
wine, it serves as a counterpoyson or sovereign Medicine against the bytings
of all venomous beasts: and yet if goats, sheep, and such like weak
beasts do drink of the water wherein those leaves have been dipped, they do
swell and dye forthwith. Lentile the which of the Latins is called Lens or
Lenticula, procures fearful dreams, specially upon his first decoction as
Plinie and Dioscorides affirm: those which have not mean to eat of this
meat, become Leepers, as Galen and Plinie say.

This may suffice (in mine opinion) for the curious searching of the strange
properties of Plants. There rests now to discover unto you the wonderful
virtues of such as have power to confound and kill man, for the use of whom,
not only all plants and herbs, but all other things contained within the
pourprise compass of of this visible world are and have been created, and yet
to keep him under, and that he lift not up his horne too high nor swell with
pride and ambition, the Lord hath caused to appear out of the earth, certain
little roots plants with power not only to be master over his pride, but
also every moment of the day, to threaten him with death and perform it. The
Hemlock called Cycuta of the Latins, sufficiently known to most men, is of a
property to smother and kill such as do drink it in any broth, whereof the
Athenians made a pruofe in Socrates at such time as he was falsely accused by
Auytus and Meluycus for speaking blasphemy against the Gods, using this herb
(as a common punishment) and made himself perform the office of
executioner. Dioscorides in his treatise of poisons and their remedies, doth
exaggerate wonderfully the accidents and Symptoms of him that hath eaten of
this herb. For (saith he) such as have either drunk or eaten of it, have a
visible virtue in their eyes, although they be blind and have their minds so
troubled that they are notable to discern any thing, and blood continually,
and suffer all extreme colds of the body. And lastly, the poison of this Plant
doth so restrain the breath and blast in the reed of the lights that the
patients do die as though they were strangled: and therefore (saith he) this
poison ought at the first to be drawn out of the body by vomit, and then
by glisters, to the end that, that which is descend to the bowels, do also
come out. That which some cal Thymeo, and the Latins Tapo, being received at
the mouth, is venomous, driving the whole body into such a cold, that it
stops the breath in a short time. The herb of Sardania eaten, makes a man
become incensed, and breeds a certain wanness in the lips, in sort that who
hath eaten of it seems always to laugh, from whence moves the wicked
proverb, the laughter of Sardanya, which appears at large in Solyn,
Dioscorides and specially in Erasmus Chylyads: in like sort the plant which
the Latins call Hios^iamus, the Greekes, Hiosciamos, and the Frenchemen
Iusquiane, but chiefly that which hath the grain black, makes a man sleepy,
and to loase his sense according to Plinie and Galen, and as Dioscorides saith,
it stirs up such vain ^llyes as commonly we see in a drunken man. Aelian
writes in his History, that the wild Bears feeding of this herb are
ready to soune, and that not without danger of death if they wash them not
presently in water. And now there is a kind of plant called in Latin
Aconitum, in French Aconit, and in English a Libardbaine or Wolfbaine, which
as last shall seal up our description of venomous herbs, because it is of a
more ready and sudden nature of death, than any other, and specially that
which they cal Pardylyanches, which kills ye Libarde and bears, a leaf
like to a wild Coucumber, but it is somewhat less and more sharp: an other
kind of Aconite is called Lycothonon, because that wolves having eaten of it
die immediately: the first kind growth in every place, but the second is
found ( that but seldom) in deep valleys between moutaines. Al kinds of
Aconit perform their poison most by gnawing the entrails, putrifactio of good
humours: The first kind kills wild Bores and other savage beasts: and those
which hunt wolves do often use it to make them die. It is most certain
(according to Plinie) that as Aconyt is the most sudden poison that is, so the
females of any beast whatsoever, touching it in any sort with their secrete
parts, do die presently. He saith again, that Aconyt given to a man in hot
wine, is present poison and kills, if he find not some thing in the body of
man, which can kill it: for having encoutred any thing of like substance to
himself, he stirs and quarelleth as if he met with an other poison in the
entrails of the man: but that which makes it of more marvel is, that two
mortal poisons meeting in the body of one man together, the one kills the
other, and saves the man on live. Wherewith we will now knit up our Discourse
of venomous herbs, and bring in those that be more familiar and friendly to
man: amogest the which the auncientes had in most estimation the Balm, as
most wonderful in his virtues. Some write that this excellent herb of the
Balm hath heretofore grown only in the town of Ferico, from whence he
fetched his name, for Ferico in the Hebrue signifies good smell. Plinie
prefers it before all the other oders, and saith there is none of it now but
in Iuda: it grows speedily, and must be underpropped and tied as you stay a
vine, or else it will fall to the earth: the leaf of a Balm is always
green, and resembles most the Herb Grace, it can not brooke that one cut or
hurt it with any instrument of iron. Whereof Cornelius Tacitus writes an
experience and saith: that if one offer to touche it with iron, it seems to
shrink for fear, and therefore it must be handled with instruments of bone,
or some other like substance: for if you touche it with iron to have either
liquour or oil, it dies forthwith: but cutting it with instruments agreeing
with his nature, it yields a suck or sap which they call Opobals^mum,
which is wonderful sweet, although it bring but a little taste. The
principal virtue of this Plant consists in the humour, the second in the
seed, the third in the bark, and the last of all in the weed After Titus the
Romaine prince had destroyed Jerusalem, revenging the death of Iesus Christ,
the herb plant of the balm were transported into Egypt. Petrus Bolonus, a
diligent sercher of rare things writes, that in the time of his pilgrimage
from Leuant, he went to see the garden where grew the Balms, being a good
league from Caire, where he said, he saw not above nine or ten plants, and the
same very curiously guarded and enclosed with great and high walls. The last
precious virtue of this plant is, to preserve (a long time) from corruption,
any flesh that is either rubbed or perfumed with it. There is an other herb
which hath ben heretofore very rare, albeit now somewhat familiar, called Lyons
foot, which grows in mountains, and hath leaves like unto the leaf of a
Mallowe, saving that they be more hard full of sinews, and crispie: it springs
in May, and flowers in June: it is most sovereign to consolidate all kind of
hurts, and much employed that way by the surgeos of Almayn. The physitios of
late put it among the rare and wonderful plants, because of his wonderful
power to consolidate all hurts: they write that if either maids or wives that
be corrupted or have forfaited their virginity do use of it, it makes them
seem maids as at the first, specially if it continue any time in his
decoction: as if there be pieces of canvas or linen cloth dipped or bathed
within the water of it, and applied or laid upon their dugs, it makes them
shrink and retire, and become round and hard: it begins now to be commonly
known in Italy, and of special delight with certain women that stand in need of
it. The Coral which is called Lythodendron, that is to say, a Treestone, is
no less meritorious for estimation tha the rest, seeing it is a plant that
grows in ye sea, which as Dioscorides writes, being drawn out of the botom
of the sea, becomes hard with the air, so is made a stone. This little tree or
plant of Coraile is green, soft, being in the sea, and bears a fruit like
unto hor^es, as well in bigness as in figure: this plant when it is drawn out
of the water is all full of moss, and is not red, but coming after into the
hands of workmen, they polish it artificially either upon the tornell by force
of the file, and so smooth him with the powder of trypoly, to give him his
glee and beauty. Al kinds of Coral be very common in Italy, because that ye
people there do fish for them in the sea Tyrenum. The Corals have an hid
virtue against the Epilepsia, or foul evil, being an infection in the head,
they defend houses from harm by lightning, they restrain the flux menstruall,
they are good for gnawing in the gummes, for blaines and biles in ye mouth and
for the flux of seed. Auicen holds them most sovereign to glad and comfort
the heart. Dioscorides makes mention but of two kinds of Coral, that is red
black, and yet we read, that in diverse seas in Europe, are found of them that
be very white, and they be sponging light. Dioscorides Schylyen in his.xvii.
book tells a wonderful history of a plant yt was showed to Alexander in a
vision, wherewith he healed his people yt were hurt with venomous weapons, which
me think not much impertinent to put in this place by reason of his woderful
effect. After Alexander (saith he) had victory against ye Brachmans, whereof ye
most part were either killed or taken prisoners, he found sundry of his
Macedonians sore hu^te and in danger of death, by reason that the end of the
Darts and Arrows of their enemies were poisoned, the same moving courage in them
to attempt the battle against him. The venom was made of certain serpents,
which they killed, and laid them to dry against the Sun, the heate whereof
made issue out a sweat, with the which sweat also distilled the poison of the
serpent, the which was of such violence, that who was hurt with any weapon
dipped in it, lost incontinent his f^elyng, and by and by turned into
wonderful torment by the retraction of sinews, and trembling of all his body,
his flesh became black like lead, and by continual vomit, caste up a
marvelous deal of choler, besides the which came out of the hurt a black
scum, whereof engendered a putrefaction, which as it was fermed and jellied
gained forthwith the noble parts, and made the patient die in great
martyrdom. The King was not so sorrowful for all the rest of his people, as it
grieved him in the payne of Ptolomeus, at that time one of the kings minious,
and after his death supplied his place, with no less love awe of his people
than he. And as there was thoroughout the whole army general sorrow for the
martirdom of Ptolomeus, there chanced a strange case, and the same of more
marvel, because (as Diodorus says) many refer it to an express
providence of the Gods. The King sleping in his tent, not without great care
for the grief of his Ptolomey, a great dragon seemed to hover before him as in
a vision, holding an herb in his thr^ts, whereof he taught him both the virtue
and the place where it grew. Alexander awaking upon this vision, went
immediately to seek the herb, and having found it, he ordered it in sort of a
plaster, and applying it to the body of Ptolomeus, gave him also to drink of
the juice, whereupon he with others were restored and made hole in few days.
Diodorus, although he recite the History, yet he fears to tel the name of
the herb: but Plinie treating of a like accident, declares the name of a
certain herb, which was good to cure the hurts of soldiers, speaking in
this manner: Sometime (saith he) the use and experience of herbs are found by
chance, or rather to speak the truth, by a certain Oracle of the gods, as
hath ben written of the plant called Cynorthombi, which is a kind of a wild
Rose, very good to heal the biting of mad Dogs, his virtue and operation
was found by chance: For a woman ha^ing her son in the wars of Spain,
and so bitten with a mad Dog, that he was in great peril of life, the
which they judged because he began to fear water, or any thing that was
moyste. This woman dreaming by night on the disease of her son, did imagine
in her sleep, that she sent him this herb Cynorthondon, which she had
seen the day before, under a would side, to drink in Milk (conceiving some
hope in the effect of her dream) wrote unto her son the next day what
had happened her in her vision. Her son obeying the contents of her
Letter, was healed by the mean of this Herb, whereupon after it grew to be
a common remedy against the like disease. A thing truly of more wonder in
that we came to the knowledge of it by such means, approving also the
unspeakable goodness, who in sleeping doth reuele unto us remedies to
preserve our health. Theophrastes makes mention of a certain herb of
India, which so stirs and moves in the body of a man, that it drayneth
all the seed of nature: Whereupon some have taken occasion to write, that
Heracles deflowered in one night a great number of virgins by the only help of
this herb. The Scythians in like sort have an herb very common in their
country which they do call by none other name than by the herb of Scythia,
which being kept in the mouth, represses hunger and thirst for ten or.xij.
days.

Aelyan, a Greek Historian makes mention of an herb which discovers
treasures that be hidden: And Plinie of an other which opens the conduictes
that be closed.

And now as we have largely dilated upon the virtues and propreties of many
wonderful herbs and plants, so it is not necessary to omit the noble and
wonderful dignity of the root of Baara, so much celebrated by Iosephus the
Hebrue, who because he is of more faith than the most of the rest, and of
less suspicion than they all, being a recorder of the Ecclesiastical
histories, I thynk^ him as worthy of this place as any other. In times past,
saith Iosephus there grew a Root in Iuda, called Baara, having a colour and
bryghtenesse of a flame* of fire, and gave light in the night like a Lamp, and
that in such a wonderful and strange order, that who so went about to touche
or gather it before that it were sprinkled with either the blood or urine of a
woman, dyed presently, and yet was not that a sufficient defence or surety.
Whereupon after such experience of the poison of this Herb, they were
constrained (for their own safety) to tie a Dog to some part of the
Plant, who offering to follow his Master, plucked it up by the roots. Such
again was the wonderful propretie of this Plant, that being once plucked up,
a man might handle it without peril: And being hanged at the neck of such
as were infected with the Falling syckenesse, or possessed with an evil
spirit, it did deliver them presentely. Hieronymus Cardanus a Physician of
Millane, finds it not strange, that it killed such as did gather it,
enforcyng his opinion by reasons of Philosophie, but in this sort: Baaran,
whereof this root of Baara hath taken his name, is a Ualey in Iudea, a
country very hot and haboundyng with Pytche, of which the portion or liquour
being very subtle, and too much boiled, did distill from the Mountain:
whereof (as it is most like) this Root was engendered, and because that it did
grow in continual shadow and darkness, the poison was the more violent,
being of a substance exceeding the fire in heate, the which being stirred in
the plucking up, and fuming up with an ardent and corrupt vapour, to the
brain of him that gathered it, smoothered him presentely. But touching his
reasons for the vryne and Milk of a Woman, the which seemed to have some
power over the fury of this Plant, although they be strong, and carry with
them a great lykelyhode of credit and truth: yet I think that it is neither
in him nor in all the Philosophers of the World, if all their learnyngs were
set in judgment of the matter, to give other reason, than with the Prophet,
saying: The Lord is marvelous in all his works, who has known his
secretes, or who has been his Counseller? The portraict of this Plant is in
the beginning of this Chapiter, where the Dog is tied to the Herb.

Wonderful Bankette^. CHAP. xxv.
IF I have not sufficiently treated in my first book of the Theatre of the
world, of the infirmities and maledictios thundered upon us wretches, by that
wicked and unfortunate vice of glutonie, I have now a larger field to walk
in, and a matter more ample, to dilate upon, to the fullness of my pen: but
without singing so often one sog, it shall suffice me for the present, to
describe in this place not only the prodigalities, but also the wondrous
monstrous feeding of the throat, whereof the Ancients and gluttons of late
time, have used in their feasts and banquets. The Persians and Greekes (as
Herodotus witnesses) have ben so dissolute in their feasts, that they caused
them to be proclaimed in public by the cry of an Harolde, and reserved a
special price to such as could invent new delights, or drink or eat with
most excess: besides they forbad one an other by the way of mockery and
bravery, that they should not depart at any time from their feasts, hungry:
And their reason was, for that that they should so well stuff their bodies of
all kinds of meates and drinks, that they were constrained to render account
to nature, and make an inuentorie of that which they had received before they
parted from the table: and so having discharged their stomachs, became hungry
again. Atheneus making mention of the excessive prodigality of Xerxes, king
of the Persians, assures, that after he had remained one day in a City, and
that he had dined and supped, the common poor people smelte thereof a year or
two after: As if that they had had a certain famine or barennesse of goods in
their provinces. And after continuing his purpose, he made mention of the
superfluity and sumptuous expenses of Darius king of the Persians, who (saith
he) had many times to accompany him at supper fiftene thousand men: of whom
if you will make division, you shall find every one of those guests spent at
his supper.xvj. crowns. Wherein that great cormorant Alexander was nothing at
all inferior to Darius or Xerxes, in banqueting or excessive ^harge^: for
after he had pierced the Indes* he began to give himself in pray to
delights, and proclaimed open battle to good drink, with reward to him that
got the price or victory of that combat, the same amounting many times to the
value of thirty Mines, being three hundredth crowns: or of one talent, A
drooken combat.
the which is six hundredth crowns. And although the danger of that bataile
consisted most in the blows of cups or glasses* yet he found it in the
end so tragical and bloody, that for that time there died to the number of
thirty six, who ended their lives most miserably by the excessive drinking
and gurling in of wine, as Charles Mitileneus writes in the gestes of
Alexander. Although Esope was not equal to thes^ before rehearsed, neither in
goods nor in dignity, yet Plinie recites in the tenth of his books, that
amongeste the most renowned delicacies and prodigality, the dish of Esope
hath been in greatest admiration. That dish was of a strange and wonderful
invention: for he searched with great curiosity, for the furnishing of one
banquet which he made in Rome, all the little birds enclosed in cages, which
were to be found in all the City, as Linettes, Larks, Estourneaux, Merles,
Calendres, and other like, who were sold more dearer than gold, because of
their pleasant and armonious singing, together with the pleasure which men
received in the hearing of them, who know very well how to imitate the voice
of man: which birds (if we will believe Plinie) did cost six thousand
Sesterces the piece, which were prised (acccording to Budee) at fifteen
thousand^ crowns. Which may seem strange, or not true, to them which have
read those authors, that not only that tragical Esope was so rich, but
also after so great^ expenses and charges, he left his son so welthi^* that
he was nothing inferior in prodigal allowance to his father.

These things be marvelous: but there is nothing read of, so monstrous in
Nature, as the riches and nobleness^ of Pithius, who neither was King, Prince,
nor had any^ title of dignity: and notwithstanding he received and entertained
by the space of a whole day the host of Xerxes, son of the great King
Darius, who were in number.vij. hundredth, four score and eight thousand
(...) the same being no less strange unto that which Herodotus, Plinie and
Budee write of him, when he offred to Xerxes (parting from his house) to
relieve and furnish his camp fifty months with Corn. But least we should
exceed ye bonds or forsake the path of our first intention, let us retire
where we left, to our pomps and banquets, amongst whom, for a first, it
behooves us to place in rank Cleopatra, Queen of Egipte, who (as Plutarch
saith) had so pleasant delectable a phrase in talking, that when she would
dispose her tong to entertain any great Lord, she framed her reason so
tunably, as though it had been an armonious instrument of many strings: which
was the first gin or snare, wherein th^ Pigeon Marcus Antonius was taken: for
after he was infected with the sweetness of her divine eloquence, mixed or
seasoned with a rare and wonderful beauty, together with an incredible
magnificence in feasting and banqueting, determined in place to pursue his
causes of importance, to make court unto her, and so being captive to her good
behaviour, stood more need to be pitied, than of other help: although he
was at the first master and Lord, yet in the end he became vanquished and
overthrown. But now to commend the nobleness of Cleopatra, you must
understand, what Plutarch writes, that Antonie going against the Perthes, he
sent to summon her to appear personally before him, at such time as he was
in Cilicie, to answer to the faults and charges whereof she was accused,
knowing that she had given aid and comfort to his enemies against him: but
^he being of a noble mind, nothing fearful or abashed of his threats, put
not on the ap^ell of a person accused (as was the custom of the Ancients) but
decked her self with ye most sumptuous habits she had: to (...) nothing
unperformed, y^ appertained unto the settin^ forth of so great a Princess,
she caused to be trimmed a galey, wherein she sailed to him by ye flood Cydius,
ye powpe whereof was of gold, the ores of silver, and the sail of purple,
being shrouded under a tent trimmed with gold, environed with singers and
other heavenly instruments of music, besides all other things which might move
pleasure or cotentement to a man. Whereupon Antonius knowing of her coming,
sent to desire her to supper, but she being of haughty mind, feeling-hir self
tickled with such request, sent him word that if it pleased him to come to
her, he should be most welcome, so much was her confidence in her beauty,
eloquence and good behaviour: for besides her glistering beauty, Nature had so
endued her with the perfect understanding of diverse languages, yt she was able
to answer the Arabians, the Syrians, the He^rues, the Medes, the Partheans,
the Ethiopians, and the Troglodytes, without interpretour or construer: which
was the cause that Antonius (seeing such stoare of perfections in this
wonderful creature) was incontinent surprised: whereof we have left hereunto
to speak, because the magnificence of the banquet made afterwards by
Cleopatra to Antonius hangs thereupon. Which with the sudden encounter of of
this new beauty of Cleopatra, made Antonius to commit to oblivion Octauia
sister to Octauus Caesar, his lawful wife, the remembrance and regard of
whom he seemed forthwith to exchange, for a wanton delight in the braueries
flatteries of his new friend, who by treat of time governed so well his
amorous dispositeon with allurements of contentation, that if I would
describe particularly her liberal beauty which she used in the entertainment
of Antonius (according to the authority of Artheneus a Greek writer) I fear
the nobility of it would take away the credit, such was her pomp in her
self, and such her prodigality in expenses. Albeit what I prefer therein: I
appeal to the testimony of the whole troupe of writers, that have dealt in
the doings of Antonius Cleopatra: who having employed all his slights
policies, in the device of new delights, for the more honour of her Antonio:
she became extreme in one thing, which was, as they were in argumet of the
bounty of the feast, she said, it was not equal and much less exceed that
which she was able to do upon far less warning than this: for (saith she) you
cannot take me so unprovided, but that I shall be able to entertain you at the
charges of a hundredth Sesterces in one banquet. Two hudreth and.l. crowns and
some value them at.ij.C.xxx. and iiij.M.iij.C.lx. and v. Duca^s.
Antonius which was a very patron of prodigality, provoking an experience of
her saying, argued against her: whereupon were judges chosen on both sides, and
pawnes put in for the proof of the contention. Not long time after, Antonius
observing his advantage of time, with intent to visit her without warning, came
upon a sudden to sup with her, when albeit he found his table furnished with
sundry choices of exquisite meates, yet was he of opinion, that it was far
under the value estimation of her promise, until he perceived her to take from
her ears two great and Orient pearls, whereof she dissolved immediately one,
drunk it in his presence, and offering to perform the like of the other, she
was stayed by the judges, who assured her the victory. This pearl was of
such monstrous greatness (that as Plinie affirms) it weighed half an uncle,
which contained 80. quarettes, A pearl weighing half an uncle.
the same being so massive, that it exceeded in weight the hug^st at this day
by a quarter of an ounce: which is the cause that Plinie (commending the
excellency of that pearl) calls it ye only chief principal work of Nature
in that kind, and not without reason, seeing the most part of them which have
valued it, do give it an estimation of 2500. crowns. And yet was this
prodigality little or nothing in respect of the magnificall pomp which the
Emperor Gecta used in his public banquets: for he caused himself to be
served at the b^rd^, with diversity of meates, as fish and flesh in order of
the Alphabet, for all foul and fish that he could recover* that began with A,
he caused to be set on his table as a first service, as Austriges and such
others, practising the like in the second course with B, as Bustarde, Bitter
and such like, the same not failing to come immediately after ye first service
was taken away, and so consequently every letter was honoured with a service
till the whole Alphabet was performed, having in deed, Cooks and cators
appointed for that purpose only. But what stand we so long in the search of
foreign prodigalities in banquets, seeing (amongst a number of others) our time
hath stirred up a mostrous example that way, in Auignon, at such a time as
mine author studied the law under Emilius Farretus, in whose time there was a
Prelate stranger, whose name I will concele, A wonderful prodigality in an
Italian Prelate.
as well for the honour of his profession, as to much superstition in him self,
who one day invited to a banquet, the nobility of Auignon, as well men as
women, where for a first beginning of his pomp, at the very entry into the
hall where the banquet was appointed, lay spread upon a curious board a great
beef with his head pulled of, and purged in his entrails, having in his
belly a whole Heart or dear of the like dressing, stufte full of little
birds, as Quails, Partriches, larks, Pheasants and other like, the same being
so cunningly enclosed in the belly of the second beast, and they so
artificially conioined ye one within the other, that it seemed some excellent
Mathematitian had been the workman thereof: But that which made the matter
both strange and wonderful, was, that all the birds so assembled, did roast
and turn all alone upon a brooch, by certain compass and conduits without
the aid of any man: For the first course and order of the table, his gestes
were presented with store of curious pastrie, wherein were wrought and
enclosed many little birds quick, who as soon as the crust was taken of,
began to fly about the hall: there were besides, sundry sorts of silver
plate, full of Iellie, so subtillie conveyed, that a man might have seen in
the bottom a number of little fishes quick, swimming and leaping in sweet
water and musk, to the great delight and pleasure of the assistants: neither
is it less strange, in that all the fowls which were served upon the table,
were larded with Lampraye, albeit it was in a season when they cost half a
croune a piece: but that which seals up the superstitious pomp of this
proud Prelate, was, that there was reserved as many quick birds, as he was
served with dead fowls at his table, the same containing such indifferent
number, that if there were a Fesant sent dreassed to the board, there were
Gentlemen (appointed for the purpose) which presented an other alive, and al to
show the magnificence of the priest, to whom, what remains for the
consummation of his prodigal delights, but that the Gentlemen which served him
had their faces covered with a veil, least their breath should offend either
him or his meat, all which I have preferred in this place (as most
prodigious and monstrous,) not for imitation sake, but rather that all good
Christians should deteste him and his example, seeing it might be, that
whilst his Ship went with full sail, and he in the middeste of his Epicures
delights, the poor Lazarus perished at his door, for want of food and fire.
But alas what could the faithful Saint Iohn, and Peter think of this, who
had not one Deniere to give in alms to the poor lame man that did demand it
at the Temple gate? or what would the other Apostles (constrained with
extremity of hunger to eat the ears and awnes of Corn) if they had seen
their successor in so hot a kitchen so diversely garnished with delicate
meates. This had been a time and place and fit occasion for the wicked Iudas,
if he had been there, to have cried against them, Vt quid perditio haec?
potuisse^ hoc multum vendi dar^ pauperibus. Who list to be privy to the pomp
of other Prelates, let him read Platinus in his treatise De honesta voluptate.
There was besides, a Cardinal no less famous this way, than our Italian
Prelate, who in the time of Sixtus the Pope, consumed into two years in
banquets, ionquets and such other belly vanities 3000. crowns: wherewith
many poor members of Christ, and sundry needy scholars and students might
have been relieved and kept long time at their books. Let us leave to report
of these disorders in our time, and return to our ancestors: who the more
manifest their vices were, the greater was their slander, and the tragedy of
their life less honourable. Wherefore all that is spoken of before, is but as a
shadow or figure of magnificence, in respect of those monstrous and
diabolical feasts of that great glutton and devourer of meates, Heliogabalus
Emperor of the Romains, who was so disordered in his delights, that s^arce the
life of an excellent Historiographer would suffice to dilate thereof at large.
That wicked and unhappy minister of Satan, drowned as it were in the ^nke of
unsatiable eating, never made dinner after he was created Emperor, wherein he
spen^ less than.60. marks of gold, which (according to our computation)
amounts to the sum of 2500 Ducats: besides he was so fantastical and
unruly in his appetites, that he used no common meates at his meals, but was
^edde with the combs of cocks, the tongues of peahens: also being made to
understand that there was but one thing rare in the world (which they
declared to be the Phoenix) he sent for her to eat, promising I kn^w not how
many thousand marks of gold, to him who could furnish him thereof, and
said in a common proverb, that there was no sauce but dearth. Wherein not
sufficing him self to feed^ of these rare exquisite meats, he feasted like wise
with as great abundance his gentlemen and champions, causing also his Dogs and
Lions to be nourished with the flesh of Phesants, Pehens, and birds: not
ceasing to use only this prodigality in daintiness of his mouth, but (which
more is) he was as lascivious and extreme in all other furnitures of his
service: for he caused to serve him at his table four maids naked, who were
oftentimes carried in that sort through the city of Rome: he neither drank
nor eat at any time above once in one vessel or dish, although the same, and
all the rest of the implements of his house were of pure gold or silver, the
stool wherein he did his excrements not excepted. And in the place of wax
candels to give him light, he caused to be put into his lamps an excellent
balm, which he caused to brought from Iuda and Arabia. That unhappy Emperor
was so frantic and mad in all his actions, that he invented things which
devils themselves could never devise before: for he made to be counterfeited
artificially meates of marble, wood, and other things, causing not only the
people to be kept hungry, but also to sit at the table, beholding these
meates in pitiful sort. He made many banquets to the which he invited.viij.
bald men.viij. crooked men.viij. lame men viij. deaf men.viij. dumb
men.viij. black men.viij. white men.viij lean men, and viij. fat men, to the
end that those which did assist the baket might have cause to laugh: sometimes
he made his guests drunk, and then shutting the doors and gates of the place
where they were a sleep, put in unto them Bears and Lyons without nailes or
teeth, to the end that when they awaked, they might die for fear, to see them
within the danger of such ravenous beasts: some others he would make drink
till they burst: and of some again when they had well drunk, he would tie
their legs and their hands, and al the conduits of their urine, and so let them
die. And being reprehended of these follies, and warned to avoid such
extraordinary expense, least hereafter it were revenged upon him with
poverty. His answer was, that he was not subject to any thing he had, Some
writers have referred this to the Emperor Tyberius.
neither would he have other heir than himself and his wife, not caring for
children, least they should conspire against him. These were the charities and
deeds of devotion, wherein this reverend Emperor consumed the revenue of his
state, which by reason of their monstrous order, if they seem incredible to
any, let him read Aelyus Lampridius, Sextus Aurelius, Victor, Eutropius,
Iulius Capitolinus, and Spartian in the life of Septimus Seuerus, by whom
albeit the matter is plentyfully aduouched, yet have they not brought to
memory the moiety or one half. There rests now to discover the end of
these delights, and what bitter gall attended the pleasant taste of such sugared
vanities. Xerxes killed by his provost And Darius poisoned after by Alexander.
What other end had Darius and Xerxes, (whereof we have first spoken) than
after so many duties and gluttonous delights done to their filthy bellies, they
were miserebly confounded, the like happening rightly to Alexander, whom one
drop of poison made digest in one cup, that which he had excessively devoured
all the days of his life. Mar. Anto. killed him self.
And did it happen better to that prodigal Marcus Antonius, or his liccorishe
Cleopatra? What mirror, what spectacle, what example to such as live in this
world as in an eternal Paradyse of delights? but what more shameful
punishment and just hire could he receive of his Epicures life, than to be
the bloody butcher of himself, the like end attending his Companion in
wantonness: Cleopatra was story to death
which according to her dissolute life, was at last devoured of an Aspick, the
most venomous of all other creatures. And that sink or gulf of gluttony
Heliogabalus, Helioga. slain and cast into Tyber.
did he escape the fury or justice of God? no no: for as he had devoured an
infinite number of sundry sorts of creatures, he was in the end^ torn in
pieces of them, seeing his own people after many hard experiences of his
tyrannies, conspired against him, and killed him, and trailing him as a dead
dog along the streets THe figure and portraict of Denis Heracleot, who became so
gross, that he was constrained to have his blood drawn from him by
Horsleaches, as appears further in the leaf 82. Galene reports the like
history of Nicomachus Smyrneus, who was so gross and monstrous that he could
not remove.
of Rome, threw him at last into Tyber, where his body was a pray to fishes,
whereof his throat (whilst he lived) had murdered an infinite number. The
Emperor Iouian and Septimus Seuerus, (as Baptista Ignatius witnesses) died of
the disease of drunkenness. There be also other kinds of banketters, which
albeit have not died upon any surfete of eating or drinking, yet they became so
monstrous fat, that they were little better in ef^ect, amongst whom the
Emperor Maximyn, may challenge first place, as their chief patriarch, whom
they affirm to have such store of grease kitchen stuff within his paunch,
that the breath that came from him, seemed of force to turn about a Windmill,
having continually two men to bear up his belly, his hands, and other members
by succession of time, being so great, and charged with fatness, that his
wives bracelettes scarcely served his fyngers for Ryngs, as the Histories
affirm. In like manner Denys Heracleot gave him self so over to the desire of
meat and drink, and other fleshly delights, that he became so monstrous huge
and fat, that he durst not show himself to the people, for fear of contempt.
By which means and continual keeping in his close house, he became so gross
and swelled thorough all the parts of his body, that he was forced to apply
continually to certain parts of his body both day and night, a great
quantity of Horsleaches to draw the humour that fed his fatness: for
otherwise he had died, as may appear in this Portraict adjoining.

Certain wonderful discourses worthy of memory, touching Visions, Figures
and illusions appearing as well in the day as in the night, and sleping as
waking. CHAP. xxvj.
I Account it to small purpose to argue in this place whether the shadows of
dead men do return, or if the spirits having passed the wrack of this
mortal life do visit us sometimes or no: Wherein notwithstanding, as it is
most credible, that the two most famous pillars of the church Saint Augustine
and Saint Hierome, and almost the whole route of the Ecclesiastical writers
have stand upon the dissolution of the doubt of Samuel, I mean whether it
were the true spirit of the Prophet that appears by the invocation of the
enchantress, or some slights of Satan, to abuse their judgements. For my
part, I mean to give out mine opinion touching such doubts in order and
terms of a philosopher, and with the authority of the most ancient and
learned writers now a days, who (for the first) have made of great estimation
by their Histories, the discourse of the two Arcadians, whereunto they give no
less faith than if it were an Oracle of truth. As also Pope Pius the second
of that name avouches the same with probable argumets and reasons. Amongst the
ancients, Valerius and many other that recorded the affairs of Greece and
Rome, affirm, that there were two Arcadians which loved so dearly one an
other, with such an affinity of actions and humours, that it seemed they had
but one heart divided between them both: They came one day to Megare, a city
in Greece, to perform certain business there, where they repaired to several
places of abode, the one to a friends house of his, the other (according to his
custom) toke harbour in an Inn: he that went to the place of his acquaintance,
after supper feeling a vehement motion or desire of sleep (the same moved by
the weariness of the way) went to bed, where he fell forthwith into a
profound sleep of two hours continuance, which notwithstanding was not so
quiet, as it escaped without a terrible and fearful dream: for he seemed to
see standing before him, his Companion, pale and of a hideous regard, crying
with tears to give him aide against the distress and danger of his host:
wherewith he awaked, and giving faith to the vision, and solicited besides with
the vehemence of mutual love between them, arose and put him on the way to see
his companion, albeit arguing within himself the vanity in dreams, he
changed his purpose, and went to bed again, where he had not long lien ere he
was assailed with a second remembrance of his first apprehension, but in a
more strange order: for he seemed to cary the shape or figure of a dead man,
all to be bathed in the bloody floods of horrible murder, preferring this
lamentable request: A dead man speaks to his companion in a dream.
seeing thou hast used so small care to succour my life, at the least discharge
the office of a friend in revenging of my death: for this body which thou
see so murdered and dismembered before thee, is at the gate of the City in a
chariot covered with dong by the cruelty of mine host. This second summonce
or rather importunity was of such force in the troubled mind of the other
Arcadian that he arose in great sorrow, and with no less compassion,
requested diverse friends to accompany him to the gate of the City, where as
they found the dead body of his friend, hidden in the dong, in such sort as
he appeared to him in his dream. Whereupon the Host being taken and examined,
avouched the murder, and received his hire by the loss of his head. The like
is affirmed by Alexander ab Alexandro, in the ninth chapter of his second book
De ses iours geniaux, which he understood of a familiar and dear friend of
his, a man whose learning and virtue acquit him from just imputation of
vntruthe in any sort whatsoever. This man being at Rome, was required by one
of his very friends, to accompany him to the bathes of Cumes, the intent of
which journey, as it was to seek remedy for a disease which had troubled
him many years before: So the other agreed to his request in sort to his own
expectation. Neither had they travailed many years together, but this
disease grew to such extreme debility thorough all his body, that what with
the anguish of it, and weakness in him to endure the pain, he died, and
gave up the goast in an Inn. To whom after the other had performed such
funerals as agreed with the time and place, seeing no cause of need to pass
further to the bathes, returned to Rome, and being overtaken with extreme
weariness of the first days travail, took up his lodging in an Inn by the
way, An other visio appearing to a man that was not a sleep.
where he was no sooner in bed (and before he had desire to sleep) than the
image of his friend, whom he had put into the earth the day before,
presented him self before his eyes, beholding him with most earnest and
pitiful regard, and that in the same lean and defourmed estate he was in,
during the extremity of his sickness. The same striking such mortal dread
into the other, that he was ready to dye for fear, and yet was not void of
courage and remembrance to ask him what he was: who without making him any
answer, put off his ghoastly apparaile and robes of a ghost, and went to
bed to him, offering to embrace him with great familiarity: which forced
the poor man half dead with fear, to leap suddenly out of the bed, and
save him self by flight, without that the vision appeared to him afterward.
Which notwithstanding could not so well assure him, but the remembrance of
that fear, made him fall into a mortal disease, which albeit brought him to
the extreme hazard of death, yet the worst being prevented by special
remedies, and he returned (...) health, amongst the wonderful reports of this
vision, he ^yd, he never felt ice more cold than the feet of that dead body,
touching him in his bed. The same author in the.xj. chapter of his first book
confirms this discourse with a like example which he hath neither red nor
learned by report, but seen the experience him self in one of his trusty
servants, a man both virtuous and of upright living, who laid in his bed
fast a sleep, began upon a sudden to sigh, lament complain in such sort, that he
awaked all those in the house. His master in the morning asked him ye cause of
his trouble, to whom he answered, that these complaints were not vain, seeing
that he seemed to see before his eyes to be buried the dead body of his mother.
Whereupon as his master observed ye very day and hour to the end he might
know whether it did prognosticate any harm to his man: so within certain
days after, there came a servant of his mother (the messanger of her death)
who discoursing her disease with the order of her dying, conferring the times
together, it appeared that the hour of her death agreed with the very instant
of the vision, which (saith Alexander) need not seem either vain or
doubtful to such as know certain houses in Rome, at this day of great hate
and horror, Certain houses at Rome haunted with spirits.
by reason they are hauted with spirits. Whereof Plurarch makes mention of
Damon, in the beginning of the life of Cymon: The same also being confirmed
with like example written of Pausanias, Cleonices, and Bizantia the maid,
besides the authority of Plinie in his.vij. book of his Epistles, touching a
vision appearing in a house in Athens, and that which Suetonius writes, when
Caligula was killed, whose house was troubled with prodigeous monsters and
visions many years after until it was burned. And lastly, such like is
approved by Marcus Paulus Venitian, who writes, that at this day, the
Tartarians be very strong by enchantments of spirits, being able to change the
day into darkness, bring either light or darkness when and into what ^ace
they list: wherewith whosoever hath ben at any time circumueted, escapes hardly
without mortal danger. Whereof Hayronus is a sufficient witness in his history
of the Sarmares, wherein he shows how the Tartarians being almost
overthrown, were restored, and became victorious by the enchantment of the
Ensign bearer, who made such a darkness overwhelm the army of the adverse
part, that it dimmed their sights, and mortified their corages. But here me
thinks we stand too long upon profane examples, seeing we have sufficient
confirmation by Ecclesiastical authority, S. Augustin approves enchanting
by example.
as Saint Augustine in his twelfth Book and seuententh Chapiter upon Genesis,
in the History of a frantic man, prophecying upon the death of a Woman, who
as he was banqueting in his own house among^ certain his familiar friends,
falling into question of a woman known to them all, willed them to end their
talk of that woman, because she was already dead, which as it moved them, the
rather because some of them saw her not long before, so being asked how he
could assure it, said he saw her pass before him carried by such as put her
in the ground, which happened accordingly within.ij. days after, for that the
dead corps of the same woman passed before his gate to be buried, without that
she felt any motion of sickness at the hour of the prediction. In like sort
the said S. Augustin in the same place treats so strangely of prodigeous
visions, that were not the holiness and authority of him yt wrote them, they
deserved small credit. There was saith he in our City a young man so vexed with
a pain in his coddes, that by the fury of his grief, he seemed to endure a
marvelous torment, having notwithstanding his memory perfect and sound, and
yet sometime with the mortal assaults of his passions he became immovable as
a tronke or block, having his eyes open, with perfect knowledge of all the
assistants, his feeling albeit so far withdrawn that he would not stir or
move what pricking or pinching so ever was offred him, but the pang being
retired and his body returned to his former state of health quiet, he would
tell of many wonders in that qualm, but most of al of.ij. men appearing before
him as in a^ision, whereof the one bare the figure of a child, the other
seemed to have a more perfect age, who also in the beginning of Lent appeared
eftesoones unto him, with these words in order of special charge, that if he
would cause to be cut the prepuce he should not feel any pain for.xl.
days, which he did, and accordingly was delivered of grief for that time, in
the just end whereof his sorows began to return, in sort as they did before,
and likewise the same.ij. men presented themselves before him invisible saving
to himself, counsailyng him to caste himself into the Sea unto the navel,
where tarrying a certain time, his grief should cease, and only should
remain a certain slymie humour which would pass away, which he did, and
found an effect of their advise: what wonderful Philosophie is this of
Saint Augustine, and what strange appearance in visions. But what more cause
of wounder can be, than to see them privy to the secretes of Physic, all
which sure as they breed indifferent doubt and fear in such as read or
hear of them, and yet for my part I have not heard nor red either in
profane or sacred report any thing more marvelous that way than the vision
of Cataldo, Bishop of Tarento, the same appearing in our time, not without
infecting many men's consciences with great scruple and doubt, seeing that
that vision hath left sufficient matter to trouble the most Theologians and
Philosophers of the world. This Cataldo, a man holy in life, being buried a
thousand years past within the Bishoprike of Taronto, appeared
notwithstanding after* the end of such time, in a night to a young infant
given altogether to God, with express charge to uncover a certain vault in a
place in the earth which he assigned him, wherein he had hidden (whilst he
was in the world) a book written with his own hand, which as soon as he
had taken out of the ground, he should offer it immediately to Ferdinando,
first King of Aragon and Naples reigning at that time. This child (for the
small faith he gave to the vision) performed not the charge give him.
Whereunto albeit he was eftesones solicited at sundry times, yet he never used
regard to the persuas^n, until one morning before day as he was in his
prayers in the Church, he beheld Cataldo in his Byshoppes weed and
countenance of threatening severity, who appeared said unto him: as thou haste
given slender credit to my words, with less regard to search the book and
deliver it to Ferdinando, so assure thy self (this time for all) if thou
refuse to perform the charge, or once stay to attend an other sommonce, thy
punishment will be to great for thee to endure: which last threat stirred
such fear in the child, that the next morning he imparted the vision to the
multitude, who according to the strayte and too strange terms of the same,
assembled very curiously to accompany the child to the place of charge, where
being arrived, and vncouering the earth, they found a little coffer of lead
so close and curiously wrought, that the air or sound had no place to enter,
in the bottom whereof they took up a book, wherein were written in form of a
prophecy, the miseries, plages and curses, which should happen to the
kingdom of Naples, to the King Ferdinando and his children, the same having so
directly happened and succeeded since, as it may seem the bishop did not err
or write false in one syllable: For such was ye infortune of this miserable
King Ferdinando, to fall so deep and desperately into the ire of God, that he
was killed in the first conflict, the like happening not long after to his
eldest son Alfonsus, The effects of the bishops prophecy.
who before he could settle himself within the state Royal, was put to flight
by his enemies, and dyed in miserable exile. Such was also the chance of
Ferdinando his younger son, to whom as the kingdom was due by inheritance,
so death prevented his use and possession of it, and that in the flower of his
age, being so environed with wars, that he had scarce leisure to take breath.
What ot^r good was reserved to Federike, sons son to the said Ferdinando,
than that he saw sacked and burned before his eyes, his country, his people
bathing in the suddes of their own blood, and his own life in the end
committed to the mercy of his mortal enemies. And lastly if we well consider
what fortune hath governed this kingdom of Naples, withal give faith to the
authority of such as have written truly of it, we shall find that of al the
kingdoms of the earth, only this state of Naples hath exceeded in revolution,
mutation, persecution and loss of blood, the same making it seem in deed, and
as it is and may be most properly termed, the very but and mark whereat
fortune hath delighted to vnloase her cursed and sharpe arrow a very gulf and
sink out of the which were drawn all the miseries which infected the whole
body of Italy: this was in effect the Prophecy and vision of the Prelate
Cataldo, according to the witness of Alexander ab Alexandro in his book of
the general days, which with the other before recited, as me think, may
suffice for the examples of our visions appearing to men, both by day and
night, sleeping and waking, as well in sickness as health. So there rests
now (according to our general intent touching all other matters in this book)
to search out the cause of the^ fantastical illusions, and of what
substance they are founded or do proceed, which because it doth not include
an indifferent or equal respect to all men, I think it most sure and best to
follow and marche under the enseigne of S. Augustine, who (above any other)
hath used a more learned diligence to discover this matter, and yet is it
necessary before we pass further herein, (for ye better exposition of the
circumstance) to make an universal partition, in the deduction whereof we will
follow that which he hath written against Adamantum, where he proceeds in
this sort. There be (saith he) diverse kinds of visions avouched by the holy
Histories, whereof some do make themselves appear before the eyes of the body,
as the three men which appeared to Abraha, that which Moyses saw burning in
the bush, and lastly that of Moyses and Elyas to the Apostles at such time as
Christ was transfigured upon the mountain. The second kind of visions
consiste in imagination, as when we imagine those things which we feel by the
body: seeing that our thought being ravished and lift up to Heaven, and that
the beams and reflection of divinity do pierce into the soul, many strange
things are manifest to her, and that not by the eyes of the body, ears or
other members of the flesh, but seem in deed to be revealed by a divine
influence and celestial inspiration: according to that which Saint Peter saw
in a vision, the great Uessell descending from Heaven in a sheet, wherein
were contained all sorts of beasts, Act. 11.
and immediately he heard a voice which said unto him, Peter, rise, kill and
eat, so according to the text. The third sort of visions may be called
intellectual, because it consists also in the thought, as where the King
Balthazar saw a hand writing upon the wall, and many other like visions of
Nabuchodonosor, which (...) large set forth in Daniel: wherewith having laid
thus the first foundation of these fantastical apprehension^ rests now to
declare by order what hath ben the advise (...) ^ugustine touching the same,
which he doth above all (...) places most amply dilate in (...) ^iij. chapter
of his book entitled De cura pro mortuis agenda, there are (saith he) so many
and strange opinions of visions of the night, that the disputation may seem
tolerable, seeing the question is doubtful: for some say that dead ghosts
have appeared to men on live, showing the place where their bodies lay
shrined, to the end they might provide their own Sepulcher: which things if
we hold to be either false or vain, we resist impudently the authority of a
number of faythfuil writers, whereof albeit some have heard, and some assisted
such matters with their own eyes, yet ought they not to persuade a belief
that such visions participate with either sense feeling or motion: for do we
not see sundry times, men on live appear to other in sleeping or waking? and
yet being asked whether they have so done or not, they answer that they are
utterly ignorant of such matter, neither know they what it means. Then it
must follow as Saint Augustine saith, that those visions come by the
operation of Angels, to whom it is suffered by the Lord to use such power,
which is the effect of the Latin text as near as I can construe it, and yet
am I not ignorant for all that, that sometimes these illusions move no other
way, although Saint Augustine leave it out in that place, the same
notwithstanding being a matter proper to the Ecclesiasticals to whom I refer
my self for these things with the judgment of the catholic Church, wherein
I pray to the almighty to persist immovable so long as Nature lends me one
breath of life in this world. (...) also we are deceived by ^he illusions of
evil and wicked spirittes, as Saint Augustine teaches in his third book de
Trinitate, showing b^ a (...) art, Cap. 11.
the power of Satan and his accomplices with these (...). It is an easy thing
(saith he) for the wicked ^ their bodies of air, to do many marvelous ^
things, which exceed the compass of our understanding, being wrapped and
buried in bodies of death. And if sometime (saith he) we be drawn into
admiration with the view of strange things presented upon theatres or stages,
which also we would not believe though they were told us by others, because
they are so far without the compass of our understanding, why ought we to
find it strange if Devils and their Angels (with their bodies of the
Element) do abuse our fragility in showing us visions, Idols, and figures,
as well sleeping as waking, to make us fall: their functions saith he be
diverse, seeing that some of them do trouble our thoughts, some offend our
bodies, others infect our blood, some assail and attempt our heart,
suggesting infinite follies and conceits, and lastly by some we are pressed
with diseases according to the text of S. Luke, Luke. 11.
where the woman that Christ healed, was so persecuted with pain grief, that
for the space of.xviij. years, she was so courbed yt she was not able to lift
up her head and behold the Element above, adding besides in the antiquity
of the Devils, In his book of the Divination of Devils.
the nobleness of their creation, seeing they be Angels of Nature, their long
experience gotten since their creation, the continual conflict which they
have with Angels, which makes them able to the wars, the agility of their
bodies of air by the which they pass all other beasts and birds in
lightness, the sharpness of their wits, their knowledge in all disciplines,
as well divine as human, a perfect and exquisite skill in the property of
plants, stones, metals, and many other like things, all which as they be ^eir
instruments wherewith they forge and fashion their illusions and engines which
they bend every hour against us, so they be also snares and baits which
they cease not to lay every moment and minute of a day to entangle our poor
souls. And by the same mean (saith he) they do prognosticate sometimes things
to come, and perform certain holy miracles by which they deceive such as
give faith to their dreams, as it happened to those poor women, who seduced
with the illusions of Satan, persuade them selves that they go all night on
horsacke when thed worship Devils, transfigured into Angels of light, the
better to play their part, and sometimes they show themselves in diverse
other shapes and figures, presenting unto them sometime pleasant and goodly
things, sometimes sorrowful things, sometimes they prefer to their eyes
personnes known, sometimes shapes unknown. All which sure, albeit they are
very strange and are found of hard digestion to such as measure the work of
God according to the capacity of their gross and rude understanding, yet the
discourse of Saint Augustin in his City of God is no less marvelous to my
judgement, whereof (plunged in a profound contemplation of the power of wicked
sprits) he brings in certain women instructed in the art Magical, reigning in
Italy in his time, who giving to eat such as passed by them, a certain fish
mingled with cheese, the passengers immediately were turned into mares, and
carried their necessaries until they had performed their voyage, and discharged
their burdens, when they returned to their former shape. The like happening to
the father of Prestantius, who being turned into a horse, carried corn with
other victuals of certain knights. All which notwithstanding (saith S.
Augustine) ought not persuade, that either the body or thought of the man,
could (by any Diabolical illusion) be converted into a beast, or take their
shape or members, but rather that their fancy did abuse them in making them
seem like unto beasts. And touching the burdens which they carried, it might
be (saith he) that the Devils themselves carried them, to entertain the rather
the error of those miserable creatures. But now to prevent such opinions as
may import that there were no evil spirits: but in S. Augustines time, or
other Auncientes, I will infer things of no less wonder, whereof the
experience hath happened in our own time. Gasperus Pucerus in his commentaries
de Diuinatione, after he hath long argued the reasons touching the Artificial
deceit in Devils, brings in an authority no less marvelous than of terror:
There was (says he) a certain maid at Bolonia, who by the excellency of
her art, carried a great name thorough all Italy, and yet could not so
prevent infirmities in her self, but being overtaken with a mortal disease she
died: An other Magician her copanio, knowing what profit moved by her art in
her life time, with intent to make the same common to her self, by the help of
certain evil spirits, she conueyed a certain charm under the dugs of the
dead woman, the which made her seem to be on live in every respect: for in
common assemblies she was seen play upon the harp, sing and dance as she
was wont to do, with other actions and gestures differyng in nothing from one
bearing life, saving that her colour was wonderful pale. There happened
certain days after to come to Bologna an other Magician, who desiring to see
whether the excellency and skill of this Woman, agreed with the fame she had
in every place, went amongst other to hear her sing and play. But after he had
some small time assisted her doings, he cried suddenly to the people: What
madness is this? what abuse to your simplicity? what do you hear? or why
do you wonder at such deceit? she that feeds your fond eyes with these
pastimes, is no better than a stinking and vile dead carrion. Wherewith before he
had fully ended his exclamation, she fell dead to the ground. Whereupon the
sophistry of the devil and the enchantress were discovered. There was also
in Pauia, an other woman enchantress in the time of Leouicenus, of no less
marvel in her art than this, but somewhat more cunning, because no evil could
be so secretly committed in Pauia, which by her means were not forthwith
reveled, the same making the Philosophers come from far to visit her: and
yet was there in the same university a public professer of Philosophie, a man
of very holy conversation, who refusing continually of him self to visit or
hear this woman, was won at last by the importunity of his dear friends to
see her: and being before, with intent to sound her to the depth, desired
amongst other things, which was the best verse that ever the Poet Virgil
made? She answered him with small leisure, that Discite iustitiam moniti, non
spernere Diuos, was the best and most excellent verse that ever he writ. The
same so amazyng the Philosopher and his company, that they returned without
other reply, marvelling not a little howe she could form so precise an
answer, having never learned so much as to write or read. Such a like
Histarie is verified by Hieronymus Cardanus, and the experience to be justified
at this day by all the Citizens of Myllan, where (saith he) is at this day
living, a woman called Margareta, the wife of a Painter, who is not ashamed to
publish openly, that she has a Devil or Familiar, which follows her
continually, saving that he is absent for two or three months in the year.
This Woman lives of no other revenue, nor feeds of no other gain than of
the experience and pleasure, the which this Spirit gives to the people, who
for the strangeness of this sight, will call oftentimes this Woman into their
houses. And she when she calls this Spirit, either puts down her head
into her bosom, or lappeth it in some cloth: and so begins to adiure her
familiar after her Italian order, neither doth he refuse to appear and
answer unto her euocation only his voice carries not a sound as though it
were near her, but seems drawn from far very hollow, as if it were
spoken out of a crevice in the wall: and if any man draw near the place, from
whence this sound comes, he may marvel to hear and understand it more
plainly in the uttermost corner of the house, than fast by the place which is
thought to yield it: Such is the propretie of the voice, that it is not
articulated, nor otherwise formed, but it may be vnderstaded, albeit it is very
soft and weak, in sort that it may more proprely be called a murmure and
sound than a voice: she becomes an interpreter to his sayings, imparting the
same in plain language to the people: whereof be some women dwelling in the
house with her, who observing her use and dealing with it, say, that sometime
she encloses it in a sheet, and that customably it bites or sucks her
mouth, the same confirmed chiefly in that she hath most commonly sore lips.
This History makes me remember that which the auncientes have noted of the
spirit of Socrates, which imports some vanity in them, because Socrates
carried always such regard to the truth, that for any thing he would neither
suggest nor support a lie: and yet it is confessed by himself, that he had
one, as granted him to follow him from his infancy, the same being a voice
(as he confesses) that is already to dissuade him against any thing that is
contrary to him, and yet never move him to do the thing which he ought to do:
he affirms further of his spirit, whereof he challenges the witness of
Thymarcus to kill Nyceas, (notwithstanding he had warning by the spirit of the
inconvenience that fell of it) in his condemnation confessed, that if he had
believed the counsel of Socrates, he had both avoided the fact and danger of
the deed. Franciscus Picus Mirandolanus, an excellent Philosopher of our
time, affirms, that there was a Priest of the age of.lxxij. years, the
which for.xl. years together had always a Familiar in his company, who
drunk with him, lay with him, spake to him, and so directed him in all his
actions and doings, that the people (not able to conceive the mystery of those
things) gave their judgment that he was a fool. This Priest called his
spirit by the name of Hermelina. Cardan also avouches no less of his father
Facius Cardanus, who for the space of.xxviij. years, used the conference of a
Familiar in most of his business. Plutarch in the life of Cymon writes, that
after Damon was slain by treason within the Bathes or hot house, there
appeared long after spirits with such lamentable voices and sighs, that
notwithstanding the gate and entry were rammed up to bar access, yet it is
affirmed at this day, that fearful visions be seen, and doleful cries
heard. There appear at this day many strange visions and wicked spirits in
the metal Mines of the great Turk in Sydero Capsa, who sometime present
themselves in the form of great Goats, to the terror of^ such as draw
mettle out of the Mines: They are of diverse kinds, and even so they differ
in disposition, for some of them will appear and do no harm to the workmen:
but some have so offended their work, and tormented themselves, that they have
abandoned the place, and so lose the revenue of their Mines. The like avouched
by Georgius Agricola, a notable Philosopher, and by whom passed the convey of
the Emperors Mines in Almayne, who amongst other places writes, that in the
Mine at Anneberg was a mettle spirit which killed.xij. workmen, the same
causing the rest to forsake the mine, albeit it was very rich. There were also
such like wicked Spirits, at such time as our Saviour Christ was on earth,
who keeping most commonly in the graves of dead men, became so terrible* that
few durst pass that way. This is most certain, that Porphyrius, Psellus,
Plotinus, Proclus, Iamblicus, and certain other of late days, assure, that the
uppermost region of the air swarmeth as full of spirits, which we call in
Greek Daemones, as our air is full of birds, foundyng their opinion, I
think, in that the air and skies whereby the Quindecines be as great, and the
regions so delitefull and full of pleasure, as we see the earth replenished
with lively substance, metals, stones, plants. The water hath her fishes, and
the weak air here below, brings forth creatures that breath and live.
Whereupon may be persuaded, that the great mass of the superior air is full
of those spirits, whose excellency far excedeth the inferior creatures,
because their region is more clear and pure, which because they seem things
unworthy of our christian Philosophie, we will cease to argue so far as the
matter requires. And because none may justly think that we give such scope
to devils, as they have power to abuse the creatures of God (bought so dearly
(by the precious blood of his son) it is needful so to tempre and direct
the reason of those things, that we give them not such authority over us as
the Cat hath over the Mouse, or the fool is fearful of the whip: for if it
were yt their power were not governed by ye mighty hand of God (hating so
mortally the kind of man in who is grave the very image of God) their tiranies
cruelties had long ere this extirped both stock root of such generation: for
if they could not of themselves enter within ye bellies of hogs, without asking
leave according to ye scripture: how much more ought we to be assured, yt
without the permission of God, they cannot offend us, who are ye paunes of his
redeption, his house wherein he hath taken harbour, and carry his mark, figure,
and affinity: besides, what greater witness can we have of the debility
small power of the Devil, than that which he doth acknowleage in Iob, where
demanding leave to persecute that Prophet, he said not Suffer me to hurt him:
but craving of god to stretch forth his hand touch his flesh, said: Mitte manu
et tange carnem eius, as though he were not but the organ to execute the will
of God, calling his permission his hand: whereof also we have a like
testimony in S. Luke, where our Saviour, comforting Symon, Cap. 22.
told him that Satan had asked leave to torment him and to syfte him as they
fan corn, but he prayed for him, to the end his faith should not fail.
Which may sufficiently persuade, that the Devil can not offend us without
leave, seeing he dared not address him to the Apostle, without he obtained his
saufconduict of God, wherein that great Oracle of God. S. Augustine who
oftentimes had endured many and furious assaults of Satan, gives us one
special consolation, saying: Gen. lib. 1^. cap. 14.
Let the Devil forge and stir up both day and night so many illusions as he
will, and present thee with visions of bodies, which be none in deed, what
doth all that hurt thy soul, saying thou dost not consent to the vision? live
then assured, for thou art not within his danger without leave, and yet the
permission which is given him, is not to condemn thee, but rather to rebuke
thy sins, and make a proof of thy faith. S. Paule also in his second Epistle
to the Corinthians and.xij. chapter affirms, that God suffered Satan to
buffet him, for fear he should be lifted up above measure, doing yet more as
himself witnesses in his first Epistle to Timothe, where he gives Timothe to
understand, that he hath given Hymeneus and Alexander to Satan, to the end
they learn to blaspheme no more. Whereby we may see howe the Lord doth use
sometimes wicked spirits as good for our health, which are oftentimes
transfigured in diverse forms and figures of day and night to resist us,
and draw us to the Combat: But none shall wear the Crown, that doth not
manfully fight. Let us then learn from hensforth of ye apostle to put on the
armour of God, saying we have not to make war only (as it is written in the
Ephesians, against flesh and blood, but against principalities and powers,
and such as govern the world and the darkness of the same. Let us then stand
upon our guard, least we be circumuented and abused by that false enchanter,
who is now more shameless and of greater rage and fury than ever he was*
Whereof what greater witness can we have than that which is written in the
Prophet Micheas, 3. Reg. 22.
where he sees him before* God, crying and houlyng: I shall go forth, and
become a liar before the face of all the prophets of Achab? And in Zacharie, who
is always upon the right hand of the Priest to let that there descend no
benediction upon Ierusale, which being very lively apprehended by that great
bishop of Hipponenses. S. Augustine crying after the Lord, saying: Deliver us
(O Lord) of our common enemy, who whether it be in riches or in poverty, joy
or sadness, speaking, or in silence, sleeping or waking, drinking or eating,
or in any other our humain actions, doth watch us, follow us, prompe and prick
us, lay his nets to entrap us, discharge his arrows to hurt us, and dress
his engines and snares to entangle our poor souls. And then with the Psalme he
concludes and cries again: Deliver us good Lord from the snares of the
hunters. But now seeing (contrary to our hope and expectation) we be so deeply
anckred in the profound depth or Labyrinth of visions, it is also convenient
before we hoise sail to bring in the last member that they depend upon. There
is yet an other sort of visions, Visions of the imagination.
which do not proceed of any diabolical illusion, nor by any other secret
mystery of the Angels, but they engender of the corruption of humours, or by
some indisposition of the imagination, or some other infirmity of nature, as
when we seem to see those things which be not in deed: and such kinds of
imaginatios do torment most commonly the melancolike men, as Galene wri^eth of
him that thought him transformed into a Cock, seeming to be amongst them, song
when he heard them crow, beat him self with his arms, as they do with their
wings: As also some other that persuaded them to be transfigured into a vessel
of earth, who keeping continually upon the plains champaines, dare not come
near houses or trees, for fear to bruise or break them in pieces. There was a
certain Damsel* whereof Alexander Trallianus writes this history, that by a
corruption of the imagination, Lib. 1. cap. 20.
she persuaded her self to have devoured a Serpent sleeping, neither could
she be delivered from the disease of such thought, until, being provoked to
an extreme vomit, there was secretly conueyed into the basin, a quick
Serpent: immediately after the which, she was delivered of her disease,
persuading that she had vomited the Serpent that stirred in the basin. There be
yet visions, which proceed by eating certain poisons, as Plinie and Edwardus
witness of him, of those which did eat the brains of a Bear, which being
devoured, they imagined that they were turned into a Bear. The like happening
in our time to a Spanish Gentleman, who having eaten of a Bear, went
wandering by the deserts and mountains, thinking to be transformed into a
Bear. Yet there be other sorts of visions which (according to ye opinios of
certain Physicians,) proceed upon certain Natural causes, as when any man
is killed and buried not very deep in the earth, Visions by natural cause.
there come (as they say) from the dead body certain exhalations and
vapours, which ascend into the air, do seem to represent the figure or
form of him that was put in the earth. We have also many other things,
which under the colour of illusions, abuse our understanding, as when the
air is troubled with contrary winds, by whose agitations is engendered a bruit
or murmure, resembling properly the lowing or noise of beasts, or not much
unlike to the complaints of women and little children: sometimes also the air
pierces within the creuisses and vaults of rocks and old walls, and being
sent back again by his own violence, gives out so distinct a sound, that
it seems a precise or set voice, as we prove oftentimes in that which we call
Echo, the same pronouncing for the most part v. or.vj. words with so great
marvel, that it easily persuades such as know not the cause, but specially
in the night, that they be some spirits or Devils, the like happening in our
time to a counseller secretary of a certain Prince, the which by reason of his
ignorance in the cause of his Echo, was in danger to be drowned according to
Cardanus, in his book of marvelous inventions, who writes of one Augustinus
Lauisarius, Counseller to a certain Prince, who being in the country and out
of his way, In his book of marvelous inventions.
and lastly overtaken with night, found himself greatly passioned, and riding
all along a River side, began to lament his distress, and after the Italian
manner, cried Oh, the Echo which came from a certain rock thereby, replied
unto him incontinent with Oh, Lauisarius somewhat comforted with the voice,
thinking it was some man which spake, demanded in his language, vnde debo
passa? the Echo answered Passa, then the poor secretary being in greater
pain than before, demanded, Chi, which as much to say as hear: the Echo
replied chi: but being yet not well assured, he asked him again, debo passa
chi? passa chi? saith the Echo: which words fed him with such comfort of
his way, that he took the river, being astonished notwithstanding that his
horse at his first entry lost the bottom and began to swim, and had it not
been the goodness of his horse, and mercy of the waives that seemed to take
compassion upon his distress, he had taken a moyste lodging in the bottom of
the river, from the which albeit he escaped so hardly, yet being brought
with much ado to the other side, he passed the rest of the night in cold and
prayers, without comfort, saving for the pleasure he took in the
remembrance of his peril past: whereof certain days after, (being come to
Millan,) he made discourse to his dear friend Cardanus, in sort as if it had
been the malice of an evil sprite that went about to drown him: telling the
place every circunstance in order, Cardanus smelled forthwith the ignorance and
simplicity of the secretary, knowing that in that place was a wonderful Echo,
which yielded such a plain and perfect voice, that it seemed to be formed
out of the mouth of some creature: for a more assurance and proof whereof,
he led him eftesones to the same place, where they found that his Passa that
guided him was none other thing than a reverberation of the Echo: wherein
seeing we are now so deeply fallen, I will not forget to infer the
authority of mine author in an example, whilst he write this book at Paris:
I have saith he, heard a sound in the borough of Chalenton near Paris, Of.vij.
voices or sounds.
which yields and returns, the words that are spoken, whole, entier,
distinctly and plainly, and that.vij. times one after an other, like to the
Echo septuplex of the Ancients, and specially commended of Plinie. I have
also oft marveled yt those which have written the Antiquities, and things
worthy of memory in Paris, have left such a strange thing without
remembrance in their writings, seeing I have neither heard nor seen so rare a
thing in all the voyages I have made over the high Alps of Italye and
Germanie. But now there rests (to put a last seal to our difference and
diffinition of visions) to make some discourse of artificial illusions,
Artificial visions.
the which being wrought by sundry secret and Sophistical slights of men,
move no small terror to such as behold them, as that, whereof Hector Boethius
in his Histories of Scotlande, makes mention, wherein as there was a help and
furtherance by art, so the effect was no less marvelous and strange, and
at last the only cause of conservation of a whole Kingdom in sort as
follows. The Pictes (according to the Histories) have always borne a mortal
hate to the Scots, killing after sundry battles and skirmishes) the first King
of that country, with the overthrow of most of the nobility of that
country. Cenethus second King of the Scots, and son to him whom the Pictes
had murdered, desirous to revenge the death of his father, used many
persuasions to incense the nobility to fall into arms against them: who in
respect of their late infortune in the war, and their lack of power to
maintain the quarrel, would not agree to the persuasions of the King, in whom
as there remained a more grudge against the death of his father, than in the
rest, so finding him insufficient to work it by words or incitation, he
reposed a last help and refuge in art: and to give a beginning to his
devise, he fained a cause of conscience and consultation, for the which the
nobility were sent for to assist the counsel, where being lodged all
together within a castle, and himself also, he gat to favour and further his
cospiracy, some.iiij. or.v. men (whom according to the trust he put in them)
he made to be hidden in certain secret corners of the chambers appointed for
the noble men, having first attired them in horrible order with skins of
seawolues (whereof is great stoare in that country by reason of the Sea) with
every one a staff in his right hand of a kind of old and dry wood which
shines in the night, and in their left hand a great horne of an Ore pierced
hollow: these, according to their commandment, kept very close secrete
until the Princes were in their first and fast sleep, when they began to
appear and discover, with their staves glimering like the glances or flames of
torches, braying out of their hollow horns a hideous voice, containing that
they were sent of God to summon them to the war of the Pictes, against whom
the sentence of victory was already pronounced, and agreed by the heavens. And
so these artificial sprites assisted with the benefit of the night, which is
the mother nurse to all illusions, used so fine a convey in the dispatch of
their business, that they escaped without being disclosed, leaving the poor
Princes so passioned with fear, that they passed the rest of the night in
prayers, until the morning when every of them with great solemnity imparted
his vision to ye king, who also for his part to aggrauate the matter with
further credit, notwithstanding he was the first founder and forger of the
mystery, approved their sayings with the like appearing to himself, albeit he
was curious to reveal the secretes of God, until he had more sure
advertisement thereof: wherewith some other persuasions on his part to enforce
their forwardness, they became as eager and earnest to begin the war, as if
Christ himself had been their captain, and so assailed their enemies that they
did not only overthrow them in battle, but also made such mortal
extermination, that the memory of the day ever since hath been utterly extinct.
There be some now a days, that put lighted candels within the heads of dead
men, to fear the people, and others that have tied little wax candels lighted
upon cockles, tortures snails, which they put in that order within the church
yards by night, to the end that the simple people seeing these beasts move a
far of with their flames, might believe that it were some dead sprite returned
for some special cause into the world: by which villainous means as they have
gotten money of the common and ignorant sort, so let them be assured to render
account of their doings to the sovereign judge for abu^ng the pore flock of
his dear son under ye colour of visions. There hath been yet of late time
in Italy, an other practise of Diabolical visions performed by certain candels
made of the grease or tallow of a man, which so log as they were light and did
burn in the night, the pore people seemed so overwhelmed with enchantments
and charms, that a man might have taken any thing out of their house, without
that they were able to stir out of their beds to reskue it: but our God who
according to his justice doth leave nothing unpunished, hath suffered that the
authors and executors of such vanities, have been taken as the thief with the
manner, and being condemned, have yielded tribute to such offences, with the
price of their life. And lastly there is an other sort of artificial visions,
which are made with an oil or licoure, which comes of certain worms we see
shine in the night, which because they be things not worthy to be handled in
argument amongst no christians* I will make silence of them for this time,
marvelling notwithstanding that sundry learned men heretofore have used so
large a liberty in discovering such vanities, the rather for that our natures
for the most part are more credulous of such shadowed things, than apt to
believe a truth.

A wonderful history of a monster seen by Celius Rhodiginus. CHAP. xxvij.
TO the end we should taste of these wonderfell visions (which may be thought
very strange to the Reader) me seems good to show here the portrait of two
marvelous monsters, the one a man, the other a woman, seen in diverse provinces
by two as excellent Philosophers, as have reigned in our age. The first being
the man, was seen by Ludouicus Celius Rhodiginus, as he writes in the iij.
chapter of his.xxiiij. book of ancient lessons, following in this manner: There
was (saith he) brought forth a monster at Zarzara in Italy, in the year of
grace, 1540. and the.xix. day of Marche, worthy to be considered off for many
causes: One, for that it was brought into the world at such time as Italy was
afflicted with the plague and scourge of civil wars. And that this monstrous
child was a certain forerunner or messanger, which showed unto them the
miseries of those domestic quarrels: the other causes for the which it
deserved to be diligently noted, were for the strange and marvelous effects
that nature exhibited in this little subject: for in the first place the mother
of this infant brought it forth within.iij. months well formed, which is a
thing monstrous in nature: Secondarily, he had two fair heads well
proportioned, and two faces joined one to an other, and tied upon the top of
the neck with a proportion marvelous in every of those parts: he had his
hair a little long and black: and between these two heads, he had a third
head, which exceeded not the length of an ear. And for the rest of his body,
it was so well made and proporcioned in all things requisite, that it seemed
that Nature delighted to frame and make him so fair. Who after he had soiorned a
certain time in this miserable world, died: wherein, as he was made a present
to one of the king of Spaynes lieutenants, governing in that country, so he
thought it good to have him ripped and his belly opened, and entrails seen,
which being done, he represented unto the sights of the lookers on, things no
less marvelous than the presidents written of before: that is to say, he had
two livers, two milts, and but one heart. Wherewith ends the description that
Celius hath made of that monster. The second monster is a woman, having two
heads, whose figure is before to be seen with the other, and more to be
wondered at than the first in one thing, for that she lived many years, which
is contrary to the nature of monsters, who ordinarily live not long, for the
abundance of melancolike humour, which abundeth in them, to see them selves so
opprobrious to the world, are thereby so dried and consumed, that their lives
be short. Which happened not to this maid, which thou see here
portraicted: for at such time as Conradus Licostenes, came into the Duchy of
Bauiere, which was in the year 1541. she was of the age of.xxvj. years. That
learned Philosopher Licostenes writes one marvelous thing of that monster,
for reserving the duplication of the head, nature otherwise had left nothing in
her imperfect. These two heads (as he writes) had desire in like to drink,
to eat, to sleep, and to talk together, as also did all her other affections.
Wherefore this maid went from door to door searching her living, to whom
they gave more willingly for the novelty of so strange a creature, so new a
spectacle: Albeit she was chased thorough the Duchy of Bauiere, to the end
she might mar the fruit of women with child, for the apprehension which
remains in the imagination of the figure of this monstrous Woman.

A Monster on live, whose entrails and interior parts were to be seen naked
and uncovered. CHAP. xxviij.
IN the time that Seruius Galba, and Marcus Scaurus were Consuls, a noble and
famous woman in Nursiue, brought forth a son on live, which had the uppermost
part of his belly so open, that men might see his entrails naked and uncovered,
and it was so harde and entier in the nethermost part, that I believe if you
have red al the Authors Greeks and Latins, which have written of the wonders of
nature, you shall scarcely find his like. And although the Romains were always
superstitious in those things, yet was this monster a certain Augur and
soothsayer of the victory which they obtained against Iugurth, as Iules
Obsequent writes in the hundredth Chapter of his book of the wonders of the
Romains Wherefore if the Greeks and Arabes, (which were so fine in searching out
the secretes within the shop of mans body, that they demanded of the king the
bodies of the condemned, to open them alive) had had that little monster at
their commandment, they need not have exercised such butchery, tiranie and
cruelty on the behalf on living creatures as they did: for casting their eyes
only upon that little monster, without making further opening or incision, they
might have seen and discerned the substance, the greatness, number, figure,
situation, commodity and action of all the principal parts of mans body,
the lively spirits being within: the which is not of small consideration in
nature, seeing that by the ignorance of those things, if that a sinew or muscle
be cut, for the most part the feeling is lost, sometimes the moving, and
sometimes both the one and the other, and very oftentimes death thereby
follows. Wherefore the ancient kings and princes, as Marcus Anthonius, Flauius,
and Boethius, (as Galene witnesses) took so great pleasure in Anotomies and
cutting of bodies, that they themselves used that art, who as they observed
not the same carefully, so they made err the most renowned Philosophers in the
time past, as Aristotle in his first and third book of Histories, treating of
Creatures, the.vij. chapter, where he writes that the seames of the head, by
the which the moist matters of the brain do euapour, be not like, but differ
in men and women, notwithstanding we see by common experience the contrary:
whereby the same author is also deceived, in that he writes, that the heads
of Dogs have no sinews, although in anotomysing of them, we find they have
seames so well as in the head of man: In like manner Cornelius Celsus one of
the most excellent, which hath written of physike in Latin, is beguiled in the
same matter of seames, in his eyghte book and first chapter, where he writes,
that those heads which have no seames, be the most sound, and least subject
to sickness, though the same be utterly false, as wytnesseth Hipocrates, in
his first book of men, where he writes, that the heads which have the greets
number of seames be the most healthful: wherein as I have showed the mistakyng
of the two matters of the cutting of the body: Even so could I discover unto
you a number of other errors, which be found in Mundinus Carpus, and others,
who in their writyngs have ben often beguiled in the opening of the shop of
mans body. But for that we are to entreat of wonders, we will therefore make
an end of that matter, without setting before you the faults gathered in the
Harvest of Physike.

An history of a prodigious Dog, which engendered of a Bear and a Mastife
bitch in England, scene by the Author at London, with the discourses of the
nature of this Beast. CHAP. xxix.
LIke as mine Author in the beginning of this Chapter seems to prefer in
sort of a French flourish or commendation to him self, his being in
Englande, with sundry honours that were done to him by the Queenes Majesty,
and certain nobility, at what time he was brought to the view of this Dog,
so (for certain respects, I account it as necessary to leave it out, as to
fill or cloy the Reader with such vain folly.) In Englande then (according
to mine Author) was bred this monstrous Dog, whose figure seems to
resemble indifferently a Dog and a Bear, which argues him to participate
both of the one and the others nature: the same not seeming very strange to
such as have observed their conditions at London, Paris Garden.
where the Dogs and the Bears do lie in little Cabinets or vaults of wood,
one fast by an other: and being in their heates, those that do govern them,
will not stycke oftentimes to put a Bear and a Dog in one house together,
when being prycked with their natural impressyons, they convert their
cruelty into love: of which coniunctions are engendered oftentimes creatures
like unto this, although very seldom: amongst which mine Author hath observed
two: Which as they were given to the Marquess of Trans, so he made a present
of the one of them to the County of Alphestan, the Emperors Ambassador, and
the other he made to be carried with him into France, where mine Author caused
this portraict to be drawn, omitting nothing that was necessary to be seen:
In whom albeit may appear some cause of wonder by the strange effect of
Nature: yet the attestation of sundry famous authors makes it neither rare nor
new. Like as Aristotle, who is of opinyon, that diverse beasts may have
Coitum, and join together, so that their natures do not much differ, as do
the Dog, the Wolf, and the Fox. He writes in an other place, that the
Indian dogs be engendered of a Dog and a Tiger, which is also approved by
Polux, and Plinie. Patritius and Senes in their third book of their common
Wealth, have affirmed, that the Indians have not only made cover their
bitches with beasts of an other kind, but also the ancient Frenchemen used
to have them engender with Woulues, to the end that the fruit of such fierce
commixture and seed, might be of the more strength and fury, the same
being also confirmed by Augustus Nyphus, in a History, assisted with his own
eyes, and not gathered by any report. On a time (saith he) that the Lord
Federike of Montforce and I returned from huting, we lost one of our dogs,
which we could not recover by any sound of horne or hallow of the hunters, and
yet after we had long sought him, we found him joined* with a she Wolf in a
corner of the wood, his fierceness being vanquished with the delight he had in
her company. Hierom Cardan assures to have seen a Fox gotten of a Bitch
and a Fox. But to return now to the description of our beast, whose figure as
it resembles a cutted Bear, so had he the gestures and other disposit^ons,
more participating with a a Bear than a Dog, and exceeded (as mine Author
affirms) all other beasts in fury: For there is neither Lyon, Bear, Bull,
nor other beast, howe cruel so ever, which he dare not assault, using withal
such a fierceness in his fight, that after he hath fastened his teeth upon
him, he will be rather dismembered and torn in pieces by piece-meale, than
suffer himself to be taken off. Whereof mine Author prefers an experience at
London, in a battle between him and a Bear, the same also making me
remember that which the Ancients have written of a Dog that was given to
Alexander, in the Indies, which (as some say) was engendered of a Tiger and a
Bitch: but because there is diversity of opinion touching this History
amongst many Authors, as Aelyan, Diodorus Siculus, Strabo, Plutarke,
Patritius, with others, I will bring in only that which most resembles a
truth.

In the journey that Alexander had in the Indies, he was presented by one of
the noble men of the Country, with a great Dog, engendered of a Tiger, who
as he did seem of a huge and fierce regard, likewise Alexander, desiring to
prove his doughtinesse and disposition of heart, presented him a Bear tied at a
stake, where at the dog being couched on the ground, neither moved nor
angry, vouchsaued not once to rise from the earth: the king commanded eftsoon
to offer him the Bull, and then the wild Bore, which seemed to move the dog
no more than the rest, what provocation so ever was made the assistants:
Alexander, enuyin* (as it were) that nature had planted so fearful a heart in
such a huge and massy piece of flesh, commanded to kill him: Whereupon the
Lord that first ought him and gave him to the king (bieng more privy than
they, to his valiant disposition), desired Alexander that before the dog were
killed, he should be offred the Lyon or Elephant, which being done forthwith,
the dog began with a wonderful fury to assail the Lyon, and so claw him in
his cruel kind, that where he once imprinted his teeth, the characters remained
and could not be defaced, being also so fierce upon the Lyon, that he could not
be taken off by any means, whereat the king seeming to marvel, and the Indian
Lord desirous to increase the pleasure he toke in his pastime, commanded to
cut of his tail, and his four legs one after an other, tearing in effect
one leg from an other, notwithstanding which horrible torments he endured, he
gave not over the battle, but continued as constant as in the beginning,
wherewith to preuet a displeasure in Alexander, who seemed to grieve to see so
valiant a dog so lothsomely dismembered, the Lord told him he had two other
of the same litter, whereof he made at the same time offer to ye King, with
charge, that according to their natures, he must prove them against either
Lions or Elephants, seeing customably they contemn all other beasts, yielding
no glory to ye victory which is got of others of baser condition. The Ancients
have given special commendation to these creatures touching their faith and
fidelity to their master, whom they do not only know by view, but
understand their whistle, they ^latter them, fawn upon them, are jealous of
them, follow them thorough out all the world, and be such sure keepers of their
goods, that they will die rather than suffer them to be taken away. Which is
very well verified in a dialogue wherein Plutarch seems to dispute whether
beasts have reason or not, confirming it by an example of the faith of a
strange dog, the same being of harde belief, were it not the authority of
him that writ it. The Athenians (saith he) had a Temple called the Temple of
Aesculapius, garnished with great treasure and riches, for the guard whereof,
they keep only an excellent dog called Caparus, notwithstanding whose
barking and other means of defence used by him, certain thieves brake in one
night, and toke away ye most precious jewels that were in the temple: the dog
seeing the Sexteus with other Wardens of the church, were not moved with his
barking at the thieves, runs out of the Temple as enraged or mad, and
pursues the thief that fled before him, not leaving to follow him,
notwithstanding his threats and stones which he cast at him. The day being come,
the dog stayed always where the thief rested, without coming near him for
fear of harm: which being well considered of the fellone, who to prevent yt
which would not be avoided, offred bread to the dog, which he did not only
refuse to touche, but also did not forbear to bark without ceasing: which
being heard of certain passengers that way, the report came to Athens, by
which means hue and cry was sent forth, and the thief taken at Cromion: but
the sporte was to see the dog skip and leap before the felon, rejoicing as
though the thief were his pray, and taken by his means: for which cause the
Atheniens ordained him to be nourished at the charges of the City, and gave
him in custody to the Priests of their Temple. There is also spoken of in
diverse Histories, a like discourse of the fidelity of a dog, found by the
king Pirrhus as he passed with his army, guarding the dead body of his master
slain by the high way side, being not so much astonished at the view of the
mortified ghost of him that lay dead, as double amassed when he understood by
certain paisantes of the Country, that the dog had not stirred out of that
place for three days, without desiring either to drink or eat. The king for
compassion of the dead carcass commanded it to be buried, and the dog for his
faith to his master, to be nourished in some convenient place. And as no
inquisition or policy could try out the murder, what diligence so ever was
used: so it chanced that certain days after, the King taking a view or
muster of his people, assisting it in his own person, the dog attended the
King, and lay very still and quiet at his foot, till it came to their turns
that had killed his master, to pass along by the king: when the dog upon a
sudden (venting as it were the murderers) assailed them with such fury, as if
strength had agreed with his good will) he wold have torn them in pieces: but
being not able to perform the effect of his meaning, he looked here and there,
giving out such arguments of pity, according to his dumme kind, as if he had
demanded justice of the murder at the kings hands. The same moving in him and
the rest of the assistants such suspicion of the fact in them whom the dog
assailed, that what with torment and other examination, they confessed the
matter, were punished accordingly. A thing very woderful, wherein our God
shows himself most just in his judgements, having in such horror such as do
spoil and spil mans blood, that he stirs up sometime little beasts to be
his ministers of revenge of their iniquities. Plutarch, Aelyan, and also
Tretzes, in the third Chiliade and a hundred thirty and one Chapter, write,
that after Darius the last king of the Persians was vanquished by Alexander,
and hurt in many places by Bessus and Nabarzenes, he was forsaken of all the
world, and void of human suc^ors, except a dog, which he had nourished and
brought up, who never forsook the body of his master, but became no less
faithful to him being dead, tha he was whilst he lived.

The Roman histories give also great commendation to the fidelity of the
dog of Titus Fabius, who being condened by the justice of the Senate, and his
body laid dead upon the ground, the dog did not only accompany the dead
carcass, but made such a pitiful howling and crying, that he stirred the
assistats to compassion, who (to appease him) if they offred him bread, he
took it, and in the presence of them all by such means as he could, he opened
the mortified mouth of his master, and put in the bread, thinking that as he
saw his distress, so he would relieve it by means as he best might: but that
which is more wonderful touching the faith of this dog, was, in that the
body of his master being cast into Tyber (according to their custom at that
time to bury dead men) the dog leaped also into the river, not ceasing to
conted with the waives, till he had got hold of his master, whom by maine
strength he did not only support and keep fro sinking, but also drew him out
to the shore, thinking he had the delivered him from peril. By this and such
other may we discern in some respects a more great faith and amity in these
brute beasts, than in reasonable creatures, who for the most part now a days
observe the order of the swallow, shunning (as they do the roof in the
winter) their friends touched with any adversity or sinister fortune: for which
cause also Masinissa the great king of Numidia, would never commit the guard of
his body by night to the faith of men, but used for his sauetie that way the
company of.viij. or.x* great dogs, whom he brought up for the nonce, and made
them be shut in his chamber by night, to the end that by their barking he might
be warned of any peril: which remains in practise at this ^ay in S. Maloes in
Britain, a town of defense environed with the Sea, wherein only a great number
of dogs of England do keep watch, and that so truly that the whole guard and
protection of that city consists no less in the fidelity of those dogs, than
in their strong bands of their old soldiers of Piemont, neither moves any
charge by them, for either armour or weapon, seeing they content themselves only
with their lives, which are reserved by common order, they nourished continually
in certain dark caves, where they are bard to see any light, to the end to
give increase to their fierceness: the same in deed giving them such a
woodnesse, that they neither know, nor use regard to any, but such as are
appointed to nourish and feed them, in such sort yt at night when they are
drawn out of their dens, they are driven to soud drums and trumpets as a
warning to every body to retire, which hath bred such a custom in those
dogs, that after the last retreat be sounded, there is none so hardy to be
found before them, which escapes not their jaws, without great hazard and
danger of his life. There is also mention made in the Eccles^asticall
histories, how the Emperor Aurelian, forcing Benignus the Martyr to worship
Idols, made to be kept fasting for.iiij. or v. days, certain great mastiues,
whom he reserved only to fed upon christian men flesh, before whom he caused
the body of the said Martyr to be brought forth bound: but the dogs refusing
to become the mynisters of the sin of such a tyrant, in place to devour or
tear him in pieces, they licked his hands, and smelled to his body, without
either offer or effect of other harm. Which makes me remember an History
commended by Appius the Greek, Aulus Gelius ye Latin, Iouianus Pontanus lib. 1
amoru, and lastly Anthonio de Gueuuare bishop of Monodemo. Al which albeit they
treat of an other beast than a dog, yet because the discourse is no less
prodigious, than confirmable to our former arguments, I think it no time evil
employed to describe it in sort, as they have left it behind them.

Titus the Emperor, son to Vespasian, upon his ret^rn from the wars of
Germanye, determined according to an ancient custom of the Nobility there,
to solemnise at Rome with great pomp the day of his nativity. For a first
entry or beginning whereof, he caused royal triumphs to be made to the Senate,
with a bountiful distribution of treasure amongst the Romaines: He enjoined
withal by special charge, to make provision of Lions, Bears, Hearts, Bulls,
wild Bores, Wolves, Camels, Elephats, with a number of other savage and fierce
beasts, found most commonly in the deserts of Egipt, and valley of the mount
Caucase. In like sort it was decreed sometime before by the majesty imperial,
that to all thieves, felons, murderers, periurers, traitors, and rebels, their
lives should be reserved, to be punished and torn in pieces y^ day by those
beasts: by who should not only be thundered upon them due revenge of their
wicked life past, but also in the combat should appear equal pleasures and
delight to the lokers on: wherein this was the order that was observed. One of
those miserable men was let out after an other, and committed all alone to a
place, which is at this day being at Rome called the Collisea: after the which
in the view of all the assistants, was let loose in the same place one of
these cruel beasts, who if by chance he tare the man in pieces, the same was
the sentence and punishment of his offence: but if the man subdued the cruelty
of the beast, and killed him, it served as an absolution or dispense from
further punishment. And as they kept hungry of purpose (long time before)
these cruel beasts, to the end to add a more fierceness to their would
nature, so amongst the ^est that were brought to the combat, the Emperor
seemed chiefly to see fight a Lion brought out of the deserts of Egipt, who was
of a huge body, horrible in regard, fearful in his cries and yelling, and
most desperate and cruel in fight, having already committed to morsels.v.
or.vj. me, without devouring them, least withal he should lose his appetite
and delight to fight: albeit the Emperor not liking to keep him any longer
without meat, commanded to let loose unto him one of the Captives, whom if
the Lyon overcame, he should also devour him: whereupon was committed into the
place a poor slave, so lean and mortified with imprisonment, that he seemed
to delight in no other felicity than sudden death: This fierce Lyon setting
up his brussels, making two or three turns about the Coll^sea, seemed to whet
his teeth and stomach, to pray upon ye miserable man: but yt which is no
less strange to hear, than wonderful to see, this cruel beast approaching
near his prisoner, seemed at a sudden to case in beholding his face with
great judgment, which having performed and viewed with such leisure as he
thought good, he did not only refuse to do him any harm, but also with great
humility, he smelled to his hands, and licked his fingers, and falling
prostrate before him, he seemed not only to know him, but acknowledge most
thankfully in his kind an aucient debt and good turn done unto him. This
brought such indifferent comfort and courage to the pore man, that he
converted his former fear into present assurance of safety. The same moving
him in token to be thankful of his part, to stroke and cherish the Lyon, as
if there had been an ancient familiarity between them, which bred such
cause of amaze in the Emperor and the assistants, (as never having seen nor
heard of the like) that they imagined him to be some Nycromancien, or by some
Art to have enchanted the disposition of the Lyon. And forthwith called the
slave unto him, and asked what he was, of what Country, and his name, what was
his offence, and for what cause he was there delivered to such distress of the
wild beasts: what (saith he) hast you nourished this Lion or hast thou
heretofore stad his life in stead, or delivered him from any mortal danger? Or
if then be some enchanter, I enjoin thee upon pain to be here disinembred
quick, to yield us a truth, seeing it is now happened to thee, which never
hath been seen to chance in Rome since the first foundation. Wherewith the
wretched prisoner, having yet the Lion couched at his fete answered the
Emperor with an assured and stayed countenance in this sort: Albeit sir, I
bear here a miserable body of the malice of my time and fortune, the same with
other mortal distresses in prison, making me rather resemble the ghost to a
dead man, than seem of state as I have been, yet (sir) the extremity of my
case doth not take away the estimation of the house yt bred me, being not long
since a knight of the country of Eselauonia, and of the line of the
Androniques, of no less honour in that country, than the famous Quintus Fabius
and Marcus Marcellus through your province and part of Rome: the city whereof
I am. is called Mantuca, who as she revolted against the obedience of the
Romaines, so all such as remained of that miserable calamity, became servile
to your city, whereof my fortune (as you see) made me a miserable partaker: but
touching your demand to be privy to the discourse of my tragical life, It is
now.xxvj. years since I was first prisoner in my country, and as log since I
was brought in that order to this city, sold in ye field of Mars, to a sawyer
of wood, who finding me unapt to supply yt trade, sold me to the Consull^ Dacus
living at this day, whose commendation as it consisted chiefly in wisdom,
profound experience, so had he for a counterpoise of his virtues a vice most
familiar to him, y^ same eclipsing al the rest, as the clouds do the
clearness of the Sun: for his covetousness was so great, that I was at a
point to starve with hunger in his service, my toil travel both day night so
painful extreme, that during the space of a xj. years (which was the time
scope of my miserable life) I never joyed in other thing than in the desire of
death, which being withstanded by my destiny, I thought to abridge my
desolation by means as I best might: whereupon I tendered a request to my
master, either to sell me to an other, or by some other way to give end to my
misery. Wherein if I prevailed, it was in increase of further rigour on his
part, seeming rather to aggrauate his villainy, than diminish any part of his
cruelty: and for my self, feeling the threats of age, and fall of my former
strength, I resolved desperately to bury my self and sorrows in the
solitary deserts of Egypt: wherein fortune favoured me with a most convenient
occasion, for that the Consule my master, leaving Rome, to visit a country
called Tamutha, situated between the confines of Egipt and Africa, from whence
as he rested one night, and was in the depth of his sleep, I departed without
other leave, than that I came with as slender noise as I could, and so taking
only with me some reasons dry, and a bottle of water, I committed me (in that
state) to the mercy of the night and guide of fortune: But at the dawning of
the day, fearing some search to pursue me, and being pressed withal with a
wonderful desire of sleep, I laid me down in a cave which I found by
chance in that desert place, wherein I had not rested many hours, but I saw
enter into my lodging a huge and cruel Lyon, having his throat and feet
embrued with blood, the same adding further dread to my former, the rather
because I saw me as void of means to flee his fury, as unprovided of force
to resist his fury, which made me pronounce secrete sentence of mine own
death, with contentment that the bowels of ye Lion to become the sepulchre of
my bruised bones. Wherein as I was in the depth of these mortal cogitations,
behold the Lyon, which had a little paused at the entry of the cave, began to
draw near the place where I was, drawing one of his legs after him with great
grief as it seemed: and hovering over the place where I lay upon the earth
for fear, he laid his hurt leg upon my hands, in sort as the wisest man
would that sought to discover his grief i^ an other: which made me take heart,
the rather for that ye fear which I had of this proud beast, was turned into
a desire in him self to demand succours at my hand. His grief was in his foot,
by reason of a great thorn which lay within the flesh, the same making it
swell, that it was at point to yield matter, to the which I gave a vent by
breaking th^ impostume, and took out the prick with the point of my knife,
and lapped up his wound with a band or shread of my sheart. And having performed
this work of charity upon the poor beast, he lay with an extreme patience by
me all that day next nght, till the morning following: when I unfolded eftsoones
the sore, and pressed out the corpuption with no less suffrace in him tha
before, who after.ij. or.iij. hours in the morning, seeming to be pinched with
hunger he left me and the cave, went to the desert. When I seeing the honest
departure of my guest, preueted ye like peril saved my self by flight: wherein
(sir) I could not be so precise as to escape the hands of such as pursued me,
by whom I was presented to my master: fro him (amongst others no less
unfortunate than my self) I was passed prisoner to Rome, where if my good
fortune have brought me into the danger of this Lyon, and he to return the
benefit of my good turn with a compassion safety of my life, I humbly beseech
thy majesty royal to consent to the same, and suffer not thy decrees given out
by thine own mouth to be violated with any respect of cruelty. Which moved
such indifferent pity compassion to ye assistants, yt there was not (...)
amongst them al, which with great intercession were not suitors to ye Emperor
for his liberty safety of the Lyon. Whereunto he did not only agree, but also
enjoined from that hour, that Andronique and the Lion should use their
liberty to pass at all times thorough the streets of Rome: whom the people
beheld, not without a singular pleasure, the rather to see the Lion contented
to carry great wallets full of bread, and other relief given them in alms.
And sometime to get money to his keepers, he would suffer children to leap upon
his back: The same moving such cause of marvel to the strangers yt came to
Rome, that there was question touching the meaning. Whereupon, to satisfy the
and al men, was written a little bill, and fastened to the breast of the Lion
with this inscription: Hic Leo est hospes huius hominis. And upon the breast of
the man were written these words, Hic est medicus huius leonis, whereof the one
signifies: This Lion is the guest of the man, and the other: This man is the
physician of the Lion. This is sure a woderful example of charity in a beast
without understanding: wherein is also approved the opinion of an Indian
Philosopher named Dephilus, who was wont to say, That ye great workman dame
nature had graved certain laws in beasts, which might be applied to men, as
exaples to direct ye estate of their life: for if we consider and view with
discretion the order of doing of diverse beasts, we shall find them to exceed
men in many things, and have (as it were) a natural virtue in every affection
of courage, wisdom, force, cowardice, clemency, discipline erudition. They
know one an other, are able to decern amongst themselves: desire things that be
profitable, and eschew such as be hurtful, foresee what will fall, and make
provision of such things as be necessary for their relief. Al which being
considered by the ancient Philosophers, they have not ben ashamed to dispute
and make a doubt whether brute beasts did participate with reason or not:
which made Salomon send some of them to the schools of the Philosophers. Like
as also Essay reprochyng the vnthankefulnesse of the Israelites towards GOD,
lays before them an example of the Ox and Ass, which acknowledge their
master, but Israel hath mystaken and not known her Lord.

A wonderful history of certain women which have brought forth a great
number of children: And an other which ^are her f^te five years dead within
her belly. CHAP. xxx.
LIke as that great Philosopher Aristotle doth most firmly assure in his
writings, that a woman can not bring forth at one time above five children, and
that very rare. Even so (saith he) that happened on a time to a servant of
Augustus Caesar, who at one burden brought forth five children, who (besides the
mother, lived but a short time after. In remembrance whereof, the Emperor
Augustus caused to be made and erected a monumet, writing on the out side
thereof, the number of the children which she had born. Wherefore though
Aristotle did believe that a woman could not bring forth at one time above the
number of five children, notwithstanding the contrary hath been proved in many,
as is witnessed by many grave authors. Amongst whom, that notable learned
Prince Picus Mirandulanus in his comentaries, upon the second hymn assures,
yt one Allemande (called Dorothee) brought forth in Italy at two several times
twenty children, that is to say, at one time.xij. at an other.viij. who during
the time yt she was with child, her belly was so great, that she was
constrained to payse ye weight thereof with a towel bound about the same for
the succoryng of her charge. There is none of those which have read the
chronicles and histories of Lombardie, which knows not that in the time of
the reign of Algemont first king of the Lombards, there was a certain common
Woman brought forth.vij. boys at one time, who for the horror of her sin,
cast them into the water. But God by his almighty power and wonderful
providence not willing to blot out of memory this wicked and detestable act,
brought the same to light, who permitting the king Algemont to walk by fortune
nigh the water where she had cast them, espied one of the children in the water
on live, who with the crook of a staff which he held in his hand, he
plucked out, causing the child to be nourished and brought up in learning and
virtue: who as he grew in years, so he in like manner persevered in al
perfectious and good gifts: and as the historias make mention, succeeded
Algemond, and was named Lanytius second king of the Lombards. And if thou
would read the History of Martinus Cromerus in his sixth book of the worthy
acts of Poloigne, thou shalt find an history of a woman of the county of
Virboslaus, which surpasses all the precedents before recited for the
multitude of children, wherein like as all these histories be wonderful for the
great nubres of children borne at one instant: even so I have not red amongst
al the Historians which have written thereof, that for the great nubres of
children which they have had, they have had cause to open, bruise, and anatomize
or put an iron into their bellies to pluck forth their fruit, as it was
strange and marvelous to behold, that a woman for one only child hath ben
opened, for that she by the space of.v. years carried her fruit in her body
dead, as thou may understand by the discourse of this history following
worthy of remembrance, the which Mathias Cornax, a learned and excellent
physician of Vienne, writ in a Latin work, which he sent for a wonder to
Ferdinando, Emperor at that day. And although he have dilated on this History
sufficiently, yet notwithstanding, I will write thereof more at large in that I
shall be able. He writes to the Emperor Ferdinando, that in the year.1545.
there was at Vienne in Austrice, a certain woman named Margareta, the wife of a
Citizen of that town called George Wolczer, who being quick with child from
S. Bartholomew day to S. Luce, and then upon point to be delivered, she began
to feel ye sharpe and dolorous pangs, which women accustomably taste and suffer
in the bringing forth of their children, caused her mother and certain other
sage women to be called for her better help therein. But when they came to the
great conflict of Nature, and hoped to have received the child, they perceived
such a brute noise as it had ben a thunder clap within the belly of that poor
martyr, yt which made them to think, that the child was dead with the great
striving and battle that it had with Nature. The noise being at last
appaised, they could not perceive or judge any moving or life in the infant,
which was cause after they had employed all their labour and art in vain,
thinking to draw the child out of the mothers belly, they were constrained in the
end to abandon and leave her for a time to the help and mercy of almighty
God. Albeit after certain days her dolor grief renewed, that she was not only
forced to use for help herein, the advises of the most excellent and best
experimeted physicians in that province, but also all others elsewhere, whose
fame was most renowned and celebrated for their excellency in that art: who
with all their physike resolutiue, attractive, suppuratiue, were not able to
deliver her from this misery, or otherwise comfort her, than with that which
the angel said to the Prophet^: Dispone domus tuae, quia morieris. Whereupon
she seeing her self void of hope to receive help at mans hands, determined to
take truce which nature, and persevere constantly in this her martirdom, the
which she continued with extreme dolor the space of four yer^, carrying this
dead caryon in her belly: which being ex^ed she resolved in her self that it
was most expedient to expose some ready death rather than to suffer her self
continually to pine by the cruelty of that torment. Wherefore resting upon this
deliberatio, she made to be called the Surgeons Physicians, at whose hands she
requested to be opened. And in the year.1550. the.xij. day of Noueber they
opened her belly, from which they drew the child half rotten, which she had
carried the space of five years: And after purging and phisiking her, they
restored her by the aid of God to such perfect health, that she remains at
this day on live, and so whole, that she may yet conceive and bring forth
children. As it is more amply declared in the Latin work sent unto the
Emperor Ferdinando.

A wonderful history of a Monster, having the shape of the face of a man, who
was taken in the forest of Haueberg, in the year.1531. whose portraict
Georgius Fabritius sent to Gesnerus, drawn naturally, as he is here figured.
CHAP. xxxj.
LIke as those which admeasure the greatness of the works of God according to
the capacity of their understandings, could scarcely be persuaded, that this
monster which is here figured, should be natural: Even so in my judgment as I
have oftentimes protested, that I will not fill or pester my wrytings with any
fabulous matter or history, whereby I shall not be able to verify the same by
the authority, either of some famous author, Greek or Latin, sacred or
profane: for as Gesnerus in his History, de quadrupedibus viuiparis, writes
that in the Forest of Saxonie in the coast of Dace, there was taken certain
mostrous beasts, having ye shape of the face of a man, whereof the female in
chase by chance was killed of hunters, and the male taken by them, was brought
alive, who afterwards became domestic and tame, in such sort as he began
to talk a little, albeit his words were imperfect and host, much like unto a
Goat: and touching the rest of his actions, they were more brutal than
human. For at such time as he was moved by ye ardent heates and motions of
nature, the women were not in safety with him, for he would endeavour himself by
force to viola^e them openly. And as an other like to this, was taken in the
year.1531. in the Forest de la seigniory de Sal^ebourge in Almaine, who wold
never be made tame, nor yet endure the loke of a man: but living in such sort
certain days, in the end died of hunger, refusing to be fed of any living
creature. Even so in the time that Iames the fourth king reigned in Scotland,
which was in the year 1409. and yt he sent Iacobus Egilinus in embassage to the
French king, who by tempest of the seas was cast on land in a certain Isle of
Norway, where he saw mosters like unto these spoken of before, as he witnessed
at his return: and enquiring of the people of that country what kind of
creatures they were, they answered, that they were certain beasts having the
shape of the face of men, who accustomed very often to come by night to their
houses, which being not repulsed by dogs, would devour as well their men as
children. And I remember that S. Augustine in his book of the City of God,
makes mention of sundry monsters of straungo forms, who were found in
deserts or elsewhere, whereupon grew a question, whether they were descended of
the first man Adam, or that they had a reasonable soul or not, or whether they
should rise as others shall at the general day of resurrection: But for that
this matter is a little to long to entreat upon, by reason of the shortness
of this Chapiter, I will therefore reserve it for a another place more fit and
apt for the dissolution thereof.

A wonderful History of sundry strange famines. CHAP. xxxij.
I Do remember that I have treated in my third book of the Theatre of the
world, howe famine is one of the most cruel ministers of the justice of God,
as he himself witnesses very often by his Prophets and Apostels, sometimes
threatening to give them for their wickedness a heaven of brass, and the earth
of yro, that is to say, that it shall bring forth nothing: albeit I will not
forget in this place to make mention of two notable famines, noted in the book
of Ecclesiasticus, to the end that drawing our Histories out of the lively
springs of the scripture, the same may move us yt rather, and touche us the
more with remorse, even upon the hammer of our conscience. It is showed in
the.iiij. book of the kings and.vj. chapter of a famine which happened in
Samarie, in the time of Elizeus, which was so harde and extreme, that the head
of an Ass was sold for.xxiiij. pieces of silver, and the fourth part of a
measure of Doves dung for.v. pieces: but that which is most far from all
humanity, after that all their victuals were consumed, ye mothers eat their
children: In such sort that a pore woman of the city, se^ing the King of Israel
upon the wall, made her complaint unto him, that one of her neighbours wold not
perform couenat and agreement made betwixt them, which was: that they should
eat together her child, and having so done, that they should also devour the
child of her neighbor, which she told the king she had already done, for we
have boiled and eaten my son, and now she hides and conceals hers, for fear
she should feed or relieve me. Which when the King had understand, his heart
began to die for sorrow, and he entered into mortal war with his hair, flesh,
and garments: saying: God deal so with me, and so according to the rest of the
text. Iosephus an Hebrew writer, in his.vij. book and iij. chapter of the
wars of the Iewes, declares a history almost confirmable to this, but
performed in a more strange and bloody manner. He writes that there was a noble
and rich woman, at such time as Jerusalem was besieged, who had pacte
together some remainder of her goods, which she had in a certain house of the
City, and lived husbandlyke of that little which remained: but the soldiers
and men at arms spoiled her of all within an hour, in such sort that they
constrained her to beg: but that which gave increase to her misery was, when
she had any thing growing to her by the alms and charity of others, the
soldiers toke it from her with violence, with the extreme oppressio of
hunger, and small hope of means to be sustained, forced her to arm her self
against the laws of nature, in such sort as beholding with pitiful regard
one of her little children, whom she embraced between her arms, cried out
with great compassion in this sort: Oh unfortunate child, and me most
miserable mother, who have vnhappely harboured thee in my flanks? What shall
henceforth become of thee, considering the desolation of our state, which so
rages against us both, that albeit I had will to save thy life, yet would thy
destiny make thee subject to a continual thraldom of the Romains? come then
my child, serve for food and nurture to thy pore mother overcome with
hunger. And after she had pronounced this tragical sentence of the death of
her child, she stretched her cruel hands over his tether body and killed him,
put him on the broach, roasted him, and at one instant eat ye one half of him,
in which mean time came in again the soldiers, and tasting in their nose the
smell of roasted meat, began to threaten her to death, if she did not impart it
with the: but she resolved in her rage, and as one most desirous to accompany
her dead son, without any astonishment or fear of their threats, said unto
them: be content soldiers saith she, for I have reserved a more faith and
loyalty than you think, seeing I have kept you as great a part as to my
self, wherewith she brought forth the rest of her child, and set it on the
table before them, which moved such confusion and remorse of conscience in them
all, that they stood as men enchanted, and had not the heart to answer any
one word, but she on the contrary side, as a Tigress full of amaze cruelty
having lost her young ones, preferring in her face both fury and fiery looks,
said eftsoon unto them. Now masters: this which you see is the fruit of my
body, it is my child, my blood, my flesh, yea and my bones: it is a creature
formed of my substance, and a regeneration of my self. Why are you more
scrupulous or delicate than his tender mother yt hath brought him into the
world with so many pangs? Do you refuse to eat whereof she hath and will make
a taste before you? which struck such pitiful terror into all the soldiers,
that they ran away, leaving her alone with the one half of her roasted
child, which was all in ef^ct which their cruelty had left her touching her
goods and comfort. And this as it is the proper text of Iosephus, which I have
as near as I could, drawn out according to the contents of ye same, so the
view of this makes me remember an other History which I have red in Auenzouar
a Physician of Arabia touching an extreme hunger which so afflicted the place
of his nativity, that after that miserable people had stuffed their bodies
with diverse sorts of filthy and corrupt meates, as dogs, horses, rats,
mise, and such like as they could find by any devise or travel, and yet not
being satisfied, nor having wherewithal to quench the rage of their hunger,
did not forbear to turn up, and open graves and sepulchres, and feed of the
mortified carions of dead men: for as soon as any were buried (the porest sort
most pinched with hunger) would rise by night and vnshroud ye ghosts, which
made ye magistrates at last to establish a solemn watch to guard the sepulchres
from such unnatural violation.

A wonderful History of a Bird, which hath no feet, and lives continually
in the air, being never found upon the earth, or in the sea, but dead.
LIke as this bird, whose figure is here depainted, is both mostrous wonderful:
eueso she yields sufficient matter to trouble al ye Philosophers in the world:
wherefore who so will consider ye great marvels of nature which be found in this
little foul, need not dout to confess yt the air wherein she makes her
continual abode, nourishes nothing at all more strange or worthy of
admiration: For, for ye first part, there hath no ma badled her alive, she lives
always with the dew, hath no fete, which is wholly repugnant against the opinion
of Aristotle, who writes that there is no bird without feet, but for that I
never saw it before this present hour, I will therefore write simply, that
which I have red in the Latin authors at this day, who have seen, handled
written thereof. Gesnerus in his Latin history of Birds (from whence I have
taken this portraicte) writes that which follows: that Bird whereof thou see
here the portraict, is called the Bird of Paradise, or Apis Indica, whose
figure was showed unto me by the most Noble and well learned personage
Conradus Pentigerus, who affirms to have seen one dead like unto this. It is
not long since there was a Chart at Noremberg, wherein was figured the form
of a Bird like to this which is here depainted, the which was sent hither with
this inscription: the Bird of Paradise, otherwise called Apis Indica, is of
the greatness of a Gripe, but of such wonderful swiftness and light
condition, that no ship how so ever she be assisted with winds or weather,
is able to make sail equal with the wing of that Bird, whose wings in deed
are long and thin, but of a marvelous reflection and light, whose feathers (or
more properly shag or long hair) be almost of the hardness of a horne: this
Bird hath no feet, she flies continually without resting in any place,
saving that she stays against a tree or bough upon the which she hangs and
stays by a lock of her log hair: she is of great price, by reason of her
straugen^sse and rarietie: the great men of Leuant for a bravery do deck the
crests of their armours with the plumes of this Bird: they saw it at Noremberg
by Iohn Cromerus. The Almaines call this bird in their laguage Luffruogel,
which signifies a bird of ye air, either by reason yt she lives in the air,
or that they make account she is releued thereby, the most be of opinion yt the
female hath one receptacle or retreat under her wings where she lays and
hatches her eggs. Wherefore the kings of Marmin in the Isles of Moluques, not
long since were persuaded did believe yt their souls were immortal, by the
consideration of this Bird, being moved by no other argument, if not that they
observed one little bird of extreme beauty, which at no time touched the earth,
but sometimes fell dead from the height of heaven. And as the Mahometists
travailed with them, they showed them this bird, persuading them that she came
from Paradise, which was a delicious place, where the dead souls toke their
repose: whereby that people gross and barbarous, believing that which the Turks
declared to them, began very curiously to examine of their law, and in the end
became Mahometists, and follow at this day the Mahomet law: for which cause they
name that bird Manucodiata, that is to say, the bird of God, which bird they
have in such reverence and honour, that the Kings having her about them,
account themselves sufficiently guarded from all peril and danger of war:
whereupon the Kings of the Isles aforesaid, did send to Charles the fifth
Emperor, five of these little birds dead: for as we said before, they were
never taken by any man alive. Maximilianus Transsiluanus Gesnerus, pursuing the
History of this bird, adds yet that which follows: I have (saith he)
attained to write these things by the letters of Melchior Guillandin Beruce, a
man great in science and doctrine, which were brought unto me to Padoue, by
the which he writes her the bird of Paradyse, as here follows: Albeit those
which have left in writing the navigation of the Spaniards to strange
countries, assure and affirm, that there is a little bird bred and borne in
the Isles of Moluques, very pleasant and of singular beauty, whereof the body
is but little, notwithstanding by reason of the hugeness of her feathers, she
seems more great, which be broad and hovering, disposed in a round, in such
sort that they represent the circuit of a circle. That little bird
represents in greatness and form a Quail, being adorned and decked with
feathers of diverse colours most fair and bautifull, contenting very much the
eyes of those which beheld her: her head proportioned to the body, somewhat
more great than a swallow, her feathers which deck the height of her, from the
uppermost part of the bones of the skurfe of her neck to the midst of her
beak, be short, great, hard, thick, and of a yealowe colour, and shines like
the purest gold, or the beams of the Sun: the others which cover her chin
be most delicate, tender, and resemble a piercyng colour like to the green,
and not much unlike to those which we see upon the heads of Canardes, being
directly against the sun. That bird hath no feet, and is very like a
Hearon, touching the feathers of her wings, saving that they be more tender and
long, holden of a brown colour, participating with red and black. The male
of that bird hath a hole upon the skurfe of his back, where the female puts
and hatches her eggs, and not relieved by other meat, than the dew of
heaven, which serves them for meat and drink. And who list to visit the
inward parts of this bird, shall find her full of fat or grease, whereof I
may boldly talk, because I have seen two, without legs, which is contrary to
the writing of Aristotle, who affirms, that no bird wants feet: he
dwells always in the air. I am sure this would amaze you to write wholly the
form of this bird by his particulars, as Gesnerus writes, according to the
witness of the foresaid authors. Albeit, who is desirous to see a more ample
description thereof, read that which the said Gesnerus hath written in the
chapter, where he treats of the bird of Paradise, or in the book of Auium
natura. Hieromeus Cardanus in his books de subtilitate, or place where he
writes of perfect beasts, reports the like to that which follows. In the
said Isles of Moluques, they have found upon the lad or in the sea, one dead
bird called Manucondiata, which is as much to say in the Indians tongue, as the
bird of God, or Bird of Paradise, which they have not seen on live, for
that it has no feet. Which for my part I have seen three or.iiij. times,
and always wanting those members: she dwells continually in the air, and
that very high and far of. She bears a body and a beak much like the sea
swallow both in bigness and other form, the quills of her wings and tail
be full as big as those of an Eagle, when she advances or stretches them
abroad. Her feathers be very small, and most like (reserving their
litlenesse) to the plumes of a Pehenne or a she Peacock, and differing in that
point from the Peacock him self, because these feathers have not such
stars or eyes as we see in the tail of a Peacock. The back of the male of
this bird is holowe: where by most reason the female doth lay her eggs,
seeing her belly is also hollow, the same arguing that by the hollowness of the
one and other, she lays and hatches her eggs: there is in the tail of the
male, a thread of the length of three shaftments, black in colour, neither
round nor square, of an ordinary bigness, not much unlike to a Shoemakers
thread, by the which it may be presumed, that the female is tied and joined
to his back, whilst she lays and hatches her eggs. It is most certain,
that as she remains continually in the air, so likewise when her wings and
tail be drawn into a roundness, she supports her self that way, and being
weary, she becomes as she was before. She doth live by none other food than
by the dew of Heaven, which serves her both to eat and also to dryncke,
the same arguing a wonderful diligence and marvel of Nature, to make such
prouysion for this bird in the air. It seems not that she should be
nourished of pure Air only, because it is too subtle, and it is not likely
that she should be nourished of small Beasts and Flies, because the
substance whereupon these Creatures be formed, is not engendered in the
air, neither hath there ben found any such digestion in the belly of this
Bird, as they have written of her that have seen her dead: she hath not her
relief of the vapour which ascends from the earth, because she was never scene
to descend so lowe: besides, there is often peril in vapours, and this bird
is not consumed but by old age: all which prove, that she is only fed and
preserved upon the dew that falls in the night. Wherewith end the opinions
of Galene and other late writers touching the properties of this bird. Neither
can it much disagree from our purpose of strange birds, to avouch in this
place the authority of Hector Boethius, and Saxo, who write, that they found
certain Trees in Scotlande, whose fruit being lapped within the leaves, and
the same falling into the water in some convenient time take life, and turn
into a living bird, which they call a Tree bird. This tree grows in the yle
of Pomonne, which is not far from Scotlande, towards the north, the which is
verified in some sort by Aeneas Siluius, affirming that he hath heard, that in
Scotlande is a tree growing for the most part upon the bank of a river, which
brought forth fruit of form likeness to a de Caunes reed, which being ripe,
fall off themselves, some into the water, and some upon the land, and those
which take the water, are seen to have life, and swim upon the waives: and
after certain time to take wings and fly into the air, which notwithstanding
by diligent inquisition hath not ben found in Scotlande but rather in the Isles
of Orchades.

A Monstrous Serpent bought by the Venetians in Africa, and sent afterward
into France, embalmed as our late writers affirm. CHAP. xxxiiij.
According to the testimony of Conradus Licostenes (of whom I have borrowed
the portraict of this horrible Serpent with vij. h^es) this monster was sent
out of Turkey to the Venetias embalmed, who not long after made a present of
it to Francis de Valoys, the French King, by whom for the rareness of it, it
was valued at six thousand ducats. Wherein like as (for a more certainty and
truth of the matter) I have ben curious to search whether there hath ben any
such monstrous thing within the court or not: so if it be true (as it is to be
presumed, in respect of the authority of him that wryt it) I think nature hath
never brought out or formed any thing more marvelous, amongst all the
monsters that ever were: for besides the monstrous and fearful figure of this
Serpent, there is yet a further consideration and regard touching the faces,
which both in view and judgment seem more human than brutal: but touching
the multitude of her heads, me thinks it ought to argue no great
strangeness, to find serpents with two or.iij. heads, seeing we have and
mean to make mention of both men and women that have had no less, the same
being also witnessed by certain of our late writers, who trauailyng into
India, have seen the same. Ludouicus Vertomanus in his book of the
peregrinations of the Indians saith, that he hath seen in Calycut, fourfooted
serpents breeding within certain marshes, which contain for the height of their
body, the bygnesse of a Hog, but of an ugly foul and deformed head: he makes
also mention of an other kind of serpents which be so venomous, that as soon
as they touche or pierce the blood of a man, he falls forthwith dead to the
ground. He saith, that if the King of that country, could discover the place
of habitation of these serpents, he would build them little caves or cabinets
to defend them from the violence and inundation of waters when there happened
any such: besides he held them so dear, that if any of them were oppressed or
killed by any of his people, such as committed the fact were sure to pass the
same way, the same moving of a fond superstitious opinion of the king
inhabitants there, that these serpets were certain spirits of God, which if
they were not such in dede, they persuaded that their biting or poisoning could
not work such spedy death and destruction to man, which makes that those
venomous beasts walk and pass thorough their towns without peril or hurt:
and albeit in some one night there hath perished about nine persons of their
venomous biting, yet can they lose no credit or estimation with the King or his
people: who besides all these vanities, if they meet any of these ugly
creatures in the beginning of any voyage or enterprise, they do account it a
special good speed in their busynesse, such is their blyndnesse, and such is
their mserable superstition.

Iambol, a notable Merchant of Greece, affirms yt in his traffic to the
Indians, he found certain flying Serpents, of the length of two cubits,
with wings in their foreparte, the which fly by night, and be of so mortal
a poison, that if they let fall or distill but one drop of their urine, it
kills forthwith the creature whereupon it falls. Certain late Ambassadors
of Portugal have brought from thence to their Prince, one of these Serpents
embalmed, the same carrying such a terror with it, that albeit he were not to
be feared, and without cause of fear, yet very few durst approach him. The
Ancient Histories enlarge very far touching the wonders of the monstrous
Serpent which appeared in Africa to Attylius Regulus, whose fear and force of
venom was such, that notwithstanding any strength, torment of war, engine or
other policy which he or his people could devise, he could not be
vanquished till he had torn in pieces and murdered the most part of his
army. They agree all, that the skin of that Serpent contained.xxvj. foot in
length, whose jaws were hong up, and remained there for a miracle until the
war of Muancya. Diodorus Siculus in his.iij. book treats of a serpent yt
was carried on live into Alexandria to ye king Ptolomeus Philadelphus, no less
woderful tha true, which I will describe particularly, according to the text,
the rather because it cofirmeth in many respects the circumstace effect of our
purpose: Seeing (saith he) the noble and bountiful consideration of the King to
such as brought to him any strange or monstrous Beasts: certain Hunters
determined to present him in his own country with a quick serpent, wherein
although the enterprise imported almost an impossibility, yet fortune so
favoured their intent, that within certain days after, by diligence they brought
their purpose to effect: for they came to the knowledge of a great Serpent,
near the water, of the length of.vij. toises and an half, who being withdrawn
into a circle, and as other beasts went to the water, he advanced him self
upon a sudden, and swallowed certain of them forthwith, the rest he kept
within the circle of his tail to pray upon afterward. These hunters
beholding at large and with discretion the orders and doings of this Serpent,
whom they accounted without policy or understanding, began to marche near
him, thinking to take him with their coards and chains: but being come within
his full view, that they saw his eyes flame as fire, his huge and great teeth:
and being astonished withal at the hideous noisemade by his hard scales or finns
when he moved on either side, and lastly noting his other fearful regards of
his head, they began to stand in more awe of the danger than able to attempt
it to the uttermost effect of their meaning: and yet notwithstanding this
fear, they cast forth their hooks and coardes upon his tail, which so
kindled his fury upon a sudden, that he assailed them forthwith with hissing
and horrible noise at his mouth, devouring at one morsel him that was next
him, throwing his tail about an other of the company, who likewise passed the
same way: the same so amazing the rest that they reskued themselves by flight
without intent eftsoones to practise their devise: albeit not long after the
hope of gain profit overcame the present peril and danger they were in, for
that they proved against him a second experience rather by art and policy
than strength, making of great cords hollow as a bow net sufficient byg by
their estimation, to contain within it the said serpent: and then noting
diligentely his place of retire with his times of coming and going, as soon as
he was gone abroad to hut for some pray, they stopped the entry of his cave
with stones and earth, by and by made a vault or hollow hole in the ground,
near to the other where they laid their net: the effect and success answered
fully the meaning of their devise, for after the serpent had fed sufficiently
abroad, and repairing towards his place of rest, was amazed when he heard
himself pursued with a great noise of trumpets, horses, dogs and men, whose
brute made the whole air sound after him, and thinking lastly to save himself
in his den, was forthwith overthrown in the net, and so overcharged with
blows (notwithstanding his force) that he yielded unwillingly to the snares of
the hunters, who, to prevent any mischief by his mouth, knocked out his
teethe, and so wrapped in his net as he was taken, they carried him into
Alexandria, and presented him to the King, who wondering no less at ye
stragenesse of the beast, than their policy in taking him, gave order from
that time forward, to preserve him with a thin diet, to the end to diminish
his strength, which being justly observed, made this horrible Serpent, by
succession of time so tame and familiar, that he made him to be showed as a
thing of great miracle to strangers, that came to visit him: it appears in
a volume or remembrance of the acts of Alexander, that in the pursuit of Porus
king of India, (who fled before his fury) he found among the deserts burning
sands many Serpents called C^rastes, other whose terrible hissing procured a
fearful brute in the air, and had eyes sparkling with venom, who charged the
soldiers with such fury, that notwithstanding their resistcae every way, they
killed well nigh.xx. me of war.xxx. servants: there be also found in hot
places an other sort of Serpent, which some call Dipsas, and other Prester, the
which is very short, white in colour, with three strokes of black in his
tail: such as are bitten of them, become immediately so oppressed with an
extreme drought, that they be never afterward satisfied with drinking, being so
distempered that way, that the more he drinks, ye more he desires to drink:
the same being the cause (as Dioscorides writes) that the ancient
Physicians, finding no remedy able to encounter this venomous infection, have
left it at large and uncurable. There is a kind of Serpent considered of by
the Historians, which is called Boza, who feeds most commonly of ye milk of a
Cow: He, if he have time to assist his inclination, becomes very huge and
big, which was very well approved in the time of Claudius Caesar, when one of
them was taken and killed, in whose belly was found a whole child. Plutarche
is of opinion, that even as Honey flies are engendered of beasts, wasps of
horses, hornet of asses, so may it be, yt of the marrow and carrion of men
certain kind of Serpents are bred: which he justifies in that he affirms,
that many (by reason of this corruption) have been bred in graves and
Sepulchres of men. Which (according to mine author) happened in Auignon, in
the time of his study there, where a simple Artisian, opening the lid of a
coffer of lead, wherein was a dead man included, was bitten of a Serpent,
which was of such mortal operation, that if he had not ben speedily rescued,
he had dyed of the infection. Conradus Lychostenes, in his prodigious works,
writes that in September, the year a thousand four hundred ninety and four,
there was a woman in Cracouye in a place called the holy Ghost, who was
delivered of a dead child, having tied at his back a quick Serpent, which
ceased not to devour and gnaw the dead bones of the child: neither is that
of less marvel whereof Baptista Leo makes mention in the time of Pope Martine
the fifth, when he says was found amongst a sort of rocks or stones, a
great Serpent on live, the same being so enclosed with a heavy stone, that
there appeared neither place to discern him, nor hole from whence he might
either take or yield breath: the wise men which were there assembled to
pronounce a reason of his being there, held opinion that he was engendered of
the moist substance of the stone, which being putrified, brought forth such
deformity: But when they should resolve touching his respiration or taking of
breath, they seemed greatly troubled, because the stone being massive and
heavy, had also neither vent nor conduicte whereby he might either cast up,
or receive any breath, no more than that which was found in the Sepulchre,
whereof I have made mention here before, which was so surely closed and stopped
with lead on every side, that the air could not pierce into it. But now
albeit our sundry histories have here preferred diverse cruel and venomous
Serpents, yet I think nature and the earth have formed none more marvelous
than the Basilic, to whom all antiquity hath always given the name of king
of the Serpents: this is a kind of those Serpents, which bear in their head a
white mark or stroke, seeming upon them in sort and manner of a crown: her
head is very sharpe, her throat red, her eyes and other colour drawing
somewhat near a black: she chase with her hissing (as Plinie saith) all the
other Serpents: she makes trees die with her breath, scorches herbs, breaks
stones, and so infects the air where she remains, that no bird can use
wing there without peril: she kills men with her only regard, like as an
unclean woman infects and spotteth a glass. And although she contain not
above one foot in length, yet is her poison so strong venomous, as she kills
other Serpents with the very breathe that comes from her fore end: she is so
mortally venomous, that she infects and overwhelms great Cities with the
air or breath of her mouth, the same approved not only by the historians
profane, as Dioscorides, Plinie Aelian, Lucian, Isidorus, with many mo, but
also confirmed in some sort by the Ecclesiasticals.

Hieronimus Cardanus in his books of diverse Histories, treating of the wonders
of this beast, brings in a strange thing happening in our time which he
describes in this sort.

At such time (saith he) as I made my books of diverse Histories, the.xxiij. of
July happened a thing no less worthy of admiration, than memory, which I did
assist with mine eyes and presence. Iacques Phillippes Cerunse caused to be
made under the earth, a valt or cave, which because it should consolidate the
better, he made stop very close, and within.xviij. or.xx. days after, made
the same to be opened to draw forth certain arches of wo^de which sustained
it, whereunto as one of his workmen disposed himself to descend by a ladder,
and being in the midst of the same, he fell down dead, the master seeing no
return of his ma, would prove the experience in himself, who likewise being
come so lowe as the other, fell also dead, after whom the assistats (not
doubting any mortal peril) set a third, a fourth, with many other, which al
passed one way: this albeit it gave great indifferent cause of suspicion and
fear, yet was it no such terror to the people without the hoale, as to make
them desist to send any more, but chose out amongst the al a strong huge man of
no other regard with them all, than as a fool, who descending as low and to
the place of the others, fell not, but with a crook of iron drew one of them
that were dead, which gave him such courage yt he would once again go down,
and being within the mouth of the vault, he began to sink and fall, albeit he
was prevented by the diligence of the assistants, who by special remedies
recovered him of his trance, but not of the use of his speech till the next
day, when I perceiving (saith Cardan) that he began to speak, I asked him many
things, but he seemed not to remember to have said or done any thing save only
his going down: there was let fall in a corde, a dog whom they also plucked
up again half dead, whereby every man that was not able to comprehend the
cause of these wonders, judged that there was within the cave a Basilicke,
which otherwise is called Serpens Regalis. Wherein as we have now (as I think)
treated sufficiently of certain strange and monstrous Serpents found in
sundry provinces parts of the world, it is no less necessary (in mine
opinion) to search out certain singular things which are found in some
particular kinds of them: those which have treated of the nature of Serpents,
have observed chiefly that their excrements smell sweet, which by natural
reason may proceed of their dryness: for Serpents of their own nature be
dry, the same arguing that their excrementes be well boiled by reason of the
straitness of their entrails. Some affirm that Serpents have so odiferous a
breath, that it seems as sweet as Musk. There be Serpents which keep their
venom after their death, as the Vipers, for otherwise their flesh could little
profit to the composition of Triacle, if they were altogether without poison.
Besides, whereupon could come the excoriation in the Leper that hath eaten them,
if they did not reserve some poison? It hath chanced in our time that such as
have taken of the hide from a beast, that hath perished of the biting of a
Viper, die also of the like disease. Dioscorides in his sixth book where he
treats of poisons and venomes, saith that immediately after a man is bitten
with a Viper, the biting swells and becomes dry, and of a whitish colour:
there appears in the beginning of the biting a fiery anguish, all died with
blood, which doth force out of the flesh round about it, certain blisters, as
if they had been burnt with fire, then follows an viceration, then they bleed
swell, touching those parts that be about the liver, whereupon are procured
vomits of choler, heavy sleep, shaking thorough the whole body, Passions of
the urine and cold sweat. Certain late Physicians are of opinion that the
Viper is no other thing than the Serpent which we call in France the Aspic.
Some do affirm that the Viper doth abhor a naked man, and fears him more
than if he were clad with garments. The Physicians are of opinion that if a
man eyes be rubbed every morning with the skin or flough of a Viper, his
sight shall never be dim nor hurt with suffusion, affirming besides, that if
an old floughe be burned when the Moon is full, and in the first part of the
sign of Aries, and that the cenders be sprinkled upon a man head, it
stirs up terrible dreams. Plinie and Dioscorides avouch that the earth
never receives within her entrails, the Serpent that hath once bit a man,
seming (as it were in respect and reverence of a certain royal benignity)
to have in horror him that has offended the King, chief and Prince of all
beasts. Plinie writes that the spittle of a man, specially of him that is
fasting, is venomous to a Serpent, in so much that if he but taste of it never
so little, he dies, and that which more is, if a man but pour it upon him, it
offends him no less than if he had scalding water cast upon him. All the
Physicians and wryters observe that the venomous Serpents hide them selves, or
abide within the three leaved grass, bi^ause that herb is mortiferous to
them. Those that will handle serpents without danger, let them wash their
hands first with the iuise and sap of Turnips, the same being so great an
enemy to their poison, that they had rather die, than once cease upon the
place that hath been rubbed with Turnips, whose only smell doth take away both
his life and force. Cardanus in his.xviij. book de subtilitate, and in the
Chapiter which ^reateth of marvelous inventions, saith: that the wild
Cowcumber, black neesing powder called Eleborum, and the great Serpentine
called Drachontiu mains, be of so great force against serpents, that such as be
anointed or rubbed with their iuise, be seldom or never offended or hurt with
Serpents: for better confirmation whereof I may boldly bring in a History which
I have neither red nor understood, but was privy to ye experience of it my
self in the time of Pope Iulia that died last.

Such as have hauted Italy, know (I am sure) that there be certain charmers
which they cal Enchaunters of serpents, who use to cary about their necks,
great boxes full of quick Serpents, under the pretence whereof, they live and
sell certain Oils, which they say are most sovereign against the bitings of
mad dogs and serpents: amongst those I noted one chiefly at Rome, who had
many of those creatures, amongst which he had one of a foot and a half long,
whom in the presence of a thousand persons he made bite him by the tongue,
which began forthwith to swell as big as his fist, and besides the swelling it
became black and scur^fie, in such sort that every one judged it to be
infected with poison: soon after he began to rub his tong with a certain
oil which he called oil Balsamium, which did so qualify the swelling, that
in one instant it appeared as fair and natural as before: by which miracle he
sold his Oil at what price he desired: wherein as I was very curious to try
if he performed that water by either Art or sophistical slight, and not able
to discover any deceit at all, even so Plaudanus a notable Physician in Italy,
and from whom we atted every day some learned work of such matters avouched
unto me by other, an History very like to this, whereunto I give as great faith,
as if mine own eyes had assisted it, the rather by the fidelity of him that
told it me, who besides he saw the experience, yet his learning demeth him to
be abused or deceived by either policy or Art: he said that in the
year.1533. there was in the famous City of Bresse (governed at this day by
the Venetians) two of these Enchanters of Serpents selling their oils in the
very same street, wherein for more credit and authority of their traffic,
they showed to ye people sundry quick serpents, whereby their gain grew the
greater: but one of their company borne in Verona, jealous belike of the
profit of his fellow, gave it out to the multitude that it was but a deceit,
and yt the oils which they sold, were a vain substance, cofected by sophistical
means, which he offred to prove if the Magistrates would assist him with
warrant or authority, whereunto they agreed with small entreaty, as well for
a desire they had to have the disceit disclosed, as special delight in seeing
the effect of the devise. This galland of Verona, at the day appointed, having
made to be set up a little Theater, to the end the assistats might behold the
experience of his promise, mounted with great majesty upon the scaffold, where
calling the other of Padua, who was no less ready than himself, said unto
him: If thou hast of the true Oil of Balm (as thou haste given out to the
people, to abuse their simplicity, and win their money by deceit) stick not
to show in this place and presence an unfeigned proof trial thereof, wherewith
he drew out of his box with his bare hand a great Toad quick swelled with
poison, holding in his hand a certain root, bad him choose whether of those
two things he had rather eat, either the root or the Toad, for for my part
(saith he) loke as thou dost devour the one, I will eat the other, and then
shall it be seen which of us two escapes the best cheap, wherewith the
Padouan albeit greatly amazed, yet being pressed with compulsion to do the
one, toke the root and eat it. The Veronian at the same instant, tare the
Toad in pieces with his teeth, and swallowed her into his body, retiring
immediately both of them to their drugs, and arming them albeit with their
Antidotes or counterpoisons, could not so cunningly convey their sleights, but
one remained dead as a pawn, for within.2. or.3. hours ye Padouan began to
change colour lose strength so fast, yt he was taken in a soud from the
Theater, (what remedy so ever could be aplied to him) within 24. hours after he
died, being swelled as one diseased with the dropsy. The other yt devoured the
toad, understanding ye tragedy of his companion, saved himself by flight,
being seen notwtstanding.2. or.3. years after, selling his drugs other
confections in diverse places in Italy according to his wont: some also which
the Greeks cal Ophirgenes, are wont to heal the bytings of such Serpents with
only laying their hand upon the hurt body, from whence they drew the venom,
as also do the Psilles and Marciens, a people of Africa, whose Ambassador
called Exagon, for an experience of the matter, being come to declare his
message to the Romains, was put naked into a Town full of Serpents, Vipers,
and other venomous beasts, who being thus amongst them, in place to offend
or do him any hurt, they began to like and cherish him. Constantine Caesar
in his books of Husbandry writes, that to draw or gather together all the
Serpents of a country, it is needful to make a hole or cave in the earth,
and to put therein a pot or vessel, wherein hath been of those confections,
which (as the Adamant doth the iron,) is of a virtue to draw all the Serpents
of that Country into that place.

A wonderful History of two maids knit and conjoined back to back, scene in
diverse places, the one a^ Rome, the other at Verona. CHAP. xxxv.
THe Indians and Brachmans have showed them selves for the most part very
ceremonious in observing the nativities of their children: For two months
after their birth, they caused the to be brought in public, beholding them
very diligentely whether they were perfect or imperfect, fair, or deformed,
mete for war or peace, after which ceremonies so observed, knowing that
according to their education, they would be mete to serve in the common wealth,
caused them to be instructed and nourished in those arts and sciences which
best agreed with their inclinations: but contrary, if they found them monstrous,
deformed or wanting any member, repugnant to nature, they caused them
immediately to be murdered and killed, like as the Spartins in Greece by the laws
of Licurgus, caused those children whose shape and members were well formed to
be brought up nourished: but if nature had not don or performed in them her
duty, they being thereby monstrous or broke, were immediately carried into
strange regions, or into some Isles and deserts, and so committed to the mercy
of their fortune: even so the Athenians immediately after they found any
monstrous child in their City, caused him to be cast headlong into the sea,
purifiyng not only their city with a number of maids, who went through the
same, singing hymns and Psalmes, but also making sacrifice to Iuno. The
ancient Romains following the ordinance of Romulus, used to cast such monsters
into Tyber, burning their bodies and blowing away the cinders: wherein the
Emperor Mauritius (although he were a Christian) followed in this the laws of
the Ancients, who forthwith upon the sight of any monstrous child, caused it
not only to be killed, but kissed the knife wherewith he committed the
butchery. All which I have preferred to memory in this place for the respect
of these.ij. maid twynnes, whose portraict is here to be seen, for if they
had been brought forth into the world* in the time of the aucient Indians,
Brachmans, Spartins, Lacedaemonians, or in the time of the Romains, or in the
reign of the Emperor Mauritius, their history and figure had be buried with
their bodies, and had not be scene in deed of so many thousands of people. In
the year of grace.1475. these two maids that you see so knyt together by the
rains, even from their shoulders to their haunches, were engendered in Italy,
in the famous City of Verona. And for that their parents were poor, they were
carried through diverse Cities of Italy to get money of the people, being very
desirous to see that new spectacle and wonder of Nature. Wherefore some write,
that that monster whom you may here see, was a show and prognostication,
foretelling sundry marvelous mutations which happened after in those
provinces: for in the same year that they were engendered, Charles Duke of
Burgoyne, occupied and governed the country of Loraine. Ferdinande the great
king of Spain divided the realm with Alphonsus, king of Portugal. Mathias
and Vladislaus kings, made peace with the Hungarians and Bohemians. Edwarde
king of England, was procured by the Duke of Burgoine to come into France,
where was a peace concluded betwixt^ him and king Lewys. And in the year of
grace.1453. an other monster like unto this was brought forth at Rome, with
great marvel to all the people, in the time of Pope Alexander the sixte, (who
as Polidorus writes) prognosticated the evils, hurts and miseries which
should happen and come to pass in the time of that Bishop.

A wonderful History of Cruelty. CHAP. xxxvj.
MAny be astonished to see the great number of marvelous examples of Cruelty,
which have reigned not only amongst the Ethniques, but also (the more to be
lamented) amongst us Christians, which be all issued out of one vine, formed
of like elements, incorporate in one church, having one head Lord Iesus Christ,
being the children of one father celestial, of one spirit, ransomed by one
blood, regenerate of one baptism, nourished of like Sacraments, participating
of one Chalice, and fighting under the cross and banner of Iesus Christ,
having one common enemy Satan, being called a like to one heritage, and yet
notwithstanding we be not ashamed to dismember and tear in pieces one an
other, with such horror and confusion, that it seems we would fight
against nature, and drenche the earth of humain blood, leaving it besides as a
desert or place inhabitable. But because you shall not marvel of that yt the
Historians write of the great effusion of blood, which was shed in the battle
which Edwarde the.iiij. king of England made against the Scots, where he killed
murdered three score thousand men, I will show you a more horrible spectacle in
nature, whereof also Sabellicus writes of Charles Martell king of France, and
Abidaran, where in one conflict was killed and murdered three hundredth and
fifty thousand. But what a butchery and slaughter had the poor flock of
Iesus Christ in the battle which Ladislaus king of Pauonie had against
Amurath Emperor of the Turks? seeing that of the party of the same Turks
being victors, was found.iiij. hundred thousand dead carcasses, as
Sabellicus witnesses, There is scarcely to be found such a wonder or horror in
nature, as that whereof Iosephus writes in ye wars of the Iewes by that great
butcher Alexander, in the bloody battle which he had against Darius, where was
slain a million of men. In like manner Cyrus king of Perses was so unfortunate
in the battle which he had against the Scythians, that of two hundred thousand
men, which he had in his army, was not found one man to report the news of
the overthrow. Albeit reading now amongst the Historians of those that Sylla
killed of the Mariens, those that Pompey slew of the soldiers of Mytridates,
those that Ptolomeus overthrew of Demetrius, of those that Caesar cut in pieces
in ten years, when he sent to fight against the Gaules, those that Lucullus
slew in the war which he had against the Armenians, those that Attilla
killed, those that Miltiades slew, those that Marcus Claudius Cornelius killed,
with an infinite number of like slaughters, which be found by the Historians,
Greekes and Latins, you shall find, that if you could see them all put in
account, there must needs be inueted a new Arithmetike to number them: and I
believe that if they had made a roll of al the bieues, muttons, veales, goats,
and other fourefooted beasts which have been killed in a thousand years
within all the butcheries of Europe, their number would not exceed the dead
carcasses of men slain murdered: yet it is not sufficient so to kill men in
battle by sword, but that they must search new means and inventions to
murder them, as Eusebius doth show in his Ecclesiastical History of that
infamous butcher Dioclesian the Emperor, who seeing that the Christians which
reigned in his time, would not renounce the name of God, and worship his
ydoles, was not content to cut of their noses, and their ears, causing
spells of wood to be put under their nails, pouryng hot lead upon their
privy parts: but in like manner he caused to be bowed by great force four
trees, to the which he made to be tied their feet and hands: who being left
in this sort, were by the violence and force of those trees dismembered plucked
in pieces, as may be seen by the portraict and figure here before, the which
torments have also been practised put in ur in our time in Piemont, against a
certain soldier, which would have betrayed a city, as le seigneur de Launge
writes in his art of warfare. Astiages that great king of the Medes, hath not
only surpassed that president in cruelty, but hath also executed that, which
you will not only have in horror to read, but also in as great detestation to
conceive in your heart. At what time the great Patriarch of tirany, happening to
dream one night of a certain thing touching one of his little children, which he
could hardly digest, withal fering yt it should one day take effect, determined
to prevent his misfortune: and the better to execute his intent, he made to be
called Arpalus, one who he most favoured, and the best of his realm, to whom
he gave secretly in charge forthwith to kill one of his own sons, without
making any ma privy thereunto, for certain causes which he would make him to
understand more at leisure. Arpalus understanding the sorrowful commandment of
the father against his child, began to feel as it were a furious war in his
mind: for as the pity and innocence of the infant, withdrew him on the one
side, so the commandment of his master tormented him on the other: albeit
reason remorse of conscience in the end so much prevailed, as pity obtained
the victory: in such sort that he resolved not only to save the life of the
child but also to cause him to be brought up in some secret place, without the
knowledge of his master: notwithstanding he could not so well play his part,
but that within certain days after, the king Astiages did discover his friend,
and that against his will, howe he had saved the life of his son, which he
dissembled for a time with a good countenance, in such sort, that poor Arpalus
thinking him self clear from suspicion, and living in that liberty of mind,
was astonished, that his master caused him to be called to accompany him at
dinner, having besides made to be killed one of the children of Arpalus, which
he caused to be so well seasoned and disguised by his Cooks, that it was hardly
to be discerned what meat it was, causing the same to be served at the table,
without any knowledge to him thereof: by reason whereof, the poor Arpalus
mystrustyng nothing, did eat thereof willingly. But that infectiue tyrant
Astiages, never glutted in his cruelties, was not content to cause him to eat
the flesh of his own propre child, so abundantly dressed with store of
delicate fruit, but made to be brought in in platters, the head, the feet and
hands of that little innocent, to the end that the father understanding that
it was his flesh, blood and bones which he had eaten, after his rage and
cruelty a little appeased, he demanded pleasantly, and in manner scoffingly,
if those meates were not well seasoned and well liked of him: to whom poor
Arpalus, troubled of an extreme compassion in his mind, fearing him to be
angry, answered him soberly, that all was good at the table of a King. These
cruelties he great: but those which Maximilian Emperor of the Romains used, were
nothing inferior to the rest, who was not only content with the killing of an
infinite number of persons, by the fury and force of the four Elements, as
broiling some, drowning others, burying some quick, and making others to be
smothered: but besides, searching out more great and horrible wonder in nature,
he caused the dead to kill the living, by tying the bodies of living men to the
bodies of the dead, face to face, and mouth to mouth, leaving them so, till
that those which were dead, by their putrefaction had killed the living. Let us
pass under silence that butcher of Satan, Tiberius the Emperor, who me
seems hath surpassed in cruelty all those whereof the Historians have at any
time made mention: for he forbad upon pain of death, (that which no man hath
read of other, but of him, which was) that for the great number of innocent men
which he caused to die, there should no man lament, weep, sigh, or make other
like dole: and he had of Satrapaes, and ministers expressly deputed to execute
these cruelties, who had no other charge than to spy and mark with regard
here there if any man wept, or sighed from his heart, or gave any other
witness of sorrow or grief, to the end he might be brought forthwith to the
place of execution, to be punished with the like pain to him, whose innocence
he lamented. All these cruelties tirannies before specified, be extreme, but
those which follow be most brutal, and executed of a rare and strange fashion:
for in the first they touched but living creatures, but in these that follow,
they fight with those that be dead. Cambises King of the Persians, was not
satisfied with the cruel murthering of Psamenitus king of Egipt and many
others: But besides that being at Caire, be caused the carcass of Damasus to be
drawn out of his tomb, causing the same not only most shamefully to be
whipped, pricked full of bodkins, as though he had been alive, but in the end
broiled it (as Herodotus witnesses) which he proved not only on the behalf of
men, but performed the like on women, to whom the laws of pity be for the
most part most familiar. For after that Cyrus king of the Persians had killed
in battle the son of Thomiris Queen of Scithia, having a new supply of
soldiers* she pursued the king with such fury, that she cut al his rout army
in pieces, whom she encountered, and king Cyrus himself was also slain: but for
all that, her rage was such, as it was nothing thereby appeased, for she felt
yet the death of her sons, for which cause she caused the head of Cyrus to be
separated from his body, putting ye same forthwith into a vesse^lful of humain
blood, and afterwards beholding it with a furious regard, said unto him: Cyrus,
thou hast already drenched the blood of my sons, and hast thyrsted for mine,
but now fill thy self of blood. Tullia the daughter of Tarquin, King of the
Romains, hath yet surpassed all the rest in cruelty, for she caused her father
to be killed, to the end she might inherit his realm, please thereby her
ruffian or champion: wherefore seeing the body of her dead father lying on the
ground, being mounted on her chariot, she passed therewith over him, and
although that the horses, (fearful of the dead person) refused to pass that
way, and that ye Chariter who did guide them, finding in himself some pricks of
pity, would have turned them an other way, to the end they should not tear
the body of the king, yet that infamous tirannesse, surpassing the horses in
cruelty, did constrain them by force to marche over the body of him which had
engendered her.

A wonderful History of a monster brought forth into the world alive, who
from the navel upwards, had the shape of a man, and the rest like a dog.
CHAP. xxxvij.
THe ancient Ethnikes have had in so great horror adulterers fornicators, that
there was not amongst them either people, nation, or Province, which were not
chastised by some severe law: for like as Strabo writes in his sixtenth book,
that the Arabes punished adultery by death: even so also did the Lumbardes and
the Egiptians, causing the whooremonger to be whipped through the City,
cutting of the woman's nose so taken, to the end her face might by that means
become the more deformed. Wherefore Iustin witnesses, that the Parthians
amongst other vices, punished most severely adultery: so the ^ocrenses plucked
out the eyes of those, who were apprehended and taken committing that vice,
which their king Zeleucus (who was the author of that law) approved both
justly and severely in his own son who being taken for that office, had one
of his eyes plucked out. The ancient Almains (as Tacitus writes) cut of the
hair of their adulterous women, causing the afterwards to be whipped through
the streets. In like manner the Romains gave liberty to the husband, of his
own proper authority, to kill the whoremoger and his wife, if he toke them
committing of that abominable vice. Macrin the.xix. Emperor, caused al such as
were apprehended in adultery, to be broiled quick, who being informed, that
diverse soldiers had violated their hostess chamber maid, he caused the
bellies of two great Beefs to be opened alive, and made the soldiers to be
sowed and enclosed therein, saving their heads which appeared out, to the end
that all men might see them, the one talk with the other. And Aurelius
the.xxix. Emperor, being made to understand yt a soldier of his army had
deflowered the wife of his host, invented for him to make him die by a new kind
of cruel punishment: for he caused two great trees by force to be bowed and
plied, whereunto the soldier was tied, to ye end that the trees returning to
their place, might tear and pluck him in pieces. Confer these punishmets with
those written of before, and you shall find no adulterer receive ye reward of a
better hire: for in ye sacred histories* by ye law of Moises they were
smoothered, murdered and stoned to death. S. Paule in his.xiij. to the Hebrues,
cries that God will condemn fornicators and adulterers. After in his first book
to the Corinthians and.vj. Chapiter, he writes thus: Do not disceiue your
selves, for neither fornicator, Idolatour or adulterour shall not possess at
all the kingdom of God. Wherefore amongst the most principal causes that moved
God to drown the world, was chiefly this wicked vice of whoredom: five famous
Cities (as it is written in the book of Moyses) became ruinous and overthrown
for their disordered and wicked lives. In the book of numbers xij. kings were
hanged, and.24000. men killed for committing of whoredom. It is written in
Leuiticus xxviij. chapiter, how the Chananeans were afflicted punished for
their whoredom: well nigh all the line of Beniamin, (as you may read in
the.xxxix. of the Judges) was afflicted for committing fornication with the
Leuites wife. Diverse grievous punishments were sent unto Dauid, for his
whoredom, as you may read in the book of the Kings. Salomon for the same cause
and committing Idolatry, became reprobate: wherefore S. Ieremie the Prophet
recompteth very often ye whoremongers and fornicators, were the chiefest
causers of the destruction of the City of Jerusalem. Diverse many Realms (by
this detestable vice) have received change and alteration, become subject to
others. Troy the proud became ruinous for the ravishment of Helen. In like
manner Thebes the populous was afflicted and scourged for ye abusing of
Chrisippe, and the incest committed by Eclipus. The Kings of Rome were extirped
banished for the ravishment of Lucrecia. Aristotle in the.v* of his politiques,
saith: that adulterers and fornicatours be the principal and chiefest causers
of the ruin and mutation of realms. The King Pausanias so much renowned in
Licaonien, who first defiled a maid at Constantinople, and after killed her,
was advertised by an Image, of his end and destruction. A thing very strange,
that whoremogers should be warned of the pains prepared for them by wicked
spirits to their own confusion, which Pausanias proved true, for that the
Ephores constrained him to die by famine. Wherefore if the Histories both sacred
and profane be so fully replenished of grievous pains, cruel punishmets,
ireful cursings sent by God commonly upon whoremongers, what may then the
Sodomites and others loke or hope for, who join them selves in the ignominy
of God and nature, with brute beasts, as is most plainly showed unto us by this
shameful History, whose portraict thou may behold in the beginning of this
Chapiter, of a child who was conceived and engendered between a woman and a
dog, having from the navel upwards, the form and shape of the mother, so
well accomplished, that nature had not forgot any thing unperformed, and from
the navel downwards, it had the form and figure of the beast who was the
father, who (as Volateranus writes) was sent to the Pope which reigned at that
time there, to the end it might be purified and purged. Conradus Licostenes
writes a like History in his wonders, of a woman which brought forth in the
time of the Emperor Lothairus, a child and a dog, joined knit together, by
the nether parts, that is to say, from ye rains or tip of the back to the
haches. And Celius Rhodiginus in his.xxv. book and.xxxij. chapiter of his
ancient lessons, writes that there was a Priest called Crathin in Ciba^e,
having had the company of a Goat, with whom he used this brutal desire: and
afterwards within a certain time brought forth a Goat, who had the head and
shape of a ma, resembling the Priest which was the father, but the rest of the
body was like the Goat. Whereupon S. Paule saith in the fourth Chapiter to the
Ephesians, that the plague ordained for whoremongers, is, that they become
blind and mad, after that they be once forsaken of God, and will not be
reconciled by good and wholesome council, but persevere still in their
wickedness, provoking thereby Gods wrath and indignatio against them.

A notable complaint made by a Monstrous man to the Senate of Rome, against the
tyrannies of a Censour, which oppressed the poor people of the river of
Danube by rigorous exactions. CHAP. xxxviij.
THat great Monarch Marcus Aurelius, who was as well a philosopher as an
Emperor, retiring himself into the fields with a great number of wise men, as
well to deceive certain envious times of the year, as to moderate the heate
burning of a fever, which had vexed and troubled him many days, with intent
not to be idle, they began to talk of diverse matters amongst themselves, as
of the corruption of princes, the alteration of common weals, and generally of
the universal disorder, which was found amongst all the states of the
world: wherein after every man had touched particularly that which seemed good
unto him, it pleased the Emperor to become therein a party, and continuing
the tal^e, he said unto them: My fr^end, although each of you have very
learnedly spoken of the question propouned touching the corruption of Princes
and public weals, so it is notwithstanding (as me seems) that the original
of that contagious evil proceeds of others, as of flatterers, which serve
rather to feed the affections of Princes, and content their delights, than to
make them bold to utter unto them the truth. They fill their heads with good
words, they are ready to claw before they do itch, they lull them a sleep with
the harmony of their false praises, and fade them fat with their own
faults, in such sort, that I know them at this day, whose legs and feet can
carry no more, neither the force of their bodies hable to sustain them
upright, neither their hands sufficient to write, their sight to read,
their teethe to pronounce, their jaws to eat, their ears to hear, nor their
memory unoccupied: who want no tongues at any time to require for them selves
or theirs at the princes hands, either one good benefit or other: In such
sort that these miserable creatures are so much drowned in covetousness,
that they neither know nor perceive at all, that even as their greedy desire
to heap riches grows daily in augmentation: so in like manner, their life
shortneth and slips away. Which is in deed in effect (my friends) the just
cause of the abusing of princes and weals public. And the better to make you
understand the difference of the ancient liberty of speaking to kings, and of
the covetous servitude and weakness, which reigns at this day amongst those
which assist them, I will recompt unto you one history, which I learned of no
man, neither read in the books of the ancients, but I saw the effect in my
presence: In the first year wherein they did me honour in creating me Consule,
there came to Rome a poor villain of the river of Danube, demanding justice
in the Senate against a Censor, who tormented the people with tyrannous
subsidies exactions: who was so hardy and barbarous to frame his complaint,
that neither most assured captain, nor eloquent Orator in the world knew
better how to speak. This villain had a little face, great lips, hollow eyes,
a dusky colour, his hair staring, his head uncovered, his shoes of the skin of
a porpentine, his cote of goats hair, his girdle of bulrushes, his beard
long and thick, his eyebries covering or drawn over his eyes, his stomach and
neck overgrown with hair, and a staff in his hand, who being in this attire,
when we saw him enter into the Senate, we judged him to be some beast having
the shape of a man: but after we understood ye majesty of his talk, and the
grauenesse of his sentences, we thought him to participate with god. For as his
shape was monstrous, so his talk was wonderful. That villain having paused a
little, and turning here and there his ghastly looks, said unto us: Most noble
fathers, and people most happy, I a rustical and unfortunate wretch, dwelling
in the cities which be nigh Danube, and you other Senators of Rome, which be
here assembled, God save you, and I pray to the Gods immortal, not only to
give you grace to govern well the common weal, to the which you are now
appointed, but also that they will so guide my tong at this present as I may say
that which is necessary for my country, my sorrowful destiny permitting the
same, and our angry gods not forsaking me. Our country of Germanie was
subdued by you Romains, wherein as your glory is now the greater thereby, even
so shall your infamy be a^ extreme in the world to come, for the cruelties and
tirannies wherewith you have plagued us. And if you see not what you know
(neither would know it before this hour) that when we unhappy wretches were
brought before the chariots of your triumph, and cried Viue Rome, besides an
other part of poor and miserable captives, shedding drops of blood in their
hearts, crying to the Gods, Justice, Justice, Romains Romains, your
covetousness is so great to ravine and take away the goods of your
neighbours, and your pride so unmeasurable in commanding the lands of
strangers, that neither the seas with their deapths, nor the land with her
largeness be able to contain the same: but be ye assured, that like as you
without reason, cast out others from their houses, lands and possessions, and
some do sell them: Even with the same reason in the end shall you be chased from
Rome Italy: for it is a law infallible, yt a man which takes by force ye
goods of an other, shall lose by right that which is his own: and besides, all
that the wicked have heaped together by their tyranny in many days, the just
gods shall take it away in one day: and contrariwise, all that the good lose
in diverse years, the gods will restore to them in one hour. Wherefore if you
think to enrich your children by evil gotten goods, and leave the same to
their use, you are much deceived. For the Ancient proverb hath been always
true, that by the unjust dealing and gain of fathers, doth come afterward
just to loss their children. Heap then what ye can heap, and let every man
obey your commandments, and know for a certain, that where you think to
make them lords of strange provinces, you in the end shall find them but
slaves of your own proper riches, and thieves of the sweat and labour of other
men's travail. Notwithstanding I would demand (Romains) what action hath moved
you, being borne nigh the River of Tiber, to have desire to plant and enlarge
your borders to the river of Donnue. Have we showed any favour to your enemies?
Have we conquered your lands? Or have you found any ancient law, which
affirms that the Noble country of Germanie ought of necessity to be subject
to the proud City of Rome? Are we not your neighbours? And if there hath been
any thing amongst your selves, which hath stirred up this quarrel, truly, you are
not thereof indifferent judges: Nor think not (Romains) though you be made
Lords of Germanie, that it is by any industry of war, for you are no better
soldiers, neither more courageous, hardy, or valiant than we: but as we have
offended our gods, so have they ordained in their secrete judgements, you to be
scourges unto us for our disordered livings. And seeing then we be ouercomed,
not in respect we be cowards, fearful or weak persons, but only for our
wickedness, that we trusted not in our Gods, what hope may you have you
Romains, being as we are vicious, and having as you have the Gods angry with
you? And if I be not beguiled, we have endured sufficient misery, for the
apeasing of ye gods: but your cruelties be so great and terrible, that the
lives of you and your children, can not suffice to make recompense for your
offences. Suffices it not (Romains) to take from us our ancient liberty, to
load us with insupportable impositions subsedies, heaping upon us from time to
time all kind of miseries, but you must also send unto us judges that be so
bestial and ignorant, that I swear unto you by the Gods immortal, that they
neither know, nor can declare your laws unto us, and much less they
understand ores: And that which worse is, they take all presented unto them in
public, and refuse nothing given in secrete, and under colour they be Romains,
they fear not to rob all the land. What means this (Romains) shall your
pride in commanding have never end? nor your covetousness he withdrawn from
your neighbour? If we be disobedient, and our services not content you, command
to take away our lives: for to be plain with you, cruelty to cut our throats
can not so much offend us, as your tyrannies do continually grieve us. If you
do it in respect of our children, tie them on your backs, use them as your
slaves: and when you have so done, they can carry no more than they can cary:
but of commandments and tributes you have given us more than we be able to
sustain or suffer. Wherefore know ye (Romains) to what extremity your
tyranny and cruelty hath brought us, that all those of our miserable realm,
have sworn together, never to inhabit with their wives, and to kill their
children before they suffer them to fall into the hands of so cruel and
ungodly tyrants as you be: for we rather desire that they may enjoy liberty,
tha that they should live in thraldom bondage: besides, as desperate, we have
determined to endure as yet ye furious motions assaults of the flesh, by
sequestryng our selves fro our wives, to ye end they may become barren:
thinking it much better for us to continue so.xx. or.xxx. years, than to
leave our children perpetual slaves, for if they should suffer that which
their poor fathers have endured, it were far more better and profitabler,
they were not borne, than living to prove so many wickedness and torments.
Wherefore will you understand (Romains) how your officers govern here? If the
poor come to demand of them ^ustice, having no money ^o give, nor wine to
present, neither oil to promise, nor Silk to offer, neither favour to aid
them, nor revenue to relieve them, yet they find the means to make them
consume that little they have, nourishing them by (...) vain hope or other to
obtain their matters and thus being once brought in, they cause them to
consume the best part of their life by dilatory delay^ and afterwarde^
altogether become ruinous and overthrown: the most^ part of them assuring his
cause to be right, and at last pronounce against him a contrary sentence, in
such sort that the poor miserable man, who comes to complain of one,
returns again into his country, crying out of many, not only cursing his
perverse and unhappy Fortune, but also exclamyng against the pitiful add just
gods. I have not yet made an end (Romaines) but before I proceed further, I
will recompt unto you my life, and make you to understand and know what be
the delights of those in my country: I gather in the Summer Acornes, and
sometimes fish, as well for necessity, as to pass the time, in so much that
I spend the miserable course of my life alone in the fields or mountains,
and if you desire to understand the cause, hearken, and I will tel you. I have
seen such tiranies amongst your Censours, such willing robberies spoils made
of the poor miserable people, so great discentions in our realm: so many
hurts and miseries in our common weal, that I am determined (unfortunate as I
am) to abandon mine own house and wife to the end I may not see with mine
eyes such lamentable things, loving far better to wander alone in the fields,
than every hour to understand and hear the sorrowful complaints, sighs and
bloody tears of my unhappy neighbours: for being thus bestowed in the fields,
the cruel beasts will not offend me, if I offer to them no wrong: but the
wicked men in my public weal, though I serve them, will annoy and torment
me. Cruel Romains, Romaines, do you not understand the things I have spoken of
before, saying that only in bringing them to memory, mine eyes be blind, my
tongue foltereth, my members quiuereth, my heart pants, my entrails break,
my flesh consumes? yet is it a more grief unto me to see them in my country
with mine eyes, to hear them with mine ears, to touche them with my fyngers,
and to understand them by proof. Behold (Romains) the iniquity of our
Judges, together with the misery and desolation of our poor Realm and
country: the one of these two things ought to be done, either to chastise me
if I lye, or to put your officers from their offices if I have spoken the
truth: and if my tong have offended, having spit out the poison of my heart,
I am ready in this place to loase my head, desiring rather to win honour by
offering my self to die, than you should gain the same otherways in taking
away my life. Wherewith the rustical person ended his matter, and incontinent
the emperor Marcus Aurelius cried out, and said: Howe seems it unto you my
friends? What kernel in the nut, what gold in the mine, what seed in the
straw, what rose in the thorns, what marie in the bones, what reasons so
high, what words so well framed, what sentences so aptly applied, what
allegations more like a truth, and what covert so well discovered? I swear
unto you (saith Marcus Aurelius) that his discourse brought such amass to us
all, that there was never a man so hardy to answer one only word, which
made us to determine the next day to provide new judges for the province of
Danube, and to do punishment on those which had so corrupted their common
wealth: comaunding for end, that he give us his oration in writing, to the end
it might be recorded in the book of good sayings of strangers, which were in
the Senate: and the Rustic was enfranchised, and made rich of the Common
treasure. Behold Christians, what holiness, what oracles under the bark of
the words of an Ethnike. But have we at this day of such rustikes for to
reform our Christian public weal, and to discover the deceits, subtilties,
frauds and iniquities of the mercenary judges which be found in these
provinces? For who would describe plainly ye tromperie, sdeceites, enimities
and dangerous end of processes, there should be no one man hable to write
the same with black ink, but rather with lively and pure blood, because that
if every man which follows the law, suffered as much for the christian faith,
as he endures in the pursuit of his process, there should be as many
martires in courts, Chaunceries, palaices, and Justices of princesses, as
there hath ben at Rome, in the time of the persecutions of the ancient
emperors: in such sort that to search or begin processes at this day, is no
other thing than to give sorrow to his heart, to his eyes occasion to weep, to
his feet and legs to run, his tong to complain, his hands to be always in his
purse, to request desire his friends, his men to run, and to al the rest of
his body pain and travail: besides, he that knows not what is ye pursuit of
a process, let him learn and understand that the effect and conditions of it
include no other thing, than of a rich man to become poor, from joy to fall to
melancholy sorrow, of a free man to become servile and bond, in place of
courage, to be infected with cowardice, in stead of liberal bounty, to use
ambitious covetousness, of one beloved indifferently, to be hated generally,
and from an honest fear to fall into a miserable despair. In such sort that
as we read that the Egyptians were sometime scourged and afflicted with ten
plagues at Gods hand: so we may say by good right, that the miserable suitors
and solicitoures of the law, do partycipate dayely with ten thousands,
whereof there is no difference as touching their torments, saving yt the
Egiptians plague, was moved (through their own occasion) by the providence of
GOD, and this of the Pleaders, is incensed by the malice of men: besides, if
the Egiptians were afflicted by the biting of beasts, rivers running of blood,
their lands swarming with Grassehoppers, flies and gnatts, and their people
annoyed with Leprosy, Botches, and other loathsome diseases, our poor pleaders
are persecuted in attending the Presidents, paying the Notaryes, bribing the
Solicitoures, and anointing their clarks in the hand with double fee, to use
duty and reverence to the judge, to clap and kneel to the door keepers, and
lastly pawn his land and credit to borrow money to discharge it. All which,
beside the toil and travail of their bodies, are incident to the poor
pleader, without yt he makes any reckening upon what points he must form his
accusation, what delays are awarded to his cause, how he must tender his
demand of the one side, and challege his exceptions on the other, make
inquisition, examine witnesses, endure reproaches, and make perfect his process,
and after that he must take a copy of it, record it, abreuiate it, and lastly
bring it to the opinion of the judge, from whose sentence (for diverse respects)
he may appeal and remove his process, bring it to a higher Court, with such
infinite toil disquiet of mind, that who cosiders of them according to their
value and merit in deed, ought rather to be contented to lose one part of
his goods, than to get or buy any other at so dear a price, which is the
cause in deed, why this learned bishop of M^nodemo, Anthonie de Guauara, writ
in a certain book of his, that the pleaders were the only true Saints and
Martirs of the world, seeing that of the.vij. mortal sins they are not to be
accused but of.iij. only, because touching ye other iiij. although they wold
commit them, yet had they neither the mean ^or leisure. For how is it possible
yt they should be proud, seeing that they go continually with their hats in
their hands, and sometimes with great humility solicit the judge, reserve a
solemn reverence to a pelting procurer, lastly perform a fat payment to a
scribbling Notary. And how can they be touched with the sin of covetousness,
seeing their purses be never shut, nor their hands come empty out of them,
but making Idols both of master advocate and his wife, do never cease
offering unto the, till they have left their purse without a living? And
touching the sin of sloth idleness, they are void of infection that way,
seeing that most commonly in place to pass the night in sleep and natural
rest, they are tormented with sorrows, sighs, and other passions of grief,
and the day slips away in drudging toil, trotting from one place and other,
to procure expedition to their cause: And lastly and least of all are they
infected with gluttony, seeing they must observe neither times nor hours, to
fed their stomach, or procure them an appetite, most commonly for expedition
sake they eat standing with great gross morsels, ill swallowed, and worse
digested, and all to be ready at the palace gate to salute his councellor,
pull his advocate by the sleeve, make a sign to his clarke to remember his
cause: wherewith he concludes lastly, that a process is so daugerous and
venomous a Serpent, that who would wish any evil or heavy fortune to his
enemy, let him not desire to see him poor or miserable, hated of others,
banished his Country, afflicted with diseases, nor threatened with present
death. But let him pray to God, to give him some crooked or intricate process:
for in al the world can not be found a more cruel revenge for a man enemy,
than to see him plunged in a troublesome cause in the law.

A wonderful History of a monstrous child, which was borne the same day that
the Geneuois and Veniciens were reconciled. CHAP. xxxix.
ALthough that nature (as Galen witnesses in his.xiiij. book de vtilitate
partiu) had an earnest desire that her work should have been immortal, if it
might have been performed, but for yt it was not lawful both by the corruptible
matter of the elements sprite of the air, she made therefore a forge or help
supuly for ye immortality: for she found out a woderful mean, yt in place of ye
creature yt should die, there should be a supply of an other, and therefore nature
hath given to all creatures conueniet instruments as well to conceive, as
engender. But it is so that these instruments so ordained by nature, although
yt she had a care to make them perfect, yet there is found in them both vice
and default, as is afterwards showed by the form of this creature: wherein
Hippocrates witnesses in his book De genitura, where he shows by the
similitude of trees, how these children issue from the belly of their mother
mostrous and deformed, saying thus: that of force those bodies which cannot
move by reason of the straightness of the place, must become the rather
misshapen deformed: like as trees before they issue out of the earth, if they
have not liberty and scope to spring, but be with holden by some let or
hinderance, grow crooked, great in one part, and small in an other: Even so it
is of the child, if in the belly of the mother the parties where he is
nourished, be more straight one than the other: and that vice (saith he)
comes of the narownesse of the place to straight in the womb. Whereupon
arguing a little before of the same matter, he shows other reasons, by the
which children be made monstrous and deformed, as by the natural diseases of the
parents: for if the four kinds of humours, whereof the seed is made, be not
wholly contributorie to ye secrete parts, there shall be then some party
wanting. Besides this, he adds further other reasons touching monstrous
births, as when the mother receives some blow or hurt, or that the child
fortunes to be sick in the belly of his mother, either that the nourishment
wherewith he ought to be relieved, happen to slip out of the womb: al which
things be sufficient causes to make them hideous, wating or deformed. And if we
would consider with judgment, these reasons of Hippocrates, treating upon the
generation of monsters, we should without all dout find, that this whereof
thou see the portraict, is engendered so misshapen by one of these causes which
he showed: that is to say, by the narownesse of the place, wherein nature
willing to create two, found the womb to straight, which is ye cause that she
is found to want, in such sort that the womb is congealed and gathered in
one, whereupon grows this form and superfluity of members, in this little
male moster, whom thou see here figured, having four arms, four legs, and
but one head, with all the rest of his body well proportioned: who was
engendered in Italie, the same day that the Venetians and Geneuois (after the
shedding of much blood, both of the one side the other) cofirmed their peace,
and were reconciled together: and which was baptised and lived a certain time
after, as writes Iacobus Fincelius in his book de miraculis post renatum
Euangelium. And in the same year that Leopolde Duke of Austrich, vanquished of
the Swizers died. And Galea was created Uicount of Millain, after the death of
Barnabone.

A wonderful History of Covetousness, with many examples touching that
matter worthy of memory. CHAP. L.
DIogines Laerce writes that there was a Rhodian jesting one day with the
philosoper Eschines, saying to him: I swear by the immortal gods ( Eschines)
that I have great pity and compassio of thy poverty. To whom he replied
suddenly: and by the same gods do I make ye like other, that I more bewail
thee, to see thee so rich, seeing that riches once gotten, breed not only
pain, torment, care with heaviness to keep them, but also a more great
displeasure to spend them, peril to preserve them, occasion of great
inconveniences and dangers to defend them. And that which yet seems to me more
grievous and horrible, is, that where for the most part thou hide thy
riches, in the same place thou leave thy heart buried. And like as Herodotus
writes, that the inhabitants of the Isles Baleares, watch and defend with
great care, that no ma entering into their Country, bring or leave behind
them, either gold, silver, silk or precious stones: which happened so well unto
them, yt during the space of.400. years wherein there was most cruel wars not
only amongst the Romains and Carthaginois, but also the French Spaniards, never
any of the said nations were once moved to invade their lands, for that they
could not find either gold, silver, or other thing of price or value to
rob, pilfer, or take away: even so there is yet one other thing more
strange, that is, that Phalaris Agringetin, Dionyseus Siracusan, Catilmus
Roman{us}, Iugurth Numidien, being.iiij. famous tirats, never maintained their
estates realms by any virtue which they used, but only by their great gifts
presents which they bestowed on their adherets: wherefore I wold wish yt al such
as be favoured of Princes, should note well this saying, yt it is impossible for
one being in great favour to continue long therein, being overwhelmed accompanied
with the wicked vice of covetousness. Neither am I out of my matter, having
touched ye same in the Histories before, for yt in these our days, ye world is
so co^rupted therewith, as there is no other talk in our common weals of any
thing, but only of the burning rage of covetousness, which reigns in all ye
estates of ye world, namely amongst ye Ecclesiastical persos, as our high father
with his Cardinals, a thing much to be lameted, considering that they ought to be
rather distributers of the goods of the Lord, tha affectionated burning as we
see with this greedy desire of riches, yt it seems yt they would drain al the
wealth of ye world into their gulphs, in ye end bury the same with their bodies
in the grave: whereof I have written more largely in my other works, making
mention of the cardinal Angelot. But now I will return to my matter, for
since that ye pestilet venom of covetousness hath sprinkled her poison
through ye world, yt the most part of the provinces remain be so much infected
therewith, yt they by that means stick not to make marchadise of mes bodies to
obtain money: whereof Celius Rhodiginus in his iij. book of aucient lessons.lvi.
chapter is a sufficient witness, who declares yt in his time diverse wicked
persons sold the flesh of men so well seasoned, yt is seemed to be the flesh of
Pork: in which wickedness as they continued till God by his almighty power
discovered the same, by suffering them to find the finger of a man mingled
amongst their meats, which was the cause that they were taken cruelly
punished: even so this needs not seem strange, or a fable to those which
have red Galenes.xiij. book of Elements, who shows ye man flesh is so like
unto pork, having the very taste and savor of it, that those which have eaten
thereof, judged it to be the flesh of a Pork. Wherefore in the History of
Caelius Rhodiginus it is not strange, but most apparent, that covetousness
hath so blinded ma, and rages even to the very tip of iniquity, that they
cannot add any thing more thereunto. Albeit Conradus Licostenes recompteth yet
one other wonderful History of covetousness, which is nothing inferior to
this before, who writes that in the Dukedom of Wittemberge, there was a
wicked host, who presented at supper all his gests, lodged in his house, with
the flesh of a Pork, bitten of a mad dog, which was so greatly infected
with the venom of that beast, that all those which eat thereof, became not only
mad, but also pressed in such sort with the fury and rage of their evil,
that they eat and tare in pieces one an other.

A Monster brought forth at Rauenna, in the time of Pope Iule the sec^nde, and
king Lewes the.xij. CHAP. xlj.
REader, this monster which thou see here depainted, is so brutal and far
differing from human kind, that I fear I shall not be believed in that I shall
write there of hereafter: notwithstanding, if thou wilt but confer this with
those having faces like Dogs and Apes, whereof I have written in the Histories
before, thou shalt then find the other far more monstrous. Iaques Ruell in
his books of the conception and generation of me, from whence I have this
figure. Conradus Licostenes in his treaty of wonders, Iohanes Multiuallis,
Gasparus Hedio affirm write, yt in the year 1512. at what time pope Iule ye
second, stirde up caused so many bloody tragedies in Italy, that he had made
war with king Lewis, even at the journey of Rauenna, this monster was
engendered borne at Rauenna aforesaid, (a city most ancient in Italy) having
one horne in his head, two wings, and one foot, like to the foot of a ramping
bird, with an eye in the knee, it was double in kind, participating both of the
man woman, having in ye stomach yt figure of a Greek Y, ye form of a cross, no
arms. And like as this moster was brought into ye world in ye time yt all
Italy was inflamed molested with wars, not without bringing great terror to
the people, in such sort yt al the provinces of Italy Greece came to see behold
this miserable creature: even so they entered into diverse judgements thereof,
whereupon amongst the rest, there was found sundry learned and holy men, which
began not only to decipher the misery of this infant, but also ye monstrous
shape thereof in this sort, saying, yt by the horne was signified pride
ambition, by the wings lightness inconstancy: by default of the arms, want
of good works: by the ramping foot, ravishment, usury, and covetousness: by
the eye in ye knee, too much love or affection to worldly things: by both the
kinds, the sins of the Sodomites. All which vices and sins reigned at
that time in Italy, which was the cause they were so afflicted with wars: but
by this figure Y, the cross, they were two signs of salvation, for Ypsilon
signifies virtue: the Cross shows that al those which will return to Iesus
Christ, and take up his cross, shall not only find a true remedy against
sin, but a perfect way to health and salvation, and a special mean to
mitigate thereby the ire of the Lord, who is inflamed and ready to scourge and
punish them for their wickedness and abominable sins.

THere is found by sufficient authority in writing, that in the year.1496.
was taken up out of the river of Tyber, a monster, having the tronke of the
body of a ma, the head of an Ass, one hand and arm like to a man, and the
other of the fashion of an Elephants foot: he had also (according to the
portraict you see) one of his feet like the foot of an Eagle, and the other
like the hoof of an Ox, his belly like a woman with two duggs and the rest of
his body with skales: he had also growing out behind him, a head old and
hairy, out of the which came an other head of the form of a Dragon.

WE read also, that in the year.1548. was borne a child in Almayne, which
had his head divided from his body, he had one leg only, with a crevice or
chink where his mouth should be, and had no arms at all: The same happening
(as we may easily presume) by a want or default in the seed, as well in the
quality, as in the quantity of the same.

IN the year.1552. was borne in England a child, which had two bodies, two
heads and four hands, and yet had but one belly, and one navel: On one side
of the body came two perfect legs, and on the other, but one, the same having
one foot made like two, tied the one against the other with ten toes.

THere was borne in the year 1554. a monster of this proportion, having a
great mass or lump of flesh in place of a head, and where one of his ears
should be, came out an arm and a hand, he had upon his face writhen hairs
like to the Moostachoes of a cat, the other arm appeared out of one side: he
had no form of body nor breast, saving a line al along, the ridge of his
back: there could not be discerned any figure or likeness of either sex, nor
joints in his arms or legs: the ends of his hands and feet were soft and
somewhat hanging, as appears by his portraict.

AMongst the rest we must not forget two monsters which came forth in the
year.1555. the one in Germany and the other in Sauoy, the first was a horse,
who (according to his portraict had all his skin chequered and divided into
great panes, after the order of the Dutchemens hose, his neck and body
covered with a collar of the same: This is affirmed by Iohn Foucet in his book
which he hath made of the marvels of our time.

THe other Monster of the said year.1555. had two faces, in sort as the
Poets feigned the God ^anus had. He had like two great pocketts hanging
upon his back, wherein were his bowels: He was Vtriusque generis, and that
of the one side a male, and the other a female. Also he was so huge above
order, that it was impossible to draw him whole from the belly of his mother.
It is most likely that this imperfection happened by too great a quantity of
matter sufficient to form two children, which might also have happened of a
right shape, if by some inconvenience the substance had not ben mingled, so
that that which should have served for two, made but one creature.

THe monster that was brought forth in Germanie.1556. (...) so wonderful as
this touching the shape of his body, which makes it not easy to judge
whether there were default of nature in his generation: It was (as you may see
by the portraicte) a Calfe of perfect form in every respect, saving that he
had no legs before: and yet such was his wonderful lightness, that having
but two legs behind, he exceeded all other beasts of that kind in
swiftness. The same arguing that nature had considered and supplied his other
wants with a marvelous agility of his two legs. I remember I have scene
heretofore a moster of the same shape, albeit formed by some artificial
slight, it was a yonge Goat, whose forelegges being broken, was brought by
custom and necessity to marche upon his hinder legs, whereby the simple sort
was more than half persuaded that it was a Satire.

THere was borne in the same year.1556. at Basle, a child sufficiently formed
of his body, saving the head, which was so monstrous, that it seemed rather
the head of a dog or a Cat, than a creature human: Besides the which,
that year was so fertile of prodigious accidents, that according to the
witnette of such as recorded them, there happened above fifty monsters, as
fires in the air, horrible tempests, burning of towns by fire from Heaven,
armed men appearing in the air; fearful Cometes, inundations of waters,
threatening voices from heaven, skirmishes in the air, as well with men as
beasts, with a monstrous show of many Suns at one time.

THis as you see (resembling most a Calfe) hath the head of a man, bearing a
beard, with a breast like to a man, and two dugs well formed.

THe year wherein mine author writ this book, seemed no less plentiful of
monsters corporal, than wonders spiritual: for it is affirmed that the.xxvj.
of January, there appeared about.ix. of the clock three Suns upon the town
of Caffa, a City situated between the Pont Euxin, and the Sea Zabach^,
otherwise called Pailus Mertis, in the place which the ancients cal Taurica
Chersonessus. these iij. suns remained by the space of.iij. hours: had above
them a white bow, an other underneath the coloured red, green, yelow and
Azure, and about noone, the two uttermost of either side vanished and went out
of sight, the one towards the East, the other towards the West.

IN the same year.1567. and.28. of the same month, there appeared in the
Element, over the same place at.x. of the clock in the night a shining Cross,
with a star in the top, and a Moon at the lower end, retiring immediately
after it began to be day, without being seen any more at ye time: but touching
these sights and visions in the air with their causes, which move in dede by
natural means as we behold the figure of our selves in a glass, or the
Rainbow in the Element, I shall not need to use large description of them
here, because they are avouched by the Astronomers, Philosophers and others of
like profession: beside for mine own self I forbear to wade far therein,
until a time cause more convenient for such purpose.

THe monsters which are this year come to knowledge be two, the one was in
Prouence at Arles, and wandered besides thorough France. It was a child rough or
hairy on all the body, having the navel in the place where the nose should
stand, and the eyes where naturally should stad the mouth: between the which
was a certain opening: his ears stood on either side the chin, and his
mouth at the end of the same.

THe other monster of this year.1567. was seen in Flauders between Anwarpe
and Macline, in a village called Vbalen It was a child which had.ij. heads
and.iiij. arms, seeming.ij. maids joined together, yet had but.ij. legs.

Of a wonderful Dance.
LIke as I am greatly in dout whether so infer in the number of wonderful
Histories that which we now write, not for the matter, but that it is short,
and yet worthy of no less memory than admiration: Even so, for that the
History may seem of less credit and truth, the same being written in that
time, wherein men would scarcely suffer it to be imprinted or taken as a witness
of antiquity, albeit it were aided and assisted by a truth or other probable
arguments to the like effect, having withal sufficient colour to make men
believe that they speak to be such as they recite: notwithstanding for that we
be able to justify the truth of this present History by one who as be
assures to have seen it, so hath he taken pain to write thereof him self,
which is Othopertus of Saxonie, and after him Vincentius wytnesseth the same in
his xxvj. book and.x. chap. and besides Antoni. in his fourth chap. his.xvj.
titles and second tome of his works, where as I need not fear to recite it
as it is, or to aggrauate the opinion or belief of any further than a truth:
So nevertheless I have to prefer and make mention of one History very
strange, and not heard of, yet albeit true. Whereof Othopertus writes, that
the year.1012. which was in the tenth year of the emperor Henry the second,
in a certain borough or town of Saxonie, where he himself, accompanied
with.xvij. other of his friends, which by computation were.xviij. he accounted,
did see.xv. men and iij. women dancing of a round in a Churchyard, and
singing of Wanton songs, not meet for the solace of honest Christians. And
albeit there passed by at that instant a Priest, who cursed them in such sort,
that they danced and song there the space of a whole year. Yet that which was
most marvelous, is, that as it rained not (said he) upon them, neither were
they hot or desirous of meat or drink, nor left from doing that exercise
or labour, so their garments and shoes in all their dancing were not worn or
consumed: albeit in the end they sonke into the earth, first to the knees, and
lastely to their middles. The year expired, and their dance ended, and they
withal come to a perfect understanding in what sporte they had spent the
year paste, one of the women and two others of that company dye^ suddenly,
and all the rest slept continually three days and thr^ nyghtes: Whereupon
some of them immediately upon their waking, dyed, the others deferred to the
end to taste more their folly, remained in a continual trembling, thorough
all the parts of their bodies, during the term and space of their miserable
and unfortunate lives.

FINIS.

