A Pronostication for diverse years, right vtyle and profytable to al sorts of
people, wherein is declared what persons hath most and least dominacions over
the stars and elements, whereby the judgements of the Astrologiens be
scarsely true, geuynge together great consolation to those who much fear the
constellations. Also of the fourth and last Monarchy, the which Charles
the.v. right victorious Emperor of the Romaynes, and Edwarde the.vi. most
noble Emperor of great Bryttayne, by the grace of God, governs,
comprehendynge also brieflye some words of the last age of the world, gathered
together by Master Arnold Bogarde doctor in medicine, resident in Bruxels And
translated into English out of French by Iohn Coke, clarcke of the
Recognysances, or vulgerly called clark of the Statutes.

The year of our Lord God.

M. D. LIII.

Iohn Cooke to the Reader.
IN semblable manner, as people being free of infirmities, customably are not
desirous of Physic, so those as live prosperously seek scarcely remedies in
tribulation. But if it be discretion among worldly people, in peace time to be
in a redines for the battle, and to exercise armours before the danger
approach, it is no less necessary for all Christians, being borne to have no
peace, but a daily conflycte while they abi^ in this flesh, to prevent in
prosperity, ^ suffer afflictions, and to put in a redines w^pon against
adversity, considering we be subject to adversity, troubles, persecutions,
miseries, in firmities, and death. And albeit in holy scripture haboundaunce is
left to us of such furniture, yet our sloth and negligence is such, that we
rest peaceably, as if we were in assurance, we take no sorrow, as though we
were clear without danger, and not minded to search and provide municions
of war for us defensible, which causes us in time of affliction or death
(suddenly approchynge) for the more part to be found slomberynge, naked, and
out of a redines, thus without resistance constrained shamefully to yield our
selves unto despair. Against the which storms, let us fortify our selves
with holy scripture, and walk in the commandments of God, that by the grace
of his holy spirit, we may he conforted in such wise in our couraiges that we
may fear no dangers, perylles, nor yet death. Although the end of the world
approach at hand, as by this most necessary and godly pronostication, set
forth by the worshypful clark master Arnolde Bogarde, doctor of Physic
resident in Bruxelles may appear, which pronostication being in Latin,
French, Dutche was delivered unto me by a loving friend of mine, to be
translated out of French into English, which I have gladly done. Desyringe
the gentle reader to accept my good will. And in the translation, though I
have not curiously followed the letter, I have very little or nothing varied
from the mind of the author.

Fare you well. (?)
Lunge time amiable reader. I thought howe I might not only heal the common
people (half blid) but also those which have knowledge, to take away their
errors, desiring that it may profit al men, pryncipally to witness, and show
my good will towarde^ the magistrates and Senate of Bruxelles, saying then that
in these present tumults, destructions of towns, robbing of villages, and
evil reports on all sides, all persons (except such as be mad) gladly
trust of better time, the which thing the common people were wont to look for
in the yearly pronostications as of ye Oracles of Apollo, whereunto divers gave
more faith, then in times past to ye sayings of the Sibelles. Nevertheless of
tentymes they varied far fro the truth, as they may know which will take
payne to rede our opinion herein the fartilitie of the year is desired by the
paysant or husband man, Divers be curious to know if the year shall be subject
to many maladies or not, and principally the physicians and Apotecaries, the
man of war enquyreth whether the confederation of the peace shall be kept or
not. Of the success of towns, and gouernemente of the same, enquyreth the
Citezyn and handycraftman. Fynally by the pronosticatours, ye fortunes and
encombraunces of Emperors and kings be looked for, but therein they speak
soberly: for by experience princes desire no evil tidings. All this is
treated diversely of many, that coldly and doubteously, wytnes the year
precedent. M. D.lij. for of the great fluddes there chaused two or three times
not without great damage of Selande Brabant, no man declared. Nevertheless it
had ben profytable to have known it, for things foresene receaueth not so
much hurt, as things not foresene. Of the wars not looked for, so
secretelye wrought by the French king against the emperor, who advertised his
majesty? Of ye tumult of ye Iarmanes who pronosticated? Of the last went
rainy whether being some what damageable, no man made brute. If in these little
things (as daily rain and tempests) men fail, then by a more stronger
reason, in things more secrete, Thastrologiens fail.

Cardanus saith how no man can pronostike of things secret, which knows not
the daily disposicions of the air. We conlesse Astronomye as tother arts to
be a gyfte of God, amongst whom Astronomye occupies not the least place, for
sondry vtilities that they have necessary to the life humayne. She disposes
the measures, ordre, nombre of days, months and years by the circuyte and
moving of the Son, and the Moan, by the which we know that the world
lasts not always, for if this good ordre of years were not known,
thentendement rauyshed from things of time past shulde fall into innumerable
errors and darckenesse. And should not await after certain years, thend of
the generation humayne, nor also of the dead returned to life shall be of God
separated, nor his holy church from other, and adorned with the rewards
perpetual. There is further in the histories daily businesses right great
vtilite, of the which he that makes no count, disprayseth the common wealth,
and likewise that which to the life of man is most excellent. In the same
Astrology we have abundantly proposed certain great and true signs,
signyfyinge many things, yet nevertheless they be not to be feared, nor
credited as gods: but to the end that by deuyne signs we be admonished to
know our selves, and from evil threteninges to keep our selves. Y et always
trusting in the goodness of god, we sleep in pleasures, and delights, which
thereby provokes his wrath towards us, yet he chastises us from our excessive
evils by some discipline, as wars, sterilitie, inuudation, sickness burninges,
taking our riches goods, and by these means, as by men of war (as saith
Theo philacte) distresses us of our puissances, to the end that recognisyng our
evils, we should not perysh, by the which chastisemente, he will correct us.
Divers by tharte of Astronomy, wold make certain advertisements, albeit that
they know not the pleasure of God. Ecclesiasticus saith: I regard all the
work of god, saying that man cannot find any reason of that which is done
under the son, and the more he trauayleth therein, the less he shall find,
and if the sage say that he knows, yet he cannot find it. And in
Ecclesiastici, search not things exceeding thy intendement, but to that which
God hath commanded the, upon that only think always, for the inquisitour of
the majesty shall be thrust down from glory. These things shall be more clear,
when we have declared what men be least governed by the constellations, as
first Emperors and all kings be not subjects to ye stars. Of the emperor of
Thassuri^ns, Iulius Firmicus in the second book, the.xxxiii. cha. saith that
some Mathematicien can not say truth, nor discern of the fortune of Emperors.
Themperours saith he be not subject to the course of the stars, for they be
only of whom ye stars has no manner of puissance, for to descerne their
fortunes, for so much as they be lords of al the world, their fatal fortunes
are governed by the only judgement of God. Hitherto be the words of
Firmicus. Of the kings the holy scripture testifies, how their harts ben
governed of the hand of god And in Prouer, xxv. the heaven is the height, and
the earth is the lowe part, but the hart of a king is inscrutable. All things
then, only of kings be made to us, (yet though to our judgement they seem
evil) it is necessary that they be good, for god indifferently using kings
as instruments, for ye most part gives them to us for our sins, and
enormities, for there is no evil in the city which the lord hath not given,
the which City if god keep it not, they labour in vain that kepeth it. This
is a great consolation to all Christen men, to the end that for mourmurynge
and resystynge the word of God, there come not upon us things more grievous.
This opinion confyrmeth Firmicus, howe there is no man unto this present time
hath said other things then incertayne of them perour Charles the.v. and of
other kings: but we shall declare things veritable of the majesty of this
said Emperor, when we shall make mention of the. iiij Monarchy. We may
say some thing by his revolution, but for certain respects we will not
touche it. The wise men not after this present world, (as some be, disguising
their vysages and apparel resemble wise) have do mination over the stars and
elements. Of this true wisdom is the beginning of the fear of god, the which
surmounts in the hearts of them that truly knows him. The true knowledge
is to embrase him, as being only ye fountain of truth, wisdom, bounty,
justice, judgment, mercy, pity, puissance, and health, and that we should do
reverence to his fatherly bounty, by a love the which the Son ought to have
towards his father, for to the lovers of the lord all things turns to
goodness. This knowledge thus aduaunsed enstructeth us in a true fear, and
reverence, that he makes us believe (and truth it is) howe all goodness comes
from him.

They know alsoo (as we have said before) howe of God comes peace, war,
life, death, lyghte and darckenes, peste, famine, haboundaunce, health, and
divers innumerable other thin ges, whereby he shows unto us his will to our
wealth, or the seuerytye of his just judgements with vengeannce. Those be they
the which nothing so difficile or be so maleheureux, that depart from the
charity of Iesu Christ. Those I say, have domination over thelementes, and
have armures, that is to say the buckler of faith. The contrary, the debility
of faith makes the courage right feeble in times of afflyction, without
remembering God. Thempyres and dominations of kings be thereby augmented and
demynyshed, he molifyeth our dolor, yfwe believe S. Paule, the which
admonishes us of the perylles that shall come upon us at the last days, not
only as to the body, but also to the spirit, to the end that we shall learn
to defend our selves, and in so great calamytye, all things to ask of the
only GOD, aid and consolation, and to obtain the same let us not doubt.

In this last age of the world we be fallen into such time that one brother
arises against tother, one country against an other so that the gest
shall not be sure of his host. Every man studies for his particular wealth,
one will take no payne for his brother, yet always after the sentence of Saint
Augustyne, he lives well and holylye, which the least that he may, lives
for him self. Let us not think that the first parts be premysed to the
love of him self, and the second to the charity of his neighbour. Saint Paule
teaches us by thaffinitie composition connexion, proportion, and beaultie of
our members that which one member owes to tother, here by the offices
fraternelles be given to us to know that we have a father in heaven, to whom
all that we think to be secrete, is known. But alas our confidence is
returned from us, the which is fixed in our rychesse, but the knowledge thereof
profits little to the which daily attend affliction, as all Christen men do,
which have no war with heaven, but with the world, the Devil, and the
flesh, what more, all their life is but war. Likewise also the saige falls
not here, for by divers sciences, as Philosophie, Theology, the sciences of
the laws, Physic, Astrology. c. we be elevated and come to the wisdom of
God, the which is profoundly reueyled in these arts and sciences, to the end
that we may be reduced to his knowledge For the heavens manyfeste the glory of
God, and the works of his hand shows the firmament. Who shall be he that
regarding man (the which of the philosophers is called ye little world) shall not
be rauyshed in great admiration of his maker and creator. If you look on
high, you shall see the divers mouinges of the stars and elements, likewise
their situations, distance, property, and yet so many lamps burning, two
great lights, as in the day the Son, in the night the Moon, the which
shynynge and illuminynge over all the world, be created for the vsaige of man,
and to manifest the glory of God. These be creatures and instruments whereby
God enspireth his natural puyssance according to his will, and converts to
accions such as he hath predestinate. We have of no creature more greater and
marvelous virtue then o^ the son, the which ^ ^uers for that cause hath been
honoured for a god, by reason whereof the Lord (to the end that all praise
redound to his glory) hath made the lyghte, and has filled thearth with all
kinds of herbs, before the creation of the Son. Man then (as saith
Aristotle) makes not the son ye principal and necessary cause of things
that hath ben created before that, but it is an instrument wherewith God uses
his pleasure. For without that he might work by him self, this consideration
delivers us of a superstitious fear, and is made of the creatures, ye which
we think is contrary unto us, as amongeste the plants Mars and Saturne, the
contrary retires us from an evil admiration of things semynge to us
wholesome and salutaire, and makes us turn to the Auctour of the same, which
is only God, this wytnesseth Ieremy which saith, fear not the stars and
signs of heaven as in time past the wicked Ethnyckes and Paynims did. The
prophet condempneth not here all fear, but when thynfydeles transported the
government of the world, to the Stars and Elements, they thought howe
their felicity or misery was in the judgement of them, and not in the will
of God. If so be that the stars elements threatens any thing (as apt to
vices) evil inclinations, and other like things, our manners ought to be
governed with a dylygent and mean temperance, to the end that the evil
inclinations be not vanquysshers.

In aduersites we must cloth our selves with force and magnanimity. In things
prosperous and equal the stars gives us inclination to some virtue or good
manners, enforce our selves to be aided by study and knowledge keeping us not
to pass a mean in our courage, calling al way aide of God to be governed by
him. Let us not glorifye in our gifts, as the strong man was wont to do in
his force, the rich man in his riches (yet in vain) but let our reioysynge be
to understand and know that it is the Lord that doth mercy, judgement,
justice in thearth, the which in great liberty by his wisdom makes that
which he purposed to make from ye beginning of the world, and by his
incomprehensible and mighty puissance puts in execution that which he
predestined to make. It follows then, that by his prouydence not only the
heave, thearth, or creatures be governed (as above is said) but also the
wills and councels of men, ben governed to come to the end to have known him
before. To fortune or good adventure we ought not to attribute any thing, as
the paynims do. If good success be blessing of God, c^lamitie and adversity be
contrary, these words be by for tune, or at adventure, and agree to the
pouidence of God: but for so muce that by thordre of reason, thnde and
necessity of things wiche commonly comes vpons, be hidden in the council o
God, and by humayne opinion incomprehensible, men calle^ them fortunes,
albeit that they p^ede from ye will of god. Like reason is to be give of things
to come, this is confirmed by the holy Scripture, whereof all those that
travail and turment them selves in the things abouesayde, may take a
remedy. Dauid saith in ye.liiij. psal. Caste your solicitude upon the Lord,
and he will nourysh you. And in the first of Saint Peter the.v. Humble your
selves under the puyssant hand of god, to the end that he exalt you in the time
of visitation, casting all solicitude in him, for he sorrows for you. And
Saint Mathewe in the. vii, Chapiter, He sorrows for us as the mother doth her
child. Hereby it is evident howe much and howe great is the solicitude and
benevolence of God towards us. The Astrologiens make obiectio, esteminge howe
the stars and elements be ordained to infallible mouementes, as appearance,
or rising and going down of the same elements, conjunction of lumyres and
planetes, appositions, and other aspects, Eclipses, by the cognysion,
congression, consentment, discordant, and regression of them, men may predicte
diverse accidents coming to the world, as wars, mortalities, famines,
contagious sickenesses, peace, haboundaunce of goods, mutacions of realms,
and sectes, death of Princes, tumults of people, perturbations of public
things, inundacions, earthquakes and like things, the which by the influence
celestial virtue of the Elements, and puyssance of the stars we se follow
and fall on us.

These things (as we confess) be made, and depend by the stable and
constant mouynge of heaven, and the coning Astrologien in predestinatynge
these things is only God. Let us believe, and we must confess that God may by
his mercy and pity turn these right horrible thretenynges of the stars,
and present evils, and of his bounty, and by prayers of good people, change
turn his sentence from us. We rede that this chaused to the Niniuites, to
whom was declared by Ionas the prophet, howe within forty days they should
peryshe. Likewise the furnace of Babylon burning above the accustomed fashion,
by the commandment of king Nabuchodonosor, could not burn the children
being put therein. The death of Ezechie, pronounsed by the mouth of Iesaie,
was by compassion diuyne prolonged because of his lamentation and prayers* God
is not now abriged, what thing should let, but that the evils which the
stars threatens may be changed by this remedy? We have seen in years
paste right cruel wars shortly appaysed, against the opinion of divers.
Now we must pray God to give us the same success and fortunes in those
things that in this troubelous time they may be profytable to his honour, and
to the increase of his church* Finallye in things that be more worthy then the
heaven, thaccion of the stars is of no puissace, as the soul reasonable
enspired of God, and the which work by his will is more noble then all other
creatures, for she bears with her the image of God, and to the vtilitye of
the same, by the right haboundaunte larges of God, the other creatures be
given to us, this confyrmeth Ptolomee in Centiloque, ye.viij. chapiter, the
soul (saith he) of the wise man aydeth the celestial virtue, as the good
paisaunt or husbandman laboring and culturynge ye earth, aydeth nature. If
then the soul be cause, aiding to things celestial, she seems to be free,
saying that she is more noble then the heaven. Also the virtue of the stars
be much aided by the complexions of the people, the which be causes of
maladies, for these complexions changes by the disposition of the stars,
and likewise doth thynclinations, that by tharte medicine grace of god, we
easly vanquysh, which to the Lucianistes, Atheistes and Epicuriens* is
impossible, who makes a confusion of the soul, and of the complexion of the
body, herin they be great imitatours of Galien, whereof is the religion to
eat, dryncke, play, and after this life there is no joy, but let us relynquysh
these foals which have no god. And saying the benefytes of God be so great, let
us demand his succours and aide, he will give it unto us oftentimes, as he
showed to Moses in the read sea, and to Iosue likewyse, he retarded the son
manifestly, geuyng aid against thumayne esperace. This honour perteineth ought
to be referred only to god to thend that we shulde believe yt god may will succour
aide us, without lokig for it. Also thastrologie must regard ye causes universal,
as wars, cotagious maladies, ye which have more stregthehe ye causes
particulars, as teaches Ptolomee in the first Centiloque, hereby it is evident
howe divers men be subjects to the constellations, as those be the which by
study education, and institution couenable, may not surmount, nor change
their affections and manners, And to those hereunto contrary, as those the
which by study, education, disciplyne, institution, science, or otherwise
may surmount and vanquyshe their affections, it is notarye that to them the
stars bears little or no damnaige. Nevertheless we will not sustain with the
Stoiciens, that men be without affections, for every manne follows the nature
of his seed: but those which be more wise, may by industry, art, and manner of
meates change their complexions, for the natures and entendementes of some
changes more easily then those of other: wherefore, this celestial word
serves, know thy self.

This studious providence is greatly necessary to our life, the most part
of this philosophy is comprehended in decent and couenable education, the
which (as wytnesseth Quintilien) must begin in youth, by this reason, it
makes that the most noble, and those which eats best meat, be more
ingenious then the other. The air is as well right couenable to the prudence
and industry of man, as the blood, wytnesse Hyppocrates in the book of thayre
and waters. c. To make couenable and decente education or nouryshment, we must
consulte with the Physician, which knows a good part of Astronomye, being a
part of Physic, for that is as much couenable to a Phisicion, as necessary,
as saith Hyppocrates in his said book of thayre and waters. c. For thereby
the varyacions of time and mutacions of the stomach is known. And after there
must be considered the rysynge and going down of the Elements, pryncypally
of the Canycle, after Arctures, and thoccident of Pleiades or Porceletes, for
the diseases in these days commonly make their Iugementes and shewynges, the
other makes the personnes to dye, and other change into other kinds of
maladies, this saith Hyppocrates. These rysynges and occidentes of the
Elements, we have put in our Almanacs, wherewithal every man that will may
aid himself: these things be almoost forgotten of the phisicions, which
nevertheless will be of great estimation, and not only be forgetful but
dyspraysers, which is worse. I fear that the ignorance of diverse is cause of
envy which is always hurtful to al good arts: but of these things we
shall speak at an other time more amply. (?)

Of the last Monarchy, which is of the Romaynes, presently governed by the
grace of God, by Charles the.v. Emperor, right victorious.
Divers have prescribed things much variable of ye last Monarchy, and of
Charles the fyft Lord there of: but for that the most part be fables, we let
them pass, taking only that which said by Daniell the Prophet his
prophecy, the which is e true cronicle of this world, ytynge of this
Monarchye, saith as herafter follows. The first is the most noble of al
tother, being of the Chaldeens, and Assiriens, the which is represented by
the head of gold, of the stature of Nabuchodonosor. And by the Lyons having
wings of an Egle, the which amongst all other beasts is the most noble, so
is this Monarchy, whereunto is joined for the nature of the beasts cruelty
and rauyne. The second hath been of the Mediens and Persiens, likened to the
poictryne arm of silver of the stature aforesaid like unto a bear, and stood
upon the one side. Among his teethe in his mouth he had three great lunge
teeth, and it was said unto him, arise eat up much flesh. The third was like
unto a leopard, this had wings as a foul, even four upon the back, this
beast had four heads, and there was power given him, this was of the Greeks
and Alexandre the great, king of ye Macedonians, by the nature of the beast
this Monarchye is known, if it be not sufficiently known of al men, gentle
reader loke on the history of Gesnerus of four foted beasts, she hath also
ben likened to the belly and cuysses made of brass. Of ye fourth saith Daniel,
that it is the last of the Romaynes, and of ours now present. After Daniell
saw in a vision by night, and behold the fourth beast was grymme and
horrible, and marvelous strong, it had great iron teeth, it devoured and
destroyed and stamped the resydue under his feet, it was far unlike the
other beasts that were before it, for it had ten horns. c.

It is also compared to the legs of Iron in the stature of Na buchodonosor,
to the which parts of the feet, one was of iron and tother of earth. Of
these Monarchs read Iosephus, Sabelliq. Canon, Sebastian Munstre. The
history of Alexandre the great, and Daniel the Prophet in the second and.
vij Chap. of his Prophecy, other Historigraphes worthy of faith.

By this is sufficiently known the shortenes of the world. To whom our
Saviour Iesus Christ, the only Messias (so much desired) is borne, reigning
Caesar August, there is common years passed since thincarnation. M.ccccc. lij.
yet from ye hour of the Nativity, the said Romayne Empire had lunge
endured, that is to say, XLVII years, when Iulius was made Consul. It is
showed unto us further, how god toke great cure and solicitude over us, that
the mutatacions of Realms been made and predicte dyuynelye, to the end that
being admonished by good counsel, we may avoid evils, further by thinter
pretation of Daniel, it is evident that this Empire shall be divided and
departed, which the ten horns shows, diverse parts of her be separated,
as Englond, France, Denmark, Espaigne, Pole, and other, Saint Paule
testifies that before the coming of the defection of the last time they should
not come. And because the same is passed lunge time, it is likewise true that
the day of the lord approaches, that the Empire is come to ye Almains.
Cardanus referreth the great bear to the last star of the tail when she
passes (saith he) over Constantinople, she gives over thempyre. After she is
come upon France to the Galls, and last she is come to the Almaynes, to whom
she transported thempire. The tail of the bear sygnyfyeth force without
comparison, and she is yet situate upon the Almaynes, hitherto be the words of
Cardanus. The nature of this star is like and semblable to the strength of
the beast, proposed in the fourth Monarchy. The fortune of this Empire shall
not be always vnanime, but sometime habound in puisance, sometime weak and
affeabled, which is showed by the legs part Iron and part earth.

This Romayne Empire has had some magnifique and noble Emperors of great
virtue and felicity, as Arthure, Maximian, Constantyne the great,
Charlemain, and at this present Charles the.v. Hitherto in some things
victorious, other Emperors they have had with out any virtue, and in feats of
war unfortunate, and in divers batayles vanquished. By this it is evident
and clear, that the victories come of God, and that the Romayne Monarchye
shall be the last, and shall not be vanquished, destroyed, nor reversed, then
only of God, and by the Roialme of Iesus Christ. Divers have attempted to
subuerte the same, pryncypallye the Turks, the which (albeit they have
obtained certain vyctoryes against Themperoure) yet shall not this last
Monarchi be put in subjection, nor broken, as by lunge experience it hath ben
hitherto approved: but it shall abide one time in great augmentacion, and
another time with discresemente, unto such time as of the Mountain is cut a
stoone without hands, and until she have bruised the stature of
Nabuchodonosor, the which represents the Monarchye of the world, and the
face fall entierlye, and this stone become a great mountain, that is to say
the great Roylme during the world. This we have willed to put to, to the
end that all Christen people should know that the Monarchies be governed
diuynely, and that they rule over the configurations celestialles. And this
last Monarchye (the which Charles the fyfte governs at this present) shall
not be bruised nor affeabled by humayne puysaunce, although divers be of the
opinion and sentence that the Roialme of Turques shulde abate it, but by the
only stone which is Christ, it shall perysh, when he shall come to judge the
quycke and the dead, but the day and howre when he shall return to judgement,
is not known of any creature nor of thaungelles, but it is in the only will and
judgment of the heavenly father, the which clearly rehearses S. Matthew in
the.xxiiij. Chap Nevertheless it is permytted by holy scripture to enforce by
some conjectures similitudes, to attain and come to the age or year of his
coming (always the day and the hour abiding unknown) Our Lord hath invited
and drawn us for to search and observe by a couenable similitude or parable of
a fig tree, when the branch is tender, and his leaves be out, you know that
Somer is approchynge. You also likewise when you se the things above said in
the.xxiiij. cha. Lift up your heads, knowing that your redemption and the
kingdom of God is next to the gates. By these words, and by the fashion of
things, future now present, whereof also many be past, he that diligently
searches the, may easily conjecture something for us, of this which divers
auctours have little reculed of the breuite and small enduryng of this world,
we shall briefly resit. First we will set forth the words of Elie, whereby
the Iewes confound them selves, which have set fourth (as they say) howe the
world shall endure six thousand years, that is to say, two thousand
years without law, two thousand years with the law, and two thousand
years after the days of Christ. To these words it seems Saint Peter
confyrmeth in his second epistle in the third chapitre, saying that one day
to the Lord is as a M, years, and a thousand years as one day. Of the like
that follows, that as the Lord in syx days created al, and the vij. day he
reposed him self, likewise six m. years he governed this world, subject to
generations corruptions, in the. vii, M. he began repose perpetual, as the
syxt day was not in all permytted to work and travail, but that a good part
of the same day drawing towards evening was laid to the saboth, likewise
the sixte thousand shall not be holy suffered nor granted as it is written in
other passage that the Lord shall abrydge ye days for the chosen, as the six
first generations, that is to say, of Ada, Seth, Iared, Cainan, Malaleel Iared,
be trespassed or departed, and the seventh which is of Enoch, is immortal,
Likewise six thousand years shall regenerate death, in ye seventh shall have
the fortunate immortality, his vigour. Item in S. Math.xxiiij. S. Mark.xiij.
saith the Lord, of this day and hour no creature knows, nor yet thaugelles
of heaven, but my father only. And as the days of No were, likewise also
shall be the coming of the son of man, for as they were in the days before
the deluge, eating, drynckynge maryinge and geuynge in marriage, unto the day
that No entered in the arcke, they knew nothing, nor unto the time yt the
deluge came toke them away all, Likewise shall be the coming of the son of
man. By these words it seems Iesus Christ to have taken not only the
similitude of the quality, but also of the quantitye of things, I call
qualities manners of this corrupted world, whereof there is no doubt, for S.
Luke confirms it in his. xvij, Chapter, the quantity is called the nombre of
years. The sentence is somewhat more obscure, but Saint Mathewe declares it,
when he saith: Likewise as the days of No were, so shall be the coming of the
son of man. And Saint Paule to the Romaynes in the v. Chapter, affirms how
Ada was the form and figure of the coming of Iesu Christ. As also he saith
in the first to the Corinthiens, the.xv. Chapt. The first man Adam in soul ^
and the last in spyryte ^ the first man of thearth ^, the second manne that
is to say the Lord, is of heaven. If then Iesus Christ is the other Adam of
whom the first hath ben the figure, and that the coming of Iesus Christ
shall be as the days of No before the deluge, who will not believe that so lunge
time that is passed from Adam terrestre, unto the days of No the deluge, that
it shall not pass so much from Adam celestial, the which is our lord Iesus
Christ, unto the end of the world or deluge of fire. Saint Peter saith in his
second Epistle in the third chapter, the day of the Lord shall come as a thief
in the night, whereby the heuens shall pass in manner of a tempest, and the
Elements being chafed ^ the earth shall founder, ^ thonerages or works ^ in
them shall burn, and by and by after the same saith, whereby the heavens being
on fire shall be defayted, and the elements being burned shall foundre. Now it
is evident out of Genesis, the.v. Chapyter, that from Adam unto the deluge be
passed. M. CCCCCC.lvi. years, it is likewise true howe the end of the world
shall be approchynge to like year of our lord thousand six hundred fifty and
six. It is ne'er at hand, for there remains now no more but. C. and four
years. Yet always for so much that none knows the abreuiation of the said
time, the which is purposed for the elect, for this reason it seems right
difficyle precisely to know the time.

There is other that say how the years of the Lord ought to be accounted, not
from his Natyuytye: but from his resurrection, Ascencion, or sendynge of his
holy spyryte, which should make great variation and mutation of the years.
And as No knew not the day nor the howre of the deluge, (yet always of the
year not ignorant) Likewise to us is permytted by the holy Scryptures to
search the year, albeit that the day and howre remain unknown. Some also
conjecture the end of the world, from ye birth of Christ unto his passion
and resurrection which comes to xxxiij. years and certain days, whose
number is unknown. And for every year of Iesus Christ they account so
many great years Mosaiques, yt is to say, Iubilaires, and make every year
fyfty years, the which iubiles seems right well to accord together,
for.xxxiij. Iubiles be of our Civil years. M.cccccc. and. L. whereunto add
certain few years for the portion and rest of the days yt Christ lived
amongst us, more thenne the said.xxxiii. years. It shulde be more evident if
every one of the said years of the life of Iesu Christ, we shulde make
comparison and similitude to every iubile of the church then beginning. And
if the symilitude of things make so many years of Christ, as of the Iubilaires
of the church, it shulde be the more to accoumpte of the end of the world:
but for so much that these things deuines, ought to be more subtyly and at
length treated, and that it pertains more unto Theologiens then to medecynes,
we will make here no further mention. There is other things that would a little
serve to this purpose, as thaccomplishment parfytte of the escriptures and
Prophecies, insomuch that one jot is not written in the holy scrypture that
shall not be* accomplished before the end of the world. By these words we
may certaynely persuade that the world is now lame, and very aucient, and
in manners and fashions falls, and greatly halts.

Now let us pray the eternal father of our Lord Iesu Christ maker of
thumayne gendre, that to this time so evil and dangerous (by whom marvelous
signs shows us great calamities) for the love of his said son* our
saviour, whom he would to be offered for our sins, that he keep his church,
and so by the virtue of the grace of his holy spirit, he confyrme, and
conforte in such wise our couraiges, that we fear not any dangers or
peryls, nor alsoo the death. Here we have finished our pronostication, if the
reader had not attended some thing of the wars, peace, fruits of the earth,
and such like things as men were accustomed to put in pronostications. Our
pronostication forsomuche as it is vtile and continual of divers years makes
of such things no mentio, adding nevertheless that the wars which has
happened in the church in the last days of the world, that is to say,
discentions, sectes, divers factions and like things, be more to be had in
horreur, then the discords of Emperors and kings, and what is worse, they be
more hurtful then should be war turquoyse. Let us pray to god that it will
please him to be peace and accorde in his church, and as he is the self same
verity, so to declare and manifest the only verite, and in such wise to
accorde the hearts of princes, that they may with one mind resist the cruel
beast which always is thursty of the Christen blood. The Lord shall give
largelye the fruits of the earth, if we follow the counsel of Moyses,
Deutero.xi. Chap. and Leuitic.xxvi. The Lord saith: if you walk in my
ordinances, and keep my commandments, and do them, I will give you the rain
in his time, the earth shall give fruit, the thresshynge shall reach unto the
vine harueste, and the vine harvest shall reach unto the sowynge time, you
shall eat your meat in plenteousnes and dwell in your landepeaceably, and I
wyllsende peace in the earth, and you shall sleep without any man to make you
afraid These things we must daily remember to thend that GOD turn not his
wrath upon us, and shette the heaven. But let every man walk so in his
vocation, that he as much as he may keep himself from offendynge God, and
let us at his hand, attend his great munificence, the which to his own
he never denied.

Conclusion.
Gentle Reader saying that pronostications comonlye be not welcome, and that
men call them the books of lies, we will as much as i us is possible, preserve
ours from that vice, and have fortified it by holy scripture, and with the
sayings of the good philosophers, more then by the doubteous opinions of
thastrologiens, this manner hath not ben lunge used: but when it shall be in
vsaige, it shall have the moore sweetness and grace, for every time hath his
guise and use of his methode or practike what he will, we have followed ores,
semynge to us most conformable and nereste the truth. And to the end that
those which have almooste lost their courage, and be ouermoche fearful, we
may deliver from their fear, and that they shulde not fall (as divers did the
year past) into desperation. Fynallye, this calamity and misery the which
was wont to come by pronostications, toke his beginning of the phisicions, for
leaving the counterpois, they meddled things against the deuoir of Physic.
Read and give no more faith to pronostications then they meryte, and confyrme
your heart in such sort against al things, that you may live ioyousely, and
in the end dye in the faith of Christ our Lord.

Amen,
Imprinted at London in Paules churcheyarde by Myllyam Awen.


