

The Book of comfort called in laten Boethius de Consolation philosophie
Translated in to englesse tongue.

Prefatio Translatoris.
UN suffysance of conning of whit
Defaute of langage experience
This labour viche ye have upon me put
Must fully excuse un to your reverence
if hit be not with craft of eloquence
Depainted so as other books be
yet must I needs do my diligence
with al my pouer to please yo^ur souerente
This subtel matter of Boethius
In his book of consolation
So hye hit is so harde and curious
Full far a bow my estimation
That hit be not by my translation
Defouled no corrupt to god I pray
So help me with thy inspiration
That art of wysedom both locke and key
As fro the text that I vary nougth
But keep the sentens in his true intent
And words eke as ny as may be brougth
where law of meter will thereto consent
This matter wiche that is so excellent
And passes both my conning my migth
So have yt lord in thy government
That cannest reform al thing to rygth
I have herd speak somewhat have I seyn
Of divers men that wonder craftily
In metre sum sum in prose pleyn
Haueth this book translated dyuersly
In to englesse tongue word for word well ny
But I must use the wits that I have
Though I may not do so well / yet truly
with ye help of god the sentens will I save
To chaucer that was flower of retoryke
In englesse tongue excellent poet
I woteful well I am no thing leke
Though I his making do conterfete
And Gover that so craftily doth trete
As in his books of moralyte
Thougth I to him in making am vnmete
yet will I she worteh that is in me
Hit leketh not me to labour nor muse
upon these old poyses derke
For christen faith such things most refuse
As witneseth Ierom the noble clerk
Hit shulde be no christen man work
Tho false gods names to renew
For he yt has received cristes merke
if he do so to criste he is vntrew
Fro them that criste in heaven bless shall
Such manner works must be put a side
For certenly hit nedet not at al
To vhette now the darts of cupyde
No for to bid that venus be our gyde
So that we may our foul lusts win
Lest hereafter the same to ous betide
As did to the said venus for her sin
And certain I have tasted wonder lyte
As of the wells of calyope
No wonder though I sympelly endyte
yet will I nofte un to Tessiphone
No to her susters that in hell be
Besekynge after craft of eloquence
But may to god of his benignite
My spirit to enspyre with his influence Caliope as poets fayneth is one of
the sons daughters is one chef of the ix muses they cal her goddas of
eloquence. She hath. iii. vvelles Gramatica / Dialetica / Retorica. of whom is
driued al craft of eloquece Also they feyneth to be in hell iii. fusters called
furyas or vengeresses / that punish men for there mesdedes. the one is called
Allecco / a another Megner / the iii. Tessiphone. These also be called muses of
morning that tecyth enformeth men to mahe souroful complaints:

So that fro blame and confusion
Of al this foul wordly wrechednesse
He help me in this occupation
To the honour of his blysfulnesse
And in reverence of your worthiness
Madame this work at your instance
I have begone after my symplenesse
In will to do you service and plesance
Incipit Prologus.
THe while yt rome was regnig i her flores
And of ye world held al the monarchy
She was governed then by emperors
And was renowned wonder noblely
Till pride had set there hertes up on hy
Then began they to use crudelyte
And regned by rygurnesse and tyranny
And oppressed sore the comynalte
For leke as pouerte causes sobernesse
And feblenes enforces continence
Rygth so prosperite and sykernesse
is the moder of vice and neglygence
And pouer also causes insoleuce
And after honour changes good manners
There is none so perilouse pestilence
As is hye astate given to srewes
Of the which was Nero one and principal
That such manner tyranny began
Though he bare the diadem ymperial.
yet was he a very cursed man.
So cruelly he began to regne than
Heslew his master his moder both.
And much he did that tel I no can.
Ho so hath hit red he knoueth well ye soth.
The chief of holy church he slew also.
Sent Peter Paule both upon one day.
And after them full many other mo.
And of the same hit is I dare well say.
That Paule writes thus hit is no nay.
And saith now is the foune of wickedness.
And figure rygth of anticristes lay.
In whom shall be al manner of cursednesse. Misterium jam operatur iniquitatis /
vt qui tenet jam teneat donec de medio fiat. Now saith sent Paule vvorchet the
mystery form of anticristes wickedness. vvych anticriste shall be leke to him
/ vsynge none other lave but vvylfulnesse / ledynge his lyffe in lusts /
finding occasions for to destroy al the good vertuos / cruel and full of
vnkyndly affections drayng to him al the that be leke to him in foul
conditions.

For they yt truly teaches cristes lore.
To make men forlete there vice.
Antecriste will punysshe them therefore.
And al there prechynge set at no price.
So was he given to lusts delyce.
That what desire came unto his thougth.
He wold yt do without more advise.
For no thing then wold he spare hit nougth.
And he yt wold ageyn his vices speak.
And counsel him his lusts co refrain.
withouten more anon he would bewreke.
He wold him put in torment and in pain.
And he that wold his Instes oft withsayn.
He no was but ded if that he wold appear.
For such a cause Boecius was slain.
Of whom this process after treteth here
And rygth these days men may se this same
Of some yt have the astate of governance.
Ho so will there vices or lusts blame.
They take hit in despite and displesance.
They will him do some myschefe or mischance
And tho th sat hold amend e correct.
vice / in them hit hath her sustenance.
And good folk they holds as suspect
The year of criste. v. hundred. xv.
when Anastasius was emperor
Boethius this same of whom I mene.
In Rome he was a noble cenatour.
But in manner as a conqueror.
Theodoricus regned in Italy
And Rome he held as king and governor
He had yt won by conquest in battle
For Anastasius was not leke
No not so strong of maney at lest
He consented that Theodoryke
Should regne in Rome hold yt at his hest
And he wold hold him self in the este
He said hit was acordynge to his heal
And for his es in sothe he thougth yt best
For Romayns be full perylous with to del
This king of Rome then Theodoryke
Was full of malice and of cursednesse
And eke for cause he was an heretyke
The christen people began he sore oppress
Boethius with al his besynes
withstode hem alwey sparing none offence
And him present often time express
Reversed his vnlauful iugementes
He no spared not ye higth of his astate
But ever he spake agenste his tyranny
wherefore the king hem had sore in hate
And him exiled in to lumbardy
To prison in the cite of papy
where as for a recreation
Between himself and philosophy
He wrote this book of consolation
In prose meter interchangingly
with words set in colour wonder well
Of retoryke indicted craftily
And schewyng that these welthes temporel
Are not to be desired never a del
No wordly mischeffe nothing to be dread
Enforseng ous by reason natural
So virtue fully for to taken heed
Then Anastasins had made his fine
As time of age un to his death hem drew
Then aster hem was emperor Iustine
A noble knygth a faithful a true
For cristes laues wonder well he knew
And kept them as a very christen man
And heretikes fast he began persew
That arrianes were called than
His letters then in to Rome he sent
For to destroy al that heresy
And fully gave them in commandment
That they should put them out of company
Theodoricus toke this wonder hye
For he himself was holly one o tho
This message he repelled utterly
And made a vow yt shulde not be so
And swore but if the arrianes must
Have there pese granted to them a geyn
He wold not leave one in al that cost
Of christen faith but he should be slain
And thus he bed the messengers seyn
That if he wold with arrianes strive
Says the emperor with words plain
Of christen will I leave none a live
To constantinople he sent a none
Of senators which that him lest
And a mouges other pope Iohn
And bed them labour for there awne best
And ruthfully they made there request
That Iustyne should this mandement relese
For ye christen migth not ben in rest
But if he granted the arrianes piece
The emperor his malice understood
Benyngly he granted them there bone
And well he thougth yt yt was as good
That matter to cesse till efte soon
And better mygth yt afterward be done
By good advise of wiser ordinance
The arrianes so he let a lone
To vsen forth there old governance
These messengers to the kings pay
Torn not so hastily ageyn
As he desired at a certain day
where fore in heart he had great dysdeyne
And Boyce that lay in prison in pain
In exile in the cite of Papey
In Melayn he made him to be slain
In Papey ben his bones sykerly
And when these messengers at ye last
Returned were / in heart he began to brenne
Pope Iohn in prison then he caste
Fer out in the cite of Rauenne
And made him closed in a narowe den
where he no mygth torn him self no wend
And soth to say he went never thenne
Till of his lyffe he had made an end
Also the worthy noble Symmacus
That was a man grounded al in grace
The wyche in virtue was heroicus
There left not such a another as he was
Vir heroicus is a man given al to contemplation to virtue / in whom al flesly
passyous ben quenched repressed.
without cause surfyt or trespace
At Rauenne eke he slew him cruelly
And after wards in thatsame place
The next year he dyed suddenly
And as sent gregory doth him self write
As yet his books makes mentyon
There was yt time a holy heremyte
As he was in his contemplation
He did se Theodoryke in visyon
Between Symacus and pope Iohn
Right as a theffe to his dampnation
How he was led / after that anon
In the I'll of vulcane was he caste then
That full is of a fire flam of hell
Theryn alwey in peynes sor to brenne
And with the foul fendes for to dwell
For tyrants that so fers ben and fell
Ben arayd such rewards for there mede
I sey you but as old books do tell
Now to my purpose time is that I speed
And every lord or lady what ye be
Or clerk that leketh for to reden this
Besekynge louly with humylyte
Supports where I have oft said a mys
Corrects only there that nedful is
if word or sentence be not as hit shulde
My self I am vnsufficyant I wis
For if I cowed have better done I would
Explicit prologus.
Reason and intelligens purely considered in kind of there vvorching haueth them
self every again other / as practick theoryk / or as actyf contemplatyf. And al
tho the vvorchyng of reason leke to practyf in ordre {pro}cesse in us that uses
process go before intelligence as practycke goyth before theorich / actyf
before contemplatyfe / yet in vvorthines also in perfection of blestulhed /
intelligens sormounteth is sovereign to reason. For the same treuthes that reason
seeks finds by discourse / these pure blissful spirits (vviche ben called
iutelligences) says knoueth perfectly in the mirror of eternal lygth / that
is gods son vith outen any discurse of reason. And much more viche no may
not be perceued here of ous in this pilgremage. But rygth as a good practiser
by exercise of labur experiens of his craft / may deserve to be made privy of
soteltes of his craft to be made a master / rygth so a soul coniuned to bodly
matter / may by his good labour of discourse / deserve to atteyu to be made privy
by intelligence of al the same trouthes on hye in bliss that these blesful
spirits haueth of there first creation. By nature of the resonabelte of man
soul / viche resonabelte is the form substantial of the self soul / there
should not be denied hem that he vvolde desire. And that may be scheued by this
skyle. The saule vhos form substaniial is reason or resonabilte / he may of
proper kind not desire but reasonable. for if he other desired / he were
vnresonable. And if he desire but that is proper to hem of kind / yt may not
of reason be denied him. But hove is hit that a soul coniuned desires oft
other than reasonable / There be.ii. causes. One is for some souls for the
intemperance bosteynesse of there material body fails in discourse In other
that haueth clear discourse yet sensualite vych us the flesly part of the soul
replies ever a gen this discourse of reason / asking his lusts as proper to his
kynder And togth he be ueuer ^o oft ausuered concluded / yet ever he resorts
to his first asking hauyur ^o regard to al the reasons that may be made agenste
him. Right as a man that fails discourse vhom men calls a mad man / tough a
man make to him never so great reasons / yet is he not ansuered / he feleth them
not / but ever he resorts to that he first began. This importunate pressenge
of sensualite of such vnresonable replications encombreth so the reason that he
leueth the true end that he had travelled for by discourse entendethe to the
lust of sensualite desiring things that be vnresonable / vvyche desire if yt
were grounded in sensualite vych is changeable / yt shulde a none bring the
soul in to endless mischief. for there may no thing stand kyndly that contraries
his avne kind. No a reasonable spirit though he be moveable in vvorkyng in
affections yet of propre kind he may not vvyl contradiction / that is to sey
nove this nov the contrary for then he erred again reason So then a soul
desiring that thyug that is vnresonable / consequently to his destruction / by
the hy gouerne^ hit is oftentyme denied him. vherfore he falls in to a
peynful heuynesse be cause he lacks that he desires / or hath that him
lotheth. And were not that the sensualite bears this peyn the mischief were
endless. vherfore the sensualite that is changeable lotheth this peyn vyllyng to
be delivered thereof / sometime reforteth to reason forsaking such vnskyleful
desires suffers reason to have his kyndly operations. And if this peynful
heuynesse be mored in the soul reason fully overcome / then falls a man in
despere. so sum destroeth themself by vvylful death so continue in perpetual
peyn vythout end. Thus fell hit of the first angel that desired vndiseretly to
be leken to god for he migthe not have his desire / he fell in peynful
heuinesse. but in heaven may be no peyn / And he mith not vvyl the contraty to
that he ones villed / he was so pure simple of nature. vherfore without
remedy he was caste in to mischief in the peyn of hell So yt be fell of this
noble clerk Boyce / because he had that he vvold not / that was prison other
tribulation. And also he wanted that he vvolde have / that was his astate in
the cite of Rome / his hovse / books / his other goods / presens of his vvyffe
chyldern his other friends vherof he was vvron gfully spoiled but out of his
cite / exiled as a traitor / he fell in to a peynful heuinesse and made his
complaint sayug. Allas I vvreche. c. But for asmoche as this heuynesse was but
the mevyng of sensualite / viche of his nature is chaugable. And lest he fell
in to full forgetyng of himself in the vttermest myschef. Reason conforteth the
flesly kind / reducyng yt to knovlege of yt self / so to forget the
heuynesse that he was so greuosly peyned with for losing of his dignyte /
vvyffe / chyldern / goods a fore rehearsed.

Incipit liber Boetij de cosolatoe philosophie.
Metru primu.
Carmina qui quondam.
ALas that I wretch vhiles I was in wealth
And used lustey dytes for to write
Now am I set in sorrow vnhelthe
with tmornynge my mirth I must respyte
Lamentable muses teaches me to endyte
Of woo. with weeping they weteth my face
Thus hath dysese destroyed al my delyte
And brougth my bliss Iolyte full base
And though yt I with myschef now be met
That false fortune lours thus on me
No dread fro me mygth these muses let
Me to ensue in mine aduersyte
My Joy they were in al my Iolyte
Of you the that was so glad om so grene
Now they solaceth my drery destyne
And in my age my comforteno we they been
Vnwarely age comes on me hastily
Heyngh on me for harm that I have had
And soro we his hestes hath hoten to be ny
Whore here's on my head to rathe ben spread
Al to me of blod my bodey wexeth bad
My empty skyn begins to tremel quake
I have no cause whereof I may be glad
Thus morning for mysese my moan I make
A death of men a blesful thing yt were
if he wold spare them in there lustiness
And come to them that be of heavy chere
When they him cal to lake there distress
But ooh allas howe dull deffe he is
wryngynge a wey fro wrecches when they clept
And worneth thenne with wonder cruelnesse
The yes for to close that wele weep
But vhyle fortune vnfaythful vntru
Of lusty lyffe was to me favourable
Full suddenly my head to ground he dreu
The careful hour of death vnmerciable
But now yt she so chaungynge unstable
Hath torn un to me her cloudy face
This wrecched lyffe that is vnconfortable
Draeth along and tarries now allas
where ye friends maden your a vaunt
So often times of my felycite
This wordly wealth is not perseueraunte
No never abidynge in no stabilyte
For he that falls out of his degre
Full sothe yt is yt stable was he nougth
No he stood never in full prosperyte
That in to mischief was so low I brought
Fortune was depainted after fantasy of poets a lady sitting in midst of a
vhyle viche her self continuelly torn a bout / she had ii. visages / one
brygth another dark. in both she was blind

The comentor trinet assgneth iii. causes vhy that philosophy was descryued
apperynge un to Boyce in lekenesse of a woman The first cause is for this name
philosophia as well in laten as in greek is put in the feminine gender. The
second cause is for rygth as a woman norysseth her child vvyth her milk /
rygth so philosophy no ressched her discyples vvithe the subtilyte of her
science.

The third cause is / for a woman is of kind more tender and compacient for
to comfort a man in mischief. And sith this clerk was fall than in to
mischief as himself seemed / he iuduced philosophy in lekenesse of a woman to
comfort him in a s^akynge of his heuynesse

She was also descriued reverent / for she makes the persons reverent in
vyche she is impressed.

The yees of philosophy ben reason and understanding / vherby philosophy is
kendly perceived. They brenne by desire of conyng They shyne clear by
possibilite of understanding.

Her myghtes been the virtue of her principles that never may be empted no fully
comprehended. The chyre of her visage is perfection of doctrine. the colour is
fullness of truth. for the whole entente is for to perceive and conprehende
truth. She passedde man age / for her truths ben perpetual. not subget to
time that mesureth man his age.

Prosa prima. Capitulum secundu
Hec dum mecum
Boecius loquitur. In murnynge thus I made my complaint
And for to write my fyngers began I fold
For drerinesse I wax al feeble faint
That of my lyffe almost no thing I told
But upward at the last I began behold
In sothe I saw so fair a creature
I couth her not descriuen though I would
So femly was her shappe and her feyture
She was so wonder reverent of her chyre
Her colonr eke so lovely so brygth
Her yene brenne semenge as for clear
Passing fer a bouen man sygth
Al thoe she were full fresshe clean of mygth
As she had ben full yongly of courage
yet seemed she to every wordly wigth
That she was over passed man his age
Her stature was of douteful iugemente
Sumtyme thus of come men mete
And sumtyme was her stature so extente
That with her head she seemed heuens beat
And other vhyle so hye her head she get
She pierced heaven migth no more be seyn
So that we most the sygth of her forlete
And al our lokynge after was in veyn
Her clothes were wrogthof thredessmale
By subtel cratf of matter perdurable
And with her hands by her awne tale
She had them wrogth I trow for no fable
The beutey of them was full commendable
But duskey they wereforleten as for eld
As images that in smoke had stonden stable
That be oot weshe no wyped but selde
And in ye hem by neth made she had
So as I could yt know a greeks P. O.
And in the bordure al a bow I rad
And there also she had made a ^ ^
And so by twene these letters migth I se
Leke to a ladder what that ever yt mend
whereon men migth alwey fro gre to gre
Fro there beneth upward ever ascend
Nevertheless some men by violence
Had cut this cloth pieces boren a wey
Such as they migth without reverence
And did there with as was unto there pay
This creature of whom I began you sey
In her rygth hand small books were
A septre also of full rich array
For certain in her other hand she bare
And when this ladey saw these muses there
Un to my beds side approchynge ney
Enditynge words to my weeping chere
She began to loke upon them fervently
Ho she said let in this company
Thus with there songe this seek man to please
That no thing heleth him of his malady
But rather doth him greuance dysese
Lo these yt ben she said that fowls feden
with ye sweet venem of corruption
And tender hertes makes for to bleden
with thorns of there foul affection
They sleyn the worthy fruit of reason
And only brings sekenes in usage
This is the kind of there condition
And nought at al the sekenesse to assuage
if ye she said with your dalyance
Had drauen fro me some foul vnprofytable
Less yt should have done me displesance
I might have boren yt then as sufferable
For vhy in such a foul that is unable
May nought ben harmed of my besynes
But these that ever in studies hath ben stable
Should not be founden with your folesnesse
But goes ye fylthes out of my presence
your swetnes wold him bring at an end
I shall him save with the salfe of my science
That shall be more comfort un to his kende
And thus this company a wey began wend
And bitterly abashed them of there blame
Showing well the habit of there mind
Hanging down to groude there heads for shame
I then yt ny for teres saw right nought
Began wonder much vhat might this woman be
Meruelynge also greatly in my thought
That so imperial of auctoryte
She made yt maney smartly fro me fl
I was abashed hinge my head to ground
what she wold after done or sey to me
Then I abode held me still a stounde
But to my bed then began she nyen ne'er
And on the corner down herself she set
And sadly began behold upon my chere
That so was then with teres al be wet
And right thus she began wythouten let
Complaining on my perturbation
Because of myschef wherwyth I was met
Of me she made this lamentation
Metrum secundu. Capitulu tercium.
Heu {quam} precipiti.
Philosophta loquitur Allas she said how this man mind
Is cast down in to full deep dullness
Forlete the clerenesse of his proper kind
And mentynge for to go to strange derknesse
As often time as noyos besynesse
wythouten mesure gynneth to encrece
when wordly wind with myschef destresse
Him hath byrafte al out of rest piece
This is that man yt sometime was so fre
To whom by craft was even for to conn
Up in to heuens to behold and se
And to mesure the meuynge of the son
By craft also the conning had he won
How yt the moan changes for to prymen
And what recourse the sterres have run
In there spears how dyuersly they meuen
As victor hath he sotelly conquered
The craft by number al he comprehends
Fro vhens also these wyndes ben a rered
The smothe see that turns so wendeth
why esperus at even so ascends
Este / in the west a down a geyn to lout
And what spyryte so besely entendeth
The round world to wend al a bout
And what a tempers so the lustey hours
Of the fair first somer seson
Araynge hit with red rose flowers
Of the vyche in winter ben very feweor none
And al this could he show by very reason
In full years ho is that our fedeth
with great grapes that the peple pleson
And other fruit that them al needs
I wont he was also to seek to know
Pryme causes for to tell of kind
Allas witless now lies this man full lowe
Under full heavy bonds that him bind
And now can he none other comfort find
But heuely his face he hath down fold
So is he al dismayed in his mind
That needs wrecched earth he mot behold
Prosa secunda. Capitulu quartum.
Seb medicine.
Philosophia loquitur. But now of medicine {quod} she have we need
For in complaints lies no remedy
Un to that purpose let our works speed
She set her ye on me ententyfly
Art thow not he she said wyche that I
Have fed with milk vhyle thou were young of age
And sith with strenger metes tenderly
Till thou were wexen a man of strong courage
And sith I gave the armour good strong
Wych but if thou had caste a wey fro the
Thou might have be dysesed with no wrong
But have ben suer fro al aduersyte
why art thou still she said knouest you not me
Is yt for shame or thou art stoned sore
The no shames noght I trou by cause of me
Thou art a stoned of that me dredeth more
And vhen she saw me sytten dome still
She set her hand full safte upon my breast
As here she saed no perel is of i'll
This man is with a letargy a rest
A come sekenesse that many hath oppreste
That out of mind themself have forlete
Full esely this euel shall be redreste
A little what he hath hemself forget
He shall remember well esely
if I may first me make him for to know
I shall his yeen wypen tenderly
Of clouds derke that have them over grow
And then he shall amend as I trow
A pleyt she lapped of her garnement
My yeen then that teres had beflowe
She wyped till the derkenesse was al spent
Metru tercium. Capitulu quintu.
Tunc me discussa.
Boecius loquitur. And vhen this cloud was cleansed fro mine ye
I was a none restored to my sight
Right as vhen clouds clip in the sky
The son is let to leme a down his light
And reyne clouds makes in manner night
But vhen a north wind chaceth them a way
The son will show then his bemes bright
And as yt were brings ageyn the day
Prosa tercia. Capitulu sextu.
Haud aliter trsticie.
Boecius loquitur But even so in / none other wise
This drerynesse out of mine heart began reche
I looked up began me better advise
if I might know the visage of my leche
Than knew I well by visage by speech
Mine own gentle noryshe philosophy
That me was wont to viset to tech
And fro yought had me in company
Do {quod} I my worshypful masteres
Of al virtues and of honest
what do ye in this wretched wilderness
Come thus a down out of the souereyn see
In to this exile vhether be cause of me
As gylty made also of my trespace
Hit no besemeth not your souereynte
For to be seyn in this unworthy place
Phia.) Oh nory {quod} she should I the forsake
Since thou for me art falsely put in blame
And not the charge also upon me take
The wyche thou berest for envy of my name
To philosophy yt were repreue shame
To leave an Innocent so thus a rayed
And now at last redoute me of that game
That is not new to me no un a said
Trouest thou that I have ben not erst assayied
Of wicked folk with perel damage
How have I ben tormented traueyled
with fulhardinesse foul outrage
Be foren Plato in time of elder age
And vhyle that Plato leued presently
Socrates was slain had to wage
In my presence a croune of victory
The Epicures The Stoicenes
The heretage of there opynyou
They caughten to them as for very means
Of wealth fullness euerych a portion
And mo of wiche I make no mention
Haueth enforsed them with sotelte
Drauenge his words to there entention
Of there opynatyue felycyte
This same folk in partey of there a pray
Caught this clothe that my self had weuen
And though that I rebelled said nay
To rent this cloth / no wold they not beleuen
And with tho clouts yt they had me bereuen
They went there wey though al had ben well
And folysly they did themself deceuen
And went I had gon with them every del
And so for cause that they these pieces ber^
Loo some men troued as fowls utterly
That they had ben with me familyer
And in my household ben abydyngly
And so thorugh error of this company
Full many a foal is foul out of the way
And by them ben perverted perylosly
And wene that al be wysedom that they say
Haste you not herd of Anaxagoras
That was exiled for be cause of me
Of Socrates yt eke enpoysoned was
How zeno was tormented by cruelte
And though yt this be a strange thing to the
yet Canio Seneke as I trow
And Sorane also in thy mind be
For this is a late thing well y know
Nought else these brought in to destresse
But for they were learned in my lore
And al vnleke as in there besynesse
To wicked folk that hated them therefore
Hit is no thing that you shulde wonder fore
Though we be styred with storms of desese
Since that our purpose hath ben ever more
These wicked folks for to dysplese
And though thereof be hugy habundance
yet nevertheless yet is to be reprieved
Forvhy they ben withouten governance
And nought but flod of error hath them meued
And if they by this error this contryued
Arese an host with strenght ous assetteth
Our governor by this is nought a grieved
His tresour al in to his tour he fetteth
These fowls laboreth than ententyfly
On veyn things that may them nought avayle
And we that sytteth in this tour on hy
Full suer y noghe fro them that ous assail
In such a palace strong of apparyle
whereto these fowls may not up attain
we scorns them of al there waste traueyle
There besynesse is euerydele in vein
Metrum quartum. Capitulu vij.
Quisquis coposito.
Philosophia loquitur. He that stands clear ordynate
And proud haps suffers under slyde
In al fortunes standing streght algate
In wealth woo can euenlych a bide
The wood see that floueth to every side
Him dredeh nto thing of his cruelte
But what desese that may to him betide
Him grieves nought but stands in one degre
The foul fire that out of hell reketh
In the monteyn that cleped is vesene
No thunder lyte that hy tours breketh
No dredeth not me / what is yt that ye mene
Why dredeye then ye wrecches that ye ben
Tyrants fyers that ben withouten migth
Put false hope out of our hertes clean
And flesly dread puts fro your sight
For if thou no thing of a man desire
No what he may the don thou haste no dread
Thou shalt deserve the wrecched man Ire
And in no wise he may the nought mysbede
Ho so hops ought or dredeth out of need
He casts a wey his shield is unstable
And knetteh a cheyn / hemselfen with to led
where that them lust to him unprofitable
The covetous king Mida was made Jug betvene Apollo Pan by there both
assignemet for to demen vhether the harp of Apollo were more delicyous /
other the shalmuse of Pan. And so vhen he had herd them both / he judged that
the shalmuse was svvetter than the harp vherfor Apollo having indignation of
his lewd iugement / punysshede him in that party that was semyng the cause of
his error / and gave him lunge ass eres. Motally Mida is every vvordly man
that more appryseth the lust lekynge of the world them he doth any vvhit or
gostely vvysedom. vherfore such men ben dull insensible to reason / leke to
rude asses.

Prosa iiij. Caplm viij.
Sentis no inquit
Felest thou not vhether my word be soft or sharp
{quod} she withyn thy heart ententyfly
Or art thou leke an ass to the harp
That is not meued with no melody
If thou covet help or remedy
Thou must vnhele the wondes yt the greuen
Be then a know show me openly
And hyde yt not for I the shall releuen
Boecius) I droe to me the might of my courage
ye ben {quod} I that brought me in astate
Needs yt now to tellen my damage
That haueth me had in your presence algate
ye knoueth in what degre I was but late
No meueth you nought the manner of this place
Is this the library where ye with me sate
when ye were al my Joy my solace
Dyuyne things dysputynge there with the
And other sciences that full lusty were
when that I stood with you in this degre
was than this mine habit my chere
when I with you was wont to seek lere
Full privy points langynge to nature
How that the sterres meued fer or nyre
Descryuyng yt in nombers and figures
Formynge in me the manner of my live
I leke un to the heuenly governance
And techynge me to be contemplatyue
I yield you thank with louly obecyance
This was a sentens of your ordynance
That Plato wrote if I well understand
Full blesful were thastate of governance
if only wise might yt have on hand
Or if that they which have government
wold upon wysedom spend there besynes
And Plato also to the same entente
Teaches ous thus / thyn own lore hit is
To wise men a skyleful cause is this
For to desire astate of souereynte
Lest wicked folk that will govern a mys
Receive astate harm a comynalte
For if that wise men virtuous
Should thastate of souerente forsake
Then other wicked folk and vicious
wold be full feyn the sam astate to take
And such as they ben soueraynes wold they make
And wise persons should be set at nought
Thus should vice wickedness a wake
And treuth virtue be to ground y brought
As showing therefore your auctoryte
I had desire to this entention
That I had lered of your benygnyte
To put yt forth in execution
witness upon your awne dyscretion
And god that has you set in man mend
I coveted never administration
But come profet was both cause end
The hate that I have had heuynesse
Of wicked folk is open euydence
In maintenance of treuth ryghtuesnesse
By very freedom of my consciens
Of wicked folk I spared none offence
when Conigast the porayl wold oppress
I met him ever with mighty resistens
And oft I let him of his cruelnesse
And Tranguyle provost of the kings house
How oft I caste him down of his malice
And many a pouer man anguissous
That weren asset by cursed couetyce
Of men that full of venem were vice
I halpe them oft in there adnersyte
For to defend them out of such foleys
Lo mine astate I put in Iupardy
There was no man yt me fro right withdrow
To wrong by favour / frenshyp / or by wage
But when I saw the contres now now
Be put in thraldom in foul seruage
what by tribute what by caryage
And what by raven extortion
As sore me grieved the harm of there damage
As them that suffered tribulation
And when the prouynce hoten Campaye
was sore oppressed in a dere year
So that no man must sell no bye
Till that the king had sold up his garner
At snch a price so grenous so dere
That pouer folk were harmed a noyed
Than I withstode the kings offycer
Wetynge the king that statute I destroyed
And Paulyn eke a consuler of Rome
Whom palace hounds had oppressed so
That wrongfully his goods him benome
I received him vhether they wold or no
Albyne that was a conseyler also
That was a judged to a grievous payne
Myself a lone to sauen him there fro
Of Cypryane I suffered great dysdeyne
That had accused him (how seems you
In paleys have I hate enmyte
For love of right were not thus y now
For to be favoured of the comynalte
Since I no frendshype have as toward me
In kings court I have no love reserved
Me seems than I should the surer be
withouten fail where I have love deserved
But now by whom was I accused thus
Forsooth of none that honest was of fame
But one there was that hight Basileus
wych that be forehand founden was with blame
And out of offyce was he put with shame
And sith he fell at myschef at need
He was accept accuser of my name
Allas thereto by geftes by mede
yet other ij. that haven me thus defiled
were Gaudencius and Opilion
The which the kings Iuges had exiled
For certain surfeit that they had don
In to the sanctuary then began they gon
Them to defend again the kings law
But knowing thus the king commanded soon
That out of sanctuary they should be draw
But if they voided the cite of Rauenne
By time assigned at a certain day
And in there frounte an Iren should them brenne
And be compelled for to go there way
Un to these false attaynte what shall I say
Or to the kings cursed cruelte
Upon that same day yt is no nay
They were admytted to accusen me
whether that mine art occupation
Deserved had thus falsely to be blamed
Other else thus that my dampnation
Had made them true that false were proclaimed
And was not fortune hereof foul a shamed
That she rewarded not mine Innocence
Unworthiness of them that were defamed
Should none appel have made in her presence
But perauenture ye wold wit the ground
In to this exile vhy I am remeued
I would the senate had ben hole sound
And in no manner hyndred no reprieved
This is the cause that I am sore agreued
But ye wold wit the manner the wise
By cause of letters viche I had beryued
Fro him that would the senators accuse
you masteres vhat will ye demen now
Shall I this blame forsake or cal a geyn
Lest that yt shulde be shameful un to you
Nay sekerly I shall yt never with seyn
I have yt willed ever shall certain
That the senate were in rest piece
But the accuser hereafter to refrain
Or let him oft of his intent I cese
But vether to willen there prosperite
Shulde ben deputed for sin or felony
And certenly they self in there decre
Have put on me that point of treachery
But vnwyse be they that to themself doth lye
They may not change the meret of my dede
Though that the fowls themself will destroy
My good will is worthy thank mede
But un to me by dome of socrates
Howe so ever yt stand in there entente
I trou yt be not laful nevertheless
To deny a sothe or to a false assent
But nevertheless al this verament
Excuses not me in no manner wise
I put hit holly in the iugemente
Of yowr selfen and of other wise
The process of this matter every del
I have hit write put in remembrance
That men hereafter may perceive feel
How wrongfully I suffer this greuance
But ye ylke letters of there ordynance
That in my name so falsely were contrived
if I had had that lyberte perchance
There false fraud shulde plainly have ben preued
Or had I at the examination
My self ben present vhen I was accused
Right by there own aperte confession
I trou that they shulde have me clean excused
This lyberte were goodly to ben used
But now what lyberte shall I a bide
Of an answer I am fully advised
if ever I shulde that lyberte abide
As Canio un to the king answered
That was accused of conspyracy
Had I {quod} he thereof knouen or herd
Thou shuldeste have knouen hit not sykerly
And soth to seyn the same wise would I
Mine own letters better can I bestow
And also procured them so privily
That no thing thereof shulde the king know
yet hath not morning dulled so my mind
That this should be the cause yt I complain
That wicked folk ben alwey so vnkende
A genste virtue such malice for to leyn
But this is yt where I have dysdeyne
Not only for the purpose of there will
But that they may there purpose so menteyn
I meruyl much how they yt may fu^lle
For as to wyllen ^
That may be of thee ^
But that they have that pouer ^
To execute that so purposed is
As Innocence virtue to destres
Only of that I meruele in my mind
As in his sight that al thing sees express
Hit seems me a monstre out of kind
wherefore there was with you famylyer
One that complained thus skylefully
Since god is present here every vhere
Fro vhens comes al euel this marvel I
And if that god no were not verily
Fro vhens should al good things be
But he that causes things perfectly
May know al and none in sothe but he
Al were hit leful to tho surfetours
That al good men noyeth dysesen
Purposynge for to sle the senators
No wonder were though they wold me lesen
For ever my purpose was them to dysplesen
And let them of there foul entention
To senators yet gave I none encheson
For to conspyren my dampnation
And masteres ye remembers well
That vhatsoeuer I thought to don or sey
Both word work ye ruled every del
And al by you I governed me alwey
And eke the senators yt is no nay
For there defence they knoueth every one
In vhat perel I put me at one day
A gen the ye king myselfen at verone
ye knoueth well that I no sey but so the
Though I my self had kept yt in silence
For certenly alwey I have ben loathe
To be commended of my excellence
For he that will be fain of reverence
And so receueth reward of renoune
The privy secret of his conscience
Apereth much by that condition
But here ye may your self take heed
For innocence now what worchyp have I
For virtue loo receue I to my mede
Peynes that proper be for felony
And ho had ever for any treachery
His Iuges so concord in cruelty
For gylte that was confessed openly
That some of them ner moved with pety
Al had yt be so that I had desired
The prestes death or holy church y brent
Or cruel death to good men conspired
Or vhat malice so that I had y mente
yet should I have ben deemed me present
So conuycre of my surfeit or confessed
And after this have had my iugemente
Thus justly might my dome have ben dressed
But then I being for that same vhyle
with al my labour my diligence
Fro my iugemente five hundred mile
Having in court no advocate no defence
To death I was a judged in absence
Me being in the senators needs
And they consenting given was ye sentence
Loo how I am rewarded to my medes
O worthy men of worchyppe of mede
For none of them came never at that degre
To be conuyct of such a manner dede
As to withstand a kings cruelte
As I have done for there comodyte
And therefore were they of my gylte a shamed
For thy in foylyng of the dygnyte
with sorcery now they have me defamed
They sayn for covets of hy astate
That I had used craft of sorcery
But ye that were my governor algate
ye knoueth well how falsely yt they lie
For fro my heart ye hadden utterly
A voided clean al wordly couetyce
And in your presence might not skylefully
Such sacrilege be used in no wise
For every day ye putten in my thought
These sothfast sentence of Pictagoras
That many gods shulde we serve not
But one a lone that makes corn gras
Hit needed not / no none accord yt was
To me / but full vnsembly in your sight
The help of foul gostes to purchase
Since ye have made me leke to god almight
Also my wise that is full Innocent
And other friends of my compaygne
My wives fader also reverent
Fro such defautes may defend me
But oh malice cursed crudelyte
This blame they bears on you by euydence
By cause that my governor ye be
They sey that I use such enchauntementes
And this to them hit seems not y now
That reverence of you me nought profyteth
But eke my gylte they puts upon you
And mine offence fully you they wyteth
A another thing my sours yet excyteth
That men says not the meret of your dede
But saith alwey when yt fortune ous smyteth
Of our meret yt was deserved need
And saeth that welthes prosperyte
Comes un to ous for our rightuesnesse
And also when there comes aduersyte
Hit falls only for our wickedness
with fortune goes our fame worthiness
Ow noble thing so light hit is to less
And certenly the first thing yt is
That flees a way fro wrecches in mysese
what rumours now this folk will of me find
How divers sentence how varyente
Hit lotheth me to think yt in my mind
For every man of me saeth his entente
And this yt is that most my heart shente
There is no fortune grieves me so sore
As vhen that myschef is to wrecches sent
Men saith yt was deserved there before
I am a way fro al my good y put
Also despoiled of my dygnyte
And to my heart yt noyeth more yet
My name defoyled in the comynalte
And for the benfet of mine awne bounte
Lo now I suffer torment distress
And in my heart me seems that I se
How felons folk beth on there lustynesse
And every lorel ready is boune
Some new coniected frauds to deuyse
And good folk hangs the head a down
Lest they be served in he same wise
And every surfetour now dare accuse
By cause of favour un punyshmente
The good men to defoulen despise
And proudly to performen there entente
Styred thereto by geftes by mede
And rightuesnesse may have no reverence
So Innocents leueth now in dread
Not only that / but lacks there defence
A genst malice is made no resistance
But sothfastnesse is had in al dysdeyn
That god will suffer this in his presence
A cause I have to cry me complain
Metru iiij. Capitulu vij.
O stelliferi coditor or
Phia loquitur. O maker of the sterred heaven on hy
Eternally that syttest in thy trone
Thou torneste heaven with a wonder swy
Constreynyng sterres to thy law alone
So that now in fullness of the moan
Beshened with her brothers bemes bright
The small sterres hedeth them full soon
In her presence to shyne they have no might
And when she to the son nyeth ne'er
Full soon she must her bright horns hyde
And hesperus that shines bright clear
And shows him in the cold even tide
A another year he is the sons gyde
A rysynge up full pale in the morn
Loo needs in that course he must a bide
For so thou hast commanded him beforne
In winter when that leues goen a way
Thou shortest then the fair days light
In hot somer lengthest thou the day
And make short the derknesse of ye night
And thou attemperest times by thy might
That bare branches wexeth fair grene
which that were defouled vnhyght
By styffe storms of the winter kene
The sedes in winter yt ben sow
Thou make them to wexen fair hye
And when that they ben full to corns grow
Thou make them to rypen to dry
Thyn old law there may no thing vnplye
No by no way there kyndly course forlete
Ow god that gouernest al certenly
Now only man work thou hast forget
why shall fortune tornen up so down
This thing that is in thy government
These wicked folk to set in hye renoune
And driven down the good innocent
with peynes that by ryghtuous iugement
Ben dew to catyffes for there cursednesse
Loo faithful men ben shamed y shent
And wicked folk ben set in worthiness
Thus false folk the faithful have oppressed
And virtue that so worthy is of name
Is put in derkenesse till yt be redressed
The rightuous bears ye wicked men blame
Forshoren men that ben withouten shame
They colour there deceits as them lust
And vsen they as for a come game
Deceyuynge them yt most upon them trust
And after them they draeth to consent
Kings great that many a man must dread
And makes them to perform there entente
And them encombreth with there cursedhed
And as they lust rygth so they will them led
But now behold this wrecched erthly place
Thou yt knettest al in length breed
Now sometime send ous succour of thy grace
For of thy work we ben a portion
Not foul / but fair after the form of the
we men that fortune dreueth up down
A monge the wawes of this wordly see
Repress this flod lord what ever thou be
That knetteste al in certain ordynance
Thou reuleste heuens in tranquillyte
Now set ous somvhat in that governance
Hit belongs not a vvyse man to be moved vvyth a fools vvorde but rather to
inform tech comfort him / reducyng him in to the bonds of reason. So was
this clerk by excess of heuynesse / in manner fallen in to foley / forletynge
the bonds of reason / vvyche philosophy calls his kende country. for by
resonablete man is made leke to angeles a very cytesen of heaven. vherfore lest
this painful heuynes should put him in despere / philosophy conforted him saeth
that he is not exile by the foresaid violence out of his kende contre / but by
error of his ovne false deduction. For vhy as lunge as a man kepeth the
knouynge of his kendly principles / he may not be compelled to leave the bonds
of reason. but erren he may by his false deduccion / by vyche he vveneth that he
be necessed constrained to that false conclusion. But standing the knoulege of
these forsaed principles / he may return examen his deduction by labour or by
techenge / find out his error consequently return a geyn to the truth

Multitude of astates in a land or cite is cause of great confusion / for be
cause that euerych of them covets to be gretteste / so that after his vvyl
may stand al the rule governance. Hit betydeth oft that lords sotellen in
destruction of other / that be cause of favour of the cominalte / by vvysedom
of governance / or by excellence of conning or of vvyt / ben preferred or
lekely ben to be preferred in to hye astates so that they may the more frely
seketly vverken as they vvold as for to vvynne the astates that they de^yren /
or else the astates that they haven the more frely for to hold / other for to
be pferred in excelles more singnlerly tha other But in this realm of
resonabelte that specially belongs to the court of heaven / there is but one
lord souereyn. the vyche is god / principle and ruler of reason / vverfore in
so much as any man leueth after reason / in howe much he is subgect to the
rule of gods law. And in howe much he leueth after reason / so much he a
bids in his contre in his proper cite. In vviche god a lone is prince
governor Then ensues thus / that if a man be obesyant subgect un to gods
law. he may not be exile not put out of his contre. Boethius complained him of
no gostely desese but only of harms bodily / vvelyng of his prison vvatynge of
kys books To vyche complaint philosophy ansvvereth says / that him ought
more to complain the perturbation of his spiret that so erred vvelynge the
lost of his temporal goods vvyche must needs at last utterly be berafte
him. Also she saeth he erreth foul vvelynge for his books / for vhy she had
put in his mind tho same things that makes books dere and precious / sotel
sentences of reason of kende

Sienim cuius oriundus sis patrie. The realm the very cotre of resonablete is
the bliss of heaven. And al the vhyle we work after reason we ben in our
contre as holy heuenlych by manner of vverkenge The realm of Athenes first
was governed by kings / vyche regned the term of lives. And after that were
ordained princes / vyche regned comenly.x. ye0res / After these were made
princes annual that regned but one year / of them shulde be ix. at ones. and of
these here speaks Boethius Romulus vhen he had founded the cite of Rome / that
he might make the cite copyous of people / ordained this law that ho so
vvolde bylde in that cite / he should never ben exiled after for no manner
trespace.

Prosa quarta
Hec vbi continuato dolor.
Boethius loquitur. when I with morning thus had made my moan
She was no thing of my complaint a meued
with pleasant chere she held her still as stone
Sothly she said while er thus I conceued
That thou were exile thy good beryued
Right by thy weeping chere I knew yt well
But yet how fer no yet had I not perceived
But thou thy self had told me every del
Nevertheless understand now well this
Thou art not exile out of thy cite
But thou thyself haste taken thy way a miss
A strayed out in to a strange contre
And if thou wene that thou exiled be
Than haste yt put thyself out sekerly
For that power has none over the
But thou thyself will do hit wyllyngly
For if you knew or could have in thy mind
As of what land or what cite thou were
Of which thou toke thy nature thy kende
The laws of that land I could the lere
For al the world no may yt not conquer
Not leke Athenes that many lords had
But one lord one law none other there
That of his multitude is blithe glad
He is full fain that folk will to him draw
And willingly he will no wight forlete
For to obey under his lustey law
Is lyberte the grettest that may be get
No knoueste thou not or else thou haste forget
The law yt alwey there is had used
Ho so that lust theryn to bylde his sete
The lord he will not yt he be refused
And ho so will in that place a byden still
He may deserve none aduersyte
But also soon as he forleteth that will
He may no longer in that pales be
For he forfeteh then his lyberte
And flees his contre of his awne assent
when that he sues sensualyte
Forletynge reason in his iugemente
Thou ask where the manner of this place
Me with the for to morn moves ought
Me moves more the manner of thy face
For this prison moves me right nought
Thy lybrary with glass Iuery wrought
Nether thy books set I at no price
But I seek the habit of thy thought
Where I have made a sete at my deuyse
For in thy heart I have no books put
But things that makes books precious
Sotel sentence of conning of wit
wiche un to me was more delicyous
Of thy meret thou haste remembered ous
The wiche you haste on come wealth bestow
Full sothe yt is not suspecious
Some haste you said yet well more I know
Thou haste also rehearsed furdermore
The manner of thyn accusation
And the gilt that thou art grieved fore
Full honest in thyn estimation
None harm deserved no dampnation
But rather reward for thy besynesse
And now for thy remuneration
Thou haste no thing but harm heuynesse
And shortly haste rehearsed every del
The false frauds of thyn accusers
wiche the come peple knoueth wele
The wrongful dome eke of the senators
That rather shulde have ben thy defensours
Thou soroest also greatly for my blame
The wyche I bear for the of surfetours
Thou welest eke the leasing of thy fame
But at last with fortune began thou chide
That mede with meret was even wey
why surfetours ben suffered in there pride
And good men a grieved thus I herd ye sey
And in thy songe to god thus began thou pray
That ye ylke piece that is in heaven on hey
This wrecched world shulde keep under his key
That now is ruled thus vncertenly
I understand al thyn entention
But yet soon in that other side I se
That much desire of thyn affection
Has now distracted dystrobled the
And put thy mind out of tranquillyte
As sorrow / morning / heuynesse / Ire
And vhyle yt thou art in this degre
Thou may no mighty medicine endure
wherefore we shall attempten assay
Now with a little lighter remedy
That doleful sorrow for to put a wey
That in thy heart is wexen hard dry
with esy salfe a chafe hit and defy
A medicine than that more mighty is
Amenden shall that malice esely
That sorrowful swellynge lightly shall we less
Metru quintu. Capitulu. xi.
Cu phebi radiis.
Philosophia loquitur. Ho so that will in hot somer seson
when that the son in cancer is y set
Sown his corn he worcheth out of reason
And of his trust no dout he shall be let
By that he hath with winter days met
Of other purveyance he shall have need
And but he can govern himself the bet
with akernes his hunger must he fed
And when ye north wind bloueth kine cold
In winter time a very foul he were
In wild wode that gether flowers would
Or ripe grapes in the time of vere
Hit falls not that ceson of the year
The flowers fresh no ripe fruit to find
For god hath set al thing in earth here
To kepen ever one certain course of kind
He no suffers not the stoundes for to mell
That he hath set in certain governance
As in there offyce every thing to dwell
They may not faylen with no variance
what thing that leueth certain ordynance
A bydynge not withyn the course of kende
He prospers not but falls in mischance
He may not faylen of a feeble end
Here before hath philosophy enquered the qualyte condition of the greuance that
this clerk was in. Now here she begins to enquere the rote the original
cause / viche stodeth specially i iii. things one because he soroed
vnskylfully that is to sey of mesure the lost of his temporel goods. The
second stood in error of false opinion trouyng that vvycked mighty men to the
world were by might of vvickednes vvelful. The third that he troued the
enterchaungynge of fortune by vyche often times the good ben depressed and the
wicked resed / was without rule of gods purueance. So the very ground of
al his heuynes / was ignorance or else more verily to sey forgetyng of diuyn
governance / as touching the kende of man / vich error he was fallen in / by
false deduction fro his first principles. for he granted well that god was
maker governor of al. but be cause that he sufferedde vvycked folk to execute
there malice upon the good / vyche execution is very open vvronge / to vyche
vvronge god that is perfyt ryghtuous by no way may consent* wherefore he
supposed that god had forllete the governance of man / committynge there rule to
fortunes vnstabilyte Fro knouen principles by very true deduction / a man is
brought to exclusion of error by conclusions deduced of this principle. So of
this principle that god governs al as presidet to his proper work / viche
Boys confessed / hit ensues well that god forleteth not the gouernace of man
/ but dresses his works rightuously. To vyche conclusion this clerk feled
the contrary. The fallace of this consequent of this foul error then is
founden in iii. things. One in false deduction. A another in defaute of
knouenge of the manner of governance. And the third of knouynge verily the
kind of man. In this his deduction failed that. for cause god vvetyngly
suffers vvronges / he said other god consents to vvronge (viche is
inconvenient) other he forleteth the governance / suffers in that vvyse. but
this foloeth not / for he snffereth vvronges knouyngly both by rightuous by
mercy yet he consents not no farleteh not his governance By ryghtuesnes he
may compelle no creature a geyn the principal properte of his kende. But the
properte of man vvyl is for to be fre to good or to yuel / tha shall not god
bereave him that lyberte. but rightuosly suffers him choose so that for his
good chose he may deserve mede / for his bad chose he deserves pain. if god
should bereave him this lyberte the failed mercy / for the must he needs utterly
destroy him / or put him i to endless punesmente. for bereuynge the principal
properte of a creature / that creature is utterly destroed. as bereave hete fro
fire / then is yt no fire Right so bereave lyberte fro fre vvyl / then is yt no
vvyl. But sy^h a spiret may not be destroyed. if he shulde less this lyberte of
vvyl / (...) must then anon be put in to endless punishment / this must a
void mercy. This may be proved thus. if god left this euel vnponeshed finally
/ then might he seem to consent to euel / but that may he not no more no may he
leave yt finally vnponeshed. if he berafte him his liberte / then might he never
after deserve mede in releuynge of his puneshment / then must he needs be
endless in pain / wherefore of mercy of rightuesnesse he suffers wickedness.
But here might be saed that god of his goodness might let the execution of
such malicious purpose / No dout so he doth for the more partey. For though
malice be executed / yet fails yt the full intent of his execution.

Prosa sexta. Capitulum xij.
Primu igitur pateris.
But first she said wilt thou suffer me
Now with a few demands for to feel
The very kende of thy infirmyte
And al the ground to gropen every del
that I may wet how you might have thy heal
Boecius) Now says on {quod} I what ye lust
That ye enserche my sore I will hit well
And I shall answer as me thinks best
Phia) Sey meshe said thou is this world demened
As vhether by fortune his variance
Or else thou trouest yt hit is sustened
By reason of some certain ordynance
Boethius) That god knoueth yt hath al in gouernace
This dout I not / but truly I believe
Come never yt day yt me befall that chance
Out of my heart that sentence for to meve
Phia) Right as you say {quod} she so hit is
And in thy songe vhyle er right so thou mente
But neuerthelater thy complaint was this
That god on man set no gouernemente
No to there works takes he none entente
That thing yt was yt thou began weep wele
Al other thing thou would well consent
That god had set hit at certain gouernele
Oh that I wonder now full hugely
Sith thou in such a sentence art y set
That thou art seek af any malady
Some thing there is whereby thy heal is let
wherefore the ground I shall enserchen bet
Sith god himself al things rules
Thus say thou while er / but say me yet
By what gouernmentes as the seems
Boecius) your sentence {quod} I have I not conceived
I can not answer to your question
Phia) In soth {quod} she now am I not deceived
The causes of thy perturbation
I know them well by estimation
But sey me yet if thou have this in thy mind
To what purpose by inclination
Draeth fynally ye come course of kind
Boecius) I have {quod} I herd tel yt here be forn
But drerynesse hath marred al my thought
Phia) yet hast you not {quod} she thy wit forloren
That you no wost ho hath this world y wrought
Boecius) O god {quod} I hath al thing forth y broft
Phia) I wonder then she said how may this be
Of the beginning sith thou doutest nofte
The end may not ben vnknouen pard
This is the kind of such desturbelance
That they may meue a man out of his place
But nevertheless such manner of greuance
No may him not al utterly arace
No put him fully fro the state of grace
Might thou remember that you art a man
Boecius) In sothe {quod} I this were a wonder case
if I should not my self in mind han
Phia) yet cannest you {quod} she tellen furdermore
The kyndly {pro}pert of man what yt is
Boecius (ye {quod} I as I have herd be fore
A reasonable best with dedlynesse
That I am such I know will confess
Phia) Nought else {quod}, she knouest you of thy kende
Boecius) In sothe {quod} I noft else as I gece
No noght but this can I have in my mind
Phia) A another cause now know I well {quod} she
Of thy desese that I wonder great
wiche is the ground of thyn infirmyte
For what you art thou hast thyself forget
wherefore the reason fully have we get
Of thy desese / furdermore a mene
How that thou shalt yt utterly forlete
And thou to helthe be restored clean
For cause thou art confounded in thy wit
with the forgetynge of thy self / for thy
That fro thy good in exile art thou put
Thou wenest / complain pyteosly
And furdermore also as suppose I
For you no knouest what the end of things is
Thou trouest that wrecches full of felony
That they have very might welthynesse
Thou hast forget by wiche gouernementes
This world is led this make you thy colour
That these fortunes enterchaungementes
Ben fletynge thus withouten governor
Lo these ben causes of right great vygour
Not only to sekenesse desese
But un to death if that you fail succour
That may the with these bitter pains less
yet nature hath not al forsaken the
worth thanks be the auctor of thy heal
we have yet one comfort that I se
That shall thy sorrow slaken every del
This sothfast sentence have we saved well
That god this world hath in his governance
Thus you beleuest as I conceive and feel
And nought subject to haps variance
No dread ye nought for of this little schyn
A lyfly hete shall spryngen in thy breast
But for asmoche as mighty medycyn
To give the yet the time is not best
And for as much as minds thus oppressed
Haueth this nature condition
That when they have true conceits lest
They clothe themself in false opynyon
whereof derknesse perturbation
May wexen up that fully will destroy
The sith of true consideration
where for I shall a say sotelly
To a void with some esey remedy
This derke cloud if yt may voided be
Of false affection / and esely
The very lyth then migth thou know see
Metru. vij. Capitulum xiij.
Nubi{bus} atris codita nullu.
The sterres covered with the clouds blake
No may not clearly cast down there lyth
And when ye wode south wind doth a wake
He waleweth up the see withe hugy might
The wawes then yt were clear bright
Leke as the glass or as the somers day
with fylthe yt is resolved ben on hyth
And fro these wawes lets our sight always
The river rennynge out of hye montens
Is often time withstanden hugely
As by some stone enconterynge there a gens
The which is fallen fro some rock on hy
if thou therefore wilt seyn ententyfly
with true beholdynge truths for to deem
Loo / take this path hold yt certenly
Gladness dread out of thy heart thou fleyn
No Joy thou nought of worldly welthynes
No dread ye nothing of this worldly dine
No hope thou not that transitory is
No sorrow thou nought but if yt be for sin
For every thofte that these regneth in
Troble derke yt is may not se
He is so wrast a way he may nofte win
And bridled so that he may not be fre
Incipit Liber secundus.
Prosa prima. Capitulum secuudum.
Post hec paulisper
THen after this a stounde she held her still
And when she by a temporet stylnesse
Saw well yt mine attention my will
was set to heren her with sobernesse
Thus she began if yt be as I gese
Quod she / yt I the ground cause know
Of al the habit of thy heuynesse
I can the tellen fully as I trow
In thy desire thou soroest complain
Upon fortune that with the was a vhyle
which that hath perverted as thou feynest
Thastate of thy courage in this exile
I understand her wrenches her while
Of the ylke fortune wonderly dysgesed
The wiche to them that so her lust beguile
Not first in the / but ever she hath them used
She will be pleasant famylyer
Full blandesshynge / full soft deboner
Till that her leke for to change her chere
And atlast forlete them in despere
Al out of hope that ever she will repair
if that thou knew her kende her desert
That thou by her no had no thing fair
No nought y lost thou should know aperte
But as I trow withouten great travail
we shall reuoken this to thy science
For thou were wont to dyspute assail
with manly words drawn of my science
when that she blandeshynge in thy presence
So pleased the / but certain sothe is this
There falls never such soden chaungementes
That your courage somewhat no changed is
So is yt now befall hit is no nay
That thou art put out of tranquillyte
But time yt is to tasten assay
Some soft things that sweet lustey be
That when yt hath his deueyr don in the
I hope yt shall the amend dyspose
That stronger drynkes may have there entre
That shall the helen up as I suppose
Com forth now swetnesse retoryen
with sotelty of thy suasyon
Wiche only then thy ways can demene
When thou no leuest our institution
Mysyke also with swetnesse of thy soun
That art a damsel of our awne house
Attempre well thy tunes up down
That to this man may be delycyous
what is yt man / whereof can you complain
what is the cause of al thy heuynesse
Some new or uncouth things hast thou seyn
Fortune a geyn the only turned is
Now trouest thou so / than err thou y wis
For always such her manners has be
But she hath kept in the her stabelnesse
That kendly stands in mutabilyte
Right such she was with al her blandyshynge
when she such flaterynge plesance began the make
To lere the lusten in these wordly things
That passes right as doth the clouds blake
Take heed / that blind goddas hast thou take
with doble face of doubtful adventure
For she yt is that hath the now forsake
Of whose frendshep there may no man be sure
if thou approve in thyn opynyon
Her goodness when she is to thy plesance
Take thou a worth than her condition
And use yt must thou with her varyance
Complain ye nought make no contraryance
And if the greases of her treachery
Than cast her of / despise her with mischance
That to pley is wont so harmfully
The cause yt hath the now with sorrow schent
Should move the now with Joy lustiness
She hath the left / ye which er she be went
There is no wight that may have sekernesse
And hold thou this as for a welthynesse
Of preciosty / that thus a way shall slyde
And now so dere to the ye presence is
Of this fortune vnfaythful to a bide
And when she goes / to morn she you makes
Since halden at your will she may not be
She leueth wrecches the yt she forsakes
She is nofte else than / as seems me
That so vncertenly will fro you fl
But sign of mischief that shall after fall
Loo than / is this al your felycyte
Nought but a fair that ye foloeth al
For yt suffices not I the ensure
Only to seyn one thing that is present
The end of things prudens doth mesure
For vhy this divers interchaungement
For wele to woo that fortune hath the sent
Hit should the tech her manace noft to dread
No to her blandyce take rygh none intent
To her behestes take no manner hyde
For at last the behooves need
Since thou hast ones in her yoke y draw
To suffer al that fortune will the bed
with esey heart stand thy lady awe
And if thou to thy lady write a law
To go or come at thyn ordynance
Thy labour loo / avails not an haw
Thou wrongest her with thyn vnsufferance
Now suffer then take yt not to strange
Lest thou her feerser in her wrethe find
And sherpe ye swerdes wiche you may not change
Thou may her not compellen out of kende
For if thou have thy sail up in the wind
Thou may not choose where you shalt a ryue
For what so be the purpose of thy mind
Thou must there / as the weder will the drive
if thou thy corn wolt in the feldes sow
Hit may not wexen as thy wits fain
For in thy thought you must conceive know
Some years ben plenteous some bareyn
No for to grow thou may yt not constrayn
And if yt fail / there to what may thou done
How ever yt be / to whom shalt thou complain
Let nature al her self therewith alone
Thou hast the put under the governance
Of fortune / loo she must thy lady be
Un to her manners owe thou obecyance
And if thou purpose to enforcen the
To stent her vhele of mutabilyte
Of al fowls yet art thou the meste
For when fortune stands in stabilyte
The name of fortune may no longer lest
Metrum primu. Capitulu ij.
Hec cu superba
Philosophia loquitur. When yt thus fortune with her hands proute
Hath thus her stoundes changed to fro
As Erinus Erinus is a river that sometime runs one way / sometime a another
so that she uses no ready course / no certain in to nether partey. So fares
fortune byche indifferently and vncertenly gives both mischeffe and
prosperite.
that runs in and out
So wonderly her vhele begenneth to go
Full ryal kings casts she douue in woo
The which some time many a man began dread
And some that lies dyscomfet undo
Loo these untrusty / lyfteth up your head
She thus of wrecches has no pity
Though that they weyle weep day night
She scorns eke so wonder hard is she
The wailing that herself hath them dyght
Loo thus she plays thus proves she her might
To her servants showing many a wonder
For he that hye in welthes was now right
withyn an hour he lies cast under
Prosa ij. Capitulu iij.
Vellem autem tecum.
Philosophia loquitur. ME lnst to plede a little now with the
with such words as fortune may
Loo saith she / right now loke thyself se
Me seems well such words might she say
what is ye man / complaining every day
what have I gilt / what wrong have I ye wrought
what good of thyn have I berafta way
That was thyn awne or with thy selfen brought
Assign thou I shall soon appear
Be fore a Jug that can this case redress
And if thou can thy purpose prouen clear
Of hye astate / riches / or worthiness
To any man that leueth in dedlynesse
That these things should appropryat be
And certenly I shall the grant express
That thyn yt was that you now ask me
When yt nature in to this world the brought
Out fro thy moder where that you began
I toke the nedy / naked / with nought
And I the noryshed with my goods than
And al with favour noreshed the to man
wherefore impatient I find the now
Have I the wronged / tel me if thou can
As in vhat points / where with / as how
with al goods longing to my right
I had the fully fret with habundance
why should yt not be fully in my might
As fro the same / wiche that I avaunce
Mine hand withdrauen after my plesance
The Joys thou had yt was of my grace
Hit was not thine / take yt for no greuance
with wrong thou the complain in this case
Why playnest you I do the no duress
No violence as every man may trowen
well leketh me such honour riches
Right as me leketh fully to be stawen
The mayne need must there lady known
with me they come with me must they wend
This dare I say if they had ben thyn awne
Thou might never have lost them in this kende
where I be she yt only am forhyght
To execute the custom of my law
The heaven may the days make bright
And eke at night she may her light withdraw
The year also the earth may bestrawe
withe flowers them efte with winter shynde
The see may now be calm withouten wawe
And now with styffe storms torn wend
But the said vnfulsome man couetyse
Me wold now to stabelnesse bind
A genst mine awne manner my wise
But this my might is / this play is my kind
My swyfte vhyle thus up down I wind
The hye low to enterchaungen oft
That now be forn is / efte mot be behind
That now is law / me lust to set a loft
Now worth upon my vhele if yt the lust
But on this covenant yt I shall the say
Thou must desced a geyn there to thou trust
when that the reason asks of my play
No knew thou not my manners er this day
How Cresus that was called king of Lyde
That Cyrus oft a feared with great a fray
yet Cyrus toke him in his most pride
And in the fire he cast him for to brenne
Loo how ye effect was torn to reverse
A little rain defended him fro then
what befell him after books doth rehearse
And when that Paule had take ye king of Perse
This Paule began on him weep for pure pity
what cries al tragedyens verse
But playneth al on mine vnstabylyte
Tragedies hen dytes made of certain persons / vyche begynnethe in vvelthe and
prosperyte / and ends in myscheffe aduersyte
They wepeth yt sodenlyche I smite
And welful realms oft I overthrow
Thou learned this when you were yonge lyte
Thou hast not yet forgeten as I trow
That Iupiter ij. tonnes had bestow
Withyn the thresfold of hes celer laid
That one was good wine every man to know
That other nofte / now hast thou both assayed
And vhat if you more plenty hast y take
Lo of the better part of lustynesse
what if I yet have the not al forsake
what if so be that mine vnstabelnesse
May give the hope of better after this
For vhy dysmay the no thing in thy thought
No withyn ye realm that come is
Thy proper law to use / covet ye nought
Metrum ij. Capitulu iiij.
Si quantas rapidus.
Phia loquitur. Though plenty wiche yt cleped is goods
Of wordly good / wold cast un you at ones
As many habundances of rychesse
Loo as the see hath small gravel stones
Other as sterres when full many one is
Full clerly shynynge in a lusty even
yet this mankend of there ruthful moans
No there complaints can they not leven
And though yt god of his benygnyte
There prayer here gladly wold them please
And of hes goods grant them great plente
Of riches honour fully to there es
There couetys yet / may there no thing pese
There cruel raven gapes after more
And always ben complaining of desese
And set at nofte al that they had before
what manner brydel might a man deuyse
This wrecched lust to rulen restrayn
To this vnthryfty men couetyse
That ever ye more they have the more they pleyn
The thirst of having brenneth them with peyn
For he that nedeles so fereful is
And weyleth so / forsooth I dare well sayn
He is not rich though al the world were his
Prosa iij. Capitulu v.
Hijs igitur verbis.
Phia loquitur. if that fortune might for her selfen sayn
Right in these wise as I have said to the
Thou hast not what one word to speak a geyn
And if thou have now say yt un to me
Defend thy quarrel (if thou can) let see
Thou shalt be herd till that you have rehearsed
And if thou can not let thy plaints be
Vnlaful quarrel ought to ben amerced
Boecius) Certain {quod} I full fair is this to hire
Of retoryke al full / honey sweet
wiche only while they souneth in mine ere
They lusts well / but soon yt is forget
For my desese so light is not to let
For al so smartly as your songe is cessed
The gruggynge of my greuance is so great
That al my mind with morning is oppressed
Phia) Right so yt is she saed / but yet for that
This is no remedy for thy sekenesse
But a geyn thy sorwes obstynat
A geyn thyn helthe yt is a manar less
But when I see that better seson is
Of such as shall the percen to the rote
I shall the serve / al that is a miss
Hit shall redress hoelly be thy boat
But lest yt thou thy self a wrecche hold
Now wold I wet where you remember not
The manner of thy welthes many a fold
Boecius) I hold my pees {quod} I saeth on your thought
Phia) when you she saed were so low y brought
As orphelyn in manner desolate
Fortune for the so goodly had y wrought
Thou were in cure of men of hye astate
And drawn sith in to affynyte
Of princes of men of governance
Full lefe to lords / er thou might be
Ought worth thy self in wordly suffysance
And set in hye degre of alliance
Ho saed not then that you were fully bleste
Thy fader in law whom virtue doth avaunce
Thy wyf also so goodly honest
Thy sons both sitting by thy side
your worship went on every man mouth
And for to let these come things slyde
what dygnytes thou had in thy youth
That to full old men ben werned in sothe
But I delyte to tellen more express
Of soleyn things stranger uncouth
How thou were wrapped al in welthynesse
if any thing that mortal is in kende
with eny fruit of bliss be founden here
There may no myschef put out of thy mind
That day yt when thy sons both in fere
Hadden take thastate of consuyler
And with a semble fro thy hons y lad
Of senators lords that there were
withe hugy press of people blithe glad
And than in court vhen that you saw them sit
In setes belonging to there dygnyte
There won you Joy of eloquence wit
As pronouncer of kings nobylyte
Of al that folk behaldynge upon the
And with thy preysynge as victoryous
So well thou feddest al that comynalte
with geftes of thy words glorious
Thou feoffedest fortune then with words gay
while she the norshed in her awne delyce
And such guerdon fro her thou bare a way
The wiche in sothe was so hye a price
That never before that day at my deuyce
She granted not un to no comyner
will thou a count with fortune / art thou wise
Of a rereage thou shalt not passen clear
For now at arst she has on the behold
And prynched on the with a bitter ye
But now considering clearly if you would
The manner of thy welthes by by
Of al thy Joys leuynge lustely
And in that other side thy heuynesse
A counted al / yet may thou not deny
That thou no hast yet a part of welthynesse
And if thou hold thy self unfortunate
Now for asmoche as these yt welthes semen
Ben passed thus / no cause hast you for that
That thou in mischief should thy selfen demen
For these sorrows yt trobeleth thus thyn heart
And haldest them as for a grievous peyne
No dout the nought but fro the will they stert
Then art thou set in welthynesse a geyn
And will thou trow that you the first be
That to this lyf came as a soden gyst
Or will thou trow yt any stabylyte
In man lyf be where upon to trust
This knouest thou well yt is nothing vnwyst
That in an hour a man is at an end
Loo al your lyf with death so is bet wit
Now here ye ben / here a way ye wend
And if so be as yt betydeth selde
That in fortune is any faythfulnesse
Abiding with man till he the gost up eld
The last day yet of your lyf y wis
A manner death eke un to fortune is
what fors is than where she the forsakes
Fleing fro the of her vntrustynesse
Or thou fro her / when death a way the takes
Metrum iij. Capitulu vj.
Cum polo phebus.
Philosophia loquitur VHen that phebus begins for to sprede
Her bright bemes out on every side
As by the morning / the sterres for dread
They wexeth pale beginning them to hyde
Forestes eke that large ben and wide
Full fresly in the first somer ceson
The zephirus right as yt were for pride
with flowers hath depainted / you to plesen
And when that austere puts out his horns
And bitter blasts gynneth for to blow
A bateth than the beutey of the thorns
Thus al your lusts passes in a throw
The see also as enery man may know
Now may be calm withouten mouone
And suddenly er any man will trow
with tempest is yt torn up so down
And sith the form of al this wordly things
So selden is yt that yt stands stable
But changes by so many varyenges
And man fortune is so transmutable
Than wolt thou trust to goods deceyuable
This is a law withouten chaungementes
There may no thing be kendly perdurable
That is engendered of these elements
Prosa iiij. Capitulu vij.
Tum ego / vera inquam
Boecius loquitur. Than said I thus / O worshypful noryshe
Alle virtue to feden and sustain
In al my wit / but if I were vnwyse
I can not wet but sothe is that ye sayn
And of my fortune sothe yt is certain
That wonder smartly hath she me enhanced
But here upon yt is that I complain
That she vndoth wiche yt she had avaunced
For of myshappes to rehersen al
Hit is the worst / for to ben well
And in to myschef aster to ben fall
For this must shend a very heart of steal
Phia) Though you {quod} she thus in thy wits feel
By false conceit of thyn opynyon
The truth no agreueth the never a del
To wit yt her / yet hast thou no reason
And if this Idel name of welthynesse
That so vncerten is / yet moves the
with me now come thyn a counts guess
Of thynghes wiche as yet) thou hast plenty
The wiche you had ever in most deynte
when al in rychesse fortune had the fret
How migh thou plain of thy felycyte
Since that thou hast thy best goods yet
yet whole sound the fader of thy wyf
He leueth loo / honour reverence
Of al man kende / which you with thy lyf
would gladly obey standing in his defence
Symmachus made of al sapience
Al full of virtue of honest
Though he be suer of any violence
As to him self / yet weyleth he for the
Thy witty wyf so full of sobernesse
So chaste / so honest / so debonaer
In short to conclude al her worthiness
Leke to her fader as his kendly heyer
Full loath her lyf she ledeth in despaer
Only to the she kepeth her careful gost
This one thing is that may thy wealth apayre
This grant I well do moan yt most
And of thy sons wiche ben consulers
what shall I sayn / but shortly yt they be
In manner prynte as exemplares
Both of there elder fader of the
And every mortal thing as you may se
Upon this hath his princypal besynes
This live to keep fro al infirmyte
And un to man the derest thing yt is
And these to the ben derer than thy life
I dare yt well affermen certenly
Lo Symmachus / thy sons / thy wife
Thou hast them yet now let thy teres dry
For yet fortune is not thyn enemy
In al / so ferforthe as thyself feign
No yet is not on the so fervently
The tempest fallen as thou the complain
For vhy good holding hath thyn anchor hent
They ben full strong cleueth wonder fast
The wiche / thy comfort of this time present
No hope of better / suffers not to ben past
Boecius) Ow god {quod} I you grant yt yt they last
For vhyle they haldeth how yt ever yt stand
Or how yt ever these wicked wyndes wrast
Yet in some manner shall we flete a land
But how great beauty of mine apparel
Is fro me gon / yowselfen says yt best
Phia) I have {quod} she if yt may ought a veil
Promoted somewhat yt thou were in rest
But if so be thou thy selfen tempest
Dysplesed with the sort of al thy lyf
How should than thy myschef be redressed
if thou wolt always set thyself in stryf
But I no may not suffer thy delyce
Complaining with so grievous heuynesse
Always coniectynge so in thy deuyse
That somewhat wants of thy welthynesse
For hoys that yt leueth in dedlynesse
That in his welthes stands so ordynat
That he no stryueth always more or lass
with the qualyte of his astate
Full anguesous they ben as for ye nones
The kende of wordly wealth I sey / for vhy
For other they comes not al at ones
Or they no stands never stabelly
For these hath riches loo habundantly
Him shames that his lynage is so lowe
And these loo is renowned nobelly
Yet had he lever for pouerte ben unknow
Another hath both renoune riches
He hath no wyf wherefore he is dysplesed
These hath a wyf that to him lusty is
Defaute of issue makes him be desesed
He note ho with his goods shall be sesed
And these hath issue to his lust perchance
yet happily of there vice he is vnesed
And weyleth of there wicked governance
wherefore in sothe there is no wight yt can
with proper fortune hold hemself a paed
For why some thing is feled of every man
That none knows but he that hath assaed
And he that knoueth he is thereof a frayed
Set this thereto ye every welful wight
Full tender is to suffer mysapayed
If al thing fall not to his will a right
And he that wordly is most fortunate
And set most hyely in prosperyte
Full little thing his bliss may abate
That is not used in aduersyte
How many trouest you in this world there be
if that they had ye lest bliss of. vij.
That I can tel of thy felicyte
They wold supposen that they were in heaven
This place of exile as you hast yt named
Good contre is to them that in yt ben
And never the worse though yt of ye be blamed
Thou art no wrecche but thou thyself yt wene
Though fantasy have brought ye thus in ten
And every fortune there a geyn is good
Ho so can in patience himself demene
And suffer softly with an esy mode
Now tel me thus what wilful man is that
That stondeth in bliss as he can deuyse
That sometime nold changen his astate
when patience is put out of service
what trobel with your welthes many a wise
Is menged / if ye could yt have in mind
Though they be sweet to such as them use
They will not be with hold when they wend
Than may ye seyn by open euydence
The myschef of these mortal things thus
They stands not though thou have patience
No lusts not in al thy anguysous
O folly / vnwyt / so erroneus
Of mortal folk seeking themself without
your welthynesse hit so plentuous
Is set withyn yourself withouten dout
I shall the show of thy felycyte
A soueren point / entend what I shall say
Is any thing so dere worth un to the
As is thyself thou wolt answer me nay
if thou be hole thyn awne conclude I may
Thou haste that thou no would forlete
The wiche fortune may not bereuen a way
Till thou thyself yt wylfully forfete
And that thou know yt things temporel
May not be such wherein thou should find
Thy blysfulnesse / now understand me well
And take these words hoelly to thy mind
Since blysfulnesse is sovereign good of kind
Hose lyf is reason intellygence
And sovereign good is thing yt hath no end
No may beraft the by no violence
Than upon this I may conclude seyn
That these fortunes mutabilyte
To blesfulnesse may no thing attain
No is not had by such vnstabylyte
And wham so that this false felicyte
Thus carries forth / he wot or wot yt not
How false she is always hath y be
This division is immedyat
if he no wot hit not he is deceived
what bliss may be than in this ignorance
And if so be he hath well a perceived
The manner of her kyndly varyance
He dredeth than with full great greuance
To less that thing yt lightly may be gon
So that this dread with lunge continuance
withdraws his bliss wiche yt he trust upon
Other if yt be so that he less his bliss
He weans to stand in repreffe in scorn
And no dout full little good yt is
whose lost with esey heart may be born
And thou art he to vhom that here be forn
Hit has be showed by demonstration
That man soul no may not be forlorn
As thing that turns to corruption
And clear yt is that al this wordly wele
As fro you men with death a way shall wende^
Than may yt not be doubted never a del
But sothe yt is by reason by kende
if wordly bliss should be your fynal end
And very form of al your welthynesse
Than every creature of mortal kende
with death must tornen in to wrecchednesse
But we have wit of many one here be fore
To seek the fruit of bliss in there intent
That haueth yt bought full bitterly sore
By death / by dolor / by pains torment
How might yt be then that this lyffe present
with any lusts / might you welful make
Sith yt is so that vhen this lyffe is went
They be no wrecches wiche hit hath forsake
Metrum iiij. Capitulu viij.
Quisquis volet
Phia loquitur. HO so that lust to byld hemself a sete
That should be mighty / sure / {per}durable
That bitter Eurus brese yt nought no beat
No fers floddes make yt not meueable
The hye hills be not profytable
And moystey sands must he needs exchew
For on the mounteyn may no thing be stable
Nether in sand no thing be trwe
For vhy / the south wynd blows sore a loft
That on the monteyn may no thing be sure
And sands that so lose ben soft
An heavy borden may they not endnre
To fl therefore this perylous adventure
A syker sete to set thy self a pone
Take this in mind do thereto thy cure
To byld a law hows on a syker stone
That is to sayn yt thou shalt set al thy mind
Upon that bliss that ever shall a bide
And though so fall that the wood wind
Torn up down the see on every side
In very rest / thou may thy selfen hyde
As in thy castle full of blesfulnesse
In lusty age then shall the well be tide
And set at nought this wordly wrecchednesse
Prosa v. Capitulu ix
Sed quonia rationum.
Phia loquitur. But for asmoche as I have don this
By my reason descendynge in to the
To vsen now (I trow that time is)
Some medicine that more mighty be
Now understand / al were yt so pard
That goods wiche yt fortune hath bestowen
Should standen ever in perdurabelte
How might thou ever accopte them for thy awne
And these same that ye acompte them best
if that they were consydred as they ought
Full foul they sholden seem dyshoneste
And ben a counted for a thing of nought
Now of riches how seems in thy thought
why ben they good / vhether of there proper kind
Or for they ben in to your ward y brought
And should ben good till yt they fro you wend
What is yt. / gold wiche that ye cal riches
Or money gadred in your tresory
But these shows more there worthiness
In putting out / then keeping pryuely
For auarous men ben hated comenly
And every wight will have them in dysdeyn
And tho that will dyspenden largly
They shall have love worship there a geyn
And this good that you dyspendest thus
when yt is spent a bids not with the
Than is thy money only precious
when thou yt hast pnt a way fro the
Than in dyspendynge lies the precyouste
Of your tresour not in hepes great
Hit stent you never at no comodyte
No avails no thing till yt be forlete
And what if al the gold that al men han
As hit is now in dystribution
were assembled in an hepe / and than
One man hit had in his possession
This gold then by this supposition
Al other men must nedy make bare
And one man rich this is no question
Beleuynge after al the world in care
A voice universal (I may conclude)
At ones may without apeyrement
Fulfylle the years of a multitude
your riches is not so suffycyant
For till they be departed y spent
To many men no may they not be taken
And these men fro whom they ben y went
They leave the pour when they have the forsaken
O streyte pour that riches may I cal
wyche al men no may not have at ones
No one have al / but if that other al
For pouerte for need make there moans
And eke I marvel that these precious stones
That ye be haldeth them so lustely
And fayneth beauty in things where none is
And there hit is ye can hit not a spy
And what thing is hit? brightness of colour
why that this perry seems you so fair
This wet ye well the bryghtnesse is not your
No nought of you / but only hit is there
As by a light reboundynge in the air
And much I marvel vhy ye wonder so
On things that may be a mend no pair
Your kendly good by noght that they may do
what thing is that yt lacks lyffe light
what may be lekened to a creature
That bears lyffe / reason hath there with
That should be deemed fair as by nature
And though they draw a beauty in figure
Of him that made hit / yet in your presence
They may not worthy ben in no mesure
To be merueled of your excellence
And where these feldes that ben fair grene
So full of flowers delyteth ought your sight
Boeci{us}) why should they not said I since yt they ben
A fair part of ye work of god al might
For so some times when the see is bright
we wonder much / when the heaven is clear
Upon the moan sterres in the night
And on the son that shines a monge ous here
Phia) But apperteyneh {quod} she ought to the
May thou that beauty in thy selfen find
Dare thou reioycen that they in the be
As thing subjected in thy propre kind
Art thou depainted seems in thy mind
with flowers of the first somer seson
Or art thou as a tree with rote rynde
May thou noryshe fruit? trouest you this by reason
And vherfore art thou rauesshed so in veyn
As though these goods should be thyn awne
The wyche fro the ben utterly foreyn
And wonder fer as every man may known
For vhy fortune (thou may hit fully trowen
No may not make them thyn for to ben
The wych nature has else vhere bestowen
And utterly made fro the alyen
For vhy the fruit yt doth on earth encrecen
Deserves un to bestes sustynance
And little thing your need may a cessen
So that nature have her suffysance
why should you then desire abundance
And ask of fortune superfluyte
Sith that nature may have her plesance
with little thing in pryse quantyte
And if thou wolt her suffysance oppress
with superfluyte surfetously
Other hit will the bring in heuynesse
Other else the a noyen grievously
But of this one thing certain meruyl I
That thou would semen fair glorious
As for to ben clothed ryally
In divers shappe colour precious
For if in clothes any beauty be
where by the sight is fair aggreable
That appertains no thing un to the
But that matter hald I meruylable
Other the wit of him is commendable
That made this thing this may be cause of wond
But that you should therefore be honourable
As in your kend / ye ben full fer a sounder
Or for to walken with a hugy route
And of mayne to be copyous
May make the blysful / nay wythouten dout
For I suppose that they ben vicious
They ben a grievous charge un to thy house
And may be cause of thy destruction
And what if they be good virtuous
And very honest of condition
why should there virtue other honest
Be accounted as part of thy riches
Or wherefore should thou commended be
Or have a thank of foreyn worthiness
Loo in al these rehearsed here express
The wyche as thou acomptest in thy thought
As for thy goods clearly as I guess
I have the showed that thyn be they nought
In wych things as I have said beforn
if thou no lusty beauty can find
why soroest thou yt thou them hast forloren
Or of the having enIoyest in thy mind
if they be fair as of there awne kind
what may that apperteyn un to the
For had they ben fro the wythouten end
Also fair lusty had they be
For no dout they be not precious
For thou them hast kepest besely
But for they seemed the delycyous
Thou them accompest in thy tresory
what crave ye then with so great a cry
That ye on fortune calls thus alwey
with abundance in sothe / as suppose I
ye seeks for to dryven need a way
But yet the contrary to your intent doth fall
For you needs help (not little) to maynteyn
And for to keep your precious things al
Lest so be fall that ye hit less a geyn
So much the more your labour is in vayn
That ye must live in heuynesse dread
And this is soth also that I shall sayn
Ho so myche hath / of much thing hath need
And little thing him needs certenly
That can his plenty mesure on this wise
Right even as nature needs kendly
And not un to the lust of couetyce
No can you not your selfen better advise
To se what good is set your self wythyn
But needs will ye seken deuyse
In strange things your goods for to win
And thus of things that should be worthiest
The ordre is perverted up so down
The wyche is called a dyuyne best
By kendly might meret of reason
No can not known his awne condition
Nor se the meret of his excellence
But by the desire of vayn possession
Trusts wordly riches to be his defence
Al other bestes haldeth them self a payed
Of beauty that wythyn them self is
But ye men the wyche as I have said
your god hath set you in such a worthiness
That in your souls ye bears his lekenesse
And be in kende so nobel a creature
ye seeks here by fylthe wrecchednesse
To enblemesshe your excellent nature
ye understand not no will not se
what wrong ye do un to your creator
Sith he man kind hath set in this degre
Al erthly things to exceed in vaylour
ye do your dygnyte great dishonour
To thrast hit under most unworthy things
Right as hit were a lord governor
wold make him subject to his vnderlynges
For if ye should have this entention
That al thing wyche is had of every wight
Should more be set of reputation
Than he that hath or aweth hit by right
ye do your self shame great vnhyght
So foul things / sith ye deem them yours
Submyttynge you as in your awne sight
To things where of ye ben the possessors
At your desert this falls verament
The kind of man loo stands in this degre
That only than he is most excellent
when that he knows his awne dygnyte
And there a geyn eftsoon when that he
No can not know his awne worthiness
He is be nethen bestyalyte
And vndercast to al wrecchednesse
A rude best his nature uses thus
To may not know hemselfen kyndly
In man hit is full foul vicious
His nature to forleten folely
And thus your error shows openly
There ye supposes that such accydentes
your kende that is so worthy so hy
Should make fair by foreyn ornaments
Hit may not be that reason hath forfended
For if such accydentes be fair gay
These accydentes ought to be commended
But that covered thing hit is no nay
In his fylthe a bids still al way
And I deny utterly dyspreue
That any thing is good / that harmen may
Or ought the hauer noyen or a grieve
Now is this soth in certain as I guess
Thou wolt hit say / I gabbe not of this
For oft hit falls that tresour riches
Makes her lords for to fare a miss
Sith every wrecched foul that cursed is
Such gold tresour vhos that ever hit be
He will coueyte will that hit were his
And therefore put his lyffe in Ieparde
And only them he holds worthiest
That of such gold tresour haueth y now
For vhy he besyeth him with outen rest
To have that good no recks he not how
But thou that leuest in such a dread now
As though you should with swerd or sphere be stonge
Had you ben pour hit had ben for thy prow
Be fore the theffe thou may have gon songe
Oh / wonder clear is this felycyte
Of mortal thing worthy to be soft
That reueth a man of his tranquyllyte
And makes him destrobled in his thought
I note how dere that bliss may be boght
A man to win such a welfulnesse
Thou art in pees the vhyle thou hast hit noght
when thou hit hast thou lesest thy sykernesse
Metru. v. Capitulu x.
Felix nimiu prior etas.
Phia loquitur. Full wonder blysful was that rather age
what time yt men couth haled them self a paid
To fed them self with out such outrage
With mete that true feldes had a rayd
With akernes there hunger was a laid
And so they couth cessen there talent
They had as yet no quenty craft assayd
As clarrey for to make / no pyment
To dye purper couth they not bethynke
The white flees with venem tyryen
The rennynge river gave them lusty drink
And holsom sleep they toke upon the grene
The Pynus that so full of branches ben
That was there house to keep them under shade
The see to kerue no ships were there seyn
There was no man that marchaundyse made
Them leked not to saylen up down
But kept them self there they were bred
Tho was full husche the cruel claryoune
with eyger hate there was no blod y shed
No there with was none armour yet be bled
For in that time ho durst have ben so wood
Such bitter wondes yt he wold not dred
wythouten mede for to less his blood
I wold our time might tornen certenly
And these manners always with ous dwell
But love of having brenneth fervently
More ferser than the very fire of hell
Allas ho was that man yt wold him mel
This gold gems yt were covered thus
That first began to mine I can not tel
But that he found a perel precious
Prosa. vj. Capitulu.xj.
Quid aunt de dignitati{bus}
Phia loquitur. But furdermore what shall I tel or sayn
Of hye power or else of dygnyte
The wyche ye magnyfyeth so in vayn
As though they should as hye as heuens be
Rygh as a thing of hye felycyte
And folely ye fails al a miss
No can ye not wythyn your wits se
where that very dygnyte power is
And if hit so be that a wrecched wight
As often hath hit fallen hire before
In hye astate or dygnyte be dyght
How fers a flod may harmen you so sore
The fire of Ethna may not harmen more
That blasts out brenneth every side
Such a wretch had better ben un bore
Than such astates should to him betide
And certes thou remembreste as I guess
Of the consulers dygnyte
That was the hyeste astate of worthiness
In the beginning of your lyberte
They were so full of pride cruelte
wherefore your elders wold hit have remeued
And for the same cause fro your cite
The name of king was voided repryued
And if so be that good men be raised
To hye astate as selden is that chance
Ho is therefore of reason to be praised
Not that astate / but there good governance
So than in virtue lies the suffysance
where by that honour comes to dygnyte
And dygnyte not by contraryance
Makes not virtue worshypful to be
This power which yt is so sore y soft
So dere worth so clear in your entente
what thing is hit / vhy behald ye nofte
To wiche things ye ben presydent
And vher upon your power is extent
what if thou saw a wrecched mouse a lone
To cleymen power or government
Of other myse / thou would laughed soon
And if thou would behalden in thy mind
what is the mortal body of a wight
A freyler thing no shalt thou none find
That less hath of power or of might
How soon yt may beflayed or a fright
Or ded by bytynge of a little fly
Or by some worm that crepen may in right
withyn a man body privily
And ho is he yt may do strength or fors
Or vsen might or power / say me this
But only on a corruptyble cors
Right of the same kende / that is his
Other on thing / that more unworthy is
As on fortune / or vhose might may attain
By hye astate / power ^or worthiness
A fre courage to arteyn or constrayn
Steadfast that hath hemself in rest
And knetteh himself in reason every del
May thou his piece beryue out of his breast
un to thy will his purpose to compelle
Of such a man (zeno) as some time yt be fell
A tyrant wold have arted him by peynes
A certain counsel to be wrey and tell
The wiche yt was conspired him a geynes
But then this man boat of his tongues end
And in his face hit spete / so that he
This torment wiche this same tyrant wend
To have ben matter of his cruelte
This wise mau to show his lyberte
Of fre courage that may not be constrained
He made yt cause of virtue for to be
And set at nought how sore yt he were peyned
And what is that of auger or of grame
wherewith a man a another may oppress
That he no may sustain of him the same
if afterward such adventure encresse
As we have learned that Busirides
His awne gestes often had slain
And afterward hemself of Hercules
That was his gest: was don to death a geyn
And Regulus full many one in batel
Of men of affryke / as thou hast yt rad
Had taken vhen he had gouernayle
And cast them in to bonds sore sad
And afterward in manner was he glad
For fere of pain to put forth his hands
To tho that first of him were sore a dread
Than was he fetred in the same bonds
And would you setten by a man might
That may not let the same thing be wrought
un to him selfen of the same wight
The wiche he has in to desese y brought
And if so were as seems in thy thought
if hye astate might kendly conteyn
Any proper good / I no dout yt nought
To wicked folk no should yt nener atteyn
Contrary things yt manner hath not used
As for to ben coniuned y met
For ever yet nature hit hath refused
And sith yt often wicked men ben set
In hye astate as yt will not be let
Than seweth this that no good kendly
Hath that astate yt suffers to be knet
To such that ledeth there lives wyckedly
And loo the same I may well deem of al
Fortunes goods be they more or less
That most abundantly be wont to fall
To wicked people full of cursednesse
For of al these I may suppose guess
That ho so has strength a mighty man he is
And in wham may be founden great swyftnesse
That man is swyft / so most yt needs be
Thus musyke makes a musytion
And phisyke a physician to be
Thus rethoryke makes a retoryen
The kende of every thing (we may well se
Most needs induce his kendly properte
No suffers not to be coiuned to
None effects of contraryouste
But al adverse things puts him fro
But loo your wordly riches hath not that
For to restrain your cursed auaryce
Neither the power of none hye astate
May make him strong that is bound in vice
That ledeth his lyffe in lusts delyce
No dygnyte in shreued folk bestaued
Makes not them the worthier of price
But rather makes them vnthryfty to be knew
And vhy is this? in soth for ye delyten
And reioycen in your fantasy
False names on things to conterfeten
Al other / than becomes them kendly
For vhy / the effects preueth openly
That dygnyte / that power / that rychesse
There names bears al un properly
As I have showed / yt sues even express
And too this same I may concluden well
Of al fortunes things (as seems me)
In which there is no bounte naturel
No cause vhy they should desired be
For selde yt is as every man may se
They Joins them to good virtuous
As may thastate of good plente
Of foreyn thing to neden noght at al
But in hit self to have al suffysance
Of al good to speak in general
And furdermore what say thou / erren they
That such a thing a counten honourable
The wyche is souereyn good / for soth nay
For such a thing may not be repreueable
That to al mortal folk is desyreable
where to is set al there entention
And also power / is hit commendable
Hit is full good hit is no questyon
How should might fro such a thing be rived
The wyche of al thing is worthiest
And noble renoune should yt be reprieved
That is a thing so worthy honest
Sith thing that is most excellent best
Must need be worchypful reverent
For every wight to win hit is full pressed
And there to travels with there hole intent
But for to speak of anger or distress
Or sorrow / murnynge / anguesse / other pain
Such things may not be in blysfulnesse
Therefore of ^uche hit needs noght to sayn
For in full little things men be fain
To have use that may them do solace
And only this to haven in certain
Al wordly men enforcen to purchase
And for this cause desires they abundance
As lordship / fame / delyce / dygnyte
There by to win have suffysance
Of honour / reuoune / might / glad to be
Than is hit good as every man may se
That men so fast seeks in this wise
And so travels euerych in his degre
To win hit as they can best deuyse
In wyche desire apereth openly
How great mighty is the strengh of kende
Sith also be yt that full dyuersly
Dyscordeth loo the sentence of there mind
yet al these consents at one end
As for to love a thing that seems best
For here to nature doth there hertes tend
Till this be had they may not be in rest
Metru ij. Capitulu iiij.
Quatas reru flectat.
Phia loquitur. Hit lust to shown by subtle songs
And by ye so^ne of delectable strenges
How yt nature that mighty is strong
Attempreth the government of things
This great world with al his varynges
So by her laws kepeth susteyneth
And by bonds that haueth no losynges
Full sykerly she binds restrayneth
For though the lyon of that strange land
That hight Pene / the fair cheynes bear
And takes mete by gefte of man hand
And of there sturdy masters haueth fere
Of vhom they often styffe strokes bear
And softly they suffers to be beat
yet be they ones losed of that ger
There old courage will they not forget
For if the hot blod of any best
There foul mowthes have made red
There hye courage that lunge has ben a rest
Hit will repair in to there cruelhed
He casts then his cheynes over head
And roreth fast remembrynge as yt were
His master first of whom he was a dred
with blody teeth than wol he al to tere
The bird that syngeth on ye branch on hye
if he be closed in a cage of tree
And lusty men him serves besely
with metes that full sweet lusty be
if he may ones skyp out be fre
His Insty mete he casts under foot
And to the wode full fast seeks he
And begins to trute with a lusty note
A yerde that is grown up in length
with man hand bowed down to ground
if that the hand remitteh of his strenght
The crop full soon will up a geyn rebound
And when the son is passed days stound
As vndergon the wawes of the west
Full soon he hath a privy path y found
And in the morning a rises in the este
And so a geyn the day begins spring
Thus every thing rejoices in his kende
There recourse a yenwarde for to bring
And besely to tornen to wend
Loo this we should conceyuen in our mind
That al things must there ordre sew
And the beginning Ioynen with the end
And to them selfen make a cercle true
Prosa iij. Capitulu v.
Vos quo{que} terrena.
Phia loquitur. But ye erthly bestes / as yt seems
with a full thynne Imagination
your beginning as yt were ye dremeth
I led by natural inclination
And haueth in manner blind inspection
As of the end of very blysfulnesse
But error of your false affection
Wythdraeth you to very wrecchednesse
Behalde se now if hit may be so
where men atteyn mowen in this wise
Un to that end that nature draeth them to
Of blysfulnesse so as them self deuyse
if so be that there nice couetyce
Of money / honour / or such other thing
May make them fully to them self suffyce
That no good lack as un to there lekynge
And than by these will I grant seyn
That a man may leven blysfully
But than efte in that other side a geyn
if they may not performen verily
Al that they have behyght them utterly
But many goods lacks that they miss
will hit not than apperen plenerly
As a full false colour of blysfulnesse
But first of the I ask this demand
As thou that were not yet full lunge a gone
In wordly welthes fully habundante
whether thou a monge tho welthes euerychone
As in thy courage / never feldest thou none
Distress or greuance no time in thy mind
Boecius) Certain {quod} I yt I can think upon
In that astate couth I me never find
That I no was always somewhat in distress
Phia) And was not this {quod} she the cause vhy
That some thing lacked the as dyst you guess
The wyche thou would have had presently
And some thing eke thou had sykerly
The wyche thou would gladly have forgon
Boecius) Right as ye sayn right so hit is {quod} I
Phia) Thou wyllest {quod} she ye presence of that one
And the absence of that other than
Boecius) {quod} I I grant I can not go there fro
Phia) Now than {quod} s;he needs every man
The same thing that he desires to
Boecius) Full soth hit is {quod} I him needs so
Phia) Now than {quod} she he that needs ought
He is not suffysant (Boecius) I said no
As to him selfen he suffices not
Phia) when thou she said were full in thy riches
Thou suffered then this same vnsuffysance
Boecius) How else {quod} I so hit is express
Phia) Than is hit so {quod} she that abundance
Of wordly good may never a man a vaunce
As to him selfen that he may suffyse
And need nought of foreyn purveyance
And this is that they hight to a complyse
And this is to be consydred I trow
That money hath no kendly resystens
For to defend the lords that them owe
That they no may be raft by violence
Boecins) I grant well {quod} I to your sentence
Phia) And what {quod} she though yt thou sedyst nay
Sith every day men doth there dylygence
The strengest for to get hit if he may
For vhereof else be quarelles moved
That men al day in courts them complain
But for there good is falsely them bereaved
By fors or fraud asks hit a geyn
Boecius) In sothe {quod} I hit is right as ye seyn
Phia) Loo then {quod} she needs every man
Of succour of foreyn help certain
As for to keep the money that they han
Boecius) Ho is that may denyen this {quod} I
PHia) And then {quod} she should him need none
Of such defense no ward certenly
No had he that money that he may forgon
Boecius) There is {quod} I no dout there upon
Phia) Loo than {quod} she al your affyance
Is torn you un to reverse a none
For hit bereaves you your suffysance
where by ye wene in es for to be
And brings you in anguysse distress
Of foreyn help to have necessyte
yet wold I know the manner wise express
How need may ben voided by riches
where rich men no hungreth never a del
Or where they may not thursten will you guess
where they no may no cold in winter feel
But un to this thou wolt answer me soon
That rich men have vherwyth every day
There cold / there thirst / there hunger to for done
As un to this in al I sey not nay
In sothe this will I graunten that they may
By there good be comforted at there need
But utterly to putten need a way
That power have they not wythowten dread
For sith this need that always gapes so
To be fulfilled / after more hit gredeth
Is such a thing that never may be do
Of kende no speak I nought yt Iytel needs
But auaryce that no thing fully fedeth
No may not be fulfilled with habundance
But in to more necessyte you ledeth
why trow ye there by to have suffysance
Metru iij. Capitulu vj.
Quauis fluente dives
Phia loquitur. AL were hit that the rich covetous
Had al of gold full rennynge a river
And also feel of stones precious
As in his neck he might hem selfen bear
And o^en on fylde his lands for to eyre
His besynesse yet till that he shall they
He will not leave / no when he lies on bear
Al his riches no shall him not convey
Prosa iiij. Capitulu. vij.
Sed dignitates.
Phia loquitur. VHether dygnytes to such as them win
May make them fully worshypful to be
Other impressen virtue them wythyn
And make vice out of there hertes fl
Not so for soth thou may thy selfen se
Hit is not wont to a voyden wickedness
But vice that was al close in preuyte
Hit makes fully to be known express
where of hit is I have rygh great dysdeyn
That such wicked men surfetours
Should any time in dygnyte be seyn
There fore hit was that one Catullius
when he saw one that hight Nomius
Set in a sete of worship in the town
He called him a postem venomous
Al full of atter corruption
No seyst thou not what shame velony
To such shrewd wicked folk hit is
For to be set in such honour on hye
For were not that / yet there unworthiness
Of other folk should known be the less
And what perylous would thou standen at
Er thou would bear an offyce / shall I guess
with a such cursed man dedecorate
No I no may not demen in my wit
That such wrecches should ben honourable
And worth that worship though they have hy^
That ben there to unworthy unable
But if thou saw a wise man an able
And hoelly al fulfilled with sapyence
would thou deem that man as repreueable
And as unworthy to that excellence
Boecius) I said no ( Phia) now certes the ^ she
These dygnytes belongs properly
Only to virtue to honest
And virtue shall transport them verily
To wyche she is conjoined sewyngly
And for as mychel as such reverence
Received of the people comenly
Accords not always with conscience
No to that honour wych that they receyuen
No may not make them worthy for to be
Than may we clearly known conceyuen
That honour has in propre no bewte
As even worthy to that dygnyte
And most to this ye awth to taken heed
The mo folk that despyseth them perde
The more abiecte they ben hit is no dread
So than as dygnyte may not suffyse
To maken srewes worth no reverence
But rather makes that men them will despise
Though they honour them in there presence
yet they despise them in there conscience
There dygnytes so makes them to be know
And clerly shows to folks there offense
Of whom they ben despised as they owe
And this is not vnponysshed sykerly
For they revenge them on there dygnyte
The wyche they have defouled wrecchedly
As with there vice there vnhoneste
But that thou might thy selfen know se
That very honour falls in no wise
By such astates that transitory be
Now understand what I the shall deuyse
I suppose that a man of hye renoune
That oft has had the astate of consuler
Should come a monge a strange nation
That they no knew what astate he bare
Trow you they wold him honouren there
For his astate thou wolt answer me nay
But if honour in such astates were
In kend a propre thing / than wold I say
There kendly offyce should they not forlete
Though that he went un to the worlds end
As fire no may not cessen of his hete
Vhyle that hit fire is where yt ever hit wend
But honour is no propre thing of kind
To dygnyte / but false opynyon
As nice men deuyseth in there mind
where fore a monge a strange nation
That nought no knows of that dygnyte
He is honoured as a another man
In strange land thou seyst this may well be
But loke that land vher that astate be began
where that hit should always his honour han
Stands hit always in his honour there
But of the prouostry what say thou than
That vhylom was astate of hye power
Now is hit no thing but an Idel name
And loo the charge of senators rent
Now at this day hit stands in the same
Though that some time hit was full reverent
A man some time was holden excellent
That had the charge of vytayl in the town
Thus up so down is the world y went
Now is hit of no reputation
As we have said a little here beforn
A thing that hath no beauty properly
Now hath hit honour now hit hath forlorn
After the use of men fantasy
Sith dygnyte no may not kendly
Inducen very cause of reverence
But oft hit is defouled sykerly
By them that uses hit with insolence
And if they now be fair now not so
As times have there transmutation
And if there beauty thus them passes fro
After man estymatyon
what is there / after your opynyon
Of beauty in them worthy to be sought
Sith that they ben of such condition
How should they give that they no haueth noght
Metru iiij. Capitulu viij.
Quauis se tirio.
Phia loquitur. Though proud Nero with his lechery
Clothed him with purpur tyryen
And with full rich perry ryally
Of lyffe he was vnthryfty vnclene
That he was lothly every wight to seyn
yet gave he seytes to the senators
How should thou trow them blysful for to ben
Tho that of wrecches takes such honours
Prosa v. Capitulu ix.
An vero regna.
Phia loquitur. But what trow you for to ben a king
Other with kings to ben famylyer
would you hold hit for a noble thing
That may ye make strong mighty here
Boecius) what else {quod} I should I trow yt were
Phia) ye {quod} she when that there felycyte
Shall always stonden in his welthes clear
And ever a bide in perdurabylyte
But elder age of time that is y went
Ensamples hath of great vnstabelnesse
And also of this time now present
we se hit preued every day express
That kings falls fro there welfulnesse
And un to very myschef ben y brought
Ow / clear noble thing that renoune is
To save hit seluen that suffices not
For if that realms of such regalte
And governance of lands lunge wide
May make a man to have felycyte
what if him lacks ought in any side
Than must his wealth some vhat slake slyde
And myschef entre for vnsnffysance
And though hit be so as hit may betide
That kings haueth in there governance
Much folk at there commandment
yet shall we find many a nation
That ben to kings not obedyent
No haldeth them at no reputation
Than here of ensues this conclusion
where fails might that causes blysfulnesse
There is no mene in this dyuysyon
Vnmyght is there that causes wrecchednesse
There is none erthly king this dare I sey
That is so mighty in his governance
But mo there ben that will him not obey
Than be constrained at his ordynance
In these his power lacks suffysance
And if that both / his power vnmyght
Should ben counterpeysed in balance
His vnpower wold be the more of wight
Sith wrecchednesse comes of vnpower
As may not be wythsayd by no reason
And loo there is no king that leueth here
But his vnmyght has in proportion
As for to make a just comparison
well much more than his power is
Than will there ensuen this conclusion
Loo that his more part is wrecchednesse
A king there was that had experience
Of great perel often was in dread
He made a man be set in his presence
And made a sword to hang a above his head
Fastened by a little sotel thread
That every man might wnderstand se
Loo break this thread than is this man but ded
So stent a king always in Iuparde
what is this power yt noght may remewe
The bitter bytynge of this besynesse
No the pryckes may he not exchwe
Of al this dread al this heuynesse
These kings loo wold leave in sykernesse
But certenly they can not come there to
And ever more they seek hit as they guess
And ever the far they ben a way there fro
But they reioycen mighty to be hold
And will thou trow him mighty for to be
That may not worken that he feign would
Or for to walken with a company
Of mighty men that lusty ben to se
And at his bidding al a realm a rereth
And yet him selfen stondeth in this degre
He dredeth the same that he fereth
And for he would mighty seem strong
He must put him selfen in danger
As of the mayne wyche he is among
And of his lyffe he stands in a where
Or with a king to be famylyer
To what hit shall a veil I can not sayn
Sith often is hit showed a monge ous here
That kings of there mayne have be slain
And often times is this y showed express
Of some that with kings haueth be ny
That these kings of there cruelnesse
Haueth them put at myschef suddenly
Some time styred by malice envy
Of wicked folk that worse ben than fendes
And kings often stands slyperly
And if they fallen falls eke there friends
For loo Nero that cursed emperor
Made Seneca his awne death deuyse
That was his master his governor
And Antoninus in the same wise
Papynyan that had him don service
And a full mighty man had lunge ben
He made his knights full of cowardyse
That with there swerdes al they should him slain
And both ij. yet wold they have ben glad
To have forlete there power utterly
And Seneca loo al the good he had
He wold have given hit Nero wyllyngly
And ben exiled ever perpetuelly
Forsakynge al his occupation
And so have lived solytaryly
And led his lyffe in contemplation
But he that menteth downward for to go
His awne wight will draw him down in hast
And therefore nether of them both to
No might his purpose haven at last
This power than that every man so fast
Desires thus / what is hit wold I se
Sith he that hath hit is there of a gast
Ho so will forlete hit may not syker be
And vhen thou would hit wyllyngly forsake
Loo at thy will thou may hit not forgon
And friends wyche yt fortune doth the make
And virtue not / what profyt may they don
when lusty fortune forth is fro the gon
Than al her friends with her goes in fere
A more perylous myschef is there none
Than is thy foo wyththe famylyer
Metru v. Capitulu x.
Qui se volet.
Phia loquitur. Ho so desires mighty for to ben
And of his foes to have the victory
First his courage that is so fers kene
He must repressen well myghtely
So that the foul lust of lechery
May have no manner mastery in his mind
For though thou be so hawte so hye
That men the dredeth in the land of Inde
And eke the I'll that ferrest is of al
Out in the west that Tyle cleped is
Be to the suget as thy bound thral
yet if thy foul derke besynesse
with sore complaints of thy wrecchednesse
Thus in there bounds haldeth the so fast
That thou no might them voyden no repress
I say hit is no power that thou hast
Prosa vj. Capitulu xj.
Gloria vero {quam} fallax.
Phia loquitur. But hye renoune how full of vanyte
How foul hit is often deceyuable
As a tragedyen in his dyte
Not causeles thus cries in a fable
Ow / renoune says he false varyable
To many a thousand of thyn homagers
In no thing else art thou commendable
But as a wind that swells in there years
For many one by false opynyon
Of nice folk have had a hugy name
But certenly a foul confusion
Hit is / so falsely for to have a fame
For needs return to them most shame
when yt they ben commended wrongfully
And though they have deserved yet that same
what shall a wise man furdred be there by
That meteth not the mesure of his mede
By veyn rumour of folks audience
But puts al the meret of her dede
In very virtue of there conscience
And if thou hald hit for an excellence
Thy noble renoune for to ben extended
Than will hit enswe even of consequence
That thou were foul but if you were commended
But as I said a little here beforn
That needs must be many a nation
To wyche one man name may not be born
The wyche as in thyn estymatyon
A man of worshype is of renoune
Loo than as for the most quantyte
Of al this little wordly regyon
He must needs vnrenouned be
I hald hit not full much expedyent
Of come people to be commendable
That haueth no reason in there Iugemente
For hit is fletynge not perdurable
They dyscord in dryth moisture / for fire is dry air is mostey this dyscord
lets them for to meddle / that eueryche kepeth his kendly place Also the air
the water accords in moisture / they dyscordeth in hete cold. for air is
hot water cold. vvyche dyscorde lettethe the to meddle. water earth accords
in cold dyscordeth in moisture drythe / for the earth is dry the water moystey
Fire earth accords in drouth so that the earth may not dysioyne fro his
place / no the fire fro his they dyscord in cold hete / wherefore they may not
meddle but euerych kepeth his kendly place. Also the elements that of qualyteys
ben contrary / he binds to gether by intermene elements acordynge in
qualyteys vvyth both / as fire water that ben very contrary in qualyteys /
ben bounden to gedres vvyth air that is intermene acordyng vvyth fire in hete
vvyth water in moisture. Earth and air ben knet to gedres by water that is
entermene according vvyth earth in cold vvyth air in moisture.

For clear understanding of this chapytre / hit is for to know that he that
shall help a another / hit needs that he be mighty / vvyse / and well vvylled.
For if a thing be asked of a man the vvyche he may not do no can not / no his
vvyl skylefully may not consent / of very right he may deny hit / for no such
thing ought to be asked. Therefore first he shevveth the suffysance of god in
might / in asmoche as he governs al the world / not by great labour as
creaturs governs / but by perdurable reason. For sith he first set the world
in governance the natural progression never varied / but haldeth himself always
in the first ordynance. Also in producynge of creaturs he shevveth his
benevolence good vvyl to al that is consonant to reason. In that he shevveth
that is to say In that he makes the elements as sede matter whereof ben
engendered al erthly things. And thus doth he not compelled of no foreyn cause
as men ben compelled / but only of the habundance of his goodness* vvyche is
ever was perfe^ly in himself / the vvyche goodness was so entensyfly
habundant that hit must needs of reason be exteded by comunyon: Also he shevveth
the suffysance of his vvysedom conning / in as much as al that ever was / is
/ or shall be her after / hit is open to him / in his eternal exsampler or
mitrour of his mind that al things coprehendeth presently at ones. And sith
so vvysely produces hit in to his being / not only in general / but al parts
in specyal absolutely vvythout defaut or need of any exterior cause.

And in this is showed the vvysedom of god in asmoch as he is the formal cause
of al thing as in exsampler. After that he has showed the suffysance of god
in might / goodness / vvysedom / in governance of these things in specyal / he
comendeth the same suffysance in general in creation governance of some other
things of more deper conceit of invvard speculation / i that he shevveth
rehearses the sotel knytting of the iiii. elements / as is before said
Furdermore also in creation of the mene spiret of treble kend / vvyche some
phylosophres as plato his folders called anima mundi / the soul of the world
For cause that Plato saw his master Socrates epoysened put to death for his
sothe saying / he vvold not discover his sotel conceits no the preuy^es of
nature to the rude people / but put the under manner of parables privy words
vvyche might enstore his vvysedo un to the time that men vvold be better
vvylled for to hire truth. The greeks at that time vvor shypped the son
called him Apollo / god of vvysedo / fantasyng that he caused al other things
tobe. Fro vvyche error socrates dyssented said that the son was a formed
creature / wherefore he was slain as is be fore said. And before him
Anaxagoras was exiled for the same cause. wherefore Plato left the cite of
Athenes chose his habytation in a cite or place named Acadencia. In vvyche
place was often times earth quakes. This place he chose be cause his dyscyples
should ever leave in dread of there lives / vvyche dread should refrain foul
passyons of flesly lusts / so for to a void the foul error of Epicurenes
that did put the fulfelycyte of man in fleshly delyte. Plato then speaking of
the governance of the world in his book named Thimeus / saith thus.

God of the same ever a hydynge matter. also of divers matter and varyable /
meddled made the third kende. Of the vvyche he toke first one part. sith ii.
sith iii. after iiii. after viii. after ix. after.xxvii. Of vyche he made the
kende of this spyret or of this soul. And the he fulfilled the interualles of
these nombres vvythe mene proporcions / as here after doth appear.

I. dupla ii. ses{que}al^a iii ses{que}^cia.iii. dupla viii ses{que}otaua ix.
tripla xxvi^

Then this renge thus draen a lunge he dyuyded in ii. parts of the vvyche one
should conteyne even nombres proporcions / and the other odd / so that the
beginning of either should be I. Then either of these nombres he brought in to
compace / put the lass Circle vvythyn the more. And the circle of the same
nature that is to say of odd proportions he torn fro the right hand to the
lift hand. And the other of divers nature that is to say of even {pro}portions
/ he torn fro the lift hand to the right hand / this may be perceived by this
figure foloyng

diagram of the celestial sphere Primu mobile mouetur motu vniformi ab orient
in occidentem.

Sphere planeta{rum} mouea difformiter ab occident in orientem.

Inter numeros ext{er}ioris sphere est proportio equalis.

Inter numeros iterioris sphere est proportio inequalis.



Fordermore Philosophia shevveth her petiton reasonable as to iii. things asked
First he asked the knovvlege of some reyn godd. He asked also i this knovvlege
perseverance. And last he asked to be comforted by his souereyn light. First
she assigns a reason for this last petition / where she says thou art
clernesse / by vvyche al things ben beshened clered. For perseverance she
assygneth the second reason says / thou art peseable rest to the meke.

Than assyneth she the third reason saith the to behald hit is the end to
vvyche man was made. For thou art beginner of al thou betest conteynest al /
thou ledest ous by natural inclination. thou art the path of the way of love
by vvyche we shall return to the. thou art al the bliss or heaven / thou art
the term end of al our vvordly labour / we seeks none other.

The understanding of this sotel conceit is thus. where he saith this saule
is meddled of the same matter diverse / he vnderstadeth that the saule of the
world was made of nature changeable of nature unchangeable. Nature
unchangeable he calls the same / And changeable he calls diverse. The
even nombres for asmoche as they may be dyuyded in to even / he calls nature
changeable: And the odd nombres that may not eueuly be dyuyded / he calls
nature unchangeable. Furdermore for to show that this soul is princyple of
doblenesse / that is to say of vnyformyte that is in the first meueable vvyche
is the sterred fitmament that clerks callen Primur mobile / And also of
difformyte / that is in the planetes. he saith that god cut these nombres in
ii. parts. of the vvyche one part coteyned odd nombres that longs to
vniformyte. And the other contained even nombres that perteyneth to difformyte
/ by cause of his diuisibilyte. And either of these parts he torn in to
compass in sign of circuler meuynge But the part of odd nobres he torn for
the rygth hand to the lift hand in sign of vniformyte in meuynge. And the
other of even nombres / he torn fro the lift hand to the right / in sign of
difformyte. The right hend of the world is the este / the lift hand the vveste
/ the head is the southe / the fete is the north. The meuynge of vniformyte he
put to meue fro este to west for so meueth the sterred sphere. The meuynge of
difformyte / he calls the spears of the vii. planetes / vvyche is meued fro
vveste to the este.

Also hit is to considre that both these nombres of odd even meteth at one /
that is callid vnyte / in sign of the onehed the simplicite of god. at whom
begins ends al creatures. upon hoos stablenesse is grounded every meuynge
/ upon hoos vniformyte / al difforme variable things ben ryghted reduced. Now
then to the process conceit of Boecius where he saith thus. Thou god
knettest the mene soul that is the soul of the world of treble kend that
meuythe al thing. He calls the soul of the world / the spyret that next
under god entendeth to the meuynge governance of the world / vvyche is mene be
tuene the stabilyte of godhed meueablenesse of creaturs.

Of treble kind. For first he is partener of the kende of angeles vithe ben of
uniform kende / that is to say of simple nature / pure / vnmedled: vvyche
Plato calls the same ever a by^ynge matter / that is to seyn of perdurable
kende. The second part of his kende / may be called the alliance to these
erthly things. vvyche ben variable corruptible diverse in there being. The
third part of his kende / is medlede of these both / that is his alliance to
the spheres of sterres of planetes. vvyche ben in part meueable in part
vnmeueable. they be meueable in there kendly course / vnmeueable in cotinuace of
there course ^e^yng of the place ordre vvyche they were set in at there first
creation. How he meueth al thing the letter shevveth furdermore where he
saeth. Resoluynge hit in members consonant / that is to say / departing his
labour in to the meuynge of al the viii. spheres of sterres of planetes.

Hoos meuyng tho they be discordant in there course / cotrarious divers in
effects / yet be they so consonant to gedres / that none lets but rather
righteth dresses euerych other. For the viii. sphere meuyng west vvard
rauesheth al the nether spheres makes them to meue the same way / where there
natural meuynge is estevvarde. Also tho the effects of the planetes ben divers
yet there kendly course of meuynge is such that euerych tempers other so that
there fall no confusion in this vvordly governance Also this meuynge he dyuydeth
in to ii. spheres or ii. cercles as is a fore said. by meuynge of vviche / ben
governed the clemetes vvyth al there trasmutatios al other things under the
moan. And he retorneth un to him self / that is to say to there where he began
for there is no perfet meuynge but in compace that always retornethe in to him
self / by vviche circuler meuynge or vvorchynge he atteyneth by similitude of
natural perfection to the deep mind of dyuyne intelligence vviche is the last
end of nature simpliciter. vvithoute other And after this circuler meuynge by
form of leke convenience he tornethe heaven bout / dressynge the effects of
al this meuynge after the souereyn exempler of the hye purueance of god.
Furdermore Boecius comendith the might / the goodness / the vvysedom of god /
in making governing of erthly things / specially in the disposing of manes
soul vhee ^e saith in the text thus Thou auauncest or reysest souls less
lives of creatures by evenly or leke causes make them able to lift cartes.

Vhen he has sotelly treted of the soul of the world than goethe he to the
soul of man saith that in manner leke as god has made the soul of the
world of iii. naturs / so has he made the soul of man.

For first he takes a matter perdurable that is to sey a nature immortal of the
kende af angeles Joins hit to a nature chaugeable corruptible / that is the
sensualyte drauen of this corruptible f^eshe. And of these it* resulteth the
third / vviche is in part dedly be cause of he body also be cause of his
vnstablenesse / And in part vndedly / be cause of the perdurable nature of
intelligence / vhereof he is partener This soul is druyded in to ii. compaces
of the vviche one is of {per}durable nature that is reason / meueth kendly fro
the right hand to the lift hand that is to say* he groundeth al his works
upon virtue / so puts the in perfet execution* But the other circle of
sensualyte meueth in contrary for he groundeth al his works upon the flesh /
so proceeds in to vicious lusts. But the reason must rauyshe the sensualyte
with him in to the way of virtue. or else must they both torn in to
mischefe

And so tho reason be stirred distract by error rehellyon of sensualyte / yet
must he return in to him self / beh^ldynge the excellence of his nature / not
resting there proudly with Lucifer / but enserchynge sekige by thought devote
prayer the de^e intelligence that is god. And there behald in the mirror of
eternal vvysedom what he ought to do. repres^ynge vvithe the fire of love al
vicious meuynges. For vhy thou god haste made the soul able to hye cartes
(that is to say) to be re^ed in heaven. Thou sovvest in heaven and in earth.
First he makes the soul puttethe hit in to this earthly body / there for to
encrese in meret and virtues. And sith when they ben ripe / he takethe hem in
to heaven: And howe? For sothe the virtues that him self has planted in the
soul / he him self no^ysheth them vvythe ^yry bemes of love / And makes them
rypen in to full ^rute / and so return up to him fro vvhennes they toke there
being.

Prosa x. Capitulu xix.
La igitur.
Phia loquitur. FOr as much as thou hast seyn in this
wyche is imperfet good to eschwe
The form of good also that perfet is
The wyche yt is to seken to sue
Fro heuens forth our process to pursue
Hit is to shown as hit seems me
The very good that perfet is true
what thing hit is where hit might be
But first I hold yt needful to enquere
if such thing may ben in any kende
As we be forn dyffyned have while ere
Lest so be that in vayn our wits wend
And lest we be deceived at the end
As by a false Imagination
Of thing that nought is formed in our mind
And so to less our occupation
But yt we save our purpose hole sound
That perfet good is / no wight may wythsayn
The wyche is in manner the well ground
Of al good that is / thou be certain
There may no wight replyen there a geyn
if any thing have imperfection
That is be cause hit is not full no pleyn
with perfet thing as in comparison
For why in any general of kende
where any thing imparfet is / say I
A perfet thing also there may thou find
For if there were no perfet utterly
Sith lack of perfet is the cause why
That any thing imperfet may be preued
A perfet thing there must be sykerly
Fro wyche imperfet things be dyscryned
For why of things scars dymynute
Nature toke not her first production
But al hole complete absolute
Fro al defaute al corruption
And so fro thens made progressyon
Un to these lower things that we seyn
That less hauethe of perfection
And as hit were al void empty ben
And if so be / as I have showed er this
There is an imperfet felycyte
Of frayel feeble good / full sothe hit is
Another good perfet must there be
Boecius) Full sothe is this {quod} I as seems me
Concluded also full fermly
Phia) But now she said you must behald se
where that this good is founden fynally
The come conceit loo of man mind
By reason is un to this point y brought
That god / that prince auctor is of kende
Him self is good / in this they fails noght
Sith that there may no better thing be thought
Than god him self / this wot well every wight
That god is good worthy to be sought
This doutethe none that reason says a right
yet reason will inducen furdermore
By very fors that in god perfetly
Is very good / in no wight may be more
He were not else called ryghteusly
The prince of things / I shall the tellen why
For else one were worthier than he
That perfet good possessed pryncypally
That rather must also elder be
For every thing that fully is perfet
Than any thing imperfet rather is
Now lest our process pass in infynyt
we be compelled for to graunten this
That souereyn god of perfet good y wis
Loo is fulfilled / than suethe here upon
Sith perfet good is very blysfulnesse
In god is perfet blysfulnesse a lone
Boecius) Full well {quod} I this I {per}ceyue feel
There may no wight replyen here a geyn
Phia) I pray the {quod} she understand me wele
How fermly is preued that we sayn
Loo / that of perfet good souereyn
God is fulfilled by my conclusion
Boecius) In sothe {quod} I this wold I heren fain
How ye hit preue by demonstration
Phia) That self {quod} she that is the prince of al
And full of souereyn good how seems the
That fro wythouten this good is fall
Or is hit in hem by kendly properte
And think that ii. things must they be
God / the hauer / his blysfulnesse
And in there substance have dyuersyte
This wolt thou not supposen as I guess
And if he have received of without
This blysfulnesse / then suethe sykerly
The geuer of that thing / is no dout
Precelleth the receiver certenly
But this we must confessen utterly
A bow al things god is excellent
And if this good in god be kendly
In substance in reason dyfferent
The prince of things wyche yt we rehearse
Let se deuyse or fain hit ho so may
Ho hath conjoined these ij. diverse
He may no further by no manner way
But at last this dare I sothly say
A thing that divers fro a another is
Hit may not be the same hit is no nay
Fro wyche hit is dyuersed so y wis
wherefore that thing that has dyuersyte
Fro souereyn good / in reason of nature
The same souereyn good hit may not be
And god forbede that any creature
As in his wit should passen so mesure
Of god our souereyn for to deem so
That kepeth al has ous in his cure
So perfet so good there beth no mo
Loo this I trow perceives every man
That the kend of no thing utterly
May better ben than he that hit be began
Than may I thus concluden fynally
That he that is beginner verily
Of al thing that is / I say that he
In substance in kende properly
This souereyn good he must needs be
Boecius) This is {quod} I concluded well clear
Phia) And souereyn good {quod} she is blysfulnesse
Boecius) Right so {quod} I this grouted I while er
Phia) Lo than {quod} she hit suethe here express
That god himself is souereyn blysfulnesse
Loo where hit is that thou so long hast sought
Boecius) This must I {quod} I grauten confess
your reasons have me to that point y brought
Phia) That this {quod} she be preued fermly
Behald here what I shall further sayn
ij. things that ben divers properly
They may not be ij. goods souereyn
For if there be dyscord be twene them tweyn
They may not ben the self the same
Euerych that other is / thou be certain
Tho that they both be called on by name
if they be souereyn goods both ij.
Deuyse yt in his conceit ho so may
if that this one good be that other fro
Imperfet ben they both hit is no nay
Sith nether ben wythouten other may
But thing that lacks of perfection
That hit be souereyn good thou wolt not say
Hit wold includen contradiction
Then may they not be ij. thus no diverse
This souereyn good as sues here express
But blysfulnesse god that we rehearse
This souereyn good in al wise hit is
That same thing that than is blysfulnesse
That same thing is souereyn deyte
Boecius) No thing {quod} I may truer be I guess
No worthier of god concluded be
Phia) Than right {quod} she as geometres al
when they have showed there propositions
They brings in Porismus / yt they call
That ben conceits or conclusyons
And as in manner declarations
Of foresaid thing / right so shall I the fed
As suynge on my demonstrations
This correlary I give the to thy mede
Sith that by getynge of this blysfulnesse
Men ben blysful made / wolt thou se
Blysfulnesse the souereyn godhed is
And eke the getynge of that deyte
Makes blysful / as hit is showed to the
But right as wysedom makes men be wise
And ryghtuosnesse ryghtuous for to be
I may conclude suyngly deuyse
That by winning of dyuynyte
Men ben maked gods sykerly
Loo than is every blysful man pard
A god / this suethe also formally
Though that there be but one god kendly
In sothe yet by participation
Right well there may be many / not for thy
As in the astate of full perfectyon
Boecius) This is {quod} I full fair precious
whether hit porysme or corrolary is
Phia) Hit is {quod} she more fair glorious
That reason will annecten un to this
Bow{us}) I asked what Phia) {quod} she sith blysfulnesse
So much thing doth in hit self conteyne
As honour / pouer / lust / fame / rychesse
whether al they ben as members will you sayn
wyche as of parts divers in manner
This blysfulnesse compounds in this wise
In to a perfet body as hit were
Other thou trouest that some one thing of these
The same blysfulnesse doth a complesse
In to one perfet thing substancyal
To whom these other as I do deuyse
Referred ben as to there pryncypal
Boeci{us}) I wold have this {quod} I declared fain
Phia) Have we not said {quod} she yt blysfulnesse
Is good ( Bow{us}) yes said I / hye souereyn
Phia) Add we {quod} she ye remanent un to this
That souereyn good before rehearsed is
Loo souereyn might souereyn suffysance
Lust / fame / honour / one thing they ben y wis
with blysfulnesse wythouten varyance
This is that I wold asken er of the
This suffysance / honour / delyte / renoune
whether they be members of felycyte
As divers parts doth one thing compoune
Or thou hast this consyderation
That al these wyche that we rehearsed han
To souereyn good should have relation
As to there head / this say me if thou can
Boecius) In sothe {quod} I now understand I wele
what ye pnrposeth to enserchen here
But I desire to here of you feel
This questyon that ye wold make yt clear
Phia) I shall {quod} she said in this manner
if al these things wyche that we reherce
Of blysfulnesse in manner members were
Than must these members needs be divers
For loo of parts this the nature is
That they divers one body certenly
Shall make / but hit is showed er this
That al these ben one thing Boecius) ye {quod} I
Phia) They ben {quod} she no members sykerly
Sith they ben one / or else wold hit sue
That blysfulnesse were made full wonderly
Of a membre that nature wold exchwe
Bow{us}) This is {quod} I full sothe I dout yt noght
But now full fain the remanent wold I se
Phia) Than al these things {quod} she must be brought
And to this good as chef referred be
And for this good full sothe hit is pard
Men desyren after suffysance
To have pouer or stand in hye degre
For hit is good they makes purveyance
The same I may deuysen suyngly
Of reverence / renoune / lustynesse
They deem hit good that is the cause why
That they require hit with there besynesse
Than is this good the very cause y wysse
And sum of al yt ought to be required
For thing that no good has in lekelynesse
No none in sothe / hit may not be desired
And there a geyn loo in contrary wise
A thing that is not good in no manner
yet if hit seems good as they deuyse
Right as they very right goods were
Men wills them / than will hit suen here
That bounte is the ground cause of al
why things ought to be leave dere
That any man of right desyren shall
And over this hit seems furdermore
That every thing that is the cause why
Loo that a another is desired fore
That cause is eke desired pryncypally
Right as be cause of heal fynally
A man desires for to ride play
His heal he doth desyren sekerly
As well as for to ride hit is no nay
Sith al this thing yt thus desired is
The cause of al is pryncypal / bounte
This bounte is desired than y wis
As much as that thing in his degre
But we have granted that felycyte
is cause these things euerychone
Desired ben / then sues hit pard
That blysfulnesse desired is a lone
Of this hit seems hit suethe loo
That then this good very blysfulnesse
In substance ben one thing no mo
And verily the same thing express
Boecius) I can not say {quod} I in sothfastnesse
How any wight your words may blame
Phia) But god {quod} she very blysfulnesse
As we have showed ben one thing ye same
Boecius) Right as ye sayn {quod} I hit is full clear
Phia) Than may I {quod} she well sykerly
The sentence the sum of this matter
Loo thus concluden full fynally
That the substance loo of god on hy
Is set founded in none other place
But in the same good eternally
To find hit there god send the grace
Metru x. Capitulu xx.
Huc oes pariter venite.
Phia loquitur. HOwe comes al ye that ben y brought
In bounds full of bitter besynesse
Of erthly lust a bydynge in your thought
Here is the rest of al your besynesse
Here is ye port of pees restfulnesse
To them that stands in storms of desese
Only refuge to wrecches in distress
And al comfort of myschef mysese
For al that ever Tagus Tagus is a river of Spayn / full of golden greynes.
doth you bed
with his golden gravel stones bright
Other Erinus Erinus is a river in Asya the less / al full of greynes of gold.
with his strondes rede
May given you for to please your sight
Other the river wyche that Indus Indus is a river of India / that rennethe in
to the red see / full of perry and much precyousty*
hight
That is full ny the hot regyon
wyche the grene stones with his might
with white perelles turns up so down
They shines wonder clear un to your ye
But your insight in sothe they makes blind
And with there derke clouds perylously
with vanyte your hertes doth they bind
For how that ever they plesith to your mind
As praised worth full many a thousand pound
yet ben they full unworthy in there kend
As noreshed in the caves of the ground
But the shynynge of that souereyn light
By wyche the hye heaven governed is
Chaceth a way the foul derke night
That has your souls drawn al a miss
This souereyn light if you may seyn y wysse
Behald hit well keep hit if thou conn
And thou shalt se that in regard of this
There be no bright bemes in the son
Prosa xj. Eapitulum xxj.
Assencior inquam.
Boecius loquitu TO this {quod} I / I must needs assen^
your words haueth me knet so fermly
By reason of your subtel argument
Phia) what if you knew {quod} she verily
This good / what would you than set there by
if thou might known clearly what hit were
Boeci{us}) I wold hit prese at infynyte {quod} I
If I might known god in that manner
Phia / I shall {quod} she as very reasonable
Show the that apertly er thou go
So that these things stand ferme stable
That we be fore this have consented to
Boecius) They must {quod} I we may not go there fro
Phia) Have I not showed the plenerly {quod} she
That al these things that ben desired so
Of fell folk ben full of vanyte
And sith they ben divers hit is no nay
They be no very goods perfetly
For when that one fro other is a way
No full no very goods utterly
To no wight may they bring certenly
But when they ben assembled in to one
In workynge in form verily
Than is hit good else is hit none
So that this power this suffysance
Gladsomnesse / honour / nobelte
Be right the same one thing in substance
And if they lacks of this vnyte
There is not why they should desired be
No loved / if ye do loke well a bowte
Boecius) while er {quod} I thus have ye showed {per}de
Full true hit is hit may not ben in dowte
Sith so hit is that good be they nought
when dyuersyte is founden them between
And when that they to onehed ben y brought
Than be they good as every man may seyne
what is that makes them good for to been
But the getynge of this vnyte
Boecius Right so hit is {quod} I right as ye mene
Phia) But every thing yt good is then {quod} she
why is hit good / will you not graunten this
That for hit has partycypatyon
Loo of this foresaid good (Boeci{us}) I said eyes
Phia) Than must you {quod} she by the same reason
Grant also this conclusion
That good one ben one thing verily
For things lekely of condytyon
Not divers in effects kendly
In substance ben they one thing no mo
Boecius) Fro this {quod} I y may not go a side
Phia) And know you not that every thing also
That is {quod} she / so lunge shall a bide
while hit is one / if hit so betide
That this thing forleteth to be one
Is hit not then dyssolued destroyed
Boeci{us}) And how {quod} I Phia) I shall the tel anon
Thou seyst thy self that in a best {quod} she
while soul body ben to gender knet
And so abides in there vnyte
This know you well a best men calls hit
But when this onehed is dyuyded
As by there bothes separation
That no best hit is / hit is perceived
But careyn tornynge to corruption
And eke also the body of a wight
while that the members stands kendly
On / in that form yt nature hath them dyght
He is a man this know thou verily
But if they ben departed sykerly
So that this vnyte be don a way
That same thing hit is not utterly
No no man body ye sothe to say
And in the same wise hit stent y wis
Of every thing to thynken in thy thought
The while hit stands one / that while hit is
And when hit fails one then is hit noght
For hit is to corruption y brought
Boecius) In sothe {quod} I I can not other find
Of every creature that may be sought
This must be sothe by very course of kende
Phia) But will you trow that any thing {quod} she
Hath this of natural intention
As to forleten utterly to be
And lust to torn in to corruption
Boecius) To have {quod} I consyderation
To bestes wyche that haueth of nature
Both will nel by fre election
I will not trow hit of no creature
That but they be constrained of without
There kendly being will they not forgon
No wyllyngly be ded hit is no dout
Therefore hit is that bestes euerychone
Loo al there labour sets here upon
Them selfen for to save keep in heal
And wyllyngly to death there wills none
I note ho is / with death that lust to del
But nevertheless as yet I am in dout
Of trees eke of herbs of grass
And stone that utterly is live without
Phia) There is nought why to douten in this case
Sith thou may se {quod} she be fore thy face
And every day thou hast experience
That trees herbs wexyth in that place
As to there kend is most conuenyence
So that asmoche as there nature suffices
They suffers not to schorchen no to dye
For some of them in fair feldes rises
And some wexyth in the hills hye
And some doth in marreys multyply
And some to the hard roches clyngeth
And some there be that in the sands dry
That bareyn ben full plenteously spryngeth
And if a wight yt noght there kendes knows
wold elleswhere them plant they dye as fast
For nature gives to euerych that him owes
And laboreth yt as long as they may lest
That they be not destroyed no down y caste
Now what say thou of there cheuysance
As though there mouths were in earth y thraste
So by the rote they draw there sustenance
And so the kendly moisture after this
In to the stock rynde hit sends wide
And yet this moisture that most tender is
wythynforth always hit doth a bide
A geyn the wedres hard / hit self to hyde
wythouten hath hit sadness of the tree
wythouten that the bark on every side
That may defence a geynst the wedres be
Here may you well behald taken hyde
Loo how nature entendeth besely
Every thing to nory hen by his sede
That year by year doth cress multyply
Not only for a time sykerly
But they ben sotel gynnes as hit were
That hit may stonden perdurabelly
By generation in that manner
And things that without souls ben also
Doth they not euerych besely entende
To that his nature aperteyneth to
why else doth a flame of fire ascend
Or why doth heavy earth so descend
But for that euerych has conuenyence
To certain place to wyche as to there end
They meueth / so they have no resystence
For every thing entendeth sykerly
As ferforthe as hit may have suffysance
Tho things to conseruen besely
with wyche hit has in kend his accordance
Right even as thing that of contraryance
Al that they may corrupts destroys
Right so have they there kendly governance
For to exchwe al thing that them noyeth
And stones that so hard strong ben
How they wythstandeth there partytion
And clyngeth fast as every man may seyn
To save the parts fro corruption
And things that so floeth up down
Air water parts esely
By violence / fro wyche dyuysyon
To onehed they retorneth kendly
But fire al such dyuysyon refuses
Of wylful meuynge of the soul I let
To speak as now / in that he reason uses
But of the natural intent I trete
That when ye do receyuen so your mete
ye swoloeth haueth thereon no thought
And in your sleep when al thing is forget
ye draueth brethe yet ye know hit noght
Not only of the souls wylfulnesse
These bestes loves to leave endure
But pryncypally depends hit express
Of the hye pryncyples of nature
For oft hit falls that a creature
His own death will taken wyllyngly
where needful causes ben perauenture
The wyche that nature aborreth kendly
ye sees also that in contrary wise
The will of man wythstandeth refrayneth
The lust of very kendly couetyce
By wyche al only nature hath ordained
That dedly kend to keep be sustained
The wyche is flesly generation
so that this love is not only contained
Pryncypally in your bestly motion
But also of intention natural
For why the souereyn gods purueance
Has given this as cause effectual
To things that ben of his ordynance
That by a very kendly governance
They shall desyren always for to be
As long as nature hath that sufffysance
To keep she parts in there vnyte
There is noght why thou should dout in this
But that al thing coueyteth kendly
To keep hit self in ferme stablenesse
And to be corrupt they lothen utterly
Bow{us}) Loo now must I confess this {quod} I
For things that in dout were before
Now I behold them well certenly
Phia) And thing that so desires evermore
For to stand in ferme stablenesse
That self thing desires for to be
And if this one be voided sothe hit is
Then is hit not / thou may thy selfen see
Boeci{us}) Full soth {quod} Phia) then al thing {quod} she
Desires one Boecius) {quod} I I grant yt well
Phia) But one good as thou hast granted me
Loo ben the same divers ne'er a del
Bow{us}) Right so {quod} Phia) the al thing requires
This one {quod} she yt thus may be descryued
Good is that thing that al thing desires
Boecius) No thing {quod} I may sother be contryued
Al thing to noght must else be deryued
As flowing ever wythouten governor
As destitute of there head depryued
Than were our end but myschef dolor
And if there may be founden there a geyn
One thing to whom al other ben intended
Of al good this must be souereyn
As he that al hath in him comprehended
Phia) This conceit {quod} she may not ben amended
My nory dere now am I glad y wis
The point now of thy thought you hast extended
Right in ye midst of very sothfastnesse
And loo in this is showed the plenerly
The thing wyche whyler thou told me
Thou knew yt not Boecius) what is that {quod} I
Phia) what is the end of things said she
This same thing loo must hit needs be
That every thing of kend desyren shall
And sith that this is good hit seems me
That souereyn good must be the end of al
Metru xj. Capitulu xxij.
Quisquis profunda.
Phia loquitur. NO so will enserche sothfastnesse a right
And will not be deceived never a del
The pure clerenesse of his inward sight
wythyn hem self he must reuoluen wele
And al his thoghtes trenden as a whele
And leave this erthly occupation
And tech his soul to understand feel
By dome of good delyberation
That al that ever he seeks here without
Travelling these truths for to know
Hid hit was al close hit is no dout
Right as tresour wythyn hemself bestow
Tho things than that erst were overblow
with the clouds of error ignorance
Hit shall to the be clerer as I trow
Than is the son more to thy plesance
For why the body that has yt soul oppressed
As with the wight of his corruption
Has not al despoiled no dystressed
The light of understanding of reason
There cleueth yet a noble portion
wythyn thy soul right as an abylyte
The sede of truth in full possession
The wyche by techyng must enforced be
How might ye else Iugen formally
Other answer to demands that ye hire
But if your heart contained verily
A lyfly noryshyng as hit were
And thing that Plato said in this manner
if hit be sothe as do his books trete
no thing else do ye when ye lere
But as record a thing that was forget
No thing else do ye when ye lere ^. An harp well lustily ^uned by true
accords of musyke / al be hit in that no vvyght toche hit no set hand there to
/ yet conteyneth that harp vvythyn hem al songs ^ al tuues possible to be
songe or touched upon the same harp. Or else might not the harper find there
on that was not there be fore Right so in man soul is contained al cony^ge
/ that of an erthly creature possible is be knovven. But hit is slylled in
manner forget / other more properly for to speak / forlete / vvyche conning by
labour of reason exercise of learning is found out by little little. right as a
man that lerneth to harp seeks out his tunes.

Prosa xii. Capitulu xxiij.
Tu ego platoni.
Boecius loquitur. TO Plato said I / must I need consent
For twyes now ye have remembered me
Of thing yt first was fro my mind y went
As by my bodily contagyouste
And sith I stood eftesone in this degre
Of heuynesse / I had hit eke forlorn
Phia) if thou she said will behald see
To things of the granted here be forn
Thou shalt record also to thy science
Things wyche you said whyler you knwe hit noght
Bow{us}) what {quod} I Phia) by wych gouernmetes
This world {quod} she is in this rule y brought
Boecius) I am {quod} I remembered in my thought
Of mine vnconnyng that I was beknowe
And tho I have as now perceived ought
More plenerly yet wold I lern of you
Phia) while er {quod} she thou dowted noft at al
Loo that this world by god governed is
Boecius) No now {quod} I no never hereafter shall
As in that matter ben in dout y wis
And what reason induces me to this
Breuely I shall you show / as seems me
Now loke your self if I perceive a miss
This world {quod} I standing in this degre
Of parts divers contrary
As every wight may understand feel
In such a form might never accorden this
But if that one conjoined every del
That so divers ben / this wot I well
No so conjoined might they not endure
But if one keeper were perpetuel
The same dyuersyte of there nature
So dyscordant should apeyr shende
And al dysioyne as seems in my thought
But if there were one governor of kende
To keep al this that is to gedres brought
No such a certain ordre might not
Of nature / so proceed in ordynance
To meuen so / but he that al has wrought
Should have hit holly in his governance
There meuyng is so fair ordynat
In times / stedes / space / qualyte
And such effects causes eke algate
That wonderful hit is / every wight to se
Than is there one that this dyuersyte
Hem selfen stable that so dysposeth al
And ho so doth al this / I say that he
Is god / this used name I will hem cal
Phia) Sith thou {quod} she may this behald feel
I trow I shall with little besynesse
Full hole sound the make to se full wele
Thyn own country full of blysfulnesse
But that we have purposed her er this
Let ous behald / have we not long a go
Said that suffysance is in blysfulnesse
And that god is blysfulnesse also
Bow{us}) Right so {quod} I phia) yt him needs noght
{quod} she un to this wordly governance
For if he of without needed ought
He had not then plenary suffysance
Boecius) Fro this {quod} I there is no varyance
Phia) Him self a lone al thing dysposeth than
Boeci{us}) I may {quod} I now make none avoydaunce
Phia) And god is good as we deduced han
Bow{us}) And this also remember I well {quod} I
Phia) By good then he governs al {quod} she
For sith as thou hast granted / suyngly
He that is good dysposeth al pard
Him self a lone than must he needs be
Right as hit were a ruler of a sterne
Him selfen stable ever in one degre
That al this world incorrupt doth govern
Boecius) Full well {quod} I acord I un to this
And loo whyler as by suspection
I trowed the same ye wold have said y wis
And preued this in your conclusion
Phia) I trow hit well / for thyn inspection
Is more ententyf then hit was before
As to behald a truth good reason
But that I shall the shown furdermore
Hit is as clear open to thy sight
Bow{us}) And what {quod} I that known fain I wold
Phia) Sith god {quod} she if we beleuen right
with his sterne of bounte as I told
Governs al rewleth as he should
These things al by natural intent
Ben wyllyngly subject vnderfolde
Obeyng always un to his government
Boecius) This is {quod} I full true necessary
For else were no blysful governance
if no yoke were to things contrary
That will not obey to his ordynance
Phia) Then is there noght yt doth there obseruace
To keep them self in ordre of nature
That may enforcen with contraryance
A geyn there god Boecius) {quod} I no creature
Phia) what if so yt a geyn this gouernayle
They might enforcen them with frowardness
Might they ought a geyn there god avayle
wych that by right of very blysfulnesse
As we be forn have said almighty is
Bow{us}) In soth they might noght avayle {quod} I
Phia) {quod} she then is there no thing as I guess
That may or will wythstanden kendly
This soueren good what will thyself suppose
Bow{us}) I said no Phia) this soueren good {quod} she
Al things than full sweetly doth dyspose
And myghtely al thing governs he
Boeci{us}) {quod} I not only I delyte me
As in the sum of your conclusion
But the words wych that ye use to me
well more they doth me delectation
In so fer forth that in my self I shame
And of my folly foul I am confused
So hye a thing to reprehend or blame
And that I have so masedlych y mused
That man of god was utterly refused
And that he had him not in his governance
Phia) Such fables {quod} she have poets used
As you hast herd / that some time gyauntes
wold have made there way up in to heaven
And hye hills began they to bylden fast
But god sent down a thunder certain
And al there work upon them over caste
And so they were wythstonden at last
By the might of souereyn god benign
wyche for them al disposed so in haste
As there dysert was worthy condign
But will thou now that we to gedres drive
Thesresons al in to one them bring
And perauenture of that stroke as blyue
There may of truth a little sparkel spring
Boecius) Now saith {quod} I as is to your lekyng
Phia) we say {quod} she that god almighty is
Boecius) Sith he of al {quod} I is lord king
There is no wight that is in dout of this
Phia) And he she said yt is so full of might
Is there any thing that he no may
Bow{us}) Nay {quod} I Phia) {quod} she now say me right
May god do any euel Boecius) I said nay
Phia) Loo than is euel no thing I dare well say
Sith he that is almighty may hit not
Boecius) {quod} I whether do ye scorn or else play
And have to this labour hit y brought
your reasons weueth ye so wonderly
In manner leke the house of Didalus
Full hard for to resoluen or vnplye
your reasons ben so hye curious
that to my wit they ben full marvelous
Where ye go out ye enters efte a none
And even there as ye ben entered thus
The same way ye passes out efte soon
A wonder compace have yo knet fold
Of the hye dyuyne ymplycyte
For thus while er when ye began ye told
Of blysfulnesse that is felycyte
That souereyn good was hit ye said to me
And that also in souereyn good hit is
That god was souereyn good then said ye
Also that he is perfect blysfulnesse
And for a gyfte ye toke me this there to
That no wight mygh have very blysfulnesse
But if he were in manner god also
By lekelynesse of possessing of his bliss
And furdermore also ye said this
That the form of very perfet good
Hit is the substance of this welfulnesse
And eke of god / loo this I understand
ye said also as un to my conceit
That good one al one thing should they be
That every kende of things must coueyte
That god eke with the sterne of his bounte
Governs al this hole vnyuersyte
And al must to his governance a lout
That euel is no thing / also preued ye
Not seeking hereto reasons fro without
But ye have this enplyed y preued
By skyles that ben known openly
And euerych makes other to be believed
They knetteth so in compace sotelly
Phia) She said then I play not sykerly
But that we have whyler of god besoght
Now have I showed the here that is so hy
And greteste that in heart may be thought
For of substance dyuyne the form is this
That he may not augment no decresse
By no foreyn thing the so the hit is
And al yet he conteyneth never the less
But right as said Perymenydes
The round whele of things al a bout
He meueth / yet him self is in piece
And meueth noght at al hit is no dout
if I have showed the skyles good mete
Not fro wythouten sought / but verily
wythyn the things whereof that we trete
To wondre now thou hast no cause why
For thou hast herd red as suppose I
This sothfaste sentence / Plato said hit loo
That words must be cousins kendly
To things wyche they ben referred to
Full blysful is that man that may behold
The bright well of very blysfulnesse
And well is him that may himself unfold
Fro bounds of this wordly wrecchednesse
The poet Orpheus with great heuynesse
His wyffes death had weyled wepyngly
And with his songs full of carefulness
Made wodes for to run full wonderly
And made the stremes standen bide
The hynde also feared of no perel
But suffered the lyon to lye by her side
Nether the hare dreded ne'er a del
To se the hound / hit leked them so wele
To here these songs that so lustey were
And boldly they dared to gender dwell
That ne'er a best then had of other fere
And when the love began kendle in his breast
Of his wyffe most hot fervently
His songe that had so many a wyld best
Made so meke to leven comenly
They might him not conforten utterly
On hye gods began he then complain
And said they deled with him cruelly
That they did send him not his wyffe a geyn
He went then to howses infernal
And fast his strenges there dressed he
And souned out the sweet songs al
That he had tasted of the wells three
Of his moder dere Caliope
That is goddess chef of eloquenc^
With words that most pyteoust myghe be
As sorrow had given him full experience
And love also that dobeleth heuynesse
To hell began he his complaint to make
Asking mercy there / with lowlynesse
At the lords of these shadous blake
And Cerberus that woned was to wake
with heads three hell gates keep
So hadden him these new songs take
That the swetnesse made him fall on sleep
The furies that ben vengeresse of sin
And surfetours smyteth so with fere
For heuynesse that this man was in
They began to morn wept many a tere
And tho the swyft while had no pouer
To torn a bout the head of Ixyon
No Tantalus for thirst al though he were
I peyned lunge / yet water wold he none
The grype that ete the maw of Ticius
And tyred on hit long there be fore
This songe to him was so delycyous
He cast hit of tyred hit no more
And when that Orpheus had morned sore
Tho said the Jug of hell / peynes strong
Pity me hath conuicte / I will restore
This ma his wyffe / this won he with his song
But with a law this geft I will restrayn
That un till he this bounds have forsake
if he behald upon his wyffe a geyn
His wyffe fro him eftesones shall be take
But ho to lovers may a law make
For love is rather to hemself a law
when he was ny out of the bounds blake
He torn him Erudis he saw
Allas he lost lest his wyffe behind
This fable loo to you perteyneth right
For ye that wold lift up your mind
In to the hye blysful souereyn light
if ye eftesones torn douue your sight
In to this foul wrecched erthly dell
Loo al that ever your labour hath you dyght
ye lose when ye looks in to hell
As Duyde in his book of Metamorphoseos makes metion / and feynynge in manet a
fable saying that Orpheus was a curious harper dvvellyng in Trace / that was
sometime a prouynce in the north side of Greece. vvyche Orpheus was the son
of Callyope. He harped so lustely / that not only men were dravven by his
melody / but also vvyld bestes for very delyte forget there kendly courage of
fersnesse. And not only this / but he made ryuers for to stand forestes for to
meue ten This Orpheus had a vvyffe named Erudis / vvyche a shepeherde named
Aristeus vvoed desired. But Erudis refusing his love fled thorgh a mede /
tredynge upon a serpent she was enuenemed ded. went to hell. Orpheus soroynge
for his vvyffe vvyllynge for to dra her out of hell / purposed for to please
the hye gods vvyth his melody that they should restore him his vvyffe / but
hit availed not. Than went he to hell / as this process shevveth in the
letter / so much he pleased the gods of hell vvyth his melody / that at last
upon a condition his vvyffe was granted him / so that he looked not upon her /
till that he were passed the bounds of hell. But when he was ny the
bounds / so much he desired for to see his his vvyffe / that he torn him
looked upon her / a none she was gon a geyn to hell where she was before*
This fable Fulgencius exponeth morally on this vhyse. By Orpheus is understand
the hyer part of the soul / that is resonabelte / informed vvyth vvysedom
eloquence. wherefore he is called the son of phebus of Laliope Phebus of the
greeks was called god of vvysedo. The same is Apollo. Caliope is asmoche to
say / as gods son. hit betokens eloquence. so every vvyse ma eloquent in
this manner of speaking may be called the sorne of phebus Caliope. This Orpheus
bythe svvetnesse of his harp / that

Explicit Liber tercius.
Liber Quartus.
(...) But tho that haueth might to worken ylle
They may not worken al that is there will
Then is hit plain clear y no to seyn
These wicked men that wyckedlych may
Full less of power of might they ben
Set this there to that I shall after say
Sith might is such a thing the wyche always
Ought to be coveted desired
And every thing that is to be required
To good hit must be referred need
As to the souereyn head pryncypal
But power for to worken wrecchedhed
To good may not referred ben at al
Hit is noght then / that be desired shall
But power shall desired be by right
Than power of the wicked is no might
Loo of al this hit will apperen well
That mighty ben the good folk a lone
And wicked folk be mighty never a del
But weke myghtles ben they euerychone
The sentence than may be perceued soon
where that Plato writes in this wise
Do that them leketh only may the wise
For wicked men do works that them lust
But there desire they may not yet fulfylle
what them delyteth that them seems best
For why they do hit be hit never so i'll
To there desire yet may they not a till
The wyche they seek in lusts delytes
For blysfulnesse may not be had by vice
Metrum ij. Capitulu iiij.
Quos vides sedere celsos.
Phia loquitur. These great kings full of cruelte
Shynyng in there purpur ryally
Syttyng in the heythes of there see
with wild words thretyng cruelly
with blastyng woodnesse of there hertes hye
with much wrecched weeping by there side
Ho so wold fro these princes full of pride
Spoil them of there wrecched vayn a ray
Behald se well what they be wythyn
Though they be lords wonder stout gay
In streyt cheynes ben they bound of sin
Fro wyche they may not them selfen win
These loo ledeth his lyffe in lechery
That al the world him speaks velony
So is he troubled by this passion
with wreth his mind is beten oppressed
Or heuynesse draeth him a down
Or slyper hope him else has destressed
Loo such an head I trou is euel y blessed
That is encombred with so much vice
His might is to be set at little price
Prosa iij. Capitulum v.
Vides no igitur.
Phia loquitur. ANd seyst thou not the foul vicious
what filth the hath defiled vnhyght
And the good folk virtuous
How worthily they shyne fair bright
Of this hit may apperen to thy sight
That the wicked folk fails never of peyn
No the good folk there mede there a geyn
That same thing that meueth any wight
For to don or worken any dede
That same thing I may hit seyn by right
Loo of that work hit is the very mede
This shall I preue if thou wolt taken hyde
For rennyng lies a garland for the game
And he that runs best shall have the same
But souereyn good is very blysfulnesse
And is the very ground cause why
That any manner work purposed is
As for to speak of purpose kendly
Than is this good purposed comenly
For man work a mede for his traueyle
Fro good men this mede may not fail
Ho so lacks good as seems in my thought
Be called good of right yet may not he
The good then of mede fails noght
Sith there mede is verily bounte
Though wicked folk be wood in cruelte
And uses al the malice that they mowen
yet the wise man leases not his crowen
For why there is no foreyn wickedness
Of men that ben so perylous proute
That may beryue the kendly worthiness
That longs to the good / hit is no dout
But if they had hit wonnen of without
A another then might hit take a way
Or he that gave that good / hit is no nay
But sith the goodness of a worthy wight
Of good manners must be caused need
when he forleteth them / then is hit right
That he should be despoiled of his mede
But fynally in this matter to proceed
Sith al medes that desired ben
Hit is for they ben good / or as they wene
Of him that hath this good ho will hit seyn
That he this mede lacks utterly
None that reason has I am certain
But what thing is this mede verily
The best thing fairest sekerly
That may be had or heart may deuyse
This is hit that is desposed for the wise
A Corrolary hye precious
That I the gave whyler remember the
wyche al in sum thou shalt assemble thus
Loo sith that god is this felycyte
wyche that makes blysful for to be
Al tho that good works vsen
And wrecched vice will utterly refusen
And tho that blysful ben thou vnderstond
In a manner gods that they were
Than is this gift the mede of al good
That no day may consume in no manner
No dymynuce hit may no power
No dymmen hit no other man vice
Though wicked folk hit wold of there malice
Sith hit is so hit is wythouten dread
The wicked may not be wythouten peyn
For sith that euel good / loo peyn mede
Contrary ben / then is hit clear pleyn
Sith good is sure of mede in full certain
The bad is sure of peynes of woe
if one be sothe the other must also
Then is the goodness of the good wight
The reward the mede of his goodness
And to the wicked by the same right
There peyn is eke there propre wickedness
what ever he be / than sues hit express
That with such peynes is he desesed oft
with euel he is infect hit fails noght
For if the wicked wold them selfen seyn
Might they trowen as hit seems the
That they wythouten bitter peynes ben
whom loo the vttermest extremyte
Of al wickedness cruelte
Not only hath infected grievously
But eke him hath infected hugely
But now behald that other part upon
if any peynes have the good a grieved
Hast you not learned / that al that ever is one
Is good also / as I have hit descryued
Loo consequently than hit may be preued
As seems well that every thing that is
Hit must also be good hit is no miss
I may concluden than that al tho
That fails fro this good rehearsed here
He fails then for to ben also
The wicked then they be not that they were
For thoh thou se that man body there
Full sothe hit is a man he was beforn
By wickedness his kende he has forlorn
But sith that only virtue goodness
A bouen manhood may a man a reyse
Needs than ho so uses wickedness
Benethen manhood down hit doth him peyse
And tho so be that many one them preyse
whom that you seyst transformed in to vice
Thou hold him not a man if thou be wise
whose lusts brenneth al in couetyce
And ryueth men there good by violence
I leke a wolf thou might him well deuyse
He that is fers spares none offence
And what he saith he hath no consciens
To make stryffes dyssention
He is an hound as by comparison
And he that will a wayten privily
Foreyn goods how he may beryuen
A fox thou might him callen skylefully
And whom that cursed Ire doth a meuen
A lyon as in that thou might him preuen
He that is feared flees wythouten need
An heart thou might him call hit is no dread
And he that uses sloth I delnesse
And will not do no works profytable
Thou might him call a very ass express
And he that is inconstant unstable
To fowls might thou hald him comparable
And he that ledeth his lyffe in lechory
Aswyne thou might him callen skylefully
Hit seems than that he yt has forlete
The lyffe of virtue of honest
To ben a man in that he has forfete
And skylefully forlorn that dygnyte
And there he might a god in manner be
Or leke to god in leuyng at lest
Now is he changed to a rude best
Metru iij. Capitulum vj:
Vela Naricii ducis.
Phia loquitur. The southwest wynd yt blows boustesly
The sails of the Duke Naricius
But of that we have granted here before
As necessary must hit suen need
Bow{us}) I asked what phia) {quod} she now take good heed
More welful ben ye wicked in there peyn
Than if they sholden none at al susteyn
But this is not my conceit pryncypally
That comenly men have in there deuyse
That wicked folk so peyned ryghtuously
There by they ben corrected of there vice
And dread of peyn a peseth there malice
And that exsample un to other mo
whythdraeth them fro that they wolden do
But in a another manner wise I mene
That bad folk without punytion
More vnwelful sykerly they ben
Than if they suffered none affliction
Not having regard to correction
No to exsample / no to dread of peyn
That much myschef often doth refrain
Boectus) {quod} I what manner wise may this be
Other than ye tolden here before
Phia) Loo have not we confessed here {quod} she
That good men ben welful evermore
And wicked folk ben wrecches forlore
Bow{us}) right so {quod} I phia) {quod} she now say me thyg
What if that un to such a wrecchednesse
If any part of good were added to
were not he then more welful will thou say
Than he that stands al in myschef so
Fro whom al manner good is raft a way
Boecius) {quod} I Hit seems so hit is no nay
Phia) And what {quod} she if to this wrecched man
Fro whom al manner goods lacks than
Another harm were Joined y knet
Above the myscheffe wyche has him oppressed
would you not deem him more vnwelful yet
Than of his myschef somewhat were relesed
And so by perceiving of good repressed
Boecius) {quod} I How should hit other wise be
Phia) Than have the wicked certenly {quod} she
Somewhat of good when yt they ben in peyn
Annexed then un to his wrecchednesse
when they ben punysshed so / that is to seyn
The same peyn that for there wickedness
They suffer / wyche be cause of ryghtuosnesse
where by that peyn is give hit is no nay
That self peyn is good I dare well say
And when that they ben spared of torment
Of this yuel then have they somewhat more
That is the favour of vnpunysment
Of ryghtuous peynes that they ben forbore
The wyche as thou hast granted here before
Sith peyn is dwe reward of felony
Vnpunysment is euel sykerly
Boecius) I may not this denyen though I would
Phia) The wicked the vnpunyshed so with wrong
So more vnsely ben they many a fold
Then when by ryghtuous dome they vnderfong
Vengeance for there sin soroes strong
Sith ryghtuousnesse torments trespasours
Than is hit wrong to sparen surfetours
Bow{us}) Denyen this {quod} I there may no wight
Phia) May any man {quod} she denyen this
That al is good that ever is don by right
And al that ever is wrong is wickedness
Boecins) And this {quod} I is consequent y wysse
To that ye hove concluded loo while ere
But now I pray you one thing say me hire
When that the body resolved is by death
Shall the soul suffern any peyn
Phia) when yt the soul out of the body geth
Full hugy {quod} she / take hit in certain
For sum full bitter peynes shall susteyn
And sum shall be purged al with grace
To treten here of this / we have no place
But I have un to this that is in me
Full don my deuer that thou should known
The might of shrews / wyche as seems the
In them is full unworthily bestowen
Hit is no power verily to trowen
And there as thou complain in thy thought
That wicked folks ben y punysshed noght
There might you seyn the wicked for there sin
To faylen never of peynes sykerly
But that they may there wicked purpose win
with license for to worken wyckedly
Thou dyst pray to ben ended hastily
And I have made the clearly for to know
That hit no lesteth but a little throw
And that the longer that endures tho
The more wrecches ben they I the told
And if they shulden ever endure so
Than were they wrecches more a thousand fold
And more wrecches eke you might them hold
when they with wrong of peynes ben relesed
The when they be with ryghtuous peyn oppressed
And over this yet shall I further sayn
Loo of this sentence sues consequent
Than are the bad in most despytous pain
When that they seem they have no punysment
Bow{us}) I said than / when I with hole intent
Behald your reasons how ye doth them preue
No thing is sother said as I believe
But to the Iugement of man wit
That is not meued by such euydence
Ho is that man that will beleuen hit
Or deem hit worthy any audience
They troweth no thing but experience
Phia) As thou hast said {quod} she right so hit is
For yees that ben used to derknesse
The light of treuthe may they not behold
As fowls that ben wont to fl by night
For to be seyn a day they be not bold
For why the day is blyndyng to there sight
But nyghtes derknesse makes there yees bright
So men infect with lusts lekynges
Have no regard to the ordynance of things
For they supposes that such sufferance
Or vnpunyshment of cursedhede
Should a man to welfulnesse avaunce
But in the law eternal may thou rede
if thou do well thou hast no manner need
To ask a Jug for thy recompense
For thou hast set thy self in excellence
And if thou have thy selfen wyllyngly
Inclined un to sin wrecchednesse
To seek no vengeour of thy felony
without thyself hit needs not y wysse
For thou hast set thy self in wickedness
And made the leke un to a rude best
And put the in peynes that ever shall lest
Right as thou would cast thy sight a bout
Now to ground now to heaven light
Al other causes cessyng of without
Be cause of thine vnstablenesse of sight
Now would thou seem with the sterres bright
And now right in this moddy ground to be
But come people this can they not se
Bow{us}) I asked than what this should mene
Phia) Shulde we {quod} she consenten un to these
wyche we have showed that leke to bestes ben
if one of them wyche yt the lust deuyse
Loo had forlorn his sight in any wise
Al utterly / also furdermore
Had al forget that ever he saw be fore
And weans him want no thing utterly
Of man natural perfection
Now we that this behaldeth verily
Shulde we acorde to there entention
And not believe our awne inspection
Should we not troue that such men ben blind
And well the blynder for there mased mind
And things that as lekely may be preued
By reasons of as mighty foundement
Of such folk they may not be believed
That such wicked men violent
when they desese a simple Innocent
lWel more vnsely ben they in the dede
Than tho that suffers al there wrangfulhede
Bow{us}) Tho reasons said I wold I heren fain
Phia) Every wicked shrewd man {quod} she
will thou deny him worth care peyn
Boecius) Nay {quod} I that have ye not of me
Phia) Then more vnsely must they needs be
Such that ledeth there lyffes cursedly
Boecius) Right as ye sayn right so hit is {quod} I
Phia) And tho {quod} she yt worthy ben torment
will thou not deem them wrecches in that case
Boecius) yes {quod} I hit is full convenient
Phia) {quod} she if thou should. Iugen in this place
And myghtest do vengeance or else grace
whom would you demen worthy to be honge
whether him yt doth or him that suffers wroge
Bow{us}) To him {quod} I yt had the wrongs don
I wold a Iugen suffysance of peyn
The pacyent so should be a venged soon
That he should have no matter to complain
Phia) More wrecched is ye worcher will you sayn
{quod} she than he that soffereth every del
Bow{us}) In sothe {quod} I right so hit sues well
Phia) Of these causes of other mo
That of the self rote suyngly
Enforced ben / hit will apperen loo
That the fylthe of sins kendly
Right of the self sins proprely
Tho men they makes wrecches for to be
That uses vices dyshoneste
The wrong also is not the wrecchednesse
Of him that suffers harms greuance
But in sothe the wrecchednesse is his
That wrongusly has don him a noyance
But pledours don in this contraryance
That so the Iuges unto mercy meuen
A genst them yt wrongs doth agreuen
For sykerly ye pity longs more
To hem that hath vnthryftyfully wrought
And as the seek a leche is led before
So should he be before ye Jug y brought
Of piteous accusours and wroth noght
That with ye peyn as with a sotel gynne
Cowed cut a wey the malady of sin
And thus the besynes of advocates
Schuld be forleten men schuld hit refusen
Or if they wold approuen men algates
Al other wise they schuld there offyce vsen
And tho yt so mysdone alwey accusen
And if these wrecches also furthermore
Mygth scene the virtue yt they have forlore
Since that bout with peynes may be had
And fylthe of vice ben utterly fordone
To suffer peynes schuld he be full glad
No peynes sothly schuld he hold them none
His advocates forsaken should he soon
And to the Jug he should hem self be take
That might hem hole of al his sins make
Than is hit so yt as a genst the wise
Is left no place of hate hit is full soth
Hoo will the good haten or despite
But a foal yt wot not what he doth
And though ye bad be to the full loath
To haten hem yet have ye no reason
But rather have of them compassion
for as sekenesse ye body doth greuance
Rygth so is vice a manner malady
The wyche the soul oppresses with noyance
And as we should not demen skylefully
Him worthy hate that seek is bodily
But rwen rather on his peynes sore
Then goostly languor should ous meuen more
Hit is not convenient to haten no pursue
The souls that oppressed ben with vice
But rather on there bitter peynes rwe
And ho that could (not meued with malice)
That man a menden with full good advise
Though that he put him to full bitter peyn
Of cruelte there may no wight complain
Metru iiij. Capitulu viij.
Quid tantos la.
Phia loquitur. WHat helps hit to meuen or excite
with {pro}per hands your haps besely
For if ye seek death hit needs lyte
For he will come hymselfen wyllyngly
He tarries not he spedeth him hastily
Loo serpent / Leon / Tiger / Bore / Bear
They seeks you to a racen to tere
And ye with sword each other doth assail
For cause that your manners ben divers
Vnryghtuously so meueth ye battle
with enterchaungyng darts for to perse
your cruelte / your reason doth reverse
wolt thou that every man his meret had
Loo love the good / rwe upon the bad
Prosa v. Capitulu ix.
Hinc video inquam.
Boecius loquitur. In this {quod} I I perceive every del
Both the myschef the welfulnesse
As for the mede of them that worcheth well
And eke of them also that done a miss
But nevertheless alday I se well this
That of fortune to wyche the people hedeth
Both good euel full often time proceeds
No there is no wise man as I guess
That rather would be pour nameles
And in exile / than flouresh in riches
In power in honour to encresse
And in his cite for to dwell in piece
This is the best way as I deuyse
To profyt by the offyce of the wise
So may there blyssfulnesse / hit is no dout
As by the virtue of there governance
Be well transfunded in to folk a bout
That ben committed to there ordynance
But than / this mine heart doth greuance
Sith hit is so that lauful prysonment
Divers Ingynnes / peynes torment
For wicked folk were first ordained
And un to them hit longs skylefully
why is hit then that good men beth peyned
And in there stead oppressed grievously
And mede that to virtue properly
Of very right is pertynent dwe
These medes have the wicked vntrwe
What is the skyle of this confusion
That so vnryghtuous seems for to be
Of you I would have Information
For less merueyl should hit be to me
if al things stood in this degre
Meddled al with fortune with chance
And had at al none other governance
But god yt is the governor of al
Lo makes me a stoned as in this
Since Joy welthes often doth befall
To good folk. often time y wysse
The wicked be in care and heuynesse
And often time the bad there ageyn
Ben in there lusts the good in peyn
But if there be some skyle or euydence
why god rewards folk in this manner.
As thinks me there is no difference
But hap and fortune rewleth al y fere
Phia) Of this {quod} sche I wodre nought as here
Since thou no coudest ye skyle of ordynance
Though thou meruele upon the governance
And hald hit folly confusion
But though to the ye causes beth unknow
As of so hye a dysposytion
wham so him lust to setten hye or low
Sith he is good as thou must needs trow
That al governs / take this for a sothe
That al is ryghtuous what yt ever he doth
Metru v. Capitulum x.
Si quis arcturi sidera
Phia loquitur. HE that knows not the causes why
No how hit is / in sothe he can not sayn
That the sterre arcturus goes so ny
Meuynge a bowte the pole souereyn
And why Boetes rests not his weyn
And he his flammes plongeth down so late
And why so soon he rises este algate
Hit is no dowte he shall be stoned soon
As of the law of hye heaven bright
why that the horns of the full moan
So infected with the derke night
Becomes pale / the sterres light
wyche that she hid with her bemes clear
Dyscouerynge them / she makes to ous appear
And open error makes fowls blind
That bets bras the moan to reskewen
Men wonders noght upon the stormy wynd
That makes the see so fersly for to flown
That doth the brenkes beat overthrown
No that the cold forsen clottes great
So ben resolved by the sons hete
The cause of this is esy to be feled
These other are hyd / therefore ye wonder so
For al that falls suddenly seld
Thus wonders these meueable folks loo
And if this cloudy error pass them fro
So that they might the very causes se
They should not semen wonderful to be
Prosa vj. Capitulum xi.
Ita est inquam.
Boecius loquitur. RIght so {quod} I this will I not reverse
But loo this gyfte is yours sykerly
These pryme causes wyche that ye rehearse
And reasons hyd in clouds mystycally
To maken clear / this one thing coueyt I
Hit is a thing that trobleth most my mind
And with merueyl marred / I me find
Phia) She began to smile a little said than
Thou ask now of me a questyon
Loo of the highest thing that any man
May asken at mine estymation
Or may perceive by clear entention
To wyche vnnethes may there ought suffyce
Of any word that I can the deuyse
Such is the matter that we ben a bout
The wyche to known thou desyrest so
That when we ben delivered of a dout
wythouten nombre soon rises mo
That ben well ny as hard to a voyden fro
As heads that one dragon encresse
The serpent that was slain of Hercules
No in this matter is none other end
No how these great doutes to redressen
But that a lyfly fire of man mind
Must myghtly restrayn them repressen
For otherwise thou shalt them not expressen
For loo in this men uses to enquere
Thus fell as I shall the rehercen here
First of the wonderful symplycyte
Of the hye dyuyne purveyance
Of fatum that men calls desteney
Of fortune that is called soden chance
Of knowing of gods ordynance
That is called predestination
And eke of freedom of election
How hugyous is this matter with to del
Thou know hit well thy self hit is no nay
But sith hit is a parcel of thyn heal
To known this / I shall do what I may
Thou that the time be short I shall a say
Sith I have said the somewhat here before
I shall my self enforcen furdermore
And though so be that musyke the delyte
And metre is full lusty to thyn ere
As for a time that lust must thou respyte
The while that I in ordre knette in fere
My reasons wyche I shall the shown here
Boeci{us}) Right as ye lust {quod} I / she began
As hit were al a another process than
Phia) Loo every kendly generation
Of al things be they more or less
And every natural progress you
That in his being has chaungeablenesse
And what that ever hit be that meued is
There ordre / form causes forth ben brought
Fro the stable hye dyuyne thought
This souereyn thought that al doth so deuyse
Set in the tour of hye symplycyte
Has ordained many divers manner wise
To things that ben don / loo will thou se
And if this manner of desposytion referred be
Un to the pure dyuyne intellygence
Than is hit purveyance or prescience
But when this same manner referred is
To things that ben meued governed
As old men have called hit er this
Than is hit destiny as I have learned
Full soon is this dyuersyte dyscerned
Of him that sees the myghtes of them both
And esely he shall well se the sothe
For purveyance loo is that reason hye
Of good our aller prince souereyn
By wyche / al he desposeth myghtely
But destiny the very sothe to sayn
Loo is that dysposytion certain
wyche these things ben annexed to
That of there kendes ben meueable so
By wyche the hye dyuyne prescience
Al things in there ordynance enlaceth
This purveyance loo hath this excellence
That al thing at ones he enbraceth
Fro his presence is no thing that passes
Though they be Infynyte endless
Yet al he comprehends nevertheless
But destiny in certain time space
Syngulerly dyuydeth every del
Desposyng hit in meuyng time place
And when that this desposyng temporel
Is comprehended referred well
Un to the onehed of gods governance
Than is hit sothly called purveyance
But for to have consyderation
How they dyuyded in divers times be
That self ordre of this desposytion
Than is hit hothly called destiny
And though they have such dyuersyte
yet nevertheless there may no thing be sother
Then yt one of them depends of ye other
For of ye symplycyte of purveyance
This ordre fatal certain doth proceed
There is the form of al that ordynance
Right as a crafty man that will him speed
A work to maken / first he takes heed
And al the shappe desposeth in his mind
And sith the effect he brings to the end
As he hath first devised every del
And in his thought enprented symplely
He brings forth by ordre temporel
Right so god al purueyeth syngulerly
And to be don desposeth stablely
And when hit fully is desposed so
By destiny he makes hit to be do
And whether this exercise destynal
By any spyrytes of the heaven on hye
That to this purveyance entendeth al
Or if the soul doth hit verily
Or else nature doth hit kendly
Or the meuyng of the sterres bright
Or else angeles of the heaven light
Other else by the fendes besynesse
By some of these other by al in fere
This ordre destynal performed is
yet loo this is full open full clear
And needs hit must be so in al manner
That the stable simple ordynance
Of thing to don is called purveyance
But loo / the process of successyon
In wyche they ben performed suyngly
By the simple dysposytion
Fore seyn of god be forn eternally
Loo destiny men call hit sykerly
So al that ever is under destiny
So must hit under purveyance be
As is the self destiny also
And to that self purveyance both
Some things ben subject that ben y do
As after this I shall declaren to the
That a geyn stondeth destiny for sothe
And some to god approaches so by love
That ordre destynal they pass a above
As divers compace on one point y pyght
Upon the centre tornyng al a bout
The Innermest compace to thy sight
The wyche next to the centre is without
A centre will hit seem / hit is no dout
And seems as hit meueth never a del
A bout wyche so meueth al the while
But this vttermest circumference
That to thy sight is largest in compace
And ferrest fro this point in difference
So must he meuen in a larger space
And he that negheth to that myddel place
Compressed next to that symplycyte
He cesseth for to meuen as seems the
By lekely reason he that ferrest fleteth
Fro the souereyn thought of god on hye
To destiny the faster he him knetteth
And he that can will approchen ny
This souereyn centre-god ententyfly
The more he stondeth in freedom in es
That destiny shall little him desese
Right as dyscours of reason may not be mete
Un to the Intellect of man mind
No thing that is / to thing that is not yet
No a little stound to time wythouten end
May not be leke in worthiness of kende
But as the point to the circumference
Between them is an hugey difference
Right so this fatayl mutabylyte
That always is so full of varyance
Referred to the hye symplycyte
Of the stable souereyn purveyance
wyche that heuens has in governance
He meueth sterres / he tempers elements
Transformyng them by enterchaungementes
And al yt nature doth on earth breed
And so bids / shall fallen down efte soon
Renewyng them by fruit by sede
He sees also the works that ye done
And fortunes he governs euerych one
Constreynynge with an Insoluble bond
Of causes wyche that may not be wythstonde
And sith these causes passen fro so hye
A ground / as purveyance vnuaryable
Than may I say full well sothfastly
That needs must hit ben vntransmutable
That governance / most profytable
when this symplycyte of dyuyne thought
Ordeyneth causes wyche that fails noght
Thus in a certain ordre sothe to sayn
That steadfast is hit may faylen never
And but this ordre govern refrain
This wordly things wyche that changes ever
Full soon they shall dyssoluen desseuer
Fletynge / right as thing of no valour
And whaueryng so wythouten governor
And though so be that we may not behold
The causes of this desposytion
No se the skyleful ordre as we should
There fore be we in perturbation
Hit seems ous error confusion
Yet is hit dressed if we understood
And well desposed every del to good
For cause of euel is no thing verily
Performed of the worst man that is
For as I have declared plenerly
They seeks good / but they ben led a miss
By error of there own wrecchednesse
For why that ordre wyche that doth proceed
Fro souereyn good / hit may no wight myslede
But un to this perauenture will thou say
What confusion may there worse be
Sith good bad indyfferent alday
Now have they welthe now aduersyte
Now that they love / now yt they wolden fl
But will thou trow that men be now so wise
That every thing must be as they deuyse
As whom them lust to Iugen good or bad
Of very force hit must be needs so
In man dome dyscorde full oft is had
For of these one man / these will demen loo
That he is worthy much peyn woo
And these will deem him worthy thank mede
And yet the one must be deceived need
But let ous graunten here that any wight
The good bad may verily dyscerne
Now trow thou yt they ben of such a might
For to enserche the Innermest thought
Of man gost al that he hath wrought
And clearly Iugen thereof every dowte
As men are wont of bodies here without
As for to Jug there attemperure
Of dyuersyte of there complexion
As greatly wonders every creature
That knows not by clear inspection
There kendes no there dysposytions
why these accords well with things sweet
These other most have sour sweet forlete
And seek folks ben y cured oft
Sum with sharpe things sykerly
And sum by thing that esy is soft
But this the leche knows verily
That knows the manner of the malady
There temperure manner of there heal
Of this dyscorde he wonders never a del
And what may be the helthe of thy courage
But honest virtue most of price
what sekenesse may thy soul do damage
But vnhoneste cursednesse of vice
But now what creature may be so wise
To sauen helthe a voyden heuynesse
No wight but god in certain as I guess
He is the very leche of man mind
That fro the waytyng of his purveyance
He sees what is acordant to the kende
Of euerych that he has in governance
And for them so he makes ordynance
To euerych as belongs to his helthe
whether that ye deem hit woo or welthe
Than is this noble wondre to your thought
And merueyl of this ordre destynal
when god al conynge / has that work y wrought
Hit stoneth them that knows noght at al
For man conning certain is but small
And man reason little may dyffyne
Of things in the souereyn thought dyuyne
Perauenture thou will demen of a wight
That he is Just trwe in his intent
yet in the purveyance of gods sight
There falls al a another Iugement
And a dome that is fer dyfferent
Loo as Lucanus my famylyer
In his books wrote of this matter
The cause conuyct as Cato began deuyse
He deemed best / that was Pompeius
But loo the gods Judged other wise
They deemed Just the cause of Iulius
Wherefore they maden him vyc^oryous
So things don outwardly to thy sight
Yet is hit don by ordynance of right
But yet as to thyn opynable wit
Hit seems ouerthorte confusion
But perauenture I suppose yet
Here is some man of such condition
That in the dome is no dystynction
But god man accords al in one
In Iugement that error is there none
But upon hap so feynt his courage is
That if there fall him other than he would
Hit should him causen for to don a miss
And to forlete his good custumes old
By wyche / fortune might he not with hold
where fore the wise dyspensation
Regarding to his dysposytion
And saying that by such aduersyte
He should be much apeyred y shent
For why he spares him of his pity
And gives him so as is convenient
That he may keep him true Innocent
And these loo stont in virtue perfetly
And as a saint is Joined god full ny
Of these the hye dyuyne purveyance
Wold deem hit as for sin felony
To put upon him harms or greuance
He will him noght be harmed bodily
No be desesed by no malady
Thus said one that of wysedom was fulfilled
That virtue has a sayntes body bylded
And often when astate of worthiness
And governance is given to the wise
That is for to rebuken repress
The vice that wold encressen a rise
And some he rules in a another wise
And as him leketh enterchaungeth both
Right as best is for them hit is the sothe
And some he suffers softly to be grieved
Lest they outrage in there welthes long
And some with sharpe showers to be meued
That virtue of there courage ever a mong
By use of pacyence be preued strong
And be confermed by that exercise
And some because of very cowardyce
Full nedeles of much thing they dread
wyche they may well perform ye sothe to sayn
And these loo is full hardy in his dede
Presuming more then he may sustain
To these expedyent hit is there a geyn
To know them selfen by experience
And these loo for a name of excellence
Full manly with death he hath hit boght
And so he hath sustained peynes sore
As for exsample ever to be thought
That men may seyn by things don be fore
That virtue has Inuict ben evermore
And is not harmed by aduersyte
But if defaute of men them selfen be
How ryghtuously desposed al a bowte
And loo how well these things ben y do
Ho so looks this / he may not ben in dowte
And for there profet wham they falls to
For to the wicked that betydeth so
That now they have desese now there lust
To these same causes may be wyste
But when they ben in peynes distress
There is no wight that wonders never a del
For why they al will suppose guess
That (...) peynes were deserved well
And these peynes that these wrecches feel
Makes other wrecches peynes for to fere
And often foul vices to forbere
And also for there awne amendment
But things falling lusty to there chyre
Hit gives men a mighty argument
what they should demen of these welthes here
Sith they to wrecches be famylyer
And certenly I suppose as in this
That god despenseth with there frowardness
For some men ben there loo perauenture
That ben so importune in there malice
And eke so ouerthrowyng of nature
That need them makes fallen in to vice
But than this prescyence that is so wise
A genst the perel of this malady
By wordly plentey makes remedy
Loo these behaldeth on his consciens
Defouled so with sin cursedhede
And says how great a dysconuenyence
Than is between his fortune his dede
Perauenture he falls so in dread
Lest that the use of thing that doth him es
He may forfete by his sins less
He changes than his customs euerychone
Him fereth so his fortune to forlete
And al his vices he forsakes soon
And these hath loo these wordly welthes great
To wyche in sothe his meret is vnmete
And suddenly the wrecche is overthrown
And set at noght as his deserts awen
And some have pouer auctoryte
Loo whom them lust to punysshen dystrayn
So that hit may un to the good be
An exercise of virtue the sothe to sayn
And to the wicked man a cause of peyn
For right as good bad dyscordeth ever
Right so bad them self accords never
And why not / sith hit falteth every day
That they dyscorden in them selfen so
There conscience repreueth them always
And often time hit falls that they do
Some dede / yt when the time is over go
Them self they demeth in there awne thought
That better had that dede ben vnwroght
This purveyance if ye hit understood
Hit worcheth here a wonder to your heart
By bad men the bad he makes good
And fro there vices wonderly convert
For when the fowls feel them felfen smert
when other wrecches has them harmed sore
Hit falls that they hates them there fore
And while they coueyt un to s^che men
To be vnleke / that uses such vnryght
To fruit of virtue they resorts than
For only this is thing of gods might
Right as hit leketh him / hit is but light
That bad thing is good as he deuyseth
when good effects of the bad a rises
For why in ordre al thing embraces
And what that fleteth fro this ordynance
In to another ordre than hit passes
For in the realm of certain purveyance
That mighty god hath in his governance
There may no thing be done vncertenly
No but hit have a skyleful cause why
For un to man in sothe hit langeth not
To know al his wonderful engyne
As of the works wyche that ben y wrought
So by the hye purveyance dyuyne
No them with words fully dyffyne
No creature has that habylyte
But only this suffices / hit to se
That god the first founder of nature
Al thing to good desposeth he dresses
So fer forth that in every creature
The lekenesse of him self he empresseth
And for to kepen this / loo he represses
Al wicked things fro his governance
A voydyng hit by fatal ordynaunce
For why if thou mark well in thy mind
The purveyance that al thing desposeth
There is no thing that you shalt bad find
Though so be yt thy wits so supposes
For every thing wythyn hit self encloses
Some manner cause of good hit is no dread
where of some other goods shall proceed
But yet whyler I saw the wexen faint
As for the wyghtes of my questyon
This long process has the sore atteynt
Some sweet thing of delectation
Thou ask for a recreation
Have taste of this strenger shalt thou be
Than / hegher to ascend after me
Metru vj. Capitulum xj.
Si vis celsi iura tonatis.
Phia loquitur. TOo if thou will behold ententyfly
with al the clear myghtes of thy mend
The laws of our souereyn god on hey
Up in to heaven thou must thy wits send
There every thing doth keep his course of kende
The sterres with a ryghtuous allyaunce
They kepeth there there old gouernauuce
And loo the bright son hit is no dout
The cold moan lets never a del
And Vrsa wyche that meueth round a bout
The pole artyke right as hit were a whele
Her old course she kepeth wonder wele
Though other sterres meue in to the west
To a byden there a above she leketh best
And Hesperus the eve sterre clear
Loo shows him self before the derke night
And the lustey sterre Lucifer
He brings by este a geyn the day light
This perdurable course they kepeth right
Thus al dyscord by enterchaunged love
Loo is exiled from the heaven a above
This same accorde of love by stoundes mete
Attempereth eke the fighting elements
That drouth may accorde with the wet
That hete cold may have conuenyence
And though they keep there kendly resistance
The light fire yet algates up asceudeth
And the heavy earth contrary way descends
And by causes of the self reason
Sweet flowers spryngeth lustely
In the fair first somer season
And so the hot somer suyngly
Makes the corn to rypen hastily
And so autumpnus brings forth his blede
Lusty fruit folks for to fed
This same attemperaunce hit is no nay
The winter so be dweth with the rain
Al leuyng thing hit norysseth soth to say
And efte with death retorneth down a geyn
The while sytteth the maker souereyn
well ground both lord king is he
Law / wise Jug of equyte
The reins of the world he hath in hand
So making hit to meuen to go
A resting efte he makes hit to stand
For thing that fletteh ever to fro
But if that he enstabelysshe hit so
Compellyng hit to meuen in to round
Hit must needs faylen fro his ground
And fro the ordre wyche they now observe
This love come to every creature
Coueyteth them to kepen conserve
The end of good that ground is of nature
For in other wise may they not endure
But love return them in to vnyte
Of god on hye that caused them to be
Prosa vij. Capitulu xiij.
Jam no igitur vides.
Phia loquitur. ANd seyst thou not {quod} she what sues here
Upon al that we have rehearsed now
Bow{us}) I asked what phia) {quod} she yt is full
That al fortune is good bow{us}) y asked how (clear
Phia) Full soon {quod} she that shall I show the now
Thou understand well that this is sothe
That every fortune Iustey is or loathe
Yet ben they given for an exercise
Of virtue to the good or else thus
As for a guerdonyng un to the wise
Or they ben given to the vicious
To punyshe them that ben malycyous
Or to correct them of there mysdede
This is the very cause hit is no dread
And al that ever is Just profytable
will thou not hold hit good Bow{us}) I said yes
For why hit sues right as reasonable
To that ye have rehearsed here y wis
Of purveyance destiny er this
Full fermely your sentence is y knit
But saeth me one thing if you leketh yet
As ye have put be fore a little er
Acounteth fortune now in this degre
ye sayden that a rude comyner
Can not believe / no will hit not se
Phia) And where shall I speak of that {quod} she
Bow{us} {quod} I this speech of men is used wide
That euel fortune to some men doth betide
Phia) And will you {quod} she yt we negh ne'er
Un to the come used speech than
Lest them seem that I go to far
A bouen al the come use of man
Bow{us}) As leketh you {quod} I Phia) she began
Demest you not good that causes good to encresse
Bow{us}) yes {quod} I for sothe I may Jug no less
Phia) Now al that virtue is enforced by
Other that corrects any dede
Doth hit not profyten) Boecius) yes {quod} I
Phia) Than is hit good {quod} she wythouten dread
Boecius) In sothe {quod} I this must I grauten need
Phia) But this {quod} she to them doth aperteyn
That grounded ben in virtue ye sothe to seyn
That takes bateyl with such auentures
whythstandyng them with mighty patience
Or hit perteyneth to tho creatures
That have led there lyffe in insolence
And so to virtue doth there dylygence
There to enforsed with aduersyte
Boecius) this {quod} I may not denied be
Phia) But when {quod} she fortune of lustynesse
To good men is given for there mede
Is hit then bad? will these folks guess
Bow{us}) I said nay full right they will hit rede
That this fortune is good wythouten dread
Phia) And what {quod} she when fortune anguysous
Is bestowed upon the vicious
To peyn them for there sins ryghtuously
whether will they deem hit good or noght
Bow{us}) Good will they not Iugen hit {quod} I
But wrecchednesse ye worst that may be thought
Phia) Behald {quod} she now where we ben y brought
As suynge this vulgar opynyon
In to a marvelous conclusion
Bow{us}) I asked what Phia) hit sues here {quod} she
Of that we have confessed plenerly
Lo that there may no wicked fortune be
To such that haveth virtue perfetly
Or to tho that encresseth ought there by
Or tho that doth in virtue first begin
To virtue so converted fro there sin
And they that dwells in there wickedness
what fortune that them fall of well or woo
Hit is myschef to them wrecchednesse
Bow{us}) In sothe {quod} I hit sues well there to
Though no man will hit grant yet is hit so
Phia) For why she said a wise perfet man
Should not so sore grogen than
When fortune as a foo doth hem assail
Right as a strong man should him not dysdeyn
When that he hyreth rumour of battle
But thereof should he be full glad fain
For such destresse a matter is certain
For to conferme these one in sapience
These other in astate of excellence
For then her name virtue uses right
Al only when hit stont in this degre
when hit enforces of his propre might
To be not ouerthroen by aduersyte
And to you that in encrece of virtue be
Hit belongs not to led a lusty lyffe
with every fortune have ye taken stryffe
And a bateyl wonder sharpe kene
Loke how ye can you keep in this distress
To set your selfen in a mighty mene
So that her sorrows no thing you oppress
No that ye be not by her lustynesse
Corrupt / for al that a above this mene a rises
Or is benethe / felycyte despyseth
And shall no mede as for his labour take
For in your awne hands put is hit
your propre fortune / wyche ye will make
For if hit seem sharpe un to your wit
Loo exercise of virtue gives hit
Or else you converts fro your sin
Or punysseth you that will a bide theryn
AGamenon the vengeour of heleyue
A bateyl held of erus twyes five
So he destroyed troy wanne a geyn
The same helyue yt was his brod wyffe
But when he first began styre him to that stryffe
Him lacked wind to sail on the flod
And soon he boght hit with his doghter blod
And so he made him selfen pyteles
In sacryfyce he sloo his doghter dere
Also when that noble Vlixes
In the see had sailed many year
He wept his mayne with a ruthful chere
For Poliphemus daryng in his den
So fersly had devoured al his men
But Vlixes full warily began espy
when that this Poliphemus was a sleep
And suddenly than put he out his ye
And Poliphemus tho be began to leap
And for malice anguish weyle weep
where of Vlixes was full blithe glad
In vengeance of the harms that he had
And Hercules gate him a noble name
By labours wyche that hard were great
First the proud Centaurus made he tame
The Lyon fers out of his skin he get
And Arpyas eke with aroes he shete
And golden apples wych the dragon kept
He gate them while the cruel dragon slept
And Cerberus the foul hound of hell
with a three fold cheyn he bound full last
And dyomede the tyrant fers fell
He made his horse devour him at last
Upon the serpent Idra fire he cast
And so he brent him in to asches cold
That no man his venem noyen should
When Achilaus made him self by craft
I leke to a bole with Hercules to fight
Than Hercules his horns him be raft
And fully him despoiled of his might
Achilaus in to a river right
For shame he leapt hyd him selfen there
And on the land he dare no more apere
Antheus the geaunt of Libie
That on the ground his myghtes would renwe
Thus Hercules him sloo full manfully
Upon his breast to the ground him thrwe
And Cakus the thief that was vntrwe
He sloo / Euanderus Ire he pesed
That of Cakus often was desesed
And over this he sloo the mighty bore
with hoos foom his shulders marked were
But than his last labour furdermore
was when he on his neck heuens bear
And of this labour he deserved there
That heaven for to have to his mede
ye mighty men to this ye takes heed
Now hastes you the hye way to wend
Right as ye may by this exsample se
ye nice men mased in your mind
why will ye not fight a genste aduersyte
with virtue / sith ye may so syker be
Ho so in earth has the victory
He shall be worthy to the heaven on hye
Explicit Liber Quartus.
In this chapytre Philosophia confermeth her exhortation / by exsaple of iii.
mighty men / of synguler deeds that they had done. Agamenon. Vlixes. Hercules.
And for cause often times men eschevveth great acts for lack of courage /
vvyche courage is blemesshed or oppressed: by iii. things in specyal. There fore
he rehearses of these vverryours, certain deeds / in vvyche they showed the
might of there courage not hurt no blemesshed by none of these causes. One thing
is that often lets vvythdraeth the force of manes courage / fro mighty and
manly deeds / that is tendrenesse of heart and affection that he has other to
vvordly things vvyche he delyteth upon / Other to vvyffe children / kynred /
or frenshyppe / vvyche he kepeth not to dysplese in vvythdrayng his presence /
nether in any other thing / that might be cause of morning or heuynesse. But a
geynst this carnalyte / he puts the exsample of Agamenon. That when he was
saylynge towards the sege^ of Troye / when he came to the I'll of Aulydes /
him lacked vvynde. Then was hit showed him by vvycches dyuynours / that if he
vvolde have vvynde: he must slay his doghter Ephigenie / brenne her in
sacryfyce to the plesance of Dyane. And not vvythstandyng that he loved his
doghter passing al thing / yet in hope of victory / he put a way the
tendrenesse of faderly affection / and made his heart pyteles to his dere
doghter / so sloo her in sacryfyce.

And so had he vvynde to his vvyl / suyngly the victory as he desired The
second thing that lets a man courage is: when he hath seyn many peryshe
for a certain purpose: vvych him self desires / and few or none atteyn hit
vvyth prosperyte. A geyn this a basshement / he puts the second exsample of
Vlixes. vvyche when he had x. years erred saylyng in the see after the
destruction of Troye suffered many miss adventures / specyally in
transformation leasing of his feloshyppe: by the cursed enchaunteresse Circes.
Here he tellethe how the great giant Poliphemus vvyth one ye in his frount /
had deuored destroyed his people / And not vvythstandynge the myscheffe that al
his people had suffered / yet Vlixes a basshed him noght / but vvayted when
this giant was a sleep / suddenly put out his ye: And theu was he syker of
him / that he might harm him no more. so he venged the morder of his meyne*
The moralyte of this fable / is this. Poliphemus is as much to say / as
leasing of fame: And he that recks not of his fame / may well be called one
yeed. For he regards not that is to come: no that is passed. but only to his
present lusts. But Vlixes the vvyse man / has regard both to that is gon:
to that that is to come / quenches in him self this one is of these present
lusts. And though so be that al the world for the more part / by rauesshynge
of this one ye / peresseth / foloynge these momentaney lusts: and vnnethes any
man is that can or vvyl refrain the: yet Vlixes the vvyse ma: vvyl stop this
ye / not excuse him by the come excuse of vvrecches saying: Ho is he that may
vvythstand his desires / sith so many mighty men vvyse have ben dyscomfete of
there lusts. But he vvyl myghtly repress these passyons by good gouernace* And
so avenge him self upon his gostely enemy.

The third thing that a basseth the courage: is covvardyce: when a ma haldeth
him self unable to the labour that he puryoseth / and his might vnsuffycyant
vnmete to resyste that: that vvythstandethe his vvyl enteut. Agenste this
covvardyce: philosophia Inducethe the xii. labours of the mighty man Hercules /
vvyche seems to every man hyrynge far to exceed the might of any man* yet
not vvythstandyng / Hercules a basshed never his courage: but myghtely
{per}formed his intent purpos. wherefore as philosophia concludes he was
rewarded vvyth a souereyn geft / and made a bright shynyng sterre in the heaven
a above. By these mighty manues labours / is given to ous an exsample / that there
may no thing a basshe the courage of a vvyse man: where by he should leave the
labour of virtuous leuynge / no bodily exercise in virtue shall not seem him
ouerhard to his might / but that he may perform his entente lust. so shall his
desire be enforced vvyth desire full hope to heuenly Joy.

The first labour: the proud Centaurus made he tame: Of these Centaurus is said
be forn / That Ixion gate them of a cloud / when he vvolde have oypressed
Iuno. But what vvyse that Hercules tamed them / hit is expressed by the
commentor thus. when that these Centaurus in a certain time were come to gedres
in the mount of Pheloe to a pley that was called Palestra / vvyche we call
vvrastelyng / Hercules so sore asset them in vvrastelyng / that they bled.
Also another time Hercules coming out of spain was logged in the den of Tyro
Centaurus that was one of the ^heffe masters. And as this Tyro handled an
aroe / vvyth vvyche Hercules had slain a serpent the venomous aroe fell upon
his foot / and made him a vvonde / that was uncurable. The third time hit fell
that Hercules vvyth his love Deiamra tornyng toward his contre / come to the
river of Heuenu / And when he tarried for caryage of his vvyffe: Neffus
Centaurus bade him svvymme over before: he vvold bring her after. And when
that Hercules was come to land / he looked after his vvyffe / he saw
Centaurus a bout for to oppressen her / And a none vvyth a venomous aroe he
shet him thoro the heart s^vve him. And thus he tamed the proud Centaurus. To
the litceral truth of this tale. Ixion that was called the fader of the
Centaurus / was the first that ordained horsemen for to ride in greece / and
gadred of them a hundred vvasted sore the country. And when the rude people
did see them so smartly pry^k^ng in and out / they vvend hit had ben bestes /
half horse and half me. And at last these mighty Hercules fought with them
destroyed them. By these Centaurus geten of the cloud may be understand such
men as ben exalted in to hye astates / not by meret of there virtues / but by
favour of lordshyppe / by there vayn plesaunce. They ben half bestes half men /
bestly in there leuyng / raueners extorcyoners: leke men in pleasance to there
lords Hercules the virtuous shall spare none offence of there hye astates / no
dread of there tyranny / but boldly repreue them of there vices / make them to
loke as men should. The second of Hercules was that he strepte the Lyon out of
his skyn. The truth of this labour was this: There was a passing hugy Lyon in
the forest of Nemeas: vvyche sore a frayed the people of the country. vvyche
Lion hercules slvve / strept the skyn: bare vvyth him in sign of vrctory. By
this Lyon is understand / proud fers tyrants: that delyteth al in raven and
pylyng of the people / having no pytey upon the pour. These men a virtuous man
should spoil of there pour / suffer none such to bear astate of off^ce.

The third labour was that he sher the herpyas vvyth aroes.

Syneus put out the yees of his sons / because they had accused there
stepmoder of adultery. wherefore by Jugement of gods he was blinded him self
/ and had certain fowls about him vvyth maiden heads / that defoyled his
table bare a way his mete. These fowls Hercules slvve and drove out of
country

By these Herpyas may well be understand rennets or ryders over the contre /
covered under lordship / as menstrelles Ioculers and such other / that comes
in to householdes of worthy men / eteth and deuoreth there vytelles / And but
they have also geftes / they vbyl defoule the table / despysyng the persons /
And when they ben passed / speak vylenously by al the household. Such people
a virtuous man should not cherysshe for fere of words / but rebuke them of
this foul manners / and so destroy that foul vice and dishonest usage.

The fourth labour was: that he gate the golden apples fro the dragon. As
Lucanus feyneth Athlaus had vii. doghters / vvyche had a gardenful of golden
apples / vvych garden was taken to keep to a dragon / that always was
vvakyng. But Hercules by craft made this dragon to sleep / and so bare a way
the apples: and brought them to Euristeus the king. By these vii. doghters of
Athlaus / ben understand the vii. arts liberal. These damseles have a garden /
that is the lybrary disperse a monges clerks. Appel trees ben books / the
apples ben sotel sentence of vvysedom / vvych the vvakynge dragon / that is the
sensualyte of man has to keep. vvych is ever vvakyng to lusts and delytes /
and so lets the soul fro conning. But Hercules the virtuous man oppresses
his sensualyte by good governance so that hit lets him noght fro study /
And so by his good besynesse he geteth the fruit of al the vii. science.

The v. labour was when he bound Cerberus the foul hound of hell. Of these
Cerberus the fable is this. Pirritous vvold vvedde the queen of hell. And he
called Hercules Theseus / other mighty men to help him. And when they came to
hell / lest Cerberus the porter should let them of there purpose / Hercules
bound him vvythe a cheyn of adamant: The queen of hell may well be called
vvordly vvorshyp / vvych Pirritous desires. But he takes vvyse men to his
counsel. And Cerberns vvyth iii. heads Hercules binds / That is Pride /
Auaryce / and Lechory. These iii. head sins lets a man to be vvorshypful /
where for the virtuous man binds restreyneth them vvyth a treble cheyn of
virtues. And when that these vices be so repressed by virtues / a man may not
fail to be vvorshypful.

The vi. labour was that he made diomede to be eten of his avvne horse. The
fable is this. Diomede king of Trace / fed his horse vvyth man flesh:
where fore he used to slay his gestes for his horse. But at last came Hercules
and slvve him / * And made his horse to ete him. And fynally sloo the same
horse. This Diomede betokens a vvastour that pylleth and despoyleth the people
/ for to maynteyn his great a ray / vvych passes the suffysaunce of his
astate. But a virtuous man shall besey him self for to destroy such manner
leuers / compelle them for to leave by there avvne good: But when they may not
continue that a ray vvythoute raven and robbery / there horse and there a ray
brings them to noght. so that of need they must leave hit and leave as they
may. The vii. labour was / that he brent the serpent Idra. In the river of
Learn was a serpent vvyth many heads / And ever if one were cut of / there
vvaxe ^ii. there fore. And when that Hercules had shot him no thing a veiled
/ at last he made a bout this serpet a hugey hepe of food: after set hit a
fire so brent this serpent. This fable is touched be fore in part declared The
viii. labour is of Achilaus. the fable is this. Hercules and Achilaus
vvressheled to gether for the maiden Dianer / when that Achilaus field him self
at the vvorse / he torn him self suddenly in to a serpet / slypte out of his
hands. And Hercules eftsoon caught him was in point to vvery him. And then
Achilaus torn him self in to a bole. So Hercules a none toke him threw him
to the ground break his horne. he for shame leapt in to the water hyd him.

The truth of this fable is this Achilaus is a river be tvvene greece
Calcedoyne. In this Calcedoyne regned a king named Genus / hose doghter
Hercules rauesshed. And coming to this river when he might not pass hit he
stopped an arm of hit dried hit / so he passed with his love. By this kings
doghter may be understand virtue / vvyche Hercules the mighty man coueyteth for
to have. Achilaus betokens the sensualyte / vvych in youth hyley
vvythstandeth a man that vvold be virtuous. But first the sensualyte as a
serpent assails him by many side ways / And when this mighty man hath
overcome al tho serpents deceits / he turns in to a bole vvyth ii. horns /
Lechory / Glotony. But this one horne of Lechory / the virtuous man breketh
utterly destroys. then is the sensualyte overcome / For the other horne of
glotony vvyl lightly of a virtuous man be put under by good governance. So
this bole lepeth in to the river. the sensualyte is repressed keleth him self
by penance / and so vvynneth the mighty man virtue to his love.

The ix. labour is of Antheas the great geaunt / vvych was geten of the earth
/ And ever as he touched the earth / he renewed his strength vvyth vvych geaunt
Hercules vvrasteled / But always when he seemed dyscomfeted / falling to ground
he became as fresshe as he was before Than Hercules perceuyug this toke him in
his arms / leyd him on his breast / and so strained him to death by strength:
so caste him to the ground / thus destroyed he the geaunt. By these Antheus may
be understand vvordly couetyce / vvych encresseth renews his strength by
tochyng of the ground. For couetyce vvyl not be quenched by plenty of vvordly
good / but rather is there by renewed enforced. Hercules the the virtuous man /
streyneth this couetyce vvythyn his breast / vvyth draeth hit utterly fro
vvordly good / so he quenches the lust that he had there on / puts hit
holely in virtue in vvysedom.

The x. labour is of Cakus the theffe of Libia vvych Hercules dyscomfeted
slvve. The fable is this. There was in the mount Aucentyne a monstre / that
spete fire at his mouth / robbing despoylyng the people of the country. And he
was the son of Vulcane / by whom Euander king of the land was greatly a
noyed. And Hercules coming by that contre / bringing vvyth him out of spayn
great plenty of bestes / this Cakus stale iiii. bolles as many keyn: droe them
in to his den by the tails bacvvard / that the stappes should not be seyn
Invvard. And Hercules by estimation espied where they were / and so droe
Cakus out of his den / and sloo him. and so he esed the king destroyng his
enemy. The moralyte is thus. By this Cakus may be understand pride. He speteth
fire at his mouth / hye words of malice and manace: He is Vulcanus son.
For that vice is appropryat to the deuel that first hit found. He vvasteth and
deuoreth and steleth al that he may / and so harms the contre* For a proud
man vvasteth much in his a ray other expenses / that al that ben a bout him
ben noyed there by. Euander the reason that is king of the soul may not overcome
him / for he vvyl not vvorche by him / He dares in his den: syttyng in man
heart / he steleth iiii. bolles of Hercules he oppresses the iiii. cardynal
virtues / as many keyn / al other virtues that ben under them. For a proud man
is myghtles / intemperate / vnvvare vnryghtuous. This theffe Hercules that is
consciens espies: and draeth out this theffe pride out of the heart / and
sleyth destroyth him / and so hath he his bestes a geyn / that be virtues. And
reason that was over come / now regneth in the soul as king in ^pece and
rest.

The xi. labour is of the bore that Hercules s^vve. In archadia was a mighty
bore that vvasted the regyon sore. vvych Hercules hunted and at last this bore
torn un to Hercules smote him in the shoulder / and marked hit vvyth the foom
of his mouth. By these bore may be understand the vice of the flesh / vvyche
vvasteth foul a ma his substance: These vices Hercules the mighty chaceth and
hunts / in vvyl to destroy them: But this bore turns and assails
Hercules: For hit chances oft / that a full mighty man in virtues: that
pursues hates al vices / is assailed repted vvyth the sin of the flesh /
perauenture is marked falling theryn. But one vicious dede beryueth not the
habit of virtue: but ma^h a man more ware: and dylygent for to keep him self /
and so at last he ouercometh his flesh and sleyth this bore of lust and
lekyng.

The xii. labour was this: after the fable of Duyde. Athlas the mighty geaunt
/ in the geauntes battle / fighting a genst the gods above / bare heaven upon
his shoulder: And when that he saw Hercules come to him / after his other
labours / he was vvery of fighting also of this burden / prayed him to help
him to bear heaven / And he toke and bare hit myghtely. whereby he deserved to
be made a fair sterre in heaven. The truth was this. Athlas was a cheffe
astronomer / wherefore he was said that he bare heaven / the conning of
heuenly things. But when Athlas dyed / vvych death is a rest and a refresshyng
to the virtuous / Hercules toke heaven upon his shoulder. The moralyte may be
thus. The battle of geauntes is the enforsynge of goostly myghtes a genst the
gods a above / that is a genst natural inclination to vices / vvyche is caused
by constellations / But a genst these inclinations / he may fight best / that
has conning of astronomy. For to search the myghtes of the planetes for
certain times / and knows also how these vycious inclinations becaused. But
at last he must leave the labour of astronomy compelled by age / when al his
passyons ben cessed: and then Hercules takes heaven upon his shoulder: and
gives him holly to heuenly contemplation.

And so he deserves by this labour specyally to be made a cytesen of heaven.
Loo thus must every mighty man that vvyl de seruen heaven. First loathe and
abhor the monstres of sin: both in him self: and also in other: and at
last leuyng al outward occupation / give him holly to serve god: in prayer and
contemplation: and so many he be syker of al that he desires.

To whom so ever the moralyte of these fables be plefaut or vnlusty were ye
well that they lacks al in some things lytteral truth. But a fable lacking
lytteral truth vnexponed: is noght else but a lesyng. And as holy scripture
saeth / al that ever doth or speaks lesyng / shall be parteners of the pit of
hell. Where fore after my simple conning / I have moralysed the in my manner:
leuyng the correction to other that ben clerks and more conning in that
science. For sith hit aperteneth not to holy vvryt: every man vvythout offence:
may say that him seems most lekely to truth.

Explicit Liber quartus.
Sequitur Liber Quintus Boetij de cosolatone Phie.
WHen she had said she began her selfen hye
To other things treted for to be
your noble exhortation {quod} I
Full worthy hit is of hye auctoryte
But yet while er as I remember me
ye did speak of dyuyne prescience
How hard hit is I have experience
And al belapped with demands feel
Encomberous to any man wit
Full dangerous is that matter with to del
But now I pray you that ye say me yet
if hap be ought / what manner thing is hit
Phia) I speed me {quod} she for to pay my debt
Of things that while er I the behete
And for to set the in a ready way
So that thou might return in to thy land
This matter that thou ask sothe to say
Though hit be good to know understand
Loo yet this purpose that we have on hand
Somewhat hit is impertynent there to
And furdermore hit is to dread also
Lest of thy ways that thou faint fail
As for thy Journey that is overgone
And lest thou suffyse not to thy traueyle
To that thou hast hereafter for to done
Bow{us}) Then dread ye not {quod} I let me alone
For this shall be right as a time of rest
To hire of thing that me delyteth best
And namely sith your process al a bout
By dysputation so formally
Concluded is / hit may not ben in dout
Of that ye will enducen suyngly
Phia) Right as you will {quod} she right so will I
And she be began to declare in this wise
what ever he be {quod} she yt will deuyse
That hap is such a thing that should be fall
wythouten cause or skyle of governance
Than say I thus / that hap is nought at al
But an Idel name of no vaylaunce
Sith god hath set al thing in ordynaunce
Now should there any place then be
To worken things in vncertente
For tru^y nogh this sentence hath be hold
Loo that there may no thing be don of nought
This sentence revoked never faders old
Of one beginner al thing must be wrought
yet this was not the conceit of there thought
Tho al thing have a maker pryncypal
They did mene of subject materyal
For that they put as for a fundament
And that hath ever reason of nature
Than will hit suen clear and consequent
This may well perceive every creature
if any thing were don by adventure
wythouten causes where of to proceed
Than must hit come of nought hit is no dread
But sith this may not be in no manner
Than hap may not be called sykerly
Such as we dyffyned have while er
Boecius) what is there than no manner thing {quod} I
That chance or hap is called skylefully
Or such a thing there is to folk unknow
where to these name belangeth as ye trow
Phia) yes mine Aristoteles {quod} she
In his book of physyke naturel
Breffely he shows what thing hit should be
Full ny the truth dyffyneth he hit full well
Bow{us}) And how {quod} I phia) Lo this is every del
{quod} she that writes Aristoteles
Of this matter / hit is no les
As often as there is a work y wrought
As for a certain purpos of intent
And then of other causes vnbethoght
Betydeth other wise then was be meant
Loo hap this may be called verament
As if hit lust a man to delffe his land
And hid theryn a sum of gold he found
Of such a thing men demeth sykerly
Loo that a soden adventure hit is
yet came hit not of no thing pardey
But propre causes were be forn y wysse
The concours of wych causes this
But for hit fell vnware unbethought
Hit seems folk that hap ^ut hath y wrought
For but the telyer had dolue his ground
And eke the hyder put hit in that stead
Thou may well seyn the gold had not be found
As in that manner wise hit is no dread
These causes ben of adventurous dede
when that they mete ben assembled so
wythouten certain purpos to be do
For he that dalf he that hyd hit there
Purposed not thou may suppose hit well
That gold to have ben found in that manner
Never one of them bethoght hit never a del
But right as I have said hit so befell
That in the same place where these hit hyd
That other dalf found as hit betide
Now then in short to make an end of al
And to make a fynal dyffynytion
Loo hap is such a thing that doth befall
No thing purposed of entention
Of divers causes meting in to one
In things that for somewhat were y wrought
But un to that that is be fall / noght
But this vnescheuable ordynaunce
wyche that the well head proceeds fro
Of the hye dyuyne purveyance
wythouten wyche there may no thing be do
That makes these causes to concurren so
That al thing desposeth kendly
In propre place times certenly
Metrum j. Capitulu ij.
Rupis achimenie scopulis.
Phia loquitur. TIgris and Eufrates spryngeth both
Out of a crag rock of Ermeny
Out of one well head to say the sothe
where men ben wont to fyghten wonderly
In flight they harms them that sues ny
There sharpe darts in there breast fyxyng
So when they fleyth there foes most noyng
These ryuers both ben dysioyned soon
And runs in to divers stremes great
And after that they fallen in to one
where that they in a another place mete
The ships than stocks that there flete
In ether of these stremes down a long
Hit happeth that they mete ever a mong
This water thus ImpLyeth (...)
Thus medelyng many chances fortunel
But of that shevey earth hit so behappeth
The wych this water sues / wet hit well
That fletyng ordre rules every del
Right so is hap unruled as demeth ye
But nevertheless hit hath a law of certente
Prosia ij. Capituln iij.
Animaduerto inquam.
Boecius loquitur. TO this {quod} I full well acorde I can
And yt ye say I may hit well beleuen
But in the ordre of these causes than
The wych so suyngly to gedres cleueu
This wold I se / if ye could show or preuen
if in out choys is any lyberte
Other else that this cheyn of destyne
Constreyneth al the mouyug of our wit
Phia) {quod} she in sothe then were hit al a miss
That will I show clearly preuen hit
For why / no kend that reasonable is
whythouten lyberte may ben y wysse
For al that kendly reason vsen may
May demen dyscern hit is no nay
And by him self he knows kendly
what thing is to desire what to fleen
And what thing that he demeth verily
That worthy is desired for to be
That thing loo seeks desires he
And what he Jugs worthy to be forsake
That will he leave / that other take
Then every thing that reason hath certain
Of will nel hath lyberte there to
But al y leke / in sothe will I not sayn
For dyuyne substances stands not so
The Iugement is wonder clear of tho
There will is incorrupt / there might is pressed
And spedy to al that them leketh best
But most in freedom is the soul of man
when he is set in contemplation
And fully fyxen al his thoughts can
In hye dyuyne speculation
And less if that his occupation
In wordly thing dystracteth ought his mind
And less when flesly bounds doth him bind
But when a man is given un to vice
Than is he utterly bound thrall
When he hath set his reason at no pryse
And wylfully hath let hit fro him fall
His lyberte is then lest of alle
When that his sight in wordly wrecchednesse
Is cast fro light of souereyn sothfastnesse
He begenneth then to wax derke dull
Of that foul cloud of Ignorance
Of foul affections than he shall be full
Encombred with the vice of inconstance
That trobeleth him with anguysshe greuance
To wych when he consents in his wit
In seruage then him selfen hath he knit
In manner of his propre lyberte
A caytyf is becommen in conscience
But never the later he that al may se
As by his hye eternal prescience
Al thing governing by his excellence
He hyreth says well every thought dede
And so he will desposen for there mede
Metru ij.
Puro claru lumie.
Phia. THe noble poet honey mouth Omere
Loo of the son syngeth on this wise
And saith / for al his bright bemes clear
The see / no land yet may he not suffyse
To persen thorugh / so may we not deuyse
Of him that hath this wide world y wrought
The heavy earth him wythstandeth noght
Fro fer hye al thing he says a none
He is not let by clouds of the night
For al that is / was / or shall be done
At ones is hit al beforn his sight
Sith he alone with his bemes bright
So al things may behald se
We may well sayn a very son is he
Prosa iij. Capitulu v.
Tum ego en inqua.
Boecius loquitur. I said then / a gretter dout now
Confounds me then did be fore y wysse
Phia) Of what {quod} she art you in dout now
Now right in sothe coniect I what hit is
Boecius) full hugely {quod} I repugneth this
That god may known al thing er hit be
And that our will may stand at lyberte
Sith god be forn says al that shall be do
And his sight loo may be deceived nought
Of very fors then need hit must be so
That prescience hath seyn yt is to be wrought
And not only work / but will thought
Of every wight he knows plenerly
Than is no freedom in our arbytry
For why there may be another thought no dede
That pnrueyaunce beforn no says hit al
He fails not there of / hit is no dread
But al that ever he wot betyden shall
Al that he says beforn hit must befall
And if hit may be torn other wise
Hit was not seyn be fore at my deuyse
Than shall this be no very prescience
But as an vncerten opynyon
But sykerly this were a foul offence
Of god to felen that conclusion
And sum men supposes that this questyon
May ben assoyled thus / as they believe
But there reasons can I not apprene
Loo thus they sayn / a thing that shall betide
Betydeth not for god prouydeth so
But god that thing to come doth provide
And says beforn al thing that shall be do
And thus a geynward should the causes go
That god foreseyth this thing yt shall be wrought
But of need hit shall vetyde nought
They sayn also that thing yt shall befall
In gods sight provided is hit need
Loo this answer assoyleth nought at al
This doubtful questyon hit is no dread
Only to this entente hit doth proceed
Loo of ij. divers things to enquere
wych of them the cause of other were
Whether that the prescience of god a lone
Causes thing to fallen nedely
Other else thing that needs shall be don
Loo causes prescience in god on hye
This is no very answer sykerly
To that that I entend for to show
But nevertheless my purpose stands true
How ever hit stands of this ordynaunce
That wych of these the cause of other be
A thing that is forseyn by purveyance
Of need hit must betide as seems me
Though hit be so that this necessyre
Be not y caused of this presc^ence
As in effect there is no difference
As if I sit thou suppose hit
Than needs sothe is thyn opynyon
But my syttyng is not caused yet
As needful by thy estimation
And right so if thou torn hit up so down
if thou suppose sothe of that I do
Eke of necessyte than is hit so
Necessyte then must there ben in both
Un to that point loo here we ben y brought
In me of syttyng in the of sothe
yet wotest thou well that therefore sit I noght
As for that sothe opynyon in thy thought
But rather thus / be cause that I sate
Loo thyn opyuyon was sothe in that
Than is this truth caused of the dede
And so in both there is necessyte
Loo in the same wise we may proceed
Of this purveyance as seems me
For cause these things shall here after be
There fore by purveyance he says hit al
And yet there fore doth hit not befall
And never the later al that shall betide
Of god hit is provided nedefully
And efte a geyn al that he doth provide
Of need hit doth befallen certenly
And al the freedom of our arbytry
Loo this suffices to destroyen clean
Here apereth well how masedly we mene
That adventure of things temporel
Should causen his eternal prescience
But this wold ben a folly thing to feel
with reason hath hit no conuenyence
For hit wold suen of there euydence
That things past long time seyn
Should causen god that is our souereyn
As if I know a thing that present is
while I hit know needs is hit so
Right so a thing that shall ben after this
if I hit know / of need hit must be do
Hit sues well we may not go there fro
And so my purpose may not be remeued
That thing prescite / may not ben exchued
For if I deem thus of a certain thing
And is not so / hit is no questyon
Not only is that conceit no conning
But error of a false opynyon
And wonder fer is that suspection
And divers fro the truth as I suppose
But ho can save hit with a better gloss
For if there shall a certain thing be wrought
And shall not fallen of necessyte
But is vncerten to betide or noght
Hit is not known to ben as seems me
For knouyng / with falsehood may no wise be
In no manner conjoined no deceived
But hit must ben that knouyng hath conceived
And other wise may hit not be done
For loo that is the very cause why
That in a knouyng error is there none
Sith troth then stands nedefully
And knouyng comprehends verily
what than a vayleth that we ben a bout
How knows god a thing that is in dout
For if that god a certain thing deuyse
For to be don that no wight may exchwe
And yet hit may betyden other wise
A perylous error here of will there sue
That gods Iugement should ben untrue
But loo of god our hye souereyn
Full felones is / thus to think or sayn
And if he knows things for to ben
So that they may betide indyfferent
As be or not be / then can I not seyn
But this is an vncerten Iugement
The prescience of god omnip^otent
what thing is hit I can hit not defend
That may no thing in certain comprehend
Than should there be no manner difference
As seems in mine estimation
Be twene the hye dyuyne prescience
And Tyresyes dyuynation
Of whom Ouyde makes mention
what ever I say she said / hit shall be fall
Other else shall hit not betide at alle
what better shall this purveyance be
Than the opynyon of a man wit
That demeth things in vncertente
And so vncertenly betydeth hit
Over al thing we must beleuen yet
That god is very well syker ground
In whom no thing vncerten may be found
Than every thing in certain shall betide
Thyt is before seyn in his purveyance
Than is no lyberte in man side
No in our chesyng is no cheuysance
Dyuyne thought may have no varyance
wythouten error he behaldeth al
And binds ous to thing that must befall
And have we ones fully geten this
He may perceuen ho so takes heed
Man lyffe in what myscheffe hit is
And stands ever in heuynesse dread
why should there any man receyuen mede
Or any surfetour be put in peyn
Al this will semen but a thing in veyn
Sith that no wylful meuyng of there gost
Of lyberte they nought deserved han
And things that now ben commended most
As very wrong they must be deemed than
For virtue to rewarden any man
Or punyssshen any wicked skylefully
There neither hath deserved wyllyngly
But necessyte them hath constrained
To things that of certain must be done
Than vice virtue is but thing y feigned
No in our works meret is there none
But an vndyscrete confusion
There is no thing that worse may be thought
Sith al thing in ordre forth is brought
Of purveyance / no un to man wit
No thing is lefful / our vices wood
Loo un to god they ben referred yet
wyche that very auctor is of al good
And furdermore if that this error s^ode
where should we prayen ought or trust
when we may no thing win that ous lust
if al that ever we can desire or say
One certain ordre vnreuersed knetteth
Then where should we hopen ought or pray
Sith purveyance fails not no fletteth
That every thing so at a certain puts
This only marchaundyse is voided than
That used is be twene god man
Prayer hope should ben vnprofytable
But with the price of Just humylyte
we geteth of god a mede inestimable
For only that hath ever the manner be
That every man may have hab^lyte
with god to speak neghen to that light
That pierced may not be with man sight
By very reason of this prayer meke
To him we be conjoined verily
Before or then we get that we beseke
And if we should assenten utterly
That thing to come must fallen nedefully
This hope trust of wyche we spoke beforn
Is thing of nought al our labour loren
How should we then to that prince a above
Aprochen or be knette by any mene
if that we may deserve of him no love
And al our labour is not worth a been
But al mankend stands dysioyned clean
As fro there head departed al with wrong
Right as while er ye said in your song
Metru iij. Capitulu vj.
Que nam discors.
Boecius loquitur. WHat manner cause of wonder dyscordance
So hath disjoined thus in this manner
Our lyberte gods purveyance
That neither may to other neyghen ne'er
What god this battle hath devised here
Be tweue ij. truths here of have I wonder
That sothe y nogh ben while they ben a sounder
But loo they may not ben to gether set
And yet dyscord in truths is there none
Full certenly they ben to gedres knette
But man soul that so is overgone
Enclosed thus wythyn fless^e bone
That soppressed hath her fyry light
That she yet may not lyften up her sight
These sotel knots to be hold se
The flesly bounds doth hit so oppress
But why so fervently desires she
The notes for to find of sothfastnesse
And that she seeks so with besynesse
wot she that her selfen knows hit
But ho desires a knawen thing to wet
Ho may desire a thing knows hit nought
if he no knows what seeks he so blind
Or ho may seek that is not in his thought
Or if he seek hit / how shall he hit find
Or how shall he remember hit in his mind
How may he known when he finds this
And wot not of what manner form hit is
when that the saule is sole separat
Behaldyng on that souereyn thought on hye
Then may he se / that now he may not
Al thing in sum also syngulerly
But now she is enclosed bodily
Some part of this sight she hath forlete
But utterly she hath not al forget
For why the sum she haldeth as I trow
But not so every thing in specyalte
He than that these truth wold know
Al knows he not / thou may well se
No al the truth forget hath not he
But loo the knowing of the general
Makes him to labour for the specyal
This sum then wych she haldeth here
In her thought remembering oft a geyn
She seeks in that souereyn mirror clear
whet every sothe may syngul^rly be seyn
Enforsyng her with labour with peyn
Forgeten thing / if that she may hit find
To put hit to the tresour of her mind
Prosa iiij. Capitulu vij.
Tum illa vetus inqua.
Phia loquitur. SHe said then / this is an old complaint
And a full come used questyon
To Marcus Tullius hit samed queynt
As by his book of dyuynation
He had there with great occupation
And of thy self full long hit hath be sought
And none of you as yet no fonud hit nought
No suffysantly have not declared hit
And sykerly the cause may this be
That the dyscours of a man wit
May not atteyn to so hye degre
To demen of that hye symplycyte
wyche is in dyuyne purveyance
He is not sothly of that suffysaunce
And if this might be thought or comprehended
Thou should then be never a del in dout
But at last I hope I shall amend hit
if that I may my matter bring a bout
This error of thy heart to a voyden out
But first I will a voyden dyspreuen
Conceits / wyche the to this error meuen
But first I ask the the cause why
Thou hold this reason not effectuel
Of them that shown that your arbytry
Algates in his freedom stands well
Sith presciens constreyneth never a del
By need / things wyche that shall be done
But is contingeut for to ben or none
Loo make thou any other argument
Of thing to fallen of necessyte
But for cause that god omuipotent
Knows hit / that hit shall here after be
Hit may not be undone as seems the
And yet this presciens causes nought
The same thing of need to be wrought
That granted thou while er if you have mend
why is hit then that voluntary dede
So is constrained to a certain end
That thing to come must be fallen need
But that I may the to the truth led
To se what sues here by consequence
I put this case there were no prescience
Will then thyn argument a vaylen ought
The wych in prescience thou groundest so
That things wych of fre will should be wrought
That any need compels them there to
Thou will not trow that Boecius) I said no
Phia) Now set we {quod} she prescience a geyn
So that of need hit do no thing constreyn
Than stands absolute the same will
Hole in his lyberte / this wotest thou well
But I suppose thou make me this skyle
Though prescience necesseth never a del
Thing to come in stoundes temporel
Thou seyst hit is a very sign true
Of thing that must as necessary sue
Right so thou might concluden as by this
Though that there were no prescience at al
That things wych to come hire after is
Necessarily hit must be fall
For only every sign shown shall
A thyug that is or after shall be seyn
But yet that sign makes hit not to ben
And if that prescience a sign were
Of every thing that needs must come
First hit needs ous to shown hire
That no thing falls but needs hit must be done
And if hit be not so than know thou soon
That sign may there none be verily
without a thing betokened be there by
But to confirmen fully al a bout
And sadly to susteyn our intent
we may not seek signs of without
No fyxe ous in a foreyn argument
But of causes full convenient
And necessary / behooves ous to proceed
if that we should in our purpose speed
But this thou will replyen here a geyn
How may that thing not fallen say you me
wyche that is provided foreseyn
By purveyance here after for to be
As chance that I couth none other se
But thing that prescience doth provide
we trowed that hit were not to betide
But rather this intended I for to preue
That though a certain thing befall so
yet of propre kende we do believe
So was hit not necessed to be do
This lightly may you vnderstanden loo
As many a thing* is subject to our sight
The while hit is be forn ous present right
As when a charre is ruled readily
And how hit turns we be hold full well
And so of other crafts suyngly
Doth any thing this crafts men compelle
Or any of these works can thou tell
Or if they be constrained to be wrought
Boecius) Nay {quod} I they be compelled nought
Then ydel were the craft of any man
if every thing were compelled for to meue
Phia) Sith things while they ben she said the
Ben not coacted to be / thou will believe
Loo by that same reason now may thou preue
That before tho same things be
Not for to come of necessyte
Full many a thing shall ben hit is no dread
And is to come hit sues well by this
That utterly is absolute of need
I trow that no wight this will sayn y wis
That any thing that now in present is
was not to come un to the time hit fell
Though they beforn of god were known well
In sothe yet ben they frely to be fall
For rygh as very knowing science
A present thing compels nought at al
Right so hit stands eke of prescience
As thou may se by leke conuenyence
Though god this thing to come doth provide
yet is hit not compelled to beryde
But loo of this you say me / doutest thou
Sith things wych that shall here after ben
Be not to come as necessary now
How is that thing fore seyn thou can not seyn
Hit seems the that this dyssoneth clean
To foreseyn thing hit must needs sue
Necessyte / thou can hit not exchwe
And if necessyte should be forfended
Loo foreseyn is there no thing utterly
No nought by knowing may be comprehended
But thing that must betyden verily
And if there ought betide vncertenly
And is fore seyn full certain as hit were
Thou say / no very knowing is there there
But as a derke opynable thing
And for to trowen other wise or guess
Than very sothe / that call thou no conning
But a wenyng of vnstablenesse
And loo the cause of al this error is
That ye trow the cause of knowledge to be
In the thing not in the knower perde
But in contrary wise hit stands right
For every thing that known is by wit
Hit is not known by his propre might
But by his might that comprehends hit
As by exsample may thou felen yet
For of a thing that round is verily
Loo sight feeling knows hit dyuersly
The sight behaldeth the form fro a fer
At ones comprehending every del
But he that feleth is conjoined ne'er
Un to that compace for to know hit well
Al a bout the sides must he feel
And al that roundness so he knows than
Loo / dyuersly y known is a man
The come wits Iugen of without
Imagination a another wise
And reason other wise hit is no dout
Intelligence passes al these
Every of them so as he may suffyse
The come wits knows nought at al
But forms of subject materyal
Imagenyng al only comprehends
The form of man as vnmateryally
Reason then a bouen this transcendeth
Of man kende he demeth syngulerly
with vnyuersal sight full sotelly
But al these passes yet intellygence
As by a sight of heyer excellence
He passes al a above these kendes here
The compace of the vnyuersyte
And he behaldeth in that exsampler
The mirror of the hye eternyte
The form of man in his symplycyte
But most hit is to taken hyde in this
That the same might always that higher is
Loo al the lower comprehends well
But they may ascenden nought a geyn
To know comprehend never a del
Of tho that ben a above sothe to sayn
For there come wit may not up attain
To things wych ben Immateryal
They may perceyuen never a del at al
And furdermore Imagination
Vnyuersal kendes may not seyn
No reason may have none Inspection
Of forms / wych that pure simple ben
Intelligence comprehends clean
And as hit were / behaldeth fro on hye
These forms he perceives plenerly
Conceyuyng than this form pryncipal
He demeth after / al that is in man
As he hath in the exsampler Ideal
Conceived / that none other may no can
The vnyuersyte of reason knows he than
And also forms of Imagenyng
And eke materyal sensyble thing
And reason yet in this he uses nought
Imagination no come wit
But with a sotel smytyng of the thought
Full formally so he behaldeth hit
And more plenerly to speken yet
The souereyn hye dyuyne Intellygence
Over al things hath prospycience
When reason doth behalden ought or se
As in his come kende vnyuersal
Imagenyng / no thing yet uses he
Nether the come wits never a del
And never the less he comprehends well
Al thing that Imagenable is
And al that come wit may know y wysse
Thus reason his conceits strong stable
Of universal loo deffyneth he
Man is a best ii. foted reasonable
Loo / this knowing as every man may se
Universal must hit needs be
And this thing also to every man wit
Imagenable sensyble is hit yet
But reason this behaldeth kendly
No thing by Imagination
No by the come wits sykerly
But only hath consyderation
By dyscours by conceit of reason
But this Imagination begin doth
In the come wits his works in sothe
Forms for to shappen deuyse
And yet these come wits al without
Sensyble things / in a wondre wise
He says / them compaseth al a bout
Not sensyblely / hit is no dout
But by Imagination of mind
Of knowing loo / here may thou se the kind
That not ye might of thing that known is
But propre might / the knower uses need
And skylefully for every dome y wysse
Loo of the Jug / hit is the propre dede
So than of reason / if thou take good hyde
The work of man is no foreyn might
But propre myghtes uses every wight
Metru iiij. Capitulu ix.
Quonda porticus attulit
Phia loquitur. Some time in the porches of Athenes
were old clerks derke in there courage
wyche in there time were called stoicenes
That in the porches had maden there stages
Desputyng / that the forms Images
Of bodily substances / as they guessed
were in to a man soul impressed
As men ben used to written portrayen
Letters in a pagyn fair clean
In wych beforn were no notes seyn
But this a mased thing is for to mene
For if the soul of man / so as they wene
Of his propre might Implyeth nought
But suffers to ben prented in his thought
Subjected to tho notes as hit were
That bodies doth in them enpressen so
And veyn Images represents there
Right as a mirror is y woned to do
But al this knowing whens comes hit fro
By wych not only things corporal
But also forms Immateryal
He says so behaldeth singulerly
As in her hye conceits speculatyffe
And knowing things then suyngly
So he dyuydeth by a negatyffe
And after wards by an affyrmatyffe
These same things that divided be
Assembleth a geyn compouneth he
And so this way he enterchaungeth oft
For now to pryncypal proposytions
Loo / his intent he lyfteth up a loft
And falls after to conclusions
Referring then his own ententions
And says what things will of other sue
Repreuyng so the false by the true
Than is he rather cause efficient
And more of might than thing yt lies oppressed
In manner leke a matter pacyent
That notes hath so in him self Impressed
But that thou have this matter more expressed
There goth before a manner sufferance
wythyn the lively bodily substance
wych that the myghtes of the soul excyteth
And makes the to understand lere
As when that light in to thyn yeyn smyteth
And makes the for to behalden there
Or when a voice hath souned in thyn ere
And so commoueth the to herken ought
Then ben styred the myghtes of thy thought
And things wyche that were yet kendely
wythyn thy selfen hid / hit is no dout
Thou then applyest in thy fantasy
To these other notes of without
And thus remembering in thy self a bout
Tho foreyn Images then adds he
To forms wyche that hid wythyn the be
Prosa v. Capitulum ix.
Quod si in corporibus.
Phia loquitur. THough that object qualyteys than
Comoue styre our foreyn Instruments
wych I call the come wit of man
That of wythouteforth gives Iugementes
And goth before the ghostly sentementes
A manner sufferance corporal
For to excite the ghostly might with al
And styren so the worchyng of the mind
To forms wych arrested so were wythyn
So that the courage may them feel find
And though the wits al this work begin
The knowing of these bodies for to win
And brings him to a manner remembrance
The soul is subject to no sufferance
But he demeth of his propre might
These passions that in the body ben
How much more such a ghostly wight
That fully is al absolute clean
In whom may none affection be seyn
Of any thing to be feled bodily
His propre might shall vsen kendly
And foreyn myghtes shall he vsen nought
For to dyscerne objects of without
But by the worchyng of his own thought
He wynneth his conceits al a bout
And by the same skyle hit is no dout
Full many fold of knowing may thou find
In substances / divers in there kende
The feeling may be called one of tho
wyche have bestes that ben vnmeueable
That wit they have al only no mo
As shelle fysshe such that cleuen stable
In cleffes / as to them is couenable
And so such other shylle fysshe of the see
wyche in divers places norysshed be
But knowing of Imagination
Meueable bestes have doth hit sue
The wych in manner haueth affection
Some manner thing to coueyt or exchwe
But reason to dyscernen false true
Only to man hit hath conuenyence
As only doth to god Intellygence
Than is hit so as every man may se
That this knowing most worthy is hye
wych of his own kendly properte
Not only that perteyneth kendely
Un to his own knowing properly
He knows well / but furdermore yet
The subject knows he of every wit
But what if come wits stood a geyn
And in this wise perauenture answer
And would un to dyscours of reason sayn
Loo / that this universal / no thing were
That reason seems he behaldeth there
For al that ever Imagenable is
Or come wits may perceive y wysse
Hit is not universal in no wise
Now / or the Iugement of reason than
Must be sothe / if he will thus deuyse
That no thing may be sensyble to man
Or for he wot well that these wits han
Subjects many / divers / that they know
His own conceuyng fallace must he trow
When that he says comprehends well
Thing that sensyble is singular
Behaldyng hit right as universal
To this if reason wold aunsweren here
That she her self behaldeth well clear
By reason of vniuersalyte
Al that these other may perceive se
For wits no Imagination
May no way comprehenden sykerly
These vnyuersal things of reason
For they may not exceden proprely
As by there own knowing kendly
Shappes figures corporal
A bouen that may they no thing at al
In knowing then of things at the last
Hit is to give credence to the Iugement
That most perfet is stedefaste
And we that have this reason excellent
And come wit to demen thing present
And Imagination also
Should we not reason here assenten to
But man reason is y leke in this
As towards dyuyne Intellygence
Right as Imagenyng or wits is
To reason of a man conscience
That weans that dyuyne prescience
May no manner thing behalde as he troweth
That is to come / but as him selfen knows
For loo / this argument thou make me
if things that hereafter shall be done
Not certain no necessary be
For knowing may not fallen there upon
For prescience say thou is there none
And if so is that prescience be
There falls nought but of necessyte
But if we might parteners ben
Loo / of the domes of dyuyne thought
Right as we may by very reason seyn
That Imagenyng suffices nought
No come wits to perceyuen ought
The Iugement of reason as we deem
Full Just hit should man reason seem
To be subject vndercast always
Un to dyuyne thought / I am certain
A rise we there fore fully if we may
To that Intellygence souereyn
And if we may in to that hight atteyn
Loo there shall reason feel known well
That in hit self he may do never a del
Loo / that is this as in what wise how
The things that betydeth thus vncertenly
This prescience says hit well y now
Dyffyned in his thought eternally
Not by gessyng opynablely
But by souereyn science of symplenesse
whom terms may not closen no compresse
Metru v. Capitulum x.
Quam varijs terras.
Phia loquitur. These bestes in there kendes dyfferent
Full dyuersly on earth doth they glyden
Sum on there body strecchyng extent
Crepig upon there breasts down they slyde
And in the dust a forwe they dyuyden
And sum by very lyghtnesse of there kind
with there wings planeth in the wind
And long spaces of the air on hye
So in there flight / they swymmeth as hit were
And sum ben glad to keep them selfen ny
This ground a low set there stappes here
In grene feldes / there is al there chere
And some to walk in wodes forestes
And though so be that al these wild bestes
Ben divers in there shappes figure
Al there faces ben inclined yet
Un to the ground showing there nature
And the kendly dullness of there wit
Loo / only kende of man reuerseth hit
For man head a rises up on hight
And even upright his body stands streght
And under him the earth behaldeth he
whether dotest thou / or art you in a sweuen
Thou erthly man thy figure teaches the
That lyfteth up thy visage in to heaven
And thy frount in to the air full even
On erthly thing thou should not set thy love
But set hit holly in the heaven a above
There should thou be there is thy kendly place
Thou hast of the earth but thy bestly kende
And yet loo thou will bring thy selfen base
And so with bestes set thy self behind
Let not the noble nature of thy mind
Be plounged down to the ground y pyght
Sith that thy body stands even upright
Prosa vj. Capitulu xj.
Quonia igitur vti.
Phia loquitur. Sith every thing as I have showed now right
That wit or known is in any way
Hit is not known of the propre might
Of that self thing hit is no nay
But of the kendly might / the sothe to say
Of tho that doth hit know or comprehend
Now let ous then behalden entende
So as our simple kende may suffyse
what thing is that astate of excellence
Of dyuyne substance / in that wise
Than somewhat may we know of his science
This is the used general sentence
Of al / that by reason doth dyscerne
They say that god him self is eterne
But now what thing is this eternyte
Hit needs first to known sykerly
And after that we may behalde se
The science and the nature plenerly
So as we may suffysen symplely
Of god that is our prince souereyn
Eternyte is this as clerks sayn
Hit is a perfet hole possession
At ones of a lyffe intermynable
This is declared by comparison
Of thing that is by times varyable
For al that leueth in time hit is unstable
Present yet is / the time a gon is passed
To time coming hies hit full fast
There may no thing be set in time space
As clerks have devised here be forn
That al at ones may his lyffe embrace
For why as yet / he fails of to morn
And yesterday is passed forlorn
And in the same day that present is
Of your lyffe ye have no more y wysse
But this moment transitory loo
That thing that hath this dysposytion
His times for to over passen so
Though that hit were of such condition
By Aristoteles tradition
That said this world never began
No never here after shall an end han
Though that hit might as Aristotel seemed
To infinyte hit selfen so extend
Eterne hit may not ryghtuously be deemed
Though hit were infynyte wythouten end
At ones al hit may not comprehend
No clyppen al these spaces temporel
For of time to come yet hath hit not a del
But he that of the lyffe intermynable
The fullness comprehends verily
Possessing hit at ones perdurable
Fro whom no thing doth lacken verily
For time to come he hath hit presently
No time passed fro him is there none
Is / was / shall be / al is one
Eterne he may be called well by right
To him self present and pereles
And al way present is be fore his sight
The moble space of times endless
But they rehersen Plato / nevertheless
His conceit they reports al a miss
And of his menyng fails foul y wysse
Loo Plato saith this world hath ever ybe
As clerks have deffyned / Time is mesure of meuyng of before after. This
mesure is take most comely after the meuyng of the E^noctial vvhos meuyng is
the svvyftest that is possible. The vvych lyne is divided in to CCC.lx. even
parts. Of vvyche parts / eueryche is called a degre. The mesure of a rising
of xv. degrees / is called an hour naturel. The mesure of a rising of xxiiii.
hours / is a day naturel. The mesure of CCC. lxv. days vi. hours of encresse
and certain mynutes / is called a year. By vvych times: the perdurabelte of this
world of before after / is mesured vsyngly. Sith than that mesure of meuyng
is called time / then sues hit: that before the world meued / there was no
time: But god eternally is / er any thing meued: or any time were / and shall
be after that al meuynges cesseth: For his being is mesured by no meuyng of
before after / for himself is vnmeueable / no his being hath no regard to
before after For al times present / passed / and to come: ben to him verily
present No his being is not mesured by successyon of times. For he has his
being vnmesured al at ones. vvyche is called his eternyte. There fore is god
called Inmensus. But the perdurabelte of the world is mesured by meuyng of
the heaven / vvyche is called time: And longer than heaven meueth / shall there be
no time. Than is hit so that the being of god is called erernyte. The being of
this world is named perpetuyte. Then is this the conceit of Plato sayng that
the world hath ever ben / That is to mene / as long as any thing has
meued. And as long as any thing meueth: or any time is / so long hit shall
endure in such being as hit now has. And after that al meuyng and al times
cesseth / the world renewed shall endure in lyffe interminable. For so saith
our lord. Ecce nova facio omnia.

This interminable lyffe / is the eternal being of our creator* to who as to
there end / al thing shall be reduced: and at him as at there fynal end: rest
abide. Therefore saith plato as is in the text alleged / that the world has
ever ben: that is to say: sith any time was. and hit shall never vvhyle any
time is / cessen of his menynge. So meuyng time shall cessen both at ones. And
the world then shall not end by destruction or torn in to nought / for god
and nature did never thing in vayn. No god noughteth never thing that he made
but the corruption of one thing / is the generation of a another thing. So that
at last every corruptyble thing retorneth in round in to the Elements / that
hit was first formed of. And there fore the author saith / that the intent of
temporel things that so meuethe in round / casts entendeth by ledyng of
nature / to counterfete the perdurable lyffe of god. For kendly every creature
coueyteth: to conforme him to his make / at lest in being. where fore of nature
every thing vvythstandeth in that hit may / his own corruption division of
his parts. And when hit is corrupt and resolved in to his first matter /
vvyche is the elements / vvych ben cleped the sedes of erthly things then ben
they apt as they were be fore to be matter and to clothe other divers forms.
And so ben they perpetuate / by there chaungeabelte in to an endless compate. For
these things if they fail in there indiuidues / yet in there vniuersalles they a
bids ever: after time that they ones be. And the matter of the singulers /
turns into other things / after that nature vvorcheth. Than is this the
conceit of the clerk in the letter. Every creature as is before said /
coueyteth of nature / for to counterfete his maker. But for canse these erthly
things of feblenesse and contraryoustey of there matter / may not endure / but
needs be resolved / there fore they take that they may of being / enduryng by
successyon of times. where that god endures (not by temporal successyon) but
has his being separate fro creatures al at ones so that towards him nought
is to come / no nought over passed / But al that is / was / and shall be: is be
fore him present.

Than having regard to the eternyte of god / vvyche hath his being al at ones
vnmesured by successyon of times / there is no purveyance no foresyght / but he
says al by present knovvlege / in him / is none other sight but conning. For
al knovvyng of present and passed / notes imperfection of creatures that be
passing and corruptyble. And hit needs nought / no is convenient / to conforme
his eternal insight to our temporal estimation / that al thing demeth by
before and after as we have over being. But hit accords better / and is
more kendly / that the creature submytte al his vvytte / and conforme al his
knovvyng holly to his maker / vvyth out whom he is nought / can nought / no
hath nought at al / that ought ovveth to be cleped.

Sith hit is so then that every Iugement / must sue the nature of the Jug /
that is of him that knows / hit needs not the to bynden things to fall
necessarily / no to vvete the knovvyng of god for to compelle tho things to
betide / be cause that he says hit presently as he al behaldeth / no more than
for to vvyte me the meuyng of the son / by cause I se hit meue / or for to
vvyte me the death of a man / by cause I se him dye. For the meuyng of the son
is caused absolutely of the first ordynaunce of him that made hit for to meue.

But that I now se hit meue / hit proceeds of my own fre vvylle /
presupposed that I have my yees hole lyberte to se al present objects that
falls to my lust.

And to an end hit shall never be brought
They say therefore hit hath eternyte
As even y leke with god that hath hit wrought
But yet al one in certain is hit nought
A lyffe interminable for to led
As Plato thought him self hit is no dread
Hit is a another to enclosen al
At ones so this lyffe intermynable
For al that is / or was / or ever shall
At him hit is present permenable
He fleteth nought but always stands stable
Loo / of dyuyne thought the state is this
No creature may ben y leke y wysse
And yet for that ye shall not demen here
That god is elder as in time of space
Than creatures made of his power
But this loo shall ye Iugen in this case
That god him selfen always is was
Before / er any formed creature
In propre symplenesse of his nature
And the intent of things temporel
That always meueth so contynuelly
They cast to counterfeten every del
The perdurable lyffe of god on hy
That changes not but stands presently
But when hit may not even hit self there to
There very stablenesse they falls fro
And meueth then out of symplycyte
Decressyng out of present then a none
To Infinyte and endless quantyte
Of time to come time that is a gone
But when he may not bring hit in to one
Al his lyffe at ones for to have
Hit wills thus hit selfen for to save
And there hit may not ben a bout y brought
So al his lyffe at ones for to get
yet in as much as hit ends nought
This lyffe hit doth not utterly forlete
But hit seems that hit volde counterfete
The souereyn lyffe of god omnipotent
In so much as he somewhat hath present
And so hit binds him to a little stounde
To have a manner perdurablenesse
In wyche no time of space may be found
But for hit hath a manner lekelynesse
Of the eternal lyffe that present is
Hit seems how so ever hit flee or flete
That in present ever a bids hit
And for hit may not after his delyte
A byden / but for such a little space
Hit takes always of times Infynyte
And for hit may not al his lyffe enbrace
At ones / as his princypal purpose was
Passing forth the lyffe he kepeth so
For cause he may no canne none other do
And if we should by names him dyscerne
To suen Plato where he said well
He said that god him self is eterne
Loo / the world should be perpetuel
Of this may thou conceyuen then full well
Sith every Iugement that shall be true
Hit must the nature of him selfen sue
To comprehenden things of without
And thastate of souereyn god on hye
Stondeth ever in one hit is no dout
Algates in him selfen presently
His knowing then surmounts sykerly
Al thing / that hath meuyng in difference
A bydyng in his symplycyte of presence
And so encloses spaces Infinyte
Of time that was shall here after be
But to tho spaces hath he no respect
But to his own hole eternyte
By knowing of his hye symplycyte
Al thing in presens of his sight
He says hit as hit were do now right
if thou consydre that prescience in thy though
By wych he knows al things so
This prescience shalt thou referren nought
As to a thing that after shall be do
But very science shalt thou deem hit loo
Of present time that never faylen may
No out of presens pass never a way
For why hit is not called preuydence
But rather is hit called purveyance
That al things knows in presence
In wych knowing there is no varyaunce
Fro our knowing / hit hath full great dystaunce
For we behaldeth lo things here
But fro on hye behaldeth he al in fere
Sith every Iugement must suen than
The nature of the knower kendely
wherefore is hit that thou ask than
That al must fallen necessarily
That seyn is in dyuyne sight on hye
Sith men the present things yt they seyn
Makes nought / of need for to ben
Loo / may thy sight of things here present
Make them to fallen of necessyte
Bow{us}) I said nay Phia) {quod} she right so hit stent
Of gods purveyance / as seems me
Al tho there may no comparison be
For the prescience of a man thought
To gods prescience may be lekened nought
For right as ye behaldeth with your sight
That in this time present is y don
Rygh so he says in his eternal light
So / that thing to coming is there none
As in his sight / no no thing over gone
where fore his prescience (hit sues well)
The nature of things changes never a del
For sith he says tho things presently
Right as they shall here afterward befall
The Iugement of things sykerly
His knowing confundeth no thing at al
For al thing that betide here after shall
whether needful or contingent be the end
At ones al he says hit is in his mind
Right as thou seyst a man go on the ground
And the son also in heaven a rise
And both thou behaldest in one stounde
yet can thou well dyscernen deuyse
Loo that yt this man wych walk in this wise
He doth him self wyllyngly that dede
But yet in sothe the son a rises need
No the sight of god that is so clear
That al thing doth him be nethen se
Of these wordly things that ben here
Destorbeleth never a del the qualyte
wyche in the sight of his eternyte
Ben present now / but to the sight of man
There time they shall here afterwards han
And here of comes this conclusion
That what he wot that shall here after sue
Hit is no fallace another opynyon
But very science suffysant true
By wych he knows yt hit is not due
As of necessyte to fallen so
But than thou say a thing that shall be do
And is provided in dyuyne thought
Hit may not vnbetyde / hit is no dread
And thing that so may be exchwed nought
Than of necessyte / hit falls need
And so thou wolt me bynden to the dede
As by this word / that is necessyte
And loo as truth / I will hit grant the
But this vnnethe may felen any wight
No well conceyuen in this erthly lyffe
But if he had a conceit a sight
Of god / fully were contemplatyue
But un to this I answer the belyue
when that thing that so to come is
To dyuyne science / referred is
Loo / necessary is hit sykerly
But in the manner of that propre kende
when that thou hit behaldest verily
Necessyte doth hit in no wise bind
For ij. necessyteys shalt thou find
Of wyche that one is simple / wet hit well
And that other is condycyonel
That every man is mortal of nature
This is necessyte of symplenesse
But when thou know a man perauenture
That walk of his own wylfulnesse
That man walking necessary is
with this condition y put there to
The while hit is y known to be so
For thing that known is in man thought
As for the time hit may none other be
But this condition suffices nought
with him to drawn this symplycyte
For well thou wotest that this necessyte
Comes not of kendly dysposytion
But of that accydent condition
And necessyte doth him not compelle
To walken / he that walk wyllyngly
But while he goth / this will I grant well
Loo that he walk uecessaryly
And in the same wise sykerly
what purveyance as present doth provide
So of necessyte hit doth betide
And yet that thing as of his propre kende
Truly doth not of necessyte befall
But al that god behaldeth in his mind
That so of lyberte betyden shall
He behaldeth hit as present al
And so referred to dyuyne sight
As necessary they ben a counted right
But this is only by condition
Of the knowing of dyuyne wit
But when these things have relation
Un to there own propre kende yet
Al absolutely then betydeth hit
No thing compelled of necessyte
No hit forleteth nought his lyberte
So than hit shall befallen doutles
Al that god to come doth provide
And much thing shall fallen nevertheless
That only shall of lyberte betide
So that they stands fre fro either side
And though they be to come yet may we chese
So propre nature doth they not forlese
There kende is this / be forehand er they were
Of lyberte they might have ben undo
But what force is hit will thou say me hire
where they come of necessyte or no
Sith of dyuyne science is hit so
In al wise hit doth befallen this
Right even as thing that necessary is
Loo this / as I a little here beforn
Purposed by exsample plenerly
Of the son that rises by the morn
And of a man that walk wyllyngly
Till time they be in doyng presently
They may well be undone hit is no dread
But that one was to betyden need
But sykerly that other needed nought
So al that he behaldeth as present
Right so wythouten dout hit shall be wrought
But that the son rises verament
Loo of necessyte hit hath dessent
But the man to walken or to gon
His own choys hit stands al upon
Now then in this we have said but right
That when these things so referred be
Un to the knowing of dyuyne sight
Loo then they falls of necessyte
But referred to there qualyte
Full absolute in lyberte they stoned
As out of al necessary bond
As al that apereth to the come wit
if that they be referred to reason
Universal than in sothe is hit
And if thou set in thyn entention
The properte of there condition
So then thou felest hit as synguler
But if hit be (thou say) in my power
My purpose for to chaungen as me lust
Loo than shall I a voyden purveyance
By wyche the same is known wit
But I shall answer to thyn allegiance
Thy purpose may thou change at thy plesaunce
But this might for to don or do hit nought
And al that divers chaungyng of thy thought
The very present truth of prescience
Every del behaldeth presently
And thou may not a voyden his presence
No more than thou may a void verily
The behaldyng of a present ye
Though yt thou would thy selfen torn or wend
As leketh to the fre will of thy mind
But here thou make this objection
if gods science may be changed so
At my propre dysposytion
As when I this now / now that may I do
Than may I enterchaungen to fro
Loo his science by stoundes at my will
Nay for sothe / that may thou not by skyle
For why the knowing of dyuyne sight
Goes before that thing that shall befall
And before the propre presence right
Loo of his knowing he retorneth al
That ever was / or ben here after shall
No as thou wenest he alters nought
His presence by stoundes of thy thought
As now this thing now yt thing to know
But he abiding every wit compaseth
The chaungyng of thy thoughts al a row
with one sight al at ones he enlaceth
He goth also before al embraces
His might also / that al comprehends
And eke his sight that to so fer extends
Al things to behalden presently
He hath them not received so as we
Of thing that is to come suyngly
But of his propre hye symplycyte
whereby hit may full well assoyled be
That thou while er a geynst me hast y put
Vnsembly say thou is hit to thy wit
That thing to come of our vnstablenesse
Should the cause ben of his science
But of his conning loo the might is this
He closes al with knowing of presence
Of divers time he hath no difference
And al thing in to certain hath he brought
To things passed owes he right nought
Sith hit is so / I may concluden now
That in every mortal creature
The lyberte abides hole y now
And stands fully in there own cure
And laws wyche that medes doth mesure
To tho men that ben good virtuous
And also peynes to the vicious
Then for vnryght they may not ben arected
Sith every man his own will is at
As by necessyte no thing y let
But that he may deserven love or hate
And god him selfen sit a above algate
And every thing he knows er hit be
As present in his hye eternyte
In ous behaldyng every thought dede
That is / or shall be don / in full certain
And to the good men he desposeth mede
And to the wicked punysshement peyn
To trust in god hit is no thing in veyn
And preyours / if they ryghtuously be led
Believe hit well / they may not ben vnspedde
Wythstande thou vice / give the to virtue
To ryghtuous hope / thou lift up thy courage
And for thy needs / if thou wolt pursue
Humble preyer send in thy message
Up to thy god / hit fails not his wage
No dout the nought / you shalt be sped full soon
For he refuses never a lowly boune
And loke that thou my counsel not forget
Dyssymule not / but do thy besynesse
The need is thyn / also the charge is great
That thau be found in virtue prowess
Sith al thy work is open express
Un to the presence of the Jug on hye
That al thing doth behalden plenerly
Explicit Liber Quintus Boecij De consolation Phie.
Deo gracias.
Collectis in sequentibus cuiuslibet linee primis litteris / non solum
Translatoris sed transferri procurantis / nomina cu cognominibus / inuestigare
poteris.
Nomen transferri procurantis.
EVer more exalted be thou lord on hy
Lawly wyche of thy benygnyte
In flesh and blodde aperyng wyllyngly
So piteously were peyned on the tree
And suffer / that grievous was to the
Be bled with al thy blodde for man sake
Ever more exalted be thy majesty
Thyn heart blodde / our raunson would you make
Cognomen.
Blysful lord I pray the heartily
Er I depart of this mortalyte
Reskewe me fro my perylous enemy
Keeping me fro his cursed cruelte
Eternally to set my thought in the
Lust of sins fully to forsake
Endless god wyche art both one iij.
in to thy cure for ever I me betake
Nomen Translatoris.
Tyelde you thanks lady Sapience
Of yt this work ye to an end y brought
Have ye the worship the recompense
And I no del / I have deserved nought
None other lust desire I in my thought
No nought coueyt I but your Influence
Eternally / so that I may be brought
Souereyn lady in to your presence
Cognomen Translatoris.
with al my heart to do you reverence
And service / such as of me may be wrought
Lawly under your obedyence
To plesen you if I suffysed ought
With al my heart / as ever I have besoght
No thing coueyt I of your excellence
Eternally but that I may be brought
My souereyn lady in to your presence
Here ends the book of comfort called in latin Boecius de consolation Phie.
Enprented in the exempt monastery of Tauestok in Denshyre. By me Dan Thomas
Rychard monk of the said Monastery / To the instant desire of the right
worshypful esquyer Master Robert Langdon. Anno d. MDxxv.

Deo Gracias.
Robertus Lanhdon.

blazon of Robert Langdon, Esq.


