: A COMpendyous Regyment or a Dyetary of health made in Mountpyllyer, by
Andrewe Board of physycke Doctor, newly corrected and imprinted with divers
addycyons Dedycated to the Armypotent Prince and valyent Lord Thomas Duke of
Northfolke.



The preface or the proheme.
To the armypotent Prince and valyent lord Thomas Duke of Northfolke Andrewe
Board of physycke doctor r doth surrender humyle commendacyon with immortal
thanks.
AFter the time that I had travelled for to have the notycyon practes of
Physycke in diverse regyons and countres returned in to Englande and required to
sary and to remain and to cotynue with sir Robert Drewry knight, for many
urgent causes. Your grace hearing of me did send sir John Baruyngham now being
knight to me to come to your grace to have my counsel in physycke for your
infyrmytes. The mesage done, I with festynacyon dylygece did not prolong the
time but did come to your grate according to my deuts. The which was in the
time, when lord Thomas Cardinal Archbishop of York was commanded to go to
his see of York. And after my coming to you and feeling the pulses of your
heart: the pulses of your brain, and the pulses of your liver, and that I had
len your vryne your egestyon I dared not to enterprise or medyll with out the
counsel of Master doctor Buttes, the which did know not only your coplexcion
infyrmite but also he did know the usage of your dyete. And the imbe^yllyte and
strength of your body, with other qualytes exuedyent necessary to be known,
but brefely to conclude your recuperatyng or recovering your health. And for
synguler trust and high favour the which the king had to you was compocated to
be in the presence of his magesty, I than did pass over the sees again and
did go to all the vnyuersytes and great Scloles the which be approbated with
in the precynet of Thrystendome for to have the practes of physycke, I saying
many expedyent things in divers regyons at the last I did staye my self at
Mountpllyoure which is the head university in al Europe for the practes of
physycke surgery or thyrmig I being there. And having a cotydyal remembrance
upon your bountiful goodness, d^d consulte with many egregyous Doctors of
physycke what manner that I m^ghte write the which might be acceptable for the
conseruacyon of the health of your body. The said doctors knowing my zele
and true intention had to you, did aduertyse me to make a book of dyete not
only for your grace but also for your noble posteryte and for all men living
wherefore I do nomyaate this book The Dyetary of health, the which doth pertract
howe a man should order him self in all manner of causes partenynge to the
health of his body, if your grace or any man will have forther knowledge for
divers infyrmites let him loke in a book of my making named y^ Breuyary of
health. And where I have dedycated this book to your grace. And have not
ornated hit with cloquence retorycke terms, the which in all manner of books
and wryttynges is used these modernall days. I do submytte me to your
bountefull goodness. And also divers times in my wrytynges I do write words of
mirth, truly it is for no other intecion, but to make your grace merry for
mirth is one of ye chefest things of physycke the which doth advertise every
man to be merry, and to bewere of pentyfulnes, trusting to your affluent
goodness to take no displeasure with any of the cotentes of this book, but to
accept my good will dylygent labour. And forthermore I do trust to your super
abundant gracyousnes, that you will consider the love and zele, the which I
have to your prosperyte, and that I do it for a common weal, the which I
beseech Jesu christ lunge to continue to his will and pleasure in this life.
And after this transitory life to remunerate you with celestial joy and
eternal glory

From Mountpyller. The fyft day of May. The year of our Lord Jesu Christ.
M. CCCCC. XLVII.
Here follows the Table of the Chapiters.
THe first Chapyter doth show where a man should cytuat or set his mansyon
place or house, for ye belth of his body. The second chapiter doth show a
man howe he should build his house, and that the {pro}spect be good for ye
conseruacyon of health. The third chapyter doth show a man to build his
house i a pure and a fresshe air for to lengthen his life. The fourth Chapiter
doth show under what manner a man shulde build his house or mansyon in
eschewynge things yt shulde shorten his life. The. v. Chapiter doth show howe
a man should order his house concerning the implements to comfort the spyrytes
of man. The. vi. Chapiter doth show a ma howe he shulde order his house and
household, and to live in quyetnes. The. vii. chapiter doth show howe y^ head
of a house, or a household shulde excercyse him self for the health of the
soul body. The. viii. chapiter doth show howe a ma shulde order him self in
slepynge, and watchynge, and in his apparel wearynge. The. ix. chapiter doth
show ye repleccion or surfetyng doth much harm to nature, that abstynece is ye
chiefest medison of al medyson The. x. charpiter treats of all manner of
drynkes, as of water of wine, of ale, of vere, of cider, of mead, of
metheglyn, of why. The* xi. chapiter treats of bread. The* xii. Chapit
treteth of potage, of sew of stew pots, of grewel, of fyrmente, of pese
potage, of almon milk, of rise potage, of caudels, of culleses, of alebrues,
of honey soppes, and of all other manner of brothes. The. xiii. Chapit treats
of white meat as of eggs, butter, chese, milk, crayme, posettes, of almon
butter, and of bean butter. The. xiiii. chapyter treats of fysshe. The. xv.
chapiter treats of wild foul of tame foul, and of birds. The. xvi.
chapiter treats of flesh, wild and domestycall. The. xvii. chapyter
treats of pertyculer things of fysshe and flesh. The. xviii. chapit
treats of roast meat of fryde meat, of soden or boiled meat, of bruled
meat and of beaken meat. The. xix. chapiter treats of rotes. The. xx.
chapiter treats of herbs. The. xxi. chapyter treats of fruits. The. xxii.
chapiter treats of spices. The. xxiii. chapyter shows a dyete for sanguyne
men. The. xxiiii. chapiter shows a dyete for flematyke men. The. xxv.
chapyter shows a dyete for colorycke men. The xxvi. Chapiter doth show a
dyete for melancholy men. The. xxvii. chapiter treats of a dyete of an order
to be used in the pestyferous time of the pestilence the swetyng syckenes. The.
xxviii* Chapyter treats of a dyete for them the which be in an ague or a
fever The xxix. chapyter treats of a dyete sor them the which have the
Ilyacke, or the colycke and the stone. The. xxx. Chapiter treats of a dyete
for them the which have any of the kinds of the gottes. The. xxxi. chapyter
treats of a dyete for them the which have any kinds of lepored The. xxxii.
chapiter treats of a dyete for them the which have any of the kinds of ye
falling syckenes. The. xxxiii. chapiter treats of a dyete for them which
have any payne in their head The. xxxiiii. Chapiter treats of a dyete for them
the which be in a consumpeyon. The. xxxv. chapiter treats of a dyete for them
the which be asmatycke men, being short wynded or lacking breath. The.
xxxvi* Chapyter doth show a dyete for them the which hath the palsy. The
xxxvii. Chapyter doth show an order and a dyete for them that be mad and out of
they^ wit. The. xxxviii. Chapiter treats of a dytte for them the which have
any kind of dropsy The. xxxix. Chapyter treats of a general dyete for all
manner of men or women being sick or whole. The. xl. Chapiter doth show an
order or a fasshyon, howe a sick man shall be ordered in his syckenes. And how
a sick man shulde be used that is likely to dye.
Here ends the table. And here follows the Dyetary of health.
The first Chapyter doth show where a man shulde cytuate for set his mancyon
place or house for the health of his body.
WHat ma of honour or worship, or other estate, the which doth pretend to
build a house or any mansyon place to inhabyte him self. Or else doth pretend
to alter his house, or to alter old building in to comodyous and pleasant
building, not only for his own proper comodyte, wealth, and health, but also
for other men the which will resort to him: having also a respect to his
posteryte.

First it is necessary and expedyent for him to take heed, what counsel god
did give to Abraham, and after that to take heed what council god did give to
Moyses, and to the children of Israel, as it appears in the. xiii. chapyter of
Exodi. the. xx. chapyter of Numeri, the. vi. chapyter of Deutro. And also in
the book of Leuites, saying first to Abraham. Go thou forth of thy coutre from
thy cognacion or kynred. And come thou into the country the which I will show
to the, a country abundynge or plentyfull of milk and honey. Here is to be
noted that where there is plenty of milk, there is is plenty of pasture and no
skarsite of water, where there is plenty of honey there is no skarsyte but
plentyfulnes of woods, for there be mo bees in woods, and so consequently
abundance of honey, than there be bees, or honey, or wax in the hyues in
gardyns or orchards, wherefore it appears that whosoever will build a mansyon
place or a house, he must cytuate and set it there where he must be sure to
have both water and wood, except for pleasure he will build a house in or by
some City or great town the which be not destytute of such comodytes. But
he the which will dwell at pleasure, and for profit. and health of his body he
must dwell at elbow rome having water wood annexed to his place or house, for
if he be destituted of any of the pryncipal les, that is to say first of water
for to wasshe and to wrynge, to bake and to hrewe, and divers other causes
specyally for parrel yt which might fall by fire were a great discomodyous
thing. And better it were to lack wood than to lack water the premysses
cosydered, although that wood is a necessary thing, not only for fuel,
but also for other urgent causes, specyally concerning building and
reparacyons.

The second Chapyter doth show a man howe he shulde build his house or
mansyon, that the prospect be fair and good for the con^eruacyon of health.
AFter that a man have chosen a convenient soil and place according to his
mind purpose to build his house or mansyon on, he must have before cast in his
mind that the prospect to and fro the place be pleasaut, fair, and good to
the eye, to behold the woods, the waters, the feldes, the ^ales, the hills,
the plain ground. And that every thing be descent sayre to the eye, not only
within the precyncte of the place appointed to build a mansyon or a house to
se the comodites about it, but also it may be placable to the eyes of all men
to se to behold wh^n they be a good dystaunce of from the place, that it do
stand comodyously. For the commodyous building of a place doth not only
satisfy the mind of the inhabytour, but also it doth comfort and rejoices a
man heart to se it, specyally the pulcruse prospect. For my cosayte is
such that I had rather not to build a mansyon or a house, than to build one
without a good prospect in it, to it, and from it. For and the eye be not
satisfy, the mind can not be contented. And the mind can not be contented the
heart can not be pleased, if the heart and mind be not pleased, nature doth
abhor. And if nature do abhor, mortifycacyon of the vytal, and anymall, and
spyrytual powers do consequently follow.

The third chapyter doth show a man to build his house in a pure and a
fresshe air to lengthen his life.
THere is no thing except poison that doth put ryfye or doth corrupt ye
blood of man, and also doth mortyfye the spyrytes of man, as doth a corrupt
and a cotagyous air. For Galyen terapentice nono saith, wither we will or
will not we must grant unto every man air, for without the air no man can
live. The air can not be to clean and pure considering it doth compass us
round about, and we do receive it in to us, we ca not be without it, for we
live by it as the fysshe lives by the water. Good air therefore is to be
praised. For if the air be fryske, pure, and clean about the mansyon or house
it doth conserve the life of man, it doth comfort the brain. And the powers
natural anymall and spyrytuall ingendrynge and making good blood, in the
which consists the life of man. And contraryly evil and corrupt airs doth
infe^tc the blode, doth ingendre many corrupt humours, and doth putryfye the
brain, and doth corrupt the heart, therefore it doth breed many dyse ases
infyrmytes thorough the which mans life is abreuyated and shortened. Many
things doth infect, putryfye, and corrupts the air, as the influente of
sondrye sterres, and standing waters, stynkynge mists, marshes, caryn lying
lunge above the ground, much people in a small rome lying vnclenly, and being
fylthy and sluttesshe, wherefore he that doth pretend to build his mansyon or
house, he must provide that he do not cytuat his house nyghe to any marsh or
marysshe ground, that there be not nyghe to the place stynkynge and putry^yed
standing waters, pooles, ponds, nor myres, but at lest wise that such waters
do stand upon a stony or a grauayle ground myxt with clay, and that some
fresshe spring have a recourse to nury she and to refresshe the said
standing waters. Also there must be circumspection had that there be not
about the house or mansyon no stynkynge dyches, gutters, nor canelles, nor
corrupt dunghylles, nor synkes, except they be oft and divers times mudyfyed
and made clean. Swepynge of houses and chambers ought not to be done as long as
any honest man is within the precynct of the house for the dust doth puttrify
the air making it dence. Also nygh to the place let not her flax nor hemp be
watered, beware of the snoffe of candelles, and of the savour of apples for
these things be contagyous and infectyue. Also mysty and cloudy days,
impetuous and vehement wind, troublous and vaporous whether is not good to
labour in it to open ye pores to let in infectious air, Furthermore beware of
pyssynge in draughts, and permit no common pyssynge place be about the house
or mansyon, and let the common house of easement be over some water, or else
elongated from the house. And beware of emptynge of pysse pots and pyssyng in
chymnes. so that all evil and conragyous airs may be expelled, and clean air
kept vnputrysyed. And of all things let the buttery, the ^eller, the kytchen.
the larder house, with all other houses of offices be kept clean, that there be
no filth in them, but good odyferous souours, and to expel expulse all corrupt
contagyous air, loke in the. xxvii. Chapyter of th{is} book.

The fourth Chapyter doth show under what manner and fasshyon a man shulde
build his house or mansyon, in exchenynge things that shorteneth mans life.
When a man doth begin to build his house or mansyon place he must puyde
(saith Jesus christ) before that he begin to build for all thing{is}
necessary for the performacion of it, lest that when he has made his
foundacyon, and can not fynysshe his work that he has begone, every man will
deride him saying. This man did begin to build, but he can not fynysshe or
make an end of his purpose, for a man must consider the expense before he do
begin to build, for there gothe to building many a nail, many pynnes, many
lathes, and many tiles or slat{is} or straws, beside other greater charges, as
timber, bordes, lyme, sand, stones, or brycke, beside the workmanshyp and the
implements. But a man the which have puruyd or hath in store to accomplished
his purpose, and hath chosen a good soil and place to cytuat his house or
mansyon, and that the prospect be good, and that the air be pure, fryske and
clean. Then he that will build, let him make his foundacyon upon a graualy
ground myxte with clay, or else let him build upon a roche of stone, or else
upon an hill or a hills side. And ordre edyfye the house so that the
pryncypall and chief prospectes may be East and weest, specyally North east,
South east, and Southweest, for the merydy all wyndes of all wyndes is the
most worst, for the South wind doth corrupt and doth make evil vapours. The
East wind is temperate, fryse, and fragraut. The weest wind is mutable. The
North wind purges i'll vapours, wherefore better it is of ye. ii. worst that the
wyndowes do open plain North than plain South, although that Jeremy saith,
from the North depends all evil. And also it is written in Catica
cantico{rum}. Rise up North wind and come thou South wind and parfyat my
garden. Make the hall under such a fasshyon, that the parler be annexed to the
head of the hall. And the butterye and pantry be at the lower end of the hal,
the sell ler under the pantry set somewhat abase, the kychen set somewhat a base
from the buttry pantry, coming with an entry by the wall of the buttry, the
pastry house the larder house annexed to the kychen. Than deuyde the lodgings
by the cyrcuyte of the quadryuyall court, and let the gate house be opposyt or
against the hall door (not dyrectly) but ye hal door standing a base, and the
gate house in the mydle of the front entering into the place, let the pryue
chambre be an red to ye chambre of a state, with other chambers necessary for
the building, so that many of the chambers may have a prospect into the
Chapel. If there be an utter court made, make it quadryuyal with houses of
easementes, and but one stable for horses of pleasure, se no filth nor donge be
within the court, nor cast at ye back side, but se the donge to be carried
far from the mansyon. Also the stables and the slaughter house, a dairy if any
be kept shulde be elongated the space of a quarter of a mile from the place.
And also the bake house and brew house shulde be a distance from the place
and from other building, when al the mansyon is edyfyed and buylte, if there
be a woot made about it, there shulde some fresshe spring come to it, and
divers times the moote ought to be s^owered and kept clean from mud and
wedes. And in no wise let not the filth of the kychen descend in to the moote.
Forthermore it is a comodyous and a pleasant thing to a mansyon to have an
orchard of soundry fruits, but it is more comodiouse to have a fair gardayn
repleted with herbs of aromatyck redolet savours In the garden may be a
poole or two for fysshe if the pooles be clean kept. Also a park repleted with
dere conyes is a necessary and a pleasant thing to be annexed to a man syon. A
dove house also is a necessary thing about a mansyon place. And among other
things a pair of buttes is a decent thing about a mansyon, other while for
a great man necessary it is for to pass his time with bowles in an aly, when
all this is finished and the mansyon replenysshed with Implements. There must
be a fire kept cotynually for a space to dry up the contagyous moysters of the
walls, the savour of the lyme and sand. And after that a man may lye and
dwell in the said mansyon without taking any inconuenyence of syckenes.

The. v. Chapyter doth show howe a man shulde ordre his house concerning the
Implements to comfort the spyrytes of man.
WHen a ma hath built his mansyon, hath his houses necessary about h{is}
place, if he have not houshode stuff or implemet{is} the which be needful, but
must borrow of his neighbours, he than is put to a shefte to a great after
deal, for these men the which do brew in a botyl bake in a walet, it will
belong or he can bye Jacke a salet yet every thing must have a beginning,
every man must do after his possessyons or abylyte, this natwithstadinge
better it is not to set up a household or hospytalyte than to set up
household lacking the performacyon of it, as now to ron for malt, and by and
by for salt, now to send for bread, and by and by to send for a shepes
head, and now to send for this, now to send for that, and by by be doth
send he can not tel for what, such thing{is} is no prouysion, but it is a
great abusyon. Thus a man shall less his thryfte, and be put to a shefe, his
goods shall never increase, and he shall not be in rest nor peace, but ever in
carcke and care, for his porse will ever be bare, wherefore I do counceyll every
man, to provide for himself as soon as he can, for if of implements he be
destytuted, men will call him light wytted, to set up a great house, he is not
able to keep man nor mouse, wherefore let every maloke or he leap for many
corns makes a great hepe.

The syxte Chapyter doth show howe a man shulde ordre his house and
household, and to syue quyetly.
Whosoever ever he be ye will keep an house, he must ordre ye expenses of his house
according to the rent of his lands. And if he have no lands he must ordre
his house after his lucre wynuynge or gains. For he yt will speed more in his
house, than yt retes of his lades, or his gains doth attain to be shall fall to
pouerte, necessite will urge cause copel him to sell his land, or to waste his
stock, as it is daily scene by experyece of many men, wherefore they be yt which
will exchewe such ^digalyte incovenience, musie divide his retes portion
exspeces, whereby yt he doth live into. iii equal porcios or {per}tes.

The cyrst part must serve to provide for mere and drink, all other necessary
things for the sustencyon of the household.
The second porcyon or part must be reserved for apparel, not only for a
man own self, but for all his household, for his servants wages,
deductynge somewhat of this porcyon in alms dede to pore neygh bours and pore
people, fulfyllynge the. vii. works of mercy. The third porcyon or part
must be reserved for urgent causes in time of need, as in syckenesse.
reparacyon of houses, with many other catydyall exspences, beside rewards the
charges of a mans last end. If a ma do exsyde this ordre he may soon fall in
det, the which is a dangerous thing many ways beside the bringing a to man
trouble. And he that is ones behind band and in trouble, he can not be in
quietness of mind, the which doth perturb the heart, so consequently doth
shorten a man life, wherefore there is no wise man but he will exchewe this
inconuenyence, will cast before what shall follow after. And in no wise to set
up a household, before he hath made prouysyon to keep a house. For if a man
shall bye every thing that belongs to the keeping of his house with his penny,
it will be lunge or he be rich, and lunge or that he can keep a good house. But
he is wise in my conceit that will have or he do set up his household. ii.
or iii. years rent in his co^er. And if he have no lands than he must
{pro}uyde for necessary things or that he begin house hold, lest yt he repeat
him self after, through the which he do fall into pencifulnes, after that in
to syckenes dyseases, living not quyetly, whereby he shall abreuyate his life.

The. vii. Chapyter doth show howe the head of a house, or a householder shulde
exersyce him self, for the health of the soul and body.
AFter that a man hath provided al things necessary for his house and for his
household, expedyent it is for him to know, how he should exercise him self
both bodily and ghostly. For there is no catholycke or christen man living,
but he is bound in conseyence to be more circuspecter about the wealth of his
soul then the health of his bodre. Our sauyour Jesus Christ saith, what shall
it profit unto man if he goat all the world and less him self, and bring him
self to a detrimet, wherefore it appears that a man ought to be circumspect
for the health and wealth of his soul. For he is boude so to live, that night
and day and at all hours he shulde be ready and when he is called for to de
part out of this world, he shulde uat fear to dye, saying the words with
saint Ambrose. I fear not to dye, because we have a good god, when a man has
prepared for his soul, and hath subdued sensualyte, and that he hath brought
him self in a trade, or a usage of a ghostly or a catholyke living in ob
serving the comaundementes of God, than he must study to rule and to govern
the the which be in his household, or under his custody or domynyon, to se yt
they be not idle, for king Henry the eight said when he was yonge, ydlenes is
chief masters of vices al. And also the head of a house must over se that
they which be under his tuyssyon serve god the holy days as diligently, ye
and more dylygentler than to do their work the seryall days, refraynynge them
frome vice and sin, compellynge them to observe the comaundementes of God,
specyally to punysshe swerers, for in all the world there is not such odyble
swearynge as is used in Englange, specyally among youth children, which is a
detestable thing to here it, and no man doth go about to punysshe it. Such
things reformed than may a householder be glad not cessynge to instruct them
the which be ygnorant, but also he must continue in showing good example of
living, than may he rejoice in God and be merry, the which mirth rejoicing
doth lengthen a mans life, and doth expel syckenes.

The. viii. Chapit doth show howe a man shulde order him self in slepynge and
in ^erynge his apparel.
When a man has exercysed himself in the day time as is rehearsed, he may
sleep soundely and surely in god what chance soever do fortune in the night
Moderate sleep is most praised for it doth make parfyte digestyon, it doth
nurysshe ye blood, doth qualyfye ye heate of ye liver, it doth acuate, quycken
refreshes ye memory, it doth restore nature, doth quiet al ye humours pulses
(...) man, doth animate, doth coforte all ye natural anymall spyrytual powers
of man. And such moderate sleep is acceptable in the sight of God the premysses
in the aforesaid Chapiter observed and kept. And contraryly immoderate sleep
and slugglysshenes doth humecte and makes light the brain, it doth ingendre
room impostumes, it is evil for the palsy wither it be vnyuersal or
partyculer, it is evil for ye falling syckenes called Epilencia, Analencia,
Cathalencia, Appoplesia, Soda, with all other infyrmytyes in the head, for it
induces and causes oblyuyousnes, for it doth obfuske and doth obnebulate the
memory and the quyckenes of wit. And shortly to conclude it doth perturb the
natural, and anymall, and spyrytuall powers of man. And specyally it doth
instigate and lead a man to sin, and doth induce and infer breuyte of life,
detestably it displeases God. Our lord Jesu Christ did not only bid or
comaude his dyscyples to watch, but did anymat them and al other so to do
saying. I say not only to you watch, but to all men I say watch. And to
Peter he said, myghtest not thou one hour watch with me, although these holy
scryptures with many other mo the which I might allygated for me, be not
greatly referred to this sense, yet it may stand here with my purpose and
matter without reprehensyon. These maters here need not to be rehearsed, wherefore
I do return to my purpose, and do say that the moderacyon of sleep shulde be
mesured according to the natural coplexcion of man, and in any wise to have a
respect to the strength and the debylyte to age youth and to syckenes health
of man. First as concerning the natural coplexcyon of man, as sanguyne and
colorycke men. vii. hours is suffycyent for them. And now considering the
imbecyllyte and wekenes of nature a flematycke man may sleep. ix. hours or
more. Melancholy men may take their pleasure, for they be the receptacle the
drags of al the other humours. Secondaryly youth and age would have
temperauce in slepynge. Thyrdly strength may suffer a brounte in watch, the
which debilite and wekenes cannat. As I will show by a famylyer example. There
were two me set at the dice together a day and a night more, the weke man said
to him I can play no longer. The strong man said to him fie on the
benchewhystler will thou start away now. The weke man to satisfy the
strounge man mind, appyted desire, plays with his fellow, throghe the which
he doth kill him self. The strong man doth him self little pleasure al
things considered, the which I do pass over. whefore I will return to the
sick man, which may sleep at all times when that he may get it, but if he
may sleep at any time, best it is for him to refrain from sleep in the day, to
take his natural rest at night when all things is or shulde be at rest and
peace, but he must do as his infyrmyte will permyt and suffer, whole men of
what age or complexyon soever they be of should take their natural rest and
sleep in the night, to exchew merydyall sleep. But an need shall compel a man
to sleep after his meat, let him make a pause, and than let him stand and
lean and sleep against a cupborde, or else let him sylte up right in a chair
sleep. Slepynge after a full stomach doth ingendre diverse infyrmyties, it
doth hurt the sp^n, it relaxeth the synowes, it doth ingendre the dropsyes and
the gout, and doth make man loke evil coloured. Beware of Ueneryous acts
before the first sleep, and specially beware of such things after dinner or
after a full stomach, for it doth ingendre the cramp, the gout, and other
displeasures. To bedward be you merry, or have merry company about you, so that
to bedward no anger nor heuynes, sorrow nor pencyfulnes do trouble or disquiet
you. To ^edwaade and also in the morning use to have a fire in your chamber to
wast and consume the evil vapours within the chambre, for the breath of man
may putryfye the air within the chambre. I do aduertyse you not to stand nor
to sit by the fire, but stand or sit a good way of from the fire taking the
flauour of it, for fire doth aryfye doth dry up a manes blode, and doth make
sterke the synewes joints of man. In the night let the wyndowes of your house,
specially of your chamber be closed, when you be in your bed lye a little while
on your left side, sleep on your right side. And when you do wake of your
first sleep make water if you feel your bladder charged, and than sleep on the
left side, and loke as oft as you do wake so oft turn your self in the
bed from the one side to the other. To sleep grouclynge upon the stomach and
belly is not good, one^es the stomach be slow and tarde of digestion but
better it is to lay your hand or your bed fellows hand over your stomach,
than to lye grouelynge. To sleep on ye back upright is utterly to be abhor^ed,
when ye you do sleep let not your neck another your shoulders, no there your
hands nor fete, nor no other place of your body lye bare vndyscouered. Sleep
not with an empty stomach, nor sleep not after that you have eaten meat one
hour or two after. In your bed lye with your head some what high, lest that ye
meat which is in your stomach thorough eructuacions or some other cause ascede
to ye oryfice of the stomach let your night cap be of scarlet, this I do
aduertyse you for to cause to be made a good thycke quylt of cotton, or else of
pure flocks or of clean wool, and let the covering of it be of white
sustyan, and lay it on the feather bed that you do lye on, and in your bed lye
not to hot nor cold, but in a temporaunce. Old auncyent doctors of Physycke
saith. viii. hours of sleep in somer. ix. hours of sleep in winter is
suffycyent for any man, but I do think that sleep ought to be taken as the
complexcyon of man is, when you do rise in the morning, rise with mirth and
remember god. Let your hosen be brushed within and without, and flauour the
insyde of them against the fire, use lynen sockes or lynnen hosen next your
legs, when you be out of your bed stretch forth your legs and arms and
your bobye, cough and spyte and than go to your stole to make your egestyon,
and exoncrate your self at all times that nature would expel. For if you do
make any restryction in keeping your egestion or your vryne or ventosyte, it
may put you to displeasure in bredynge diverse infyrmyties, After you have
cuacuated your body, trussed your points, kayme your head oft, and so do
divers times in the day. And wasshe your hands and wrestes, your face and
eyes and your teeth with cold water, after that you be apparelled walk in
your garden or park a thousand pace or two, than great and noble men doth
use to here mass, other men than can not do so but must apply their busynes,
doth serve God with some prayers surrendrynge thanks to him for his many fold
goodness, with asking mercy for their offences, before you go to your refeccyon
moderately exercise your body with some la (...) meat than accords with
nature is named replection, or a surfete. Replection or a surfeit is take as well
by gurgytacyons or to much drinking, as it is take by epulacyon of eatig of
crude meat, or eating more meat than doth suffyce or can be truly dygested.
Or else replection or a surfyt is when the stomach is farced or stuffed, or
repleted with to much drink meat, yt the liver which is the fire under the
pot is subpressed yt he ca not naturally nor truly decoct, defy, no digest
the superabundance of meat drink the which is in the pot or stomach,
wherefore divers times these impedymentes doth follow, the tongue is depryued of
his offyce to speak, the wytes or sensys be dull obnebulated from reason.
Sloth slugy shene consequetly follows, the appetyde is withdrawn. The head
is light doth ache, full of fantasies, divers times some be so sopyled, yt the
malt worm plays the devil so fast in the head, that al the world roneth
round about on wheles then both the principal members the offycyal members
doth fail of their strength, yet the pulsys be full of agylyte. Such
replecyon specyally such gurgytacyons doth engender divers infyrmytes thorough
the which breuite and shortness of life doth follow For the wise man saith,
that su^fetes do kill many men, and temporaunce doth prolong the life. And
also it is written Eccle. xxxvii. That there doth dye many mo by surfeit,
than there doth by the sword, for as I said, surfetynge ingendereth many
infyrmites, as the Idropses, the gowtes, lepored, sausfleme pymples in the
face, behemet impressyons, vndy gest humours, opylacyons, fevers, and
putryfa^cyons. And also it doth perturbate the head, the eyes, the tongue,
and the stomach, with many other infirmities. For as Galen saith, over much
replecyon or surfetinge, causes strangulacyon soden death, for as I said the
stomach is so inferced, and the liver is so sore oppressed that natural heate
and the poores be extyncted, wherefore abstynence for this matter is the most
best and the parfytest medysone that can be. And in no wise eat no meat unto
the time the stomach be evacuated of all ill humours by vomed or other
convenient ways, for else crude and raw humours vndygested will multiply in
the body to the detrymet of man. Two meals a day is suffycyent for a rest
man, and a labourer may eat three times a day, he that doth eat after lives
a beestly life. And he that doth eat more than ones in a day, I aduertyse him
that the first refeccyon or meal be dygested or that he do cate the second
refeccyon or meal. For there is nothing more hurtful for mans body than to
eat meat upon meat vndygested. For the last refeccyon or meal whyll let the
dygestyon of the first refeccy on or meal. Also sondre meates of divers
operacyons eaten at one refection or meal is not laudable, nor it is not good
to sit lunge at dinner and supper. An hour is suffycyent to sit at dinner, and
not so lunge at supper. Englande has an evil use in sitting lunge at dinner
and at supper. And English men hath an evil use, for at the beginning at
dinner supper they will fed on gross meates. And ye best meat which be
wholesome and nutrytyue and light of digestion is kept for servants, for when
the good meat doth come to the table thorough fedynge upon gross meat, the
appe tide is extynct, but manes mind is so auydous although he have eat
enough when he seth better meat come before him against his appetyde he will
eat, whereupon doth come repleccyon and surfetes.

The. x Chapyter treats of all manner of drink, as of water, of wine, of ale,
of bear of cider, of mead, of metheglyn and of whaye.
WAter is one of the four Elemen tes, of the which divers licours or drynkes
for manes sustynauce be made of, taking their orygynall and sustaunce of it, as
ale, bear, mead, and metheglyn, water is not wholesome sole by it self for an
English man, consyde ring the contrary usage, which is natrocurraunt with
nature, water is cold, slow, and slake of digestyon. The best water is rain
water so be it that it be clean and purely taken Next to it is ronynge water,
ye which doth swyftly ron from the Eest into the west upon stones or pybles.
The third water to be praised is river or broke water, the which is clear
ronynge on pybles grauayl Standing waters the which be refresshed with a
fresshe spring is commendable, but standing waters, and well waters, to the
which the soon hath no reflexcio, although they be lighter the other ronyng
waters be, yet they be not so commendable. And let every man be ware of all
waters the which be standing, and be purryfyed with froth, duckemeat, and
mod^, for if they bake, or brew, or dress meat with it, it shall ingendre
many infyrmytes. The water ye which every man ought to dress his meat with
all, or shall use bakynge, or bruyng, let it be ronynge, and put it in vessels
yt it may stand there. ii. or. iii. hours or it be occupied, than strain the
upper part thoroughe a thycke lynnen clothe, and caste the inferyall part
away. If any man do use to drink water with wine, let it be purely strained,
than seth it and after it be cold let hi put it to his wine, but better it is
to drike with wine stylled waters, specyally ye water of strawberes or the
water of buglos or the water of endyue, or the water of cycory, or ye water of
southystel, dandelyon. And if any man be cobred with the stone or doth burn in
the pudybunde places, use to drink with white wine the water of hawes, the
water of milk, folk for this matter in a book of my making named the breuyary
of health.

Of wine.
All manner of wynes be made of grapes, except respyse the which is made of a
bery. Those your wine after this sort, it must be fine, fair clear to the
eye, it must be fragrant and redolent having a good odour and flauour in
the nose, it must spryncle in the cup when it is drawn or put out of the pot
in to the cup, it must be cold pleasant in the mouth, and it must be strong
and subtle of substance. And than moderately drunken it doth acuate and doth
quycken a mans wits, it doth comfort the heart, it doth scour ye liver,
specyally if it be white wine it doth rejoice al the powers of man, and doth
nury she them, it doth ingendre good blood, it doth comfort and doth
nurysshe the brain and all the body, and it resolves fleume, it engenders
heate, and it is good against heuynes and pencyfulnes, it is full of agylyte,
wherefore it is medsonable, specyally white wine, for it doth mundyfye and
cleanse woudes sores. Forthermore the better the wine is, the better humours it
doth ingedre, wine must not be to new nor to old, but high wynes as malmyse
may be kept lunge. And because wine is full of fumosyte, it is good therefore
to allay it with water, wynes high and hot of operation doth comfort old men
and women, but there is no wine good for children and maids, for in high
Almayne there is no maid shall drink no wine, but still she shall drink water
unto she be married the usual drink there in other high coutres for youth is
fountain wattr, for in every town is a fountain or a shalowe well, to the
which all people that be young servant{is} hath a confluence and a recourse to
drink. Mean wynes as wynes of Gascony, French wynes, specyally raynysshe
wine that is fined is good with meat, specyally claret wine. It is not good to
drink another wine nor ale before a man doth eat somewhat although there be
old fantastycall saying{is} to the contrary. Also these hot wynes as malme
sye, wine course, wine greek, romanysk, rony, secke, alygaut, basterde, tyre,
osay, muscadel, caprycke, tynt, roberdany, with other hot wynes be not good to
drink with meat, but after meat, with oysters, with saledes, with fruyt a
draught or two may be suffered Old me may drink as I said high wynes at
their pleasure. Forthermore al sweet wynes gross wynes doth make a man fat.

Of ale
Ale is made of malt and water, and they the which do put any other thing to
ale the is rehearsed, except yest, barm, or godesgood, doth sophistycat their
ale. Ale for an english man is a natural drink. Ale must have these
properties, it must be fresshe clear, it must not be ropy nor smoky, nor it
must have no weft nor tail. Ale should not be drunk under v. days old. New
ale is vnholsome for all men. And sour ale and dead a^e the which doth
stand a tilt is good for no man. Barley malt makes better ale the oaten malt
or any other corn doth, it doth ingendre gross humours, but yet it makes a
man strong.

Of bear.
Bear is made of malt, of hoppes, and water, it is a natural drink for a
dutche man. And now of late days it is much used in Englande to the detrimet
of many english me, specially it kills the the which be troubled with the
colyke the stone the stragulyon, for the drink is a cold drink: yet it doth
make a man fat, doth inflate the belly, as it doth appear by the dutche men's
faces belyes. If the bear be well brude and fined, it doth qualyfye the heate
of the iyuer.

Of cider.
Cider is made of the juice of peers, or of the juice of apples, other while
cider is made of both, but the best cider is made of clean peers the which be
dulcet, but ye best is not praised in physyke, for cider is cold of operation,
and is full of bentosyte, wherefore it doth ingendre evil humours, and doth
swag to much the natural heate of man, doth let dygestyon, and doth hurt
the stomach, but they the which be used to it, if it be drunken in haruyst it
doth little harm.

Of mead.
Mead is made of honey and water boiled both together, if it be fined and pure
it preserves health, but it is not good for them the which have the Ilyacke or
the colycke.

Of metheglyn.
Metheglyn is made of honey water, and herbs boiled and sodden together, if it
be fined and stale, it is better in the regymente of health than mead.

Of why.
Why if it be well ordered, specyally the why the which doth come of butter,
is a teporate drink and is moist, and it doth nurysshe, it doth cleanse the
breast, doth purge red colour, and good for sausfleme faces.

Of poset ale.
Poset ale is made with hot milk cold ale, it is a temporate drink, and is
good for a hot liver, and for hot fevers, specyally, if cold herbs be soden
in it.

Of coyte.
Coyte is a drink made of water, in the which is laid a sour a salt leuyn.
iii. or iiii. hours, the it is drunk it is a usual drink in Pycardy, in
Flaunders, in Holande, in Brabrant, in Selande, hit doth but quench the
thyrste.

To speak of aptysan, or of oxymell, or of aqua vite, or of Ipocras, I do
pass over at this time, for I do make mensyon of it in the Breuyary of health.

The. xi. Chapyter treats of bread.
AUycen saith, that bread made of whet makes a man fat, specyally when the
bread is made of new whet and it doth set a ma in teporauce. Bread made of
fine flower without leuyn is slow of dygestyon, but it doth nurysshe much if
it be truly ordered well baken, when the bread is leuyned it is soon digested
as some old Auctours says, but these days is proved the contrary by the
stomach of men, for leuyn is heavy ponderous Bread having to much brand in
it is not laudable. In rome other high countres their loves of bread be little
bigger then a walnot, and many little loves be joined together, the which doth
serve for great men, and it is safferonde, I praise it not. I do love manchet
bread, and great loves the which be well moulded and thorough baken, the brand
abstracted abiected, and that is good for all ages, Mestlynge bread is made
half of whet and half of Rye. And there is also mestlynge made half of rye
and half of berly. And ill people will put whet and barley together, bread
made of these aforesaid grain or corns, thus {pro}ched together may fill the
gut, but it shall never do good to man, no more than horse bread or bread
made of beans and peason shall do, how be it this matter doth go much by ye
educacyon or the brynginge up of the people, the which have ben nurysshed or
nutryfyde with such bread. I do speak now in barlyes or maltes part to be
eatene and also drunken, I suppose it is to much for one grain, for barley
doth ingendre cold humours, and peason and beans, and the sustaunce coming
from them repleteth a man with ventosyte, but and if a man have a lust or a
sensual appetyd to eat and drink of a grain bysyde malt or barlye, let him
eat and drink of it the which may be made of otes. For haue^ cakes in
Scotlande is many a good lord and lords dysshe. And if it will make good
hauer cakes consequently it will make good drink or evil, every thing as it is
handled. For it is a common proverb, God may send a man good meat, but the
devil may send evil cokes to dystrue it. But wives maids other bruers, the
which doth dystrue malt the which shulde make good ale. And (...) the which
that doth not till their pote^ (...) euyn^ false measure I would they were ^
their, pootes and ta^cardes at dymynge^dale. A^yll bakers the which ^reade of
whet but will ^ith where, or do not or ^yu^nge good weight I (...) they ^ by
pepe thorough a (...) for ^de doth comfort, cofyrme, ^ones her^* beside the
property^ ^ vnholsome ^any ma, ^or it doth lye in y^ stomach like a sponge
haustyng vndecoct humours, yet ye smell of new bread is cofortahle to ye head
and to the heart. Soden bread as symnels and crackenels, bread baken upon a
stone, or ^yon iron, and bread that saffron is in, is (...) laudable. Burnt
bread and harde crust{is}, (...) crusts, doth ingendre color aduste, and
mel^ncoly humours, wherefore chyp the ^ crust of your bread. And who so doth ^
y^ second crust after meat, it ma^e. And so doth wheten bread ^ o^ orande.
Bread y^ whi^ praised in physyke shulde ^. First it must be new, ^, nor it
is not good ^. ^ or. ^ days old, except y^ ^ it must not be muldy nor ^melt
^ylded, it must be tho^ must be light not heavy, and it must be temperatly
salted. Old bread or stale bread doth dry up the vlode, or natural moyster of
man, and it doth engender evil humours, and is evil and tarde of digestion
wherefore there is no surfytte so evil as the surfytte of eating of evil
bread.

The* xii. Chapyter treats of potage, of few of stewpottes, of grewell, of
formentye, of peas potage, of ^lmon milk, of rise votage, of caudels, of
culleses, and of other brothes.
AL manner of lyquyd things as potage sew, all other brothes doth replete a
man that eats them with betosyte. Potage is not so much used in al
christendom as it is used in Englande. Potage is made of the liqnor in the
which flesh is soden in, with putting to chopped herbs, otmell salt The
herbs with the which potage is made withal, if they be pure, good, and
clean, not wanne eaten, nor infected with the corrupt air descendynge upon
them, doth comfort many men, the bentosyte natwithstandynge. But for as much
as diverse times, many parts of Englaude is infected with the pestylence,
thorough the corrupcion of the air the which doth infect y^ herbs. In such
times it is not good to make any potage, nor to ^te no potage. In certain
places beyond see where as I have traueyled in, in y^ pestilence time a general
comaudemet has ben set fro the superyoryte to the comonalte, yt no man should
eat herbs in such infectuous times.

Of sew and stewpottes.
Sew stewpottes, grewell made with otmel, in the which no herbs be put in,
can do little displeasure, except yt it doth replete a man with ventosyte, but
it relaxeth ye belly

Of fyrmente.
Fyrmente is made of whet and milk, it is harde of dygestyon, but when it is
digest dit doth purysshe, and it doth strength a man but flesh soded in
milk is not commendable.

Of peas potage bean potage.
Peas potage and bean potage doth replete a man with ventosyte. Peas potage
is better then bean potage, for it is sooner dygested, lesser of ventosyte,
they both be abstercyue and do cleanse the body. They be copytent of nutriment,
but bean potage doth increase gross humours.

Of almon milk of rice potage.
Almon milk and rice potage, Almons be hot and moyste, it doth comfort the
breast and it doth mollyfye the belly, and provokes ^ryne. Rice potage made with
almon milk doth restore and doth comfort nature.

Of ale brues, caudelles, colesses.
Ale brues, caudelles, and co^esses for weke men and feeble stomachs, the
which can not eat solydate meat is suffered. But caudels made with hemp
sede, and collesses made of shrympes doth comfort blode and nature.

Of honey soppes other brothes.
Honey soppes other brothes of what kind or substance so ever they be made of,
they doth ingendre ventosyte, wherefore they be not good nor wholesome for the
colyke nor the Illycke, nor other inflatyue impedymentes or syckenesses,
specyally if honey be in it, the sayings of Plyne, Balen, Auycene, with other
Authors natwithstandynge, for in these days experience teaches us contrary
to their saynges wrytyng{is}, for although the nature of man be not altered,
yet it is weker, and nothing so strong now as when they lived, did practes
making ye ^okes.

The. xiii. Chapyt treats of white meat ^o of eggs, butter, chese, milk,
and crayme. c.
IN euglande there is no eggs used to be eaten but hen eggs: wherefore I
will first write and pertract of hen eggs The yolks of hen eggs be
cordials, for it is temporatly hot. The white of an egg is viscus cold
slack of digestion, and doth not ingeder good blode, wherefore whosoever that
will eat an egg, let the egg be new roast him rear eat him, or else potche
him for potched eggs be best at night, land new rear roasted eggs be good in
the morning so be it they be tired with a little salt sugar tha they be
nutritiue, In Turkey and other b^he christian lands auexed to it, they use to
seth two or three bushels of eggs together harde, and pull of the shells, souse
them, and keep the to eat at all times, but bard eggs be slow and slack of
digestion, and doth nutryfy the body grossly. Roasted eggs be better than
sodden, fried eggs be nought, Duck eggs gose eggs I do not praise, but
^esaunt eggs and partryche eggs Physycke singulerly doth praise.

Of butter
Butter made of crayme is moist of operation, it is good to eat in the
morning before other meates, French men will eat it after meat. Bu^ eaten
with other meat{is} it doth not only noryshe, but it is good for the breast
and lunges, and also it doth relaxe and doth mollify the belly, dutche men
doth eat it at all times in the day, yt which I did not praise when I did
dwell among the, cosiderynge that butter is vnctious, an^ every thing that is
vnctious is noisome to the stomach for as much as it makes lubrifaccion. And
also every thing that is vnctious that is to say butteryshe, oil, grease, or
fatdothe swim above in the brynkes of the stomach, as the fatness doth swim
abo^e in a boylynge pot, the excess of such naucacion or superfyce will
ascend to the orifice of the stomach, doth make eructuasions, wherefore eating
of much butter at one refection is not commendable, nor it is not good for them
the which be in any ague or fever, for the ventuosyte of it doth auge and
augment the heate of the liver, a little portion is good for eueey man in the
morning if it be new made.

Of chese.
Chese is made of milk, there be four sorts of chese: which be to say,
grene chese, soft chese, harde chese, and spermyse, Chese is made of milk,
there be four sorts of chese: which be to say, grene chese, soft chese,
harde chese, and spermyse, Grene chese is not called grene by the reason of the
colour, but for the newnes of it for the whey is not half pressed out of it,
and in operation it is cold and moyste. Soft chese not to new nor to old is
best, for in operacyou it is hot and moist. Harde chese is hot and dry and
evil to digest. Spermyse is a chese the which is made with curdes with the
juice of herbs, to tell the nature of it I can not, considering that every
milk wife may put many iuces of herbs of sondry operation virtue, one not a
greynge with another But and if they did know what they did gomble to gyther
without true compoundynge, and I knowing the herbs, than I could tell the
operation of spermyse chese, yet beside these. iiii natures of chese, there is
a chese called a rewene chese, the which if it be well ordered doth pass all
other cheses no no excess taken. But take the best chese of all these
rehearsed, if a little do good and pleasure The overplus doth ingendre gross
humours for it is harde of dygestyon, it makes a man constyfe and it is not
good for the stone. Chese that is good ought not to be harde nor to soft, but
betwyxt both, it should not be tough nor brutel, it ought not to be sweet nor
sour, nor tart, nor to salt, nor to fresshe, it must be of good savour
taledge, not full of eyes nor mytes, nor magottes, yet in hyghalmen the chese
the which is full of magottes is called there the best chese, and they will
eat ye great magot{is} as fast as we do eat comfetes.

Of milk.
Milk of a woman, the milk of a got is a good restoratyue, wherefore these
mylkes be good for them that be in a consumpcyone, and for the great
temperance the which is in them it doth nurysshe much.

Cowes milk and ewes milk, so it be yt the beestes be yonge do go in good
pasture the milk is nutrytyue doth humect, moysteth the members, doth mundyfye
cleanse the entrails, and doth alleuyat mytygate the ^ne of the lunges the
breast but it is not good for the the which have gurgulacyons in the belly, nor
it is not all the best for saguyne me, but it is very good for melacoly men,
for old men children specyally if it be sodden, adding to it a little sugar.

Of Crayme.
Crayme the which doth not stand lunge on the milk sodden with a little
sugar is nurysshynge. Clouted crayme and raw crayme put to gyther, is eaten
more for a sensual apetyde, than for any good nurysshemente. Raw crayme
vndeco^ted eaten with strauberyes, or hurts is a rural mans banquet. I have
known such bankettes hath put men in ieoperdy of their lives.

Almon butter.
Almon butter made with fine sugar and good rose water, and eaten with the
flowers of many vyolettes, is a commendable dysshe, specyally in lent when the
violet{is} de fragrat it rejoices the heart: it doth comfort ye brain: and
doth qualyfye the heate of the liver.

Been butter.
Been butter, is used much in lent in divers countres, it is good for ploughmen
to fylthe panche, it doth ingendre gross humours it doth replete a man with
ventosyte.

The. xiiii. Chapyt, treats of fysshe.
OF all nations countres, Engl^e is best served of Fysshe, not only of al
manner of see fysshe, but also of fresshe water fysshe, of all manner of sorts
of salt fysshe.

Of See fysshe.
Fish of the see the which have skales or many fynnes, be more wholesome than
ye fresshe water fysshe, the which be in standing waters. The elder a fysshe
is so much he is the better so be it that the fysshe be soft and not solydat,
if the fysshe be fast and solydat the younger the fysshe is, the better it is
to dygeste: but this is to understand that if the fysshe be never so solydat
it must have age, but not over grown: except it be a young porpasse the which
kind of fysshe is no there praised in the old testament nor in physyke.

Fresshe water fysshe.
The fysshe the which is in ryuers brokes be more holsomer, than they the
which be in pooles, ponds, or mootes, or any other standing water, for they
doth labour doth skower them self Fysshe the which lives doth fed on the
moude, or else doth fed in ye fen or morysshe groude doth saver of ye moude
which is not so good as the fysshe that fedyth and doth skowre the self on
the stones or gravel or sand.

Of Salt fysshe.
Salt fysshe the which be poudered and salted with salt, be not greatly to
be praised specyally if a man do make his hole refection with it the qualyte
doth not hurt, but the quantyte, specyally such salt fish as will cleue
to the fyngers when a man doth eat it And the skin of fish be utterly to
be abhorred, for it doth ingendre viscus fleume color adust. All manner of
fysshe is cold of nature, and doth engender fleume, it doth little nurysshe,
fysshe and flesh ought not to be eaten together at one meal.

The. xv. Chapyter, treats of wild foul, And tame foul birds.
OF all wild foul, the Fesaunte it most best, Although that a Partreche of
all fowls is soonest dygested. Wherefore it is a restoratyue meat, doth comfort
the brain and the stomach: doth augment carnal list. A wood cock is a
meat of good temperance. Quayles plouers lapwynges doth nurysshe but little,
for they doth ingedre melacoly humours, yonge turtyl doves doth ingendre good
blode. A crane is harde of dygestyon, doth ingeder evil blode. A young herensew
is lighter of dygestyon than a crane. A bustarde well killed ordered is a
nutrytyue meat A byttoure is not so harde of dygestyon as is an hernesew. A
shoueler is lighter of dygestyon than a byttoure, all these be noyfull except
they be well ordered dressed A fesannte hen. A more cock a more hen except
they suit abroad they be nutrytyue. Al manner of wild foul the which lives
by the water they be of dyscomendable nurysshemente.

Of tame or domestycall foul.
Of all ^ame ^oule a Capon is most best. For it is nutrytyue and is soon
dygested. A ^enne in winter is good and nutryt^ue. And so is a chyken in somer,
specyallye cockrelles and polettes, the which ^e vntroden. The flesh of a
cock is harde o^ dygestyon: but the broth or gely made of a co^ke is
restoratyue, pygyons be good for coloryke melancholy men, ^ose flesh and duck
flesh is not praised except it be a young gren^ goose young pechyken of half
a year of age be praised, old pecockes be harde of dygestyon.

Of birds.
All manner of small Birds, ^e good and light of dygestyon, except sparrows
which be harde of dygestyon. Tytmoses, colmoses and wrens, the which doth cate
spyders and poison be not comedable, of all small birds the lark is best,
then praised y^ black bird the thursshe. Rasis and Isaac praise the yonge
staares, but I do think because they be bitter in etyng, they should ingedre
colour

The. xvi. Chapyter, treats of flesh, of wild and tame beestes.
Beef is good meat for Englyssh man so be it the be be yonge, that it be
not cow flesh. For old befe cow flesh doth ingedre melancholy and
leprouse bumours: if it be moderately poudered that the groose blood by salt
may be exaustyd, it doth make an English man strong the educacyon of him with
it cosydered, Martylmas befe which is called ^anged befe in the ^ofe of the
smoky house is not laudable, it may fill the belly and cause a man to drink,
but it is evil for the stone, evil of dygestyon makes no good juice. If a man
have a peace hanging by his side another in his belly, that the which doth
hang by the side shall do him more good if a shower of rain do chaunse than
that the which is in his belly, the appetyde of mas sensualyte natwtstandig.

Of Ueale.
Ueale is nutrytyue meat: and doth nurysshe much a man, for it is soon
dygestyd whereupon many men doth hold oppinyon that it is the best flesh and
the most nutrytyue meat that can be for mans ^ustenaunce.

Of mutton and lamb.
Mutton of Rasis and Aueroyes, is praised for a good meat, but Balen doth not
laud it, and surely I do not love it considering that there it no be that
is so soon infected: nor there doth happen so great mur ren and seckenes to any
quadr^ped be as doth fall to the sheep. This natwithstanding if the sheep be
brought up in a good pasture and fat and do not flauoure of the wolle it is
good for sick persons, for it doth ingeder good blood.

Lambs flesh is moyste and flumatyke wherefore it is not all the best for
old men except they be melancholy of coplexyon nor bit is not good for
flumatyke men to fed to much of it, for the flesh is waterysshe.

Of pork, brawn, bacon, pygge.
Where as Balen wi^h other ancient approbat doctors doth praise pork I dare
not say the contrary against them, but this I am sure of, I did never love it.
And in holy scrypture it is not praised, for a swyne is an vnclene beast and do
the lye upon fylthy stynkynge soils, and with ster^orus matter divers times
doth ^ede in Englande, yet in Hyg^almen and other high countres except (spain
other countres annexed to spain) doth keep their swyne clean, and doth cause
them ones or twyse a day to swyme in great ryuers, like the water of Ryne,
which is above Coleyne, but Spaynerdes with the other regions annexed to the,
keep the swyne more fylthyer than english persos doth. Further more the Jeue,
the Sarason, the Turks, cocernynge their poyltycke wit and learning in
physycke, hath as much wit, wisdom, reason, knowledge for the sauyte of their
body, as any christen man has. And many expert physycyons, I have known
amongst the: yet they al lacked grace, for as much as they do not know or
knowledge iesu christ as the holy scrypture tells us the. They loves not
pork nor swines flesh, but doth ^ytuperat and a^orr^ it, yet for al this
they will eat adders, which is a kind of, serpents, as well as any other
crysten madwel ling in Rome, and other high coutres, for adders flesh there
is called fysshe of the mountain. This natwithstandyng physbke doth approbut
adders flesh good to be eaten, saying it doth make an alde man yonge, as it
apperethe by an heart eating an adder makes him yonge again. But pork doth
not so, ^or if it be of an old hog not clean kept it doth ingendre gross
blode, doth ^ume^ to much the stomach, yet if the pork be yonge it is
nutrytyue.

Bakon is good for carters and ploughmen, the which be ever laboring in the
earth or dung, ebut and if they have the stone and use to eat it they shall
singe wo be the pie, where fore I do say that coloppes and eggs, is as wholesome
for them: as a talowe cadell is good for a horse mouth, or a piece of poudred
befe is good for a blereyed mare, yet sensual appetyde must have a swing, all
these things n^twitwstandynge.

Of brawn.
Brawn is an vsual^ meat in winter amongst English men, it is harde of
dygestyon the brawn of a wild bore, is much more better than the drawn of a
tame bore, if a man eat another of them both it shall never do him harm.

Of Pygges.
Pygges specyally sow pygges is nutrytyue and made in a gelye, it is
restoratyue sobe it the pygge be fleed the skyn take of, and than stewed with
restoratyues, as a cock is stewad to make a gely. A yonge fat pygge in
physycke is syngulerly praised if it be well ordered in the rostynge, the skyn
not eaten.

Of kydde.
Yonge Kyddes flesh is praised above all other flesh, as Auycen, Rasis
Aueroyes saith, for it is temporate and nutrityue although it be somewhat dry.
Oloe kydde is not praised.

Of wild beestes flesh.
I have gone round about crystendome and ouertwharte crystendome, a thousand
or two and more miles out of crystendome, yet there is not so much pleasure
for heart hynde, buck, and do: and for ^oo buck and do, as is in Englande,
although the flesh be dispraised in physycke, I pray god to send me part of
the flesh to eat physycke not withstanding. The opynyon of all olde^phy
sycyons was and is that venyson is not good to eat pryncipally for two causes,
the first cause is that the be doth live in fere: for it he be a good wood
man, he shall never se no kind of dear, but at the. x. bites on the grass, or
brosynge on the tree, but he will lift up his head loke about him, the which
comes of tymorysnes and tymorosyte doth bring in melancholy humours, wherefore
all Physycyons saith that venison which is the secon de cause doth ingendre
coloryke humours of truth it doth so: wherefore let them take y^ skyn and let
me have the flesh, I am sure it is a lords dysshe, and I am sure it is good
for an Englysheman, for it doth animate him to be as he is: which is strong
and hardy, but I do aduertyse every man for all my words not to kill and so to
eat of it, except it be lefull. for it is a meat for great men. And great
men do not set so much by y^ meat as they do by the pastime of killing of it.

Of Hares flesh.
A hare doth no herme nor displeasure to man, if the flesh be not eaten, yet
he makes gentylmen good pastime. And better it is for the bounds or dogs to
eat the hare after they have killed it, than man should eat it: for it is not
praised another in the old testament another in physycke, for the bible saith
the hare is an vnclene beeste. And physycke saith hares flesh is dry and
doth ingendre melancholy humours.

Of Conies flesh Rabettes.
Conyes flesh is good, but rabettes flessh is best of all wild beestes, for
it is temperate and doth nurysshe, and syngulerly praised in physycke, for all
things the which doth suck is nutrytyue.

The. xvii. Chapyter doth treat of pertyculer things, of fysshe and flesh*
THe heads of fysshe, and the fatness of fysshe specyally of Sam^n and Cunger
is not go^d for them the which be disposed to have reumaty^ke heads. And the
beds of lampryes, and lamprons, and the string the which is within them, is
not good to eat refrain frome eating of the skynnes of fysshe, and flesh
borned meat, and browne meat, for it doth engender viscus humours, and color
and melancholy. And doth make opylacyons. The brains of any best is not
laudable, except the brains of a kydde, for it is evil of dygestyon and
doth hurt a man appetyde and the stomach, for it is cold and moyste, and
viscus a hot stomach may eat it, but it doth ingeder gross humours. The
brain of a wod coke and of a snype and such like is comestyble. The fore
part of al manner of beestes and fowls be more hotter and lighter of dygesty
on, than the hinder parts be. The mary of all beestes is hot and moyste, it
is nutrityue if it be ^ll dygestyd, yet it doth mollyfy the stomach, and doth
take away a manes appetyde, wherefore let a man ^ate pepper with it. The blode of
all beasts fowls is not praised, for it is harde of digestion. All y^ inward^
of beestes and of fowls, as the heart the liver the lunges, and trypes, and
trylybubbes, with all the entrails is herd of dygestyon, and doth increase
gross humours. The fatness of flesh is not so much nutrytyue as the lenes of
flesh, it is best when len and fat is myxte one with another. The tounges
of beestes be harde of dygestyon and of little nurysshement. The stones of a
co^ke^ll, and the stones of other beestes that hath not done their kind be
nutrytyue.

The. xviii. Chapytre, treats of roast meat, of fried meat ^nd of bake
meat.
WIth us at Montpilour, other vniuersyties is used boiled meat at dner, roast
meat to supper: why they shulde do so I can not tel onles it be for a
cosuetude. For boiled meat is lighter of dygestyon tharosted meat is. Bruled
meat is harde of dygestyon, evil for the stone. Fried meat is harder of
dygestyon than bruled meat is, it doth ingendre color melancholy. bake meat
which is called flesh that is bered, for it is bured (...) paste, is not
praised in physycke. All manner of flesh the which is inclined to humydyte
shulde be roasted. And all flesh the which is inclined to drynes shulde be
sod or boiled Fysshe may be sode, roasted, bruled baken every one after their
kind, use a fasshyon of the country, as the coke and the phisicion will agree
deuyse. For a good coke is half a phisicion. For the chief physic (the
council of a phisecion except) doth come from the kytchyn, wherefore the
phisicion and the coke for sick men must consult to gyther for the preparation
of meat for sick men. For if the phisicion without the cooke prepare any
meat except he be very expert, he will make a werysshe dysshe of meat, the
which the sick can not take.

The. xix. Chapiter treats of rotes first of the rotes of borage and
buglosse.
THe rotes of Borage Buglosse soden tender and made in a succade doth ingeder
good blode, and doth set a man in a temporaunce.

The rotes of Alysaunder and Enula campana.
The rotes of Alysaunder soden tender, and made in surcade is good for to
destroy y^ stone in y^ rains of the back bladder. The rotes of Enulacapana
soden tether made in a luccade is good for the breast, for the lunges, for all
the interyall members of man.

The rotes of Percelly, of Fenel.
The rotes of Percelly soden tender and made in a succade is good for the
stone, and doth make a man to pysse. The rotes of Fenell soden tender made in
a succade is good for the lunges and for the sight.

The rotes of Turnepes Persnepes.
Turnepes boiled and eaten with flesh, augments the sede of man, if they be
eaten raw moderately, it doth provoke a good apetyde. Persnepes soden eaten
doth increase nature, they be nutrytyue, doth expel vryne

Radysshe rotes, and Caretes.
Radish rotes doth break wind doth provoke a ma to make water, but they be
not good for them the which hath the gout. Caretes soden and eaten doth auge
increase nature doth cause a man to make water.

The rotes of Rapes.
Rape rotes if they be well boiled they do nurysshe, if they be moderately
eaten, immoderately eaten they doth engender ventosyte and doth annoy the
stomach.

Of onyons.
Onyons doth provoke a man to veneryous acts, and to sompnolence, and if a
man drink sondry drynkes it doth rectyfy and reform the varyete of the
operation of them: they makes a mans apetyde good, and puts away
fastydyousnes.

Of Lekes.
Lekes doth open the breast, and doth provoke a man to make water, but they
doth make and increase evil blode.

Of Garlyke.
Garlyke of all rotes is used most praised in Lomberdy, and other countres
annexed to it, for it doth open the breast, it doth kill all manner of worms in
a mans belly, which be to say, lubrici, ascarides, and cucurbitini which is to
say lunge worms, small little lunge worms which will tycle in the
foundement, and square worms, it also hetythe the dody and desolueth gross
wyndes.

The. xx. Chapyter, treats of herbs. And first of Borage, and Buglosse.
BOrage doth comfort the heart, and doth ingendre good blode, and cause a man to
be merry, and doth set a man in temperance. And so doth buglosse for he is
take of more vygor and strength, and effycacye.

Of artochockes, and rokat.
There is nothing used to be eaten of Artochockes but the head of them, when
they be almost ripe they must be soden tender in the broth of befe, and after
eat them at dinner, they doth increase nature, and doth provoke a man to
veueryons acts. Rokat doth increase the sede of man, and doth stymulat the
flesh, and doth help to dygestyon.

Of Cykory, and Endyue.
Cycory doth keep the stomaeke the heed in temperannce, and doth qualyfy color.
Endyue is good for them the which hath hot stomachs and dry.

Of white beetes, and purslane.
White beeten be good for the liver, for the spleen, and be abstersyue,
Purslane doth extynct the ardor of lassyuyousnes, and doth mytygate great heate
in all the inward parts of man.

Of time, and Parsley.
Time breaks the stone, it doth desolve wyndes. And causes a man to make
water. Parsley is good to break the stone, and causes a man to pysse, it is
good for the stomach and doth cause a man to have a sweet breath.

Of Lettyse, and Sorrel.
Lettyse doth extynct veneryous acts, yet it doth increase milk in a woman's
breast, it is good for a hot stomach, doth provoke sleep, and doth increase
blod, and doth set the blode in a temperance. Sorrel is good for a hot liver,
and good for the stomach.

Of Penyryall, and Isope.
Penyryall doth purge melacoly, and doth comfort the stomach the spyrites of
man. Isope cleanses viscus fleume, is good for the breast and for the lunges.

Of Rosmary, and Roses.
Rosmary is good for y^ palsy, and for the falling syckenes, and for the
cowghe, and good against cold, Roses be a cordynall and doth comfort the
heart and the brain.

Of Fenell, and Anys.
These berbes be seldom used, but their sedes be greatly occupyde. Fenell
sede is used to break wind, good against poysone Anys sede is good to cleanse
the bladder, and the raynes of the back: doth {pro}uoke vryne and makes one
to have a sweet breath.

Of sauge. and Mandragod.
Sauge is good to help a woman to conceive, and doth provoke vr^ne. Mandragod
doth help a woman to concepcion, and doth provoke a man to sleep.

* Of all Herbs in general.
There is no Herb, nor wed, but god have given virtue to them, to help man.
But for as much as, Plyne, Macer, and Diascorides with many other old
auncyent and approbat Doctors hath written and pertracted of their virtues, I
therefore now will writ no further of herbs, but will speak of other matters
that shall be more necessary.

The. xxi. Chapyter, treats of Fruits, and first of Figs.
AUicen saith that Figs doth nurysshe more than any other Fruit, they doth
nurysshe marvelously, when they be eaten with blanched Almons. They be also
good roasted, steued. They do cleanse the breast the lunges, they do open y^
opylacyons of the liver the spleen. They doth stere a mam to veneryous acts,
for they doth auge inerease the sede of generation. And also they do provoke a
man to sweat: wherefore they do engender lice.

Of great Raysyns.
Great raysyns be nutritiue specially if the stones be pulled out. And they do
make the stomach firm and stable. And they do provoke a man to have a good
appetite, if a few of the be eaten before meat.

Of small raysyns of Corans.
Small raisyns of Corans be good for the raynes of the back, they do provoke
urine. howbeit they be not al y^ best for y^ spleen, for they make opilation.

Of Grapes.
Grapes sweet and new, be nutritiue, and doth stymulat the flesh. And they do
comfort the stomach and the liver, and doth avoid opilations. Howbeit they
do replete the stomach with ventositie.

Of peches, of meddlers, and ceruices.
Peches doth mollify the bealy, be cold. Meddlers take superfluous doth ingeder
melacoly. and Ceruices be in man of like operatio.

Of strawberies, cherries, and burtes.
Strawberies be praised above all beries, for they do qualify the heate of the
liver, and doth engender good blood, eaten with sugar. Theries doth mollify
the bealie, be cold. Hurts be of a groser substance, wherforethey be not for
them the which be of a cleave diet.

Of nuts great and small.
The walnut the hanocke be of one opera cyon. They be tarde and slow of
dygestyon, yet they doth comfort the brain if the pyth or skyne be pylled of,
and than they be nutrytyue. Fylberdes be better than hasell Nuts if they be
new and taken from the tree, and the skyn or the pyth pulled of, they be
nutrytyue, doth iucrease fatness, if they be old they shulde be eaten with
great raysens. But new nuts be far better than old nuts, for old
nuts be colorycke, and they be evil for the head and evil for old men. And
they doth ingendre the palsy to the tongue, yet they be good against venym.
And immoderatly taken or eaten doth ingendre corrupcyons, as boils blaynes
such putryfaccyon.

Of Peason, and Beans.
Peason the which be yonge be nutrytyue howbeit they doth replete a man with
vento syte. Beans be not so much to be praised as Peason, for they be* full
of ventosyte althought the skynnes or husks be ablated or caste away, yet they
be strong meat, and doth provoke venerious acts.

Of Pears, and Apples.
Pears the which be melow and doulce, not stony doth increase fatness
ingenderynge waterysshe blod. And they be full of ventosyte. But wardens roasted
stewed, or baken be nutrytyue, and doth comfort the stomach specyally if they
be eaten with comfettes. Apples be good after a frost have taken them or they
y^ which be of good odor melowe, they should be eaten with sugar or cofettes, or
with fenell sede, or anys sedes because of their ventosyte, they doth comfort
than the stomach and doth make good dygestyon, specyally if they be roasted or
baken.

Of Pomegranates, Quynces.
Pomegranates be nutrytyue, and good for the stomach. Quynces bake the gore
pulled out doth mollyfy ye belly, doth help dygestyon, doth pserue a ma fro
dronkenshyp.

Of Dates, and Mylons.
Dates moderately eaten be nutrytyue but they doth cause opylacyos of the liver
of ye splen. Mylons doth ingeder evil humours.

Of gourdes, of cocubers, pepones.
Gourdes be evil of nurysshement, cocumbers, restraynethe veneryousnes or
lassyuyousnes, or luxuryousnes. Pepones be in manner of like operation: but the
pepones tngen derythe evil humours.

Of Almondes, and Chesteyns.
Almondes causes a man to pysse: they do mollyfy the belly, and doth purge the
lunges And. vi. or. vii. eat before meat preserves a man fro dronkenshyp.
Chesteynes doth nurysshe the body strongly, doth make a man fat, if they be
thorough roasted and the husks abiected, yet they doth replete a man with
vetosyte or wind.

Of Prunes, and Damysens.
Prunes be not greatly praised, but in the way of medicine, for they be cold
moyste. And Damysens be of the said nature: for the one is old and dried, and
the other be take from the tree. vi or vii. damysen eaten before dinner be good
to provoke a manes appetyde, they doth mollyfye the belie and be abstersyue:
the skyne and the stones must be ablated and caste owaye and not used.

* Of Olyues, and capers.
Olyues codyted, eaten at the begynnige of refeccyon doth coroborate the
stomach {pro}uoketh appetyde. Capers doth purge fleme and doth make a man to
have an appetyde.

Of Orenges.
Orenges doth make a man to have a good appetyde, so doth the ryndes if they
be in succade, they doth coforte the stomach, the juice is a good sauce doth
{pro}uoke an apetyde.

The. xxii. Chapyter treats of spices, and fyts^e of Synger.
GYnger doth heate the stomach helps dygestyon, Grene gynger eaten in the
morning fasting doth acuate and quycken the remembrance.

Of Pepper.
There be. iii. sodry kind{is} of pepper, which ve to say white Pepper, black
Pepper, long pepper. Al kinds of pepers do heate the body and doth desolve
fleume wind and doth help digestion, and makethe a man to make water Black
pepper doth make a man lean

Of Cloves and Maces.
Cloves doth comfort the sinews doth desolve, and doth consume superfluous
humours, restores nature, Maces is a cordial and doth help the colycke: is
good against the blody flyxe and laxes.

Of Grains and Safferon.
Grains be good for the stomach and the head. And be good for women to drink.
Safferon doth comfort the heart and the stomach but he is to hot for the
liver.

Of Nutmeges and Cynamon.
Nutmeges be good for the yt which have cold in their head, doth comfort the
sight the brain the mouth of the stomach, is good for the spleen, Cynamone is
a cordial, wherefore ye Hebricion doth say why doth a man dye can get cynamone
to eat: yet it doth stop is good to restrain fluxes or laxes

Of lecorice.
Licorice is good to cleanse and to open the lunges and the breast, and doth lose
fleume.

* The. xxiii. Chapiter shows a diet for Senguine men
SAnguine men be hot moist of coplexc^on, wherefore they must be circuspecte
in eating of their meat, cosiderig that the purer the coplexyon is, the sooner
it may be corrupted, the blode may be the sooner infected, wherefore they must
abstain to eat in ordynatly fruits and herbs rotes as garlyke onyons likes,
they must refrain fro eating of old flesh, exchewe the usage of eating of
ye brains of beestes: fro eating the vdders of keyne. They must use moderat
sleep moderat diet or else they will be to fat and gross. Fysshe of muddy waters
be not good for them. And if blode do aboude cleanse it with stufes, or by
fleubothomye.

The. xxiiii. Chapyter shows a dyete for Fleumatyke men.
FLeumatyke men be cold moist: wherefore they must abstain from meates the
which is cold. And also they must refrain from eating viscus meat, specyally
from all meates the which doth ingendre fleumatyke humours, as fysshe, fruit,
and white meat. Also to eschew the usage of eating of crude herbs specyal
to refrain from meat the which is harde and slow of dygestyon: as it
appears in the properties of meates above rehearsed. And to beware not to dwell
nyghe to waterysshe and morysshe ground. These things be good for fleumatyke
persons moderatlye taken, onyons, garlyke, pepper, gynger. And all meates the
which be hot and dry. And sauces the which be sour. These things following
doth purge fleume Pglypody, netyll, elder, agarycke, yreos, maiden hear, and
stycados.

The. xxv. Chapyter, shows a dyete for Colorycke men.
COlor is hot and dry wherefore Coloryke men must abstain frome eating hot
spices, to refrain frome drinking of wine, and eating of Colorycke meat:
how be it Colorycke men may eat groser meat than any other complexcyons,
except iheyr educacyon have ben to ye contrary Colorycke men shulde not be
lunge fasting These thing{is} following do purge color. Fumytory Centory,
wormewod, wild hoppes vyoletes, Mercury, Manna, Reuberbe, Eupatorye,
Tamaryndes, the why of butter.

The. xxvi. Chapyter treats of a dietarye for Melancholy men.
Melancholy is cold dry, wherefore Melancholy men must refrain from fried
meat, and meat ye which is over salt And from meat the which is sour and
harde of dygestyon, and from all meat the which is burnet and dry. They
must abstain frome immoderat thurste, from drinking of hot wynes, and gross
wine as redewyne And use these things, Cow milk, Almon milk, yolks of rear
eggs. Boiled meat is better for Melancholy men than roasted meat Al meat the
which wylbe soon digested and all meates the which doth ingeder good blode and
meates the which be ^emperatly hot be good for melancholy men, and so be al
herbs the which be hot and moyste. These things following doth purge
Melancholy. Seen, quekbeme, Seen, s^cados, Hearts tongue, maiden here,
pulyall mountane, borage, organum, sugar, and white wine.

The. xxvii. Chapyter treats of a dyete and of an order to be used in the
Pestyferous time of the pestylence and swetynge sycknes.
When the Plages of the Pestylece, or ye swetynge syckenes is in a town or
country, with us at Moutpylour and all other high Regyons countres yt I have
dwelt in, the people doth fl fro the contagious infectious air pseruatyues
with other counsel of Physic natwitstandynge In lower other base countres,
houses the which be infected in town or city, be closed up both doors
wyndowes: ye inhabytours shall not come a broad, another to church: nor to
market, nor to any house or copany, for infectyng other the which be clean
without infection. A man can not be to ware: nor ca not keep him self to well
from this syckenes, for it is so vehement so parlouse, yt the sycknes is taken
with the savour of a mans clothes the which hath vysyted the infectious house,
for the infeccyon will lye hage long in clothes And I have known yt when ye
straw russhes hath ben cast out of a house infected the hogs the which did
lye in it, dyed of ye pestylece: wherefore in such infeccyous time it is good
for every ma yt will not fly fro the cotagyous air to use daily, specyally in
ye morning evening to burue Juneper, or Rosemary, or Rysshes, or Bay leues, or
Maierome or frankincense, or Bengauin Or else make this powder. Take of storax
calamite half an uncle, of frankesence an uncle, of the wodde of Aloes, ye
weight of vi. d. myxe all these together. Than cast half a sponeful of this in
a chafynge dysshe of coals, and set it to fume abroad in ye chabers, the hall,
other houses, and you will put to this powder a little Lapdanum: it is so much
ye better. Or else make a pomemauder under this manner. Take of Lapdanum. iii.
drames, of ye wodde of Aloes one drame, of Amber of greece. ii. drames, a half,
of nutmegs, of storax calamite of each a drame a half, cofect all these
together with Rose water, make a bal. And this aforesaid Pomemauder doth not only
expel cotagious airs, but also it doth coforte the brain, as Barthelmew of
Montagnaue saith, other modernall doctors doth afferme ye same: who so ever yt
is infected with the pestylence, let him loke in my Breuyary of health for a
reme by. But let him use this dyete, let the Chamber be kept close. And keep a
contynual fire in the Chamber of clear burning wodde, or chare cole without
smoke, beware of taking any cold, use temporat meates and drynge. and beware
of wine, bear, cider, use to eat stewed or baken wardens if they can begotten
if not eat stewed or baken peers with comfettes, use no gross meates, but those
the which be light of dygestyon.

The. xxviii. Chapyter, shewethe of a dyete the which be in any Fever or ^gue.
I Do aduertyse every man that hath a Fever: or an Ague, not to eat no meat.
vi. hours before his course doth take him. And in no wise as lunge as the Ague
doth in dure, to put of sherte nor doublet, nor to rise out of the bed, but
when need shall require and in any wise not to go, nor to take any open air.
For such prouysyon may be had yt at uttermost at the third course he shall be
delivered of the Fever dsynge the medsynes the which be in ye Breuyary of
helthe. And let every man beware of casting their hands arms at any time out
of the bed, in or out of their agony, or to spraule with ye legs out of ye
bed, good it is for ye space of. iii. courses to wear continually gloves not
to wasshe the hands. And to use such a dyete in meat and drink as is
rehearsed in the pestylence.

The. xxix. Chapyter, treats of a dyete for them, the which have the Ilyacke,
or the colycke, and the stone.
TJe Iliacke the Colycke be ingedred of ventosyte, the which is intrused, or
enclosed in two guts, ye one is called Ilia. And ye other is called Colon.
For these two infyrmytes a man must beware of cold. And good it is not to be
lunge fasting. And necessary it is to be laxatyue not in no wise to be
costupat. And these thing{is} folowinge be not good for the yt which have
these before said ifirmites, hot bread, nor new ale. They must abstain also
fro drinking of beer, of cider, red wine, cynamom. Also refrain fro all
meates yt honey is in exchewe eating of cold herbs, use not to eat beans,
peson, nor potage, beware of ye usage of fruyt{is} And of all things yt which
doth ingeder wind. For ye stone abstain fro drikinge of new ale, bewarde of
beer, of red wine, hot win{is} refrain fro eating of red hearing, martylmas
befe baken, saltfysshe, salt meates. And beware of going cold about the myddel
specyally about ye raynes of ye back. And make no restryctyon, of wind water:
nor egesty on that nature would expelle.

The. xxx. Chapiter, treats of a dyete for them the whtch have any kinds of
the gout.
THey the which be infected with the gout, or any kind of it. I do aduertyse
the not to sit lunge bollynge bybbyng, dysynge carding, in forgetting the
self to cronerat the blader and the belly when need shall require, also to
beware that the legs hang not without some stay nor that the boots or shoes
be not over strayte, who soever hath yt gout must refrain fro drinking of
new ale, and let him abstain from drinking of beer red wine. Also he must
not eat new bread, eages, fresshe samon, eels, fresshe hearing, pylcherdes,
oysters, all shell fysshe. Also he must exchewe the eating of fresshe befe, of
gose, of duck, of pygyos. Beware of taking cold in the legs, or riding, or
going wetshod. Beware of veneryous act{is} after refection, or after or upon a
full stomach. And refrain fro all things that doth ingendre evil humours be
inflatyue.

The. xxxi. Chapiter, treats of a dyete for the the which have any of the
kinds of lepored.
HE that is infected, with any of the. iiii kinds of the lepored must
refrain fro al manner of wynes, fro new drynkes, strong ale than let him beware
of riot surfetyng. And let him abstain fro eating of spices, dates, fro trypes
podynges, all inwards of beestes. Fysshe eggs, and milk is not good for
leperous persons: and they must abstain fro eating of fresshe befe, and from
eating of gose, duck fro water foul pygions. And in no wise eat no vene^on,
nor hare flesh and such like.

The. xxxii. Chapiter, treats of a diet for the, the which have any of the
kinds of the falling syckenes.
WHo soever he be, that have any of the kind{is} of ye falling syckenes must
abstain fro eatig of white meat, specyally of milk he must refrain fro
drikyng of wine, new ale, strong ale. Also they shulde not eat the fatness of
fysshe, nor the hedes of fysshe, the which doth engender room. Shell fysshe,
eels, samon, hearing, viscus fyfthes be not good for Epilentyeke men. Also they
must refrain fro eating of garlyke, onyons, lekes, chybboles, all vaperous
meates, the which doth hurt ye head: beneson, hare flessh, befe, beans, peason
be not good for Epiletyke men. And if they know yt they be infected with this
great syckenes, they shulde not resort where there is great resort of copany
which is in church in sessyons market places on market days, if they do the
syckenes will infeste the more there, than in any other place, or at any other
time. They must beware they do not sit to nyghe ye fire, for the fire will
overcome them, will induce the syckenes. They must beware of lying whore in
their bed, or to labour extremely, for such things causes the grefe to come
the ofter.

The. 34. Chapyter, treats of a dyete for them the whiehe have any payne in
the heed.
MAny syckenes, or infyrmytes impedymetes may be in a mans head, wherefore
whosoever have any impedimet in the head must not keep the head to hot, nor to
cold but in a teporau^e. And to beware of ingendryng of room, which is the
cause of many infyrmytes. There is nothing yt doth ingeder room so much as
doth the fatness of fyssh the heads of fysshe, surfestes, taking cold in the
fete: taking cold in the nape of the nycke or head. Also they yt which have any
infyrmyte in ye head must refrain of immoderat sleep specially after meat.
Also they must abstain fro drinking of wine, use not to drink ale bear the
which is over strong ^ocyferacyon halowyng, cryeng, and high syngyng is not
good for the head. All things the which is vaporous or doth fume, is not good
for the head. And all thing{is} the which is of evil savour as caryn, synkes
wynkraughtes pissebolles snoffe of candels, dunghylles, stynkyng canels,
stynkyng stading waters, ^ynkyng marshes, with such contagyous eyes doth hurt
the head and the brain, and the memory. All odyferous savours be good for the
head and the brain and the memory.

The. xxxiiii. Chapiter treats of a dyete for them the which be in a
consumpcyon.
WHo soever he be that is in a cosupcion must abstain fro al sour tart
things as veneger alegar, such like. And also he must abstain fro eating of
gross meates she which be harde slow of dygestyon. And use cordials
restoratyues and nuttytyue meates. All meates drinks the which is sweet that
sugar is in be nutrytyue. Wherefore sweet wynes be good for them the which be in
consupcyos moderately take And sour wine, sour ale, sour bread is good for
no man. For it doth freate away nature, let the beware that be in a consumpcion
of fryde meat, of bruled meat, bronte meat the which is over roasted. And in
any wise let the beware of anger pencyfulnes. These things following be good
for the the which be incosupcios a pygge or a cock stewed made in a gely,
cockrelles stewed, got{is} milk sugar, almon milk in ye which rice is sode,
rabbert{is} stewed, new laid egg{is} rear yolks of egg{is} rice sode ialmo
milk.

The. xxxv. chapit treats of a diet for the the which be asmatyke men,
being short wynded or lacking breath.
Shortness of wind comes divers times of impedymetes in the lunges, straytnes
of the breast opylated thorough vyseus fleume, other while when the heed is
stuffed with room called the pose lets the breath of his natural course,
wherefore he that has shortness of breath: must abstain fro eating of nuts
specyally if they be old: and chese and milk is not good for them, no more is
fysshe and fruit, raw or crude herbs. Also all manner of meat, the which is
harde of dygestyon is not good for the. They must refrain from eating of
fysshe specyally fro eating fysshe the which will cleue to ye fyngers: be
vyscus slyme in any wise beware of the skyns of fysshe and all manner of meat
the which doth engender fleume. Also they must beware of cold. And when any
house is a swepynge to go out of the house for a space into a clear eyre. The
dust also yt rises in the street thorough the vehemens of the wind or other
wise, is not good for the. And smoke is evil for them, so is al thing yt is
stoppyng, wherefore necessary it is for the to be laxatyue, to be in a clean
pure eyre.

The. xxxvi. Chapit treats of a dyete for them the which have the Palsye.
THey the which have the Palsye, vnyuersall, or pertyculer must beware of
anger, hastynes, testynes, must beware of fear, for thorough anger or fear
divers times the Palsye do come to man. Also they must beware of dronkenes,
eating of nuts, which things be evil for the palsye of the tongue, coldness
contagyous, uynkyng fylthy eyres be evil for the palsye. And let every man
beware on lying upon the bare groude or upon the bare stones, for it is evil for
the Palsye, the savour of Castory, and the savour of a Fox is good against the
palsye.

The. xxxvii. Chapiter, doth show an order and a dyete for them the which be
mad and out of their wit.
THere is no man the which have any of the kinds of madness, but they ought to
be kept in safeguard for divers incouenyece that may fall, as it apperyd of
late days of a lunatycke man named Michel, the which went many years at
lybertye, at last he did kill his wife and his wife's suster, his own self,
wherefore I do aduertyse every man the which is mad, or lunatycke or
frantycke, or demonyacke to be kept in safeguard, in some close house or
chamber, where there is little light. And that he have a keeper the which the
mad man do fear. And se that the mad man have no knife nor sheres nor
other edge roll, nor that he have no gyrdyll except it be a wekelyste of
cloth, for hureynge or killing him self. Also the chamber or the house that
the mad man is in, le^ there be no painted clothes, nor painted walls, nor
pyotures of man nor woman or foul or be: for such things makes them full
of fantasies, let the mad persons heed de shouen ones a month, let them
drink no wine nor strong ale, nor strong beer, but moderat drink, and let
them have. iii. times in a day warm suppynges, and little warm meat. And
use few words to them, except it be for reprehensyon, or gentle reformacyon
if they have any wit or perseverance to understand what reprehensyon or
reformacyon is.

The. xxxviii. Chapiter, treats of a dyete for them the which have any of
the kinds of the Idropyses.
Saint Beede says the more a man doth drink that hath the Idropyse, the more
he is a thirst, for although the sekenes doth come by superabundaunce of
water, yet the liver is dry, whether it be alchytes Ipo sacra.
Len^oflegmancia, or ye tympany. They that has any of these four kinds of
the Idropyses must refrain from all things the which be constupat and
costyue, and use al things the which be laxatyue, nuts and dry almonnes and
harde chese is poison to them. Aptysane and posset ale made with cold herbs
doth comfort them: whosoever he be, the which will have a remedy for any of
these four kinds of the Idropyses, and will know a declaracyon of these
infyrmytes, and all other sycknesses, let him loke in a book of my making
named the Breuyary of health. For in this book I do speak but of dyetes, howe a
man shulde order his mansyon place. And him self his household, with such like
thing{is}: for the coseruacion of health.

The. xxxix. Chapyter treats of a general dyete for all manner of men and
women, being sick or hole.
THere is no ma nor woman, the which have any respect to them self, that can
be a better physyon for their own save guard, than their own self can be to
consider what thing the which doth the good. And to refrain fro such things
that doth the hurt or harm. And let every man beware of care, sorrow,
though, pencyfulnesse, of inward anger. Beware of surfettes, and use not to
much veneryouse acts Break not the usual custom of sleep in the night. A
merry heart and mind, the which is in rest quyetnes, without aduersyte, causes
a ma to live long, to loke yongly although he be aged, care sorrow brings in
age death, wherefore let every ma be merry: if he ca not let hi resort to merry
copany to break of his {per}plexatyues. Forthermore I do aduertyse every man to
wasshe their hands oft every day. And divers times to keyme their head every
day. And to plouge the eyes in cold water in the morning. Moreover I do
counsel every man to keep the breast the stomach warm. And to keep the fere
from wet, other while to wasshe them, and that they be not kept to hot nor to
cold, but indyfferently. Also to keep the head and the neck in a moderat
temporaunce not to hot nor to cold, and in any wise to beware not to meddle to
much with ^eueryous acts: for that will cause a man to ioke agedly: and also
causes a man to have a brefe or a short life. All other maters pertaining to
any pertyculer dyete, you shall have in the dyetes above in this book reversed.

The. xl. Chapiter, doth show an order, or a fasshyon, howe a sick man shulde
be ordered. And howe a lycke man shulde be used (...) is likely to dye.
WHo so ever that is sore sick, it is uncertain to ma, whether he shall live
or dye, wherefore it is necessary for him that is sick to have two or three
good keepers, the which at al times must be dylygent, and not slepysshe sloug
gysshe nor sluttysshe. And not to weep and whale about a sick man, nor to use
many words, nor that there be no great resort to common and talk. For it is a
busynes a whole man to answer many men, specyally women that shall come to
him. They the which comes to any sick person ought to have few words or
non: except certain persons she which be of counsel of the Testament making,
the which wise men be not to seek of such matteers in their syckenes, for
wisdom wold that every man shulde prepare for such thing{is} in health And if
any man for charity will byset any person, let him aduertyse the sick to
make every thing even betwyxt god the world his conseyence. And to receive
the ryghtes of holy church, like a catholyke man. And to follow the council
of both Physycyons which is to say the physycion of the soul, the physician
of the body, that is to say the spyrituall council of his ghostly father, and
the bodily council of his physician consernyng the receytes of his medsons to
recover health. For saint Augustyne saith he yt doth not the comaudement of his
physician doth kyl him self. Forthermore about a sick person shulde be
redolent savour{is}, and the chamber should be replenysshed with herbs flowers
of odyferouse sauonr, certain times it is good to use some perfumes to stand
in the mydle of the chamber. And in any wise let not many men, and specyally
women be together at one time in the chamber, not only for bablyng, but
specyally for their brethes. And the keepers should se at all times that the
sick persons drink be pure, fresshe stale, that it be a little warmed, turned
out of the cold. Yt the sick me w^ ^ sycker, that there is little hope ^
^ndemet but signs of death, than no man ought to move to him any wordely
maters or busynes: but to speak of gho^ly and godly maters. And to rede the
passion of christ, to say the psalmes of the passion, and to hold a cross or
a pycrour of the passion of christ before the eyes of the sick person. And
let not the keepers forget to give the sick man in such agony warm drink
with a spoon, with asponeful of a cau del or a colesse. And than let every man
indeuer him self to prayer, that the sick person may fynysshe his live
Cathol^ely in the faith of Jesu christ. And so depart out of this miserable
world. I do beseehe the Father, and the son, the holy ghost throw the
meryte of Jesu chrystes passion, that I and all creatures iyuynge may do so.

Amen.
Imprinted at London in Fletestrete at the sign of the George next to saint
Dunstan church by Wyllyam Powell. In the year of our Lord god. M. CCCCC.
LXVII.


