The pryncyples of Astronamye the which diligently perscurutyd is in manner a
pronosticacyon to the worlds end compylyd by Andrew Board of physic Doccor



Thet preface
Hit is greatly to be dolentyd ye all men almost doth now adnichilat the.vii.
liberal scyences specyally. Astrona my the which of trewth is. a. necessary
science And doth illucidat all other scyences, not only ye liberal scyeces as
graer retorick logic Arithmetrick geometrick and music. but also hit is an
Introduccyon to philosophy, phylicke diuinite it is not unknown yt philosophy
consyscyth in natural philosophy moral philosophi. to ye naturalite moralite
of the which no man can attynge with out. Astronamy, Also Astronamy doth
illucidat physic for hypocrates saith. Cecus medycus est qui. Astronamyam
nescyt yt is to say he is a blind physician ye which doth not know Astronamie
also Astronamye doth give knowledge to dyuynyte as hit doth plainly, appear in
the first Chapter of ye genesys. and dyuerce other places wherefore dauid doth
say Celienatrant gloriam dei et opera mamum eius annunciat firmamentum. heuyns
doth show ye glory of god the fyrmaent doth show the warkes of god I
considering these premysses with the great vtylyte of the affore said s^yrnce do
make this book to any met al men to have a respect to hit and to sludy hit to
laud to praise god in his warkis and where I have ometted lefft out mani
matters a{per}tayng to this book latt them loke in a book namyd the
Introduction of knowleg a book of my making the which is aprintyng at old
Robert Coplands the eldist printer of Ingland the which doth print these year mi
pronosticacions.

Finis.
The Capytles of contences of this boock folowth
The first Capytle doth show the names of the.xii. synes and of the. vii.
planetes. And what the zod. ack and how many minutes a degre doth cotaine. The
second Capytle doth show what signs be movable, and what signs be not
movable and which be commone and which be masculyn signs and which be
femynyne and of the tryplycyte of them. The.iii. capytle doth show in what
members or places in ma ye signs hath their dominion and how no man owt to be
let blod when the moon is in ye sign where the sign hath domynyon and also
what operation the signs be of when ye moon is in there. The.iii. capytle doth
show of the fortitudes of the planetes and what influens they: doth give to us.
The.v. Capitle doth show the natural dyspocycyon of the moan when she is in any
of the.xii. signs. The.vi. capytle doth show of ye nature of al ye.xii. signs
And what influece they hath in ma. And what fortitudes ye planetes hath in ye
signs. with the names of the Aspects. The.vii, capytle doth show ye natural
dysposycions of the planetes. And what operation they hath in mans body.
The.viii. Capitle doth show of the. v Aspectus. and of their operation The ix
capitle doth show of ye mutacio of ye Air when any rain wind wedder frost
and cold, should be by the course of ye signs and planetes. The.x. capytle,
doth show ye pedyciall of the aspectus of the moan and other planets and what
dayer be good. and what days be not. c. The.xi capytle doth show of flenbotho
my or letting of bold The xii capitle doth show how when what time a phisicion
should minister medycynes The.xiii. Capitle doth show of sowig of seeds
plantynge of trees and setting of herb.
Thus endyth the table.


The first capytle doth {per}tract of ye names of planetes and also of the
names of the signs and what the zodiac is and how many degrees be in ye
zodiac how many minutes adegre doth contain.
THe names of the.vii. planetes be these. Saturne Iubiter. Mars ye Soon. venus
Mercury and the Moon. These be the names of the.xii. signs Aries. Taurus,
Gemini. Cauncer Leo. Virgo. Libra. Scorpyo. Sagittary. Capricorne. Aquary.
Pisces. The zodiac is the Circle in the which the.xii. signs be in namyd the
circle of beestes. or ye oblique circle hit may be called well ye circle of
bestes for the signs within the circle hath or be of that dyspocycyo of the ye
bestes of whom they doth take their names. or be lykyned unto. As Aries is
lykinned to the Wedder or Rame. Taurus is like to the Bull. Geminy is lykned
to.ii. chyldryne borne at a bordyn. Cancer. is likened to the Crab or Crauys.
Lio is lykned to the Lyon. Virgo is likened to a Maid. Libra is likened to a
pair of balance. Scorpio is likened to a venemus worm namyd a Scorpion.
Saget tarms is likened to a monsterus archer or shoter the which is lycke a man
fro the mydle upward and lyck a fore fo^ed best from the mydle downward.
Caprycornus is likened to the watter Pisces is likened to fyshes These signs
gives influence to us by leke operation as the bestes be of nature. Every one
of these signs is deuydyd in.lx. degres And every degre doth contayn.vi.
mynutes. So that in ye zodiac is.CCC.vi. degres.

The second Capitle doth {per}tract of the signs which be movable And which
be not movable. And which be comone And which be maculyn signs, and which be
feminyn And of the triplycyte of them
These signs be movable. Aries Caucer. libra. and Capricorne. And these signs
be fixed. Taurus leo Scorpyo and Aquary. These signs be comne Gemini. virgo.
Sagittary and pisces These signs be masculin signs, Aries. Semyny. leo libra.
sagittarius and aquary And these be femynie signs. Taurus. Caucer vyrgo.
Scorpyo caprycorne and pysces. Alsother be.iiii. triplycytes. Oriental
meridyonal Occideutal And ye Septrionall The oryent tryplicite the which is in
the est is colorycke fire and masculyne And this triplicite hath theirs.iii.
signs Aries. leo and Sagittary. The lords or planetes of this triplicite is
the soon. in ye day. And Iubiter in night And Saturne is in both. And. this
triplieite is dyurnall The second tryplicyte is the meridionall triplicyte
which is in ye sowth. And this tryplicite hath other.iii. signs. Taurus virgo
an Capricorne This tryplycite is melancholy feminine The lords or planetes of
this tryplycyte is venus in the day And the moan an ye night And mares in both
And this triplycyte is nocturnal The therde tryplycyte is the occidental
tryplycyte, which is in the west And is sanguyn femynyne And this triplycite
hath other.iii signs. Gemyni lybra and Aquary. The lords or planetes of this
tryplicyte is Saturne in ye day marcury in the night And Iubyter in both, And
this triplicite is dyurnall The.iiii, triplycyte is the Septemtryonall
triplycite which is flewmatick femynyne this tryplicite hath.iii. other signs.
Cancer Scorpio pisces. The lords or planetes of this triplicite is venus in ye
day mairs in the night the Moon in both.

The.iii. Capytle doth show in what members or places in ma ye signs hath there
domynyon or power And how no mane owght to be let^ blod when the moon is in
the sign where the sign hath dominyon And also what opercio the signs be of
when the moon is in them
The.xii. signs hath domynyo upon the members of every man, for Aries
beholdyth the head. Taurus the neck. Gemini the arms hands Cancer the breast
Leo the hart. Virgo ye belly. Libra the raynes but tokes. Scorpio the secret
places of ma Sagittary the thyes Capricorne the knes Aquary the legs pisces
the feet. Let every man be ware ye not flebothomator or letter of blod. nor no
manner of Chirurgyon do such him in opnyng any vain or do make any incicio or
cutting when the moan is in any sign where the sign hath any domynyon dominion
or doth regne also when ye moon is in a movable senge hit is good to take a
vomet and good to take a Iurney or to good about any manner of busynes or to
begin any matter pertaining to worldly polise when the moon is in a fexed
sign hit is good to make fundacione of howses or wails good to bild to re^difi
to goo about stable warkes when the moon is In a comune sign hit is not good
to make no mareg nor to mari nor to make no bargyn with out record and sure
wretcing nor good for sick men signfieth much in stabilite.

The iiii capitle doth show of ye fortitudes of planetes having or geueng their
influence to us
THe planetes hath.v. fortitudes or strengthes or testimonialls which be these
ye hows ye exaltacio ye Triplicyte the term And the face. The hows hath.v.
fortitudes, The exaltacyo hath.iiii. fortytudes. The triplicite hath iii
fortitudes. The term hath ii. fortytudes and ye face hath one Every planete in
his hows is as a king syttyng in is mageste in a parliament. Every planet in
his exaltacyon is lek a king that is a crownyng every planete in his replicyte
is as a king in actoryte amongst his lords which be his helpers in euere planete
in his term is as a man that is a mongs his freds and kings folk the face
gives to a planete room or space as a chayer or a set is for a master.

The v capytle doth show the natural dyspocycyon of the moon when she is in
any of the.xii signs.


When the moon is in Ariete. hit is not good for no sick man no sickly men
to shave their head or berd. for every here hath a whole. by the which evil
vapours be in haustyd. Also hit is not good to medyl with the eres nor eyes nor
tong nor no other place in or about the head with no instrument of Iron nor to
let blod or to box or cup any place or vain about the head and neck be ware
that no blod be exhaustyd owt of a vain namyd Cephalica. But it is good for
bathes. and also it is good to begin any thig that would have short expedycion
good to goo about any matter that a man hath to do with great men or rich men

When the moon is in tauro hit is not good to medyll with the neck to exhaust
any blod But this time is fortunate to many things. it is good to bay oxen kine
calves hit is good to byld any hows or mansyon or to begin any other thing it
is good to plant to Impeor to graf tres it is good to sow al manner of corur or
seeds and good to common with women c.

When the moan is in gemini exhaust no blod owt of the arms nor hades it is
good to putt children to shoal or to any science or crawght and good for a man
to begin that thing that he wold have it reite ratyd or begone agene.

When the moon is in cancro a man may be let blod without apparel and ptholomy
saith it is a good time to take medsons specyally electuares also it is good to
take any journey and to remove from one place to an other and from one castyll or
mansyon to another

When the moon is in leon it is good not to take any vomyte for hit will hurt
ye hart and breast it is good to begin that thing that a man would have
continue

When the moan is in virgin it is not good to make any incycyons for ruptures
another to meddle with the huckyl boones, to exhaust any blod, to mary in this
time is not praised lest ye woman bear no fruit to obtain the love of a maid
in the way of marage is good and Also this time is good to set children to
skole.

When the moon is in Libra exhaust no blod from the buttocks take no medsons
frome the raynes of the bake this time is good for a man to bay or to sell good
to take a iurney this time refrain from all veneryouse acts also this time is
good to go about any matter bisines works or of doings

When the moon is in Scorpione be ware of al manner of incysion for the stone
for harnyes for ruptures. And be ware of bathes this time is good for few
things or noone.

When the moon is in. Sagittario. exhaust no blod owt of the thyes to have
busynes with judges justices men of law it is good this time is good for Archers
And marchautes good to make bargins When ye moan is in Capricorne exhaust no blod
owt or from the knes this is an evil time to take any medycynes hit is good to
ere and to plant to set herbs When the moon is in Aquari hit is not good to
exhaust any blod out of ye legs nor to take no medicens. hit is a very good
time to byld

When ye moan is in piscibus. be ware of exhaustinge of any blod owt of the
fete and legs nor medyl with no sickness or dyseses in the fete or legs this
time is good for them that will take any iurney and good for Feshers and for
them that vsyth the water.

The.vi. capitle doth show of the natur of all the signs. and what influence
they hath in man. And what fortitudes the planetes hath in the signs. with the
aspects.
ARies doth govern the head. and is a masculine sign. and is hure and hath his
dominion in the hows of deith and lyef. geuynge influence to them the which be
borne under him to have a loge neck. a len face. short eres and some what hery.
Taurus doth govern the neck and is a feminin sign and is cold dry leke to
melancholy. And is in the hows of substance and possession. of gift and
recaite giving influence to the ye be borne under this sign to have a broad
face. a great nose great eres great nostrells and a great neck Saturne in Tauro
hath.ii. fortitudes. ye term the face. Iubiter in Tauro hath one ye is ye
term. Mars in Tauro hath, ii fortitudes. A triplicite and a term. The soon
hath none. Venus hath.iii. ye hows the triplicite the term. Marcury hath.ii.
The term and the face. The moon hath.iii. fortitudes in Tauro exaltaciont the
face. And the triplicite. Gemini doth govern the Arms and hands. And is a
masculyn syne and is hot moist leik the Air and like sanguyne complexion. And
is in the hows of Kynred fraternite and counsel, geuyng influence to them yt
which be borne under this sign to be bewtyfull and fair and comely. and
somnolent. Saturne in Gemini hath.ii. fortitudes. A term. and a triplicite.
Iubiter hath.ii. A triplicite. The face and term Mars hath.ii. The face and
term. The soon hath one which is the face. Venus hath one which is The term.
Marcury hath.iii. which be these. The triplicite ye hows and the term and the
Moan doth not posses not dyngnite in gemini. Cancer doth govern the Breast the
lunges and the stomach. And is a feminine sign. And is cold and moist like
the watter and ye complexion of flewmatyck persons And is in the hows of the
father of hosbonds and wives. Cytes. Tresures. buryalles and herytag. this
sign is also unstable. wyndy and waitery she geuynge influence to them the
which be borne under this sign be greose byneth and slender about Saturne in
cancro hath but one fortitude which is. The term Iubyter hath.ii. fortitudes.
The exaltacyo the term Mars hath.ii. a triplicite and a term. The Soon hath
noone Venus hath.iii A triplicite. a term and The face Marcuri hath.ii. The
term and the face and the Moon hath.iii. the hows the triplicite and the
face.

Leo doth govern the heart and ye liver And is a masculine syne. and is hot
and dry like the complexion of colerike men And is in the hows of honour. and
children And doth give influence to them the which is borne under this sign to
be gross above and slender vnderneth the waste Saturne in Leo hath.iii
fortitudes. ye triplicite the face and the term Iupiter hath. iii. The.
Triplicite the term and ye face. Mars hath. ii. the term and ye face The Soon
hath. ii. ye hows Triplicite Venus hath one which is the term And the moon
hath noone.

Virgo doth govern ye entrails or womb And is a feminin sign And is cold
dry leek the earth And complexion of melacoly parsons And is in the hows of
sycknes. And catell And doth give influence to the ye which be borne under this
sign to be beauty full having a fair loving visage Saturne in Virgin hath
one fortitude namid the term, Iubiter hath one namyd the term Mars hath. ii
The Triplicite and the term. The soon hath one which is ye face, Venus. iii.
The triplicite the face, and the term Marcury has iiii. the hows. the
term. ye exaltacion and the face. The Moan hath one which is a Triplicite

Libra doth govern the raynes of the back and ye buttocks and is a masculin
sign and is hot and moist lyek the air And sanguine {per}sons. And is in ye
howses of marriage theffth. strife and robbery. and doth give influence to them
the which be borne under this sign to evil dispoticions onles grace wark
above nature Saturne in Libra hath. iiii. fortitudes. The eraltacyo ye term ye
Triplicite and the term and the face Mars hath one which is the term. The
Soon hath none. Venus hath.ii. The hows and the term. Marcury hath. ii the
Triplicite and the term And the Moan hath one. which is ye face

Scorpio doth govern ye secret members of man and woman. And is a femynyne
sign. And is cold and moyste. lick ye watter the complexio of slewmatick
{per}sons And is in the hows of death fere.

debate. war. det labour chastyte and wit And doth give influence to them the
which be borne under this sign to have a ruddy face slender and small leges.
And great feet Saturne in Scorpione hath one fortitud which is the term
Iubiter hath one which is the term. Mares hath. iii. which be these ye hows.
ye term and the triplicite. The soon hath one which is the face Venus hath.
iii. The triplicite the term the face. Marcury hath one which is the term.
The Moan hath one which is the triplicite.

Sagittarius doth govern ye flanckes And the thyes And is a masculyne sign
And is hot dry liek the fire colorick {per}sons. And is in ye hows of
honour. And master sheep by way of offyce. And doth give influence to them ye
which be borne under this sign to be wise and to have knowledge in. Astronami.
And should have a lunge visage and a big belly and not greatly hered but
suffycyent and straight Saturne in Sagittario hath.iii. fortitudes. The
Triplicite The term and the face Iubiter hath.iii. the hows the Triplicite
and the term Mars hath one which is ye term The soon hath one which is ye
Triplicite Venus hath one which is the term. Marcury hath.ii. ye term and
the face. The moan hath one which is the face.

Capricorne doth govern ye knes. And is a feminye sygne^ And is cold dry as
the earth. and melancholy {per}sons and is in ye hows of lordshep. honour. and
substance And doth give influence to them the which be borne under this signs
to be slender legged. having a dry body a hery face. repletyd with melancolines

Saturne in Capricorne hath.ii. fortitudes. the hows and the term. Iubiter
hath.ii. the term and the face. Mars hath.iiii the exaltacion ye term ye
Triplicite and the face. The soon hath one which is the face. Venus hath the.
Triplicite and the term. marcuri hath one which is ye term. And the moon
hath one which is ye triplicite Aquarius doth govern ye legs bi neth ye knes
to ye feet. is a masculine sign And is hot and myeste as the Aier lyck to
the coplexeon of sauguine me And is in the hows of friendship and substance and
doth give influence to hem the which be borne under this sign to be amiable
how be hit the one leg most comeli is longer than an other or else bigger than
an other and such {per}sons should be a boster and a great waster Saturne in
aquario hath.iii. fortitudes The hows the term and the triplicite Iubeter
hath.ii. the triplicite and the term, Mars hath one which is the term, The
son hath no one. venus hath.ii. the Term and ye face Marcury hath.iii. The
triplicite the term ye face The moon hath one which is the face

Pisces doth govern the feet. And is a feminyn sign And is cold and moyste
as the watter liek to fleumatick {per}sons and is in the hows of heuynes and
enemies and riding bestes. And presonment. And doth give influens to them the
which be borne under this sign to be of alarg breast a little heed and whitly
faced rownderes of good corag Saturne in pissibus hath.ii. fortiudes The term
and the face Iubitor hath.iii. the triplicite the term and the face The son
hath noone, venus stath.iii. the exaltacion the term and ye tryplicite Marcury
hath one which is ye term and the soon hath one which is ye triplicite.

Now her is to be notid for Aspects which be these. A. sextyl a term. A
quartyle a coniuctyon and an opposicyon Ever mor haueng a respect to ye
Aspects of the planetes. And if the Aspects be good of ye moan. the signs
above namyd be good. the matter shall be of affect and if the aspects be evil
of ye Moon the matter will take little affect or none. And which be good
aspects and which be evil. shall be showed in the next capytle after this that
follows.

The.vii. capitle doth show of ye nature of the planetes. and of their
operation in man.
AS necessary hit is to know ye nature of the planetes with there operacione. as
it is to know the nature and operation of the signs. Saturne is the highest
planete which is cold and dry like ye earth having a great interest in
malancoli men. This planet is a masculine planete And his hows in Capricorne.
this planete hath an interest in the clargior spirituallte for he enducithe
diugnite pontificalnes polyce and ingeniousnes. how be it he is a signifier of
such as doth warke in vise handy chraftes. is enimito ye lyf of man for he is
enemy to nature And is a slow planete in fetching his cercuite or
curcunference they yt which be borne under him be slow not quick hasty.
malycyouse except grace warke above nature Saturne doth govern ima Melancholy.
the splen. the gal the bladder And hath a {per}ticipacion of flume And he doth
engender these infrimites. splenyticknes and pricis and the fener etick be
cosumpcyons. Also be is one of the causers of the.iiii. kinds of leprosnes.
The.iiii. kinds of the ydropises The.iiii. kinds of the gowtes. The to kinds
of the palsyes Room descending frome the head to the breast namyd catarrus. And
ye Canker and all manner of sickness in the which is any coldness for this matter
look in the Breuyary of health and in the Introduccyon of knowleg Iubiter is
the second highest planete which is hoot and moist lick to the Air and he is a
masculyne planete having an interest in sanguine persons. and his howses be in
Sagittari and Pisces and he is lord over the temporalte. Specialy of chyualry.
and men of estate. as a veniuoluse planete. how be hit he is so what slow in
fetching his circuit. and they ye which be borne under this planete. should be
manly. comely. gentle and honest. c. Iubiter doth govern in man the lunges the
nature of man and woman. the boones with the cartalages. and these be his
sicknesses. The squince. periplumoia which is an impostume about the lunges.
the plurese the Cramp The Appoplexe. the Litarge the Cephalic and the
Cardiac and such lyek the which doth com by the occasion of blode.

Mars is the therde planete. which is boot and dry leke to the fire. And is
a Masculyne planete. And hath interest in choleric persons. and his howses be
in Aries and Scorpion. and he is full of malice wrath and vengyons. furicuse
and full of bate and strife how be hit he^ is indyfferent infetching his
cercunference. and they the which be borne under this planet except grace
warke above nature should be a lyera robber a morderer furyouse and vengable.
full of wrath and angry hasty and testy and euell disposed And he doth govern
in man woman ye veins and the testicles of man and colet And albumeser saith
he doth govern ye Liver. And I say he hath interest in the gall of a man
woman. And these be his sicknesses the fever t^ciane ye cen^nt wan the causen
and al other hot fevers. hot appostomacions. Also the migrime.

And woman that be delyuerid before their time and all other infirmytes the which
doth com of extrmee hete. The soon is in the mydle of the.vii. planetes.
geuynge as much light upward to heaven as he doth downward to us The son is
hot dry lyek ye fire yet he is a friend to blod singuin persons And his hows
is in the lyon he is a masculin planete beniuolense and good in all things and
a confortor of all terrestrial things And doth induce natural strength and is
a friend to great men of Honour And he doth fetch his cercuite ons in a year. And
they the which be borne under the soon should be strong welfanerd lusti wise
descret and rich. and he doth govern in ma and woman the hart. the brain. the
mari with in the boones the senowes and the sight. how be hit thorough his
vehement hete in somer he doth hurt the head doth califi or chaffith ye blod to
much of ye which he hath vigour and strenght,

Venus is a pulcrus planet. and is cold and moist lycke the watter and hath
interest in blod and fleme she is a feminine planete and her howses be in Tauro
and Libra. she is lady over louyers. and she doth fetch her cercuite almost as
soon as the Some She doth induce love and veneryonsues. And he or she that is
borne under this planete should be a true lover. Loving. Merthe melady and
music loving also syngyng and dawnsyng ^nterludes games sports and gestes
and they should be fair and amiable full of beauty and pleasant. And She doth
govern in man woman the seed of man the rydgboones the loins the matrix and
ye secret parts. and the fames in man and woman and ye smelling. and these be
her sicknesses. coldness of the stomach ye slackness of the liver to digest. the
passyons of the hart the Ilica passio the colyck the fystyls the plies ye
heinerodes ye suffocacyon of the matryx other infyrmytes ye be about the secret
places of ma woman yt commyth of superflug humores, Marcury. is temperatli hot
dry. good with goodness and evil with euylnes. he is a masculyne planete and
his howses be in Gemini and virgo and he doth fetch his cercuyte almost as
soune as the son. He doth induce ingenyosues great knowleg of divers arts.
sacultes scyences. And good in travel and messages doyng. who so that is borne
under this planete should be gentle amabell And a great traveller and good to
send or god in messages and he should expert in seyences. for he should have a
good wytt cast fare in polytyche reason Marcury doth govern ye memory and the
long and the gal. And these be his infyrmytes. the.iii. kinds of madness. ye
iii. kinds of the falling sycknes. The cowgh ye percipitacien of the matrix.
and parturbacio of mind other infirmites the which comes of siceite or drynes.
The Moon is the lowest planete. And is cold and moist lyck the watter. and
hath an interest in flumatyck parsons. and she is a feminine planete and is
mother and a ministrix to all moyster and is lady and gubernatrix ever the sees
and watters and her hows is in Cancer and she doth fetch her cercuite ons in a
mounth. And the doth induce mutabilite. inconstance. Travel. message
embassage. And fortunate to aquatical maters or bysines. they that be borne
under the Moan should not be stabyll wytted. and should be a traveler and seek
strange coutres. The Moan doth govern in man or woman the stomach and the belly
and the secret place of women and hath also an interest in the head. And these be
her infirmites. comocyon trymblyng or shaking of members universal or
{per}ticuler the cardyack the palses such leke. who so ever would have a forder
noticion of the signs and the planetes of their influence or consteltacyon.
let the look in a book that is now a pryntyng at Robert cooplondes namyd the
Introductyon of knowleg. And he that will have the knowleg of, all manner of
sicknesses dysesys let them look in the breuyary of health which is pryntyd at
Wyllyam Mydyltons in flet street.

The.viii. Capytle doth show of the.v. a spretes of the planetes.
AS I said in the.vi. capytle there be.v Aspects of the planetet. A
coniuction. A sextile, a trme A qurtile and an opposicyon. A comunctione
{per}peily is not takyn for an Aspect. sor an Aspect is a dystance of signs.
But planetes centunet. doth not distere by distance of degrees. for a coniuctio
amongst ye planetes is when the planetes doth draw to gydder by lesser dystance
than.vii. degrees. that one of them falldth under the bright beemea of an
other. than it is namyd coniunct to the son. And when the planete doth
drawenygh to ye soon by.xv. degres than is ye planete combustid by ye splender
or beemes of the soon. And than dyuerce times happynith rain as it doth. when
the soon and the Moon be almost to gydder in there orbs or cercles. than in the
end of that moon should be rain This aspect which is a conjunction And first
in order is namyd a beniuolet or a frendful aspect for good to goodness is in
cresyd of a great and high beniuolence and virtue. And if goodness be Iowned to
evil. tha yt euilnes takyth a way half the goodness. wherefore he that will go
about to do any good thig owt to mark the moan specyally if she be coniunct to
good planetes or else seperatid from evil planetes And he that will go. about an
evil or a shrod turn must chose the time when the moon is coniunct with evil
planetes. or else seperatid from good planetes.

The second aspect is a sextyle. that is when the planetes be dystant one frome
another by.vi. parts of the zodiac. as thus in making a similitud of.ii.
planetes. that venus be put in the beginning of Aries. and another planet in ye
beginning of Gemini Or else one in the the mydle of Aries and another in the
mydle of Gemini and so in leke manner of all other Planetes. but this. Aspect is
not {per}fit in frendshep for the aspect is not certin mor opyn but pryne

The therd Aspect is a quartyll. And yt is when a planete hath an. Aspect to an
other planete. by dystaunce of.iii. signs the which dystance is the.iiii. part
of the zodyack. as thus if one planete be in the beginning of. Aries and
another in the beginning of Cancer. Or else one planete in the mydle or end of
Aries. and another in ye mydle or end of Cancer. Such aspect is in{per}fit of
hatred envy and traytery.

The.iiii. Aspect is a tryne. And that is when one planete is dystant frome an
other by.iiii. signs. the which distance is the therd part of the zodiac as
thus, if one planete. Ware in the begynyng of Aries. and the other in the
beginning of Leo this is a manifest and a perfect aspect of frendshep

The.v. Aspect is an Opposition that is when one planete is distant from an
other by half of ye whole zodiac as thus that one planete be in the
begyunyngeo in the middle or end of Aries and the other be in ye beginning mydle
or end of Libra taking both lyek and so is hit in al other signs This aspect
is an evident manifest aspect of hatred of war and other displesures

The.ix capitle doth show of ye mutacio of the Air when any caine. Wynd
thonder hayle frost or snow shall fall.
WHo so ever yt will {per}nosticat of the mutation of the Aier he must first
mark the.iiii. times of the year. which be to sai ver estas Autunus hiems that
is to say, the spring ye somer haruyst. and wyntter. Ver which is the spring by
nature should be hot and moist And in this time blod doth move and in cresyth
with all other natural things, Eitas which is somer is hot and dry than
coler doth move incresith. Atunus or haruyst is cold and dry hath respect to
melancholy, hymns which is wyntter is cold moist has respect to flume.
Secundaryly. one must mark the nature and the qualytes of the signs, which be
moist which be cold And which be dry Cherdly one must consider the nature or
{pro}pertes of the planetes. for the hows of cornscacyon is Iubyter. The hows
of tempests is Mars, if they be coniuct or be in a quartyle aspect both will
hap If. saturne venus be coniunct, or be in a sertyle than hit wylbe cold,
Iubyter is the soon. or in an opposytine aspectt will have grett wynd Marcury
with venus causyth rain Forder more a contucty on of saturne with the moan.
maki^h mutacyon in the Air foreign gross eloudes be elenatyd with cold.
specially when this coniunctyon is in any aquartycal or tereestyall sign. A
coniunctyo of Iubyter with the moon. causyth dyuerce many whyt clouds. A
coiunctyon of Mars with the moon in moist signs casyth rain A coniunctyon of
the son with the moan. causyth rain specyally in moist signs. A coniunctio of
Venus with the moan in moist signs causith sweat dwes and soft rain A
coniunctnon of the moon to Marcury in moist signs causyth rain with Wynd. A
conjunction of saturne with Iubiter.iii. days before or.iii. days after
causyth great mutacyo in the Air. A coniunctyon of saturne with mars in moist
signs.iii days before and after the Air to be coruptyd by the which many men
women chyldryn be infectyd with dyuerce disesis spec^ with the pestylence. And
dyuerce tym^ causyth hayle rain lyghtuynge th^ dryng. this coniunctyon for ma
or woman is moist worst A coniunctio of saturne with the soon. causith cold
rainy wedder A conjunction of saturne with. Venus coniunct in eny aquatycal
sign makyth cold raynes to induce A conjunction of saturne with Marcury in
aquatycal signs causyth rain And in dry signs causy th. drynes, A
coniunctyon of Mars with marcury. in hot sign causyth. Hete in dry signs. in
aquatycall signs rain.

The.x. capytle doth show the Iudiciallnes of the Aspects of the Moan another
planetes what days be good. c.
A Sextile aspect of the Moon to Saturne is a good day to sped matters with
women to take counsel of lernyd men or wise me. this day is good to begin
byldyng or to rehedyfy. good to to till or dig the grown and to set and plant
herhes and tres.

A sextile aspect of yt Moan to Iubiter is a good day for A man to spek to a
spiritual Judge to lawyers. this day after astronamy is good for all matters.

A sextile aspect of Mars to the Moan is a good day to speak to any great man of
nobylyte. and good to comone or talk with strenuose armigernse men of berth. and
good to bay any thing. And to set forth horses with horsemen in war seson.

A sextile aspect of Venus to the Moan is a good day to make a marriage. and to
seek love and fauer of any parson good to speak to any noble parson. A sextile
aspect of marcuri to ye moan is a good dai for a ma to make a copte. to show or
plet his caves good for ama to by or sell or to make merchants. And good to set
chyledryn to lerunyng And good to take a Iurney. and good to make meter or
oracyons or to prech. or rede a lecture.

A sextyle aspect of ye soon to the moon is a good day to mete to salute
kings and princes and to ask or desyer lefull lawful things a good day to
sek owt ye trewth of a matter. good to assocyatt with wise men

A tryne aspect of saturne to the moon is good to be associat or in the
company of old menor women and good to dydg delve or ere the grown or to sow
any seeds. good to plant and to set herbs and good to make fundacyons to byld

A trine aspect of Iubetor to the moon this is a fortunate day for all manner
of matters or causes and very good to spek to judges and men of law specyally
of ye spiritualte

A tryne aspect of. Mars to the moon to be with the company of knights and
squyers and such lick. And to

{pro}cure ordin spare for all things {per}teynyng to wat and good to bay
bestes

A trine aspect of the soon to the moon is a good day to ask a pdon of a king
good to spek to a king {pro}nce lord or counsellets

A trine Aspect of the moan to venus is a good day to geti friends and louets
to make mariags

A trine aspect of the moon with marruri is a good day to reason and to make acopt
and to make bargens with marchaunth and to put children to shoal and to mete with
wise me and good to take a Iurney

A quartil aspect of saturne with the moan let every ma be ware that day a bout
what matter or bisines be goth a bowt.

A quattile aspect of Iubiter with the moan is a good day to cosull with
prelats and judges

A quartile aspect of Mars with the moon is an euell day to sek an fauer or
friendship of knights or squires or of me of war

A Quartile aspect of ye soon with ye moan is an euell day to goo about any great
matter

A Quartil aspect of venus with ye moan is a good day to goo about any thing and
specialli hit is a good day to make a mareg or to get love c

A Quartill aspect of Marcuri with the moan is a good day to send forth
ambassitors or messengers good to take a Iurney good to bai or to sell or to make
marchautes or to make a reckoning or account

Anopposicion of Saturne with ye moan is an euell day to goo about eni great
matter

An opposition of Iubetor with ye moon is a good dai to make sewt or service to
any great man spiritual or temporal or to god to him for any other matter

An opposition of the moan to Mars is an euel dai to take servants or to sek
friend shep for hit is a day of malice anger and strife and war euel for other
matters

An opposition of the moan to the soon is an evil day to medell with great me
or with any great matter.

An opposition of the Moan with venus is a good day in all matters to be don. An
opposition of ye Moan with Marcury is an indifferent day A conjunction of Saturn
with ye men is a (...) day to goo about any great matter ^ to medell with old me
or with ^ or chor lish persons

A coniunctio of Iubiter with ye moan is a good day to make piece and to intrete
for any matter how be hit verite justice will this day have interest.

A conjunction of Mars with ye Moan this is a day of anger of war of strife
and beat wherefore maryd men that hath shrews to their wives must not dysplese
them for fere of after clappes.

A coniunctyon of the soon with the moan is an evil day for all things. how be
it it may be good to do that thing that no man shall know

A coiunctio of ye moan with veus is a good to make a mareges or to get love of
women so couerse and good to hire me women to saruece

A conjunction of ye mon with Murcuri is good to bay to sell to make marchadis to
take a Iurney c

When thee is no aspect night to the moan or far from an euell conjunction yt
day is good for all manner of things

The moan coniunct in the drogons head is very good And coniunct with the tail
of ye dragon is euell

The moan Iunct with good steres is good And Iunct with even sterres is euell

The.xi. capitle doth show of flenbothom* or letting of blod
WHo so ever will chose a day to be let blod in first he must chose a fire
sign which is hot and dry. as ares Sage tari And leo And althowth leo is a
free sign and is the hows of the soon and the soon in nature is contrari to
the nature of the moon for ye soon is hot and dry the moon is cold and
therefore ye hows of the soon which is. Leo in him is no good letting of blod.
Secundaryly he must choose an Aerie sh sign which is hot and most As the
first medieate of Libra. And the wole sign of Aqury. and although yt Gemini
and ye second mediate of Libra be Ayerysh. yet the Galax hath his course that
way in ye which be many sterres of the nature of Mars. wherefore ye mooone being
in that place is combustio And therefore in that signs at that time is not good
to let blod Therdli watterish signs which be moyste and cold begood to let
blod As Cancer pisces, And Scorpio althowght of nature he be waterysh yet not
with stonding he is an oppositiue sign of the exaltacyon of the Moon for
Taurus is the exaltacyon of the moon Scorpio is oppositine in descending of ye
muoe Also Scorpio is the hows of mars wherefore exhaustyng of blod in this thig
is not good Also ye coniunctyon of ye moan with the soon.iii days before
and.iii. days after is not good (...). Nor ye coniunctyon of the move with
sature. Nor ye coniunctyon of the moan with mars and iz. degres before an as
many after. Nor the oppsicyon of the moan with the soon. Nor the oppsycon of ye
moan with Mars is not good to exhaust blod. Also a quatile aspect of the moan
to the soon. And a quartile aspect of the moon to saturne. And a quartile
aspect of the moon to Mars. all these aspects be not good to minishe blod for
the Moon being in these Planetes Aspects is contrary to the nature of ma
consyrnyng flebotomy

A tryne aspect and a sextyle aspect is good to let blod so be hit the moon be
in a good sign Also the moon coniunct with Iubyter in a good sign is best
lettynge of blod The moon coniunct to venus or Marcury althowh they be good
coiuctons yet for as much as the moan is ver^ night the coniunctyon of the
soon hit is not good to let blod Also ye moan being in a good sign having a
sextyle or a tryne aspect to Iubiter or venus. (...) is best to let blod
forthes aspects be good Also the moan coniunct with the heed or tail of the
dragon being with in.xii. degrs before or after is not good to exhaust blod.
Forder more no wayne nor member of man owght to be tochyd or hurt with any
instermnent or Ierne when the mon is in any sign that hath domynyon of ye
member. wherefore in all manner of exhaustyng of blod from man or woman ye day and
the time must be electyd poyntyd by some doctor of physic or Astronamer. what
vain, should be opynyd for and if aman do let blod of a vain namyd cephalica
which is a vain for the head the sign be in Aries. here ye flebothome doth
great harm thorough his ignorance thus in lyek man^ may offend in letting* blod
in any other place of man. Forder more ye.iiii. fire signs be good for slemy
tyck parsones for ye signs be of nature contrary to the complexione therefore
Contraria cotrariis curate. So in liek manner Aierish signs is good for
melancholy me And watreysh signs are good for (...)ryck men And I say now a
days to use letting of blod except for the squynce ye pestylence or for the
kinds of lepery. is not good. for no ma can exhaust evil blod but he must take
good blod with all. And ye leyf of man is in ye blod for ye spryt of man is in
ye blod. And there be other ways to cleanse or to puryfy the blod without
flebothomy or letting of blod

The.xii. Capitle doth show. how when what time a phisicyo should mynyster
medycynes
HYpocrates saith ye phisicion is a blind phisicion ye knowth not Astroamie
for Astronamy doth show how when and what time al manner of medsons owght to be
ministered wherefore I do say if an expulcyue medicine be takyn inferyally. And
the moon being in. Ariete. Tauro. or. Capricorne which takyth their name of
terrestyall beestes namyd. The Rame the Bull and the Goote which hath doble
belys. one is molifycatyue chewing their cud ye other is digestiue mow by reason
of the influence of the celestyal signs of lyek properte. shall cause the sick
parson other to vomyte or else shall cause nauseons or eructuatio. or cause the
substance that is in the stomach to ascend to the orifice of the stomach and
this doth let ye operacione of such medicynes specyally if Saturne by a
quartil Coniuntion or an opposicyon doth give their fortytudes to ye said
signs. Where for let phisicyons be circumspect in these matteres and in all
other. for hipocrates saith in his first pronosticates. There be certyn
celestial thing in the which the phisicyon must {pro}uyd and he must be of
great {pro}uydence. c. Wherefore Auice faith of celestyal terrestyal matters
hapynth.c. Wherefore hit is to conclude that every phis^on should know yt nature
conplexio of ye signs and ye planetes. with ye aspects of them and to have in a
memory the cretyck days. And not to forget ye operacio of the signs which be
attractyue. reten time dygestyne and expulcyne Wherefore I do say that the virtue
of actraction consistith in hete and drynes And he that will confort and help
ye virtue of actracio must do hit when the moon is in a hot sign as in
Sagittary ad Leo. To coforte or to help the virtue of retencyon. is when the
moan is in a cold sign dry as in tauro and virgo. The sucur help the virtue of
dygestyon is when the mon is in a hot sign a moist as in Gemini Libra and
Aquary. To help expulcy ues is when the moon is in a cold and a moist sign
as Cancer Scorpio and pisces. When Venus regnyth in a good aspect to purge
Coler. when the soon doth regne in a good aspect, purge flem me when Iubyter doth
regne in a good aspect, purge Melancholy, When there is a coiunctyon or a quartyle
aspect of saturne with the moan minister tha no medicine for when Mars is in a
coniunctyon. c.



The.xiii. capytle doth show of sowyng of sedes. of setting of herbs. and
planting and Greffyng of trees.
THe moon being in Tauro is good to sow sedes to set herbs to plant and
graff trees takig the time of the year. being in a sextile or a tryne aspect

The moan being in Cancer is good to sow sedes althowh it be a movable sign
And so hit is in virgo having a sextile or a tryne aspect with to Saturne
ptholomy saith in the first of his quadri{per}tites hit is good to plant

The moan being in libra hauig a good Aspect is good to delve dygg to gooe to
plow and to ere and to sow And so is ye moon when she is in caprycorne

The moan being in libra is good to set herbs to plant tres haueg good aspect

Hereis to be notid that all these things is not good to goo about if Saturne or
Mars have any euell aspects

Now to conclude I desire euere ma to take this lytil wark for a past time. for I
did wrett make this bok. in.iiii days and wretten with one old pene with out
mendyng and where I do wret ye signs in Aries in. Taurous in Leo is for my
purpose it stondyth best for our maternal tongue

FINIS
Enprynted at London in ye Fletestrete at the sign of the Rose garland by
Robert Coplande.


