Eccle. 38. Altissimus creauit de terra medicinam, vir prudens non abhorrebit
illam.

BVLLEINS Bulwark of Defence against all Sickness, Soarenesse, and VVoundes
that do daily assault mankind: Which Bulwark is kept with Hilarius the
Gardener, Health the Phisicion, with the Surgeon, to help the Wounded
Soldiers. Gathered and practised from the most worthy learned, both old and
new: to the great comfort of Mankind: by VVilliam Bullein, Doctor of Physic.
1562.

IMPRINTED At London by Thomas Marsh, dwelling in Fleetestreate near unto
Saincte Dunstanes Churh. 1579.

Cicero. 1. Offic. Eos quoru vita perspecta est in rebus honestis, been de Rep.
sentientes obseruare colere solemus.



TO THE RIGHT honourable Lord Henry Cary Baron of Hunsdon, and Knight of the
most noble order of the Garter: William Bulleyn wishes all health, and perfect
felicity in Christ.
MAnkynde, which is called of the Philosopher, Microcosmos, Orbiculus, or a
little World, having in it self, either Misery, Felicity, or a Mean: although
it be of the most beautiful Form, and fairest Shape, excelling all other
living Creatures upon Earth: And also is rightly endued with goodly gifts of
Nature, in whose Brain is fixed the Jewel called Reason, the Mother of Art,
and Science, by whom be wrought, Invented marvelous things, whereby our
eternal GOD is perceived in us his Creatures, more abundantly, than in the
high Lights mooueable, and fixed in the Firmament of Heaven: whose natural
influences be known unto Mankynde. Even so be the virtues of every Creature
here in Earth: as Beast, Foul, Fyshe, Serpent, Trees, Plants, Fruits,
Flower, Herb, Grass, Gum, Stone, and Metal. There is nothing so secret
hidden, within the Mynerals of the Earth, or lurking so lowe under the Floods
of the Sea: but by means, and policy, they are brought to use. Their Names,
Qualities, and Natures are known unto the witty Head of Mankynde: to this
end, to help Mankynde in the time of his bodily infirmity. These hath GOD
ordained by his dyuine providence, that every Creature sensible, and
insensible, should serve his best Creature, Mankynde. Luke. 1.
To this end, that he should serve GOD in righteousness, holiness, al the
days of his life, for these his Gifts. And the Philosopher saith, in libro de
Coelo, Mundo: Deus, Natura nihil frustra agunt: GOD, and Nature doth nothing in
vain, but are ever working, and doing: he the principal cause, and they his
effect. Yet for all these syngular Virtues, gieuen to Man: through the
continuance of time, Calamities of this World, Wounds in the Body, corruption
of the Air, abundance of Humours. c. the same Mankynde doth decay, dye, and
return unto the Dust, and become as though he had never bin: although he be
never so honourable, yea or poor, death doth make equality between them. Every
mans course is appointed, they cannot prolong their time: notwithstanding, Iob.
14.
GOD hath ordained sundry Means, by his Mynisters, to help Mankynde in the
time of Sycknesse, to ease their pains, and heal their Wounds. And I being a
Child of the Common wealth, am bound unto my Mother, that is, the Land in
which I am borne: to pleasure it, with any good gift, that it hath pleased GOD
to bestow upon me: not fo this end, to instruct the learned, but to help the
ignorant, that they may resort to this little Bulwarcke, which I do Dedicate
unto your honourable Lordship. Where they shall not only be defended in the
same, from sickness, and Wounds: but also being wounded, through cruel
Assaulters of this Bulwark, or Sick, here eftsoones they shall have at hand,
all manner of Cordials, and wholesome Salves. Whereby they shall be the abler, to
keep this Hold against all bodyly evils: which I do call Soarenesse, and
Sickness: for whose sakes, I have builded this little Fort calling it my
Bulwark. Not being able to build any bigger work of defence against
Sickness, or evil Diet: as that Man of worthy memory, Sir Thomas Eliot Knight
did, when he builded his Castle of Health, a Book very profitable. Would GOD,
that all Men of Worship in their calling, were likewise disposed to their
Country, as he was, and many more, whose names I do commend unto the Reader,
within this little Bulwark. And although there will be many peradventure,
both malicious, spiteful, and cankered of Mind, that both with slander and
disdain, will lay their Battery, against this Fort: I shall be able ever to
repulse them, through your Lordshippes good aid. For I have builded it very
lowe, wanting neither the strength of Ordynaunce, prouysion of Uictualles, nor
the Policy of most worthy Captains, good Souldeours: as Hippocrates, Galen,
Dioscorides. c. Now finally, I shall most humbly desire your good Lordship, to
take this simple Book, as an Argument of my good Zeal and Love, that I bare
unto you, for your goodness toward me. For if I were otherwise able, to
gratify your Honour, according to my bounden Duty: I would not leave it undone,
as knows GOD, who ever give your Lordship continuance of Honour, and
prosperous Health.

From London. In Marche. 1562. Your Lordshippes ever to command: VVilliam
Bulleyn.

TO THE friendly Reader, VVillyam Bulleyn sends Salutation.
FOr as much good Reader, as four years last past, I promised (in a Book of
mine, called the Government of health, which I dedicated to a Knight of great
worship in the North, called Sir Thomas, the Baron of Hilton) to set forth an
other Book of healthful Medicines: Even so, by the space of one year next
after the same, I travailed to perform my Promise made, so finished my Copy:
which Copy did perish in Shipwreck, so my Labour was lost. And not only my
Labour, but also my Life, by sundry malicious and devilish Inventions, by, and
through one William Hilton: in nature, Brother to the foresaid Baron of Hilton,
but in Conditions, nothing like at all: for he wanted his gentleness, good
nature. Now, after that God had delivered me from the great peril of this Man,
that is to say: conspiring of my giltles death, hurtless life, towards him and
his: Eftsoones this man attempted an other new displeasure against me for debt:
colouring his Malice by a pretence of law. By which Action, finally I was
imprisoned, me thought a long time (for there are but few Ghestes, that have
pleasure in such Innes.) And being thus in Prison, me thought I had not only
convenient time, but also a quiet Conscience, to travel, in renewing my late
Book, or lost Copy, which in deed, I am not able to finyshe, being prevented
with so many Troubles, and Lets of my said Enemy, whose doings at large, I
commit to sylence, least I should seem to write, a Story or Tragedy, or else a
description of his folly, in the place of Physic: no less also can I, but
declare some cause of my let, and why my Book came not forth ere this time.
accordingly as I promised. But blame me not, good Reader, although I put him
in my Book, which would have put me from this Life. And this Book, which I
have done, Gentle Reader, take it in good part, I pray you, for that is my
desire.

First, I have made you a Book of Simples, as Herbs, Fruits. c. For I had
no small pleasure in the natures of them, being moved of the Heathen men, so
to do: whose names do, ever shall remain, among such as read of Simples. Galen
comendeth unto us, ye love cunning ye Orpheus, Museus, Hesiodus, Homerus, Rufus
Ephesius had in Herbs. Who can forget Lysimachus, a worthy noble Capitayn to
Alexander? who, when he was wooded very deep, found an herb which healed him,
called ye same herb, by his own name: Artemisia a noble Queen, called
Mugwort, after her own name. Helena found first ye virtue of Enulacampana.
Gentian was named by Gentias king of Illyria: with many mo noble Men Women,
which delighted in the Flowers, Fruits of the ground whose names for ye most
part you shall find in the Simples. I cannot forget Attalus, the king of the
less Asia, and Euax a king of Arabie, who wroate good Books to Nero the
Emperor: with many good Worckes of Compounds. Among all, Dioscorides a noble
Knight of Egypt, which served Antonius, Cleopatra, like a worthy Soldier in
the Field: and excelled all other in the Noble knowledge of Herbs. c. Let us
not forget, the passing Wisdom of Salomon, who had knowledge most excellent
in natural Philosophy, as well as Moral: and taught the Queen of Saba all the
virtues of herbs. How worthy were Archelaus King of Cappadocia, Agamemnon
Prince of the Argiues, which were noble Kings, yet were they Heathen, saving
Salomon. Whose chief delights, were not in Bacchus Banquets, or Venus Games:
but spent their time pleasantly, in the sweet Fields among Fruits,
Flowers, Spices of delight. Would GOD in such Virtues, the Christians were
their Equals. When you have read the Simples following, then approaches the
Surgeon Plaster, and Salve prepared ready, to make whole the wounded Man
helped by Hippocrates, Galen, and Auicen to finish his cunning cure. Then
comes the Apothecary Nicholaus, with rich Cordials, Pills, Electuaries, and
Purgations of each kind, with his master the Physician, who doth dispense
every Medicine in Time, Place, Quantity, and good order, to his Patient with
good Diet, travel, sleep: and finally, ye perturbacions of the Mind. At
which place good Reader, I should have declared of other Judgements, as Pulse,
Uryne, and the proper Cures of every Fever, afflicting the Body: which
hereafter, by Gods grace, I shall bring to pass, if time will suffer me to
live. And until such time, most gentle Reader, take this in good part, from
the hands of him, who thincketh it well bestowed upon thee, if courteously thou
do receive the same again. Thus fare thou heartily well. Thine ever to his
small power.

VVilliam Bulleyn.

THE AVTHOVRS, captains, and Soldiers of this Bulwark*
Moyses. Dauid. Solomon. Esdras. IESVS Christus. Lucas Euangel. Paulus Apost.
Hippocrates. Galenus. Lysimachus rex Maced. Auicen. Dioscorides. Auerrhois.
Rasis. Ruellius. Isaac. Theophrastus. Fulgentius. Mesue. Paulus AEgineta.
Arnoldus de nova Come. Pandect. Leonardus Euchsius. Conradus Gesnerus. Petrus
Andraeas Matthiolus. Leonellus Fauentinus. Iulianus Moristica. Nicolaus Prep.
Nicolaus Myreps. Ioh. Placatomus. Ioh. Tagaultius. Iacobus Hollerius. Marianus.
Plato de Legibus. Xenophon. Pompeius Mela. A. Gellius. Strabo. C. Plinius
Secundus Persius. Textor* offic. Ouid. Virgil.
XLIII. in number.

Thomas Newton to the Friendly Reader.
DUe proof doth show, so doth Experience teach
That handcraftsmen (when Sun is gone to glade)
If slender light their weary Eyes empeach,
Or hindre them, in that their toiling trade,
(For that their sight is dim with darkness made)
Of custom use to covet open Air,
And bring their work into more lightsome layre.
The Mind of Man in Bodies Prison kept
Is pressed down, and fetired lies full fast*
All rest, all case, all Joy is from it swept,
Unless it be reuiu'de with souereygne taste
Of sacred Lore, or worthy Woork^s forepast:
By which one mean, it bayles it self from Gyeues,
And (maugre Spite) with comfort great survives.
This work thus pend by Bulleins busy brain,
With travail, toil, expense, and mickle charge
(Which proves shows how glad he was fayn^
To help each sort, and set his Mind at large:
As one (saunce f^are) by help of Palias (Targe)
He frankly here unto the learned Crew
Beequeathes and gives with friendly eye to view.
It was at first but roughly hewn out
Himself that time in Prison fast detained,
No marvel the, though scapes faults did sprout,
Sith he the while from liberty was waned:
Yet his goodwill, his skill, and love unfeigned
He kept not back, but offred it to all,
In hope thereby to pleasure great and small.
If God on high had lent him longer days
He would the same have repecus'd again
And brought in frame, as mountain Bear astates
With licking Tongue, her whelps in shope to train:
But gone he is, with Christ above to raygne:
He plainly spake, he plainly wrate also,
His Lyte, and Speech did both together go.
His pleasant Pen, his merry Mind, and Wit
Did most men please, yea all of judgment found:
Tried truth he told, and nail on head he hit:
Examples stoare in all his Books are found.
Whose sap and fruit doth to each sex redound.
Blind Empiricke, no Doggeleach could he brooke,
No cosening Mate, no popishe Clawback^s look.
In lieu of pains thus taken for thy sake,
Afoorde him thanks, and good report withal:
Of Ashes his so may thou some awake,
As pressed as he, t'assist thee in thy thral.
Few faults (I trust) and they but very small
Are left beehinde: God grant to thee, and me
(Good Reader) grace our faults, sins to flee.
1579. Thomas Newtonus, Cestreshyrius.

Ad adyta virtuti aditus.
THE BOOK OF SIMPLES.
Marcellus. FIrst of al, my friend Hilarius, because I have no small grief in
my breast, Azarabaccha or w^de Nardus.
I shall desire you, to show me the nature of an herb called Asaron, which I
trust will help me by the way of vomit.


Hilarius. PLinius remembering this herb lib. xj. cap. xiij. and lib. 21. cap.
6. among al other flowers or herbs (saith he) it is utterly refused,
Azarabaccha is br^ader in Italy, then here in Englande.
not worthy to be preferred among pleasant Garlands, or sweet Nos^gaies,
because of the baseness, and bitterness of his nature. In form saith he, it
is not unlike unto Ivy leaves: notwithstanding it is rounder, softer, and
brother: it is much like unto Vngula, called Foales foot. Dioscorides with
whom none hath ever been comparable hetherunto, for the excellent invention,
and knowledge of herbs, lib. 1. cap. ix. saith that the leaves be of the
foresaid form. And is so hot, that it doth vehemently bite the tongue, but in
virtue it provokes urine, helps the dropsy, and painful ache of the huckle
bone called Sciatica. Six dragmes of the roots of Asaron, sodden in sweet
water, the same water drunken will draw forth the terms in women. Asaron
provokes terms* helps Sciatica.
Galen lib. 6. simpli* medi. speaking of the roots of Asaron saith, they be
like to Acorus, but yt is marvelous it should so be: for Acorus will not
provoke strong vomits, as Asaron will. Therefore Dioscorides hath said the
truth, and Mesue saith, that Asaron hath the virtue of Elleborus, to purge both
up down, Choler* and fleume, which Acorus cannot do so: it is hot, and dry in
the third degree. In Latin it is called Vulgago, it provokes urine, cleanses
the matrix, Asaron doth help the Liver and stomach.
helps the liver from all grie^e, Raynes, Stomach, Belly, and Spleen. c. in
the laud thereof, having these virtues as I have said from Dioscorides, and
Mesue, Marcus Aemilius affirms the same, saying: Asaron in Greek, Vulgago in
Latin, heate, dry in the iij. degree, provokes Urine, and purges terms
menstruoli takes away the pains of the Liver.
Est Asaron Greece, vulgago dicta Latin,
Haec calidae siccae virtutis la esse,
Tertius est illi gradus, vt dicunt in vtro{que}.
Prouocat vrinam, potata{que} menstrua purgat,
Hoc{que} modo iecoris medicatur sumpta dolori:
Here have three notable learned men, declared the virtue of Asaron.
Furthermore, if the juice of six leaves, be strained with a pint of Whale,
specially of Goats milk, and drunk in the morning: This Drink in Summer,
will cast forth yellow Choler, and unnatural Fleume. For in Summer vomets
ought to be taken, to cleanse the upper parts, as the lower mebers be purged,
by electuaries in Winter. Furthermore, 20. Leaves do seen in unjust on, but
other ways three, sower, or five do suffice,
xxx. green leaves steeped in new Wine all the night, and strained in the
morning, drink this against all the abundance of humours in the Breast, or
precordial parts, in this manner. Power this wine into a close pot, with a
piece of fat Pork, and sees the same: then let the Patient eat of the Pork,
and then drink the Wine, or else the Wine may be drunk after the Pork, simply
diluted or steeped all the night with the leaves, and never to be sodden with
ye Pork. This will help the Iaundice, Asaron good against Dropsy. Fe^ers.
and frenzy.
and if it be drunk of any body, which hath a Tercian being first digested:
and specially not on the sick day, it will clean deliver from the said
Tercian: in the beginninges of Hydropsies, Timpani^s, Quotidians, green
Sickness, Quartaynes, Worms, and swelling in the Stomach, there is no better
reamedy, than to drink this, as in the manner aforesaid: For a weak frantic
Brain, coming of an extreme cold, when Melancholy is placed in the masion of
reason, through which, the principal Senses be obscured and darkened: shave
the Mold of the head, and wash the same with Wine, wherein Calamintes,
Rosemary, Lignum Aloes, and Asaron have bin sodden, and then anoint the head
with the oils of Maces, Mintes, and Asaron warm, purging the head with
Pills of Hierae simplex, and abstayning from such meates, as wyllingender
Melancholy, or make exhalation, or Smoke up into the Brain. The juice of
Asaron tempered with Nill, The Arabians call that Nill which we name Visc^m or
Missiltowe Lib, primo Paradox. Cap. xxvj.
called Missiltow, and strained with a little Rosewater, will cleanse the dark
sight of the Even, and make them clear. And thus I end of herb Asaron,
which hath virtue against Choler: would God it had the like effect, to cleanse
Disdain, rankor, malice, so that grace, that most precious herb, might be
replanted again in each mans breast, which the Devil hath supplanted through
pride.


Marcellus. What is Asplenon, called Scolopendrion, or Citrache, and
Hemionitis, leaved like Dragons, and Phyllitis, called Hearts tongue, good for?


Hilarius. Asplenon good for the Spleen.
TO this herb Asplenon, no herb may be compared, for his singular virtue, to
help the sickness, or grief of the Spleen, the place of Melancholy. It is
called Scolopendrion, of a speckled Worm with many feet. This herb is a
small Fern, growing among stones, neither having stalk, flower, or seed: the
leaves be yellow by neath, and green above. There is an other herb of the
same virtue, Hemionitis leaved like Dragons.
for the spleen called Hemionitis, whose leaves be much like Dragons, with
many small roots: these said heroes dye not, be hoate in the first, and dry in
the second degree. Goodly Sirupes are made of them for the Spleen: Diosco.
lib. 3. Capi. 134.
they be very good in decoction for ye same: if one do drink of this herb
sodden in Vinegar, by the space of.40. days, it hath virtue to consume ye
spleen: this herb hath virtue to help the Iaundice, stone, stragury, Galen.
lib. 5. S^. medica. Capi. xij.
hicket, or wind, and Capper barks, Tamarice roots, Scolopendrion, Scilla
sodden by art together, will help the Spleen. There is an herb called
Phyllitis, or Hearts tongue, growing in dark places, which is partly of the
nature of the said herbs, which hath singular virtue, both for man and beast,
to be drunk against poison, and bloody flixes, or flowing of terms immoderat
in Women. But many now a days, have such passions of the Spleen Cankered with
melancholy, The spleneticke love.
corrupted with disdain, and with golden words, loving only from the
Spleen, and not from the Heart, that they give each other the courtesy of the
tongue, without the consent of the heart: and thus I conclude of heartless
Tongue, and Hearts tongue, the one of comfort, the other of decay. Lingua
fallax non amat veritatem, Proverb. 27. d*
os lubricum operatur ruinas.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Wormewodde? that bitter herb called
Absynthium?


Hilarius. Absinthium is a common herb: it is of diverse kinds, as Ponticum,
Wormwood.
and Romanum. c. it is hoate in the first and dry in the second, and it is
very bitter, and being dried, kepeth clothes from worms and moths, and the
Sirupes thereof eaten before wine, preserves Men from dronkenesse: if it be
sodden in Uyneger* it will help the sores that breeds in the Ears: being
laid warm upon it: it is to be drunk against swelling of the Stomach.
And Ophthalmia which is a Syckenesse of the Eyes, is greatly helped with
Wormewodde* Sore ears.
if it be stamped and made luke warm with Rosewater, For the Eyes
and put into a clean Walnut shell: the Syrupe heals the bloody Flux
bound to the Belly: Bloody flux
it doth help a cold Stomach, if it be drunk.x. days, Cold Stomachs.
every morning two spoonful of the Syrupe: it is also good against the
Dropsy. And thus saith Auicen, Figs, Cockle. Wormwood, and Niter stamped
together, Dropsies.
and made in a Plaster, is good against the disease of the Spleen, Auicen.
lib. 2.
and also kills Worms in the Belly, used in the foresaid manner: Simp. 2,
one dragme of the Powder may be drunk at once in Wine: For ye spleen.
it hath many goodly virtues, as the Wine thereof being drunk, against
Dropsyes, coldness of the Stomach, Wind, Swellinges: Wormwood hath many
virtues.
if a handefull be sodden in.viij. pound of clean Water or Wine, in a
vessel of Silver, Glass, or Stone, putting in sweet Calamus, Cynamon, the
flowers of Cassia, Squinance, Spikenarde, and Dates of each..iiij. beaten all
together and sodden, as is aforesaid: or else these things put in a vessel of
new Wine with a linen bag, and so kept close.ij. months, and afterward
drunk of them that have either the yellow Iaundice, pains in the Raynes,
lothesomnesse of the Stomach, stopping of terms, swelling after meat,
continuance of Uomites, cold passions of the heart. c. this virtue hath
Wormwood Wine says Dioscorides, libro qum. Cap. 40. Furthermore gather a. l
i. of Wormwood leaves, and stamp them in a Mortar of stone, and then put unto
the same. l i.iiij. of the best white Sugar, and so beat them together until
they be come to one substance, keep this in a close Pot or Glass. And this is
the virtue thereof, saith that well learned Man Matthiolus, A goodly medicen
for Hydropsie.
it helps the Dropsy, if the Patient eat every day of this half an
ounce.iij. hours before meat, and with this I have known many helped, saith
he, and as for the virtue of the syrupe of Wormewoode, it shall come in his
place accordingly.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Anisseede?


Hilarius. IT is much like unto Fenell seed, and is called Romayne Fenell,
Galen de sim. Opens the Raynes.
it is warm and sweet, and hoate in the second, and dry in the third degree:
the new Seeds be best, it engenders vital Seed, if opens the stoppyng of
the Raynes and Matrix, being drunk with Ptisanes or clean temperate Wine:
this herb or seed is comfortable in sweet compounded medicines or in powder
for shortness of breath, soreness of the lunges: and also is good to be sodden
in Ptisanes, made of Barley, to be drunk in the Fever Quotidiane bred of
Phlegm: it engenders Milk in the breasts drunk with sweet Wine or Milk: it
provokes vryne, makes sweet breath, and is good against the Collike or wind
of ye great Guts, being drunk with good white Wine and Sugar, and also
stops the whites which runs oftentimes from the bodies of Women: the
powder thereof, Tamarix.
with the pouders of Fenell, Gallingale, Spicknarde, Tamarix, Nutmegs, and
Grains of Paradise, called Cardamomum, tempered with Wheat flower, A good
remedy for the runinge of the Raynes.
water and red Wine, and so baked in manchets or cakes, is most wholesome to be
eaten of them which have the running of the Rains, wasting of Nature, moist
Dropsyes, or of them in whom the humour of phlegm doth greatly abound, through
humidity, wind, or cold, and this was proved to help a Lady which was sick
of a Timpany, and was sir Thomas the Baron Hiltons wife, within the Byshopprike
of Duresme, which used this Bread during one half year, and also once a
month was purged with wholesome Electuaries accordingly, and blood letting: and
thus I conclude of Amsseede the best whereof comes from Egypt.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of a Mouse ear, which is like the ear of
Mouse, and full of hair, in form much like the ear of a Mouse?


Hilarius. AN herb commonly known, cold and moist in the first degree as
Galen saith, a decoction of this herb sodden in water with sugar, Falling
sickness.
is good against the Falling sickness, being oftentimes drunk and a leaf
thereof put into the Nose, it will provoke sternutation or neesing, Neesing,
which wonderfully doth cleanse the veins: and sodden in white Wine, Ptisane
or Borage water, with Sugar candy, this is good against pains in the Throat,
Mouse ear helps the Throat.
called Angina, and Dioscorides writes but little of this herb. And Galen
saith, in the.vij. lib. of Simples, that it is dry in the second degree: and it
grows in May upon Hills, Meadows, and Waysides, saith Matthiolus upon
Dioscorides. Furthermore if it be stamped with Madder, and the great Plantein
roots, an herb called Sheperdes purse, and so sodden in red Wine and strained
out, and so put into a little drink warm, this is also good against the
bloody Flux, or a broken Uayne within the Body of one, Against the bloody
flixe.
which hath fallen into some deep place, and this was proved by a yonge man
dwelling in Newcastel, which fell into a deep Coal pit, whose outward wounds
were healed by an aucient Practicioner called Michell a Frenchman, who also is
cunning to help his own country disease, Michell the Chyrurgian of
Newcastle
that now is to commonly known here in England (the more to be lamented) but
yet daily increased, whereof I entende to speak of in the place of the Pox.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Garlyke?


Hilarius. GArlyke is very hot and dry in the fourth degree, Garlic.
it troubles the Stomach of Cholorike men, it is hurtful to the Eyes, and
Head, it increases dryness, Provokes vryne.

Biting of a Snake.

Hemeroydes.


but it will provoke Uryne, and is good to be laid upon the biting of a Snake,
or Adder, it is good for the Emeroydes, applied to the sore place being first
stampte: if it be sodden, the stink thereof is taken from it, Coughs.
but the virtue remains to be eaten against coughs and payne in the Lunges,
it cutteth, and consumes corrupt Fleume, and brings sleep, it is not good
for hot Men, and Women with Children, Corrupt Fleume.
or Nurses giving Milk to Children: but Galen calls it the common Peoples
Treacle. If Sanguyne Men eat much of it, it will make the to have red
Faces, but is a special remedy against Poison, Against poison.
and a hoate Plaster applied to the biting of a mad Dog, made of Garlyke,
helps it: if it be drunk it kills Worms in the Belly. For Tothach
And Garlyke stamped with Mastike, and put into the mouth, doth aswage the
Dolor of the Teeth. Garlyke dried or burnt into Powder, To increase hair.
and tempered with Honey and Bears Grease, is good to anoint a baulde head to
recover hair: and all this and more reports Dioscorides, which excelled in
herbs. Plinius reports, if it be stamped and made in a Gargarisme, it
heals the Angina, it helps the Throat, with Oil of Quinces and so warm
applied to the Belly it is good against the Colic, and the bloody Flux.
New Ale, and Garlyke, kills Worms to be drunk: A medicine for the fistulo.
it is good to be eaten against the Falling evil. And Garlic heals
Fistulaes tempered with Pitch, Brimstone and Rosen, made hoate in a Tent.
These with such like virtues do Plinius, Aetius, Galen. c. report: but it is
a gross kind of Medicine, very unpleasant for fair Ladies, and tender Lylly
Rose colloured Damsels, which often times prefer sweet breathes before
gentle Words: but both would do very well.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Honey, the Fruits of Bees labour, and their
Summers travel?


Hilarius. AVERHOIS saith, Auerhois. 5 Simeon Sethi.
Honey is hoate and dry in the second degree, and doth cleanse very much, and is
a medicinable meat, most chiefly for old Men, and Women, Ill for chollerike
persons.
for it doth warm them and converts in them to good blood. It is not good
for Choleric persons, because of the heate and dryness: they do greatly
err that say Honey is hoate, and moist, but if it be claryfied from his Wax,
and dross, and kept in a close vessel, there is nothing liquid upon the earth
that remains longer. And this precious Jewel Honey hath bin ever more praised,
for it will conserve and keep any fruit, Honey is an heavenly dew.
herb or root, or any other thing that is put into it, an exceeding long
time. Plinius writes of a Monster which was long kept in Honey in Claudius
days. Marvelous is the work of God, Honey being an heavenly dew that falls
upon flowers and leaves as Auicen saith, Auicen. Can. 2. cap. 504.
and is neither Juice of leaves nor fruicts, but only the heavenly dew,
whereunto the Bees in Summer in due time do resort and gather the said Honey,
Bees be an example unto us, both for love and workinge in the como wealth.
and lay it up in store, in their curious houses builded, whereas they dwell
together in most goodly order. O Bees, Bees, how much happier are you than
many wretched men, which dwell never together in unity and peace, but in
continual discord, and vnqui^tnes, as Virgill saith: En quo discordia ciues
perduxit miseros? Virgill.
Behold whither discord hath brought wretched Citizens. But now to speak of
the most excellent virtues of Honey, New Honey.
it is good in the meates of them that be Fleumatike. Honey newly taken out of
the Combs is partly laxative, clarified Honey doth bind, dry up Fleume,
Clarified Honey doth bind
and keep the bodies of Fleumatike and old persons from corruption. The best
Honey is gathered in the Spring time, the second in Summer, but that which is
gathered in Winter is ill, and hurtful. One part of Honey, and some part of
water sodden together until the Froth be all scommed of, An healthful drink
for Summer.
and when it is cold, kept in a close stone Pot, this drink (saith Galen) is
wholesome for Summer, it cleanses the Lunges, and preserves the body in health.
Oximel simplex, and Compos^tum, be made with Honey, Pandect. cap. 347.
and so be many mo things, which be of great virtue. Also the author of the
Pandect, saith yt Honey poured into a new wound yt eftsoones it cleanses and
makes it whole. Honey mingled with a little Salt, and poured warm into the
ear, kills Worms that breed there: The same also kills Lice, if
Childrens heads be anointed therewith. Rub young Childrens Gummes with clean
Honey every day and it will easily cause their Teeth to grow. Honey mingled with
Oil of Roses, and so drunk incontinently, will cause one to vomit when he
hath eaten any venomous thing, as rotten Moushromes, called Fungi. c. Also
Gargarismes and Suppositories be made of Honey, the one doth cleanse the
Throat, and the other doth relaxe the Belly. Serpigo. Cost.

To cure Serpigo.


There is an infection in the skin, through the corruption of the Liver,
which is called Serpigo, oftentimes in the Paulme of the hand, chiefly in the
right hand, specially in Chollerike persons* which is helped with Honey mingled
with Cost, and anointed warm every day twice. To cleanse the Face.
Also the distilled Water of Honey hath virtue to make clean the skin of them
whose Faces be unclean: but most chiefly if it be stilled with strong
Vinegar, Milk, and the Urine of a Boy, and so with a Sponge wash the Face to
bedward, and let it dry in of it self. The goodly Ointment called Vnguentum
Aegiptiacum, which cleanses all corrupt humours, and wounds being rotten
within, the chief thing in this Ointment is Honey: it is marvelous that they
which use to eat Honey daily, daily anoint their Stomachs with Oil of
Wormwood, should either die suddenly, or live painfully, or be euell colloured
in their Faces. The people of Wales do use to drink Mede, Welchmens drink.
and Metheglyne, and under Heaven there is no fairer people of complexion, nor
cleaner of nature, To increase Hair.
Anoynte the head being new shaven with Bears grease and Honey mingled
together, and it preserves the hair from falling. Honey of Roses is a goodly
Medicine, outwardly in wounds, and inwardly cleanses fleume, mundifieth the
Stomach, and opens the mouth of the veins, and also is good to put in the
Eyes to cleanse them.


Marcellus. I Did never here any thing so greatly commended as thou hast
commended Honey: if it be true that thou hast spoken, there be but few things
may be compared to it, for the excellent virtue of it.


Hilarius. BE not in doubt of the truth thereof, for the best Authors have
taught me, Exodus.
and daily experience moves me, thus much to report of Honey: I ought to
think no shame thereof. In asmutch as the God of Heaven, Earth, maker of all
Creatures, did give his people of Israel no greater blessing than a land which
did flow with Milk, and Honey. And often times amongst ye Blessings of GOD,
sweet Honey. is rehearsed. The Prophet Dauid in the Psalmes, doth often name
Honey, Psalmes.
and the Honey Comb, making a comparison between it and the word of God.
In some of the holy Sacrifices, Honey was brought in for an Offering, before the
Lord GOD into his holy Temple, Iudic. 14.
the strong Nazareth of GOD Judge of Israell. That mighty Prince Sampson, loved
well Honey, as appears after he had slain the Lyon, he did eat the Honey
which he found in his Carcass, so did his Father, and his Mother eat of the
same Honey. It was as a divine Omen of the Wisdom and learning that afterward
came unto Plato, when in his Cradel, Bees brought Honey unto his Mouth. Who was
greater among men then S. Ihon Baptist? What was his most food? it was wild
Honey. How many pleasant verses hath Virgill written upon Bees and Honey?
Plini. lib. 11. Cap. 9.
who ever did excel Plinius secundus, in the nature of Creatures, and as it
plainly appearteh in his.xj. book, he declares of a worthy man called
Aristomachus, who so wonderfully loved Bees: and in the same book, saith he,
Xenophon, in his book of Household.
the Bees have many Kings with small Coronets on their heads: about whom the
great agmen or swarm doth cluster and flees into the fields, and comes
home in order, bringing their treasure with them: the elder Bees do build
within the Hyues, The property of a good huswyfe.
having therein a Mistress or Queen to set them to work, which never goes
from home, but places every thing in order: the younger do bring their Stuff
to the Hyue: none of them be idle, every one of them hath a house to dwell
in.vj. cornered in fashion: they will suffer no filthines to be amongst them,
nor strangers to dwell within their City or comonwealth. They also punish them
with stynginge, that hurt their Princes, Bees maintain no strangers, for they
be not profitable.
and they have fore knowledge of weather when it is fair foul. Also they have
senses of smelling, for if any of them be lost in the field, they follow their
fellows by the sweet air, they be scant perfect of hearing* but yet as
appears they hear, when they muster at the sounds of Basins: their greatest
delight is in Time, and Balm, and therefore about Athens is the best Honey in
the World, as Plini saith, and in the Island called Calydna, Plin lib. xj
Cap. xij.
and also in Meleta: would God, saith he, that we had the Honey in the same
nature that it falls from the heavens. Yea rather would to God that Idle
people would take Bees for an example to labour, and Subjects to obey* c.
What shall I speak more of the properties of Bees, and of their good natures,
providence and cunning? nothing else Marcellus, but these simple Uerses
following. A Noble Prince there is, whose wealth and work excel,
More than all other earthly wights, that in the world do dwell.
The king of Bees and his Army.
Saturnus black and cold, hath taught him for to fly,
The hory Frosts and Snowes so white* and darkness of the Sky
Sagittarius, and Pysces, Lord Iupiter called by name,
Doth cunning give unto this Prince, how he his house should frae.
The red and flaming bloody Mars, the Lord of war and strife,
Doth teach this king his host to train, with sharp darts al their life.
O happy Sol with golden beams, whose glory doth excel,
Thou art the candle of this World, and darkness dost expel.
Thou make glad this little King, in fieldd when he doth ride,
No Horse he hath, but wings to fly, thou only art his guide,
When he doth sound his warlike tune, in Hyue where he doth dwell,
His Soldiers muster all on heaps, the Stars they do excel
In number infinite most fair, clear Air doth them infuse,
Dame Flora sweet doth them rejoice, but Boreas them misuse.
With grisly storms and Hayle so harde, he breaks their tender bones,
No helmets have, nor shields they bear, to keep them from harde stones.
When Storms be past and Venus come, the banisher of cold showers,
With pretty Horns, and tender wings, they play among the flowers.
The Bean flowers make them glad, the Lilly makes them gay,
Their chief delight is Time, and Balm, most glad they are of May.
For Mercury doth gieue them mirth, when Twynnes he doth embrace,
From rising Sun to Titans fall, labour is all their grace.
In flowered Fields and Motley meads, where white doth grow in green,
The heavenly dews, that nightly fall, is gathered up of Been.
Jove doth rain from virgiliae this precious heavenly gyfte,
Whom Bees do know, and bear to Hyue, with Wings forth flying swyfte.
And then they make this goodly meat, Manna fallen from Heaven.
The signa.xij. with Bees do work, so do the Planets seven.



Marcellus. Now have you well declared what Honey is: is there also any virtue
in the Combs, or Wax?


Hilarius. GALEN saith, in the.vj. book of Simples, Wax is good for
Plasters, not only in drying, but also in that per accidens, it moisteth, and
is used for outward Medicines, but not for inward and Dioscorides reports
that Wax doth mollify and warm ye body, Dioscorides libr. secundo* Cap.
lxxvij.
and.x. grains wayght drunken with the syrupe of Platein is good for the
bloody flux: it also dries the Milk in Women's breasts: and to conclude,
there be but few Emplaysters yt can be without the help of Wax. It hath also
bin abused in Churches, Chaples, and Teples, offered by the ignorant, before
the blind.


Marcellus. I do know Sage by name, because it doth grow in my Garden and is
used in my Kitchen, but Christ doth know, the virtue thereof is hidden from
me.


Hilarius. This noble herb is called Elclisphacon, Saluia, or Sage, Sage.
and as it should appear by Theophrastus there be two kinds of Sage, the one
of the Garden, which is rough, Lib. vj. Cap. ij. de Plan. Libr. iij.
Dioscorides
long and broad leaved, which saith Matthiolus, I suppose to be the Female
herb: the other Sage which is shorter, and narrower, with two small ears in
the beginning of ye leaves, which the said Theophrastus calls Sphacelo, Lib.
6. Simp.
whom Matthiolus clepes the Male herb, and of this grows great plenty in
Italy in the tops of Mountains, in the noble Countries both of Apulia, and
Calabria: so doth there almost in every Garden in England. This herb is hot
dry, saith Aetius, so saith Galen, and some notable Practicioners do say, that
perfume of Sage doth stop the immoderate Flux menstruall. Agrippa did call
this the hory herb, because it was so good to Women, not only in expulsing
evil matter from the Matrix, but also in retaining the vital seed of
Generation, whereby Conceptione is made perfect. The Juice of Sage helps
Conception.
If a Woman drink the Juice thereof with a little Salt, and Sugar sodden
together, four days before, and after the use with her husband, giving the
man the like quantity, before the time of procreation, without doubt Conception
follows. is said, sometime there was so great a pestilence in a City of
Egypt, that through the Poison thereof few were left a live: but when the
Plague was ceased, the young Women were compelled to drink the Wine, or Juice
of Sage, through whose virtue they were conceived with Children, having the
help of Man: that in the end, the City was replenished again, and filled
with People of their own Generation. Sage, saith Orpheus..iiij. mingled with
clean clarified Honey, and eaten of an empty Stomach, To stop blood running
at ye mouth.
doth incontinently stop the blood that comes from the Breast, Stomach, or
Lunges, breaking out of the Mouth with cruent Uomites. There is a Sycknesse
within the Body, called Tabes, which is a great corruption of humours,
through foul Matter, and Blood mingled together, whose beginnynge comes
from the Head through a continual Rheum, and doth Apostumate, and wound the
Lunges: through whose putrefaction by little, and little, all the Members of
the body consume, through dryness, leanness, and a continual cough, with
pains in the Breast, An excellent Pill against Apostumatio of ye Lunges,
Rheum, or consumption, which helped Bullem the Author of this Book.
and shortness of the Wind: the remedy there of sometime hath bin with Sage
in this manner. Take Spicknard, Ginger, of each..ij. seed of Sage..viij. dried,
beaten fine in Powder, with the foresaid Spices, and..xij. of lunge Pepper in
like manner, and..j. of old Aster, and the Juice of Sage, and so make your Pill
in a clean Mortar, and take every Morning fasting..j. of this, as much at night
drinking after it pure clean Sage water: and this is the best Pill that ever
I did know, and helped me in a great sickness in Suffolke, where sometime I
dwelled. This herb also provokes vryne, cleanses phlegm, expulseth wind,
dries up the Dropsy, helps the Paulsie, strengthens the Sinews, To kill
Canker and quech Robin good-fellowes Fever.
and purges blood: If it be sodden in running water, Roch Alum, and Woodbinde
leaves, it kills the Canker in the Mouth, and also quenches the great heate
and burning, stink, filth, and matter that oftentimes comes through
corruption of nature, or meretrix manner, and doth chance into the Secret
places of Men or Women, which is helped this way, putting in a little of the
Powder of Aristolochia rotunda: forasmutch as it dries, it is put into Pygges,
which be most moist of nature to dry up their humidity or moisture withal,
which else be evil for Flegmatike persons. Auicen. 3. trac. cap, 1.
The incomparable virtue of this herb is excellent, that the great learned
Fathers of Salem, did write these words to the late famous Prince King Henry
the eight, in the laud thereof saying. Curmoritur homo, cui saluia crescit in
horto? Inquiring why mortal Men should dye, which have Sage in their Gardens?
But because no herb hath power to make Men immortal, they say furthermore,
Contra vim mortis, non est medicamen in hortis. And thus I do conclude of this
virtuous herb Sage. Whose Wine being daily drunk, is good against the
falling sycknesse. And the common Sage Ale, ryghtly brewed with Sage,
Squinance, Spicknarde, Calamus, Fenell seeds, and Betony, is very wholesome for
the Flegmaticke, Dropsy, wind Collike, and rawnesse of the stomach with
indigestion.


Marcellus. What be the virtues of Onyons in their kinds?


Hilarius. THey do make thyn the Blood, and bring sleep, they be not good
for Choleric men. Onions provokes sleep. Lunge Onyons.
The lunge Onion is more vehement then the round, and the Red more then the
White, the Gray more then the Green, and the raw more then the sodden, or
preserved in Salt, although they cause sleep very painful and troublous,
Green sickness.

To cleanse ye Stomach.


be hot in the third degree, but they warm and cleanse the Stomach, bring
good Colour to the Face, and then they must be good for the neewe Green
Sycknesse, and do very well provoke Uryne, and being roasted, and warm
applied to the Painful harde Emeroydes, eftesoones do open them (if vinegar
warm be put to them) and being clean pilled or taken from the over rind and
Skin, and cut of both the ends, Onions do heal the Emeroydes.
and cast into water, remaining in it one howre, and slicesed: these do take
away the vehement sharpness, that else would hurt the Eyes, and Head, For
biting of a Dog.
and being applied with Honey, Rue, and Salt, all incorporated together to the
wound bitten of a Dog, do heal it soon. Leekes purge the blood in Marche,
and payne the head, and be not greatly praised, for their Juice is evil,
Leekes.
saith Dioscorides. The head being anointed with the Juice of them, keeps
hair from falling, Hair from falling.
there is much variety of this Onion among Wryters, saith Plinius, but this
shall suffice, for us Englishmen. There be great plenty of good Onions that be
brought from Flaunders, Where plenty of Onions do grow.
called saynct Homars Onions. So there be very many growing in Holland in
Lyncolneshyre, and in the Town of Duresme in the North country.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Fenell?


Hilarius. IT hath power to warm in the third degree, and dry in the first,
and makes sweet the Breath: Foeniculum. Sweet breathes.

For the Eyesight.


the Seed eaten oftentimes upon an empty Stomach, doth help the Eyesyght.
The Roots clean washed be very wholesome in Potage, and good in Ptisants. The
green or red tufts, growing upon the Stalks, sodden in Wine, Potage, or
Ale, To break (...) Stone.

Increases Milk.

To wash Feet.


help the Bladder, Raynes, and break the stone, increases Milk in Women's
Breasts, and Seed of Generation. It is good to use Endyue, or such like with
it, because it is very hoate, and it is very good to wash ones Feet to
bedward. It is good in Barbarians Bathes, and washinge Water, with Balm, and
Baize. The syrupe is very good and wholesome, An excellent medicine of Fenel,
for the Raynes and Bladder.
it helps a Flegmatike Stomach. And Fenell, Parsely, Watercresses, of each
like quantity stamped together, pouring white Wine to them, and the crumbs of
Barley bread, standing all one night in a stone Mortar, the next day being
strained, Clarifyed, and drunk, this will cleanse the Raynes from Gravel,
Stone, and Choler, For fat folks.
and cause one to make much Water that hath the Strangury. Two kinds of
Fenell.
It is good for fat Men to open the vessels, as Uaynes, and Guts. There be
two kinds of Fenell, one Marathrum, which is best: the other Hippomarathrum
which is Wild, the Seed hath greater virtue then the root.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Purslan?


Hilarius* Cold in the third, moist in the second degree. Purslan is an herb
of a singular virtue to cool, or quench Choler.
If it be stamped with steeped Barley, it makes a good plaster to cool the
Head, Eyes, Liver, in Agues, and hoate inflammations. To eat of it, stops
fluxes, quenches burning Choler, extinguishes venereous lust, greatly
helps ye Raynes, and Bladder, and will kill round Worms in the Belly: and
comfort the matrixe, against hoate choler, and terms abounding. And the
juice is good to drink in hot Fevers: it may be preserved with Salt, and then
it is very good with roasted meates. Plini saith, it is supposed to make the
sight blunt and weak: An example of Purslan.
Further he saith that in Spain, a great noble man, whom he did know, did hang
this Purslane root on a Thread, commonly about his neck, which was troubled of
a Vuula, and was healed therewith.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Dragons?


Hilarius. THe juice of Dragons, saith Dioscorides, dropped into ye eyes, doth
cleanse them, Of Dragons which help against the Pestilence.
causes much brightness unto the eyes of them, which have dark sights. The
Water of this herb, hath virtue against the pestilence, if it be drunk blood
warm with Uenice Triacle, or Mithridatum. The savour of this herb is hurtful
to women newly conceived with Child. Plini saith, that who so bears this
herb upon them, no venomous Serpent will do them any harm. This herb is
hoate dry, and being sodden in Wine, it heals a kibed heel, called Pernio.
And this herb being bruised, and applied with Plantein, heals a new wound.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Filipendula?


Hilarius. Filipendula hath round roots hanging upon small fine thredes in the
earth.
IT is called Filipendula, because it hath small round roots, hanging upon it
with thredes in the ground, it is an herb hoate dry, in the third degree: if
it be sodden in white wine, drunk, it dries up windy places in the guts,
and cleanses the rains of the back and bladder. And the powder drunk in
Wine, is good against the falling evil, and helps the yellow Iaundice: the
leaves and stalks sodden in Wine and drunk, cleanse the secondes.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Violettes?


Hilarius. SIMEON SETHI reports, that they do help against hoate
inflammations of the Guts, Violets be great coolers and to cold for the
heart.
head, and stomach, if the cause be of burning Choler: either the Water,
Sirup, or Conserve of the said Violets, being eaten or drunk, after the
digestion of any hoate passion: but undoubtedly it offends the hart, because
of ye great coldness. The savour of the Flowers be pleasant. The Oil that is
made of this herb, hath virtue to reconcile quiet sleep to them, which have
grievous hoate payne in the head, Good for Coughs and shortwinde.
Violet water, and clean Sallet Oil, of each one uncle together drunk,
cleanses rotten matter in the Stomach, and Coughs, or payne in the Lunges.


Marcellus What is the virtue of white Lillies, and water Lillies called
Nimphea.


Hilarius. DIoscorides says, that the Oil of Lillies doth mollifye the
Sinews, and the mouth of the matrix: ye Juice of Lillies, Vinegar, and Honey,
sodden in a Brazen vessel, doth make an ointment, to heal both new and old
wounds: if the Roots be roasted, and stamped with Roses, they make an healing
plaster against burning of fire: the same root Roasted, hath virtue to break a
pestilence sore, applied hot unto the sore place, and is dry in the first
degree. The oil of Water Lillies, is moyste, sovereign against all hot
diseases to anoint the ardent and hot places, and doth reconcile quiet sleep,
if the forehed be anointed therewith it is wholesome for mad men. The seed and
root sodden in wine, stops the immoderate flux menstruall, and the bloody
Flixe, as Dioscorides and Galen say Libro viij Simplicium Medicamento^um.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Chickweede?


Hilarius. ALmost every ignorant woman doth know this herb, but there be of
diverse kinds of it, Anagallis o^ morsus Gallinae, called Chickweede.
they be very good to keep wounds fro apostumations, stamped, and applied unto
them, and draw corruption out of wounds: and sodden with Vinegar, do draw
fleume out of the head if Chickweede be often warm, put into the mouth, spit
out again, in the same manner it helps the teeth, and sodden in wine, and so
drunk, it will cleanse the raynes of the back.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Sorel, which in the North is called Sower
Docks.


Hilarius. Every one doth right well know it, and al they that make greensauce,
but the description, I leave to Dioscorides, Rumex, ^apathus, or acedu is
Sorel, an Sor^ll de bois.
and Leonardus Fuchsius, not only in this herb, but in all other, and to tell
the virtue I will: it is cold and dry, in the second degree, it also stops:
it is like Endiue in property, because it ouercometh Choler, and is much
commended. It helps the yellow Iaundice, if it be drunk with small wine or
ale, and also quenches burning fevers: to eat of the leaves every Morning
in a Pestilence time, is most wholesome, if they be eaten fasting. This herb
doth Dioscorides, Galen and Auicen greatly commend, besides the great learned
men of this time.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Planten or VVaybrede?


Hilarius. THe greatter Planten is the better, it hath seven great veins, it
is cold and dry: Plantago called arnoglosia.
the seeds drunk with red wine, or the roots sodden therein, stop the
bloody flux, likewise the roots and leaves being sodden with fair water, or
with Burrage water and Sugar, and given to him yt hath an Ague, either Tertian
or quarten, two hours before his fit, helps him. Prove this, for thus have
I helped many, it is very comfortable for children that have great fluxes
and Agues, and is a friend unto the Liver. This herb is greatly praised of the
learned wryters. Water Planten roots, leaves and buds be wholesome to be drunk
against the falling sickness.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Camomill?


Hilarius. THis herb is very hot, it is drunk against cold winds, and
matter being in the guts, the Egiptians did suppose it would help all cold
Agues, and did consecrate the same as Galen saith: also if it be tempered and
strained into white wine, and drunk of women having the child dead within
their bodies, it will cause present deliverance: it doth mightily cleanse the
bladder, and is excellent to be sodden in water to to wash the feet, the Oil
is precious, as is declared hereafter.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Hoppes?


Hilarius. THere be Hoppes which do cool, that be called Lupuli: those that we
have be hoate and dry, Lupul{us} Salictarius, be ^oppes
bitter, sower, hot, saith old Herballes, and Fuchsius saith, they cleanse
Fleume, and Choler, and the Water between the skin and Flesh. The syrup will
cleanse gross raw Fleume fro the guts, and is good against obstructions. If
the Juice be dropped in the Ear, it takes away the stink of Rotten Sores,
the roots will help the Liver, and Spleen, being sodden and drunk, the Beer
is very good for Flegmatike men.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Horehounde?


Hilarius. IT is an herb hoate and dry, if it be sodden with fair water,
Sugar or Honey, and strained, this drink doth cleanse the stomach from stinking
fleume. It is an excellent herb for women to cleanse their Monthly terms.
Stinking fleume.
The water of this, is good to help them which have a moist Reume falling from
the head upon the Lunges, being often drunk, To help a moist reume.
but it is hurtful to the bladder raynes, the syrup thereof doth cleanse the
kings evil. And also put into the ears it doth greatly comfort the hearing,
if ye ears be troubled with deafnes: stamped with honny and applied to the
eyes, it cleanses the sight. Kings evil.
To help the sight.



Marcellus What is the virtue of Ueruen. Ueruen.



Hilarius. IT is called the Holy herb, it dries and binds: if it be sodden
with Vinegar, it helps a disease called. S. Anthonies fire, Wild fire
oftentimes washing the pained place. The leaves of Ueruen, and Roses, To keep
wo^des from corruption.
and fresh Swynes grease stamped together, will cease payne and grief in
every wound, and will keep wounds from corruptinge. It is good for peopel that
have the Tercian, and Quarten Agues, thus saith Dioscorides. Against Agues.
Moreover he saith the weight of a, of this herb with three halfpeny wayghtes of
Olibanu, put into.ix. of old wine tempered together, and drunk forty days
in this quantity fasting, it will help the disease called the kings evil, To
help the Kings evil.
or payne in the throat.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Rice? Rice.



Hilarius. There be many opinions concerning Rice, Auice, in ij. can. Cap*
78.
but I shall staye my self with the Judgements of Auicen. Rice saith he, is
hot and dry, hath virtue to stop the Belly, it doth nourish much, ^it be
sodden with Milk, qut it ought to be stepped in water an whole night before.
If Blaunched Almons be stamped with Rose water, and strained into them, and
sodden with Cowes milk, it is very much nourishinge: the Flower or Meal of
Arza or Rise, stops the bloudye flyxe, in drink or Clister.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Peas and Beans* Beans*



Hilarius. Beans be more grosser and fuller of wynd, then Peas be, and make
evil matter, except they be well sodden and buttered, and so eaten with the
whitest Onions that may be gotten, because they be hard of digestion: how be it
they do make fat, and partly cleanse, To make fat.
yet they are not compared with tender white Peason, well sodden and buttered,
or else made in pottage with garden Mintes, and gross Pepper which have virtue
to cleanse the raynes of the Back and bladder, There is a place in Suffolke
called Orfort, where Peas grow on the stones, never sown. Lintelles be of the
same virtue. Barley being clean hulled, and sodden with milk, clean water
and Sugar, makes a very wholesome and comfortable potage, for whole Choleric
persons, or young people, and this is much used in the North parts of England
and is called Big Keale, and of clean Barley and pure water, Ptisant.
is made that excellent water. called Ptisant.


Marcellus. Beats.
What is the virtue of Beetes.


Hilarius. White beetes
THere be of two kinds, and both be praise worthy. Simeon Sethi writes, that
they be hot and dry in the third degre, the white be the best, Purging the
head.
they have virtue to cleanse, as Niter hath but are of evil juice: ye juice of
this herb with Honny, applied into the Nose, do purge the head, so doth the
leaf, it is an holsom herb in pottage, if it be well sodden, or else noisome to
the stomach, if it be parboyled and eaten with Vinegar, it is good against the
stopping of the liver, Stoppinge of the Liver.
not withstanding the juice of this herb doth stop the belly being symplie
taken. It is called Beat of Beta, or Ueta the Greek. B. because of the form
or shape.


Marcellus. Betony.
What is the virtue of Betony?


Hilarius. THey be of diverse kinds Leonardus Fuchsius, doth call the sweet
Giloflowers by the names of Betonye, but he seems to talk of that which is
commonly known of the people, To kill worms,
called the land Betony, which hath virtue to kill worms within the belly,
helps the Quarten, cleanses the Matrix, For Bruses.
and hath virtue to heal the Body within if it be bruised: it is of so great
effect, if it be sodden with Wormwood in white wine, as to purge Fleume, it is
hot in the first degree, and dry in the second.


Marcellus. Sauery.
What is the virtue of Sauerie?


Hilarius. IT is hoate and dry in the third degree, if the green Herb be
sodden in water or white wine, Liver soft. Cold coughs. Dead children.
and drunk, these be his virtues: to make the Liver so it, to cleanse Dropsies,
cold Coughs, to cleanse women's diseases, and to seperate the dead child from
the mother, as Dioscorides and Galen say: also Germander is not much unlike in
virtue to this herb.


Marcellus. Mustard.
What is the virtue of Mustard or Sinapium.


Hilarius. PLINIVS doth greatly allow it, saying, that there is nothing doth
pierce more swifter into the brain then it doth. Honey Vinegar, To Gargarize
the head.
and Mustard tempered together, is an excellent Gargarisme to purge the head,
teeth, and throat. Mustard is good against al the diseases of the stomach, or
Lunges, wind, fleume and rawnesse of the guts, and conduces food into the
body, Falling sickness. Palsy.
provokes urine, helps the Palsy, wastes the qua^ten, dries. up moist
reumes, applied playsterwise unto the head. Honey and Mustard helps the
cough, and is good for them that have the Falling sycknesse: And tents of
Vinegar and Mustard put into the nose help the Palsye. Notwithstanding the
common use of Mustard, Evil for the eyes.
is a cruel enemy unto ye eyes: many more virtues have I read of Mustard, but
the occasion of time hath vnhappely prevented, not only my large description
in this, but also in many other Simples.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Senetion or Groundesyll? Senetion.



Hilarius. IT is of a mixed temperature, it cools and partly cleanses. If it
be stamped and sodden in water, and drunk with your Pottage, Hot Collar in ye
stomach* To help the eyes.
it will purge hot Choler: this done with Saffron and cold water, stamped and
put into the eyes, it will dry the running drops of them: and prepared ^laster
wise, it helps many grievous wounds. Dioscorides says, that the heads of
Senetion with the flowers, and a little wine and Manna, Dioscorides lib iiij.
cap. xcij.

For wounds


tempered together, heals the wounds, that be in the synewes. The flower of
this herb, hath white hair, and when the wind blows it away, then it
appears like a Bald headded Man, therefore it is called Senecio.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Cucummers* Cucummers?



Hilarius. THey be (truly) in the second degre very moist, and cold the
Seeds be very good to be given in hot sicknesses. The powder of the same
Seeds drunk in clean Wine, are good against diverse hoate passions of the
Heart, To provoke vryne,

Uomit.

Good blood.


This Fruit will cause one to make water well. The root dried, and the powder
thereof drunk in water and Honey, provokes vomit. If they be moderately eaten,
they bring good blood. Tempered with Honey, Epinictides*
and the Eyes there with anointed they help a disease called Epinictidas,
which troubles men with strange syghtes in the Night: the best of this fruit
is yt which bears ye best seed ye savour of them is holsom. Melons, citruls,
Pompeions, Raw herbs*
this kind of Pepins, or great Apples, be much used in England, and are more
common the profitable, because they use to eat the raw, Englishmen being born
in a teperat region, enclyning to cold, may not without hurt eat raw herbs,
roots, and fruits so plentiful, as many men which be borne far in the South
parts of the world, which be most hoate of stomach: therefore eat these
fruits boiled, orels baked with Honey, Pepper, and Fenell seeds, or such like:
there be an other hot kind of bitter Cucummers, which do purge called
Colocynthis. The Apple being steeped in Ptisant water, during Twelve hours,
and so strained, drunk in the Morning half a pint, doth purge Melancholy,
and Choler adust and vitriall fleume, but it is a very gross purgation, but
ye Trochiskes of Coloquintida are better to purge with. Coloquitide*
But.i of the Powder of Coloquintida sodden with Mirth and Ote water, Honey to
a thickness, makes a goodly Pil to purge Fleume and choler, it is good in
Clisters, Dioscorides. lib. iiij. capit. Clxx.
for the same purpose, sodden with vinegar, this kept in the mouth, kills
worms in the teeth. The Oil of this is good to anoint the pains of the Huckel
bone called Sciattica, It also kills worms in the Ears: this is most
bitter to the mouth and stomach, it kills worms in the Belly, Matthiolus
super dioscoride.
both in Emplasters and drink. The Arabians cal this herb Chandel, but in
Laten it is called Cucurbita Syluestris.


Marcellus. Cabage.
What is the virtue of Cabage or Brassica?


Hilarius. CAbage is of two properties, of byndinge the Belly, and making
laxative, Ius Brassicae soluit, cuius substantia stringit.

To bind laxative

To cleanse Leprosy.

Aristote.iij. probl. Auicen.ii. caRasisiij. Al.


the juice of Cabages, lightly boiled in fresh Beef broth is laxative, but
the substance of this herb is hard of digestion, but if it be sodden twyse,
the broth of it will bind the Belly, if it be tempered with Allume: This herb
hath virtue to cleanse a new Red Leprosye, laid upon the sore place, in the
manner of a Plaster, but to conclude of this herb, ye broth of it hath virtue
to keep a man from drunkenness, as Aristotle, Rasis, and Auicen do report,
eaten before meat or drink. And this is good to make Pottage withal, and is
a profitable herb in a common wealth, which the Fleminges sell dear, but we
have it growing in our own Gardens, Dioscor. li. 4.
if we wold prefer our own commodity, before ydlenes, and not suffer weeds
to grow where herbs should be planted. If Fenegrike and this be sodden
plaster wise, it helps the Gout, The leaves sodden with Honey, heal ulcers
and Cankers, and kill worms in the Belly, there be sundry kinds of wortes,
both Garden, Field and Sea, much like to each other in virtue. There be
great plenty growing between Albrought and Horthforde in Suffolke upon ye Sea
shore.


Marcellus. Few called Herb grace.
What is the virtue of Rue, or herb of Grace?


Hilarius. I Tel thee this herb* is very hot and bitter, and doth burn,
because of his hotenes in the third degree. If a little of this Rue be stamped,
and sodden in wine, and drunk, it is an excellent medicine against Poison and
Pestilence. Roses, Vinegar and Rive stamped together, Poison Payne in the head.
and put into a Forehead cloth or Big and applied to the Teples of the head,
or Forehead, do cease grievous pain in the head. And in like manner it helps
the bytinge of Serpents, and of Dogs, stamped with vinegar, many nice people
cannot abide it, crying fie it stinks. The sede of this herb beat in powder
put in fresh clarifyed Butter, Against biting of Dogs and serpets.
and Pitch melted together, is good for them to drink that are bruised The
seed of this Rue being dried and beaten into powder, with ye pouders of sweet
Calamus and long Pepper sodden in white Wine, drunk warm helps the wind in
the small Guts. Buleins experience many times.



Marcellus. What is the virtue of Lattice Lattice.



Hilarius. IT doth mightily increase Milk in women's breasts, To increase Milk
therefore it is called Lattice, as Martial saith, first shall be given to the
virtue and power, to increase milk in women's breasts every howre. Comfort
against hoate cholic^ in the stomach.
Lattice is an herb cold and moist and very comfortable for a hot stomach,
brings sleep, mollifyeth the belly, the dryer it be eaten the better it is.
I mean, if it be not much washed in water, adding clean Salet Oil, Sugar
and vinegar to it, it abates carnal lust: and much use of it dulls the
sight. Ill foresight. To abate the Lust.

An increase of seed.

Broke bones Cough.

Dioscor. lib* ij* Cap. cxxxliij.


The seed is precious against hot diseases, drunk with Ptisantes. There is
an herb called Rocket gentle, that partly smells like a Fox, which is very
hot, an encreaser of seed, this herb must always be eaten with Lattice. The
root thereof sodden in water will draw forth broken bones, and will help the
cough in young children, the seed doth vehemently expel vryne, drunk in
white wine, and kills woormes: and tempered with an Ox gaul, doth cleanse
black spots in the face or skin after strypes.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Mintes? Mintes



Hilarius. MIntes be of two kinds, garden and wild Mintes, Stoppinge of vomits.

Repletion.

To kill worms.

Bytinge of a Dog.

To help the Collike.


they be hot unto the third degree, and dry in the second degree Garden
Mintes be best: the powder of this with the juice of Pomgranets, stops
vomits, helps sighing, cleanses hot choler. Three branches of this sodden
with wine doth help repleation, being drunk fastinge. This juice tempered
with good Triakle, eaten of children in mornings, will kill worms, and stamped
with salt, and applied to the bytyng of a Dog, will heal it. It is wholesome
sodden with wyndy meats Peason c. and sodden in posset ale with Fenel, it
increases vital seed. It is not best for Chollerike complexions but good for
Fleumatike and indifferent for Melancholic, and it will stop blood, stamped
and applied to the place: the juice of Mintes be best to mingle in a medicine
against poyso: To make sweet brea^h.
ye powder of Mints are good in pottage to help digestio, and to make sweet
breath.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Dandelion, or Lyons teeth* Dandelion.



Hilarius. IT is temperate, cold, and dry: The head. Sowthistell ^o loa^e
the^ belly.
with Roses and Vinegar tepered together, it helps the head in hot
diseases, the sowthistle called Sonchos hath ye same virtue so hath Cicory: if
they be sodden, the loose the belly quenches heat which burns in the
stomach, Yellow choler

Burning Agues.


and defends the head from hot smoking vapours, and purges yellow choler,
and rebates venerous fleshly heat, is good to be sodden drunk in hot burning
Agues: though this herb be commonly known and counted of many as a vile wed,
yet it is reported of Dioscorides to be an excellent herb, is called Lyons
teeth.


Marcellus. Hysop.
What is the virtue of Hysope?


Hilarius. AN herb commonly known, growing in gardens, and hot in the third
degrre: it hath virtue to make humours thin and warm: Dioscor lib. 3.
sodden with Figs, Few, and Honey, in clean water, and drunk, greatly
helps the sickness in the lungs old Coughs, Sickness in the Lunges. Old
coughs, Rotten humours.

To help the Spleen.


rotten humours, drippinges upon the lunges, sodden with Eris, and Grains of
Paradise called Cardamomu, it mightily purges and brings good colour.
Figs, Salt Nitrum, and Hysope stamped together, and applied to the Spleen,
help it much, and take awoy the water that runs between the skin and the
Flesh: sodden with Oximel it cleanses flewme. Howe be it, Galen writes but
little of this herb in his eight book of Simples, Fleume.
but saith that it is dry and hot in the third degree. But this herb was
used in the old Testament, in the old time of the bloody Sacrifice. And the
holy prophet in his. li. Psalm, says unto almighty God? Sprinkle me oh Lord
with Hysope c. God grant us all to have such blessed plants of that Hysope in
our gardens, which have virtue to heal all sicknesses of the Soul, defiled
with sin.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Wine?


Hilarius. HIPPOCRATES says, of a customable thing comes lesser hurt than
of things not used, Hip in ij. lib. Apha^i.
whereof I gather that they which drink wine moderately with measure, it doth
profyt them much, and makes good digestion, but those people that use to drink
wine seldom times, be distempered. Digestion.
White wine if it be clear, is wholesome to be drunk before meat, White wine.
Auerhois in.6. colig. Rasis in li. 26. con. ca. 1.
for it preserves the body and perseth quickly to the bladder, but if it be
drunk upon a full stomach, it will rather make opilation, or stopping of the
Meseraikes, because it doth swiftly drive food down, before nature hath of
himself digested it: and the nature of white wine is of less warmness.
Claret wine warms the Body.

Galen lib. de tu. sani ca. 9. Wine is an ennemy to children.

Red wine corrupts blood


The second wine is pure Claret, of a clear Iacint or yellow colour: this
wine doth greatly norish and warm the body, and it is an wholesome wine with
meat, and is good for Flegmatike folk, but very vnholsome for young children:
for Galen saith Vinum pueris inimicum, because it heats above nature, and
hurts the head. Nor for them which have hoate livers, or pains in the head,
occasioned of hot vapours, or smokes* for it is like unto fire, and flax. The
third is black or deep, Red wine which is thick a stopper of the belly, a
corrupter of the blood, a breeder of the stone, hurtful to old men, Auicen
in 3. prim. 2. doc. cap 8.

To know good wine.


and profitable to few Men, except they have the bloudye flux. And for the
Election of wine Auicen saith, that Wine is best, which is between new and
old, clear, declining somewhat to Red or Amber, of good odour, neither
sharpe nor sweet, but equal between both, for it hath virtue not only to make
humours temperate, warm and moist, but also to expel euell matter, which
corrupts the stomach and blood: In Summer it ought to be delayed with pure
clean water, To know good Wine.
as Aristotle saith in his Problems: and note this, that in dry years, wynes
be best and most wholesome: but in watery years, the Grapes be corrupted, which
wine doth bring to the body many evil diseases, as Dropsies, Timpanies,
Fluxes, When Wine is best.

Galen. in Regacu.


Reumes, winds and such like, as Galen saith: And thus to conclude of wine,
almighty God did ordain it for the great comfort of mankind, to be taken
moderately, but to be drunk with excess* it is vnholsome and is Poison most
venomous: it relaxeth the sinews, brings Palsy, Wine moderatlye comfort.
Falling sickness, in old persons, hot Fevers, Fransies, Fighting, Lechery,
and a consuming of the Liver to the Chollerike: and generally there is no
credence to be given to drunkardes, although they be mighty men. It makes men
like unto monsters with countenance like to burning coals. A glass for al
excessive. wine bibbers to look in.
It dishonoreth noble men, and beggereth poor men, and nearehande kills as
many as be slain in cruel battayles the more it is to be lamented. Plato in
secundo de legibus. Plato in 2 legibus.
commanded that none under.xxij. years old should drink wine. And this wise
man doth show a reason saying: Non oportet ignem igni adiscere. One fire ought
not to be put to an other or coupled together for they will devour each other,
because there is no mean between them, but extreme in one degree. Prouer.
xxxj.
And the words of king Lamuel be these against drunken Princes or Judges:
Noli regibus o Lamuel, noli regibus dare vinu, quia nullum secretum vbi regnat
ebrietas, no forte bibat obliuiscantur iu^ciorum, mutet causam filiorum
pauperis. c. Oh Lamuel it is not fit for Kings, it is not for kings to drink
wine. For there is no secret* where dronkenes reigns, least they being drunk
forget the law, and pervert or change the Judgement of poor men Children.
Lethi ^ Flood whose water did cause men to forget them selves when they druk of
it
Give wine to such as be condemned to death, and Wine to such as Mourne^,
that they may Drink it and forget their misery and adversity. I conclude
that wine is wholesome for cold complexions and crude stomachs, euel for
choleric, immoderatly taken* a prince to princes, and a confounder of Judges,
and finally the flood of Lethe to the afflicted, to make them forget their
miseries,


Marcellus. What is the virtue of the common water of Ryuers. Waters.
springes and fountains. c


Hilarius. WAter is one of the four Elements, Gal. 3. de vic. acu. lib. ij.
fe. 2.
more lighter then Earth, heavier then fire and air. But this Water which is
here amongst us in Rivers, Ponds, Springes, Fluds, and Seas, is no pure water,
for it is mingled with sundry Airs, Corruptions, Grossenes and softenes. What
kind of water is best.
Notwithstanding in all once Meates and Drynkes Water is used, and amongeste
all living Creatures cannot be forborne neither of Manne, Beast, Fish,
Foul, nor Herb. c. for all have need of water. And Auicen saith, the Clay
water is pure, for the clay cleanses the water: ye water is better, Auice lib.
ij* fen inde dispositionibus.
then ye water yt runs over gravel or stones, so that it be pure Clay, void
of corruption. Also waters running toward the East be pure, coming out of hard
stony Rocks, and a pint of that water is lighter then a pint of the standing
water of Wels or Pooles: the lighter the water, the better it is. Also water
that is put in wine. c. ought first to be sodden, or it be occupied, and so the
fire doth cleanse it from corruption. Standing waters, and Waters running near
unto Cittyes and Towns, or Marrish grounds, woods, and fens, be ever full
of corruption, because there is so much fylthe in them of Carrions, and rotten
dung. c. The hyer the water doth fall* the better it is: Ise and snow waters
be very gross, and be hurtful to the bodies of men and Beasts. To drink
cold water is evil, for it will stop the body, Salt water heals scabs
and engender Melancholy. Salt water cleanses a man from scabs, Itch, and
moist humours, it kills Lice, and wastes blood between the skin and the
flesh, but it is most hurtful to the stomach: but the vapoure and smoke of it
is good for them that have the dropsye. If one that is bitten with a mad
Dog, be suddenly cast into a swift running River, and so plunged up and
down, three or four times, hanging by the wast in a strong Lynnen cloth, it will
help him by the reason of the great sudden fear, in that Melancholy passion
saith Dioscorides. And Auicen saith, water wherein steel is quenched, is good
to be given to him that is bitten with a mad Dog. Also he saith, whosoever
is bitten of a mad Dog, and is vehemently afraid when he sees his face in a
vessel of water and knows him self, it is a sig^e that he shall not die. Also
bathes for the clensyng of the corrupt bodies of men be made of clean water:
The goodly virtues of common water.
without water Men are more defiled than beasts, for it is a nutriment of
every living creature, sensyble, and insensible. There is a River running at
Rome called Tiber, whose water is of such virtue, that it will remain in a
vessel of stone by the space of an hundred years uncorrupted as says Petrus,
Andraeus* Matthiolus upon Dioscorides. There were some time near unto that
ancient and old City called Agrigentum, sacred wells, which were of such
virtue, that the water brought forth such precious Oil, that the bodies
which were anointed therewith, were cleansed of sundry and diverse diseases.

Of Nilus that noble flood.
Let us not be forgetful of that noble River Tagus in Spain, in whom swims
diverse kinds of fyshes, under whose streams lies plenty of golden sands:
what shall we say unto the Capital river of all this World called Nilus, which
runs over all Ethiopia and Egipte, in which Egipte there is no Rain, but
only the swelling and overflowing of that fludde, which being fallen down
within his banks, eftsoones great plenty of spices, Herbs, Plants, and
fruits do grow, in so much that the people of ye Land do live without any
great travel, pain, or Labour, the cause of the abundance, and swelling of
this famous river sayethe Galen, is when the Snowes be melted, through the
great heate of the Sun in the Mountains of Ethiopia? The cause why Nilus
doth flow.
The Ocean the most Mighty Sea of all the World, the Mother of Fyshes,
strange Monsters, Stones of diverse natures, seperater of lands, enuironer of
Ilandes, ye water thereof through a lunge continual boiling over the fire, is
converted into salt. Also in the North parts of Scotland ne'er and upon the
said Ocian Sea, sticks, branches, and bordes of broken ships falling into
the same Sea, The cause of Barnacles.
upon these things be engendered fowls or birds, which we commonly cal
Brants or Barnacles, a kind of small Geese, which we do see commoly in this
Realm, al of one colour and bigness, their Eggs were never seen amongst us,
they have none other generation than I have said: although to the incredulous
and ignorant it seems untrue, whose fantasies I force not of, but of the
truth. There be also waters in the North parts of the Ocian Sea, which do
freeze for evermore, The cause of Crystal.
whose Ise is nothing else but Crystal, for Crystal is of no other
generation. There be waters of an other nature here in Englande called Aquae
callidae, or the hot Bathes, at a place so named called Bathe, whose water
doth never freeze through extreme coldenes, but is ever warm, which hath
virtue to help the sore, The effects of the Bathes at the town of Bathe.
scabbed and mangy, if I may so term them: many have come thither lame and
have gone away without corruption of the Flesh* contraction of synewes,
lamenes of Limbs or weakness of nature, this is a blessing of God among us, to
have so precious a Jewel. There is a well near had of the like effect at
Buckestone, whose water hath done many sundry good cures, Guiacum is of
greatter virtue then bath or Buck^stons wels against the nosegay of Naples.
both to the sore, and lame: yet these waters are reported to be so gentle,
that they will not usurp or steal from Guiacum, his virtue and good service,
which it daily doth to his Neapolita, French or English friends, you know what I
mean. What shall I say more of water or deep wells, which be warm in
winter, by the reason that heate is in the bowels of the Earth, and cold in
Summer, because heate is above the earth: There is a noble well called Alissus in
Arcadia, and who so drinks of this water shall be delivered of the venom, or
bytinge of mad Dogs. There be diverse wells at Nante wyche. c. whereof is
made great plenty of good white Salt, very rich and profytable to our common
wealth. I will not forget the Well of Silo and the Sacred flood of Iordane,
which was the first water of Baptism where as Iesus Christ our Saviour was
Baptised himself, whose beginning is from the heads of Ior. and Dan. or from a
Fountain called Pancade so named of Caesarea: in this river is plenty of good
Fishes, it is a sweet noble Flood where Christ Iesus our saviour, did show
Miracles. But Asphaltites says Plinie will suffer nothing to syncke into it,
Bull nor Cammell. c. in this Flood is plenty of Sytumen, The dead se^.
where was Sodome and Gomor, sometime the dead Sea. And thus I make an end of
water the Earth. Rain water is bynding and stopping of nature, water is a very
good seruaunt, but it is a cruel master.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Beer and Ale?


Hilarius. ALe doth engender gross humours in the body, but if it be made of
good Barley malt, of wholesome water, and very well sodden, and stand.v. or vi.
days, until it be clear, it is wholesome, Although Beer Ale be compounds yet
I have here placed th^m after water, whereof they receive their greatest
substance.
especially for hot Cholorike persons, having burning Fevers. But if Ale be
very sweet and not well sodden in the brewing, it brings inflation of wind
and fleum into the Belly, If it be very sower, it nips and freateth the
guts, is evil for the eyes: to them that be very Fleumatike, Ale is very
gross, but to temperate bodies, it increases blood, it is partly laxative
and provokes urine. Clean brewed Beer, if it be not very strong, brewed
with good Hoppes doth cleanse the Body from corruption, and is very wholesome for
the Liver, it is an usual or common drink in most places of Englande, which in
deed is hurt and made worse with many rotten Hoppes, or Hoppes dried like
dust, which comes frome beyond sea: but although there come many good Hoppes
from thence, yet it is known that the goodly fields, and fruitful grounds
of England do bring forth to mans use, as good Hoppes as grows in any place
of the world, as by proof I know in many places of the Country of Suffolke,
where they brew their Beer with the Hoppes that grow upon their own
grounds, as in a place called Brisiarde, near to an old famous castle called
Framingham and in many other places of the country. A late house of Nuns
Thus to conclude of Ale Beer, they have no such virtue, nor goodness, Surfeits
of Ale Beer Au^ce ij. tert^a capi. viij. Auerho in co. Rasis in.iiij. Almen.
cap. v.
as wine hath: and the surfeits which be taken of them, through dronkennes, be
worser then the surfetes of win^. Know this, that to drink Ale or Beer, of
any empty stomach moderately, hurts not but doth good But if one be fasting
hungry, or empty, and drink much Wine, it will hurt the Sinews, and bring
the Cramp, sharpe Agues, and Palseis, as Auicen, Auerhois, Rasis, saith. The
rinsepichers had a good medecin prepared for them: for the Mayor of London,
upon a polityke consideration, Anno. 1560. made an order against mighty Beer
and Ale, as well for the health of the commons of London, as for their profit.
Whereat the Ale knights, were not little offended, do continue still as true
Soldiers to ye strong Beer and Ale, which is their Captain, notwithstanding
my lord Majors decree, as it plainly appears in their flushing, red, coppred
noses. For strong Ale hath such virtue and worthiness, that he cannot be so
persecuted, afflicted, yea and banished, but his disciples most constantly will
follow him, to the end of their lives. Therefore they shall have Bacchus
blessing for their labours. But yet the end of Drunkards and Gluttons is
miserable: therefore my Marcellus, hear that most prudent and wisest Prince
king Salomon, saying. Noli esse in conuiuijs potatorum, nec in comessationibus
eorum qui carnes ad vescendum coferunt: quia vacantes potibus, dantes symbola,
consumentur vestietur pannis dormitatio. c. Keep no company with Wine bibbers,
and ryotous eaters of Flesh. For such as be drunkardes and ryoters, shall come
to poverty. And he that is given to much sleep, with ragged clothes. c Lo,
these be the rewards of such companions and unthrifts.


Marcellus. I Thank you for your good counsel, good Hilarius, you have
spoken indifferently: and you have alleged good writers, but specially
Salomon, whose words be well placed, against ryotours and drunkardes, with
their rewards, as poverty, shame, and rags. c. for abusing the good
creatures, and blessings of God: but to use them in good order, they be our
servants, and we may take them for our need. I pray you say some thing of
Bread, which is the chyefe food to all living men in this Land.


Hilarius. THE best bread is made of clean Wheat, The mean baked bread* the
best.
which grows in clay ground, lightly Leuened, meanly Salted, and the Bread
to be baken in the oven, not extremely hot, least it be burned, nor also less
than meanly hot, least the Bread be heavy and raw: the lighter the bread
is, and the more fuller of the holes, the holsomer it is, thus Auerhois, and
Rasis say. Aue in v. col. Rasis in.xxx. in almu Cap. 3 What bread is best.
And also Bread must neither be eaten new baked, nor very stale, or old, for
the one causes dryness, thirst, and smokyng in the head, troublyng the
brains and eyes, through the heate thereof. The other dries the body, and
brings melancholy humours, hurting memory. The best bread is that, Bread of a
day old,
that is of a day old: and the loaves or Manchettes, may neither be great nor
little, but mean, for the fire in small loaves, dries up the moistenes or
virtue of the bread, in great loaves, it leueth rawnes and grosenes, Read
Galen, Galen ii. al^ment. capi. 2 Sodden bread not wholesome.
in the properties of bread: sodden bread, which is called Simnelles. or
Crackenelles, is very vnholsome, and hurts many one. Rye bread is wyndie, and
hurtful to many, therefore it must be well salted, and baken with Anisedes.
And commoly crusts of Bread, be dry and burned: they do engender choler aduste
and melancholy humours. Therefore in great men houses, the Bread is chipped
so nigh, and so largely pared, that much of it is abused, shamefully made into
sosse for Dogs, which would feed a great number of poor people: but many
men be more affectionate to Dogs, Barley bread.
than to men. Barley Bread doth cleanse, and make the body lean.

Yet thus much more of Bread. If a Manchette stand al night in Borage water,
and in the morning be given to a man, that is new fallen mad, it will help
him, using it xiiii. days: being also letten blood in Cephalica, a vein in
the forehead. Also a Cake or Manchette, made in this manner, and daily
eaten:.viii. half in the morning, and as much at Night, helps Gonorrhea
passio, or running of the rains. A pound of fine flower, and the fine dried
pouders of Walnuts, Chestnuttes, Hasil nuts, Filberdes, Master R^ger
Strages Medicine, brought from Uenice, written by a learned Italian Doctor.
Nutmegs, Almonds, and Pistacia, of these, vii. kinds of Nuts..iii,
tempered with this meal, and red Wine, and so your bread made thereof. There
is also a kind of Bisquit made with Anisedes, wholesome for the lunges, or
reumatike persons. Calamus, long Pepper, Ginger, Spicknard, and Galanga, be
good to put into their bread which have the Dropsy, or Tympanie.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Pears.


Hilarius, THere be of diverse kinds of Pears, heavier then Apples, not good
until they be very ripe, The operation of Pears.
unless they be tenderly roasted, or baken, and eat after meals. There is a
kind of Pears, growing in the City of Norwich, called the Black Freres Pear,
very delicious and pleasant, and no less profitable unto a hoate stomach, as
I heard it reported, by a right worshipful Phisicion of the same City, called
Doctor Manfield, who said, he thought that those Pears, without all
comparison, were the best that grew in any place of England. Dioscorides
says Lib. i. Capi. cxxxii. That all Pears do stop and bind, Black
Freres Pears. of Norwiche.
so do the leaves, and therefore says he, plasters be wholesome made of the,
to stop vomits and laxies. There may Lye be made of Pear tree branches,
or barks, which is wholesome to sees wild Pears in, that be called
stranglyng, or choke Pears. For so sod, it doth take away venom or hurt:
the same Ashes doth help Men, being drunken in white Wine, Ashes made of wild
peare-tree, the virtue thereof.
that be almost strangled with Mouseums, or such like. Pears have many names,
as Pear Robert, Pear Iohn, Busshops blessyngs, with other pretty names. The
red Warden is of great virtue, conserved, roasted, or baken, to quench choler.


Marcellus. Apples.
What is the virtue of Apples?


Hilarius. Apples be very cold and wyndye, hard to digest, engenderers of ill
blood, hurtful to the flegmatike persons, good to choleric stomachs, if they
be through ripe, The operation of Apples. Diosco^ides Lib. i. Cap. 131 For a
chole^ike stomach. Costarde. green Cote. Pipins.
but best if they be roasted, or baken and eaten with gross Pepper to Bedward.
They be of many kinds, as Costardes, the green Cotes, the Pippe, the queen
Apple, and so forth: the distilled water of Apples, Champhire, Vinegar and Milk,
is a good medicine to anoint the Faces of children, that have the small Pockes,
when the said Pockes be ripe, to keep them from pits or erres, provided,
that they have given them in their Milk Saffron, or Mithridatum, to expel the
venom, and keep them from the air, A medicine for the small Pockes.
during the said sickness. The pap of an Apple with Rose Water applied to the
Eyes, doth quench the burning, and takes away the rednes of them. Apples be
good in Winter, and provoke urine: eat them with a little Salt. Tartes of
Apples with Anisedes, make sweet breath: there is a wyndy drink made of them
called Cider: Uergis is not greatly to be^ lauded, albeit, custom doth permit
it.


Marcellus. Peaches.
What is the virtue of Peches,


Hilarius. The operation of Peaches
THE leaves be hot, for if they be stamped in plaster wise, applied unto the
belly, they kyl worms: the fruit is cold, and very good for the stomach: Hot
stomach.
they be good to be eaten of them, that have stinking breathes of hot causes,
Against stynking breathes
eaten of any empty stomach, as it is the counsel of Galen. who says, if
they be eat after meat, they do corrupt, both them selves, and the Meates
lately eaten, and they be bin ders of the belly: Quinces wholesome.
but Quinces be most comfortable after meat, and they do enclose the s^mack,
let vapours fro ascending into the brain, stop vomits. Folks that be
swollen in their bodies, and use to eat quinces with the gross powder of
Galanga, Spiknard, Calamus, Swellinges.
and Ginger, shall receive comfort: they may be eaten before meat, of the said
sick pacyents, as well as after, but much use of them, is not so profitable,
as delectable to the eaters of them.


Marcellus. What is the virtues of Quinces? Any more than thus. Quinces.



Hilarius* IF thy stomach be very hot, or moyste, or thy belly laxative, The
operation of quinces.
then Quinces be good to be eaten before meat, being roasted, or eaten cold:
and in this case, the tarter be the better: Pogarnettes.
and Pomgarnettes be of the same virtue, as Isaac says: but eaten after
meat, they do enclose the stomach, and moyste the belly, Isaack in perti*
die.
they ought not to be used in common meates: the custom of them hurts the
sinews, but in the way of medecin they be excellent: and the cores being
taken out, and preserved in Honey, or kept in their musslege, they may lunge
continu^, Quinces raw hurt.
to the use of rostyng, or bakyng, for they be perilous to the stomach eaten
raw, but preserved, they do mightily preuaile against drunkenes: Against
drunkenesse.
they be cold in the first degree, and dry in the beginning of the second.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Cherries? Cherries.



Hilarius. THE tart Cherries undoubtedly, be more wholesomer then ye sweet, The
operation of Cherries.
and eaten before meat, they do mollifye the Belly, Against hot Choler.

Galen de alimen. Ra lib. xxiii. Capi Diosc. in libr. i. capi. cxxix


prepare digestion, and they be most excellent against hot burning choler,
they be good also after meat, and be of many kinds, as black, red, and pale:
the red Cherye partly tart is best, Galen and Rasis, greatly commend this
fruit. This fruit is cold and moist in the first degree. And the gum of a
Cherye tree, sodden in Wine and drunk, hath all these properties, says
Dioscorides, it helps old coughs, gives good colour to the face, sharpeth
the sight, makes perfect digestion, and makes clean the raynes from gravel.
Plinie says, Libr, xv. Capi xxv. it was a strange thing to see Cherries at
Rome, until such time as Lucullus the Noble Romaine vanquished Mithridates,
the king of Pontus. And from thence came Cherries at that time to Rome, which
was about the incarnacion of our Lord Christ.lxxiii. years. And then within
few years after, all Italie was full, and the most part of France: and so they
came in to this our great Britan chiefly in Ket, whereas great plenty doth
grow yearly.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Grapes, Rasines, Prunes, Barberies, Orenges,
and Meddlers?


Hilarius. Grapes.
HIppocrates says, that the white Grapes, be better than the black, and
wholesomer when they are two or three days gathered fro the Vine, than
presently pulled from it: and if they be sweet, they be partly nutratyue,
and warm the Body, and this agrees Galen, Galen de alimen. ii. Rasis in
iiii. alimen. xx.
and Rasis, who seems to commend sweet Grapes, above Dates, saying: although
they be not so warm, yet they do not stop the body, or make oppilation as
Dates do. They be wholesome to be eaten before meat, even as Nuts be good
after Fysh: towards the South, South East parts of the world, there be many
growing in diverse Regions, whereof the Wines be made, the farther from us, the
hotter the Wine: there be very good Grapes growing here in England, in many
places, as partly I have seen. Raisons.
Raysons of the Son be very wholesome, and comfort digestion, but the stones
and rindes, would be refused: and then they be good for the spleen and liver,
To comfort digestion Spleen and Liver.

Sweet prunes be laxative, but tart be byndyng Oxiacantha, called the
Barbary Mespila called the Medler.


so be Aligantes. Rasis doth much commend them, but undoubtedly the small
Raysons be hurtful to the spleen. Prunes, and Damaseins have virtue to relaxe
the belly, if they be sweet and ripe: they do nourysh very little, but
quench, choler. Grapes Raisons, Prunes Plumes, and Sloes, if they be sower,
be all binders of the belly. And so is the Barbery, called Oxiacantha, and
Orenges, except the said Orenges be condited with Sugar, and then they be good
coolers against hoate choler, whose rindes be hoate, and dry of nature. The
fruit called the Medler, is used for a medicine, and not for meat, it
provokes urine, and of nature is stipticke.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Capers and Olyues?


Hilarius. Capers and Olives.
FResh Capers be hoate and dry in the second degree, and eaten before meates,
do greatly comfort digestion: and be the best things for the Spleen, Good
for the Spleen.
or to cleanse melacholy, so is the oil of Capers to anoint the Spleen, or left
side, that can be taken. Preserved Olives in Salt, eaten at the beginning of
meates, do greatly fortefy the stomach, and relaxe the belly, cleanse the
liver, and are hoate and dry in the second degree. The decoction of Caper
barks helps the Spleen, being drunk.


Marcellus. Aloes.
What is the virtue of Aloes?


Hilarius. THere be two kinds of Aloes, one is named Succotrina, which is
like a liver, Two kinds of Aloes.
clear, brittle, bitter, coloured between red and yellow: this is best for
medicines, a little of this tepered with Rose water, To help watery eyes.
and being put into the eyes, helps the dropping, watery eyes. Also it is put
into many excellent medicines laxative, as Saffro, Myrrh, Aloes, mingled
together in the form of pills, is the most excellent medicine against ye
Pestilence, Against the Pestilence. cal^ed pillule Ru^i
as it is writ in this book following. Honey Aloes mingled together, do take
away the marks of stripes, and also do mundyfye sores, and ulcers, it doth
cleanse the abundance of choler and fleume from the stomach, it is not good
to be taken in Winter. For Auicen doth forbid it, Marks of stripes of the
skin.
but in the Spring time, or Harvest: the powder thereof, the weighty of a
French croune, mingeled with the water of Honey, or Mede, and so drunk in the
morning, doth cleanse both Choler and fleume. To cleanse choler ^nd fleum*
There is an other gross Aloes, which is good for horses tempered with Ale,
and ministered, and as well to other great Beasts, as horses, the wayght of
half an Uncle, and thus much have I said of Aloes: but if Aloes be clean
washed, it is the holsommer, much vnwashed Aloes will cause Emeroides. A cause
of the Emroides.



Marcellus. What is the virtue of La,


Hillarius. IT is of a singular virtue, leaved like unto Peneryal, but greater,
and somewhat rough, and tastes like Ginger when it is bit on: this herb is
incomparable for his singular goodness, in spedy deliverance of dead children
from their Mothers, being drunk in Syrupe. There be two kinds of them the one
called La, and the other Pseudo la, one of the garden, the other
of the field, and have many roots: La is a good sode* salve for a
soldier in the field*
the Leaves be only occupied, and not the stalks, being sodden in wine, it
draws corruption out of deep wounds: if any man be wounded with Iron, as
Dagger, Spear, nail, pyece of harness, hayleshot, or mayle, drop in ye Juice
of this herb into the said wound, and eftsoon it will draw forth the Iron
therein fixed, so that the pacyent drink of the same herb in wine.
Dioscorides. lib iij. cap. xxxj. A maruailus work of La.
Dioscorides reports, that wild beasts, and Goats among the Greeks, when
they were wounded with arrows, did feed on this herb, whose virtue caste
out the Arrows, and healed the wound. It will do the like also to mankynde,
if he be not smitten witha mortal wound. The smoke of this Dittan, called
La, doth drive away any living thing fro man, that is venomous, as
Tod, Neute, Skorpion. c. And the Noble Poet Uirgil doth greatly commend the
same precious herb, Lib. xij. Aeneidos.
with these pleasaut sweet Uerses, saying: Hic Venus indignonati concussa
dolor,
La genitrix Cretaea carpit ab Ida,
Puberibus caulem folijs, florae comantem
Purpureo: non illa feris la capris
Gramina, cum tergo volucres haesere sagittae.


Which Uerses are Englyshed thus. But Venus much apauld at this her Sons
unworthy payne:
Green Ditainie from Ida sacred mount in Creeti she brings,
The stalk with tender leaves, and Purple flowers full fresh that springes
An herb to Roebuckes wild, and Beasts not tame right well be known.



Marcellus. I pray you, what is the nature of Helenium, called Enula campana,
which we common plain people call Alacam pane.


Hilarius. Enula capana
THis herb of worthy Memory, hath thus ben called, as some do say, from the
battle of Troie: which was before the incarnacion of Gods only son, A
fable perhaps.
our God and sa,+uiour Iesus Christ.1189. And then was named Eleniu of the
lamentable and pitiful Tears of Helena, Wife, to Menelaus, A bitter
diffinition.
when she was violently taken away by Paris into Phrigia, having this herb in
her hand. Or as other do say, this noble Helena made a goodly medicine of
this herb, against the deadly Uenome, or poysone of Serpents. And Plinie
reports, that Iulius Augustus the Emperor, Auicen secum C^n. cap. Enula
campana.
did eat of this daily with his meat. It prevails against poison, it doth
comfort the heart, as it is said: Enula campana, reddit praecordia sana.
Aicuen. The wine of this herb, doth cleanse the lights, breast, and iunges:
and swallowed with clean Honey, it causes to spyt, and breaks wind. Balm
and this herb be great friends to the heart: and if it be sodden with Rue, it
prevails against the colike, and ruptures, which come of wind: it is not
exactly hot and dry. It is very comfortable in bathes, to wash and cleanse the
body from filth, itch, skabbes, and to keep the parts of the body warm, and
to make them red that were pale: and is good for Ischias called Sciatica, or
pains in the huccle bones, applied plaster ways warm. The root is of great
virtue, says Galen Libr. vi. Simplic Medic. If it be champed, says Plinie,
fasting in the morning, it will confyrme stablysh the teeth: and the oil is
good against the tourments of the guts, which be vexed with wind, and
helps the sinews. If any wild beast fall in any net, dyed with the same
Enula, they shall be poisoned therewyth, as Galen says in his book de Theriaca
ad Pisonem, but some wysemen do think rather it be a fable, than a true
history. And thus I do end of this good herb, whose chyef virtue is in the
root.


Marcellus. What is a Tassill good for, besides the Clothe workers business,
which is in his shop?


Hilarius. Tasell.
A Tasell is called Dipsacus in Greek, by a contrary name, for it receives in
the concauitie and holonesse, dew and rain, to releue the dryness. It is
also called virga pastoris, Sheperdes rod and Fuller Thystell. There be two
kinds, one wild unprofitable: the other is a good Seruaunt in the common
wealth, for trymming of cloth, and caps, it is a styffe Tasell. The roots
and leaves with the pryckes be dry in the second degree: if this herb be
sodden in water to a thickness, and drawn through a strayner, and sodden
again unto a more thycknes this laid upon chappes, or places, opened with
wind, as in Marche, it heals them. The same put into a Fistula, doth heal
it, and takes away Wartes, so say Dioscorides and Plinie,


Marcellus. What do you say of an herb, called Hypericon.


Hilarius, DIoscorides calls this herb, Libr. tertio Capitulo. Cliiii.
Hypericum, Chamaepityn, Androsaemon, or Corion, with such coppye of names:
Hypericon S. Iohns herb, weeds grass. or woorte.
The seed doth partly smell like Rosen: If this herb be chafed and broken
in ones hand* it sends forth a bloody Juice, says he, the seeds be
black, and the flower yellow, it grows in the Month of July, and August,
and is commonly known in every place: and of temperament or nature, is hot
and dry* Galen says, it provokes vryne: Galen. Libr. viii. Simpl.
medicamen. torum.
al the herb must be put to the medicine, as to salves, then it heals moyste
and stinkyng putrified sores. And being drunk, either the water, the Syrupe,
the juice, or powder, heals Ischias, or the Sciatica, of the same mind is
Dioscorides, But they must drink of the seed, says he, by the space of.xl.
days. And this Saint Ihons wort or herb, helps tartians or quartaynes,
drunk with wine: the juice heals any burnt place, and is good for the
stone. Acyrum, Androsaemum and Coris, be kynsfolk. But the seeds of Acyrum
will purge, they differ in form. But for time, savour, place, and nature, they
be much like one unto the other: And are al named among us, saint Iohns wort
or herb.


Marcellus. OUr fyelds do grow full of Scabious, every mere and balke is full
of it in June: Some do use this Herb for the Pestilence, commonly called the
plague. Wherefore do the learned men, as Dioscorides and Galen say it is good.


Hilarius. SCabiosa so named of old time, because it is given in drink
inwardly, or oyntmentes outwardly, to heal Scabs, sores, corruption in the
stomach, yea, Scabious for scabs, it takes the name of the property, the
right name is Stobee or Psora-there be two kinds of it.
and is most fryend among all other herbs, in ye time of the Pestilence, to
drink the water with Mithridatum a mornings. It stops the bloody flixe, and
Hemeroides, and anoyntment made thereof, heals Antrax, called the Carbuncle,
or hot burning Pestilent botch, or fearful sore. Galen says Lib. vii.
Simplicium medicam. that it is hot, dry, and bitter, and hath virtue to bind,
dry, and stop, it will join a fresh wound together. The juice dropped into
the eye, heals it, if it be pricked or bleed. It is good to be dropped into
foul running moist ears, it should seem, being both hot and dry, if it be
sodden in wine, and drunk, it dries superfluous humours. Dioscorides calls it
Stoebe, the flowers are like a Blew or white thrummed hat, the stalk rough,
the upper leaves ragged, and the leaves next the gross roots be playner.
Under whom often times, Frogs will shadow them selves* from the heate of the
day: hoppyng and playing under these leaves, which to them is a pleasant Tent
or pavilion, says Aristophanes, who made a play, wherein Frogs made
pastime.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Buglosse? Buglosse.



Hilarius. IT is an herb most temperate, between hot cold, To comfort^ the
heart.
of an excellent virtue, a comforter of the heart, a purger of Melancholy, a
quieter of the Frensye, a purger of the vryne, wholesome to be drunk in wine,
Frensye.
but most effectually in Syrupe, Dioscorides, and Galen do greatly commend
this herb, and to be praise worthy daily experience proves.


Marcellus. Basil
What is the virtue of Basil.


Hilarius. THis herb is warm in the second degree, having the virtue of
moistnes: Ozimum or sweet oder, or redolent.

Dropsy For the brain and heart.


and if it be sodden in wine, with Spicknard, and drunk, it is good against
dropsyes, wyndes, fleumes, coldness of the heart, hardness of ye stomach. The
savour of Basyll doth comfort the brain and heart, the use of this herb in
meates, doth decay the sight,


Marcellus Polipodie.
What is the virtue of Polipodye.


Hilarius. IF this Herb be sodden with Beafes, and Mallowes, in the broth of a
Hen, Fleume.
and drunk, it will lose the Belly, and cleanse Fleume: the root of this
herb, being dry, and beaten in fine powder, and drawn into the nosethrylles,
helps a disease called Polipus. Galen. and Actu^rius. affirms that.i. of
the roots of Scene, Actua in li. de compo. med.
sod with Polipodye in Mede, or Honey, and so strained, doth purge choler
and melancholy, without payne. It is of the like virtue and effect, sodden in
the broth of a Hen, or Ptisane, and is of order temperate, and relaxyng:


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Burnete, which in Summer time is used to be
put in bowles, glasses of wine, served at the table?


Hilarius. Potentilla.
IT is very pleasant to be put in clean Cups, Gobblettes, or pieces,
wherein is clean French wine: it makes it pleasant with the Juice of
Lymondes, and good white Sugar: it hath golden flowers, green leaves, purple
roots of the out side, and white within, and doth dry and bind, and
stops the bloody flyxe very well.


Marcellus. Spinach.
What is the virtue of Spinach,


Hilarius. Mollefying.
It is an herb much used in meat, cold and moyste in the first degree: it
mollifyeth, and makes soft the belly, it is good for them that be hot and
dry, and ill for flegmatike men,


Marcellus. Vinegar.
What is the virtue of Vinegar?


Hilarius. Vinegar is cold and dry, and is hurtful for them that be
melancholy: but when it is drunk, or powered upon an outward wound, it stops
the blood, The property of Vinegar.
it also kills hot apostumacions of Erisypilas: it is an enemy to the
Sinews, Vinegar Brimstone sod together, are good for the gout, to wash it
withal. Vinegar tempered with wolle. To help the gout.
helps a disease called Soda, in the head, applied warm unto the place. It
is good in Sauce, for warm and moyste men. Vinegar with clean clarifyed Honey,
Pains in the throat.
Penidies, and fair water sodden together, doth greatly help the pains of
the throat, lunges, and, stoppyng of the wind, and quenches hot dyseases,
And sharpe Vinegar mingled with Salt, Biting of a Dog.
and put upon the biting of a Dog, doth heal it: and against poison it is
excellent, chiefly to drink a little thereof against the Pestilence, in a
morning. Against the Pestilence.



Marcellus. What is the virtue of Setwall? Setwall.



Hillarius. IT is hoate and dry in the second degree, and is good: the powder
thereof to be drunk, is most of effect against the pestilence, Theophr^stus
of Setwall.
except Mithridatum. It is good against poison, windy, chollerike, and cold
passions of the heart, and doth restrain Uomites, the wayght of.viii. G.
doth suffice to be drunk in Ale or Wine, upon an empty stomach. Uomites
strained.



Marcellus. What is the virtue of Mellilote? Mellilote. Sertu^a, or kings
croun^



Hilarius. IT hath virtue to ripe, and is more hoater than cold, Mellilote
Flaxsede, Rose leaves, Champhire, and womannes Milk, tempered together, do
make a goodly medicine against the hoate inflamacion of the eyes. For the eyes,
stomach and liver.

To help the Spleen.


If this herb be drunk in wine, it doth mollifye the hardness of the stomach
and liver: the most excellent plaster against the pains of the Spleen, doth
Mesuae describe, which is made of Mellilote. Vinegar, Roses, and Mellilote
together, do help the headache, it applied to the forehead in a cloth,


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Time? Time.



Hilarius. IT is vehement of heate, with dryness in the third degree:
Dioscorides says, if it be drunk with Vinegar and Salt, it purges fleume:
sodden with Honey or Mede, it hath virtue to cleanse the lunges, and the breast,
matrix, rains, and blader, and kills worms. The powder of Time eaten in
Potage, is wholesome for the eye sight: Theophrastus says, there be two kinds
of Time, the one white, the other blackysh. Theop lib. ii. Capi. vi.
There be no flowers growing in fields or guards, better beloved of Been,
then the flowers of Time: and that year wherein the greatest plenty of these
flowers be seen, that same year Honey doth abound: when they be scarce, not
fertyl, the there is little, or no good honey yt year. Dioscorides says in
his.iiii. book, that Epithymum is the flower of the harder Time. One uncle of
Time dried, beat in powder, mingled with.iiii. of Oximel, drunk of an empty
stomach, before diner supper, helps the stomach, guts, matrix, and blader:
and is good for them that have red blered eyes, and for those that be
tourmented with the goufe. Galen commends Time in his.vi. book of Simples,
so doth Aetius with these commendacions aforesaid. The whiter the Time is, with
white and purple flowers, the better it is, the blacker ye worse. And thus I do
conclude of Time desiring God that we may spend the time well to his glory,
(...) cannot (...) called (...).
and profit of our neighbour: for time cannot be called again, but by little
and little slips away, they which Godly observe the time, in time to come,
shall receive the fruits of their own labours, with happy lives, quiet
minds, and blessed ends: whereas the shameful abusers of time, and mysusers
of themselves, although evil spent time, seem well unto them, yet their lives
be wicked, their labour fruictlesse, and their end horrible: as once shall
appear when death doth come, which is the end of every time.


Marcellus. Sweet Calamus odoratus.
What is the virtue of sweet Calamus odoratus, called Calamus Aromaticus.


Hilarius, IT is an excellent sweet root, and profitable for men, if the
Poticaries keep it not until it be rotten: it is hot and dry in the
beginning, to the midst of the second degree. It hath power to cleanse, to dry,
and to wast all windines within the body, without hurt. Galen doth greatly
commend the savour of it. To waste wind in the body.
They that drink of this root sodden in Wine, shall have remedy of ye white
Morphewe, and recover good colours in their Faces, and this have I often
proved. A remedy for the white Morphewe.
It helps to cleanse, purge, and dry the water that is between the skin, and
the flesh: being drunk with the sedes of Smalage, Parsely, and Fenel, sodden
well together strained, it helps cramps, and syckenes in the sinews: being
drunk with wine, sodden with Sage and fresh Cappers, it helps the coldness
of the spleen, liver, and raynes. Also it augments seed of generation, Seed
augmented.
and purges terms menstrual if the powder be drunk. What is better in
Wormewoode, or Sage Ale, then Calamus to be drunk, for them which have the
dropsy, as Ascites. c. It will expulse and put out sores of the blader, and
make the stinkyng vryne to be sweet: truly it is a noble herb, but the
virtue is in the root.


Marcellus. Ginger.
What is the vettue of Gynger.


Hilarius. Auerhoisin v. in coll, Mesue in.iiii. disunt.
It is hot in the third degree, and moist in the end of the first, if it be
vncolloured, white, and not rotten, it is very good, most chiefly if it be
conserved and green, as Mesue says: it makes warm a cold stomach* and
consumes winds, helps evil digestion and makes meat go easily down
into the stomach.


Marcellus. Oil of Olives best.
What is the virtue of Oil made of Olives.


Hilarius. Green oil of Olives, is ye mother of al Oils which doth draw
into her own nature, the virtues of herbs, leaves, To digest cold herbs.
flowers, fruits, and roots: sweet Sallet oil is wholesome to digest cold
herbs, and Sallettes, tempered with sharpe Vinegar and Sugar: new Oil doth
moist, Anerhois commended oil in quinto de ouis* Oil of roses.
and warm the stomach, but old oil corrupts the stomach and cleaves to
the Lunges, makes one hoarse. Oil of Roses, sharpe Vinegar tempered together,
is good to anoint the foreheds of them, Against Frensies.
that be troubled with extreme heate, or frensye: so that Buglosse be sodden in
their Possetale, or else drink the Syrupes of Endiue, or Buglosse. There be
many goodly virtues in compounded oils, both to make hot, and to cool the
body, when it is extreme hot, as the great learned man Mesue, hath descrybed
in his Antidotarie. Of oils, you shall have plenty following.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Rosemary. Rosemarye.



Hillarius. ROsemarye is an herb of great virtue, hot and dry: sodden in
wine, and drunk before meat it doth heal the Kings evil, or pains in the
throat, as Dioscorides and Galen say. Kings evil
The savour of it doth comfort the brain and heart, the flowers of Rosemary
is an excellent Cordial, called di Anthos, is good after Fevers, or for
Melacholy men. The brain comforted.
And ye seeds drunk in wine, help the falling sickness, and pains of the
breast.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Agrimonye. Agrimonie.



Hilarius. DIoscorides says, that if this herb with Swines grease, be
stamped together, and laid upon an old rotten sore being hot, Old sore.
it hath Virtue to heal it. The seed of this herb drunk with Wine, it is
good against the bytyng of Serpents, stoppyng of the Liver, and bloody flixe.
Biting of Serpents.
The Syrup of it is good to open the liver,


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Mugworte. Mugworte.



Hilarius. MUgwort, Fetherfew, and Tansy, be very hot and dry in the second
degree: Mugwort, Spurge, Oil of Almods, tempered plasterwyse, and applied cold
to the sick pained stomach, will bring health. It is good in bathes, A pained
stomach.
saith Galen, it is wholesome for women: it cleanses, warms, coforteth the
matrix, and breaks the stone. Plinie says, Breaking the stone.
it is good against biting of Serpents, and wholesome for travailing Men, if they
carry it, it lyghtneth them from weariness. Tansye doth kill and caste Worms
from Children, drunk with Wine: Killing worms in children
a cold plaster stamped, and laid upon the Belly of a Woman, whose Child
is dead within her, it will separate the dead Child, A preset help of a
dead child
from the living Mother. Galen says in his syxt book of Simples, there be
two kinds of Mugworte, The one is commonly known to us, To neese,
the other grows ne'er the sea side: they be both of singular virtues, their
waters being stilled, their Syrupes prepared, be very wholesome for the
corrupted, or stopped Matrix, and also the herb is good for bathes, in such
purposes for Women. This herb was first found of a Noble Queen, named
Artemisia, wife to Mausolus King of Caria, who was both learned in herbs and
plants, chaste of Life, comely of person: and so loved her husband, that when
he was dead, she made a Sepulcher, which was so excellent, costly, rich, that
it was counted to be one of the wonders, and greatest maruailes of the World,
she called this herb Latifolia, Tenuifolia, after her own name, Artemisia.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Parsely, and Saxifrage?


Hilarius. THey have virtue to break the stone: Parsely is hot in the second
degree, and dry in the midst of the third. The seed drunk with white wine,
provokes the menstrual terms, as Dioscorides says: also Smallage hath the
like virtue, as further appears,


Marcellus.. Now say on, and show to me, my good Master, I pray you of
Elleborus the white, and of Elleborus the black.


Hilarius. ELleborus Candidus. which causes vomits, very strong and daugerous
for conuulsion, is called Albus, because the root is whitish, it hath long
stalks, reddish leaves, with ribs in them, in the form of Planten leaves,
many yellow flowers growing upon stalks by themselves, and growing in cold
Grounds. The roots must be gathered in Harvest: and this herb is hot and
dry, in the third degree. And is perilous to be given, to women with child,
old folks and Children, or to tender people, or in Winter, but in summer
only, and before supper. But one dragme, put in Milk or Furmentie: but first
do thus. Cut a Radish root in the great end, cleave it ouerthwarte: then
put your Elleborus Albus into it one whole night, How to correct Elleborus
albus.
or twelve hours, then press it hard, this will not only take the venom from
this Elleborus, but also give it virtue, that it shall not hurt nature, or put
the body into danger, when vomits approach. This will help the falling
syckenes, Vertigo, Melancholy, madness, white Leprosy, winds in the guts,
Dropsye, Timpany, Goutes Quartens, Coughs, and many such like; and provoke
neesynge. c.

Elleborus niger, is called Melampodion, not only for the blacknes, but of the
inuenter who was called Melampus, Of Eleborus niger.
a keeper of Goats, It is hot and dry in the third degree, is planted in the
Guard, is called Bears foot: black, rough, hearie roots, like the bush upon
the breast of a Foul, which we call the Cock of a Turkaye. It hath all the
virtues that the white hath, more: three penny weight in powder drunk, casts
forth Worms, cleanses fleume, melancholy, and dropsye. And it will cleanse the
matrix, and expulse, or caste forth the dead Child. It is good for Pessaries
for Women: the Juice is good for to be put into the cares against defnes. In
plasters, it kills worms: the juice thereof helps horses of the bottes,
and Swine that be infected. Or else if it be put into their ears, it will help
them, when they be pained in their heads. No beasts dare eat thereof it is
so bitter, nor fowls, but only Quayles: As Aristotle, Auicen, Galen, Lucretius
affirm. These herbs be wholesome in outward plasters, to cleanse melancholy, to
dry fleume.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Centaury, or fell terrae?


Hilarius. PLINIE saith, that the syrupe of this herb, drunk with a little
Vinegar and Salt, doth cleanse the body: the Leaves and flowers be of great
virtue, to be sodden and drunk against all raw humours of gross fleumes,
watery, or windy. It doth cleanse cruent or bloody matter, within the bodies of
men or women: the powder of this herb, is good in pessaries for women, causing
the dead child, to depart from the mother. And is wholesome against the
Pestilence, in the time of Winter: and is hoate and dry, and of two kinds, and
heals both old and new wounds, as Galen writes ad Papiam, of the virtue
of little Centaury. This herb was found with his virtue, by that old noble
clarke Chyron Centaurus, the inuenter of Herbs, Astronomy, and Music.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Penicialle?


Hilarius. IT is an herb of much virtue and profit, hot and dry in ye
third degree: Dioscorides saith, if this herb be sodden with Honey, and Aloes,
and drunk, it will cleanse the Liver, and purge the blood most excellently: it
helps also the lunges. Simeon Sethj saith, if a woman drink it with white
Wine, it will also provoke, and cleanse the terms mestruall. And is also a very
wholesome Potherbe, and much used among Pudding makers: which was invented of
some Phisicion, because of the warmnes goodness against melancholy. The juice
with Vinegar, put into ye nose, is good against the Fransy, or Lunatike
sycknes.


Marcellus. What is Lichen called Lyuerworte, that grows in Wells, dark
cold places, and rocks?


Hilarius. WIthout all doubt Lichen doth so grow in darck places, and is called
Lyuerwort: for it is good against the sickness of the Liver, Hepatica liche
called Lyuerworte.
it is cold and dry. Yet it hath a watery humour, it is unpleasant in savour,
it stops the bloody flixe, it heals a ryngworme, saith Dioscorides:
stamped with Honey, it helps the yellow Iaudice, Diosco. lib. 4. Cap. 48.
if the mouth Tongue be anointed therewith. The juice stops wounds from
bleding: Galen Plinie agree to the same.


Marcellus. What say you then of the herb, belonging to the Lunges, called
Lungworte?


Hilarius. LEonardus Fuchsius saith, Pulmonaria doth grow out of the Oak tree,
or stony places, Lungworte because it is like ye lunges of man.
having soft leaves, the vpperside green, and the nether whitish, with little
small bladers upon ye crumpled leaves, and the whole lump of this herb, saith
he, is like the Lunges of mankind. It is drying and binding, and not cold and
moist, as some do affirm: and the reason is, because it grows from the Oak,
which is of ye same nature, and temperament. And this herb doth close new
wounds together: most chiefly it helps the Lunges, or spitting of blood,
and stops terms immoderate, Super Diosco. lib. 4. Cap. 48
the bloody flux. Mary Matthiolus saith, that Lungwort hath leaves like to
Buglosse, sharp, rough, white spots, purple flowers, very like to the great
Dogs tongue. It hath the same virtue yt the other hath, works one effect:
therefore it is no error, to call them both a like, Lung wort, or
Pulmonaria. Specially, because two great learned men, so call them of their
elders and virtues. The last Lungwort. did Iulianus Marostica, Iulianus
Marostica his strupe for ye lunges.
a noble Phisicion use to sees in water, to the one half, putting in Sugar,
and made a simple syrupe thereof to give his pacients, to stop spitting of
blood, and to heal sores of the lunges.


Marcellus. What say you then to Mercury, what is the virtue thereof, and why
is it so named?


Hilarius. THis ancient invented herb, was found of Mercurius who flourished
about.164. years, Mercury.
before Chrystes birth. He was ye son of Maia, this man was afterward called
one of ye Gods, for his wondrous wisdom, and invention of Music, and other
Arts. He among al other herbs, so loved this, that he for ye singular goodness
thereof, called it after his own name Mercury. Whereof there be two kinds,
Male and Female: the first hath blackishe leaves, Mercury helps conception.
the second whitishe: they be hoate and dry in the first degree. Dioscorides
saith, that these doth move the benefit of the Belly: they be very good for
women after their natural terms be past, to drink either in syrupe, or
decoction, to help conception. The male Mercury for men, the female for women.
This Mercury is very good in Clisters laxative: we cal Rumex Mercury, which
hath golden Sands upon the backesyde of the leaves, which is also solutiue,
and beneficial for the belly. Sodden with Mallowes, it purges the Belly, and
expulseth fleume, but it annoys the stomach, as saith Plinie.


Marcellus. MAllowes so called, ab emollienda aluo nomen traxit, it takes his
name of mollifying the belly: Mallowes.
and they be good with Lattice, parboyled and eaten in fine Sallet Oil, to
mollify the belly. Mallovves for nature be very good,
To relaxe the belly, and purge the blood.



Hilarius. DIoscorides and Galen say, there be two kinds of them, one of the
garden, which is great with flowers like Roses, Galen. Li. vij. simplis.
called Bismalua, and the lesser kind of the field wood: this herb is
commonly known. The more that Mallowes be watery the lesser they be of virtue,
the dryer the seeds are, the more they be of strength. And Mallowes be moist
and slimy of nature, relaxing the belly, but hurtful for the stomach, saith
Dioscorides: the leaves with Salt and honey eaten, heal the pains of the
throat, called Angina. But used in wounds or sores, put in no Salt, they
heal the stinging of Bees: they be excellent good in Clisters, to purge the
belly, raynes, and stone. The root sodden and drunk, and eftsoones vomited,
doth prevail against poison: the leaves stamped, and tempered in oil, do take
running ulcers from the head. And sodden in vryne or peace, do take away
skurfe, skabbes. c. from the Face. The root sodden soft, and laid warm upon
a Woman's breast, A medicine for women's breasts.
with black woolle, doth heal the same, when it aketh, burns, swells, or
is harde. So will the leaves, one handful sodden in Oil and Wine, purge
Women, saith Plinie. The leaves sodden in Wine, warm applied to the mouth of
the matrix, after deliverance of the child, do stay the falling down, and
makes soft. They are good against the Fever, called Sacer ignis, the holy
fire, which we call saynct Anthonies fire, sodden in Oil Vinegar, and applied
to the member, where as it burns. The Seeds drunk in Wine, do cleanse the
Stomach from noysomnes, and rotten stinking fleume and melancholy. The Juice
of Mallowes, often times drunk, helps the falling evil, and also cleanses
ye Lunges, and causes one to speak clear, saith Simeon Sethi.

There is also an other Mallowe, called Althaea, Althos doth signify medicine,
or remedy: this Mallowe so named, is excellent in virtue. Althos do signify
medicine
I think it to be that, which we call the French Mallowe: the leaves and the
flowers be hot and dry, in the first degree, and so be the roots in the
beginning of the second degree. Sodden with Swines grease, Goose grease, and
Terebintin applied to the belly, do aswage the grievous swelling, burning, or
inflation thereof. The same medicine doth open things venomous within the
members, that be stopped, saith Dioscorides. Sees the root in wine, Dioscori.
lib. 3 Cap. 146.
and drink this Wine, it provokes vryne, cleanses the Raynes, eases the
stone, and is good for Ischias, called Sciatica, ruptures, and the bloody
flixe. Galen saith Lib. vj. Simpli. medicamen. the Seeds be good for the stone
and Raynes: the roots sodden, do stop the bloody flixe. Theophrastus saith, to
be drunk in sweet Wine, it helps ruptures, and the cough, and with Oil, it
heals ulcers. And sodden with flesh it doth conglutinate, or join together
things separate within the body: and yet it digests, loses, and concocteth
crude matter, saith Galen* The leaves sodden in white Wine, quench the heate,
abate the swelling of a woman's breast. Who is able to give more commendation or
praise to any herb, than to this herb, for the singular medicine called
Dialthaea, which is in ye book of Copoundes? Mallowes be commended of all
good Wryters. Plinius saith, that the Mallowes in Arabia, Plini. Lib. 19. Cap.
4.
within seven months be fertile, lusty in growing, that they be as big as
staves forthwith, he calls them trees. Further he writes a marvelous history
of a Mallowe, which was monstrous to behold. There was saith he, in
Mauritania, sometime a garden (where Hysperides which were the.iij. daughters
of Atlas, which kept ye garden) wherein grew Orenges, called the Golden Apples,
taken away by Hercules: in this Garden grew a Mallowe, twenty foot long: and
no man was able to fadome the same. Such like Mallowes grow in Inde, and thus
I end of Mallowes, good friend Marcellus.


Marcellus. Cursed fellows, and taunting Merchant, will say in derision,
scorn, and mockage, when they be angry with others: I care not for them, no,
not a Rush: is a Rush of so small an estimation, and nothing worth, as it is
counted?


Hilarius. RUshes do grow in Fens, and dry groudes, and be commonly known.
And I my self did know a Rush growing in a Fen side, by Oxforde in
Suffolke, that might have spent three hundred Marks by year. c. Was not this
Rush of good estimation? Sir Thomas Rush.
A few such Rushes be better, than many great Trees Bushes. But Marcellus
thou dost not know that country, where sometime I did dwell, at a place called
Blaxall, near to that Rush Bush: I would all Rushes within this Realm, were
as rich in value: it would make a flourishing common wealth, and much plenty,
no Beggars, but riches, and a golden World.


Marcellus. THe old proverb is, Wishers and Woulders, be no good
householders: Poverty is better among the common people, than abundance of
riches.
And if there were such plenty* face well labour, art, learning, and
obedience: But need is the prick and whip, that causes the Plowman to
travel, the Mariner to sail, the Scholemayster to teach, and to conclude,
every man to labour in his calling, through which labour, and industry, the
teaching of youth, the government of age, the building of Cities, the
maintenance of good laws, the rewarding of virtues, the punishment of vices,
the defending of enemies, and rewardinge of friends, and obedience to Princes
be maintained. Whereas through such abundance, all were cast away, and every
man would be a master. Every one would disdain service, and so at length, all
should be turned into slavery, If harpstringes were of one degree,
vnpleasaunte were that harmony.
and the harmony of the Common wealth, should be changed into horror, whereas
no order is. Example, if all the Pipes in ye Organes, were of one tune, or one
degree, unpleasant were that Music. But here will I stop, and lay a straw,
and fall into my bias again. I pray thee answer me, what a very Rush is,
which grows in the field?


Hilarius. COmmonly known, and of sundry kinds, as Rushes growing in Rivers,
and running streams: as there be great plenty round about the Isle of Ely, my
native country, whereof the plain People make Mattes, and Horse collers of
the greater Rushes, and of the smaller they make lights or Candelles for the
Winter. Rushes that grow upon dry grounds, be good to strew in Halles,
Chambers, and Galleries to walk upon, Old Rushes and old courtiers, be past
pleasure.
defending apparel, as traynes of Gowns, and Kertles from dust. Rushes be
old Courtiers, and when they be nothing worth, then they be cast out of the
doors, so be many that do tread upon them. A Rush is called Iuncus, that is
a Bull Rush: the Rush bearing black seeds, is called Atrifer, whose seeds
drunk in Medicine, do stop flixe, and terms immoderate: Libr. viij. simplici.
medica.
and the same seeds be good for to cause sleep. Galen speaking of Iuncus,
saith that some bare seed, which is good in medicine, that is, to bring
sleep. The other that have no Seeds, be unprofitable. Dioscorides saith, the
seeds of ye Rush of Inde do bring sleep, used in pocion.

There is also Iuncus odoratus, of two sorts, Plinie doth call the first
Triangularis, it smells as sweet as the Rose, when it is broken. An other
Rotudus, the Apothecaries do call it Squinantum, and grows in Africa, Diosc.
li. pri. Cap. 16.
but yet Dioscorides is of this mind, that the best grow near to Babilon:
because this Squinantum is an English herb, used only of the Apothicaries,
we have it like Ote straw, and is called Iuncus. The flower is Anthos, as all
flowers be so named in Greek: this herb, flower, or root, drunk with Pepper,
do help the Dropsy, being used: and is good for the lunges, spleen, and
Raynes. The root of Squinans herb, is hot and dry, and is good against
wind, collike, dropsy, fleume or crude raw matter in the body, or any member
of the same beaten into powder, and drunk in wine.


Marcellus. OH how sweet and pleasant is Woodbinde, in Woods or Arbours,
after a tender soft rain: and how friendly doth this herb, Woodbynde.
if I may so name it, embrace the bodies, arms and branches of trees, with
his long winding stalks, and tender leaves, opening or spreding forth his
sweet Lillies, like ladies fingers, among the thorns or bushes? Is this
Woodbinde so profitable, as pleasant? I pray you tell me.


Hilarius. WOodbinde is called Siluae matter, Caprifolium, Lilium inter spinas,
Sondry names of Woodbinde, as Periclimenon, because it winds about ye next
trees and Bushes, that it grows unto.
Periclymenon. This herb is so commonly known, that I need not describe the
form thereof: for thou hast done well thereof thy self. But to the virtue of
this Woodbinde, in temperament or nature, it is vehemently cuttinge and drying,
as Galen saith, Lib. 8. Simplic. medicamentorum, the leaves be sower. The oil
of this is good to anoynte any part of the Body, that is numme or very cold:
and the water is good to be drunk against pissing of blood. And also the
Syruppe is good for the Lunges, or one dragme drunk in wine, is very good for
the Spleen, that is stopped, or corrupt Lunges. And there is nothing (in
oyntmentes for wounds of the head) better than this Woodbinde: and Woodbinde
water is wholesome for sores in the Throat and mouth. And it is said, that
women, which use to drink plentifully, or much of this water, are by the use
thereof made barren.


Marcellus. THere is a long winding weed, having the property of Woodbynde, in
spreding, winding, and embracing, or lasing, Bushes, branches, and hedges: the
Leaves somewhat like Ivy, and Flowers like to white Cups, or Belles, what
call you it?


Hilarius. The Bell woodbinde Smilax.

Dioscorides Lib. 4. Cap. 35


THis is called Helxine, Smilax, or Campanella, or the Bell Wodbinde, Antonius
Musa saith, the leaves in likeness, colour and form, be between Mercury and
Plantein. But Dioscorides saith, they be like Ivy, and the Juice of the leaves
drunk, or sodden in Wine, do make the Belly laxative: and nothing else can I
report, but that it is noisome among herbs and Flax.


Marcellus. WHat is the virtue of Senturion, which grows almost in every
Meadow, in May, and June? It hath sweet pleasant purple Flowers, and of diverse
colours, and is soon gone after June comes in.


Hilarius. Testiculi canis Dogs stones
THis herb hath sondry names, as testiculus Canis, or Orchis, or in the Greek
Cynosorchim, Serapias, or Dogs stones. In the Byshoprike of Durisme, in a
place called Warrell shyre, the people do call it Crowfoote, although
Crowfoote be another herb. This Testiculus, or saving your reuence Ballocke
Flower, hath two stones, and named Orchis, an other three stones, which is
called Triorchia, with many spotted leaves, like a Snake. These be of kinds,
Libr. iij. in Cap. 124.125 126.127.
Male, and Female, great little, of both sorts. Some will have Satyrion, which
you call Senturion Dogs stones, both one: but they do err, and mistake the
matter, that make no distinction between them. For there is distance between
them, by the judgment of the Eye: although that in virtue, they be not much
unlike, and thus saith Petrus, Andraeas, Matthiolus, upon Dioscorides and he
doth prove it by this reason: the roots of Dogs stones be like other beasts
stones, Satyrj are beasts having a head like a man, body like Goats and are
named Gods of the woods, and they first found this herb of Venus, to stir up
carnal lust.
they be long, two haging one higher then the other, that which hangs beneath
is full, will sink in water, the other stone is hollow, and will swim. And
this conclusion did one master Ihon Sharman, an ancient good Practicioner of
Northfolke, show me long since: but the stones of the Satire be round without
green, within very white, when the rind is of, and swelled great, leaved like
to ye garden Lilly, but smaller, bending to the ground: soon broken, and three
leaves in number. Then there is an other of the kind of testiculi called Palma
Christi, whose roots be like hands, with fingers Auicen calls them golden
fingers* and be of nature of the greater testicles. The greater testicles be
hot moist, and eaten, either in Goats milk, Dia, or Syrupe, they will
provoke abundantly to Venus. But the little kind, eat either whole or in
powder, do quench, cool, and withstand the said Venus: and brings to dame
nature, cold, trembling Saturne, which is cold dry. But Galen saith, Satyrium
or Satires stones, be hot and moist, sweet to taste upon, and do as the
great testicles* and more abounduantly, and be good against running of the
raynes, and consumption. c. Gieuen to the frentike body, or one whose sinews
be weak in hand, in Polsy it helps them: The seed..j. fine in powder drunk
in wine, morning and evening, or diner and supper, used a long time, heals
the falling evil. Nicolaus Florentinus saith, it helps the quartayne, and it
stops the bloody flixe, sodden in red wine, and heals stinking ulcers,
made in a Plaster. Diasatirion is made of this, which is of virtue most
excellent, as appears in the compounds.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Ligusticum, called Louage, with the long
black seeds, and long white roots?


Hilarius THe herb is great, with large branches, Fuchsius.
stalk leaves smelling much like to Smalage, but much sweeter: it is called
Ligusticum, because it was first found in Liguria, Liguria is a part of Italy
from the hill Apeninus, unto the Tuscum Sea. Dios. li. 3. ca. li
and we cal it Louage here in England, ye Italians call it Ligustico: the
root, herb, and seed, bruised and sodden in wine, or in the decoction of
Ptisane, or Barley water, will cleanse the lunges, open the vessels of the
vryne, provoke terms, or secret infirmities, heal wounds: being sodden and
applied to Phlegmon, or hardness in any outward member, the sore is made
softer. Eritius Cordus calls this common Angelica, but Manardus Epist. lib.
xij. Epist. iiij doth cal it Alexander. Ruellius calls it Louage Galen. lib.
7. simplici.
And warm applied in the manner of a plaster to the Belly of a Woman whose
Child is dead, eftsoones it is sent forth from natures most secret Chamber.
And the seed finely beaten in powder, put in to some wholesome thin broth, or
wine of a piercing nature, doth skower the Raynes, cleanse the spleen* and amend
the liver, expulseth the secondes after the birth of children, and drives
forth wind. Plinie saith, that the seeds will stop the belly, and is good
against the biting of Serpents. c. But the Seed eaten alone, provoke vomits,
and sometime therefore, saith he, it must be given with Few, and so the seed
is good for the dropsy. The roots sod and the decoction drunk, is very
wholesome for the Femenine kind, for ye matrixe, belly, precordials, and
breast: It warms and makes good concoction. Thus I conclude of this
Ligusticum. But Galen saith, there be two kinds of them, the one he calls
Smirnium: the other doth grow in the mount of Amano, called Hipposellinum,
which is called Smalage,


Marcellus. What say you to Apium, which is called Smalage?


Hilarius. THis herb is named Hipposellinum, the great Persiley of Macedon,
The virtue of Smalage, Louage, Alexander, Persiley is to open places, which
st^p urine and wind.
which we name Smalage: other say, it is Olus atrum, which is Alexander. Some
call it Smyrnion, Marcellus and Brasauolus do seem either to mistake, or else
untruly to report of this Hipposellinum. For they say the leaves be rough,
and the root black: But Dioscorides Lib. iij. Cap. lxiiij. doth say, the
root is white and sweet, the leaves be not rough. But Galen made very little
distinction, between Hippofellinum, and Smyrnium: but this is one kind of
Persiley, the horse Persiley, or the Mountain Persiley. Seseli, Smyrnium,
Imperatoria, Elaphoboscum, and Alexander, The virtues of Persileis.
al these seem to be Perseleys. Some greater, and of more puissancy than
other: some called Wyld, some tame. As garden Persiley, mountain water, wood,
or hedge Perseley* c. and all these have power both in root, stalk, leaf,
and seed, to open the raynes, bladder, and to be put in every Antidotarie,
that moves vryne, breaks stone, or cleanses gravel. Or against collike, or
stopping of the spleen, with abundance of melancholy. Sodden in oil any of
these roots, or Seeds drunk, they cast out strong venom or poison: but the
seed is the strongest part of the herb. They be good to be put into Clisters
for the stone, or torment of the guts: and in pultases, for swelling of the
legs or arms. And all these be good against the stinging of Serpents, and
fevers: swelling in the stomach, or dropsy, both in plaster, Clister, or
drunk with clean white wine, or Ptisan.


Marcellus. There is a stinking weed called Dogs tongue, wherefore is the
same weed good?


Hilarius. IT is no weed, but a very good herb, and is called Lingua Canis:
Ruellius and Fuchsius do err saith that famous man Matthiolus upon
Dioscorides, Cynoglossum. Dogstongue. But Licopsis is a kind of Dogstongue,
and called Anchusis. Dioscorides. Lib. 4. Cap. 24.
in calling Dogstongue Lycopsin, for it is not so named, but Dogstongue. And
there be ij. kinds of them, as saith Matthiolus in Dioscoridem, lib. 4. cap.
12^. which about Adryans days the Emperor, were found in ye sands, near unto
Rome. This kind of Dogstongue, hath neither stalk, flower, nor seed, but out
of one root, there springs leaves, lowe by the ground, in the compass of a
little we'll, like Bean leaves, somewhat white, with tender soft wolle. This
herb, saith Pet^us Andreas Matthiolus, is like a widow having no children.
But there is an other Dogstongue, which hath rough seeds, with pricks in the
midst like unto Targets: which seed sodden and drunk, heals tertians and
quartens, and these smell like each other, and be cold and dry in the second
degree. And stamped with old Swynes grease, do make a plaster for a Dogs
biting: It heals old and new cruent bloody wounds. And mingled with Honey,
it preserves the hair from falling, and will quench burninges, tempered with
Uynegar, and sodden in red wine, either drunk, or made in a plaster. It
stops the bloody flixe, Fuchsius.
and restrayneth Gonorrhaea, or distillation of the Seed, called nature,
ulcers, skabbes, pox, or such like. But the first Dogstongue is the best to
make Pills withal, for the reume and Catarre. Galen makes no mention of
this, but Dioscoris and others do.


Marcellus. Dios. li. 4. Cap. 127.
What is the virtue of Hippoglossum, which is called Laurus, or Horse tongue, as
I have heard say, by one that read me a piece of Dioscorides?


Hilarius. THis herb, or small stirpe, is called Laurus Alexandrina, or
Daphne, the Englyshe people call it the laxative Laureola. It dies not in
Winter, it shines like Ivy, or Baize, but is whitish. It bears the berry
within the leaves, red: it is hoate and dry of nature. If..4. or.vj. be sodden
with Symphytum, called Cumphory, in Wine, and so strained and drunk, it will
purge the belly. A little powder of this, is gieuen to children in potage, to
take away the abundance of humidity, kill worms. It makes quick or speedy
deliverance, in childbirth, secondes, and terms drunken three penny wayght,
two or three times saith Plinie: Galen affirms that it forces vryne. The
leaves stamped, and bound to the head, Lib. 4. Ca. 127
take away the payne, saith Dioscorides. With this herb, did that most noble
victorious Alexander, sometime triumph, and his Captains, he wearing the
Diadem. And sometime the best herb of this kind, did grow upon the Mountain
Ida, near to the dolorous City of Troy in Phrigia.


Marcellus. What say you to Sanicula, called Diapensia, Sauicula and
quinquifolium
or the great five leaved leaves, and other five leaved herbs?


Hilarius AMong the herbs for wounds, this is much praised, and doth heal
wounds equally, with any other healing flower, root, or leaf. The Tops of
this herb, are not much unlike Straburies, somewhat whitishe, and is called
Sanicula a sanandis vulneribus, of healing wounds. Sanicle heals woudes.
It grows in dark places in May, and is bitter, hoate, and dry in the
second degree: the syrupe or juice of this herb, is very good to be gieuen to
wounded men, Women, and children, in small Wine, or their other drink. For it
takes effect both to heal, both within and without the body: if it be applied
hoate, upon a swelling part or member, it will assuage the same speedely. The
juice thereof is good also for Oxen, milch Kyene, Sanicle is good for Horses
Kyen.
and horses that be bruised, or wounded: given either in their drinks, or
applied to the hurt member, or place. There is no speedier remedy to help the
lunges, than this herb sodden, and the decoction drunk upon an empty
stomach. And what soever Cumphorie, called Symphyton, can do in woudes, the
same can Sanicle called Sanicula^ It stops the bloody flixe, or helps him
that hath taken to strong a purgation, and stops the immoderate running of
the raynes: now besides this Diapensia, whereof we have spoken, there be her
kinsfolks, called Pentaphillon, or Quinquefolium, which hath five leaves in
number. There be three sorts of them, the great, the mean, and the little:
these be commonly known rather by the forms among the common people, than by
their singular goodness, which in deed they have. As Dioscorides saith. lib
4. Cap. 38. the roots well sodden, and the same decoction drunken, helps the
tertian, and the Mouth washed warm with the same, and so kept in the mouth, it
takes the pains from the teeth, and stink, filth, and ulcers from the same,
and is wholesome in a gargarisme, A good gargarisme, to wash the throat*
for pains in the throat. And if the leaves be well sodden, or the juice,
with Endiue or Planten water and the same drunk eight days, helps the
yellow Iaudice: in quotidians quartens, this herb helps sodden in posset
Ale. Also for the falling sickness, because it is hot and dry, in the third
degree: sodden in Vinegar, it kills a Tetter or ringworme, it heals the
fistula, tempered with Salt and Honey, and stamped together, and put into the
place or hole: The syrupe of this, drunk.xij. times, heals Angina, or
swelling in the throat, and stops the immoderate flux of the Belly, and
terms.

Fragraria Comaron or the Straubery, of the swee^e odour, so named.
Master Andrewe Matthiolus, in his commentary upon Dioscorides, couples
Fragraria, called Strauberies, with these five leaved herbs. Although the said
Straubery have but three leaves, cold in the first degree, and dry the second.
The leaves and roots, will heal Wounds and ulcers, and a flux of blood, and
terms, it provokes urine, and helps the liver. If they be sodden in clean
white Wine, they do cleanse the raynes and bladder: will cleanse the mouth, and
strength the teeth, when they be lose. The distilled water of Strauberies, will
cleanse the dark mists of the even: and also quench heat in the face, To
cleanse the face.
and take away red spots. And the same water is wholesome to delay Wine at
dinner and supper, specially for choleric persons in Summer. The berry it
self being ripe, is partly hoate and dry, so some learned do affirm, but
being not ripe, they be cold dry. These ripe beries strawed into clean
clarifyed Honey, and put in the powder of white Pepper, For a short wind.
do help them, which have short wind, and payne or strayghtnes in their
breast or do use much sighing, saith Paulus Aegineta. There be two kinds of
Strauberies, the greater, and the lesser. Also Rubus idaeus, allow Bramble,
called Ribs, or Raspes. a bery like to the Straubery: these beries stop a
flixe, sodden in red Wine, and drunk oftentimes. Nothing may be compared to
them in that case, and they quench saynct Antonies fire. The leaves stamped,
For to heal the Hemeroydes.
saith Dioscorides. Lib. 4. Cap. 34. do heal the Hemeroydes, to anoint the
place therewith: and also the virtue is to cleanse and dry. And this fruit or
leaf, doth heal the sores in the mouth, and do close wounds new made with
any weapon: and this fruit stamped, and applied plaster ways to the
stomach, helps presently Cardiaca passio, and hoate pains in the stomach,
For Cardiaca passio.
and the burning pains of the eyes, when the said eyes be almost start forth,
as they term them, through great vomits, fall, footebaule, leaping. c. And they
also kill these foul ulcers, that crepe through ye skin, growing upon the
head. The flowers of them, with fine clarified Honey, put into the eye, do
clear the sight, and quench heate, and dry up water contained in them. For
red even.
And of these Ribs called Raspis, be two kinds, the one with sharpe pricks,
which be not so effectual and good, as the other with tender pricks. And thus
I end of these beries, which have the virtue of the Mulberry. Dioscorides.
being an Heathen man, served his prince in battle, and yet learned ye
knowledge of herbs: But many professing the name of Christ, will neither serve
^ one, or learn the other, servants to idleness, abusers of time.
And thus doth that old famous Egyptian Knight and most learned man in herbs
that ever was, without all comparison, called Phacas or Dioscorides write, he
was subject to Cleopatra the queen of Egypt, and to Antonius, and learned to
know herbs in their kinds most truly, and commended these herbs and berries
aforesaid, whose works be greatly advanced, and most cunningly handled now,
by that famous learned Phisicion Petrus Andraeas Matthiolus Senensis. Anno
salutis. 1558.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Arum, which we in English cal
Cockowepintell? And some call it the burning herb, or dragons mace?


Hilarius. THis herb is commonly known, it grows in the Springetime, Aron
called Cucko prick.
leaved like Dragons, in moyste and dry places, and of natuure is hot and dry
in the first degree, and so it is without doubt in the third degree. The virtue
of this Leaf, Seed, or root, tempered with Cowes dung, is good to make a
plaster against the Gout, saith Dioscorides. Plinie saith the seeds thereof
finely beaten in powder tempered with clean oil, help the soreness of the
ear dropped in, the juice heals polipus in the nose: and mingled with clean
Honey, it cleanses the darkness of the eyes: and sodden hot with oil, it
heals Hemeroydes, as Plinie saith, as I have proved the virtue thereof often
times.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Maydenhayre, Called Tricomanes?


Hilarius. IT is an herb between hot and dry, if it be sodden in Wine, Maid
hair.
it breaks the stone: it cleanses the matrixe, brings down the secondes,
as Dioscorides and Galen say, the syrupe of this helps ye spleen and lunges,
the best doth grow upon hard rocks. Great plenty grows about Chiueat hills
in the North, called Ordo Lucis: so doth Ad^antum, which is of the same virtue.


Marcellus. THat herb which you do call Symphytum or Cumphory, you said
before, Saniculum is equal with it. By this I do gather that this Cumphory is
then equal with Saniculum. Wherein is their equality, in savour, taste, or
other virtues, I pray you tell me?


Hilarius Neither like in form nor taste. Symphytum. Solidago. Cumphory.
Consolida. of the healing a comfortable herb so named.
First in form the leaves be like Buglosse, yea, or rather to Solanum, called
the great night shade leaves, the roots great and black without, and white
within, flowers yelow. Secondly, the savour and taste not pleasant, but ye
virtues agree in this point, to heal wounds, yea broken bones, because they
have power to draw forth, and also to glue the separated flesh together: it
grows in Rocks, even so doth it in Gardens, it is of two kinds. c. and is
hot and dry in the second degree. This herb will draw forth filth from the
Lunges, if it be sodden in sweet Water, and so drunk. And will effectually
stop the bloody flixe in men, and menstruall terms, when they do abound in
women immoderatly. To heales broase, or a fall.
This herb assuredly doth heal men, when they be fallen from some high place,
if the fall be not deadly. The like it doth to al manner of beasts. Chirurgens
cannot miss it. Consider also, that there is a lesser kind of Symphytum, of the
third sort called Consolida minor, which is of the virtue of healing, both
within and without the body, and for all broken bones, and doth heal foul
sores in the pudent, or secret places of men Women. These be sufferant
medicines in meates for the wounded men. These be herbs of great virtues, and
excellent in goodness for mankind: Consolido to heal,
and may well proceed of the verb Consolido, of healing ye which was broke,
or joining together things separated, to comfort or make them safe, either in
Oil, Salve, Plaster* c. And thus I do end of this Symphytum.


Marcellus What is the nature of an herb, called Scilla or Squilla, or the Sea
Onion?


Hilarius. THere be two kinds, which of nature be hot and dry, in the second
degree: and yet of a marvelous nature. For the outward rynde is very hot and
bitter, and the core is very cold: therefore they must be cast both away,
after the said Scilla is either roasted, baken, or sodden. For else it is evil,
and hurtful to nature, and thus it must be prepared. Cut of the leaves, which
be like unto the leaves of Aloes, but not so groase. The fruit is as great as a
boys head, of Scilla which is the greatest kind. Goodly medicines be made
both of Squilla, and of Pancras, which is the great and lesser sea Onions.
The second kind is lesser, of the bigness of a great Onion or a Pear, and is
called Pancras, these both spring or bring forth their yellow flowers three
times in the year: and in the Canicular days, roast it under the coals in a
Paper, until it be soft, or else bake it in Clay, or else sees it in shift of
waters, until the water leave bitterness, then take it forth and let it dry in
a shadowy or dark place, covered with a clean Linne cloth then you may put to
it Oximell, that is clean Honey clarified, and sharp Vinegar sodden together,
which is called Oximell simplex: and when the Scilla and this hath stand to
gether in a close double glass in the Sun, all the Canicular days, or else
to make more speed, all that is contained within this glass have bin sodden
together, set it in a vessel with hot boiling water, then it is called
Oximell Scillitici which is of great virtue. This Oximell is good to be eat of
them which have pains in the head, coming of cold, or for them which be
smitten with the fearful sickness, called the Falling evil, or Morbus
comitialis, with opilacion in the head. It also is good for cold rotten
Coughs, and stinking breathes, and chiefly for short winds in the spirable
parts. It helps to aswage the swelling of the Spleen, or the dolor therein:
and casts out filth from the guts, that causes payne and tormenting wind
in them. But beware if any Boil, or festered sore be in the guts, then use it
not to much. And it kills small Worms in the breast, and also cleanses the
raynes and bladder, moving vryne, and heals the yellow Iaundice. The wine
thereof if it be sodden in wine, after it is prepared, provokes vryne, and
cleanses the raynes, and is good against Dropsies. The oil is good against ye
Palsy, and coldness of the joints, or trembling, for the Spleen, and coldness
of the Brain or feet. The vinegar cleanses the inward parts, To heal
ryngwormes and Tetters.
and also kills Tetters, Ryngwormes, and Itch in the Skin.

The seed beaten into powder, and eaten with Honey, doth cleanse the Belly.
Truly this is an herb of great virtue, To heal ring worms and tetters.
as saith Hippocrates. li. ij. Cap. 167. and Galen. li.viij. Simplicium
medicamentorum. and is called the Onion of the Sea. And his Root makes a
mollifying emplastrum, to make warm and soft a harde cold sore, coming of
Melancholy, or cold and dry matter.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of the Marigold, with golden yellow flowers


Hilarius. THe Marigold, named Caltha or Calendula, because it flourishes al
the kalendes of the year: and is also named Solsequium, because it opens his
Flower, Marigoldes.
and turns round al the day after the Sun, and closes in his gold beams at
night. This herb needs no further description, it is so commonly known, and
is hot and dry, the flowers will change the hair, and make it yellow. To move
Sweat.
And this herb sodden in wine, drunk warm, moves sweat, and provokes
terms mestrua^, specially the flowers of this herb, or the Syrupe. Perfumes
of the same, will do the like: the smoke of them to be made in a close
subfumigation, will do the same. The juice warm, put into the mouth, helps ye
teeth if the aching come of cold.


Marcellus. What say you of Nigella Romana?


Hilarius. THis is called Melanthium, which you do name Nigella: for
Dioscorides doth remember this herb in, Nigella.
Libro tertio. Capit. lxxviij calling it Githe, like Poppye. It hath black
seeds, the leaves much like Coriander: the knoppes wherein the seed do grow,
in the top have little horns, and is hot and dry in the third degree. Brose
it, and smell thereunto, put it in a Lynnen cloth, and hold it to the nose in
the morning, and it will stop a cold reuine: temper it with vinegar, and it will
take away headache applied thereunto Even so it kyleth Woormes in the Belly,
applied thereunto plaster ways, mingled with an Ox gaul: the juice dropped
into the eye, heals a disease called Epiphora, which is droppynge of them.
It is good for to drink, to cleanse the Lunges, purge terms, put away wind
and collike, and kyl worms. c. Drunk in wine, by the reason of the
bitterness, it makes way and quick passage for the vryne: and skowreth clean
the bladder, except the stone be confirmed in it. Against poysone.
It takes pains in the mouth, and teeth away. Received in warm with
vinegar, it prevails against poison, as eating of a Spider, or any venom: and
drunk in wine or why certain days, it will draw milk into ye Breasts of
women, cleanse and increase the same: with many other singular virtues, as
Dioscorides, Galen, Plinie, and Simeon Sethi affirm. Of Opium made of black
Poppy.
And wyld Cocle that grows in Corn, is of the same kind: and the juice may
be pressed forth, as Opium, and preserved to medicine to cause sleep.


Marcellus. What virtue hath Poppye, I pray you


Hilarius. THere is wyld Poppye, leaved like Rocket, flowered like Rose: it
grows in corn, the seed red, and is cold ne'er hand in the fourth degree,
Of Poppye wyld and tame.
Dioscorides affirms, if this be sodden in water and applied to the head, or
drunk, it recosileth sleep. It also quenches S. Anthonies fire. called
Sacerignis, or shingles, made in a plaster with Oil of Roses Vinegar. Acacia
this sod together in red wine do stop ye bloody flixe and terms, which
behard to be stopped. But this herb makes the memory very dull, to use it
much: but saffron, Mirth and the Oil of Bitter Almondes, tempered with the
juice thereof, warm, put into the deaf ear, brings hearing, if it be not
incurable. Rose water, woman's milk, and the white of an Egg beaten together
put into the eyes, doth take away dimnes, A medecin for sore eyes very
excellent
burning, rednes, and swelling from them, and clears the sight. Now the
great Poppye, called Papauer of the Garden, which in Greek is named Mecon
there be of two kinds, white black in their seeds and Flowers, the white is
best for it hath all the virtues, many more than I have written of the wild
Poppye. White Poppy is the best.
And the seed is good to be tempered with meat, to make bread, to give to
them that can not sleep: to be put into Milk and so eaten, at night, it
stops the belly Opiu is made of Black Poppy, which is cold, and is used in
sleaping Medecines: but it causes deep deadly sleapes. And thus I do end of
Poppye wyld, and tame.


Marcellus. What is Coriander of nature?


Hilarius. CORION called in Greek, Coriandrum in latin, and bears a round
seed, Coriander.
like in form to a worm called Corus or Crinex: this herb is commonly
known, and is cold saith Dioscorides lib. 3. cap 62. It heals S. Anthonies
fire, Carbuncles, such like, burning things, but Galen observing more
diligently the nature of this herb, whose judgment the greatest number of the
wisest, best learned do follow until this day, doth affirm in Lib. viij. cap
4. de compositione medicamen, Galen doth dissent in this place, from
Dioscorides, in the nature of Coriander.
that it is altogether hot, saith he Si Coriandrum strumas dissolvit, quonam
igitur pacto frigidum erit? that is, saith Galen, if Coriander do dissolve or
wast the kurnels in the throat, called the kings Evil, By what means then
shall it be cold? for it is not possible that such gross hard things should be
wasted of cold things. But this doth both wast and as Simeo Sethi affirms,
the seeds eaten with, or after meat* do warm the stomach, and retain the
meat until it be almost concocted. Therefore the conclusio must be needs true,
Plini. lib. natu. hist. li x^. c^p. xx.
that it is hot and dry. Plinie writes to Marcus Varro Coriander beaten in
powder, mingled with Vinegar, doth preserve flesh from corruption in Somer:

But the virtue is in the seeds steeped with vinegar dried. But to drink much
of the juice of the herb, doth take away the speech, or causes madness: thus
I end of this Coriander.


Marcellus. What is Foenigraece, commonly called Fenicricke?


Hilarius. THis herb is like iii. leaved grass, Dioscor. lib ij cap. xcv.
and the seed grows in a long Cod. The meal or powder, of the sede of
Foenigreeke called Fenecrike, hath virtue to mollify. Sodden in sweet water, it
quenches both within and without any inflammation of the body. The same being
sodden in sharp vinegar Niter, applied warm to the left side, asswageth the
dolor and payne of the Spleen. Even so it doth the like to the liver, having
Oil of Roses mingled therewith: Tenasmus.
this seed is used in many mollifying plasters. The decoction drunk, and the
seed applied to the belly, doth help Tenasmus, which is a desire to go to the
stool, and cannot, or a stinking flixe. Flegmon.
And the oil doth cleanse spots and skars in the flesh or skin where as
wounds have been, and helps Flegmon, which is an impostimation of blood
coming of heate above nature, gathered into some place of the body, and is
hoate in the second degree, and dry in the first, saith Galen libro. viij.
Simpl. medicament. Master Luke of London.
Of Foenigreke is an excellent Fomentum made for the iyen, that be sore or dim:
which I have seen master Luke make, which is an excellent man, in the cure
or Regiment for the eyes.


Marcellus. What say you then of Flax?


Hilarius. Known of every body, but there be two kinds of Flax, Flax.
the wild Flax is not good: the common sown Flax, is good profitable for
linen cloth, without which we shall be like beasts, both at board and bed.
Linen is comely both for men specially for women, and more commendable in the
temple tha holly, and is called in Greek Lynon, and our enlglishe word is
Linen, ye Latin Linum, much like to each other in name. Galen saith. lib. 7.
simplic. medica. The seed of Flax is hoar and moist in the first degree, yet
somewhat drying in the midst: it hath virtue to mollifye ripe, and break
Apostumes, if it be made in meal tempered in swynes grease and Mallow tootes,
warm applied, in the manner of a Plaster. It is used in many medecins, and
Clisters, with oil of Roses, to cleanse sharpe costife humours: but it will make
the belly to swell, if it be used in the manner of meat, yet it will stir up
Uenus, if it be eaten with pepper and Honey. The virtue of linte Oil.
The decoction thereof is wholesome to cleanse, mollify and rypen the
apostimations in the secrete places of women so diseased or pained. The Oil yt
comes thereof hath many virtues: as for Printers to make their Inck of, for
Painters, to temper their colours with, and for varnishing of boards: for the
Armourer in making clean Harnisse, and weapons, and Lamps. Flax Oil, washed
in iiii, or.vi. shifts of clean cold water with a stick, until it turn white,
the with a Spoon taken forth, for it will swim ever aloft, this will heal
burnings, scaldinges, hot inflammations. This Oil mollyfyeth hard sores, and
is good for bone setters, for to strength the Sinews, Iointes, and bones, for
conuulsion, Hemerodes. c. And if it be drunk after poison, it will caste it
forth by vomittes, and cleanses the stomach. Flax being fine, is used with
Repercussiues, as with Bolearmony, and whytes of Eggs. Without f^axe,
Surgeons, can not work, nor help the eyes except fine flax be in it.


Marcellus. THere is an herb, which light fellows, merrily will call
Gallowgrasse Neckweede, or the Tristrams knot, or Saint Audres lace, or a
basterd brothers badge, Neckweede.
with a difference on the left side. c. you know my meaning.


Hilarius. WHat, you speak of Hemp? mary you ferme it with many pretty names.
I never hard the like terms given to any simple, Hemp.
as you give to this, you cal it neckweede. A, well, I pray you would you know
the property of this Neckweede in this kind being changed into such a
lace? This is his virtue. Sir if there be any yonkers troubled with Idleness
loitering, having neither Learning nor willing Hands to labour: or that
have studied Phisike so lunge that he or they can give his masters purse a
Purgation, Many good medecines made of hemp.
or his Chist, Shop. and Countinghouse a strong vomit, yea, if he be a very
cunning practicioner in false accomptes, he may so suddenly, and cashlye
minister, Perilous practicioners. be here described.
that he may smite his father, his Master or his friend. c. into a sudden
incurable consumption, that he or they shall never recover it again, but be
utterly undone, and cast either into miserable poverty, prisonment, bankroute.
c. If this come to pass, then the best reward for this practicioner, is this
Neckweede. If there be any swashbuckler, common thief, ruffen, or murderer
past grace, the next remedy is this lace or Corde. For them which never loved
concord, A quick. medecin.
peace, nor honesty, this will end al the mischief, this is a purger not of
Melancholy, but a fynal banisher of all the yt be not fit to live in a common
wealth, no more then foxes among sheep, or Thistles among good Corn, hurters
of true people. This hemp I say, passes the new diet, both in force and
antiquity. If young wantons whose Parents have left them fair howses, goods,
and lands, which be viciously, idly, vnlearnedly, yea or rather beastly
brought up, after the death of their said parents, their fruits will spring
forth which they have learned in their wicked youth: The misery of vnthri^tes
seems plea^saunt but shame pain is the end.
then banquets and brotheles will approach, the harlots will be at hand with
delights and entisements. the Bawd will do her diligence, robbing not only the
purses, but also the hearts of such young men, which when they be trapped,
can never skape, one among an hundredth until Hemp breaks the band among
these loitering lovers. The Dice which be both small and light, in respect of the
Coluering or double Cannon shot or Bollet, yet with small force and noise can
mine, break down, destroy, and cast away their own masters, houses, fair
fields, pleasant woods, al their money, yea friends, and altogether, this
can the Dice do. And moreover can make of worshipful borne gentlemen miserable
Beggars or thieves, yet for the time aloft sirs, hoygh child turn thee, what
should youth do else? I wis not live like slaves or peasants, but al golden,
glorious, may with dame Uenus, my hearts delyte say they. What a sweet heaven
is this? have at al, Kockes Wounds, Blood and nails, cast the house out of
the window, and let the Devil paye the Malt man, a dog hath but a day, a good
^ariage will recover al together: or else with a Barnardes Blow, lurki^ge in
some Lane, wodde, or hill top, to get that with falshode in an howre, which with
truth, labour, and payne, hath been gathered and toiled for perhaps xx.
years to the utter vndoinge of some honest family. Here thou see gentle
Marcellus, a miserable Tragedy of a wicked shameless life: I need not bring
forth the example of the Prodigal Child. Luke. xvi. Chapter, which at length
came to grace: It is, I fear me in vain, to talk of him, whose end was good,
The innocent sometime dies in the eyes of man most miserably.
but a great number of these, flee from grace, and come to ends most
ungracious, finishing their lives only by this Hemp: Although sometime the
innocent man dies that way, through perjury for his own proper goods, as
Naboth died for his own vineyard, miserable in the eyes of the World, but
precious in the sight of God. This is one service which hemp doth.

Also this worthy noble herb Hemp, called Cannabis in Latin, The
consideration of Hemp in Physic.
can not be wanted in a common wealth: no Ship can sail, without Hemp the
sail clothes, the shrouds, stays tackles, yearde lines, warps, Cables can
not be made without it. No plow nor carte can be without ropes, halters* trace.
c. The fysher and Fouler must have hemp to make their nets. And no Archer
can want his Bowstring: and the Maltman must have it for his sackes. With it
the belle is rong to service in the Church, with many more things profytable,
which are commonly known of every emanne to be made of hemp. Now
furthermore there be two kynds of Hemp, the wyld which is hot and dry in the
second degree, and is called Te^minalis staped with Oil of wormewoord, and
warm applied to the Belly, it doth assuage swelling, and with swynes grease,
the same doth ripe apostumes of sores. This wyld hemp hath leaves like to the
Garden hemp, but rotes and seeds like unto Mallowes. Hemp will kill woormes.
The Garden sown hemp is also hoate dry Plini lib. xx. cap. xxiij. This herb
and seed sodden, strongly pressed, or the juice strained, and powered upon the
earth, doth not only bring forth worms for Fishers* but also dropped into the
ears, doth kyl worms that be crept into them. And Galen lib. vij. simplicium
medicamentorum saith: that to eat much of the seed, doth dry up the seed of
Generation, is an adversary to the head and brings evil humours. Simeon Sethi
saith: Hemp quenches natural seed.
it dries seed as much as doth Camphor, and is hard of digestion, and
hurts as Coriander doth yt is immoderatly eaten, which brings madness. How
be it the sede or leaves sodden, and warm applied to the hands or feet, do
help against the contraction, or shrinkyng of Sinews, which comes of cold
and is helped through the heate of this herb And all syngyng birds which be
plentiful in laying of Eggs, they rejoice greatly in Hemp seed, as in
their chief delicious food. And thus I have no more to say, but to answer
to the next question my dear fellow and Friend Marcellus.


Marcellus. Now I pray you, what is Barley of nature?


Hilarius COmmonly known (...) al this Realm, it is the mother of the best
Malt, Hordium. Barley.
whero^ both Bear and Ale is made: there is Barire double, or with four set,
and single two set The greatest and whytest is best, and it is cold and dry
in the first degree: and doth not noryshe so much as Wheat. Of this Barlye,
being hulled and cleansed from the rynde, beaten or broken, is made the noble
drink called Ptisana: apound being put into ten pounds of Clean water,
sodden unto half, P^ison made of Barley, will quench choll^r
into a stone pot, or tynned vessel, close in the mouth, standing until it be
cold, and then let it run through a strayner, and so drink simple of this,
for it will quench hot burning Choler above nature, in vehement fevers. You
may put in the feeds of white Poppy, and Lattice not only to cool, but also
to reconsyle sleep to the afflicted with the Fever to cleanse corruption of the
Lunges, and horsenesse, with shortness of wynd Put in Figs, Liquoris,
Annisseedes, Reysynges of the Sun, and a little Hysope with Sugar: sees al,
and let it stand close until it be cold, and strain it with a strayner, and
so drink thereof, for the foresaid shortness of wind. To help the lunges.
Sees Barley meal, Lint seed, and Fenegreke seed, and the juice of Few with
Malmesye, warm applied to the belly, will put away swelling and pains in the
guts. The meal thereof sodden in vinegar, will assuage the hoate burning
gout: and this is good against all hoate inflammations of the body. And sees
Barley in Honey, Rosen, and the juice of Chelidon, and it will heal an old rotten
sore. With Oil and Fenegreeke, meal, Against inflamacion heate, or swellynges
in the body.
it will assuage the swelling of the precordal or stomach. Melilote, Poppy and
Honey tempered together, do help the swellynge heate of the Privy members,
pains of the sides or Flesh, which is gone from ye bone with many other goodly
virtues, which Barley hath as affirms Dioscor. lib. ij. Cap. lxxix. Galen lib.
j de aliment. facult. and Theoph. lib viij. Cap. de plant^rum Historia. The
bread drink of the poor be the life of the needy: and he that takes it away
fro them is a murderer.
Barley is the Principal Vine grape of Englande, that our Malt is made upon.
And mother of our Bear and Ale, which Malt in the time of our extreme
need, hath been sold away into foreign realms by certain old known
thieves called Humber, and Lin haven with their branches: from Cambryge, S.
Iues, Milden haul, Thetford and Bradon fery also Yermouth in Norffolke, I pray
god amend ye market, stay such practices, that for the private commodity of a
few, a great multitude be not famished. And now what have you else to say.


Marcellus. IN the eight leaf of Simples, you speak but a little of Barley and
also of Beans and Peas, but smallye to the purpurpose, to mine instruction.
Therefore show me a little more of their natures, because I am a rural man of
the country* and love Peas and Beans, and as I hear tell, many good
medicines be made of them to help in the time of Sickness. I have good plety of
them, more than any other Poticary stuff.


Hilarius. FABA called Beans among pulse be very wyndye, A more larger
description of Beans and Peas.

Pythagoras ^ayed thus: Faba abstineto that is abstain from Beaues. Plinie
Tullie say, be cause of the ingendryng of gross humours he forbade the
Aristoxenes. and Empedocles affirm yt by abstaining from Beans he meant
Lechery or filthy lusts.

Plutarchus says that it was to beware, to be in office. in a common wealth be
cause it is soperilious For coddes swelled.


and bring grievous dreams. Pythagoras would not suffer his Schollers to eat
them: be like terrible infernal dreams did follow, which did hurt the wit, and
the eye sight. They be cold and dry in the first degree, I need not descrybe
them: every man knows them. Being well sodden with Mintes, they do stop
vomittes and the flixe, if the first water wherein they be sodden, be cast
away, and then ye sees them in the second, so they be less wyndye and
hurtful. Bean Meal, called Lomentum, by it self* or with Barley Meal and
Vinegar doth quench inflammations, and mollify hot hard Apostumations, and the
Gout, sod which swynes grease. This meal dries up wounds, milk in the
paps or breasts of women. Temper it with Fenegreeke and Honey, then it will
heal Furunculum, called a Felon, and it doth the like to pushes, in any part
of the body. Temper this meal with white Frankynsence, the white of an Egg,
and Rose water: this helps sore swelled or dropping eyene. And this tempered
with oil and vinegar, doth assuage the swellynge of the coddes of men and
boys, warm applied unto the. This meal doth cleanse the face of women, washed
therewith, tempered in cold milk at night. strain it through a cloth.xx.
times, and let it dry on. And in the morning with a hard Lynnen cloth softly
wet in cold water and Milk, stryke or wipe the face therewith, and keep it from
the Sun, like good huswyues spynnyng a thread of small thrift until night for
their labour: Mary then if they will a mornings, rake in ii. or iii. Reisynges,
half a drame of yellow Alows then flusshyng will the sooner depart from the
face, by that means of opening the Liver and specially if it be in summer. I
refer the worthy consideration of this Beans to Galen lib. vij. simplicium
medic. Although he thereto I have not only alleged him, but other as Dioscor.
lib. ij. cap. xcviij. which by him in Greek is called Cyamos, Beans in the
old time were used for lots
in deed they will partly move Venus lust. And in thold time the general
assent consent, as in a parliaments, elections or questes, were al declared by
Beans. The white beans did grant or affirm, and the Black beans did denay
or refuse: And this manner doth still continue, in many places of Europe. As in
that most worthy rich, and noble city called Uenice, which began Anno. a
partu virginis. 54. When Uenice first began*
Of a fearful number of people which fled fro the cruel hands of a famous
Tyrant Called Attila, the King of Hugary, who brake into Italye, distroied many
places, among al ye most aucient city, chief mart of Europe, called Aquileia,
which is now of no estimation. Of this lost city, be these venecians come,
which have used hitherto to number with Beans. The most worthy, noble,
learned, and valiant Family of the Romaynes, whereof took they their names,
The old Romaynes were more humble than the new Romaynes. late Popes, in
keeping names of bafeltitles.
I pray you? Of any noble old city, as Thebes Troie. c. Or of any valiant
beast, as a Lyon, Tiger, Panthar. c. No forsooth. They took their names only
of pore Beans: Fabius Portius, and their worthy ancestors were sowers and
sellers of Beans, and keepers of swyne, and for their virtues, were advanced,
and kept still their names. Although the sacred Vicar of Satan, called the
Pope, kept not his old name: as example. If he be christened Mark, Laurence,
Cornelius. c. Well when he is degenerated, or triple mitred, then he is new
named, Leo, Clemente, Paulus, Boniface. c. A very Anabaptiste, or ashamed of
his name received in Baptism. Welfare the old Ethnic Romaynes, which
excelled the new counterfecte Christian Romaynes, which were not ashamed to
have Base names, as Fabius had of Beans and Cicero of a Fytche or Tare, took
his name, The time of Cicero.
and for eloquence, his like was never found: and was before Christ's
incarnation forty years. Piso that ancient name of a noble family of the
Romaynes, took their name only of Peson: whose parents were ploughmen, Of base
parents spring noble children
and sellers of Peas.

Therefore of Peas, let us say some thing of their properties, and virtues more
than we have declared in lib. Simplic. And first from whence they came, and why
they be called Peas, and in Greek Pison, in Latin Pisum. The first spring of
them was most plentiful in Greek in a Country called Peloporensus, Peas came
first from Piso in Greece.
in which was a noble city named Piso, by the river of Alpheus. About which
city every five years, the nobles and most worthy Grecians, did prove al
manner of maisteryes, and made tryumphes, pastimes, and plays, in the honour
of Iupiter Ouid ij. de art: Lo, this Peas came fro Piso, and be now in the
most part of Europe, as well as among the Grecians. And of nature they be of a
mean temperament, cold and drying, and in al points like unto Beans, but
not so windy: and more better for nourishing the body, and more clensyng the
belly, saith, Galen, and Paulus is also of the same mind. Let both Peas and
beans be well watered, hulled and tenderly sodden, the best peas pottage,
in shy^t of waters, before you do eat them, drawn through a Colender or
strayner with Onions, Mintes, Pepper. sodden with them. then they will not hurt
the stomach, or move wind, but cleanse the raynes, and make fatness, increase
with seed of generation.

Tares do the same, and nourish Milk, cleanse the Liver, Gaul, spleen,
raynes, the Mouth of the Bladder: sodden in wine, or with diuritike, or opening
herbs as Persely. c. Theophrastus commends them. lib. viij. Cap. v de
historia. plantarum, the white be the best. There is thanks be given to God,
no small plenty of Beans, peas, Fytches and Tares, growing in England: both
white and gray peas, the like of the Beans, to the great comfort of men, A
practice of Inholders their horse stealers.
horse and swyne: Although many Inkepers with their hostlers, through a cast
of legerdemayne, can make a peck of Draff and Beans, buy three Bushels of
clean peas or Beans, whereby the pore Hackney horse if he cold speak, as
well as Balams Ass did, might call his host knave for his labour, and wysh
the Pillory to be his Ghostly Father. For although an horse do both lack
money in his purse, and reasonable wit in his head: yet without all doubt, he
is the best bond slave, in the common wealth, and least can be forborn, as it
appears in his service, A horse is a good seruaunt takes most pains for ma
of any living beast.

Peas growing on the one accorde, without sowing where no earth but stones
was.


both in war and peace. c. And saying his drink is so good cheap, it is
villayny to rob him of his meat. For of al creatures, he suffers most payne
in body: but I will meddle no further in stable matters, but end of that, which
I have taken in hand, that is of Peas Anno salutis. 1555. in a place called
Orford in Suffolk, between the Haven and the mayne sea. whereas never plow came:
nor natural earth was, but stones only, infinite thousand ships laden in that
place, there did peas grow, whose roots were more then iii. sadome long, and
the coddes, did grow upon clusters like the chats or keys of Ash trees,
bigger then fitches, and less then the field peason, very sweet to eat upon,
and served many pore people dwelling there at hand, which else should have
perished for hoger, the scarcity of bread was so great. In so much that the
plain pore people did make very much of Akornes, a sicnes of a strong fever did
sore molest the commons that year, the like whereof was never hard of there. Now
whether the occasion of these peason providence of god came through some
shipwreck with much misery or else by miracle, I am not able to determine
thereof: but sown by man hand they were not, nor like other Peas. Of Otes
called Auena. or Bromos.
And thus I do end of Peas Beans and Tares which be good for man, horse,
swyne, geese, hens.

And now I shall answer you of Otes which in Greek are named Bromos, Auena
in Latin: they be wild and tame of nature, sown in March and ripe before mid
August. Otes do clese the Lunges.
And of Temperament they be cold in medecines, and are of the same virtue that
Barley is in cleansynges, and in plassters they have the same effect also. They
partly warm and dry inwardly: thus saith Galen lib. vij. simplicium
medicamentorum, are of a bynding virtue against the flowing of the Guts, and
are good against Coughs, or foulness of ye Lunges. And Plinie saith lib. xxij.
cap. xxv. Otes sodden in Vinegar do take away molles, blains or spots. And
Otes are a good grain in the common wealth, for men, horse, and fowls, as
they have little other bread in many places of Wales, and Darbishyre. In
Northumberland, horse have as great plenty to eat of them, Plenty of O^ in
Northumberland
as men have in most places of this realm either Wheat or Rye, for their own
food. And in the North this grain is called Hauer, the Southern people cal
them Otes, the It alians, Vena, ye French Auoine, the Arabians Cartamum, or
Churtal: and thus I have ended of Beans, Peas, Otes and Fytches, my friend
Marcellus.


Marcellus. What say you of Wheat whereof our bread is made which is our common
food, and best grain.


Hilarius. THe Greekes do cal Wheat Pyro, many years before the name of
Triticum was found: which is Latin for Wheat. Triticum vero la, Tritticum.
Wheat, or our bread.
quod tritum ex spicis sit. It is called wheat, for that it is threshed, or
broke from the Eires wherein it grows) as saith Marcus Varro. The kinds be
well known both red and white wheat, the tasseled o^ long eared wheat, and the
naked or polled Wheat. The time, manner, and place of Sowing, Reaping,
Thressinge, Gryndinge, Baking, and eating, is naturally known throughout all
this realm. Even so the ingrossiue keeping until it corrupt, and sellinge yt in
to other foreign realms, is known to the, who neither fear god, obey their
Prince, or love their neighbour. And the natural complexion of Wheat, is hot
in the first degree, used in plasters. Wheat meal tempered with the juice of
Henbane, doth stop the flux of the Sinews, and the inflammation of the
Guts, as saith Dioscorides Lib. ij Cap. lxxviij. The Bread that is leauened,
is better to make a plaster for the stomach, than the meal. The iuices of
Mintes. Reu, Sage, To feed of Bran, makes a man lean but flower brings
fatness.
wormwood. c be good to mingle with meal, or crumbs of bread in Plasters for
pained stomachs, put in vinegar. A plaster of ye Bran with vinegar, and the
juice of sower Pomegranets, warm applied to the belly, doth stop the flixe,
and swelling in the guts. Many goodly virtues belong to Wheat, the Bran
nourishes little, bread wherein much Bran is left, Meal and Wax have made
great merchants at Rome.
shall make the common feeder thereof lean. And the pure meal nourishes, and
makes fatness to increase: of fine meal, Starch is made. c. The kingdom of
Antechrist hath not alitlle enriched it self, by Meal and Wax: they have sold
them dear. And many a man hath lost his life, by constantly affirming, The
very Diuynes Dusmen did never agree generally.
that meal would only be changed into bread, but not into flesh. The
determination thereof, I leave to ye learned Divines, but not to the Dunsme,
whose distinctios ma^al, in ye chyefest point in our religio. c

And yet more of Wheat, this precious grayn and corn Theophrastus. lib. vij.
cap iiij. doth name in many places of the diversity of Wheat: as Aphrica
Thrasia, Pontus, Assiria, and, Aegipt. c. And in all these places, Wheat doth
differ in shape, colour, greatness, he writes marvelously of the kinds of
Wheat. He obserueth the nature of every soil and land, and of the mantions
under Heaven, and the climattes, and saith in Asia beyond the Country of the
black Trions, the Wheat grains be as big as green olives, The sondry
kinds matures of wheat.
which be as big as Nutmegs. The Sun and the soil is of such virtue, and
more prodigious wonders writes he of Wheat. Plinie. lib xviij. cap vjj. of al
Wheat in the World, there is none to be compared in goodness unto the Wheat of
Italy, for whitnes and wayght. In Spain there is little Wheat but the Wheat
which they have is very clean, there bread as white as the mean bread of
York, Well, I have sufficiently written of bread in his place: Wheat will turn
and degenerate out of his kind, and be changed into Darnel. Specially in weate
years, so saith Matthiolus in Discordis. lib. ij cap. lxxviij. Wh^at will
degenerate out of kind* that is from Wheat to Darnel.
I have scene the like in a Fe^ld named Helly, in a town called Kelshal in
Suffolke. There be Tongues and Irons made accordingly, which being made very
hot, do press forth the Oil of Wheat, which will heal vicers and wounds,
and all chappes, and open places in the hands, Lyppes and feet, through the
sharpness of the North wind in March: Plasters of Meal, Leaven. Salt,
Vinegar, Butter Oil of Roses tempered together, warm made in a Plaster upon
Leather, and applied to the breast, or any place of him, which hath fallen from
some high place, A plaster for a brosed body
if he be curable, it heals him, geuinge him Vnguentum potabile to drink,
and roll the patient with a long roller or towel, and thus I do end of Wheat,
the most precious and best grain, for the food of mankynd, is our daily
bread:


Marcellus. What be the Lupines which the Greekes call Thermos


Hilarius. THey be like Beans, having seven leaves. Lupines.
somewhat like Bears foot, and are commonly known: whose Meal mingled with
Honey or licked up, or drunk, doth cast worms out of the belly. And made in a
plaster, and applied to the belly, it doth ye like to children: sodden in
Vinegar, it helps the Kings evil, being made in plaster. And also doth
break a pestilence sore, laid on warm. To kill worms wi^h Lupines.
And sees Lupines in rain water until they be wasted, strain this water, and
when it is cold wash thy face and it will cleanse it from foulness and spots.
Mirth, Honey and Lupines incorporate together, and rolled in Wolle, make
thereof a Pessary, and convey it into the place, and it will dryng forth the dead
child, force the menstrual terms. This herb and seed thereof, will kill
Cancers, and skales in the head: tempered with hogs grease, Vinegar and
Brymstone. Diosco, lib 2. Cap. ciij.
Sees it in Persely water, or whaye, and it will cleanse the bladder, and
provoke urine: and drunk with Vinegar, it cleanses the stomach, helps
digestion, expulseth al noysomnesse, or abhorring of meat. Lupines, saith
Galen, be of an earthly substance, and engender evil humours: to be eaten as
meat, they be hurtful, but in medecin good. And they be bitter hot and dry.


Marcellus. What is the goodness of Staphis. Agria?


Hilarius. THis herb Staphis Agria; is called also Pedicularis: for if it be
mingled with Oil, it will kill Life, nothing better for Lousy children, Hawk.
Staphis agria Pedicularis. a seed that will kill life in children, an hawk.
c The leaves be like the wyld Vine with blew flowers, and is hot dry in the
fourth degree. If fourteen seeds stamped, or broken in sweet Water, be
Drunk, it will purge gross, crude, raw humours by vomit: but he which
drinks it, ought to walk after it, saith Dioscorides. lib iiij cap ^j. And
further saith he, the drinker thereof, most providently geeue attendance, to
drink sweet water, unless, else he be strangled with the medecin. This seed
with Oil of Tartar. kills tetters, itchinge, as they term it, mangines:
sodden in Vinegar, warm holden in the mouth doth help the pains in the
teeth, and stop the reume. And with Honey heals ulcers in the mouth, but it
is perilous to be taken down, because it burns. And is good to make an
Apophl^gmatum with: A plaster to bring forth a dead child.
it cleanses the matrix of women, made in a plaster. Plenty of this doth grow
in the countries of Apulia, Calabria in Italy: this I end of this. What have
you else to stay?


Marcellus. What is that sleaping herb called Solanum and his fellows I pray
you?


Hilarius. IT is called Solatrum, Solanu, or Morel, in English ye great sleping
Nightshade, or Dwal. And of this there be.3 kinds among us in England, as the
great Morell, ye little pety morel, Solanum Nightshade* the sleping Dwall.
or Night shade, Alkakengi, which is the Uesicke or bladder herb, to cleanse
the same and open, skower, and purge the vessels of the vryne. The great
Nightshade, with black beryes, like round Plummes, which be venomous when
they be eaten, brings utter madness or death: the lesser causes much sleep.
These be cold and dry of complexion, as Galen saith, lib. v. cap. ix.
Dioscorides saith, that petty Morrell leaves, because of nature they be cold,
their juice with Barley Meal doth quench Sacer ignis, or that we do call saint
Anthonies fire: and by them selves stamped, do help the burning of the head,
or swelling together under ye tongue, applied to them. This juice drunk doth
help the yellow Iaundice, and burning of Choler: Drink but a little sodden
wine of this morrell.3. ii. will suffice.
but if you be evil at ease after them, then drink Oximel Simplex, with warm
hot water, and put your finger in your mouth, vomit. The mad great
Nightshade, is cold in the extreme degree, if one drink one drame, says
Plinie thereof, then they begin to play their pagiantes, past shame. But if
they drink two dragmes, then they shall be star^ mad: but if they eat or
drink three dragmes, then ensues present death, this venom is called Doricmo.
The Alkakingi or Kengi hath beries like Cherries wrapped in a close Husk with
many synguler virtues to cool, to cause sleep, moderately used or taken, I
mean their iuices in Ptisant. But chiefly it excells, for the stone with
Parsely, Fenell, Asparagus, the four less cold seeds, ana.ii. and damask
Prunes.xvi. in number, stamped well together and put into clean whaye, or
Barley water, standing.xii. hours, putting thereunto.ii of fine Reubarbe, Then
strain it, and draw into the same Potion..ss. of good Cassiafistula, or
Uenice Turpentine, clean washed..ss. then drink the same in the Morning: A
good medecin for the stone rains
this will break the stone if any medecin can do it, cleanse the raynes, and
heal any sore in the same, annointinge the back with Oleum Scorpionis. And
thus I do end of Solanum Hortense, called petty Morel, which is good in
medecin, both in wardlye to cool, and also outwardly to cool the head, to
help the eyes from heate, tempered with the white of an Egg. c.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Henbane. I pray you tel me?


Hilarius. HEnbane is called of the Greekes Hyoscyamus, it is also called
Altercum of the Arabians. This herb doth kill swine, An herb of venom
thorough cold, called Henbane.
except they be driven incontinently, through a great stream of water, is
called the Swines bane. The nature thereof was first found by Appollo. This
Henbane is of three kinds: the black, the yellow, and the white. Three kinds
of Henbane.
The white is more better for medicine, than either the yellow, or black. The
seeds be as plentifully growing within the cod, as the seeds of Poppy,
both in form and bigness: it grows upon dungehill sides, or else upon old
ruins, and about broken walls, and is ripe in the month of July. The
temperament or complexion of the white seed, is cold in the third degree. The
white Henbane is* used in medicine.
The other two seeds be venomous, and full of poison. This white seed is
good, with the ointment of Roses. to be laid upon an hoate gout, or swelling
of the privy members, or breasts of a woman, which swells or burns. A
halfpenye weight of this seed beaten in powder, with asmutch white Poppy
seed, drunk in sweet water, or the water of Plantain, doth not only
reconcile sleep, but stops also spitting of blood, and helps the rednes
of the eyes. The leaves of this white Henbane* Barley meal, Vinegar, be good
to make a plaster, to quench the burning of the raynes of the back, or
extreme headache which comes of Choler, and also it helps all
inflamacions. Dioscorides says, this seed drunk in wine, doth heal a
Fever called Hepyalas: even so doth the juice of the leaves. But if this herb
be used, either in sallet, or in potage, then doth it bring frenzy and
madness: the root sodden in Vinegar, does help the payne in the teeth.
Galen also doth utterly refuse the black and the yellow seed, as poison: but
the white he doth accept as medicinable. Plinie doth commend the same white,
saying: if it be stamped with Honey, it heals the biting of a mad Dog.
And with Wine, against ye biting of Snakes, And against thoughes, streightnes,
through great extreme filth of the lunges. The oil thereof helps the
deafnes in the ears, dropping in but little. Plinie would that none should
use more than four leaves of this herb, or the juice thereof at once. For who
so uses more, shall be in danger to sleep without waking. And thus I end of
Henban, which is also called the poison, or bane for Hens.


Marcellus. What is the nature of Humlocke, that stynkyng weed?


Hilarius. HUmlocke is called Cicuta in Latin: the Greekes call it Koneion, The
most cold herb and a poyson^
that is to say, a tyrant or killer of men, for it is cold above nature, if it
be taken within the body. The cruel murderers of Athenes, did most
traitorously, maliciously and falsely, poison their chief patron, and well
spring of learning, called Socrates, an excellent Philosopher, Son to
Sophroniscus a Mason, and Phanarista, a midwyfe, which were his Parents. This
man when he had best the knowledge of natural Philosophy, gave himself to
moral Philosophy: he was virtuous in living, and disputed against them, that
were called Sophistae. This man breasts of learning: gave forth the milk
of knowledge, unto the most famous clarks: Plato, Xenophon, Xenocrates. The
death of Socrates was with wine, and the juice of Humlocke.
And after he had taught a lunge time in Athenes, he was by the Malice of
Anytus and Miletus accused, to have spoken against their Gods: wherefore he was
condemned to death, whose death was the juice of this Humloke, called Cicuta,
mingled with wine. After which drink, he did expyre the breath of Life,
before the year of Chrystes incarnacion.367. Dioscorides saith, To help him
that hath drunk Humlocke.
who so ever drynketh of this venomous juice, the remedy is only to drink a
great draft of clean new wine alone without any other myxture put thereunto
with speed. The juice of this, saith he, doth quench that disease, which we
call S. Anthonis fire, applied to the burning place. It doth extinguish or
quench the heat, which is above nature, either in the breasts of women, or in
the privy members of boys or men, called the colt evil among horses, but in
men the abundance of nature, with heate gathers upon a lump. Humlocke is a
venomous herb.
And it doth quench and dry milk, in women's breasts. Plini writing of the
nature of this, says it was the public or common death, used among the
Athenians. The seed and the leaves, have power through coldness, to kill both
inward, and outward parts of the body: the remedy is this, says he before it
come to the vital parts, to drink hoate wine, but drunk with wine it is
incurable. But the juice of this, dropped into ye eye doth quench the heate,
and cleanse the sight, and heals a disease called Epiphora says Anaxilaus.
And thus I end of this venomous herb, which here in England, women use to
buck their clothes with: and Weavers do make quylles upon their stalks, which
be called Kexes.


Marcellus. What is the nature of the Artichoke, whose heads be sodden with
Beef, and used among us for meat.


Hilarius. Scolimus. Cinara. Artichocke.
THe Greekes call it Scolimus, it is also called Cinara, because this herb
delights to grow in earth, mingled with Ashes: Some suppose it to be named
Cinara, of a maiden who as the Poets did fain, was transformed into a great
Thistel, or an Artichoke: this herb is commonly known, and is of two kinds.
That which is full of pryckes, both in the fruit and leaves is wild, and of
small effect, and that is taken to be Scolimus, Cinara the tame or Garden
Artichocke, is good. The root or leaves being sodden, or drunk with wine, do
heal the stinkyng and filth in the bladder or yard of a man body: and make
the vryne sweet, and cleanse melancholy or fleume, which doth abound. This
saith Dioscorides and Galen, A nourishing herb.
in lib. ii. de alimentorum facultatibus. This fruit doth nourish the body,
and increases the seed of generation, both in Men Women, if it be well
sodden, in potage or Wine, and is a prouydence of Nature, and heals. Plinie
doth greatly commend this herb, saying: if the root be sodden in wine to the
third part, it is wholesome to be drunk, either after the bath, or after
Meat: and doth cause vryne to be cleansed aboundatly, through which the
corruption of the raynes and Bladder, shall be purged effectually. And thus I
end of the Artychocke, which is hot and dry of nature, as appears by the
taste in the Mouth, which will burn, and is bitter in the mouth.


Marcellus. What is the nature of Trifolium, called the three leaved grass?
Ttiple grass,



Hilarius. THis herb bears a sweet flower, and every day his nature is, to
leese vii. times his savour or odour in a day, and receives it seven times
again in the same day. But being dried, it kepeth still his savour. Two kinds
of Triple grass.
Of this herb there be two kinds, the one of purple colour sweet, and the
other white flowered, and not so sweet. The roots be long white: this herb
grows in every meadow in June and July, is hot dry in the third degree.
Dioscorides says, the seeds and leaves, sodden in water or wine, and so
drunk do not only help the diseases of the sides, but also the falling
sickness, Triple grass hath many virtues, and celleth against poison
the dropsy, or water crepyng between the skin and the flesh, the strangurye,
both in men and women. And also purges the humours menstruall: three dragmes
of this, stamped with Oximel, and drunk in wine, doth help the biting of all
venomous beasts, and will not suffer any venom to come within the body. Even so
it helps both Tercians and Quarteins. Galen is of the same mind, and Plinie
doth affirm the same: that it prevails against poison and venom,
drinking.xxv, grain weight, of the leaf, or the seed. And this saith he, is a
goodly Antidotarie, also there is no Serpent dare come near the triple grass:
it is wholesome to make warm, and heal wounds, and cankers. And thus I end
thereof.


Marcellus. What is the blessed goodness of that worthy herb, Valerian*
called Ualerian, which some do cal the blessed herb?


Hilarius. IT is named Phu in Greek, and Nardus Siluestris in Latin, or
Ualeriana there be of it two kinds, the great and the little, this herb of some
learned men is called Triacle, because it will cleanse venom from the stomach
sides, and cleanse the stopping of the matrix, and the urine, as Plinie
affirms, being drunk in wine. Dioscorides says, if you dry this herb
drink it, it will move vryne, and help the dolor in the sides, and force
Terms menstrual, and the best of this doth grow in Pontus. We have good
Ualerian also of good virtue, to help inwardly for the stone, and outwaedly
for Wounds? and a goodly precious Balm may be made thereof, to heal wounds
with al. The Spaniards do call it Herba benedicta, the blessed herb because it
gives such health, to purge terms, and help the stomach. For woudes.
It is not much inferior, to the Narde of Inde: but for the stone, it is
better. It is hot and dry in the second degree: and will grow in moist places,
Ualerian makes salves of great goodness.
of a great height. They do greatly err, which do take Calamus roots, in the
place of Ualerian: the root hath many small roots, growing unto it, like unto
the Bears foot roots, or the roots of Iuncus Odoratus: somewhat yellow
sweet are best, and must be gathered in Summer, and dried for pessaries, and
clensyng of urine: this herb is commonly known, for his singular virtue, among
Phisicions and Surgeons, and also precious for women. And sodden in Wine,
with Fenell seed and Mastick, it is diuretike, and most best for them, which
have either the collike or stone.


Marcellus. What is the nature of Columbine which bears pleasant blew
flowers, whereof some also bear white?


Hilarius. A Columbine is called Aquilegia and is commonly known, the flower
of five heads, A columbine.
like unto Egles, meeting together in the neither part of the said flower, the
upper part spredeth out with wings, and feet answering unto the same,
therefore it is called the Egles herb: the Leaves be like unto the greater
Chelidon, but somewhat rounder and softer: For swelling in the throat.
it flourishes in the month of May, and is somewhat hot of nature, and doth
dry up Scabs and Fistulaes if it be stamped and applied unto them in the manner
of a plaster: it helps also to resolve, cleanse, and scour Struma or the
painful swelling in the throat, called the Kings Evil, received in Milk,
sweet wine or Oximell squilliticum either drunk or used in a Gargarisme
warm: if the juice thereof be mingled with wheat meal and made warm this
way, it hath in Plaster great virtue to dry up moist humours in Biles or sores
Many do affirm it to be Aegilops, wherein they do greatly err, for that is a
kind of Oats or else Iuncus odoratus whereof is mention made before. But this
Columbyne may be used in his place. It also cleanses young children if it be
put in their drink from a filth growing in their body through the abundance
of heate, A. h. medice.
called in the south the Redgome: but in the North it is called the Felon, and
thus I end of this herb,


Marcellus. What is then the nature of Chelidon, commonly called Cellenden?


Hilarius. IT is called in Greek Chelidonion Mega. that is the great Chelidon
or if you will, Chelydonion.
ye Swallows herb, for a Swallow in Greek is called Chiledon: and it agrees
well to the reason that Plinie makes concerning this herb, which observed
first the Nature of the same, saying, it doth grow when Swallows do breed,
and if through the heate of the swallows donge, their young ones loose their
sight, left soones nature hath taught the old ones to gather this herb, through
whose virtue the said young birds receive again their sight: this herb is
hot and dry in the third degree, Swallows dung will make blind. example of
Tobias.
and is commonly known of every reasonable Man or Woman. Dioscorides lib. ij.
cap. clxxvj. saith: if the juice be strained into a brazen Uessel, and mingled
with Honey and so boiled into a thyckenesse upon a soft fire, this hath virtue
to claryfye the Eyes, and to lighten the sight. The leaves, stalk and root,
s^amped and strained in Summer, and kept in a close Uessel, For sore even
and dried by little and little of it self in a shadow place, this juice is
good to make Trosses withal, to heal the eyes. The root thereof sodden in
white Wine, with Annysseedes, and so strained, is good to be drunk against the
yellow Iaundice stopping of ye Gall And also it drives away all manner of
Choler aduste out of the body: if it be sodden with vinegar, Honey, white Rose
leaves, and Swynes Grease, it cleanses the body from Scabs, Biles, Soores,
and Cankers. Many precious Ointments, waters, Salves, and balms, be made of
this herb, as Galen, Plinie, and Ramundus Lullius, saith: it may rather be
called Celidonum yt is a gift of heaven for the synguler gift and goodness
thereof, rather than Chelidonium, or the Swallows herb: and thus I end of
this most precious herb called the great Chelydon. There is a another lesser
Herb of this name which is also called Scrofularia minor, having Leaves much
like unto Azarabacka or Ivy, having many small roots white, in the form of
Pears, but very small, and this herb hath yellow flowers, varnished with in
like gylte, which the common people call King Cups. Theophrastus saith in.
lib. vij. cap. xiiij* this herb vanysheth away when Swallows come in, or
begin to breed: Dioscorides lib. ii. cap. Clxxvij.
Galen says that this Herb is hoatte and dry in the fourth degree.
Dioscorides says it will exulcerate or blister the skin, by which means it
cleanses, scours, and casts away foul scabs, and leprouse matter from
the skin. The Juice being tempered with Honey drawn up into the nose,
purges the head. After this manner used in a Gargarisme, it doth cleanse the
throat, and corruption of the stomach and lunges. This Scrofularia or small
Cellenden is extreme hoatter in Asia than it is in Spain, and more hotter of
nature in Spain, than here in England. Scrofularia
In Scotland I have seen the people eat of this small root parboyled with
other cold sallet herbs, with clean Oil, Sugar and Uynegar: for every herb
flower and root must be observed according to the nature of the region as well
as of their own teperament. And thus I end of these two herbs


Marcellus. What say you then of an herb called Pimpernell?


Hilarius. IT is called Pimpynella or Pampinula, whereof be two kinds, the
greater and the smaller, Pimpinella. is good against the Pestilence.
These Herbs be commonly known with long roots, cornered stalks, agged
leaves, white flowers and small seed, and doth grow in every place, as
Feldes, Woods, Pastures and Meadows, and it is hoate and dry in the second
degre nerehand to the third: the juice* of this herb is drunk against the
biting of Serpents. If it be drunk in wine, it cleanses the rains and bladder.
Nothing is better against the Strangury, both in men and Women. The dystilled
Water of this Herb doth dry up moyste humours in the eye, which we call
blered watryng eyes: it cleanses spots from the face: and drunk with
Mithrydatum, there is nothing better against the Pestilence, and thus I end of
this herb.


Marcellus. What say you then of an herb called Sheperdes purse.


Hilarius. THis herb is called Pera pastoris, Sheperdes purse. to stop blood.
because it is like a bag which sheperds do use to wear. The seed is not
unlike unto a little hart of a small bird. The leaves be like unto Rocket, it is
cold of nature, and stops blood or flixe, being drunk with small Red wine or
Plaintain water A plaster made of this herb with vinegar and fresh swines
grease, doth quench all inflamacions, or heate of the body, as the Shingels. c.
The juice alone doth heal a new wound, and stop the blood. Nothing is better
to restrain the immoderate flixe menstruall, than to make a fomentum, and
moist bath of this herb, and to sit over it close, and to drink of the same
clarifyed in Red wine. Many great learned men do affirm, that the only
holding of this herb in a mans hand, doth stop the blood flowing at the
nose, or any other part of the body. Many marvels might be declared of the
virtue of this herb, but to the ignorant and incredible, it is but vain to
write any farther, and thus I end of Shepards Purse, or blood stopping herb.


Marcellus. What is the nature of Lyons foot, called Pes Leonis*


Hilarius. Lions foot. Pes Leonis.
It is in form like unto a Lions foot, with broad jagged leaves, with viii.
indented leaves together in one, small flowers, yelow in colour, the stalk.vi.
handful lunge, with a root finger bigness, in colour somewhat red, in nature
this herb is dry in the second degree: the juice thereof doth join new wounds
together, and heals them quickly, the decoction thereof is wholesome to wash all
manner of wounds new and old, To heal wounds and sores.
with warm linen clothes, washed in the same: and the Decoction heals
women's sore breasts: if this be drunk in wine, it heals wounds inwardly, in
the breast belly, and guts: and draws up the guts in young children,
that are slypped down from the body, through occasion of weakness, coldenesse,
or the flixe. This is an excellent herb for Chirurgens, to heal wounds with
all, and thus I end of Lyons foot.


Marcellus. What have you else to say of the nature of an herb called
Knotgrasse, or cumber field?


Hillarius. Knotgrasse, Kneeherbe, or Poligonon.
IT is called in Greek Polygonon, because it hath so many knots, like knees
or ioynctes, there is an herb that stops blood better than this doth, and
it bears an infinyte number of small seeds. The leaves be like unto Rue,
somewhat longer, and by every lease the seed doth grow, and bears a small
white flower. This herb is taken to be a weed of no estymation, and is cold
and dry in the second degree, and in the beginning of the third. Dioscorides
says, it hath virtue to restrain and cool, if the juice be drunk, either of
them which spit blood, pysse blood, or else have ye bloody flixe.
Notwythstandyng, it doth cleanse the raynes, and prevent or put away the fit of
a fever, if it be drunk one hour before the access of the same. It stops
the flixe menstruall, either in a vomit or a bath, or to drink the same with
wine. It doth the like against the distyllyng of the whytes of women. Dropped
into the ear, it fortyfyeth the hearing of them which be dull or stopped.
This herb stamped with Honey, doth heal soores, infectyng ^o corrupting the
privy or secret members: the leaves thereof do quench the burning Shingles,
hoate inflamacions, and join heal and cleanse new wounds. There is no better
plaster than this against the heate of the stomach, and this affirms Galen
and Plinie, this much of this herb.


Marcellus. What is the nature or virtue of Stoechados.


Hilarius. THis is a noble Herb, and of great virtue, leaved like unto Time,
Stoechadus or Stoechas.
with knops in the top like Hoppes, whereupon grow purple Flowers, sweet of
savour, bitter of taste, the root is small and hard, it bears flowers in
June, and it is of a restraining temperament, somewhat cooling: the decoction
thereof helps the lunges even as Hysop doth, and is put in many medicines of
great virtue: it doth extenuate or cleanse the inward parts of the body, the
Liver, the Spleen, the Reigns, Guts, Stichados good for the Spleen. c.
and privy members: provokes terms menstruall, and helps all the dyseases
of the stomach, and thus affirms Dioscorides, Galen, and Plinie: this Herb
grows in Arabia, and is brought from Alexandria, Dioscor. lib. 3. Cap. xxvi.
Galen lib. 8. sim. medica.
even so there is great pleney growing upon the Mount Gargane in Italy. The
Arabians do call it Astochodos, the Italians call it Stoechade: and thus I end
of this worthy strange Herb, which grows not commonly in Englad, but the
Poticaries have it.


Marcellus. What is the nature of Verbascum.


Hilarius. THis herb is of diverse kinds. The one is called Mullen, which is a
long herb like a wax taper, Verbascum.
bearing yellow flowers in ye top with small seades, which is called the
white male Verbascum: but the white female is in the same form, and bears
white flowers. Then there is a kind of black Verbascum with great roots,
sondry branches, and yellow flowers, and these herbs be called Lunge wort,
among the common people. The third kind is called Pagles, or Cowslips.
Cowslips or Pagles.
These herbs are commonly known, and be of a drying nature, do greatly restrain
or stop ye belly, in the time of a bloody flyxe, the decoction of the being
drunk warm. The water of them quenches the inflamacion or burning of the
eyes. This herb stamped with clarifyed Honey in a Leaden mortar, putting
thereunto wine and Vinegar, doth make a medicine to heal Ulcers withal. This
same medicine is good against the stynging of an Adder, Snake or Wasp. The
juice of their leaves tempered with washed Oil of Lynseede, doth heal
scalding or burning of the skin or flesh. The pith which is in ye root, is
good to heal Fistulaes. And al the flowers sodden in vinegar, do heal the
Kings Evil, applied to the place, or in gargarisme: ye root, seed, or leaf,
sodden in Wine, is good, not only to be drunk against all dyseases of the
lunges, breasts, sides, and raynes, but also casts out of the flesh any
thing therein fixed, as Nail, Thorne, or prycke. Of this herb is there a
synguler medicine made for beasts, Horse, Cow, or swyne, after this manner.
Stamp this Herb, putting therein Fenicreeke and Madder with warm Ale, convey
it into the throat of the sick Beast, with a Horne or tonnell made for the
same purpose, and this will heal and cleanse their Lunges. For lack of this,
and many such good like medicynes, do many Beasts dye. Therefore, good
Marcellus, take here none occasion to dispyse this my regement for men,
although I here show a little medicine for beasts, for we without them should
live very beastly. They be the gifts of God, his creatures and our servant:
and thus I do end of this herb called Verbascum, Mullen, or Cowslip.
Primrose also is of the same kind.


Marcellus. What is the nature of Tormentill:


Hilarius. THis herb is calsed Ceptaphillo, Tormentill, or of some Bistort:
this hath leaves like five fyngers, but that it hath.vii. leaves in number
jagged or tothed like a Saw, Tormentill doth grow di^minish with the vine.
growing about the stalk with yellow golden flowers. with a great root.
Plinie saith lib. xv. cap. ix that this herb doth begin to grow, and vanish
when the Uyne doth grow and wyther: this herb also grows upon hills, and in
Heath ground, and in Woods. The temperament or complexion of this herb is
cold and dry in the third degree, say the late writers, but others affirm not
the same, but rather that it should be hot in the third degree, 1. Fuchsius in
hist^ strip.
and that appears by his faculty, it wants coldness in the third degree, but
rather is of the nature of Quin{que} folium, and the root is dry in the third
degree, and hot. Paulus Aegenita saith, if this herb be stamped with Oil, it
will heal the sorenes of the feet or feabbes, within three days, Against the
Pestilence
The new wryters say, it will close heal new wouds, and cleanse the eyes. The
powder of the root, with the juice of Planteine, is drunk against the
stopping or scalding of vryne, it is good against poiso. pestylence, and bloody
flixe, Kings evil, filth in the mouth, and sorenes or swelling of the
stomach or Spleane, Liver and Belly, and stops blood, if it be drunk in
the decoction, the Water, or powder. Sheep which feed thereupon shall not dye
on the rot and that I have seen proved in sundry places in Norfolk,
Tormentyll kepeth Sheep from the rot.
and in a place of Suffolke, called Blaxall, upon a little sheep walk, in the
same Town, whereas Sheep lived many Years without rottyng, through the
virtue of this herb: and Shepardes have observed the same. And thus I end of
Tormentyll.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Rocket Gentle?


Hilarius. Eruca or Rocket. Dioscor lib. 2. Cap. xxiiij. Galen lib. 2 de
aliment.
THis herb is called Eruca for it doth ^rode and burn with heate, an bites
the tongue, it also smells like a Fox, the seed grows in a cod like to
Rapes with a white root, yellow flower, and jagged leaves, and is very hot of
nature, and increases seed of generation, And the people of Spain, says
Dioscorides, did use this Rocket seed in the place of Mustard: it hath virtue
to provoke plenty of vryne. Galen saith, eaten alone, it hurts the head:
therefore his council is to eat it with Lattice, to rebate the heate. The
roots sod in water, will draw forth a broken bone, The seed is good against
the sting of Serpents, and poison of Spiders made in plaster: and drunk, it
hath virtue to expulse worms out of the belly, saith Plinie.


Marcellus. What is Serpentaria?


Hilarius. OF this herb, there be two kinds, the male is called Bistort,
Bistort hath a crumpled root, lying wrinkled like a serpent, but ye female
root is black, with out, and red within, and a great knot in the end.
ye female is named Colubrina, the leaves be fashioned much like Beetes, a
small stalk with a bush in the top, and grows in dark places, and is
cold, restraining and drying in the third degree. The root hereof doth heal
and glewe wounds together in a plaster, doth chiefly stop the bloody flixe:
the powder or decoction restrayneth vomits: and it stablisheth the teeth, the
decoction warm holden in the mouth. It hath the same virtue which Britanica
hath in stopping or restraining: it doth retain the new conceived seed
without hurt in the Matrix of the Mother, and thus I end of Serpentary.


Marcellus. Giloflowers are sweet and pleasant, but are they good for any
medicine?


Hilarius YEa forsooth, they are no less profitable, than pleasant, and
greatly commended among the old Wryters: Gillofloures. Matthiol. in Diosco.
lib. 2 Cap. 152.
for Dioscorides reports of them, that they do not only preserve ye bodies of
men from corrupt Airs, but also keep the mind and spyrituall parts, from
terrible and fearful dreams: through their heavenly savour, and most sweet
pleasant odour, they do fortify the brain: there is no Apothicary can by any
natural Art, make any confection so pleasant as this is, which nature hath
wrought most wondrous in pleasing of the senses, both of seeing and smelling.
If Gilloflowers be stamped, Gilloflouers will heal wounds.
they heal new wounds of ye head, and draw forth broken bones. The
decoction of them is good to wash the head withal. The Oil of Gillofloures
doth heal the biting of a mad dog, and wounds of the sinews, and cold
goutes. If this flower be sodden in white Wine, it drives away the terror of
a Tertian, and the horror of a Quarten, being drunk warm before the fit: and
by ye means also be Worms killed in the belly. This herb of nature is hot
and dry, of this there be sundry kinds, some small and some great, and of
sundry colours, as white, red, carnation. c. And is called Garyophyllum, or a
domestical flower, and in the old time it was used to be put in the Gardens
among the Romayne virgins. The root is good against the Pestilence and
Falling sickness, and thus I end of Gilloflouers.


Marcellus. What is the natural virtue of Houslyke?


Hilarius. IT is called Houslike, Sedum. Houslike.
and Seengreene in the South parts of England, but in the North it is called
Full, in Latin it is called Sedum or Semper viuum, that is evermore living,
and never dying: therefore the old Wryters do call it Iouis barba, Iupiters
Beard, and hold an Opinion supersticiously that in what house so ever it
grows, no Lightning or Tempest can take place to do any harm there. The
leaves be like unto Tongues, this herb is commonly known, and thereof be
three kinds: the greatethe mean, and the less, and of temperament and
complexion, they be somewhat drying, and vehemently cold, I mean the two first
kinds, But the third, which is the least, called Stonecrope, is hoate in the
third degree, and will burn the tongue, if it be bitten upon, Dioscorides
calls it Telethion. Diosco. lib. 4 Cap. lxxxvii.
The great Houslike doth quench hoate Apostimacions, Biles, painful sores,
Felons, Rednes in the eyes, Scaldyngs and burnyngs, and the richmannes evil,
Many goodly medicines made of houslike.
called the Gout: either stamped by it self, or else mingled with Barley meal,
oil of Roses and Vinegar: and this way it doth help the head, and reconcile
sleep. The juice of this herb drunk in wine, prevails again the biting of
venomous beasts, bloody flixes, and womes terms flowing immoderatly, and
kills worms in the Belly: and thus affirms the said Dioscorides, Galen,
and Plinie. But the third kind, called Telethion, hath virtue to make hoate,
to blister the skin: and stamped with Hogs grease, it doth heal the
kings evil, or pains in the throat, if it be warm anointed therewith
oftentimes. And thus I do end of this Houslike, which is commonly known,
growing upon walls, or house tops: and of the other.ii. kinds, growing upon
ruins, rocks of the sea side, or broken walls.


Marcellus. I Pray you, be not Nettelles a noisome kind of weeds? Me think
they should be none other: as appears by their spyghtfull stinking, for they
be fearful, both to Man, Woman, and Child, sondrye kinds of beasts.


Hilarius. A Nettel is called Vrtica ab vrendo, of burning, blistering, or
stingyng of the skin. There be two kinds of Nettelles, Vrtica the* Nettle.
the common Nettell, and the red Nettel. There is also the third, though not
commonly known in these parties, called Vrtica Romana, the Romaine Nettel, of
the which, there grows plenty about the walls of Yarmouth. This Nettel
bears great beries upon it, and the other Nettles but sedes: and of nature
they be al very hot and dry. Dioscorides says the virtue of them, is to
heal the bitynge of a mad Dog, stamped with Salt, and so applied to the
wound. It doth the like unto Cankers and to cold swelling Apostumacions: ye
juice put into the nose* Netele sedes will serve in the place of Pepper.
stops bleedyng. The juice tempered with clarifyed Honey, cleanses the
lunges, stomach, and sides: drunk with Ptisant, it doth cleanse the belly,
and matrix of a Woman. The juice also tempered with Myrrh, will move terms
menstruall, if it be drunk warm. The seed thereof finely beaten in powder,
and drunk in wine or broth, doth augment and increase the seed of
Generation. The seed of red Nettels, being gathered between the saint Mary
days, may serve poor Men in steed of Pepper, and hath the very taste of
Pepper, and is good to season Pies, or what you will therewith. And of virtue is
accounted, of no less Value than Pepper: the Leaves of Nettelles sodden with
Oysters, cleanse the Raynes of the Back, scour the Bladder, and provoke
Uryne. And they are good against obstructions, and stoppyng of the Liver, upon
cold causes, and kill UUormes: the syrupe thereof is most excellent to be
drunk of women, in their painful travail of children, and causes spedy
delyueraunce. And thus I end, of the nature of Nettelles.


Marcellus. What is the nature of Paeonia?


Hilarius* This is an herb of an excellent virtue, Paeonia is called the chaste
herb.
and is called ye chaste herb: ye coddes thereof are full of grains, in form
to the Pomgarnet. There be two of them in kind, the male and female. It is
said that the noble Clarke Bias was the first inuenter of this herb: this is
commonly known amongst us here in England. The flowers are like unto a Rose.
The seed doth grow in a cod, which seeds be of colour red and black, and it
flourishes in May: A good medicine for the falling sickness. and the yellow
Iaundice, made of Pionie.
the root is somewhat byndyng of nature, neither bitter nor sweet, but
between both. And is of a drying heate, in the second degree, and warming in
virtue. Galen declares yt a child did not fall, as long as he had this root
hanging about his neck, But we have oftentimes proved it contrary: but for the
falling sickness the powder thereof tempered with Mugwort water, and given unto
ye sick pacyent: prevails greatly again the falling evil. The juice of this
herb or powder, is good to be drunk against the stoppyng of the gaul, liver,
or raynes: if it be sodden with old red wine, and drunken, it stops the
bloody flixe. The red grains, do stop the red menstruall humour: the
black grains, sodden in red wine, do fortify and strengthen the matrix in
them in whom the flux of blood doth abound. The root sodden in wine and
drunk, purges the belly, puts away the collike, makes clean the guts,
defends against frensies and passions of the brain, strangury, and biting of
Serpents. But there must no more be taken in medicine at one time, but four
drames: and what is better than Pionie against the yellow Iaundice, being
drunk in white wine, with the powder of Saffron? This and many more virtues
hath this worthy herb, and is beloved of the Spaniardes, and of them it is
called Rosa De month. And thus I conclude of this virtuous Pionie, that the
red is better than the black.


Marcellus. What is the nature of a strange herb, called Asparagus?


Hilarius. THis is an herb of great virtue, and full of roots, long stalks
full of branches. Asparagus hath many goodly virtues, specially to increase
seed.
The brauches that spring first from ye root be prevented of them, which grow
after them. This is a garden herb: but of his own nature it grows in
rocks, chiefly in Italy. Galen says, that this herb of nature is
marvelous: for it is sometime coolyng, and sometime warmyng or heatyng. And
also cleanses and scours: if the tender branches of this herb, be sodden in
wine drunken, they do not only molifye the Belly, but cleanse the raynes.
Nothing is better to open the gall and cleanse the yellow Iaundice, than this
herb is: there is great virtue in the root, to be made in powder, or sodden
in medicine, for the same purpose. The beries be of a singular virtue against
the diseases of the teeth: the water of this herb, will clarify the eyes: the
syrupe doth increase seed of generation, the decoction thereof in Uynegar,
prevails against the white leprosy. There is no herb sooner converted into
good blood tha Asparagus, notwithstanding the beries thereof must be boiled and
eaten with sweet Oil, Vinegar, and sugar: and then it prevails against
barrennes of women. Plinie doth commend this herb, the.xx. book, the.x
Chapter, that it prevails against the pains of ye bone called spina, and all
these foresaied diseases. Auicen says in his last Fen. lib. iiij. that this
herb makes a pleasant odour in meat, and brings sweetness to the whole
body, To make the urine sweet.
cleanses stinkyng vryne, and causes the bladder and all the vessels to be
sweet. Galen doth not a little commend it, Lib. vij. de Alimen facultatibus.
And Dioscorides lib. ij. Cap cxviij. doth first begin the praise. and laud of
this herb, with all his virtues. And thus I end of Asparagus.


Marcellus. This same is an herb, of incomparable virtues, and doth excel
all other, for his synguler goodness to mankynde: I trust to remember it
therefore. Now I shall desire you, to show me the nature of ye great Bur,
which is more commonly known, than commended: notwythstandyng, I would be
glad to learn the virtue, for every manne doth know it, to be an herb of
great anoiaunce in pastures, and an unpleasant atire, for the mains and
tails of horse.


Hilarius, Bardana the great Bur
This great Bur is called Personata, lappa mayor, or Bardana, and is commonly
known, whose Burs will cleave to the apparaile of men: the leaves be
very broad, the root great, within white, without black and doth grow
commonly in many places, and is dry. and byndyng of nature. Dioscorides says
lib. iiij. if one dragme weight of this be drunk with the curnelles of the
Pyneaple, it doth help the cough, and spyttyng of blood, and fylthynesse in
the stomach, and is good against the contraction of the sinews, Rotten sores
helped.
and specially of the Arteires. If the leaves be stamped, and applied
plasterwayes, they do heal old rotten sores, and stinkyng fylthy ulcers: even
so will the juice of this herb do, for Galen affirms the same. The
decoction of the root thereof, is good to wash wounds withal: the root
stamped with Salt, doth heal the biting of a mad Dog, applied to the wound.
The juice tempered with Honey, and so drunk, provokes vryne: and takes away
the pains of the bladder. The seed beaten in powder, Scalding and burning
help^.
and drunk in wine, by the space of forty days, will take away the pains of
the huccle bones, called Sciatica. The leaves stamped with the white of an
Egg, also heal Burning or Scalding, thus says Apuleius. The root
prevails against the bytynge of Serpents, either inwardly, or outwardly: the
same root sodden in Wine, doth cleave deliver a man from the horror of the
fever quarten, if he drink thereof, one hour before the coming of the fit.
And tempered with Swynes grease it makes a goodly Plaster, against the
swelling of the Throat, called Angina, and thus affirms Columella. And here
I do end of Burs.


Marcellus. What is the natural virtue of an herb, called Gramen, or
Stichworte?


Hilarius. THis Gramen is called Sperewort, Stitchwort, or Stitch grass: It
grows in dark places, Gramen is Stitchworte.
and an infynite number of stalks grow from one root: the root creeps of a
great length within the ground, but not deep. The flowers be white, growing upon
the top of the branches, with a pretty round seed in the midst. This herb is
commonly known, cattle delight to eat thereof in pastures: they do greatly
err, which take this herb for Eufragium. It flourishes in April, most
sweet, white, pleasant. This herb is cold and dry, with a little
bitterness, having virtue to open: Dioscorides doth say, the root hath virtue
to close a new wound together. This herb sodden in Wine, doth break the
stone: it is good against ye hardness of the spleen, stopping of the liver,
Stitchworte will heal the stone, heal^ wounds.
and gall. It cleanses the raynes, scours the bladder, and conduits of
Uryne: Galen doth call this herb Pernasus, for there grows great plenty
thereof upon a Mountain in Greece so named: which had two high tops,
Pernasus. herb.
under whom did dwell the.ix. Muses, as Poets fain. Plinie saith, the seed
doth vehemently purge the vryne, and stops vomits, with many other goodly
virtues. And thus I end of Stitchwort.


Marcellus. What is the nature of Sauine, that bitter bush?


Hilarius. THis venomous herb, is commonly known, Sauine. A practice of
Harlottes wrought ^ Sauine.
from whom diverse Devilish drabbes, have gathered venom, to destroy their
bastardly children, to cover their filthy whoredom withal. And yet ofttimes it
happens, that the mother is slain, and the child is delivered, and by Gods
providence, is helped and saved. Yet this herb rightly used, is of a singular
virtue, may rather be numbered among trees, than herbs, for no frost can kill
it. It grows very thick, like unto a bush, the leaves do never wither nor
dry, it grows in gardens, the beries are gathered in Harvest, and it is hot
and dry in the thride degree. Dioscorides saith, the first book.88. Chapi.
that there be.ij. kinds of Sauin: Sauine of.^. kinds.
one hath leaves like unto the Cipers tree, the other hath leaves like unto the
Tamarice tree: They have virtue being stamped, for to heal all painful
sores, Boils, and pusshes, applied unto them. This herb is a good perfume
against the mother, to burn when Women do sownde, receiving the smoke in at
ye nose-Tempered with Honey, it breaks a Pestilent sore, made in plaster
ways: Drunk in Wine, it purges them that peace blood. And by subfumigation,
it doth draw down the dead child from the Matrix of the Mother. It is
mingled in hot oyntmentes, against coldness of the joints sinews. and is
good against the Palsy. Plinie doth greatly commend this, in his.42. book. A
new practice for ye pox made of Sauin^.
Chap. xi. It is good to put Sinamon to this herb, being used in medicine.ii.
times the weight: It helps also the Kings evil, or pains in the throat*
made in the manner of plaster. The fume of this herb doth preuaile against the
French pockes: and thus I do conclude of this Herb, called Sauin, which the
Arabians call Able.


Marcellus. Daisies
What is the nature of Daisies, double or single, I pray you tell me?


Hilarius. Plinie. lib 21. Capi. viii.
NEither did Dioscorides, nor Galen write of these herbs, nor any of the
ancient Greekes: but Plinie saith, that one Bellius was inuenter of this herb,
called Bellis. And this herb hath.l. little branches, or white beams growing
round about the yellow flower, which is in the midst* and some do call it
herba Paralysis. What shall I say any farther I need no more descripcion
thereof, because this herb is so commonly known grows in every field and
pasture. Notwithstanding, the double Daisy doth grow in gardens: and these
great Daisies do flourish in May, and of nature be hot and dry, as we may
gather of Plinie, who saith this herb doth heal swellings of the throat,
pains in the neck: therefore it must needs be hot and dry, for no cold thing
can help the swelling in the throat, This Juice is good for wounded men to
drink, for it doth resolve hard and cold things, Gout, and Sciatica, and is
very good against the resolution of the members, which in Greek is called
Paralysis, which we call the Palsy. With this herb Bellis, Paralysis.
and other good medicines, I Bullein did recover one Bellises, not only from a
spice of the Palsy, but also fro the quarten* And afterward the same Bellises,
Bellis. Bellises. Bullein.
more unnatural than a viper, sought divers ways to have murdered me, taking
part against me, with my mortal enemies, accompanied with ruffians, for that
bloody purpose, and deadly feed. Such was his shameless ungrateful nature,
Proverb. 10 Proverb. 17
Evil will stirs up strife, and a sedicious person, seeks mischief. This
man being worshipfully born, doth bare the name and title of a Gentleman,
rather than any conditions of one in deed. R. Bellises of Iarowe in the
Bisshopricke.
And in complexion is more effeminate, than a feeble pale woman: a dweller in
the place, whereas holy Bed was borne, but yet possessing none of his Virtues.
And thus of Bellis the herb, I make an end: and of Bellises, which would have
ended me.


Marcellus. What is the nature of Scene, my gentle friend Hilarius, I pray you
tell me


Hilarius. THere be two kinds of it: the one is called Scene, which bears
Cods like Brom. Scene of Alexandria
The other is a lesser kind, bearing his seed in a gross Cod. The Cod is
much like an Almond growing on the tree, but as thynne as Perchemente. The
Flowers be like the Flowers of Brom, very yellow. This herb grows in
Gardens, in the Month of May and June, and of nature is hoate, in the first
beginning of the second degree, dry in the beginning of the first degree. A
dragme of ye cod, saith Actuarius, may be drunk without any hurt: for it
hath virtue to purge, both fleume and choler. The leaves and coddes be
wholesome, to be sodden in the broth of an Hen, against old pains in the
head, scabs, falling sickness, and the itch. The juice in infusion or
steeped, is better to be drunken, than the powder, for all obstructions in the
body: and these be the words, of that great learned man. Doctor Actuarius.
This is used against the abundance of melancholy: and doth open the
instruments of the senses, and the parts both Animal, vital, and
Neutrimentall. There is of this growing in France, but ye best comes fro
Alexandria in Egypt, or else from Siria, which may be given to women with Child,
and young Children, without any hurt, chyefly in infusyon, it may be also
mingled with Cassia or Manna: or else it may be beaten into fine powder, and so
tempered with Syrupe of Roses solityue, and so drunk: and this way it is a
gentle lenitive purgation. But the deluting, steepyng, or putting these leaves
in wine, cold whaie, or distilled water, with a piece of Sugar, and some
Anisseedes, standing all the night in a close pot, and in the morning streyne
it, I assure you, this is more better to purge withal than if it were in
decoction, or sod in broth. Note also, when you do make a decoction with
sondry herbs, let all your other herbs be sodden soft, before you put in your
Scene, for it is so thin of substance, that else it will go away in a smoke.

Here will I show you a most excellent decoction, Sir Richard Alye, his
lenitive, Matthiolus uses the same in Dioscoridem Lib. 3. cap. 70.
wherewith I purged sir Richard Ally, a knight of a synguler conning: which
knight hath been a profytable instrument to our common Wealth, in worthy
fortifications and buildyngs, as of the strong, and famous town of Barwick,
whose walls are invincible, as presently appears. Beside many of his other
worthy works. This man being sick, in whom diverse and sondry purgacions and
Electuaries took small effect, this only did him much pleasure: the best Scene
leaves, dragmes.vi, white Ginger dragme one, the flowers of Buglosse, dragmes
two, mingled together, in a new clean stone Pot, with a narrow mouth, and
one pynte of whaie of Goats milk: this pot was closely covered in the mouth,
that no air should go forth of ye mouth. Then it was set in a vessel, with
hot water, and so did sees, by the space of two hours, and then was taken
from the fire, and set in a close place till it was cold, and the vapour clean
delayed. Then it was strained, and give him to drink, in the morning following,
which did purge choler aduste and melancholy, which is his complexion. This
whaye being drunk, prevails against all passions of the brain, Scene helps
the head with al the senses*
from the head down to the bottom of the Blader. And helps al the senses,
both of hearing, seeing, and smelling, and will strengthen all the Body: and it
doth exonerate, and unburden the same of every humour that doth abound, as
cholour, fleume, and melancholy. And this affirms Mesue: Actuarius, Ruellius,
and Matthiolus upon Dioscorides. lib. 3. cap. lxx.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Goose foot, which herb is like Geese feet,
Pes anserinus.
with iadged leaves?


Hilarius. Gosefoote an evil herb.
IT is called Pes anserinus, leaved like Night shade, but more jagged in the
said leaves, bearing small little red flowers, with great plenty of seed, like
unto Arage: it commonly grows in each place whereas plenty of dung is cast,
and is cold in the second degree, and it is venomous as Solanum is, and
kills Swyne, if they do eat of it: it makes men to be mad, or die sleeping,
therefore beware of it.


Marcellus. What is Felon weed good for, which is named Saynct Iames weed?


Hilarius THe old Wryters made small mention thereof, it hath leaves like
Rocket, S Iames wort called Felon weed
many roots, flowers like Chamomill, growing by water sides, and in sandy
places, by path sides: it is hot dry of nature, this will heal Furunculi,
called Felons and other sores and wounds, and Fistulaes: and is wholesome to
make salves withal to dry, ripe, and heal, and will not suffer any venomous
scabbe, or sore to spread any further, therefore it should be good, both for
Serpigo, the Canker, and Ringwormes. c.


Marcellus. What will Spatula Foetida do?


Hilarius IT grows by hedges, the Berries grow in coddes, which cods opens
in three parts like the Paeoni, Spatula will kill Lyse.
the leaves be long flags, this herb is vehemently hot, and hath virtue to
kill Lyse, as Staphisagria hath, and to heal scabs. c.


Marcellus. What can Orpin do?


Hilarius- This Orpin will long hang in an house, after it be cut, and grow
still geeene, Telephus. Crassula, or Orpin.
we call it Orpin. Telephus was a king of the Goathes, and Mysia, son to
Hercules, which warred upon the Greekes before christ's birth. Anno. 1212. This
man slew a famous capta^ne of the Greekes, named Thesandius, his soldiers
vanquished Aiax, and Achilles, but yet Achilles wounded him with a Dart, which
wound was healed by this Crassula which he named Thelephium, and until this
day, it is so called: whereof there be two kinds, the great with white
flowers, and the small with yellow, Orpin heleth the morphew*
but these flowers be variable, and will change their couller, the leaf is like
Purssen, but grosser, and this doth grow in moist places, under the dropping of
houses in Gardens, and flourishes in July, and August, and is dry in the
second degree, and in the beginning of the third, and is very hoate. The
Juice therefore is good to anoint the place of the Morphewe every hour, so
that it be mingled with strong white Vinegar: But Galen affirms that it
does not only cleanse the faint Morphewe, To cleanse the Morphew.
which he calls Alphos, but it also cleanses a foul corrupt stinkyng ulcer,
scours and dries the same. Plinie says, this juice will heal a fylthy
Leprous sore of diverse colours to be anointed therewith, every hour, day and
night.iii. times in one month, and as you do anoynte the same to put upon the
same sore Barley meal. It makes a plaster for Hernia, and heals wounds, both
old and new, and Fistulaes. And thus I do end of Orpin, or herb Telephion.


Marcellus. What is the goodness of Paunsis, or three faces in one hodde? Some
call it Hartesease.


Hilarius. THis herb is called herba Trinitatis: Herba Trinitatis of iii.
colours so named.
but I read in an old Monkish written Herbal, wherein the author writes,
that this herb did signify the holy Trinity: and therefore was called the
Herb of the trinity, and thus he made his allegory. This flower is but one in
which said he, are three sondry colours, yet but one sweet savour. So God is
three distinct persons, in one vndiuided Trinity. An allegory. of (...) herb.
United together in one eternal glory, and divine Majesty. c. Well, although
the three distinct persons be even so, whose glory is indiffinable: yet this
glory may not be comprehended of mortal men, nor Angels. The majesty thereof
may not with reverence, be compared or likened, by any alligory, to any base,
vain venerous flower: but may rather be called, three faces in a Monks hodde:
Iohn i.
That this day grows in the Garden, and to morrow withers as dust. Much
more the offence and danger is, for any christian man, to grave or paint any
Image, calling it the sign or Image of the Trinity: which can not be done, of
any living creature, for God forbad the same. God hath no man seen, but only
his son Christ, which is God of his substance, and of the same deity.
Neither any mortal man may see him, Exodus. 20.
before he be cleansed by death, transformed into an other life, saith the holy
scripture: thus all glory be to the holy Trinitye. i. Iohn. 4.
And now I will show the right diffinicion of this herb, fit and apt for the
same vain flower. It is called herba Trinitatis, that is, because it hath
three colours: yet the old Pagan writers, did call it Iupiters herb, because
of the beauty of colours: it is like a Uiolette in shape and savour, and of
temperament, is much like Comphorie* hot and dry, and is good to be drunk,
both against the falling evil in children, and also against all manner of
rotten fleume, and filth in the stomach, sides, and lunges. Thus it doth
inwardly help, in syrupe, decoctio, or ye water inwardly drunk: no less it
helps all wounded men, Women, and Children, and al them which have broken
bones. Outwardly, it cleanses from the skin, all itch, skabbes, shyngles,
ulcers, and ringwormes: heals or closes green wounds together, without the
danger of any apostumacion, if it be made in plaster, or else the juice
preserved with oil. For herbs being stamped, strained, and cleansed upon the
Fire, and made cold, and kept in a clean Glass, power thereupon fresh
clean Oil of Olyues, this will conserve it, and keep it from the corruption
of Air, and so you may preserve your juice, as this many other mo serve for
syrupes and Salves, for the health of mankind. And thus I do end of the nature
of Paunses, or the triple coloured Uiolettes, called herba Trinitatis.


Marcellus. What goodness is I pray you in the Ivy, the Women's Christmas herb*
whose leaves be ever green?


Hilarius. Hedera or the Ivy bush.
THe Ivy is like a fresh lusty young pleasant body, still flourishing and
green, the Greekes do cal it Cissos of Bacchus, for they called him Citton,
and this is Bacchus herb or his Winter Crown, the Uyne is his Crown in
Summer. This is a very evil neighbor, for where as it doth grow upon any
tree, the tree decays, although the Ivy do flourish still green, whereas it
is nourished. There be.iij. kinds of Ivy, the white, which is the male,
brings forth white beries: the second bareth black beris: Ivy hath many
goodly virtues in medicine.
the iij. is fruitless, or ground Ivy so named, these be commonly known. Ivy is of
a contrary compounded faculty, adstringing, binding, or stopping which is cold
earthly: and it is also bitter and hot, if it be green, but dry and cold, The
beries sodden in Wine drunk, do stop the bloody flixe, drunk two times in
the day and as much in the night: the tender leaves sodden in sharp Vinegar,
tempered with crumbs of leaven bread, will help the liver, made in plaster.
Stamped with Roses and tempered with oil of Roses, Vinegar and Woman's milk,
it doth make a good frontal, for his forehead, that is pained in the head. The
juice, with oil of bitter Almondes, warm put into th'eares, helps the
instrument of hearing: the leaves sodden in Wine, be good to anoint or wash
the, which have spots, or scabs in the face, skin, and pryuy parts. Nothing
prevails more against the Cancer, then the juice of Ivy, tempered with
clarifyed Honey, Wine sodden together, so use the same drink.i.. After the
natural purgation of Women* if it be drunk, it causes sterility and
barrenness in them. The juice warm, powered into the contrary ear, doth help
the teeth, on the other side, if they do ache, but if the beries of Ivy, called
Corymbi be often times drunk, saith Dioscorides, they will vex and trouble
the mind. Honey and the beries of Ivy, To kill lice.
will kill Lice in childrens heads: the juice put into the mouth of the matrix,
will draw forth the dead child. The green leaves, sodden in Wine, saith
Galen, do knit, heal, and join cuts, and great wounds together, and heal
the body: But yet this juice oftentimes drunk in Wine will heal the terror
of a Tertian, To heal wounds.
or horror, of a quarten, drunk before the fit, and also purges the head, put
into the nose, and will shorten the sickness. The Gum of Ivy will blister, and
is very hot, they which gather it, must cut the barks from the Ivy: and every
morning, To gather Ivy gum.
when the sap doth ascend, they shall find it in the nether cut of the bark.
Even so when it descends in ye upper bark or rind, renew your cut every
morning, wash your hands in vinegar, and Rose water, and your face in like
case, To draw teeth with out payne.
before you gather it. But whipe it not, then your gum shall not blister, or
hurt your skyn: this gum tempered with Wax, put to a pained tothe, will draw
it forth without pain: this gum must be kept close in a glass or box of
clean mettell: and these foresaid virtues are confirmed by the best learned,
as Dioscorides, Galen, Plinie. c. Dioscor lib. 2. Capi. Clxxv. Plini. Lib. 16.
Cap. xxxiiii. Theophrastus lib. iii. cap. 18. Galen libro simp. medic. 7
And thus I do end of this Ivy, whose gum, leaves, and beries, are wholesome
for mankynde. Even so they are for beasts, as horses or Oxen, against the
sickenesses of ye Lunges, sodden in Ale or wine, with Anisseedes and ^ayes.


M^cellus. What is the weed, which h^th leaves like Peers, growing in Marris
or moist ground?


Hilarius. THis herb hath brown spots, in the midds of the leaves, and
knots in the joints, stalks red, flowers like Lavender. First white,
Persicaria or Pereleues. growing in marris ground called Jasper.
then purple, roots yellow, small seeds, many in number growing on the
branch. This of nature is cold and dry, the taste doth declare the same: this
herb sodden in Planten water, Ptisant or red wine, doth stop the bloody fliex.
And this same herb, is good to heal Fistulaes: it cleseth rotten sores, and
furthermore heals new wounds. And thus I leave of this herb,


Marcellus. What be brakes good for.


Hilarius. COmmonly known, to lodge the Dear, Brakes called Filix or Fern.
to shroud and cover the Cony withal. Dry Brakes be good Fuel, whereas small
plety of woodis, or cole. There be brakes male, without flower and seed,
growing fro one great root many brauches, with spots upon their leaves: the
female Brake is common in Warreins Parks, And grows long: if the root be
cut overthwart, To kill broad^ worms in the chest or belly.
there will appear the similitude of an Egle spleid.iiii.. weight, of the male
Root, dried and beaten into powder, drunk with sweet water, doth kill broad
worms in the chest or belly. But it is bitter, saith Dioscorides: if four
halfpeny weight of prepared Scammonie, be drunk with the same, Dioscorides.
it will work accordingly, or else as mutth powder of black Elleborus. The
female Brake roots..iiii* drunk, sodden in wine, do kill round worms: it is
perilous to give to women, it makes them barren. And if a woman with child
drink it, it makes an abortive or dead Child come forth: the meal or powder
of Brakes, heals dangerous sores upon beasts bodies, as Swine, Kine. Brake
seeds were never seen among christen people, but witches have used practise
with them, as foolish writers affirm.
c. The young branches of Brakes, eaten, being tenderly sodden, do molyfy very
gently the belly. Galen, Theophrastus and Plinie, affirms the same. This
herb bears no seeds at any time, although Witches fain, yt great Secretes
may be wrought with the same: which must be gathered, say they, upon Midsomer
night: As sure I warrant you, as the sea doth burn, it will do no less. This
herb is hot and dry, and is called Thelepteris because it hath wings, or
leaves like byrds feathers.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of the dead stinkyng Nettle?


Hilarius. The dead Nettle.
IT may be called a dead Nettle, it is like in shape unto the burning Nettle,
but stings not: it is called Archangell, with a stalk four square. There be
three kinds of Archangell, White, called Lamium, Yellow, and Purple with
Black seed, hot and dry of nature: the white Flowers do help the Shingles,
stamped and applied to the sore places of the skin: this herb stamped with
Salt, makes a plaster for the gout: swelling in the throat, and Dogs
biting. The roots stamped with Salt, do draw forth thorns, or pryckes from
the body. And thus I end of this dead Nettle.


Marcellus. What be the properties of Crosses?


Hilarius. Crosses be commonly known, there be both of the water, and also of
the Land: N^turtiu^. Le^idion, or Crosses.
Garden, and River Crosses, spring from March, to the end of May, and are
near hand hot in the.4. degree, not so much drying: the seed is chiefly
used in medicine. Crosses help the Palsy.
The herb is good green, but nothing worth dry: these seeds sodden in Wine,
in a linen bag and holden under the tongue, or champed in the mouth, do help
a speechless man, or him which hath the Palsy,
through a long or strong agewe. This will dry up moist humours, it provokes
vryne, sodden in white Wine: and stops Gonorrhaea passio, or wasting of
nature. And this herb so helped a Gentleman of Suffolke, called Thomas Colby,
which long time was troubled with the same, when other medicines* did take in
him small effect, during his service in the field or war, finally he was
recovered by this, This herb, specially saith Dioscorides, the roots stamped
with fresh Hogs grease, do make an excellent plaster, against the pains of
ye joints, laid upon warm.4. hours: but for women, but.ij. hours. And also
the same for the Sciatica* and then quickly to sweat in the bath: then when
the patient hath sweat, to anoint it, with the Oil of Crosses, and warm
sodden Wine. And to drink of this Wine, Crosses do help many infirmities.
wherein Crosses be sod is good against pains in ye joints, Dropsy, Timpany,
Gout, swelling, Palsy, Pore, Apostumacions, Reumes, bloody flixes, broyses, and
moystnes of the brain and eyes* c. Galen commends the same. lib. 1. de
compose. medica. secundum locos, Cap. vij.


Marcellus. What is the virtue or nature of Horstayle?


Hilarius. Horsetayle. Caudae equin^.
This is also called Hippurus, that is, Horstayle because it bushes like hair
about the joint: and is of two kinds, soft long: and grows in moist ground,
and watery places: it is called holy Water sprinkle or bush. It dries, and
restrayneth, and is bitter: this herb sod, the Wine or decoction thereof, is
good against the bloody flixe, stopping of the Bladder. It mundifyeth the
Stomach, and sides, and cleanses the Lunges: and if the guts be hurt and
wounded, nothing is better to heal them, than the syrupe or Juice of
Horstayle, saith Dioscorides. To help the flixe.
Galen affirms that the same herb doth heal wounds, and stop blood in the
nose, with all the deseases aforesaid, drunk with Wine. Goodly salves of
healynge may be made with the same: Plinie saith* that I have proved
oftentimes, that it heals ruptures. And further saith Plinie,
it stops or defends Enteroclea, which is a disease very perilous, called
ramex intestinorum, when the guts are fallen into the coddes. Even so it will
heal them, To help the guts.
drunk oftentimes. And a plaster of this, with warm Vinegar stamped together,
applied to the Belly, is good, for the same purpose: the Smoke or fume is good
to cause childrens Guts, to go back into the body, when as through flixe or
cold, they will hang forth. To stop the terms of women.
Even so it will stop the immoderate red terms in Women: and this shall
suffice, of the same herb.


Marcellus. What is the herb Botris?


Hilarius. THis herb Botris is so named, because the seed is so plentiful,
clustering with great number on the branches, it grows by Ryuers, Sweet^
Botris.
or Water sides, is ripe in September. This herb is sweet, and when it is
dry, it is good to cast into Chests, to preserve apparel fro Moths, to make
both linen, and woollen sweet. This herb is yellow, whereof is plenty near
unto Paris in France: It is hot and dry of nature. Drunk in Wine, it helps
the lunges, and cleanses them from cold coughs, and soreness in the breast:
and helps against the shortness of Wind, Dioscorides, Paulus, and Plinie
affirm the same.


Marcellus. What say you of Gentian?


Hilarius. This was found by Gentian, a noble King of Illyrica, which being
wounded in battle, had health by the same herb: Gentian a bitter herb.
having many virtues.
it is leaved like Plantan, the roots be also not unlike Aristolochia the
lunge. This root is gross and bitter, with yellow Flowers, growing upon
high Mountains or Alps, and we have plenty thereof among our Apotheca^aries,
it is hot and dry, and most bitter. Two dragmes drunk with Pepper and Few in
Wine, do defend from poison, and biting of serpents: it is good for wounded
men to drink: and casts dead children from the matrix. This is profitable
against all oppilation, and stopping of the Liver, gall, and spleen, and will
purge choler: but it is perilous for Women with child to drink. There is
nothing better for Illiaca passio, it strengthens the Stomach. This is not
only profitable to mankind against Dropsy, stoppyng of the body, venom,
poison, and pestilence, to be drunk in Wine or Water: but also it helps the
dumb brute beasts, as horse, oxen. c. for all diseases of the lunges, to be
given them, as Plinie saith. The root sodden, is good against conuulsion, and
shrinking of the Synewes. And thus I do end of Gentian.


Marcellus. What is the property and virtue of Lavender?


Hilarius. OF this kind, there is Lavender Spica, which is the great Lavender:
Lavender the sweet virtue thereof, wholesome for cold folks.
then there is the single Lavender. This herb is called the counterfayt, or
false Nardus, and is named Lauendula, because it is good in bathes and washing,
and gives a sweet odour. This herb is commonly known and is hot and dry in
the second degree: and is good against the coldness of the stomach,
hardness of the spleen, and swelling of the guts, stopping of the Liver, the
raynes, it provokes vryne. Nothing is better against the diseases of ye
Synewes, the coldness of the Brain, Palsy, Falling evil, either to be drunk,
Lavender helps the Synewes.

Oil of spike doth warm.


or else smell of this herb, or also to be anointed with the goodly warm oil
made thereof. Which oil hath virtue, against all the dyseases of the Synewes:
and thus I end of this herb.


Marcellus. What is the nature of Mandragora?


Hilarius. MAny superstitious, and foolish things have bin devised of this
herb: a very invention of Wytches, and Hypocrites, through the suggestion
motion of the devil, to delude the weak hart of mankynde withal. For they
do affirm, that this herb comes of the seed of some convicted dead men:
and also, without the death of some living thing, it cannot be drawn out of
the earth to mans use. An old supersticion, invented by wytches, and a practice
of Satan.
Therefore, they did tie some Dog, or other living beast unto the root
thereof with a corde, and dug the earth in compass round about, and in the
mean time stopped their own cares, for fear of the terreble shriek, and cry
of this Mandrack. In which cry, it doth not only dye it self, but the fear
thereof kills the Dog or Beast, which pulled it out of the earth. And this
herb is called also Anthropomorphos because it bears the Image of a man,
and that is false. For no herb hath the shape of a man or Woman, no truly, it
is not natural of his own growing: but by the crafty invention of some false
man, it is done by art. As many roots may be made, in the forms of men,
fowls, and beasts, and secretly covered in the earth: Mandrack is made like a
man or Woman by craft, for nature gives no mas shape to a Beast, much less to
an herb.
which when they are found, by the crafty hyder thereof, the beholders be
driven into no small admiration and wounder, supposing there by, that some
strange fearful thing, shall quickly follow the same. My Friend Marcellus,
the description of this Mandracke, as I have said, was nothing, but the
imposterous subtilty of wicked people. Perhaps of Fryers, or superstitious
Monks, which have written thereof at length: but as for Dioscorides, Galen,
and Plinie. c. they have not written thereof so largely, as for to have head,
arms, fyngers. c. But there is an herb called Mandracke, whose leaves be
large and long, like unto large Lattice: whose apples be in the form of
Cherries, very cold, properly given to help conception, some say, as it
appears by the Wives of the holy Patryache Iacob. The one was fruitful, the
other did desire help, by the means of Mandracke, brought out of the Fields,
by the hands of Ruben Leas son. This herb hath a long large root, Gene.
xxx. This place proves not ye Mandracke will help coception, but Mandracke
will cleanse the matrix, or cast forth the dead child from the same, then it will
kill the living seed. Dioscorides* is of that mind.
with two Legs in form, one wrapped about the other: and fine roots like
hair, growing upon it. But no arms, feet, fingers, hands, head, nor
stalks, but ye leaves creep out of the ground: of which herb be two kinds,
male, and female, the male greater than the female. This herb is cold in the
third degree, hath virtue, to cause deep sleep: the strength is in the
Apple, and in the rynde of the root. The remnant, that is in the leaves, and
inward parts of the root, is but weak saith Galen: the seeds of the apple,
saith Dioscorides, being drunk, will purge the Belly. The juice of this herb
pressed forth, and kept in a close earthen vessel, according to art, brings
sleep, and casts men into a trans on a deep terrible dream, until he be
cut of the stone. c. This herb sodden in Wine unto the third part, doth
purge black choler as well as Elleborus niger will do. This herb stamped,
and applied upon a wound or ulcer, doth heal the same, and so naturally, that
it will suffer no scar or mark called Stigma to remain: the leaves be
preserved in Salt, for the same purpose. The green leaves stamped, and applied
with the white of an Egg to the eyes, do assuage the swelling, burning, or
dropping of them: if the root be cut in sundry places, The virtue of Mandrack,
is to make one to sleep.
there will come forth a worthy juice to anoint the forehead, to bring sleep.
Pessaries be made of this, which will draw forth dead children, from the
matrix: Therefore rightly to say, it doth rather hinder then further concepcion:
the root is unpleasant to smell upon, and pestiferous, saith Plinie. The
juice must be gathered, when Grapes be ripe, and clarified in the Son, kept
close. The apples must be dried in ye Sun, the root must be sodden in old dark
coloured Wine, which Wine must be sod to ye third part: the apples may be
bruised kept in unripe oil Olife in ye Sun. All these be good to cool, to
cause sleep, moderately used. Two halfpeny weight of the powder of the rynde
thereof, Mandrake was called Circaeum and also Anthropomorphos.
may be drunk in sweet Water for the Kings evil, or lack of sleep. The
juice thereof with oil Honey, heals woudes: and thus I end of Mandrack, which
in old time, it was called Circaeum, of Wytches, which had virtue (said they)
or craft to transform, both man beast, and herb out of kind. Among all
other, they wrought Wonders by this herb, to provoke, bewitch, or cast men
into mad blind fantasies, or freses, called Love, which rather may be termed,
noisome beastly Lust, and when it is wrought by herbs, foolishness.


Marcellus. What is to be said of Crowfoote, wherefore is it good?


Hilarius. This herb is called Ranunculus, or Frogwort: Of sundry kinds of
Crowfoote called Ranunculi, or little Frogs grass.
of this Crowfoote Dioscorides found four kinds, lib. 2. Capit. 171. But
since his days, three kinds more be found: these be herbs both of the
water, whereas Frogs do cast their Sperma or seed, in which herb, they do
greatly rejoice. And also of ye land, as Garden, Meadow, and Wood Crowfoote:
this herb is commonly known. Some have white Flowers, some yelowe, some
Purple: some have Leaves like Coriander, some have Leaves like Bears foot,
growing upon the top of the stalk, having long roots. Another hath broad
jagged leaves, growing near the ground, but upward smaller leaves like
Crowfoote, do grow upon the brauches. These herbs be vehemently hot and dry,
Dioscorides lib. 2. Cap. 171
and do vlcerate and blister the skin, wherewith valiant beggars, do blister
their legs and faces, which makes them to seem Leprous, and whosoever doth
eat of these herbs, shall be smitten into madness. Their sinews shall be
shronke, and they shall laugh them selves to death, if they do eat of the
kind of Crowfoote, called Apium risus as Plinie doth testify: the root
thereof dried, provokes neesing, and is good to be put in an hollow toth, to
break it, and draw it forth without payne. The juice of this herb, tempered
with Bears grease, will bring hair to the bald head. Also this juice takes
away skabbes, and crusty scurfes from the legs and arms, of sore people. And
tempered with swines grease, it helps the swelling of ye throat. And thus I
end of Crowfoote.


Marcellus. What is the nature of Aconitum?


Hilarius THis herb is venomous, whereof be two kinds: the one is called
Pardalianches, A conitum Libardes. bane.
or Liberdes bane. The other is called Licoctonon, or Wolfes poison. The first
hath three or four leaves, growing in the top, with a round bery in the
midst, and no leaves upon the branch, having a long root like a Serpent,
very rugged. The second hath many leaves upon the branch or stalk, like
unto Crowfoote, with yellow flowers in the top like Brom, with long divided
black roots. This herb grows in May, and is acorosiue burning, poisoning,
and killing. The powder of this root, put into pieces or baits of flesh,
poisons Wild beasts: as Wolfes, Foxes, Grayes, Polcattes. c. and is
venomous for mankind: To poison Wolves and Foxes.
and there is no remedy, but to drink oil, and to provoke vomit, to expulse
the poison.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Geranium, called Sheepherdes needell?


Hilarius. This herb is called the Storks bill, or Cranes beak, for there
grow out of the flower, Sheepherdes Needle. Geranium.
seeds like Bodkins or Needels, whereof there be six kinds. Some of their
leaves be like Crowefoote: and some like unto Mugwort. Some have purple
Flowers, and they be the first kind: and some white, with red roots, but some
of them have white roots. And they be all of nature stopping and drying, the
roots be sweet of the first kind, Diosco. lib. 3 Cap. 114.
and red also. Dioscorides saith, that if a dragme of the first kind of the
herb, be drunk in wine, it doth aswage the swelling of the matrix, and Belly,
and heals the cough of the lunges: Paulus Aegineta is of the same mind. But
you must take the first kind, whose leaves be in form, between the leaves of
Rocket and Mugwort: with the long red root, called Geranium primum. This root
will break ye stone, and cleanse ye raynes and bladder. This herb the third
kind, with blew flowers, do heal woudes and sores: and the same third is
called Douesfoote, which if it be sodden, and applied on sores, it will heal
them. The first kind with Myrrh, Doves foote^
and Pepper, sodden in Wine, is good against the Dropsy, collike, wind, and
wounds within the body, and cricke in the neck. There is also a kind of this
Geranium, which is good for wounds, called herb Robert: but rather I take it
to be called Ruberta, a rubro colore, an herb of a red colour. Herb Robert
And thus I do conclude of Geranium, called Storks bill, or Sheepherdes
needle: Whereof the first kind, is the best for the stone, and raynes,
outward wounds. The Doves foot is good for sores festers, so is herb Robert:
all the other be evil and venomous inwardly taken, but yet for drying may
sores outwardly, they be tolerable. And thus I make an end of Geranium, called
Crow foot.


Marcellus. What virtue is there in Angelica, that sweet root?


Hilarius. This herb Angelica is very lunge leaved, indented, Angelica, or
Angels blome,

Some call it Radix sancti Spiritus, the root of the holy Ghost.


or hath small teeth like Eldren, a great stalk, and hollow, a big sweet
root, black without, and white within, Purple flowers with white spots, and
great broad seeds. This is called the Angels herb, which is of.ij. kinds,
of the garden and of the field: this herb excells al other, against poison,
and is hot and dry. It doth open, warm, dissolve, is good against the
fearful dangerous plague, called the pestilence, if it be but bitten upon,
much more it is effectual being drunk in the morning. The powder drunk with
Wine.x. gran weight, or the water drunk.xx. drops in the morning in Wine,
is a goodly armour against poison, foul air or plague: this cleanses the
Lunges, Breast, Guts, Raynes, Angelica. defends the pestilence.
Bladder. This herb soden in Wine, Water, doth heal inward wounds: this doth
strengthen the heart, and dries superfluous moisture as ye dropsy, and
Timpany. And they which can not keep their meat, for weakness, through vomits,
let them drink this. It delivers from biting of Serpents, as Snakes, or else
any prick or wound, if it be sodden with Few, Honey, and Wine. It hath one
virtue, excellent for young lusty, Angelica preserves chastity.
single People, to quench carnal rage, or youthful lust: if one do byte or
swallow.ss. of this, it will extinguish the same* with many more virtues, for
ye which few herbs, are to be compared to it.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Lagopus, with three leaves growing upon the
stalk, and a rough flower, like an Haresfoote, it grows in Corn, in Harvest
time?


Hilarius. This is called Lagopus, or Hares foot, it hath growing near the
flowers, three Leaves together, in sundry places, Hares foot Lagopus.
and is also called the triple Hares foot. And is of a drying virtue, saith
Galen, and sodden in Wine and drunk, it doth stop the Belly in a Flixe: and
this also affirm Dioscorides and Plinie.


Marcellus. What say you of Lunaria, that increases deminisheth in one month?


Hilarius. Lunaria or the herb of the Moon.
THis herb springs in the end of May, sending from the stalk.xiiij. leaves,
growing seven against seven, in the form of little hearts, but green in
colour, in the top it bears seeds, like Beat seed, and is cold and dry of
nature. Oh how this herb prevails, or excells in healing of wounds,
knitting them up, making no scarre* Goodly salves be made thereof so there be
Balms also: this herb in red Wine drunk, doth stop the Whytes and Flux which
passes from Women unnaturally. Lunaria heals woudes.



Marcellus. What say thou of Lysimachus, which is a long herb, bearing a
leaf like Sallowes, and is called Woodwaxen?


Hilarius Lysimachus stops blod Lysimachus a king of Macedon, found this
herb, he was scholer to Calist henes, and one of Alexanders most worthy
Captains.
THis herb grows also among Salowes, of two kinds: one bears red flowers,
and the other yellow or golden flowers, and was found by Lysimachus, it
flourishes in June, and is of virtue drying, and bynding: it gleweth wounds
together, stops blood at the nose, applied to the same: it stops bloody
Flixe, and terms menstruall, drunk in Wine or Planten water. And the smoke
thereof, kill Gnats and Flies, this affirms Dioscorides, Galen, and Plinie:
it is so bitter, that no beast will feed thereof. And it is in English
called Woodwaxen, it dies green.


Marcellus. What is that herb, called Hearts horne?


Hilarius. Harts horne or the stars he. ^.
THis herb called Cornu Cerui, Hearts Horne, some call it Pes Cornicis, Crows
foot. Some herba Stellae, because it spreads abroad with jagged leaves, or
beams like a Star, growing flat, near ye ground, with flowers growing much
like small Lavender, but yellow. Plinie writes of this herb. lib 24. Cap. 19.
This herb helps the flixe, and is good in Sallets. The roots sodden eaten,
saith Dioscorides, and Galen, do help the Ilias, and stop blood in new
wounds. c.


Marcellus. What say you of Safron?


Hilarius. OVID that pleasant Poet fayneth, that a young man called Crocus,
was transformed into Safron, Crocus Safron.
for the lout of a Virgin named Smilax as it is written: Crocus with Smilax was
turned into small flowers: Ouid.
Et Crocum in paruos versum cum Smilace flores.


This Safron is commonly known here in England, both in Norffolke, Cambridge
shyre, and Essex. c. with purple flowers, with yellow small Chiues, and heads
growing in the ground, wherein be cloves of yearly increase. The best Safron
in al this world, doth grow say sundry Writers, The best Safron of this World,
where i^ is.
upon a Mountain called Coricos in Sycill, ye next in Lyca in Asia the less.
c. But let us go no further than this our natural realm, in which assuredly
there grows such Safron as there is no better in Europe. The flower doth
spring of this before the leaf, it is hot in the first degree, Against
drukennesse, Safron helps.
and dry in the second: it doth warm, make, soft, digest, provoke urine, make
good colour in the face. It comfort the heart, and defends drunkenness,
moves Venus: and..ij. is good against poison, and it will reconcile sleep:
tempered with Rose water and Woman's Milk, dropped into the eye, A singular
medicine for the pestilence.
it will take away dropping and dimness. Oil of bitter Almondes, and the
powder of Safron, warm powered into the deaf ear, doth help the organ of
hearing. The powder of Safron.x. grains, Walnuts, twenty grains Figs..ij.
six Sage leaves stamped together, with..j. of Pimpernel water, and three
grains of Mithridatum: keep this in a close glass, and eat thereof in the
morning twelve grains, and this will defend the receiver thereof, from the
Pestilence. Many godly Medicines be made of Safron, as Diacurcuma against the
Iaundice: and it is put in many Antidotaries, and also plasters, as Oxicroceum.
c. and with oyntmentes against Palsy and Gout. Dioscorides, Galen, and Plinie
affirm the same. Simeon Sethi saith, Safron, Milk, Rose water* Opium tempered
together: do make a goodly medicine against the pains of the feet. Safron
hath many virtues
Safron stamped with Beat leaves, do reconcile sleep, applied to the
forehead. Safron is good against all manner of swelling in the breast, wind in
the Belly and Guts: stopping of the mouth of the matrix, either in ointment, or
drink. It is a good cordial, to be used in the meates, of melancholy persons,
to rejoice, make glad a weak heart. And thus I do end of this our English
spyce, my dear Marcellus.


Marcellus. WHat say you of a Thistell, growing near ye Sea side, called
Eryngium, or Carduus Marinus: I have seen much thereof growing between
Lestoffe rode, Orforde ness, by the Shore side in Suffolke.


Hilarius THis in deed is called Eryngium, The sea Thistle, called Eringus,
which is so called, be cause if the root be sod and conserved with Honey
(...) Cloves it will preserve nature, or lift him up, which is decayed, it may
come of Erigo, gis, ere^i to lift up, o^ repair. Diosco. lib. 3. Capi. lxxj.
but the true name is Centum capita, because of the number of the heads: which
is like a Thistell with thick pricking leaves, and long roots, whose leaves
being yet tender, if they be boiled, they may with Salt, and Oyse, be trimly
preserved for Sallets. This herb with the roots, as Plinie saith, must be
gathered, when the Sun is in Cancer, in the midds of Summer. They be black
without, and white within: but some roots of them, be white both within and
without, very Aromatik and sweet like spice. This root or herb, being made
in powder, infusion or decoction, drunk, doth cleanse the raynes, bladder, and
matrix, and cause the stopped terms to pass. And it greatly prevails
against the Collike. and torment of the Guts, drunk, in, or with Hydromel. It
is good against ye falling sickness, drunk a dragme at a time: the roots must
be tenderly sodden, and preserved in Succate, to the use of m^te or medicine in
Winter, Galenus lib. 7. Simp medi.
as to restore nature, or help the conception of nature: Plinje saith, of this
root., i. drunk in wine, heals the prycke of any venomous beast, or worm
or fever. The juice or oil of this, doth clean recover any venom of the
body, infected with a Spider. Heraclydes the Physician did affirm, Against
poison.
that this herb, the leaf or root, being sodden and drunk, did prevail and
overcome the poison of any venomous herb, which any have eaten ignorantly. As
Aconitum called Leopards bane. c. Aetius affirms, to drink this xvi.
Euenyngs to bedward, and as many mornings, doth heal all infections of the
raynes, Eringium helps them which can not make water, or which have eaten any
venomous herb sayerh Ateius and Heraclyde^.
stopping of the urine, or stone. This Eryngium is of nature somewhat warm, and
very dry.


Marcellus. There is a Thistell called Chamaelion, wherefore is it good, and
why is it so called?


Hilarius. FIrst, to the virtue of this Thistel, it is ripe in August: and the
root is hot in the second degree, The Bore or carl Thistel^ (...)
Chamaelion.
and dry in the third. This root sodden in Ale or Wine, and drunk, doth kyl
the worms in the chest and belly One dragme of the powder thereof, drunk in
sharp old wine, wherein Organ hath ben sodden, will help the Dropsy, and also
the same will provoke urine, and break the stone. The Thistell heals the
Pestilence.
It is drunk in wine in place of Triacle, saith Dioscorides, lib. iij. Cap.
ix. when Charles the great, his army began to be diminished, through an
horrible Pestylence, he was warned to use none other medicine, but only that
every soldier should drink. Note that the black Thistel root with swines
grease and Bri^stoe will heal scabs and itch.
.i. of it in wine: which being done, the said Pestilence did cease presently*
This root sodden, the decoction thereof holden in the mouth, will lose rotten
teeth, so that with little help, they may be drawn. Theophrastus lib. ix. Cap.
xiij. de plantarum historia saith, that there is distance, between the virtues
of these two roots. The one is black, the other white, which white is best, to
do as is aforesaid. Further, the Juice of these roots, will kyl dogs swyne:
if it be put into their meates, Plinie affirms ye same. Now to ye name, which
is called Chamaelion not only because it is diverse of colour as having blew
flowers, speckled leaves, which is ye black kind. c. The white hath a long
root, no stalks, Leaves like wild Artychokes, great head, many sharp
pryckes, with plumes shaken, or blown away with wynd. And to conclude, look
upon what soil or Earth so ever these thistles* grow upon they will change
their colours like the same. As a little beast, which is in Inde, called
Chamaelion, spotted like a Libard, which changes into diverse colours, Of the
littie. beast called Chamaelion.
according unto the thing, which it sees. This beast doth never eat nor
drink* nor wink, but lives by the air only: which little beasts, be yearly
brought from Barbary, by the ships of London, into this Realm.


Marcellus. UUhat is to be spoken of Diars flowers, called flos Tinctorum.


Hilarius. This is along herb, with yellow flowers, having small black Cods, in
which the seed is like Lentelles, the leaves be like Hysope, Flos tinctoris
but much larger and longer. This is hot and dry, in the second degree, and
is of the nature of Brom: To vomit.
and this herb is good for a man..j.ss. either the herb or seed to drink to
provoke vomit, to cleanse the stomach, purge the raynes. Drunk two sundry
times, it will provoke urine, when it is stopped.


Marcellus. What say you of rubia Tinctorum, called Madder?


Hilarius. THere be of them two kinds, the garden Madder, Madder with red
roots.
with quadrangle stalks, and sharpe, and at every joint, the leaves grow
round about the stalk: the berries be round and green, when they are young,
being ripe, then are they black: the roots long, small, red of colour. The
wild Madder is less, with stalks four square, leaves compassing them like
Stars: flowers white, but roots not so rough. Dioscorides lib. ^ cap. 143
This herb is called of the Greekes Erythrodanon, with this, Diars colour their
Wool withal: it is hot in the second degree, and dry in the third. This
will cleanse the bladder, break the stone, and force vryne, saith Auerhois, and
is good to be drunk against bruses, and the Pestilence: Against the
Pestilence.
drunk in sweet water, it helps the kings evil. The roots or berries
sodden, says Galen lib. vj. simplic. medicamen. will cleanse the Liver,
Spleen, Gall, Urine, Matrix, Brusinges, and the pains in the Joints, chiefly
the huckle bones, called Ischias or Sciatica.


Marcellus. What is Paritorie of virtue?


Hilarius. Partridges do delight to feed upon this herb, Galen saith,
Parietaria that g^o^ upon stone. walls.
it hath virtue to cleanse, stop, and cool: therefore it hath virtue to help
flegmon. From the beginning, augmenting, unto the state of the said flegmon,
the hoatter any Apostumacion is the better this herb will help the same: if
you make a plaster of this Parietaria, it is good to cleanse the lunges* when
they are stopped, for it hath virtue to scower or cleanse. No herb is better to
make clean glass, then this herb as Galen affirms, if it be incorporate
with Salt: it will help the Hemeroydes, a Fistula. The juice of this being
drunk, cleanses the raynes, and by little little, doth break the stone: and
anoint Shingles, or saynct Anthonies fire therewith, and health will follow the
same with speed. For the gout
The same juice with Wax, and Goats tallow melted together is a good plaster,
for to take the payne of the gout away saith Plinie: this Juice also with Oil
of Roses, powered warm into the ear, will take away the payne.


Marcellus. What say you then to Cartamus?


Hilarius. IT is called wild Safron of the garden, with indented Leaves,
Cartamus or wyld sa^ro
sharpe ends, the flowers yelow, and knoppes as big as Olives. The Seeds
white and red, lunge and cornered: the Seed is hoate in the third degree:
the juice of this seed pressed forth, drunk with the Broth of a chicken, will
purge the belly, and to the stomach it is noisome: the juice tempered with
Niter, Cartamus cleanses humours.
Almondes, Honey, and Anisseedes, beaten together, is very beneficial to
cleanse the guts. To eat thereof the third part of a Walnutte, before supper,
it is very good for to convey excrements, superfluous humours, and it
fortifyeth digestion.


Marcellus. What is Spurge, or Purge of Nature?


Hilarius. THere is one kind* called Ricinus or palma Christi: whereof there is
Oil made for Lamps, Great spurge called Ricinus in Dioscorides days xxx.
Seeds, but now.viij. will suffice because nature is weaker, Dioscorides lib. 4.
cap. 158.
and plasters called oleum Ricinium. Dioscorides saith if.xxx seeds thereof,
be clean blaunched from the rind, and stamped, then drink this saith he, it
will purge fleume and choler, and Water downward. This seed will trouble the
stomach, and cause strong vomits: the juice thereof will cleanse the face
from pimples and spots, and make smooth the skin from wartes, broken with
Oil of Tartar, and anoint the place withal: this is hot in ye third degree,
and skowreth, warms, and cleanses: the leaves be like fig leaves. Then
there be seven kinds of the Tithimal^, Larhyris, or Cataputia minor, or the
leave Spurge.
says Dioscorides lib. iiij. Capi. Clix. and other old writers: which herbs
be called Goats Lattice, or the Milk herb, for if you break of a piece
thereof, drops of bitter Milk will follow* But to our common Catapucia or
Spurge, this is hot in the third degree, and dry in the second and is used to
cleanse the body from fleume, To purge choler.
choler, and melancholy, sodden in the broth of a chicken with Polopodie,
Damask Prunes, Mirobolans, and also the herb called Mercurie. I do here by
occasion put to Mercurie, this word (herb) because through the absence of a
Cooke, Note.
in the time when he should have made his Lords broth in the Kitchen, an
ignorant fellow, did put into his pot Mercuri Sublimated, Quid pro quo was
given to the Lord Wharton in his potage of ignorance to his great peril of
life.
that is Chalcantum, Quicksiluer, Uyneger, and Salt Armoniack together, which
he sent for quickly to the Apothicaries shop: thinking it had ben a
pleasant, or else a very wholesome confection, or at the least the same Mercury,
which the forsaid Cooke, did put daily into the pot, for the health of his Lord
and master. But eftsoon, contrary to his purpose, or intent, this broth in
whom the lurkyng, sleeping, venom was spread, was received into the body, of
the good LORD Wharton, in whom if withal speed, medicine had not gotten the
happy victory by vomits, c. this Noble Gentleman had there lost his life,
whose death had been no small want unto the publyke wealth of his country. Nor
yet no little comfort unto the foreign enemy: sutth a violence I say, would
dedly poison have done in one hour by death upon him, whom Fortune, Wisdom,
and honour had advanced, and nourished many years with happy life. And now
again to the matter, Marcellus, I neither do abuse the time, nor yet use to
much copy of words, when I speak of Mercurye, to put this word (herb)
thereunto. Unless some should, or would, mistake ye matter* as this good
fellow did. And further note, Tithimalus Characias. or Lathyris is good in
medicine to purge melancholy. Choler and fleume.
that the powder of this Spurge, supped up with a little Cinnamon* in ye broth of
a Chiken, or else a rear Egg in the morning, will purge gross fleume very
gently, Even so it will do, if it be taken with Honey of Roses. Seven seeds
eaten, saith Dioscorides, in a Fig, will purge melancholy and Water. The said
Seeds seem sweet, but they purge by vomit vehemently. Plinie affirms,
that if one which hath the dropsy, Sondry kinds of spurge, but yet very
perilous, the great spurge and the second excepted, for they be good.
do drink twenty grains of them in pure sweet water, he shall be delivered
from the dropsye. Al the other Spurges as Mirsenites, having leaves like Mirte,
are perilous that grow by the sea side. Ciparistus like a Cyprus tree.
Helioscopius that turns with the Son, from morning until night. And the
rest of them, be all hot in the fourth degree, and venomous, burning, as Galen
saith, and what part of the Body so ever they take, forthwith they do blister
the same, therefore it can not be taken without danger. Howbeit, Dioscorides,
Galen, and Plinie affirm, that it will help the toth ach, tempered with wax:
and a dragme of the root, drunken with Hydromell, will purge fleume
downward. c. Thus I do end of Spurge.


Marcellus. What is the yellow wall Gilloflower, and the white and yellow
Gilloflower, called sweet William, or hearts ease?


Hilarius, THis sweet herb is called viola alba, or Cheiri, the white Violet
that is one kind: there is also a purple, the third is yellow, Viola Lutea the
yellow, Violet, the wall Gillowflower.
these be all sweet, and very pleasant. They flourish in May and grow a
cubitte long: and when their flowers do fade, the seed doth grow in coddes,
they be garden flowers, and of nature be hot and clensing. The yellow, says
Dioscorides, is best in medicine, the flowers may be kept dry to be drunk,
to purge the stopped terms. And of the seed. li.. sodden in wine, and drunk,
do quickly convey, or bring forth the dead child, and the secondes. The
roots sodden in Vinegar, be good to anoynte flegmon, and the gout: and the
same root sodden softly with Vinegar, and Oil of Roses, will help the liver
and spleen, to anoint them, when they be swelled, or hardened. This will the
yellow Gilloflowers do, besides there is a precious Oil made thereof: which
will help the raynes and bladder, Flegmon is a certain apostimacion of
corrupted blood, gathered into one place.
or pains in the joints, or sinews, As appears in the compounds, and it is
there called Olium de violata alba. Now to conclude of this herb, the juice
thereof tempered with Honey, heals sores in the mouth and head: And with wax,
the broken skin fretted with wind in March, called chappes, be made whole.
And thus I end of this herb, which is commonly called Sweet William, or Harts
ease: God send thee hearts ease, dear Marcellus. For it is much better with
poverty to have the same, than to be a king, The greatest treasor of this
world, is a quiet mind.
with a miserable mind. For, from thence spryngeth either felycity, or
adversity: an Image of heaven with joy, or else hell with inward horror of
mind, and vexation.


Marcellus. I Do heartily thank you, for wishing to me so precious a Jewel,
so rich a treasure, Hearts ease, or quietness of the mind.
and so heavenly a comfort. For what is more to be desired, than hearts ease?
Nothing. For when adversity comes in at the one door, eftsoon, hearts ease
doth run out at the other. For they can not dwell together in one place. Why
so? They be, ii. extreme contraries, and marvelous affections of the mind
felt, and not seen, although oftentimes things, which are seen, may be a
means to bring quietness to the mind, and ease to the heart for a time. But
rather my dear Hilarius, there be which affirm that harts ease or rest,
comes by the ear, For say they, there is no rest in the heart of the
Infidel, but in the believing man: Perfect hearts, rest and true quietness of
mind.
and there can be no faith, without hearing. and not the sight of things
worldly brings faith, which faith gives the true hearts ease, passing all
other jewels. And albeit Hilarius, thou art not without wordly hearts ease,
which I grant, doth please sometime thy vain delight. Yet I pray God give
thee, but one handful of heavenly hearts ease, which passes al the pleasant
flowers, that grow in this World. Now what be the virtues of Hermodactilj, I
pray you tell me.


Hilarius. Hermodactili. of.ii. kinds. Colchicum Ephemerum, called the fyngers
of Hermis* or else of Mercurius, one is like
HERMODACTILI, be of two kinds, the first is Colchicum wyld Bulbus, or great
wild Safron, having great round heads within the ground like Onions, and with
black rindes, and Flowers like Saffron, red seed, but shining white and red
chiues, but very great, and a span lunge: sweet juice, and it flourishes in
the Spring. The second is like a Lilly, with tether leaves, white flowers,
bitter seed, one long root, of the bigness of a finger. Safron, the other like
lyllies.
And both these Hermodactilj be called Mercuryes fyngers. Colchicum is of
nature hot and dry, in the second degree. Paulus Aeginetae. lib vij. says
the root of Colchis, sodden by it self, do purge the belly, and helps
morbus articularis, which is the sickness of the joints: as the Gout, the
Sciatica, and the pains in the joints of the hands, called Chyragra. The
roots be perilous to be eaten, as other wholesome roots are in meat, as a
Sallette: for they will put one in danger of choking, or stranglyng. Cholchis
roots will strangle one take heed thereof, although they seem sw^ete
But they will purge the superfluous humours, and blood downward and be
venomous, saith Dioscorides lib. iiij. cap. lxxix, Yet saith he, they be
sweet, and sometime the ignorant do eat them for Bulbi, a kind of sweet
roots: but the remedy is, only to drink a great draught of milk. Their
roots and flowers stamped, will kill Lice, anoint childrens heads therewith.
The second kind of Hermodactilj is called wild Iris, or Flowerdeluce of the
field, Hermodactilus will kill Lice.
or Lillium conuallium, the roots sodden, the decoction of them, doth cleanse
the fylthy teeth that stynketh: the leaves sodden in Wine, do dissolve
humours, gathered into apostumacion, if it be warm washed often times
therewyth, specyally hot apostumes, or swellynges gathered of Choler. Galen
does remember these Hermodactili, calling them Ephemerum colchicum, or Iris,
describing the same, as is aforesaid, with the same Virtues, lib. vij.
simplicium medicamentorum.


Marcellus. WHat virtue is in the herb Rumex, called the great Dock, Of
Rumex* the Dock. Monks Rubarbe, or bastard Mercurie.
I mean not the Sorel, called Acedula, whereof you answered me before in this
book.


Hilarius. I Know your meaning very well, of that wild herb, which grows
commonly by paths, hedges, and waters sides. Monks Rubarbe.
And of this kind, there is one called Monks Rubarbe, which grows in gardens,
the other is wild and with lesser leaves. Marcellus, the blind ignorant
people, have of long time not a little erred, in one kind of Lappa or Rumex. I
mean neither Sorrel, nor the common wyld Dock, or the bastard Rubarbe: They
which call Rumex with the golden Sand, Mercurie, do greatly err.
but that which is commonly called Mercurie, with golden sands, upon the back
sides of the leaves, great roots, clusters of seeds, leaves like a broad
spear head, not purfled about with iagges, or small teeth like a saw, which in
deed the very Mercurie hath, with one only root. Whereupon many small fine
roots do grow, like a bush: and this Mercurie is much like unto wild Hemp.
But this bastard Mercurie, whereof I have now spoken called Rumex, is none
other but a kind of Docks, which being sodden, or used in Clyster, will move
the belly to be laxative. And is good to be sodden in brothes for them which
have the yellow Iaundice. And the root of this Dock, which is yellow, is also
good for the same purpose, for the Timpanie of water: Of the great Dock, how
it purges.
a dragme of the powder, of the Munkes Rubarbe, called the garden Dock, drunk
in wine, will purge fleume, water, and choler downward. The herbs well
sodden in Wine, and applied to the swelling of the throat, will speedyly help
the same. And thus I do end of Rumex, called the Dock, and also of the bastard
Mercurie, which master Leonard Fuchsius, doth affirm to be Rumex, in his
books of Plants. Chapit. Clxxiiii And some there be, Of the herb called
Atriplex or Arage
which affirm this bastard Mercurie, to be one kind of Atriplex, but red
Atriplex is Arage, a garden herb, which will quickly spring forth, to do
pleasure to mankynd. And is called the golden herb, because of his yellow
flowers: and of nature is moist in the second* and cold in the first degree,
The kings evil.
And this herb raw or sodden, will move the belly to be laxatyue, and is good
in Clysters: the seeds thereof drunk with sweet water, will very quickly help
the kings evil, saith Dioscorides, Galen affirms the same. And furthermore,
that it will open the Gal, and purge choler: Plinie would that the Water, Shift
water. often times* when Atriplex is sodden
wherein Atriplex is sodden should be often times shyfted or else it will hurt ye
stomach and infect the face with little spots or pimples. With Beats, saith
Hyppocrates, it is good to wash, or cleanse the mouth of the matrix: with Honey
and Vinegar tempered, it heals the Shyngles. This Garden Atriplex is good for
medicine: but the wyld Atriplex, To die the hair.
or golden Arage is only good to change the colour, and make the hair yellow,
with Barbery barks, and the Flowers of Calendula, called ye Marigold. And thus
I end of Atriplex, called Arage or Chrysolochanon, or the golden herb.
Chrysolochanon.



Marcellus. What then of Germander, called Quercula minor, the little Ox?


Hilarius. Quercula minor the little Oak, or Germander.
IT is called Quercula minor, because the leaves thereof be like unto Oken
leaves, although very small: It is even so named Chamaedris, of a very lowe Oak
of the ground, it is named Serrata, for it was first found by this Germander
is commonly known, and dies not in Winter, the flowers be Purple. And this will
grow in rocky places of his own nature, although plenty grow in Gardens: it
flowrisheth in July, it is hot dry, saith Galen, in the third degree. But my
friend Marcellus, understand this, that although Galen saith so, yet for all
that, the herbs here in England, be not so hot of nature, as they be in the
hot country of Greece, A good note of the nature of herbs.
where as Galen was borne, therefore, observe the Climate and Region, and then
you shall do very well. Now to this herb, which is scant so hoate and dry,
Dioscorides affirms that this herb green or dry, sodden in Wine or Water,
and so drunk, hath all these virtues. It helps conuulsions, coughs, hardness
of the spleen, stopping of urine, Dropses, and forces the terms to pass. And
in the time of peril, ye Midwyfe may give it to the Woman, whose child is
dead, to come forth. Drunk with Vinegar, it doth rebate the swelling of the
Liver, and prevails against poison. And drunk with good Wine, and pills of
this herb, with Honey, and then swallowed it will purge sores and ulcers. It
opens the stopping of the joints, and dries gross humours, thus saith
Galen, Many good ve^tues of Germander.
Theophrastus affirms that the leaves stamped with Oil, will heal wounds:
and the seeds draw forth yellow choler, being drunk, and be good for the
eyes. The Juice of the leaves, tempered with clean oil Olife, will cleanse the
dimnes of th^ sore even, says Plinie: and these be goodly virtues, which God
hath given to this herb, my friend Marcellus.


Marcellus. What is Psyllium.


Hillarius. Psyllium called Flewort.
PSyllium is called Fleawort, because the seed is like to Flees, black hard,
which Flees in the North country, be called Loppes: or else as some do say,
whereas this herb is cast green into any house, no Fleas will remain there.
It grows in dry places vnsowen, the seed is cold in the second degree:
with Oil of Roses, Vinegar and this seed stamped together, is good to anoint
the joints, swelling, hot burning pains in the forehead. For pains in the
head coming of heate. or burning.
This herb or seed, broken in a Leaden mortar, with hogs grease, is good
to to heal a foul, burning, rotten ulcer or sore. The Juice thereof with
Honey, dropped into the ear, will kill Worms, or any Flea cropen therein: and
thus much affirm Dioscorides, and Plinie, of this herb.


Marcellus. WHat say you of Fox Gloves, commoly ye Finger flowers: the flowers
of some be yellow, Digitales.
there be of them Carnation in colour? Thus I know them by name and colour: but
no further, I can say of them.


Hilarius. THou say well, I need no further description of them: Yellow
and Purple Fingers.

Bitter herbs be hot dry.


it grows in mountains, shadow, or rocky places. It is bitter, and therefore
it must needs be hot and dry, for Galen lib. iiii. de simplic. medi. facul.
cap. xvij. those herbs saith he, which be bitter of taste, do cleanse and purge
and do cut away gross matter in ye veins. Therefore with bitter things ye
terms menstrual, and the filth from the breast, and lunges be cleansed, what
more? To cleanse the stomach.
This herb will do all, or asmutch as Gencian will do: in whose place, this
herb called yellow or Purple fyngers, is used: these be Galen his words of
this herb.


Marcellus. ALthough you have showed me the nature of common Garden Mints I
had almost forgotten Calamyntes, Organ, and Mariarum I pray you show me some
things of them.


Hilarius. IT is called Calaminte, the profytable Mint, Calamintha Montana
Nepeta. Pulegium. Siluestre.
the virtue thereof causes Serpents to fly from it: much of this Calamynte
doth grow upon Mountains, and is called Calamintha Montana. An other kind is
called Nepeta, or Neppe of the garden: an other is Pulegium Siluestre, the wyld
Pulyall royal of the Wood, with great leaves than Peneroial, called Pulyall,
growing in Woods, or moist places. And Calaminte, is of essence, Diosco. lib.
3^ Capi. 36.
or being hot dry in the third degree: the roots be of none effect: or
profit, but the leaves be very hoate, and eager to taste upon. The virtues of
Calaminte be many, as against poyso and stingyng of Serpents, either drunk, or
anointed: against the strangurie, or the stoppyng of vryne. or stone,
conuulcions, pains in the stomach Orthopnaea, which is a disease, Orthopnaea
difficulty of wind.

Tormina fretting of the Guts.


that a man can not take his breath but holding his neck upright: Tormina, or
pains of the guts, stopping of ye terms in women: tercians, and the kings
evil. All these be cleansed, opened, and healed, by, and through Calamintes.
drunk in wine: the powder and sirupe have the like virtues, the water thereof
is but weak, except to stop vomits What more of this herb, it will kill great
worms, drunk with Salt and Honey: even so it will Ascarides, which be little
round worms, breedynge in the long guts of children. Who so hath
Elephanticus morbus, which is a Leprie, bred of melancholy with swelled flesh,
and black spots, and use to eat Calamintes sodden, or raw, and then drink
the juice in Wha^e, shall be healed of the same leprosy. This sodden in wine,
doth take away blew, or black spots from the skin, made by a stripe of hand,
wand, or rod, or stumbling against ones fist in the dark, applied to the same
stripe: a plaster made thereof, or hoate laid upon the huckle Bones, will
assuage the payne of Sciatica, and it will draw down humours. The juice will
kyl worms that be in the ear. Galen doth write very much of Calaminte. The
oil of Calamintes doth warm the body, is good against the Sciatica.
lib. vij. simplicium medicamen. agreeing with Dioscorides, and doth much
commend the Oil of the same, to anoint the body, saying: it will enter
quickly, and that it is a present remedy for the Sciatica. And through the
bytternes of the same, it will skoure, and cleanse the yellow Iaundice. and open
the Gall. And to conclude, the Mountain Mint with the Purple flowers, having
leaves like to Ocimum, Organ.
called Basil, Nipotellae, called Neppe, is one of the Calamintes. So is an
other called S. Marie Mint, with flowers like to Chamom^ll. Dioscor. lib. 3
C^p. xxviii.xxix.xxx.viii.
Some there be, that do take Organ, to be a kind of Calamyntes: but it is not
so, for Organ is a proper herb of it self, in name and nature. And is
distinguished in four bye names. Heracleoticum, Onitis, Syluestre, and
Tragoriganum, these be sweet herbs: Goats and other beasts love to feed of
them. Some of them have leaves like Hisope, but broader: Some like Sauerye,
called Satureia, of increasyng of seed, which Sauorye is near kin in nature
to Organ, Sauerie. Maioram
so is Amaracus, called Maioram, or Sampsuchum. These all be herbs very
sweet, wholesome, and pleasant, good to mankynde, and enemies to venom,
poison of corrupted worms or Serpents: and of nature be hot and dry in the
third degree. These herbs will warm all the body, either in bath, or to be
anointed with the Oil, against all cold syckenesses, or rigours of trembling.
These herbs sodden green in broth, or the powder simply of them put into the
same, or else drunk in Wine, or the Sirupe thereof, will do thus, as follows.
Help the dullness of sight: provoke neesyng, Against evil sight* Sauerie
prevails.
either in oil or powder: open ye raynes: provoke vryne: force terms
menstruall: kill worms in the belly: Cleanse gross fleume from the Stomach:
make good digestion: help the green sycknesse, nothing better for melancholy,
and pains in the left side. Good for the collike, palsye, stinkyng breath,
shortness of wynd, or vomytes, or swelling with dropsy: There is a forgetful
sycknes, called Lethargus or Veternus, which is placed in the head, in which
the power of reason is contained, through a sickness of fleume. as a quotidian
not purged, or else of Peripneumonia, which is a sickness of ye lungs. When
through heat, Lethargus helped with herbs, hoate and dry in the third degree.
phlegm is melted, or made thin eftsoon, drawn to the head: the best remedy
is then, to purge the head, with Hierae simplicis. i.ss. to wear a garland, or
cloth full of these herbs, of Organum Maiorum, or Sauerie. and health will
follow: and thus I do end of them.


Marcellus. What is Ormyn, Which we do call Clarie, Gallitricum?


Hillarius. ORmin hath stalks four square, leaves grosser than Horhound.
flowers in form like the Archangel: but purple coloured, growing about the
stalk, Orminum Ormyn. Or Clarie.
with black seeds in the Cods. This herb is hot and dry: Dioscorides saith,
the seed drunk with wine, will move Venus, with Honey it will cleanse the
bloody spots in the eye, this affirm also Paulus and Plinie: and it is good
for to cleanse the whites in women, sodden with Planten in red wine and drunk:
Clarie good for women.
stamped and put to a prick, it will draw it forth of the flesh.


Marcellus. WHat is the virtue of wyld Basil, called Ocimastrum, having stalks
four square: flowers Purple, seeds black, and leaves like unto the king of
herbs, Ocimastrum wyld Basil
for sweetness called Basil.


Hilarius. THis grows in sondry places, and flourishes in October: bearing
the Seeds and Cods, is hot and dry of nature with Bytternes. The seed sodden
in Wine and drunk warm, helps the biting of Serpents, and drunk in wine,
with Myrrh and Pepper, it heals the Sciatica, saith Dioscorides.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of wyld water Pepper, an herb so named


Hilarius. IT is called Hidropiper, because it grows in water, Hydropiper
water pepe^
the taste thereof burns in the mouth, as the spice Pepper doth. It hath a very
tough stalk, leaves like Myntes but broader, thynner, and whyter, the Seeds
grow by the Leaves upon slender Branches, it flourishes in August. It is
hot and dry, Dioscorides lib. 2. cap. 155. Gal. lib. 7 Simp. medic.
not so much as Pepper Dioscorides saith, this herb with the seed stamped,
annoynt the black spot, or hard knot through a strype therewyth, and it shall
be healed. If this seed be dried and beaten unto powder mingled with Salt, it
is good to eat with meat, or to season flesh. Hydropipe one hath leaves like
Mintes: the other is Persicario with leaves like Peches. and will serve in the
place of Pepper.
The root thereof is good for nothing: of this herb be two kinds, the one
having leaves like mintes: of the second speaks Matthiolus saying he takes
it to be Persicaria. which hath Leaves like Peaches, with colour spotted,
somewhat like Puke, of which Persicaria. I have spoken of before.


Marcellus. What be the virtues of Aristolochia rotunda, and Longa


Hilarius THis Herb is good to quicken the time of Child birth, Aristolochia
Rotunda Longa Clematis. Dioscot. lib. 3. Cap. 155..
and expulse the secondes, whereof there be three kinds: one round with leaves
like Ivy, but rounder, with round rotes: fro which herb comes a pleasant
sharpe savor white flowers upon pretty red knoppes, this is Rotunda, or roud,
ye Female: an other is called Longa, or long with long roots and leaves, small
brauches, purple flowers, and stinking, when it doth grow: and is of the fashion
of a Pear. Both of them have berries like Capers very bitter, of colour like
Box, and do stink. Galen. lib. vij Simplic. medic.
Now to the third which is sweet having small roots and flowers like Rue or
herb grace. The roud root is the best in medecin, as salve, powder, Oil.
The fume or smoke thereof put under beds, or the cradels of young children, is
very wholesome puts away air of infection: this herb is most bitter somewhat
sharp hot and dry in the second degre. This herb hath virtues to incarnat
ulcers and wounds, with clensyng and mundifyinge them: and will extenuate and
make thin Gross humour, and knits. The root or curnelles thereof, dried and
beaten into powder with Pepper and Mire mingled together, is wholesome to rub
the gummes and teeth, when they be foul cankered. The powder is good to
takeaway ded flesh, to be put into a fistula, to cleanse it: even so it will
help the conduit of the vryne, conueyghed in with a syrynge or instrument
when it is corrupted with burning heate, or vlcered: a foment Oil and wine,
and this root will bring forth a young child. Gentian Aristolochia, and Honey,
make a wholesome confectio, for a stinkyng breath. Aristolochia helps Cankers
and burninges.

Many good virtues of Aristolochia.


The second ii. kinds saith Plinie, drunk with wine, or water, be good to be
given them, which have the cramp, or have fallen down from some high place,
being sore bruised. The seed drunk, is good against the plurisy and worms, with
rosen and wax, this root, or roots, in powder, withdraw corns from the
feet, and also draw pryckes, needles, arrow heads from the Flesh. With
vinegar, this powder will, heal a green, would: it is drunk against the
falling sickness, and shortness of wind. And this root must be gathered in
April.


Marcellus. VUhat is the virtue of that wild clyminge Vine, with the great
whyght root, stinkyng berries, red of Colour, and leaves like unto Hoppes, or
wild Fyges?


Hilarius THis is a hedge weed in every place commonly growing, and creeps
about bushes, Brionia la alba, or the wyld tunning Vine.
branches, boughs and trees it flourishes until Harvest the branches be
somewhat bitter and sharpe, stopping of nature. The root doth dry with
moderate warmes, in the second degre, it hath virtue to cleanse skoure with
maturation or rypenes. To heal sores with Brionia.
The root of this Briand, or the powder of ye rotes, with Smalage. Mallowes,
clean Honey. Flaxeseede in powder, and Barley meal clean Terebinthin, and a
little white wine sodden softly together, makes a medecin to heal Felons
and vncomes withal. or pushes. This herb being yonge and tender, may be eaten
as Asparagus may be, saith Dioscorides, for it moves or provokes the belly
and vryne, the leaves, fruit and roots be sharpe, and will byte the tongue, if
you taste of them. Therefore they will stamp them with Salt, to heal Cankers,
fylthe in hands or feet, or Legs, c. as sores, foul pushes. c. This root
will cleanse all the filth from the body, To cleanse the face with Brionia.
and black spots, blaynes, blisters, shingles, pimpels called good Ale
pearls, tempered with the Powder of Fenegreeke and the Oil of Tartar. Or else
Bryona sodden in white wine, from a quart to a pynt, then strain the same,
putting some Champhere* and wash the infected face every Night with a Sponge,
Briomia defends poison.
and let it dry in. The roots pressed in the Spring, and the Juice Drunk
with sweet water doth purge fleum: drunk daily in the morning with wine or
Ale, well sodden, they help the falling evil, and vertigo Two vnces drunk are
good against the poison of Serpents, or venomous drink. But yet it will kill a
young child, in the mothers womb. Mary, if the child be dead, by any casualty
in ye belly, the it will bring it forth by the way of a foment, or aplication,
by iniection into the mouth of the Matrixe. The berries of this broken, do
help to cleanse scurfe, and fylthy Leprosy from the skin. If nurces do kneede
their Wheat meal, Brionia. increases Milk
with the juice of the Bryon beryes and bake it in bread, if they eat the
same bread, it will increase milk in their breast. But to use it much, except
cause of infyrmity move the patient, it is hurtful for memory: it helps the
lunges, Liver, and spleen to be drunk, and draws forth pryckes, heals
wouds.


Marcellus. What is Pellitory of Spain good for?


Hilarius. THe flower thereof, put into the nose, Sternumentaria

Pyre^hrum*

Ptermic

Pellitorie


will provoke much nesyng: and therefore it is called Ptermica, it hath Flowers
like Chamomel, branches much like Sothernwood, It will grow in hard stony
places, the root must be dug in the end of Harvest: it is hot and dry in
the third degre and in the beginning of the fourth, specially if it be dried.
The leaves with the flowers stamped together, Dioscoridesi lib. 3. cap. 71
will make a good oyntmente to take away Marks made with strypes, causynge
blew or black spots in the face or any part of the body. The roots have
virtue to draw filth and cold humour from the corrupt pained teeth, saith Galen
lib vij. simplicium medic. But if the said roots be first steeped in strong
Vinegar and beaten in a mortar, and small round pills made of them, Pellitorie
hath virtue to help the teeth.
putting them into the mouth, they will draw much filth from the paller of the
mouth and gummes, and fynally ease the tooth ache. Or the said roots or juice
of the sodden in Oil, will put away a cold Fever, Pellitorie will take away a
cold Fever.
if the body be well anointed therewith against a Fever before the fit do come,
either in tertian or quarten. And it is a good oil for a cold stomach, that
is swelled: and thus I do end of Pellitory.


Marcellus. VHat virtue is in a wed which we cal Goosegrasse, some people
calit Hare weed? It grows it hedges, in hath rough leaves, and berries which
berries hang by couples, and will cleave to men or women's clothes, and therefore
some do cal it cleuer grass, with white flowers, white round seeds, like
nauelles.


Hilarius YOu have rightly described this herb, Philanthropos A perine
commonly called goosegrasse, hareweede. Dioscor. lib. 3. cap. lxxxviij
which in deed bears al those names among the people: it is called
Philanthropos, for it loves to hang or garment, and go with men. This is a
name of property, ye very true name is Aparine, it is dry and clensyng: and
this herb and seed drunk in wine, prevails against stinging of venomous
things: and the juice distilled in the ear, helps them, that cannot well
hear, This herb tempered with fresh Swynes grease, heals Struma, or pains
in the throat, applied to the same place: the juice thereof saith Plinie
stops blood in a fresh wound, and heals the same.


Marcellus. ^ sondry (...) of ^ this viscum.
WHat is the virtue of Mislen, growing upon Thorns, Peretrees, Oaks, whereof I
have seen great plenty growing in the country of Suffolke, with many goodly
herbs and flowers: ^
as in these most ancient Parks of Framingham Kelshal, Nettlestede,
Lethringham, Parham, Somet, Heningham* Westwood, Huntingfeeld, Henham, little
Glenham, and Benhal c. These Parks be old neighbours, God send them continual
friendship with each other in unity, for where as unity is broken, the Park
pale will not hold, but fall into sudden ruin and decay, and the Dere will
scatter.


Hilarius. I Know the places which you have named right well. Furthermore, I
commend your good zeal that you bear to that worthy country: wishing their
continual unity and concord. I desire the same. For they be people of no less
civility then of most aucient good fame and worship: Very gentle men spring not
by extortion* but by true serving their Princes, and living of thei^ own,
hurtinge not their poor neighbor, preferring the favour of the c^untry before
lucre. which is their chief treasure
descended from houses of fame, worthy of memory, I mean no parks, but
people, nor them which have crept under a goose wyng, drawing forth a bastard
sword no longer the a writing pen, fighting their combat upon the backsyde
of a shete of paper, to the hurt of many perhaps, and profit of none, but to
theimselues only. But of them speak I* whose blood hath been shed in the just
quarrel of their Princes: whose houses be builded upon hard rocks, of true
gotten goods: whose doors be open, keeping hospitality according to their
calling, who with the love of the country guard themselves, and with justice
defends causes of the pore. These be they which be worthy of laud, that thus
fears god: these be the right gentlemen, otherwise not. Now to our matter,
from which we a little have digressed. For this Mislen, which is called in
Latin Viscum, Dioscor. lib. 3. Cap. lxxx.vij Mislen heals many pertilous
sores.
which is hot tart, having ye coplexion of air water. This herb with Rosen
and Wax boiled together, will make a medecin to mollifye, dissolve, draw forth
swelling cur^els, distilled of foul humours, gathering behind the ears: or
any foul push, fester, or felon, in any other place of the body: tempered with
Rosen, it heals an old ulcer. Take the berries of this Mislen, Misteltow or
Mislen will make a good ryping plaster and heal corns

Galen. lib. 6. Simplic. medic.


put thereunto the powder of Jet, make it warm apply it to the left side upon
Leather when ye spleen swells, and it will help it. Temper it with
Auripigmentum. or vnsleaked Lime, and it will draw forth corns. This Mislen
saith Galen is one of them, which after the first putting to in any medecin
will not be hot but requires a time, by little little, as Thapsia doth: this
mislen grows of no seed, nor will grow upon the earth, but upon the tree
through the dounge of birds that syttte upon them by night, which by little
and little, breaks through the barks of the tree, into the sap: fro whence
at length this Viscum doth spring and grows green in Winter, when the poor
naked tree seems withered and ded Virgil observing the nature thereof. in the
Aenedos. liber. vj. says thus of it. Qual solet syluis brumali frigore
Viscum
Fronde virere nova, quod non sua seminat arbos. Virgil

The Misteldine by kind, in storms of Winter cold,
Is never sown yet green doth grow on trees bouth bare and old


Plinie the xvi. book the last chapter, saith there be certain plants,
Misteltow is not natural in kind but ^ basterd brauch growing upon some other
tree.
which cannot be engendered, or bred upon the earth: for whom nature hath
prepared, to take their beginning and nutriment of trees. For when they have no
places of their own, then they live upon other, as this Viscum or Misteltow
is wont. But now by the way of protestation. What benefyt hath that tree, upon
whom this Misteltow doth grow? No more than any member of the body, upon whom
a Canker is placed: it will at length desstroy altogether, except it be pulled
fro the tree, unless it be a mighty tree, strong and full of humour, with
plentiful increment, Even so, into what realm or common wealth, Country,
Borough, or Cittye, that unnatural strangers, or forriners, be planted,
placed, or as they say, made naylfaste: Misteltow is like a stranger that
waxes ^ych and flourishes by the hurt and loss of a freeborne man of his
natural country or city.
forthwith they wax high, I mean wealthy, lusty, and green in Winter: they
lack nothing in the time of dearth and misery. When as the natural people,
upon whom they have their gain profit, taste of sore labour, lack, loss,
honger, and poverty. And thus I do conclude, both of misery, and Mistleden,
remembering Plinies words in the foresaid Chapiter: Namque cum suam sedem non
habeant, in aliena viuunt, sicut Viscum.


Marcellus. VUhat virtue is in Ebulus, called walwort, which in Suffolke they
call Danes weed: it grows like Eldren, which leaves be like Walnut leaves,
and berries in the top?


Hilarius THis herb is of the nature of Eldren, called Sambucus, Sambucus
Ebulus.

Eld^r^e and walewoorte.


of one Sambix, which first found out the virtue of this Eldren: and of nature
is hot and dry, resolves, and dries moist sores ulcers, but is very hurtful
to the stomach. Dioscor. lib. 4. Cap. Clxviij.
Notwithstanding the tender leaves sodden, and eaten like a sallet, purge
fleume and choler. And it is good to heal the dropsye, Walewort makes
medecin for the gout, pains in the joints
and doth mollify the mouth of the matrixe, to make a fomente therwt. The juice
of this Ebulus or the berries stamped with fresh Grease, and Barley meal, will
cleanse deep rotten sores, and cool the burning of a Gout, and pains in the
joints. Paulus Aegineta saith, these ii. kynds of Elders, do glue and heal:
and either eaten or drunk do cast forth water by the belly, and nether parts.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Epithimum?


Hilarius. THis Herb doth wrap and fold about Time, Eythymum. Diosco. lib.
4. Cap. 172. Galen. lib. 6 Sim. medica.
and is therefore so called: the flower is used much in medecin, and is hot
and dry in the third degre, And purges Melancholy, Fleum, and gross humours
from the head, and doth comfort the heart. Cassutha is hot in the first, and
dry in the second degree, and is of great virtue to open the Gall, cleanse the
raynes, deminish the Spleen. It purges, skowreth, fleume and Choler, and
heals ye Iaundice: drunk in decoctions, potions, Syruppes. c. And this
Cassutha grows grosser, Epithymum. Cas^utha helps the Liver Gal spleen.
and larger than Epithimum with white flowers, and no roots: but grows upon
other herbs, as Paritorye, young Flax, and other Plants, as Plinie lib. xvj*
Cap vltimo* writes.


Marcellus. What say you of Vngula Caballina or Tussilago?


Hilarius. IT is called Vngula Caballina, yt is horshoue, because no herb is
liker: but the Greekes call it Bechion, which is Tussilago, yt is, to help ye
cough. It is commonly known, some cal it clot leaves: white on the one side,
Vngula Cab^llina.

Horsehoue.


and green on the othersyde. And grows ne'er waters, and in fallow lands:
the flowers flourish in May only, but the leaves al the Somer, and of nature
be cold and moist. These leaves stamped and strained, the juice will heal
shingles, skaldinges, burninges, and hot inflammations. Dioscorides, Galen and
Plinie affirm, Diosco. lib. 3. cap. 10^. Galer. lib. vi. Sim. medica.
that these leaves and roots, being dried and cast upon the coals and so to
receive the smoke thereof through a reed or Trunk into ye mouth* will cleanse the
Lunges, and help them, and quickly deliver them from old rot^es, and cold
coughs.


Marcellus. Apiastrum.
What is Apiastrum?


Hilarius. APiastrum or Melissa which we name Balm: be of two kinds, garden,
and field. Bees love this herb above al other, and it is called the Bees, or
Honey herb: and is dry in the first, and warm in the second degree. Melissa
Balm. Dioscor. lib. 3. Cap. ^01. Auecennae in libro medicin.
The juice of this herb, heals stinging of Bees, Serpents, mad dogs, and
wouds, drunk in wine, and cleanses also the terms menstrual. Nothing doth more
comfort the heart, then this herb in decoction, or the water thereof: Burrage
water, and syne Musk sodden in a clean vessel and drunk when the hart is
weak, or in a great Hicker, this herb will cleanse the Lunges, and stop the
bloody flixe, and pains of the throat called Angina made in a warm plaster.
Galen lib. 7. Simpli medicamen.
It kepeth vomits, and helps collike drunk in wine: Balm Nuts, stamped
with Honey, help to lighten the Dull blemished dark iyen, and the sight. It is
like Horhounde saith Galen.


Marcellus. What is Carui, which we do cal Careawayes?


Hilarius. THis fine small seed comes from the country of Cari in Asia which
is ye place, Caros.
where as they grow very plentifully: this Cary seed, is hot and dry in the
third degre. Dioscor. lib. 3 Cap. 57. Galen. lib. 7. Sim. medica.
Dioscorides saith, this is the virtue of the seed, pleasant to the mouth,
and profitable to the stomach, it provokes vryne, helps digestion, it is
good in medecines, and of the nature of Anisseedes: the roots be yellow and to
eat upon be better than the Past nip. The seed doth not only extinguish
hot swelling and move vryne: but the plant also, says Galen: the decoction
of Cary wine, is best to be drunk to cleanse the raynes.


Marcellus. What is Cartafilago


Hilarius CArtafilago hath red stalks two cubits long, and hollow long leaves
like Sallow, with small teeth like a saw, about them yellow flowers, many
Roots, and red without: it flourishes in August, Cartafilago ^ulnararia.
Herba.
it is dry, stoppyng, and byndynge. This herb is equal to the best healinge
wound herb: and it will incarnate and heal the said wound, and cleanse ye same
stamped and put into it. You may dry this herb and make powder thereof, and
cast it into a fresh wound, and it will heal speedily. A goodly. wound herb.
What is better for a fystula? Prove it I pray you.


Marcellus. What is Grummel seed?


Hilarius. GRana solis, Millium solis, is comonlye known, these seeds be good
to be finely beaten in powder, and drunk, Grana Solis.
to cleanse the raynes and cause vryne to pass, that is stopped: Fenel,
Parselye, and this seed broken in white wine, and let it stand all one night,
putting some Scene leaves to the same, and in the morning sees this in a stone
vessel, put in Sugar then strain it, and drink the same: To c^use vryne to
pass plentifully.
it will purge fleume, choler, and open ye raynes and bladder, and force forth
vryne most plentifully.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Cichory?


Hilarius. THis Herb is called in Greek Serin, in Latin Intybum, whereo^ are
two kinds, the wyld and tame, Sponsa Soli^. Intybus. Endiuia. Cichory.
these be the names of Endiue and Cichory, that with broader leaves, somewhat
like Beats, is Endiue. The Second with Jagged Leaves, like unto Dandelyon, is
Cichorye: these have harde stalks with trim blew flowers like hats, some have
white flowers. Dioscr. lib. 3. Cap. Cxxv.
These be cold and dry in the second degree: the Endiue is more cold then the
Cichorye, be both of a restringing, or stopping, bynding nature. These herbs
green, both roots and leaves, hath virtue to cool the hot burning of the
liver, the stoppyng of the gall, the yellow Iaundice, the heat of the heart,
the lack of sleep, the stoppyng of vryne, hot burning fevers, being first
digested. The syrupe thereof is excellent good against the said sicknesses: the
Water cannot be missed in all potions coolynges, or purging drynkes, to purge
mankynd withal. The waters of Endiue, Planten, Roses, and stylled Milk, with
fine Bole Armoniake, or seefe without Opium, is good to be cast with a Syryng
into the fylthy, burnt swelled, or corrupted yards, or Conduictes, of unclean
persons.

For the heate of the liver. R. Endiue or Cichory, whytes of Eggs, Barly^
flower, A very good medecin for the ulcer in the yard.
Sanders, clean young fresh swynes grease, the oil of Roses, Violets, and
water Lillies, wrought together in a Leaden mortar, and applied to the side,
spread upon leather. This plaster is very good, against the hot burning gout
in the feet, A plaster for the liver and gout.
or shingles, or burning in any part of the body. Dandelion is of the same
virtue.


Marcellus. What is that root Napus called the Naue?


Hilarius. IT is called Napus Bunias, because of his own nature, it grows
great and round, whereof be two kinds: one bears leaves like Rapes, The
other like Rocket, but greatter, and hath yellow flowers, the Seeds grow in
coddes, and of Nature be hot in the second degre. The roots of Napee increase
wynd, and less norishe then Rapes, the sedes be good in many medecines, and
prevail against poison. The roots sodden and preserved in salt, be wholesome
to eat upon: in Egypt the people make much of this herb.


Marcellus. What say you of Rapes.


Hilarius. THis Rape is a rural common root, and no less known than common,
of two kinds: the tame hath leaves like Radix, and yellow flowers. The other
hath blew flowers and small sharpe leaves, Napus. Bunias.
in the length of a finger, with small teeth like a Saw, roud about the said
leaf. The garden great Rape doth noryshe, inflate, engender, loose or weak
flesh, and moves carnal lust. The root sodden, warm applied, helps a
kibed heel, and eases the gout, make this Root hollow, put therein oil of
Roses and Wax, then roast it in hot Ashes, this will heal kybes, which be
deeply rotten or festered within the heel. Sees Asparagus in the decoction
of Rapes and drink the same to purge the blader, Goodly virtues of rapes.
cleanse the raynes, and force vryne. The seed of Rapes is good in many
medecines, Plini. lib. 17. cap. xiij.
and in Triacle, and expulceth poison: wild Rapes be put in medecines, to
cleanse the face, as with Lupines, been m^ale. c. Plinie saith, the seed being
sown, within three months following, it will be a great root: but it is very
hard in decoction it increases wind and seed, says Gal. lib. vi.
Simplicium Medicamentorum. There is great plenty of the oil thereof made in
England, as in Marsland ne'er to Lin. c, Very profitable to our common wealth.


Marcellus. What is the root called Rhoyda?


Hilarius. ROyda is a goodly root, whereof is great plenty in Macedonia, now in
many places of Germanye, growing in gardens, and is hot dry in the second
degree: it smells much like a Rose and these roots stamped, made warm with
oil of Roses applied to ye forehead, will assuage the grief, burning heat, lack
of sleep, frensye, that mankynd doth through weakness fall in to. This herb will
grow in England also, Roid^ helps the dead.
if idleness were not the let.


Marcellus. What is the root called Doronike


Hilarius IT is a precious root, growing in Egipt, and is called Doronicus.
Actuarius calls it Carnabadium: it hath many knots, Doronicu^. Alexandrie
Doronicus do help dig^stion.
is no bigger than a mans finger, and is put into confection, for lack of
perfect digestion, and against poison, there is no berter Root than this.
Ruellius supposes it to be that, which the Greekes cal Arnabo.


Marcellus. What is the good of Liquorice roots


Hilarius. LIquoryce called Glycerrhiza of the sweetness, Liquorice.
grows great plenty in hoate Countries. Even so there is much here in
England, the yellower and moyster, the better: it is sweet, warm and moist of
nature. Liquorice is wholesome against the exasperation, Dioscorides.
Liquorice helps the lunges. wounds.
or sharpnes in Arteries, to byte upon this root, or keep it in the mouth,
for that purpose. For the burning heat In the stomach, and sycknes of the
Lunges, spleen, and old rotten cough, Scabs in the bladder, and sorenes in
the raynes, drunk in pocions or broken: Liquorice heals wounds, if it be
anointed therewith. The powder thereof put into the eye, will help Pterygius,
which is a little skin growing from the corner, covering the sight.
Liquorice, Wine Honey, heals both wounds, without and within also


Marcellus. I would as gladly learn the virtue of Radish roots for medecin
as I have been desirous to feed of them with meat.


Hilarius. First I shall declare unto you the name thereof, it is properlye
called Raphanus because it Spryngeth soddaynelye, and Radix is a name common to
all Roots, Rapha^u^* Radix. Radish.
But this Radish bears the chiefename among other roots: and therefore it is
called Radix. Plinie makes mention of Radish roots lib. xix. cap 5. that were
as hyg as young infant children. Of Radish roots there be no small store
growing about the famous city of London: they be more plentiful then
profytable, and more noisome, then nourishinge to man nature, ingenderyng of
wind, enemy to the stomach, saith Dioscorides. These be nombred rather among
roots used for meat, tha accounted of perfect wholesome nutriment: good to be
eaten before meat, Diosco. lib. 2. cap. 106.
to vomit and cleanse the stomach. But wholesome in the end of meals, for
choleric stomachs, a little at once, to help digestion* and to distribute
the meat: but Galen affirms, that tender young Radish with Vinegar, is good
sauce in the beginning of Meals, to loose the belly.

For the plain people do eat these roots with bread, taught by nature, not
by art: Gal. lib. 2. de ali^n ento^m faculratibus.
And so is Organ being green, Crosses, Time, Sauery, Peneroyall, Germander,
Mintes, Calamintes, Paritory, and Rocket. These herbs and this root, be
rather eaten of necessity, then of will and fantasy. But sodden and then
prepared with sharpe vinegar, Sugar, and sweet clear oil, How to use Radi ^
roots
are more profitable than crude, raw herbs or roots. Many learned and
unlearned, do marvel, saith Galen, why men use to eat them raw after supper,
to help digestion: who answers, long custom hath so taught them.
Notwithstanding, the example of such is not to be followed without peril or
hurt. Plinie affirms, that Raddyshe, sodden in wine, drink that wine in the
morning, and it will deminishe, and cast forth the stone, open the gall,
deminish the spleen, move Uenus, cleanse spots and bruses made in the skyn by
some strype. Hyppocrates saith that if women chafe their heads, Radix helps
the belly.
with Raddysh roots, the hair will fall, and applied to the Navel of women, it
will quickly assuage the torment of the belly and Matrix. The juice will h^lpe
any payne within the ear, dropped in warm: with many mo virtues used in
medecin, although abused in meates, through ignorance, in eating them so raw,
and out of time. Of nature, Garden radish is dry in the second and hot in
the third degree. The wild Radish is hotter and dryer of nature: the seed is
good in medecin to cleanse vryne, and Radix loves to grow in fat grounds.


Marcellus. What of Pastnippe*


Hilarius. Pastnips their roots.
THey be called Pastinacae a Pascendo, that is of Fedyng, or noryshing, or
warming nature: they be pleasant in taste, and move Venus, whereof be wild
growing in stony places* but the best are sown in Gardens, and of nature be
hot and clensyng, The seeds of wild Pastnips drunk will provoke terms
menstruall and vryne. heal dropsye and Pluritici, and are good against venom,
and stinging of Serpents, and help conception. But this Herb applied into
the Matrix, by the hand of the mydwyfe. Draws forth the dead Child, stamped
with Honey put upon a spreading ulcer, Diosco. lib. 3 Cap. lii. Gal. lib vij.
Sim. medica.
it is healed thereby. Those of the Garden are more apt in meat then the wyld:
and the said wyld are more affectuall in medecin: one of these parsenips is
called yellow Caret, the other a Rape.


Marcellus. What is the Sicer, or sweet white Carret good for?


Hilarius. Dioscor. lib. 2. cap. 107, Gal. lib. 8. Sim. medica.
THis root is commonly known, it is no less pleasant to the Mouth, than
profitable in meat for the Stomach: it provokes vryne, and helps appetite,
and is hot in the second degree, And is sowhat bitter, and is called white
Pastnip, with yellow flowers, leaved like Pimpernel. The seed sodden in wine
and drunk, helps the collike, and wynd in the stomach, or hicket, which
follows after vomits or weakness of the heart.


Marcellus. What say you of Rubarbe?


Hilarius. RHeum Barbaricum, or Rhabarbe, is a noble root of great virtue,
Rhabarbe and Rhapontike.
and doth differ from Rhaponticum, is better in purgynge, in savor, in
substance, compact and heavy, golden colowred with gray Turkey coloured
veins. dry and in taste bitter, whereas Rhaponticum is lyghte not heavy, not
harde with drynes, but soft with moystnes, not bitter but tart, not compact,
but slender. And therefore Rhabarbe and Rhapontike, The difference between
Rubarbe and Rhapontike.
be not both one, as many have most foolishly affyrmed, then with good
arguments truly proved. And the best Rabarbarium comes from Troglotide
which is a hot country, in the fardest part of Aphrica beyond Ethiopia, where
as ye people to avoid the extreme heate of the Sun, From whence Rhabarbe.
doth come co^
are constrained to inhabit in Caves, under the earth, and feed on Dragons
Flesh, which were called Barbarous people, from whence many precious gummes
and spices be brought, as Galen. saith. lib. vj. Simplicium medidicament. and
lib. 4. cap. vj. de tuenda sanitate. Ginger is brought saith he, from
Barbarye, which Plinie in lib. xij. cap xxj. calls Trogleditis which was
Barbary. And in his xix. book saith he. the cause why Cinnamon is so scarce
and of no plenty: the Ireful Barbarians, do burn the Spice trees. For Myrrh
comes from thence Galen and Plini, agree this to be that Barbary, calling it
Trogloditis Pomponius Mela, a great writer in his first book of the situation
of the world saith: the vile people, whereas these precious Spices and roots do
grow, do rather grin like Dogs, than speak like men, and dwell in Holes, and
feed on serpents flesh. And Strabo lib. xv Geographia doth testify, that all
kind of Spice and plants begin in Arabia Foelix, and in the South part of
Inde, For the Sun takes like force in them, But in Arabia Foelix, The
cruelty of the Barbarians, is to burn the Spice trees and plants. Pomponius.
Mela lib. 3* de situ orbis.
which is between the Seas Arabicum and Persicum, is so Fertile that it hath
two Haruestes yearly, with all spices, fruits and gummes. whereas the people
live ever in peace, without War, or walled towns: out of these Places
comes Rhabarbe to Alexandria, and then to Uenice, so is dispersed into many
places, to the great comfort, health, and help of mankynd, to purge choler,
and humours, superfluous in the body. What is better to comfort the liver, to
cleanse the blood, and heal the kings evil called the Iaundice than Rubarbe.
How many goodly Electuaries, Pills, Syrupes, and purgations, have Rubarbe in
them? Very many. Simple by it self, by infusion, how marvelous doth it purge,
cleanse, skower, and expulse venomous fylthe from the body? It asswageth
timpanies, tertians, dropsies, reconsyleth sleep in dry collerike persos: by
correcting hot choler in the if it be slysed into clean Goats why, Cichory
or Buglosse water.iii. and Spicknard.i. standing al the night, in the morning,
strained drunk, it will cleanse the Blod, and expulse choler. Mesue affirms,
that Rhabarbarum excells all other Rhaies, both turkish and Indishe.

It is a purgation hurtles, very gentle, and here is an infusyon thereof most
excellent, An excellent infusion of Leonellus Fauentinus to cleanse the blood.
to cleanse the Blood: written by a famous man of this time, called Leonellus
Fauentinus. R. Rhababaru of the best.i. Spicknard. G. iii. make an infusion
according to art in the waters of Borage, Violets, Sorel or Mallowes, as much
as shall suffice: after that it hath stand viii hours, strain it hard, and put
into the same infusion Diacatholicon.vi. and Electuarie e Succo Rosarum and,
Diaphaenicon any. ss. dissolve them in the decoction of Flowers and fruits:
and this drink will very gently purge all foul humours. If any man have a
Bloody flyxe, to help the same, or let him slyce a piece of of Rhabarbe, and
tossed it hard, and eat the same, or crome it warm into red wine, and planten
water, and drink it. In Italy there is Rhabarbe, which will purge choler, but
not so good. as I have descrybed above: Rubarbe must be preserved in Wax or
Honny, Flax sede, or the seed of Psyllium so it may be kept.iii. or iiii.
years. Rhapontike, grows by a famous city called Pontus, Marcellinus. lib.
xij. saith, it grows by the river Tanais, which seperateth Europe from Asia.
Of this saith Paulus Aegineta, it is earthly and cold, but the subtilier
parts thereof, are moist and warm, and but meanly tart of taste. Therefore it
will help fractures, Paulus Aegineta. lib. 7. litera. R
conuultions, and shortness of wind, and strypes: it hath virtue to direct, to
draw forth, and cleanse spitting of blood and pains in the guts.


Marcellus. Of Agarike
What say you of Agarike?


Hilarius. OF Agarike there is the Male, which is compacted roud, and the
female being broken, Diosco, lib 3. Cap. j.

How to know good Agarike


hath directed straight veins, and is flat: these Agarikes. be white, light
compact, thycke together, and sweet in the beginning of theiretast, and then
very bitter in thend of the same, with biting on the tongue. It grows upon
the region of Sarmasia, in a place called Agaria, whereas is a famous river and
City so named. Some say, that the Root thereof doth grow, and bring forth
this Agarike: other that it grows like Musroms, on Cedar trees. There grows
Agarike in Italy saith Plinie. lib xvi. Cap vij. Agaricke cleclenseth the
guts, expulceth raw humours.
But because it is a stranger unto us, it shall suffice us to know the virtue
thereof. It is hot of nature, and is good against a tourmet of ye guts,
raunesse in the stomach, abundance of Phlegm, ruptures, dropsies, brewses or
falls, stoppyng of urine, strangury, swelling of ye matrix, falling evil,
poison, or stinging of any venomous worm. One uncle steeped in sweet wine or
sweet water, strongly strained, drunk before the coming of a Fever quotidian
puts it clean away. Agarike helps ye falling sickness.
Drunk with vinegar Sugar sod and then well strained, it helps Sciatica,
and the falling evil. This Agaricke is no less commended then much used in
sundry electuaries and pills. c. to the great help of Mankynd Galen. lib. vj.
Simplicium medidicament* doth remember Agarike among some kind of Roots, and
that grows on the trunk of a tree. First in taste sweet, then bitter,
Agarike purges all the orgaynes of the senses.
and so forth he declares the virtue thereof, to purge the guts, heal the
Iaundice, and open the gall, and discharge all viscous humours: who did ever
commend any purging thing, more than Mesue doth Agarike? saith he, it cleanses
fleume and choler, and al the instruments of the senses, the brains, back
bone, muskles, sinews, lunges, breast, Liver, Gall, and spleen. Democrites
saith, it is a familiar medicine to all the Principal parts of the Body, and
from them, to all the other parts: It purges and doth not weaken or decay,
any natural or animal virtue, with many goodly commedacions which, he gives
to the same Agarike. And thus I end, giving you warning, that it be very finely
beaten, and close kept, and Spicknard put to it in medicine.


Marcellus. What say you of Cassia, and Lignum Aloes, and Cassiafistula.


Hilarius. GALEN makes mention of Cassia in lib viij. Simplici. medica.
saying it is dry, and hoate in the third degree, Cassia Aromatike.
and doth warm the body, and strengthen the instruments thereof. This Cassia is
of Aromatike nature, and is good for UUomne to drink whose terms be
suppressed: a goodly medicine of Cinnamon beaten in powder, with Lignum Cassiae,
is thus made. A precious water made with Cinnamon, Cassia, rose water, (...).
white wine, for all cold causes.
R. Cinnamon l i.i. Cassia.ii. water of Roses. l i iiii. clean white Wine. l
i.vi. put these altogether in a close pot covered: put this pot into a warm
vessel of leuke warm Water, during.xxiiii hours, making a small fire under
the receiving vessel, wherein it is put. Then take it from the same vessel, and
power it into the pan of a common stillitorye, then set on the helmet close,
and with a soft fire distil ye same, keep it in a close glass, to give it to
them, which have any cold syckenes, as dropsy, quotidian, abundance of
fleume, stoppyng of the Gall, raynes, or conduit of vryne, Collike, weakness
of the heart, dullness of spyrite, Lignum Aloes called Agallocum which is
Aromatike.
moystereume, or lack of memory And if you cause this water to be distilled
two times, it is the better and of the greater strength. As for Lignum Alces,
which is hot and dry in the second degree, it is called Agallochum, and
grows in Inde, and Arabia Foelix, and is spotted, Aromatike, smelling sweet,
Dioscorides Lib. 1 cap 20.
and is a little bitter to taste upon, with byndyng nature, and it hath a
pleasant verdure in the mouth. Serapius faith the best is black, with
varyable or diverse colours, full of sap, heavy, and hard, gross* and
compacted together, Lignum Aloes comes not from Paradise, but fro Mondella
city of Inde
with sharpe sweet smell. This wood comes from a city called Mondel in Inde,
and not from Paradyse as some do foolyshly fancy, it doth, and so is conueyed
by the River Ganges. Well to the virtue thereof. It will comfort the brain,
when it is dystempered with cold, through the sweet savour. The decoction
thereof, made with Barley, Madder and Sugar heals Ulcers, and UUoundes in the
Guts: and it is good against bloody flixes, and hardness of the Spleen, and
is a very wholesome Perfume. Cassiafistula* comes fro Egypt.
Cassia solutiua, or Fistula, called the Coddes of Egypt, can not be spaced
among old Persons, and tender People: for the gentle purging of the Body,
clensyng of the Raynes, provoking Uryne. Either drawn with Endyue water,
Goats whaie, or eaten new from the Cane, tempered with Barley water,
Cassiafistula have many virtues to help mankynd it can not be forborne.
or Morell UUater. It makes a good Gargarisme for Angina or pains in the
throat, or Apostumacions in the Guts. It is good in washing or clensyng
Clisters, and it will make soft a hard Apostumacyon applied thereunto, in any
part of the body. It is good for the Gout to be made in plaster, for the same
purpose. Who so hath great pains in the Guts, it is not good to give Cassia
simply alone, Note.
but to mingle it with the powder of Hiera Picra, and for the raynes, to put it
in the Syrupe of Liquorice. It is hot and moist in the first degree, the
heavier, the Ramisher in savour: the shynyng black of colour, is best
Cassiafistula, fro Memphis, and Alexan^ria in Egypt comes Cassia.


Marcellus. There is a very sweet Moss, which grows upon trees, men say it
is good in medicine, what say you to the matter?


Hilarius. Dioscor lib. 1. Capi. xx.
THE best Moss that grows upon any Tree, is of the Cedar: the second of the
Popular Tree, the third of the Oak. The white is good* but the blackishe is to
be refused. It is sweet and odoriferous, and hath virtue to stop: the
decoctyon thereof is good to wash, and help the pains of ye mouth, of the
matrix. This white Moss is good in Bathes, and in comfortable Ointments, for
the weakness of a cold feeble stomach. Plinie do commend it, Lib. xij. cap.
xxiij. calling it Sphagnos or Briand: saying. it grows in the Province of
Cyrenaica, which is a country in Afrike. c. In other places, as Cyprus, Egypt,
and Phaenicia: there grows very good in France and Italy, both sweet, and
will mollify Galen lib. vj. s^mplici medica. saith, Briand, which is Splanchnon,
is found among Oaks, Pine trees, and white Populors: it hath power to stop or
bind, but very weakly: it is neither hoate nor cold, To comfort the spyrites.
but mean. It hath virtue to direct and mollify, chyefly that, which comes
from the Cedar trees. Auicen saith, it will make a wholesome Cordial medicine. And
also the savour is good for the brain, and spirits or senses, that be weak.
Of sweet Musk Serapius saith, it comes fro a beast, much like a Goat,
that feeds upon Aromatike trees, Ruellius and Simeon Sethi affirm that Musk
comes from a city in the East, Sweet Musk.
called Chorasa, the Barbarians cal it Pat, and of colour is somewhat yellow An
other Musk comes from Inde, not comparable in virtue to the first: this is
black of colour, The beast which gives Musk, is like a Goat that which
brings S^uette, is like a Cat. The blaunching of Musk.
and this comes from a beast like a Goat. armed with one horn in his
forehead. And this comes from between their legs: and also is gathered in
the clear air, and bright shining days from the dung, and closely preserved
in Uessels: and sold to the merchants, both this pure duge and sweet coddes,
and or it comes to our uses, it is adulterated by the Apothicaries, by many
crafty ways, as with Mouse dounge, Charcoles. c. But of the own nature it is
most pleasant and comfortable to the weak spirits of mankynd, against
frenzy, collike* Cardiace, Palsy, lack of memory, heaviness of mind, dropsy,
lack of digestion c. And what is pleasanter in sweet water, Sweat things
be good.
to wash hands, head, beard, and good in apparel and may be rightly used, it is
Gods gift, to adorn and garnish Mankynd with, although, light wanton,
lecherous people, for mankynd but yet abused of youthful wanton^ are not to
be suffered in them.
do make it an Instrument of provocation to naughtiness withal. Yet the good use
thereof among the honest, is no more to be forborne, than the abuse is worthy
to be suffered among the harlots. Precious Balms and perfumes are not
forbydden by Gods word: although Iudas did murmure, when the Woman did anoint
Iesus, with the precious Nardus. And Isaac being blind, did rejoice in the
precious smell, which came from the Garments of his Son Iacob, Marc. xiiii.
when he blessed him, saying: behold the smell of my Son, Gene. xxvi.
is as the smell of a field, which the Lord hath blessed. And thus I end of
Musk, which is hot in the second, and dry in the third degree. Some affirm,
Musk.
that if Musk do swim in water, then it is good, but the contrary if it
synketh, As for Sibetto, called Siuet, is a beast like a Cat, which Beast
comes from Syria, and sometime there be seen of them here in England brought
from Venice: Of the Siuet Cat.
and between the testiles of this beast, comes the sweet Siuet, which is
hot and moist of nature: if Women be stopped in the matrix, put some of this
anointed upon a pessarie, into the mouth of the matrix, and she shall be soon
helped. Matthiolus, reports more thereof. Lib. 1. Dioscorid Cap. xx. which I
will not name, it is so venerous. As for Amber Grice, or Amber Cane, Diverse
opinions, how Amber Grice is found.
which is most sweet mingled with other sweet things: some say it comes
from the rocks of the Sea. Other say it spryngeth out of the earth, in Arabia
Foelix, or Inde, upon things that smell like Mosrumes, and so is pressed forth
preserved. Some say it is gotten by a Fish called Azelum, which feeds upon
Amber Greece, and dies, which is taken by cunning Fishers and the belly opened,
and this precious Amber found in him. Other do say, it is found swimming upon a
fountain of pure water: and that is thought to be the best invention. For
Symeon Sethi, saith Amper called Amber, is increasyng, or found in diverse
places. and is gathered in Fountains swimming above, as Bitumen is* or
Brimstone, whereof be three kinds, the first is Fuluus, which mixed of green
and red. yields a dark yellow, Amber Grice of three kinds
which is brought from Inde. An other kind comes from Arabia Foelix, which
is dark, white, or gray in colour: the third is blackish, and is the worst, a
very counterfeit Amber. This Amber Grice is of nature hot and dry, the savour
thereof doth greatly comfort the heart and brain of old People, or weak women:
and to comfort the heart, it is equal to any other odoriferous treasure. It is
put into many precious Cordials, and wholesome medicines: and nothing is more
better to quicken the spyrytes and comfort memory, tha this rich Amber Greece.
Gloves sweetly perfumed with Musk, Siuet, Amber Greece, and Oil de Ben, be
very wholesome for Citizens, Sweet Gloves, their profit.
that dwell in close, corrupted foul air. In deed, it can not be forborne
of noble Princes, Lords, Ladies, and gentle folks: God give them grace to know
it to be his gift, to pleasure the Sense of smelling, and to defend evil
airs, and not to move, or to be an instrument of Ungodlynes. Whereas to use it
well, it is of no small profit to Nature, as example. R. Storax Calamite.iii.
Beniamyn.ss. Cloves..ss. Lignum Aloes..ii. Galia Muschata..iii.ss. Amber
Grice..i.ss. Musk. G. xvi. Siuet. G. xii. a little sweet Terebinthin, all put
into a warm mortar, A good Pomamber against coldness of the brain very
pleasant.
strongly beaten with the pestell, pouring in sweet Rose, or Damask water. Of
this is made a precious Pomaber. to be worn against foul stinkyng air:
weakness of the brain, coming of cold. And thus I do end of this most sweet
Oders.


Marcellus. What say you of the Wood, called Ebenus.


Hilarius Diosco. lib. 1. Capit. iii. Ebenus of.iii. kinds.
THe best Ebenus comes from Ethiopia, and is very black, it hath no veins in
it, but abyting sharp taste: yet very sweet in perfume, and is gummy, this is
the best. There is an other dark yellow, and spotted, and this hath a byndyng
virtue is good to be put in Colliries, for sore even. And Galen lib. v. simplj
medicam. Ebenus is one of the woods, beaten into powder and resolved in water,
to be drunk to help the Stone: and of Nature is hot and scouring. And for that
cause, it is good to be put in Medicines, for to help the sight of the eye. A
goodly medicine for sore eyes, of Ebenus.
or blysters in them. If Ebenus be fine ground. upon a whet stone, and with
a Knife taken from it. G. iiii. and the powder of Lapis Calaminaris. G. ii.
Seef. G. iii. Chamfer. G. i.ss. the white of an Egg, Rose water, and Woman's
Milk ana..ss. mingled together: this will most effectually, cleanse scour sore
darkened Eyes. Theophrastus lib. 4 cap. vi. de historia plantarum. saith, in
Inde the wood is common* and of two kynds: the one is precious, and doth
service, and the other is of no estimation. The Princes of Inde do esteem
Ebenus, Sceptees for Kings* and the Heathen Idolles of Ebenus.
richer than gold, for of that Wood, they do not only make their drinking
Uessels, against poison, but also the Scepters of regal honour. And fynally
their Idols of their Gods, whom they do worship. Thus the Indyans do both use
and abuse this rich Wood, which will syncke like Mettle, and not swim. When
Pompey did triumph over Mythridates the King of Pontus, one of the greatest
glories the Romaynes had, was in this strange wood, When Ebenus came first to
Rome. Seades of Ebenus.
whereupon the Scepters and vessels were made of it. This Ebenus also though
it be good, yet it hath ben an instrument of Idolatry, in many places of
England: whereof beads have been made, not only of Ebenus, but of Corrall,
Jet, Amber, Jasper, Granites, Glass, Amyll, Gold and Silver: which creatures
were ordained for man bodily health, and not for their Contemplacyon, and
Spiritual prayers. I did know within these few years, Two Witches in Suffolke
Charmed with Ebeni Beads.
a false Witch, called. M. Line, in a town of Suffolke, called Perham, which
with a pair of Ebene Beads, and certain charms, had no small resort of
foolish women, when their Children were sick. To this lame Wytch they resorted,
to have the Fairy charmed, and the Spyrite conjured away: through the prayers
of the Ebene beads* which she said, came from the holy land, and were
sanctified at Rome. Through whom many goodly cures had ben don, but my chance
was to burn ye said beads Oh? That danable witches be suffered to live
unpunished so many blessed me burned: witches be more hurtful in this realm
than either quarten, Pox, or pestilence. I knew in a town called Kelshall, in
Suffolk a Witch, whose name was M. Didge, who with certain Aue Maries upon her
Ebene Beads, and a wax Candle, A Witches blessing for saint Anthonies tyre.
used this charm following for S. Anthonies fire, having the sick body before
her, holding up her Hand saying: there came two Angels out of the North east,
one brought fire the the other brought frost, out fire. and in frost. In nomine
patris. c. I could rehearse an. C. of such knackes, of these holy gossips, the
fire take them all, for they be Gods enemies.


Marcellus. THis is wood of great virtue, and excellent goodness, few woods may
be compared to it, for the estimation: yet for the French disease, there is an
other rich wood, called Guaicum, I pray you speak something of that wood.


Hilarius GVAICVM, or Guaiacanum called Lignum sanctum, or the holy wod, or
wood of Life, is of a kind of Ebenus. Of the Wood of life called Guaicum.
And as almighty God prepared a tree of great virtue, for Moises to cast into
the water called Mara or bytternes, through which tree, the same water was
made pleasant and sweet, for the children of Israell to drink upon in the
wilderness, when as they murmured against God and his holy Prophet Moyses:
Even so it hath also pleased him to ordain prepare this Guaicum: whereby
through his mynisters knowledge, Exod. xv. d
it might be a mean to make whole, and cleanse the fylthy stinkyng corrupted
bodies of his dysobedient children, which have lived in most shameless lust
and lechery, among painted stinking harlots, for which offence, they be smitten
with the plague, called the French Pockes, The Pox of France.
an evil most noisome to nature, cousin Iarman to thincurable Leprosye. This
Guaicum I say will not only make a Pocky body clean, but also is good to
cleanse any of the princypall humours, when they do abound, whereby there shall be
a temperance most perfect in nature, it will cleanse the raynes, itch, and
skabbes. And nothing may be compared to the same, to rebate, assuage, cleanse,
consume, and wast without hurt* great fatty gross bellies of idle men and
women, which be puffed up with eating, drinking, sleapyng and sytting in the
house al ye day without labour, the tables, cards, and Pot, excepted which
causes them but little to sweat, and less to thrive: for such folks Guaicum
drink is incomparable above all others for the goodness, to renew them make
them appear young again: for the Gout, Dropsy, Sciatica, Canker, and
Timpany. This is equal to the best medicines, therefore it may be called
Lignum vitae, the wod of life, because it hath virtue to renew. This worthy wod
of life, God hath given to the christian people, in these last Days; which wod
was unknown to the old Fathers as Dioscorides, Theophrastus, Antonij Musae
exam. omnium, Simpl. de lignis.
Plinius, Gale, Paulus, Aetius. c. And yt is no marvel, for ye part of ye world
whereas this wod doth grow, was never found forth by the famous Cosmographer
Ptolomaeus, Pomponius, others, but of late years only. This wod was found by
the sailors into the new Ilandes, called Corterali, Hispaniola, distat somewhat
from the Equinoctial line, in many other parts there about, whereas the people
of those lands be often infected with soores, biles, and a sickness much like
the Pox, or else the very same in deed: and to recover the same, the sick
folks do eat of the fruit of Guaicum, and are made whole: this fruit will
soon rot, Three kynds of Guaiacum but the white is most excellent.
but whereas the fruicts can not be gotten, then they do make a decoction of
the wood or barks of the same which brings the like health. The Spaniard
perceiving the same, did bring this wood in to Europe, not only for to heal
their own Pox, but also for France, Italy, Germany, and for England, in whom
this wood takes no small effect for the foresayed Pox: of this Guaicum are
three kyddes, the first is black within, in the heart, pale coloured, having in
it ru^let lines, very hard and heavy. The other black within but white without,
having very small lines, is hard and heavy, and not so great as the first. The
third is al right whyt^ within and without, having very small lines, and the
hart of this Wood is the best, The consideration of Guaicum.
the arm of the tree is better then the body the bows nearer the fruicts hath
more virtue, warmnes and drynes, than the lower parts of the tree, which are
groser more earthly of nature, and the more vncteous the wood is, it is the
better, the sap is not so good as the heart, neither the bark as good as the
sap. But the white wood is sweet and most excellent in operation, and is
Lignum sanctum, the holy wood. The bark of the straight young branches or
bowghes, being heavy and white, moyste and without lines hard compacted be the
best barks for the Pox. All these woods called Guaiaci, have a rosin or
matter like Beniamen or pleasant Gum within the wood. which is the spyrite or
lively helping humore in decoction for the Pox For the ertreame pains in the
joints sinews, Man nature is subject to many evils for want of perfect
temperament.
veins muskels, head hands, feet, and the bones, no sycknesse is so sharpe
and cruel to nature, but this precious wood will both quickly and gently
assuage the payne and grief of the same, if it be ministered accordynly in
decoction, namely to them whom either the Pox hath tormented, or else the Gout
hath torn or racked with intolerable grief: Among all mortal infirmites,
which is more grievous to nature, than the Strangurie, pyssyng of blood, or
stoppyng of the stone: what diseases again be more Enemies to mans nature,
than swelling of the Belly, Hydrops, putrefaction of Humours, opilacions, he
dach, Vertigo, Fevers through heat above nature, with fire in the arteries,
shingles and horrible apostimacions, with a great number of plagues more. which
be all mortal enemies to the nature of man, as a contynual fire to burn him,
or else a merciless drowning water of utter destruction, or fynally a deadly
earthly Grave to swallow him up, through the corrupcion infection of air? Thus
the.4. eliments or humours in mankynd, through evil mixture, or one abouding
above the other, grow to corrupcion. The cases of deadly peril, an hard matter
to bring the body again into good order or perfect healthful estate. What evil
have happened through the abusing of Guaicum among the imperikes.
As I have said. what is better tha Guaicum, called wood of life, which wood
was not a little abused of a great number of ignorant, murdering, shameless
practicioners, which have taken upon them to bind sick men to a law, observing
the new diet, only with Guaicum, wherein they have sodden in the decoction
thereof many drugs Colocinthis, Briony, Turbith. Diacridium. with an hundredth
sondry more such like simples sodden or brewed with this Guaicum: this, they do
use one geenerall rule, to every complexion a like, to every age the same, and
to the Man: Woman, and Child al a like, neither observing the quantity, place
or time: but as I have said, one only general rule. Close Chamber like a Be
in a box, bread by the ounce, a few Raysons, and sometimes a chickens Leg,
Beware of the new diat except you-haue two lives. or else a wise minister of
the same.
with many such foolish Ceremonies, much cost and small good cheer, if one be
healed by chance medley, a hundred are slain through this diat wilfully. or else
very foolishly: and who so goes to board to such an host, first let him make
his last will and testament, perhaps he shall not die the sooner, but live the
wiselyer For this diat with close air, Raysons and Chickens legs, is very
good victail for mareners that purpose to sail through the dangerous rocks,
and sands of the fearful passage between Scylla, and Charibdes. Experience
hath learned us sufficiently, by the deaths of many which have ben slain in
this purgatory of this folysh Phisycke, ignorantly used, or this Guaicum rather
folishly abused for money: as many goodly creatures, by. and through money,
are changed, transformed and altered out of kind, for money is a marvelous
instrument a chaunger, a transformer, or a bewytcher of mankynd, and an
instrument whereupon the covetous man doth continually play his infernal
discords upon: as example, if lawers take wrong matters in hand: if djuines
desire many spyrituall promocions, and be careless of their heavenly duty,
Covetousness and Money, do make blind, both Divines, Lawers, and Phisicions,
trasforme the from the nature of men into infernal monsters.
if Phisicions prolong or abuse their times, with their miserable sick
pacients, then what is ye cause? nothing but coueteous Hearts, and Money.
Covetousness is the Mother of all the evils of this world, and gold and
Silver ar^ ever deceitful, and beguile mankynd. Gold is the prince of evil,
ye shortner of time, the waster and consumer of virtue, love, liberality rest,
peace. and quietness, the instrument of treason, war, theft, whoredom,
slaughter, bloudshedyng, and perilous perjury: this wretched money should not
thus be abused of the Christians, saying one of the Heathen wise men most
vehemently doth count it a vice most hurtful and intolerable in any common
wealth, according to my words aforesaid, crying out against covetousness,
with her instruments (Gold and Silver) which is abused saying. Auaritia matter
est vniuersae malitiae,
Aurum argentum{que} semper insidias struunt hominibus,
Nummus dolosus
O aurum maloru princeps, vita distruens omnia deni{que} minues.
Vtinam non esses amabile nocumentum mortalibus.
Tua enim eulpa pugnae, praedae, coedes{que} vita humana perturbat. c.
Therefore God grant of his mercy to three kynds of callyngs in this world yt
they may walk truly. obedietly, charitably, in the sight of God and man, Three
most notable and best instruments of the common wealth The Divine the Lawer the
Phisicion*
whereby that Christ may be chiefly honoured, his peple profited. First, to the
of the church which should be ye mouth between God his flock. Secodly ye
Magistrate, or Lawer, that ryghteousnesse may be ministered, and Justice,
boserued, and no Man wrongfullye oppressed. Thyrdly, for the preservation of
the Body, that the Phisicion mar not, or caste away that which God hath so
richly garnished with the Gifts of Nature whi^he is Mankind. And now let us
return again unto our Guaicum or Lignum vitae, called the wood of Life,
which through covetousness, hath ben rather made the wod of death, through
long new diates, to small effect to many, though fortunate to few. Marcellus my
brother, when your fryend Senior F. Neopolitani was smitten with the Pox, his
hair fell away, he could not sleep for boneache, his breath did stink, Lord
how pale he looked, his muskles consumed, the skabbes appeared, under whom
were deep hooles graven with putrified matter. c. but now his head is covered
with hair his skin clean, rose coloured in his cheeks, full of strength, he
sleeps very well, and is in health.


Marcellus. I Am not a little glad of ye good tidings, but gladder, I would be
to learn how he was healed, and with what medicine. For a man may through
chance medley fall into this peril: then a present remedy for a Myschyefe
would do well for that purpose.


Hilarius. March and Apryll are the best time to help the Pox.
THus he made his drink for him self and one of his companions in the month of
March and Apryll last past. R. The best Guaicum, most heavy, and full of gum l
i.iiii let it be well rased with a rape or turned into fine chips by a Turner.
and of the same barks. l i ii. Carduus Bened^ctus, which is called the blessed
Thystell, Dioscorides lib. 3. cap. xci. Atractylis is Carduus Benedictus.
which Thistel Dioscorides calls Atractylis, with pricks like Carthamus,
with many leaves, which Thistell is good against pryckyng of Serpents, and
among herbs it excells all other against poison. And in decoction with
Guaicum, saith Petrus Andreas Matthiolus, it will help the French Pox.
Therefore of the said Thystell, put. l.ss, Maiden hair, Cetrach, the flowers
of the wyld, and Garden Buglosse, ana. l.i. sweet Cassia..vi. Anisseede..i.ss.
white Sugar l i.v. cast all these into a Wine vessel, clean and apt for the
same purpose, upon which pour of the cleanest best white Wine, that may be
got, very hot, in quantity. l i. one hundredth and fyfty, cover this Uessell
close three days, then strain it through an hair cloth. then keep this in a
clean vessel, for the Patient at Dinner and Supper, but not to drink in the
Morning, and evening, like unto Syrupus, or medycines as many men rashly have
used. Besides the drinking of this Guaicum at Dinner, A good way to sees
Guaicum for the Pox.
and Supper, the Patient may between the times, as one hour before and after
Dinner and Supper drink..iiii. or.v. Also your foresaied receiptes may be put
in clean new white or claret wine, being fined, and made in the prescribed
manner. Furthermore, the paciet which hath the Pox, Dropsye, or Gout, may
drink among, this worthy medicine following, the dosse or quantity is..ii. or
more according to the age and complexion of the patient. Take maiden hair,
clean fresh Hops, Fumitorye Sitrach, called Asplenu, Scene of Alexader, of
each.M.iii. great Cetauri roots Liquorice, Polipodie, wyld Garden Buglosse,
ana..iiii. Anisseedes. Nigella, Romana, ye flowers of Bugloss, ye three Saders,
Cinamo, an..v. put this into. l i.xxiiii. of the Guaicum water, sodden after
the description in the Compounds following, then put it in a close Uessell, and
stop the mouth. and when that is done, set the said Uessell, in an other
seethyng kettle upon the Fire, so let it stand and sees for.xx, Hours
fair and softly, then strain it, and keep it in a clean close vessel, for
the use aforesaid. But if the pacyent be very full of humours, then do thus. The
most excellent best manner to sees Guaicu in composicions with other simples to
cleanse the Pox from all the members of the body.
Take Scene of Alexander l i.ii, Succorosarum solitiue l i.vi. white Sugar. l
i.vii. Rhabarbe elected, iii. finely cut, Turbit of the best..i. put these in a
clean stone pot with a narrow mouth. pour into this pot. l i.xxjiii. of
the common Guaicum water, made in manner in the compounds following, stop your
pots mouth, sees it in the foresaid manner upon a soft fire.xxiiii. hours
until it come to a thin Sirupe, called a Iulep, then strain it and keep this
precious pourging drink for mornyngs, the dose..i.ss. according to the age,
complexion and strength the patient must also eat bread..iii. well baken like
Bisquet, and the flesh of Chicken, Hen, Capon, Patrige Fesant, small Birds of
the wod roasted, excel sodden meates: and if the common drink be to strong, The
diat for the pox, shortly declared.
then the pacyent may pour thereunto some small clean wine or beer: let the
patient be merry, kept in a fair clean chamber with sweet perfumes, not much
feeding but little and fine, with clean warm apparel, and a fire of
charcoles. eschewyng venery, wynes, fruicts, fish, gross flesh potage, and
white meates. Care, anger, cold, much heat: and thus I do end of this
precious wodde Guaicum called Lignum sanctum.


Marcellus. I pray you what is the nature of Mumia, Bytumen, Sperma Caeti,
Tartar, Terra sigillata, and Dragons blood?


Hilarius MVMIA, is of nature hot and dry, in the second degree, Mumia, or
Mum.
and comes from Arabia, is made of dead bodies, of some of the noble people:
because the said dead are rychly embalmed with precious Oyntmentes and spices,
chyefly Myrhe, Saffron, and Aloes. This Mumia hath virtue to staunch blood, to
incarnate wounds, to help the Falling sycknes, Against running of blood or
bruses.
beaten into powder and squirted with a syringe with Mariarum water into the
Nostrylles. Tempered with Cassiafistula and drunk with Planten water, it is
very good against bruses: but Dragons blood, Planten water, Madder, Terra
sigillata, and Mumia, Bitumen of the dead Sea
tempered together and drunk, helps great bruses, bloody flixes, and
stauncheth wounds applied to the place. Bitumen, which is a some of the ded
sea, Sperma caeti of the whale*
and turns into a matter like Rosen, and is hot in the second degree. it
hath Virtue like unto Mumia, to staunch blood. to heal wounds c. The Greekes
call it Asphaltos, Sperma Caeti, the seed of the generation of the mostrous
Whale, Tartar, made of wine lies.
hath virtue being drunk with Planten water, Ale, Malmsey or other old clean
wine, to help bruses of great falls. Tartare, is made of wine lies, hoate and
dry in the third degree, it is most excellent against itch skabs, put in
ointments when it is beaten into powder, it cleanses the Morfew. A little Seue,
Mastick Tartare, sodden in a Chickens broth, is beneficial to purge ye belly.
Terra sigillata* is stipticke will cleave to the tongue, Terra sigillata
stops blood.
of nature hot and dry, and is put to oyntmentes to stop bloody flixes, new
bloody wounds, and hath virtue of Bitumen* Sanguis draconis, is cold dry in
the third degree stypticke of nature, therefore it stauncheth blood, and bloody
flixes: If it be stamped with Mouseare and Planten, it will stop Blood, applied
to the place. But myngle the powder of Dragons blood with Terebyntine. and
Frankincense, it is good for to stop a new bloody wound.


Marcellus. What Virtue is in Masticke, Rosen, Frankincense, Beniamen, Storax,
and Mirrh called Stacte. c,


Hilarius. MAsticke is a fine sweet dropping Gum, from a tree of great virtue,
and is hoate and dry in the second degree, and is good for the Reume to
champ upon, Mastick, is wholesome to champ upon for the reume.
pleasant against corrupted air in perfume. The pylles be of synguler Virtue
for the said Reumes. The Oil will much comfort the Synewes, and also will
incarnate the flesh. Mastick^ with Stauesager provokes humous, by retraction
from the brayn to the mouth, Myrrh preserves the body from putrefaction or
rotting.
champed upon. Myrrh a noble gum of most singular virtue, which is hot and
dry in the second degree, and preserves against rot and putrifactyon, and is
of great virtue in fresh wounds to defend them from apostimacions or rotten
matter: to heal a wound quickly, nothing is better: in balms artificial,
Myrrh is principal. In wound waters, Myrrh takes the chief force. In the
pylles of Ruffius against the pestilence, Myrrh, Aloes, and Saffron, do resist
the poison of the same pestilence: for wounds in the head, Myrrh is of great
virtue. The bodies of Princes are long preserved after death through Myrrh.
The savour of the same and daily drinking in Betony water, Thus called
Frankincense or Olibanum Dioscor. lib. 1. lxx.
G. vi. of Myrhe, defends from the falling Evil, and sorenes of the lunges.
Thus, called Frankincense is hot in the second and dry in the first degree,
and drops from trees of the same name, which we do cal Fur trees, it hath
virtue to nourish and engender flesh in the tender bodies of men or women: and
this Frankincense is used in many salves, to help mankind, and is more
profitable for mankynde in medicine then commendable to be wasted in Churches,
in parfuming the insensible Images. Frankincense is good to parfume the
Clothes, for them which have the bloody flixe, and thus I end of Thus called
Frankincense. Olibanum is not much unlike in nature to this Frankincense. but
the very same in Greek. Gum Sarcocole.
Gum Sarcocoll, is dry in the first degree and hot in the second, it is a
sanatyue gum to incarnat wounds and sores, and nothing excells this gum to
put into Collyries for sore even. as when the sight is covered with white
spots. Resina.

Rosen.

Diosco. lib. 1. capi. lxxiiii.


Rosen called Resina pini, hath warming, mundifying, and dissolving nature.
This Rosen no Ship, or Surgeon can want. Rosen dries and warms cold
Melancholy, sores Apostimations and Ulcers: and furtermore it will produce
Flesh in the Wounds of strong persons: Picea. Pix naualis and Tar.
there be sundry kinds of Rosen, as dropping from the Cedar. c. but all of one
nature. Also a little I shall put you in remembrance of Pix. commonly called
Pix Naualis, of nature hoate, and dry, and hath virtue to dissolve, Consume,
and is put into Plasters, against cold Dyseases, it is also put into inward
Medicines to be drunk against Bruses, as Mummea is. There is another Pix called
Liquida, which is more h^at^r and thinner, ever moist commonly called Tar,
which hath virtue to spread, consume wast humours, put into sondry goodly
Ointments against cold soores, and also to heal Skabs. Tar is not only
wholesome for Mankind to kyl sondry skabbes and soores, and scaules (as take Pix
Naualis, Tar, Litarge of Silver, Honey, ana, q.ss. sharpe Uyneger, Planten
water, Bean meal, a little Salt, boyle all these in a little close vessel,
stir it, and shave the head, A goodly place for a skaule in the head.
and make a plaster, and lay it on hot.xxiiii. hours, and then tear it of,
and put on another, so do until the skabbe be rooted forth). But also Tar,
grease and French Soap, tempered together, is good to anoint skabbed Sheep,
horse. c. with a tent of Baken and Tar, I have healed the Fistula often
times: and thus I do end of Tar.

There is a goodly Gum called Galbanum which comes from ye Galbanum trees
in Syria, which is put in sundry plasters, Galbanum is a wholesome gum.
and is hot in the beginning of the third degree, and dry in the second, and
it hath virtue to mollyfy and spread. Dioscorides affirms, Galbanum will draw
forth dead children.
that if it be applied plaster ways or in subfumigacion, it will not only draw
forth the stopped Terms, but also a dead abortive Child: The smoke thereof
makes venomous things to flee. It prevails against poison. And a little
Galbanum with Myrrh druk, cleanses the lunges, cough, and stoppyng of wynd,
but yet it is very noisome to savour upon: therefore it helps the Mother. To
cleanse Galbanum, To cleanse Galbanum.
put it in very hot water, and by little and little the filth thereof will
seperate from the clean part, and so you may use the said clean part for your
Plasters, as it is written in the book of Compounds. You may also resolve
Galbanum all the Night in Vinegar, and in the morning boyle it: and in water or
vinegar you may do so to other Gummes. and some other hard Gummes you may break
into powder in a mortar, or upon a stone. Eupherbium of Lybica.


Euphorbium comes from a tree that doth grow in Lybica. The best Euphorbium
is that is clean, like unto Glass, and is sharp of taste: this is hot and
dry in the fourth degree, and is very good for wouds in the head, To help the
prycking of synewes.
dropped into them. It is wholesome in Linaments and Cerots. If it be sodden
with Oil of Elder, Bean flower and earth worms, it is good against the
pricking of the sinews. In plasters and Cerots, for the French Pox it is
profitable. Plinius affirms, that Iuba the king of Libye did first find this
Euphorbium upon the mountain Atlante beyond Hercules Pillars, and called it by
the name of his Phisicion which healed Augustus the Emperor: it will not only
draw forth raw fleume, but water abounding, as in Dropsy: but it is evil for a
dry cholorike body to drink in medicine, it is so hoate of nature.

Ammoniacum comes from Africa, by the place where as the Oracle of the false
God Ammon was. Ammoniacum of Ammon.
This gum Ammoniacum is much like Frankincense, bitter in taste, and smells
like to Castorium, it mollifies, warms and draws. It is good in any
Linaments. And being drunk, doth lose the belly, and casts forth the dead
child, helps the Spleen, and Sciatica, one dragme being drunk. And thus I
do end of Ammoniak, which is hot in the third, and dry in the first degree.

Assafoetida doth stink yet it helps the Mother Lunges.
Assafoetida stinks, and is good for Women to smell upon, that be commonly
sick of the Mother, it is hot and dry in the second degree, some do affirm
in the third. It hath virtue to dry, to consume, to cleanse, spread. Five pills
of Assa, taken in a rear Egg at midnight, do cleanse the lunges, and helps
a short wynded Man or Woman. Oil of Spike, Mastike, Safron, Wax, Castor, and
Assafoetida* stamped and sodden together, make an excellent medicine for the
gout, or pains in the ioynctes: and thus I do end of stinking Assafoetida.

Sagapen, or Serapinum, a goodly gum
Sagapenum or Serapinum is a precious gum, running from a small tree, like a
Kix or a Reed, and is hot in operation. The best of this gum is yt which
shines through, and in colour is dark, yellow without, and white within.
Dioscorides lib. 3. cap. 79 Sagapen will help ye lunges, and spleen.
This Gum is good in many Lenetiues, and also inward medicines: as to pourge
Fleume, to help the Falling sickness, to cleanse the Lunges, help ye swelling or
hardness of the Spleen and is good against the resolution of the Synewes,
conuulsyon, ruptures, first steeped in Wine or Hydromell, then drunk.

Bdelium helps hard Apostumations
Bdellium is a goodly tree, growing in Arabie, from which tree distills a
worthy gum like Wax, but clear shining, vnctuous, and sweet of savour, and
bitter in taste: it is hot in the second degree, and is put in many
oyntmentes: it resolves, consumes, and disperses apostumations yt be hard.

Boras.
Boras, is hot and dry of Complexion, whose virtue is to knit, and glewe
wounds together by attraction.

Glaucium, is good for to cleanse sore even.
Glaucium or Memitha, so called, is cold and dry in the first degree, and
comes from Syrra: Plinie affirms this to be the lesser Celidon, and that
cannot be, for Celidon is hot, and Glaucium is cold: therefore they cannot be
one, seeing they be of two sundry natures: yet in couller it is yellow, and
marvelous good for to make Syef, for to cleanse and help sore even.
Dioscorides doth commend this Juice. lib. 3. cap. lxxxiiij

Gum Arabike will stop a bloody would
Gum Arabyke, is hot and moist, of virtue will staunch blood in wounds,
because it is slimy, it will also mollify and make things soft yt be hardened,
as apostimations, and it will stop the bloody Flixe, resolved in Red Wine, and
drunk.

Glue, called Glutinum, of nature is hot dry, and is made of the skyns of
beasts: Glue,
the best is made of the strongest beasts, as Bulls, Oxen, red Dear. c. that
which is whytest, and clear shynyng, is very good. Resolved in Vinegar all the
night, Dioscorides. lib. 3. cap. 85.
the same will cleanse Leprous filth, and Marmols from the skyn, the place being
warm anointed therewyth. And sodden in warm Water, Glue hath many virtues
with Oil of water Lyllyes or Flare, it will help scalding burning of the
body, to anoint the sore place therewith. Woudes be helped with Glewe resolved
in Vinegar, and tempered with Honey, and put into the said wounds, or else with
Vinegar resolved for the same purpose. And thus I do conclude of Glewe, made
of Skins, which cannot be forborne, 3. Glewes, of Beasts skins, of Fish,
and of Corn.
neither of Bowyers, or Fletchers. There is a Glewe made of Fyshes, as of the
Bellies of Whales or other great Fyshes, which will quickly be resolved. And
this is very good for to make Emplastrum for the head, or cleanse ye filth or
red spots from the face. There is another Glue made of Corn, as Wheat. c. good
for Paste for Stacyoners, which Galen doth remember libro. vij. simplic. medic.

Gum Opoponax, is a gum coming from an herb called Panax, Opoponax, doth
resolve.
and of nature is hot and dry, and of virtue resolving, warmyng, making soft
things which be gross, cold and hard, and is used in sundry Oils and
Linaments.

Tragacantha comes from Mons Gargano, Gum Tragacantha helps the rains.
and is a noble Gum of great virtue, and helps wounds inwardly in
Linaments: and resolved in Fenel water, and drunk, helps the raynes of the
back and bladder. And with clean clarifyed Honey..i. doth cleanse the lunges,
and will clear the voice from coughs, and is of great effect to help sore
even. Many good Pills, and mixtures to be put under the tongue be made of this
gum, Diosco. lib. 3. Cap. 20.
against Angina, and all the pains of the mouth and throat.

Laudanum, is a precious gum, having virtue to heat and humecte or moist in the
second degree: the best comes from Cyprus, and is sweet of savour, Laudanum.
Galen doth commend it lib. 7. simplic. medica. because it puts away cold,
and gives heat, and is good against the coldness of the brain, or cold
reume. And Laudanum melted with Bears grease, Laudanum, doth help the hair
from falling saith, Pausus.
will keep the hair from falling, to anoint or emplaster the naked or bare
pallet. It makes goodly Pessaries for to comfort the Matrix that is cold, and
opens the mouth of the veins. Melted in hot Oil of bitter Almonds, it
makes a singular ointment for deaf stopped ears: in subfumigation close
under the secrete clothes of Women, which be newly delivered of child, it will
eiect or cast quickly forth the seconds, it moves vryne. If it be drunk in
old Red wine it will stop the guts in a bloody flixe. Masticke and Laudanum
incorporate together, do fasten lose teeth, and this Laudanum is used both
inwardly and outwardly, for the health of mankind, and hath a sweet savor of
singular Virtue.

Lycium or Pixacantha, so called of Dioscorides. lib. j. cap. Cxiiii. which
comes from a sharpe thorny bush or tree, leaved like Box, Lycium comes from
Lycia.
fruit like Pepper black and bitter, it grows in Cappadocia and Lycia. The
branches being cut, stamped and sodden, and so strained, from them comes
a Juice, which is as thycke as Honey, which is sophistical with sundry
substances* as the juice of Wormwood, Ox gaules c. This Lycium is yellow and
bitter drying and piercing, of substance very earthly, and stiptik, it hath
Virtue to help the Eyes, dries moyste Skabbes, and is good to be given them
which be bytten with a mad Dog, and have Tenasmus or the bloody flyxe. For
yellow hair.
It will make one have a yellow hair, stops the immoderate flixe, either
Red or white abounding in women. And thus I end of Lycium. Acacia comes from
a thorne in AEgipt, which hath coddes growing upon it like a Broom, out of
which coddes, leaves, and seed, Acacia stops the bloody flixe.
is pressed forth the gum Acatia, which will restrain and stop most
effectually, and is cold and dry. This Acatia above all gummes hath virtue to
cool and stop blood, and bloody flixes, and cool the burning of the eyes, and
in the commendation thereof read Dioscorides. lib. j. Cap. xxv. Theophrastus
lib. 4. cap. de plant. historia. Galen lib. 7. simplicium medicamentorum. c.

Terebinthus, is a goodly tree, hard and black, and grows in Arabia, from
which drops a precious liquor, Terebinthus or Terebintine hath great virtue.
Galen. lib. 8. Sim. medica.
or thin guin called Terebintine, although from every Rosen tree a kind of
Terebintine doth drop. Terebintine is hot and dry of nature in the second
degree, and is used in many outward parts or pains of the body, and is put in
sundry oyntmentes Cerots. c It will help the Synewes and muskels, it stops
Tenasmus, which is a running of the guts or flixe, made in a subfumigation upon
ye coals. Clear Uenice Terebintine washed tempered with Honey, will cleanse ye
lunges. Taken with Sugar in Pills, it will cleanse the raynes, open the
Bladder, purge Gravel, The virtue of Terebyntine.
cause much urine, help the Yard, and also mollify ye Belly. Terebintine..ij.
often washed in Fenell or Time water, then put into it ye powder of new Safron,
Hiera simplex, ana..ss. and keep this in a box who so feels grief within
their guts or raynes, let them eat of this..ij every morning, during.iiij.
days. There is a fine Terebintine coming from the tree Larix, used much: and
thus I leave of Terebintine which is sweet, Gum Larix is equal to the
Terebinthin reed in Aetius
and shining clear, yet somewhat noisome to the stomach. There is much
counterfeit Terebintine, made of Rosen Oil. c, which the Surgeons can
craftily Sophisticate.

Styrax calamite, and liquid Styrax; be sweet and wholesome.
Styrax Calamite and Styrax liquid, be both hot and dry, the best of this,
saith Galen, is brought fro Pamphilia, it is good to be incorporat with
Laudanum, clean new Wax, Musk, Siuet, it will make a pleasant Pomambre
against stinking air, or coldness of the brain or melancholy. Styrax calamite,
or of the Reed so called, makes good Parfumes. The black is worst, the gum
with shining couller is best: but to say ye truth, the Apothicaries can so well
Sophisticate the same with Wax. c. that we can have but little true Styrax, as
Myrrh, Amber, Musk. c. the Apothicaries do gieue them al their blessings
with adulterate baggage, The craft of subtle Apoth^caries, doth mucch harm.
with a cast of legerdemayne, to fill their purse, but if we had them in their
right kind, little Wax were worth much money: and now in sundry places,
much Wax is worth little money, or nothing at all. This very Styrax calamite
doth mollify, warm, and drunk with Wine, helps the greatest griefs in the
stomach and Reume, and lets ye terms slip naturally: and helps stinking
breath. Tempered with Oil, makes a precious ointment for the head, of them
which be overcome with cold. Styrax liquid is good in Oyntmentes for skal^s,
skabbes, and French Pox, and is good to be burnt in Parfume against a
pestilent Air.

Diacridium is hot and dry in the fourth degree, and is pressed out of an
herb to purge with all, Diacridium.
the best is shining in substance, and black, there is good which is whitish,
To know good Diacridium.
but much is sophisticated with spurge, Colophonie. c. but that is not good,
if it be brittle bitter in Savour: and if you like Diacridium with your
tongue, so that white some do remain after it, then it is good to purge
choler, phlegm and melancholy: beware you receive not Scammonie, before it be
well prepared as you may see in ye book of Compoudes: for this Scammonie is
very venomous before it be prepared, expulseth good matter, and retains still
the evil or hurtful humours to the great peril of the Receiver, and will put
the body in danger of a bloody flixe incucurable: therefore prepare, I say,
your said Scammonie in Quinces made hollow, or in gray Costards, after ye same
manner: put in your Scammonie, sprinkled with Oil of Uyolets, and bake it in
Paste, yt the venom may pass away: when it is cold, then it is Diacridium fit
to purge, being corrected with Mastik: and why shall Mastik be put in?
Scamonie is perilous, except it be first prepared.
Because it will abate the violence thereof, and keep the stomach and heart
from danger, and guts from the bloody Flixe. Gum Arabic is also wholesome
therewith. Chollerike persons may be purged with lesser prepared Scammonie, or
Diagridium, tha the Flegmatike or Melacholy, and it may not be occupied.15.
days after it be prepared as with Myrobalans. c. It is used in sundry
Electuaries, pouders, Pills. And vndiscretly mynistred it annoys the heart,
dries good Humours, and wastes nature, yea disolueth and finally kills the
body. Read in Valerius Cordus, which is a good Apothicary, not only to prepare
this, but also all other things profitable for nature.


Marcellus. I Thank you with all my heart, I have conceived no less pleasure,
to hear you all this long day, than you have taken pains of your part to
teach me, the virtues of so many things without many questions moved: yet I
had almost forgotten to move you, what virtue is in Myrobalans, which even
lately you have named to be good with prepared Scammonie?


Hilarius. MYROBALANVM is a noble fruit of Inde like Plumbs which hath
virtue to purge superfluous humours, Myrobolans of.v. kinds.
and comfort nature, To seem young how to do it.
and who so uses to eat often of Myrobalans being condite, shall not seem
old, saith Mesue, and makes pure colour. There be.5. kinds of them, as
Flauj, Chepuli, Indicj. or Nigrj, Empelicj, and Belliricj, which do differ one
from the other: for yt Flauj, and Chepulj, do grow both upon one tree, for the
Flauj are gathered unripe, and the Chepulj have their full nature and
rypenesse. Myrobalans, Flauj, Indicj, Chepulj, and Belliricj, be cold in the
first, and dry in the second degree Empelicj are cold and dry in the first
degree, and be good for the Liver, Gaul, Spleen, Raynes, and Bladder: and put
in infusion of the Juice of Quinces, standing.24. hours, and then strained,
then put prepared Scammonie, they will purge choler, as for example: Take
Myrobalans Flauj..j. the juice or syrupe simple of Quinces..iiij. stamp your
Myrobalans, and then mingle them with the said Juice, the Juice being made
warm, and let it stand in a close stone vessel.24. hours, then strain it
forth, when this is done, beat your prepared Scammonie fine into powder..iiij.
and temper it together, putting it in a close warm place to dry it by little
little, and of this.j. or little more will purge choler, humours superfluous
without hurt. Myrobalans may be stamped with the Syrup of Wormewoode, then
sodden with ye infusion of Agarike, Rhabarbe, to purge phlegm choler: To purge
tether parsons.
it may be drawn with Chassia Manna, for noble persons or People of tender
nature. This fruit defends the body from corruption, trimbling of the heart,
heaviness, Melancholy, brings to nature, Cleanlynesse, favour, mirth. And
drawn with Fe^ill water and Sugar, To cleanse sore even.
it will cleanse the sight to be dropped into them morning and evening. The
powder of them with Rosen will heal sore Ulcers. And thus I do end of
Myrobalans, which will draw back the venomous force of every purgation that
doth aboude in operation.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Gaules, called Galla?


Hilarius. GAules will bind, and nothing will cleanse the mouth from filth
better, gaules grow like Akorns. D^oscorides. lib. 3. cap. 123
applied to any sore therein. When the intolerable pains of the teeth do rage
on still, a piece of Gaul applied to the place, will so one aswage the same.
Gaules sod and stamped, apply them to ye Matrix when through weakness it is
displased or faule down, and it will go back to his natural place again.
Gaules will stop the Flixe
Gaules will stanch blood, and make hair black, and stop the bloody flixe
in Clisters. Galen. lib. 7. simplic, medic. saith Gaules be cold in the second
degree. The cups wherein they do grow be of the same nature. And thus I do
end of Gaules, which are good to make Ink withal.


Marcellus. What say you of Acorns of the Oak tree?


Hilarius THe Oak tree of all noble trees for strength excells all other for
substantial buildings, The Querke or Oak tree, will stop the bloody flix or
blood, so will the Bark, Akorns, or leaves, with the Cups.
which Tree shall be once in no small estimation in this Realm of England to
uphold houses, dwellinges, and the royal Navies: although the Oak be of
little price, yet for the Age, strength and virtue, few other trees excel it:
the Bark cannot be forborne of Tanners to make Leather to serve the common
wealth. The timber, as I have said, is pryncipal in buildings. The Acorns have
virtue to stop Dysenteria, and Tenasmus, which be extreme flixes. Of al trees
that be glandiferous or bearing nuts, or Mast, nothing doth restrain more than
the Oak and Acorns, as saith Dioscorides, lib. 1. cap. 121 and Theophrastus,
The Beach tree, with his fruit will stop flixes.
lih. 3. cap 8. and 9. de plantis historia. Fagus the Beach tree, and Ilix do
bear Mast, not only good for Swyne to feed upon, but also in medicine doth
stop terms imoderat, or restrain or drive back guts that be relaxed, or the
precipitation or coming forth of the Matrixes of Women, ^f either the barks,
Leaves, Buds, Acorns, or Cups be sodden in red Wine, running Water, and to
sit close over it warm, and to drink the decoction thereof in clean Red
Wine, Cynamon, and Sugar. Suber the Cork Tree with his Fruit, Suber the
Cork, will stop blood flixe.
hath the foresaid virtue to stop the Flixe, or Blood* Read Plinie. lib. 11.


Marcellus. What then of Castania the Chestnut?


Hilarius. CHestnuts be commonly known, Castania the Chestnut.
which of nature will stop Flixes restrain, make fat, indurate the Spleen. In
many places of Italy and France, the people doth live by these Chestnuts in
winter, when they want other fruicts. Stamp Chestnuts, Honey, and Salt together,
Chestnuts help the biting of a Dog.
apply it to the biting of a mad Dog, it will heal it. Chestnuts move Venus
or carnal lust, being roasted and eaten, they do offend the head, and
Spleen, because they do inflate stop, they be called Iouis glandes, that is
Iupiters Nuts, saith Dioscorides, lib. 1. cap. 122.


Marcellus. What say you of Myrtus?


Hilarius. MYRTVS the black, Myrtus hath virtue to restrayn.
that grow in the Gardens be of more virtue to restrain, than they which grow
upon the Mountains, which be white, the seed hath great virtue to restrain.
The seed is good to be given to them which have the bloody flixe and spit
blood, and it opens the vryne. The Juice of Myrtes drunk in Wine, doth stop
the flixe, heals filth, breading about ye priuy-mebers being washed
therewith, it doth clese ye even. Myrtes hath virtue, restraining both
inwardly, outwardly, do dry, To stop the flixe, called Dyscenteria, Tenasmus
with Myrtes
as Galen affirms lib. 7. simplic. medic. it is partly overcome with coldness
earthly nature, yet it hath also a thin substance of warmness, which gives it
dryness. And thus I do end of Myrtus, called so of the Latens: and of the
Arabians it is called Alas, whereof be three kinds, Saliua, Tarentina, and
Exotica, and all be of virtue good to help the bloody Flixe.


Marcellus. What say you to Coloquyntida?


Hilarius. IT is most bitter, white like a baule, full of seeds, Colocithis,
or Coloquyntida Dioscorides. lib. 3. cap. 171
leaves like to Cucummers, hot in the second, dry in the third degree. Good in
Clisters against the collike, resolution of synewes, purges fleume, choler,
raw humours: it opens the mouth of the veins, yet it is perilous to be given
to Women with child, or weak people, A piece of Coloquyntida knit in a clout,
and steeped in a draught of white Wine al a night, with.iiij. or v. Branches
of ^sop, strained in the morning, and so drunk, To kill worms in ye ^elly
with Coloquyntida.
will purge a strong body from much filth and Iliac: even so it will being
sodden in sweet Water, cleanse al the body. Coloquyntida, Ox gaul, Honey,
Meal of Lupines, and Oil of Wormwood, and Aloes, ana..j.ss. stamped
together, and warm applied to the belly, eftsoones a lax will follow, To help
the Teeth with Coloquyntida
with Worms if any be within the guts. Sandarak..ij. vinegar..ij.
Coloquyntida..j. in powder incorporate and sodden together put into sore Teeth,
takes away the pains, if it come of cold: the Oil of Coloquyntida will kill
Worms, help Sciatica, and put into the ears will take away the sound or
tingling in them: and thus I do end of Coloquyntida, which is most bitter, and
must be taken with discretion, the Arabians do call it Chandell.


Marcellus. UUhat is Turbit?


Hilarius TUrbit is to purge phlegm, but as for the very Turbit, most me be
uncertain what it is. Turbit which purges phlegm.
Actuarius saith it is the root of Pytiusa: Manardus and Mesue, affirm it to
be second kind of Tithymalus which is called Mircyniles. But Dioscorides
plainly doth affirm it to be Tripolium, Much varitie of Turbit what it is.
as some suppose by the mind of Serapio. Antonius Musa supposes it to be the
second kind of Spurge agreeing with Manardus and Mesuae.


Marcellus. What are Tamarindes.


Hilarius. TAmarindes are a sower fruit of Inde, which be wyld Dates, called
Tamardactyli, Tamarindes or Tamardactylos.

Dioscorides lib. i. cap. 126.


and be cold and dry, saith Mesue, in the second degree. This fruit will
assuage the heat of choler, open the Gaul, and purge the belly. A decoction of
Tamarindes with Ptisant, and the juice of Pomgarnets, will quench hot
Apostumacions in the throat: when humours be to sharp, and bitter in the
increasyng or augmenting of the said Apostumacios. The very pure Garden Dates,
Dates of the best kind.
be fruicts of great Virtue. This Date is the very fruit of that tree which is
called the Palm tree, which fruit makes precious wine in the Lad of Syria,
these Dates be commonly known here in England. To help Emeroydes.
Sodden Dates in old wine will help the Emeroides. A Date stamped with Honey of
Roses, will glue knit a new wound. But much eaten upon, being raw, are
unfriendly to the head, and make gross Blood, and stop the Liver. Dates good in
stewed broth.
Notwithstanding clean pared Dates be good in stewed broth, as we do commonly
observe by custom. Galen doth remember Dates. lib. 7. simplic. medicamentorum,
saying they be sweet and warm, and used much in meates c.


Marcellus. UUhat say you of Tamariscus, or Tamarix.


Hilarius. TAmariscus, is a wod much like Quickbene, whereof there is plenty in
one part of Germanye, Tamariscus is a little tree like Quicben
within a certain Island belonging to one of the Germain Bishops: and this
Tamariscus, is the better known here in England by the famous learned Man
Wylliam Turner Phisicion: not only this, but many other simples, by the same
Doctor, which Doctor is a Jewel among us English men, Doctor wyllyam Turner
as well as among the Germaynes, as Conradus Gesnerus reports of him for his
synguler Learning, knowledge judgment. The wynd of the decoction of Tamarix is
wholesome to drink against the hardness of the Spleen, and stopping of the vryne
or strangury, because it doth open so much. The powder thereof in bread is
wholesome for them to eat which have the quarten or Dropsy, Tamarix do help the
Spleen.
it is as good as Asplenum for the Spleen. Galen affirms that Tamarix or
Myricae lib. 7. simplic. medic. hath virtue to cleanse and open, and is hot and
dry. Sodden in Vinegar, it helps the Spleen, and also the tooth ache.
Dioscorides, lib, j. cap xcix. doth commend Tamarix, Tamarix against the flixe.
and saith it is used oftentimes in the place of Galls, and is good to be
drunk against spitting of blood, and flixes. c.


Marcellus. WHat say you of the Nut called Pistacia, which is a Nut of Italy.
The Iuglans called a Walnut, the Hasell Nut, Nutmegs, Almondes, and the
vomiting Nut,


Hilarius. PLinius affirms that the Pistacia is a fruit of Syria, Pistacia.
a nut of Syria or Italy.
and was first brought into Italy by the famous Censor called Lucius Vitellius,
in the time of Tyberius Caesars days, and now there be great plenty of these
Nuts in Italy. Galen reports of them lib 2. de alementorum facultatibus,
that they be but little profitable to nutriment, notwithstanding good to the
liver, clensyng evil humours from the same. But whether good or evil to the
Stomach, profytable or noto ye belly, relaxing or bynding, he doth not affirm.
Auicen saith thus, one saith he, affirms that the Pistate doth not profit the
stomach: but I, saith Auicen, say, that the said Pistate, doth not only
preuaile against the noysomnesse of the stomach, The virtue of the Pistac^
Nuts.
but also will coroborate and make strong the ventricles. And to conclude,
Dioscorides. lib. j cap. cxl. saith that Pistates of Syria be friends to the
stomach, stamped and tempered with wine: either eaten or drunk they prevail
against the stinging of Serpents. Nux Iuglans the Walnut, Quasi iouis glans as
Iupiters nuts, with which fruicts the people lived by, before they knew
Tillage, Walnuts against poison* as Mithridatus reporttth.
and called the the great Gods nuts. These be commonly known, sweet within
and bitter. without. And this tree, with all parteining to the same is
adstrictiue of nature, and good oil is made thereof, and is bitter, and sooner
digested than the Fylbyrd or Hasel nut, and is used in medicines against
poisons. They be hoate in the first and dry in the second degree: and wholesome
clean pycked washed in wine, to be eaten after Fysh, and best new. Plinie
reports that, when Mythridates the king of Pontus was dead, there was found
in a chest of his, his own hand writing, in the land of walnuts, against Poison
R. UUalnuts, in number.ii. Figs.ii. Rue leaves xx. stamped together with a
little Salt, and eaten fasting doth defend that day from the Pestilence or
poison put Honey to it, and it helps the biting of Dogs, laid upon the
would. The oil of nuts with Honey, or the grene nutrindes will kyl the Canker,
to anoint the place, and also bring hair, and defend baldness.

Fylberdes be good of digestion, not good to be eaten before meat, Filberdes
are good after. meat and doth help the reume.
for then they be not a little noisome to the lunges and head. Notwithstanding
if they be roasted and eaten with a little Pepper or Aster, then they shall be
comfortable to help a moist reume. Stamped with Honey and Hysop water, the they
be good for old coughs. Walnuts.
There is a good ointment made of small nuts and Beeres grease, for to anoint a
bald head to bring hair, Galen affirms that they be more cold and earthly
than the Walnuts. To heal a prycke.
Diocles saith they do less nourish than the Almonds, how be it the green be
more wholesome than the dry. There is a come medicine made of Hassell nuts, or
Filberdes, the juice of Dittany and black Soap stamped together, and this will
draw forth a prick fixed within the flesh. And these Nuts be tolerable
after fish, to dry up moist matter the Greekes call them Karia pontica, because
they came first from Portus, now be almost in all the places of this World.

Almondes sweet bitter.
Almondes: the bitter Almondes, their Roots sodden, the decoction of them will
cleanse the Face from spots. Bitter Almondes stamped with oil of Roses and
Vinegar, will assuage the pains of the forehead to anoynte the Head, Almondes
to help the biting of a Dog
Temples, or Forehead therewith. Tempered with Honey Rue, they make a good
plaster for the biting of a mad Dog, and the reason is this, the plaster is
very hot, and the byte of the Dog is cold with Melancholy. The oil of
bitter Almondes is wholesome for many things, as to warm the body, stomach,
Matrix c. and to pour into the ear to help them which be deaf, if it be
curable. Bitter Almondes be hoatter then the sweet, they cleanse the guts,
Liver, Stomach, and draw foul humours from the Lunges, Almonde milk, the
virtue thereof.
saith Galen. lib. 7. simplic. medic. Almond milk will cleanse skower, and cut
gross humours, may be made in the decoction of Hens, Partridge, or Chycken, to
strengthen nature, or with cold herbs, as Sichory, Endyue, Violets. c. to
quench choler, to reconcile sleep. To cleanse ye raynes, stamp Almondes in
clean washed Uenyce Terebintine, and eat it, both for the Collike, Strangury
and the Stone: eat Almondes before meat and drink, if you be afraid of
drunkenness: quench Gold, Silver, Steel, Flint, or any of them in Almonde
Milk, wherein is put the powder of Rice, and it will stop a flixe to drink the
same. Many great virtues be written of Almondes, Gum of Almondes stops the
Flix.
as Dioscorides libro primo. cap. 139. c. The gum of Almondes slept in Wine
and drunk, helps the Flix or spitting of blood, so will gum of Cherries.

Nux vomica to vomit how to do it.
There is a Nut called Nux vomica, which if it be stamped and eaten by it
self, or else with a little Salt, or Oximell simplex..j. it provokes vomits of
choler and phlegm. And mingled with Honey, the seed of Fenell, Dill, warm
Water, it makes a most wholesome vomit for a foul stomach, but beware ye take
no more than..j. for then it is most perilous to nature or life. Dog leches.
With this Nut and Helleborus Albus, many dog Leches do put the ignorant
people in danger of their lives. As of late one called Edwardes, a doltish
impericke, came to Newcastell, and had like to have killed Cutbert Blunt,
Edwardes the imperike. Cutbert Blunt.
a gentleman of the same town, who through drinking of the Syrups of Uyolets,
Quinces, and Mintes, was happily recovered, and after through infortune
finished his careful Life in London, being Prisoner in the Fleet. Anno. 1660.

The Nutmegge or Musk Nut most odoriferous, pleasant, and sweet, used in many
Cordials and wholesome receipts against coldness, Nutmeg, or musk nut, have
many singular virtues against cold.
and comes from the hot Country of Inde, from an Land called Badan, and is
enclosed with Maces, as with a Nutshall, which Maces is a spyce most wholesome:
the clove is not the stalk whereupon this worthy Nut doth grow: the
Mauritanians affirm that they be hot in the second degree. The old Wryters
speak but little of this Nut, it is proved to be good against wind, collike,
phlegm, weak digestion* vomits, headache, coldness of the Liver, cardiakes,
stopping of the spleen, Dropsy, swellinges, bloody Flixes: it comfort the
Synewes, muskles, Ueynes of cold, or old people: makes sweet breath,
puts away trimbling of the heart* and is wholesome to be beaten in powder,
and tempered with oil of Myntes, and to anoynte the forehead and temples
against coldness of the head, or dullness of memory, and is wholesome in
plasters for the stomach, quilted in Leather and Sylke: good in stewed
brothes, for them which be long sick, and the Oil is comfortable for cold
Stomachs: Nutmegs not good for hot coplexioned men.
but Auicen speaking a little of the Nutmeg saith, it is euel for a Sanguine
man to use it, because it will adust the blood, (and make one appear with a
face as though he had a visor of Currall) be cause of the dryness: so to
conclude, the Nutmeg is the fruit, the Mace the flower, or Rose that doth
enclose it, the Clove is the small Stalk that bears it, as they say. But
Cinnamon is a another manner of Bark. Sinamon.
Dioscorides saith there be diverse kinds of Cinnamon which are hot, and dry of
nature in the third degree, and help the stopping of ye Liver, Dropsy, Flixes,
and all the pains of the Guts, Lunges, and breast, cause a sweet breath, and
are wholesome in blanch powder or soppes. Cloves come from Inde, and grow like
nails upon Trees, and be hot and dry, and odoriferous, Cloves.
and be good against cold.


Marcellus. What say you of Fraxinus, the Ash tree?


Hilarius. THis tree is commonly known, Fraxinus the Ash tree.
whose leaves being stamped or sodden in Wine, do heal the stinging of
serpents. Plinie saith, ye leaves of Ash trees be deadly to beasts, but that
should seem to be erroniously spoken of Plinie, because we see the contrary:
but there is an herb which hath leaves like Ash leaves called Ditten* Ditten.
of which Matthiolus makes mention in his comment upon Dioscorides, which herb
is good for man against poison, Worms and swellings, but no beast dare eat
thereof. And I suppose Plinie meant this Dittany, which I have proved to be good
against the Tympany of Water. I have proved it at Tinmouth Castle, where plenty
doth grow upon the Rocks. But to conclude of the Faxin, or Ash tree, the
leaves being sodden with the Oil of S. Ihons grass and Terebintine are good
against Cuts, sores, and open wounds to glewe, To help broken booes
or draw them together again: they also be good with Consolida, Compherie,
Bean meal, oil of Myrtes, to lay upon broken Benes. To help the Spleen.
And ye kayes of Ash tree sodden in Wine, Citrach, fresh Capers, and Sugar,
are good to drink to diminish the swelled Spleen, and of nature are cold and
dry in the second degree.


Marc^llus. What say you of Populus, called the Popler tree?


Hilarius. THere is the white and the black Popler, Populus the Popler tree.
which be cold and dry in the third degree. Of the Popler is made the goodly
Huguenot called Populeon. The Juice of the Leaves be wholesome to be dropped
into the hot stopped Ears. The Popler young Buds, incorporate with clean
Honey and Rosewater, be wholesome to assuage the pains of the even, coming of
heate. And the Juice of the bark sodden in red Wine, will stop a bloody Flix.
and the Sciatica: read further. lib. 1. Dioscorides. Cap. xciij.


Marcellus. What say you of Brom called Genista?


Hilarius. THe Brom, and the Whin or Fur Bush be hoate and dry in the
second degree: Brom.
ad the seed will provoke vomits, cleanse filth in the stomach, and kill
Worms. The Juice tempered with Staphisagry, oil of Wormewod Aloes, To kill
Lice.
will kill Lice. The oil of Brom will heal a Tetter.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of the Ienuper?


Hilarius. Ienuper
DIOSCORIDES is his first book Cap. 87. saith, there are.2. kinds of
Ienupers, or bigger than the other both sower or tart of taste, hot of nature,
moving urine, Serpents will flee from the smoke thereof. Ienuper beries be
wholesome to cleanse ye Stomach, Ienuper will drive away Serpents.
help the cough, inflations, and the torments of the belly. There is a
precious Oil made of Ienuper to warm the synewes and comfort the head, being
overcome with cold. Ienuper beries be wholesome to put in medicine against the
Pestilence, biting of Serpents. Plinie in the laud of Ienuper saith, Ienuper
was the beams of Dianas Temple. Plinie. lib. 16. Cap. 40.
that the beams in the rich temple of Diana of Ephesus, were made of Ienuper,
the which remained many hundred years vnperished, until the burning of ye
same. The Chemistes or Distillars of Waters, make their ardent hot Fires of
Ienuper.


Marcellus. What virtue is in Hypocistis?


Hilarius. Hiposistis.
HYpocistis is cold and dry in the second degree. Galen saith, lib. vij
simplic* medicamentorum. Cistus is a binding fruit, the leaves and. small
buds do dry and bind and glewe Wounds together: Hipocistea will stop blod.
but the flowers be of most effect. Drunk in Wine they are good against the
bloody flix, or weakness of the belly: and also for Women, that have to much
red flux menstruall. And with Sanguis Draconis and Bosearmen, with the white
of an Egg, it will stop a bloody Wound.


Marcellus. What say you of the Pomegranate, and Balaustia, Lymondes, Oringes?


Hilarius. Malum Punicum the Pomgarnet.
EMplasters made of Pomgranets, be good against hot Fevers: the Wine of
Pomgranettes, is good to comfort the Stomach after meat. There are two
kinds of them, the sour, and the sweet the sour be cold, Balaustica the
flower of Pomgarnete which will stop a flixe.
and dry in the second degree, but the sweet be cold and moist in primo.
And this Fruit is called Malum punicum, the flowers be called Balaustium, of
the Wild Pomegranate which flower hath virtue to stop flixes, by the reason they
be cold and dry, and slipticke of nature, and very good to be put in Clisters
and in the drink of them, which have Disenteria, or Tenasmus. The sower
Limondes are cold and dry, Limondes Orynges.
but the sweet are warm, the tindes are al dry. And Limondes are good in Wine
and do resist poison: Oringes are weaker of nature, and are cold and dry.


Marcellus. What is Cubebes, I pray you of nature?


Hilarius. THey be hot in the beginning of the third degree, Cubebes have
goodly virtue against melancholy.
and be good to cleanse the breasts and bellies, of raw flegmatike persons,
which be full of gross humours. They help the spleen, and coolness of the
Guts: with Mastike they will draw filth from ^. And with Balm Water, there is
nothing better against Melancholy trembling of the hart, and the falling evil.
And these Cubebes be used in many goodly medicines.


Marcellus. What say you of Figs?


Hilarius. Figs be of diverse sorts, but hot in the first degree, Figs
will ^ipe apostumes, best of al fruits and are wholesome to be eaten.
and dry in ye second: and be full of maturity or ripeness, and will open ye
poares, cause sweet breath, breed Lyse, by the reason the foul humour is
cleansed through the skin by them. Relaxe the belly, and sodden in Wine with
Hysop, strained and drunk, help the throat, lunges, and old rotten coughs.
Figs be good against Melancholy, and the Falling evil, to be eaten. Figs,
Nuts, and herb Grace, do make a sufferent medicine against poison, or the
pestilence. Figs make a good Gargarisme to cleanse the throat, and stamped
with Shomakers ware, will heal an ulcer. Figs will ripe hard apostumacions,
of ye plague sore: Snails, Swynes grease and Figs, with Bean flower stamped
together, Figs heal ulcers.
and warm applied to a sore swelled throat, will ripe it, and help Angina. The
Wine of the decoction of Figs, is wholesome to be drunk against bruses, or
falls. Figs be fruit most worthy and commendable to mans nature, both
inwardly in meat to cleanse the blood being also a goodly Medicine: Figs be
both meat and medicine.
and outwardly in wholesome plasters, to ripe an hard Apostumacion or sore: by
the reason they will warm, and make the skin thin. And thus I do end of
Figs.


Marcellus. What say you of the Mulberry?


Hilarius. GALEN. lib 7. simplicium medicamen^orum saith, Morus the Mulberry.
the ripe sweet Mulberry will somewhat relaxe, but the Tart unripe will
restrain and stop the belly: so it is then of nature relaxing and binding. The
Bark of the Mulberry tree root sodden in Water, to drink that Water doth
resolve the belly, Dioscorides. lib. cap. 143. the leaves stamped with Vinegar
do heal scalding, or burning, to anoint the place therewith. Tricoctus called
the Medler, Mespilus.
or Mespilus hath virtue also to restrain, stop, and cool.


Marcellus. What is Sebesten good for?


Hilarius. Sebesten will help Struma
SEbesten and Iuiubes be good to help the grief in the throat called Struma
if they be sodden in sweet water, Mead, or in the decoction of Lyquorice and
Figs. And they be both of a temperate heate and moystnesse, used in many
medicines.


Marcellus. What say you of Leven?


Hilarius. Leven dissolveth harde things, and makes them soft.
Leven called Fermenrum, is hot and moist, and will quickly dissolve a hard
apostumation: and if it be stamped with Figs it will speedely ripe and draw.
And Leven is wholesome to help the prick within the flesh or Synewes, made like
a Cerote.


Marcellus. What say you of Ceruse?


Hilarius. Ceruse tooleth inflamed sores
IT will scour, and is used among the Surgeons, for to quench hot ulcers:
it hath virtue to dry, and is cold dry in the second degree.


Marcellus. What then of Licium?


Hilarius. Licium.
LIcium is very subtle, drying and penitrating: and of nature is cold and
stiptike.


Marcellus. Wherefore is Litarge good?


Hilarius. GALEN remembering Spuma argentj: saith Lytharge doth dry, as other
medicines do, Gale. lib. 9. simp. medica.
that be made of Mettell, Stone, or any other earthly thing, of a strong
faculty, and is used in sundry linementes, against hot burning Ulcers.
Litarge.
And is naturally cold and dry, and is tried out of Sand, called Molybdis.
Look Dioscorides. lib. 5. Capt. lxiij.


Marcellus. What say you of Galanga, and Cost?


Hilarius. Galanga.
GALANGA is hot and dry in the third degree, and bites as Gynger doth upon
the tongue, with burning like Pepper, and will take away coldness of the breast,
heart, guts, matrix and raynes: drunk with Planten water, it stops the
bloody flixe, and strengthens nature, Ciperus.
comfort the brains, and trembling of the heart. Ciperus, which is called
Aspalathum, is very sweet, and of the nature of Galanga, and is called wild
Galanga, but it doth more vehemently expel the terms being drunk: the roots
be like Ginger. Cost is diuritike, hot and warm, and resists Uenime.


Marcellas. What say you of Iris, called Ireos?


Hilarius IRIS is so called, because of similitude of the Raynebowe, Ireos.
and is commonly known: it is called the flower Delice, hot, and dry in the
end of the third degree. And is of two kinds, Garden, To resolve.
and Field Ireos: and it will resolve, soften, and open, and is put in
mollifying Cerotes, with grease of Ducks, Capons, Hens, and Geese, and the
Powder of Flax, Bean meal, Holioke, and Wax accordingly. Ireos powder
tempered with Honey, and therewith a convenient Pessary made, is good to draw
forth the dead child. It is wholesome for Struma, or swelling in the throat, in
lynamentes. And the Powder thereof will heal a Fistula, or a rotten Ulcer.
Vinegar, Oil of Roses, and Ireos, sodden strained, To cover a bone with
flesh.
put thereunto Honey of Roses, and it will cover a naked place, whereas ye
flesh is gone from the Bone, and will quickly cover it again with fleashe.
The whyter it is, the meaner it is, the better: Plinie doth not a little
commend it libro.xx. for ointments, so do Aetius lib. xiij. cap. iiij. but not
inward in medicines.


Marcellus. What say you of Pepper?


Hilarius. Pepper comes from Inde, Pepper.
the black grows upon clusters like to little black Ienuper Beries: Some
grow in Husks, both the white Pepper, long Pepper, and black Pepper be all hot
in quarto, and dry in the second: the long is most biting, because it is
gathered before it be ripe, therefore it hath still the hot humour. The black
is perfect ripe, and is wholesome: the white is sweetest, but weakest of them
three. Pepper is used in sundry medicines, and in meat against coldness: Pepper
dissolveth consumes moist humours.
it draws dissolveth, and consumes moist humours, and dries them, and
helps an Agewe, being drunk many times, specially before the Fit. Gross
Pepper will help digestion, and never hurt the Liver. There is a goodly Dia
made of the three Pepers, called Dia trion Pipereon, which hath great virtue
against horsenesse, stopping of the lunges, and cold Reumes.


Marcellus. What say you then of the three Sanders, have not they the same
virtue, that the three Pepers have?


Hilarius. NO sir, for ye Sanders be Wood, or a Tree called Santalum, The three
kinds of Sanders.
of three kinds: the pale, the white, and the red, cold in the second degree.
And all these be wholesome to stop flixes, and wounds: and with Rosewater,
Saunders be wholesome, to be applied to ye forehead in a clothe, with a piece of
a Rose cake, to aswage the hot burning pains in the forehead. Sanders be
wholesome in Drynkes, to be gieuen to quench a hot Fever. Temper the Juice of
Solanum, and Purssen, Sanders do^ cool the head and reconcile sleep help the
Gout.
with Saunders, and the oil of water Lyllies, and anoynte the raging Gout
therewyth, and the pains will vanish away, through the virtue thereof Auicen
in libro de viribus Cordis, affirms Sanders be put in sundry good medicines,
against the trembling of the heart. I noble Dia is made thereof, called
Di^trion Santalj.


Marcellus. What say you of Cardamomum?


Hilarius. Grains of Paradise called Cardamomum.
CARDAMOMVM, is a precious spice, called the grain of Paradise, growing in
Arabia Foelix: the best be the heaviest and sharpest, bitter of taste in the
mouth, with a pleasant verdure, flening up into the head, or Pallet of the
mouth: these be hot of nature, and to be drunk against the falling sickness.
Cardamomu helps the Faling sickness.
Sciatic^, Cough, resolution of the Synewes, Ruptures, pains in the b^lly, and
kill Worms in the Belly, and provoke Uryne. A dragme drunk to Wine, with as
much of the bark of Laurus, breaks ye stone: the common grains be nigh
hand as good, and are hot and dry.


Marcellus. What say you of Laurus, called the Bay?


Hilarius. IT hath been in great estimation, since Tyberius Caesars time, which
was crowned with Baize: it signifies victory, and is of a fiery nature. For
example, cast two dry Bay sticks over each other, and cast a little powder of
Brimstone between them, and eftsoones fire will flame forth. Marvelous things
be written of the Bay tree: read Theophrastus. lib. 4. Cap. viij. Galen. lib.
7. simplic, medic. saith, the Bay tree leaves and beries, do dry, and warm
vehemently: Laurus called the Bay.

Against the stone.


the more they be bitter, the more they are adstrictyue. They will break the
stone, and are good for a cold Liver, drunk in strong Wine..j. yet they are
evil for Women with child. The berry is hoatter then the Leaf, and the Oil
is wholesome against cold Agues, and goodly plasters be made thereof.


Marcellus. THe children of Israell, in their hunger had Manna falling from
Heaven, during their passage in the Wilderness: and after their coming over
the River of Iordan, they were fed no more therewith. And as I do hear say,
there is a certain Manna, which our Apothecaries do sell, to delicate persons,
to quench the heat of choler, and purge their blood withal.


Hilarius. Manna. Exod. xvj. Sapi. xvj. Psalm. 78. Ihon. 6.
THE children of Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, were fed by the providence of God:
because he^ was their God, and they his own people. He provided for them by
miracle, because they should love him, and honour him above all earthly
things, for feeding them with heavenly Bread, called Manna, which as the holy
Wryters affirm, was ye Spiritual food, even Iesus Christ: with which the
true faithful Christians, are most comfortably nourished within the blessed
sacrament of Chrystes body, which is our redemption, once bodyly offered on the
Cross, daily in the congregation of ye faithful, spiritually mynistred in the
holy Sacraments, until th'end of yt World according to his promise. But this
Manna, which we do use in bodyly medicine, is a sweet lyquour, which doth still
from the Air, in the time of the Canicular days* Manna of Calabria.
falling upon Trees, Branches. Herbs, Flowers, and Stones. c. Some Manna
comes from the Orient, and other from Calabria, which is sweet, light and in
small grains, much like unto Mastike. Manna of the Ash tree in Italy.
There is a City in Calabria called Coslentia, and the Ash trees about the
same once a year in the Canicular days, have great plenty of Manna hanging
upon them. There is but little dyuersity between Manna and Teryniaben, but that
this is like drops of Honey, and will quench heate, purge blood, and relaxe the
belly, Manna will do the same, and is white and clear like gum. And yet these
two do descend from heaven. Galen, Plinie, and Theophrastus, remembrynge Manna,
say: that in one time of Summer, there is Honey raining from heaven upon trees.
c. At which time, the Husband men play, and singe, The great virtue of Manna
for mankynde.
saying: Iupiter raynes Honey, Iupiter Mell pluit. This Manna is wholesome for
to cleanse the breast, lunges, raynes. c. And of nature is hot* temperate, and
moist, and the more it is to be lamented, by false craft it is sophisticated,
or it comes hither. And when it comes into England, it is but little helped
among some Apothicaries: and this Manna with Cassia is wholesome to purge: and
you may receive Manna Simple..ij. in your drink, or eat it like bread in the
morning, or at noone: it is most delicious, and pleasant to tender Folks.
Children may eat..i. at once, and young Babes in their milk, may
receive..ij*ss.


Marcellus. What say you of Sugar of the Cane?


Hilarius DIOSCORIDES remembering Sugar. lib. 2. cap. 75. saith, Sugar of the
Cane.
there be Reeds in Arabia, in which is a thing contained like Salt, breaks
in the mouth like Salt, and is both pleasant, and good to the Belly stomach:
deluted or steeped in water if it be drunk, it helps the raynes. And Sugar is
good to cleanse the darkness of ye even. Sugar is used in most Sirupes, and
Iuleps, Manus Christi. c. Sugar cannot be spared in banquets, or garnishment of
feasts: Although Sugar cannot be simply made, from the panell, or sand, which
comes from the Cane, without some art, yet there is much craft in it, by
sophisticacion, to make it trim to ye sale, sweet and pleasaut, like Musk to
the mouth more pleasant, than profitable. But the clean clarifyed Honey, Honey
is more excellent than Sugar to preserve.
doth excel for health the Sugar, specially the Honey of Athens, where as the
Bees feeds most upon time. Sugar Candy is good for the Lunges.


Marcellus. What say you of Spiknard?


Hilarius. SPiknard is odoriferous, pleasant sweet, comfortable to the brain,
synewes, and warms each part of the body being cold, Spicknard of Spain*
help^th ^he bray^
is good to be drunk against ye falling evil, Colic, Flix, Cardiaca*
Dropsies, Hickit, it will increase hair, ye powder being tempered with Honey to
anoint ye place. Spicknard beaten into powder tempered with the Waters of
Fenell, For sore eyes to help them.
Roses, and Eyebright, putting a little Lapis tutia and Aloes Epatike, standing
all the night together, and strained in the morning* this dropped into dim
eyes, will comfort, scour, and stregthe the sight. And of nature it is hot in
the first degree, and dry in the second. And thus I do end of Spica Nardi,
whereof there be two kinds, one of Syria, and the other of Inde. Read more
thereof. Dioscorides. libi 1. Cap. 6.


Marcellus. What is the nature of Caphura, commonly called Campher?


Hilarius. Caphura called Campher, a gum of a great tree of Iude.
IT is a Gum of a tree of Inde, whose bigness, breadth of the brauches be so
large, that a. C. men or more, may be shadowed under the same: this tree
grows near the sea side, and the people of Inde do cover theymselues from
the heate of the Sun under the shadow of the same. There was a certain king
among them called Riach, Riach found first Campher
which found out the worthy virtue of this Gum, and from the base coullour
thereof did by art change it into shining whytnesse, which is the best
Campher, all the other is but base and of small estimation. Some also say that
Campher is a heavenly influence, Sundry opynions of Campher.
cast down by the violence of thunder, and lightning, and is gathered out of
the earth like unto Sulphur or Brimstone, although it be by the judgements of
Serapio and Auicen cold and dry in the third degree, and comes from the
Meridian part of the World: but there is much craft and sophistication of the
Campher, through the craft subtilty of strangers before it is brought into the
Realm. But if you will know good Campher, Howe to know good Campher.
do this, take a new Manchet hot from the Oven and cut it a sunder in the
midst, then put in the Campher and close the loaf loose together, then if
the Campher do cast a moystnesse, it is the best argument to prove it to be
good Campher, but if it remain dry like unto earth, then it is false, and
counterfeit: good Campher will burn upon Snow, and also in Water, it ought
to be kept close, covered about with Flax seed, Pepper, or such like, for by
it self it will waste away quickly: it is put in many goodly ointments to
quench the heat that is above nature to extinguish carnal Lust, Campher will
quench nature.
as to temper it with the Juice of Nightshade, Vinegar, and water Lillies, then
to anoint the Testicles or privy parts, and this shall quench the heat of
nature: it will also reconcile sleap, to make an oyntmet with Rose water, Oil
of water Lillies, Woman's Milk, To cause fleape.
and to annoynt therewith the Temples* and Forehead. Planten water and
Campher, will stop the bleeding at the nose: it is put in goodly oyntmets to
cleanse ye spots from the face, the filth from the skin: it preserves the eyes
fro blindness tepered with medicines accordingly. It stops the running of ye
Rains white Fluxes passing from Women, To stop the whites running of the
Raynes.
drunk with the Juice of water Lillies: it is good against ye Pestilence,
finaly it will preserve a dead body from stinking putrefaction. And thus I end
of Campher called Caphura. Vitex called Agnus Castus is also of the Nature of
Campher, Agnus Castus or Vitex for chastity.
to dry up the seed of Generation, but in complexion as Galen saith, it is
hot and dry in the third degree, bitter of taste and bynding Read Galen
thereof. lib. 24. cap. 9. And Dioscorides the first book the. 116* Chapter of
the nature of Agnus Castus doth greatly laud it for ye syngular virtue, being
so goodly an instrument for chastity. And how the Women of Athens that professed
chastity did straw the Leaves thereof about their Beds. And thus I do end of
Agnus Castus, that is to say, chaste


Marcellus. What is the nature of Sulphur, called Brimstone?


Hilarius. SVLPHER called Brimstone, Sulphur or Brimstone.
is hot and dry in the fourth degree: with this Sulphur, and fire, God plaged
the People of Sodom, and Gomor, for their abominable Sins against Nature.
Su^pher is one of the simples put into the receypt of Gunpouder, wherewith God
by his instruments hath plaged the proud World with, through merciless
Gunnes, Sulphur is found in diverse parts of ye world, as in veins of the
Earth, Wells, Pits, as well in the cold parts of Iseland, as in the hot
parts of Inde. Of a sulpherous humour it is presupposed that the waters of the
Bathes here in England have their continual warmness. Also in Italy in the
field Senensis, Bath spring came from a vain of Brimstone.
upon ye mountains not far from the warm Bathes of S. Philip, is much
Brimstone food, therefore it is none error to say that the hot Bathes have
their original spring of Brimstone. Sulphur hath virtue to dry up Scabs
being tempered with fasting spittle, Vinegar, and Swynes grease. It also helps
Leprous, Scabs, and Poxes, being sodden in Oil Debay, and sharpe Vinegar.
And Galen saith, that it doth resist the venom of Serpents. To cleanse scabs.
Notwithstanding through the heate thereof it will exulcerat, if it be not
corrected. And thus I end of Brimstone, the whytest clearest is the best.


Marcellus. Hitherto have I not remembered the noble Rose, with his singular
virtues, I pray you show me the nature of the same?


Hilarius. DIOSCORIDES writing upon the Rose. The Rose, a friend to the brain,
eye^.
lib. 1. Cap. 112 saith that the Rose is cold, and bynding, and is friendly
unto the eyes. Roses being first dried in the shadow, and sodden in Wine, the
same liquor is good for ye pains in the head, Eyes, and ears, Oil of Roses
for ye head.
the places to be washed or anointed therewyth. The Oil of Roses is of a
syngular virtue to be put in Linementes, for to cool hot burning Ulcers,
inflammations, and such like, because it will resolve, also extinguish, comfort
wounds in the head, through any stripe or fall. And of this Galen doth
remember lib. x. simplic. medic de sanguine. There is a precious ointment of
Roses called Vnguentum Rosarum, whose virtue is to extinguish the heate of the
Raynes of the back, and it reconcileth sleep for to have the Temples, and
Forehead anointed therewith, if it be made sweet and white according to Art.

There are sew Cordials can want the help of Roses, and Rose water. And as
Dioscorides saith, when the Rose is pulled from the bush, the whitest must be
cut away from the red with a pair of Shears, which red leaves must be dried,
preserved, or stilled to the use of medicine. There be divers and sundry
kinds of Roses, as the red Rose, the white Rose, and the province Rose, Sundry
kinds of Roses all of great virtue.
which is excellent in medicine, and most pleasant to be smelled upon,
comfortable to the Brain, and Heart: among all Flowers none excells the
province Rose for his manyfolde virtues: as against ye trembling of the heart,
dimness of sight, frensies, lack of sleep, corruption of the Air, heate
above Nature, Flixes. c. Of Succus rosarum is made the most excellent
electuarie to purge choler with all. The waters of Roses excells all other
waters, if they be purely stilled. Read Plinie the 21. lib. cap. 4. which
writes most copiously of the natures, shapes, virtues of Roses. The more
leaves that Roses have, the preciouser they be. The best Roses of the World do
grow in Italy, The best Roses be in Italy.
and France. The Roses of England be not much inferior unto them. The
little yellow tuftes growing within the Roses, finely beaten into powder, be
wholesome to stanch blood, to kill Worms, to cleanse the Canker in the mouth, and
to take Pollipus from the Nose. There be also many wild stinking Roses, as
Theophrastus makes mention. lib. 6 cap. 6. de historia Plantarum. There is
also Rosa Solis which is distilled to make a water compounded to preserve
nature withal: and thus I do end of this precious flower called the Rose,
which the Arabians for the excellent sweetness thereof* doth call Narde.


Marcellus. What is the nature of Alum?


Hilarius. Alum.
DIoscorides doth remember the same in his.5. book, the 22. cap. saying it
comes out of Egypt, found where as metals do grow, in many other places, as
in Melo, and in Macedonia: also there is great plenty thereof in Italy, which
is most white and clear, it is hot and dry in the fourth degree, and is very
wholesome in the cure of Cankers: Alum for the Canker.
and if it be sodden with Planten water, it helps ulcers yt seem incurable:
sodden with Honey and Vinegar alone, it will stablishe make fast teeth. Alum
doth cleanse scour, is used in many medicines: brunt alone, Burnt Alum
consumes flesh.
makes Corosiues to corode, consume, take away dead flesh: you may read more
thereof in Galen. lib. 4. simpli. medica. of ye virtue of ye clensing, and the
scouring. Alum is profitable in every common wealth, where as good clothes be
made.


Marcellus. What is the nature of Quickesiluer?


Hilarius. THere is much variety wheather it should be hot or cold in the.4
degree, Quicksiluer or Mercury.
but it should seem rather to be hot, by reason it doth dissolve and pearce:
it hath virtue to consume, and it is perilous to be used in ointments to kill
scabs with all, for it is piercing, and subtle, that at length it will come
into the inward parts, where as finally it will mortify and kill. It is
found in Minerals of Silver, and is a destroyer of other metals. With this
Quickesiluer and Sal Armoniake, is made Mercury sublimate, which must be kept
in a close vessel, Mercury sublimate.
adusted in a Oven, or burnt until it come to the colour of white Sugar, which
Mercury sublimate is used of Surgeons for to cleanse foul ulcers and
soars, and is a poison inwardly to be taken, except with al speed after the
same a vomet be taken of Oil or Azarabaccha. If Quickesiluer be taken
inwardly, it is also pearillous, and nothing better to help it, than to
drink Wormwood wine with the seed of Clary boiled therein. Marvelous
things be done by means of Quicksiluer as the Chimistes doth know, and yet
for all that we see little Gold multiplied thereby. Thus to conclude,
Quicksiluer may be conveniently ministered in oyntmentes, to heal the Pox.


Marcellus. I pray you what is the nature of Atramentum, of the Mineral?


Hilarius It is a natural Corrosive, and hot and dry in the third degree.
Atramentum.



Marcellus. What say you of vnslecked Lime, called Clax viva?


Hilarius. IT is hot and dry in the third degree: vnslecked Lime, oil of
Roses, Calx vius Lime, helps rotten soars.
ye Juice of Enulacampana and Uynegar, strongly beaten together in a leaden
Mortar with putting in Terebintine: makes an Ointment which will heal
scabs, infecting the Thighs, or Legs, and al rotten ulcers.


Marcellus. What is the nature of Uerdigreace?


Hilarius IT hath virtue to consume superfluous flesh, Uerdigreace.
and doth mundefie rotten humours, filthy ulcers, deep stinking soars, and
rebates consumes proud flesh, and is the chief thing in Vnguentum
Aegyptiacum, Vnguentum Aegyptiacum.
for Uerdygreace. Honey, Roche Alum, Wax, Oil, and Uynegar, sodden together in
a convenient vessel, stirred together with a stick till it come to a
thycknesse, this ointment is good Aegyptiacum which hath the foresaid virtues,
and is hot and dry of nature.


Marcellus What is the nature of Spodium?


Hilarius. SPodium is cold and dry, and tempered with Roche Alum, Spodium.
it will heal ulcers, and Cankered matter in the mouth.


Marcellus. What is the nature of Minium?


Hilarius. MINIVM is used in divers linementes, and Cerotes, Minium and
Cerusse,
and by burning in the Furneis, it is made of Cerusse, and of nature is cold,
and dry.


Marcellus. What is the nature of Uernishe?


Hilarius. Uarnish.
IT is good for Armourers, it hath virtue also to scower and cleanse soars, and
wounds, and is hot and dry in the second degree.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Soap?


Hilarius. SMigma is called Soap. Soap cannot be forborne in any common wealth,
Smigma or Soap.
for washing of Lynnen, and clensing of the Bodies of Men and Women, which be
defiled with sweat and filth, through travel labour. But it is perilous to
be put into wounds, because it makes separation: notwithstanding, it is hot
dry, yet it doth neither burn, nor adust. French Soap, Nighter, common Salt,
French soap.
ana..j. put in a little close stone vessel, with three spoonefulles of
Vinegar, let it stand in the Fourneys, until it be dried. This is good to
wash the head, in a little Malmesy, wherein Azarabaccha hath bin sodden,
against al coldness, and dullness of ye Brain. French Soap mingled with the
powder of Elleborus Niger, called the root of Bears foot, Uerdigreace,
Litarge of Silver and Gold, Tartar, and Quicksiluer corrected, beaten all
together in a Leaden Mortar with the Juice of houselike, and Stonecrop, makes
a goodly Ointment to kill Tetters, black Morphew, Soap will kill Tetters.
Ringwormes, Spots, and Melancholy, infecting the Skin. French Soap, Oil of
Roses, and the white of an Egg beaten together, are good against scalding, or
foul stinking Scabs, or itch. It Soap be applied in a Walnut shell to the
Navel of a child, forthwith it will cause the vryne speedely to purge. Soap
is used also among the emperikes, or unlearned practicioners to be take
inwardly, to provoke urine stool: but this practice is not to be commended. And
thus I end of soap, called Smigma.


Marcellus. What say you of Lead?


Hilarius. Lead will cool* help soars.
GAlen. lib. 9. simpli. medica. saith Lead to refrigerat and cool, it hath
also humidite, and is a little earthly of nature, cold and moist in the second
degree, and is good against foul cankered soars, and filthy ulcers, fistulaes,
Emeroides. c. thus washed. White or red Lead beaten with an Iron Pestill in a
Leaden Mortar pooring in oil of Roses, Burnt lead.
or Vnguentum Rosarum, labour it well, and then it will make a good ointment
for hot burning soars, will resolve ye hardness of them. A plate of Lead is
good to cool the burning of the raynes: Plumbum vstum burnt Lead with
Brimstone, hath virtue to corrode and waste superfluous flesh.

Iron do mudifie cleanse.
Iron doth mundify much, and is cold and dry in the second degree, so is
Scoria or Rubigo, called ye skales or rust of Iron, but more dryver: stamped in
a Leaden mortar, with Uynegar and oil of Roses, it makes a good cooling
drying ointment. And the rust of Iron beaten fine and sodden with strong
Uynegar is wholesome to be dropped into soar running ears, read Galen, lib. 9.
simplici. medicam. Calebs, or Steel made hot, quenched in red Wine and
drunk, doth stop the Flixe.

Spodium is cold and dry of nature, Spodium stop^peth blood.
blackish and heavy, tempered with Olibanum, sanguis draconis, and Beanemeale
beaten in a Leaden mortar, it will stop blood. Spodium with Roch Alum, and
strong Vinegar, beat together, will kill the Canker in the mouth. Spodium
comes from Furnaces of Brass, or Copper Read of this Dioscorides, lib. 4.
cap. 46. and Galen, lib. 9. simplic. medic. Of Spodium and Pompholix, Cadmia.
it is rather a kind of Cadmia than Tutia, and is tolerable to put into
Collyries for sore Eyene.

Gold, the most pure and undefiled mettell, Gold ye most undefiled, and pure
mettel.
not Leprosse which Sol hath digested by heavily influence. This mettell is
most rich. This gold is not more profitable to our worldly business, than
wholesome for medicines, specially as Auicen saith, for to put away Melancholy,
and to make burning actual cauteres of Gold is holsom, as if any filth be in
the mouth, to burn the same with Gold is most best, so it is when ye vvula is
fallen: a Cautery of Gold is best, in medicens of Cordials. Gold put into
Cordials.
Gold is wholesome to deaurate, or gilde Losinges. And for the dimness of sore
even, Gold is tolerable for the in some Colories, is good for Leproses: all
Mettels will corrupt, when as Gold will remain undefiled. God grant we use
Gold as a seruaunt, but not as a Master, for then we are bond Slaves: for
Gold will not help in the day of vengeance.


Marcellus. What say you of Salt?


Hilarius WIthout Salt we live not, it is used commonly in our meates. Salt,
what it is.
With Salt, Flesh, Fish, and many fruicts be preserved. The great Ocean Sea is
Salt, through which Saltness the earth is kept from poison, through the
exhalacions, or vapour coming from it. Salt is of nature hot and dry, Salt
hath virtue to warm dry.
and hath virtue saith Dioscorides lib. 5. cap. 85. to scour, stop, warm,
dry, and mundify, and defends from putrefaction, and is put into
supposytories Clisters to cleanse, with Honey Vinegar: with Organ, and Hysop it
makes a good medicine against stinging, or biting of Dogs, Snakes, Adders.
c. Salt, Vinegar, and Sugar sodden together, makes a good wholesome drink
against the drinking of Opium, or eating of the Moys^oms called Fungus. Salt is
good against the ulcers of the mouth, to burn Salt, and make it white, wash it
once in Water, To dye Salt.
poureforth the water, and gather the Salt in the bottom, and put it into a
stone vessel covered, and put it into the Oven, cover it with coals, and dry
it, and so it may be used in medicine. Oribasius affirms Salt to be compouded
of matter Abstersiue and stiptike, which is matter bindinge, and drying moist
humours: but salt is not good for lean persons, Salt not good for lean
persons.
it will make them seem old, and moves anger to the Chollerike. Much salt
is made in England, as of Sand and Salt water Pits, in Hollande in
Lyncolnshyre, and only by a marvelous humour of water, at the Wytch, far from
the sea: and in ye North there is salt made, at the shiles by Tinmouth Castle.
I Bullein the author hereof have a pan of salt upon the same Water. At Blithe in
Northumberland is good salt made, Sir Ihon Delauall, a good knight.
and also at sir Ihon Delauals Pannes, which sir Ihon Delaual knight hath bin a
Patro of worship, and hospitality, most like a famous Gentleman, during many
years: and powdreth no man by the salt of extortion, or oppressing his
neighbor, but liberally spends his Salt, Wheat, and his Malt, like a
Gentleman, I need not put his name in remembrance in my book, for it shall
live by immortal good fame, The floweyng of Salt at Nilus.
when my poor book shall be rotten, dear brother Marcellus.

There be also sundry kinds of Salt, among which there is a Salt flowing about
the brinkes of that famous River Nilus called Flos Salis, the flower of Salt,
of a Saffron colour, of taste and savour unpleasant, which Flos Salis is put
into sundry Oyntmentes to heal soores about the privy parts, or other places
of the skin. In colliries it is tolerable for to cleanse sore even. And
tempered with Vnguentum Rosarum, or other Ointmentes, it moves sweat to all
the body, Sal Gemmae
well rubbed with the same.

Sal gemmae, is a Salt of the earth, plenty is dug thereof in Calabria in a
place called Altomonte, and is cut forth like stones most clear Translucens,
or through shining like to Crystal, which if this salt be cast into the fire,
it will not crack nor break, but keep styll whole, burning like Iron. Plinie
makes large mention of Salt. lib. 21. cap. 7. saying that Salt is either
growing naturally in the Earth, Plinie of salt.
or in veins of hills. c. or else made of Salt water sodden in Pannes, unto a
thycknesse, whereof common Salt is made.

Salt Ammoniac is hot and dry in the fourth degree. saith the Pandact, saying
that it comes from Ammoniac, and is made of Camels vryne: but it is called of
the best writers Sal Ammoniacus, Sal ammoniac. doth cleanse th skin.
that is found under ye sands in Aphrike near unto the Oracle of the God
Ammon, and also in the regio called Cyrenaica, which salt is black without and
white within like Alum, but not very bright, noisome to the mouth, but wholesome
in medicine, to cleanse the skin, mingled with Campher and Rosewater tempered
together and made warm: Salt of Inde
Many and sundry Lotyons for Apostimacions and soores, he made with these
saltes, and they must be mingled with other simples.

Sal Indus grows in Inde, through the heat of the Sun, upon Reeds, which
salt is much like Sugar. With Sugar and common salt, the Apothicaries do
sophisticate and craftily counterfeit this Salt. Sal Niter. or Peter, for Gun
powder. Spuma nitri or Barach.


Sal Nitrum, or Saltepeeter. is dug in vaults, flowers of houses, or
walls, which Salt is white, when this is prepared: thereof with other
receiptes, as Cools, Brimstone c is Gunpouder made, which do shot of Gunnes,
which are the instruments of Gods wrath. And Spuma nitri, is is called Barach
of the Arabians: Salt of Mare Mortuum. whereas Sodome stood. Asphaltum.
of these saltes read Dioscorides. lib. 5. cap. 86. Galen. lib xi. simplicium
medicamentorum: further saith Galen in the same book, there is salt made of
the water of Maremortuum, the dead sea, whereas Sodome and Gomor stodde, called
Asphaltnm.

Salt of ye Earth is grosser, and more colder astringing, than the salt of salt
water: but there is a salt called salt upon salt, which is very good to the
use of Man, so is Bay salt, which through the Marche wynd is so made and
finished, which will continue for ever like stone, being kept close but yet
Salt peter will grow therein at length: and thus I end of salt, which the
Arabians call Mesha.


Marcellus. I Have seen sundry saltes before this time: as white salt Bay, Bay
Salt.
which we do use to powder Flesh, and Fish withal. I would your salt Peter
had never bin known, whereby Gunnes do so much mischief, and ye noble state
of Mankind through them are decayed, Boys can kill the strongest men with
Gunnes.
yea through a very vile Coward or Boy, often the valiant man is slain cast
away, But Hilarius, I will a little more proceed in simples, and leave Gunning
matters, to the Men of War, or Servitors to ye noble Princes: now I pray you
what is the nature of Spuma maris, and Fumus terrae?


Hilarius. THese are two clean contrary simples, of.ij. sundry natures, the
one of the land called Fumaria, Spuma maris Fumus terrae.
an herb engendered of the Fume or vapour of the Earth, Dioscorides. lib 14.
Cap. 105. in form much like Coriander, and in colour like Ashes, purple
flowers, bitter of taste, ye Juice will make clean sore even, and this Herb
drunk, Against stopping of the Spleen. Fumitery doth prevail.
the Decoction thereof will purge choler by urine. Fumus terrae, or Fumaria, is
good against the stopping of the Spleen, Liver, Gaul, or Raynes, and doth make
strong the Uentricles, through the dryness, warmness, sharpness,
bitterness, sodden in Wine, stilled, or in syrupe, and so drunk. And so I do
end of this Fumus called Capnos: but as for Spuma maris, the Some of the Sea,
it hath virtue to cleanse, Spuma maris doth make clean ye teeth*
scour, and, dry and is cold and dry in the third degree: it is good to rub
the Teeth, to cleanse them: and the fine powder thereof with the white of an
Egg, Rose water and Sief beaten together, put into the eyes, To cleanse sore
even.
doth cleanse them, and takes away the Web: and thus I do end of Spuma maris,
or ye Stone which the Scriveners do rub, and make clean their Parchment
withal. What have you else to say?


Marcellus. What say you of Spongia, the Sea Sponge?


Hilarius. GALEN. lib. 11. simplic. medic. saith that they did use Sponges to
be a manuel instrument to receive blood, Sponge of the Sea.
wherewith they used to wipe and dry blood in Woudes: and also they do receive
things to stop blood. A sponge is hot in ye first degree, and dry in the
second, it is of a resolving virtue. Sponge good for wounds.
A sponge adust, or burnt not much, the powder thereof will consume flesh,
which is superfluous, and may be put in Wounds of the Head. With a Sponge
which is soft, tents for the head may be made. With sponges sodden in Wine,
and Oil of Capers it is good to wash, and chafe the left side: nothing is
better to anoint the Stomach for a Pleuresy than with a spong in warm Oils,
as of Myntes, Chamomel, Roses, the grease of Hens, Capons, and Ducks. Sponges
new are good but old are evil.
New sponges are wholesome of them selves, will heal woudes, without any thing
put to the. Old sponges be evil. Pitch the Ashes of Sponges together, will stop
blood. A sponge sodden in Honey, will heal and resolve Wounds, and harde
Apostumations, Sponge stones do break the stone.
Read more thereof Dioscorides, lib. v. cap. 96. and Aristotle of the nature
of sponges, which grow among the rocks of the Sea, and have stones in them
beaten in powder, and drunk, will break the stone in the bladder.


Marcellus. What say you of Coral?


Hilarius. THe Indians have Coral in no lest estimation, than we have their
Diamonds and great Perles. Coral grows ^n ye Sea.
Diosco. lib. 5. Cap. 97. calls Coral Lethrodendron, which is a branch
growing in the bottom of the Sea, which by certain means is drawn forth,
and soon turned into hardness, and eftsoon into a stone: we do see of this
Coral great plenty of beads, more vain glorious, Coral of two kinds.
than religious godly. Of Coral be two kinds, ye red which is best, and white
which of nature be cold and dry in the second degree, and be restrictiue and
stopping. Coral beat in powder, mingled with Dragons blood, To stop blood.
whytes of Eggs, Bolearmeni and the Juice of Sheperds purse, Knot grass, and
Rabbits woll beaten in a Lead Mortar, will stop blood. The powder of Coral
drunk with Wine, provokes urine, and will rebate the swelling of the Spleen,
and finally as Auicen saith, doth comfort the heart, Coral provokes vryne,
and helps digestion. The Powder of Coral will cleanse wounds, in whom
flesh superfluous doth remain, and also heal ye same. What is better to stop a
bloody flixe, called Dysenteria? it stops both the flix of men, running from
them in their sleep, and also the whites from Women. Read more in Matthiolus
upon Dioscorides. lib 5.


Marcellus. What say you of Pearl called the Margarite?


Hilarius The Margarit or Perle -- good in Cordials.
THe Pearl is not only rich and pleasant to behold, but also wholesome and good
in medicine. Plinie. lib. 9. cap. 35. saith, that there be plenty of Pearls in
Arabia, in the mouth of the Red sea, growing within the shells, called the
mother of Pearl, in which they are conueyed: the union which is clean,
bright, white, round, and heavy, is the richest. The powder of Pearl is good
to be put in cordials, as Manus Christi, and the same powder with the white
of an Egg, will cleanse the eyes. About this Realm many Pearls be gathered in
Muscels, and other Shell fish, but not the most orient.


Marcellus. Is there any virtue in Lapide lazulj?


Hilarius. THere is nothing better to purge Melancholy. There be Pills called
Pilulae de Lapide Lazulj, Lapis lazulj.
against old Quartens, or Madness: this stone is cold and moist.


Marcellus. What say you of Saphyrus?

DIOSCORIDES affirms, Saphyrus resist poison.
this heavenly coloured precious stone, is wholesome to be drunk against the
stinging of Serpents, to resist the poison: and being drunk it helps all
exulcerations of the Guts, and also is wholesome for sore even, to clear the
sight. Many goodly virtues are belonging to the Saphyr, as chastity c Yet it is
not cold enough for the quenching of Venus They say the Turquois will keep a
man from falling, but it is a lye. The rich Hemerald, some say, will declare
when the knot of Marriage is undone, and than it will separate and break a
sunder, and that were a perilous case to lose a good Jewel for an evil wife:
Fables gathered.
with many such foolish old fables gathered out of some writers which have
rather vnwittily reported, than truly proved the nature of stones so far
passing their natures, although they be of great virtue, and both pleasant and
profitable to mankynd, and nothing under heaven more rich or costly.


Marcellus. IF the Emeralds would so quickly break or crack when such parts
be played, I assure you there would be great loss in costly Jewels, and some
separacion of friendship, but they be of much virtue and patience when such
offences be committed, that they will tell no tales by breaking them selves:
well let this matter pass, it is but to fear folks withal, and I pray you
what say you of Lapis Naxius, and the Jasper.


Hilarius. THe powder thereof with Bears grease will increase hair, Lapis
naxius, helps to increase hair.
and keep one from baldness. This stone will make small a maidens Breasts, and
defend them from growing: if the powder thereof with Vinegar be drunk, it will
consume the greatness of the Spleane. And this stone is good against the
falling sycknesse. Jasper doth comfort digestion.
The Jasper is wholesome to be hanged about the neck, down to the mouth of the
stomach, for it is comfortable to the same saith Galen, lib. ix. simplic.
medicamentorum.


Marcellus. What then of Lapis Tucia, and Lincis.


Hilarius. IT is used in many ulcers, and foul stinking Cankers, Lapis Tutia
and lapis Lincis.
for through the coldness and drynes, it doth cleanse and incarnate foul
sores: and this Tucia is most excellent, if it be prepared, to be put into
Colliries to cleanse the even. What is better with Planten Water to cleanse the
yard? Lapis Lincis, is hot and dry, engendered of the vryne of Lynx, and is
good in powder. iij. to be drunk at once, or put into Cassiafistula..i. to
consume the stone, and cleanse the Raynes.


Marcellus. What say you of the stone called Byzabar.


Hilarius THe Arabians do call it Bizabar, which Stone is precious, and
resysteth Poison, Bizabar ^ precious
and is put into precious Antidotaries which prevail against all foul air,
pestilence and venom. This stone is yellow without oder or smell: stone against
poison.
if it be hanged upon the left arm, touching the flesh, it will preuaile
against the foresaid evils. look Matthiolus lib. 5. Diosco. cap. 73.


Marcellus. What then of Lapis Phrygius?


Hilarius GALEN lib. ix. simplic. medic. with this stone combust saith he* I
use to help or cleanse stinking ulcers, Lapis Phrygius for sore even.
and it hath the same Virtue that Lapis Pyrites hath. And of this stone,
medicines be made for sore even, mingled with Colliries accordingly. And this
stone called Pyrites looks like Brass, and wrapped in Honey, then put it in a
small earthen Pot such as Goldsmiths do use, Pyritis lapis. against proud
flesh.
and set it in the fire blowing until it be red hot so coule it: and this
stone in powder will cleanse scower, and consume flesh superfluous,


Marcellus. What say you of the Haematist?


Hilarius. Alexander Tralianus upon the Hematist for the flixe.
IT is cold and bynding of nature. Alexander Tralianus saith, I have often times
without any Thyriaca or any precious medicine cured many, namely by the
Haematist stone, for them that had the bloody flix: and with the Powder of this
stone, the iuices of Pomgarnets, and Knot grass, mingled together: of
this..iiii. was his dose in this juice for the flix.


Marcellus. What say you of Jet.


Hilarius. Ieta for the Mother.
THereof is great plenty in England and Ireland, and at Whithe in the North: it
hath virtue being drunk to cleanse the bladder: burnt, the Smoke doth help
them which swell and are in peril with the Mother.


Marcellus. What say you of Lapis Magne?


Hilarius The magnet stone.
THe best is that which will draw Iron or Ste^le to him: given three half penny
weight in powder tempered with sweet water, it will cast forth filth and
groose matter out of the body. Plinie shows. lib. xxxiiii. Cap. xiiij. that
one builded a Temple, covered with this Magnes stone, wherein his Image with
pomp was brought in, which was made of Iron, which ascended by attraction, and
did hang in the roff; his name was Arsion. The Arabians and Mahumetans did in
like case bring in the steel Tomb of master Mahumet (their iuglyng false
Prophet) into a Temple of Magnes stones, whose nature was to draw the said
Toumb up. But the best service that the Magnes doth, is in the Ship, for the
compass of sailing in true setting the needle. Also in plasters the powder
thereof to draw forth Iron or pricks from the flesh.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of the flesh of Oxen, Steers or Bulls, and
Calves.


Hilarius I Will not undertake to show mine opinion at your request only, but I
will also declare the minds of some wise and learned men: and first of Simeon
Sethi, who saith that the flesh of Oxen, Of the flesh of Oxen, steres, Bulls,
and Calves.
that be young doth much nourish and make them strong that be sed with Beef,
but it breeds choler adust, and melancholious diseases, it is cold and dry
of nature, and hard to digest, except it be eaten of choleric persons, but
being tenderly sodden, Beef good for the cholorike, but evil for tender
stomachs.
it nourysheth much: Beef customably eaten of idol persons, and nice folk
that labour not, brings many diseases, as Rasis saith: and Auicen saith, that
the flesh of Oxen, or Kine, be very gross, ingendryng ill Juice in the Body,
whereof oftentime come scabs, Cankers, and Biles: but unto hot strong
chollerike stomachs, it is tolerable and may be used as we have the daily
experience thereof. The broth wherein the Beef hath ben sodden, Beef broth
against the flixe.
is good to be supped or drunk half a pynte every morning against the flix of
the belly, and running forth of yellow choler, if the said broth be tempered
with Salt, Mustard, Vinegar, or Garlic, commonly used for sauces to digest
the said Beef with all: for the said sauces do not only help digestion, but
also defend the body from sundry inconveniences, and divers sycknesses, as
Dropsies, Quartens, Leprosies, and such like. The Gaul of an Ox, or a Cow
distilled in the Month of June, and kept in a close Glass, Ox Gaul cleanse
the eyes
doth help to cleanse the eyes from spots, if you put a drop of this water
with a feather into the eyes when ye go to bed: the Milte of a Bull dried, and
the powder thereof drunk with Red wine, will stop the bloody flixe: Ox Mylte
stop the flixe.
light poudred young Beef is better: than either fresh or much poudred* in
specially of those cattle that be fed in fair and dry pastures, and not in
stynking Fens. the great learned man Gesnerus in his description of beasts,
doth write more of the virtues of Bulls, Oxen, Kine, and Calves, Gesnerus
writes much of breasts, the male better then the female.
than any other hath don and thus to conclude, the flesh of the Male beasts, is
more better than of the female, and the gelded beasts, be more commodious to
nature than any of them, and the young flesh more commendable than the old,
for it is moyster, and a friend to the blood. Haliabas saith, roasted flesh
doth greatly nourysh the body, for it is warm and moist: baked meates be very
dry: clean boiled meates with wholesome herbs, and fruicts. be excellent in
virtue to comfort the body if they be nutrimental flesh. Calves flesh the
profit thereof.
Calves flesh doth greatly increase nourish, and make good blood. Specially
the brawn or Muskels of the thigh, are best, saith Master Conrade Gesner, and
further saith he, if a man be wounded, then lay Calves flesh newly slain to it,
and this will defend the wound from apost^macion or swelling: and sodden in
vinegar, and warm applied to any part, as armeholes, Against Ramishnes under
ye arms.
breast of them that stink like a Ram or Goat, it will take away the said
stink: also it helps the biting of a Man or a mad Dog, so that this flesh
remain upon the said wound, during five days, and v. nights close and not
taken away. Celsus for a vomit.


Celsus in his medicines against the biting of Serpents, if nothing can suck
it forth by medicine or boxing, saith he, then drink the broth wherein Geese
or Ueale hath ben sodden, and then provoke vomit.

Great is the goodness of this flesh, both in meat and medicine. Take the
knuckel or sinew part of a Calfe, sees it in Wine and water, putting in Dates,
Prunes, Reisynges of the Sun, grated bread, Maces, Cloves* Fenell roots,
Liuerwort, Planten, Purs^en, fresh Capers, Borage, and Rosemarie flowers,
sodden all together in a silver, iron, or stone pot, close boiled that no air
can go forth. You may put in half a Cock: this flesh and broth gives health
to them that are in consumption, weak bodies, or them which be evil
complexioned, or cold of nature. overcome by Melancholy. c.


Marcellus. What is the goodness of Pork, or of gelded swine, Pigs, and Bores
flesh. c.


Hilarius Pork the commendation thereof.
MOst of the ancient, and wisest Phisicions that ever were in this world, did
consent, that of all flesh, the flesh of young gelded swyne, partly salted or
poudered, was ever meat of the best nourishing, moyster, and colder than other
flesh. For Isaac saith, it is a flesh most moist, except it be the flesh of
Lambs. as Galen reports: yet it is not good for every complexion, nor to
every age, but unto youth and middle age. And whereas Almighty God, did
prohibit the Iewes to eat. swynes flesh: it was a figure to abstain from
unclean things, which I leave to the divines. The Mahumites abhor swynes
flesh, because their drunken false Prophet and Pseudo Apostle was torn, and
rent in pieces with Hogs: Swines blood.
being drunken and fallen into the mire: now we must give credence to time, and
to learned Phisicions. The Blood of Swine doth nourish much, as is seen in
Puddings, made with great Otemeale, Pigs
Pepper, sweet suet, and Fenell, or Anisseedes. Young Pigs be very moist,
therefore Sage. Pepper and Salt doth dry up the superfluous humours of them when
they be roasted. Tripes.
They be not wholesome to be eaten, before they be three-weekes old: Bacon.
the Trypes and Guts be wholesomer, and do nourysh better, than any other
beasts Guts. Bacon is very hard of digestion, and much discommended of some
men. and is hurtful only unto a hot Chol^rike laboring body* but a tender
gammon of Bacon is tolerable, and very good flesh with wine as custom doth
prove it.

Swine of Inde have horns.
Agatharsides saith, that the swyne in Aethiopia have horns growing upon
their heads, there be diverse kynds of swyne, both wyld, tame: whose inward
parts, be not much unlike unto mankynd, and for that Galen began to make
Anatomies of them, in the beginning of his practise, teaching the Surgeons
to do the like. Why hogs are diseased.
These kind of beasts do hear very easily, and be given much to sleep, and
will eat their own Pigs, and feed upon most vile things: for which cause
they have most vile diseases, as Angina in the throat* sores, botches, and
boils. If they be letten blood in the vein under the tongue, and Madder be
given them and an herb called Pancis, otherwise named in Latin herba
Trinitatis, it helps them, if it be sodden in Whey. Those swine that use to
feed by the sea side. eat of young Crabs, be delivered of many diseases: if
they do feed upon Polipodie, they shall be delivered of the Pestilence. Among
the Christen Men, Bores flesh is had in great estimation, to be eaten in
Winter: and chiefly upon Chrystmas day. Galen doth greatly commend the same
flesh, or Braun, to be eaten in winter: and also this Bores flesh is proved in
the time of Pestilence, to break a plague sore. Bores grease, and his stones,
or any part of them stamped together and warm applied to the same sore,
works that effect. And thus I do end of Swyne, which in their lives be most
vile, noisome, and never good until they die.


Marcellus. What is the virtues of Lambs, and Weathers flesh?


Hilarius. SImeon Sethi saith, Lambs flesh is partly warm, Lambs flesh good
roasted. evil sodden.
but superfluous moist, and evil for flegmatike persons, and doth much
harm to them that have the Dropsy, boneach, or a disease called Epialus,
which is spitting of phlegm, shining like Glass. Therefore, if Lambs flesh
were sodden, as it is roasted, it would bring many dyseases unto the bodies of
them, without it were sodden in wine, and some hoate Grosseries, herbs, or
roots. When a Weather is two year old, which is fed upon a good Ground, the
flesh thereof shall b^e temperate, and nourishes much. Hippocrates says,
that the Lamb of a year old, doth nouryshe much. Galen seems not greatly to
commend Mutton, but that which is tender, sweet, and not old, is very
profitable, Mutton.
as experience and custom do daily teach us. The doung, Tallow, and UUolle,
be very profitable in medicines, as Plinie saith, and Conradus Gesnerus, de
animalibus* and Galen in his third book de Alementis,


Marcellus. UUhat be the virtues of Goats, or Kids flesh?


Hilarius. THese be beasts very hurtful unto young trees and plants but Simeon
Sethi saith, Kids flesh very good.
that Kids flesh is easy of digestion, in health and sickness, they be very
good meat, they be very dry of nature. Hippocrates saith, it behooves that ye
conseruers and keepers of health, should study that their meat be such as the
flesh of Kids, Flesh good for sick persons.
young calves that be sucking, and lambs of one year old, for they be good
for them that be sick, or have evil complexion. Haliabbas saith, that the
flesh of Kids, doth engender good blood, and is not so flegmatike, watery and
moyste, as the flesh of Lambs: they remain Kids for six months, and
afterward come into grosser, and hoatex nature, and then be called Goats: the
flesh of them that be gelded are wholesome to eat, The lunges of them eaten
before a man doth drink, doth defend him that day from drunkenes, Goats
flesh.
as I have heard, by the reports of learned men: but the flesh of old male
Goats is evil, and engenders Agues, or Fevers. Conradus. Gesnerus de
animalibus Matthiolus super Diolco.
If the Uriue of Goats be distilled in May, with Sorel the water distilled is
not hurtful nor noisome* but whosoever uses to drink thereof..ii. morning
evening, it will preserve him fro the Pestilence. The Milk of Goats I will
describe in the proper place.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Red, and fallow Dear:


Hilarius. Dere red and fallow* be spoilers of Corn.
THey are more pleasant to some, than profitable to many as appears once a
year in the corn fields, the more it is to be lamented. Hippocrates, and
Simeon Sethi do plainly affirm that ye flesh of them doth engender evil juice,
and Melancholy, cold diseases, The winter Dere better then the summer.
and Quarts: the flesh of winter Dear, doth less hurt the body. than that
which is eaten in Summer, for in winter mans digestion is more stronger, and
the inward parts of the body warmer, and may easelier consume gross meats,
than in summer, as we see by experience, in cold weather and frosts,
healthful people be most hungrest. The lunges of a Dear sodden in Barley
water, and stamped with Penidies, and Honey, of equal quantity, The lunges o^
the Dere.
to the said lunges, and eaten a Mornings doth greatly help the old coughs,
and dryness in the Lunges: there be many goodly virtues of their Horns,
bones, blood, and tallow. Look Conradus Gesnerus de animalibus.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Hares and Conies?


Hilarius. Of Hares flesh and Conies.
AVICEN saith, the flesh of Hares, is hot and dry, an engenderer of
Melancholy, not praised in Physic for meat, but rather for medicine: for in
deed if a Hare be dried in ye month of March, in a Oven or Furnice and beaten
into powder, and kept close, and drunk mornings in Bear, Ale, or white wine,
it will break the stone in the Bladder, if the pacyente be not old: The powder
of the Hare, for the stone.
if childrens gummes be anointed with the brains of an Hare, their teeth will
easily come, and grow. The gaul of an Hare mingled with clean Honey, doth
cleanse watery eyes, or red bloody eyes. The flesh of Hares must be tenderly
roosted and well larded, and spyced. because of the grosenes, but it is better
sodden. The flesh of Conies, is better than Hares flesh, and easier of
digestion, but Rabets be wholesome, for meat of sick people: and thus to
conclude of Conies, experience teaches us, that they are good: they be cold
and dry of nature, and small mention is made of them among the ancient
Phisicions, Galeni de simp. medica.
as Galen saith. I need not to speak very long of every kind of beasts, as
some of the beasts that be in Hiberia, like little Hares which be called
Conies.


Marcellus. What is the nature of a beast called Erinaceus, called the
Porpentine, and Echinus called the Hedgehog, which is full of pryckes?


Hilarius. DIOSCORIDES lib. 2. cap. 2. saith, the skins of them combust or
burnt, and beaten in fine powder, Erinaceus or Porpentine for baldness* to
increase hair.
and tempered with Tar, is a good ointment for to increase hair, and keep of
baldness. The dried flesh of them sodden in Vinegar and Sugar, is good to be
drunk against the stoppyng of the raynes, conuulsions, Leprosies of phlegm, or
an evil complexion. The powder of this Porpetine must be kept close in a
vessel for medicine. The powder of the Hare which is dried in March, Hares
powder for the Raynes.
must be used for the purging of the Raynes, and clensyng of the bladder, ye
said powder is to be drunk with white wine, and Cassiafistula. Also the
grease of the Propentine, or Hedghogge, with Bears grease and Laudanum,
ana..i. beaten in a Leaden mortar, this is a good ointment against baldness or
loss of hair, to rub the place daily therewyth The Livers of Porpentines
dried and beaten into powder are good for the Rains, or Morbus Elephantiacus.
Tese beasts be of cold nature. better for medicine than meat. and be vermen
or beasts of the night, armed against Dogs, with long pricks, and headed
much like a Hare, with teeth according, and ears like an Ape. c. The Urchin
or Hedghogge is commonly known, and headded like a Swine or young Pig. The
powder of them as Plinie affirms, being drunk, will help and defend the
consumption: and thus I do end of this beast called Echinus, which the
Arabians call Caufed. The Urchin or Hedgehog.
The Urchin of the the Sea is good for the belly, stomach and vryne.
Dioscorides lib 2. cap. 1.


Marcellus. uWhat say you of the Fiber, Beaver, or Castor?


Hilarius THis Castor lives by water and land, he loves to feed upon Crabs
and Cankers of the Sea. Castor or Beaver.
The stones of a Castor are a warm medicine, and prevail against poison, to
be drunk or in ointment. And the powder of ye same stones be good to move
sternutation or neesyng, blow into the noose Of the powder..ii. with
Penyroyall, called Pulial. ii.ss tepered together in wine and drunk, will cause
a woman in her travel soon to be delivered, and the seconds to follow, and
finally to cleanse the body, and helps swellings, collickes Iliaces,
syghinges, Cordiaces, Lytharges poison drunk with Vinegar: and in fine it is
so warm, that it helps all the passions or sickenesses in the breast, belly,
liver, and sinews, Castor stones do help all cold infirmites both in men women
coming of cold: the Beaver stones be best, that be most grave and strong of
savour and have a liquor much like Cerase within the Cod, and covered with a
natural covering. Plinie. xxxij. cap. iij. Castor is good to help the
Comitiall or falling sickness, to be drunk. The Oil of them is also good for
the Teeth, raynes. belly, breast, and to be dropped into the Ears.


Marcellus. What say you of the little beast Mustela. called the Weesell or
Wezell, which is commonly known?


Hilarius. This Mustela called the Weasel, is commonly known: and this Weasel,
the flesh thereof sodden in Wine drunk, The Weasel is good against the falling
sikenes and Struma. Angina or swelling of the throat.
is a present remedy against all venom, poison, and the Falling Sickness.
with Vinegar the grease of the Weasel sodden, is a goodly medicine to anoint
the Gout with all. The Blood of Weesels is good to anoynte the Necks.
Throats, and stomachs of them which have Struma, that is, the swelling of the
Throat or the Falling sycknesse, or Palsy. The donge of the Weesell with
Honey, Fenigreeke, and Lupines beaten together, is good to anoint warm the
throat, for the sycknesse called Struma: the gaul of the weasel tempered with
the water of Fenell, is a present remedy for the dimness of the eye, to be put
therein: and all the spots as Morphew of the skin, is cleansed therewyth. The
Lunges of the Weesell is good in powder, For to heal ye Morphew.
to be drunk against all the infirmities of the Lunges, with many other Virtues
of the Weesell, and properties, as to kyl Mise and Rats, to serve in the
house like Cattes, but the savour of the said Weasel is mortiferous and
deadly. Plinie lib. 8. cap. 22.


Marcellus. What say you of Raynard the Fox, and the Bear?


Hilarius. THe Lunges of the Fox is good in Medicine, for the sick Lunges of
mankind. The Fox the Bear the Badgarde.
The grease of the Fox is also good for all Coldness, Palsy, and the
contraction of the sinews, and trembling of the body. The Bear is a beast
whose flesh is good for mankynd: To help baldness.
his fat is good with Laudanum, to make an ointment to heal bald headded men
to receive the hair again. The grease of the Bear, the fat of a Lamb, and
the ointment of the Fox, makes a good ointment to anoint the feet against the
payne of travel or labour of footmen. Bear, Fox, and Broke are good to
help the Palsy.
All the parts of the Fox, the Badgar, and the Bear are good in medicine, or
meat against the Palsy, trembling or coldness of the flesh, or any of them.
There is a common fable among the people, that is to say a Bear hath a
disformed Whelp in the time of delyueraunce, without Members, which is not
true: for the Bear in the birth hath all the members, as other beasts have.
Read Matthiolus in Dioscorides lib. iii. cap. supra.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of a Bird, called the Osspraye.


Hilarius Haleetus the Ospray a water Egle.
LIke as the Egle, and all kinds of Hawk, do pray and feed upon the flesh
of birds: even so God hath ordained ye water Egle, called Haliaeetus the
Osspraie, to fear the Fishes, and feed upon them. And all Hawk, or Birds of
the Nature of Egles, with hard crooked bills, are counted unclean flesh.
Leui. xi. are not used common among us, unto this day. Ospraies oil good to
put in water to gather fi^h ready to be taken.
Howbeit, the Oil or grease of the Osspraie, is had in great estimation to
take Fish withal: and the head thereof dried and beaten into powder, makes a
good medicine for young infant children, to be put into the Nostrils, to
break wind very gentle. And the Gaul is wholesome for sore even to be dropped
with the white of an Egg into them. And the geease and Gaul, Medicines made
of the Ospray.
will heal the stinging and biting of Serpents, and also is good to be
dropped into the ear to cleanse them, and h^lpe hearing Read Gesnerus. Lib.
iij. de Auibus.


Marcellus. What say you of Iuery.


Hilarius. IT is good, to astringe or bind, and to race it with Turmerike and
Saffro putting in Diacurcuma in Tabulis, sodden in the water of Endiue, Iuery.
wherewith many people are helped of a perilous hot and dry sickness called
R^gius morbus, or the yellow Iaundice. A drink for the Iaundice.



Marcellus. What is the virtue of Chickens and Hens?


Hilarius ALL fowls, which have hard pens, be strong of nature, Of house
Cocks. Capons and Chickens. Their flesh much commended.
as Chickens or Hens, saith Auenzoer, which be most commended, and laudable of
any other flesh, and nourish good blood and are light of digestion, and do
also comfort the appetite. Cock chickens be better than Hens. the Capon is
better than the Cock, they do augment good blood and seed, as Rasis
reports, and experience proves in men. both whole and sick. An old Cock
which is well beaten after his feathers be pulled of, until he be all bloody,
and then cut of his head, and draw him, and sees him in a close pot with fair
water, and white wine, Fenell roots, Burrage roots, Uiolettes: Planten.
Suckerie, and Buglosse leaves, Dates, Prunes, great Reisons, Maces, and Sugar,
and put into the Marie of a Calfe, and Saunders, makes a very good broth, for
them that be sick, weak, A good broth for a body which hath ben long sick.
or consumed: the brains of Hens, Capons, or Chickens, be wholesome to eat,
to comfort the brayn and memory: and will cause young Childrens Teeth to grow
quickly. And thus to conclude, these foresaid fowls be better for Idol folks
that labour not, than for the that use exercise, or travel, to whom gross
meates are more profytable. The Cock is the best clock, to keep the time.
Gesnerus lib. iij. de Auibus.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Geese?


Hilarius. THe flesh of wyld Geese and tame, Of Geese and Goslinges.
are very gross and hard of digestion, as Auicen says: the flesh of great
fowls, as of Geese, be slow and hard of digestion, for their humidite, doth
breed Fevers quickly: but their Goselinges, or young ones, being fat, are
good, much commended in meates, Galen saith, of the Flesh of Beasts, Birds.
Goose flesh breeds Melanchory.
But undoubtedly, Geese, Mallardes, Pecockes. Swans, and every foul having a
lunge neck, be all hard of digestion, and of no good complexions: but if these
be well roasted, and stuffed, with Salt, Sage, Pepper, and Onyons. they will not
hurt the eaters of them. The Barnakle of Scotland, never lay Eggs, but are
bred only of the Ocean Sea, dead Gesnerus de Auibus. lib. 3.
There be great Geese in Scotland which breed upon a place called the Basse,
there be also Barnacles, which have a strange generation, as Gesnerus saith,
which never lay Eggs as the people of the North parts of Scotland knows, and
least it should seem incredible to many, I will give none occasion to any,
either to mock, or to marvel: and thus I give warning to them which love their
health, to have these foresaid fowls somewhat poudered, or stopped with Salt,
al the night before they be roasted.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Cranes flesh?


Hilarius. Cranes, are hot, and increase seed.
SImeon Sethi saith, their flesh is hot and dry, the younger be good but the
old increase Melancholy, they do engender seed of Generation, and being
tenderly roasted, doth help to clear the voice, and cleanse the pipe of the
Lunges. Cranes be birds of a wonderful providence, Gesnerus de Auibus.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Ducks flesh?


Hilarius. THey be the hoatest of all domestic or yard fowls, and unclean
of feeding: Ducks are very hot of nature and Melancholy*
notwithstanding though they be hard of digestion. marvelous hoate, yet they
will nourish the body, and makes it fat. Hippocrates saith, that they that be
fed in puddels, and foul places, be hurtful, but they that be fed in Houses,
Pens, or Coopes, are nutriue, but very gross, as Isaacke affirms. There
are sundry kinds of Ducks. Gesnerus de Auibus.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Pigeons, Turtles, or Doves?


Hilarius THe flesh of Turtles is marvelous good, and equal to the best
birds: and Auicen saith, Doves are very hot.
they be best when they be young, and wholesome for flegmatike people* Simeon
Sethi affirms, that the house Dove is hoater than the Field Dove, and doth
engender gross blood, the common eating of them is evil for choleric
persons with red faces, Of Doves.
for fear of Leprosy* therefore cut of the feet, wings, and head of your
Pigeons or Doves, for their blood is that, which is so venomous through heat:
they be best in the Spring time, and Harvest, and Isaack saith, because they
are so lightly converted into choler, they did command in the old time, that
they should be eaten with sharp Vinegar, Doves flesh. must be eaten with
Vinegar.
Purssen, Cucumbers* or Citros. Roosted Pigeons be best, the blood that comes
out of the right wing, dropped into ones eye, will soon help the eye, if it
swell, or prycke: and thus much have I spoken of Pigeons, or Doves.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Pecockes?


Hilarius. Peacocks flesh is hot moist in the first degree Gesnerus lib. 3
THE Peacock, his voice fears Serpents: Aristotle de natura any. and is hot
and moist, in the first degree. But Simeon Sethi saith, it is a raw flesh, and
hard of digestion, unless it be very fat, but if it be fat, it helps the
Pleurisie* Haliabas saith, that both Swans, Craines, Pecockes, and any great
fowls, must after they be killed, be hanged up by the necks, two or three
days, de Auibus.
with a stone weighing at their feet, as the weather will serve* and then dressed
and eat, provided that good wine be drunken after them. Their Eggs are
noisome to be eaten, Dioscorides.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Swans flesh?


Hilarius Every gross foul is Chollerike, and hard of digestion. Swans
flesh, choleric
The Swan is gross, therefore flow of digestion. But the Signets be better
than the old Swans, if there gal^ntines be well made, it helps to digest
their flesh The Swan is numbered among the unclean byrds, Leuiticus. xi. and
will singe a little before his death. Plinie Gesnerus de Auibus.


Marcellus. Swans sing.
What is the virtue of Her^nes, Bittures. and Shouelers.


Hilarius. THese fowls be Fishers, and be very raw and Flegmatike, Bitters*
Herons. Shouelers.
like unto the meat whereof they are fed, the young are best, and ought to be
eaten with Pepper, Cinnamon, Sugar. and Ginger, and it is good to drink Wine
after them, for good digestion: Such meat, such coplexio,
and thus do for all Water fowls,


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Partriches, Fesantes, Quayles, Larks,
Sparrows, Plouers, and Black birds?


Hilarius. PArtriches will bind the belly, and do nourish much, the Cocks be
better then the Hen Birds, Partridges
they do dry up fleume and corruption in the stomach. Fesantes be the best of
all Flesh, for their sweetness is equal unto the Capon or Partridge, Fesantes.
but they are somewhat dryer, and Rasis saith, Fesants flesh is good for them
that have the Fever Ethicke, for it is not only a meat, but a medecin,
Quails.
and doth cleanse corrupt humours in the stomach. Quayles although they be
eaten of many, yet they are not to be commended, for they do engender Agues,
and be evil for the falling sickness For as Conciliator saith, of al fowls
that be used for meates, a Quail is the worst, Dioscorides saith, Larks
roosted be wholesome to be eaten of them that be troubled with the Collike.
Black birds taken in the time of Frost be wholesome and good of digestion, The
dung of Black birds tempered with Vinegar, Larks hel^ the Colic. Black
birds Plouers Sparrows, Woodcockes* small Birds.
and applied to the place of any that hath the black Morphew, or black
Leprosy, oftentimes anointed with a Sponge doth help them. The flesh of
Plouers doth engender Melancholy. Sparrows be hoate and provoke Uenus, or
lust. Plinie doth descrybe their properties: the Brains be the best part of
them. Woodcockes be of good digestion, and temperate to feed upon. Al small
birds of the Field, as Robin Redbrest, Linnets, Finches, Red Sparrows,
Goldwinges, and such like: if they be fat, they be marvelous good, and do
greatly comfort nature, either roosted, or boiled: and thus I do conclude with
thee of birds: that the small field birds are most wholesome for sick folks:
Read Gesnerus lib. j* de Auibus.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Fishes.


Hilarius. IN many Lands of this World, placed near unto the Ocean seas, the
people live there most chyefly by Fysh, and be right strong and sound people
of complexion, for as Aristotle says, consuetudo est tanquam altera natura,
custom is like unto another nature: but because I speak of Fish, I will divide
them in three parts. Three things considered in fish.

Sea fish wholesome then yt of the fresh water.


First of the Fishes of the Sea. Secondly the Fish of the fresh running Rivers.
Thirdly of the Fishes in Pooles, and standing waters* The Sea hath many gross,
and fat Fyshes, which be noisome to the stomach, but the small kind of Fyshes,
that feed about R^cks, And clear stony places, be more dryer, and less of
moystnes than the fresh water Fish, and do engender less phlegm, and wynd, by
reason of their Salt feeding, as Galen saith: they be the best fyshes, that
feed in the pure Sea, and chyefest of all Fyshes, for the use of mankynd, and
Haliabas saith, new fysh lately taken, is cold and moyste, and flegmatike, then
the best of all next the sea fysh, is that which swims in fresh clear
Rivers or stony places, whereas the water is sweet, being fishes that bear
skales, these be marvelous good: but if they feed near unto places where
much filth is daily cast out, Muddy Fish not wholesome.
there the fishes be very corrupt, and vnholsome, as the said Haliabas saith.
Fyshe that feeds in Fens, Marshes, Ditches and muddy puddels, be very
vnholsome, Fish that have skales. be good, but fish without skales are not
wholesome.
and do corrupt the blood, they be gross and slymie, corrupt and wyndie: but
those that be fed in fair ponds, whereunto running Water may ensue. and
whereas sweet water, herbs, roots, and Weeds, that grow about the banks,
do feed the fish, those fyshes be wholesome* Galen saith, Fysh that is white
skaled and hard, as Perches, Breames, Cheuins, Roughs, Carpes, Roches, Troutes
c. be all good, but vnscaled Fyshes, as Eels, Ten^hes, Lampres, such like be
dangerous. unless they be well baked or roosted, and eaten with Pepper and
Ginger, and Vinegar. And note this, that it is not wholesome travailing, or
laboring, immediately after eating of Fish, for it doth greatly corrupt the
stomach, and as Galen saith the nourishments of Flesh are better, than the
nourishments of Fish: and thus much generally I have spoken of Fysh. Of the
natures of Fyshes, read Rondoletius* and Conradus Gesnerus de Piss*


Marcellus WHat, it seems by these words, that great Fishes, which be
devourers in the Sea, as Seal, Porpose, and such like, be vnholsome, and
that the small Fishes, as Cods, Whitynges Plaice, Smelts, Buttes-Soole, Pike,
Breme, Roche, Carpe and such as feed in clean stony Waters, thou say they
be very wholesome. Eels Lampers, and other muddy Fishes, thou doest not greatly
commend, There be also some kinds of Fish soft, and some hard, but which be
the best.


Hilarius IF Fysh be soft, the eldest Fysh is best: if Fish be hard, the
youngest Fish is best, Fish soft and hard.
for it is either soft or hard, of hard Fish take the smallest, of soft Fish
take the greatest: provided that your Fish be not very slimy, and thus saith
Auicen in his book of Fyshes.


Marcellus. What is the virtue of Shelfishes.


Hilarius. CRauises, and Crabs, be very good fyshes, the meat of them, doth
help the Lunges, Shell fyshes.
but they be hurtful for the bladder, yet they will engender seed. If Crabs
of the fresh water, be sodden in pure green Oil Olife: this Oil dropped into
the ear luke warm, doth heal burning obstructions, and stoppinge matter, For
deaf^es,
that hinders ye hearing. As for Lympetes, Cockels, Scallopes, as Galen saith,
they be hard of digestion. Muskels, and Oysters, would be well boiled, roasted,
or baked With Onions, wine, Butter, Sugar, Ginger, Pepper, or else they be wyndy,
Flegmatike: Oysters
cholorike stomachs may well digest raw Oysters, but they have cast many one
away, yet raw Oysters will cleanse the raynes.


Marcellus. What say you of Milk, Butter, and Cheese?


Hilarius. Women's Milk is the most gentle nutriment for yonge children, which
milk is of the decoction of pure blood, Milk of women is the best of al
Milkes.
by natural heat and drawn forth by the Nibles from the breasts or Paps,
this is the first food of mankynd: for like as bread is a blessing of God for
men, even so is Milk one of the great blessings, as appears in the promise
which god made to Israell. Without Milk, it is not possible to bring up man or
beast. The best milk is of women, and most temperate, for it preserves
against consumption. The second is Goats Milk, which doth norysh, and is
hoatter than womes. Milk of Goats.
Sheep Milk, is not so much noryshyng, and not pleasant to the stomach.
Young Cows milk is thicker, and full of Butter: Note also that iiii. things
must be considered in milk, the whiteness of colour, Milk of Kine Milk four
things considered in it.
the sweetness of savour, the pleasantnes of taste, the substance, neither
thick nor thin: it is good Milk, when a drop will stand whole upon your
thum nail, without shedding. There be three essences of Milk, Cheese, Butter,
and Why, the best milk is of the youngest and fattest Kine, or Goats, that be
fed in ye cleanest, dryest, and sweetest Pastures. whereas plenty of sweet
flowers are growing, and purest Clay or Chalk water, with wholesome layer. The
best time of milk, is in April, May, and June. The new Milk is most wholesome
for them to drink, which hath clean stomachs, to drink i^ with Sugar, as it
comes from the Cow three hours before al other meat or drink, and then it
will not coagulate nor crude in the stomach, but quench Choler. Moreover milk
is not only good to yonge children helthful people: but if it be sower, then
beware the stone in the raynes, Milk hurtful to whom.
and bladder through the same: and to them which have Fevers or headache, Milk
doth much harm, as Hippocrates saith Lac dare caput dolentibus, malum: malum
vero febricitantibus quibus hypochondria suspensa murmurant, siticulosis: malu
autem in febribus acutis, quibus biliosae sunt deiectiones, quibus sanguinis
multi deiectio facta est: conuenit autem tabidis, qui non multum febricitant in
febribus longis paruis si nullum ex supradictis signis affuerit c,

That is Milk saith he, is very unwholesome to such as have pains in their
heads, Hyppocrates of the hurt of Milk, and ye utility thereof
or that be sick of any Fever, and also to them which have any noise or wind
in the upper part of their belly called Hypochondria, that have choleric
decoctio in hot fever, or have lost much blood: notwithstanding milk is good
for such as have a consumption without a Fever, and may be given to them.
which have had Fevers long time, if none of the foresaid tokens do appear c.
And to conclude of milk, seeing oftentimes it is very evil, and will
through the couldenesse, and wind offend the whole Bodies of men, Milk is
a good thing in a common wealth.
what harm doth it than to Sickly personnes? howe be it, we se Milk is a
goodly staye in a common Wealth, and the feeders thereof are people of a good
temperament, or complexion, as in Wales, Suffolke, Essex, and in a place in the
Mountains in ye North called Alston More, Alston Moore in the North
whereas little* tillage is, but bringing up of Chattel: in this country the
people be al chiefly nourished with milk, little other drink they use, milk
excepted. This country was sometime the land of a worthy knight, called sir
Thomas, the Baron of Hylton, to whom I dedicated my little Book entitled the
Government of health, Sir Thomas the Baron Hylton his land.
promising in the same Book to set f^rth an other book, whereof the copy
perished with my Books, in shipwreck: and when I came to London to have
reuined my dead book, one William Hilton gentleman, brother to the said sir
Thomas Hilton, accused me of no less crime, William* Hilton let William
Bulleine to finish his book of healthful medecines
then of most cruel murder of his own brother, who dyed of a Fever (sent only
of God) among his own friends, fynishing his life in the christen faith. But
this William Hilton caused me to be arrained before that noble Prince, the
Dukes grace of Norffolke, for the same: to this end, to have had me dyed
shamefully: That with the covetous Ahab he might have through false witness, and
perjury, obtained by the counsel of Iezabell, a Vine yard, by the price of
blood. But it is written, Testis mendax peribit a false witness shall com to
nought, his wicked practise was wisely espied, his folly deryded, his bloody
purpose let, and fynallye I was with Justice delivered. Notwithstanding, yet
am I by the same William Hilto still molested and troubled as much as lies in
him, to shorten my days, by some means or accident, who with neither lawful
pollicye, nor false testimony, cold hitherto accomplish his wicked intent* Now
therefore blame me not my dear friend Marcellus, though this man be remembered in
my book hear of health, and preserving of life, saying I was sometime in his
book of a false indightment, conspyring my death This man hath let me, in
so much that I cannot run to the mark, that I did set before mine even,
therefore I must make a shorter course, fynishing with fewer things, trusting
not unprofitable for the common wealth: whose profit I do seek, and more
would have done, this his malicious facts excepted, whose malice doth the
less molest me, being a Stranger to him, saying he hath vexed a Lady,
which was his own Brothers Wife, whose shame, loss, yea and Blood he hath
sought: which Brothers Wife redeemed much of his Land from loss, A bloody
practice against ye lady Hilton.
in lendyng him a great Sum of Money. And when this man should thankfully
have repayed this lady her Money, then he gratified her, as he did me.

And so to conclude, you that are gentlemen, beware of shameful ingratitude,
whereas you have reaped commodity. For it is the most leprous sickness against
nature, to do evil for good, preferring a little lucre before honesty. worldly
worship, shame, and fynally, Gods wrath or vengeance, due for such wyckednes
against conscience, and nature. What a very gentelman is
For ingratitude doth degenerate mankynde, and transform him most monstruously,
into an evil vile nature, from gentleness, into Churlishnes. For like as
gentleness with virtues makes a very gentle man: although sometime obscurely
borne: so doth ingratitude, blemish, and defile them, which can bring nothing
else for themselves, but Pedigrees, lines, cotes. and standerdes, most anciently
descended, yet themselves void of al goodness. Thus I leave to molest thine ears
with him, who hath thus molested me, profitable to few, and noisome to
himself. A lover of few, a flatterer of many, a vessel of ignorance, full of
ingratitude, unnatural to his Children, if that he spoils in law, Cataplasme
for M. Hilton of Bidicke, of the Bishoprik of Duresme.
which should be their relief: thus I commend him to this Cataplasma, to his
mortified conscience. Faythles and fruitless he is.

Butter of nature is hot moist, hath virtue to mollify hard apostimatios yt are
above nature, as Galen saith: fresh Butter doth ripe, cleanse, warm ye inward
parts in meats, ointments or drynks. Fresh butter is good to anoint ye
swelling of Hypochondrion or belly, for ye Phlegmon Bubo. Further to cause young
children their teeth to grow, through the anointing of the place and it is
good to make annoyntment for the Pleuritici, And to be drunk in wine or Beer,
for the stopping of the lungs, Butter, Honey, Butter the virtue of it.
and bitter Almonds, be wholesome for to cleanse the breast, and being put in
suppositories, and Clysters, do mollify the belly. New Butter meanly salted,
is good with Bread, Flesh, and fysh. The old Butter changing with many colours,
is the worst, it is noisome to the stomach. Butter is good in the morning,
but not wholesome at night: yet Butter prevails against poysone in woudes, it
will purge, cleanse, and increase Flesh. When y^ Butter is first made, there is a
mylk coming from the same somewhat sharpe, sower, and cold, very wholesome to be
drunk in the morning or evening, Butter Milk called Char^n Milk is good
against hot burning choler: it opens the liver, cleseth the gaul,
provokes urine, causes, sleep and nourishes much if it be eaten with Sugar,
and new white bread.

Cheese which is a part of Milk of the grosser substance, Cheese fresh is
best.
through the coagulation or cruddes, being gathered and pressed together,
from ye moist why, the same cheese is finished: and if it be made of clean
milk and the Cream therewith, then it is beneficial to the stomach,
specially, if it be fresh and good it nourishes the flesh much, Green cheese
helps wounds.
and is good for green wounds to knit them, and will also quench heate, or
cleanse a spot in the eye, being laid thereon.xxiiii. hours. Cheese meanly
salted nourishes but little, by ye reason of the Salt. old Cheese stops the
flixe of the Belly, but it is hard to digest hurting the stomach, gaul,
raynes, Cheese old stops the flux, but bredeth the stone.
and will breed the stone in the bladder, and cause the increase of melancholy
with much coldenes and drynes Gal. lib. 4. alimentorum facult* commends the
Cheese of his own native country, because of the purenes of milk, and sweetness
of the Cheese, but in his x. lib. of Simples, he refuses Cheese for the
sowrenes. c. when stone pots be broken, what is better to glue them a gain or
make them fast, Sundry kinds of Cheese
nothing like the Syment made of Cheese. Know therefore that it will quickly
build a stone in a dry body, which is full of choler adust. And here in England
be divers kinds of Cheeses, Much good Butter little good cheese
as Suff. Essex, Banbury. c. according to their places and feeding of their
Cattle, time of the year, layre of their Kine, clenlines of their dayryes,
quantity of their Butter, for the more Butter, the worse cheese. And thus I
conclude of Cheese. like as the Welshmen love it roasted, even so do Flemminges
love Butter at al times, and of all makings refusing none, what colour soever
it hath, and from whence soever it comes, their stomachs are such.

Why the virtue thereof.
Why is the thinnest part of Milk. Why with Fumitory sodden in May, drunk cold
in the morning and Evening* hath virtue to scour, cleanse open the parts of
the body that are stopped, provokes vryne, and makes clean the Bladder, is
good to quench choler, helps the belly, asswageth thirst, yet it
inflames, and brings wynd to the guts but recocted or two times sodden
whaye, is the best why and will bring sleep, and also is good in Clisters, to
cool, scower, quench choler in the guts, or help the ^xcoriation in them,
made by bloody Flixe: Galen commends Whaye lib. x. simplicium medic. and
Mesue doth not a little praise the Why of black Goats, Gotes why
and how it is hot and dry in the first degree unto the second: this why is
good to be given to them which abound with much melancholy, or frensies, and
cleanses the water between the skin and the flesh, opens the Gaul,
mollifies the Spleen: in sharp acute Tertian Fevers, or stopping of the
vessels, with yellow choler, this why doth much help, to drink ye same,
nothing is better to be drunk against hot Leprosy tha why, it makes a clean
skin. Why is used in many decoctios, infusios, for lenitives to purge the
belly* and thus I do end of Whaye, which is a good drink in Summer in the
common wealth, whereas good dayries be, as in Suffolk, the best country of
Milk, as about Lethringham, Stratbrooke, Laxefield Keishal* c.

Eggs be commended of the most excellent Wryters, as Dioscorides, and Galen,
Eggs of Birds.
that they do excel al other nourshing meats, also are good in medecin Isaac
the Arabian, in his diates, doth praise Hens Eggs, for that* they be
pleasant to the mouth, and profitable to the Stomach and that they nourish
more then other meates, and are soonest turned into good blood, ef^soones into
seed of generation, specially Eggs that be new and white, but old Eggs be
most fylthy and noisome to the stomach. Furthermore Eggs have no part of the
Foul, saith Galen Simplic medi. but a portion of the thing fro whence they
come: Eggs three things in the.
Symeon Sethi saith.iii. things must be considered of Eggs, the first is the
substance cleannes of nature: the second is their age, either new or old: the
third is of the manner of their dressinge, as potching, see thing or rostinge.
Potched Eggs be wholesome to be supp^d up in the morning upon an empty
stomach. To cleanse the Lunges, breast the rayns: hard Eggs do bind: fried
Eggs be hurtful to the stomach: next in goodness unto them are the Eggs of
Fesantes, Partridges, the Eggs of small Birds of the wood, whose Eggs are
white, but ye Eggs water fowls, as Swans, Gees^, Ducks, with al their
kinds, be gross and not pleasant to nature, Eggs of great ^oules be not
good,
although good to strong stomached labourers. Doves Eggs, because of their
great heate, are more better for medecin then meat. Pecockes and Estrige eges,
be not good: of an evil nature and ennemy to mankynde: In food, Of Eggs
their virtue.
the yellow parts of Eggs be warm, and nourish the blood, and the white
of the Egg, is cold, and flegmatike. Galen doth commend the white of Eggs,
because they freat not, but cool: and therefore they are good for medecines for
the eyes, and ulcers and wounds of the head, and other places whereas blood
doth flow. Raw Eggs, with Oil of Roses beaten together, are good for Flegmon
in the Ears, breasts, Arms, Legs, or privy members. The white of an egg
the juice of Pomgranets: Vinegar, and the oil of water Lillies, Eggs for
^eepe.
are good beaten together, to annoynt the forehead, to cause sleep. Eggs
sodden in strong sharpe vinegar, until they be harde, eat them, and they will
stop the belly. Whytes of Eggs, the powder of the flowers of Pomgranetes,
Planten water, and Hypocistes, with oil of Roses, and Alume, For burning
beaten in a leaden Mortar, will heal a burning or scalding in the flesh,
covering the place with a Launde Clothe, and anointing the said Launde with
this ointment. Oil of Eggs is good to heal Serpigo the breaking or Crames of
the Lips, hands, scalding, burning, pains of the ears, stomach, Oil of
eggs
raynes, belly, and the privy members, which have great burning, fylthe. or
heate: and fynally, all the pains of the joints.

Of Eggs come all fowls, save Barnacles, which are engendered of the
marvelous work of Occean Sea: Read Gesnerus, of the nature of Fowls. The
horrible Serpent called the Cockat^ise, is bred in the Egg: so is the
Crocodile, and many more Serpents, and many fyshes of the sea, Eggs of
serpents.
and little Worms, as the Antes. And thus I do end of eggs, whose yolks or
reddes be first bread, within the Fowls body^s, as it doth appear when they be
killed, by the great plenty of the said yolks and no whytes, of which Yolks
the bird is bred. and nourished of the white: So is mankynde engendered, and
formed of one part, and nourished of an other, Read Hippocrates in libro de
natura pueri


Marcellus. What virtue is in Coagulo Leporis.


Hilarius. THree half penny weight, after the old weight of the Apoticaryes,
tempered in wine, Coagulun or the cr^ddes of young beasts* that suck
and drunk doth prevail against venom, or pricking of Serpents, bloody
flixes, pains of the matrix, after the time that the ^termes menstruall be
past: it helps conception, but to drink it, it will dry the Seed, and let
conception. Aristotle doth remember Coagulum lib. iij cap. 12. de historia
Anima* saying: it is the substance of Milk, of those beasts which chew the
cud, and suck of a curdye substance, as Calfe, Lamb. Kidd, c. And of
nature is sower and drying, and drunk with vinegar, it helps the falling
sickness as Galen afyrmeth lib. x. simplic. medic.


Marcellus. What say you of Sepum called Tallow, and Adeps, which is fat or the
grease of beasts and fowls. I pray you tel me?


Hilarius. FIrst of Tallow, understand that of nature it is warm, and therefore
it hath virtue to resolve, Tallow of male best are hotter the the female.
and make soft: and is used in sondry medecines, among the Surgeons.
Notwithstanding, you must understand, that one Beast bears more warmer
tallow than an other: the Male hotter the ye female As example, the Hart hotter
then the Hind: the Ram more warmer then the Ewe, c.

But for the fattes of beasts and byrds, they be al warm and moist: some
more, and some less, according to their ages, fatness, and natures, as example
following shortly said.

The fat or grease of ye Swans, Geese, Ducks, Bustardes. Hens and Capons,
being fresh, doth comfort the Matrixe, breasts, and joints, and are warm.
Gelded Swyn not salted is much like Oil, and moyste good against the
pleuresie, and used in many oyntmentes. Goats is harder than ye Swynes, is
also dryer, is good against the pains of ye great guts, in Clisters or
Suppositers Bears is warm, and melted with Laudanum, makes an ointment to
increase hair. Foxes, is good against cold and palseye, and pains of the
ears. Porpentine against baldnes, as the Bears grease is. Bulls and Calves
doth warm, and are good to bind and stop flixe, put in Clisters, ointments
c. Male beasts, hotter and dryer than the female. Lyons is most subtle and
hot of all fattes. Cattes hoate, and good, to annoynte Aches, and Goutes.
Seals or other Seafish, clarified with Honny will cleanse the iyen that are
dim Snails cleanses the iyen helps the Cares, and is wholesome for bone
ache. Vipers good to annoynt the dim sight, dropped into them, Young lusty
creatures, not salted and clean clarifyed, is best kept close. Ravening
beasts hotter then them, which eat Grass: the water Fowls, hoatter than the
land birds. Wolles called Oesypus, will resolve heat apostumations, and Struma
in the throat.



Marcellus. What say you of Mary, which in some place is called Marthe:
contained within the bones of Beasts.


Hilarius. IT hath power to mollify, and make hard things soft, and of nature
is hot and moist, as Galen saith. lib. xi. Simplicium medicamentorum. Example.

The Mary o^ Medulla of the Stag or Hart is the best of al beasts, to mollify
Muskles, ligamentes, tendons, and the guts. Calves or young Steers is next in
goodness, used in sondrye oyntmentes, and linimentes. Bull and Goats are very
warm, and good in pessaryes for women. Ox, is good for the stomach, and the
Lunges, and increases, seed of Generation. Fox, for the palsy, and
trembling of the memberss. Back bone of beasts is dryer than other Mary, and
unpleasant to the stomach, drunk with Aligante, it stops the whytes in
women.


Al these must be kept in clean vessels, a loft in a chamber, with Windows
towards the North. For the South wynd, or standing in vessels ne'er to ye
ground, will soon corrupt Maryes, except they be clarifyed upon the fire, To
preserve fat.
and preserved in clean close stone or Glass vessels.


Marcellus. What say you of the Gaules of beasts, or Fyshes?


Hilarius. THe Gaul is the most hottest and bytterest part of albeastes, the
place of Choler, and choler it self and dry, specially in hot Beasts, as
Lyons, wolves. Foxes, Dogs c, Gaules of Beasts.
more then of the other Beasts, which denied the hooves. Even so it is among
fowls, the crooked bylled birds, are hottest of al next them which feed upon
weeds or seeds, and the water Fowls, more then the field birds, as
Dioscori. affyrmeth- lib. iij. cap. lxxj. and are used in medecines as example.

The Gaul or fell of ye Scorpion of the Sea, the Sea Snail, or such like of
the Sea for sore even. White Cock, Capon, Hen, Fesant, Partridge, Dove,
against sore even, dropped into them. Crane, Osspray, for pains in the ears,
with oil of bitter Almondes dropped into them. Swan, Mallard, will kill
worms. Bull, Ox, Cow, Goat, Ram, good for wounds or swellynges, and to kyl
worms in the belly made in Plaster. Swyne, For ulcers in the ears. Bears, to
annoynt the heads and nosetrels, of them which have the falling sickness.


Also Gaules with Honny, and the juice of Rue, make a good oyntmente to annoynt
the belly, to kyl worms, and help the Collike, and are used in inward
medecines. There are stones found within the Gaules of Oxen Bulls, the powder
of them drunk, will cleanse the raynes and Bladder. As you may se, Matthiolus in
Comment. Dioscor.. lib. ij. cap. lxxj.


Marcellus. What say you of Brains


Hilarius. Brains are cold and moist of nature, of every beast or foul,
according to their kinds. Some not so moist as other, as you have had example,
of heat and cold beasts: and their brains are used in medecines. As example.

The brains of the Hare sodden or roasted are good to make young childrens
teeth to grow Hens, Capons, or Fesauntes, to be drunk in wine against
poison, saith, Dioscorides,. Wesel or Ferret, dried, and drunk in vyneger,
against the falling sickness. Swallow mingled with honey, against the dinnes of
the eyes. Sheep prepared, good to cause teeth to grow, mollifyeth
apostumations. Field birds costed are good to nourish the brain of man, when
it is weak. Calfe and Pig, not good for Flegmatike people.



Marcellus. What say you of Livers?


Hilarius. THe liver is the Nutrimental part, and the fountain of Blood, a
spongy matter, whereas the veins do begin, and is warm and moist according
to the nature of the animal or Beast, and is used in medicine. As example.

The Liver of ye Mad Dog, roasted and eaten, helps him which is bitten
with a mad dog, Goats being clean, do comfort the sight, applied raw or
distilled, and is eaten to help the falling sickness. Wolf with Liver wort
dried, makes a goodly powder, to help the liver and lunges. Fox, clean
washed and dried doth the same. Ass or Horse Broiled and Eaten against the
falling Sickness. Bore, both in meat and medecin, against the slinging and
biting of Serpents. More Hen or water Hen, against the stone, or gravel in
the raynes. Hen, Capons Chikens Partridge, Fesaunt, and al field birds doth
nourish and comfort nature.



Marcellus. What say you of the Horne^


Hilarius. NOt much, I assure you, although many things may be said thereof,
both for nature and property: I commend the discriptio to them, that covet to
be merry. Horns their nature.
And thus much will I say with Aristotle in lib. de natura Animalium, who saith:
al beasts wanting their upper teeth, have naturally horns, for their defense:
as we do see the Bull, the Hart. c. and they are good in medecines, as example.

The horne of Unicorn is most excellent, to be drunk against venom and
poison, and helps the yelow Iaundice. Hart rased and drunk against Collike,
or Iliacke, Iaudice, and the bloody flyxe. Goats makes good powder to cleanse
thee teethe, and stablish them, so doth ye Hearts horne. Bulls in powder,
drunk with wine, helps to heal the Hemeroydes burnt in powder. The
Elephants tooth will help the yelowe Iaundice, rased and drunk in Endiue
Water. Sondry monsters of the Sea, are good against poison,



Marcellus. What say you to the Hooves of Beasts?


Hilarius. THey are their natural Shoes, keeping stil^ their old fashion*
Hooves of Beasts
which God hath prepared for them. For neither horse nor Ox should be
profitable for mankynde, but for the Hove: without which he cold not go or
travel, or have any shoe made fast. They are also good for mankynd in,
medecin, as example.

The houes of ye Horses rased are drunk in wine, and good to help the falling
sycknes. Asses will do the same, and help the mother: burnt in perfume, sodden
in Oil, they will help Struma. Goats, with Vinegar and Laudanum, will increase
hair^ anointing the place. Any beast burned* the smoke thereof helps the
mother, and kills Gnats that trouble your chamber: Any Beast drunk in powder
makes women baren and fruitless. Mule, will retain most strong Poison, or
deadly venom. Them which are divided in two parts, are clean beasts. Leuit
Chap. xi.



Marcellus. What say you of Bones?


Hilarius. BOnes are the timber and strong posts which couple the body of every
living man, beast, fish, and foul together: without which we might not be
perfect. If any of the are broke, then are we lame. Thus bones be not only good
to nature when we are living: but ossa humana man bones are good in
medecin. As example.

The bones of Man beaten into powder do greatly dry moist humours and sores.
c. Lions strongly smitten together, will bring light fire and are most dry of
nature. Hogs beaten into powder, drunk, are good against falling sickness.
Hens burnt with Egshels, made in Powder, make a frettyng powder. Pigs are
good for writing Tables, and to kyl worms in the stomach, drunk in wormwood
wine. Many sea fyshes are wholesome in medecin against poison. Sepia or Cuttle,
cold and dry will cleanse the skin* and Even.



Marcellus. What say you of vryne.


Hilarius. IT is the Whaye of the blood, conueyghed by the raynes into the
bladder: hoate and dry of nature, very salt according to the complexion of
the body that makes it as Manne and Beast. Fowls Pysse not, for the moyster
is turned into Feathers. Aristotle de nature Animalium. vryne is used in
Medecin. As example.

The urine of ye Man is weakest, except gelded swyne, and is wholesome to be
drunk against venom. Young boy, to be distilled with Litarge of Mettle, a
water to wash against Leprosy, is made thereof. Mule, to wash hands and feet,
and against the gout and pains of the Joints. Goats or Camels, to be drunk
against the dropsy, or swelling of the belly. Boor, with oil of Wormwood, to
annoynt the belly and kill worms. Dogs will kyl wartes, and ryngwormes.
Urchyne, will corrode and fret, cleanse, and skower corrupted humours.



Marcellus. What say you of blood?


Hilarius. THe life of every living thing consists in the vital blood*
without which, the soul can not remain within the Body, and it is used often
times in medecin. As Example.

The blood of ye Geese, Ducks, and Kids is used in sondry Antidotaries.
Stock Doves, Turtle Doves, House Doves, and Partridges, is good for sore even,
and new wounds. Hare, for the stone, and bloody fly^e: Dere, for ye flix, or
terms immoderate running in women. Goats, which are fed with opening herbs
killed in June for the stone. Calfe fed so, for the same stone and also the
flix. Dragons is declared before. Swyne is cold blood: yet it is used in
puddings, but not commendable. Bears, and Bulls, are horrible, not good.
Sheep helps the Emeroides. Henes, Cocks Capons, stops blood, and wounds.
Ducks, kepeth a goodly colour long time: the Idolatoures did practice
therewith, dereyuynge the People at Hails, with a Blood which they called
holy.



Marcellus. What say you to the nature of ordure, the dung of Beasts?


Hilarius. ORdure or dung, is the corruption or fylthy excrement, which nature
expulceth to the earth by the office of the guts. without which no creature
should live, if the dung were still retained, in the said guts. and yet it is
good in sondry salves, plasters, medicines. As example. And they are hot and
dry of complexion, according to the nature of beasts,

The dung of Oxen and Kine, doth mitigate inflammation of wounds, and helps
stinging of Bees. Calves, sod with vinegar, helps Struma in ye throat, or
swelling of joints. Goats, doth resolve and make soft: a plaster thereof applied
to the Matrix forces the child to the birth. Horse or Mule, sod in wine,
strained and drunk helps ye Iaundice. Sheep sodden in vinegar and oil of
Roses, resolves, quenches and heals burning and scalding. Dogs fed with
bones, helps the bloody flixe, drunk in milk: with Honey, it helps Angina,
to anoint ye place of the throat withal. Mise doth cleanse, and with Honey
tempered together doth increase hair in oyntmentes for the head. Swyne,
cleanses, it stops blood in flowing wounds. Curlues drunk in wine, helps
ye falling sickness. Corocodisus of Nilus cleanses the skin, the best of this is
white. Man is best in medecin, although most abominable to the sense of
smelling: yet there is art to make oil for the Gout, swelling of the throat,
and to help Flegmon, of this ordoure of Mankynd, and a water to be drunk
against the Falling sickness, Stone, and the Water between the Flesh and
Skin. And finally to help evil complexion. Read. Gal. lib. x. Simplicium
medicamentorum, and Dioscorides. lib.ij. cap lxxiiij



Marcellus. What say you of the Scorpion* Frog, Mouse, Lasarde, Cantharides,
Horseleeche and earth worms?


Hilarius THe Scorpion is a cruel woorme, whose sting will prick to death,
Scorpion.
except the oil of Scorpions be gotten, which reconcileth the hurt, anointing
the place therewith. Also this oil is good to anoynte the raynes, to break the
stone, Frog
and provokes vryne.

The Frog sodden with Salt, and clean Oil, and so eaten, helps against all
venom of serpents Dioscorides. lib. ij. cap xxv

Mouse.
The Mouse being roasted, is good to be given to children, that peace their
bed, to help the. Further it will dry up the Some and spattle in their
mouths. There are sondry kinds of Mise Aristotles. lib. vi de Historia
animalium.

Lacert.
Lacerta with legs, a lunge tail, an earth Serpent. The head broken and
applied to any place on the body, whereas either prick or nail is fixed,
forth with it shall be drawn forth. This worm is much used of Chirurgens.

Cantharides are flies hot dry, and burning, of nature, and have power to
blister and make issue, Cantharid.
and draw forth water: there be that write in their books of Physic, howe
these flies may be drunk inwardly against the Dropsy and the stone, but I
dare not here commend the same, for fear of no small peril that might follow.

Horsleech.
Horseleeches are wholesome to draw forth foul blood, if they be put into a
hollow Reed, and one of their ends cut of, whereby the blood may run forth.

Snail.
Snails broken from the shells and sodden in white wine with Oil and Sug^r
are very wholesome, because they be hot moist for the straightness of the Lungs
and cold cough. Snails stamped with Comphory* and leven, will draw forth prycks
in the flesh.

Earthwormes
Earthwormes are hot of nature and of the is a precious ointment made to close
wounds, if they be sodden in Goose grease strained it is a good ointment for to
drop into a dull hearing ear, {per}ouring it into the contrary s^de. Earth
woormes stamped, are good for pained teeth. The Oil of woormes is greatly
commended for the comforting of the sinews, joints, veins and gout, Oil of
wormes^
they must be washed in white wine, and the Oils of Verbascum or Cowslops, of
roses, of Lyllies, of Dil. of Camomil, al sodden to geather, when it is cold,
put in your earth worms* stop your glass, let it stand xl. days in the
Sun, then strayn it, it will make an excellen^e oil against ache, Sciatica,
gout. c,

Read more of them Plini. lib xxx. cap ix. And thus I do end of Earthwoormes,
Earth the mother of every living creature.
which are the bowels of the ground or earth, which earth is cold, and dry of
nature, yet the mother of each living wyghte, fosters and gives food to
every creature, both sensible and insensible, and remains still, firm and
stable, and each creature hath his original spring, and first life upon the
earth: when they have run the race, some in pleasure and other some in
wretchedness, the earth doth devour them again at length and swallow them, as
though they had never ben: Generation falls into corruption
and thus is generation turned into corruption, as Aristotle affirms. But how
mighty is that Lord God, which with his blessed word did for our sakes make
the Earth to be our own free dwelling place during this our Mortal Life, to
what end, to abuse the same, as the old World did, for whose sakes he did
destroy all flesh, his small chosen people excepted? No forsooth, but to use
the Earth with diligent travel, in tillage, sowyng, cherishing herbs, plants,
grass. c. which be Gods gifts, both for our medicines and meat: not to
despise the sweet Creatures of God, Math, 6.
which spring in sundry times of the year, as flowers, fruicts, seeds,
barks, roots, with conning to be preserved for mans use, against the daily
danger of cruel sickness, which assalteth each man, Woman, and Child, through
the corruption of humours, and other evil accydentes of our Life. And for as
much as we can not make one flower, The prouydence of God.
neither can give to any of them his proper beautiful shape, virtue, or
savour, which Salomon, when he was flourishing in his regal estate, was not
comperable to any of these flowers for their excellent beauty: Psal. 103. Psal.
104. Iob. 26. Ier. 5. Gen. 3.
Therefore let us daily behold the Earth whereunto we must once come, and also
in the mean time, humbly laud and praise the high divine providence of the
almighty our Lord and God, who hath laid the foundations of the Earth, that it
should not move at any time, and hath covered it with the deep, like as with a
garment, the waters do stand between the Hills, yea he sends his Sprynges
to the ryuers, which run among the hills: all Beasts of the Field drink
thereof, and the wild Asses do quench their thyrst: besides them all the
fowls of the air have their habitation, and singe among the branches, and
he watreth the Lillies from the Clouds. The earth is filled with the Fruit
of his works: he brings forth Grass for the Cattle, and green herbs for
the service of Mankind, that he might bring food out of the earth, and Wine
that makes glad the heart of man, and Oil to make him a cheerful
countenance, bread to strengthen his heart withal. Wine Oil * bread, Gods
gifts.

The trees of the lord are full of sap.


The Trees of ye Lord are also full of sap, even the trees of Libanus which he
hath planted Therein the Birds do make their nestes: the Fur trees are a
dwelling for the Stork. The high Hills are a refuge for the wild Goats, and
so are the stony Rocks a refuge for the Conyes. He appoints the Moon for
certain seasons, and the Sun doth know his going down: he makes darkness,
that it may be Night, wherein all the beasts of the Forest do move. The Lyons
roaring after their pray do seek their meat at God, the Sun arises, and
then they get them away together, and lurk them close in the dens. Then man
arises, and goes forth to his work, labours until evening. O Lord how
manifold are thy works, in wisdom hast thou made them all. The Earth is full
of thy Riches: so is the great and wide Sea also, Psal. 92.
wherein are things innumerable both small and great Beasts: there sail the
Ships, and there are g^eate Whales, whom thou hast made to play therein: all
these creatures weight upon thee, that thou may give them, meat in due time:
when thou gyuest them, Esa. 27. Io li. xi. Psal. lxii.
they gather it, and when thou openest thy hand, they are filled with good
things: when thou hydest thy face, they are troubled, when thou take away
their breath, they dye, and they are turned again to their Dust. c.

Every thing turns to dust.
Lo here my dear brother Marcellus I do end simply of Simples, praying thee
in the mean time to take them in good part: weighing my present case,
disquietnes, and trouble. Good will ever was with me and shall be to my small
power, although leasour lacked, and time would not serve for the purpose:
Trouble hath so hindered me, that I am constrained, presently to stay.
but when it shall please God that we shall talk together again, I will make
amends for all faults escaped, GOD willing, who ever keep thee, thine own,
Hillarius. Moreover, behold two old friends approach at hand, the one is called
Soarenes, the other Chirurgerie. Let us hear what they will say, a little
while.


The end of the Simples.
A horned Still.
Bagpipe Still.
Two heads.
Pelican Still.
The little Glass


These stills are very good to desti, cleanse and rectify al waters

Walnut.
Satirion.
Wormwood.
Strabery.
Solanu the great nightshade.
Radish.
Cherie.
Hyssope.
Chickenweede.


Scabious.
Peach.
Lavender.
Endiue, or Southistell.
Onions.
Parietory.
Parsiley.
Plantein.
Pemroyall*


Rose.
Sage.
Chicorie.
Housleeke.
Alkakengi.
Tilia.


A.
AZarabaccha or wild Nardus. Fol. 1. Aspleno called Scolopendrion or Citrach.
Ibidem Absinthium called Wormwood. Fol. 2 Anisseedes. Ibidem Anagallus called
Chickenweede. 7. Apples. 13. Aloes of two kinds. 14 Agrimonie. 18 Apium called
Smalage. 22 Aron called Cookoprick. 24 Arthichoke called Scolimus or Cinara. 31
Asparagus. 36 Aconitum two kinds, Perdalianches, and Licoctonon. 42 Angelica
Angles flower, or radix sancti spiritus. 43 Aristolochia rotunda longa. 49
Apiastrum Mellissa or Balm. 51 Agaricum or Agaricke. 54 Amoniacum, of God
Ammon. 60 Assafoetida a stinking Gum. Ibidem. Amber Grice most sweet. 59
Acatia a fruit of a Thorne in Egypt. 61 Almondes sweet and bitter. 64 Agnus
Castus or Vitex. 68 Alum, or roche Alum. 69 Atramentum. 70 Alston more in the
North. 79
B.
Beats. Fol. 8 Betonie. Ibidem Beer, and Ale. 12 Barberies. 14 Buglosse. 16
Basil or Ozimum. Ibid. Burnet. Ibid. Bell Woodbynde called Smilax. 21 Barley,
called Hordium. 27 Beans. 28 Bardana the Bur. 36 Brakes, or Filix the Fern.
40 Botris a sweet herb of France. 4^ Basil wild called Ocimastrum. 48
Brionia la alba the running wild Uyne Fol. 49. Boras. 60 Bdellium. Ibid.
Balaustia the flowers of Pomegranate. 65 Bay, or Laurel. 67 Brimstone. 69
Barach. 76 Bay salt. 71 Bores flesh and Bakon. 74 Bear, and Badgar. 76 Black
bird. 78 Barnacle wondrous. 82 Bitter the bird. 78 Butter the virtue. 80
Brains of sundry kinds. 82 Byzahar the stone. 83 Bones of sundry kinds.
Ibidem Blood of sundry beasts. 84
C.
CAmomill. Fol. 7 Cucumers. 9 Cabage or Brassica, wortes. Ibidem Claret wine.
10 Cherries. 14 Capers, and Olyues. Ibidem Scabious. 16 Calamus Aromaticus. 17
Centaurium or fell terrae. 19 Campher^e called Symphitum. 24 Consolida minor
Daises. Ibidem Coriander. 25 Chelidon ye great or Chelidonion mega. 32
Collumbin. 32 Crosses or Nasturtium. 40 Crowfoote or Ranu^culus. 42 C^ocus or
Saffron. 45 Cartamus or wild Saffron. 45 Calamintes of the Mountain. 48 Clary
called Orminum. Ibidem Carawayes of Carintha. 51 Cartafilago. 52 Chicorie or
Sponsa solis. Ibidem Carrets the roots. 53 Cassia lignea a sweet wood. 55
Cassiafistula to purge. Ibidem Castanian the Chestnut. 6^ Cola^iuthida. Ibidem
Cutbert Blunt. 68 Clo^es* Ibidem Cucubes. 6^ Ceruse. Ibidem Ciperus. Ibidem
Cardamon. 67 Campher or Caphera. 68 Cadmia. 72 Corrall. 72 Calves flesh. 74
Cocks flesh. 81 Cheese fresh and salt. 80 Co^gulum leporis. c. 81
Cantharides the Fly. 84
D.
DRagons. Fol. 6 Dandelion. 10 La. 15 Diapentia ye great fine leaved
grass. 23 Dogs tongue or Cynoglossum. Ibid. Darnel. 31 Dayses called
Bellis. 37 Diers flowers called flos Tinctoris. 44 Docks the great called
Rumex. 47 Digitalis called fingers or Fox gloves: 48 Doronike a precious root
of Alexadria. 53 Dragons blood. 59 Diacridium called Diagridium. 61 Dates. 68
Ditten. Ducks flesh* 77 Doves flesh. Ibidem
E.
ENula Campana. Fol. 15 Elleborus Albus niger. 18 Ebulus or Waleworte^ 51
Epithymum. Ibidem. Eringium of the Sea. 54 Ebenus Wood. 56 Euphorbium. 60
F.
FEnell or Fincle. Fol. 6 Filipendula. Ibidem Fenum Grec^ Fenegreeke. 26 Flax
or Lint. Ibidem Felonweede, or S. Iames wort. 38 Flos t^nctoris for Diers. 45
Fox Gloves, called Digitalis. 47 Frankincense, or thus. 49 Filberd Nuts. 64
Fraxinus the Ash tree. 65 Figs. 66 French Soap. 64 Fumus terrae. 66 Fallow
Dear. 75 Fiber. 76 Fox. Ibidem Fesant. 78 Fish. 75 Fatness of beasts. 81
Frogs. 84
Garlic. Fol. 3 Groundsill. 9 Grapes. 14 Ginger. 17 Gallowgrasse or Hemp. 27
Giloflowers. 35 Gramen. 38 Goose foot. Ibidem Geucian. 41 Germander. 47 Goofe
grass. 50 Grummell. 52 Gum Sarcocolle. 59 Galbanum. 60 Glaucium. Ibide Gum
Arabic. Ibidem Gum Tragacanthe. 61 Gum Larix. Ibide Gaulles. 62 Gum of
Almondes. 68 Galauga. 66 Goats. 75 Geese. 77 Green Cheese. 79 Goats milk.
Ibidem.
H
Honey. Fol. 3 Hoppes. 7 Horehounde. Ibidem Hysope. 10 Helenium. 15 Henbane. 31
Humlocke. Ibidem Houslike. 35 Horse tail. 40 Hearts Horne. 43 Hermodactylus.
46 Hypocistis. 64 Haematiste. 73 Hernes. B. S. 78 Hippoglossum. 23 Hypericon.
16 Hemp. 26 Hilton of Bidick. 80
I.
IEnuper. 65 Ire^s. 67 Jet. 73 Ivy. Fol. 39
Iuery. 77
K.
Knotgrasse. 33
L.
LIllies. Fol. 6 Lattice. 10 Liuerworte. 19 Lunges, 1 L^gusticum. 22 Lupines.
30 Lions foot. 33 Lavender. 41 Lagopus. 43 Lyquerice. 53 Leaven. 66 Licium. 61
Litharge. 66 Lautus. 67 Lime. 70 Lead. Ibidem Lapis Lasulj. 72 Lapis Tutia. 73
Lapis Phrygius. 73 Lapis magnes. Ibidem Lambs woolle. 80
M.
MOuse Ear. Fol. 2 Mustard 8 Mintes. 10 Mellilote, 17 Mugworte. 18 Mallowes.
19 Marygolde. 25 Mandragora. 41 Misten, or Viscum. 50 Moss. 55 Mumia. 59
Mirobalans. 62 Mirtus. 63 Mulberry. 66 Minium. 70 Margarit. 72 Milk. B. C. 79
Maiden hair. 24 Masticke. R. F. B. S. 59 Mustela. 75
N
NEttles. Fol. 35 Nigilla Romana. 25 Napus the root. 52
O.
ONions. 5 Oil. 18 Orpin that lives so long. 38 Oak tree. 62 Ostpray the sea
Egle. 76 Oats. 31 Oil of Worms. Otter that lives by fish. 90
P.
Philitis or Hearts tongue. Fol. 1 Pursleyn or Portulace. 6 Plantein, or
Plantago, Lambs tongue. 7 Peas, or Beans. ^ Pears. 13 Peaches, or Persica.
Ibide Prunes. 14 Polipodie of the Oak. 16 Peneroyall, or Pulegium. 19 Poppy,
or Papauer. 25 Peas, or Pisum. 28 Pimpernell. 33 Paeonia, or Pionie. 36
Paunsis, or herba Trinitatis. 39 Paritarie. 45 Purge, or Spurge, called
Ricinus. 40 Psyllium, or fleaworte, 47 Pepper of the water. 49 Pellitorie, or
Sternumentaria. 50 Phylanthropos, that will hang upon (...) Apparel, called
Goose grass. Ibide Pastnippes, or Pastinaca. 53 Pixnaualis, or Pitch of the
Ship. 60 Pistaciae a kind of Nuts. 64 Populus, or Poppler tree. 65
Pomegranate, or Malum punicum. Ibide Pepper, or Piper. 67 Pearls, or Margarite
stones. 72 Pork, or Bakon. 74 Pigs. Ibidem Porpinti^e, or ^renaceus. 75
Peacock, their flesh. 77 Partriches, their flesh. 78 Pl^uers. Ibidem Playce
the fyshe. Ibidem
Q.
QUinces. Fol. 14 Quercula minor. 47 Quayles. 78 Quicksiluer. 69
R.
RIce. Fol. 8 Rue, or herb Grace. 9 Raysens. 14 Rosemary. 18 Russhes. 2^
Rocket gentill. 34 Rumex, called red Dock. 47 Rapes. 52 Roydes. Ibidem Radish
roots. 53 Rubarbe. 54 R^sine. 59 Rose. 69 Roche. 78
S.
SAge. Fol. 5 Sorrel. 7 Sauery. 8 Senecion, or Gronsell. 9 Scabious. 16
Spinach. Ibide Se^walle. 17 Senturion, 21 Smallage. 32 Simohitum, or Comfery.
24 Scilla* or Squilla, or the Sea onion. Ibi. S^a^esaker. 30 Solanum. Ibidem
Shepherds purse. 33 Sticados. 34 Serpentaria. 35 Stitcheworte. 37 Sauine.
Ibidem Scene Alexan. Ibide Spatula foetida. 38 Shepherds needle. 42 Saffron. 43
Sperma Coeti. 59 Storax. Ibide Stat^e. Ibide Stirax Calamite. 61 Sanders. 67
Sugar of the Cane. 68 Sulphur, called Brimstone. 69 Spodium. 70 Soap. Ibidem
Salt. 71 Spo^gia, the sea Spounge. 72 Sapbyrus. 73 Sparrows. 78 Shelfishe. 75
Sepum called Tallow. 86 Scorpion. 84
T
TAsill* ^brum veneris. Fol. 15 Time. 17 Triplegrasse. 32 Tartar of Wynelies.
59 Terra Sigillata. Ibide Turbit. 63 Tamarindes. Ibidem Tamariscus, or Tamarix.
Ibidem
V.
VIolettes. Fol. 6 Ueruen. 8 Ualerian^ 32 Verbalcum. 34 Vngula caballina, or
Tussilago. 51 Uerdigrease. 70 Uernishe. Ibidem
W.
Wormwood. Fol. 2 Water of Rivers. c. 11 Wine. 10 Woodbynde. 21 Wheat. 29
Wild water Pepper. 49 W^sell. 76 William Hilton. 79
A.
AZarabaccha, called Vulgago, hot, and dry in the third degre: provokes
urine, helps the Liver, and purges terms menstruall. c. Fol. 1 Azaron is
good against the Fever, Dropsy, and Frenzy. Ibidem Asplenum, is good for the
Spleen. Ibi. Absinthium, helps soar Ears, Eyes, Spleen, and the Dropsy. 2
Anisseedes opens the Raynes. Ibidem A good reamedy for the running of the
Raynes. Ibidem Against the bloody flixe. Ibide Against poison. 3 A medicine
for the Fistula. Ibidem An healthful drink for Summer. Ibid. An excellent
Pill, which helped. W. Bullein th'aurthour of this book, for the Reume. 5 A
medicine of Fenill for the Raynes, and Bladder. 6 An example of Pur^en. Ibidem
An encreaser of the seed of generation. 10 Against the biting of Dogs* and
Serpents. 9 A glass^ for a drunkard. 11 Ale* and Beer. 12 Ashes made of
wild Pear tree they^ virtue. 13 Apples their virtues. 14 A medicine for the
small pockes. Ibide Against stinking Breath. Ibidem Against drunkenness. 14
Against hot choler. Ibidem Against the Pestilence. Ibidem A cause of the
Emeroydes. 15 A marvelous work of La. Ib. A pained Stomach. 18 A
present help to be delivered of a dead Child. Ibidem A medicine for Women's
breasts. 20 Althos, doth signef^e medicine. Ibide A good Gargarisme to wash^
the Throat Fol. 23 Against poison. 25 A good Medicine for soar Eyes. Ibidem A
quick Medicine for a sta^e Ruffen. 27 Against hot inflammation, or swelling of
ye body. 28 A more larger description of Beams, and Peas. Ibide A knavish
practice of Inholders, their Hostlers. Ibidem A Horse is a good seruaunt. 29 A
plaster for a bruised body. 30 A plaster to bring forth a dead child. Ibi. A
good Medicine for the Stone, and Ray^es, Ibidem An hea^be venom, called
Henbane, or Altercum. 3^ Against the Pestilence. 34 Asparagus hath many Virtues
as to increase the seed. c. 36 A good Medicine for the falling Sickness.
Ibidem An alligory of an herb, an old Supersticion, invented by Witches, a
practice of Satan. 39 Angelica defends poison, and preserves chasticy. 43
Against drunkenness. Saff^on doth help. 44 Against poison. Ibide Against the
pestilence. 45 A good note of the nature of herbs. 47 Against evil fight,
Sauery prevails. Fol. 48. Aristolochia helps Cankers. 49 A very good
medicine for the Ulcer of the Yard. 52 A p^aster for the Liver, or Goule.
Ibidem A good wound herb^. Ibidem An excellent infusion of Leonellus
^auentinus to cleanse the blood. 54 Agaricke cleanses the guts* and expulseth
raw humours. Ibidem Agaricke helps the falling Syckenesse. Ibidem Agaricke
purges all the Organes of the Senses, 55 A precious Water with Synamon, and
Cassia. Ibide Amber greece of three kinds. 56 A good Pomeamber against
coldenesse of the Brain. Ibide A Witches blessing for saynct Anthonies fire.
57 A good plaster for a soar skabben ^ate. 60 Ammomacum comes from the Oracle
of God Ammon. Ibide Assafoetida doth stink, yet it helps the Mother, and
Lunges. Ibidem Acatia stops the bloody flixe. 6^
B.
Biting of a Snake. Fol. 3 Bees be an example unto us, both of love, and
working in the common wealth. Ibide Bies maintain no Strangers, for they be
not profitable. 4 Bread of a day old. 13 Black Friars Pears in Norwiche.
Ibid. Beans in the old Time, were used for Lots. 28 Bistort hath a crupled
root, lying wrinkled like a Serpent, but the Female root is black without,
red within, a great knot in the end. 35 Brake Seeds were n^uer seen among
christian people, but Witches hath used practice with them as foolish Wryters
affirm. 40 Bitter herbs be hot and dry. 48 Brionia la alba, or the wild
running Uyne. 49 Brionia defends poison. Ibide Brionia increases milk. 50
Epi^hymum, and Gassutha h^lpeth ye Liver, Gaul, and Splen^. 5^ Beware of the
new dyate, except you have two lives, or else a wise minister of the same. 58
Bitumen of the dead Sea. 59 Balaustia the flower of Pomegranate: which will stop a
flixe, 65 Bath springes come from a vein of Brimstone 69 Burnt lead good for
Surgeons. 70 Boys can kill the strongest men with gunnes. 72 Bizabar a
precious stone against poysone the bloody flixe. 73 Beef, not good for the
Choleric, but for tender stomachs. 74 Beef broth against the flixe. Ibidem
Bear and Badgard have virtue in medecin. 76 Bear, Fox, and Broke, are good
to help the palsy Ibidem Butter, the virtue of it. 80
C
Coughs how to help it, 3 Corrupt fleume, to help it. Ibidem Cold coughs, to
help it, ^ Coloquintida is perilous, 63 Comfort against hot choler in the
stomach. 10 Claret wine warms the body. 10 Capers Olives: good for the
spleen. 14 Couslippes, or Pagles. 34 Crosses help the palsy. 40 Crosses do
help many infirmities. Ibid. Cartamus cleanses humours. 45 Clarie good for
women. 48 Cassiafistula comes from Egypt. 55 Cassiafistula hath many virtues
to help mankind, it cannot be for borne among us Ibidem, Covetousness and
money, doth make blind both Divines, Lawers and Phisicions, and transform them
from the Natures of men, into infernal monsters, 58 Cubebes have goodly virtue
against melacholie. 66 Ceruse cools inflamed sores, 66 Cardamon helps the
falling sickness, 67 Caphur called Camphora, of a great Tree in Inde. 68
Camphor will quench nature. Ibidem. Coral grows in the Sea. 72 Coral of
two kinds. Ibidem Calves flesh, the profit thereof. 74 Celsus for a vomit.
Ibidem Castor stones do help all cold infirmities, both in men and women. 76
Cranes are ^oat, and increase seed. 77 Dioscorides was an Heathen man, yet was
he most cunning in the natures of Simples. 23 Drink but two dragmes of night
shade in Wine. 30 Doronicus helps digestion. 53 Dates good for nature, 67
Ducks flesh is very hoate, and corrupted and vnholsome flesh. 76 Doves flesh
nourishes cold folks, and is very hot it self. Ibidem Diverse opinions, how
Ambergrice is found. 56 Dragons blood is very good to stop the bloody flixe.
62 Doctor William Turner, found the very Tamarix in Germanie, which is best
for the Spleen. 63
E
Epithimum Cassia help the gaul. 51 Edwards, a foolish Empiric, had almost
killed Cuthbert Blunt, with Elleborus albus, at Newcastle. 64 Eggs of birds,
three special things considered in them 80 Eggs of great fowls, are noisome
to the stomach. Ibidem Eggs their whites help the even and quench heate.
Ibidem Eringium maris, to increase seed. 44 Earth is the mother of every
thing, and into earth each creature shall return. 84 Earth worms are very
wholesome for Mankind, so is their oil. Ibidem Every thing shall turn to Dust
in the end. 85
F
For to help the biting of a Dog. 6 For the brain and heart a good medicine.
16 For the Stomach, Liver, and the Spleen a good medicine: 17 Fragaria hath
virtue to cool. 23 Fragaria hath virtue to cool. 23 For to help the
Emeroydes. Ibide From eating of beans, what Pithagoras meant* 28 For coddes,
when they are swelled a remedy. Ibidem For green wounds, use Ualerian to heal
them, 32 For to help the swelling of the throat. Ibidem. For sore even to
help them. Ibidem Flegmon is an appostumacion, gathered of corrupted blood into
one place. 46 Framingham, Nettlestede, and Lethringham, ancient parks. 50 For
pains of the head coming of heat, a remedy. 47 From whence Rhabarbe doth
come. 54 Filverdes are good after meat, also for moist reumes. 64 Figs are
both meat and medecin. 66
G
Garlic will provoke vryne, but it is not good for Choleric persons. 3 Green
sickness. 5 Guaicum is of greater virtue than ye Bath or Bukstones well against
the nosegay of Naples. 12 Good for the shortness of wind. 6 Goodly syrupe to
cleanse the Stomach is made of Squilla. 24 Gose foot is a perilous herb. 38
Genesis.xxx. doth not prove that Mandrake helps conception. 4 Great Spurge or
Ricinus makes strong vomittes. 45 Goodly are the virtues of Rapes. 55
Galbanum is a Gum of great virtue to bring forth a dead child. 60 Gaules do
grow like Acornes, and have virtue to stop flixes. 62 Guaicum will cleanse the
eyes 63 Gum Arabike will restrain the flix, and wounds. 60 Glewe will heal
wounds. Ibidem Gum Larix is equal with the best Terebintyne. 61 Gold the
most vndefyl^d mettle is good for Cordials. 75 Generation comes again into
corruption. 88. Gilloflowers are good for the hart and help wounds. 35 Goose
flesh breads Melancholy. 77
H
How to correct Elleborus albus that it shall not hurt. 18 Honey is not good for
hot people, for it will turn most soonest into Choler. 3 Honey is an heavenly
dew. Ibidem Hair how to preserve it. 6 Hydropiper may be used in the place of
pepper. 49* How to know good Agarike. 54 How to use Radish roots. 55. Hemp
will kill worms in the belly and destroy seed of Generation. 27
I
IF Harp strings were of one degree* unpleasant were that harmony. 20
L.
Leekes. 6 Lethe, a flood, whose water did cause men to forget them selves when
they drink of it. 1^ Lungworte so called, because it is like the lunges of man.
20 Liguria, is a part of Itali from the Hill Apeninus unto the Tuscan Sea. 22.
Lavender the sweet virtue thereof, holsom for cold folks: 41 Lavender ^ealeth
the sinews, Ibidem Lunaria heals wounds. 43 Lysimachus, stops blood,
Lysimachus a king of Macedonia, found this herb, when he was scholar to
Calistenes. one of Alexanders worthy captains. 43 Lathiris or Cataputia minor
or the less Spurge 45. Lithargus helped with herbs, hot dry in the third
degree. 51. Liquorice helps the kings evil. 53 Lignum Aloes called
Agallocum, which is Aromatike. 55 Lignum aloes comes not from Paradise, as
fools affirm, but from Mo^del, a city of Inde. Ibidem Laudanu doth help the
hair from falling saith Paulus. 61 Licium comes from Lici^. 6^ Leven
dissolveth hard things, and makes them soft. 66 Laurus called the Bay,
against ye stone. 67 Lead will cool and help sores. 70 Lapis naxius helps
to increase hair. 73 Lambs flesh is good roasted, evil sodden. 75 La^kes help
the Colic, black birds, Plouers, Sparrows, Woodcockes, small Birds. 78
Lime helps rotten sores. 70 Livers of Beasts. 32
M
Monseare is good for the falling sickness. 2 Monseare helps the throat.
Ibidem Michell ye Surgeon of New castle. Ibid. Master Roger Straunges
medicine brought from Uenice, written by a Learned Italian Doctor, for running
of the raynes. 13 Marks of strypes in the skin* 15 Mercurie helps
conception. 19 Master Luke of London. 26 Many good Medicines made of Hemp
Seed. Ibidem Meal and Wax, hath made great Merchant at Rome. 29 Many good
Medicines made of House ^eke. 35 Mandrake is much like a man, or a Woman by
craft, for nature gives no mans shape to a beast, mu^ch less to an herb. 41
Mandrake was called Circaeu, and also Anthropomorphos. 42 Madder with red
roots, against the Pestilence. 47 Many good virtues of Germader. Ibidem Many
good virtues of Aristolochia, longa rotunda. 49 Mis^en heals many perilous
sores. 50 Missel^owe or M^s^en, will make a good ripyng plaster, to heal the
corns in the feet. Ibidem Misseltow is not natural in kind but a bastard
branch, growing upon some other tree. 51 Misseltow is like to a stranger,
that increases and flourishes by the ^urt loss of a ^ree borne man, of his
own natural Country or City. 51 Man nature subject to many Evils, for
want of perfect temperament. 57 March and April are the best times to heal the
Pox. 58 Myrrh preserves the Body from putrefaction or rottyng. 59 Mirtes
have virtue to restrain 63 Manna of the Ash trees in Italie. 68 Medicines
made of the Osspraie. 76 M^ddie fish not wholesome. 78
N
Nettle seeds will serve in the place of Pepper. 35 Note that the black Thistle
root with Swines Grease and Brimstone, will heal Scabs and itch. 44 Note,
Quid pro quo, was given to ye Lord Wharton in his potage of ignorance, to his
great peril of Life. 45 Nutmegge, or Musk nut, hath many singular virtues
against cold. 64 Nutmegs, not good for hot complexioned men. 65
O
Onions provoke sleep. 5 Oil of Olives best. 17 Old sores. 18 Oil of Roses,
Ibidem Old Rushes, and old Courtiers be past pleasure. 21 Of the healing
comfortable Herb so named: 24 Of Popie wild and tame. 25 Otes do cleanse the
Lunges* 29 Orpin heals the Morphue. 38 Oil of Spike doth warm. 41 Of sundry
kinds of Crowfoote called Ranunculi, or little Frogs grass. 42 Of the
little Beast called Chameleon. 44 Of Rumex the Dock, called Monks Rubarbe, or
bastard Mercurie. 47 Of the great Dock, how it purges. Ibid. Of the herb
called Atriplex, or Arige. Ibid. Orthopnaea is difficulty of Wind. 48 Of the
wood of Life called Guaicum. 57 Oppoponax doth resolve. 61 Oil of Roses for
the head. 69 Of the flesh of Oxen, Steers, Bulls and Calves. 74 Ox gaul
cleanses the eyes. Ibidem Ox milte stops the flixe. Ibidem Osspraies oil,
good to put in water, to gather fish ready to be taken. 76 Of house Cocks,
Capons, Chickens, their flesh much commended. 77 Of Dragons, which helps
against the pestilence. 6
P
Poverty is better among the common people, than abundance of riches. 20
Perilous practicioners be here described. 26 P^san made of Barley, will quech
choler. 27 Pichagoras said this Faba abstineto that is abstain from Beaues,
Plinie and Tullie say, because of the ingendryng of gross humours, he forbad
them. 28 Plutarcus saith, it was to beware, to be in office in a common
wealth, because it is so perilous. Ibidem Peas came first from Piso in
Greece. Ibid. Pe^se gr^wi^g on the own accord, without Sowing, where no Earth
but Stones b^. 29 Plenty of Otes in North humberlad. Ibid. Pimpinella is good
against ye Pestilece. 33 Poor men's Pepper. 35 Paeonia is called the chaste
herbe^ 36 Paralises, or Palsy. 37 Persicaria, or Peach leaves, growing in
marrice ground. 40 Parietarie that grows upon Stone Walls. 45 Perfect
hearts rest, and true quietness of mind. 46 Psyllium called Fleewort. 47
Purple fingers. 48 Pellitorie hath virtue to help the teeth. 50 Pellitorie will
take away a cold Fever. ibi Ph^lanthropos, Aper^ne, commonly called Gosegrasse,
and Hareweade. Ibidem Pistacia, a nut of Siria, or Italia 62 Pepper
dissolveth, and consumes moyste humours. 67 Pyrites lapis, against proud
flesh. 73 Pork the commendation thereof. 74 Pigs. Ibidem Peacocks flesh is
hot and moyste in the first degree. 77
Q
QUinces are wholesome. ^4 Quinces raw hurt. Ibidem Quercula minor, the little
Oak, or Germader. 47 Quails vnholsome. 78 Quicksiluer or Mercurie. 69
R
Raw herbs. 9 Red wine corrupts blood. 10 Rotten sores helped. 36 Bellises
of Iarrow in the Bishopricke of Durisme. 37 Roida heals the head. ^ Rose
water and white wine, for all ho^te causes. 5^ R^ach a Heathen King, found
first Camphor. 68
S
SOre ears to help them. 2 Serpigo to help it. 3 Sweet breathes. 6 Stinking
fleume, 7 S^oppyng of the liver. 8 Sow Thistle the virtue. 10 Sroppyng of
vomits. Ibidem Sickness in the Lunges. Ibidem Salt water heals scabs. 11
Sodden bread not wholesome. 1^ Sarfettes of Ale and Be^r^. 12 Swellynges to help
them. 14 Sweet Prunes be laxative, but tart be binding. Ibidem Scabious for
scabs, it takes the name of the property, the right name is S^oebe or
Psora, there be two kinds of it. 60 Seed augmented. 70 Sweet Calamus
odoratus. Ibidem Sir Thomas Rush Knight. 20 Sundry names of Woodbinde, as
Periclimenon, because it wyndeth about the next ^rees and bushes, that it
grows unto. 21 Satyrus is a beast, having a head like a man, and body like a
Goat, and these are named Gods of the Woods, and they first found this herb
of U^nus, to stir up carnal lust. Ibidem Sanicle heals wounds. 23 Sanicle
is good for horse and kyen. Ibid. Staphis Agria Pedicularis, a seed that will
kill Lice in Children, Hawk. 30 Solanum, Nyghtshade, or the sleepynge D^ale.
Ibidem Swallow dung will make blind, example of Tobias. 32 Sheperdes purse, to
stop blood. 33 Stica^os good for the spleen. 34 Scalding and burning helped.
36 Stichwort will heal the stone, and heal wounds. 37 Sauen of two kinds.
Ibidem Scene helps the head, with all the senses. 38 Sir Richard Ally, his
pocion, Mathiolus uses the same in Dioscoridem. Ibidem Saintie Iames woort,
called Felon weed. 38 Spatula will kill Lice. Ibidem Sweet Botris. 41
Saffron hath many virtues. 44 Sundry kinds of Spurge, but yet very perilous,
the great Spurge and the second excepted, for they be good. 46 Shift water
oftentimes, when Atriplex is sodden. 47 Saueri^ the virtue. 48 Sweet Musk is
pleasant. 55 Sweet things be good for Mankynde, but yet abused of ^outhfull
wantons, are not to be suffered in them Ibidem Sweet Gloves their profit. 6
Scepters for kings, and the Heathen Idols of E^enus. Ibidem Sagapen, or
Serapinum, a goodly gum. 60 Sagapen will help the Lunges, and Spleen. Ibidem
Scammonie is perilous, except it be first prepared. 62 Suber the Cork, will
stop Blood and flixe. Ibidem Sinamon. 65 Sebesten will help struma. 66
Sanders do cool the head, and reconcyle sleep, and help the Gout, 67 Sugar
the Cane. 68 Spycknard of Spayn helps ye brain. Ibid Sundry opinions of
Camphor. Ibidem Sulphur, or Brimstone. 69 Sundry kinds of Roses, all of great
virtue. Ibidem Smigma, or Soap. 70 Soap will kyl Tetters, Ibidem Spodium
stops blood. 71 Salt, what it is in virtue. Ibidem Salt hath virtue to warm
and dry. Ibid. Salt not good for lean persons. Ibidem Sir Ihon Delauall, a
good knight. 71 Sal Gemmae. Ibidem Sal Ammoniac. Ibidem Sal Ammoniac. doth
cleanse the skin. 76 Salt of Inde. Ibidem Sal niter, or Peter, for gun powder.
Ibidem Spuma nitri or Barach. Ibidem Salt of Mare mortuum, where as Sodome was.
Ibidem Spuma maris. 72 Spuma maris doth make clean ye teeth ibi. Sponge of the
sea. Ibidem Sponge good for wounds. Ibidem Spunges new are good, but old are
eu^l. ibi. Sponge stones do break the stone in the raynes. Ibidem Saphyrus
resists poison. 73 Swines blood. 74 Swine of Inde have horns. Ibidem Swans
flesh cholerik^. 78 Swans s^nge. Ibidem Such meat, such complexion. Ibidem
Sea fish holsomer, than that of the fresh water. 78 Shell fishes. 79 Sundry
kinds of Cheese. 80 Stones of the Ox bladder. 82 Scorpion breaks the stone.
84 Sna^les help a^he. Ibidem
T.
THe Arabians call that Nill, which we name Viscum, or Misseltow. 1 The
splenaticke love. Ibidem To increase hair. 3 To cure Serpigo. Ibidem To cleanse
the face. Ibidem The property of a good huswyfe. 4 The king of Bees, and his
army. Ibidem The juice of Sage, helps conception. An Example. 5 To stop blood
running at ye mouth how, ibi. To kill the Canker, and quench Robin good fellows
Fever. 5 To cleanse the stomach. Ibidem To break the stone. 6 To wash feet,
Ibidem Two kinds of Fenell. Ibidem To help a moist reume* 7 To help the
sight. 8 To help the kings evil. Ibidem To make fat. Ibidem. To kill worms,
Ibidem To gargarise the head. Ibidem To help the eyes. 9 To provoke vryne.
Ibidem To cleanse Leprosy. Ibidem To increase m^lke. 10 To abate the lust.
Ibidem To kill worms. Ibidem To help the chollike. Ibidem To make sweet
Breath. Ibidem To purge the head. Ibidem To lose the belly. Ibidem To help the
sple^ Ibidem The goodly virtues of common water. 11 The cause ^hy Nilus doth
flow. Ibidem The cause of Barnacles* 12 The cause of Crystal. Ibidem The
effects of the ba^hes at the town of Bathe Ibidem The dead sea. Ibidem The
mean b^ked bread the best. 13 The operation of Pears Ibidem The operation of
Ap^es. Ibidem The operation of Peaches, Ibidem The operation of Quinces. 14.
The operation of Cherries Ibidem To comfort digestion. Ibidem Two kinds of
Al^es, Ibidem To help watery eyes, Ibidem To cleanse choler and f^ume, 15 To
comfort the heart. 16 The property of Vinegar. Ibidem To help the Gout. 17
Theophrastus of Setwall. Ibidem To help the spleen. Ibidem Time can not be
called again. 17 To wast wind in the body. Ibidem To digest cold herbs. 18
The brain comforted. Ibidem To neese, Ibidem The ^elle Woodbinde, Smylax. 19
The virtue of Smalage, Louage, Alexander, Perselle, is to open ^ places, which
stop Urine, and wind. 20 The virtues of Perselies. Ibidem To heal a bruise
or a fall. 24 To heal Ringwormes, and Te^ters. 25 To mo^ swea^e. Ibidem The
virtue of Lint oil. 26 The misery of unthrifts seems pleasant. but shame
and pain is the end. Ibidem The innocent sometime dies in the eyes of men,
miserable. 27 The consideration of Hemp in Physic. ibi To help the Lung^s*
Ibidem The bread and drink of the poor, be the life of the needy: and he
that take it away from them, is as a murderer. Ibidem The ol^e Romaines were
more humble than the new Romains, and late Popes, in keeping names of base
titles. 28 The time ^f Cicero. Ibidem The best Peas potage. Ibidem Ta^e^.
Ibidem Triticum, Wheat* or out bread. 29 To feed on Bran, makes a man leave,
but flower brings fatness. Ibidem The very Divines and Dunsmen did never
agree generally. Ibidem The sundry kinds and Natures of Wheat. Ibidem To kill
Worms with Lupines. 30 Three kinds of Henbane. 31 The white Henbane is used
in medicine. 31 The most cold herb, and a poison. Ibidem The death of Socrates
was with Wine, and the juice of Humlocke. Ibidem To help him which hath drunk
Humlocke. Ibidem Two kinds of Triple grass. 32 Triple grass hath many
virtues, and excells against poison. Ibidem To heal wounds and sores. 33
Tormentill doth grow, and diminish wych the Vine. 34 Tormentil kepeth sheep
from the rot. ibi To make the urine sweet. 36 To cleanse the Morphew. 38 To
kill Lice. 39 To heal wounds. Ibidem To gather Ivy Gum. Ibidem To draw teeth
without payne. Ibidem To kill broad worms, in the Chest or belly. 40 The d^ad
Nettle, Ibidem To help the flixe. 41 To help t^e Guts. Ibidem To stop the
terms of Women. Ibidem This place proves not, that Mandrake will help
conception, but Mandrake will cleanse the Matrix, or cast forth the dead child
from the same; also it will kill the living seed. 42 The virtues of Mandrake,
is to make one sleep. Ibidem To poison wolves and Foxes. Ibidem The best
Saffron of this World, where it is. 44 The sea Thistle, called Eringus, which
is so called, because if the Root^ be sodden, and conserved with Honey and
cloves, it will preserve Nature, or lift ^ym up, which is decayed, it may come
of erigo, gis, eroxi, to lift up, or repair. Ibidem The Bore or carl Thistle,
called Chamelaeon. 44 The Thistle heals the Pestilence. Ibid. To vomit. 45
Tithimalus Charatias, or Lathyris is good in medicine, to purge Melancholy,
choler, and Fleume. 46 The greatest Treasure of this World is a quiet mind.
Ibidem They which call Rumex with the Golden Sand Mercurie, do greatly err.
47 The Kings Evil. Ibidem To dye the hair. Ibidem To cleanse the stomach. 48
The oil of Calamintes, doth warm the body, and is good against ye Sciatica.
ibi. To heal sores with Brionia. 49 To cleanse the Face with Brionia. Ibidem To
cause urine to pass plentifully. 52 The difference between Rubarbe, and
Rapontike. 54 The cruelty of the Barbarians, is to burn the Spice trees and
plants. Ibidem To comfort the spirits. 55 The Beast, which gives Musk is
like a Goat: that which brings zinet, is like a Cat. Ibidem The blaunching
of Musk. Ibidem Two Witches in Suffolke, charmed with Ebenie Beads. 56 The
pox of France. 57 Three kinds of Guaicum, but the white is most excellent.
Ibidem The consideration of Guaicum. Ibidem Three most notable and best
Instruments of the common wealth the Deuyne, the Lawer, and the Phisicion. 58
The most excellent and best manner to sees Guaicum in composicions, with other
Simples, to cleanse the Pox, from all the members of the body. 59 The Dia^e for
the Pox* shortly declared. Ibidem Tartar, made of Wine Lies. Ibidem Terra
sigillata stops blood. Ibidem Thus called Frankincense, or Olibanu. ibid To
cleanse Galbanom. 60 To help the pricking of sinews. Ibidem Three glewes, that
is of Beasts skins of fish, and of Cor^e. Ibidem Terebinthus, or
Terebintine, hath great virtue to heal. 61 The virtue of Terebintine. Ibidem
The evil craft of subtle Apothicaries, doth mu^ch harm. Ibidem To know good
Diagridion. Ibidem To seem young, how to do it. 62 To purge tender persons.
Ibidem To cleanse sore ey^n. Ibidem The Que^e, or Oak tree, will stop the
bloody flixe, or blood, so will the Bark, Akorns, or Leaves, with ye cups.
Ibid. The Beech tree with ^is fru^cte, will stop flixes. Ibidem To stop the
flixe, called Dysenteria, and Tenasmus with Mirtes. 63 To kill worms in the
belly, with Coloquintida. Ibidem To help the teeth, with Coloquintida. ibi
Turpit, which purges phlegm. Ibidem Tamarinds, or Tamardactylis. Ibidem To
help Emeroides. Ibidem Tamariscus is a little tree like Quyckbene. Ibidem
Tamarix doth help the Spleen. Ibidem Tamarix against the flixe. 64 The virtue
of the Pistac^ Nuts. Ibidem To help broken bones. 65 To help the Spleen.
Ibidem To kill Lice. Ibidem To resolve. 67 To cover a bone with flesh. 67 Three
kinds of Sanders. 67 The great virtue of Manna, for Mankynde. 68 To cause
sleep. Ibidem To stop the whytes, and running of the raynes. Ibidem To cleanse
scabs. ibi. The Rose a friend to the Brain, and even. Ibidem The best Roses
be in Italy. Ibidem To dry Salt. 71 The flowing of Salt at Nilus. Ibidem To
cleanse sore even* 72 To stop Blood. Ibidem The Magarite or Pear^e, 'good in
Cordials. Ibidem The Magnet stone. 73 Tripes. 74 The Winter Dear, better than
the Summer. 75 The Lunges of the Dear. Ibidem The Powder of the Hare, for the
stone. Ibidem The Urchin, or Hedgehog. 76 The Weasel good against the falling
sickness, and Struma, Angina, or swelling of the throat. Ibidem The Fox.
Ibidem To help baldness. Ibidem The Barnacle of Scotland, never layth Eggs,
but are bred only of the Ocean Sea: read Gesnerus de Auibus lib. ii^. 67
Three things considered in Fish. 68 Tallow of male beasts, are hoater than
(...) Female. 71 To preserve fat, 72 The providence of God. 85 T^ooble hath so
hindered me, that I am constrained presently to stay in this little work.
Ibidem
V
Violets be great colours, and to cold for the heart. 6 Uomits strayn the body
17 Ualerian ma^eth salves of great goodness. 32 Vrtica the Nettle. 35 Viola
Lutea the yellow Violet, the wall Gilloflower. 46 Very Gentlemen, spring not
by extortion, but by true serving their princes, and living of their own,
hurting not their poor neighbours, preferring the favour of the country,
before lucre, which is their chief treasure. 50 Uirgill. 51 Vngula Caballina,
Hor shove. Ibidem Vnguentum Aegiptyacum. 70
W
Wormwood hath many virtues. 2 Welshmennes drink. 3 Where plenty of Onions do
grow. 6 UUounds kept from corruption. ^ UUhyte UUyne. 10 UUine is an enemy to
children. Ibidem UUine imoderately used, comfort. 11 UUhat kind of UUater
is best, Ibidem UUhyte Popie is the best. 2^ UUhen Uenice first began. 28
UUheat will degenerate out of kind, that is, from UUheat to Darnel. 29 Walwort
makes medicine for the Gout, and pains in the ioynctes, 51 When Ebenus came
first to Rome. 56 What evil hath happened, through the abusing of Guaicum among
the Emperikes. 57 Walnuts against poison, as Mithridates reports. 64 Why
hogs are diseased. 74 William Hilton, let William Bulleine to finish his
book of healthful Medycines. 79 Whaie the virtue thereof. 80 Wine Oil, and
Bread, Gods gifts. 85
X
XXX. Leaves of Azarabaccha do serve in infusion, but other ways three,
four, or five, do suffice. ^
Y
Yellow and Purple fingers. 4^
FINIS.
HEREAFTER ensues a little dialogue between two men, the one called Sorenes,
and the other Chirurgi, Concerning Apostumations, wounds their causes, and
also their Cures, gathered by VVilliam Bulleine the Author and Collectoure
of all these.

Dialogues, contained within this Book Very profitable for every Reader, and
true observer of them.

And first begins the Sore Manne to speak, as Follows,

(:)

1579:



A LITTLE DIALOGVE Between Soarenes, and Chirurgi.
Soarenes. NOw our old Friends have done all their long talk. very profitable
to each other, also to as many as have heard them* I trust we shall spend the
time to the like effect, with no less profit, tha Marcellus and Hilarius,
which had comfort in seeking forth the sweet flowers of sundry shapes in the
field, to their no small delyte, all this last Summer. But now the horie,
stormy, dark Winter weather approaches ne'er, as Persius saith: Admouit jam
bruma foco te Basse Sabino. Bassus, cold Winter doth draw thee to the fire, in
the Mountain called Sabinus, saith he. Cold weather saith he, draws ne'er,
Flora is fled, Boreas, pierces, and causes al beasts to tremble, bereuinge
them of their pleasant Somer shrouds, under the sweet leaves of green
Trees. The Earth is new covered with white Snowes, hard craking Ice, Sabius a
famous Mountain in Italy Flora a Gods of Flowers a harlot of Rome. Borias
the Northeast wind
and horye frosts. Birds do quiver and quake, lurking in the holes of Rocks
and old Barnes, for their relief. The Beasts with slender empty bellies and
cold trembling Carcasses, do cluster in flocks, or shroud them selves under
the naked Bushes, with their faces from the fierce wyndes. These short Days,
and long nights, cause both man and beast to draw together in warm places,
and close houses, now the pore Bees, if they laboured well in Summer, have their
close sweet delytes in warm Hyues in winter. Thus doth Nature give providence
to sondry creatures, to foresee dangers to come, as honger, cold, storm.
Furthermore, God Nature, have from the beginning, taught both man and beast,
not only to relieve themselves in health, but in the time of sickness, and
Soarnes: each of the are taught how to correct, stop, purge such humours, as do
offend nature.

Thus man artificially, and beasts naturally, have a wonderful providence,
whereby the glory of our Lord, and God doth appear of no small Majesty, and
deuyne power: which prepared his incensible creatures, as Man, Beast, Fysh,
Foul, Serpents. c. And one of them to be both meat and medecin for an
other. His name be praised therefore. Amen.


Chirurgi. HOw beit good brother you have reverently spoken, of the Divine
providence. I perceive you did hear and mark well, what end our good friend
Hilarius made, Praising God with the holy Prophet Dauid. Psal ciii.


Soarenes. YE forsooth, although I be sore in body, yet I trust to begin with
good comfort, with a pleasant Comodye, and not end in a fearful Tragidye,
Tragedies begin ever evil end the same.
For I have hard say in the wrytyng of the holy Euangell, which reports from
the mouth of God, saying: before al things seek the kingdom of God, and then
shall all things be given unto you. If al things shall be given unto them,
which pray unto God, than shall comfort be given to the Careful, First seek
Gods kingdom.
Bread to the Hungry, liberty to the thrall. And fynallye health to the
Sick, and Soar. c. As example, Christ gave health unto the Lepors, Lame,
Blind, c. Even so I trust, being a soar Body, to be relieved at the mighty
hands of God, or through him, by his cunning ministers, among whom you are one,
which have done many happy Cures, as I have heard. Well, say further, we have
present occasyon, and time convenient given unto both: you, to warn you
labour continually, and I again for health, pacientlye to suffer and learn
some wholesome doctrine, for my relief. For if the Builders of Houses, wherein
our Bodies be shrouded, be not to be sorborne: much less the repayrers of the
Bodies of men, wherein the Soul remains, can be spared when either Wound,
Soar, Botch, or such like assaulteth our mortal mansion of the body. To
conclude with you I will, following all this short Winters day, in the warm
house, to demand questions as well as I can, for my health and learning.


Chirurgi. Say on your mind a Gods blessing.


Soarnes FOr that I never did Drink upon the sweet Fludde, or Well Spring of
Philosophy, in my tender years: neither have sleapte under the noble
Mountain, and sweet two topped Hill, called Pernasus, Further, I did never
slumber, or forgot my self, through Golden Sleapes upon Helycon that Noble
high Hill, and pleasant place, where sometime the nine Muses, gave forth
their Sacred gifts. But rather I have Drunk and Bybbed upon the cold
seuerus flood of the pale Water called Perenne: Ignorance.
and washed my self in the Dark Streams, of the forgetful Hellish Broke
Lethe in Clean forgetfulness. Therefore to say the truth of my self, my sore
Body and dol^ish Brain, can receive but small health, Comfort, except it shall
please thee, gently to hear me: For courtesy is a goodly School masters,
Curtas^e.
and Comfortable are sweet Cordials, and wholesome salves: and bitter* words,
are biting corosiues, to feeble Minds.


Chirurgi. YOu say the truth. Even so, soft Surgeons make foul soars*
sweet words are pleasant to Women and yonge Children: Soft Surgeons make
foul sores.
but plain true tales, ought to be among Men of knowledge, without curious
Cyrcumstauce, or Rhetorical colours.

Therefore go to your matter, the day is cold and short, the time passes
speedily away, and can never come again.


Soarenes. FOrsooth that is most certain: therefore let us spend the time well.
For my part I would know how to heal my soars which you do se here present
before and behind.






Chirurgi. I see them very well, and I trust by Gods grace t to teach you those
things, which I have learned my self of others* for cure


Soarn^ WHat men of credit, both old, and new, have written of this most
worthy Art, of the hand craft of Chirurgi, or means thereunto, show me some
of their names, for to encourage me to love this said Art.


Chirurgi. I Shall call to mind, and note with Pen, a number of worthy men,
both old and new, Heathen and Christians, strangers, and Englishmen although a
great number whom I know not in this realm, which be worthy Persons, and
cunning men, profitable to our common wealth. As the most worthy Fraternity
of the Surgeons, of the most ancient and famous City of London: whereas
through learned Lectours, and the Secrete Anothomies, by, and through the
learned doctor, M. Iohn Kaius, reueiling unto this Fraternity, the hidden
jewels, Doctor Turner.
and precious treasures of CL. Galenus showing himself to be the.2. Linacer,
whose steps he follows.

Who shall forget the most worthy Doctor William Turner? Doctor Kaiu^.
whose learned acts, I leave to the witty commendations, and immortal praise
of Conradus Gesnerus. Yet his Book of Herbs, will always grow green, never
wither, as long as Dioscorides is had in Mind, among us mortal wights. The
noble estate of knights, among the English or Brytish nation, which of them
did ever in ra^e, give a trip, out run, or win ye victory of sir Thomas
Eliot knight? who hath planted such fruitful trees that his graftes do grow in
each place in this our common wealth, and his Castle of health, cannot decay.
Sir Thomas Eliot knight


Thomas Fair Doctor of Physic is not dead but is transformed and changed
into a new nature immortal: Thomas Fair Doctor
he hath left a piece of dark earth behind him, and gone over Lethes fludd^,
forgettinge this world, and with pleasure spends the time among the heavenly
Muses under the two topped Hill of Pernassus. Full well he knew Plini which taught
ye goodness of clean creatures, and also the pestiferous venom of deadly
Melacholy Serpents, and their present remedy by the virtues of herbs of sodry
kinds.

Doctor Androw Board, wrote also well of Physic, to profit the common wealth
withal. Doctor Androwe Board did see at Rome, no order, gnashing of teeth,
dw^llyng in wretchedness Thomas Panel.
This man declared how he was in a great city where he did see three hellish
Tragedies: the one was Nullus ordo, the second was Stridor Dentium, the third
was Horror inhabitans, yet this Board was a bird of this nest or Cage, called
Rome, whereof he makes this report. I will not forget M. Thomas Paguinellus, or
Panel, who hath played ye good servant, to the common wealth* in translating
good books of Physic.

Doctor William Kunyngham hath well travailed, like a good soldier against the
ignoraun^ ennemy: setting forth the commendation, praise* profit of Astronomy,
Cosmography, and Geographye, c.

How well was he* seen in tongues, learned in Arts and in Sciences, Natural
and moral. A father in Physic, Doctor william Kuningha
whose Learning gave liberty to the ignorant, with his Whetstone of wit,
Castle of knowledge and fynally giving place to sliding nature, dyed himself in
bondage, or prison. By which death he was delivered and made free, yet lives
in the happy land among the Laureate learned, his name was Doctor Record, with
many other, which I must give place to time. For their virtues be not unknow
in Physic, Chirurgi, although I name the not. Yet if thou do further delyte.
without disdain to know the names of them which have been execellent in the
worthy art of Chirurgi, Physic. c. I will declare their names in order as I
have noted and known. As following herafter by letters. Achilles. Aesculapius.
Aetius. Aggregator. Augustinus Doct. Medic. Albucasis Mahumetan. Alexander
Aphrodisiensis. Alexander Benedictus Veronensis Alphonsus Seruius Neopolitanus.
Amatus Lusitanus. Antonius Fumanellus. Aristoteles Philos. Princeps. Arcagathus
Peloponensis. Auicenna. lib. iiij. Fen. vij. Arnoldus de Villa Nova Come.
Aurelius Cornelius Celsus. Albertus magnus.
B.
Bartholomeus de proprietatibus rerum. Bartholomeus Montognan. Bartleus Doc.
Medi. Bunus Doc. Medi. Cant. Buttus Doct. Medi.
C.
C. Plinius secundus. Cassius Iatrosophista. Chyron. CL. Galenus. Conradus
Gesnerus. Constantius Cataplasmatis. Carrus Doct Medic. Clemens. Doct. Medic.
Calduellus Medicus Doct. Oxo. Chamberus Doct. Medic.
D.
Damocrates. Damoxine. Diocles.
E.
Eucharius. Euelpistus. Euonimus. Edwardus Medicus Doct. Cant. Edmundus
Chirurgus Ebor.
G.
Gariopontius. Gorgias. Genus Medic. Doct Oxo. Guido Caliacus. Gulielmus
Placentius. Gulielmus Turnerus Medic. Doc. Cant. Gulielmus Variginanus.
Gulielmus Kunynghamus Medic. Doct. Galus Chirurg. Lon.
H.
Hatcherus. Medic. Doct. Cant. Helyodorus. Heraclides Laurentius. Heraclius.
Hera Cappedoc. Hyeron. Hyeronimus Bruns. Hieronimus Cardanus. Hyppocrates.
Cous. Princ. Medicorum. Hugo. Huycus Medic. Doc.
I.
Iacobus Hollerius. Iacobus Ruffius. Ioannes Kayus Medic. Doct. Cant. Ioannes
Almanner. Ioannes Bauerius Ioannes Barnardus. Ioannes Frerus Doct. Medic. Cant.
Ioannus Manardus. Ioannes Tagaultius Ioannes Vigo Genuensis. Ioannes Porterus
Norwic. Hilius. id. est Albanus. Montanus Doc. me.
L.
Lucas Euangel. Medic. Linacrus Doctor medic. Lanfrancus Mediolanensis.
Leonardus Bareapalia. Leonardus Fuchsius Ludouicus Bonaciolus* Ludouicus
Caelius. Langtonus Doct. Medic. Canta. Lorkinus Doct. Medic. Can.
M
Machaon. Mantias. Martianus Corinbekus Docto. Medic. Marianus Chirurgus. Meges
Chirurgus. Michael Angelus Blodus. Masterus Doct. Medic. Montanus
N.
Nicolaus Massa. Nicolaus Myrepsi. Nicolaus Pol.
O.
Oribasius Otho Brunfelsius.
P.
Podalyrius. Paulus Aegineta Petrus Andraeas Matthiolus. Petrus Tolenus.
Philopenus.
Q.
Querenus.
R
Rasis. Rogerus. Rolandus Capellatus. Robertus Balthropus Chirurgus.
S.
Sebastianus Aquilanus. Socrates Chirurgus. Soranus. Sostratus. Symon Ludfordus
Doct. Medic. Oxo.
T
Tertius Damianus. Theodorus Epist. Theodorus Priscianus. Theophrastus
Paraselsus. Thomas Eliota Eques Angl. Thomas Philologus Raven. Thomas Colphus
Pharmacopulus Ang. Tryphon.
V
Vidus Vidius Florent. Wendius Medic. Doct. Cant Vickarius Chirurgus Lon.
And thus I do end of the names of many men, besides no small number of them,
which have, and do profess this worthy Art, both of Physic, Chirurgi, to the
great profit of each common wealth.


Soarenes. Why do you rather cal Surgery an Art, then a Science? which I take
it to be.


Chirurgi BBecause it takes the name of a Greek Nowne, cal- Chir, an hand in
English, and ^rgon ministerye, What is called Chirurgia.
and although both together called Chirurgia or hand mystery should be rather
hand craft, and not a Science: and this is my probation of this difinition. For
there be two kinds of Chirurgi, the first is Theorica, which is the mother
Scholemistres, nourish, and Learner of this profitable Art, without the which
the workers thereof, have but one eye, and see this Art But through a dark
pair of Spectacles.

The second and last part is called Practica, which is to put in ur, that
which Theorica hath learned him, Two kinds of Chirurgia.
although Practica be very ancient, and to some men fortunate, for healing is
the synguler gift of God, as the Apostle saith. Yet the former called Theorica,
is reckoned a sciece, how be it unprofitably, and by time usurped. Also the
last named Practica, I mean not as the common people do term every tryfeler,
or light does, to be a practicioner, that is able to seperate the qualities of
oyntmentes, and to decern perfectly of Herbs, Gummes, stones, trees, fruits
c. And to compound symples together, through knowledge, judgment, and quick
invention. For compounded oyntmentes make plasters, and aleie Cerotes,
according as it is seen in the worthy works of Nicolaus, Valerius Cordus,
Leonardus Fuchsius. c And when the bodies of their patients, be sore or sick,
then the practicioner must minister, and the medicine must take his effect,
with nature, and God to geeue the health, through his good instrument, whom
the ancient Learned Men do term, the artificial Surgeon to whom great
reverence was given, and such Men were in great estimation sometime, but now
not very much.


Soarnes WHat is then the cause, that so many Surgeons now a days be
despised, and live so basely and are coumpted the abiectes of the common people
if the Surgeons should so be honoured, as thou fayste they should be, being
repayrers of decayed men?


Chirurgi. REpayrers? No, rather destroyers, marrers, and manglers of the
bodies of men, women, and children: and these me lack not only learning, An
ignorant Surgean is a man ^lear.
and knowledge, but also wit, honesty, through whose wickedness, the ancient
practicioners and sober doers in Chirurgi, be greatly abused among the common
people: as commonly we see the good men are despised, through the light
behaviour of the wicked. For under ye name of Chirurgi, many young men, live in
the Saintuarie of Idleness, forsaking their own handy craft: Chirurgi is become
a Satuary.
and many crafty varlets, committing sondry crimes, eftsoon they do flee into
strange countries, wandering up and down. And what be their shifts? Mary, to
buy some gross stuff, with a box of Salve, and cases of tools, to set
forth their slender market with all: For Dogleeches and Tinkers shall have work
in every Village. Then fall they to Palmestry, Of Uacabond Surgeons worse
then thieves. Linx can serve best of a^y creatur^, and his vryne. will turn
into a stone H^im.
and telling of Fortunes, daily deceiving the simple: like unto the swarms of
the vagabound Egiptians, and some that call themselves Iewes, whose eyes were
so sharpe as Lynx, for they see all the people with their knackes, strange
looks, pricks, domifying and figuring with such like fantasies feigning that
they have familiers Glasses, where by they may find things that be lost, and
besides them are infinite of old doltish witches, with blessings for ye Fair
and conjuring of cattle: And yt is the cause yt so much idleness infidelity is
practised, in this evil, estate. Of land leapers, and many simple inhabitours,
worse than the subtle Limetours and begging Freers, which deceived many thorough
Ipocrisye: more hurtful then the crafty Pardoners, The soldier is hurt more by
an evil Surgeon, tha by his ennemies wepons often it is so proved.
which preached remission of sins in every Parish church, with belles and
Pardons from Rome. These be worse then vagabounde Beggars, robbing the
people, and more hurtful than private murderers, in kyllyng men, for lack of
knowledge, and in wars oftentimes, the good Soldier is cast away sooner,
through the villayny of such Surgeons, than by the weapon, and hand of the
Ennemy. And this is a lamentable, and most pitiful case, and hurtful to the
common wealth: but forasmuch as mankind being the principal Creature of Amighty
god the Angels excepted, The miseries of man, when he is hurt in body.
which do daily behold the presence of his majesty is so excellent a thing,
yet this mankynd, through daily casualties and missehappes, eftsoones is hurt
with faules, bruised with strypes, pricked with Spear or Dagger, wounded with
Weapon, burnt with fire, bytten with mad Dogs, Many god medecines are made
of the Plain people, to help in the absence of the Surgeons.
whereby his body stands in daily danger and peryl of Death. Therefore poor
brother Soarenes, like as I do here discover these rabelment of Mineruas
Servants, which live only by theft, yet God forfend, but in the absence of
the learned Surgeon, the wholesome medicines, prepared of good people, and
charitable neigbours, should be greatly preferred, to help in such cases, when
time, place, and danger do require, or else a great number should be cast
away for lack of help. Where as many for lack of wit and wealth, of these Dog
leaches, Dog Leeches.
which never knew letter of book, behave themselves daily as follows, with
their cosorted fellows as, I have written in plain gross words followynge,
SOme men in misery strange shifts will make,
Spending time vainly, and labour forsake:
To live like Lurchers, what force they of shame,
Preferring knavish knackes before a g^od name.
In countenances haut, and netnesse of clothes,
Roysting like Ruffians, thundering forth oaths:
Furderers of Frayes, with lunge Dagger or Sword,
Sowing of dissention, at each man board.
Caryers of news, proclaimers of lies,
Livers by Lechery, blood sucker, and spies.
Braynlesse as brute beasts, and Furious fell,
Like Plutoes whelps, trained up in Hell. The description of an vnchrist, or a
U^layn of natu^ stryuing against grace* and virtue, unprofitable for ^ common
wealth.

Murcia doth teach them, no la^our to use,
But slothful to live, and virtue refuse.
Lauernia thieves Gods, al days of their lives
Arm them with horned thumbs, and fine sharp knives
In Church, Play, or Market, they hunt for the purse,
And Preach oft on Pillory, their Ears are the worse
Their thumbs be blaunched, with a. T from the fire,
Such wooke as the use, so payed is their hire.
Dame Paena with Paleness, that Lady of need,
Brings men into misery, and evil for to speed.
Then are they make shifts, deceivers of other,
Small forcing to rob, friend, father, or brother.
To each wind that blows, the thief sets his sail,
As careless as the Fox, which waggeth his tail.
Not forcing who see him, in running to his borough,
Though hounds him hunts al the covert through,
When he hath most curses, then fares he best,
When spent is his spoil, he takes his rest.
The eftsoon he searches, holtes, felles, woods fenes,
For ravening of Lambs, and stealing of Hens.
Thus lurks wyly Raynerd, with out any care,
But thend of his progress, is the gallow and snare*
Such Foxely feats are used, among a great number.
To the public weal, much loss and cumber.
More hurtles then fat Monks, Friars of disceit,
Which lived in Idolatry, but had plenty of meat.
To give to the pore, that had honger and need,
But the Ruffen will rob, meat, money, and weed.
And under long cloak lurks, with tucke sharp knife
For goldes sake the gitles, to reeve them of life.
Thus hurting the innocent that travel with truth,
To suffer such villains, it is a great ruth.
No more then Thistel, which chokes the Corn.
Great pity if it please God, such wretches were borne.
Evil parents what fruits they bring forth, and to what end they come.
Their parents do fancy them, like relikes halowes
And will never correct the, till they climb the gallous
To no learning nor art* they train them up in youth,
But in idleness and picking, with tales of untruth,
In horehunting, beastliness, and belly joy of life,
In backbiting and bawdry, defiling maid, and wife.
Yet paretes your tether branches, easelie you may twist,
But when it hath great strength, you cannot when you list.
Then in stryuing for victory, it is no great wonder
Old boughs will not bend, but first crack asunder.
Yet instruct your children so, while youthful days do last
That they may serve the como weal, when you are gon past
Then shall they be no brokers, to usurers hands,
Whereby many oft do lose their goods and lands.
Neither to be petty Foggers, in cases of the Law,
To make mountains of Molhils, trees of a straw.
Or oppressors of poremen, with writs in their bags,
Cloth themselves like Prices, when other lurk in rags*
Then shall they not be Parasites, in time of prosperity,
But succour the helples, in the storms of adversity.
For counterfayt Surgeons.
Neither shall the ignorant, counterfeit Chirurgy,
Seming to ye simple nober they are seen in Astronomi.
VVyth flattering words, and trim tales, glosinges they can tell,
As though in natural Philosophy, they were seen full well.
VVyth retrogradation, and Lord of the ascendent,
Plasters, Oils, Pouders, Salves, and matter defendant.
In seeming to be skilful, in every evil malady,
Whether it be moist, cold, burning, hot and dry.
Yet neither read Tagaltius, Marianus, Guido, nor Galen,
Old Hyppocrates, Dioscorides, Rasis, nor Auicen.
Latin nor English, little or none, do they reed,
Small is their knowledge, much less is their speed.
Yet lack they no Brimstone, Quicksiluer, or Litarge,
Oils gross and loathsome, to bear out the charge.
They have Palmestry, and Charms, at each wyghtes desire,
Good store of blessings, for tothache, and saynct Antonies fire.
If young Babes through Fevers, with cold be shaken,
Then they say an evil spirit, the child hath taken.
A bad Angel of the air, an Elf, or a witch,
When in deed, dear friend, there be few such
To molest the faithful, to bring them to confusion,
But to the infidel and faythlesse, it is Sathans delusion,
Wrought by his instruments, Loiterers, and Liars,
VVorse then the valiant beggars, and mendicant Fryers.
Murderers of mankind, in knowing of no art,
Banish them from Chirurgi, commend them to the Carte,
To the flayle and the rake, the trace and the tog,
To the doung Fork, Mattock, to the Sheephoke the dog,
To the Naule and the Lingel, the Bristel, and the Shoe,
What should the Shoemaker, with the Surgeons works do?
For it is the noblest work, wrought by cunning hand,
Excelling al other arts, in each City, and Land.
If Princes be wounded, when noble men are sore, The virtue of Chirurgy.

The Chirurgen them helps, of Surgeons what more?
When bones are broken, and members displaced,
When the features of the face, with weapon be disgrased,
When blood is shed, in cutting of the veins,
The Surgeon alone, helps him from pains,
Repairs mankind, and gives him rest,
So of al knowledge, Chyrurgi is most best.
For no treasure or art, can help the wounded man,
When the Surgeon, by his cunning only can.
Now let this rime pass, Gond send us of his grace,
Ask an other question, I will answer to that place.



Soarenesse. GOD gieue me grace, to beware of such fellows, as you have
spoken of before, which are an evil company: and that I might learn what a
very Surgeon should be, which in your conclusion, you have commended, and
what things he should do in his office.


Chirurgi. He must begin first in youth with good learning, and exercise in
this noble art, Eight things or properties of a good Surgeon.
he also must be clenly, nimble handed, sharpe sighted, pregnant witted, bold
sprited, clenly apparelled, pytefull hearted, but not Womanly affectionated to
weep or trimble, when he sees broken Bones, or bloody Wounds, neither must
he gieue place to the cry of his soar Patient, for soft Surgeons makes
foul soars. Of the other side, he may not play the parts of a Butcher to
cut, rend, or tear the body of man kind. For although it be frail, soar,
and weak, yet it is the pleasure of God, to call it his Temple, his
Instrument, and dwelling place, the Philosopher doth call it Orbiculus, that
is, a little world. Therefore seeing every crafts man doth take great care,
both day and night in his vocation, to help and amend dead things, which be
insensible, as Ships, houses, Walls, Brydges, and an infinite number of
things, which mankynde doth make, and when it is old, doth renew it, and
preserve it from ruin, and utter destruction, although it be not perdurable:
Should not therefore mankind himself, The Surgeon is ye best hand craft
in the world.
for his reward, be diligently cured, amended and renewed, when either through
fall, wound, or stripe he is decayed, and that with wisdom, and diligence?
for when a house is fallen down ye Carpenter may build it up again. But when
mankynde departs, desolueth, and dies, he cannot be revived again, by the
policy or cunning of mankynde, Iob. 14.
because one mankind, cannot make an other, but rather thorough art, when they
be decayed, help to amend them, through the work of nature, The Surgeon, is
natures seruaunt.
and the ministration of the Phisicion: for Claudius Galen saith, that Natura
est ope^atrix, Medicus vero eius minister. That is, nature is ye worker the
Phisicion is but her minister. Therefore the Chirurgicall Physician, is Natures
seruaunt.


Soarenesse. What then doth Nature work in Chirurgj?


Chirurgi. Nature works three ways to help her self.
NAture works three manner of ways, by the reason that convenient instruments
and means are applied in the time of need, to help her. For first she
divides the things that are contained, or unnaturally knit together.
Secondly, she unites, knits, and joins together, The strength of nature.
the separated parts. Thyrdly, she expulseth, purges, and cleanses
superfluous matter, that doth abound, or offend nature.


Soarenesse. Then it should appear, that nature needs no Chirurgj?


Chirurgi. Nature must be relieved by sundry means in ye time of danger.
YEs. Nature in the time of Soarenesse, can no more be without ye Surgeon,
than the Smith can be without his hammer, or the Tailor without his Shears:
and as I have said before, although you seem to be forgetful, yet let the
Surgeon be diligent, if he love to be clothed with honesty, to live
virtuously, and to do things artificially, and not to geeue quid, pro quo,
Chalk for Cheese, or Dirt for Drink: for if they so do, if it springs of
ignorance, then they are worthy to be punished, and after to be reformed. But
if they be Men of knowledge, thus abuse their Pacients, they are worthy to be
punished, as malicious murderers: but here I stop and lay a straw, I will
meddell with no matters of the Law, I am no Judge, although it be good and the
chief Regiment, of our common wealth, yet I have received as small profit by
Lawers, and unquiet men, as wounded men get perfyte health, by ignorant
Surgeons, or quiet Men, lead happy lives with angry Wives, for whom there
is no remedy, but patience perforce, quod Socrares, to Xantippa.


Soarenesse. IS your name Chirurgj? Me think by your talk, you have a
domestic grife, how help ye your self, when your Fever takes you, you
bear out the matter as well as you can.


Chirurgi. IF I be diseased of any such Fever, I do not intend to seek
counsel at your hands, neither of Hippocrates, nor Galen. c. But only of
Diogines, which loved to be alone, Socrates was taught patience: but to
conclude, no man knows the grief of a straight shoe, but the Wearer
thereof: but for asmutch as many Hands make light Work, and many shoulders
pass small of great burdens, I care the lesser, having so many parteners. The
remedy is this, when storms be past, fair Weather comes at last.


Soarenesse. WEll, well, seek a salve for that sore, I can no skill of your
disease, God wot, much less to help mine own grief. I pray thee therefore
help us both, yet by your leave although you be called Chirugj, or Sanitas, yet
I do consider, that there is no continual sanite of body, or perfect quietness
of mind, during this Life of mortal men For if a man would descend down into
his own conscience, and see himself within, he shall easily perceive, the
words written of saynct Iob the.18. Chapiter in his most lamentable and
pitiful Book: saith he, a man that is borne of a Woman, lives but a short
time, and is filled full of mysery, and comes up and falls away like a
Flower, Man is but miserable, yet is quickly gone.
and in the end passes away like a shadow, and never continues in one
estate. For truly we daily see, adversity follows Prosperity, bondage after
liberty, poverty after riches, sickness after health, beside an infynite number
of the passions, afflictions of the mind. As zeal, strife, Ielousy, love,
Joy, care. c. And as the wise man saith, Omnia tempus habent, al things have
their time. And God hath given affliction to the children of men, to be
exercised in the among whom, I for my sins am plagued with this kind of
malady, as thou see me have: I beseech God of his mercy, send me health, and
as many as are soar.


Chirurgi. Thou hast spoken wisely, for al thing is in vain, where God doth
not put to his helping hand, and by his Prophet he saith, Psalme. 50.
call upon me in the time of trouble, and I will help thee, make thee whole,
and deliver thee. Behold, how many Lepers, sick of Palsyes, bloody Flixes,
Matth. 11.
blyndnesse, deafness, possessed of evil spirits, yea. death it self, all
these hath God helped, restored, and made perfect: for there is Tempus
occidendi, and Tempus sanandi with God, Eccle. 3
for he is ever occupied, either in punishing the wicked, or comforting of his
elected.


Soarenesse. WOuld GOD, there were such miracles now a days, as was then. It
were a great comfort to an infinite number of such as I am, Christ is not
covetous.
neither should it be painful, nor costly, for Christ covets no money,
although Simon magus delighted in nothing else.


Chirurgi. SOarenesse, Soarenesse, Thou say not well, for it is rather a
tempting of GOD, A faithful man belieueth without miracle, for faith is not
seen, but miracles are seen.
then a beleeuinge in GOD, to look or wish for Miracles, for faithful Men
need none. And I trust thou art faithful, therefore thou need no Miracle:
but rather consider this, Christ healed the bodies of sick men, two manner of
ways: the one by virtue of his Heavenly word, whereby we be taught that he is
GOD. The second, he healed sometime with Clay, with spittle. c. wherein we be
learned, and he also hath learned us, in the time of our soarenesse, prudently
to use Gods Instruments, Two manner of healinges.
and means, yea, not with Clay, or Spittle, yet with precious Herbs,
Fruits, Gummes. c. For GOD hath ordained them only to help his people, to
this end, that his people might serve him. Tobias healed his fathers Eyes,
with the Gaul of a Fyshe, an Angel prepared the Medicine. Ezechias the King
in the time of his Pestilence, was healed with a cluster of Figs, Essay. 38.4.
Regum. 20
The great Prophet Essay, gave him this Medicine. Eliseus did cleanse through the
virtue of a sweet tree, the foul stinking Waters. Christ in the Gospel,
commands the Apostles to cary Oil with them, to heal the sick. S. Luke
the holy Euangelist was a Physician, Luke.
and some of the antiquityes of his Physic, remain unto this day. It is said
also that holy Esdras made a goodly Medicine, when the people were in captivity
in Babilon, to cleanse them from their Melancholy, and heaviness of mind,
which Medicine is called after his name unto this day: These and such like
examples Soarenesse, should move thee to use these means to help thee.


Soarenesse. I Heartily thank you, I shall by Gods grace, observe your sayings.
and use Gods Instruments reverently, by whose means we poor Men be healed.
And sometime the rich Infidels, still tormented with soars. c.


Chirurgi. Even so be rich also, for Sycknesse, as we do daily see, doth not
perticulerly dwell in poor men, but rather generally in all, although the
kinds of sickness be variable, the Complexions diverse, the causes many, and
every sickness, and soarenesse, have his proper name, although men, either
through ignorance, shame, or craft do abuse their names, Men do use pretty
terms for soul ^ores and call them by one name, when they are an other,
although the effect do still remain, as in clenly terms by your license,
they will call it nothing else, but a sausy flemed Face, red or high coloured,
when many times in deed, it is not only so, but the very Leprosy with all. It
is nothing say they, but breaking out, or pains of the body, weakness of
Limbs, or a green sickness, through the obstruction of ye Liver. c. with such
nick names, whose very sure name is, the Buttens of Naples, Gallicus morbus,
commonly called the French pox.


Soarenesse. Hitherto yet stand I in doubt, although I be pained, howe to
name truly my desease I cannot, although of it self it be definable, felt of
me, and seen to us both, known only to thee, what think you it is, I pray you
tell me?


Chirurgi. It is none other then apostumation, as it doth plainly appear to
me.


Soarenesse. Then I pray you, gieue me a difinicion, and division, of an
apostumation.


Chirurgi. APostumacion is a very evil disease, compounded of.iij. kinds of
maladies, gathered, Apostumatio is compounded of three sundry evils.
and growing together in one quantity, first of an evil Complexion: Secondly
a naughty composition: And thirdely, the continuance of time. These three make
an apostumation, or swelling within or without the body, notwithstanding, as
Galen saith, not all kind of swellinges make apostumations, but such only as
annoy the body, and the root thereof is the corruption of the four
temperamentes, when they be altered, and changed into Fleume, Blood, Choler,
Melancholy, through them the shape of a member is altered, Breach of
contynuaunce is, when the whole parts are cut, or broken.
when it is changed from his natural form, into any strange, or deformed
figure. Also the breach of continuance, is caused through incitions,
corosians, breaking, or strecching, as Galen saith, in the second de art
medendi, nevertheless the chief cause is through stretching, whereby the
parts of the body be severed one from an other, and this is my conclusion of
this diffinicion.


Soarenesse. How many kinds of apostumations be there?


Chirurgi. THere be two, the one is hot, and the other cold, Three kinds of
Apostumacions, hot, and cold.
for every apostumation is hot or cold, touching their humour: but
accidentally they be diversely hot, as Galen saith the hoate have their proper
signs, to be known by, even so have the cold, whereby he perceived.
Apostumations, wherein is boiling, and burning, with continual heate, are
judged to come of blood, or Choleric humour, even so judge them of
Melancholy, or Fleume, when they seem to be cold, Pale, Howe to know
Apostumation.
deaddishe, or partly not felt, and thus thou shalt perceive their kinds, and
although they be named a like, yet they differ one fro another in cure, as they
do in complexion. Moreover, the apostumation of blood, hath great swelling and
heat over all the body, and is seldom seen without some Fever, ye colour is a
dim dark red, also hardness, if you press it with your finger, because so much
matter, is gathered grossely in the place. The pulses will beat very soar, the
matter being over laden, will keep down the artery, therefore nature
attempting to rease and lift up the same, will cause great beating in the
veins, wherefore the more arteryes be kept down, ye greater is the labour,
and beating of the Pulses, after which, sometime follows such dolor and
payne, that all the parts of the body come to destruction, The abundance of
blood in the apostumation.
as oftentimes in hot evil complexions, where evil matter is heaped together
in apostumation. That in fine, replecion, and tencion, of all the course of the
veins do come, for all the veins in the said apostumation, by the means of
the abundance of blood, will swell and become great, although before, they
were right, strayte, clean, yea, some as small as hairs, and these be the
apostumations of blood.


Soarenesse. What say thou then, of them that be Chollerike?


Chirurgi. The cruelty of the Chollerike apostumacion, but ye bloody
apostumation is gentler.
APostumacions Chollerike, be gentler as touching their swelling, but they do
excel more in payne, and be far crueller, because of sharpness, and biting
of the humour, with bitterness, dryness of Choler, whereas bloody
apostumations, although they do swell through moystnesse, yet the same humidite
or moystnesse, causes ye soar to be more gentler, and of lesser payne than
the Chollerike, for they be two contraries, as Aristotle saith in his Book of
generation, and corruption, Ignis qui est in vltimo continentis, non est in
fine ebullitionis, and in another place he saith, Of cotraryes of elements.
Elementa omnia adinuicem contrarietatem habent, and that is well said, for heat
is an extreme contrary to cold, so is moystnesse to dryness, m^re payne in
the one apostumation, than in the other.


Soarenesse. What be apostumations in quantity, which of them be greatest, and
which of them be least, I would fain know, good Chirurgj?


Chirurgi. The quant^ty of the apostumations.
AS touching their quantityes, know you, that ye Chollerike, is less then any
other, by the reason of his dryness, and heat, which restrayneth extencion,
but the accident of the payne, is most cruel and sharp, and these be destroying
qualities in this quatity, what time they are come to ye extreme degree of
heat: but apostumacions, depending of cold humours, such will bring their own
proper signs, beating of arteries, notwithstanding they be not comparable to
the beating of a Chollerike, or a bloody apostumatio but more duller, colder,
paler. c. You must also note, that apostumations that spring of blood, Sundry
names of apostumations, but in effect are but apostumations.
or Choler, be diversely termed by sundry names, as Botches, Shingelles,
Fellones, Pushes, Uncomes, saynct Anthonies fire, blaynes, Bladders, or
Blisters, crusts Carbuncles, Pestilent soars. c. eve so on ye other side,
apostumatios of Fleume, or Melancholy, have joined unto the these names, as
vndimies, knots, woudes, Carnelles, Wrates, Cankers, Esthachelles, with such
like evils of mortifycation, in their beginning, and be all called
apostumacions, but when they be grown to a ripens, and do break forth, then
call them ulcers, specially if the matter proceed to the breach of
continuance. Also apostumacions are soars compounded, and stand not in one
humour alone, yet oftentimes we say simply, that every one of them, spryngeth
of one humour, heat, cold, moist, or dry, of whom in deed they do take their
names, as Aristotle judges in his Naturalles, as where blood is excessyue,
Soars compounded.
it is called a Bubo, or a Sanguine botch, and where as Choler doth abound,
it is called a Choleric malady. And so of the Flegmatike, and Melancholy the
like, according to their natures.


Soarenesse. HItherto I have heard, but only the diffinitions of ye names, or
natures of apostumacions, but me think to talk of the cures, were more
profitable, for only unto that end, do I move these questions unto you?


Chirurgi. I Will speak somewhat of their cures, but or I enter any further in
this matter, I think it rather necessary, to speak a little of things that
be come, and would be prudently observed in their cures, for asmutch as every
apostumacion, depends of some cause, and may not well be cured, except,
cause, sign, judgment of the same with effects, be perfectly known. Blind
Bayard is bold.
Therefore seeing there is nothing bolder then blind bayarde, which falls
oft in the Mire, nor none so hurtful to ye health of mankynde, as ignorant
Surgeons, setting the carte before the horse, and the roots of the trees
upward, which shot at the mark like blind men, sometime hitting by chance,
more than by knowledge, these things considered, Soarenesse: think therefore
no time lost, to hear me speak of the causes of apostumacions, for thereby
the sooner, they may be healed, therefore I will speak a little more of the
causes.


Soarenesse. Why? Be there any more causes of apostumacions, whereof should
they rise? I pray you shortly show me.


Chirurgi. YEs, Saith he, which is the Prince of all Physic called
Hippocrates, there be three kind of causes, whereof apostumacions do rise,
the first is the Primatiue, the second the Antecedent the third the
Conjunctive. The Primatiue, where maladies hap by misfortune to the body,
from the outward parts, as incicion, breaking smiting, falling, vlceracion of
the hands and feet, or any other part. whereof ensues apostumacion. For when
great dolor is caused in any part, soon after follows, that the part
annoyed cries upon nature for help, (for such is his goodness and providence)
who sends out of hand some succour, to the impoverished, and soar parts But
it chances ofttimes, that this succour, or nourishement, rests there or
some where by ye way, in the vacant and weak parts, and so grows it at
length to an apostumation, in case the virtue degestiue, or expulsiue be not
able to master, and dispatch it. The Antecedent is diversely named, and by
diverse terms, as replecionall, humorall, complexionall, and composicionall, it
is called replecionall, when the humours increase beyond their due measure.
Albeit al these have respect to the quality of humours, yet for all that, when
all the humours grow beyond measure, it is termed replecionall: humorall, is
when one humour alone, grows to apostumation, as the shingles comes of pure
Choler, and an hot botch of pure and laudable blood. Also they call it
complexional, if the said humours be distempered from their first state or
qualities, I say from their first qualities as if their form in a body were
limited, Composition. Replecion, Complexion, what they are.
within the quantity of.ij. inches, and then if they had gotten them iij.
inches more, thereof would spring diverse diseases, taking their names of the
qualities, that have dominion and pre-eminence over them. It will be named
compositionall, where one humour exceeds the rest, in degree of his quality,
given him of nature in composition* and hereof it comes to pass, that the
whole body compounded, goes to ruin, through Fevers, and other kind of
maladies. Wherefore no man may doubt, that ye complexion should be holden for a
cause Antecedent. Some number dolor with the same causes, whereunto may be added
weakness of a Member, as watrishnesse, and windinesse. c. Also a cause
Coniuncte, is nothing else but the Antecedent, when it comes to a place
ulcerated, or well nigh vlcerating, Here may not we pass over this with
silence, that any apostumation as touching riping* or to speak playner,
rotting, and breeding of matter, hath property four times appropriate to it,
that is to weet beginning, augmetyng, state, and fall. The beginning is, when
the causes Coniunct, begin presently to appear. Four notes in an apostumatio,
beginning, augmeting, state, declining.
Augmenting is known in that it largeth, and grows to bigness, and the
accidents increase: the matter gathered, and heaped together, without further
increasinge, shows plainly the state. Fynally, the fall is known (if it be
well looked on) by a certain softness, fainting in the place. And these times
must be as well observed, I think, as the self maladies: for Auicenna with
express words, gives this admonition, saying it is not possible thou
should cure a disease, if thou know not, what the disease is. Me thynck he
doth infer, and conclude, where the times be unknown, the cure also will be
unknown, for why? In as much as the time in the apostumation is divers, the
disease is divers, the cure will be divers.


Soarenesse. ALthough you seem to speak somewhat obscurely, darkly, yet by
oftetimes reading, I trust to get some more knowledge, for it is said of a very
wise man, Omnes homines naturaliter scire desyderat. And I also being a ma, am
desirous of knowledge to help my self, without the which I am ye worst kind of
beast, most unprofitable upon ye earth: but hither unto, you have spoken, but
of the beginning of apostumations, as seems to me, but how be they ended
finished? I pray you let me know the way?


Chirurgi. GALEN, the best that ever was, and the greatest learned next to
Hippocrates, and one to whom chief credence must be given as unto a prudet Ship
master, which through running, wisely doth set his course in the raging Seas,
defending his Ship from Rock, Storm, and Tempest, to the end, to arrive at
the port, and end of his travail, so doth Galen, like to a worthy master,
defend his Patients from shipwrecks, both soarenesse, and sickness, and
saith, if apostumations turn not back again, then they do end by insensible
resolution, or else by rotting out, and they be ended four manner of ways: Of
resolution.
first by resolution, as is aforesaid, which is vnbynding, remoouing, or
undoing of the matter: secondly, to convert, change, and turn the
apostumation into a thing called matter, or waire. The third is by rotting.
The fourth, is putrefaction, and of this speaks Auicen, which is one of the
chyefe Princes of Phisicions, in th'ende of his chapter, concerning a hot
apostumation, and in this cure there is two things principally to be observed.
The one is, whether the thing be yet a doing, the other is, whether it be full
done, or ended. I mean by doing, that is, whether the matter be yet running,
or fleting to the place of apostumation, and by the thing that is don, that is,
whether the matter be past, and come already into the place of Apostumation or
not: and note also, that in all such cures, you may not prolong, or abuse the
time, but diligently go about your business, for a little lost time, puts
the Patient to great payne, and the Surgeon to great dishonesty.


Soarenesse. THerefore I pray you to spend no more time any longer in
definitions, names, causes, and signs, of Apostumations, but rather I pray
you, begin the manner of their proper cures, and helps, for else hetherunto, all
is but a labyrinth, and a crooked way unto me.


Chirurgi. WEll. If you will needs take upon you to minister, in your
beginning, you must prepare repercussiues, which will greatly comfort the soar
Member: for Auicen saith in his first book, the fourth doctrine, that a strong
Member actyuely. doth cast from him his superfluous humour, unto the weak
passive or suffering Members, and pulls it back again, and eftsoones doth
power it forth again, to the great hurt of the weak part where by the weak
Member is oftentimes Choked, and Strangled with the strength of the humour,
whereby the whole Body is Ruined, and finally brought to destruction.
Therefore, to the intent that the weak part be not utterly Destroyed,
Overladen, or Choked, with such Superfluous humour, you must, to avoid the
Danger, make Restraint with repercussiues, repercussiues, and medicines
defendant. And this shalt thou do, apply cold, and binding receipts, as Galen
shows in the third of the art, saying: Repellemus a patient particula si
infrigidemus stiptica apponamus c. We shall put of from the sick part, if we
cool, and apply bynding things. c.


Soarenesse. Do repercussiues help then in this case generally?


Chirurgi. Of repercussiues, when they are good.
NO. But for asmutch, as this place offers occasion, to speak of
repercussiues, which I do laud: even so I shall have occasion to show, where
repercussiues ought to be abhorred and fled, with no less care, than Shipmen
do the rocks in the sea. For it is no less pleasure to the Surgeons, to
obtain their purpose, and finish their cure, than it is joy unto the
Mariners, luckily to arrive in their own port, or resting place. Therefore
Soarenesse, to the end that we may eschew Shypwrackes, and dangerous places,
let us a little enlarge our course, and call to remembrance, the wise words,
of that learned man and famous clark (master Ihon Uigo) of Genua, which wrote
a learned Book unto Iulius the second, wherein he saith, that apostumations in
unclean bodies, do utterly refuse repercussiues, except they be first cleansed
by purgations, for much matter cannot away with repercussion. In case we
should fall suddenly to the cure before purging, then should we greatly err,
for in driving it back ward, we rather should couch it up, in the place so
fast, that it could not be removed, Foul bodies refuse repercussiues,
therefore they must (...) cleansed.
whereby occasion should be given of evil accidence. And furthermore, if this
come to pass, as God forbid it should, then would it plainly import, or
threat putrefaction or corruption of the member. Secondly, the emunctory or
cleansing places, will not desire any repercussiue. Thirdly, take heed how you
use repercussiues, when ye matter is fat and clammy. For Galen saith in the
third book of the Art, Corpus existens plenum repercussionem non admittet.
Fourthly, thynk it no matter of deliberation, concerning repercussion, when the
cause is venomous, cruel, or furious: but be occupied wholly, in provoking of
it forth, for if you drive it backward, after mine opinion, saith Tagaltius,
then do you range far from the high way, for this is the cause, why ye shall
err, and not do well in your cure. First, ye shall shut and close up the
matter, within your centaur, which of necessity, ought to be dispersed abroad,
in the whole circute, and thereof will follow, by the means of the malice,
venom, and poison assembled together, and so taking their force in one place
will practise no small incovenience or mischyfe, What peril is in the
applicatio of a repercussiue, although in some case it is most best.
against the natural virtues: you shall therefore, first use repercussiues, if
the matter be pressed, stopped, thrust, or shut up together in one place, do
this, for fear of deforming of the member, where ye soar is, which soon will
ensue, if it come to putrefaction in that place. Sixtly, if nature cause any
apostumation, by reason of crisis. Hoc est Iudicum, that is of judgment to
avoid, (...), or put out matter, superfluous, in this case, think there will
be no means found, to put it back, without great danger, and hurt to
nature.


Soarenesse. WHy? Would it hinder any thing in this case, to apply a
repercussiue, or medicine, to drive it back? show me some reason why it
should not be? Or what hurt would come thereof, if it were done?


Chirurgi. MAry, this evil might eftsoones ensue, for if it be put back,
What hurt ensues of a repercussiue.
or returned in again, nature will then invent, and find out some other by
path, from the unclean, to the clean places, and were not this a great hurt
to nature? Yes surely, it were no small Jeopardy: therefore we must in such
cases, make euacuatio of ye matter, putting a helping hand to nature in her
crisis, as Galen saith upon this Aphorismus: quorum crisis fit, haud facta est.
c. For the cure of all these causes, you must use mollifications, and softening
Medicines.


Soarenesse. Yet again, I put this question, why you do use repercussiues at
any time?


Chirurgi. We use repercussiues, that we may apply them, to the intent that
the matter yet fleeting, be kept of, and not that, What goodness comes of a
repercussiue.
which is already flowing, become stubburne, against us in our working,
therefore, doing according to our rules, we shall order apply repercussiues in
the beginning, and augmenting of apostumations, for why, the matter at that
time, is chiefly flowing to and fro: and Galen writes in the third of his
art, that vessels refreshed with binding medicines, put of much matter from
them, howbeit this ought to be done successively, by little and little, because
the flux of the matter, is with a continuance, and when it is come where it
should be, then must it be resolved, and not driven back.


Soarenesse. I pray thee gentle Chirurgi, take in hand the cure of
apostumations.


Chirurgi. THE Prince of the Philosophers, Aristotle saith, contraries be,
pertayneth to one science, and doubtless, the cures of Apostumations differ
not, but in distance of more and less: for this cause, must I wrestle
earnestly, that the knowledge of natures, simples escape you not, for why, the
more ye shall excel herein, the better shall you form your Medicines, for
the Patients behoove, who have joined themselves to our company: now to
obtain this purpose, ye shall advisedly look whether the apostumations fall in
a body full of humours, Consider whither apostumations chance in bodies replete
with humo^ or empty.
or void of the same. If they happen in an empty body, ye shall reckon it
long of some cause primatiue, whose cure must be in drawing forth ye matter,
with resolutiues, or softening medicines: you shall resolve, if you apply cold
and binding things together with hot and moist: with cold you must
restrain, keep it of, if any part of choler were approaching, by reason of
dolor, with binding, you shall comfort the member, as I said before, according
to the sentence of Galen, in that hot things, cause the relenting of the
matter: finally, use moystening of the same, that ye poares harden not, nor be
coagulated or stopped, this speedely must be done at ye beginning, afterward if
it take not place, as I have said: What have you to say, in any other matter?


Soarenesse. Show me some wholesome medicine, for Apostumations, I pray you?


Chirurgi. A good medicine for an Apostumation.
I Shall compound this medicine, for an example. R. Juice of Houslike, and
Lattice, ana..j. Oil of Roses, and Camomell. ana..j.ss. oil of Mirtes..x.
Eggs in number.ij. Swing all these with the Yolks, and Whites, unto such
time, as they be well incorporated, and then apply it in linen. Either thus. R
Bole Armoniacke, Acacia. ana..j. oil of Roses, Mirte, Camomell. ana..j.ss.
Bean meal.j. dust of Mirtelles, and of Cipers nuts. ana..ss. with a little
Wax, all which must be incorporated at the fire, and applied to the soar
place. Further, for the resolving, of an hot apostumacion, of what cause so
ever that it come of, ye shall apply this, which the learned have greatly
commended, in very deed, I ever found it, as they have said, th'order of it was
thus. R. Heads of white Lillies. A more excel^ent way to help an
apostumacion.
.v. roots of ye Marishe Mallowes. l i.j. Camomel, Mellelot. ana. M.ss. and a
handful of Bran, seathe all these in Water, till they be thoroughly sodden, and
then strayn, and press them, as the Cooke doth commonly grated bread, when he
makes his potage, putting it into a clean pan, unto the which, ye shall put
oil of Roses, of Camomill, of Dill, of Lillies ana..ij. of the mary of Calves,
or Cowes legs, and of Capos grease. ana..j. of white Wax..ss. of the soft
apples, roasted in hot Embers, if they may be got..iij.ss. Let al these be
melted together, with yt, which was searsed at a soft fire, be boiled, by ye
space of half an hour, wrought always, that it be diligently stirred all the
while, and this will be a Cerote, whereby ye shall get profit, and
commendations. Another also in form of a Cataplasme, more strong for the same
purpose. Take the meal of Lyn^seede, Fenigreeke. ana..iij. ye meal of
Orobus..i. flowers of Chamomill, Mellilote, Elder. ana. P.ss. red Rose
leaves..ii. flowers of Dill..iiij. powder of Ireos of Florence..ss. boyle these
in Wine Honey, or in the Juice of Smalledge. Anon add of the drags of oil,
and of oil of Lillies..iiij. oil of Uyolets..ii. and so frame a Cataplasme.
Now if the apostumations, will not be ruled, and give place to a resolutiue,
for so it fares oftentimes with them, then prepare mollificatiues, or softening
medicines, which may be made two ways, with Embrocacions, or plasters.


Soarenesse. I pray you tell me, which is the best way or means, to make an
Embrocacion?


Chirurgi. AN Embrocation, is made after this manner. R. Of a decoction of
Mallowes, Of an Embroche.
Uyolets, Barley, Quince seed, Lattice leaves. l.v. of Barley meal..ii. oil of
Uyolets, and Roses. ana..i.ss. of Butter..i. and then sees them all together,
till they be like a broathe, putting thereto, at the end four yolks of Eggs,
and the manner of applying, is with pieces of cloth, dipped in the foresaid
decoction being actually hoate, which must be often changed one after an
other, by the space of one third part of an howre: This will allay, and abate
the payne, and cause resolution, drawing forth the matter into the Skin. Such
decoctions may be also made, of a Wethers Head or other flesh, so that the
Broth be ^atte, howbeit, this shall be according to thine intent, whether thou
mean the rypyng, or the resolving of it* immediately after the imbrocasion, let
this or the like plaster follow. R Of Leaves, of Mallowes, Violets, and Lettise
ana. M.i. and afterward they shall be sodden, brayed, s^arsed, make an hard
plaster thereof at the fire, with Barley Meal putting thereto. ii.ss, of oil of
Violets, and.ss. of Butter, this done, take it of the ^yre, and then
incorporate the yolks of three Eggs, and so apply it to the soar, now if he
be loath to take so much payne, and thynk plasteryng sufficient appoynte: the
Patients fryendes to use this. R. of crumbs of bread l.i.ss, let it be
steped in a decoction of Mallowes, Uiolettes, and Lattice, or in a Bro^he of
Ueale, or Mutton: it may be done to with Ewes or Goats milk, hoate from the
dugs. Finally, let it be pressed, and stamped, and drawn round in a mortar,
and then soft, it with Oil of Uiolettes, and Roses. ana..i.ss. and of
Butter..i. with a.i.ss. of Saffron. After let the whole be thicked at the fire
a little, and then put the yolks of two Eggs to it: or else take the leaves of
Mallowes, and Uiolettes, of every of them, one handful, so boil, and stamp
them together, with Boars grease, and use these hardly. For one of these I
assure you, shall ripe a Cholerycke apostumacyon, which thing ye shall
perceive by the softness in feeling, and by easyng of the payne, as Auicen
saith, Cum videris lenitatem quandam sedatione doloris, tunc scias quod scit in
via ad maturationem: When thou see a certain softness and delaying of payne,
then thou may know it is in the way of riping: now when the place is ready to
be lauced, above al things s^e the inscision and the opening be made alongest,
with the lying of the hears, sinews for why, nothing will be done more better,
to cause a Cicatrice. A Cicatrice.



Soarenes. This is very well said: Now I pray you tel me how you make an
Incision?


Chirurgi AN Incision must be made in the lowest part, so that the matter may
the better avoid: in especially, if any humour do use to fall to that part,
Incision, how to make it.
from whence issues would most naturally fall from. Oft we conduct them, by
their convenient regions, as saith deuyne Hippocrates, and thincision must be
made, as it likes the learned, after a half or crooked moon, except, the
place be synewes, for if it be so, then must it be made alongest with the
course of them. For why if I would open it overthwart, I might cut some synew
a sunder in working: immediately upon the incision, the place must be covered
with Lynt, dipped and wet in the white of an Egg: Nevertheless before ye
so do, ye shall fill the hole of the appostumation with a Tent, made of the
same moysted lin^e^, to the intent the matter gush not out, al at ones, which
thing if it were suffered, and the Apostumation, great, the virtue natural, will
be much assembled thereby, whereas we ought most warily to save the same, that
it be sufficient to feed the place, and work rightly. For as Mesue following
the mind of Galen, saith it is nature who works health: the Physician is but
her servant. This also must be well remembered, and had in consideration, in a
place apostumated, ^ a member (...) the (...) do rot^e.
whether the apostumation, fall in a fleshye or synewye place. For when there
doth rise a knot in a synewy place, there look to be opened before it be full
rypened, lest any sinew should rot by means of corruption, but in the
other, by reason of the freshness thereof. We may a^yde the perfyte riping,
sith we be moved by no inconvenience, to open it ^efore time, which thing is
not to be permitted in the other without some good cause. Now when ye have well
filled and covered the incision, let it alone, and meddle no more with it, for
the space of xxiiii. hours, and when that time is expired, ye shall visit the
apostumation, with a digestiue made of yolks of Eggs, and Terebinthyne., in
continuing the same, two, or ^hree times. until you see more or less,
according as necessity in digestion shall show you. At the end ye may finish
the cure, with an abstersiue mingled of Barley meal Terebintyne, Rosed Honey.
But if it shall be hollow as it is often seen) we give you this abstersiue in
that behalf. An abstersiue. A digestiue.
R. of Rosed Honey, strained..i.ss. of clear Terebinthine..ii.ss. of ye juice
of smallage.ss. let them boyle, till ye juice be wasted, afterwards whiles it is
yet warm put thereto, ii.ss. of Barley flower, and mingle them together, which
ye may keep, till need shall require, for the cure.


Soarnes. What if proud, dead, or rotten putrified flesh, chance to be in
the sore, or aposiumation, what remedy then?


Chirurgi IN dede often times there grows dead flesh in such places. I have
therefore here to say howe the same must be displaced and removed, How rebate
flesh superfluous.
certaynlye my self did ever use in removing of superfluous, and festered
flesh the mixed oyntmentes, which were compounded of Vnguentum apostolorum and
Egiptiacum of like portions, and if the part had bin very sensible, I used the
powder, which ye old ancient Surgeons did use to remove such flesh over
and upon that ye shall apply this ointment, which the old ancient Surgeons,
had in ur It is descrybed after this manner, ^. Oil of Roses, of Camomell,
ana..iii. of fat Weathers..iiii. of fat Calves..iii. of the mary of a Cowes
huckel bone..ii of Lytharge of gold, and silver, ana., i ss. of Ceruse:.ss. of
Vermilion. iii. of Terebintyne.iiii. of new Wax..ii. mingle al these together
according to the art. And let them boyle first at a soft fire, encreasinge and
fortefiyng the same after a season, and so boil and ster it withal, and so do
it, till it get a very black hue, and thus have you an ointment to spread on
the soar, like a Cerote. But I saw one thing coming to remembrance, that may
not well be forgotten, by reason of ye fearfulnes, of a certain faint hearted
man, dwelling hereby, now this white liuered Lad, that I speak of, was
exceedingly tormented with an apostumation, which needed opening howbeit, he
cold abide any thing, rather than the opening thereof, with an instrument.
When I perceived the importunity of the man. and the necessity of the work. I
rotted ye apostumation with a potential cautery which we made after this sort.
I took a cup full of the best Soap lye, ye first destilled forth from the
stepefat men term it the mother lye, and cast it into a brazen cauldron. with a
dragme of Romaine vitriole, which I caused to boyle, till all the lye was clean
wasted, and then gathered I the some, and froth which remained thereof for my
purpose, and truly this is so effectually in writing, that it seems to work
suddenly the act, Cautery potential.
and seeing the work began to receive profit. when as the colour of the place
began to be dark and black. This is to be used in the time, when the
patient is very feeble. But or ever it was applied, I mean the Cautery, the
hole apostumation was covered with a piece of Leather, least that the, Cauterie
should perse or hurt some other place, than that which I did intend to meddle
with al: And further, that a hole be made in ye midst of ye same leather, And
further to annointe ye leather with some ointment, in the same hole, to apply the
said Cauterye. And then with annother piece of Leather to cover the hoale, and
so let it stand by the space of one hour and a half. close covered, and then
remove the Cauterie, and then apparel the place with a plaster as follows.
R. Leaves of Mallowes, and Violets. ana one handful, let them be boiled and
stamped, putting thereunto..ii of Barrowes grease, of Butter..ss of leaven.
iii...i. of Saffron, mingle all together, plaster wise, lay it to the place,
for this will remove an hard crust and delay the payne.

Another cautery to open a sore, used by good Surgeons. Take of sower
Leaven.ss. onions roasted under the Emeres. ii. pigeons dung, and hempseede.
ana..i. snails in number, iii. black soap, swynes grease as much as will
suffyce, make hereof a little plaster, as broad as a groat and lay it upon ye
top or head of the soar, lay a broader resolving plaster over it. Chal. Now
when the crust shall be removed, the ulcer must be cured, as it was before
declared. Hitherto have we talked of Apostumations, chauncinge in clean bodies,
Now because there goes one by, by whom I may well certify my friend of my
travel: I pray you bear with me, for a while and with al speed possible when
I have done, I will return to you a-gayn. For I intend to finish our
communication, and speak of the Appostumations which hurt Bodies, that be
replete of Humours foul painful. c.


Soarenes. Sometime an apostumation, is placed in a gross foul Bodies, full of
humours, in such a case, what is then to be done, master Surgeon, I pray
you?


Chirurgi THen above al things, my dere friend. you must do your diligence to
labour and travel, Four intentions, and six unnatural things to be
observed.
more then you did in my Primatiue cause. And for the cure thereof it is very
necessary, that you set four intentions dilligently before your eien, and
six things not natural.


Soarenes. Which are they I pray you heartily tel me?


Chirurgi. FIrst, that you order your patients life, accordingly: and to
bring the humour to just equality.

Five notable good things to be observed in healinge
Secondly, to purge the evil humours which do maintain the apostumations hurt,
or offence.

Thirdly, to remove the cause coniunct or knit to the same things,
accordingly.

Fourthlye, to correct and amend evil accidents, if any be in place.

Fiuethly, things not natural. as air, meat and drink, sleeping, and
waking, rest, evacuation, repletion and accidents of the mind, as ire care.
c. All these must be ruled with diligence according to the ebbinge and
flowing of the matter, whether the cure do seem easy or harde, to that end, yt
very spedy work may be made with wisdom, and the cure quickly finished.
Also, that the belly may be relaxed, and losed of ye humour which doth most
abound. Further, that the appostumation be workmanly lauced. And here must you
chiefly observe, that no local medecin be applied before the whole body be
cleansed and well purged of that humour, which doth most offence to nature. No
local medecin applied before ye body purged.
For in so doing, mischief will ensue to the patient, and reproach to the
Surgeon: which may rather be counted a murderer, than a man belper in such
cases, whereof I have spoken in the repercussyue. c. So note that I give you
warning, to observe dilligently to losing of the belly, in al these causes. And
further, keep of ye matter with repercussyues, as example.

R. Oil of Roses, Bole armoniacke, the three Sanders, with the white and the
yolke of an Egg, A goodly repercussyue.
or else with this. Take Mallowe leaves, Violet leaves ana. M.i. Wormwood, Red
Roses ana. M.ss. Barley meal.i. Lint^ll meal,.i.ss. Oil of Chamomel, sees
such things as ought to be sodden* and let them be strained, then mingle
them together, making a soft plaster at the fire according to the art. This
is a medecin of that great learned Manne Auicen his own invention for
resolution, and comforting the member as it may very easily be perceived,
Auicenes medecin.
if you mark well the receyptes. Now if these be found sufficient, fear not
to practise, discomfort not at all: But perhaps you shall find some matter,
very slimy or tough, to strong for this in such case do thus. Take the
Leaves of Mallowes, and Violets, ana. M.i. roots of white Lillies..ii. roots
of Marche Mallowes.iii. boyle al together, An excellent plaster to assuage
payne in a ^ore.
stamp and strain them with a strong strayner, or Colender, into a Kettle,
whereunto put fresh Butter.ii. Swynes grease.i.ss. sees them and make a
plaster in a stone mortar: Or else do this, Take roots of white Lillies..iii.
roots of Marish Mallowes..ii. and rotes. of Garden Mallowes, and roots of
Violets, ana. M.ss. sees them soft, stamp them and strain them, whereunto put
Capons grease.i. fresh Butter.ii. Barowes grease..i.ss. sower Leaven.iii. Barley
meal, as much as shall suffice..i, of Saffron, and make thereof with the former
decoction, a convenient plaster, apply it to the sore place accordingly.


Soarenes. What is then to be done, after this business, I pray you master
Surgeon.


Chirurgi WHen you be come to this point, do your feat hardly with aunce in
hand, trimble not: discomfort not your self* neither your patient, but open
thapostumation. Some what in the form of a new Moon crooked and when that is
done, use the manner of digestion, and abstertion in manner as I have said. But
as concerning ye making sound the skynning, use ye medecin which is compounded
of Uermilio..i. oil of roses Mirtes, ana..i.ss. This is of good effect in
causing of a cicatrice, cut or scar, if ye place be anointed with water of
platen, rose water, honey of roses, a little Allume: it shall be very cofortable,
How to make incision.
with a soft Sponge to moist the place: and thus have the old ancient men, ever
used among their miserable patients. Then there is an other intention which is
very good: which is to amend evil accidents, which cumber, molest and vex
apostumations often times. For if the patient be lunge vexed with such evil
accidents, the virtue natural will then decay, and be quickly overthrown:
How to dry humours that do abound.
whereof will follow incontinently great danger and much hindrance to the cure
of the same, that in fine it shall be scant curable: which accidents be
these two, the one is called extreme dolor or payne, the other is darkness,
and deadly black complexion of the same Place: these two be ne'er hand
desperate cures, Dolor and darcknes of complexion.
and most dangerous to be helped, in all Appostumations: But commonly these
Accidents, are found only to be the cause of evil Surgeons
necligences.


Soarenes. What moves the Surgeon thus to do? I pray you tel me?


Chirurgi WHen ye matter in the apostumation, was already ripe, flitting and
after the same should quickly have been expulsed or avoided by invisible
transpiration which is one of the forces, What harm (...) of an (...)
Surgeon.
or benefytes of nature. Then the ignorant Surgeon: ministers forth with
repercussiues, which drove backward, and pressed the water so fast in the
place, that these accidents did ensue of necessity. Wherefore I shall exorte
thee my dere friend, saying thou art minded, to enter into the worthy ministry
of this work, which is not only profitable to thy self, but also beneficial
to the common wealth. That thou do use repercussiues, namely in the painful
places, that may be the occasion of ryping of the matter, for fear that
otherwise thou repent thee, for when matter is ones placed, then need we not
but to open the pores, which thing every man may do very easily, if he do
resort to the repercussiues before discrybed.


Soarnes SIr, if in case these accidents whereof you have spoke, be in this
daugerous peril, it should seem then, either to be in the fault of the
surgeon, or else in the malice of the humour: what is then to be don?


Chirurgi YOu shall make a plaster with these medecines following, which the
great learned men themselves, have used unto their patients. R, of hulled
Beans, or Beaneflower that is without the bran. l, i. of Mallow leaves.
M.ii: Sethe them in lye, till they be well sodden, and afterward, let the be
stamped and incorporated with meal of Lint, A good emplaster.
or flax,.iiii of Lupyne meal.ii: and form thereof a plaster, with Goats
grease, for this opens the pores avoids the matter by transpiration, and
comfort also the member: but if the place after a day or two after the
application of the plaster, fall more and more to blacknes, it shall be necessary
to go further, even to scarisying and incision of the place, according as it
may suffer. Certainly these are such accidents, that will not so-easely be
displaced, as I have talked of, but require most prudent and circuspect
diligence, of the Physicians. Therefore who so will com unto this art should
dwell no small while with a learned Surgeon, to this end, that he may both
learn his sayings and doings, What the Surgeon must do.
and observe the same, and have them ever in mind, that he may ever be able to
trauice the air. with his own: proper wings, without the help of others.
And not be as a blind guide, neither apt to lead, nor tract the way himself,
according to profit art, Example.
and knowledge. For in so doing he shall be like unto an vnconning shipmayster,
which brings his Ship to ruin, rocks or wrack, so shall he finish his course
with shame, and his patient with death. Therefore when the place is scarifyed,
let it be done both quickly and suddenly, then lay upon the same scarification
bay Salt. After this is done, than apply this following in good order.

R. Of B^anemeale, and of Orobus. ana. vi of Lupine meal..iiii. And boyle them
in Oximel unto such time as they shall be plaster thick, and after apply them
to the place, or else plaster it with beans and Lupines, boiled in Barbery lye,
and afterward strained and stamped in a mortar. Now perchance, if ye see evil
and corrupt flesh in the place, ye shall need no further council in that
behalf. Unguentum Egiptiacum of Auicen To^bate dead flesh.
But incontinent annoynt the place with Vnguentum Egyptiacum, which must be
made after the mind of Auicen.

R. Uertdegrece, Roche Alume, Honey, Vinegar. ana, q.ss. that is, as much as
will suffice, sethe them until they come into a red colour, and with this
ointment you shall exasperate, and sharp the place by the space of two or three
days, notwithstanding, if you shall need, you may iterate or often apply the
same, until the fame come to an escarous crust or scabb and make separation*
which must not be roted up by any instrument. but rather may be renewed with one
of the mollificatiues, specially young hogs grease, as it is aforesaid, and when
this is fallen of, the same ulcer must be cured, as all other ulcers are,
whereof I shall give you further understanding hereafter Now you do perceive how
putrefaction ought and must be handled, but in the mean while, foresee with
wisdom, that this evil be prevented, avoid the same, for when a cure is not
well handled, or is cast away, the it is to late to call again yesterday.
Prayer or weeping in this case will scant prevail in the Surgeons behalf.
Now consequently, after I have spoken of the assuaging or mittigating of the
dolor and pain of apostumacion, which oppresses nature, as the prince of
Philossophy called Aristotle, A Chirurgia must have providence to foresee cure.
affirms saying: dolor and payne be the evils, that do dissolve, and
utterly destroy the humayne nature of Mankynd: ie seems necessary that in due
order, some wholesome way be taken, to help this dangerous matter, and to avoid
the dolor.


Soarenes. What is best to avoid the dolor.


Chirurgi. NOthing truly, but artificially to alter and change an evil
complexion, so that it come not by stoppinge of the matter or by the breach of
continuance, or corrosion, for then such grief would ask other succours, for
where as dolor is fallen, there doth plainly appear a soden alteration of
complexion in that part, as Galen affirms. To alter complexion in a sore.


Therefore if you will make any alteration in nature, invent some apt proper
medecin, for the same purpose: as for example. Take Oil of Roses..ii the
yolke and whites of.ii. Eggs new laid, beat them al together, and apply the
to ye place, then the next day following in the morning, apply this in place
or stead of the former. Take crumbs of white bread, sodden in Goats or
sheep milk: or else bread sodden in the broth of a Chicken: or else you may
take a weathers head sodden fro the bones, which you must press through a
cotton cloth from the same sodden flesh, save half a pynte of the decoction,
unto which decoction, then add Honey of Roses, and oil of Camomel, ana., i.ss.
with yolks of new laid Eggs. Al these must be beat together recocted, or
sodden again. upon a soft fire until such time as it be somewhat stiff, when
this is don, apply it warm to the dolours pained place, accordingly. This also
that follows is used to the same purpose. Take roots of Holioke.ii Mallowes,
violets, ana. M.ss. Chamomil, red rose leaves. ana. p.ss. boyle them well, and
slampe them together. Add unto these when they be so stamped, of fresh
Butter..ii. oil of roses, violets ana..iii. make thereof a Cataplasme, and
apply it as warm as may be suffered.


Soarenes. WHat if this medecines prevail not, what shall I do then good
master Surgeon: Choice of medecin is good
For I have hard say, that one medecin works not health in every
complexion, but choice is good.


Chirurgi. THen you shall use this which follows. For often times extreme
dolor and pains of very necessity, shall require mollifications, without
danger, wherein there may be put such cooling things, as will not hinder
mollification: thus Prince Auicen shows in his Chapiter de flegmone,
therefore do thus.

Take Mallowes, Violets. ana M.i. sees them, and bray them, and put in them
ii. of Barley meal, of Oil of Roses,.iiii. and eftsoones sees the again
until they be in the form of plaster thick, which in case serve not yet the
purpose, note this other.

Take of Fenicreke, meal of Lintseedes, of flowers of Camomel, of hens fat
melted, of Rosed Oil. ana..iii. let al these. (the Oils and fattes only
excepted) be mingled and sodden together with the decoctions of Mallowes, and
violets, unto such time, as they be thickened, to make a plaster. This done,
warm the oil and fat, and incorporate the same, with a little oil of
Camomel, and of Dil, and so make it to a plaster. This will open the pores, and
hard pressed matter, which causes the payne. Now if it be in the augmeting of
a malady: in this case, ye shall make it after this ^orme.

Take oil of Roses, and of Camomil, ana..i ss. the yolks of two Eggs..ss.
of Barley meal or more, which ye shall shake well together, and so lay it to
the place. This suppose I sufficient for the appeasing of dolor: if not you
of your own head, by these may invent new and other confections, to the behofe
of your patients, and your own contentation. Since I have dispatched this, I
will retourn to an hardened apostumation, which truly might have bin omitted well
enough, ye matter being so manifest plain.

Nevertheless, I will recite here, what ye learned have used in this case,
because I would not mayme my communication^. Certaynlye this invention shall
Minister, diverse fetches and causes, wherein Men may employ there wits.
Howbeit (according as Mesue writes de lassitudine post purgationem, we will
convert our intent, to the cause of hardness to ye intent we may cut it of. For
as he saith, this is the right way in cures, ye foresight in working Wherefore,
if it appear yt the place tend to hardness, or ever it come to that poynct, be
fixed, it may be redressed thus. Take.x. fat Figs, of roots of Marish
Mallowes smally chopped..vi. Sees them well, and then Bray them with..ii. of
Barrows grease, putting thereto a little Saffron, wherewith cover the place,
which ye would soften. and ye shall not fail of the purpose. But if it were
so, A softninge Plaster.
that the pray escaped your wits, or mist your fyngers, you may be sure to
entrap it with this.

Take of Terebyntin meddled and well incorporated with Butter and this doutles
shall serve your purpose. But or ever it be applied, the place must be prepared
and often made moist, for ryping of the matter, with blood warm water. Now when
it comes in rotting, open the place with a potential Cautery, or with some
other fetch or mean, forseyng always that it be done according to the rules
above mentioned. A potential Cautery.
In fine when it is opened proceed in the cure, as in other.

These be the things, which I had this day, to say, which though they be not
so finely uttered, no lively declared, as happily ye Looked for: ye shall bear
with my simplicity, in that behalf, For I never bestowed labour in Oratorye
(as I think ye perceive right well) to attein unto eloquence. And so where I am
simple and plain my self, I have handled such things, as I had to say with
semblable simplicity plains: which if it like you also I shall right gladly
recite unto you after the same order manner, such things as we have to utter of
wounds. Now if I have stombled or missed any where. I pray you correct it, so
if it be worthy of correction* Of God beginning and ending of all things.
And on the other side, if any thing praise worthy, be com to light, offer and
ascribe that to the living God (as I said in the beginning of our
communication.) That we may in our self, verify the saying of the Poet: Ab
Jove principium, nam sunt Iouis omnia plena. Of God take things their
beginning, for by him are al replenished, whose name be blessed for ever, Amen


Soarenes. You have handled your self very eloquently freshly enough to day,
also you have given us cups of knowledge, able to quench the thirst of better
men then we are. And I assure you no man may greatly wonder at it, saying we
are environed on every side, with such gentle humanity, and brotherly love of
each others. Wherefore we pray unto God that for this your gift, he will prosper
you and your cures and long preserve you in health, to the behove of your
country, and friends. For you have quenched our thirst* above expectation,
with worthy communication, and medicines. But to give you warning, I pray you
hast hither to morrow with as great and quick speed, as ye canne pass, after
ye have visited your cures, to the intent ye may paye us your promise at full
not without many thanks. Now therefore sith then of your part time moves you,
to tend your cures, depart in good time, remember us, For we sore people
mind to repair hither again tomorow, to hear you, although the weather be
very cold.


Chirurgi Go ye on in the name of God, doubt not, but that I am yours, and
all theirs, which be either sick, or soar, to help them, to my power.


Soarnes IT be falls oftetymes if any good or evil hang over men's heads: the
divine mind of man, hath an inkling, a smattering thereof, Mans secrete
providence.
or ever it come to effect, which thing is verefyed in our self this day. For
where we feared loss of time, we have vainly spent all the day in looking
hither and thither, for you master Surgeon. And al this together is done
for you, wherefore to say truth we charged you with the matter, and spake
liberally of you, Now therefore if ye recompense it not with diligence. we will
lay al the burden in your neck, because we have tarried so long for you this
day.


Chirurgi Do you herein as you think good For I am all together yours, and
would that you al were helped, specially, because ye begin plainly to show your
grieves. And this will I do gladly, omittyng the definition, in as much, as
it likes you so well: notwithstanding, that al ancient Authors in wrytyng of
matters, thought it best to begin at the difinition But yet they as I think,
were of that mind, and opinion, where the matter was strange and dark, and
where it could not be well perceived, but by ye difinition only, which gave some
light to it. And of truth so ought they to do, where cloudy darkness, and
crabbish knots, require light and opening by the difinition, which thing, as
I trust, shall not happen in my plain words. For I intende to speak of
wounds, which to all men be as plain as a packstaffe. Of wounds.
For it is given men of nature, warily to avoid all noyance, and as much it
fears them also to be hurt. I say that wounds be manifest to all men. And
if it were otherwise with them, I might well enough begin my communication,
at this diffinition of wounds. For it were easily said, The definitio of a
woude.
that a wound is a breach of continuance, newly made, in an harde or soft
part of the body, being without putrefaction and corruption. Now therefore, sith
there appears no commodity curatyue to rise thereof, I Think it best to pass
it with silence: notwithstanding, if you be desirous of it, the saying, which
is rehearsed may serve the purpose. And now to begin the matter plainly, I
suppose. I may lay the foundation best in the division of wounds.


Soarenesse. YOu have rightly judged. But sir my desire is, that ye will begin
whereas I may hear one long profitable tale, of the whole matter, and I will
occupy mine ears and keep silence.


Chirurgi I was minded the same my self also.


Soarenes. Well, go on then, and speak to the purpose* without interrupting of
your talk, unless where necessity shall cause you to pause, or breath your
self good master Surgeon,.


Chirurgi. I Heard my friends and brethren say, that there were two kinds of
wounds which do no less differ in name, than in their cures, Two kinds of
Wounds. the one simple and the other double or compound.
The one Men call a simple wound, the other double or compounded. The simple
is where no substance is lost, and is ensounded cured with one intention
alone. And of this, we shall make no further ado, because of the facillity
thereof. For why? Cobblers, Carters, and women be able to cure such wounds. Now
that which is properly called a copounded*would is where some substance is
lost, and necessarily requires divers intentions in the cure, as thus. To
unite that which was separated, to restore that was lost, and to displace an
apostumation, if it be concurraunt with the same. But here note, that amongst
wounds, some be uncurable. And it is not inconvenient to begin at the heart,
as the chief Forte and principal part of the body,

Then we say, that every wound, annoying and perishing the substance of the
heart, it is deadly and uncurable. For why as Auicen saith the heart during the
natural life, may not suffer any breach of continuance. And therefore to knit
up much in one knot, such wounds as give let, What wouds be mortal
and impeachment, to the virtue, which is necessary to life, take mankynd away,
without remedy. As wounds in the substance of the Brayn: of the wind pipe. of
the wessand: of the Lunges: of the Liver: of the Gaul, of the Midryfte, of the
Maw: of the Spleen: of the small guts: of the kidneis, and bladder: and
generally all such wounds, which pierce through the bulk and inward parts, be
very dangerous. Because the inward parts be altered by moving of the air from
out forth. and the spirits be offended within, Parts most dangerous to be
hurt.
and the virtue natural, which maynteineth life, is destroyed. And the reason
why, is that, when these parts be wounded, they be most hardly helped by
reason of their continual mouinge and labourynge. And when this may not be made
whole, they be notable, no sufficient to do their offices, requisite to nature.

Now must we speak somewhat of wounds, that happen in muskelles, and lacertes.
For they may be thought as dangerous, as the foresaid, Wounds in the Muskels.
For as in the one, be manifest tokens of death, so in ye other be
Prognosticable signs, for men inflamed with high and divine foresight.
Example.
For a wound in a Muscle doth much like a wood Snake, which lies in wait for
men out of their way, lurkyng under the green flowers, where he puts them
yt go by in doubt or hasard of their life. Therefore my friends let us reason
somewhat of them also, yt they lead us not forth with vain hope, and oppress us
among other, as careless, idle heads. Wherefore we suppose that wouds
chancing.3. fingers above and beneath, Of conuultio mortal.
the heads of ye Muskels or lacertes nigh unto the joints, be exceeding
dangerous: and that pricking of synewes do often cause conuultions, by reason
of the great fealyng and fellowship yt they have with the brain. Wherein ye
saying of Hippocrates* appears true who saith, yt a spasme or couulsio
chaucing upon a would, is mortal for ye most part Wherefore the wounds in such
parts must be handled warily, and with advised deliberation. For why, they will
to notably hinder the Surgeon his estimation, if he prognosticate warily of
the same to them that stad by: which thing truly had befallen to my self, when
I promised a man his life, had not I been admonished by master Rasis, who
secretly and wittily, unknown to al the family, plucked me by the elbow, and
warned me, with these or like words in effect. And then the patients
strength was agreeable to health, and no apostumation risen, but he slept as he
ailed nothing at all. Consider with thy self, saith he, as thou dost lightly
always, the signs which induce conuultion in wounds. Whereas there appears
no swelling in the soar, in good faith, I conceive an evil opinion in, the
patients life, which I have gotten me, with long observation. For the matter
which should come forth, to the pained place, is supped up of the synewes.
Wherefore I se a conuultion even at hand, For if the matter, though it were
little (for in much it fares like) had issued and gathered to ye place it
would give me occasion to think well of him. For it should signify, that the
matter did relinquish the synewes, and draw outward.

A goodly note to be observed when death is hand.
Now in as much as it remains, as a sleep within, surely I think evil of it:
and truly, it was marvelously said of him. For, or ever the fifth day came,
the man gave up the breath, by reason of a spasme or Cramp, where at I was
greatly abashed* reserving the signs in memory, and mind hereafter as I also
advise you to do. Yea, and if there be any other else, worthy of observation,
mark the vein also diligently, that it may stand you for steed, when need
shall require. For this will require a vigilante Eye of the Surgeon.
Wherefore I appeal here to your secrete hearts, and bid you beware, that ye
disgrace not your selves thorough rashness, but be ripe in Prognostications, and
circumspect in obseruinge of the times of your workings, Both for one help
and others.

Now all other wounds, these only excepted, which I have recited, no doubt be
curable, And as for the help of these that are curable. there are two
principal found, the one by the first intention, the other by the second. The
latter is, where divided parts are joined together through a portion of an
other kind of matter. As for an example

Bones are joined, together, with a certain hard matter, much like a bone but
not a bone which is much like to Alasarte. The other, when parts are joined
together, with their like in kind, as flesh with flesh. And these ways, we
must needs have before our eyes, to the intent we minister not any thing in
wounds, which we might afterward repent. Wherefore to avoid these evils I judge
it best to begin with such things as may be used generally, in all kind of
wounds, to help mankynde.


Soarenes. For Gods sake show me the best manner of wounds,


Chirurgi. WHen ye have determined, to take any such wound in hand,
incontinent remember to observe these things: that is to say, an order of the
Life, local medicines, and amendment of evil accidents. The first, ye shall
obtain by due administration of the six things, called not natural. If the
Surgeon be ignorant therein, the Physicians may rule the matter. For it
belogeth to them, to give an order of living, to bring humours to a quality* to
try out inward causes, of variable ebbyng and flowing. And fynally to give just
redress of ye same: What the (...) must observe*
which thing for the most part, Surgeons labour not to attain to, because
the matter is so secretly hyd, as it were amongst stones, but only by means
of covetousness, and gready desire of Surgeons. For when they have gotten
only a little taste, without all exercise, under their master, which thing
is mother to Arts, as Aristotle saith: They take money hungerly, they seek in
hand, and rent their skin with their teeth, making no conscience at the matter
at all. Now as touching the second, in applying of local medicines: ye shall
not play, make or mar, no go at all adventure, as ye sought blyndfield. But
persuade your self earnestly, that you made Argus, to be your companion in the
matter. For in case ye miss but a little, or negligently omit any necessary
thing in the cure, ye shall first bring your self into a peck of troubles, and
after will ensue many inconveniences* as says Aristotle: grant one
absurdity, and many inconveniences will follow. Wherefore, least this do
chance, it is good that ye loke narrowly on the matter, with advised
circumspection. Now therefore, when ye stand before the wounded, first ponder
with your self, how the wound was given, of what sort it is, and how large a
gash? For be the wound small and in a fleshy part, without losing of
substance, it may be cured only with convenable binding. Who so doth grant
to one absurdity, many one will eftsoon follow.
But if it be great and deep, first staunch the blood, if any be, with some
medicine convenient, as I shall declare hereafter, in the place of bleedyng and
Ulcers. whereunto I refer thee at this present. For there I entende to give
medicines, and means for that purpose. When the Blood is stanched, ye shall
sew the wound, with a fine thread, well twisted and waxed, A small wound.
between your fyngers. But or I speak of sewing. I will recite certain causes
where sewing is dangerous, and therefore forbidden as vnprofytable. And then
will I to my purpose again in order for your sake.


Soarenes. I pray you show me that order?


Chirurgi. YOu shall first remember, that wounds made, with any lunge and round
weapen, as an arrow or dart: must not for a few days, be cured by the first
intention, notwithstanding they be cured partly by the first. Some do say they
be not cured, by the first, for why? Example.
We keep the open, least the matter be imprisoned here. For if it were so,
wounds might incur extreme dolor, by reason of alliance, with cords and
sinews. And therefore we say plainly, they ought not to be shut up in the
first days. For my self saw this in a valiant Captain, at Barwicke, who
had a wound in the Neck. And a certain Phisicion toke the man in hand, and
willing to hast the helping of the wound, which ought to have ben kept open,
Pate Hardy the Scot a good Surgeon.
he closed it up with a seam: whereupon, the patient fell into extreme pain,
and as it were, into a continual conuulsion, insomutch, that if a cunning
Surgeon, called Pate Hardy, a Scot, had not put to his Hand the sooner, he
had borne his own message to ye dead. But to our purpose, where I said,
notwithstanding, they be cured by the first intention, this is understanded,
that is where there is no lost substance, newly produced in them. For if there
were, Of the first and second intention.
the cured should be after the second intention. And where any substance is
lost, and ought newly be produced, sewing shall be right strange and untoward.
For why, it can not otherwise be well cured, but by the second. Matter doth
covet digestio
For nature seeks ever restitution of the lost part, with no less
carefulness, than the mother her only lost Son. Wherefore, if we mind to
restore that, we may not sow up the wound, or it be recovered. If the wound be
deep, and greatly altered, by the receipt of the air, think of no sewing.
His name was Iue, of Swasa in Cambrigeshyre.
For matter is now secretly caused, by reason of the air, which cries out for
digestion, and abstersion. And if the impericke, whom ye know of, had thus
handled the matter, the honest man ye wot of, had ben yet a live. For when he
had taken a large gash in his Leg, and long had left it open to the air,
thinking to be notably well cured: caused a Surgeon to be sent for, which
immediately in all the hast (a Gods name) seweth up the wound. What will ye
more? Immediately after the sewing, importable dolours did arise, A wound of a
bruise.
and on the third day, the leg was so feastred, that in the.vii, the man
would needs take his Vltimum Vale, and say farewell to the living. Now if the
imperike had first used digestion with abstersion, and then sewing of the
wound: perchance the matter had not grown, to that extremity of death. And
in case the wound come by means of a bruise then attempt not to sew it. For
without doubt, ye shall shortly perceive, that ye labour in vain.

Whereof Galen gives us a warning word, saying: that it follows of
necessity, It is peryllous to sew a wound coming of the biting, or rendyng of
some beasts.
that a bruise should putrefy, and turn to corruption. I add, understand it,
if it be an extreme bruise: for in a mean, it takes no place. Therefore, if
it be sewed, the seam will soon be corrupted. As we saw our self, a lusty
young man, who came to see a Bull baiting in Parisse Garden, and fallen before
the same, I wot not how, the Bull gave him in the thygh a rent, with the
horns. Now when a Surgeon had taken him in hand, incontinent he sewed the
wound, which putryfied right soon. And certainly, unless master Backter had
helped it, I think assuredly, the man had dyed of it. Further we say, that
sewing is not good in a wound, caused by biting of some beast. For a bytten
place, is hollow and abated, or otherwise, somewhat savours of the nature of a
bruise. Howbeit, we leave this case to the good Surgeons Judgment. For
parts severed by bytyng may well be joined with a thread, in some cases.
Sewynge is to no purpose, where a Wound vncouereth a Bone broken, or whole,
for it will not have ado with ensoundyng through sewing: except the discovered
be first clad, and the second vnyted together again naturally.

Also a wound in a musculous place, specyally overthwart the Muskell, Of wound^
of the muscles
utterly refuses sewing, as Auicen saith in ye chapiter of bynding of wouds in
Lacertes and Muskelles. Or be it a Lacert, which is rent in latitude, it is not
drawn together, but rather some thing is put between, least the skin grow
together. c. Wherefore he would the wound went at large, whiles the cure is
after the second intention. The same do sinewy places desire also, for if they
be sewed, the Lyppes will grow to one, and the Synewes under covert, will caste
reumetike matter, and shortly cause apostumacion, so that ye shall be driven,
whether ye will or no, to louse the seam or make a new incision. Therefore to
avoid this inconvenience, we shall suffer such wounds, to run at large for a
season: and so ye shall have them, more tractable in handling. How be it, here
is a tedious disputation moved. whether a cut sinew should be sewed, or not.
For there be sundry opinions, and aucthorityes of the learned, of the one
side, and of the other. And verily, if I should dispute the matter, I would
maintain both the opinyons, although at this present, I assent with master
Ihon de Uigo, not for that I have sworn, to say as he saith, but because his
words, seem most consonaunt to reason.

And to Auicen, where he says, if the sinews be broken in latitude, then it
is necessary to sew the wound: and if it be not sewed, Of sinews
the Wound will not grow together. Howbeit, I will omit the prosecution of this
question since it is not necessary unto this treatise. But yet by the way, mark
well the saying of Auicen, where he commands to sew the wound of necessity
Certes, I, after Marianus would let it go open. But he means of a large.
wound, which would cause great deformitye, if it be vnsewed. And likewise, if
it be sewed, that there be a great distance between stitch stitch And on the
other side, where I said, I would suffer it to be louse. I meant of a small
wound, which experience shall teach you to be true. Moreover, many dolorous and
apostumated wounds, will none of sewing, which, what for the facility, and
manifest appearance, needs no further declaration. For the cause is open to
them, that will diligently consider the matter. These be the causes, where we
use not to sew Wounds, How to sew a wound, and how not.
and be worthy to be put in memory. Now will I return, from whence I
degressed. Now these cases excepted, sew the wound, with a well twisted thread,
drawn through Wax, as we said before, always remembered that ye leave some
place open in the lowest part, where matter may have issue forth. When ye have
so done, ye must apply this medicine, which is mingled of the white of an Egg,
and a little Oil of Roses. This is done, because the Patient should not
greatly be troubled, at the removing. For ofttime is caused so great payne,
namely in hearye places, The Surgeon must look pleasantly upon his
patient.
that the pacyent seems to be cramped, or ^a^kt with conuulsio* And let this
remain.xxiiii. hours in ye would if ye fear any bledig. And when this time is
expired, visit your paciet again, with a gladsome countenance, and whiles ye
be merely talking with him take of all the coueryngs, and then enbaulme it,
with a degestiue of yolks of Eggs, and clear Terebintine, laid in a cloth.
But if the wound be in the head, or any place of much feeling, take Oil of
Roses, in steed of Terebintine, wherewith proceed in the cure, till matter be
caused in the place. And when that is done, set the degestiue a part. For if ye
proceed further, it were but to put putrefaction, to putrefaction.
Nevertheless, the brinkes of the wound, must be oiled with Rosed omphacine, that
is Oil of Water Lyllies. After ye have so visyted the wound, ye shall spread
this defensive, one hand bread from it.

A defensive.
Take of Rosed Oil., ii.ss. of all the Saunders ana..ii. of Bole
Armoniack.ii.ss. the white of an Egg, and a little Vinegar, if the wound be
distant from a sinewy place, if not Wine of Pomegarnettes, in steed of
Vinegar. All which, cause to be drawn in a mortar that it be at hand, when
need shall require. When ye have thus proceeded four or five days, the must
you give over the degestiue, and use a mundyfication, which is thus mingled
Take of Rosed Honey,.ii. of Terebintine..iii. let them sees a little, putting
thereto.i.ss. of Barley meal, with..i. of Saffron. All which must be
incorporated at the fire, and used the space of.viii. days, or there about, as
is expedient. And as for the sounding, use the ointment, that I descrybed in
apostumacions, wherewith I ensound or make whole, almost all kind o^ breaches,
as our fryend can wytnesse, which (because he would have the certayntye) would
needs be present, when we cured a sore man of an apostumacion under the arm
hole, which Albenzoar Rasis reckoned for uncurable. If any fattysh flesh grow,
at the inclosyng thereof, ye shall remove it with Vnguentum Mixtum, mingled of
Vnguentum Aegyptiacum, and Vnguentum Apostolorum, of each like quantity, or else
take this powder, which my self did mtuch use. Take of Citrine Mirabolanes..ss.
of Terra Sigilla^a..i. of burnt roch Alume..ii. let them be stamped small, and
the powder used for a corrosive, wherewith ye shall get the victory and triumph
over the Malady.


Soarenes. Thus have ye spoken of a simple deep fleshie wound: now I pray
you, proceed to the double wound, and the cure thereof.


Chirurgi. Restitution is made, with a matter of an other kind* as in bones
and sinews. Howbeit, some authors affirm, that broken and displaced bones in
young children, be united again, with matter of the same kind, For why
members* which Physicians call sparma^icall, being once loosed, will not be
joined again, with Poros sarcoides* which is of an other kind. Now therefore,
here have we to declare, how this, means may be obtained, in a double wound,
of the elbow or hand. For of all wounds, they be most hard and dangerous, and
specially of the hand for the multitude of sinews and cords, and otherwise,
scarcity of nutratiue humours* Therefore let us take in had, even as it were
now newly come to our c^re*

Now then my fryend, when ye be called to any such chance, remember ye loke
seriously, that no shiver nor gobet of bone be left in the wound, which might
sharpen and anger the virtue natural, through some dolor and prycking.
Captain (...), Reed of the holy Island.
As it hath chanced in a famous worthy Gentleman and Soldier, called Captain
Rede, whose arm was broken at Lith, in war, Anno. 1559. and many bones
remained, to his hurt for a time. For if these accydentes a rise, they show an
apostumacion at hand: the affect and coming whereof we ought by al means,
ways, and pollycies to imbarre, To cleanse the wound* and draw forth broken
bones.
l^ast it creep to the wounded place. And ye shall obtain this, if ye observe
this order, which I will give you. First cleanse the Wounds of all sheuers of
bones, and then if any bones be fully cut of, place them in their roumes as
orderly as ye can. When ye have done, have a table at hand, well couched and
covered with soft lint, that the hand or member may be placed to rest thereon.
And forthwith sew up the wound, in case it be large, For a small wound as we
said before, must be left open, to the intent reumeticke matters may have free
liberty and issue, to come forth. But take heed in sewing that ye pryck no
sinew, and that passage be left in the lowest part, for sanious matter, which
shall grow, or be caused there, to issue forth When the wound is sewed, and
the hand laid on the table, then must you apparel the same with fine lynt,
dipped in the whites of Eggs: and so leave it gently enrolled, for the space of
xxiiij, hours, giving the patient a convenient regiment of life in diet
according to his nature.


Soarenesse. What shall we do then, when this is done. as you have commanded,
in this most goodly wholesome order?


Chirurgi. AS soon as that time shall be expired, return again to the pacyent,
taking a Harbour with you, to make a convenient blood letting, on ye other
contrary part: this is done, When to let blood on the contrary side of the
body.
that the matter ready to cause apostumacion, fall not to the place, which is
made weak by means of the wound. And the vein must be opened for bledyng the
second day, for saving of good blood. For if the vein were opened the first
day* then good blood might be drawn, as well as evil. Now when ye have done
with the blood letting, open the wound* and apply these Medicines, for the cure
thereof, as follow in order. R. of most clear Terebintine..ii. of oil of
Hipericon..iii. mingle them at the fire, power them warm into the wound. For
if it be applied cold, inconuenyence might ensue thereof, as Hippocrates
saith: cold is an enemy to the sinews, teeth, bones, brain, Cold is an evil
enemy to the sinews.
and nuke of the neck, but heat is profytable and friendly. Therefore it is
right convenient, that in all your works, about double wounds, ye eschew
medicines, which shall be actually cold, and see ye keep the member warm, as
a Woman delivered of her burden. Moreover, in the brinkes and circuit of the
wound, ye shall apply pieces of cloth, thoroughly weated in Rosed oil, wherein
Anglet witches, or earth worms have ben sodden. For this will comfort the part,
also cause euaporacions of humours, if any should approach. Again, anoint this
defensive about the cubit or Elbow, to defend the Wound from fletyng matters.
For this do thus. R* oil of Roses. and of Mirtille oil, ana..i.ss. of Bole
Armoniacke, Terra sigillata, Dragons blood, Abuerflue to cleanse and dry.
ana..i.ss. of all the Saunders. ana..i ss. of white Wax. q.ss. and let it be
made to a soft defensive, in manner of a liniment. And when ye have thus
proceeded in the cure.6. or 7. days or more, as unto the time the sinews cast
some reumaticke matter, then it shall be time to go to abstersiue, or drying.
The first, whereof is thus made. Take of Terebintine..i.ss. of Syruppe of
Roses..i sees them a little, and whiles they be seething, put thereto q.ss. of
Barley meal, A god abstersiue. q.ss. is as much to say as will suffice
and of Sarcocole, and Frankincense, ana..ss. of Saffron..ss. and stir them
well, till they be incorporated, and mingled together. This is a gentle
abstersiue, without biting or nypping, which is necessary in such Wounds.


Soarenes. All this shall I gladly do to my self and others, but a Gods name,
what shall I then take in hand, to proceed any further?


Chirurgi. YE shall minister this ointment, as the learned Surgeons did
order it, which is. R. Of Calves and Cowes fat l.ss. of oil of Roses, of Rosel
ana..ss. of litharge of silver..iii.ss. of fresh odorant Wine..i. of Anglet
wiches or yerth worms.ii. of Honey, S. Ihons Wort, Madder, and flowers of Rose
Marie, an. M.ss. Let all these be boiled together, the Terebintine and Litharge
only excepted, vntyl such time, as the Wine be wasted, and then strayn the
foresaid decoction, and boyle it in a new together with the Litarge, till it
have gotten a very black colour, and lastly put the said Terebintine to it, A
good ointment for wounds.
with q.ss. of white Wax. And so this will be a soft ointment, most convenient
for wounding of sinews. And this kind of ministracion, must be continued,
unto the time of sealyng and ensounding: for which purpose, ye may use this
decoction following, or that, which was discriued before, in apostumacions. But
ye shall find this decoction following better because it doth ensound and
comfort the member withal: and therefore ye may boldly use it in this place.

Take of Roses, Mirtilles, UUormewood, flowers of Pomegarnetes ana. M.i. ten
Cypress Nuts, and boyle them in red Wine, unto the wasting of the third part,
which use, and apply with a Sponge well pressed, for the repair of the member.
To end a double would and begin accidents.
And this was mine order, my fried, which in good faith, gat me both honesty
and profyt. This I suppose sufficient, as far as it appertains to the help of
a double wound. Now is it time, to come to the accidents, whereof we mentioned
a little before: which thing, yet nevertheless, I would have omitted, had I not
perceived, that ye were so desirous of it, and doubtless, not without good
cause. For why, the greatest part and feat of curing of wounds or ulcers
(whereof by Gods help, we shall reason to morrow) stands in the removing of
the evil accidents. And therefore, Nature subject to many calamities.
least I should be seen to defraud you, of your desire, I will once venture my
self for your sake, under this Burden, heavy though it be. Verily I can
not but much marvel, how it should be, that our nature is subject to so many
chances, and so great ieopardies: when I consider the accydentes, in sewing
UUounds, which when they be fallen, they bring not only the slender wytted and
learned, but trouble witty and far casting men also. when the Chirurgia is
put to shame.
UUhat think you the common sort of Surgeons will do when they see learned
to seek, to be uncertain, and to run from medicine, to medicine, thynk ye
not, but they will make Light of the matter: if they see a man, to be
tormented, with payne, burst with apostumacion* vexed with evil complexion, to
burn in Fevers, to be racked with cramps, to have Apoplexes, yea, and to be
distracte of their wits to? Therefore least we be reckened of their number,
and charged with ye crime of vnmerci^ulnes: let us endeavour our selves, to the
uttermost of our possibility. that we master every of them with many
medicines, when they befall. For if they be not well handled, they will rob us
of our honest name health and profit, and all the pacients of their lives,
which is their chief Jewel. Wherefore, we must besterre us in the matter
diligently when Nature is extremely vexed with dolor: and way with our selves,
whether it come of the breach of continnaunce, or drying of the wound, or else
by reason of gathering of some humerall matter. And it it come by breach of
continuance, or drying of the wound, then shall a molificatiue be best, for
the opening thereof. But if it come by heapyng of humerall matter, then dryinge
medicines shall be best against the pain, without any respect of time, which be
mingled of Oils, meal and other drying simples. These things well
considered, first if the wound be pained, through lack of digestion, it may
be eased with this.

Take of soft bread sodden.M.i. Goats milk., vi. of oil of Roses, and
Camomell. ana..ij. and yolks of three Eggs, all which do myngle together in
a pot, the yolks reserved, and boyle it, till the oils be well drunken up of
the Bread, and then take it from the fire, and mingle the yolks withal. Thus
shall you have, if ye boil it accordingly, an hard Plaster, to be applied
warm to the place.


Soarenesse. But what if this your medicine serve not to the purpose, have ye
no more plenty of medicines then in store?


Chirurgi. YEs forsooth, that I have a medicine of great virtue following. Take
a quarter of a pynte of ye decoction of Mallowes, and Violets, or Mutton broth
of the Weader, or else of any beast that men use to eat, and let bread be well
steeped therewith, and afterward boyle it, as it was said before. But remember
to put a little Saffron in this, as it may in the former also, if it please the
Surgeon.. But if it come of heaping of matter, use these medicines that
follow.

Take of small ground Bran.M.iii. of Barley and Bean meal ana..ii. of
Camomell, Melilote, and Worm wood, finely shorn, ana M.ss. of Odorant Wine,
three cupfulles, boiling them at the fire, with sufficient Sape, and in the end
put thereto oil of Camomell, and of Roses ana.ij.ss. oil of Dill..ss. with a
little Saffron, and make hereof a soft plaster, after the manner of a Cerote. I
warrant you, with these ye shall assuage the dolor, which for the most part
draws matter to the place, as a cuppyng Glasse^, namely if it be cold. And if
it come of heat, then alter the hot receiptes, according to the necessity. And
when the dolor is once appeased, ye shall easily win the Bulwark as touching
the rest of the cure. Now ye shall repress apostumacion, if ye apply the
defensive above described, when ye have let the pacyent bleed, with a
diuersiue blood letting a clyster going before: But if there appear swart
redness about the Wound, the cause is an evil complexion, To correct a smart
wound.
for correcting whereof, ye may use these receiptes. Take Oil of Roses. iii.
and mingle the same with the yolks and whites of two Eggs, which apply, being
well shaken together in linen. Or thus. Take. ij. of Vnguentum Rosatum, oil of
Roses..i. and put them in a Leaden mortar, casting thereto of juice of Lattice.
i.ss. of Litharge..ss. of Terra sigillata..i. and draw this, till it be as a
fine liniment, whereby ye shall fully remove, and correct the evil complexion.
But if the patient shall be vexed with any fever, conuulsion, palsy, alienacio
of mind, swonyng, or such like, by reason of moving of the humours, take a
Phisicion to you, and he will amend these accidents. For if I should now order
Siruppes, and Pocions (albeit that I entend also at more leisure, to speak
more of them in that place, but not now) I might seem to put my sith in an
other mans corn. For why, here we talk not of Physic, but of Chirurgi,
which is somewhat contented with Ointments, Fomentacions, Plasters, and
Linaments. This is the Money, which I had to coin this day, to ye intent I
might be able to pay you, without further suite in the Law. For ye bound me so
straightly, with an oblygation of an oath. Albeit in this case, every honest man
will willingly keep touch to discharge his credence to his power.


Soarenesse. OH, how ryghtly judge you? But now gentle Chirurgi, in as much as
you have yielded us the use of this day, let us depart for the time. Howbeit,
let us repair hither again, I pray you to morrow, to the intent the rest, if
any be, may be paid: and so we receive the whole sum in assurance, whereof ye
have given us, sore people, this earnest penny. And in the mean^ time, we Sore
and Lame, give thanks to the living God, for his dear benefyts, which of his
mercy, he hath plentyfully bestowed upon us to relieve us with his gifts, God
gives health.
and by his means, that we have learned, to help and heal ourselves when we
are lame and sore, whereby we may be profitable to our common wealth, I
therefore desire you, when you be at leisure, to treat somewhat of ulcers,


Chirurgi. NOW, an ulcer is a breach of continuance, with putrefaction and
rottenness, caused in process of time. What an Ulcer is.
And their breeding or ingenderyng* commonly (as Auicen takes it) is of
ulcerated breakyngs forth of pushes, and of wounds evil handled. Wherefore,
wounds) as our chyeftayn and grand master, affirms in the first treatise
of ulcers) as soon as their due time of digestion, and abstersion is expired,
and yet nevertheless, they remain foul and full of corruption, must be called
Ulcers properlye, and not wounds: whereof it is a consequent, All sores
voiding virulent matter are called Ulcers.
that every breach of continuance, which voydeth matter, or virulencie, shall
undoubtedly be called an Ulcer. Whereof some be fathered of an hot, and some
of a cold humour. The ulcers* which be found with redness, and itchyng in the
edges, come of the hot the other, which be without great redness and itch,
and have also wide roots, are fed and nourished of cold. Again, among
Ulcers, some be of small importance, and some be right dangerous. All be
dangerous, which breed no sanious matter* when the time is to breed it: or
when some apostumacion is cocurrant, which shall be hidden secretly, without
evident cause. For if the apostumacion vanysh, by reason of some medicine,
having power to work that effect, it were no matter, but if it vanish without
cause, and lye secretly a lurkyng: Certes, it imports no good, but evil, as
spasmes, destractions and alienacion of mind. Howbeit, there be also Ulcers,
as Auicen saith, which properly, and as it were of their own nature, produce
their effects now and then, as ulcers of the back, of synewes, of the knees,
of the hanche, and all such as have great alliance with the Nuke, whereof,
some be tractable, and some repine utterly against Chirurgj, in their cure.

All kind of Ulcers be most hard of cure, which succeed any syckenesse* and
end the same, by the way of euacuacion: Ulcers be hard to cure that follow a
sickness.
For nature uses to unburden her self, at that place, from thenceforth, of her
evil and vnprofytable superfluities. Likewise bodies, which be accidental,
moistye, or dry, will not easily be cured of their Ulcers: as women with
Child, and folk sick of the dropsy: which is the caused in the one through
abundance of accydentall moisture: in the other, by reason of retained
superfluities. Again, dry and ethicall members, may not easily be ensounded,
for want of good blood: We see the like effect in old sly bodies (which, what
for lack of digestyon of their meates, their natural heate being almost
extinguished* and what for lack of good blood) be continually eaten up of
Ulcers. Oft time an evil Complexion, is cause why, an Ulcer is not healed and
ensounded. Wherefore in especial, have the Complexion in consyderation, and
never rest till ye have corrected the same. For why, otherwise the
nourishment, which creeps thither, will be turned into an evil matter when
it is not ruled and maistred of nature. For what is an evil matter else but
corrupted Nutryment, which Nature could not order* no was able to convert into
the second Humidyties? And to the intent ye may achieve this well, ye shall
bestow a little Labour, to know the Natures of simples, and Signs of
Complexions, which ye may learn of Galen, in his Book, de art medendi. And
spend not your time in trifles and words, that pass with the wynd,
Surgeons do not agree.
neither in crooked distorted arguments. For what good shall you do to your
pacyents, when they cry for your help, when ye have made a great sort of
subtle arguments. Whether there may be a neutralitye, or mean between sycknes
and health, in any body. Again since we see that they, which have made mention
in their books, be all at square, and none wholly of others opinion. Why do we
embrace such losing of time? Therefore I will advise you, to follow with all
diligence, Master Ihon Tagaltius, who groundedly and pythlye in his doings,
seeks out fruitful matters, omytting trifles.

On the other side, the Ulcers, which may be easily cured, are those that
chance in bodies of good complexions, and be nourished with good blood,
without affluence of many superfluities. Ulcers in good complexions, ^r soon
cured.
Amongst which some abide in their newly caused continuance, and some fall to
discontinuaunce again. The Ulcers which fall again to discontinuaunce, b^e (as
Auicen teaches) where flesh is caused and generated or ever the mundification
be complete. For in as much as unclean superfluities, be there secretly
hidden, it follows of necessity, that the continuance be loosed and broken
up again. And for this cause, such breaches of continuauce and sores, be
reckened for fistulaes, with the learned Physicians.

Five kinds of Ulcers.
Further note here, that there be five kinds of ulcers in general an ulcer
virulet, fylthie, hollow, rotten corrosive. But me thinks it is meet first,
or ever we meddle with the cure of these generals, that we recite ye
accydents of ulcers, which cumber and hinder us, in the cure: And when we have
so done, then shall we recite, and treat of their cures. For in case we correct
not the accydents, which make most for the knowledge quod quid est rei, as
Aristotle saith in his books, De Anima, we shall never win the victory of
the ulcers, though we strive right stoutly in the cause, because the accidents
hold of the sore, and be of part against the cure,

Now the accidents which happen in ulcers, be these, bleedyng superfluous
flesh, Accidents in ulcers, their names.
evil in savour, Lips, dolor: apostumacion, hardness, corrupted bones,
swelling veins, and roundness, and every of these require properlye a cure by
them self, which if it be denayed them, when they call for it, either we shall be
convented before A Judge, to give every man his own, or the debt not payed,
there may be no confederacion in amity with men. Therefore least we be troubled
in the law or charged with tyranny, let us see how we can discharge our hands,
of these accidents, and first of bledyng.

Every flux of blood, dear brother Soarenes, commonly proceadeth from a
primitiue cause* The flux of blood proceeding of a prymitiue cause.
For the antecedente, we will omit at this present, least happily, whiles we
pass over our own, and rush rashly into other men's doors, we might anon be
thrust forth by the head for thieves. Therefore, to avoid this dishonesty, we
will only speak of bleding, coming of a cause primitiue. Now therefore a
moresage or bleeding, comes of late division of the cont^nuaunce* Distilling
of Blood from the veins.
or by reason of putrefaction of the same, In wounds we find swe^ng of blood,
from a vein, and sometime swellynge and ^le^yng of blood, by little and
little. A vein sweateth blood, when he is bereft of his proper covering.
Wherefore in this case, we judge it necessary, that the Phisicion hast to
repair with gentle medicine, that, which was wasted with cruel weapon. This
is don by couenable sewing of ye wound, but in case the vessels be broken,
and the blood run at liberty: it is to be considered, whether the blood run
gently, Of woun^ d^epe, and (...) deep.
or else spring and amount fierslye in his stream. If it fleet myldlie, then
it is plain, that it comes of veins, and is somewhat gross, and dimmysh red:
but if it mount on height, be red, fomyng and clear, it is an artery, But as
touching the cure, these things must first be considered, whether the whole
vein be cut, observe the order, which shall be declared anon, Next consider,
whether the wound be deep, or superfyciall. If it be superficial, apply
incarnatyues to it, which shall be such as follow.

Take Sarcocoll, Myrrh, Aloes Epatike, Dragons blood: Mastike, ana, as ye
shall think convenient. For so of every of them, may be ordered by your self,
according to the pacyents complexion. Repercussiues
And with this ye shall withstand this kind of bledyng, which is wont to cumber
men very much Afterward, when this medicine is cast into the Wound, ye shall
roll small quisettes of lynte, and weate the same in the whytes of Eggs, well
shaken and beaten with dust of Bole Armoniack, and lay them orderly in the
wound. These also must be covered with a lynnen Cloth, well weate in the same
white of Eggs, and afterwards be bound, observing always, that the binding be
handsomely done, that it cause no dolor. But if the Wound be deep, ye shall
consider with diligent heed, whether the gap may be suffyciently stopped, if
it be deeply stytched, and if reason allow, that ye shall not in any wise
omit the sewing: that done, immediately let follow a linen cloth, infused
in the same whytes of Eggs, and dust aforesaid. If ye see that sewing will
not serve. follow the order, which I my self followed, and had ever good
Success, as my Pacyents can tell and wytnesse them selves.

And first ye shall wash the wound, with red or bynding wine, and that for two
causes. The one is to comfort the place: the other to wash of ye blood that
none may hinder the sight, To stop a bleding vein.
to see where the medicine ought to be applied. Again, that no blood be left,
to cause corruption. For ye shall shortly after, feel with your Instrument,
what watrysh and fylthy savour it will cause, if ye let any remain. Now, when
ye are at point with these matters, a new ^abour and care will take handfast
on you, that ye shall not be idle. Then ye shall lute the gap, or mouth of
the veins, which spout lout blood with this medicine, R. The dust or powder
of Galls, Bean meal, and Mill dust. ana..ii. Ihon Uigos powder called
Praecipetatum..i. mingle them with sufficient white of an Egg, and apply it to
the gap of the vein, When to incarnate, and when to seperate a sor^.
as I said. Now if it shall come of putrefaction, lay all incarnatiues apart,
and set your mind to the separacion thereof: which ye shall do with Vnguentum
AEgyptiacum, if the putrefaction be but small, and between two parts of the
flesh. And AEgyptiacum must be made, after the description of Auicen* even at
home, Uert greece. Roche Alome, in quantity parts a like if it be deeper then
so, then apply the Trochiskes, which I will descrybe in the end of the book:
which will remove the rotten flesh, from the good without great pain. But this
can no man ryghtly minister, except he have seen it ministered before:
therefore if ye set your minds to attain to this, choose some exper^
Surgeon for the purpose, which can distinct these things unpractice. And in
good faith, if trouble did not withdraw me from practycing, I would show you
this poinct my self.

On the other side, when the vein is but partly opened, incontinent ye must
remember these two points, to wet, that the vein must fully be cut of,
or be bounden and knit. The one poinct we call incision of a vein, the other
binding of a vein. Of incision of small veins.
Incision is made and used, where the things before mentioned, did not serve,
as some, where they do not in deed. And this is practised for this purpose,
because the ends of the vein being cut of, should run back, and be hid
within the flesh, and so be covered, whereof will ensue stoppyng of the vein.
Howbeit* this may not be practised indifferently in all veins, but only when
they appear small. For when they be great and gross, then shall you use one
other fetch, not much unlike the former. Mark then, before ye make the
incision, whether if a small drawing of the flesh be made, it were possible to
knyt the vein in the upper part, which thing were much tolorable in this
work. If that may not be, cut of the vein with an hot Iron, or Instrument,
made fit to that, or to the like purpose. But take heed, that ye make not the
incision to deep, lest ye cut the artery, which accompanies the vein: for
there be few veins, which have not arteries associated with them. Now one
cunning Man when he was called to one, who had bled two days, and many right
skilful in the matter, had ben in a peck of troubles, about staunchyng of the
blood: perceiving by questioning with them, that were present, that they had
omitted nothing: Deep incision hurts the arteires.
that men commonly use in such cases, least he should seem a Door amongst
labouring Bees: and again, least he should have failed them who had said much
upon his head, used this feat, wherewith he procured him self profyt, and his
pacyents saue^ie, though men dispayred of his life. For some of them that were
pres^nt, remembered the saying of Auicen, Evil accydents follow bledyng.
who saith, that evil accydents, are wont to follow bleding as conuulsions,
through emptines, yexing proceeding of drying of the villes of the stomach,
and alteration of mind, with other symptoms which in this case are arguments
and signs of cold Death, For these be th^ accidents that follow bledyng,
Signs of death.
and when they appear, they sygnify death to be at hand, but to my purpose He
pierced the lip of the wound* in the upper part, even unto the cut vein, and
left the same untouched of the needle, on the one part: then conveyed he his
needle underneath the vein: to the other part, and pierced again the lip, from
the lower to the upper part, in such wise that he altered the vein, A good
practise.
knitting the ends of the thread together, and fastening it to the lips of the
wound, and thus delivered he the pacyent, even from Deaths door, and present
danger. But I say my Friends, one thing more, remember that about all your
Works, of staunchyng of blood (when* ye have filled the wound with quisets)
lay some piece of cloth upon the same, well weate in water, and Rosed Vinegar,
To stanch blood.
so that the piece may compass the whole member, where the bleeding is. Now
with such f^ates and engines, shall you triumph over al unbridled blood
flowinges, with much praise, erect up worthy Monuments of your acts. We have
now, as it may be thought, spoken enough, and enough of bleading: wherefore
least the time fail us, being so swiftly measured, by ye first movable, let
us now take the cures of ulcers in hand, where we shall bridle the rest of the
accidents belonging to ulcers. For if we would treat properly of every of them,
it should be a long matter, and displeasant. For why? the same things should
needs be iterated, and repeated again, and yet again in diverse cures.


Soarenesse. BUt yet my brother, me thinks it were not superfluous, in our
communication, if you did shortly declare, or ever you entered this matter,
whereof ulcers take their name in especial, sithen we have found in writing,
that they are here and there named, of their causes, as of a matter that went
before, or else of their accidents, by reason of their causes.


Chirurgi. THey be named sanguine, chollerike, flegmatike, melancholic,
according as any of these humours, shall excessively abound in the. Sanguine.
Chollorike, Apostumacions.
Or of their accidents, they call them hard, cauy, fistulous, rot, cancrous,
corrosive, dolorous, apostumated, evil lipped, so forth, as any accident shall
cumber the ulcer. Howbeit the true causes, where of ulcers take their names,
essence and being, be but two, even the antecedet, and coniunct: the
antecedent, is, where is corruption with an excessive quality of evil humours,
proceeding of an inordinate regiment of life, having power to fret, viciate,
and corrupt the parts of the bodies. The cause coniunct, is nothing else but a
malicious complexion, caused of Wounds breaking forth, and opened pushes,
Anticedent, Coniunc^.
namely when they be evil handled of Surgeons, and Physicians, as we see
daily in our time: we can also divide ulcers otherwise. For some be plain,
some deep, and of the same some hard, some soft: Again some standing, some
running or creeping. And likewise, some of them be corrosive, some putrified:
but because such definicions, make better for the dulling of the wit, than
quickening: I purpose not to make any special mention of them in cures. Ye may
note, yt oft time, they be turned after some property or quality of the
matter, or Sanies, which shall be in them. For our Doctors, and chief Phisicions
say, Sanies is matter coming of corrupted blood* or else putrefaction, and
sometime it is taken for poison.
there be four kinds of matter, or Sanies, which the Latines thus term,
cannot well be Englished, Sanies, Pus, Virus, Sordities whereof they surname
them* with like derived terms. And according to these number terms. I mind
to speak of ulcers here consequently in their order. But first of a sanious
ulcer.

And thus shall we do, if God so will, when we have said somewhat of Sanies. For
in as much, as we entend to speak of a sanious ulcer, it is reason that we
know first, what Sanies is, whereof it springs, and what be his causes. And
by the reason of this, we shall easily know the correction of ulcers, which
thing (as we take it) consists in knowledge of the causes, rectification of
complexions, and comforting of members. Now Sanies is nothing else, but
corrupted food or nourishment which nature was not able to digest, neither
turn into the second humours, which they cal glue, D^we, and the humour
unnamed: Sanies is caused and generated, when nutrityue matter, coming or all
ready come to a member, may not be couerted into the nature of a member, by
reason of the weakness of ye same, or superfluityes of other members approaching
together. Strong mebers do oppress the weak.
For as Galen writes, the strong members do oppress the weak, and put of
their superfluities to them, which be turned into Sanies, or virulency
Wherefore, when we purpose to cure any weak meber, we must endeavour our selves
with all possibility, to stregthen it with some Medicine cofortatiue, that it
may put of strange superfluities. And verily bynding medicines, being of such
heat, as shall not exceed the natural heat of the weak part, shall comfort
greatly, as Galen saith in the third De art medendi. The same effect have
defensiues also, if they be likewise qualified. And after what sort this must
be don, the nature of simples it self, will inform you. Therefore* bestow
some labour, in the search of simples, to the intent ye may fetch them readily,
as it were from a store house, and not seek at al adventure by chance medley,
as they grope for a pin in the dark. The like mischief is committed in
administracions of Oyntmentes, which be hot, or moysty of complexion, and both
the qualities do promote a soar to putrefaction. For in heat and moisture, if
heat rule not the same, then they are causes at first dash, to cause
putrefaction, as Aristotle Prince of Philosophers affirms* Therefore, who so
ever purposes, to exercise Chirurgj, must labour wi^h all industry, to know
the nature of oyntmentes, at his fingers end. I speak not of the names of
Ointments, as the imperickes, and some of our Men do, Surgeons must know
Simples.
which profess Chirurgj, as soon as they can name recite Vnguentum Basilicum,
Nigrum, Aureum, Apostolorum, Aegyptiacum, Rosarum, Album Camphoratum,
Lithargicum, Ceracinum. c. whereof they brag, and spread a Peacocks tail
against the simple. But I mean the qualities of ointments, which must be
diverse, in diverse maladies, according to our intention curatiue, in the malady.
For sometime we comfort, sometime we moist, somewhere we dry, as also oftentimes
we cool, or heat. Therefore, it is not to be marveled, that such
venterlinges and younglings stumble so oft at a Straw. For why, these men be
utterly lost in their books, and will not vary from them one finger breadth,
whereof spring many errors, specially when they understand not, which one
learned man records, considering he spared not to try out in the matter,
Fools with books, be worse than unlearned practicioners.
in his Aphorisms, saying, to work after Books, without perfect knowledge,
and a fine wit, is a right comberous thing. Wherefore I exhort you, most dear
Brethren, yt you order your medicines, according to the complexion of the
member, and your intention in the cure. And if it be possible, make your
medicines your self, and trust not so much the Apothecaries, least ye be
deceived with ye blessed terms, I will not say cursed, entitled quid pro quo,
because he is dead that made it. For as men have divers Phisiognomyes, divers
qualities, and quantities, with sundry Complexions given them partly by
influences, partly by tractes, divers Regions, so have the simples: also as
great variance amongst themselves, Uariety o^ Simples.
in as much as they be of sundry shapes, places, and countries, from whence
they acquire proper natures, qualities and powers in working. Wherefore Auicen
cries out in ye Chanon of ulcers, saying: Medicamen quidem vnum, secundum
quaedam corpora facit nasci carnem, secundum quaedam est corrosiuum: which is
thus much to say: One medicine in divers bodies, hath divers effects and
operacions. In one, by reason of the property of ye Body, it causes flesh to
grow: the same in some other is wasting, and right abstersyue, specially, if
the body be soft and fine. Wherefore this is inferred, that ointments should be
made, Auicen.
according as the Complexion of the member shall require. And this sentence
touches the fine speached Cornelius Celsus, our dearling, saying: Ignorari non
oportet quod non omnibus aegris eadem auxilia conferunt: Wherefore, be you wise
and circumspect in your confections, least it be your chance, to fall into the
Noddyes had I wist. Now as touching the Judgment of Sanies, that Sanies shall
be called good, as Auicen saith, which is white, smooth, C* Celsus.
and like in every part: which sentence he borrowed of Hippocrates the Diuyne
Physician. in his book of Prognosticacions, where he saith, Ea putredo
laudatur. c. White Sanies is praised, which is like over all, eagle in the
utter face, and not ill favoured, the contrary is most evil. Now if ye will
know why Sanies should have these properties, read Auicen in the Chap.
concerning the judgment of Sanies, where ye find even your fill, of causes
showed of the said property, which ye may seek at his hands, and not now at
mine, for it would draw us farther from our purpose. Ye may also have respect
to Galen, upon the first of the Prognosticacions: where ye shall read
certain divine things, for the perfect attaynment of this matter. Sanious
matter.
Ye have now sufficiently heard what Sanies is, whereof it comes, and of
what sort it is. Now we will join hereunto, the cure of a sanious ulcer.


Soarenesse. Speak now of ulcers, I pray you, that I and my soar brethren,
may perceive them plainly.


Chirurgi. WHerefore, for your better understanding, ye shall note, that there
be two sorts of ulcers: Two sundry sorts of Ulcers.
Whereof some be simple, and some be compound. I mean not, that they be
simple absolutely, but simple, after some manner of simplicity. For why, their
being is of an evil Complexion, breach of cotinuance, sometime composition,
also with a concourse of evil qualities. But I say, they be simple, so farforth
as they be opposite to ulcers, where accidets be found, letting the true
ensounding of ulcers. For here we call them copounde, which have such
accidents. Wherefore, when I name a sanious ulcer, as we reckon the matter, ye
shall understand it, of that which is fully void clear of the said accidents,
not wythstanding it be tangled, with some doublenes and composition. Therefore
we will speak first of a simple ulcer, which is in the plain: and then of a
simple depressed, or hollowed, which done, we shall in like manner and order
treat of the compounded, from which kind, the almighty and merciful God,
preserve us all.

Ulcers hot cold, and biting.
And first we note, that all ulcers in that and as farforth as they be Ulcers,
require drying in their cure: whereof there be two kinds, the one hot, and
the other cold. Again, some be with mordicacion and ^yting, and some without.
All be biting, which in a certain degree of heate, be dry of complexion, which
is because heate is yoked, and coupled felowshipped with drought, as Aristotle
most learnedly first taught, as ye may read in his books of Generation,
Aristotle a good note of Elements.
and Corrupcion. And he saith thus, concerning the mixture of elements: If the
coldness of the earth, were changed to heate, it might no longer be named
earth, but fire. He saith further, if the drought of the same, were changed to
moisture, it should lose ye name of earth, and be called water. Whereof it
follows, that things so dried, in case they be found with like Qualities,
they will not only waste and gnaw, but also burn, when they be applied. And
this do the qualities of the fire, and Mercury Sublimated apartly show.
Nevertheless the one shall be so much the less of mordicacion or freting, as
his qualities shall more be oppressed in it, than in the other. And therefore,
be you somewhat the wiser, Of exiccatiues.
in choosing of your simples, least ye take one for an other. Now to the intent
ye may the rather eschew this foul error, I will give you the difference of
exiccatiues, or drying Simples, which we use in Ulcers. For by the knowledge of
them, ye shall soon come to the cure of Ulcers. These exiccatiues be cold:
The three kinds of Sauders, Mirabolanes, Terra sigillata, Dragons blood, Bole
Armoniacke, Tutia, Camphor, Ceruse, Litharge, Vermilion, Sinaper, red Coral,
Gum Arabic: these be hot, and without biting or gnawing: Aloes epatik,
Myrrh, Sarcocol vnholed Galls. c. Hot with biting and mordicacion:
Uerdigreace, Alum. c. Of these ye may make Medicines to the purpose, for all
kind of, ulcers, To know whether ulcers be hot or cold.
so ye know perfectly ye property and working of them: ye shall know, whether
the ulcer be hot or no, by his edges. For if he be reddish in ye edges, it
declares heate: as also, if the flesh be remiss red, and hot in feeling,
which may be rectified with Vnguentum Album, made after this manner.

R. Oil of Roses..vj. Weathers fat..iiij. Marow of the hucclebones of
Kine..ij. white Wax..i.ss. Cerusse..iij.ss. Camphory..iij. making it to an
ointment, according to the art, which ye shall apply upon ye ulcers, when ye
have first cast in this powder, Vnguentum Album.
in the soar. R. Of all the Mirabolans, of Terra sigillata, of red Coral.
ana..j. of Cerusse..ij. of Roch Alum brent..j. of Creuishe shells..j. stamp
all these together as small as Sand, which cover, as I said with the ointment
above described. But if the flesh be so much overgrown, yt the lyppes do
appear upon it, ye shall use Vnguentum Apostolorum for ye correction thereof,
observing always warily, that the ulcer be not inflamed again. For some
complexions be so tender soft, that they will be altered almost at ye name
thereof, as I saw my self in a Citizen of London, whose name I omit, because
he hath bin unkind to our Art. When I perceive any such coplexion as he was
of, I order my rectificatiue, with such cautell, that it shall both comfort
rectify. After this sort. R. of Oil Rosed..iiij. of Oil Myrtine..i.ss. of
Bean flower..iij. of powder of Roses, Myrtils* and Cypress Nuts, ana..ij. of
Acatia..ij. of Bole Armoniacke, of Terra sigillata. ana..i. of new Wax. q.ss.
and so make thereof a defensive, between hard and soft. And this at two
applicacions, with Vnguentum Apostolorum will rectify the member, To make the
skin whole.
and make the Ulcer ready to a Cicatrice. Thus cured Ihon Backter, the learned
Surgeon, such ulcers in a month, where other, whom ye know, had them in
hand a year and more. Now when the flesh is suppressed, ye purpose to skin
the ulcer, it is most expedient, ye use this Lotion. R. Of good clear Wine,
one cup full, of red Roses.M.ss. of Rosed Honey strained..ss. of roche
Alum..iij. and as much Saffron, as shall be able to colour the Wine, and sees
all these together, till the Alum be melted, and then moist the Ulcer with
this Lyquore, being luke warm: And maintain it, as soon as it may be, dry
the ulcer again, with a fine Linen cloth, that none of the lyquore remain
there. For it will cause matter and corruption, as it befell under his hands,
who is my sworn Enemy. For while he laboured to skyn the soar, as I did,
even with the same Medicine, he caused hollowness in an ulcer. Now when ye
have so moysted ye ulcer, as is said, lay yet a little cotton in the Ulcer,
that the moisture, in case any remain, be fully dried up. Applying upon the
same this Ointment, which is very effectual in working of a Cicatrice.

. of Oil of Roses, How to make a Cicatrice.
and Myrt. ana..i.ss. of Vermilion..ij. and seethe them together, till they get
a very black hugh, and so shall ye fynishe the cure. Lo, here have you the
cure of a sanious plain ulcer. Now will we to the hollow, whereof ye shall
receive, large gifts and rewards, if ye handle your self well, in the
reformation of humours, that fall to the place ye know that sharpe Humours,
will properly freate, and consume the Flesh newly grown, and let the growing
of the same, Three sundry intencions. Of regiment. Of matter. Of growing.
wherewith the hollowness of the Ulcer, should be filled and restored. For the
reformation hereof, shall follow three intencions. The first must be to order
the life, with couenable regiment. The second to keep of matter, which
approaches thither. And the third, to cause new Flesh to grow, with the
skinning of it. The first is had by ordering of the soar things, called not
natural, and chyefly with Diet, which must be wholly bent, to the contrary of
the humours and qualities, which feed the soar. The repulse of humours may be
wrought two ways: either with competent Purgation, or with some vnctions and
cataplasmes, which comfort, and put of, as will the defensive above ordered.
Flesh is caused to grow two ways, by letting of the contraries, and by
applying of dustes and Ointments, being of like qualities. The dust must be
made, by mingling of the exiccatiues above rehearsed, which ye must indosate,
according to your need. But if ye delight more in Ointments, ye may make
that, after this manner.

R. Of the clearest Terebintine..ij. of Honey rosed and strained..i.ss. of
Plantayne water..iij let them seethe, till the water be wasted, An incarnatiue.
and put thereto of Barley and Bean meal. ana..ij. of Frankincense..i. with a
little Saffron. And so this will be an incarnatiue, with some stirring, which
ye must cover with Vnguentum Alb^, above described. Besides this, the defensive
there ordered, must be noynted about in ye circuit, that it be not inflamed to
heate again. ^ flesh.
Now if the flesh grow to fast, it will be suppressed with Vnguentum
Apostolorum, applied once, or twice, or more if need require. And when that is
come to equality with the Edges, then finish your cure, as it was said above,
in a plain ulcer. There be other feats and Engines, which cannot be written
but are left to Surgeons estimacions. For some while one quality, some
whiles an other* frouneth or flatters, and must be ru^ed now hither, now
thither, as a Sheep amongst Wolves. Of which poyncte complains Auicen, in
the entrance of his work, Auicen.
saying: The tradition of Physic, contains less, than is necessary for the
Phisicion. For the overplus, which is left to their judgment estimation, may
not be expressed, and put in writing. Wherefore, to th'entent ye may get this
Judgment in things, left to Estimation, ye must not loathe, nor be high in
the instep, to see other expert Men's Work. For there by, with diligent
aduertence, ye shall assuredly gather judgment, ^e ascertayned in your
inuencions. Now for asmutch, as we have gieuen you the taste, in a hot
sanious ulcer, we will venture (I hope luckily) the cure of the cold, observing
the same manner and order, which we used tofore in the hot Ulcer.

Now, when a sanious cold ulcer, comes to our hands (which thing may easily
be perceived by the Eye: Cold Ulcer.
for the flesh will be remise white, or wan, notwithstanding, yt sometime dim
paleness comes to an ulcer, through blood, running with choler: it is also
perceived with feeling of the hand) now then when such ulcers, I say, come to
your hands, ye shall not depart in any poynct from the order, which before was
described. Nevertheless, we say for certain, yt their remedies as far
differ one from the other, as the ulcers in heate cold. And here we will begin
with the defensive, which offers it self, first in the cure, where our
composition was thus.

R. Of oil of Camomell, and Mirte, ana..ii, powder of Camomell and M^lilot.
ana. ^ij. powder of red Roses, A defensive.
Mirtilles, and Cypress nuts. ana., i.ss. of Barley and Bean meal..ii. of
new Wax. q.ss. and so make the defensive, between hard and soft, wherewith
anoint the circute of the ulcer. R. Of Aloes, Myrrh, Sarcocol* ana..ss. of
Frankincense., ij. of Dragons blood, and flowers of Pomegranets, ana..iii. of
Saffron..i. and make a powder of all these, covering it afterward with this
Ointment following.

R. Of Oil of Roses..ij. of oil of Camomell, and Mirte. ana..iij. of Weathers
fat..iiij. of Hens grease..i. of Marow of the Cow Hart. ana..i.ss. of
Litharge..ii. of Cerusse..i. sees them, till they be black, then put thereto
of clear Terebintine. A sanatiue.
.i.ss. of Ship Pytch..i. of new Wa^e.ij.. and let them sees a little again:
and when ye have taken the of from the fire, stire them still, unto such time,
as it be congeled fyrme, otherwise, the Minerals will fall to the bottom in a
residence. This Ointment is Vnguentum Basilicum, after our descripcion and
intent. Now in case the Flesh appear foggy and fattishe, then Vnguentum
Apostolorum, shall be necessary to dry it. For that without question, will bring
it to equality of ensounding. And then ye may fynishe your cure, and skin the
same with the lotion above ordered.

Now in as much, as we be at poynct with the Simples: or right and congruent,
we must lay a foundation for the Compound, A good foundation.
so that we may like workmen, build in the humayne body, or repair ruinous
and decayed places, and prop up such as are like to fall. Wherefore, once
again remember the accidents, before mentioned, to the intent we may be able
to redress, and amend them one by one. For where this may not be obtained, we
shall to our reproach, be kept from the true ensounding of the Ulcer. And
therefore we purpose, to prosecute the amendment of them in their order
accordingly. Now when a compounded Ulcer is offered us, let us look what
accidents be concurrant, hindering ye ensounding. For if many maladies or
accidents, were found in it, we must begin at yt, which doth most cumber the
ulcer, as Auicen saith: if we will cure a malady, In healinge a compound
ulcer, mark the accidents concurrant.
where diverse accidents be concurrant, we must begin at that* which hath one
of these three properties, Una earum est {quod} alia sanari non potest antequam
ipsa sanetur vt apostema, c. The one is, where the accident is such, that if
it be not first cured, the ulcer may not be cured, as apostumacion joined with
an ulcer. For in this case saith he, we follow the apostumacion, unto such
time as the malice of the complexion be displaced, and then we follow the cure
of the principal. Wherefore, to follow and observe the Canons, accordingly:
we shall order pryncipally our intencions, First handle the accidents in a
cure, and note three things.
so that we first take in hand the accident, which shall chiefly cumber and
molest the Patient and us in the cure. And the first of these intencions shall
be, to order the Patients life conveniently. Next to purge the faulty humour,
according to the exigente thereof. Thirdly, to amend the maliciousnesse of the
quality, in the Ulcer. This last shall be divided yet again, according to the
disposition of the Ulcer, requiring divers intencions. Regimente of life.
Now as touching the order of life, you may by your own judgment consider,
what is to be done therein: partly by his regiment before time, and partly in
his syckenesse time, turning his Diet to the contrary quality. As thus: if he
used a cold regiment before, use him to hot, so if dry, moysty, but do it
moderately, and by little and little. For nature cannot away with sudden
changes: Howbeit this is not seen lightly in humours, without lunge use of
contraries in Foodes. We shall know to purge the humours, Of urine
considered, in every sick or soar man.
by the showing of the sick Water, in two poynctes, that is, by the colour
substance: whereunto is added the residence, with his qualities much or
little. And by the sygnification of these well considered, we may try out all
the sick persons complexion.

For if the Uryne shall be thycke in Substance, and red in colour: it means
that blood rules ye man. If it be thin of Substance, and red of colour: doubt
not, but choler hath the pre-eminence. But if it be thick in substance, and
white of colour, then fleume hath the maistrie: as if ye substance be thynne,
and colour white, melancholy. Now of, and by the resydence, ye shall perceive
the time to give pocions, and purgacions: for when that begins to appear,
it shows digestion of the humours to be purged. But there be also refractions
of colours, and eleuacions, and depressions of residences, which signyfy the
denominacion and Service, of the Natural Heate, Of radical moisture.
and wasting of the radycall Moisture: which things. now are not to be
prosecuted, because this matter partayneth to a Physician, whereof if God give
me Life, I purpose to treat at convenient leisure: now let this be sufficient
for the cure of an Ulcer. If ye will know howe an Humour shall be purged,
read Leonardus Fuchsius who teaches to purge, according to the fault of the
Humour. Other have at hand, Master Vygoes Book of Chirurgi, where ye shall
find, even to the full, how to purge an Humour* For if I would distemper
Pocyons, make Morsels, and myngle pylles, I should be troublesome unto you,
or ye might hit me in the Teeth with the Proverb: ye set the Carte before
the Horse: For my Communication should be unsavoury, as it fares with a
Guest, which regards not delicate Iuncates, being filled before. And
therefore, leaving these things to you as known, I will pass to the
amending, of ye Malyciousnesse of an Ulcer, when we apply cool to ye hot,
hot to ye cold. Likewyse, Apply contraries.
if ye Ulcer be moisty applying dry: if dry, applying moysty Medicines. We
shall restrain his Malice by digestion, Mundyficacion, corrosyon, incision,
and also burning and mollifying, as it shall please the Work man. But when,
and how, these means shall be put in ur, that shall we show, when we go
about to displace the accydents of Ulcers. All which things we do orderly,
omittyng the former matters, for a time, because trouble hath prevented me.

UUe have entreated before suffyciently of bleeding, coming of a cause
primatiue, from whence ye must fetch hither, such things as there were
spoken. For it were superfluous, to speak more of the matter in this place.
Wherefore, being at poinct with that accident, I will make forth to the rest,
and speak no more of this. The like would I do with superfluous flesh, if I
had rehearsed the cause of it, when we speak of a sanious Ulcer. The cause of
superfluous flesh, is to much moisture and unclean mundyficacion, as Auicen
thinks, in the Chapiter of Ulcers. saying: In some Ulcers grows
superfluous flesh, The cause of superfluous flesh.
and in some it grows* not. And the Ulcers where it grows, be they in the
which, to much haste is made, in the repair of flesh, before complete
mundificacion. Wherefore take you heed, that ye proceed not to far, in
moistyng of the Flesh. And as for remedies, the matter is plain, for that we
know the cause: but remember that ye quicken or delay, in drought and
corrosion, the medicine, according as the matter shall require, and as the
Flesh shall be more or less swelled up with foggy Fat. We have seen that
this kind of maladies, hath not felt, nor forced of other remedies, and hath
required an actually cautery. If this happen under your hands, if easy remedies
profit not (of which sort be Vnguentum Apostolorum, Aegyptiacum, take a
corosyue powder, brent Alum) fear not to dry it with an hot Iron also. And if
ye shall so do, a blisterous crust be risen: ye may displace it, as we showed
before in our treatise of apostumacions, then return to the cure again.

If hard and discovered lyppes, be found in an ulcer, letting the ensounding,
set all your cure, upon the displacing of that evil: omitting no time or
howre. For if we do the contrary, we shall in the hast labour in vain,
afterward be compelled, to give over the purpose, take that in hand at latter
cast. Therefore to spend no time in vain, begin with the shearing or cutting
of, of the lips. Ye shall cut them of by little, and little, without causing
of great dolor, if ye apply this powder, here beneath ordered. For Auicen
saith, we should never cause dolor in an ulcer, Auicens providence.
unless we be constrained to it of necessity, which is, where gentle medicines
serve not, and he did not this without foresight. For he was well ware, as a
forecasting man, that there would come after him, which would be more likely,
to subvert mankind, than to preserve: which would boast themselves of yt, that
they would imitate no rules of Physic in their works: but follow rather ye
frantic pestilent saying, of certain counterfayts of our time, Soft
Surgeons make foul soars. yet Butcherly manglers, ma^re all together.
which have this in their mouths, and have brought it to a common Proverb to,
saying: that a wound will breed worms, under a gentil Physicians hand. As
though ignorant Bocherly cruelty of ye Physician, should be cause of health. I
speak of the cruelty, which blind boosardes do use, with all counterfayt
boldness, coloured diligence, in every little felon, to the intent, they may
thereby win the name of learned, and expert Surgeons: and not a whit of
necessary sharpness, whereunto we be induced, both by ye rules, autenticall
counsel of learned Phisicions, and sweet persuasions of Poets. For this
saith the fine wylted, and eloquent Naso, Immedicabile vulnus, est recidendum.
c. Where the woude is uncurable, Quid, a good u^te.
saith he, it must be shorn of, that ye whole be not infected withal. Again
Juvenal with his Satirical trick, one Grape draws colour of an other,
Example.
only by reason of their aspect, as one Measelled Hog, measelleth the whole
Herd. Virgill also is with us at our Elbow, saying: Culpam ferro compescite.
c. Appease, saith he, the fault out of hand, with the sword, Good counsel.
or ever ye cursed infection, go farther among the people. Wherefore, when ye
shall chance upon such cures, do that which shall appertayn to the
preservation of the Patient, without all white lyuered womanlyke feeblenes. And
if ye so bold your self, work accordingly, the matter well considered, ye
shall not be called vnmylde cruel, but provident, merciful: How bold the
Surgeon should be in cure.

C. Celsus.


notwithstanding ye blustering blames of your Adversaries, because ye have
saved, and not destroyed your Patient. For doubtless, many soars will not be
mended, without ye Knife, as Cankers, others, as Cornelius Celsus shows in
his books, of hand working. We have now run out of our Race, occasioned by
blind Surgeons, howbeit, we have found nothing to much, their deserts well
considered. For who could be so patient to hear them, and would not ware hot
in the cause, namely, being exasperated day by day, of such Men? For they
cannot see the good live in quiet by them, but they lye in wait for them,
with all endeavoured mischief. Well, I relinquish this, least I should seem,
to be delighted in reprehension of men, where my mind is far distant, from
that path of writing. Wherefore, let them go play them: we will repair to our
powder, which ye shall put on the evil favoured lyppes of wounds or soars, A
good powder.
which is this. R. Of Citrine Mirabolaynes..ss. of red Coral. ss. of vnholed
Galls..j. of Dragons blood, of Terra sigillata, and Cerusse. ana..ij.
Uerdigrece..ij. of Roch Alum brent..i Sarcocoll, Myrrh, Frankincense, Mastike,
ana..i.ss. mingle them all, and powder finely as Alcocoll, upon the which, ye
shall apply Vnguentum Basilicum, after the description in the cure of a cold
ulcer. And thus must you proceed, until the accident be removed, which don,
prosecute the cure, as is above prescribed. And in case the powder, by reason of
his weakness, speed not well the matter, ye may go to stronger Medicines.
Whereof this is the first. R Of oil of Roses..iij. Weathers fat..ij. Marrow
of the Huccle bone of a Cow..i. water wherein sublimatum hath been melted..i.
sees them softly together, unto the time the water be wasted, and then put
thereto..i. of Cerusse, and sees them again a little, when it is taken from
the fire, ye must stir it, till it be thick. This must be spread on a piece of
cloth, and laid on the soar, and peradventure, ye shall dispatch the matter
with this: If not, take this in hand and without doubt, ye shall win the
castle. But yet be ye hereof warned before hand, that it be not applied in any
sinuie place, least while ye seek freedom, ye fall into bondage. As it
befell in my friend, when he would bicker with the like ulcer, in a Woman's
foot where he could never win the matter, though he left no stone unturned.
Nevertheless, if ye be constrained thereto, by any necessity, or ever ye apply
this, ye shall first use an universal Purgation, of the whole Body, and also a
comfortatyue to the Nuke, least happily there arise any Pestilet fumes, ready to
cause a conuulsion, or Spasme: and when ye have so done, proceed forth to ye
local medicines, which may be thus, which is most excellent good.

R. Cerusse, Vermilion, Sublimatum, ana..iij. mingle them, and powder them
finely, whereof ye shall sprinkle, so much in the ulcer, as is able (if I may
so speak) fault the part, which shall be removed: and incontinent, cover it with
this plaster, which shall make for the appeasing of dolor, remoouing of the
escharous crust. To remove an escharous scab or crust.
R. leaves of Mallowes, Violets, and Lattice. ana. M.i. sees them together in
Mutto broth of the Weather, afterwards stamp them putting thereto. l i.ss. of
Barley meal, of oil of Roses complete..ij. of Butter..iij, and Yolks of three
Eggs: with which plaster ye must proceed till the crust be taken of, and then
ye may prosecute the cure with digestiues, Abstersiues, and Incarnatiues, as
ye were informed before. If ye work after this sort, and with these remedies,
according as they have been declared, ye shall win your Spurs, in such
cures, and great friendship also. Now in asmutch, as we be well trained in this,
let us come nearer the accident of dolorous payne, to see howe we can rid our
hands of that also. For why, this is now and then so extreme, cruel and
sharp, that it doth not only exclude the cure of ulcers, but utterly interdite
and suspend almost, all the virtues, as well natural as animal, and
spiritual. Wherefore of very right we must put our helping hand to this also.

For as much then, as dolor is as it were a cupping glass, in drawing matter
unto the place, the writers have used much diligence, Example.
in appeasing of it, considering the accidetes, which may ensue thereupon, as
overthrow of the virtue natural, failing of spirits, and contractions of
synewes. Al which accidents are perilous, to be doubted in all maladies.
Wherefore, to the intent men may eschew this by a rule: they learn men
knowledge, in their publicated works, that it proceeds of two causes, that
is, of the breach of continuance, and alteration of qualities. As Galen saith,
Breach of cotinuaunce or hurting of the whole meber.
dolours where as they be, declare breach of continuance, or sudden
alteration of qualities: the contynuaunce may be broken four ways, by
incision, corrosion, breaking, and stretching, as in apostumation. Alteration
is by heat and cold, moisture, drought, and other such like. Note, what
diligence they took, to find the causes of dolor. Now if dolor arise,
Alteration, what it is,
by means of incision, as in woudes: the first way to appease it, is to sew
it, and next to anoint hot oil Omphacine in the edges and circuit of the
wound. And this must be don, not once or twice, but continually* till it be
appeased in a great part. If it come to corrosion, which accident, Of dolor.
properly pertayneth to an ulcer, it must be removed also, if we entende to
cure the ulcer. But here note, that there be two causes of the matter, a
proper, Two causes of matter.
and a depending: the proper cause is, a certain malignity, or shreudnesse in
the flesh, which our men call, proprietas occulta, the secret property. The
cause dependinge is nought else, but evil humours, which fret and eat out the
flesh when they come to the conuinct, as doth Choler, myxt with Salt Phlegm.
And certainly, this latter shall have need of evacuation with Cassia, Manna,
Diacatholicon, and other like purgations. But as for the former, it shall be
ruled after an other order, even by comforting of the edges of the ulcer, with
defensiues, able to cherish and feed the complexion of the flesh, and with
the strong powder, Praecipitatus, cast in the ulcer whose description ye shall
find, at the end of the treatises. If it come by breaking, it is eased by
setting of the bones, and competent bynding, and situation of the member. For
albeit, the breach be never so well restored, and set in place: there will be
yet discontinuaunce, if it be untowardly set to rest. And as for the setting of
Bone, ye shall learn at other Men's hands: For their Books are replenished,
with precepts rules for the purpose, specially Galen. c.

But if alteration come of extension, or stretching, Alteration of extension.
as it is in apostumacions, mollificatiue Medicines shall be best, to prepare
the matter to come forth: And Auicen sends us to such appeasementes, saying,
the vehemecy also of Dolor, causes us of necessity, to use mollificatiues, or
softening Medicines. But of truth my Friend, if it grew through alteration of
the Substance, the matter must be redressed by the contrary Qualities. For
Example. If an Ulcer be dystempered with heate (which is perceived by redness
in the circuit) it is redressed by a cold Ointment. And if the substance be
fallen to cold, When to use contraries in hea^ing.
Vnguentum Rasum, or some like will qualify the matter soon. If it be engendered
with drought, moisture then will pacify all the gryefe. Again, if it be
disquieted with to much moisture, drought of an ointment, plaster or dust, will
dispatch it. To be short, if we work after this manner, we shall discomfit al
manner dolours, caused through excess of one quality, above an other. Thus
shall we with proper medicines, succour the humayne life of mankynde, specially
when we attain to the cause of the malady, neither shall beg remedies, as
do these Dogleaches, Example.
which would be called Practicians, a Gods name, and wot not what practice is.
For they do as children do in their plays, which when they list to have some
sporte, apoynct some Mark, and standing a little of, blindfilde, wherle
themselves about once or twice on their foot, and then guess to the Mark at
al adventure, in which groping, they are found at last, when they think
themselves sure of it, further of then they were, where they stood at first.
Even so fares it with these groping practicians: for why? they be not able to
distynct, neither times of sickness, neither know the causes of them, or
properties of ointments, as he who bare men in hand, with gravity of words,
that he was a practician: and when one demanded, what quality Vnguentum
Rosarum had, he answered with great deliberation, a Gods name, hot, yea Mary
sir {quod} the other a worthy answer for such a practician. Wherefore I
exhort you to cast away all Sluggardy, and negligence, that ye may attain to
the knowledge* as well of Simples as of compounds, and stumble not at matters
as they do. Ye have the causes, and cure of dolor: now we will go to an
apostumacion, as the order requires.

Now, as touching apostumacion, concurrant with ulcers, what should I say,
Apostumatio concurrant with an ulcer
sithen we have largely said in the matter, when we spake of Apostumacions? But
yet to help them that be tangled herein: we will talk a little more of it, and
put somewhat to the enlargyng of our medicines, declared before. Then when an
ulcer is thus entangled, ye must use the remedies, appoyncted properly for
Apostumacions. But in case they shall not suffice, use this, wherein ye shall
find such profit, that for certain, ye shall marvel not a little at it.
But first consider, whether the ulcer be vexed with an hot or cold
apostumacio. For at that diversity, will follow ye diversity of making of the
Medicine. If it be hot, apply this. R. Leaves of Mallowes and Uyolets, ana.
M.j. of hulled Beans. l i.ij. sees them al together, Hot and cold
apostumacions.
until the Beans be soft, which don, stamp them: and if it be requisite, to
put any Oil to the same, put a little Rosed Omphacine, and afterward spread it
on a cloth, and lay it to the apostumacion, for this will apease and resolve.
But if the apostumation be cold ye shall take the same plaster again, howbeit
ye shall search, make it otherwise. R. Of Mallowe leaves. M.ij. hulled Beans.
l i.ij. of Barbers Lye. q.ss. and seethe them well, after stamp them, and
apply it to the place. Certaynely, this will work most aptly, for our purpose.
But note here, I pray you, that this plaster may be rectified in our working,
according as the Lee shall be mild or sharpe. Thus have ye enough, for the
displacing of this accident, if ye remember the sethings, with the other
above. Wherefore we will now talk, of hardness of ulcers.

Every good Physician, my friend, willing to cure his patient rightly,
Hardness of an ulcer
will appoint himself two principal intentions, that is, to preserve, and to
cure. The first searches for the causes, the other imagines ways to displace
theffect thereof. Therefore to the intent we may be able to remove this cause,
and withstand the effect, To search the cause, and displace the effect
let us see how many causes hardness hath. When I was given to read Chirurgi,
and delyted in the antique books, I fell bechaunce upon Galens first book. De
simplicium medicamentoru, where I noted him, to put three causes of hardness.
For it chances, Three causes of hardness.
says he, of to much drought of congelynge of matter, or else of fullness
repletion. If it come of drought, moisture will ease it. And this must be done
with oyntmentes, plasters, and imbrocations, after the mind of Auicen,
Imbrocations be made with hot water, Imbrocasion.
and Mutton broth of the Weather, Plasters may be of all things, as ye hard
before Now the oyntmentes be of Muscilages, and sometime of Tripharmacon, as
Mirepsus thinks. How beit I suppose Myrepsus used it in hardness, caused of
frising, and not in drought. For I never saw Tripharmacon cause moisture, but
in hardness of cogelacions or frising, it serves well, if it be made with Vinegar,
which notably cutteth clammy and viscous humours. If it come of fullness, (as
it is seen in Apostumations) evacuation helps the matter: as Hippocrates
says, sicknesses, which come of replecion or fullness, be cured by
evacuation. Now if ye mind to resolve it, let it first be softened with some
mollificatiue, and it will the better vanish and transpire, the pores being
opened with the mollificatiue. And if it fall to hardness again, ripe it again
with the same medecin as Auicen writes in the cure of Apostumations, then let
it be resolved. As for the making of these medecines, ye must return to the
treatise of apostumations, where ye shall find a special plaster made of
Melilote, Sapa or new wine and lye, and an other of the decoction of Beans,
Mallowe leaves. c. But as for the third kind of hardness, parteineth to an
vlcere, and for an end, if the hardness will not be amended by these meansfrete
it with some corrosive, according to the manner, as it was prescrybed in the
correction of hard lips in an vlcere.

Now as concerning corrosive, or gnawing in an vlcere, we would treat to the
full thereof, if we had not meddled with the matter, Corosion or bytynge.
when we were about the appeasing of dolor, namely, for that that accident is
much more combrous then any of the other, But yet in as much as we have there
given no remedies, we will here have ye matter a little while in consideration
again. We suppose then, that corosion is termed of that, that it with his
sharpness, biting, and freting, resolves, wastes, and dries up the
moistnes of the member, after which resolution, the substance of the flesh is
minished, and so falls to vlceration. Wherefore, according to our
determination, there be two causes of this, the proper, and depending. And as
for ye proper cause, it is as we said before, a certain malignity, or
fylthynes in ye flesh, which Physicians call the secrete property. And for the
displacing of this, ye must consider the property of the member and then temper
and correct it with defensiues, linimentes, and oyntmentes, made according to
your intention, as is that, which I made, respecting both complexcion, and
purpose, in the mallady, or evil.

R Oil of roses, Mirte, and Violet ana..i, ss. Bole Armoniacke, Terra
sigillata, A good liniment.
and Dragons blood. ana..ii. Acatia.iii. powder of Roses, Mirtilles, and
Cyprus Nuts ana. i.ss white wax.ss. make hereof a liniment, according to
the art, and annoynt the vlcere and his circuit with the same. In case the
hidraunce come of evil flesh, sprynkle this powder on it, and ye shall
dispatch the malignity. R. Of Citrine, Mirobolanes, of Terra sigillata of
Cerusse, A consumer of Flesh.
ana. iii. of prepared Tutia..i.ss. of Dragons blood.ii. of brent Alome..ii,
mingle them and let it be a fine powder to be caste in the ulcer. Which ye shall
cover with the same liniment, spread in a cloth: or cover it ye Vnguentum
album or Vnguentum de Minio. The cause depending, we take it to be the
antecedent, even a Choleric humour, mixed with salt phlegm, which gnaws the
flesh, Antecedent coiunct.
when it comes to the coniunct, or place. Now for the cure of this, we order
two intentions, the one to keep of humours, yet fleting, the other to
discomfyte them, which be already flowing. The first may be done with
Cassiafistula, Diacatholicon, Manna, or any like purgatiue. And administration
of the dust and liniment which we ordered now, will accomplish the other, how
beit apply this ointment following upon ye powder.

R Oil of Mirte, Roses,, and violets. ana..ii, Weathers fat..iii. Goats
grease.i.ss. juice of Colewortes..iii. sees them together till the juice be
dried, and then put thereto., iiii. of vermilion..iii of Cerusse, and,.ii. of
Litharge, To make a cicatrice.
and play them again, till they become very black, stirrynge them still that
the Mineralles fall not to the botome, and burn. This done* put yet thereto..i.
of Terebintine..vi. of new wax make it to an ointment between hard and soft,
in likeness of a Cerote. And this will bring the sore to a Cicatrice, and fill
your had full of money for your labour.

Now rottennes and putrefaction follows, whose description I will rehearse to
the intent ye may thereby be assured of the Mallady. Of putrefaction or
rottenness.
Putrefactiois when the dew breathing of the spirit is inhibited and let in
a member, by whom the complexion should be maintained and defended. And when
this is corrupted, or else let in his due passage, the moisture of that part
is not ruled, and so doth the part putrify and rot, as Aristole saith iiij.
Metheo. Moisture and heate, not ruling the same, is cause of corruption at the
first meeting. But to say truth me thinks it hath three causes in all. The
first corrupts the vital spirit with holding his due breathing passage as do
stupefactiues or dead things, as Opium, and to cool repercussiues things
letting pass, be gross thycke and clammy humours, which by their multitude,
thickness and toughnes, stop the privy spiracles, breathynge pores: and as
touching things that inhibit, they be causes primitiue. As bruising, smiting,
and bynding to strait, All these mortify a member, inhibityng his spirit and
specially bynding, which I saw befall in a Manne of much honesty lying in
the Hospital of Saint Bartholomewes. He was pained of a push between his
tooes: and when one, who ye know had opened it, there gushed forth so much
blood that the Surgeon thought it b^st to bind the member, with a right
strayt bond, whereupon the patient dyed the next day. Wherefore it is
expediente, How^ pa^iet dyed by evil cure.
that ye be ware ye fall not into such lewd oversights, whereby ye should
get the name of Boch^rly ma^quell^rs, as he did, not without his desert. Mark
here also that, that which corrupts, may two ways be considered. First as
it appears, the way to putrefaction, next putrefaction already caused. If ye
consider it, in the first respect, make your recourse to the contrary causes:
according to the saying of Hippocrates, Hypocrates.
sicknesses caused of repletion be dispatched by evacuation, which done, the
effect is at a point, as Aristolle saith Remove the cause, and the effect is
removed, But if ye take on putrefaction the second way, ye must put one the two
eyes, Remove the cause, and the effect will cease.
which Galen ascrybed to a good Physician. Whereof the right shall behold the
cause, and left the effect, which is the putrefaction. The right shall use
contraries to the least applied. Oyntmentes and plasters, to repair the
putrefaction, which shall be these, R Of Uertdegrece, of Rooch Alome, and of
Honey, like parts, with a little Vinegar, and have it to the fire, till the
colour alter from green, to red, which use, spreadyng this over it. Galen.


Take of Bean meal, of Barley, and Lupine meal. ana. li. ss. of Barbours lye.
q.ss and sees the unto such time, as they be well mingled together, like a
past, which must be spread on a piece of cloth But note, if the rottenes be so
far past, that it will not be displaced with Vnguentum Egyptiacum, of equal
parts, ye may use this, which undoubtedly will dispatch it. Take of honey. iii.
of Roch Alome Uertdegrece. ana. ii. of sublimatum..iii incorporate them
altogether at the fire, till they be sufficiently sodden, and lay it to the
rotten place, and then the plaster appointed before. To help putrefaction. A
good medecin.
And if there be caused an eschara, remove it with digestiues, made of
Terebintyne, and yolks of eggs or with Butter. It may also be removed with a
plaster which was given for Apostumatio, opened with a potencial cautery, when
this is removed ye ulcer shall be cured, as be wounds. Now ye se what is to be
done in putrefaction, or fyllthy sores.


Soarenes. What say you of corrupted bones?


Chirurgi. NOw to come to a corrupted bone, Of Bones which are corrupted two
things considered.
the signs of it must be noted, that ye may know, whether it be so or not. For
it hath proper signs, to be kowenn by, as well inwardly as outwardly. The
outward signs be dull, and loosse flesh as Auicen. saith. in the chapter De
ventositate spinae.

The signs inwardly may not be seen with the eye, but be found with the
searcher. For if a man search it well, he shall not only find it secretly fret,
but also minished and abated in substance Wherefore if we find this fault. and
mind to amend it, we shall above al things observe two points, one parteineth
to the cure, the other to eschew reproach infamy. A good observation.
We shall avoid infamy, if we refuse to meddle with the heads of great bones and
joints. For if we would work in such places, we shall be endaugered of
conuulsions, or some evil accident, by reason of the fellowship and
colligance, whi^e they have with great synewes. heads of cords, muskles:
Auicen
whereby we might be utterly disgraced and shamed. as Auicen there declares
largely. And as for the cure (these causes eschewed) may be obtained, specially
if ye fault be in the midst of the arm or leg, bones, tredes with
convenient medecines. There be also certain kinds of instruments which they
cal Trapanes, and Raspatories, very mete for repairing of alterated and
corrupted bones. Again Vnguentum Egyptiacum, made after Auicens description,
shall be good, how be it, ye shall make better speed, if ye use an actual
cautery, that is if ye burn it with an hot iron. Verily my self, when I
chanced in such bones, did ever use actual cauteryes, because they comfort
and rectify the weak member. Whereof there be two kinds in especial, the
first hath this shape A. and the part is plain, which is applied to the bone.
C. the other is figured. R. Now in cauteryzing and burning, I use this
diligence, to eschew inconvenience. I prepared an other instrument, like a
finger of a Glove, These figures are in the end.
with an hole in the midst, through which I put my cautery, to save the flesh
from burning, this used I in plain bones. The second was appointed, which I
used in holes, and hollow places. There may be invented yet many other forms
of instruments, for cauterizing of Bones, according as the work and place
shall require.

Now as touching the causes of bones corrupted, they be the accident and
priuetiue: of which two the antecedent is the worse. For why the antecedent will
fester the bone, or ever the flesh be corrupted, for by reason of the cause
primetiue, corrupt, and freting humours will fleet to the bone, and fret it,
which Auicen terms Ventositas spinae. Now how this may be known and cured,
ye shall learn of him which writes a special treatise of it. For we mind not
to meddle with it, because it would draw us far from our purpose, by reason
of the number of intentions. The primatiue cause is what soever be falls from
outfoorth, as brusynge, incision, alteration of ye air (I mean not of
alteration of the air it self, but of alteration caused in the bone by the
air, and the use of some oyntmentes. And therefore consider you whether it come
of a wound, Alteration of the air.
or apostumacion, and so by diligent calculation, shall ye come to the cause of
the corruption. If it proceed of apostumation, corrupt humours be the cause. If
it come of a wound, then applications of ointments, or occursaunce of thair
have done it. And if it come of a wound, then consider again whether any hole
bone were cut of, or any bone minished, or else any part, Again there is no
difference whether a bone were taken out violently, or expelled of nature, For
Auicen saith, a Fistula may be feared where nature expels it. Wherefore if ye
covet to know all these particular causes and observations: peruse Auicen in
that Chapter, Auicen.
where ye shall find al things to your full contentation. This is said
concerning corrupted bones. Now in as much as our time is so short by
appointment, let us go forth to the rest of our communication.


Soarenes I pray you, what is the cause of Uarices, and swelling?


Chirurgi. VArices be swelling veins in the legs, Of swellings the cause.
filled with Melacholyke, blood. And these are bred diuerslyd, by stoppinge of
the spleen* weakness of the liver, to much feding on meates that increase
Melancholy, lunge standing and waytinge before men, weariness of
footegate, and finallye bearing of great burdens, as it is evident in them that
use it And this mallady is very hard to be redressed, and requires many
intentions and observations in the cure. The first is to order the life
conveniently. The.ii. to purge the humour. The third is to apply convenable,
Melancholik metas.
local medecines. Now the regement shall be to abstain from meates, which
breed Melancholy. As Beeffe of the Ox, Bugle, and Cow. All salt meates,
Pulse, Colewortes, Water birds Salt Cheese and gross wine, with other like.
The matter is purged with blood lettynge, digestiues, and potions. Ye shall take
the blood of Basilica or the liver vein, making a large gash and hole, that
the gross melancholyke blood, may pass and comforth And it will be the better,
and more available, a great deal if the patient be exercised by going, or
some other way before, so that the humours be well mingled together. After ye
Bloudletting, these syrupes must follow syrupe of Epythimum of Fumiterre, and
then a purgatio of pills De fumo terrae, or Cappets. Al which ye shall your
self better indosate according to ye pacients state then I here make farther
metion thereof. This is spoken in respect of ye accident, which if ye mind to
cure well, apply it to the principal intention in the cure. Now as touching the
localles, and matter coniuncte: when ye will cure swellynge veins, first use
an universal purgation, First to the whole, then to the particul^r
of the whole body, and then come to the particular intentions, which
comprehend three considerations. The first puts of fletyng matter. The second
removes that which is fleeten. The third comfort the veins, strayneth them
together, and resolves congeled blood, ye shall keep of fleeting matter with
defensiues, applied under the knee, which may be such.

R. Bole Armoniacke, and clay, A defensive under ye knee.
an..iii. Dragons blood..i. Terra sigilata..iii. make them in fine powder, and
incorporate them with the white of two Eggs: with.i. of Oil of Mirtine, and
place it under the knee, byndinge it with a Roller indifferentlye fast. I say
indifferentlye fast, because to strayt bynding will mortify the member (which
were worse then the former evil) neither to slack. How to bind a member
For that is not able to press the veins together neither inhibite the
descent of the Melancholikk blood to the place. Therefore let the bond be
indifferent, so that the blood be repressed, and the member not mortified. When
he have so done, ye shall the day following, smite the vein, which appears
above the holownes of the foot, making a large hole, that gross blood may
have his passage walk, To open a vein to purge gross blood.
or press down the blood with your hands, beginning beneath the defensive,
till a great part of the blood of the veins be avoided. But note, that ye must
bathe all the leg with hot water, before ye press down the blood. When
the blood is emptied out, stop the vain, and cover the whole leg with this
plaster. R. Of Camomell, Melilote, and Wormwood. ana. M.vi. of Mirtilles. red
Roses, ana M.iii. of Cyprus Nuts.xx, of Acatia..iii. of Bran M, A
plaster for the Leg to resolve.
iiii. of Bean meal, and of Lupyne meal. ana. li. ss. bray yt is to be
brayed, and sees them in new white wine, and Barbours lye, wherein these
things were sodden before Tamarike, Moline, Smallage, and roots of Capers,
and play altogether, till it be like past: after this, put a little Vinegar to
it, that it may the better cut the humours, and so inrolle the whole leg
therewith. This plaster (if a man consider it well hath power to dry, to
comfort, to resolve, and to cut thin clammy matter, which be necessary
points, in this troublesome accident. What will ye more? If ye do thus, ye shall*
dispatch and rid your hands of it with honesty. But in case the defensive
so dry, and cause dolor, ye must change the plaster, and command the
patient to keep his leg higher the his body, always in his bed, that blood
descend not down again. For this point is necessary, if he will be cured of
the mallady: according to the popular proverb, Gamba al lecto braso al pecto,
Purge a sore man, after he is amended, for scare of dropsye. c
which wills the hand to be kept at the bosom, and the leg in the bed.
And when the patient is somewhat amended, purge him again: For otherwise it
were to be doubted, lest he fall to an Idropsie, Pthisicke, Phrensye, and
doting. For the matter, which was wont to descend would be witholden, and
in this case, his property is to rise, cause such accidents, as Hippocrates
saith, to cure old and antique emeroydes, if one be not left open, puts the
patient in peril of an Idropsy, Pthisicke, destruction of mind. And in an other
place he saith, of men that be destracted. A conclusion.
A frenzy is loosed at the rising of the swelling veins. Wherefore if a frenzy
be dispatched at the provocation of them: it is consequente that the stop of
them, will be cause of the same. Wherefore Aristotle hath this general rule, in
his book of places. If the presence o^ a thing be good, the absence of the same
is evil. Therefore to eschew this evil, we must purge the patient once every
month, with some purgatiue, which will evacuate the Melancholic humour. There
be yet other things observed, as by bynding cutting of veins, which, what for
Bocherly cruelty, and otherwise danger of the patient, I pass them over, sith
I never practised them, nor never intende to do the cures being so perilous,
and full of dangers.


Soarenes What say you of a round ulcer, Good sir Surgeon?


Chirurgi SIr, as touching roudnes in an ulcer, we need not to say any thing at
all. For ye have sufficiently laboured the demonstrative sciences,
Geometrical measures in Chirurgi
have, as I understand right well profited in them For ye can erect tryangles,
cut lines, deuyde circles, yea, and square the also, if it were need: al be
it, to this day, the true squarynge of a circle, hath not been invented. But to
the purpose. If ye will deuyde the roundness of an ulcer by the Dyameter, with a
hoate Iron, or other Instrument, ye shall deuyde the compassynge of Uilles and
small here's well enough, which is one of the greatest lets in the ensoundynge
of an ulcer. And so shall you withstand the circuition: which done ye may
prosecute the cure of the cut, burning, or otherwise working to your
pleasure. Now for that we have rid your hands of these troblesom accidents:
we will return to the cure of the capital ulcers, whereof we made mention
before. Whereof the virulent is first.

Good Physicians have ever used to try out first, the cause of maladies and to
cut them of, which done, the disease would easily be displaced. The cause of
Soarenes, is first not considered.
And in good faith, this seems to be the very path way^, to artificial
curing.

Wherefore we also, because we would not swerve from the right way of our
ancient master, will first declare the cause of a virulent ulcer, then order
the intention in ye cure. The cause then of a virulent ulcer, is Cholerik
humours, which become sharpe by reason of salt phlegm mixed with choler, and
after they get virulency, by adustion and burning. For virulency is not
otherwise bread, as saith Auicen, but of the subtilnesse of hot watery humours,
which originally proceed of evil governance, and order of life. Ulcer
Uirulent, how it grows.
Therefore we will first appoint the intencions which must be observed in their
cure. They be five. The first orders the life, the second purges ye humour,
the third kepeth the flux of humours, Five good intentions.
the fourth dries them that be already fleeting. The fyft ensoundeth the
ulcer, and comfort the meber. In the first we must forbid all sharp,
pontike, salted, and hoate things, which shall be able to alter the blood, to
heate, and adustion, as Ginger, Pepper, Cinnamon, and give him chicken broth,
Lattice and Borage, as al other things that moderate the blood, whereof Chicken
broth is thought to be best. For it reduces humours to equality, conserveth
complexions, and refreshed the virtue. Al this is spoken for example, that ye
may take occasion by this, to choose and refuse things convenient, and
disconuenient. Ye shall purge the matter, if ye give purgations, that is, things
that draw choler, as Electuarium e succo Rosarum* Electuarium solutinum,
Diaphaenicon or some other like in operation. The flux of humours is
prohibited if we apply this defensyue in the circuit of the ulcer, four
fyngers less or more for the same. The defensive is thus receypted.

Take Bole Armoniacke, and Dragons blood. ana. ss. Bean meal..i. powder of
Roses and Myrtylles, Every goo^ defensive.
ana..iii. Oil of Mirt..iiii. juice of Housleke.i. Weathers fat,, ss. with a
little Wax: sees the oil and fat, with the juice, till the juice be wasted,
and then put to the remnant, making it to an ointment, after the art, and
order it as it was now said. And as for ye drying of humous, use the drying
symples: how be it, there must be diversity in compoundyng of them, according
to the natures and complexions, whereof one may be thus.

Take ashes of Dill, of burnt Lead, and of Terra sigillata. ana..i. Lytharge
of Silver, Flowers of Pomgranettes, and vnholed Galls. i.ss of Creuis shells,
or house Snails burnt, of Cerusse, ana..ii. of roche Alome burnt. i. mingle
them all together, and powder it finely. which use for dryinge. And if this
profit not, use the red powder called Precipitatus doubtless, this will
rectify the ulcer, and digest it. And here note by the way, that digestion is
not causing of matter as some vnlearnedly holds opinion but it is
proportionating of humours to the natural heate, Digestion causes not matt^,
but it is ye proporcionating of the humour.
so that nature is animated, to expulse them defyne it thus. Digestion is an
engrossing of thin humours, and thinning of thick things, with some
preparance to the expulcing. And for this purpose, we compound hot digestiues,
in cold maladies and cold in hoate. Finally, we ensound with Vnguentum de
Minio, Tripharmacon, Vnguentum Caphoratum, de Cerussa: Or spread the defensive
aforsayd in the ulcer. This also that follows is very good.

Take oil of Myrt, ii. of Rosed Omphacine..i. of Weathers fat.ii. of
Vermilion.ss. of Cerusse..i. sees them till they be black putting thereto at ye
end..ss. of new wax. And after it is taken of the fire encorporat it with.iii.
of Camphere, and.ii. prepared of Tuti, and so will it be an ointment, like a
Cerote And this will comfort the member amend the complexion, bring the ulcer to
skinninge, Now for skynning of it, wash it with Alome water which was
prescribed before in skynning of ulcers: But one thing I warn you of, if ye see
that the vlcere be enlarged, with these drying medecines ye must lay the apart,
use easier medecines. The sign of to much drying, or abstertion by oyntmentes
will be this. The sore will be like an apostumated sore, and the patient shall
feel payne, nyppyng and bytyng, as Auicen saith, Wherefore I will ye forget in no
wise, A sign of overmuch drying a sore meber.
this token and sign, because it will be much for your aduauntage,


Soarenes. I pray you say some thing of fylthy ulcers


Chirurgi. IT is evident to see, what gluttonous, ravening kind of living we
use, Glotony is no small ennemy to nature.
by the alteration of our blood: which is not only altered to heate, and
adustion, but also to foul rottennes. In good faith, reason would we should
foresee, that we fell not to such excessive eating and drinking, whereof might
ensue, sharp fylthy, and corrupt humours, which, cause vlceration, when they
come to ye coniunct, and afterward feed the ulcer. Well let them be their own
workmen and drink as they brew: we will to our purpose. And first let us note
what sordityes, Of filthy matter* what it is.
fylthy and corrupt rottennes is. They defyne it, to be a certain white thick
matter, congeled, propense unto blacknes and like lies This kind of matter,
properly requires abstertion and skowryng, as virulency doth drying. Moreover
there be two kinds. a plain and hollow fylthy ulcer, which requires four
intentions: the first orders the life, the second purges the humours: the
third wypeth and s^owreth of the filth: ye fourth pertayneth to ensounding:
Four intencions in two kinds of ulcers.
ye shall order the life, as in a virulent ulcer because these two differ not,
but by the way of more or less. And therefore the diet shall respect, specially
the quality, which we there respected in the order. Likewise must the purgatiue
be as there was said. And the filth shall be scoured away with these medecines
following. R. Of Rosed Honey strained.ii. of clear Terebintyne..iii. play them
together, till they be well mingled and then put a, A good perfect mundification
q.ss. of Barley flower a little Saffron to it. And it will be a good
mundificatiue, for yt purpose. But if this shall not serve, let this follow.

Take of clear Terebintine., iii. of Rosed Honey strained.ii. of the juice of
Smallage..ss. sees them te to the wasting of the juice, then put q.ss. of
Barley meal to it., ss, of Frankincense,.i. of Sarcocol, and a little Saffro
and let it be a soft abstersiue, that may be laid in the vlcere, with tents:
And if ye be set besides the stool in this, then make this following. R. of
clear Terebintyne, of Rosed Honey strained. ana..iii. Juice of Planten..ii.
juice of dogs tongue..i, ss, of Sarcocol, Frankincense, Mirhe, and Aloes Epatike.
ana..i. play altogether, till half the juice be wasted, But stir it
continually, least it burn, After this let it be strained, and applied in the
vlcere, whether it be plain or hollow. But if the pray shall yet escape your
nets, make this, wherewith doutles ye shall have your purpose.

Take of Barbours lye..iiii. of red powder Principitatus. i.ss. of Rosed Honey
strained.ii. mingle them well together, To skower ^ dry al ulcers plain or
hollow
and doubtless ye shall scour anb dry the ulcer with this abstersiue. Some have
also used this mundificatiue with good effect. Take the juice of
Smallage..viii. the juice of Agrimony. iiii. the juice of Planteine..ii. sugar
rosate,, x. boyle these a season, then cast into them the meal of Barley,
Lupines, and Fenigreeke. ana..i Boyle them then to the consistence of an
ointmente, at the end, put in..i, of Terebintine, Contraries when to use them.
use this to thy honour in clensyng mundifying a sore or would fro matter. For
whereas there be but two moistures bred in an ulcer, as Galen writes, whereof
the one requires abstertion, ye other drying: both are respected and
considered in this medecin, as it may easily appear, if a man consider the
symples well. Now ye shall incarnate the sore with oyntmentes. that contrary the
strange quality of the vlcere: as with hoate if the ulcer be cold, and with
cold, if it be hot. For what is ensoundinge of discontinued parts, but to
rectifye the quality, which shorteth and hyndereth the virtue nutritiue, and
to qualify the complexion of the member? Nature nourishes her self
For if ye do thus, nature being fortified, will of her self cause flesh to
grow, as it appears not only in man, but also in brute beasts. And
therefore, I compound no other ointments in this case, than were ordered
before, in the cures of hot cold ulcers, whither ye may resort, when ye shall
need. Thus much have I said, of the plain filthy ulcer. Now will we to the
hollow and cauy ulcer.

Why should men marvel, if men of old time, came to the knowledge of Natures
sickness and causes, for asmutch as they were taught. even by the leading of
nature, which they of that time, more diligently observed tha we do: And
therefore. they came to marvelous great knowledge, which we in these days,
attain not unto, because we observe not in like case. I say this, in
consideration of a Mold warpes moinyng under Ground, which gave me occasion
to obseruacions, in a cauie vlcere^. For because I was present, where a
Gardener stopped the mouth of the earth, or hole, where afterwards, because the
cause was not removed, An example of Calyus or Moldewarp.
seven Moldwarpes came out by sundry times. Truly I noted it, thinking it
worthy of consideration in the cure, wherefore, when we be minded, to handle
this cure in his right kind, we must try out the cause, which we seek by
humours, accidents. and qualities of the matter. And therefore, when ye mind the
cure of any such Ulcere, consider advisedly, whether any of the foresaid
accidents be the cause, why the sore refuses ensoundinge. And if any such be
found there, and ye think that the accidents, be the very le^te: Amend an
evil accidents and then the cure will prosper.
return then to the correction of that accident which hyndreth your purpose,
and when ye have amended that, ye shall have your desire. Now if the cause be
found in none of them, then mark the matter, whether it be sanious, virulent,
or fylthy, and then according as ye find it, so resort to the cure of the
Capital ulcers, and work as is there appointed, for in so doing, you shall be
assured to quite your self of it. On tother side, if humours be the cause,
which is lightly perceived, by the colours of the flesh, ye must purge them:
For if it be ruddy and itching, it declares Choler. On the other part, if it
be white, it is a token of Phlegm, and so of Melancholy if the colour be dim
and brown. Wherefore if ye shall always behave your self thus in your working,
ye shall not stay, but have your eye still to ye mark, whereat you entend to
shoot.

Here should we speak of a festerd ulcer, unless we had talked of yt matter,
when we treated of the accidents of ulcers, where ye shall find the causes of
it, and the cure, Therefore ye must make your repair thither, when need
requires, and not loke that I should double it again. Now have I, my friend,
payed my debt, and discharged my bond, according to my promise it shall be your
part to bear with my travel, and to take my diligence in good worth. And
though my stamps be not so fine, to coin such rich money, peradventure as ye
looked for: yet have I laboured diligently to give you currant money, with which
I trust to content you. Wherefore thus remain, that ye be diligent labourers in
this, and then within small time ye shall swim without Cork, and traverse
great streams, by the aid of these things. But if here after ye shall look,
to be holden up by the chin (which I think not) ye must procure and retain
some other. For I may not attend upon you, for business that I have my dere
friend soreness.


Soarenes TO say for my self, and my fellows (which I may because I know
their minds) we thank you, as far as we be able to say or think for your
faithful payment, brotherly love and gentle courtesy. Ye have so finely coygned
al, so orderly laid it forth, every some by it self, and so gently deliver it,
that we cannot chose, but allow it, and highly commend it. But one thing
grieves me (I think it doth my fellows also) yt ye leave us in the stream to
swim without help. Ye know right well gentle Chirurgi, what a number of
Gulphes be in the stream of Chirurgi, which ye have not meddled withal, and
this requires the help of an expert workma, Wherefore we shall desire you, to
grant us some aid. Certainly we will repair to you again. for other things,
which we will show you at your leisure.


Chirurgi Well your desires may do much with me, howbeit I may not promise at
this present, al your desires or requests, but of ye head I will say some thing.


Soarenes. Mary we pray you, show us the cures of the head, when it is wounded
in peril. For the head is the prince of mebers, whose cures are most hard, so
bid you fare well.


Chirurgi. NO man, dear Soarenes. that covets to gratify other, Of honest
request and frendshyp.
uses to make lyghte of his friends requests, but rather embraces them with
al dearnesse of mind, specially if the thing truly asked, shall be righteous and
honest, or bring the party, who is required to no hindrance For if those
points should appear in any request, their petitions would seem dishonest,
and worthy of repulse. For why, honesty and righteousness should not please the
desired, more then the desyrer. Verily men should be far of from the way, if
they thought, that justice and honesty might be acquyred by other men's loss,
and discommodity. Wherefore saying we consider that the matter, which we covet
to get al our estimation (for we desire to hear you talk of the maladies,
that come of a cause* primatiue in the head, with their cures) shall be no less
to you profitable, than to our selves quiet of conscience.


Soarenes. WHy should we not boldly require this, namely, sith both of us, you
to declare, and we to hear, be most at leisure at this present time? We have
also good cause our selves in that our conscience doth stir, and encourage us
forth besides the charitable love, which we owe among our selves one to an
other miserably afflicted, in such causes. Again if we did demand any thing
rashly, perchance even that, which should be pleasant to other men, might
worthily be denayed us, for why, rashness seems to import two things:
vnrighteousnes in the demander, or else vanity in the thing demanded, yet for
as much as our suit is right just and honest, and you pleasant Master
Chirurgi. gentle and free hearted to your friends: let it be your will and
pleasure to re reason with us concerning the matter, to the intent we through
your apt and wise communication, may declare so many dangers in ye head (where
unto these commom practicians, rush out on with al haste, as doth Tom a Bedlam
in his naked prograce) and also redress the same, if any such chance under
our simple plain hands. For you are the Man, as we do think, who is skilful
to cure hurts in the head, and avoid dangers in the same. And thus did we
perceive right well, not only at other times but specially in the places, where
wounded men are kept, where ye helped grievous and perilous chauces in the
head. Go to then gentle master and follow your friends desire, which be in
great love with you. And thus doyng, ye shall do us presently great pleasure,
and unto our posterity. And al be it, ye cannot receive worthy reward at our
hands, for so great a benefyt: yet the almighty God, who doth suffer no good
turn to be unrewarded, nor vice unpunished, will recompense your payne, and
prosper you in your Acts and deeds, who ever be praised, for himself and
his works Amen.


Chirurgi THe beginning of your matter, al be it, I did well perceive it, yet by
means ye tale was somewhat long, it was almost fallen out of my remembrance, I
being now feeble, and fallen into decay with much labour of mind, and anguish
that I take for my pore friends. For according to the debt of our corrupt
nature, they are deceased, and have given up their Souls, to whom the merciful
God, not in respect of their good deeds, but at the contemplation of his own
bountiful clemecye, grant endless rest and salvation with his sayntes and
elected. But yet as far as I can remember, I noted in some, what we are bound
to do for our friends and acquaintance, in consideration of our familiar
conversation with them. Of truth we are not ignorant, dear friends, howe
harde a thing it is for us, at this present, to satisfy your desire,
specially, for as much as my mind doth not only take care, but melts away in
floods of sorrow, for the great affliction I daily feel. Is it possible, that
I should content your desires with like words as I used, when I talked of
wounds, apostumations, ulcers? Verily, I would I might gratify you, so that ye
should covet no further in the matter. But alas, I am racte and tormented
within my self, when I feel and consider, mine insufficiencye and
vntowardnes. But yet, lest I should be seen to turn my back, and give my
dearest friends a repulse or an vltimum vale (who be as mine own eyes) yet I
will take the matter for your sakes upon me. Nevertheless, this would I
desire obtain at your hands, that none should interrupt me in my tale: but in
such places, where I end my whole matter. For the time is very short for our
discourse, which we mind to finish. And certainly, If I thought otherwise,
nothing were better to me, than to be questioned with in every doubt, which you
shall not need.


Soarenes. GEntle sir, ye have most happily prevented us. For the matter which
we were appointed, to get at your hands or ever we came hither, by prayer or
favour, yt have you offred of your self Therefore saying we are agreed of the
matter, set on a Gods name, and luckily make the onset. For there may not be
greater pleasure to us, then to hear your words, and manner of talk, so yt
the precious fruit and profyt, which we look for in especial, be preferred,
for that is the matter.


Chirurgi. I Noted, dear Soarenes, and your friends, that R. R. in his famous
work, under whose banner I s^rued most gat all that I have, at his hands, or
not without his especilall favour: did fatherly admonish his Schollers, and
hearers, that they should to their possibility, try s^arche out, the causes of
diseases. Otherwise, they should attempt, to cure one thing for an other, and
gieue Chalk for Cheese. Chalk for Cheese.
And if they did so, they should greatly err in the cure or rather provide a
bear, to help their Pacients to their grave. Wherefore, I have determined with
my self, since your will is so, that I shall danger my self in the matter, to
recite unto you the sicknesses, which happen in the head, with their causes.
And this do I, to th'entent we fall not unadvisedly in that, had I wit,
whereof we mentioned before. They be five in number, that is to say, Five
causes that do hurt the head.
apostumacion, ulcer, wound, bruise, and breaking. But as touching
apostumacions, and Ulcers without, we will here make no further a do, because
we have sufficiently spoken of them before, in our former treatise of Wounds:
whereunto ye may repair at your pleasure. But as for bruses, Wounds, and
Breakynges, we will lay our Foundation, as far as our Wit shall extend. Ye
have the Maladies, wherefore, we may proceed to the causes and cures.

And first, we will begin at a Bruise or Crushing, The cause of bruses, what
they are.
whose causes be falls and strokes, whereof follows the member of the
continuance broken. And here we use this term, of the continuance, broken,
or bruise: after a large manner, for every riuing or frushing of mans flesh,
which may be two ways, that is to say, by means of a Wound, without a
Wound, As a bruise, which shall be without Wound, may easily be cured, except
the bone, which is under it, be riuen, the skin remaining whole sound. Which
hurt, the sick himself, will show to the Surgeon, by certain signs, as
by often scratching, or touching of the place with the Nails, or by some other
means. But if it be so, that ye cannot be persuaded, How to find out a
s^r^pe by what tokens.
by the Patients showing: or if ye be driven to and fro, and reasoning the
matter with your self, as in such cases, men's minds be plucked, now hither,
now thither. Ye must consider the smiter, of what strength and force, he might
be of, where with the stroke was inflicted: as in like manner the place also,
whether any thing fell on the head, from an high. For the higher that the place
is, and the mightier the smiter, so much the greater worse must the bruise be
deamed. For heavy things. falling towards their natural place, are found of
greater force violence, at ye end of their descent fall, than at ye beginning,
when they were first losed of their stays. Of incision in the head.
These things considered, ye shall make incision unto the scalp, ruling the
same after such sort, as shall be declared afterward, when we speak of
ryuinges of the scalp, with depression of the bone. On the other side, ye
guess by the said signs, that the bone remain sound vnbroken, then set al
your intent, to the cure of ye bruise: which shall stand in a resolutiue
medicine, being somewhat bynding withal, if ye stand in fear of putrefaction.
For what soever is bruised or frushed, must needs putrefy, as Galen writes.
But I suppose, ye are minded to ask me a question. How it is, that
resolutiues should be applied in bruses, wherein is great concurse, showing of
matter, for asmutch as repercussiues should rather be used, as was said, at the
beginning of such matters. Ye have well and trimly doubted at the matter: for
this shall make much for the cure of a bruise in great peril, whereof ye shall
diligently mark, that effusion of blood doth immediately follow upon a bruise,
because the veins be violently cut of, and the mouths op^ned. And the blood
which shall so once be Isshewed forth, can never return back, into the veins
again. Wherefore, seeing it is without the vessels, Of blood running the chief
cause, and the hurt that doth follow the same.
it must needs putrefy. so consequently, corrupt and rot the Flesh. For this
purpose gentle resolutiues, being bynding things withal, must be applied at
the beginning: whhere the one resolves the blood, and the other being contrary
in working, closes the vein, that no more come forth. And hereof appears
the ignorance, and oversight of these Emperikes, and vagabond Surgeons.
For they minister repercussiues, at the beginning of every bruise, without
resolutiues: whereof follows incision of necessity, if they will avoid
putrefaction. And therefore I will give you the medicine, which ever is used in
such cases, that ye fall not in the like reprehension and shame.

Take Camomell, Melilot, Bran. ana. M.i. of Beans, Lupines, and Barley meal.
ana..ij. of Mirtilles. M.ij. of Cyprus nuts.xv. bray such things as ought
to be brayed finely, and then sees all in new Wine and Barbers Lee, unto the
time it be like a Cerote. And at the end, ye shall put these Oils to the
same, that is, of Dill, of Camomell, and of Mirte. ana..i. But note, here the
Oils must be used, where no putrefaction is. For in case of putrefaction, I
would utterly forbid them. Then play them again, till the Oils be well
incorporated: afterward apply it warm. Mark well this medicine. For it were a
long matter, and to much for one day, to recite to you, how many have been
cured, by the help of this medicine alone. Many men have bin cured by this
medicine.
But if the bruise be concurraunt with a wound, or ever ye work in the
matter: ye must diligently consider with your self, whether the rim or
pannicule, which from out forth, covers the scalp, be cut or not. And if it
be not cut, the wound must be cured, as we showed in the treatise of Wounds,
saving that the digestiue must be made, with Rosed Omphacine and yolks of
Eggs, over which ye must ever apply this medicine, which we above recited.
For it will keep of putrefaction, and harde corrupted blood. And after this
manner, proceed forth in the cure, till sanious matter be generated, that done,
lay apart the dygestiue and apply an abstersyue, in his place. Which may be
made thus.

. Of clear Teretintine..ij. of Syrupe of Roses..i.ss. of Plantayne water. A
good abstersti^e for the head.
.ss. play them together, till ye water be wasted, and then put thereto. qss. of
Barley meal, and a little Saffron as may be able, to colour the mundificatyue.
But take it of the fire, or ever ye put to the meal, and s^e it be well
stirred, until it be well incorporated together. Now, when ye have thus
done, ye may use it, and apply ever the same Vnguentum Basilicum, after this
descripcion.

Take oil of Roses and Camomell. ana..iij. oil of Mirtine. Vnguentum
Balilicum.
.i.ss. play them together, till they acquire them a black hugh, and then put
these drugs to them, of clear Terebintine..ij. of Ship pitch..i. of new
wax.ij ss. And play them again a little, and so take it of the fire, and
stir it continually* till it be thick. And for asmutch as these wounds, by
reason of much sensibility of the part, be oftentimes vexed with an
Erysipelas: this place asks to show, how we may withstand that troublesome
malady. Erysipelas is a hoatred, roud inflamacion soar, or choleric voyle with
a fever in the body.
And to thentent ye may so do, note this, concerning an Erysipelas, or
Choleric apostumation, and Prynt it deeply in mind. It is this. An
Erysipelas may happen, by reason of boiling of the humour, or for that, that
corrupted matter, is retained within. Which thing we saw our selves come to
pass, by reason of matter, abiding within, in one worthy capitayn. Now this
thing is cured by purging of the cause: As Hippocrates saith, Quaecunque
aegretudines ex plenitudine fiunt, euacuatio sanat. Diseases coming of
fullness. are helped by emptiness.
If it be sharpened and chafed, through heate boiling of the Choleric humour:
anoint it with Vnguentum Rosatum and lute the woude with ye same, as the best
learned Surgeons did use. For if mordicacion or heate be caused, by mean of
Ointments: it will be pacified through coldness, which is in ye Medicine.
After ye are at poynct with this, cover the whole hole wound with this.

R. of Rosed Omphacine, and oil Mirtine. ana..ij. of Vnguentum Rosatum. i. of
Populion..ss. of white Wax..iij. and melt all at the fire: this done and
prepared, infuse a lynnen cloth in the same ointment, and see it be all to
weated in it, and then take it forth, and cast it in cold water, yt it may be
thick again. This cloth also must be applied to the head, Clothes applied
to a wooded head.
for fear of a noying of the place: and be applied where the hair was shaven
of. Moreover, ye shall form and shape one other cloth, after the same manner,
with the said ointment, so that ye may make permutacion, at even and morning,
of the clothes. But if the panicule or rimme be cut, and the bone discou^red,
ye shall need more diligence and circumspection, whiles ye search, whether the
bone be cloven, or riuen in pieces. And if neither of these faults be found,
then is nothing else to be done, A powder for the head.
otherwise than in wounds. saving yt this powder shall be sprinkled, where the
bone was dyscouered opened. R. Aloes epatike, Sarcocoll, Myrrh, ana..iij.
Frankesence..i.ss. Flowerdeluce..ss. let it be made into fine powder, for ye
said use. And as for farther prosecution of the matter, ye shall do as in ye
cure of woudes. But in case ye bone be riuen, an other manner of cure will
handfast you: which will be far distant, unlike the former. And to the intent
ye may be able, to ascertayne your self, in such cliftes reuinges, ye shall
here note the signs tokens, that follow clites, riuings of above.

These things be signs of a broken bone, vomiting, daslyng of eyes, Signs of
broken bones en the head.
vertige or swinyng, blyndnes and falling. All which must be understand, to
happen at that present, when the stroke was give. And sometime an apoplexy, a
dumpysh priuacion of sense, and a fever with a vehement horroure and cold do
ensue. Now were the patient taken of a Fever, without Cold, there were no
great Danger in the matter, for that accydente comes ofttyme, of a private
cause, which moves the accident. And where it is not possible. but the body
should be replete, or vacant of superfluous humours, so it cannot be, but there
should ensue great difference, at that diversity. For if this kind of
breaking, occupy a vacant body, the Paci^nt will be without Fever: But if it
fall to a replete Body, laden with evil humours, the Physicians may thyncke
the stroke to be dangerous, and hard of cure. For we have this lesson of
Auicen, saying: all Wounds, Dangerous wounds, how to know them.
and Ulcers be dangerous. which chance upon superfluities of a wayward, and
froward Body. And albeit, it be dangerous, if the Patient be taken with a
Fever, at the beginning, yet is the matter more to be suspected, if he be
inflamed with Fevers, three or four days, after the stroke was gieuen,
because this should spring of putrified Blood, retained within the Scalp
upon the Rimmes, which thing is known by the increasing of the accidents.
Notwythstandinge, this may be also, when sanious matter is a generating. For
why, Hippocrates affirms in his Aphorisms, Hippocrates. Aphorisms.
that Dolours, and Fevers will happen, more at Generating of matter, than when
it is generated. But this may easily be disceuered: For here the accidents fall
and be a laid, but there they be augmented and increased, Therefore, when
such accidents shall ensue upon a stroke, even the same day, ye may well
Judge, that the breach or breaking is complete. Which if ye mind to cure
rightly, ye shall forthwith provide these things before your eyes. First,
when the matter is come to that poynct, that ye must make incision, fear not
to cut the Wound, after the manner of a triangle, or one right angle, or else of
a cross, and remove the Flesh from the Bones. How to cut to the end to
heal.
When ye have so done fill up ye wound with small quisettes, well weate before
in the whytes of Eggs. Howbeit, note and observe this always, that the
quisettes, which shall touch the bone, must be weate in hot Wine, for fear of
altering and spotting of ye bone: better than if they were weate in whytes of
Eggs, by reason of the coldness. For why, Hippocrates saith. Frigidum inimicum
neruis, ossibus, cerebro spinali medullae: calidum vtile amicum. Cold is an
Ennemy to the Synewes, How cold hurts.
Bones, Teeth, Brain, and the Nuke, or Marowe of the Back, but heate is
profitable and friendly: and therefore cold must be kept from the Skull, least
we stumble at that block by error, Now this operation finished, ye shall
give the Patient in commandment, to rest him self after that manner until
the next morning, prescribinge him an order, how he shall rule himself, his
diet. His diet shall be to eat Wheat bread, or tried and boiled Barley with
Almonde milk, A diet.
and drink boiled Borage water, for ye space of four days: and after the
fourth day is past, give him Wheaton, for Barley bread, dipped in Chicken broth,
or broth of Mutton of the Weather, least the sick be ouermutch weakened, with
the slender diet. Now the next day, return to your Patient, open his would
gently, which done, search the Bone well and warily, with a searcher of seluer,
which must neither be to blunt, to over run the rimmes, or cliffs neither so
small or fine, that it should enter into them. Ye shall search it thus. Draw
the Searcher to and fro, prettily upon the Bone: and if it slyde plainly
without stay, it is a sign the Scalp is saulfe and sound. But if it stay,
and find some let, ye may then think well, How to search a wound.
that the bone is cloven and cut. But now, in as much as we speak of rimmes,
and because they be divers, this place requires, to distinct them properly,
or ever we meddle further in the cure.

Fissures or Chinks, be caused in the head two ways: with a thing, which
gives a blunt stripe, or else with a thing, which cutteth. Fissuries or
chappes.
If it be with a thing, that gives a blunt stripe, the thing properly, is
called a clift or a ryuing. And if it be with a cut, it is called a chynke or a
clift. And all these varry in length, shortness, largeness, and smalnes, they
vary also otherwise. For every of them, I say, the chink and clift, A clift in
the head.
may be with depression of the bone, or without depression. For an instrument,
which cutteth, may cause depression, namely, if it be thick or blunt. And
albeit, they agree in the former poynctes, yet they differ in this, that is to
say, the clift, which is caused by a bruise, is ever thought to be with
penetracion, or through going and piercing of the bone, where it is not a like
always in a cut or incision. I say this of men's scalps, and not of children.
For in children, which be within seven year of age: we may be deceived, as we
see by experience. For why, such sculls will be enfolded, A note. between a
mans Scull, and a voyes.
because they be not yet hardened no strengthened: and moisture also aboudeth in
them, which property is not found in men's scalps that are come to ripe age.
For men's Scalps will ryue. and be cut through, rather than be enfolded, by
reason of the hardness, and drought of the Bone. Wherefore, men that are come to
hardness, are depryued of this, which is found in tender age. And after what
sort, every of these may be cured, we shall declare orderly, when we have first
premysed the intencions, which must needs be observed, if we intend warily, to
eschew dangers in such cases. And as soon as we shall be at poynct with this,
we shall accomplish our promise, both of a ryuing or clyft, with the
depression of the bone.

Presupposing then the regiment of life, these be the chief and principal
intencions about this cure: that is to wit, to conserve the complexion of the
member in his proper state, to prohibit Apostumacions, and to apply local
medicines fit for the purpose. Certes we may conserve the complexion, and
rectify it, if it be decayed, with Emplasters, Auicen.
as Auicen writes in the chapiter, of the wounding of the skin of the head. Et
principium quidem consistit in emplastris, erit rectificatio. c. The beginning
stands in plasters, and so will the rectification be soon had. We shall
prevent or put of apostumacions, if we shall work the things, which the
Patients strength shall be able to abide and suffer, as we have commandment in
the same place. And doubtless, the disposition of the Body, shall away with it
well enough, if we proceed no farther than till the cause of apostumation, be
intercepted and cut of. These be the causes of an hot apostumacion, Siphac,
What thing do annoy the brayn most,
a gobbet of a bone, pryckinge the utter Rimme, which is called Dura matter,
annoyance of tents, cold approaching to the Rimmes, or Pannicules, plenty of
meat and Drink, and the secret evil (as they call it) which I understand, to
be a certain malignity of Complexion, and superfluities of froward bodies:
which we shall prevent cut of by purgation and blood letting. The Patient shall
be purged, according to the signification of his vryne. ^
For why, that will show the humour, which is excessyue in ye body, as we said
in the cure of Ulcers. And as touching blood letting it hath, as he saith, two
intencions: the one to make euacuacion, and the other to prohibit, or
wythdrawe. But where we treat of blood letting, I pray you of good Fellowshyp,
note this well: for it shall greatly make for the preservation, and safeguard of
your Patient, which is soar, and for your self also.

A goodly note ^ cure.
Note, dearly beloved, that it may chance, that the sick come under your
hands, the same day he was wounded, or else after the fourth. From the first
day unto the fourth exquisytely, you may use divers blood letting, because this
is the time, when matter causing Apostumation, uses to flow* turn again to
ye place. And this blood letting must be made in the common vein, called
Mediana, of the opposite arm. Here ye shall diligently mark, and take heed,
that ye err not, in the signification of this word opposite, as some have,
which were not seen in this word at all. For this word opposite, To let
blood on the contrary part, why it must be by reason.
signifies contrariety, as when a thing is placed, over against the contrary
part. Wherefore, the parts of the right side, may not properly be opposite
one to an other, within themselves, but parts of the right side, to the parts
of the left. This will appear in the shape of mans body, which is erected and
figured, after the manner of a Quadrant, albeeit, it be not fully square and
shaped with equality of corners, as is a true quadrant or square. M^n is made
Geometrically in order.
Now it is evident, that this quadrangle, in manner is measured, with two
Diameters, which also properly be opposite. So having respect to this
quadrangle, it shall be an easy matter to see* on whether part the vein shall
be opened. And this blood letting, as we said before, is made for two purposes,
according as the cause requires, that is to weet, to make euacuacion, or else
to divert or turn away the blood to the opposite part, If your intent be to
turn a side the blood, it must be done in the opposite part. Example of blood
le^ting.
For example: When the Wound is in the left side, a vein of the right side
shall be opened: contrarily, when the Wound is in the right side, a vain of
the left, which must be the common. On the other part, if your purpose be
only to make evacuation, ye shall work the feat in the vain, which is most
proper to the part wounded. As be the veins in both hands, called
Cephalicae, that is. the head veins: which will void matter and blood from the
^ead. Wherefore, they do amysse, and evilly, yea, maliciously, who
indifferently take blood of the one, or other hand at the beginning, where the
intent should be to divert, and turn away the blood by fleubotomy. For they
make evacuation, and turn not away the blood, to the contrary part, and so
consequently cause they the feebled member, Poor men are corrected, for great
mes faults.
to be more feeble, and decayed in such wise, that other members send thither
their superfluityes, as he saith, Quicquid delirant reges, plectuntur Achiui:
What fault so ever be committed amongst the high counsayles, the poor People
suffers for it. For it is certain, that the member is feebled, as soon as
it is wounded. Wherefore in so doing, they open the way to apostumation while
they thyncke to prevent and stop it, and become occasion of the Pacients death.
And thus craftily work the Emperikes, and Heathen Uagaboundes, coveting not
only to slay, and sup the Christian blood, but utterly to extinguish the
Christian name, if it were possible. Yet a Gods name, we can abide to call
them unto us, and intertayne them with al gentleness, where we should not only
forbid them the art, but also tread them under our feet, and make them bond
Slaves, as the Turks do us Christian men, when they take us, and use us worse
than Dogs.

Now, in case the Body be full, and replenished with humours, When to let
blood, two times in one place, why.
ye shall let your Patient bleed again, in the same place, where ye let him
blood before. But if the apostumation were in the clensing places, as under the
arm holes, Flanks, and ears, I would in no wise let my Patient blede, for
that malady: because I find not, why I should so do. For an Apostumacion may
not a rise, in the emunctory places, but by euilnesse or malignity of some
principal member, or by reason of the superfluities of some member adjacent.
If the place be apostumated through matter, expelled from a principal member:
Fleubotomy were not to the purpose, because the matter might be revoked
inward, which Nature had put forth. Neither should it be well to the purpose
also, if the swelling came of superfluityes, of ye next parts thereunto. For we
should put the matter from the unnoble and petite member, and burdein again
the principal with it, whereof would ensue great inconveniences and dangers.
We be also fobidden to use repercussiues, for fear of the like dangers, in
the said emuctory or running places. But if I had occasion (in as much as we
live, and have a do with nice, foolish, and wilful people, which cal for
things to their saufety, in such wise, that we must work against our Rules,
to satisfy their lusts) I would open in that case, the Basilica, or liver
vein. And it shall make no matter, whether ye open the vein in the right
side, or left, so the Apostumation be in the upper part of the body: but in
case the apostumation be in the lower part, If an apostumation be in ye midst
of the upper part of the body, then to bleed either on ye left arm, or else
right, is well.
blood may be taken from the Liver veins, in the foot of the opposite part,
according as ye shall thyncke it most convenient. Howbeit, it will be surer,
and farther from pearill, to take blood of the Liver, in the same part of the
Foot. For it were ieoperdy, least some humidite, retained in the glandeous
Fleashe, might by stirring and angering of the matter, cause Apostumations.
Well, I have said enough, as touching blood letting, now we will to the local
Medicines, which shall be declured in the cure. Wherefore, let us come to the
cure of a breacke in ye Scalp, namely of a clyfte, or a ryuing: and first
here mark this Figure for blood lettynge, here after this place.

Under ye ton are.iij. veins, which are good to be opened against Apoplexia
Angina, stopping of ye sprits of asperation, and respiracio, and al the evils
of the mouth, tongue, and throat. R The vein called Sciatica, comes fro
beneth the Knee* downward, are.ij. in number. are good to be opened in warm
water to help ye swelling of the secret members also ye payne called Sciatica.
Q Saphena, comes from the holownes under the kne, as Sciatica doth. It is in
ye inside of ye ankle and is opened for the Spleen Matrix. c. P The vain of ye
forehead, to be opned against frenzy Megre ache in the head forgetfulness,.
soarenesse in the eyes. c. (...) this vain springs from the outward throat
vein. O Vena externa or Cephalica in the arm, is opened with a large cut, not
dep to let forth gross matter, and to cleanse the head, from al grieves, as
falling sickness dimnes of head. c. A. Mediana. which is in the myddest is the
chief or gain or spring of the blood, it must be opened to help the sides,
Midrife, stomach, hot fevers c D Vena interna. or Basilica, coming from the
heart and liver, by this vein is a synew like to it, in which is contained ye
spyxite of life, under ye same are mighty sinews, therefore it is perilous to
open ye vein but by great knowledge, but it help to be opened against
pleuricy, pestilence. c. B A branch of Cephalica in the hand. H Funis brachij.
G Saluatella. E These.iij. last are of small force to ^open, because little
blood doth cu from the, but yet to open these small veins in warm water, doth
help Apoplexia.




But yet or ever we take the cure in hand, I think it much appertaining to our
duty, to show what way we mind to follow in the cures. For I have found two,
after Auicen, whereof the one doth only moyste, and the other only dry. But to
say truth, neither of them likes me, by it self alone. For if I used the way
of moysting, in a bruise, I might well doubt of putrefaction, because this way
greatly promotes putrefaction. For it is done with oils, and yolks of Eggs,
When to dry ^ when to moist a wound in ye head.
which cause putrefaction in a bruised place. On the other part, the way of
dryuyng down, with Aqua vitae, the powder, which Auicen describes in the
Chapyter, De incisione cutis, before alleged, doth not fully content me,
though it have two parts: whereof the one defends from putrefaction, but ye
other parts not the bruised. Therefore, because I would not fall into either
extremity of only drying, or only moystyng* I have gathered a certain way of
them both, consisting between them both. For it shall altogether have virtue,
to dry and to moist, because as I judge, medycines for the head, must actually
moist, and dry potencially. For by the help of drought, we preserve the
complexion of the bone, and pannycles which be dry of complexion, as Galen
writes. And by moisture, we procure digestion, if any thing were turned and
bruised. All these things shall we obtain, with Rosed Honey strained, Aqua
vitae, the powder, which we shall order in ye cure. Neither must you marvel at
the matter, my friend Soarenesse, and your Fellows, as did one, when he heard a
man say, that Honey was moist in feeling, and drying in virtue and working.
Verily of his corpulency, if I may so say, it moysteth, but as touching his
qualities virtue, his operation is drying. But it was no wonder, that the young
Philosopher, did not perceive the matter: Alas he had not yet read over books
of simples, neither the Prynciples of Philosophy. Lady Ignorance caused him to
muse, but not to search the cause, as did the Philosophers, as Aristotle
writes, in his supernaturals. He would not have marveled, if he had read
Aristotle concerning the mynglinge of the Elements: whereby he should have
easily perceived, that Honey is of the Qualities, whereof I reported it to be,
by reason of the complexion in mynglyng, if it be advisedly considered,
according to his essence and Nature. And if there shall be any man, which
shall not perceive thoroughly, the Nature of the Symples, contained in
Medicines, yet let him assuredly persuade himself, that I will descrybe no
other way of Cure, than I have written, and have got thereby, both profyt and
good well spent time: ye have heard the cautels and provisions, which I
reckon necessary. Now will I orderly descrybe you the cure.

Then, when ye find a Clift, by reason of a Bruise, ye shall observe this
order: if ye mind to cure it rightly, in his kind. First, Beware of sharpe
pricking bones in the head for hurting of ye Brain.
before all other things, consider whether it be with depression, enfolding of
ye bone, or not. For if it be with depression, or enfolding, all that, which is
bruised, must needs be taken forth: because it would otherwise provoke some
apostumacion. For why, in that case it could not be otherwise, but some gobet
of bone would be under the scalp, pricking the utter rimme, or Dura matter. And
in this case hear them not, which shall counsel persuade, to remove part of
the bruised, and to leave part. For these men cannot remove the whole cause, in
as much as in every little part of ye bruised bone, may be some shiver, which
by priking will come to apostumacion. Therefore to avoid, and eschew the said
cause, let us take forth all the bruised. But if the clift be found, without
depressing of the bone, ye may not cut out altogether, but only make an hole in
that part, where the matter shall most easily come forth. And to the
performance of this work, ye have three proper instruments, Saw, Chesill,
and wimble for the head
the Saw, the Chesill, and Wimble, amongst which we have most need of the
Wimble, because I find in it more commodity than in other instruments.

First, it will lightly make ye hole, yea, and that without much molesting of
the Patient: which thing cannot be done, without raspatory. Again it will make
an hole, The Wymble is best to perse the head, to purge forth matter, if it be
used discreetly.
and euentacion, meet for the Passage of matter. Howbeit, there is one great
discommodity, in this instrument, which is, it will lightly pearce the Brain,
if it be not handled of a right expert Work man, in that behalf. But this
chances under his Hands, who always turns the Wimble about, after one
manner fashion, where he should use a trimmeling kind of moving the Wymble,
for if the Wimble pass through. by the round moving, and so touch the Dura
matter, it will cut and rent the same, which doth lightly happen in a trembling
moving. For if it touched the Dura matter, it might well prycke her, but not
pearce her through. A witty head and a steady hand, is fit for a good
Surgeon,
Wherefore, it would leave her whole and sound. And therefore, who so would
exercise this feat, ought to have a light hand, and witty head together,
with a sad Judgment, and not to be taken from among them, that have used to
handle gross matters, and occupacions: as Digging, or Plowing, heaving of
Timber, and currying of Horses. For their hands be hardened with labours, and
may not lightly feel when it is through the bone, if they lay lode on their
work. And therefore this work must be done, with most exquisite diligence, and
circumspection, least we slay Men, while we labour to preserve them. For this
cause, you must gieue some attendance to them, which handle this work
manlike: so that ye may the better, and with more safeguard, attempt this cure
afterward. Now, as soon as the scalp shall be holed, ye shall with al speed
possible, Make hast in the ^ure of the head to defend ye air, which will
corrupt.
power in so much Rosed Honey strained, as shall be able to cover the rimme of
the Brain. This hast is made, least the Air be entered in, and made alteration
in Caphelica, next power Aqua vitae upon the Honey, till the hole shall be filled,
whereunto ye shall cast so much of this powder, as may rise the depth of a
Knyffes thickness, from the Rimme.

R. Aloes, Epatike, Sarcocol, Myrrh, ana..i.ss. Incense..i. Dragons blood..ss^
and..ss. of Saffron myngle them together, and ponder them finely, for the use
we spake of. All this do we, to save the Complexion of the bone, and
pannicles, after the mind of Auicen, and Galen, as is alleged before. When ye
have thus done, take so much of a Sponge, as may be sufficient to fill the
hole: and this is done for two considerations. The first is, to exclude the
noyaunce of tents. Work (...) in ye (...) of the head.
For a Sponge will give place to the stretching of the brain, and tents can
not, but somewhiles cause apostumacion, by reason of their resistance and
stubbernesse. The other cause is, that the matter is soon drawn forth, from
the pannicles. For it might alter, if it remained any while, or else be
imprisoned, which is no rare and strange thing, to see daily in the cures of
these light and common Practicians. After al this, fill the wound with Aqua
vitae, powder, linte: applying upon the same a piece of cloth, anointed with
Vnguentum Basilicum above described, to the intent the medicines be retained
there. And when ye have acccomplished all these things in order, lay this
plaster on the head shaven.

Take Camomell, Melilote, A very good emplaster for the head.
ana. M.iij. Mirtilles.M.ij. Cyprus nuts.xv. red Roses, and Wormwood. ana.
M.i. Bean meal, Lupine meal, ana..iiij. Bray all that ought to be brayed,
and sees them altogether* in new, white Wine, and Barbers Lee, of like
porcions, unto such time as it shall be like a Cerote. After this, spreede it
on a cloth warm* and apply it to ye head. This plaster is used for many
purposes. First, to comfort the head, by strengthing of the complexion, next to
defend from cold, and rectify the air, which is enclosed. This is it that
Auicen saith: Take heed of cold, in a Wound of the head.
Oportet vt vehemens caueatur f^igus, et^am in aestate, la in eo est timor
magnus. Ice must beware of vehement cold, though it were in Summer, because
there is great fear in it. He means that the Air must be rectified,
namely, which enters into the head, at the opening of the Scalp. For some
will go in. whether ye will or not to fulfil the room, in as much as nature
cannot suffer any place to be vacant, or empty, as the Philosopher doth write.
He means not that the whole air of the Chamber, ought to be rectified, as
some Practicians think, and would fain be seen to be circumspect in the
matter. Thyrdly, to procure digestion. Fourthly, There is no place empty, for
air fills every open place.
to draw sanious matter, as soon as it is generated, and retained in the
Sponge, Fifthly, to resolve the matter, which is wont to cause Apostumacion.
For oft times (as saith Galen, whom Auicen citeth) apostumacion follows
whatsoever instrument ye use, which ye shall prevent and eschew, if ye apply
the former plaster on the head. And this may easily appear, if a man consider
diligently, the Simples in the players. Now, thus shall you proceed in the
cure, unto such time as the Cicatrice shall be produced: always iterating and
renewing, the former medicines, as often as they shall be old, and dismitted.
But in asmutch, as the flesh grows here above his place, ye shall repress
and keep it down, with Roche Alum brent, applying it always, in the circuit
of the superflous flesh. But moderate the Alum in small quantity, that it cause
no dolor, To correct proud flesh.
by reason of his vytinge, mordicacion. This is the self same manner, which
hetherunto hath bin used in cures, wherewith have bin helped above many hundred
persons, in our time: but I need not here make rehearsal of them, since a
manifest thing shall need no Witnesses. But I say, I remember one thing, which
was almost forgotten negligently, and is necessary to be observed about opening
of a scalp, which is this. When ye open the scalp, in such cures, and make
an hole for the foresaid purposes: be you ware that ye touch not any seam of
the scalp. Five seames in the scalp.
They be five in number, two vncomplet and false, and three true seames. The
first is named Coronal, of a crown, because the crowns be worn in that
place, it is in the former part of ye head: the second Lambda or Lauda, like ye
Greek letter, l, which is in the hinder part of the head. The third true
seam, Sagittal, Sagittalis sine discriminalis.
like an arrow, under the parting of the hair, whence one end touches the
seam Coronall, and the other Lambda, in the hinder part: the two false seames,
be at sides in the regions, or plattes in the temples, Now in case any clyfte
or chynne, touch either of the two, we must vs^ much diligence, and
c^rcumspection. Note here also, that clyftes and chynnes, may chance in the
said seames: either in length, which is, when the clyft together with the
seam, make.iiij straight angles: or else in breadth. If it chance in length,
the bone must needs be bored, and holed on both sides, of the seam, because
the partition of Dura matter may not ^ee touched in the Work. I say it must
needs be holed on both sides for as much as it may be, that blood be fallen
from the veins, in both parts, and there be congeled. For if we would feel,
or work in the seam where Dura matter is bound and stayed (as do they, How
suffocacion in the Brain may come.
which come fro practice to Chirurgi) we might well fear and doubt, of
suffocacion of the brain, because the rimme being losed, should press it
down, and so choke it. And that we should make no such loosing of Cephaljca
in the place, we are admonished by Cornelius Celsus, in the Chap. De calua^iae
curatione. Howbeit, he doth it in consideration of Hippocrates confession,
where to the profit of his posterity, he confesses that he was deceived,
working in a seam. Where fore, ye shall not work in any seam, least ye be
deceived, as was Hippocrates, Prince of Physicians. But if ye fissure or
membrana chance in breadth ye shall make holes in the same, in both sides of
the seam: always observing this, that neither partition, neither seam be
touched at all. When these holes be made, ye shall finish the Cura, according
to the order and manner, as was before prescribed. And as for the think, ye
shall do in like manner, if ye be assured, that it pierce and run through the
scalp. On the other side, if it go not through that part of the scalp, which
they call vitrea tabula, that is, the Glassy table but only come to the
Spongious bone: Ye shall proceed to the cure, with Aqua vitae, and the powder
alone, which shall be sufficient. Now if ye list, ye may plain and abate the
bone* about the riuen place, whereof will follow sooner incarnacion, and
causing of the Cicatrice. These be rules, and orders in ye cures, which are not
much used in hard maladies proceeding of a cause primitiue. Now therefore,
have you that, which ye so earnestly have required: A gift in mine opinion, as
great as my poor knowledge is able to bring to pass shortly for the help of
mankind, which is in Soarenesse, but yet I did keep these things long with
my self, to the intent I might once at least, so soon content your minds.
But whether I have so done, as mine intent was, I am uncertain. For why, I am
become in these treactises, as one that builds his house in the midst of the
Market steed, about the which, as touching the height, and breadth, among the
lookers thereupon arise alteration, controversy, whereas the Builder thought
his work of convenient proporcion. So fear I, least perchance my doing,
shall seem to some, abject and base, and to some other, to obscure or dark.
But certes, in asmutch as I am not able to please al sorts, I thought it best,
to retain the mean way in speaking, specially since I never liked, to fly
over ye tops of trees: but plainly to go a soft pace, as it were with a leaden
foot, to the intent, that who so listed to over get me, might the easier
attain thereunto, without painful travel in their Journey. And thus gentle
Soarenesse: wishing God to send thee health, and us to meet merrily again: I
make an end with a Cautery good for thy purpose: and a rule to help the stone.


Soarenesse. But first how make you the red powder, for the parting water?


Chirurgi. YOu must make it thus.. Of water wherewith Goldsmiths do seperate
gold and silver, which is green, A goodly water of great strength, to
se^perate metal good for to consume rotten flesh.
when it hath separated the mettalles: of this take..vj. of Quicksiluer..iiij.
myngle them together, and put them either into a little stone Limbecke, or
Still, or else into one of Uenice glass, well luted with clay, both the head
of the Still, and the part whereupon it stands, and also the receiver,
whereinto it drops, that none pass away. Distill it on a soft fire, in a
close* Furneyce. Your parting water is thus made.

R. Salt Peter, Alum Roche, and Romayne Uitriall, ana. l i.ij. beat them
together in a Mortar, then put it into a double glass, well luted, or so
stopped, that no air do transpire, or go forth: this will make a singular good
Water, drop one gutta or drop upon the ground, and you shall see it boyle, as
though it were on the fire. These are profitable, to the work of Chirurgj, in
foul soars, and Ulcers: here is good occasion mynistred, to speak of making
of Medicines. But I refer that, to the book of Compounds, where there are
not only good store of them, but also good medycines, no less profitable to
Chirurgj, than needful to Physic.


Soarenesse. Now how make you Lee, to open, in the manner of a Cautery?


Chirurgi. MAke it after this fashion. A good Lee for a Cautery
R. A pretty round Tub of two gallons, with a hole in the bottom. stopped, put
into this Tub, ashes of the Ash tree. Make a hoale in the midst, to put in a
pottell or more, of vnslecked Lyme, and power upon it quickly hot Lee, as
much as shall cover the Lyme, and with all speed cover it with Ashes, that ye
air may be kept in, for two days: the third vnstop the hole, and let the
water distill, from the Lyme and Ashes, and keep this in a close Uessell.
This will quickly open any part that is soar, as apostumacions without payne:
and if an Egg will not sink in it, but fleet, then it is good Lie, for the
purpose.


Soarenesse. THere are good pouders, profitable to your Art, I pray you learn
me some of them, to cleanse dead Flesh: and as for ye book of Compouds, I will
read that at more leisure.


Chirurgi. A good powder for rotten flesh.
I Will teach you to make a trosse, to cleanse rotten Flesh, which is. R. Water
of Plataine..vi. Mercury well sublimated, made in powder..ss. Sees them in a
little Pan, to the consuming of the fourth part: then let it stand.xij. hours,
after kneade it with a little* Beanemeale, and roul^ them up into a trosse.
Note also, that you must mingle so much Vermilion, with the Beanemeale, as
will colour it: dry this trosse, in an Oven, or hot Sun.


Soarenesse. How make you a potenciall Cautery?


Chirurgi. TO make a Cautery. R. Of the strongest Soap Lie, asmutch as will
suffyse, A potenciall Cautery.
put it in a brazen Kettle. Put thereunto..i ss. Romayne Uitriall, let all
sees until the Liquor be consumed, then gather up the Some, that doth
remain: and keep this to open Apostumacions. For in opening without payne,
this doth excel all other.


Soarenesse. BUt that the time is far spent, and I have put you to much
pains, else I would have learned some thing, to have taken away Gravel Stone,
from the Kidneys, Raynes, and Bladder.


Chirurgi. AT this present, I have no time convenient, to serve that turn at
large: it requires no small travel. For like as among all mortal evils, the
Stone is the greatest: so the cure is most cunning. Notwithstanding, I shall by
Gods grace entreat, hereafter at large, For the stone a good regiment.
the diet, the proper medicines, cure, and cutting of the stone. But yet in the
mean time, let the Patient keep him warm. Eat no salt fyshe, or Flesh
burnt, roasted meates, hard Cheese, or slimy things, ingenderers of viscious
humours, gross or clammy* Or drink hot Wynes, or eat Uenison, or any water
Foul, or be costiffe bellied, or keep their Back hot. c. The signs of the
Stone are evident, as pains in the Raynes, Bladder, Yard, Loins. c. With
painful lamenting and crying, stopping of the Uryne. c. The causes are many,
as of Parents, of evil Diet, with many evil accidents. The vryne often
times doth declare the evils of those parts, as Hippocrates in the third part
of the.ix. of his Aphorisms affirms, Hippocrates. Why matter comes fro the
yard.
saying: Si sanguinem aut pu^ mingat, renum aut vesicae exulcerationem
significat. To make water, or peace blood, or else filthy matter: it signifyeth
Soars and Boils, either in the Raynes, or else in the Bladder: and assuredly,
such Soars, and Ulcers, Hyppocrates. why matter comes from the yard.
come from the stone the which do excoriate, fret, cut, and cause both Blood
and Matter without vryne, to come forth at the Yard. But sometime pure blood
is pissed, of the breaking of a Ueyne: and sometime from Women, for the secret
infirmity, or natural passion, through clensing of terms. But gravel in the
Uryne, Why men do pysse blood.
betokens the stone in the Bladder, saith Hippocrates. lib. iij. Aphorism.
Quibus in vrina velut arenuae subsistunt, ijs vesica laborat. calculo.
Furdermore, it is scant possible, for old people to be helped in the Raynes,
or Bladder, A reward for Lechery.
for ye stone. Specially in great glotonous people, as Drunkardes with Ale and
Beer: or else them, which were never satisfied with Lechery in their youth c.
Howbeit, to speak a little, for the help thereof, two things must be
considered. First, the preservative. Secondly, the curatiue. Preservative
Curatiue.
The preservative, by good Diet, and wholesome regyment of Life, as what ye do
eat, the manner of eating and drinking. The time, the place, the quality and
the quantity of the said meates and drinks: as meat of light digestion clean
Bread without Bran. Not to be to much hot or cold, neither much travel,
or sitting still idle, but good exercise. c. And note, when the stone is in ye
Bladder, then it is harder than that which is in the Raynes, and more burnt.
Now, if your gravel come of heate, Galens Syrupe for the stone.
or through hot accidents, as with hot Wynes, Labour. c. Then follow. C.
Galens Syrupe, which is most excellent also, in this our age, and is thus made.

R. Syrupe of Endiue, of Sorrel, of water Lillies, ana..v. the Waters of
Fenell, of Endiue, ana..i. mingle them together, and give the Patient to drink,
Morning and Evening: and anoint the Raynes, with Galens cold ointment, which
is written in the Compounds.


Soarenesse. But what remedy, when the Stone comes of cold?


Chirurgi. GALEN must put to his helping hand, which wills, When the stone
comes of cold.
when such contraries do happen, when nature is so changed from heate into
coldness, or if it were cold from the beginning: then to help with warm
things, to dissolve, and this was his reamedy. R. Theriacae Galeni..i. Syrupe
of the Barks of the Citri..i. warm water, Good potage, for the stone.
as of Carduus Benedictus. c..ij. mingle them together, and give your Patient,
or take it your self ten days: For it is no light trifling Medicine, but most
effectual, and substantial, invented by Galen. And like as in hot burning of
the stoue, to drink clean Why, or Butter milk is good, Men do want
providence, to foresee their own evils.
and to eat Purslen: even so in the case of coldness, Hares flesh sodden
with Capers, and young Nettles is best, and a mornings to eat half an Ounce
of new drawn Cassiafistula mingled with Sugar: and to drink Why of Goats
milk. Oh that Men would foresee, the evils against Nature, as Fevers, Pox,
Leapers, Goutes, Stone, Cankers. c. And take in hand to help them, in their
first Spring, for then they would be soon helped. As example. Fire and Water,
are good Servants, but evil Masters. For if they get the victory, who can
rule them? the proof is manifest: for it is easy to quench a fire in the
beginning: Fire and water be good servants, but evil masters.
but when it hath gotten hold, of the Thacke, Spares, Beams. c. then it is
to late. So when vile humours have incensed the blood. Ueynes. c. And have
gotten the victory, rebelling against good nature: then it is either to late,
or else to hard, to put them away, and bring nature again, to his good estate.
Yet it hurts little the Physicians, Surgeons, and Apothecaries, to utter
their knowledge, and also their Wares, with promises fair and false, in
matters past cure. For gold hath no corrupcion, although it be gotten with a
corrupted Conscience: But to our matter. Take things in due time, for time will
never be called again, do what you can. Howbeit while as the body is yet
living, there is left some help to relieve, or repair it again: and in such
case of gravel, or ye stone, what have ever done more pleasure, than Clisters,
or Enemaes, mynistred beneath at the Fundament? nothing truly, cutting
excepted. Yet in cutting, unless the Surgeon be very cunning, Cutting of ye
stone, is perilous.
the Patient will soon cry: Quare de vulua eduxisti me? And although the
Surgeon have great knowledge, yet one Patient doth scant escape among an
hundred, happy man by his dole. On the other side, there be such bodies, when
they are newly cleansed, and delivered from Gravel, or the stone: eftsoones the
bodies are such, that they have it again as paynfully, as at the first time.
And some of those bodies, have the property of the North wind, in drying, or
turning into dust: And other some have the property of Frost, Example,
to coagulate, to make cold, and turn soft things into hardness, as Ise is.
Therefore in such evils do thus. Make a Clyster after this manner.

R. Milium ^olis, or else the Berries of Alkakengi..vi. clean running water. A
goodly Clister for to help the stoue
l i.iiij. sees this until the Water be half consumed, then strain it, of
this water take a Pynte or more, for your Clister, putting thereunto the Oils
of Dill, Camomell, and new Butter, ana..ij. and a little Salt: thus is your
Clister finished, and made, minister it warm but not skaldyng. Though this
seem a plain Clister, yet it is marvelous good in working: and cleanses not
only gravel, but also helps the Cholicke, and pains in the Guts. When.
ye have mynistred this, then following within three days, minister this, for
it is of great virtue.

R. Of the decoction of Mallowes, Pari^tory, Colewortes, Holihocke, Smalage,
Another synguler good Clister.
Sitrach, Polipodium, Carduus benedictus. Alkakengi feed of each like quantity
of these. l i.i. Oils of Dill, of Camomell, of Lilles, ana..i.ss. Butter..ij.
Hiera simplex. i. and a little Salt, mingle all together, and warm put into
the Clister bladder, and Minister, as is aforesaid. If you have not this choice
of Oils, you may take common oil of Olives. This Clyster is most excellent
good, for the stone and gravel: it hath virtue to open, cleanse, waste, and
skower without danger, peril, or hurt. When this is done speedely, have this
Cataplasme at hand, and warm apply it to the pained place: whether it be in
ye Raynes, or the lowest part of the Belly, or Flanks, let it be done
oftentyme, have two in store, to lay unto the place warm, one after an other,
it is thus made in good order.

. The Leaves, and Stalks of Prassium, of Mallowes, of Holyhock ana. M.iij.
sodden in the Broth, A good Cacaptaine for the kene.
wherein a Weathers head hath bin sodden. Sees herein also the roots of
Mallowes, well beaten in a Mortar. l.i. the Muscilage of Fenigreeke, and Flax
seed. ana. l.v. then let it be strained forth strongly, to this Juice put the
Oils of Dill, Camomell, white Lyllyes. ana..iiij. fresh Butter..vj. Honey..v.
boyle all together in a clean Pan, put in Bran of Barley, and Meal, temper
all with a stycke, until it come to the thickness of soft Paste, spread it in
two several Cataplasmes, and warm apply one of them after an other, to the
dolorous place. And when one is cold, then apply on the other oftentimes, this
is of a singular operation: with this, that great learned Man, master Doctor
Marianus hath done much good, A drink for the stone.
and this I have also proved many times. Then to make ye matter perfect, give
your Patient to drink Benedictae laxatiuae.vj. tempered with clean
odoriferous, warm white Wine, a quarter of a Pynte or more, when this is done:
wrap him in warm clothes, with head well covered, and so let him sweat. And
this cleanses the Raynes, and Bladder, equal with any other: except you will
hasard your Life, in cutting. Furdermore, note a great secret, which I do
disclose for the sake of mankynde. Let the Patient have the stilled Waters, of
Saxifrage, Parietary, Persily, Filipendula, and Smalage, altogether. ana..iij.
and put into this water, this precious powder following. A most worthy powder
for the stone.
.i.ss. or.. R. Persily roots clean washed and scraped, I mean their ryndes,
and Persily seed, ana..vj or more, and..viij. of the Flowers of Iringium, or
the Sea Thistil, and also Iringium roots, and the roots of Carduus
Benedictus. ana..ss. Cut your roots finely and thyn, and put all together in a
close vessel, into the Oven, until they be dry, and then make powder: keep
it close from Air. And when occasion doth serve, temper your foresaid quantity
into your Waters, or else with white Wine or Chicken broth, drink it warm. Also
note well this Syrupe for ye stone, wherein ye Patient may take every second
night warm. A Syrupe for the stone.
.ij. R. Roots of Holyhocke..iiij. the Leaves of Mallowes, Filipendula and
Parietary. ana. M.ij. the seed of Persyly, Fenegreeke, and Flax. ana..i.
Iuiubes in number.xxx. clean scraped Lyquoryce. l.i. the roots of Sparagus,
Carduus Benedictus, Iringium, Persyly, and Fenyll. ana..ij.ss. sees all these
in.x. l j. wayght of clean running, or Well water, unto the third part be
wasted: then strain it, and put unto this Decoction. l.i.ss. of clean white
Sugar, stir it, and make your Syrupe, and keep it in a close double Glass.
These foresaid things are excellent good, to be sodden in clean white Wine,
putting thereunto. l.i. of the white Guaicum rased, and put in a Uessell of
three gallons, made close in the mouth: and so put into a fair great hollow
Cauldron of water, and so to sees four hours, then take it from the fire, and
let it stand until it be cold. Then open it, and strain it, and keep it
close, to drink at all times.

And thus also hath Rychard Bulleyn, a zealous Lover of Physike, Rychard
Bulleyn his practice for the stone.
more for the consolation help of th'afflicted sick people, being poor, then
for ye lucre and gain, of the Money of the Wealthy and Rich, written. This Man
I say, although he professes comfortable Cordials, and Heavenly Medicines
for the Soul, being a Divine: yet he hath good Experience of many Infirmities,
and Sicknesses, infecting the Bodies of Mankynde, and hath done many goodly
Cures, which I do leave vnwrytten, both for the proiixity of time, and also
for that no adulacion, flattery, or any private affection should appear, or be
suspected in him the author hereof towards him the said Rychard Bulleyn,
because he is his natural borne Brother: but to the matter, his Medicine for
the Gravel in the Raynes, and Stone. And thus he writes in his pretty Work,
which if it please GOD, shall hereafter come abroad to the profit of the common
wealth, of the English Nation. And this is his compendious order: Saith he,
the great Dolor, Phlegmon, or Ulcer of the Raynes by the which Raynes, Uryne
is conueyed into the Bladder. c. or the Stone in the Bladder: do cause great
pains in making of Uryne, which Uryne is often stopped, or else pisseth little
at once, with excoriation, and Blood. Where gravel, and ragged stones,
coming of gross, salt, hot matter, viscuous humours: after long hot burning
Fevers, evil Diet, Cheese, old poudered Beef, Bakon, Uenison, salt Fish,
hot Wynes have bin used in Diet. The stone is oftener in the Bladders of the
lean hot Men, which have larger vessels, then in fat persons having small
vessels, and cold moist fat bodies. c.

Two things considered in the stone, for the cure of the same.
The stone, saith he, after the Mind of Galen, in the Raynes is lighter,
lesser, softer, and redder, declining somewhat into Grains, but in the
Bladder, it is greater, heavier, harder, greeuouser, in colour whytishe, or
more adust, and both these are dangerous, and scant curable. After one is.xl.
year old: as saith Hippocrates. Aphoris. Quicunque nephretici sunt, non
sanantur post quadraginta annos: Who so hath the passion in the Raynes,
after.xl. years, is past cure: the regiment in the cure is double. The first
is, to prohibit the generation of the stone. The second is to displace, or
remove it, when it is grown. The first intention hath five things, not
naturally, directly contrary against the stone. As air, gross, mysty, cloudy.
c. to be fled* for it doth engender gross matter.

Meates and Drynkes, as gross Wine, and salt meates, burnt, things, cold
water, which will bring gross matter, and breed the stone.

Labour immoderate, to much exercise, which ingrosseth the blood:

Solitariness, much study, no travel, or Lechery immoderate, which are great
enemies to nature.

Great affliction of the mind, watching, fasting. c.

To help these evils, do thus, as follows.

Use meates of light digestion, in due time, place, and order.

Moderate labour between meals, to help digestion, and make the body strong:
and to beware of Lists, Wrastlinges. c. that will hurt the body, being used
immoderately.

Of all things to beware of Idleness, the mother of evils, and nourisher of
as many sicknesses to the body, as are caused through glottony: specially, of
to much copulation carnal.

Use pleasant Music, and things to delight the spirits: for Melancholy,
which is cold and dry, is a great furderer of the stone: when these are done,
use these things following.

R. Syrupe of the two Roots, Honey of Roses, R. Bulleyns Syrupe for the stone.
Syrupe of Vinegar simple. Syrupe of Fenell, Syrupe of Saxifrage. ana..ss. the
water of Fenill, of Wormwood, of Persiley, of Maydenhayre, of Alkakengi.
ana..i. mingle them, and temper them* warm, and drink this oftentimes,
morning and evening, until the matter flegmatike be digested. Then use this
potion, to purge the said digested matter in this order following. R. Of the
decoction of the four great hot roots, into whom put these seeds, R.
Bulleyns electuary for the stone.
Persily, Saxifrage, Anisseedes, Smalage, Fenell, Asparagus. ana..i. sees
these together, then strain it, and put into the same, Electuariae de Cassia,
Diacatholiconis. ana.iij. Diaphiniconis..ij.ss. mingle them in warm drink,
with Honey of Roses, to make it sweet, and drink it warm in the morning,
within four days following, which are of great virtue.

R. Pills of Hiera Nicolai..i.ss make five Pills in number, round, new and
gilted, and take them early. Drinking the Broth of a Chicken, R. Bulleyns
Pills for the stone.
within.ij. hours following. Then apply this Emplaster warm into the Raynes,
the day next after your Pills.

R. Crumbs of two Manchets new baken, and thirty Figs. three yellow Yolks
of Eggs, R. Bulleyns emplaster for the stone.
Saffron..i. fresh Butter..ij. sweet Rose water..vi. let all stand in a
Mortar ten hours, then beat all with a Pestle. Then spread it upon a clothe,
very warm apply it to ye Rains, renew it still warm, and apply it to the
Raynes again. Then have at hand this Clister following, to take after the
Emplaster hath remained, by the space of fifteen hours.

R. Oil of Dyll..vi. clean white Wine..vij. new fresh Butter..iiij Capons,
and Ducks grease, without Salt, R. Bulleyns Clister for the stone.
Cassiafistula new drawn from the Cane..ss. the yolke of one Egg, with a
very little fine white Salt, temper all in a Pan, to the order for a Clister,
and warm put it into the Bladder, and so minister towards Evening, and
assuredly these be goodly reamedyes for the Stone. The whole Regiment for the
stone, devised by the said Rychard Bulleyn, shall by Gods Grace, shortly come
forth, to the profit of the commmon People.

IN this place, good Reader, but ye unfortunate hap hath preueted me with lets,
else assuredly, I would have written at length, the whole large Anatomy of ye
body of mankind: but here I do end, only with ye names of these bones at this
present time until hereafter, if God will suffer me to do more, I am then
yours.

i. Os frontis. vel coronale.

ij. Ossa furcu^ae.

ij Ossa petiosa, vel lapidosa.

ij. Os laud.

i Os basilare, vel polim^r^hon.

ij Ossa nasi.

ij. Ossa colatoris.

xx Ossa mandibulae, super.

ij. Ossa mandibulae infer.

xxx. Ossa spondilia. vera mendosa.

ij. Parietalia

ij. Spatulae vtrius{que}. Humeri.

Os adiutorij.

ij. Focile vel radius.

xviij. Ossa manuum digito.

x. Ossa pectinis manum.

ij. Ossa focile minus brachorum.

xxiiij. Costae verae non verae.

Malleoli.

vij. Ossa thoracis

i. Os cordis.

i. Os Epiglottale.

ij. Ossa ancarum.

ij. Patella rotula gen.

ij. Ossa ^haab tibiarum.

ij. Canna tibiarum.

ij. Os nauicularis, b^ nauifama,

viij. Ossa planta pedis.

ij. Os balistae.

ij. Tubercula femoris

Os maius tibiae.

Crus.

Cubitus.

iij. Ossa cauda.

i. Ossa pectinis.

Ossa digitorum pedum, quae (...) sunt.xxvij.

Dentes numero xxxij c.

A tergo a front me finxisti. Psal. 139.



The Index between Soarnesse, and Chirurgj.


A.
A Faithful man needs no miracle. Fol. 8. Apostumation is Compounded of
three things. 9 An ignorant Surgeon, is a man steer. 5 A good medicine for
apostumacion. 1^ A Cicatrice. 13 A digestion. Ibidem An abstersiue. Idem A good
repercussiue. 14 Auicens medicine. Idem An excellent Emplaster to assuage
payne. 15 A very good emplaster. Idem A softening emplaster. 17 A Wound of a
bruise. 19 A good question. 20 A defensive very good. Idem An abstersiue to
cleanse. 21 A good Ointment for Wounds. Idem A good practice. 24 Anticedent,
Coniunct. c. 25 A good exiccatiue to dry. 26 Aristotle, a good note for the
Elements. Idem An incarnatiue to cause flesh. 27 A defensive. Idem A
Sinatiue. Idem A good foundation. 28 Auicens wise providence. 29 A good powder.
Idem Alteration of nature, what it is. 30 Alteration of extencion. Idem A good
liniment. 31 A consideration of dead flesh. Idem Anticedent Coniunct, what
they are. Idem A very good observation. 32 Alteration of air. Idem A defensive
under the Knee. 33 A conclusion. Idem An other good defensive. 34 A sign of
ouermutch drying. Idem An other good mundification. Idem A very good abstersiue
for the head. 37 A good powder for the head. 38 A Diet* Idem A cl^tt in the
Brain pan. 39 A note between a mas brain pan, a childes. i'd A good note for a
Surgeon. Idem A witty head, astedfast had for a Chirurgia. 41 A very good
emplaster for the head. 42 A Water to consume rotten flesh. 43 A good Lee for
a cautery. Idem A good powder for rotten flesh. Idem A potenciall Cautery.
Idem A reward for Lechery. 44 A Syrupe for the Stone. Idem A good plaster for
the stone. Idem An excellent pocion for the stone. Idem A good Clister for the
stone. Idem
B
BOrias the North East wind. Fol. 1 Blind Bayard is boldest in the Carte. 10
Blood proceeding of a primatiue cause. 25 Breach of continuance. 30
C.
Courtesy. Fol. 2 Chirurgerj is a Sanctuary for vagabonds. 5 Christ is not
covetous. 8 Composition, Replecion, Complexion. 10 Consider in what bodies,
Apostumacions are bred. 12 Consider to open a meber, before it do rot. 13
Cautery potenciall. 14 Choice of medicines are very good. 16 Captain William
Rede of the holy Island. 21 Cold is the greatest enemy to ye sinews of al. id.
Surgeons do never agree. 23 Surgeons must know Simples. 26 C. Ce^sus. 26
Cold vicer. 27 Consider the vryne, and so work. 28 Corosion, biting, or
gnawing. 3^ Contraries* when to use them. 35 Chalk for Cheese. 37 Clothes
applied to a wounded head. 38 Cutting of the stone is perilous. 44
D.
DOctor Turner. Fol. 4 Doctor Kaies. Idem Doctor Record. Idem Doctor
K^ningham, Idem Doctor Fair. Idem Doctor Andrewe ^orde. Idem Dog ^eaches,
what they are. 5 Do^or in complexion. 15 Distilling of blood from the head. 23
Deep cuts hurt the arteries. 24 Digestion causes not matter, but it is the
propo^tionating of the humours. 34 Diseases coming of fulness, are helped by
emptynesse. 38 Daugerous wounds, how to know them. I'd
E.
Evil parents, their fruits. Fol. 6 Example. 15 Example. 19 Example. 20
Evil accidents follow much bleeding. 24 Example of a Moldwarpe. 35
Erisypelas, is a hot, red, round inflacion soar, or Cholerik boyle, with a
fever in ye body. 38 Example of blood letting. 39
F.
FLora a Goddess of Flowers, or an Harlot of Rome. Fol. 2 First seek Gods
Kingdom. Idem For counterfeyte Surgeons. 6 Eight things or properties, of
a good Surgeon. 7 Four notes in an apostumacio, beginning, augmenting,
^ate, and declining. 10 Foul bodies do repulse repercussiues, except they be
purged. 11 Four intencions, and six unnatural things to be observed. 14 Five
notable things to be observed in healing. id. Fools with Books, be worse
than vnlea^ned Pra^tioners with practice. 25 First handle the accidents in a
cure, note three things. 28 First to all the whole body, and then to the
particular member. 33 Five good intencions. 34 Four intencions, in two kinds
of vicers. I'd Five causes that do hurt the head. 37 Fi^res, or Chappes. 39
Five sca^es in the Brain pan. 42 Five kinds of Ulc^rs. 23 Fire, and Water are
good Servants, but evil Masters. ^4
G.
GOD gives health. Fol. 22 Galens note. 32 Great Clarks are not the wisest
men. 28 Geometrical measure in Chirurgi. 33 G^tony is no small enemy to
nature. 34 Galens Syrupe for the stone. 44
H.
HOw to know apostumacion. Fol. 9 How to rebate flesh superfluous. 13 How to
make incision. 15 How to dry humour^ that do abound. Idem How to sew a wound,
and how not. 20 How to make a Cicatrice. 27 How bold the Surgeon should be
in cure. 29 Hot and cold apostumacions. 30 Hardness of an Ulcer. 31 How a
Patient died, by evil cure. 32 Hippocrates order. Idem How to bind a member.
33 How to find out a stripe, by what tokens in the lead. 37 How to cut, to the
end to heal. 38 How cold ^urteth. Idem How to search a wound. 39 How
^ocacion of the Brain may come. 42
I.
Ignorance. Fol. 2 Incision, how to make it. 13 It is perilous to sew a
wound, coming of the biting, or ^nding of some beast. 19 In healing a
compound Ulcer, mark the accidents concurrant. 28 Imbrocation. 31 If an
apostumacion, be in the midst of the upper part of the body, then to bleed
either in ye left arm, or else right, is well. 40
K.


L.
Linx can see best of any creature, and his vryne will turn into a stone.
Pl^ni. Fol. 5
M.
MAny good medicines are made of the plain people, to help in the absence of
the Surgeons. Fol. 6 Man is but miserable, is quickly gone. 8 Men do use
pretty terms, for foul soars. call the by one name, when they are an other. 9
Mans secret providence. 17 Matter doth covet digestion. 19 Melancholy meates.
33 Man is made Geometrically in order. 39 Make hast in the cure of the head,
to defend the air, which else will corrupt, 41 Men do want providence, to
foresee their own evils. 44
N.
NAture works three ways to help her self. 7 Nature must be relieved by
sundry means, in the time of danger. Idem No local medicine applied, before
the body be purged. 14 Nature nourishes her self, 35
O.
OF vacabond Chirurgias, worse than thieves Fol. 5. Of contraries of Elements.
9 Of resolution. 11 Of repercussiues, when they are good. Idem Of an Embroche.
12 Of GOD, is the beginning, ending of all thinge^. 17 Of Wounds. Idem Of
commision mortal. 18 Of the first, and second intention. 19 Of wounds in the
muscles. 20 Of Synewes. Idem Of Wounds deep, and not deep. 24 Of incision of
small Ueynes. Idem Of exiccatiues. 26 Of urine considered, of every sick, soar
man. 28 Of radical moisture. Idem Ouid, a good note. 29 Of dolor. 30 Of
putrefaction, or rottenness. ^ Of bones, which are corrupted, two things
considered. 32 Of swellinges, the cause. 33 Of filthy matter. what it is. 34 Of
honest request, and friendship. 36 Of incision of the head. 37 Of blood
running, the chief cause, and the hurt that doth follow the same. Idem
P.
Parts most dangerous to be hurt. Fol. 18 Pate Hardy the Scot, a good
Surgeon. 19 Purge a ^oare man, after he is amended, for fear of dropsy. 33
Purge the patient, according to the vryne. 39 Pooremen are corrected, for great
mes faults. id. Preservative, and Curatiue. 44
Q.


R.
RE^ercussiues. Fol. 24 Regiment of Life. 28 Remove the cause, the effect will
cease. 32 Richard Bulleins practice for the stone. 45 Richard Bulleins Syrupe
for the stone. 46 Richard Bulleins Electuary for the stone. I'd Richard
Bulleins Pills for the stone. Idem Richard Bulleins emplaster for the stone.
Idem Richard Bulleins Clister for the stone. Idem
S.
SAbinus a famous Mountain in Italy. 2 Soft Surgeons, make foul soars.
I'd Sir Thomas Eliot knight. 4 Sundry names of apostumacions, but in effect,
are but apostumations. 9 Soars compounded. 10 Signs of death. 24 Sanguine,
Choleric, apostumacions. 25 San^es is matter, coming of corrupted blood, or
else putrefaction, and sometime it is taken for poison. Idem Strong members, do
oppress the weak. Idem Sanious matter. 26 Soft Surgeons, make foul soars
yet Botcherly manglers, mars altogether. 29 Signs of broken bones in the
head. 38 Saw, Chesill, Wimble, for the head are good instruments. 44
Sagittalis, sieve discrininalis. 41
T.
TRagedy begins ever evil, and ends the same well. Fol. 2 Thomas Phayre
Doctor. 4 Thomas Pannell. Idem Two kinds of Surgeons. 5 The soldier is
hurt more by an evil Surgeon, than by his enemies weapon, often it is so
proved. 6 The miseries of man, when he is hurt in body. id. The discriptio of an
unthrift, or a villain of nature, stryuing against grace and virtue,
unprofitable for a common wealth. Idem The virtue of Chirurgj. 7 The Surgeon
is the best hand craft in the World. Idem The Surgeon is natures
seruaunt. Idem The strength of nature. Idem Two manner of healinges. 8 Two
kinds of apostumacions, hot, cold. 9 The aboudance of blood. in the
apostumacion. id The cruelty of the Choleric apostumacio, but the bloody
apostumacion is gentler. Idem The quantity of the apostumacions Idem Three
causes, the Primatiue, the Antecedente, the Conjunctive, which belong to the
apostumacion. 11 To abate dead flesh. 26 To alter a completion in a soar.
Idem The diffinicion of a wound. 17 Two kinds of wounds, the one simple, and
the other double, or compound. 18 The Surgeon must look pleasantly, upon
his Patient. 20 To cleanse the wound, and draw forth broken bones. 21 To end a
double wound, begin accidents. Id. To correct a swart wound. 22 The flux of
blood, proceeding of a primatiue cause. 23 To stop a bleeding vein. 24 To
stanch blood. 25 Two sundry sorts of ulcers. 26 To know, whether ulcers be
hot or cold. Idem To make the skin whole. 27 Three sundry intencions: of
regiment, of matter, of growing. Idem To abate proud flesh. Idem The cause of
superfluous flesh. 28 To remove an escharous scab or crust. 29 Two causes of
matter. 30 To search the cause, displace the effect. 31 Three causes of
hardness. Idem To make a Cicatrice. Idem To help putrefaction. 32 These
signs are in the end. Idem To open a vein, to purge gross blood. 33 The
cause of Soarenesse is first, not considered of many. 34 To skower dry all
Ulcers, plain, or hollow. 35 The cause of bruses, what they are. 37 To let
blood on the contrary part, why it must be, by reason. 39 The Wimble is best,
to pearse the head, to purge forth matter* if it be used discreetly. 41 Take
heed of cold, in a wound of the head. 42 There is no place empty, for air
fills every open place. 42 To correct proud flesh. Idem Two things
considered in the stone, for the cure of the same. 45
V.
VNguentum Aegyptiacum of Auicen. 16 Ulcers be hard to cure, yt follow a
sickness. 23 Ulcers in good complexions, are soon cured. Id Uariety of simples.
26 Ulcers hot, cold, and biting. 27 Vnguentum Album. Idem Ulcer virulent, how
it grows. 34 Vnguentum Basilicum. 38
W.
WHat is called Chirurgj. Fol. 5 What peril is in ye application of a
repercussiue, although in some case, it is most best. 11 What hurt ensues of a
repercussiue sometime. 13 What goodness comes of a repercussiue an other
time. Idem What harm ensues of an evil Surgeon always. 15 What the
Surgeon must do. Idem What wounds be mortal. 18 Wounds in the Muscles.
Idem What ye Surgeon must observe in his cure. 19 Who so doth grant to one
absurdity, many one will eftsoones follow the same. Idem When to let blood on
the contrary side of the body, and why. 21 When the Surgeon is put to shame.
22 What an vicer is. 23 When to incarnate, when to seperate a soar, 24 When to
use contra^tes in healing. 30 What thing doth annoy the brain most of all. 39
When to let blood, ij. times in one place, why. 40 When to dry when to moist a
would in ye head. 42 Work tenderly, in the wound of the head. 43 Why men do
peace blood. 44 When the stone comes of cold. Idem Why corruption comes
from the Yard. Idem
FINIS.
The end of the Dialogue, between the Soar man, and the Surgeon, By
William Bulleyn. Marche. 1572.
The Book. of Compounds.
Sickness. How make you Alypta Muschata?


Health. FIrst take the best Gum of Laudanum..iii. of Storax or Styrax
Calamita..ss. of lignum Aloes..ii. stacte or the fattest part of Myrrh..i. of
Amber..i. Caphire..i.ss. of Musk..ss. of Rose water asmutch as you will, This
doth help children which be short winded, and the straightness of ye breast and
womb, which cannot keep their Milk: of this we may make excellent perfumes,
which noble men be accustomed to use, it is oftentimes mixed with electuaries.


Sickness. How make you your own Antidotarie which you use yourself?


Health. FIrst take of Myrrh..i. of Opium, which is the Juice of black
Popie..xviij. of Amomu,, vi. of Persely..xv. of smalage seed. The goodly
virtues of Aslucritum.
.xii. of Squinantum..ix. Cassiafistula..iiii. white Pepper..iiii. black
Pepper..xv. of the best Mustard..xii. Storax..vi. Siler Montan..iiii. of the
best Mithrydatum Andromachi..v. of Honey clarifyed, as much as will suffice,
and as you judge meet. The quantity which shall be received at one time of
this is..ii. Take your Storax with Honey, sprynkell or cast the other on dry,
sees your Opium with sweet wine, sodden to the third part, until it be as
thycke as Honey. This, is good against a quarten Ague, lunge headache, the
turning syckenes, the falling evil, ouermutch waking, scensines, the pain of
the eyes, reumes, tothache, shortenes of wind. syghing, old coughs from the
Lunges: it causes also the Spitell to be thycker. and apt to avoid, taken
with Hydromell, which is made of Honey and water sodden together* and if a man
do spyt blood, then it must be taken with Acetum mulsum which is made of
Vinegar and Honey, or else it ought to be received with Vinegar mixed with
Water, or with..ii. of the juice of Knotgrasse, or Plantan, howbeit you must
add or diminish, according to the strength of the pacyent. It is also a
present remedy for the stomach, for it consumes superfluous humours, and
causes a good appetite. It cures the Hikeope and stops vomitting, it
moves a man to avoid wind, both from the liver, stomach, and lower parts.
It helps pain of the Liver, the yellow Iaundice, and all diseases of
Melancholy, the grief and heaviness of the Spleen: it engenders good colour,
it purges downward fleume and choler, it doth distribute meat digested in to
his parts: it provokes vryne, and causes the gravel in the raynes and
bladder to avoid, it cures Illijca collica passio: taken with drink it
moves a man to the stole, and cures inflamacions in short time: it doth
mitigate the gnawyng and payne in the belly: it doth heal and take away the
ouermutch stretching forth of the Matrice: when it cannot be easily taken in at
the mouth, then let it be mynistred with the Juice of Fenegreeke at the
fundament, and so it will take away the payne in all the lower parts: it doth
cure all dyseases of the matryce: it asswageth the payne of Women which labour
of child: it cures the Mother and drawing up of the Matryce and stretching of
the same, it stops unnatural Purgations, purges corrupt superfluous
humours, it stops Fluxes of blood from the Matryce* if it be taken alone or
with old Wine: we may also use this in ye got of ye feet, in Arthritica
passio, which is a weakness in al the ioyncts of superfluous humours, Spasinus
called the cramp or contraction of synewes.


Sickness. FOr as much as you have showed me the virtue of sundry symples
before, now would I gladly learn how to compound medicines of sundry kinds, to
help me no to in the time of Sickness, and first what is Aromaticum Rosarum*
and how should it be made?


Health. FIrst take clean red Roses..xv. and the best Liqueris scraped., vij.
Lingnum Aloes, Sanders yellow. ana..iij. Cinamom..v. Macis, Cloves, ana..ij.ss.
Gum Traganthum..ij..ij. Nutmegs, the great Cardamomu called ye grayn of
Paradise, Galangall ana..i. Spicknard, Amber grise..ij. Muscke..i. clean white
Sugar, as much as will suffice, and so dissolve all together in the pure syrup
of red Roses.


Sickness. What is this to my help being Sick?


Health. Gabrielis Ioannis Damascen. N^cholai Myrep. Leonardus Fuc. Decom-.
Medican,
This heals the weakness of the Stomach, and doth comfort all the
principal parts of the body, and will cleanse corrupt humours, foul and
gross matter remaining in the Breast, and Stomach: it also refreshes the
Brain, and comfort the heart, and causes good Digestion, and dries up
superfluous moyster in the guts. And even so reports Nicholaus Myrepsus,
Gabriell, Ioannes Damascenus, and Leonardus Fuchsius, men learned and daily
approved, to whom we must gieue credence as to most worthy Teachers.


Sickness. GOD is so just and merciful, that he wy^l neither suffer any vice
unpunished, or virtue unrewarded. Therefore these Men have received the
fruits of their own Labours, being good instruments to comfort the troubled,
heal the sick that be afflicted with sundry infirmities. Where as an infinite
number through the beastly abusing of th^mselues, be plagued with fond foolish
delights, as inordinate riots, Banquets, surfeytes, acts Uenereons, Wrath,
and other Passions which bring them all to my house, except Diet with his
brother quiet, and merry man meet these Companions in the way, and turn them
back again, into the pleasant Palace of you master Health, which in all
poynctes are contrary to me poor syckenes, now subject to all miseries, as
Fevers. c. Yet of Charity show me some wholesome medicine for divers infyrmites.


Health. I Shall show thee a very excellent medicine against sundry
infyrmities, which Leonardus Fuchsius in his compoundyng of medicines doth
greatly commend, and it is thus made. Take of Asarabacca, Balm seed, Henbane
seed, ana..ii.ss. of Cloves, Myrrh. Cypress, Opium, ana..ii the juice of
Balm, Cynamom, Folium Indicum, Setwall, Gynger, Cost, Coral, Cassiafistula,
the Gum Tragagantum, Spike, wyld Fenell, Frankincense, Euphorbe, Storax
Calamita, Cardamomum, Siler Motane, Mustard, Saxifrage, Dill, Anisseede,
ana..ii Lignum Aloes, Rubarbe, Rhaponticum, the confection called Alypta
muschata, the Otters stones, Galanga, Opoponax, the fruit, Anacardin,
Mastyck, Brymstone vnsleked, Pionie, Seaholme, Roses, Time, Gladyan Peneryal,
both round and long Aristologia, Gentian, the outward rind of Mandrager,
Germander, Bayberies, yelow Carotes, Ualeryan roots, long Pepper, white Pepper*
the wood of Balm called Xylobalsamum, Carawayes, Amomum, Parselie, Louage, Few
seed, ana..ss. fine Gold, little Perles, little Fishes called of the
Apoticaryes Vnguis Odoratus, the bone in the heart of the red Dear, the
shauyng of Iuerie, Calamus Aromaticus, Pelletarye of Spain, ana G. xi. of Honey
as much as you judge meet.


Sickness. And what is the virtue of this?


Health. IT helps reumes of the head, which come of cold, the moystnes and
running of the eyes, the toth ache, and Head ache, if the forehead be
therewyth anointed: it doth also cure the falling evil, madness, turning
syckenes of the head, and to conclude, all manner of dyseases, which be about
the head, it heals all those which be troubled with the cough, or have
superfluity of humours in the breast, the gnawyng and grypyng of the mouth of
the stomach, which the Grecians call Dispepsia, and the Latines Appetitus
prostratus, which is a corrupted appetite: it cures spittyng of blood, and the
ache in the hyppe, or huckelbone coming of humours, it asswageth also the
Collyke, and scours the reins, it provokes a ma to peace, and cures the
strangurian, breaks the stone congeled, and takes away all dyseases in the
belly: it cures quotidian and tercian Agues, taken with the juice of
Stichados, in the beginning of the fyttes.


Sickness. I Do heartily thank you. I pray God I may receive comfort by your
wholesome composition, called Aurea Alexandrina. Now sir, for as much as I have
red the bare names, both of simples and compounds, even as men passing through
Cities, fyelds, woods and rivers, smally regarding their virtues, condicios or
properties, even so have I don: but now if it shall please your Maistershyp* I
would request that in short questions, you show me the Compoundyng of
Aromaticum Garyophillatum.


Health. WHereunto are we Mortal Wyghts borne, but one to help the other,
the Po^re to the Rich the UUyse to learn the ignorant, the whole to comfort
the sick? For we which now be in good health and feel no gryef, once shall
decay, and fall into your miserable estate, finishing our time in dolor,
agony and pain. And thus I am persuaded, that our lives can not be prolonged
one minute: for the almighty hath set our course and end, which we may not
pass, no more than the Son, Moon, and the Stars can go out of their
course and order, which they be placed in. But Medicine eases makes clean,
and comfort nature, takes away pain but prolongs no life, and thus our
Divines say. But I being thy Potycary, neighbor Sycknes, dwelling near thy
Door, will teach thee many goodly medicines: and now how thou shouldest make
Aromaticum Gariophillatum. First take of Cloves..vii Mace, Setwall, Galanga,
yellow Saunders, Trochisdiarodonis, Cinamom, lignum Aloes, Spicknard, long
Pepper, the great Cardomomum ana..i, Roses..iiii. grated Liquorice, Gallia
muschata, Folium Indicum, Cubebes, ana. iii. of Amber..i. of Musk.ss. of Syrup
of Pomecitron, as much as you judge meet. This comfort the stomach and
the heart, stops vomiting, it consumes also the corrupt humours in the
stomach, and doth nourysh all the principal members, it causes heate, and
dissolveth wind.


Sickness. How make you Acatia?


Health. TAke the plant or branch of a Bullais or slow tree, with the fruit
lay it in a vessel certain hours, and so let it stand, then sees it upon the
fire, and strain forth the liquour, the which streined, sees it on the fire
again, until it be thycke, and then keep it in fine vessels like shells and
so dry it.


Sickness. How make you Amylum.


Health. TAke Wheat and beat it lightly, not to small, and put it into a
vessel of glass, and cover it with water, so that the water be above it, two
or three fyngers* and so let it stand by the space of a Night: in the Morning
press it down well, unto the substance, which Amylum is made or do descend
to the bottom, afterward strain it with a Sieve, and cast away the Bran, which
swims on the Water above, let the resydue, which shall make Amylum, stand
till it go down to the bottom of the vessel, the water swim above, then cast
forth the Water softly, so that nothing remain, and dry it with a little
Cotton: let this be done in Summer, and also Son dried least it wax sower,
and so corrupt. Cover the vessel with a fine cloth, that nothing fall in: If
you will make this in Winter, then you must take great heed, that it be not
sower ye must also provide, that it be soon dried, either in the Sun, or in
the wynd, or in the fire, and thus you may make Amylum of Rice.


Sickness. How make you Aqua odorifera,


Health. TAke of Rose water. l i.iiii. Storax Calamita, Beniamen, Cloves
ana..i. of Musk, Civet, Amber Greece, ana. G. xx, of Camphor..ii. some put
unto this,.i. of Lignum Aloes: let them be put into a vessel of Glass,
covered with a cover, having holes in it, then let them boyle in a Uessell
full of water, as it is in Balneo Marie, which is a Glass or Uessell set
within an other greater on the fire: this done strain them with a fine lynnen
cloth, and so to be reserved in a vessel in the Sun, by the space of.xv.
days, then it will prove an odoriferous water most pleasant.


Sickness. How make you Benedicta Laxatiua?


Health. FIrst take of the best Turbith, Sugar, ana..x. Diagridion..v. wild
Lillies, Roses, ana..v. Cloves, Spicknard, Ginger, Saffron, Saxifrage, long
Pepper, Amomum, Cardamomum, Smalage seed, Salgem, Galanga, Mace, Carowais,
Fenell, Spinach, Kneeholme, or Butchers Brom, Gromell seed, ana.i. of Honey
asmutch as will suffyce. This doth cure the weakness of the joints, and the
cold gout in the feet, it doth also purge the reins and the bladder.


Sickness. How make you Balsamum artyfyciall?


Health. FIrst take Terebyntyne..xij. Gum Elemi..v. of Rosen..iii. let the be
melted together, and when they be molten* myngle these pouders, following, of
Arystolochia longa.ii. of Dragons blood..iii. make these in great pieces. This
medicine doth heal both new and old Wounds, and chyefly those that be about
the head


Sickness. How make you Confectio Dulcis de musco?


Health. FIrst take of Safron* the sweet root Doronicke, Setwall, Lignum
Aloes, Mace ana..ii. white Perles, sylke in powder, Amber, red Coral,
ana..ii.ss the confection, called Gallia Muschata, Spycknarde, Folium Indicum,
Cloves, ana..i. Gynger, Cubebes, long Pepper, ana..i.ss. Musk..i., ii. make
this with Honey not claryfyed, ye fowerth part of the weight of all the other.
This doth cure the trembling of the heart, and all dyseases of the Melancholy,
and those men, which be heavy without a cause: it remedyeth also the dyseases
about the brain, as the turning syckenes, and falling evil, the wrythyng or
pulling of the neck, or the mouth on the one side, and all dyseases of the
lunges, and shortness of wind.


Sickness. How make you Confectio Hamech.


Health. First take the four kynds of Mirobalans..iiii. Rubarbe..ii. Agarike
Coloquintida, Polipodie of the Oak ana..xviii. Wormewoode, Time,, Scene, ana..i,
Uiolettes..xv. the flower of harder Time. ii. Anisseede, Roses, Fenell,
ana..vi. the juice of Fumitarie. l i.i. Prunes in number.lx. of Raysens of
Coraynes the stones taken out. vi power all these into a vessel of Glass,
which hath a straight mouth, and stop the Mouth by ye space of.v. days
afterward let them boyle once, then strayn them, and dissolve into the
strainyng of Cassiafistula.iii. of the fruit of the wild Date tree, called
Thamarinde..v. of Manna or sweet dew..ii. break them with your hand, and
strain them. Then cast on Sugar l i i. of Scammont..i ss. sees them until
they shall be as thycke as Honey, then cast upon them the powder of all the five
kinds of Mirobolans, Reubarbe, Fumiterie seed ana..iii. Anisseede, Spicknard
ana. i. This cures all dyseases which come of fleume and choler, but chiefly
the ryngworme, scabs, keeper, cankers such others.


Sickness. How make you Cerotum Stomachale?


Health. FIrst take of red Roses..xx. of Wormwood leaves..xv. of Mastycke..xx.
Spicknard..x. beat them small, then take of Virgin wax..iiii. Oil of Roses.
l i.i.ss. make your confection. There be some which do wash the oil and the
wax, and then resolve them with a gentle lyre, and afterward myngle them with
the other, and so it is judged better. This doth mitigate inflamacions, and
hot apostumes, which be in the stomach and liver.


Sickness. How make you a confection for the eyes?


Health. FIrst take of white Lead washed..x of Amyle..iiii. of Gum Arabike,
and Tragantum ana..ii of Camphor..ss. make these into powder, and dissolve
them in Rose water, afterward make thereof little balls.


Sickness. How make you conserve of Buglosse?


Health. FIrst take of the leaves of Buglosse l i.iii. beat them in a Mortar
of stone, and then cast upon them l.iii. of Sugar, make your conserve like
Opiatum, which is a thynne Electuarie. This comfort the stomach, and
heals diseases which come of Melancholy, ^he sownynge and trembling of the
heart* it purges also Choler.


Sickness. How make you a conserve of Rosemary.


Health. FIrst take of the flowers of Rosemary. l i.ss. of Sugar, ^'i.i ss.
make your conserve. This doth comfort a moist brain. and mollify harde and
stiff members, it also purges Melancholy and fleume.


Sickness. How make you a conserve of Borage or Buglosse?


Health FIrst take of the flowers of Borage..iiii. Sugar..xii. make your
conserve, according to the art. This doth remedy the trembling of the heart
and sownyng, it also purges Melancholy, and causes a man to be merry.


Sickness. How make you conserve of Roses?


Health. FIrst take of Rose leaves. l i.i. beat them in a stone mortar, and
caste upon them of Sugar, l i, iij. make your conserve after the fashion of
Opiata. This doth comfort the stomach, heart and all the pryncipal parts, it
mollifyeth also those parts, which be hard. purges Melancholy.


Sickness. How make you a conserve of Uiolettes?


Health. FIrst take the flowers of Uiolettes. l i.i. beat the in a Mortar of
stone, and cast upon them. l i.i. o^. Sugar, make your conserve accordingly.
This does cure inflamacions of Choler, quench the thyrst, moves a man to
the stool,


Sickness. How make you a conserve of Maiden hair?


Health. FIrst take of Maiden hair* l i. beat them and put Sugar unto them.
as in the other. This helps the Pluresie, diseases of Melancholy, and red
Choler, and the Spleen or Mylte.


Sickness How make you a conserve of Gladian?


Health. FIrst take of the roots of Gladian. l i. sees them in water, until
they be well sodden, afterward dry them, and searse them through a Sieve, then
set them on the fire again, and put, l i.iii. of Sugar unto them, make this
conserve like to the Electuarie Opiata. This remedies diseases of the brain
and sinews, with all such as come of fleume.


Sickness. How make you a conserve of Enula campana?


Health. TAke of the root of Enula campana. l i.ii sees it well, afterward
dry it, then scarce it through a Sieve, and then set it on the fire again, and
put. l i.vi. of Sugar unto it. This doth comfort the stomach, and principal
parts against fleume, and helps the heart.


Sickness. How make you a conserve of Cychory, or Succhory.


Health. FIrst take the Succhory flowers. l i.i^ beat them in a mortar of
stone, and cast upon them. l i.iii. of Sugar. This purges Melancholy and
Choler.


Sickness. How make you conserve of Sorrel?


Health. FIrst take the leaves of Sorrel. l i.ss. beat them as you did the
other, cast upon them of Sugar. l i ss. This helps Choleric persons.


Sickness. How make you Conditum Cotoneorum


Health. TAke as many Quinces as you judge convenient, and sees them, and take
of the decoction of them. l i.iii. of Sugar. l i.j. sees them well, and
reserve the, some Apoticaries put in the whites of Eggs when they be
clarifyed. I will also teach thee an other way to make this confection. Take of
the seed or kirnelles of Quinces..iiii. tempre them by the space of half a
day, with. l i.iii. of the juice of Quinces, then boyle them a little. and
strain them, and cast upon them. l i.ii. of Sugar, afterward sees them well,
and keep them in boxes.

I will also teach thee an other way to make an other confection of the same.
Take of Quinces. l.vi. when they be sodden, put unto them l.iii. of Sugar, and
sees them well, as thou did before, keep them in little boxes,


Sickness. How make you Diagalanga?


Health. FIrst take of Galanga, lignum Aloes, ana..vj. of Cloves, Mace, Louage,
ana.iii, Ginger, lunge Pepper, Cinamom, white Pepper..i.ss. of Calaminte, Mintes
dried ana,.i. of the lesser Cardamomum, Spycknard, Louage seed, Fenell seed,
Anisseede Carowayes ana,.x. of Calamus Aromaticus., i. of the best Sugar..x ss.
of Honey clarifyed, asmutch as will suffice. This doth cure the diseases that
come of wind, and belchyng which seems sharpe in the mouth like Vinegar: it
is proved to cause good digestion, and fortefieth the weakness of the stomach
and liver being cold.


Sickness. How make you Diacyminum Nicholaj?


Health TAke of Cumin laid in Vinegar, by the space of a day, and afterward
dried..viii..i. of Cinamom, Cloves ana..ii.ss. black Pepper, Ginger ana..ii. G.
v. of Galanga, Sauerie, Calamint ana..i. ii. Charuil seed, Louage, ana..i. G.
xiii. long Pepper.i. Spicknard, Cardamomu, Nutmegs, ana,.ii.ss. of Honey asmutch
as you judge couenyent. This helps the stomach and pryncipal parts, which be
troubled with wynd: it causes good digestion, brings heat to the stomach,
and other principal parts that be cold.


Sickness. How make you Diambra Mesue?


Health. TAke of Cinnamon, Doronicke, Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, Leaves of Galanga
and Spicknard..iii. the great and lesser Cardamomum, ana..i. of Ginger,
Saunders, lignum Aloes, lunge Pepper ana.ii. of Amber., i. of Musk..ss make it
with the best Sugar, and the water of Roses. This comfort the brain, heart,
stomach. and all the princypall members, it causes good digestion. and makes
a man merry, and engenders heate in the principal parts, it is very
comfortable to old Men, and those which be cold of nature and complexion, to
women also, and cures the diseases of the matrice.


Sickness. How make you Diamargaritum calidum?


Health. TAke of Cloves, Cinnamon, Spicknarde, lignum Aloes, Galanga, Liquorice,
Trochisci Diarodonis, and little balls of Uiolettes ana..i.ss. Nutmegs,
Mace, the confection of Musk, Setwall, Reubarbe, Storax Calamita ana..i.
Perles, Ginger, the bone in the heart of ye red Dear, the shauyng of Ivory,
Iuncus odoratus..ss. Musk, Amber, Cardamom, Louage, Basell seed ana..j. G.
ii. of Camphor G. vi. of Mel Rosatum, asmutch as will suffice. This doth cure
the weakness of all the body, sownyng, and fainting, both of the stomach, and
also of the heart, and comfort the lively parts, and those that be pensive
and sad without a cause, it cures the cough and consumption, it doth also
recover those which be weak with lunge diseases.


Sickness. How make you Diamargaritum frigidum.


Health. TAke the.iii. kinds of Saunders, the flowers of Roses, and Uiolettes,
the seeds of Melons, Trochisci Diarodon raw Silk, made in powder, ana..ii. the
bone in the heart of the red Dear, Spodium, Doronike, ye root both of red and
white Behen, Spicknarde, Saffron, ana..ii. shauynges of Ivory, flower gentle,
Sapphire, Iacinte, Emeraude, Sorrel, and Endiue seed, Lignum Aloes, gray Amber,
ana..ss. of fine Gold..i. Camphor..i. of Musk.G ii. mix them and make
thereof a powder, putting in perles..i. and Corrals red and white, ana..i*ss.
and white Sugar.


Sickness. How make you Diathameron of Dates?


Health. TAke of Cloves, Ginger, ana..v. G. xvi. of Cinamom..iii. of the
Substance of Dates, Galanga, Spicknard, Setwall, Cost, Pellitarye of Spain,
white and red Coral, Rhaponticum, Spyke, the fruit Anacardium, Date stones,
Balm seed, Anis seed, Juniper Seed, ana..i..ii. of fine Gold, the bone of
the Hart of the red Dear, ana..ii.ss. of the shauyngs of Iuery, of Musk,
ana..ii. of Amber..i. of Honey Roset asmutch as you judge best: but few
Apotycaries do make this, for it is not greatly used, yet some do occupy it
very much. This will recover a man from dagger of death unto Life. It also
helps those that be short wynded or have any disease in the wynd pipe, or
have the cough, or be in a consumption: it cures also all dyseases of the
breast and stomach, the dropsy and payne in the raynes, it brings Mirth, it
makes a man lusty and fat.


Sickness. How make you Diarhodon Abbatis?


Health. TAke of white and red Saunders, an..ii ss, of Gum Arabike and
Tragantum, Spody. ana..ii. Asarabacca Masticke, Anisseede, Fenel, Cinnamon,
Rewbarbe. Basil seed. Berberyes. wyld Succhorye seed, Porselyne seed, white
Popy seed seeds of Gourdes. Cucumers, Melons, Citrons, ana..ss. Sugar Candy.
Roses, ana..i..iii. of Camphor. G. vii. of Musk..i. make this with the syrupe
of Rose water. This hlpeth the yellow Iandice, weakness of the Liver,
consumptions, dyseases about the heart, and those which be troubled with the
heate about the stomach, lunges or the whole body, and also those which be
recovered from lunge and little agues.


Sickness. How make you Diacalamintha.


Health. FIrst take Calamynfs, Peneriall, Hysope, black Pepper, Siler Montan,
Percellye, ana..ii..ii. of Louage..i..i. of Smalage, Amynthine, Dill,
Anysseede, Cinamom, Gynger ana..ii. of Honey asmutch as will suffice. This cures
dyseases of the stomach which come of cold, causes digestion, and chifly in
old men, it takes away the cough, which doth come of a cold cause.


Sickness. How make you Diatrion Pipereon?


Health. TAke of the Pepers..vii.ss. Gynger, Time, Anisseede, Spicknard,
ana..iii. Amomum, Cinnamon, ana. aure. Cassiafistula, sil^r Montan, Enula
Campana dried, ana. aure. ss. make it with Honey claryfyed. This doth engender
heat in the stomach and belly, it removes all pains of flumatike causes, it
purges the stomach of raw humours, and helps digestion.


Sickness. How make you Diaireos.


Health. TAke of Flowerdelice..i. Sugar Candy, Tragantum: ana..iii. myngle
them and so make them in powder.


Sickness. How make you Diairis Salamonis.


Health. TAke of Flowerdelyce.i. Peneryall, Hisope, Liquorice, ana..vi. the
Gum Tragantum, Almondes, Pineaples, Cynamon, Gynger, Pepper, ana..iii. Figs,
Dates, Reasons of Corans pycked, ana..iii.ss. of red Storax..iii. of Honey
asmutch as will suffice. This is ministered against the Cough, shortness of
wind, and also restores the speech lost.


Sickness. How make you Diatragacanthum calidum?


Health. TAke of Gum Tragantum Hisope, ana..iii. Pineaples both kynds of
Almondes Blaunched, Linseede. ana..vi. seed of Fenegreeke, Cinnamon, ana..ss.
Liquoryce, Gynger, ana..ii. make a powder of these. This is good against the
hardness and strayghtnes of the breast which comes of a gross and cold cause.


Sickness. How make you Diatrangacantha Frigida?


Health. TAke of white Tragantum..ii. Gum Arabike..ii..ii. of Amilium.ss. of
Liquorice. ii. of Penedies..iii. the four greater cold Seeds, pared and
pycked, ana..ii of Camphere, *ss. of the syrupe of Uyolets, as much as will
suffice. This doth cure all diseases about ye lunges, breast, and those which
be in a consumption, evil liking: the Pluresie, Cough, those which be hot
dry: the, roughnes of the tongue, the weason, let ye pacyent hold it in his
mouth, and swalow it down, when it is melted.


Sickness. How make you Diamoron.


Health. TAke of the juice of Mulberies. l j.ss. the juice of black beryes
straberyes. l j. honey. l j.ss. sweet wine sod to ye third part. iij. make it
after this form. Take your juice, let it boyle with your Honey sweet wine upon
a soft fire in a vessel of glass or tynne, vntyl it be well sodden, and to
know when it is well sodden you must take a drop of it, and lay it upon a
Marbell stone, and if it will abide upon the stone, and cleave like thycke
Honey, the stone being turned on the one side, then it is well sodden, and this
done strain it and keep it in a vessel of Tin. This is very good against
sores in the throat, and all kynds of stranglyng, and pains in the mouth,
togargaryse therewyth.


Sickness. How make you Diacodium.


Health. TAke.x. heads of ripe black Popye of a mean bygnes, cast upon them,
l i.ii.ss. of rain Water, and if they be more moist than dry then let them
lye in the Water a Day and a Night, but if they be dryer let them lye longer:
after this sees them until two parts of ye Water be consumed, then strain
them, then put in sweet Wine..iii. good Honey..i. then sees it again, and put
in Acatia, Hypocistis* Saffron Myrrh, and the flowers of Pomgarnets, ana..iii.
and sees it again: this helps Catars, pains in the lunges, and causes
sleep.


Sickness. How make you Diaprassium?


Health. TAke of green Horehound..v.ss. Tragantum, Pine apples, sweet
Almondes, of a kind of Nuts called Pistici, the substance of Dates, Figs,
Raisens of Corans, the stones taken out, ana..iii.ss. Cinamom, Cloves,
Nutmegs, Mace, Galinga, lignum Aloes, Spicknard, Gynger Setwall, Liquerice,
Rhaphontike, Anacardin, storax Calamita, Galbanum, Turpentine washed, Mastike,
Myrrh, Flowerdelice, Aristolochia Rotunda, the root of Cypress, Black Pepper,
Anisseede, Fenell, Dyll, Smalage seed, Parslie, Saxifrage, ana. ii. wyld
Lillies, Organ, Wormwood, Squinantum, Cardimomum, white Pepper, Carowayes,
Louage, Daisy, ana..ii.ss. Peletorie of Spain, water Myntes, Peneriall,
Ditta, Cost, Sauerie, Basil, Pionie, long Pepper, Amomum, Orobus ana*.i..iii.
the wood of Balm, Cassiafistula, Coral* shauyng of Ivory. Balm seed, yelow
Carettes, ana..ss. Musk, Amber, the bone in the heart of the red Dear, ana.
G. xiiii. of honey clarifyed as much as you judge sufficient, make it after
this sort following: put into it. l i.iii. of Honey, and of green Horehoud
Betony, and young Pine Apples pared, ana..v. put also unto them.iii. of the best
old wine, and let them boyle together with a soft fire until the wine be
consumed, let your Figs be made clean with in and without, dress likewise
your Dates, and let your Reasyngs be pycked, then dress also your Pine Apples,
Almondes, and the Nuts Pistaci, dry every one of them by them selves,
afterward beat them in a Mortar. and put unto them Turpentyne washed, after
this beat all again and let them be tempered with the same Honey in the Mortar
where they were before, and myngle them with the Spices which we have spoken of
before. This doth cure the weakness of the stomach, chyefly Reumes, and the
brayn which is cold, the. turning Sickness, the eye sight, the Wind pipe
troubled* with gross fleume, it doth also mitigate the tothe ache. The juice,
is mynistred in al fluxes, and chiefly in the bloody Flux, with the decoction
of rain water, in the which Spodie was sodden, or with Rose water, it stops
also the Flux of meat vndigested. which the Physicians call Lientery.


Sickness. How make you Dipapauer.


Health. FIrst take of white Popie..xxv. sweet Almondes blanched, Kirnels of
Pineapple, Gum Arabike and Tragantum, the juice of Liquerice ana..x. of
Amilium. iiii. of Purslen Seed, and Lattice seed, Kirnels of Quinches,
ana..iii. of Saffron..i. of Penedies..iiii. take of the syrupe of Popye asmutch
as will suffyce. This helps those which be in a consumption, and those which
can not sleep.


Sickness How make you Diacurcuma?


Health. TAke of Tragacanth, Saffron, of Azarabacca, persley, yellow Carrets,
Anisseede, smallage sede, ana..iiii. Rubarbe, wyld Fenel, Spicknarde. ana..vi.
Cost, Myrtle beryes, Casiafistula, Squynantum, Balm seed. Mader, the juice of
wormwood, Egrimony, Balm. ana,.ii. Calamus. Aromaticus, Cinamo, ana..i.ss.
wild Garlic, Ceterach, the juice of Liquerice..ii.ss. the gum Tragantum..i.
make it with clarifyed honey. This cures old diseases, and the evil liking and
deformity, of the body: when the meat being received, doth not nowrysh that is
corrupt in the body: it also heals the dropsy, and diseases of the liver and
the Spleen when they be hard or indurate, it purges the stomach of corrupt
humours, cold and wyndy, it mittigateth pain in the raynes and bladder, and
provokes vryne.


Sickness. How make you Diasatyrion?


Health. TAke of the roots of Satyrion which be like stones, the ga^den
Parsnyp, the Nuts called Pistaci, Pineaple sede, Cloves ana..xii. Ginger,
Anisseede, Rocket, Birds tongue, The two stones of Satyryon or Orches, the one
will fleet, and tother sink in water.
or Stichwort,, v. Cinamom, clove Garlik. ii.ss. of Musk, G. vii. make it
after this form, put ye roots. of Satyrion in so much clarified Honey as will
suffyce, let also the Parsenipes and Pineaple seed be well beaten by
themselves, and then put them into the same Honey, and stirring them well, suffer
them to sees a certain space, then mingle with them your Pineapels and the
Nuts Pistaci well stamped, and when they have boiled a little while, take them
from the fire, and put unto them, the powder of the spices and at the last put
in your Musk with Rosewater. This doth restore and fortefy the weakness of the
reins, of the bladder, it provokes urine, and moves a man to have great
devotion to pray in Uenus temple, or to be venerous.


Sickness. How make you Diaprunum solutiuum


Health. FIrst take a hundred Damsones, and put them in a Tin vessel with so
much water, that they may be well covered, and let them boyle well till they be
soft, afterward take them from the fire, when your water is so cold, that it
is but Luke warm, then take them forth, and put the into a sieve, over a great
vessel, and chafe your Prunes so long with your hands, that nothing remain
but stones, and skins. Then put into the water, in which the Damsons were
sodden in before...i.ss. of Violets and boil them, and make a syrup, with li.
ii. of Sugar, into the which Sirup put the substance of the Prunes, let them
sees, till they be thick, and then put into the same water..i. of
Casiafistula washed, put thereto also..i. of the fruit Tamarindes, dissolved
and strained into the same water, remember also that ye boyle in the same of
Prunes.i. of Uyolettes, sees them well, stirring them continually, and when
they be sodden, take them fro the fire, sprynckle thereon these ponders,
following. Sauders, Spody, Rubarbe, Roses, Violets, Purslain seed, Succory
sede Barberyes, the juice of Liquerice, the Gum Tragagantum, ana.iii. of the
four greatter cold seeds, ana.i. if ye will make it laxative, put unto every
pound, when it is taken from the fire.ss. of Scamonye, Diaprunes not losing
this, is ministered in hot and burning agues, and chiefly in Synocha, which is
a continual Fever of abundance of blood: in this ague it may safely be
ministered in the beginning, increase, and at all times: wi^h out Diagridion, it
may be given at al hours of the day, and with Diagridio but in the morning, and
that circumspectly, because it is very laxative.


Sickness. How make you Diaphoenicon?


Health. TAke of Dates infused with vinegar three days and three
nights.vi..i. of Penedies which be little wrethes of Sugar, dissolved in the
decoction of Barley.iii..i. of Blauched Almondes..xv. of Turbyth.ii ss. of
Scamony,.vi. Ginger, long Pepper ye flowers of dry Rue, Cinamome. Mace, lignum
Aloes, Anisseede, Fennelseede, yellow Carottes. Galinga, ana,.ii* beat them
well and make them with clarifyed Honey. This doth cure mixed Agues of diverse
humours, the Collike and payne in the belly, it purges all raw humours of
cold.


Sickness How make you Diacarthamum?


Health. TAke the root of Tragantum..ss. the substance of Quinces. i. thickest
chiues of Saffro, iiii of white ginger..ii. Diagridio..iii. white Turbith.vi.
Manna, or sweet dew, Mel Rosatu strained., i. of Sugar,.viii. wyld
Lillies..iiii. make an Electuary, putting unto it as much Honey as will
suffyce. This purges choler and phlegm.


Sickness. How make you Diacorallium magistrale.


Health First take of the Spices of the confection Dyarodon Abbatis which I
did speak of before. iiii. of both Corals, little pieces of Perles,
ana..ss. beat them to fine powder, and put unto them of Sugar resolved in the
Water of Roses.viii.ss. make them into small pieces. This doth comfort the hart
and stomach, and chiefly those which have been long sick of cold.


Sickness. How make you Diacasiafistula pro aenematibus, or Clisters?


Health. FIrst take of Flowers of Violets, the leaves of Malowes, Marcury
Parietary, ana^ M.i. of wormewod, M.ss. take al these green, young make a
decoction of these in a sufficient quantity of water: then strain them, and
pressing them with your hands into this strayner, you must dissolve a li. of
Casiafistula * li. i of the best Honey or sugar, This purges and moves a man
to the stole, it is very expedient for tender and delicate persons, because it
is gentle in operation.


Sickness. How make you Diasene?


Health. TAke of lignu Aloes, Cloves, Galinga, Nutmegs Foliu iudicu, Mace
Cinamome ana..ii. the stone Lazuli..i. of Scene, twyse as much as of al the
other, of Saffron..i. of the shaving of Ivory, Spodie, Anacardin, the bone in
the heart of the red Dear, little fyshes called Unguis odoratus, ana..ii. wyld
Lillies.i, Beries of Myrtes, Gentian, Bayberies, Eleborus niger, or Berefoote
ana..ii. Walnuts made in powder, in number xv. of Amber.ii. of Honey as much as
will suffice. This is good to heal the Leprye some Physicians mingle with
these, serpents flesh, This doth remedy al diseases of Melancholy madness, the
gnawing and grypnyg about the mouth of the stomach called Cardiaca passio, it
takes away heuines, quarten Agues, and diseases of the spleen.


Sickness. How make you Decoctio pectoralis


Health. FIrst take of dry Hysop, Maydenhere, Figs, Sebesten, Raysens, of
Corantes, Barlye, Liquorice, ana, equal parts, boyle these together in a
sufficient quantity of water, then strain them, and so reserve them This
asswageth al payne about the breast, it cures also the cough hoarsenes, and if
Aster be put in, it helps the reume.


Sickness. How make you Decoctio communis?


Health. FIrst take of Prunes, wyld Dates, Raysons or Corans, Violets,
Lyquorice Barley ana, equal parts, boyle them in a sufficient quantitye of
water, then strain them,, and keep them. This decoction is much used in hoate
Agues, and other hoate diseases, and when the year is hoate to temper
medecines withal, which be received in such hoate Agues, at all times. This
decoction is changed, according to the diversity of diseases, because some be
hotter than other.


Sickness. How make you Electuarium Catholicum?


Health. FIrst take Scene Casiafystula new drawn, Tamarindes, ana..vii,
Reubarbe, Uiolettes, Polipodie, Anisseede. ana..iiii. the four grea^ter cold
seeds, ana. i. take li. i, of Polipodye, and beat it, and sees it well in
water, and strain it* then make a syrupe with the best sugar, temper your
Casiafystula and your Tamarindes together, and when the decoction is almost
made, put them into it with the other spices, and so make the electuary. This
is ministered in hot and burning Agues because it doth mollify, disperse, and
comfort, it doth also cure diseases of the Liver, and of the Spleen.


Sickness. How make you Electuarium Rosatum?


Health. TAke of Sugar, the juice of Roses, ana. li. i.ss, of the three
Saunders, ana..vi of Spodye, iii. of Diagridion.xii. of Champhire.i. temper it
after the form of an Electuary. with a sirupe made of the same sugar, and
Roses. This doth purge Choler easily, and heals hot diseases in the joints,
the head ach, the payne of the eyes, turning sickness, and it hath bin proved
against the yellow Iaundice.


Sickness. How make you Electuarium de psyllio?


Health. TAke of the juice of Buglosse, both harde and the wild, the iuices of
Endiue and Smallage, sodden altogether and syned, ana. li. ii. Anisseede,
Scene, ana..ss. of Maydenhayre. M.i. the juice of Fumitery.iii, of
Asarabacca..iii. Spicknard.ii. let them lye a day and a night, then set them on
the fire, and suffer them to boyle once, then cast upon them.iii of Uiolettes,
of the harder time..ii. boyle them once again, but with a soft fire, then
strain them* and when they be strained, put unto them.iii of Fleaworte and let
them all stand a day and a night, but stir the continually, this done, press
forth ye slymye sap of them, take li iiii, of it, put unto it. li. ss. of fine
Sugar of Scammonye, roasted in an apple..iiii. after this set it on the fire
again, and sees it a little, and then put into it of Trochisces, Dyarodon,
Trochisces of Spodye, and Trochisces Rubarbary ana..i. little Balls of
Barbaryes, ss. then make your Asarabacca into a gross powder, that it may be
the more laxatyue, you may put also to these confections, green Uyolettes, and
dry Damasens. This purges yellow Choler. and heals the turning sycknes of
the head, which comes of a choleric humour.


Sickness. How make you Electuarium Indu maius


Health. TAke Cinamom, Cloves* Spicknard, Roses, Casiafistula, Mace, Cypress.
ana.iiii, yellow Saunders, ii.ss. lignum Aloes, Nutmegs ana. ii. Turbith..i,
of Sugar Penidies an. xx. Galinga. Cardamomu Asarabacca, Mastick ana..i.ss. of
Scammony xii Beat these altogether with the Oil of Almondes, then take of the
juice of Quinces, Pomgranetes, the juice of Smallage, Fenel. ana li. ss. sees
these iuices with clarifyed Honey, until they be thick, and then make the
Electuary with the other spices. This purges superfluous humours, and chiefly,
Flegmaticke and corrupt humours in the stomach, and in the other principal
parts: it dissolveth wynd, and cures those diseases which come thereof, as the
payne of the stomach, and the inward parts, the Collik and pain in the raynes:
it doth also consume corrupt humours in the joints.


Sickness. How make you Electuarium stomachi, to comfort the breast.


Health. TAke the Beryes of Mirtes finely beaten..xii. of Roses, Spodie Manna,
which is the Flower of Frankincense, of the three Pepers of yelow Saunders, the
flowers of the wild Pomgarnets, gum Arabyke, ana.i.ss. the kyrnels of the
Pomgarnets, made in powder. vii. of Coryander steeped in Vinegar, and made in
powder..iii. Sorel, and Playntayn seed, of Roses, ana.ii. break them al well,
and rub them with your hands, then put them into Sorel water, and so make your
Electuary. This comfort the stomach and the inward parts: it stops a
Lask, e which comes of to strong a purgation, and moves a man to meat.


Sickness. How make you Electuarium de Gemmis?


Health. TAke of white Perles..ii. little pieces of Saphyre, Iacint, Corneline,
Emerauldes, Graneties. ana..i: ss. Setwal* the sweet root Doronike, the rynd
of Pomecitron, Mace, Basel seed, ana..ii. red Coral, Amber, shauyng of
Ivory. ana. ii. roots both of the white and red Behen, Ginger long Pepper,
Spicknard, Fol^um Indicum, Saffron, Cardamom, ana..i. of Trochisci Diarodon,
lignum Aloes, ana.v. Cinamom, Galinga, zurubeth, which is a kind of Setwal.
ana.i ss, thin pieces of Gold and silver, ana. aure ss. of Musk..ss. make your
Electuary with Honey Emblici, which is the fourth kind of the Mirobalans with
Roses, strained in equal parts as much as will suffice. This heals cold
diseases of ye Brain, Heart, Stomach, and the Matrice, it is a medecin proved
against the trembling of the Heart, fainting and Souninge, the weakness of the
stomach, pensiveness, solitariness, kings and noble men have used this for
their comfort, it causes them to be bold sprited, the body to smell well,
engenders to the face good colour.


Sickness. How make you Emplastrum diachylon album?


Health TAke of Fenegreeke, Linseede, the root of Holioke, press out all
these the slimy sape, and take of it one part, and of Litharge well beaten, and
clesed from dross, one part. ss. of old and clear Oil iii. parts, beat
the Litharge and the Oil long in a mortar of stone with an iron pestel. Then
boyle the on the fire softly, styrryng them until the Litharge run together,
then take it from the fire, and suffer it to cool, after this take the slymy
sape, and boyle it once. Then cast by little and little, the slymy sape of the
herbs upon the Litharge, and the Oil, beating the with a pestel, till it be
thick: Ye may put unto this emplaster, the fine powder of Flowerdelice, and you
may use for your common Oil, which is sallet Oil, the Oil of Flowerdelice,
some mingle with this the slimy sap of Melilote. This emplasster is very
good against impostumes and hardness of the liver and spleen, or stomach,
swelling about the throat, and all hardness of every place.


Sickness. How make you Emplastrum diachylon magnum?


Health. TAke of Litharge broken and syfted..xii. Oils of Flowerdelice,
Camomil, Dyll. ana..viii. of the slymy sape of Lynseede, Fenegreke, Holyoke
roots, Figs, Reasons of Corans, and of the fat in, the belly, of the Seele
syshe, the juice of Flowerdelice, Squilla, of Hysope. ana..xii.ss. of
Turpentyne..iii. the gum of the Pyneaple tree, yelow Wax. ana..ii. make it
after this fashion: Beat the Litharge and the Oils which we did speak of
before in a Mortar of stone, with a Leaden pestell, by the space of half an
howre, then let it boyle upon a soft fire, stirring it continually till it be
thick, then take it from the fire and suffer it to cool, afterward take the
slimy sape with the other, and boyle them until they be hard, then take it of,
and lay it upon a Marbel stone, and make it in great pieces. This emplaster is
stronger in operation, better to ripe, and to resolve al hardness and
inflammations, and is daily used of good Surgeons, for the excellent virtue
thereof.


Sickness. Howe make you Emplastrum de Musilaginibus?


Health. TAke you the slimy sape of Holyoke seed, of Linseede, of the inner
rynd of the Elm tree, of Fenegreeke ana..iiii.ss. of the Oil of Camomil of
Lillies, and of Dill. ana..i.ss. of Amoniacum, Galbanum, Opoponax, Serapinum.
ana..ss. of new wax..xx. of Saffron..ii. Turpentyne..ii. make it in an
emplaster accordingly. This emplaster doth mollify al hardness of apostumations.


Sickness. How make you Emplastrum ad stomacum*


Health. TAke of lignum Aloes,, Wormwood, gum, Arabyke, Mastike, Cipers,
Cost, Ginger. ana..ss. Calamus Aromaticus, of the finest, Frankincense, Aloes,
ana..iii..iii. Cloves, Mace, Cynamum, Spicknard, Nutmegs. the confection
called Gallia Muschata, Squinantum* ana,.i.ss. mingle al these together, with
the confection called Mina Aromatica which is made of Quinces, Pears, and such
other byndyng things, lay al upon a cloth, and perfume them with a wood of
Aloes. This emplaster doth comfort the stomach and Liver, it increases also
heat in them and makes digestion perfect.


Sickness. How make you Emplastrum de granis lauri?


Health. TAke of fine Frankincense, Mastike, Mirhe* ana..l. of Baiberries..ii
of Cipers, Coste^ ana..ss. clarifyed honey, as much as will suffice to make it,
then spread it upon a cloth, and so lay it to the soar. This is a very
excellent plaster against the Dropsy, and will assuage al swellynges of Wind,
if you triple the quantity of Cipers, and put unto the plaster a little
quantitye of Cowes Dung, or Goattes dries: it doth also assuage all griefs,
which come of cold wind, and chiefly the payne of the stomach, belly,
raynes, matrice, and Blader.


Sickness. How make you Emplastrum de Melilote?


Health. TAke Melilote, and Fenegreeke. ana..vi. the flowers of Camomil,
Baiberies, the root of Holioke, Wormwood. ana..iii. Smallagesede, wild
Carrowaies, Flowerdelice, Cipers, Spicknarde, Casiafistula, Anisseede.ii.ss.
Margerum..iii. Amoniacum..x. Storax Calamita, Bdellium. ana.v. Turpentyne..i
ss.xii. Fyges, the Fat of a Goat* Buck, Reisons, ana., ii.ss. Wax..vi. Oil
of Mergerum. Oil Spyke, as much will suffice of^o beat them in. This emplaster
doth mollify the hardenes of the stomach, Liver, Spleen, and all inward
parts.


Sickness. How make you Emplastrum. coroneum a plaster of great virtue


Health. TAke of the Pitch, which is about ships, pressed or strained
wax. ana..ii..iii. of Serapinum,.ii. of Amoniacum Turpentyne, dry Pitch,
Saffron, ana..i..iii. of Aloes, Frankincense, Myrrh ana. i. Opoponax Storax
Calamita, Galbanu, Mastike, Alume Fenegreeke, ana..iii. of ye Dreges, of Storax
liquida, which the Apoticaryes cal stacte, Bdellium, ana..iii. of
Litharge*.i.ss. Make it after this fashio: beat your Serapinum, Galbanum,
Opoponax and Amoniacum a little, and temper them with wine, then boyle them
unto the wine be half consumed, then set it on the fire in a vessel of Tin.
and when it shall begin to boyle, put unto it your Pytch and stir it well, until
it be melted, and when it is melted, put wax unto it, and that being also
melted, put in dry Pitch which is called Colophonia, the Storax beaten small
with an hot pestell must be put thereto, afterward Mastike, Frankincense,
Myrrh, Bdellium; and soon after these put in Turpentine, Alume Litharge, and
at last of all Fenegreeke: when it is sodden, power it upon luke warm water,
and than incontinently take it forth again, and press it with your hands,
till all the water be forth, this done, make your powder of Aloes mingled with the
Oil of Laurel, upon a Marbel stone. Then make of all mingled together,
baules or great pieces, with powder of Saffron, your hand being anointed with
the same Oil of Laurel. This emplaster takes away al payne which is caused in
spittyng, the grief of the stomach, which comes of cold, it doth also
dissolve congealed humours in the stomach, and ye hardness of the spleen, it
helps the dropsy which comes of Coldness of ye Liver, and also the coldenes
of the Matrice, if it be laid upon it, it is excellent.


Sickness. How make you Emplastrum Oxycroceum?


Health. TAke you Pitch which is about ships, Saffron, Colophony of Wax,
ana.iii. Turpentine, Galbanum* Amoniacum, Myrrh, Frankincense, Mastike.
ana..i..iii make it thus, break the Galbanum, and Amoniacum a little, then lay
it in Vinegar by the space of a night, in the morning set them on the fire, and
melt them, and when they be melted, strayn them, and sees them again, till the
third part of the Vinegar be consumed, then put in your pitch being pressed or
strained before. When as this is melted, put in Wax, the which also melted,
put in Colophony, and Turpentine, and soon after Mastike, Frankynsence and
Myrre, styrryng it always from the beginning to the end, when it shall be
sodden, put in cold water, afterward wash it upon a Marbell, anointed with
Oil, and make it soft and gentle, then cast upon it the powder of Saffron, and
so make it in great pieces. This cures broken bones, asswageth all griefs in
what part soever they be of the Body, it doth also mollify hard impostumes, in
any part of all the body of man kind.


Sickness. How make you Emplastrum de Ianna.


Health. TAke of the juice of Giloflouers, Plantain, Betony Smallage ana. li.
i. of Wax and Pytch, Rosen, and Turpentyne, ana. li. ss. make of these an
emplaster, sodden on a soft Fire, until the juice be wasted, then put in
your Turpentyne, but stir it well, that it burn not.


Sickness. How make you Emplastrum Gratia Dei?


Health. TAke Turpentyne. li. ss. Rosen li. i white Wax..iii. Mastike..i. of
Ueruin, Betony, Pimpernel, ana. M.i. beat these herbs, and boil them in
strong white wine, until the third part be consumed, then strain them cast
away the substance of the herbs, put into this juice, the wax strained with
the Rosen and Mastike, let them boyle, styrryng them till they be thick,
take them of, and put in Turpentyne, and mingle al together, and make your
emplaster, saith Nicholas.


Sickness. How make you Emplastrum contra rupturas?


Health. FIrst take of Pytch about ships, of Aloes, ana., of Litharge of red
wax, Colophonye Galbanum, Amoniacum, ana..i. Misseltoe of the Oak,.vi. of
Chalk or Plaster, Misseltoe is called Uiscum or Mislen ye grows on ye Oak or
thoru.
of both Aristologia, Longa, and Rotunda, Myrrh, Frankincense, ana..vi.
Turpentyne..ii. of common earth worms, of Oak Apples, iiii. of Campher, and of
Daisye, of Bole Armoniake, ana, iiii. of the blood of a man. li. i. Make it
thus, Blood of ma is to be had at Barbarians, or blood letters, it must be dried
in the Ove
put the Misseltoe first into the water, and suffer it to boyle long in a
decoction wherein a Rams skyn was sodden, and let it sees by the space of a
day a night then take it from the fire, put unto it Turpentyne, Litharge,
Colophony, Mastyke, the whytest Frankincense, Myrrh, Galbanu, Amoniacu, soon,
after Comfery and Dayses, Chalk or plaster, and Bolearmoniake, after this set
it on the fire again, and put in the blood of man, both Astrologies, and last
of al Alloes, you must stir it continually: when it is well sodden, take it from
ye fire, you shall know it to be well sodden, when it will not cleave nor stick
unto your fyngers, then lay it upon a Marbel stone, anointed with oil of
Uyolets, and make it soft with woorkyng and laboring of it with your hands,
after this you must beat it again in a mortar continually by the space of two
or three days, then reserve it.


Sickness. How make you Emplastrum pro Matrice?


Health FIrst take of the Root of Sinkfolye. li. i of Lignum Aloes. yellow
Saunders, Nutmegs, Barberyes, of the flowers of Rosemary or Roses ana.i. of
Cinamum, Cloves, Squinatum, Camomil* flowers, ana..i.ss, Masticke,
Frankincense* the confection called Alipta muschata, Gallia Muschata, of Storax
liquida, which is called also Stacte. ana..iii. fine Musk..ss. of wax. li.
i.ss, of pitch about old ships. li. ii. make an emplaster


Sickness. Howe make you Emplastrum Diuinum


Health. TAke of Galbanum..i..ii, of Ammoniacu..iii*.ii. Opopanax. of Litharge.
li. i of new Wax..viii. of Oil Olive li. ss. Frankincense. i i. of
Myrre,.i.i. of Uerdigrease.i. of Bdellium.ii. of Aristolochia longa i. of
Amentis, which is a kind if Chalk..iiii. mingle al these together and make an
emplaster.


Sickness. How make you Emplastrum de minio.


Health. TAke of the oil of sweet Roses. li. i.ss, oil of Mirtelles, ye
ointment Populeon, ana..iiii. of Hens grease.ii. the Tallow of an Ox or a
Cow, ana. li. ss. Swynes grease, vii. Litharge of Gold and Silver, ana..iii.ss
of white Lead.iiii. of Turpentyne.x. of Wax, as much as will suffyce to make
your emplaster, according to the Art somewhat black.


Sickness. How make you Emplastrum de Cerusa?


Health. TAke of the Oil of Roses li. ii. of white lead. li. iiii. of white
wax..vi. make an emplaster. This is a very pleasant emplaster, against all
soars which come by reason of the heate of the son or by any other hoot
cause, against rubbinges, gallynges, or excoriations of heate.


Sickness. Howe make you Emplastrum Palmeum


Health TAke Litharge of Gold. li. iii. of Oil Olive, young swynes grease ana
li. i.ss. of green Coporas. iiii. Buds or tops of the Date Tree sees them
altogether on the fire, and stir them continually, with a stick of the same
Date tree, and if you cannot have the buds or tops of the Date tree, you may
take the roots of Reeds. This is a very excellent plaster against wounds,
festered with blood, and against grievous impostumes, burnings, brusyngs,
shoting, and prycking of humours.


Sickness How make you Emplastrum Tripharmacon


Health. TAke of Oil Olife. li. iiii. of Litharge of Gold li ii. of Vinegar.
li, ss make the plaster accordingly. This emplaster doth bring new flesh
again in wounds. and doth heal them.


Sickness. How make you Emplastrum Desiccatiuum rubrum?


Health. TAke Litharge of Gold..iii Oil of Roses, oil of Uyolets, ana. li ss,
of wax li. xii. the stone called Lapis Calaminaris, of terra Sigillata, of
red lead, ana..iiii. of Camphur. i. make ye emplaster. This doth dry up
Boils, and soars cleansed.


Sickness. How make your Hiera Picra Galeni?


Health. FIrst take of Saffron, Spicknarde, the wood of Balm, Casiafistula,
Cynamome, Masticke. ana..vi. of Aloes a hudreth. and take of Honey as much as will
suffice, beat them work them al in the Juice of Colewortes, Wormwood, or
wine that they may be so mingled together, as Leaven in dow, put unto them
Scammony, that they may the better cleave together, and also purge the body of
Choler: if you will put thereunto Agarike, the inner part of Coloquintida, then
it will purge phlegm, and if the flower of harder Time be mingled with it, then
Melancholy is thereby purged. To make it the more gentle in operation, and
leasse noisome to the Stomach, the Potecaryes put unto this composition, twyse
so much Aloes, as of al the other kinds. Your Aloes must be broken and
washed, that it may the better go to the Botome of the water, and the dross
which swymmeth above, ought to be cast away with the water, and this must be
done twyse or thryse: when it is well washed* then it will be a very holefome
medicine for the Stomach, and nothing hurtful to the inward parts: after this
the other Symples and medicines ought to be mingled, and so it shall be a very
good purgation for weak stomachs. This purgation which is made with Aloes,
doth remedy the Iliaca passio, and consumes superfluous humours, in the
stomach, it doth amend the paleness of the face, the eye sight which is dymmed
with gross humours from the stomach: it provokes a man indifferently unto
the stool, working and purging from the Liver, it doth hurt those which have a
hot Liver, but the stomach thereby is helped which is cold and flegmatike.


Sickness How make you a Iulep of Roses?


Health. First take of Rose water li. iii. of fine Sugar sodden and clarifyed.
li. ii. make your Iulep with a soft fire. This quenches the thirst in hoate
Agues, and doth assuage the heate both of the liver and of the heart: it doth
also resist corruption of humours, and keeps a man in health.


Sickness. How make you a Iulep of Uiolettes*


Health. TAke of the water of Violet flowers. li. iii. of Fine sugar sodden and
clarifyed li. ii. myngle them and sees them with a soft fire. This is a
pleasant remedy in al burning agues, and for those which have a hot liver or
hart: it helps also those, which have any roughnes in the wind pipe or
throat, it helps the pleurisy, and dry cough.


Sickness. How make you Lohoch de Pino?


Health. TAke of the kirnels of the Pine apples. xxx. of sweet Almonds,
Walnuts made in powder, the gum Tragantum, gum Arabike, Liquorice, the
juice of Amilium, Maiden here, Lilly roots. ana. iii. of Dates..xxxv. of
bitter Almondes. iii. Honey mingled with the juice of great Raysens, fine
Sugar, fresh butter ana..iiii. of the best Honey as much as will suffyce. This
doth heal old coughs, shortness of breath, and causes a man to avoid gross
spittle.


Sickness. How make you Lohoch de Squilla, or Scilla


Health. FIrst take the juice of Squilla and of clarifyed Honey. ana. li. ss.
sees it until it shall be thick. This purges gross and tough fleam, congeled
in ye wynd pipe, causes it easily to avoid, it cures also shortness of wind,
and the payne of the breast and side.


Sickness. How make you Loche sanum.


Health. TAke Cinamo, dry Hysope, juice of Liquorice. ana..ss. of Iaiubes,
Sebesten, ana, in number xxx. Reysons of Coranes. pycked Figs, Dates,
ana..ii. of Fenegreeke..v, of Maydenhere, M.i. of anisseede, Folium Indicum,
Flowerdelice, Calamint, Linfede. ana..iiii. sees al these in four pound of
water, till half be consumed. Then put into this li. ii of Penydies with a
confection of Sugar, sees it until it be as thick as Honey, then mingle with
this of Pineaples pared..v. of blaunched Almondes, Liquorice, the gum Arabyke,
of Amilium, ana..iii. of Flowerdelice ii. labour this confection until it shall be
thick and white. This cures the cough hoarsenes of the voice, which comes
of cold and fleugmatike humours which be in the breast and Lunges.


Sickness. How make you Lohoch de Caulibus.


Health. FIrst take of red Colewort. li. of Saffron..ii of Sugar, Honey, ana.
li, ss. make, your syrupe.


Sickness. How make you Lohoch de pulmone vulpis?.


Health. TAke the Lunges of a Fox dried, the juice of Liquorice, Maiden hair
Fenell seed, ana..iiii. make it with Sugar, sodden in water, asmutch as will
suffice. Some make it with the juice of Mirtes, and then it is both Laxative,
and also a comforter of the stomach This is a pleasant remedy in all
consumptions and diseases of the stomach, it doth both comofte and cleanse the
lunges.


Sickness. How make you Mithridatum Manardi?


Health. TAke the Ducks and Drakes blood, the blood of a Goose, and of herb
Grace called Rue, Fenell, Dill, Nauewes, ana..iii. the root of Gentian,
Trifoly, Squinantum, Frankincense, dry Roses, ana.iii. white and lunge Pepper,
Cost, Ualerian, Anysseede, Cinamom, ana..ii. Myrrh, Spicknard..vi.
Tormentill, Asarabacca, Amoniacum, ana. iii. Mace, Agarike. ana..ii.
Balmeseede..i. Flowerdelice, Saffron, Rhaphonticum, Mastike, ana.i. of
Stichados..v. make a fine powder of all these, and put four times so much
Honey as of the other, and myrt them, beat your poud^rs finely, and sees them
softly.


Sickness. How make you Mithridatum?


Health. FIrst take of Storax Calamita..i..i. of Cloves, Spycknard, ye wood of
Balm, Orobus, Louage, the Gum Tragantum, Mastike, This is an excellent
Mithridatum. that is of Andromachus, but the best is made at Bisance.
Galbanum, Sandarike, the sweet thorne Aspalthus, the Otters stones, the Gum
of Ivy, Bdellium, Terra sigyllata, and Lemnia, Melilote, the Gum of Ladanum,
Opopanar, Ammoniacum, Opium, Brymstone vnsl^ked. Liquerice, Salt Peter,
Hipoquistis, Acacia, Roses, Germander, saynct Iohns wort, Sotherne wood,
Pionye, Hysope, Organye, Enula campana, Sauyn leaves, the leaves of Bay tree.
Aristolochia Longa, the flowers of harder Time, Worm seed, Rosemary.
Centaury, Scaholme, the flowers of the wyld Pomegarnet, the inner rynde of the
Mertyll tree, the flowers of Pomgarnet, Raddysh seed, Squilla, Anisseede,
Balm seed, Get, Henebane, Fenell, Comyn, Cardamomum, Sylecmontan, white
Mustardseede and Parsley seed, Rue, white Popye, Smalage yellow Carets,
Clarye, lunge Pepper, Basyll, Amomum, ana. i. Gladium, the common Bur, Swynes
Nuts, Capars, Tutsan flowers, the horne of the Red Dear, ana..ii. of the
juice of Balm, or of Myrte tree, Cynamom, Saffron, Cost, Squynantum. Gynger,
Folium Indicum, and in steed of it, Cloves or Spyckenard, Turpentyne washed,
Myrre, Frankynsence, Cassiafistula, Agaryke, Spyca Romana, Rhaponticum,
Flowerdelyce, Asarabacca, Dyttan, Horehound, the inner rynd of Coloquyntida.
Styca, dos, Mugwoort, Calamynte, Pelletarye of Spain, Ground Pine, black and
white Pepper, Manna or sweet dew, Crosses, Synkefoly, ana..i. of Bayberies. G.
vi.ss. of strong and old Wine..i. of Honey asmutch as will suffyce, This doth
cure all diseases of the head, which come of Cold, and chyefly Melancholy, and
fearful persons, the falling Evil, the Mygram running eyes and all other
diseases of them, the toth ache, and all gryefes and sores of the mouth and
jaws, if it be laid on the place infected, if any Reume distill from the head
then it must be laid to the Teples, after the fashion of an emplaster, it
cures also the Quincie and Apoplexy, which is when a man can neither feel
nor move, it helps also the Cough, shortness of wynd, spytting of blood from
the Lunges, and all inward diseases, it cures also stiffness of members, when
the sinews be so stiff that the part cannot move, it also helps the
Cramp, Conuulsions, Palses, diseases about the Mydrif, Rains and the bladder,
it breaks the stone, provokes the Flowers stopped, and heals all diseases
of the Matrice, it mollyfieth all hardness, and cures the Gout, and it is a
chyefe remedy for all poisons, and against the biting of a mad dog, or any
other beast, if it be laid to the place or druken, it cures also Quarten
Agues and Quotidia taken with it luke warm wine, an hour before ye fit
comes.


Sickness. How make you Micleta?


Health. TAke of the three first kinds of Micobalans dressed and made in
powder. ii.ss. Cumin, Anisseede, Folium, Indicum, Amios, Carowayes.
ana,.ii.ss. Crosses seed., ii.ss. Bellericum, the fourth and fifte kind of
Mirobalans made in powder, ana..ii. infuse all these in Vinegar a day and a
night, afterward make them in powder, then myngle with them Spody, the flowers
of the wild Pomgarnet, Mastike. Gum Arabyke, Manna, or sweet Dew, ana..ii.
stamp them all with the Oil of Roses, and temper them with the syrup of the
Myrtle tree. This confection hath ben proved against the Emeroides. gnawyng and
griping of the belly, the bloody Fluxes of the body, and is to be given in the
Syrup of Planten..iiii. in the Night.


Sickness How make you Miua simplex seu Aromatica?


Health. TAke a hundred. l i. of the juice of Quinces, put it into a clean
vessel of stone, and let it boyle softly, scumyng of it till it be half
consumed, then strain it, and let it stand.iiij. hours, and cast upon it,
lx. l i. of old Wine, this done set it on the Fire and sees it until it be
thycke, some Potycarpes make it with these spices which follow, some without:
they take of the best Cinamom, the lesser Cardamom, ana..iii, of Cloves.ii. of
Gynger, Mastyke, ana.i.ss. of Saffron..ii of lignum Aloes, Mace, ana..ss.
stamp all these grosely, except Saffron, and hang them in a clothe, and make
them sweet with..i. of Musk, and with..ii. of the confection called Gallia
Muschata, there be also some other Poticaryes which make this confection with
Sugar. This confection fortefyeth the stomach. liver, and all the principal
parts, it causes good appetite and digestion it stops also vomyting, and
fluxes of the body.


Sickness. How make you Mel Rosatum.


Health. TAke of Red Roses prepared and dressed, as in the Conserves before,
ana. ii. parts, of good honey, vi. parts, sees them with a gentle fire
accordingly, some Poticaries put in equal parts, both of Honey, and of ye
juice of Roses without any leaves, some other put also of ye leaves.i. part and
ss. and of the juice.i. part ss. of Honey.iii. parts. This comfort the
stomach, and doth digest and purge Flegmatike humours contained in the
Stomach, or in the Ueynes.


Sickness. How make you Mel violatum?


Health. TAke of the Flowers of Uyolets.i part, of good Honey.iii. parts,
sees them with a a soft fire. This is a singular good remedy in hot Agues,
because it makes the body moist and also laxative, it asswageth the dryness
of the stomach and breast.


Sickness. How make you Mel Anthosatum?


Health. TAke of Rosemary flowers.i. part, of Honey.iii. parts, make it as the
other before.


Sickness. How make you Manus Christi?


Health. FIrst take of Sugar claryfied and melted in the Water of Roses. l
i.ss. sees these two till the water be consumed and the Sugar hard, in the end
of your decoction put in..ss. of Perles or precious stones, made in fine
powder, then lay it upon a Marbell stone anointed with oil of Roses or
Uyolets, or Rose water.


Sickness. How make you Oximel simplex?


Health. TAke of good Honey.ii. parts, of Vinegar.i. part, of well water.iii.
parts, your Honey and water ought to be sodden together, so that no some be
suffered to abide above, then put in your Vinegar, and let it sees well, vntyl
your Honey seas fomyng. This doth purge gross and Flegmatike humours, by
making of them thinner by dissoluyng them, by opening, and breaking of them, it
doth also digest the matter which remains of lunge Agues.


Sickness. How make you Oxymel Diureticum?


Health. TAke of the rynde of the root of Smalage and Fenell, ana. l i.i.
Parsilye, Kneholme, or Butchers broume, Sperage, Smalage seed, Fenegreeke
seed, ana..i. sees these roots and seeds in one. l i* of water, and one. l
i. of Vinegar, until they come to the half and a little more, then take of
Honey asmutch as will suffice, and sees it well, and make a sirupe.


Sickness. How make you Oxymel Squilliticum?


Health. TAke of clarifyed Honey. l i.iii. of Vinegar of Squilla. l i.ii* sees
it sufficiently. This dissolveth gross, tough, and Flegmatike humours, it
cures also belching which comes of raw and vndigested homors it heals also
the Bladder exulcerated in mollifying of it.


Sickness How make you Oxysaccara simplex?


Health. TAke of Sugar. l i.i. of the juice of Pomgarnets..viii. of
Vinegar..iiii. sees it on the fire, till it come to the form of a Syrupe.
This is very good in Tercia, Quart, and burning Agues. In the spring time,
it purges choler in the stomach.


Sickness. How make you Oxisaccara composita?


Health. TAke of Maiden hair, C^teracke, Hearts tongue, Liuerwort, Violets,
Fenell, Sperage, Kneholme, or Butchers broume, Stichworte, ana. l i.i. make it
after this fashion: lay your herbs and roots in the juice of Pomgarnets by
the space of three days, upon the fowerth day, boyle the a little, and strayn
them well. Afterward put unto them asmuth Sugar as will suffyce, sees them
till they shall be thycke.


Sickness. How make you oil of sweet Almonds?


Health. TAke Almonds and blanch them, and take away also ye inner Rynd, then
stamp them well, and make them in massy pieces in a boat place, by the space
of five days, then beat stamp them together again, then press them, so
that the oil may issue forth, and if you will sees it again in a vessel, set
within an other, by the space of an hour, and then press it, it will run
much better: you shall have much plenty of oil, if you fill bags with
Almondes stamped, and then lay them under hoate ashes or sand, between a
cloth, and afterward press them. This oil mollifyeth the roughnes of the
throat, the hardness of the Lunges, and of all the inward parts, it heals
consumpcions, and increases seed in me, it asswageth the heat of the matrice,
and of the privy parts of a woman, and also the heat of the reins, and of the
bladder, if it be laid to the place.


Sickness. How make you oil of bitter Almondes?


Health. THis oil must be made in all things like unto the other before. This
opens all obstructions and oppylacions, and causes wind to avoid, makes
the flesh smothe and fair, it doth also take away spots, and deformities
in the face, ache in the sinews, and all hardness.


Sickness. How make you oil of Bay?


Health. FIrst take ripe Bayberies, and stamp them well in Water, and strain
them, when they be cold gather of the fat, which swymmeth above, and it shall
be your oil. This oil brings heate and mollyfieth, in so much that they,
which be troubled with scabs, ringwormes, or any such sores, be cured
therewyth, if they be anointed, when they bathe them, Choleric persons, and
all those which be suspected to. have the Leprosye or any part thereof, must
eschew and avoid this oil: it is a synguler remedy against cold complexions,
moist and flegmatike, and those whose joints be affected with cold, it cures
falling away of the hair, taken with the water of Saltpetre: this done, you
must also wash your head, with wine and Honey, and with the flower of
Fenegreeke, howbeit, if your head be vexed with any gryese of heate, then you
must vttrrly eschew this oil


Sickness. How make you Oleum Sesaminum?


Health. FIrst take and wash the little grayn Sesamum, from all filth, then
sprynkell upon it a little water with Salt, and rub it with your hands,
then cast Water upon it again, till it be moyste, afterward lay it forth to
dry, which thing done, you must take it again, and dry it better by the fire,
so moderately as you can, and after this put it into a bag of course cloth,
and rub it again with your hands, till the husk go of, when the husk is taken
of, you must then grind it, and press forth the oil as you did in making the
oil of Almonds, you may make after this fashion oil of Lineseede, Popie
seed, or Lettyce seed, saving that your Lyneseede, may not have the Husk
taken away. This oil increases fatness, and seed in a man, it mollifies the
throat, you may also mingle this oil, with many other.


Sickness. How make you oil of Spike?


Health. FIrst take of Spike..iii. of wine and water ana..ii.ss. Oleum
Sesaminum, l i.ss. sees these in a double vessel, that is, one set within an
other, with a soft fire, by the space of four hours, and stir it
continually. This is a very good oil against all diseases of cold wind,
grieves of the sinews, stomach, liver, spleen, reins, bladder, and matrice,
the head ache, megrim.


Sickness. How make you Oleum de Costo?


Health. TAke of dry Cost..ii. of Cassiafistula..i. the buds Tops of
Mergeram..viii. of sweet wine, asmutch as will suffice to lay the stuff in
two Nyghtes, take of the Oil of Sesaminum, l i.iii. sees it as the Oil
before. This oil engenders heate in the sinews, and in all parts of the
body, it opens obstructions and opilacions, it fortifyeth ye stomach and
Liver, it keeps the hair from falling of, the head from horenesse, it
causes good colour, and savour in all the body.


Sickness. How make you Oil of Rue?


Health. TAke oil Olyue, li. iii. the leaf and juice of Rue, ana..ii. make an
oil accordingly. This doth heal and dry, therefore it is a present remedy
against all distillacions and reumes, it asswageth griefs of the breast, and
brings heate to cold members.


Sickness. How make you the oil of Dyll?


Health. TAke of oil Olive. l i.ii..ii the flowers of Dill..xi. lay the
flowers of Dill three days in Oil, and sees them the fourth, with a soft
fire a little, and then take them of, this done put in to the same decoction.
iii. of Dyll flowers, and sees it in the same, and keep it. This oil
asswageth all griefs and aches, it opens, loses, and provokes a man to
sweat, it doth mitigate the cold, and shaking in Agues, if the back bone be
therewyth anointed, it causes sleep, and cures the head ache.


Sickness. How make you oil of Camomyll?


Health. TAke of Oil Olive. l i.iii. of the flowers of Camomill. l i.i. make
it as the oil of Dyl. This doth mitigate al aches, it stops fluxes of
humours, because it doth loose, and not bind. Paulus Aegineta doth take..ii. of
the dry flowers of Camomill, without the whytes, and doth cover the vessel
with a lynnen cloth, so that the air may pearse through, then doth set it in
the Sun, by the space of forty days, after this the mouth ought to be well
stopped, and so kept, and if you cannot have green flowers, you may take dry,
and sees them in a double vessel, that is, one set within an other, howbeit,
the oil shall be of less strength and efficacye. This oil is electuarius to
the teeth anointed by it self, or by some other temperate thing, doth open the
poares, and causes the skyn to be thyn, it cures lunge Agues, and all
griefs, if the place be anointed with it, and sweet Wine.


Sickness How make you oil of Mirtes.


Health. TAke of Salet oil. l i.iii. of Mirtes stamped. l i.i. of the best
UUyne l i.ii. myngle these together, and suffer them to boyle, until the
Wine be consumed, then strain them, and so reserve it. This Oil doth
refrigerate and bind, and therefore it cures the flux, which comes of
weakness of the stomach, burnynges, pympelles, Kibes and gaulynges, if the
place be therewyth anointed, it heals clystes about the Fundament, and the
broad piles, the weakness of the Members, it stops also vomytyng and
sweating.


Sickness. How make you oil of Flowerdelice?


Health. TAke the Roots of Flowerdeluce..ii. and of the flowers..iiii. and of
the Decoction of the Roots. l i.i. of oil Olyue. l i.ii. let them boyle in a
double vessel, until the water be consumed, after this strain them, and
change the roots, and flowers, and decoction, this ought to be twyse, and
then strain them, and reserve them: the Poticaries commonly make it after this
fashion, how be it, you shall read in Dioscorides another form of making
this Oil. This Oil scours, purges, loses, opens, ripeth, and aswageth
aches of cold, it rypeth raw humours in the Breast and Lunges, it takes away
payne in the joints, and mollifies the hardness of them, all impostumes and
swellyngs about the neck, or in any other place, it asswageth payne of the
Matrice of cold, the Cramp and payne about the Reins, and the stench also
of the Nose.


Sickness. How make you Oil of Roses?


Health. FIrst take oil Olyue, or the oil of the grain Sesamum, wash it of^
with well water, then take a sufficient quantity of Leaves of young and red
Roses beaten, and cover them with the oil wherein they were washed, and stop
the mouth of the vessel, and set it in the Sun by the space of.vii. days,
afterward sees it in a double vessel, by the space of three hours, then
change again the Rose leaves, and take fresh and set them in the Sun other
seven days, after this sees them again, and change them as you did before,
and put unto them infusion of Roses, asmutch as of the oil, and stop the mouth
of the Uessell, and set it in the Sun, by the space of forty days. This
oil (as Mesue writes) doth comfort, lose, open, and assuage all aches, it is
also good against inflacions, and fluxes of Humours, therefore being drunken,
it is a present remedy against the bloudye flux, and all other fluxes. There
be two kynds of this oil, the one is made of ripe Roses, Leaves* and the other
of oil Olive, and Rose leaves: the first kind doth moilify, and make the skyn
thynne, it opens, and asswageth all manner of griefs: The second kind doth
refrigerate and bind, and therefore it cures the headache in Agues, or of the
heate of the Sun, it asswageth burning* which is engendered of wind, in a
full stomach, and finally it cures all aches of the head, if the place be
there with anointed, it is also a present remedy against payne in the stomach,
or Bowels coming of sharpe humours, if it be mixed with..ii. of Mastike, and
with a 'ytle quantity of Wax, it aswageth all red inflamacions, if the place
be anointed with it.


Sickness. How make you oil of Violets?


Health. First take Oil Olive. l i.ii. of young Violets stamped..iiii. put
them into a Glass, and set them in the Sun by the space of.vii. days,
afterward boyle them in a double* Uessell by the space of three hours, then
streyn and reserve them. Paulus Aegineta doth call this oil, Iaton and writes
that it is made either of Purple Violets, or else of yelow Violets, which many
judge to be Hartesease: he wills also that the Uyolets shall stand.x. days
in the Sun and be thrice changed* and the vessel to be so stopped that no
air may enter in, and in the mean time you may put in dry Violets. This
asswageth all inflamacions in what part so ever they be, it mollifyeth
exulceracions and horsenes of the breast or lunges, it mitigateth hot
apostumes, and the pleuresies.


Sickness. How make you Oil of Quinces?


Health. FIrst take of the Quinces which be not fully ripe, and stamp them,
and of the juice of them, ana, equal parts, of the oil of unripe Olives.
asmutch as will suffyce, put it into a Glass, and set it in the Sun by the
space of.xv. days, then set it in a double Glass, which is one vessel set
within an other by the space of four hours, then change your Quinces, and
the juice of them once or twice, and make it as you did the other, after this
streyne it, and reserve it. Dioscorides doth show an other and a better way to
prepare this oil, Paulus Aegineta doth call this oil Melinon, and makes it
after this sort: he doth take of Quinces vnpared..iii. of the oil of vnrype
Olives..xviii. and doth set it in the Sun.xl. days. This Oil fortefieth
the stomach, and the principal members. and the sinews which be lose and
weak, it prohibiteth ouermutch sweating. it is also a present remedy against
all Fluxes.


Sickness. How make you oil of Masticke.


Health. This Oil is so good, that it is called the second, that is fewer
better, for the virtue thereof
TAke of Masticke. iii. oil of Roses..xii. of good wine..viii. sees the in a
double vessel accordingly. This Oil, as Mesue writes, is the second for his
virtue, for it comforterh the stomach, sinews, liver, and joints, it doth
mollify hard apostumes, and asswageth aches.


Sickness. Howe make you Oleum Castoreo.


Health. FIrst take..i. of the Otters stones, and sees them in one pound of
oil Olive, until the third part be consumed, then keep the oil in the
powder of the O^ters stones.


Sickness. How make you Oleum de Euphorbio.


Health. TAke of Euphorbe..ss. of Oil of Hearts ease..v. of sweet Wine as
much, sees it till the Wine be consumed, and then reserve it. This oil is
very good against cold diseases of the sinews, the ache of them* and of the
ioinctes, the pain of the Liver and spleen, the head and the Reume, the
Uertigo and forgetful diseases. Galen doth make this Oil Olive of Euphorbe,
according to the Pacients infyrmitie, as it doth appear in the second book
De composicio Medicamentorum.


Sickness. How make you Oleum vulpinum.


Health. TAke a whole Fox, except the vowels, and put him in a vessel, and
power upon him Well water, and salt Water..xviii. of old oil. l i.iii.
sees this over a soft fire, with..iii. of Salt until the Water be consumed.
then put it into a vessel, and power to it sweet Water, wherein the herbs
were sodden. l i.ii. and Time. M.ii. sees them again, till the water be
consumed. This oil is a chief remedy against the payne in the ioynctes, that
is called Arthritica passio, against the Gout in the feet, payne in the
raynes, and back.


Sickness. How make you Oleum de Tartaro?


Health. TAke of the lies of white wine. l i.ii. or else asmutch as you judge
best, make it in powder, and wrape it in a lynnen cloth, or in tow, then
myngle it again with strong white Uynegar, afterward dry it again under
hoate ashes, until it shall be very black, then make it in powder again, and
set it in a Uessell in a cold place, and so let it stand by the space of.viii.
days, till it shall be resolved into oil and run, and if it will not run of
it self, then press it with your hands into a Glass. With this oil women
do anoynte their faces, to make them smothe and fair, for it cleanses the
face marvelous well with Camphere.


Sickness. Howe make you Oleum de Scorpione


Health. FIrst take twenty Scorpions, more or less, according to their
quantity, put them into a vessel of Glass, Dry your Tartar in an Oucu.
and power upon them l i.ii. of oil of bitter Almondes, stop the mouth, and
set it in the Sun.xxx. days, and so use it. This oil is the most present
remedy, to break the stone in the reins, or the bladder, chiefly if the
reins or the neck of the bladder, or the places there about, be anointed with
it, or else it be ministered in by the yerde, it is also made with old oil, and
mixed with many other medicines, which be good against poison: it is also a
present remedy against the pestilence, or stingyng of Scorpions.


Sickness. How make you Oil of garden Lillies.


Health. FIrst take of oil Olive. l i.i. of flowers of white Lylles. You shall
have Scorpions at the Poticaries.
.iiii. make this oil, as you did the oil of Camomill, Paulus Aegineta doth
show another way of making of this Oil. This Oil is very good against women's
diseases, running soars of the head, the scurfe, or any other breaking forth,
if yt place be therewith anointed, it is also good against al diseases, and
aches of cold, and inflamacions, also anointed with Saffro: if it be drunken,
it will purge choler but it is noisome to the stomach.


Sickness. How make you Oleum de Papauere?


Health. Nenuphar, is the water (...), white or yelow.
FIrst take of the flowers and green heads of Popie stamped ana...iii. of oil
Olive not ripe, l i.i..iii. make your oil accordingly. This oil asswageth
headache, and causes a man to sleep when the cause of waking comes of heate
or vapours ascendyng to the head, if the temples, nose, eyes, or forehead be
therewyth anointed.


Sickness. How make you Oleum Nimphaeatum album?


Health. TAke of oil Olyue not ripe. l i.i. of the flowers Nenuphar when they
be fresh, and stamped..iiii. keep them in a vessel of glass and repare it as
you did the oil of Violets, both for setting in the Sun, and for the
seethyng and changing of the flowers, and the mixing of the decoction. This
oil hath almost the virtues of the oil of Poppy, but because it is not so
cold, and doth not so much dull senses therefore we myngle with it the Oil
of Popie to cause a man sleep the better, it alters a hot complexion, unto
what part so ever it be laid.


Sickness. How make you Oleum Menthae?


Health. FIrst take of Mintes leaves, and of the juice of it. ana..iiii. unripe
oil Olyue l i.iii. put these into a vessel of Glass, and set them in the
sun by the space of.xv. days, stoppyng the Mouth of it, this done boyle
them.iiii hours, then strain them well, this being don, afterward strain it,
and so let it be kept. This oil is good for a weak and a cold stomach, it
stops vomyting, and causes digestion, it moves a man to his meat, and
mollyfieth all hardness in what part of the body so ever it be.


Sickness. How make you Oil of Wormwood?


Health. TAke the buds, tops, and juice of Wormwood, ana..iii. of oil
Olyue. l i.iii. you shall make this as you did the other. This doth comfort
and bring heat to cold members, it fortefyeth the stomach, and causes good
appetite, it opens obstructions and heals diseases which come of a cold
cause, it destroys worms and doth bring them forth, if it be mixte with
ointments and plasters and laid to the place.


Sickness. How make you Oleum Lumbricorum?


Health. TAke of earth worms l i.i.ss. of oil Olive. l i.ii. of wine..ii.
boyle them all together, and make an oil accordingly. This is comfortable to
the sinews vexed with cold, and good for the ache of the ioynctes.


Sickness. How make you Oleum de Cherua or alba viola?


Health. TAke Flowers of Hartesease..xii. of Oil olive. This sweet herb
grow-vpon walls and in Gardens* it flourishes in Apryll and May.
l i.ii. the flowers of Hartesease must be laid.iii. days in Oil, sees them
well on the fourth day with a soft fire, this done, put unto the
decoction..iii. of the flowers of Hartesease, then set it in the sun and
reserve it. This oil opens, loses and asswageth pain of the Ioyncts and
Sinews, Breast, Reins and Bladder.


Sickness. How make you a Pomander?


Health. TAke of Storax Calamita..i.ss. of Beniamin..ii. of the gum
Ladanum..ss. of Cloves, white Saunders, ana..iii. of Roses, Mergeram,
ana..ii.ss. mingle with these pouders of Musk and Ambergrice, ana..i. make your
baule with the infusion of Rose water and Sinet, in a mortar somewhat warm.


Sickness. How make you Diahyssopus Nicholai, which is greatly commended of
Cordus?


Health. IT is a very wholesome medicine, and must be thus made as follows, take
Hysop, Yreos or Flowerdeluce root. Time, black Pepper, ana.. -- xxx. Puliall
royal, Savoury, Rue, Commin. ana..xx. ye Fruit of Dates, Tragagant, Liquerice,
fat Figs, Raysens of the Sun without stones, Fenell, ana..x. Ginger,
vncollered Caro ways, Louage seed, ana., v. and Sugar, beat your dried
things in a brass mortar, and your moist things in a stone mortar. and then
temper them together according to art as Manus Christi or softer. This Dia is
good to be eat for the coldness of the head, and fastens up the vuila, purges
the arteirs, stomach, Lunges, Cough. helps Pleurises, and this is good for
thee, for thou art much troubled with these evils.


Sickness. How make you Diacostum, after Mesue?


Health. YOu must make it thus. Take sweet Cost Arabicum, or for that Costmary
the whytest, the wood of Cassia, Cinamom, ana., v. the seeds of Smalage, of
Anisseede, Rubarbe and Squinans ana..iii. Azarabacca roots, Saffron,
Aristolochia, Myrrh, ana..ii. and Sugar as much as will suffice, stamp your
dried things in a mortar, and serse them and stamp your moist in a stone
mortar, and myngle them together, and sees your Sugar with Rose water, put in
your receiptes in the end, and make ir as hard and as soft as you will, this
helps Dropsyes, and stoppings of the Guts, wynd, cold or rawnes, pains of
the collyke.


Sickness. How make you Diatrion Sandalon Nicolaj?


Health. TAke the three kinds of Sanders, white, red and yellow, of red Rose
leaves, fine white Sugar* ana..iii. Rubarbe, Spodium the Sprupe of Liquerice,
Purslen seed, ana,.ii..ss. G. v. Amyle, gum of Arabike, and of Tragaganth,
the seeds of Melons, Cucumexs, Gourdes, Citrons Succorie. or Endiue, ana.i.ss.
Camphor., i. and Sugar to sees it in, when the pouders be finely serced, and
the Gummes resolved, and so temper them in your pan, having Endiue or Burage
water: this is most wholesome against all the sickness of the liver coming of
heate above nature, and helps the yellow Iaundice and causes sleep.


Sickness. How make you that most worthy and excellent Cordial, Diamuscum
dulce?


Health. YOu must use these simples following Take Saffron, Doronike, Setwall,
wood of Aloes, Mace. ana..ii. white fine perle, raw white silk dried and
beaten into powder, Carabe or Crabfysh, red Coral, Gallia Muschata, sweet
Basell, or Balm, the white and the red Ben, or the flowers, Spicknard, Cloves,
ana.i. white Ginger, Cubebes long Pepper. ana,.i. sweet Musk, Ambergrice,
ana..i.ss. beat these finely in powder, and with Sugar and Rose water sees
them accordingly into a thickenes, temper it still, and power it upon a Marbie
stone. This is good against the passions of the heart, in swelling of the
stomach, lack of sleep, falling sickness. and shortness of breath to be eaten
morning and evening. You may make an other good Diamuschum Amarum, of a
stronger effect, against the Dropsy, to dry moist humours, and to cleanse
corruption, or putrefaction within the body: if you add these things. Take dry
Wormwood, fine yellow Aloes, Castor which be Beuers stones, and Louage seed
ana..iii.ss.


Sickness. How make you powder of Violets?


Health. TAke of flowers of Violets. l i.ss. of Roses..iiii of Cipers..ss of
Merg^ra, Cloves, ana..i. white Saunders, Beniamin, ana. iiii. of Storax
Calamita..i.


Sickness. How make you Puluis contra Pestem?


Health. TAke of Sinkefolie, Dittan, Tunis, Scabious, Buglosse roots, ana..ss.
the kernels of Pomcitron, Sorrel, ana..iiii. of Coriander.ii. of red Roses..i.
of Purselin seed..ii the shauyng of Iu^rie..ii. of white and red Coral*
ana..i.ss. of Terra Sigillata,.ss. of Bole Armoniake.ii. mingle them and make a
powder.


Sickness. How make you Puluis de Boloarmenio?


Health. TAke of ye three Sauders, Galaga Aloes, Cinamo, red Coral, red Roses,
the seed of Melons, ana..ss. the roots of Tunes and Sinkefolie. ana..iii. the
shaving of Iuerie, of Hearts horne, ana.ss of Anisseede, Fenell seed, Ginger
ana. G. xv. of Sorrel seed, of the Kirnels of Pomecitron, Juniper seed,
Cloves, ana..ss. of Bolearmoniake. ii. make a powder thereof.


Sickness. How make you Puluis contra Lumbricos?


Health. FIrst take of Wormwood., i. of Lupynes..i.ss. myngle them and make a
powder.


Sickness. How make you Puluis bezoardicus?


Health TAke of Bolearmoniake..ii. of red Roses, or Sorrel seeede, of the
Kernelles of Pomecitron, of Hearts horne made in powder, Rue seed, Let this
Bolearmoniake be put in a little Vinegar. and to dried
the root of Doronike, Amber seed of Sowthistel or Carduus Benedictus. ana.
iiii of both Corals, of lignum Aloes, of raw silk, neither coloured, nor
dyed. but as it comes from the silkeworme, of the three Saunders, of Perles, of
the bone in the Hart of the red Dear. ana..i. of the Emerode..ii. of the
powder of Perles, of Sinkefolie, Dyttan, Tunis, Scabious, Coryander, Terra
Sigillata, ana..ii. of Camphyre..ii. of Saffron. G. xv. of Amber,.ii. of
Musk..iiii make a powder, if it be put in the syrupe of Ribs, it is a goodly
Cordial.


Sickness. How make you Penides?


Health. TAke of the Best Sugar. li. i or.ii. and at the most three, and put
it into a vessel of Brass, being covered within with Tin or else into an
earthen vessel, one of Brass is better for this purpose, wet your Sugar with
such a quantity of sweet water as will cover it, and if your Sugar be very
good and strong, mingle with it for every pound of it.i. of Honey, then
sprinkle upon it oil of sweet Almondes, and if you have not this Oil, you
may use some other in the steed of it, set your vessel on a fire of coals
without smoke, and sees it until the water be almost consumed, you shall know
whether it be sodden enough or no, thus: take a dropof it, and lay it upon a
Marble stone, and touch it with your finger, if it appear like threads, and
will clean, and stick unto your finger, then take it from the fire, and lay it
upon a Marbel stone, and draw it abroad after that ye have mingled it with the
Oil of sweet Almonds, or of Sizamin, after this gather it together again,
as hot as your hands will suffer, afterward draw it forth again with your
hands, as sweet Elec^uaries be drawn, and then stick a crooked nail very
high in the wall* and cast it upon the crooked nail, and so draw it long till it
be white, you must keep it by the fire, as long as you do draw it, that it may
be hot, and more gentle to draw, when you judge it to be white enough, then
cut it with sheres in pieces, if you make this confection roundelong, or
otherwise, then take of white Amilum* break it and stamp it, and lay it upon
the Marble stone, and then cast upon it the paste of Penidies. and roll and
cut it, and so make it in what kind so ever you will, how be it, you must make
it quickly, least it wax cold between your hands, this done, lay it in a
sieve, or in some other like thing ny^ the fire, by the space of an hour, then
take it away, and reserve it: This is good for the Lunges or Cough.


Sickness. How make you Pignolatum?


Health. THis confection is made with Sugar, dissolved in Rose water, and well
clarifyed, and when it is sodden enough, put in Pineaples pared, and let it
stand and cool, till it come to the form of a hard confection, and then
reserve it.


Sickness. How make you piluliae sine quibu^ esse nolo?


Health. First take of Alo^s washed.xii of the five kinds of Mirobalans,
Reubarbe, Mastik* Roses, Wormwood, Violets, Scene, Agarike, Doder, ana.. temper
them with the juice of Fenel, into the which you shall put vi. of Scamony well
broken, how be it, myngle your Scamonye with the juice of Fenel, then press
forth your juice with the Scamony, so much as will suffyce for the c^nco^tion,
then make your pills with your hands, anointed with ye oil of Violets, or
Oil Olive. These be present Pills to purge Choler, Fleume and Melancholy
against evil sight which comes of abundance of humours, against payne of
the Ears, and of Iliaca passio.


Sickness. How make you pilulae Aureae?


Health. TAke of Aloes, Diacridion, ana..v. of Roses, Smalege seed. ana..ss.
of Anisseede, Fenelseede, ana..i of Mastike..i. of Saffron, of the inner part
of Coloquintida, make your pills, with the infusion of ^um ^ragan^um, these be
very excellent pills to purge the head, to amend the Eye sight, the wynd in
the stomach or Bowels, and they purge without any payne.


Sickness. How make you Pilulae Cochiae?


Health FIrst take of ye powder of Hiera picra.x. of Coloquintida..iii..i. of
Scamony ii of Turbith, Sticados, ana., v. myxe it with ye syrupe of Sticados so
make your pills. These do purge the head marvelously well, but chiefly of
gross and cold humours, they assuage the head ach reume.


Sickness. How make you Pilulae de octo rebus?


Health. TAke of Aloes, Diacridion, ana..ii. of the inner part of
Coloquintida, and of the flowers of harder Time, Agarike, Mastike, the third
kind of Mirobalans, Wormwood, ana..i. temper them with the juice of Night
shade.


Sickness. How make you pilulae de Mirobalanis?


Health. FIrst take of the five kynds of Mirobalans, Agarike, Diagridion,
Coloquintida, Scene, ana..ss. the flowers of the harder Time, Turbith,
Anisseede, Fenel, Mastike, ye stone Lazuli. ana..iii. of Aloes..i. make these
Pills with the juice of Wormwood, and if you mingle a little Ginger with them,
your pills shall be the better. These pills be very good against the ache of
the Hyp or Huckel bone, the Gout and ye spleen. They do clear the syghte,
and purge burnt choler.


Sickness. How make you pilulae Elephanginae


Health. FIrst take of Cinamom, Cubebes, lignum Aloes, Calamus Aromaticus,
Mace, Nutmegs, Cardamom, Cloves Asarabacca Mastike, Squinantum, Spicknard,
the fruit of Balm, ana i, of dry Wormwood and Roses, ana..v. stamp them, but
not small, and then put unto them. li. xii. of water, sees them till two parts
of the water be consumed, then rub them with your hands, and strayn them,
and press forth the water, this done, take of Aloes Succotrine. li. i. wash
it in a Skillet, or such like vessel of stone, covered, or else with glass: you
must wash it oft, with rain water, then dry it, and cast upon it. li. ii. of
that which you did press forth before, dry it in the Son, then myngle it
with your Aloes of Myrrh, Mastike, ana..v of Saffron.iii. beat them well and
cast upon them the residue of that, which was strained, and rub them with
your hands until they be broken: many Poticaries wash Aloes with infusion of
Rubarbe. These pills assuage payne of the stomach very well, the brain, and
the instruments of the senses, from gross and corrupt humours.


Sickness. How make you pilulae Aggregatiuae?


Health. FIrst take of the first kind of Mirobalans, of Reubarbe, ana. iii. of
ye juice of Egrimony and Wormwoode, ana..ii of Diagridion, vi. of ye third kind
of Mirobalans, Coloquintida, Polipody, ana..ii, of the best Turbith* of Aloes,
ana.vi. of Mastike, Roses, Salgem, the Flower of harder Time, Anisseede,
Ginger, ana..ss. of the Electuarye of Roses, as much as will suffice to make it
thick. These pills be very good against long Agues, and those which be
vexed with superfluous humours, ache of the head, stomach and Liver, they
purge corrupt Choler, Melancholy and Fleume, they quicken and refresh the
instruments of the senses.


Sickness. How make you Pills of Reubarbe.


Health. TAke of Liquorice, juice of Wormwood, Mastike, ana..i. of the first
kind of Mirobalans. Citrine Mirobalans be taken for the first kind
.iii ss. of Smallage seed, wild Lillies, Fenel, ana..ss. of Trochiscie
Diarodon, ana..iii.ss. of Hiera Picra.x. of Reubarbe..iii.. make them with
Fenell water. These Pills cure long Agues, and those, which be also engendered
of divers gross and corrupt humours, they assuage the payne about the liver,
and chieflye they cure the dropsy: some Physicians use these in the end of a
mixed tertian, you may make them stronger with other Symples as you judge best
for the patient, take of these in the morning..ii. or.i.ss.


Sickness. How make you Pilulae de Sarcocolla?


Health. TAke of the gum Sarcocolla.iii. of Turbith..iiii of
Coloquintida.i.ss. of Salge. i. dissolve the Sarcocolla in Rose water, and
mingle all the other with it, so make your Pills, these purge Fleume, how be
it, few Physicians do use them.


Sickness. How make you Pilulae faetidae maiores?


Health FIrst rake you of Serapinum, Amoniacum, Opoponax, Bdellium,
Coloquintida, wyld Rue, Aloes, the flowers of the harder Time, ana..v. of
Spurge, Scammonie..iii. of Cinamu, Spicknarde, Saffron, the Otters stones,
ana..i. of Turbith..iiii. of Gynger..i.ss of Euphorbe..ii. dissolve your gum
in the juice of Leekes, and so make your Pylles. These Pills purge gross
humours and be very good against ache in the joints and gout in the feet.
against payne in the back, knees, stomach, the Colike, why^e Leaprey and
Pox.


Sickness. How make you pilulae de Eupho^bio?


Health. TAke Euphorbium, Coloquintida Agarike, Bdellium, Serapin. ana^.ii. of
Aloes..v. Make Pills with the juice of Le^kes. These purge fleam, and do also
mollify, they cure the Paulsey, and purge gross humours, A good pil for
S^ta^ica.
which have course to the joints and sinews, they cure the ach payne in the
Hipp, and Huckle bone of humours.


Sickness. How make you pilulae lucis maiores?


Health First take of Roses, Uyolettes, Wormewoode, Coloquintida, Turbythe,
Cubebes, Calamus Aromaticus, Nutmegs, Spicknarde, the Flower of harder Time,
the seed and wood of Balm. Siler Montanum, Rueseede, Squinantum, Azarabacca.
Mastyke, Cloves, Cinamum, Anisseede, Fenell, Smallage, Casiafistula, Saffron,
Mace, ana..ii. of all the kinds of Mirobalans, of Reubarbe..vi. of Aloes
Succotrine as much as of them al, make them with the juice of Fenel. These be
present remedies against dimnes of the sight, they purge the instruments of the
senses, and superfluous humours, they keep the body strong and in health,


Sickness. How make you Pilulae Lucis minores?


Health. TAke of the wood of Balm, and the seed of Balm, ana..i. of
Selyden..v. of Roses, Uyolets, Wormewoodde, Eybryght, ana..iii. of Scene, the
flowers of harder Time, of all the kinds of Mirobalans, of Agarike,
Coloquintida, Squinance, the stones Lazuli and Licius, ana..ii.ss. of Aloes
succotryne, as much as of them all, make them with the juice of Selendine or
Fenell. These do purge Melancholy better then the other.


Sickness. How make you Pilulae de Lapide lazuli?


Health TAke of the stone Lazuli washed. v. the flowers of harder Time of
Polipodye, ana..viii. of Scammonie, of Salt, ana..ii.ss. of Agarike,.viii. of
Cloves, Anisseede, of Hiera Picra,.xv, make them with the juice of Endiue.
These be excellent Pills against long diseases of, Melancholy and burnt
choler,


Sickness. How make you pilulae de Bdellio?


Health. TAke of Bdellium., xii. of Anisseedes..iii. of al kinds of Mirobalans
of Amber, ana., ii.ss. mingle your Bdellium with the juice of Lekes so make the
Pills. These Pills have been proved against running Emeroides, and the soars
of them, and to stop the terms menstruall in women.


Sickness. How make you pilulae de Hermodactylis?


Health. TAke of wyld Lillies, of Aloes, of yelow Mirobalanes, of Turbith,
Hermodactile be 11. kinds one like a Lilly having one rote the other like
Saffron both root and flower, but were ^ut greater, but this is called in the
Greek Ephemeron.
Coloquintida, Bdelium, Serapium, ana..vi. of the Otters stones, of the gum
Sarcocolla, Euphorbe. Opopanax, wyld Rue, Smallage, ana..iii. of Saffron..i.ss.
Mingle these with the juice of Colewortes, and make them in Pills.


Sickness. How make you Pilulae Arthriticae.


Health. FIrst take of Ephemeron, Turbith, Agarik, ana..iiii. of Casiafistula,
Spicknard, Cloves, the wood and seed of Balm, Ginger, Mastike, Fenel*
Anisseede, Sarifrage, Sperage Kneeholme or Buchers Brom, Roses, Gromel seed,
Salgem, ana.ss. of Aloes succotrine, as much as of them all, make them with
the juice of Fenell. These Pills cure the gout of the joint of the feet.


Sickness. How make you Pilulae stomachisae?


Health. TAke of Aloes. vi. of Masticke, of Roses, ana..iii. make them with the
juice of Nightshade. Mesues pills for the stomach.
These purge the stomach and head. You may make them with mirobalans Citrine,
Aloes, Turbith, ana.x. Roses, Spicknard, Mastike, ana..ii.ss. Anisseedes.i.ss
sal Gem, and Saffxon ana..i. make this with Syrupe of Wormwood.


Sickness How make you Pilulae ante cibum


Health TAke of lignum Aloes, Cloves, Folium Indicum, Mastyke, ye wood and
seed of Balm, Cassia wood. Mace, Nutmegs, Cinamum, Cuvebes, Saffron siler
Montan, Spicknarde, ana..ii. of Reubarbe, Aloes succotrine, as much as of them
all, myngle them with sweet wine, and make your Pills. These pills cause
good digestion, distribute meat vndigested, and must be taken before meat.


Sickness. How make you Pills of Agarike, or Agarici.


Health. TAke of Agarike, Mastike, ana..iii. garden Lylly roots, horehound
ana..ii. of Turbith.v. Hiera picra.ii. of Coloquintida, the gum Sarcocol,
ana.ii of Myrrh..i make these with the juice of Herbs or fruit fined either
in the son or by the fire, and this juice so fined, is called of the
Pothicaryes Rob. These Pills purge the stomach fro gross and corrupt
humours, and they be very good against shortness of ye wynd, and old coughs.


Sickness. How make you Pills of Fumiterre,


Health. TAke of the five kinds of Mirobalans, ana..v. of Aloes..vi. of
Scammony..v. mingle them with the juice of Fumiterre, and let them stand till
they be dry, then sprinckle on again the juice of Fumiterre, and suffer them
again, to dry and so do the third time, then let them stand until they be
thick, and then make your pills.


Sickness. How make you pilulae communes?


Health. TAke of Aloes..ii. Saffron, Myrrh, ana,.i. make them with sweet wine.
This pill is against the pestilence, and called Ruffi.
These Pills be much used of the Physicians if they be taken in summer, and if
you take them in the plague time, then you must put unto them as much
Bolearmoniake as of Aloes.


Sickness. How make you pilulae Assaieret?


Health. First take of Hiera Picra..i. of Mastyke, of yellow Mirobalans
ana..ss. of the best Aloes..ii. make your Pills with ye juice of Sticados.
These Pills be a present remedy against headache.


Sickness. How make you Pilulae Bichicae


Health TAke of the juice of Liquorice, Amilum, Tragantu. gum Arabyke, sweet
Almondes, ana..i. of Sugar..iii. make them with the slimy sap of the seed of
Quinces.


Sickness. How make you pilulae Imperialis?


Health. TAke Cinamom, Amomum, Anisseede, Mastike, Cardamom, Ginger, Setwal,
Mace, Nutmegs, Cloves, Saffron, Cubebes, lignum Aloes, Turbith Manna, or
sweet dew, Agarike, Senecods, Spicknard, of the five kinds of Mirobalans,
ana, i. of Reubarbe, as much as of them al, of Aloes as much as of al the
other, make them with the syrup of Roses or Uyolets,


Sickness. How make you pilulae de Hiera picra?


Health. TAke of the powder of Hyera picra simplex..i. make them with the
conserve of Roses as much as will suffice.


Sickness SOme time the bodies of men, women, and children, be so weak* feeble,
that they be not able to receive purgations by Electuaryes, Pills or Clisters,
what easy means is then to be found, to purge the belly, I pray you tel me?


Health. THere be divers means to be found, as appears by Nicolaus Myrepsy,
whereas he teaches how to make Suppositores, as for example here is one of
them. R. Elleborus the black. To make good suppositories laxa^iue.
.ii. and good yellow Aloes..i. and Mousedung..iii beat these in pounder, seth
them in Honey, until the thickness of a Suppository, then make one or two in the
form of a long small finger, then put a little fine Cotton upon the end
thereof, and so put it in the body, and this will bring forth both Choler and
fleume: also here follows an other to pull down the swelling of the belly,
wynd in the great guts, Cholike or such like, take the seed of Few, called
herb Grace or of wyld Rue, Suppositories to help Colike
of Agarike, ana.iii. Commine well dried, Turbite, ana..ss. Diacridium..ss. G.
iiii beat these fine in powder accordingly, then put in salt Peet^r, or common
salt. iiii. and sees it in Honey, as is aforsayd. Here also doth follow the
making of an other, to relaxe the Belly take of the juice of Rapes, or Panis
Porcinus, i. and salt of the Earth, or common Salt. iiii, and Honey as much as
will suffice, as in the manner aforesaid. But if you will purge Choler adust,
fleume, or wind, in the belly, R. Colocinthidis, called Coloquintida, the
inward part thereof, but not the seeds..iii Polipody clean washed.iii. Bulls
or Ox gaul..i. Honey, as example before. I have showed you ye way of purging
suppositers, now shall I show you ye manner to make some suppositers to heal
Dysenteria, or flux of Blood, coming from the apostumations bred in the
Liver, Suppositories to stop flu^es.
and sometime a perilous fl^e, with rasyng or excoriation, continual torments,
and most grievous parties in the Guts, with casting out yellow choler,
sharpnes of blood, choler adust, salt fleume, which sicknesses have slain
many men, women and children, for lack of help.

R. Opium, which is ye juice of Poppye dried, Myrrh, Castorium, which ^e the
dried stones of Beaver, (...) is Beuers stones
Saffron, Frankincense, Hypocistidis, ana..vi (...)..iii and a little wine and
Honey accordingly, and so sees your suppositer to the thickness, and roll it
three finger length. An other for the same.

R. Opobalsamum, and the fine locks of Woll, roll them together in the manner
of Suppositer, this hath a marvelous workinge, saith Nicolaus Myrepsus in this
case: an other for the same.

R Opium, Myrrh, Saffron, Dragons blood, Bolearmoniake, Lemmy, called Terra
sigillata, Mastike, ana..i. the juice of Planten, and of Knotgrasse and a
little Goats milk, as much as will suffice, putting in a little of Aca^a, or
the juice of Slose, or wild Plummes beaten together in a mort^r, and then
sees it in a little pan, powryng in a few drops of vinegar, when it is
thick, r^ule it in a suppositer: Provided yt your said suppositers be.i in
wayght, and those be best, saith that learned man* Nicolaus Myrepsus, also his
counsel is, to make them in length more than three fyngers. Now shall I show you
the manner of an other laxative suppositer, and so I will make an end of them.

R. Mercury, and wormwood, dried and beaten in Powder, the rynde of
Colocinthida, Agarike, and Hierapicra, ana..i. Common salt, or salt Peter.iii.
and Honey as much as will suffice, and then make your Suppositer.


Sickness. Oftentimes chance great perils among women, when as either Nature
is to weak whereby Menstruall, terms are stopped, or the Child within the
Belly dead, whereupon women oftentimes do dye, I pray you tel me some spedy
remedy, and approved medecin that will so open the matrice, whereby the dead
child may come forth, to help the Woman.


Health. THere is no better medicine, then this following, Opophalion is an
excellent Emplaster, to deliver or bring forth a dead child fro the mother.
called Opophalion. R. Rapeseede, Sal Niter, Elleborus, the white, and the
black, Colocinthidis called coloquintida, Staphesacre ana..iii. Scamonie.ii.
the juice of Elaterium, which is a wild cucumber, or Cucumeres
anguini..ii.ss. beat your dried things into powder, and put them into the
Oil of Iroes, and the gaul of an Ox or Bull, ana..iii. mingled together
with the powder of Carthamus..iii. also dissolve in your said Oil
Ammoniac..iiii. the stamp bitter Almondes. li. ss. with your foresaid
receiptes in a stone mortar, then spread it upon a piece of leather, and make
a great broad plaster, and apply it upon the belly of a woman, for such a
case as I have said, and it will work accordingly.


Sickness. How make you Pomatum?


Health. TAke of the fat of a young Kyd. li. i. temper it with the water of Musk
Roses, by the space of four days, then take fine apples, and dress them* and
cut them in pieces, and lard them with Cloves, then boyle them altogether in
the same water of Roses, in one vessel of Glass, set within another vessel,
let it boyle on the fire so long until all be white, then wash them with ye
same water of Musk roses, this done, keep it in a glass and if you will have
it to smell better, then you must put a little Civet or Musk or of them both,
and Amber grice: Gentlewomen do use this to make their faces smooth and fair,
for it heals cliftes in the lyppes, or in any other place of the hands and
face c.


Sickness How make you Rosata nouella?


Health TAke of Roses, Sugar, Liquorice, ana..i. ii. of Cinamom. ii..iii. of
Cloves, Spicknard, Ginger, Galinga, Nutmegs, Setwal, Storax Calamita,
Cardamomum, Smalage, ana..i. G. vii. make these in Powder. This powder stops
vomitting and casting of the stomach, it fortifyeth those which have bin long
sick, and lets over much sweating.


Sickness. How make you Syrupus acetositatis citri?


Health TAke of the Tart and sower juice of Pomecitron. li. xii. sees it in a
vessel of Glass* on the coals with a soft fire, till the third part be
consumed, then strain it, and let it stand till it be clear, and take of that
which is clear. li vii. and then power, upon it fined Iulep li v. sees these
until they be thick, if it be in Summer, then let it stand in ye Son till the
water be consumed. This is a present remedy against all diseases, which come
of gross humours, against the pestilence and al poisons, it doth also quench
thirst.


Sickness. How make you Syrupus de Acetosa?


Health. TAke of the juice of Sorel clarifyed. li. iii. of Sugar clarified. li.
ii. make of these your Syrupe. This Syrupe is good against Choleric
personnes, and Tertian Agues, the burning of the stomach and the hart. it is a
synguler remedy in plages, and in Agues of corrupt^ humours.


Sickness. How make you Syrupus de Agresta labrusca, or vnrype Grapes?


Health. FIrst make this syrupe of vnrype Grapes, as you did the syrupe of
Pomecitron. This cannot be made, but only in Summer, because ye juice of the
vnrype Grape cannot be gotten, but at that time.


Sickness. How make you syrupe of Calamyntes, or de Calaminta?


Health TAke both of the Garden and wild Calamyntes, ana..ii^ of Louage,
yellow Carots, Squinantum, ana..v. of Raisons of Corans picked. li. ss. of Honey
li. ii. and so make it, you must take. li. v. of Water, to boyle your Raysons
in them, then this being cast forth, take as much again, and let it sees till
the half be consumed, afterward put your Honey unto it, and make your Syrupe
accordingly. This Syrupe is a present medecin against all diseases of the
Spleen, and chieflye if it b^e made harde, it doth comfort those which have
their inward and principal parts, Cold, or be short wynded, or have any
Cough, for it doth purge the stomach, breast, and Bowels marvelous well of
gross and corrupt humours.


Sickness. How make you Syrupe De menta?


Health. TAke of the juice of Quinces, and sower Pomgranets, cast upon these
iuices of dry Myntes. li. i.ss. of Rose leaves..ii let it stand a day and a
Night. then set it over a soft fire, with honey Sugar, until the half be
consumed: mingle with your syrupe the confection called Gallia Moschata to make
them pleasant. This syrupe is good for a cold stomach, it stops vomitynge,
and the disposition unto it: it takes away the hycket, and Flaxes, and cold or
wynd in the guts.


Sickness. How make you syrupe de Absinthio?


Health. TAke of Wormwood. li. ss. of red Roses, ana..ii, of
Spickenarde..iii. of good old wine and new, of the juice of Quinces. ana. li.
ii.ss, let it stand a day and a night in a vessel of stone, then sees it with
a soft fire, till the half be consumed, with. li. ii. of Honey, and then make
the syrupe. This is an excellent medecin to fortify the stomach, and to cause
good appetite, to make strong the bowels and Liver, and chieflye when the
diseases come of a cold cause, it helps also in hot diseases, if it be
tempered with cold things.


Sickness. How make you syrupe of Fumitarye?


Health. TAke of al the kinds of Mirobalans, ana..xx. of the flowers of
Borage, Buglosse, and Violets, of Wormwood, Doder. ana. i. of Liquorice,
Roses, ana,.ss. the flower of Garden Time, Polipodye. ana..vii* of Prunes, a
hundred, of Raysons of Corans piked, ana. l i.ss. of ye fruit Thamarind,
Casiafistula, ana..ii. let these boyle in li. x of water, till it come to.li.
iii. make your syrupe with the juice of Fumitary, sodden, and sinned with. li.
iii. of Sugar, seething them according to the art. In this syrupe making, you
must observe this order, in putting of your Symples* because some require more
time and some less, therefore first of all put in Polipodie, then Prunes*
Raysens* Liquorice, Wormwood, Roses, Doder Borage Flowers, afterward Uyolets,
Mirobalans, Flowers of harder Time, Casiafistula, Thamaryndes, which after some
Physicians judgement should not boyle, because they be very tender, how be it,
other learned men think it best to put them in the latter end of the
decoction, and so to suffer it to boyle once, that it may the better be myxed
with the other: and i^ a ma would contend, that soft and tender Symples do
leese their moystnes in boiling, then we must answear that they less not their
natural moystnes but the unnatural and accidental, and you must also observe
this order which follows, if you will make your syrupe well, when your
decoction is made, then clarify your Sugar with well water, the which being
sodden and clarifyed, put into it ye juice of Fumitary, when it comes ny to
the fashion of a Syrupe.

The same decoction must be sodden oftentimes, by little and little, till it
shall be well and perfectly sodden, then put in your fruit Thamarinde and
Casiafystula, and so make an end of your decoction. This syrupe opens, and
takes away all obstructions both of the Stomach, and of the Liver, and
fortefyeth all the members, it cures all the soars about the inward parts,
which come of Salt, and burnt matter, as the scabbe, leapreie, and french
Pockes.


Sickness. How make you sirupus de Fumoterrae simplex?


Health First take of the juice of Fumitarye, well fined. li. iiii. of Sugar
clarify^ i.ii.ss. make a syrupe this cleanses the Liver.


Sickness. How make you a syrupe of Liquorice?


Health. TAke of Lyquorice,.ii. of Maydenhayre..i. dry Hysope..ss. cast upon
these. li. i. of Water, and let it stand a Day and a Night, then sees it
till the half be consumed, this done, put these unto the decoction of Sugar,
Honey, Penidyes ana,.viii. of Rose water..vii. make of these a syrupe. This is
a present remedy against the Pleuresye, old coughs, to purge ye stomach and
lunges.


Sickness. How make you Syrupe of Hysope?


Health. TAke of dry Hysop, the root of Smalage, Fenell, Liquerice, ana..x. of
barley the husk taken of..ss. of the seed of Malowes, the Gum Tragantum, the
kirnels of Quinces, ana. ^iiii. of Maydenhaire..vi. of Iuiubes, Sebesten, ana.
xxx. of Raysons of Corans, picked..xii. of Figs, Dates, ana x of white
Penidies, l i.ii. make a Syrupe. To this sirupe making take. l i.viii. of water
and sees it until it be come to three, then press it, and let it boyle with
Pendies. until it come to the form of a syrupe and in making of it you ought
to keep this order for your Simples first take Iuiubes Sebest. Raisons Figs,
Dates, the root of Smalage, Fenell, then Barley, Malowseede, kirnels of
Quinces, the Gum Tragantum, Hysop, Maidenhaire. This syrupe cures diseases of
the stomacke-the cough, Pleurisie, shortness of wind, and all griefs of the
body.


Sickness. How make you Syrupus de Marubio?


Health FIrst take of green and young Horehounde..ii. dry Hysope,
Maydenhere, ana..vi. Liquoris., i of Calamynt, Anisseede, A good medecin for
old men to cleanse Fleume.
the roots of Smalage, and Fenel,.v. of Mallowes seed, Fenegreeke,
Flowerdeluce, ana..iii. of Lynseede, Kernels of Quinces, ana.ii. of Raisons or
Corans picked.v. Figs.xv. of Penedies, li. ii. of Honey. li ii. make of these
your syrupe, you must take to the making of this sirup. li. x. of water which
shall boyle till the half be consumed, because the honey and Penedies require much
seethynge. This syrupe cures old coughs, long diseases of the Breast Lunges,
shortness of the wynd, and chiefly in old men, if it come of Flegmatike humour,
gross, corrupt, and hard to be dissolved.


Sickness. How make you Syrupe de Epythimo?


Health. FIrst take of harder Time of the garden..xx. of the two first kynds of
Mirobalans, ana.xv. of Doder, Fumirerre, ana.x. of Time, There be v. kinds of
M^robalans, whose names be Citrine Chebuli, Indi. Bellerici, Emblici.
Buglose, Calaminte, the fourth and fyft kind of Mirobalans, of Liquorice,
Polipodie, Agarike, of Stycados. ana..vi. of Roses, Fenell, Anisseede,
ana,.ii.ss. of Raysons, of Coranns,.iiii. of Thamarinde,.ii*ss. of. Sugar. li.
iiii. and here you must put to the making of this. li. x. of water which must
be sodden to three. li. this must be kept: Now as concerning the putting in of
your Symples, first take Polipodie, Agarik, Raysons, Liquorice, Fenel,
Anisseede, Sticados, Fumiterre, the Roses, Doder, Buglosse, Myrobalans the
stones taken out, and the Flowers of ye harder Time, dissolve your Thamarinde
in one part of the decoction, and let your Sugar boyle with new wine, boiled to
the third part, when your decoction shall be as thick as Honey, yet sees it a
little more, To help a common known malady both in England France called the
pox.
and in the end put in your Thamarinde, and let them boyle once or twice, till
they come to the thickness of a Syrupe. This is approved medecin against the
French Pockes, Cankers, falling of the hair, great and deep wounds, Lepres
and al diseases of Melancholy and burnt Choler. This doth purge marvelous well,
if a man take thereof a good quantity, commonly we ought to take fro., iiii. to
vi..


Sickness. How make you sirupus de Eupatorio?


Health. TAke of the rotes of Smalage, Endyue. ana. ii, Liquorice, Squinantu,
Doder, Wormwood Roses. ana., vi. of Maydenhayre Carduus Benedictus the flower,
of Roots of Buglosse, Anisseede Fenel seed, Agrimony. ana.v. of Rubarbe,
Mastike. ana..iii. of Spicknarde. Asarabacca, Folium Indicum, sees the in. li.
viii. of water, until the third part be consumed, and make a Syrupe with. li.
iiii. of Sugar, and with a sufficient quatity of Smallage, and Endiue. This
sirupe is good in lunge Agues, chiefly to fortify the weakness of the Liver and
Stomach, it cures the dropsy, and evil Liking of the Body, old and almost
uncurable sores, Against dropsye.
delivers ye Stomach from wynd and coldness, it aswageth also the pain of ye
midref and swelling thereof.


Sickness. How make you syrupe of Sticados?


Health. TAke of ye flowers of Sticados..xxx. Time, Calamint, Organy, ana..x.
of Anisseede, Pellitary of Spain, ana,.vii. long Pepper..iii. Ginger.ii. of
Raysons, of Corans..iiii of Sugar, li. v. put also unto the these pouders
following, Cinnamon, Calamus Aromaticus, Saffron, Ginger black Pepper, long
Pepper, ana,.i ss. bind them in a thin cloth, hang them in ye syrupe. This hath
been proved against all cold diseases of the synewes, as the Paulsye, falling
evil, cramp, shaking, wrything of the neck on the one side, reumes from the
head to the breast, and doth comfort the stomach, and the inward parts of the
body.


Sickness. How make you Syrupus de Violis or Uyolets?


Health. TAke. li. v. of the infusion of Violets, of Sugar clarifyed li. iiii.
myngle them together, and sees them with a soft fire, and keep them. This is
a present medecin against hoate Agues and heate of the Liver and hart, the
pleurisye, dry coughs, the roughnes of the wynd pipe throat.


Sickness. How make you syrupe de Papauere simp. or Poppye?


Health. TAke of the heads of white and black Poppy, ana. lx.. sees them in
li iiii. of Rain water until it come to li. ss. and with.iiii. of white Sugar,
and Penidies make your syrupe. This syrupe causes a man to sleep, and
quenches the thyrst, it stops reumes running to the breast and doth
myttigate the payne, this is not so cold, as the compound Papauer


Sickness. How make you syrupus de Papauere Compositus?


Health. TAke of white and Black Popye. ana..l. of Maidenhayre..xv. of
Sugar..v. of Iuiube.xx. of Lattice seed..xl. of Malowes seed, of ye kernelles
of Quinces ana., vi, sees them in. li. iii of water, until the half be
consumed, then make your syrup with.viii. of Sugar and Penidies. This Compound
syrupe hath the same virtue, which the Simple hath, but it causes great cold,
and asswageth payne better. Mesue doth judge it to be good against a dry cough
and a consumption.


Sickness. How make you Syrupe of Mirtes compound?


Health TAke xx. Mirtes, of Saunders white and red, of Manna or sweet dew of
heaven, the Flowers of wild Pomgranets, Barberies, ana.xv. of Meddlers..l. of
Well water. li. viii. boyle them all to the half, then strain them, and put
into the straining, the juice of Pomgranets, Quinces, ana..vi. of Sugar
clarified. li. iii. mingle these, and sees them until they come to the fashion
of a syrupe.


Sickness. How make you Syrupe of Myrtes, simp.


Health. TAke of the juice of Myrtes, li. xii. sees them in a vessel of Glass
with a soft fire, until the third part be consumed, then strayn it, and let it
stad until it be clarifyed, then take li. viii. of that which is clarifyed, and
put unto it. li, v. of Honey, sees it, till it come to the thickness of a
syrupe..i. if it be Summer, set it in the Sun, until the Water be consumed.
This comfort the Stomach, and all the inward parts, and cures also an
old Cough.


Sickness. How make you syrupus Acetosus simplex?y


Health TAke of good white Sugar li. viii and put it into a Uessell of stone*
and cast upon it. li. iii. of clear Well water, sees it with coals, or else
with a little fire, without smoke, always scumming it, sees it, till it shall be
clear, and until the Water be half consumed. Then put unto it of Vinegar, of
white wine very strong, li. iii. sees it until it be enough This is a
present remedy against all hoate diseases, subtle or gross matter* it
provokes Uryne, quenches Choler, doth extenuate and make gross things soft,
and cleanses stinking matter in the stomach.


Sickness. How make you syrupus Acetosus compositus?


Health. TAke of Well water li. x. put unto it the roots of Fenel, Smalage,
Endiue, ana..iii. of Anisseede, Fenell seed, Smalage seed, ana. viii. of
Endiue seed..ss. sees them with a soft Fire, until they come to. li v. then
strain it, and put to the decoction. li. iii. of Sugar, let it be clarified as
before, mingle with it a sufficient quantitye of Vinegar, according to the
form of the syrupe before. This Sirupe purges gross humours, and fleume, it
scours and opens Opilations, and obstructions, which be about the Liver,
Spleen, and Reins.


Sickness. How make you syrupe de succo Endiuiae? or of Endiue simplex.


Health. TAke the juice of Endiue fined. li. viii. of Sugar clarifyed. li.
v.ss. make your syrupe, seething. This is a principal medecin to assuage the
heate of the Liver, the hart, and the other chief parts, and it cures the
Pleuresye.


Sickness. How make you syrupe of Endiue compositus.


Health. TAke the juice of Endiue and Fliworte. ana. li. iii. these Iuices
must be clarifyed, then take of Roses, Violets, Lattice, Borage, Egrimon,
ana..ss. of Maydenhayre, Barley the husk taken of, of the four great cold
seeds, ana..i. of Sugar as much as will suffice, make the syrupe, and powder it
with white and red Saunders, Barberyes, kernels of Quinces, lignum Aloes,
Cynamon, the rynd of Pomeritrone, ana..i. This asswageth the great heat of the
liver and hart, and of the other principal parts, it is very good for all hot
complexions, it loses and opens all opilacions, and obstructions, it doth
comfort weak members which be troubled with heate, it doth also digest
choleric, and sharp matter.


Sickness. How make you syrupe of Suckery, or Cichorii?


Health. TAke both of the garden and wild Suckery, and of both Endyues, ana
M.ii. of Gourdes, Lyuerwort, white Endiue, Lattice Fumiterre Lupulus, ana. M.
Barley the husk not taken of, Alcakengi, ana..iiii. of Lyquorice, Maydenheere,
Ceteracke, Tentworte, Dodder, ana..vi. the roots of Fenel, Smallage, and
sperage, ana..ii. boyle them in a sufficient quantity of Water and strain
them, and make your syrupe with good sugar, and for every pound of Sugar
take.iiii. of Reubarbe and. iiii. of Spicknard bound in a thin cloth which
shall be often time pressed, till your Syrupe be well sodden, the quantity that a
man shall take at one time is..iii. with the water wherein the four common cold
seeds were strained.


Sickness. How make you syrupe of Quinces?


Health TAke of the juice of tart Quinces, fined, and clarified, parts.x.
Sugar parts ii. make a syrupe according. This stops vomittyng, quenches
the thyrst, and doth comfort the stomach.


Sickness. How make you syrupe of Nenuphar, or water Lillies?


Health. FIrst take. li. ii. of the flowers of Nenuphar, and sees them once,
then press them, and put into the juice pressed, li. ii. of Sugar, and sees
it till it come to the form of a syrupe.


Sickness How make you syrupe of Barberyes.


Health FIrst take of the juice of Barberies fined li. iii. of Sugar clarifyed.
li. iii make a syrupe accordingly.


Sickness. How make you syrupe of tart Pomgranets?


Health FIrst take of the juice of Pomgranettes. li. ii.ss. of sugar
clarifyed. li. iii. make this syrupe as before. This syrupe is good against
hot Agues of choler and fleume.


Sickness. How make you syrupus de Bizantijs?


Health FIrst take of the juice of Endiue and Smalage, ana. li. ii. of Hops,
the garden or wyld Borage, and Buglosse, ana. li. i boyle them once, and then
strain and fine them, this done, take li. iiii. of the juice clarifyed, or
fine Sugar. li. iii. sees it with a gentle fire, until it be thick as
syrupe. This is very good against Agues, which come of obstructions and of
choler, of Fleume, and also the yelow Iaundice.


Sickness How make you syrupus de infusione Rosarum viridium, or green Roses?


Health. First take of the infusion of young Roses. li. v. of Sugar. li. iii.
mingle them, and make a syrupe. This is good for the thirst in burning Agues,
and to assuage the heate, it doth comfort the Stomach, Heart, and Liver,
being troubled with heate, it preserves the Body from all corrupcion, and
from the Pestilence, it resists poison.


Sickness. How make you syrupus de Rosis siccis? or dried Roses


Health. FIrst take you of the infusion of dry Roses, and sugar ana. li. ii.
mingle them and make a syrupe. This doth comfort the stomach, and bind
marvelous well.


Sickness How make you syrupus de succo rosarum?


Health. FIrst take the juice of Roses fined. li. i.ss. of Sugar clarifyed. li.
i.ss. make a syrupe accordingly.


Sickness How make you syrupus de Iuiubis?


Health TAke ^x. Iuiubes, of Uioletes, Malowes seed, ana..v. of
Maidenheyre..i. the kernels of Quinces seed, of white Poppy, Mallowes, and
Lattice..i. the gum Tragantum, ana..iii. of Liquorice, Barley* the husk
taken of, ana..viii. sees them in li. iiii. of Well water or else Rain water,
until the half be consumed, then strain it, and put unto the juice strained.
li. iii. of Sugar clarified, make your syrupe accordingly. This is very good
against horsenes of the voice, and the cough, the pleuresy and exulcerations of
the bladder.


Sickness. How make you syrupe of Maydenheire comp.


Health FIrst take of Maydenheire.M.ii. of Tentworte, Ceteracke, ana. M.i. of
Iuiubes, Liquorice, ana,.ii, make a decoction, putting unto it. li. iii. of
Sugar, make your syrupe, then take of Maydenhayre. li. iiii. of Iuiubes. li.
iii. liquorice.iii of sugar. li vi. and this syrupe is judged to be the better.
This purges gross humours, loses and opens obstructions* scours the
raynes, and cleanses the breast of gross humours.


Sickness. How make you syrupe of Maydenhayre symp.


Health FIrst take of the decoction of young Maydenhayre. li. iii. of Sugar.
li. i make your syrupe.


Sickness How make you an other syrupe of the same?


Health. FIrst take of Liquorice scraped. ii. of Maydenhayre..v. cast upon
them, li. iiii. or Well Water, and so let them stand a day and a night, then
boyle them until the half be consumed, and strain them, and put unto the
decoction.viii. of Sugar clarifyed, Penedyes and Maydenhayre, sees it till it
come to the form of a Syrupe.


Sickness. How make you syrupe of Mugworte?


Health. TAke of Mugwort. M.ii. of Calamint, Folium indicum, Sauerie, Organy,
Time, Quikebeme, Sticados, ana. M.i. of Camomill, Melilot, Mergeram, Roses,
ana..i. of Unguis odoratus Calamus Aromaticus ana..iii of Spicknarde..i.
Germander, Motherworte Geloflowers, Sothernwodde, ana. M.ss Gladien, Hor hound,
Madder leaves, Siler Montan, ana. Azarabacca, Squinantum, Anisseede, ana..vi.
Fenel, Smalage, ana..vi. boyle them (...) a sufficient quantity of water
according to the art, then put unto them as much Honey as will suffice, and make
your syrupe. This is a present remedy to provoke the natural Terms in women
being stopped.


Sickness How make you syrupus de Limonibus?


Health. TAke of the juice of Limondes. li. i.ss. of Sugar clarifyed. li. iii.
make your syrup. This is very good to consume gross and corrupt humours, and
Worms, it asswageth heate in Agues. and purges raw humours.


Sickness. How make you Syrupus de Cetrach?


Health. TAke of Cetrach, Hartestonge, Endyue, Liuerwort, Wormewoode, Sichory,
ana. M.ss. of Dodder, Linseede. i. the four common great seeds, flowers of
Borage, Buglosse, Langdebiefe, ana. M.i. Maydenhayre, roots of Fenel, Persely,
Kneeholme or Butchers Broom, ana. M.i.ss. make your syrupe, and cast on these
pouders, Foliu indicum, Spicknarde, the gum Lacca, Casiafistula, ana.ii.
bind these in a thin cloth, and boyle them in the syrupe and reserve it.
This doth comfort the Liver, scours the reins, and delivers the spleen
from al obstructions.


Sickness. Haw make you the syrupe of Buglosse?


Health. TAke of the infusion of the flowers of Buglosse, or Langedebiefe. li.
iii. or Sugar li. ii. make a syrupe.


Sickness. How make you an other of the same.


Heatlh. FIrst take of the juice of Buglosse, A present syrupe for the
stomach.
fined. li. iiii. of Sugar. li. iii. make your syrupe. This syrupe doth comfort
the stomach, and makes a ma merry, it is also ministered against sounyng and
fainting of the heart, and frensey.


Sickness. How make you Sapo Moschatus?


Health. TAke white Uenice Soap. li. iiii. cut it into small pieces, and ye
powder of Cloves, Iuncus, Odoratus, Spicknard, white Sauders, ana, i.ss the
powder of Beniamen and fine Masticke, Sto^ax Calamite, A very sweet^ Bauic to
cleanse the skin.
ana.i. ^ine Musk, G. xxx. Amber grease. G. xxiiii. Civet. G. xvi. put these
in a mortar with some Rose Water, or else sweet compounded water: you may put in
Oil of Bee^, or else a little oil of Almonds or Ienuper: and so make this
sweet baule and wash therewith.


Sickness. Howe make you Theriaca Galeni?


Health TAke of Trochisci, Squillini or Scillini,.iii. of long Pepper..ii.
Trochisci Theriaci. Diacorallion, ana..i. of the wood of Balm..iii. ye juice
of black Poppy, Agarik, wild Rapes seed, Cinamom, ye juice of Balm, ana,.ii.
of Reubarbe, Saffro, Spicknard, Yereos, Roses, Calamus, Cost, Squinantum
Ginger, Cassia lignea, Storax, Calamite, Mirre, Turpentyne washed, Nicholas
prepost^us doth put in white Copeta.
white Frankincense, Calamint, Diten, Sticados, wild Time, roots of
Sinkfolly, Persely, white Pepper, ana.ii. Folium Indicum, gum, Arabyke,
Serapin. Terra Sigillata, Hipocistis Spicknard, Gladium, Germander, Gentian,
wild Fenell, the seed of Balm, Smalage, Amomum, Fenel, wild Carowayes,
Siler montan, Crosses, Anisseede, S. Ihons herb, wild Aspaltum, which is a
thing compounded and made of Iewes Pitch, Castor Opopanax, Galbanum, Mummy,
Centauri, Aristologia longa, wyld yellow Carettes, ana..i, of Honey, as much as
will suffyce, This is judged to be the chief and principal of all medecines
because it brings quietness, This is a Triacle of an incomparable virtue
against poison, pestilence and venom.
and doth cure the greatest diseases and griefs in every part of the body, as
the falling sickness, and insensibilitye, which is a disease, when a man can
neither move, feel, nor understand, it heals conuultions, the head ach,
payne of the stomach, Megrim, Horsenes of the voice, and straytnes of the
breast, shortness of wind, diseases of the wind pipe, spittyng of Blood,
yelow Iaundice, Dropsye, and the diseases of the Liver, Iliaca passio, wounds
exulcerated in the Bowels, Frensinesse, the stone, it provokes the Terms
stopped, and delivers Women of dead Children, it cures Lepreies, mesels,
and old diseases: It is a present remedy against cold, and al poisons, stinging
of venomous beasts, and here you must understand, that the quantity ought to
be changed in ministering of it, according to the quanty, and quality of every
disease, this doth refresh also and comfort the senses, hart, brain, Liver,
stomach, and doth keep all the body, safe, and pure from all corruption.


Sickness. How make you Trifera?


Health. TAke the juice of black Poppy..ii. of Cinamom, Cloves, Galynga,
Spicknarde, Set wall, Ginger, Cost, Storax Calamita, Calamus Aromaticus,
Cypress, Flowerdelice, Worm seed, Gladien, Mandrake, Spicknarde, Roses, Pepper,
Anisseede, Smallage seed, Perselye, yellow Carotes, Hennebane, Comine,
Basell, of Honey, as mucthe as will suffyce. This is a preset medicine against
al inward diseases of Women, and against the payne of the Stomach, taken with
decoction of Anisseede and Mastike: It cures also al diseases of the Matrice,
which come of cold, taken with wine, wherein Muggeworte was sodden, and if you
make a round thing of sylke, or wolle, to seen after the fashion of a finger,
and anoint it with ye Oil of a Wesel, or such other Oil, put it into ye
Matrice, the it will move ye flowers of women which do not conceive. It is also a
singular remedy for children, which speak in their sleep, or can not sleap,
if it be taken with wine, wherein Mandrake or Elder hath been sodden: it will
also help them, if it be taken with Women's Milk, according to the quantity of
the little grain Cicer.


Sickness. How make you Diatrion Sandalon?


Health. FIrst take of white, red, and yellow Saunders, of sugar. ana,.ii.
some Poticartes, take Fleawort for sugar, which is though to be better. And
Gallen doth make composition, after this sort. Take of Reubarbe, Spodie,
Liquorice, Purselin seed, ana..i.ss. of Amile, Gum Arabyke, Tragantum, of
the four common great seeds, white Endiue seed, ana. i.ss. of Camphere.i. so
put unto these four times as many Roses, as of al the other, and of the syrupe
of Roses as much as will suffice. This doth cure the payne of the Liver and
stomach, and those which be in a Consumption, or have the yellow Iaundice.


Sickness. How make you Trochisci Diarhodon Abbatis?


Health. TAke of Roses, lignum Aloes..ii. of Mastyke.i.ss. Wormwood, Cinamom,
Spicknard, Cassia lignea, Squinantum, ana..i. make your balls with old wine,
and with the decoction, of the common roots as Smallage, Percely, Louage.
These Balls be very good against old Agues, and those which come of divers
causes, against the quotidian, al other Agues, by the which the beauty and form
is corrupt, and this is put into great confections saith Nicholas,


Sickness How make you Trochisci de violis?


Health TAke of the yonge flowers of white Violets..v. of Amilum..iii. the
seed of white Poppy.iii. of Reubarbe..v. the seed of Planteyne..i. of
Balm..i. of Rose water, as much as will suffice, make it after the form of the
balls before, this is not used, but when it is mingled with other compositions.


Sickness. How make you Trochisci de Squilla?


Health. FIrst take one whole Squilla, and bake it well in paste and cast away
the outward rind, beat the substance of Squilla in a Mortar, and put unto it
as much of the fine flower of Orobus, temper it with wine and Honey, and if you
have not Orobus at hand, then take as much bread, well and finely broken:
make your little balls, and dry them in the Sun. Some Poticaryes, take in
this confection one part of Squilla, and two parts of Barley flower.


Sickness. Haw make you Trochisci theriaci?


Health. FIrst take a young Adder, of the length of a span, with red iyes, a
shaking tongue, and horns like the grain Sesamum, cut away the head and
tail, about three fyngers, that which is in the midst must be dressed, the
skin taken of, and the inward parts cast away, wash it oft in sweet water, and
sees it so lunge, till the flesh fall from the back bone, and temper the
flesh and the juice of it together, put unto it as much of Orobus, or of
Bread, make little balls of the weight of..ss. dry them in the shadow.
These be not taken, but when they be used with other great compositions, except
it be in curing the Leapreie.


Sickness How make you Trochisci Diacorallion


Health. TAke of red Coral, Cinamom, Myrrh, Amomum, Popy ana..iiii of
Squinantum, Saffron, ana. ii. of Calamus Aromaticus, the wood of Balm,
Casiafistula, Folium indicum, Mastike, wild Time, Ualerian, Azarabacca, herb
Robert, ana..i. and these being first made in powder, form your little balls
with wine. These are a present remedy to staunch the bloody flux, they do
also fortefy the stomach, and cause good digestion.


Sickness How make you Trochisci de Camphor?


Health TAke of Rose leaves.iiii. of Spodie. ii of yellow Saunders,.ii.ss. of
Saffron..ii. of Liquoryce..ii of lignum Aloes, Cardamom, Amiliu, Camphyre,
ana..i. of Sugar, of Manna, or sweet dew, ana..ii. make your balls with ye
sappy part of Fleawort, and Rose water. These be very good in hot Agues, and
to quench the thyrstines and burning of red Choler, or Blood: it
asswageth the heate of the Stomach, Liver, of all the inward parts, it
cures the yellow Iaundice and those which are in a consumptio.


Sickness How make you Trochisci de Alcachengi?


Health TAke of the Beries of Alchachengi, three of the four greater cold
seeds, ana..iii, ss. of Bolearmoniacke, Gum Arabyke, white frankynsence,
Dragons Blood, white poppye bitter Almondes, Liquorice, Tragantum, Amilum, the
kernelles of Pyneaples, ana..vi. of Smalage seed, Amber, Henbane, the juice of
black Poppye, ana..ii, make your Balls with the sappye Juice of the Beryes
of Alchachengi* These be (...) present medecin against Exculcerations in
the Reins, and the bladder, and the payne in pissing.


Sickness. How make you Trochisci de Myrrha


Health. TAke Mirrh.ii. of Lupus.v. ye Leaves of Rue, wild Mint Penerial,
Comine, Mader, Pellitary of Spain, Serapin, Opopanar, ana..ii. make balls of
the weight of..ii. of which let the patient take..i. on the day time, in the
water wherein Juniper seed was sodden. These be so strong a medecin, to purge
the terms in women, that they will cause the child to discende: if they use
them oft, the terms shall be moved very well: also in boxing the Crookyng, and
bowing of the ham, or in cutting the veyn, which lies by the ankle, you may
also use boxing about the this.


Sickness. How make you Trochisci de Musco?


Health. TAke of the Wood of Aloes, v of Amber ii. of Musk..i. the gum of
Tragantum, with Rose water as much as will suffice to temper them together, so
make your balls. These do comfort the stomach, heart, and liver, and be
used with great medecines.


Sickness How make you Trochisci de Rubarbaro?


Health. TAke of Reubarbe..x. the juice of Egremony..iiii. of Roses..iii. of
Spicknard, Anisseede. Madder, Smalage seed, worm wood, Azarabacca. ana,.i.
bitter Almondes..iiii. make your balls of the wayght of..ss. These do assuage
the payne of the Liver, and do deliver it from obstructions, they cure inward
impostumes, old griefs, the dropsy, and yellow Iaundice, and resstore good
colour, to drink them is a present remedy for those which be of evil liking
or in consumption. Many Physicians do use them in hoate Agues, and when the
body begins to fall into consumption.


Sickness. How make you Trochisci de Spodio?


Health. TAke the red Roses..xii. of Spody, x. of Sorel seed..vi. of Purslayne
seed, of Coriander seed, infused in vinegar and afterward dried the rynd of
the Frankincense tree, ana. ii. Amile made in powder, the flowers of wyld
Pomgranets, Barberies ana..ii. gum Arabyke made in powder..i. make these with
the juice of unripe grapes. These Baules taken with the juice or seeds of
Sorel be very good against Agues of Choler, which have a continual flux,
they assuage the burning of ye stomach and liver, and quench also the thirst
and dryness.


Sickness. How make you Trochisci de Absynthio?


Health. TAke of Roses, Wormwood, Anysseede, ana * ii. of Rewbarbe, the juice
of Egrimony, Azarabacca, Smalage, bitter almondes, Spicknarde, Masticke, Folium
indicum, ana.i. make your balls with the juice of Endiue. These be good in
long Agues, and deliver the stomach and liver from obstructions, and
strengthen the principal parts and do cause good appetite, if they be
drunken in long Agues they profyt very much.


Sickness. How make you Trochisci de Eupatorio


Health. TAke of Manna or sweet dew, the juice of Egrimonie, ana. i, of Roses
i.ss. of Spicknard,.iii. of Reubarbe Azarabacca, Anisseede, ana.ii of
Spodie..iii.ss. make your balls with the juice of Egrimonye. These be
necessary against long Agues, and the cold and shaking of them, against
obstructions of the Liver and spleen, and inward impostumes, the yellow
Iaundice, and the dropsye, if they be taken at the beginning.


Sickness. How make you Trochisci de terra sigillata?


Health. TAke of Dragons blood, gum Arabike made in powder, Civet, Rose seed
and Leaves, Amylum made in powder, Spody, Acatia, Hipoquistis, the stone which
doth stanch blood, the flowers of the wild Pomgarnet, Bolearmonye, Terra
sigillata, Hempseede, Cokel, Perles, Amber, ana..ii. Tragantum, black Poppy.
ana i.ss. Purslein seed made in powder. Frankincense, Oak apple, Saffron,
ana..ii. make your balls with the juice of Plantayne. These be excellent
balls to stanch spittyng of blood, and chiefly if they be taken with the
water of Plantayne: if the forehead be therewyth anointed, they stop the
secrete terms. and to conclude, they stop the Flux, if so be that the place
be therewith anointed.


Sickness How make you Trochisci de Ambre?


Health. First take of Amber. aure, vi. of Hearts horne made in powder, gum
Arabyke Coral in powder, Tragantum, Acatia, Hypoquistis, the flowers of wild
Pomgarnets, Mastick the gum of Ladanum washed, black Poppy made in Powder, ana,
aure. ss. make these up with the slymy juice of Fleaworte^


Sickness. How make you Tela Galteri^?


Health. TAke of common sallet Oil. l i.i. of Ceruse..iiii. of Litarge..iii.
Myrrh.ss. make these like a ceare cloth, which is made of wax. This doth
heal and dry up sores.


Sickness. How make you Vnguentum Apostolicum.


Health. TAke of Turpentine, white Wax and Rose..xiiii. Opopanax, the powder
of Brass, ana.iii Amoniacum..xii. Aristolochia Rotunda, white Frankinsece,
ana..vi. Myrrh. Galbanum, ana..iiii. Opopanax, Uerdegres. Bdellium..vi. of
Litarge..ix, infuse your Bdellium in good Vinegar, and so dissolve it, and
sees it in Summer with. l i.ii. of oil, in Winter in three. This cures
easily old Fistulaes, swelling, and hard kernelles, it eats away dead
flesh, and cleanses the Wound.


Sickness. How make you Vnguentum Rosarum?


Health. TAke of young swines grease, as much as you will, and wash it in
hoate water.ix. times, and as oft in cold, then stamp it with a great quantity
of young Roses, and let it stand by the space of seven days, afterward sees
them with a soft fire, and strain them, then take again as many Roses, and
stamp them with the grease and so let them stand by the space of.vii. days,
then cast upon them one part of the juice of Roses, and of the oil of
Almods.vi. parts, sees all together with a soft fire unto the juice be
consumed, and if you will put unto this Vnguentum Rosarum a little quantity of
Opium, then it will prove a very excellent medicine to cool heate, and to
anoint the back* with all,


Sickness* How make you Vnguentum basilicum maius.


Health. TAke of white wax, Rosen, Talow of a Cow, dry Pitch, the Greek
pitch, the fat of the belly of the Seal, fine Frankincense, Myrrh, ana..vi.
of liquid or moist pitch..iii. of all the other ana..ii.ss. This is a present
ointment against wounds inflamed and wounds in the sinews, it doth cleanse them
and bring new flesh again. The learned Surgens, think this ointment ought
not to be laid to hoate sores or wounds, because it is of his nature also
hoate, and so shall cause greater inflamacions, wherefore use it rather in
wounds without all inflamacions of heate.


Sickness. Howe make you Vnguentum aureum?


Health. FIrst take of yelow wax..vi. good Oil. l i.ii.ss. Turpentine,, ii.
Rosen dried, Pitch, ana..i.ss. fine Frakensence, Mastike. ana..i. Saffron..i.
make your ointment. This hath ben proved for to heal bruses and strokes.


Sickness. How make you Vnguentum basilicum minus*


Health. FIrst take of Rosen, Pitch, Wax and Oil as much as will suffice,
and make your ointment.


Sickness. How make you Vnguentum Populeon?


Health. TAke buds of Poplar tree. l i.i.ss. black Popie, Mandrake leaves,
the b^ddes of Bramble, Henbane, Dwale, Stoncrope, Lattice, Howseleke. Bur.
Uyolettes, Maydenhayre, ana.iii of young fresh swines grease l.ii. dry all your
herbs and boyle them with the grease, and so make your ointment accordingly.
This is good to anoint the temples, pulses, the palms of the hands and the
sooles of the feet in hoate Agues.


Sickness. How make you Vnguentum Martiaton?


Health. FIrst take of white wax. l.ii. of oil. l.viii of Rosemary, of Bay
leaves, ana..viii. of Rue..viii. of Quickebene..vii. of Sauine, Watermints,
Sage, Basell, wild time, Calamint, Mugwort, Enula Campana, Gelouflowers,
Brankursine, goose grease, Paritorie, Pimpirnell, Egremony* Wormwood,
Primrose, Borage, young Buds of Elder, Orpin, Millefolie, Houslyke,
Germaunder, Centaury, Strawbery leaves, Synckfoly, herb Iudaice ana..iiii. the
root of Holy oak, Comin, Myrtell, ana..iii. of Fenegreeke..i.ss. of fresh
butter..i..ii. of Nettels, Uiolettes, red popy, of the third kind of Myntes,
of Balm, Docks Maydenhayre, Walethistle or Carduus Benedictus, Woodbine,
Ualerian, herb Robert, Sorrel de Bois, Hearts tongue, Ox eye, Camphor,
Storax, Dearesuet, ana..ss. Mastyke, and fat of a Bear, and of a whelp,
ana..i. of Frankincense..ss. oil of Spyke..ii. let all your herbs be gotten
in May, in one or two Days together, if it may be, and from.iii. of the clock
in the morning vntyl.xii. the stamp all your herbs together and infuse them
in sweet wine.vii. days on the eight day sees them over a soft fire, and
when your wine doth begin to consume, then put in your Oil and boyle them all
together until your herbs begin to consume, then strain them, and caste away
ye herbs, and set the juice strained on the fire again, and when it boils,
put in Storax, and soon after the Butter and the Grease, the oil of Spike,
Mastyke, Frankincense, Wax, and when the Wax is melted, then take it from the
fire, sturryng it always till it shall be thycke, and then reserve it. This is a
synguler ointment for a cold headache, the payne of the breast and stomach,
and against hardness of the breast, the spleen and the Liver, it cures, Iliaco
passio, if the place be anointed with the Ointment hoate, it heals the
Paulsie, the ache of the Hyppe, and the Gout in the feet, the frensye,
swelsynges hardened kirnelles, the Cramp, the conuulsions, and all other aches
of cold.


Sickness. How make you Vnguentum aregon?


Health. TAke Rosemary. Mergeram, the root of wake Robin, or Kucko prycke,
wyld Time, Rue, wild Cucumer roots, ana..iiii.ss. of Bay leaves, Sage, Sauin,
ana..iii. of Horsemints, Laureola.ix. of Brionie roots.iii. of Neppe, wild
Cucumer leaves, ana, l.ss. of Mastike Frakensence, ana..viii. of Pelletarie of
Spain, Euphorbe, Ginger, Pepper, ana..i. oil of Wesel..ss. Olei Petroli, the
Grease of a Bear* oil of Bay, ana.iii. of Butter..iiii. of Salet Oil* l.v.
of Wax, l.i. iii. gather your herbs in May, and use all other things, as in
the ointment before. ^ stamp them well and lay them in oil in a Mortar by the
space of.vii. days, and on the eight day set it on the fire vn^yli the herbs
go down to the bottom, afterward strain them and then set the juice strained
on the fiec again, and when it begins to boyle, put in your oil of Bay,
Butter, the Bears grease and wax, the which being melted, put in Mastike,
Frankincense, at the last* Ginger, Pepper, Pelletarie of Spain, Euphorbe, and
when they be well sodden, then take all of and reserve it. This cures cold
aches anointed after this fashion, take an Eggeshell and warm the ointment in
it at ye fire, then anoint the place, when the place is anointed, lay also the
shell unto wherein the ointment was warmed. It helps the Cramp and
conuulsions, and when a man is so styffe for cold that he can not move his
Neck: it is good against ache ^and payne in the Hyppe and ioynctes, and
against a quarten Ague, if so be the backebone be therewyth anointed before the
fit come.


Sickness. Haw make you Vnguentum Dialthaea?


Health. FIrst take of Holioke roots. l.ii. of Linseede, Fenegreeke, ana l.i.
of Squilla l.ss. of Oil. l.iiii. of Wax. l.i. of Turpentine, To cure aches in
the ioynctes, coming of cold.
the gum of Ivy, Galbanum, ana..ii. of Colophonie. Rosen ana. l.ss. wash
the roots well, and beat your Fenegreeke, Lineseede^, and Squilla altogether,
afterward put them all into. l.vii. of water, by the space of three days. and
on the fourth day, boyle them till they be thycke: then put them softly into a
bag and strain them, putting unto them a little hoate Water, to cause the
juice to strain the better, after this take. l.ii. of that juice, and boyle it
with oil, until the juice be consumed: Then put in the wax and when it is
melted, put in Turpentine, Galbanum, Gum of Ivy, and at last Powder of
Rosen, and dry Pitch, when it is thycke, take it from the fire, and make your
ointment. This asswageth pain of the stomach of cold, and the Pleurisie, if
you anointe the place thererewith, it doth also bring heate, mollifies and
causes moystnes.


Sickness. Howe make you Vnguentum Agrippae?


Health. TAke of Brionie roots l.ii. the roots of wild Cucumer and
Squilla..vi. of Flowerdelice..iiii. of Fern roots..ii. of Walwort,
Seathistell ana..ii. wash the roots twice or thrice beat them in a mortar of
Marbell, then put them into. l i.iiii. of oil Olive, and Masticke. l i.ii. by
the space of seven days, to increase the better their heate, savour and
efficacy, boyle them on the eight day, until the roots be soft, then
strain them, An ointment against the Dropsy and swelling.
and when they be strained, set them on the fire again, and when it begins
to boyle, take..xv. of white Wax, and when it is melted, take it from the
fire, and make an ointement of it, when it is cold. This is a present remedy
against the Dropsy, and all swellynges, in what part so ever they be: it
asswageth pain in the sinews, provokes urine, causes a man to be laxative,
and cures pain in the rains of the back.


Sickness. How make you Vnguentum diapompholigos?


Health. TAke of oil of Roses..x. of white Wax..v. of the juice of
Nyghteshade beries..viii. of white Lead..iiii. of commmon Lead made in powder,
of Tuthie a kind of Lead, ana..i. of Frankincense,.i. make those simples in
powder, which be fit to be made in powder, sees the juice of Nyghtshade, with
the Oil of Roses, until the Juice be consumed, then myngle the wax with the
pouders, Erysipelas to a red inflammation in ye body, with a Fever or horror.
and beat them in a mortar, and then make your ointment. This dries
Erysipelas and old stinkyng soars in the Legs and Thighs.


Sickness. How make you Vnguentum de Enula campana?


Health. TAke of Enula campana roots sodden in Vinegar, and afterward well
dried. Anoyntment against ext^eame itch, scabs, and Pox.
l.i. of swines grease, oil Olive, ana..iii. of new wax..i. of sal^ made in
powder..ss of quick Silver, Turpentine washed, ana..ii. make this ointment
accordingly.


Sickness. How make you Vnguentum contra Scabiem?


Health. TAke of Swynes grease..v* oil of Bay, Quick Silver sleked, of Wax
washed, Another for the same.
of Frankincense made in powder, ana..ii. of Salt..vii. of the juice of
Planteyn and Fumiterre, asmutch as you judge sufficient. Make it after this
fashion, set the iuices with the wax, oil of Bay, and Swines grease on the
fire, and let them boyle until all be melted, then put to Salt,
Frankincense, Mastike, and boyle them all until the juice be consumed. Then
take them from the fire, and put unto them ye Quicksiluer ^eked as you did in
the other Ointment before and so use it. This is a very strong Ointment and
therefore you must take dilygente heed, least that you touch any principal
Member with the Oyntement, because of your quick Silver, you must also myngle
a great quantity of Mastike with it.


Sickness. How make you Vnguentum pro pueris scabiosis?


Health. FIrst take of Terebintyne washed..iij. of Butter washed..ij. of
salt.i. of the Juice of Pomecitrons, the yolks of.iiij. Eggs, of Oil of
Roses..i. mingle all these together, and make an ointment.


Sickness. How make you Vnguentum desiecatiuum Rubrum?


Health. TAke the stone called lapis Calaminaris, of terra Sigillata ana..iiij.
Litharge of Gold, white lead. an..iiij. of Campher..i. of Wax..v. oil of
Roses, oil of Uyolets. ana..vj. make the Ointment accordingly. This will dry
moist humours.


Sickness. How make you Vnguentum contra Lumbricos?


Health. TAke of bitter Almondes, and the Juice of Peach leaves, and
Motherworte, ana..ss. of Roses, Lupine flowers, the powder of Hearts horne.
ana..i. of Aloes succotrine..ij. some put unto these..ij. of Ox Galls. Take a
little quantity of Uynegar, and as much Honey as will suffyce, this applied to
the Belly, will kill Worms.


Sickness. How make you Vnguentum Resumptiuum?


Health. TAke of Swynes grease..iiij. of Hens grease, Goose grease, Ducks
grease. ana.ij. of Hysop..ss. oil of Uyolets, Camomil and Dill ana..ii. of
fresh Butter. l.i. of white Wax..vi. of Tragagatum, of the slimy sap of ye
kirnels of Quinces, Lintseede, and Holyoke, of Gum Arabike, ana..ss. myngle
them together and make an Oyntmentment.


Sickness. How make you Vnguentum Album?


Health. TAke of Oil Olyue. l.ii. of fine white Lead. l.i white Wax..vi.
some Poticaries put to these..ii. of Camphyer, make the Ointment according.


Sickness. How make you Vnguentum Matritum?


Health. FIrst take of Litharge of Gold..iii. of Salet Oil. l.ss. of
Uyneger..iii. make the Oyntmen in a Leaden Mortar accordingly: This cools,
and dries, and kills Itch.


Sickness How make you Vnguentum Aegyptiacum?


Health, FIrst take of the Flowers of Brass, called Uerdigreace..v. of
Honey..xiiii. of strong Uyneger..vii. sees them until they be thycke, and
make your Ointment. This is a synguler good Ointment against old Wounds and
Fystulaes, which stand in need of clensing. It doth also ear away dead
Flesh, and purges also from all corruption.


Sickness. How make you Vnguentum Citrinum?


Health. TAke of Borar which is a kind of Salt Peter..ii. of Camphor..i. of
white Coral..ss. of Sea glass burnt..i. of the Gum Tragagantum, Amilu,
Merbull, Crystal, of fine Frankincense white, of Salt peter, ana..iii. of
white Marbell..ii. of Serpentarie, white Lead..vi. make it after this fashion:
stamp your Tragagantum, and the Marbull stones in a Mortar with an Iron
Pestell, stamp the other alone in the same Mortar, and searse them through a
Syne with a fine cloth, with. l. of fresh Swynes grease, and Goats grease, and
of Hens grease..i. These greases must be put into a Skyllet, or some other
such like Uessell, the which Uessell ought to hang over the Fire, in a
Cauderne full of water, let the water in the Caulderne so boyle that the grease
may be melted, by the heate of the water in the Caulderne. When ye grease is
melted, strain it through a fine clothe into a Dyshe, put unto it all ye
pouders, except Camphyre and Borax, stirring it continually, until all go
together on a lump. This done, myngle with it two Pomecitrons or more, stirring
it all ways, when it begins to boyle, put in Camphyre and Borax, it must be
continually stirred till it be cold, after that it be taken from the fire the
which done, make the ointment. And here you must note that one pound of
powder, will require. l.viij. of grease.


Sickness. How make you Vnguentum Neapolitanum?


Health. FIrst take of Oil of Camomill, Dyll, Spicknarde and Lillies, ana..ij.
of Swynes grease and the fat of Ueale. These Ointmets be good for the butt^s of
Naples, Soars, Aches. c.
ana. l.i. of Euphorbe..v. of Frankincense..x. Oil of Bay..i.ss grease of
Uyper..ii.ss. of quick Frogs of earth Worms washed in Wine..iij.ss. Juice of
Walworte, and Enula Campana roots. ana..ij. of Squmantum, Stichados, and of
Motherwort, ana. M.ii. of sweet Wine. l.ii. boyle them al together until the
Wine be consumed, then strain them put unto the straining, Litharge of gold.
l.i. of Terebintyne washed..ii. make this Ointment or searecloth with white
Wax, putting unto it, when it is almost sodden. j.ss. Stacte, or of the saftest
tendrest part of Myrrh, the take it from the fire stir it till it be luke
warm, after this put unto it..iiij. of Quycksiluer sleked with your spettell,
styrryng it till the Quycksyluer be run together on a lump with other
Symples, and so make your Ointment.


Sickness. How make you Another. c?


Health. TAke of Oil of Spyke..i. Olei de Tartaro, Oil of Bay, Olei
Petrolei, and Swynes grease,.iiij. of Frankincense..ss. of Euphorbe..i.ss the
ointment of Holioke, and of Agrippa, ana..j. of Quycksyluer..iiij. myngle all
together and make your Ointment.


Sickness. How make you Vnguentum Galeni?


Health. TAke of white Wax. l.i. oil of Roses. A good cold^ vnguentum*
l.iij. let these be melted all together, and washed well and oft with cold
water, until they be white, it were the better that they be washed with a
little Uyneger.


Sickness. How make you Vnguentum ad Combustionem ignis, to heal burning with
fire?


Health. IT is an Ointment which I have oftentimes proved to help many, whose
virtue excells in healing the flesh, An ointment for burning.
when it is combust or burnt with Fire, and it must be thus made. Take of the
Rynde or tender bark of Elder, the Pyth or Cork of the same Elder. ana..ij,
boyle it in three pyntes of water until half be consumed, then strain it and
put in Oil of Nuts..iiij. and sees it softly in a close vessel until your
water be wasted, then put in new clean clarifyed Wax..ij. myngle them
together, and so is your Ointment made.


Sickness. How make you Sugar Roset?


Health. TAke fine Sugar and dissolve it with Rose water, and sees it well,
then cast it on a Marbell stone, till it be cold and hard, afterward cut it in
great pieces. Thus you may also make Sugar Violet, Buglosse.


Sickness. I Have ben troubled with a bloody Flyxe many a long day, Here ^
describes the flixe with the effects.
with painful turments in my Guts, and running out of yellow Choler,
excoriation. or as I think the scrapyng of my Guts, with pourynge out of
blood, my body is clean wasted, my flesh consumes, I cannot tell what to do,
I take no rest in my bed, I have a continual dryness, this pain hath brought
unto my mind, an infinite number of cares, miserable afflictions of the soul:
I have ben with many, I have sought every where for help, but I have found
none. I pray thee, dear Health, bestow upon me some worthy medicine which may
recover me, and heal me of this sore, great disease.


Health. This assure your self, I have helped many, and hindered none that
have used it, for I my self have oftentimes proved it, even so do you. Take
the Juice of Planteyn, of Kno^grasse, A Clister to stop yt bloody flixe.
of Sheapperds purse, of Nightshade, of Ribwort, ye water of Roses. an., ii the
whytes of.iij. Eggs, the seed of Rise, ye flowers of Pomgranets, ye rynde of
Pomgranets, the wild white Rose, finely beaten in powder and searsed, ana..ii.
Acatia..i. clarified Ox tallow*.ii. Goats milk pynte ss. sees al these
together, then put in Terra Sigillata fine in powder..i.ss put these all into
your Clister bladder, and receive it luke or more than blood warm in at your
fundament, and lye down upon your bed and rest, having the lower parts of
your belly warm anointed with Oil of Rue: and afterward take Wormwood,
Sothernewood, Rose leaves, Sauery, Puleole, Rosemarie, ana. M. the beries of
Myrtels, the powder of the bark of Pomgranets, ana..ii. wheat Bran.M.ii.
sees all these in rain water, and white wine, ana. l i.iiii. until p^t be
consumed, then with warm clothes be washed, Bullein^ hath used this oftentimes
to his friends.
and after apply all these things to your Raynes of your back and belly,
then drink Red wine, wherein tart plumbs have been sodden, Planten water,
and unripe Mulberies: and this is mine advice, Sickness, to make the whole, for
with this I have helped many withal.


Sickness. How make you an Epithema to stop the flixe.


Health. I Shall teach you a very good wholesome Epithema, which hath helped many
a hundred make it and prove it as occasion shall move thee. Take a Lynnen bag a
foot square, put therein Red Rose leaves, red Briar leaves, Myrtyll beries
with the leaves, Polei of like quantity to fill this bag, according to
greatness of the body so make this Bag, but commonly.xii. inches is used,
let this sees in Red wine, the apply it to the belly very warm, and make it
warm again, yea.x. or* xii. times, and keep it to the belly: and sometime
there appears knots like lyt^le Figs in the nether parts, through the
abundance of humours, in such cases: with a Sponge wash that place often
times with the decoction of the Epithema aforesaid, and dry Mulberies, and
Briar bearies which be scant ripe, make them into powder and burn Hogs
hair, and the ashes thereof put into this powder, and.viii. grains of
Masticke in powder, cast or rub your sore places therewyth, Epithema to stop
Fluxes.
four times a day, and hereafter follows a most excellent Epithema for that
same purpose. Take Gum Arabike, Frankincense, Mastike, Aloes flaua or yellow,
ana..ii. Dragons or mans blood, the stone called Hematist. ana..i ss. the
burnt powder of the clove of a Crab or any shell fish..ss. with two hard
roasted Eggs, this gum dissolved with a little Red wine tempered with the
rest of these pouders and Eggs, make them warm and in a lynnen lunge bag
apply it to the raynes, and so make it warm between two platters upon the
Coals, and give the sick Theriaca. i. mingled with Red wine. iiii. warm to
drink at that present time, and this will stop any extreme flux: if you will
make a glister to help the Colyke or wind in the Guts, A Clister for the
Collycke.
Take Hysop, Centauri, ana..i* and one good-white Colaquintida, sees it in a
close Uessell in two quarts of Water until half be wasted, then strain it,
and take a pynte or more of this decoction, This did doctor Mansfield use to
his* pa^ients at Norwiche, many ^ymes.
and put thereunto oil of Rue..i. and warm let it be ministered, if this be
somewhat weak to a very strong body, add to this Honey..i. Hie^a simplex*.i.
and common Salt,.i.ss.


Sickness* How make you Collyria which be used for sore eyes?


Sickness. How make you Collyria which be used for sore eyes?


Health? THey be made of two kinds, Collyrium, Sieff.
the one liquid or moist called Collyrium, the other dry, made in form of a
Sugar loaf, called Sief, but in wayght not..ss. and of them speaks Gale,
lib. 4. medic. localium cap. 4. and Paulus Aegineta in libro septimo. Cap. 16.
They be made of iuices liquors, seeds, fruicts, parts of Plants, Metals c.
But I will show thee how to make some for the comfort of eyes: and first when
the eyes begin to be sore, hoate, red, dymme. c. Take the white of an Egg well
beaten, and oftentimes drawn through a strayner with the like quantitye of
clean Rose water, and Planten water mingled together, and drop part of this
into your eyes. Another, take Tuthia or Lapis Tuti prepared, Very good
Col^ries. for sore eyes.
the stone called Calaminaris, ana..iiii, the white of an Egg, Rose water,
woman's Milk, the decoction of the Kernels of Quinces, ana..iii. mingled
together, you may put in fine clear yellow Aloes..i. if you will. This
Collyrium will dry up watery and gummy matter in the eyes.

Another to quycken the sight. Take the stone Tuthia or Tuti prepared,
Amoniacum, Bras burned or adust, lapis Calaminaris, ana. xii. penny wayght,
Myrrh, the stone called Hematist, Opium, ana. vi. penny weight, The best
learned of the Greekes and Latines use this for sore eyes.
yellow Aloes called Hepatyca, Bulls gaul, Galbanum, gum Sagapena, ana. iiii.
penny wayght, Salt Armonyake, the juice of Chelidon, ana. iiii. penny wayght, and
thereunto add Rosewater, and beat it in your Mortar, then roll them in small
sharpe pieces, and dry them. keep them until you have need: and when
occasion shall serve, dissolve one of these pieces in Rose water, the white of
an Egg or woman's Milk, and put it into your eye. This is most excellent to
make clean the eyes, sharpe the syghte, and make it beautiful.

Another for the same. Take Ceruse washed in Rose water.viii. sundry times in
several waters..i. white Gum, Sarcocol of Persia..ii. Amylu, Traganth. ana.,
i. Opium. G, iiii. all lightly beaten or ground on a Stone put thereunto a
little of the Mussege or thick decoction of Fenigreeke, and so fashion them
and make them dry, and keep them clean, A Linament for Pleurisie.
you may put some of this into your waters for the eyes.


Sickness. How make you a Liniment to put away pain in the Pleurisie.


Health. TAke oil of Camomill, the fat of a Capon, ana.i. of fresh Butter
newly made..iii. and a little piece of new wax, so make your Liniment to
anoint the stomach.


Sickness. How make you a Frontale or a Foreheadcloth to quench heate in the
head, in the time of a Fever, and to cause sleep


Health. AFter the mind of Galen prepare a double cloth of Linen three
Fyngers broad, A fronta^e for hedache.
and in length from one Ear* to the other Ear, put into this clothe as
follows. Take Red Roses or their Leaves, Lettyce leaves* Poppy leaves or the
seeds, and quilt it, and make this Frontal warm between two broad Plates or
Platters, with Rosewater Uynegar* and then bind it to the Forehead. An other
for the same. Take water Lyllies, Uyolets, Mellilot, Lattice flowers, white
Poppy heads, ana. M. q. bruise all together, For sleep.
put them into your clothe. If the head be cold, have no warmenes, the make
your Frontale thus. Take Sage, Rosemary, Camomill, Betony, Bryonie, Melilote,
Basil, Savoury, or such like Herbs bruised, and put into your clothe: And in
hot pains of the head, pour water of Roses and Uynegar together, upon a hot
Tyle stone, and receive the Uapour or Smoke into your Mouth. Uapour to smell
upon.
In cold causes pour Aqua vitae, Sage water upon a burning Tyle or stone,
receive ye smoke. Commonly Galen in.12. of his Therapeutice, did anoint sick
Folks heads with Oxyrhodinum, which is made of Oil of Roses..i. Uynegar..ij.
mingled shaken in a Uyal of glass, cold, anoint ye Forehead therewith.


Sickness. How prepare you a Gargarizme or washing Gurgle, for the Mouth and
Throat?


Health. A gargarizme to gurgull in the mouth and throat.
YOu shall do thus. Take the stilled waters of Roses, Planteyn, Uynegar, Honey,
Lattice, Strabury, Nightshade, water Lilly, of Burnet, ana..i. Diamoron..vi.
the Juice of Raspes, of Barberyes. ana..vj.ss. syrupe of Poppy..ss. of
Strauberies.iii of Uynegar..ss. myngle them well, and this is a Gargarizme, to
skowre the throat in all hot dyseases, and in the time of Angina. And here
follows an other for the same. Take Planten, Burnet, Strabury leaves,
Knotgrasse, ana. M.i. Sorrel, Sage, ana. M. red Roses. M.i ss. long Pepper,
Pellitory, ana..ss..ij. boiled in a Pottell of Water, till the half or more be
consumed, then strain it, and put to it Honey of Roses..i.ss. Oximell
Scilliticum..i. myngle them together, then it is perfectly made. An other very
good, which hath done much good, as Doctor Leonard Fuchsius reports. Take
Hiera Picra simplex..ss. Oximell Scilliticum..ij. the stylled waters of Hysop,
Betony, and Organie..i.ss. myngle them, and make your Gargarizme. A gargarizme
must be given warm to draw humours from ye head.
Mustard, Uynegar, Pepper and Honey mingled together, do make a good ready
Gargarizme. Provided that you minister your Gargarizmes warm, to draw humours:
But when you stop the, use cold things, taken cold in your mouth, as Vinegar,
foutayne water. c.


Sickness. How make you Nasalia, or to stop blood in the Nose?


Health. WHhen the blood doth abundantly flow out of yt Nose, it is good to
open the Liver vein in ye right arm, Nasalia.
to take the aboudance away, sometime small strings or veins will break in such
cases moderat diate and cold things, are good to be used, and this powder to
be put into the Nose. Take the Kaies or woly knots growing upon Sallowes,
commonly called Palms, being dry, Bole Armonie fine, To stop blood in the
nose.
that will cleave to the tongue, and Dragons blood, ana..i. beaten into Powder,
and finely sifted, and the fine hair of a Hares belly. i.ss. cut or mynsed
most short like powder, put these together, and stuff them into the bloody
nostrell* or else dissolve them with the white of an Egg, and so draw them into
the Nose: The profit of neesing.
Often times the head is stopped, and the stomach so disquieted, that
sternutacions or neesyngs will help. And also the said sternutacions will
help Women to quycke deliverance, in the time of their travel. Then do thus.
Take Margerum, Nigella, Cloves, white Pepper, Ginger, ana..ii. Castor, Condisi,
ana..i. make them in fine powder, and put them into ye nose. Or thus. Take
Nutmegs* Ireos roots, ana..i. Elleborus Albus, called neesyng powder
root..i. white Pepper, Pellitorie. ss. Calamus..i..i. beat them in powder, and
keep it to use, as a mornyngs, in child births. c.


Sickness. Reumes, weakness of sight, dullness of hearing, slowness of speech,
over much sleep, sometime trouble me with foulness in my mouth what help
then to cleanse, or draw forth fleume?


Health. MAke a pretty lynnen bag of fine cloth, put therein Mustard Seed,
Apophlegm^tismi, to put in the mo^th to draw forth filth.
Hysoppe, Ginger, Pepper, Pelletorie, Stauesagre, Mastike, Organ, ana..i.ss.
beaten together, put part of this into this bag, or else into your mouth,
without the bag, or else tempered with the juice of Beats and Honey, and so
make your mansill or biting thing. It will draw fleume, cleanse the eyes,
comfort memory, and quench the salt fleume, that make the face high coloured,
use it a mornyngs often times.


Sickness. How make you Pessis to mollify, to vnbynde, and to restrain, to be
put into the secret place of the urine of women?


Health. TRuly the making of them which do mollify is in this. Take Oesipi*
which is an oil sodden out of the wolle that is clypped or shorn from the
Necks or flanks of sheep, Oesypi is an foul Oil made of wool but very good
for Pessaries and other medicines.
Hearts tallow or the marth called Mary, Goose grease, Capons or Hens grease
ana..i ss, Flax or lynt seed, Fenegrekee in pouders, ana..ii. Melilot..i.
Masticke. i.ss. the yolks of Eggs, Oil of Roses, and the Oil of
Flowerdeluce, ana..i.ss. fresh Butter..iii. put to a piece of wax, melt them
together, and prepare woll rolled together in the form of a finger or such
like, dip it in this liquor, A mollifying Pessary.
when it is styffe let it be used, I mean into the secret place of Conception,
retaynyng it in the place.iiii. or.v. hours with a thread in the end thereof,
How to use (...) Suppositor.
it may be made with a Sponge. To provoke terms menstrual. Take Mugwort
Sothernewood* Dyttan, Calamus odoratus, ana., ii. the Seed of Nigella..i, ss.
Bay beryes..ss. dry Rue..i. Sauen..ii. Mirth, Styrax liquid, ana..i.ss.
Sagapine, Ladanu, ana.. beat in a Mortar with Honey, roll it in the Pessary,
and apply it accordingly.

Sometime immoderate flux or terms passes so much and so painfully, Pessaris
to restrain.
that in such cases, Pessaries restrictiue be very wholesome, as example. Take
the powder of Hearts horne, Olibanum, ana..ii. Dragons blood, Balaustia, ana..i
ss. Damask Roses., ii Acatia, or juice of sower Plumbs dried, Hypocistidis,
Mastike, ana..i. Bole armeny..ii. Bistort, Comfory, ana..i.ss. bruise and
stamp them well in a Mortar, put in the juice of Planten, and Oil of Roses,
as much as will suffice to roll in your woll and make your Pessarie.


Sickness. Against the foul stink of a corrupt air, a fylthy house, and
coldness of the brain, what smoke, fume, or savour is then good?


Health. How to receive fume or vapor.
NOt only for a cold brain, but also against raw humours, and vomyting of
Blood. c. If the Patient have a few coals between the Legs, stoupyng
downward, with clothes cast loose about the naked body, as a mantle, Gown c.
receiving the smoke, at the mouth, through some Trunk or hollow thing. Take
the wood of Aloes..ii, Gallia muschata..i. Sage, Margaru, Rosemary, Maces Bay
leaves, ana. i stamped in a mortar into fine powder, put in fine Musk. G.
viii. and cast part of this or all this, by little and little on the coals, or
thus as follows.

Take fine Frankincense, Cinnamon, Cloves, Maces, the rynde of a Pom Citron.
ana..ss. the wood of Aloes, Mirth, Mastike. Trochisces of Gallia Muschata..ii.
beat all in a mortar, and put in some Styrax liquid, and your mortar partly
warm, beat altogether and make your sweet Fume, putting in if you will Musk,
Amber greece. ana. G. iiii. Here is a good one. Take Ladanum..i. Frankincense,
Mastike* ana..i. Styrax Calamita..ii. Cloves, Cinamom, Nutmegs, ana..i. wood
of Aloes, Myrrh..ss. dead coals of Salow, Cyprus. Fur, or Genuper,.ii. beat
them all in a Mortar somewhat warm, put in a little Uenice Turpentyne, and
clean Rosewater, and work all together with your Pestil, and make your
parfume, and this shall suffyce: but when Women do suddenly fall sick with
swellynge of the Matrix called ye Mother then it is perilous to use sweet
parfumes, Perfumes for ye mother.
but then use to parfume with Galbanum Asa foetida, Castor, Feathers, the paring
of Horshoues. c.


Sickness. How make you Sacculum or Scutum, the shilde or twilte for the
breast?


Health. THey be very comfortable for the breast and stomach, to stop
vomits, and be good for the Hart, Scutum.
Spleen, and Belly, and thus it is made. Take flowers of Rosemary, Lavender,
Camomill, Betonie, Roses, ana. M.ss. or Sage, Margarum, Mellilote, Myntes, ana.
M.ss* or Leaves of Scene* ii.ss. Stichados. iii. Cloves, Nutmegs, ana..ii. and
Maces..iii. stamped in a Mortar and twylted in a sylke or fine lynnen cloth,
made in the form of a Shield or a square Trecher. Another. Take flowers of
Buglosse, Roses, Balm..iij. Cloves, Maces, wood of Aloes, Cardamon,.ij.
Saffron..j. Galanga. Spycknarde, the Bone of Hearts heart, an..j.ss. Musk,
Ambergreece. ana. G. x. beat in a Mortar, and with soft Cotton quilted and
applied to the breast. You may put in warm herbs, as Sage, Wormwood, Mynts,
Horehound, Sothernwood. c. put in a Quilt, or Stomycher with the pouders of
Calamus, Cloves, and Come, quilted made very warm with Wine or Aqua vitae
between two Platters, and so applied to a weak feeble Stomach: This is an
Emplaster, if oil be put in,
and thus I end of Sacculum, or Quyltes.


Sickness. How is a Cerote made?


Health. THey be made of Wax, Oil and Pouders in a Quylt, in form of a Shoe
soole, or an Ox tongue, A Cerote and howe to make it,
and are thus made. Take Cinnamon, Cloves, ana..i. Galingal, Maces. ana..ss.
sweet Calamus..i.ss. wood of Aloes, Gallia Moschata. ana..i. Flowers of
Pomgranettes, Mastike, Ladanum, ana..i. oils of Mastike, Roses, Myntes,
ana..i. with Wax..i. Terebintyne, beat your dry things in powder and put your
Wax to them, and so melt them, and so to keep your Cerote. You may make ye
same in Leather or Silk. You may for the Spleen put in Mellilot, Lintseede,
Fenegreeke, Capper barks, Calamus, Nutmegs, Wax, Terebintine, according to
Art, putting in Oil.


Sickness. How make you Insessus?


Health. FOr lack of a Bathe, these are good for the Belly, raynes Take
Filipendula, Saxifrage, Mallowes, Holihoke, Insessus.
water Crosses, ana. M.i. the seeds of Flax, Smalage, Fenegreek, sees all
together in sufficient Water to the third part, and so use it for the stone.
Another. Take Mugworte, Sage, Betony, Calamint, Organie, Peneroyall, Camomill,
Melilote, saynct Iohns grass, Sothernwood, ana. M.ss. the Roots of Yreos and
Smalage ana. i. sees your roots soft your herbs: this is good for the
Matrix, Belly, for the Colic, swelling wind, Timpany, cold. c. Another
against a bloody flixe. Take Planteyn, Knotgrasse, the Ryndes of Pomgranets,
Shepards purse, Horsetayle like a water sprinkle, A goodly remedy for the
flixe.
the flowers of Pomgranets, ana..iiij. sees all in rain water. Uynegar, or
Red wine to the third part, apply it to the lower parts of the Belly.


Sickness. How make you Fomentum?


Health, THere be two Foments one moist, the other, dry as Hippocrates saith lib
ij. victu. acut. and now of a moist one. Take Mallowes the Flowers, Fomentes
moist dry.
or tops of Dyll, Camomill, Melilote, ana. M.ss. the seeds of Lyne, and
Fenegreeke, ana..ss. sodden in. l.ij. of Fountain water to the half, so you
may draw it through a Searse or a Strayner, and with a Sponge warm, you may
wash the Belly, or any other grieved place.


Sickness. How make you Dropax to cleanse the head, and pull of scaules, and
filthy Glewe that Children are infected withal?


Health. A Dropax for a scald head.
DRopax will do many things to the body, it may be made to humect, and to dry,
to cleanse, to cool, and warm, but to your question to make a Dropax for an
unclean head, called the scaule, or glewe, or else crust. Take Pix or Pitch,
Wax, Colophonie. ana..iij. Bitumen..ss. Brimstone..iij. Pepper, Pellitory.
ana..ij. Stauesagre. Where the he^rt is unquiet, prosperous labour doth not go
foreward.
.j.ss. Euphorbium, Elleborus the white, ana..ss. beat your dried things into
powder, and melt them together, spread this upon a Leather warm laid on the
foul head, being first shaven for.xxiiij. hours and so quickly rent it of,
and thus I make an end of these kinds of Compoudes. And when I have more
quietness, with convenient leiser, I will say some thing of Compounded waters:
But it shall make no great matter if I give place to them, whom no man can
mend, that have written most plentifully, learnedly and compendiously, of the
natures of Precious waters, both Simple Compound: yet shall I remember some
good waters shortly, because time, place so moves me in that case.


Sickness. MIne Eyes begin to be dim, my sight fails me: I would learn to
make a water, to keep them from utter blyndnesse. For when the sight is
decayed and gone, the Joys of this World are past, and nothing is left, but
misery heaviness of mind, continual musing.


Health. A goodly water for sore eyes.
A Marvelous water to conserve the Sight, I shall teach thee, which I have
proved my self, to have helped many one: and the great learned Man in waters,
called Euonimus, hath written it, who in Distillations was equal to any, that
ever practised the same, and it is thus made.

Three rich waters, Silver, Gold, and Balm.
Take the leaves of Rue, Mynte, red Roses, Sage, Maidenhayre (other leave out
Mint, and Sage, and for them put red Fenel, Ueruyne, Euphrage called
Eyebryght, Betony, Honey succle of the Moutayne, and Endyue) of every one six
handfuls, let them be put into white Wine, for the space of.xxiiij. hours*
then let them be distilled in a Limbecke: the water that shall first run out,
is compared unto Silver, ye second unto Gold, the third unto Balm, and this
must be close kept in a glass: it is a water for all Dyseases of the Eyes,
that be curable, out of Aegidius, and Lullius, it is described Amongst the
waters, composed for diverse inward dyseases by V'lstadius.

An other water for the eyes, about the beginning of May* gather ^landine,
Ueruen, Few, Fenell, beat them severally, and take..iii. of (...) juice of
every one of them, then mix them, put to a little of the green brauches of
Euphrage, called, Iye bright, or Roses..iii of Sugar Candy..iiii. of the best
Tucia, and as much of Dragons blood, when all th^se are beaten, thou shalt
mix them together, and distille them in a Limbeck of glass the liquor that
runs forth, thou shalt let it stand two or three days in a receiver, and
then use it: it is of great virtue, for the eyes that be da^ke* ^
dim, red, or have the web in the eye. The water of the Vine, together with
Honey sublymated by the fire, cures the blyndnesse of the eyes sp^cyally. The
Monks in Mesuen that is the water of the vine (said they) which in every
Spring time, when the Vines are cut, for certain days space without any
distillacion is pressed forth: this puts away pryckynges, heate of the eyes,
and clarifyeth the sight, coming by a hot cause: if a Man put into both
corners of the eye, one drop of this water, it sharpens the sight, and
cures any disease of the eyes, within.v. days saith Euonimus. c. Read after
in the trymming waters, amongst them that be ordained to Dying of the hair.
Here is also a water for the eyes in Summer, to preserve the sight, described
by Ioannes Mainardus, in his Epistelles, vi.iiii. three parts of Roses, the
herbs of Fenell, and Few, of either one part, let them be well myx together,
and after three days, let a water be distilled, other in only vapor of sethyng
water, or in the Son, or in Balneo Mariae, as they call it, so that a
handful of the foresayed herbs, The manner of distil^ing the Water fore^es
be put into the receiving vessel, that the drops may fall upon them, and
the mouth of the receiver and the nose of the upper vessel, must be diligently
joined together, and closed, that the vapours may not get out, but be kept very
close from air.

And hereafter follows an other water, of an excellent Virtue. Fill a styll
full of the leaves of Agrimonye, Ueruen, Euphrage, Fenell, Rue, red Mintes, and
Louage, cut them. spryncle upon them a little white wine, and clear wine, and
distille them in a clay stillitorie, Goodly waters for the eyes, which
excells in virtue.
this liquor represses the swelling of the eye lyddes, of a cold cause, it
dries up the blear eyednesse, it stops the flowing of tears, it clears
the sight, it breaks the blemishes, spots, corns, or pearls: if thou will
have it stronger to break spots or pearls, put unto it Gallitricum, and
Chickens weed, with red flowers. You may get a Water out of Fenell also for
the same causes, for a liquor gathered out of the roots and leaves of Fenell,
sod in Water, with a Basin laid upon the water, while it yet sees, and kept
in a glass, and one drop put into the corner of the eye every day, morning and
evening, for the foresayed causes, this is proved to be very good. To break the
spot or Pearl, myxte with the foresaid waters, Myrrh, and Aloes a poud and
put a drop of the liquore strained, in either corner of the eye, early and
late.

A Water distilled of the flowers of white Thorne, and Willow, puts away
pryckyngs, heates, or rednes of the eyes, The water of white thorne and Willow
for redness of eyes, coming of heate.
it stops tears coming of a hot cause, and breaks the spots, or
Pearls of the same cause. A Water of the Leaves (flowers) of Euphrage,
stops Tears, coming of a cold cause, and makes slender the Eye lyddes,
that swell of the same cause, Water of Euphrage called Eyebright, for swelling
in the eyes, coming of cold. Euphrage or Ophthalmica so named, because it is a
herb for Eyes Gordonius water for Eyes. Gordonius water for a Fistula.
and restores the same sight, that hath any impediment. Euonimus doth say,
that Euphrage doth not heate, but is temperate, or else doth cool moderately in
the first degree, and dries in the second.

An excellent water for the debility of the sight, described by Gordonius, take
Selandyne, Fenell, Rue, water of the Mountain, Euphrage, Ueruen, red Rose with
their Buds. ana. l.ss. Cloves, long Pepper. ana..ij. when they are bruised
together, dystill them in a Limbecke of Glass, with a slow fire, and put of
it every day in the Eyes.

An other of the same mans, for a Fistula, which he is certain will heal it:
two pound of good white Wine, dystilled in the same vessel, Aqua vitae is
dystilled in: the waters of Rosemary Sage. an l.v. Sugar l.ij. when they are
distilled, put again to them..j. of Sage, and as much of Rosemary, when they
are steeped together viij. days, thou shalt strain it, and use it. A canker
in what part of the body so ever it be, the herb called Canker, which is also
called Doves foot, the Flowers of Quinces, the Flowers of Cerifolium, Andreas
Fornerius water for a Canker.
the Flowers, or Leaves of the Brier, called Idea, which is like a sweet white
Rose, a few white Roses, Honey, and white Wine, and the Alum which is called
Alum Glass, let all these be dystilled together.

A good Water dystilled of a Molewarpe, for all kind of Goutes, or Dropsies,
noli me tangere, Scalles of the head, Saucy face, and the Wolf. If you will
have a Water without dystilling, quickly to wash your Legs, or Feet, to
make your said water to smell well. Set a vessel of running or conduit water
on ye Fire, sees it well, and put into it the flowers of Lauendula, or
Lavender, and much rather of that, which is commonly called Spike, both
green, and dry Baize, Basell, Sage, Fenel. c. and so wash at night: put
clean running or Conduicte water, white Wine into a vessel well stopped, and
set it in the Sun, putting in Laueder, Spike, and Cloves, that they may make
sweet the said Water, and Wine with their smell, but yet if the Lavender be
green and moyste, it will turn the Wine almost into Vinegar which if it be
dry, it doth not so. The Liquor shall be made the more smelling, if the
Flowers be dried in the Sun, in a Glass closed, afterward white Wine to be
put into it. How to make sweet water without stilling good for to wash the
feet, or for Barbers.
If so be it, a man desire to have a sweet water forthwith, by and by, let him
put a drop of Oil of Spyke unto a good deal of pure Well, or Conduit water,
and chafe it together, in a glass with a narrow mouth, although this be made
without dystillation, the same notwithstanding, being right dystilled in the
Sun, specially if certain other things be myxt with it as Musk, Ambre,
Civet, Caphura, or meaner things, as Styrax, and Stacte, Myrhe, or any other
Spices, chiefly Cloves, or else things of less estimation, as Roses, the
Barks, Flowers, or Leaves of Orynges, Lymons, Bay leaves, common sweet
Herbs, Rosemary, Margerum, Bazill. c. it shall be made much the sweeter. But
if you will have a very pleasant water, take..ss. of good Musk beaten in two.
l. of Rose water, put in the belly of a Glass Still, and distill it, by little
and little, then put it in a Glass well stopped, with Ambergrice..i. it is a
Water marvelous sweet, and convenient for fine Persons, A pleasant sweet
water
that their clothes may be sprynkled there with: put..ss. of good Saffron, in.
l.ij. of Rosewater (for the space of one day) and dystyll it, this water is
wholesome to be mixed with Medicines: also for smell, and garnishing, put..ss. of
Cloves beaten, in a pound and a half of Rose water.24. hours, and distyll
it, dystill Campher..i. with a pound of Rose water, and use it in medicines,
for Noble persons. After the same manner is Rose water, made with Saunders, and
other spices (sweet smelling) what so ever a man will, some distill al this in
pure Water, in steed of Rose water, three leaved herb, an herb very sweet
of savour, which they dystill for Perfumes and to make divers other pretty sweet
Savours. The Monks of Mesuen, make a water of sweet savour, where with the
head, heart, and stomach are revived.

. Four handful of the flowers of Lauendula, Roses white, and red, The Monks
water for correction of the flesh, better than holy water, and more costly.
of either two handful, Rosemary, Cloves, new and fresh Ciperus, of every
one a handful, Mint, Sage. Time, Bayleaues, or Peneroyal of every one half a
handful..iiij. of Cloves, Galingal, Nucis Mosch, Calamus Aromaticus, Ginger,
Cinnamon, of Flowerdeluce, of every one..ss. six pounds of white Wine
(asmutch as shall suffyce) when they are braid and beaten in a Mortar, let them
be put into a Glass, well closed, for the space of eight days, afterward use
them, as occasion shall serve: it is excellent to wash the hands, if you myxe
a little of it, with a great deal of pure water. A man may use it also
dystilled, and put in..i. of Musk. Epiphanius Empericus, writes an other of
the same mans, delectable, with a marvelous sweetness of savour: Civet,
Musk, of either..i. let it be tied in a fine lynnen cloth, and let it be set
to soak in. l.ij. of Rosewater, a few days in the Sun.

An other of the same Epiphanius, of a very sweet savour: Bazill, Mynt,
Marierum, Flowerdeluce, Hysop, Sauery, Sage, Melissa called Balm, Lavender,
Rosemary, of every one half a handful, Cloves, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, the
Pomecitron, of yellow colour, three or four, let them be beaten, and set three
days in Rose water, then let them be dystilled with a slow fire: when the
destillacion is finished, put to..i. of Musk, and set i^ in the Sun: you may
add Ambergrice..ss.

An other of ye same Epiphanius, of most excellent savour. R. Three pouds of
Rosewater, Cloves, Cinnamon. Saunders. ana..vj. two handful of the Flowers of
Lauende^..vj. of Assa dulcis, Malmsey, Aqua vitae..ij. let it stand a month to
styll in the Sun, well closed in a Glass, sweet water for linen.
or upon the top of a Furneyce: then dystil it in Baln^o Mariae, and ad. i.ss.
of Musk to the dystillation, then let it stand ten days in the Sun, or
above the Furneyce, and so use it. It is a marvelous pleasant Liquor in
savour, a water of a wondrous sweetness, for the perfuming the sheets of a
Bed, whereby the whole place, shall have a most pleasant sent: put into a
little Uyall of Glass.xviij. or.xx. Grains of Musk, Civet and a little of
Ambergrice, after filled full of Rosewater, set it over the fire* and when it is
hoate, take it away, then let it stand to cool, well closed, after you have
done let it stand two days, you may use it from thence foreward, it is as good
as though it were distilled: when thou will perfume thy Napkins, or other
linen, put it in a vessel with a wide mouth, spread the clothes upon it
boiling, and that they may drink up the vapor and breath of it.

Agalam, or Agalugun, is the wood of Aloes.
An other manner of sweet water, is called the water of the casting glass: put
into some little vessel of Silver, a little Rosewater made with Musk, and a
little Civet, and Cloves, Agalam, Styrax calamita, when they are all pound
against a fire, mix them, and perfume any clothes with the vapour or smoke
thereof, it is a marvelous sweet savour, if thou wilt keep close the vessel
diligently, and when thou think good, put more Rose water unto it, that it
may be renewed.

An other. Thou shalt put into four pounds of Rosewater, Assadulcis, somewhat
gross beaten, Styrax, and Cloves, Camphor, Agalam, of every sort. i. Musk,
Civet, of either of them G. xx. put these together in a glass shut with a
Parchement, pryckt through with ten or twelve small hoales, and let the vessel
boyle four hours in a kettle, full of clean water, as though it were in
Balneo Mariae, after when it is cold, strain it through a fine linen cloth,
and keep it in a Glass, in the which Grains.xii. of Musk shall be put, which
being moysted, and steeped with Water, thou shalt stop the Glass, and set it
in the Sun.viii. days, so shalt thou have a wonderful well smelling water,
a sweet water, and a secrete, whereof one part myxte with ten parts of pure
Water, makes the whole most sweet: Grains.xx. or there about of Musk, as
the smell thereof pleases the more, or less, Nutmegs, Cloves, Galingall,
Spicknard, Grains of Paradise, Mace, Cinamom, of every ana..i. all these
beaten in a Mortar, let them be put into a Glass, fit to distille in, with
Rose Water l.i.ss. powered unto it, let it stand so, for the space of four or
five Days, afterward put to it thryse asmutch of Rose Water, and destille all
this in a Limbecke, set in a kettle full of water sethyng, as in Balnco
Mariae. thou shalt keep the water gathered together, diligently stopped for
the same purpose aforesaid, that the former serves for.

An other excellent water, two pound of the water, of the flowers of Citri,
There be.ii. kinds of this Assa, one is called Assa foe. ^ida, or Devils
dung, ye other is called Assa dulcis, which comm^th from Syria, and is also
named Syr^naicus liquor, or the juice of Lasar pitium.
one pound of the water of red Roses, of Mirtes. l.ss. of Musk Roses a good
quantity, and likewise of the flowers, of Cloves, ana..ss. of Assa dulcis..iii.
well beaten ana..i. of Stirax Calamita, and red Styrax, ana..ss. all these
stamped, and mixte with water, thou shalt distille them in a Glasen Limbecke,
the head and the receiver dilligently closed with clay* with a soft fire, or in
a Balneo Mariae, or in a kettle of sethyng water: a Water of most sweet
savour, with the which Oil is stilled also, the last water being mixte, with a
hundred times asmutch of pure Water, doth savour with the sweetness thereof, so
is this following of greater Virtue, health, and sweetness,

Take a pound of Myrrh chosen, pure, new and fat, beaten into small pieces,
half a pound of the juice of Roses, when they are mingled together in a
Limbecke, let them be distilled in ashes: where first thou shalt seperate the
water, with a slow fire: then make the Fire bigger, A water incomp^table* for
the singular goodness of the most excellent virtue thereof.
and seperate the Oil: and at last deuyde the water from the Oil. It makes
the Face bright, it closes wounds effectually, as well old as new, the oil
is most precious, and doth the same things that the water doth, but much
sooner, as for example: it doth that in a hour that the water is about in.
xxiiii. one uncle of this water distilled, mixed with a pottell of pure water, it
doth the same.

A goodly Rose water made with Musk, which is required, and used also in other
composicions, put. G. xii. or more of Musk, and. G xvii. of Amber grice.


Sickness. THese waters be very pleasant and profitable, Of sleeping waters.
but waters to make a man sleep were comfortable, I pray you say somewhat of
them.


Health. IF you will cause one to sleep, then do thus as follows: Take..ii.
of Henbane..i. of the roots of Mandragora. To cause rest and sleep.
.vi. of Popie, Lettyce. Orpin, Housleke, ana..ii. the water Lilly one
handful, when they are beaten, let them be put in two pound of water of Popie,
with..i.ss. of the seed of Darnel for the space of two days, and let them be
stilled, and this is perfect.

An other causing sleep Take the seed of Darnel. l.i. of the seed of
Henbane. li, ii. of the seeds of Purslen..iii of the seed, or root of
Mandrag, as much of Alkakengi, when they axe beaten, power to them. l.i. of
the juice of Beans, as much of the roots, or leaves of Henbane. l.ss. of the
juice of the leaves of black Popye, minister..i. of this water, when it is
distilled, it is vehement, and of great virtue. A goodly water for the stone,
it helps the palsy and falling sickness.


A water for the stone, made by Aegidius, because it breaks the Stone, R. the
seed of Pimpernell, Parsley, Smalage. Cokowprycke, Mustardseede, Burs,
Masticke, of every one like much, when they are well beat let them be myxte
with the blood of a he Goat, and a little Vinegar poured to it, let them stand
a few days in a Uessell well closed and then at the last ^et them be well
stilled it is good for them that be troubled with the stone, what manner of
stone so ever it be, red, white, sharpe or plain, if so be it the stone be
confirmed, and gathered to some straight, let the pacyent drink of this water
everyday, for so shall it be broken and brought into Sand: if so be scabbed
heads be washed once a day with this water, they shall be made hoale, and new
hair shall spring, and the Scabs shall be cured within nyne days (otherwise
any kind of Scabs washed therewyth are made whole within three or four
days) if it be drunk fasting, it makes good Blood, and good colour* more
than any other Medicine) marvelously it makes strong the sinews, takes away
ye falling sickness, if it be drunk twyse a day, otherwise it is added: it
heals clean the Palsy, if it be not dead and radycated in the members.
Thus saith Aegidius* and Lullus, with other learned Clarks, Also. R. Caudae
equinae, Plataine, red Roses, the grains of Alkakengi, the roots of holy Oak,
shaven or scraped Liquorice, of every one..i. Juniper Sebeste, of either of
them..vi Bolearmoniake,.ss. Cummen seed, the great cold seeds cleansed, of
every one..iiii. the seeds of white Popie. vi..ss. of Quinces, or the thynnest
of Goats milk, l.vi* let them stand two days in the infusion, and after let
them be distilled, give the sick pacyent to drink,.iiii. warm, so lunge as
the disease continues Epiphanius Emper^cus.

An other water composed of Aegidius, and it is commended of Lullus, of waters,
R. Rue, Satyrion with the hands, and Satyrion with ye stones, Agrimonie,
Chelidome, Sugar, and the stone called Calaminaris all of one wayght, and beat
them in a Mortar, it must be distilled with a slow fire: this water excells
in virtues, no disease of the eyes is so dull or dim, or great, but it will
vanysh away, and give place to this medicine: being drunk, it drives away all
poysone, or taken with meates, for so it avoids the poysone by vomits, it
cures the Dropsy, it purges the stomach from all evil humours, Sacer ignis.
it quenches saint Anthonyes Fire in one day, if Flax dipte in it, be laid
upon the sore: it is good also against the fire of a black Melancholy, and
white apostume without the Fire, but if it appearered without, it shall in no
wise be convenient, to lay on a plaster. It also heals the Canker, if Aloes
be myx^e with it, and a little Tow or Flax dipte in it, and laid like a
plaster upon it twyse a day: this is a precyouse medicine, and never fails.


Sickness. THese be excellent waters. Be there any good waters against the
falling syckenes, and resolution of the sinews and, Fevers? I pray you tell me
them.


Health. HEre after I will show thee goodly Waters, for the same purpose, as
follow. Take Hysope, Peneriall, Cloves, Cicory* ana..i. let them be beaten in a
Mortar, and distilled in Sage water. l.vi. afterward take the stone Tutia,
Persely, Rue, Setwall, Aloes, and the stone called Calaminaris, ana..i. and
Ualerian..vi. when they are beaten in a Mortar, sees them in the foresayed
water, till the third part be consumed, and the liquor strained with a cloth,
thou shalt keep in a Glass, diligently closed nine days, afterward let it be
given in drink, every day in the morning before day (by the space of ten days)
to the sick pacyent fasting, it is profytable against the falling sickness. If
he that takes it, continue fasting after it six hours. A goodly water for
fevers.
And truly it is a most effectual remedy, it heals all resolucions of the
sinews, and the members are strengthened thereby, if it be drunk with
Castorium: it is good against all Goutes, which have not taken Root yet in the
members, if it be drunk nyne days together fasting, it puts away all manner
of agues* what matter so ever they come of, if it be drunk Nyne days, every
morning early. This Water is also most profitable to wash Wounds, in which
the Synewes are cut. general.


An other of Aegidius, the nynth in number, otherwise they call it double: the
seed of Smalage, ye seed of white Popy, Ginger, Sugar, Another water of
Aegidius
Cloves ana. equal wayght, beaten in a Mortar, put to it water (that is
dystilled of Persely) and dystill it: this is the chiefest remeady for the
cough, breast pained, if a man drink it cold in the morning fasting, Water
against the Palsy, to help the Brain.
and in the evening as hot as he can: If it be drunk hot with Castorium, it
is good against the disease called Apoplexia: it heals also the members sick
of the Palsy, if so be the Palsy be not dead in the members: it brings
sleep and rest easily, it cherishes all the members, it drives away evil
humours, and strengthens the Head and the Brain.

An other amongst Aegidius waters: Gladiolus, Hysope, Sauine, Sothernewood, or
the seed of Sothernewood, leaving out Sauine, of every one like quantity, beat
them together, let them stand certain days, A water to be used with
discretion.
then dystil it. This water is of great strength, it wythstandeth all Agues,
both hot and cold: it provokes Women's terms, if it be drunk thryse: but it
is hurtful to Women with child, it stancheth the bloody flixe, and other
flixes: It kills worms, being drunk fasting. It cures al ye grief, There
be so that use this water to purge.
which with Beuers stones heals the Palsy (if it be drunk daily very heat)
within three days: the same description is found in the Book of Lullus of
waters most excellent.

Here after follows a very good water. Take a Weather, that is all white, and
fat fed in a good pasture, and well liking, cut his throat, receive his blood,
and stir it while it is fresh and new, a good time, with a stick of red
Iuneper, and ever in the stirring cast away the lumps, that are gathered of
the blood, then cast in the shauinges of the same Juniper, and the berries of
Juniper that be red, to the number of.xxv. and to this put a little, Agrimony,
Ru^, Ualerian, Scabious and Ueronica, commoly so called, Pimpernell, Cicory,
Peneroyall. ana. if so be it, Distill this blood, keep it close.
the measures of the blood exceed three quarters, the put into it..iij. of
Triacle of Ieane: but if it be less, according to the portion of the blood,
thou shalt make less the measure of the Triacle. They must all be prepared
ready at hand, that they may be put into the blood, while it is yet warm: when
they are all mixed, draw out a stilled liquor, which thou shalt keep diligently
in a glass, and set it in the Sun eight days, for it will endure twenty
years, it is known by experience, that this liquore is excellent, and good
against the Pestilence, the impostumes of the head, the sides, or ribs, or
against the diseases of the Liver, and Lights, the inflacion of the Spleen,
corrupt blood, agues, swellings, tremblynges of the Heart, the dropsye, An
excellent liquor against the pestylence and many other diseases.
unnatural heates, ill humours, and chiefly against poysone, and the Pestilent
Ague. The sick patient that is taken with any of the foresayed diseases,
shall drink a Sponefull, or four or five, and procure himself to sweat, and
shall be healed within his sick body.


Sickness. What are composed Waters, I would gladly learn them?


Health. THey are to be called composed waters, that are distilled of
medicines composed, and steeped in Wine, Aqua vitae, or other liquore: certain
composicions of spices and herbs, to restore the strength of the heart, and
the spirits, are mixte with waters of Capons, dressed by distillacions,
accordingly: also with burning Waters, or called Quintessence of Wine, against
the Pestilence, and poisons, as we declared before, but also hot medicines
Electuaries, chiefly in the which Diacridium, and other vehement things
hurtful to the stomach, are received, mixte with the Liquores, specially with
burning water rectified, or with Wine (sometime also with Milk, and Wine, or
with Whaye: also in hot natures dyseases, it should do well) and sometime let
stand in infusion, or soakynge, they are artificially distilled, What composed
waters be
that they may be given to drink to them that are weak or feeble, or as they
call them daynty, or have their Stomachs abhorring against other medicines,
which Lullus also praises greatly, and certain Practicioners of Antiquity
have used it with praise, and commendation.


Sickness I would learn to make Quintessence of Antimony, if it would please
you to show me?


Health. QVintessence of Antimony, is thus made: incorporate, and mingle the
powder of Antimony, Antimonium is called Stib^, or a stone b^ight. shining
found among ^yluer: this side doth ^ense the Eyes.
most finely beaten, with most sharpe white Vinegar distilled, and let it stand
until the vinegar be turned into a very red couller, then pour this Vinegar
out, and keep it. And in a clean vessel, put other dystilled Vinegar, upon
the Antimonium, and set it over a little fire till the Vinegar be coulered,
this shall you change so oft, till the Vinegar will be coulered no more, and
so much of the Vinegar as is coulered, thou shalt distill it in a Limbecke in
Ashes: first the Vinegar it self will run out, after this, thou shalt see a
matter issue forth of sundry collars, and this is that Quintessence, which is
called of the Ph^losophers, the Philosophers Lead and of some called Virgins
Milk (it differs not wythstanding from it) it is almost like blessed Oil in
colour: Philosophers Lead.
put this in a Pelican to be circulated by the space of Forty days, it
dries up Wounds, and it is profitable for all Wounds, in steed of Balm,
for it cures all the said Wounds easily, A water that dries up Wounds and
heals them
and quickly: it is marvelous good for all Impostumes, and Quintessence is
extracted, and drawn out of white Lead, after the same manner, as out of
Antimony, powringe distilled Vinegar upon it, that the Uynegar be over it
four fingers deep, afterward let it be digested in a Dunghill, as it is used
in Quintessence of Hearb^s, and Flowers, then let it be distilled and first
ye shall see the Uynegar it self ascend up, after that a Lyquore like unto
Oil, and also this is called Oil of Lead, or Quintessence of Lead, and it
hath in it a certain sweetness* like as the Oil of Antimony: it is good
against all burnings with ^yre, hot water, as also against Itches, as
Ringwormes, and Chollerike bladders, but a man must note that the white Lead
ought first to be washed often with water of Roses, driving it through a
lynnen clothe, until none of the powder of the white Lead remain in it,
Quintessene is drawn out of many meates.
then when it is dried, reserve it to your uses. So doth Bulbasus, and Ioan of
saynct Amandus, upon the Antidotarie of Io. Mesue, will to be done: Of the
drawing forth of quintessence, out of diverse mettalles, as Gold, Silver, Lead,
Tynne, Uitrioll, or Coporas, Iron, Coper, Brymstone, red Orpemet, yellow Ocker,
Antimony, Marchasita Leaden, who so lists, let him read in Lullus, in his
book of Quintessence: the spiryte of Quintessence, or Uitrioll is commended of
certain Men against the falling Sycknesse, and Apoplexia, or the benumbing of
the Senses. The spiryte of Gold, against ye dyseases of the Liver, the spiryt
of Birral, against the stone of ye Raynes, and Bladder.


Sickness. How make you Aqua vitae, after master Raimundus Lullus: which was a
man most excellent in Waters?


Health. He in his days, did make the Water of Life, Raymonde Lullius,
flourished, anno. 1322. he was a Spaniard.
called Aqua vitae of incomparable goodness. Mary he used to still his Waters,
both simple and compounded: many times to make them more heavenly or pure. But
to the matter, of making this Aqua vitae.

Take an herb called wild Mirte, like Butchers Brom, Asparagus, called
Sperage, Rapes, Persily, the Sea thistle called Eryngium, His water for the
stone.
Maiden hair, Grumill called Grana Solis. Cichory, Endiue, and wild Carrets,
Fenill roots. ana. of like quantity, cut or brayed grossly, and styll them with
your wine, upon a soft Fire. This Water will break the stone, and make much
Uryne.

Here follows an other. Take Nutmegs, the root called Doronike, which the
Apothicaries have, Setwall, Galangall, Mastike, long Pepper, Another precious
water.
the bark of Pomecitron, or Melon, Sage, Bazell, Margerum, Dill, Spicknard.
wood of Aloes, Cubebe, Cardamon called grains of Paradise, Lavender,
Peniroyall, Mintes, sweet Calamus, Germander, Enulacampana, Rosemary,
Stichados, Squinance of each like quantity, Saffron..i. the bone of a Hearts
heart grated, cut, and stamped: but beat your spices grossly in a Mortar. Put
in Ambergrice, Musk. ana..ss. distill this in a common simple Aqua vitae. made
with strong ale, or Sackeleyes, and Anisseedes: not in a common Styll. but in a
Serpentine: to tell the virtue of this Water, against cold, Wind. Phlegm,
Dropsy, and heaviness of Mind, coming of Melancholy. I cannot well at this
present, the excellent virtues thereof, are such, and also the time were to
long.


Sickness. How make you a Water that will kill the Canker, and heal the place,
whereas the said Canker hath been?


Health. MAny good Men and Women within this Realm, have divers, and sundry
Medicines for the Canker, and do help their Neighbours that be in Peril and
Danger, which be not only Poor, and Needy, having no Money to spend in
Chirurgi: But some do dwell where no Surgeons be near at hand: in such
cases, as I have said, many good Gentlemen and Ladies, have done no small
pleasure, to poor people: as that excellent Knight, and worthy learned Man,
Sir Thomas Eliot, Sir Thomas Eliot. S^r Philip Parris. Sir Wylliam Gaiscoigne,
whose works be immortal. Sir Philip Parris of Cambridge Shyre, whose Cures
deserve praise. Sir VVilliam Gaiscoigne of York shyre. that helped many soar
Even: And the Lady Tailor of Huntingdon shyre, and the Lady Darrell of Kent,
had many precious Medicines, to comfort the sight, and to heal wounds
withal, and were well seen in herbs.

The common wealth hath great want of them, and of their Medicines: which if
they had come into my hands, they should not have bin written on the backside
of my book. Among al other there was a knight, a man of great worship, a Godly
hurtless gentleman, which is departed this Life: Sir Anthony Heueningham of
Heningham in Suffolke his medicine against the Canker.
his name is Sir Anthony Heueningham. This Gentleman learned a Water to kill a
Canker of his own Mother, which he used all his Life, to the great help of
many Men, Women, and Children: he had also a Salve, for sundry green Wounds.
But because I have not the copy thereof, I will make report, but only of ye
Water, which I am assured he used, it is not much unlike a water for the
Canker, which Andreas Furnerius the Frenchman, did make of a great virtue, thus
it follows.

Take doves foot, an herb so named, Arkangell, Ivy with the Berries, young
red Brier tops, and leaves, white Roses, their leaves, Buds, red Sage,
Selandyne, and Woodbynde, of each like quantity, cut or chopped, and put into
pure clean white Wine, and clarified Honey. Then break into it Alum glass,
and put in a little of the powder of Aloes Hepatica, destill these together
softly in a Limbecke of Glass, or pure Tin, i^ not, then in a Limbecke,
wherein Aqua vitae is made. Keep this water close, it will not only kill the
Canker, if it be daily washed therewyth: but also two drops daily put into
the Eye, will sharp the sight, and break the pearl and spots, specially if
it be dropped in, with a little Fenell water, and close the Eye after.


Sickness MAny Men, Women, and Children, now a days, be grievously vexed with
a shameful disease, called the French Pockes, pains in their Joints, no
rest, paleness of couller, falling of hair, baldness of Head and Beard,
lameness of Limbs, Skabs, filth. c. in such cases what is to be done, I
pray you tell me, gentle Health, for this Sycknesse waxes common, but yet it
would fain be called, but only a Fever.


Health. A treatise of the Pockes.
MAny Men have written much of this Pockes, after sundry sorts, and divers
ways, have killed not a few with long Diets, but I will speak yt, which I do
know, have proved and seen, to have helped very many. Yet would I not, that
any should fyshe for this disease, or to be bold when he is bitten, to think
hereby to be helped: but rather eschew the cause of this infirmity, and filthy,
rotten, burning of Harlots. c. As to fly from ye Pestylence, or from a wild
fire, for what is more to be abhorred, than a p^cky, fylthy, stynkinge
Carcass? But if through blind Ignorance, ^
sudden chance c. any have gotten it: then do thus to be delivered from it.

First, ye shall provide that the sick body, Three nota^ble thi^nges to be
osberued in this (...) drink, and the Diet in the time of sickness.
have a close chamber out of all gross air, and clean warm garments, both
for the body, and Legs, and at rising, and going to Bed, a fire of Charcoales,
for wood is not wholesome for smoking, also they must not be troubled with any
thing to bring them out of patience, for that corrupts the blood, which must
be new altered: also the sick body must eat but little meat, and that kind
of meat as shall hereafter be prescribed, and at such time as shall be
appointed, and let the sick body use playing of some Instruments, or here
some playing, or tell merry tales, and have no company of Women, for that is a
most dangerous poison for the health of any person in that case.

Secondly, ye must prepare two Brass Pots, or else Iron, one being iiij.
Gallons, the other.vj. Gallons, one for strong drink, the other for small drink,
also ye must have close covers to them of brass or Iron, ye must also
prepare good earthen vessels with close covers to keep your drink in of both
sorts by them selves. Also ye must have a strayner of a Scarce clothe, to
strain your drink after it is decocte: Although the pockes be most unclean
yet to heal the same, requires clenlinesse asmutch as medicine.
Instruments to take out dead flesh, and to search a soar, and a spring to
cleanse any soar being deep with the same drink. Also ye must have a wooden
vessel to bathe the sick body in, at such times as hereafter shall be
appoyncted. Also ye must prepare clean clothes, to dry the sick body after a
sweat, being warmed well first: other Instruments ye shall need none, but
only your wood raped small, or turned, the Bark of the wood pounded in a
Mortar, and the drugs also small, and your Water which ye shall decoct, the
same must be of a Cundite, or running Brooke, very clean without any kind of
filth. Chalk water is good.

Thyrdly, for your strong drink, Howe to prove good Guaicum.
ye must take your Pot of.iiij. Gallons and set him one a soft fire of coals,
with.iiij. Gallons of the fair running Water, then put into the same one
pound and a half of your wood small Raped, or Turned at the Turners, but when
you do buy your wood, see it be not old, and lack moisture, the trial is
best, take a little coal burning and lay it on the Block, before it be raped,
and if it be good it will boyle up on every side of the coal, like Myrre, then
put thereto..j. or a little more of the bark of the same wood, made in small
powder, then take a quarter of a pound of Cummen seeds put whole into the
same, one half quarter of an ounce of Radix, and Rubarb, and then stop your
Pot fast, and lay Paste about the Cover, and so fast, that no air come out,
Soft fire makes sweet Malt, and ye like doth make good Guaicu drink.
then sees it on a soft fire, but ever keep it boiling, let it boyle at the
least.viij. hours, then set it by, and vnstop it not until it be cold, then
take your Scarce, and strain it into a fair Earthen Pot, and cover it close:
the sick body must drink of this but one draught leuke warm in the morning,
and one other at night.

Fourthly, you must take your Pot of.vj. Gallons, Fourth rule.
and put in it.vj. Gallons of running water, and one pound of the wood raped,
and a quarter of Cummen seeds, and decockte it in all kind of thing, even as
the other* being close stopped, and when it is cold strain it into an earthen
vessel, or Uessels: and that must the party drink at meal, at all other
times when he list to drink, and spare not but draw it by.

Fifth rule.
Fiftly, the sick body must be kept very warm, and not rise out of Bed
before.viii. of the Clock, and then eat a dozen or twenty Raisons of the
Sun, Note also, that F^lcrum is good to cleanse the Guaicum water with
and no bread, and about a leaven of the clock, let the sick Body eat a
little meat as may suffice nature, and what meat, it shall be hereafter
showed, then let the sick body walk some while in his Chamber, or read some
Book, or play on Instruments to keep him from sleeping, then at.vi. of the
clock, a dozen of Raisons of the Sun, and nothing else but his draught of
strong drink warmed at vi. a clock in the Morning, and at evening at eight.

Sixth rule
Sixtly, give to the Patient to eat these meates following, Chicken Partridge*
Fesante, Hen, Capon, Rabette, Coni^, Ueale, Mutton, and none other, nor any
Salt, nor leauened bread, nor Rye bread, and very seldom tosted, but boiled in
water, and no broth, nor porrage, nor any kind of sauc^-if the sick body have
roast, let it be but every third meal, and no kind of Fish, Milk, or
fruits, Raysons excepted.

Seventhly, once in.iii days, for the first.ix. days in the morning let the
sick body drink a good draught of ye strong drink something warm, Seventh rule
and then lay very many clothes on him till he sweat, for ye space of two
hours, then ease some of the clothes, and have warmed linen clothes, and
rub all the body dry or he rise if he have any sores that be deep, wash
the sore with the strong drink, and with a syring, and dip a little cloth
in the strong drink, and lay it to the sore, whether it be sores or knobs.

Eightly after.ix. or.x days be past, once in three days let the sick body
be bathed on this sort. Eight rule
Set fair running water on the fire, and put thereto a great deal of ground
Ivy leaves, and red Sage and Fenell also, and by a good fire when the sick
body is going to Bed, put the Water and herbs into a vessel of wood, and let
the sick Body stand upright in it, by the fire, and take up the herbs and
rub the body of the sick Patient downwards, and then dry him with warm
clothes, use this.iii. weeks, and by the grace of God the sick body shall be
made whole, what soever he be, then if the party be very weak after.ix. or.x.
of the first days, let him eat every day at.iiii. of the clock at after
noone, a new laid Egg poched in fair water, and as much new bread as will
suffice nature, and a little clean wine: read further in the place of Guaicum
for the Pox, whereas is showed greater secretes. And for this diat few men are
to be compared in worthiness and knowledge to Thomas Glandfield a cunning
Surgeon of London. Thomas Glanfield.



Sickness. Now I pray you master Health make a brief rehearsal of the
Compounds, and shortly of their names, to what sickness they be aplied unto.


Health. THat I shall gladly, and first I will begin as follows: wherefore they
do serve, praying thee to be contented to read them, mark the diligently: and
also of the common seeds, cold hot, of ointments, c

The Table of Compounds.
AVrea Alexandrina. Mythridatum. Syrupus de Bizantijs. Trochisci diarhodon.
Pills of Agarike. c.
Against Tercian Agues.
Aurea Alexandrina. Oxysaccharum simplex. Syrupus de acetosa simplex. Syrupe of
tart Pomgranets Syrupus de Bizantijs.
Against Quarten Agues.
Antidotum Asincritum. Diasent. Mythridatum Andromachi. Oxysaccharum. Vnguentum
aregon.
Against hot burning Agues.
Syrupe of Violets Diaprunum not laxative. Decoctio communis. Electuarium
catholicum. Mel Violatum. Oxysaccharum. Syrupus de limonibus. Trochisci de
camphora. Vnguentum populeon.
Against agues cumming of divers humours.
Diaphaenicon. Pilulae Agregatiuae. Pills of Rubarbe. Trochisci diarhodonis.
Against long agues of cold.
Diacurcuma. Diacorallium magistrale. Pills of Reubarbe. Syrupus de eupatorio.
Trochisci de Rubarbaro. Trochisci de absynthio.
The four great hot seeds.
Anisseede. Fenell seed. Cummen seed, and Ca. rowayes.
The four hot, and lesser seeds.
Ameum, Amomum, Smalage, Yellow Carrets.
The four great cold seeds.
Gourdes, Cucumers, Melons, Citrons.
The four cold and lesser seeds.
Endiue, Chycory, Lattice, Purseline,
The four hot Ointments.
Vnguentum Martiaton, Altheae, Aragon, Agrippae. Vnguentum Altheae.
The four cold Ointments.
Vnguentum album, Populeum, Resumptinum, Citrinum.
The five common opening roots.
Smalage. Fenell. Perseily. Sperage. Butchers Broume. Kneholme.
The five waters which do comfort the heart.
Endiue, Succory, Scabiouse, Langdebeefe, Balm.
The.viij. solutiue herbs.
Mallowes, Mercurie, Parietarie, Vyolets, Colewortes, Holioke, Acanthus,
Beetes.
Against Lientery.
Aurea Alexandrina. Theriaca G^leni. Trochisci diacorallion. Trochisci diambre.
Trochisci de terra sigillata.
Against biting of venomous Beasts.
Mythridatum. Theriaca Galeni. Oleum de Scorpionibus.
Against evil liking of the body.
Diacurcuma. Diatragacantha frigida. Diacameron, Diasatyrion. Syrupus de
eupatorio. Oleum Sesaminum. Trochisci de Rubarbaro.
To aswage payne in any out ward part of the body coming of ache.
Emplastrum oxycroceum. Oil of Dill. Oil of Juniper. c.
Against inward diseases.
Antidotum Asincritum. Aurea Alexandrina, Mythridatum.
Against burning, and scalding.
Electuarium palma. Oil of Myrtes. Vnguentum rosatum Oil of Eggs. Oil of
water Lillies.
Against brooses.
Electuarium palma. Vnguentum aureum. Vnguentum potabile.
Against payne in the spitting.
Emplastrum ceroneum. Lohoch de Pino.
Against belchyng of raw humours.
Diagalanga. Diatrion Pipereon. Diatragacantha calida. Lohoch sanum. Oximel
scilliticum. Syrupe of Calamintes.
Against payne in the Back.
Pilulae foetidae maiores. Oleum de Cheirs. Oleum Scorpionis. Diacassia.
To draw forth broken bones.
Emplastrum oxicroceum. Emplastru cotra rupturas ^
To purge the Bladder of Gravel.
Antidotum Asincritum. Benedicta. lax. Diacurcuma. Oximel diureticum.
To aswage payne in the Bladder.
Emplastrum de granis lauri* Mythridatum Galeni. Electuarium Dulcis. Syrupe of
Iuiubes. Trochisci de Alchachengi. Oil of sweet Almondes. Oleum Cheiri.
Against exalceratios in the Bladder.
Oximel scilliticum. Trochisci de Alchachengi.
Against the Cho^ke.
Antidotum Asincritum. Aurea Alexand^ina. Dt^ph^icon. T^isci de Rosis. Oil of
Camomill. c.
Medicines ^o be used after long and ^oat agues.
D^rl^odon abbatis. Rosata nouella.
Agay^st the cold, and shaking in Agues.
M^lridatum Galeni. Syrupe of sticados. T^chi^ci de eupatorio. Oil of Dill.
Oil of Sothernwood.
To caus^ an appetite.
A^tidotum Asincritum. Ar^ma^cum R^satum. Mina ^plex Conserve of Quinces.
S^rupus de ab^nihio. Electuar^um consortatinum.
To comfort a cold Brain.
Electuarium de gem^s. A^m^ticum ^os^tum Conserve of Gladian. Ther^ca G^l^nt.
Oil of M^ces.
To co^fort a moist Brain
Conserve of Rosemary. Diambre. Diaprassion. Diatragacantha calida. Electuarium
ind^matoris. Pitulae alephanginae
To a^wag^ payne of the Breast.
Decoctio pectoralis. Lohoch de Squilla. Oleum de che^rs. Vnguentum marciaton.
Sy^upus de Hyssopo. c.
Against straightness of the Breast.
Confectio dulcis de moscho. Conserve of Maydenhayre. Diatragacantha calida.
Theriaca Galeni. Vnguentum Martiaton.
Against diseases of the Breast.
Diacameron. Dia^ragacantha fr^gida Syrupe of Horehounde. Syrupe of
Maydenhayre. Galens cerote ^r ye stomach.
To cause boldness.
Triphera magna. Electuarium de gemmie.
Against g^wing in the B^lly.
Antidotum Asincri^um. Mithridutum.
To keep the body strong.
Pilula luc^ maiores. Ro^ata nouella. Syrupus ex ^nfusione rosarum. Theriac^
Galeni. Diasatyr^on.
Against spitting of blood.
Mithridatum Galeni. Antidotum Asincritum. Electua^ium Ind^um Maius. Emplast^m
de granis Lauri. P^lulae qureae. Pilulae Foetida maiores. Pilulae sine quibus
esse nolo. Theriaca Galeni.
Against old Coughs of ^mou^es.
Mythridatum. Pills of Agarike. Pilulae Bechitae. Loho h de Pino. Lohoch
sant^m. Syrupe of Horehounde. Syrupe of Mirtes. Syrupe of Lysope.
Against (...) Cough.
Iu^ep of Violets. Syrupe of Licuerice. Syrupe of Violets. Syrupe of Poppy
comp. Syrupe of Iu^ubes.
Against the Cough of the L^n^es.
Antidotum Asin^ri^um. Diatragacantha frigida.
Against Coughs, which come of superfluous humours in ye stomach.
Aurea Alexandrina, Diamargaritum c^idum. Diacam^ron. Diacalamintha. Dia^eos.
Diapap^uer. Decoc^o pectoralis. Lohoch (...). Lohoch de pulmone Vulpis. Syrupe
of Calamintes.
Against (...) Cramp.
Mythridatum. Theriaca Galen^. Syrupe o^ Sticados. (...) of Flowerdeluce.
Vnguetum ^. Vnguentum Aregon,
Against (...).
Mithridatum Andromach^. Theriaca Galen^. Vnguentum Aregon. Vnguentum M^tat^m.
Against the (...).
Aster. Aurea Alexandrina. Diamargaritum calid^m. Diacameron. Dia^odon ^bbatis.
Diatragacan^ha fr^gid^. Mithridatum. Tria^andali. Lohoch de pulmone Vulpis.
Against the Ca^k^, ^ady part of the ^dy.
Corfectio hamech.
Against all Aches, and dyseases of cold.
Oil of Bay. Oil of Spike. Oil of Cost. Oil of Cam^mill. Oil of
Flo^erdeli^. Oil of Roses Oil of M^s^icke. Oil of Lillies. Vnguentum
Martiat^m mag^num. Vnguentum Aregon. Vnguent^m de Ali^ee.
Against ^ ^ut the Fu^dement, or ^her places.
Oil of Myr^es. Pomatum.
To deliver Women of dead children.
Theriaca Galeni, c.
To cause good cooller
Antidotum Asincritum. Electuarium de gemmis. Oleum de Costo. Trochis^i
Diarhodon. Hiera picra Galeni.
To purge Choler.
Antidotum Asincritum. Aromaticum rosatum. Conditum Cotoneorum. Confectio
Hamech. Diacurcuma. Conserve of Langdebeefe. Conserve of Borage. Conserve of
Maydenhayre. Conserve of Succory. Conserve of Sorrel. Oxysaccharum simplex.
Electuarium de rosis. Electuarium de psillio. Pilulae sine qui^us esse nolo.
Pilulae de octo rebus.
For cold Complexions.
Diatragacantha frigida. Syrupe of Endiue. Trochisci de Rabarbaro. Syrupus de
acetositate citri. Syrupus de succo acetosae. Syrupus comp. de Fumiterra.
Syrupus acetosus comp.
To make good digestion.
Antidotum Asincritum. Aromaticum rosatum. Conditum cotoneorum. Diacuminum,
Diamber. Diacalamintha. Diatrion pipereon. Miua simplex. Pilulae ante cibum,
Oil of Mintes.
Against the Dropsy.
Diacameron. Diacurcuma. Emplastrum ceroneum. Emplastrum de granis Lauri.
Pilulae de Euphorbio. Theriaca Galeni. Trochisci de Eupatorio. Trochisci de
Rhabarbaro. Syrupus de eupatorio. Vnguentum Agrippae.
To clear the eye sight.
Diaprassium. Pilulae Cochiae rasis. Collirium album rasis. Hiera picra Galeni.
Pilulae sine quibus. Pilulae aureae. Pilulae de octo generibus mirobalanorum.
Against payne in the eyes.
Antidotum Asincritum. Mithridatum androm.
Against all manner of exulceracions.
Oil of Violets. Emplastrum de Cerusa. Theriaca Galeni. Trocisci de
alchachengi.
Against deafnes and pains of the Ears.
Mithridatum andromachi. Oil of sweet Almondes. Pilulae sine quibus esse
nolo.
Against the fauling evil.
Antidotum Asincritum. Aurea Alexandrina. Confectio dulcis de moscho. Syrupe of
Sticados. Theriaca Galeni. Vnguentum Martiatum.
To purge phlegm.
Antidotum Asincritum. Diacartami. Confectio Hamech Diatrion piperion. Conserve
of Rosemary. Conserve of Gladian. Conserve of Enulacampana Mel Rosatum. Pilulae
alephanginae. Pilulae faetidae maiores Pills of Euphorbe. Pilulae de
Sarcocolla.
To purge salt phlegm.
Syrupus comp. de Fumiterra.
To make a beautiful, and a fair face.
Oleum de tartare. Pomatum.
Against fluxes of the body.
Antidotum Asincritum. Diascoridion. Mithridatum andromachi. Mycleta. Miua
simplex. Oil of Roses. Syrupus de rosis siccis. Syrupus de agresta. Syrupus de
Acetositate. Syrupe of Mintes.
Against the flux of meat vndigested.
Mithridatum. Micleta. Oil of Mirtes. Syrupe of Calamintes. Trochisci
Diacorallion.
Against the bloody flixe.
Diacodium Mesua. Mithridatum. Mycleta. Trochisci diacorallion.
To provoke ye mestruall terms.
Pilulae de Bdellio. Trochisci de terra Sigillata.
To stop the flux of a strong purgation.
Electuarium confortatinu sto.
Against paleness of the Face.
Hiera picra Galeni.
To cause new flesh.
Vnguentum Apostolicum.
To consume dead flesh.
Vnguentum Apostolicum. Vnguentum Aegyptiacum.
Against old fistulayes.
Vnguentum Apostolicum. Vnguentum Aegyptiam.
Against the Gout of heate.
Electuarium de rosis. Pilulae Arthritica. Oil of wormwood. Oleum Lumbricorum.
Oleum Cherinum.
Against the Gout of cold.
Benedicta laxatiua. Electuarium indi Maioris. Mithridatum. Antidotum
Asincritum. Pilulae Fetidae maiores. O^le of Bay. Oil of Spike. Oil of
Flowerdelice. Oil of Mas^ike. Oil of Euphorbe. Vnguentum Martiaton. Vnguentum
Aregon.
Against the Gout in the feet only.
Antidotum Asincritum. Benedicta laxat. Mithridatum. Pilulae de quinque
generibus myr oba. Pilulae Faetidae maiores. Oleum Vulpinum. Vnguentum
martiaton.
Against gaulinges.
Emplastrum de Cerusa. O^le of Martes.
For Cliste^s.
Diacasia fis^ula pro Clist. Hi^ra picra Galen^
To comfort the heart.
Diaecorallium magistrate. Electuar^um de gemmis. Syrupus de acetosa. Theriaca
Galen^, Trochisci de Gallia moschata. Aromaticum rosa^um. Aromaticum
gariophillatum.
Conserve of Roses
Diambre. Diamargaritum calidum. Diarbodon a^ bati^.
To engender beete in the inward parts.
Aromaticum gariophillatum. Diacuminum. Dia^bre. Emplastrum stomachicum. Oil
of Rue.
Against ^remblinge of the heart.
Confectio de musco dulcis. Electuarium de gemmis Conserve of Borage. Conserve
of langdebiefe.
Against beat of the hart
Iulep of Roses. Iulep of Violets. Syrupe of Violets. Syrupe comp. of Endiue.
Syrupus de infusione rosarum viridium. Sp^upus de succo acetosae.
Against horsenes.
Decoct^o pectoralis, Lohoc sanum. Oleum sesaminum. Syrupe of Iuiubes.
Theriacum Galen^.
Against the Hickop.
Antidotum Asincritum Syrupe of Mir^he.
Against falling of the Hair.
Oil of Bay Oil of C^ste.
Against ache in the hip.
Aurea Alexandrina. Pilulae fet^doe maiores. Pilulae d^ ^uinque generibus
miroballa. Oil of Baize. Oleum vulpinum. V^guentum mar^iaton. V^guentum
ar^g^num.
Against al manner of hardness
Mithridatum Oil of sweet Almondes. Oil of Bay. Oil of Mintes. Oil of
Holioke, Oleum Sesaminum. Oil of Flowerdelice. Oil of Mashke. Emplastrum
diachilon album. Emplastrum diachilon m^gnu Emplastrum de mucilaginibus
Emplastrum de meli^o^o Emplastrum de oxycroceum. Vnguentum apostolicum.
Vnguentum Marciaton.
To purge the head.
Pilulae aureae. Pilulae Cochiae.
Against old headache.
Antidotum asincritum. Pilulae Cachiae Raesis. Pilulae agregatiue.
Against headache of heate.
Electuarium de Rosis. Oil of Roses Oil of water Lillies. Oil of Poppy.
Vnguentum rosatum.
Against hedache of cold
Mithridatum. Aurea alexandrina. Oil of Dill. Oil of Spike. Oil of
Flowerdelice* Oleum de euphorbio. Vnguentum Martiato^
Against the Hemeroydes.
Mycleta. Pilulae de Bdellio.
To keep ye head fro horenes.
Oil of Cost.
Against vermin and scurfe in the head
Oil of Bay. Oil of Lillies.
Against the yellow iaundice
Antidotum Asincritum. Diarhodon abbatis. Electuarium de r^bis. Syrupus de
Bizantinus. Theriaca galeni. Trochisci de Camphora. Trochisci de Rubarbaro.
Trochisci de eupatorio Triasandali.
Against Ilic^ passio.
Antidotum Asincritum. Theriaca galeni. Mithridatum Andromachi. Hiera picra.
Pilulae sine quibu^. Vnguentum martiaton.
Against inflamacions.
Antidotum As^ncritum. Cerotum stomachicum
Against hot impost^es either in the stomach or liver
Carotum pro stomacho.
Against inwa^d impostumes.
Trochisci de rouburbar^. Trochisci de eupa^orio. Oleum violarum.
Against hot impostumes in the throat.
Diamoron (...).
To ripe impostumes.
Emplastrum diachilon magnu Emplastrum diachilon album. Oil of Flowerdelice.
Oil of Mastike.
Against incensibility
Mithridatum Theriaca galeni. c.
Against inflamacions of Choler.
Conserve of Violets. Vnguentum rosatum.
Against pain of the liver,
Antidotum Asincritum. Diacurcuma. Pilulae aggregatiuae. Pilulae de euphorbio.
Trochisci de rubarbaro. Sirupe of Setrac
Against beat of the Liver.
Iulep of Roses. Iulep of violets. Electuarium catholicum. Mel violacum Sirupe
of Violets. Syrupe comp. of Endiue. Triasandali. Trochisci de spodio. Vnguentum
rosatum
Against coldness of the liver
Theriaca galeni. Diagalanga. Diarhodon abbatis, Trochisci de gallia moschata.
Trochisci de absinthio Trochisci de eupatorio. Emplastrum stomachicum. Oil of
Euphorbio. Syrupus de eupatorio. Syrupus de absinthio.
Against hardness of the liver.
Emplastrum diachilon album. Pilulae de euphorbio.
To make a man laxative.
Antidotum Asincritum* Hierapicr^ galeni. Conserve of violet^. Diacassia
fistula pro enematibus
Against danger of life
Antidotum Asincritum. Diacameron.
Against heate of the Lunges.
Diatragantha frigida. Diarodon abbatis Triasandali. Syrupe of Violets. Syrupe
of Endiue. Syrupe of comp. Endiue. Syrupus de infusione rosarum. viridium.
Against coldness of the Lunges.
Confectio dulcis de Musco. Conserve of Maidenhaire. Theriaca Galeni. Tr^chisci
de absinthio,
Against dryues of the Lunges
Oil of sweet Almondes. Syrupe of Liquorice.
Against the Leprie,
Confectio hamach. Theriaca galeni. Trochisci Theriaci Pilulae faetidae
maiores.
Against the Mesels
Theriaca galeni
Against madness.
Aurea Alexandrina Diasene.
Against the mother.
Antidotum Asincritum
To assuage payne of the Matrice.
Emplastrum de granis lauri. Oil of sweet Almondes. Trifera.
Against cold diseases
Antidotum Asincritum Diambre Electuarium de gemmis Oil of Lillies* Emplastrum
pro matrice. Emplastrum Ceroneum Oil of Flowerdelice. Oil of wormwood.
To cause mirth.
Diambre. Diamargar^tum calidum Diacameron* Diasene Electuarium de gemmis.
Conserve of Borage Syrupe of L^ngdebief.
To purge melancholy.
Antidotum Asincritum. Alipta muschata* Confectio dulcis de musco. Diasene.
Mithridatum. Syrupus de epithi^o. Conserve of Roses. Conserve of Maidenhaire.
Conserve of Succorie Conserve of Langdebeef. Conserve of Rosemarie. Conserve of
Borage, Pilule sine quibus. Pilulae de lapide Lazuli, Pilulae aggregatiu^.
Pilulae lucis maioris. Trochisci de absinthio. Trochisci de eupatorio.
Against all diseases about the Midryffe.
Mithridatum Theriaca galeni. Pilulae Cochiae Rasis. Oil of Spike Oil of
Euphorbe
Against soarnes in ye mouth
Diamorou potio Mithridatum Cleo.
Against b^eeding at the nose.
Trochisci de terrae sigillata. Trochisci de Carabae.
Against stench at the nose
Oil of Flowerdelice.
Against writhing of the neck on the one side.
Confectio dulcis de moscho. Syrupe of Sticados
Against obstructions.
Oil of bitter almondes Oil of Cost Oil of Dill, Oil of Camomill, Oil of
Flowerdelice. Oil of wormwood. Oleum de Chieri. Syrupus de radicionibus.
Syrupe of Bizantes. Syrupe comp. of Endiue. Syrupe of Maidenhayre. Syrupe of
Ceterac. Trochisci de Rabarbaro. Trochisci de Eupatorio. Trochisci de
absynthio.
To cause good Odour and savour.
Electuarium de gemmis. Oil of Cost.
To comfort the principal parts.
Aromaticum rosatum. Aromaticum gariophillatum. Electuarium confortans
Stomachum. Diamber. Diamargaritum calidum. Miua simplex. Syrupe comp. of
Fumiterre. Syrupe of Buglosse. Electuarium indium maiu^. Conserve of Roses.
Syrupe of Calamintes. Oil of Cost. Oil of Mastike. Oil of Quinces.
Against the dryness of the principal parts.
Oil of sweet Almondes
To mollify the principal parts.
Conserve of Roses.
Against the Paulsie.
Antidotum Asincritum. Confectio dulcis de moscho. Mythridatum. Pilulae de
Euphorbio. Syrupe of Sticados. Vnguentum Martiaton.
Against the Pleurisy.
Diatragacantha frigida. Syrupe of Violets. Iulep of Violets. Lohoc of Squilla.
Conserve of Maydenhayre. Oil of Violets. Syrupe of Liquerice. Syrupe of
Hysope. Syrupe of Endiue. Syrupe of Iuiubes. Vnguentum de Althea.
To purge the wind pipe of gross humours.
Diaprassium. Theri^ca Galeni. Lohoch de Squilla. Lohoch sanum. Syrupe of
Liquerice. Syrupus de acetosus comp.
Against the Pestilence or Poison.
Theriaca Galeni. Mithridatum. Puluis contra pestem. Syrupus de acetositate
citri. Syrupus ex acetosa. Syrupus ex infusione. Rosarum viridium. Oil of
Scorpions.
Against Pimples, or Wheales.
Oil of Myrtes.
Parfumes.
Confectio dulcis de moscho.
Against reumes.
Aurea Alexandrina. Antidotum Asincritum. Mithridatu^. Diaprassion. Syrupe of
Sticados. Syrupe simp. of Popy. Oil of Rue.
To purge the Raynes of gravel.
Antidotum Asincritum. Benedicta laxa. Oximel diureticum. Syrupus acetosus
comp. Syrupe of Maydenhayre. Syrupe of Cettrac.
Against payne in the Raynes
Aurea Alexandrina. Mythridatum. Diacameron. Diacurcuma. Electuarium indi
maioris. Oleum de euphorbio. Oleum de cheiri. Emplastrum de granis Lauri.
Against Ringwormes.
Confectio hamech. Oleum de Tartaro.
To comfort the stomach.
Theriaca Galeni. Diacorallium magistrale. Diamargaritum calidum. Diaprasium.
Diagalanga. Aromaticum Rosatum. Aromaticum garyophillatum. Trochisci de gallia
muschata. Trochisci de Alchachengi. Mythridatum. Miua simplex. Electuarium
confortatiuum stomachium. Electuarium de gemmis. Electuarium Indi Maioris.
Emplastrum stomachicum. Syrupe of Mirtes. Syrupe of sticados. Syrupe of
Wormwood. Syrupe of Langdebeefe. Syrupe of Quinces. Syrupe of dry Roses.
Conserve of Langdebeefe. Conserve of Enulacampana. Conditum Cotoncorum. Oil of
Cost.
To purge ye stomach of gross humours
Hiera picra Galeni. Pilulae Faetidae maiores. Pilulae lucis maiores. Pilulae
de Sarcocolla. Pilulae stomachiae. Pilulae agarico. Oximel simplex. Oximel
scilliticum. Emplastrum ceroneum. Theriaca Galeni. Syrupe of Hysope. Syrupe of
Maydenhayre. Syrupe of Horehounde. Syrupus acetosus compo. Syrupus de
limonibus.
Against heate burning of the stomach.
Trochisci de Spodio. Trochisci de camphora. Diarhodon abbatis. Triasandali.
Syrupus de succo acctosae. Iulep of Roses. Vnguentum rosatum.
Against coldness of the stomach.
Syrupe of Mintes. Syrupe of Calamintes. Oil of Wormwood. Vnguentum de
Altheae.
Against hardness of the stomach.
Pilulae de Euphorbio. Emplastrum Diachilon album
Against payne of the stomach.
Emplastrum de granis Lauri. Emplastrum ceroneum. Pilulae Faetidae maiores.
Pilulae Agregatiuae. Trisera.
Against Dyseases of the Spl^ne.
Antidotum Asincritum. Diacurcuma. Electuarium catholicum. Pilulae de quinque
generibus myroba. Syrupe of Calamintes. Syrupus de acetosa simplex. Oleum de
euphorbio.
Against hardness of ye spleen
Trochisci de absynthio. Trochisci de eupatorio. Emplastrum meliloti.
Emplastrum diachilon album. Emplastrum ceroneum. Vnguentum marciaton.
Against Sighing.
Antidotum Asincritum. Diamargar^tum Calidum.
To cause the spittie to avoid.
Antidotum Asincritum. Syrupe of Pine apples. Lohoch de Squilla.
To restore the Speech.
Diaireos.
To break the stone.
Aurea Alexandrina. Theriaca Galeni. Mythridatum. Oleum de Scorpione.
Against the Strangution.
Aurea Alexandrina.
Against sounding* and fainting of the heart.
Diamargaritum calidum. Diasene cum Manna. Aurea Alexandrina. Syrupe of
Langdebeefe. Conserve of Borage.
To provoke sweat.
Oil of Dill, and other hot Oils.
To prohibit ouermutch sweating.
Rosata nouella. Oil of Quinces. Oil of Mirtes.
To cause a man to sleep.
Diapapauer. Syrupe of Popie. Oil of flowers of Popie. Oil of Dill. Oil of
Nenuphar.
For Ch^ldren, which cannot keep, or do speak in their sleep
Trifera.
Against Strangurion.
Diamoron potio. c. Venice Terebi^tine.
Against the Scabs.
Confectio Hamech. Oil of Bay. Vnguetum pro pueris scabiosis. Vnguentum
contra sca^i^
To purge the instruments of the Senses^
Pilula Alephaginae. Pilulae Agregatiuae, Pilulae lucis maiores. Therica
Galeni.
Against the squinancy.
Mithridatum.
Against the stiffness of the inward Members.
Mithridatum Andromachi. Conserve of Rosemary.
To mollify and ripe al swellinges
Diachilon paru^m. Emplastrum de granis Lauri. Emplastrum Diachilon album Oil
of Flowerdelice. Vnguentum Apostolicum. Vnguentum Agrippae.
To increase seed.
Oil of sweet Almondes Oleum Sesaminum.
Against the sleep or forgetful diseases.
Oleum de euphorbio.
Against deep diseases in the Synewes.
Syrupe of Sticados. Oil of Quinces. Oil of Mastike. Vnguentum agrippae.
Against cold diseases of the Synewes.
Oil of Euphorbe. Oleum Lumbricorum. Oleum de cheru. Pills of Euphorbe.
Against shootinge of humours.
Emplastrum palmeum.
Against great, and cold soars.
Tela Gualterij. Emplastrum de cerusa. Emplastrum de minio. Vnguentum
Aegyptiacum.
To dry up soars By^es.
Emplastru Desiccatiuu rubeu. Vnguentum Apostolorum. c.
To quench the thyrst.
Trochisci de camphora. Trochisci de Spodio. Rosata nouella. Syrupus de
infusione rosarum viridium. Syrupe of Quinces. Syrupe of white Popie. Syrupus
de acetositate citri. Mel violatum. Iulep of Roses. Conserve of Violets.
Against the falling sickness.
Antidotum Asincritum. Aurea Alexandrina, Confectio de moscho. Electuarium de
rosis. Electuarium de psilio.
Against the tooth ache
Antidotum Asincritum. Aurea Alexandrina. Mithridatum. Diaprassium. Pilulae de
Hiera simplici.
Against roughness of the Tongue.
Diatragacantha frigida Diamoron potio. Syrupe of Violets. Iulep of Violets.
Oleum sesaminum. Oil of sweet Almondes. Oil of Violets.
Against shortness of wind.
Antidotum Asincritum. Mythridatum. Confectio dulcis de moscho. Alipta
muschata. Diaireos. Diacameron. Syrupe of Calamintes. Theriaca Galeni. Pills
of Agarike. Syrupe of Horehounde. Syrupe of Hysope. Syrupus de pino. Lohoch de
Squilla. Lohoch de papauere. c.
To break wind.
Antidotum Asincritum. Aromaticum gariophillatum. Pilulae aureae. Diagalanga.
Diacurcuma. Electuarium indum maius. Syrupus de eupatorio Oil of sweet
Almondes.
To stop vomiting.
Antidotum Asincritum. Aromaticum gariophillatum. Miua simplex. Rosata nouella.
Syrupe of Mintes. Syrupe of Quinces. Oil of Mintes.
To cure the disposition to vomiting, which is when a man would vomit and
cannot.
Aromaticum gariophillatum. Miua simplex. Rosata nouella. Syrupe of Mintes.
To provoke vr^ne.
Antidotum Asincritum. Aurea Alexandrina. Diacurcuma. Diacassia cum Manna.
Diasatyrion. Oximel diureticum. Vnguentum agrippae.
To provoke Venus.
Diasatyrion. c.
To heate wounds.
Balsamum artificiale. Emplastrum palmeum. Vnguentum Apostolorum.
To scour and cleanse wounds.
Tela Gualterij. Vnguentu Apostolico Auicen^ Vnguentum Basilicum. Vnguentum
Aegyptiacum.
Aagaynst Worms in the Belly.
Puluis contra Lumbricos. Syrupe of Limons. Oil of Wormwood. Hiera picra
Galeni. Mithridatum. c. Vnguentum contra Lubricos.


And thus I have ended the notes of the Copoundes, with Common seeds. c.


Sickness. What be the names of the Compounds, and in what leaves may I find
them, I pray you tell me?


Health. First I will begin at the letter A. c. A.
ALypta Moscata. Fol. 1 Asincritum, a goodly Antidotarie, of singular virtue.
Ibidem Aromaticum Rosatum. Ibidem Aurea Alexandrina. 2 Aromaticum
gariophillatum. Ibidem Acatia. Ibidem Aurilj. Ibidem Aqua odorifera. 3
Apophlegmatismi, to draw fleam from the head. 40
B.
BEnedicta laxati. Fol. 3 Balsamum artificial. Ibidem
C.
COnfectio dulcis. Fol. Ibidem Confectio Hamech. Ibidem Cerotum stomachale.
Ibidem Confection for the Eyes. Ibidem Conserve of Buglosse. Ibidem Conserve of
Rosemary. 4 Conserve of Borage, Buglosse. Ibidem Conserve of Roses. Ibidem
Conserve of Violets. Ibidem Conserve of Maydenhayre. Ibidem Conserve of Gladen.
Ibidem Conserve of Enulacampana. Ibidem Conserve of Succory. Ibidem Conserve of
Sorrel. Ibidem Conserve of Diagalanga. Ibidem Collyria, sief. 38 Cerot, how to
make it. 37
D.
DIaciminum nicolai. Fol. 4. Diambra mesuae. 5 Diamargariton Calidum. Ibidem
Diamargariton frigidum. Ibidem Diathamaron, of D^tes. Ibidem Diarhodon Abbatis.
Ibidem Diacalamintha. Ibidem Diatrion pipereon. Ibidem Diaireos Salomonis.
Ibidem Diatragagantha Frigida. 6 Diacameron. Ibidem Diacodium. Ibidem
Diaprassium. Ibidem Diapapauer. Ibidem Diacurcuma. 7 Diasatyrion. Ibidem
Diaprunum. Ibidem Diaphaenicon. Ibidem Diacarthamum. Ibidem Diacorallium
magistrale. Ibidem Diacassia fistula. 8 Diasene. Ibidem Decoctio communis.
Ibidem Dropax. 37
E.
ELectuarium Catholicum. Ibidem Electuarium Rosatum. Ibidem Electuarium de
Psillio. Ibidem Electuarium indi maioris. 9 Electuarium stomachi. Ibidem
Electuarium de gemmis. Ibidem Emplastrum Diachilon album. Ibidem Emplastrum
diachilon magnum. Ibidem Emplastrum de mucilaginibus. Ibidem Emplastrum pro
stomacho. 10 Emplastrum de granis lauri. Ibidem Emplastrum meliloti. Ibidem
Emplastrum Caroneum. Ibidem Emplastrum oxicroceum. Ibidem Emplastrum de Ianua.
Ibidem Emplastrum contra rupturas. 11 Emplastrum de gratia dej. Ibidem
Emplastrum pro dolor matricis. Ibidem Emplastrum diuinum. Ibidem Emplastrum de
minio. Ibidem Emplastrum de Cerusa. Ibidem Emplastrum Palmeum. Ibidem
Emplastrum triapharmacum. Ibidem Epithema. 34 Emplastrum desiccatiuum rubrum.
Ibide
F.
Frontal for the head. Fol. 35 Fomentum. 37
G.
GLis^ers. Fol. 38 Gargarisme. 35
H.
Hiera picra Galenj. Fol. 12
I,
IUlep of Violets. Ibidem Iulep of Roses. Ibidem Insessus, used for a stone. 37
L.
LOch de Pino. Ibidem Loch de Squilla. Ibidem Loch sanum. Ibidem Loch de
Caulibus. Ibidem Loch de pulmone vulpis. Ibidem Liniment. 35
M.
MIthridatum manardj. Fol. 15 Mithridatum, very noble against poison. 39
Myeleta. 13 Miua simplex aromatica. Ibidem Mel Rosarum. Ibidem Mel Violarum. 14
Mel Anthosatum. Ibidem Manus Christi. Ibidem
N.
Nasalia for the Nose. Fol. 35
O.
OXimel simplex. Fol. Ibidem Oximel diureticum. Ibidem Oximel Squilliticum.
Ibidem Oxisaccharum simplex. Ibidem Oxisaccharum compositum. Ibidem Oil of
sweet Almondes. Ibidem Oil of bitter Almondes. Ibidem Oil of Bay. 15 Oil of
Sesaminum. Ibidem Oil of Spike. Ibidem Oil of Cost. Ibidem Oil of Rue.
Ibidem Oil of Dill. Ibidem Oil of Camomill. Ibidem Oil of Myrtes. Ibidem
Oil of Flowerdelice. 16 Oil of Roses. Ibidem Oil of Uyolets. Ibidem Oil of
Quinces. Ibidem Oil of Masticke. Ibidem Oleum Gastorej. Ibidem Oleum de
Euphorbio. Ibidem Oleum vulpinum. 17 Oleum de Tartaro. Ibidem Oleum Scorpionum.
Ibidem Oil of garden Lillies. Ibidem Oleum de papauere. Ibidem Oleum
nimpheatum album. Ibidem Oleum Menthae. Ibidem Oil of Wormwood. Ibidem Oleum
bumbricorum. Ibidem Oleum Violaceum albu, or Harts ease. 18
P.
POmander. Fol. Ibidem Pou^er of Violets. Ibidem Puluis contra pestem. Ibidem
Puluis de bolo armenio. Ibidem Puluis contra Lumbricos. 19 Puluis Bezoardicus.
Ibidem Penidies. Ibidem Pignolatum. Ibidem Pilulae fine quibus esse nolo.
Ibidem Pilulae Aureae. Ibidem Pilulae Cochiae. Ibidem Pilulae de octo rebus.
Ibidem Pilulae de Mirobalans. 20 Pilulae Elephanginae. Ibidem Pilulae
Aggregatiue. Ibidem Pil^es of Rubarbe. Ibidem Pilulae de sarcocolla. Ibidem
Pilulae faetidae maiores. Ibide Pilulae de Euphorbio. Ibidem Pilulae lucis
maiores. Ibidem Pilulae lucis minoris. 2^ Pilulae de lapide Lazul^. Ibidem
Pilulae de Bdellio. Ibidem Pilulae de Hermodactylis. Ibidem Pilulae
Arthriticae. Ibidem Pilulae stomachiae. Ibidem Pilulae ante cibum. Ibidem
Pills of Agarike, or Agarici. Ibidem Pills of Fumiterre. Ibidem Pilulae
Communes. 22 Pilulae de Assaieret. Ibidem Pilulae Bichicae. Ibidem Pilulae
imperiales. Ibidem Pilulae de Hiera picra. Ibidem Pomatum. 33 Pessis. 36
Pockes, how to heal the, with.viij. things considered. Fol. 42. and.43
R.
Rosata nouella. Fol. 23
S.
SYrupus de Acet^sitate citri. Ibidem Syrupus de Acetosa. Simpl. Ibidem Syrupus
de Agresta. labru^ea^, or unripe Grapes^ Ibidem Syrupe of Calamints or of
Calamente* ib. Syrupe de Menta. Ibidem Syrupus de Absinthio. 34 Syrupe of
Fumitery. Ibidem Syrupus de Fumoterrae simplex. Ibidem Syrupe of Liquerice.
Ibidem Syrupe of Hysope. Ibidem Syrupus de Marrubio. Ibidem Syrupus de
Epithymo. 25 Syrupus de Eupatorio. Ibidem Syrupe of Sticados. Ibidem Syrupus de
Violis, or Violets. Ibidem Syrup. de Papauers simp. or Poppy* Ibide Syrupus de
Papauere compositus. Ibidem Syrupe of Myrtes comp. Ibidem Syrupe of Myrtes
simp. 26 Syrupe of Acetosus simplex, Ibidem Syrupus Acetosus compositus. Ibidem
Syrup. de succo Endiuiae, or Endiue sim. ib* Syrupe of Endiue compositus Ibidem
Syrupe of Suckery, or Cich^ri^. Ibidem Syrupe of Quinces. Ibidem Syrupe of
Nenuphar, or water Lillies. I^. Syrupe of Barberies. 27 Syrupe of tart
Pomegra^ets. Ibidem Syrupus de Bizantijs. Ibidem Sirupus de infusione Rosarum
viridium, or greede Roses. Ibidem Syrupus de Rosis siccis, or dried Roses. i^.
Syrupus de succo Rosarum. Ibidem Syrupus de Iuiubis. Ibidem Syrupe of
Maidenhayre comp. Ibidem Syrupe of Maydenhayre simp. Ibidem Syrupe of the same.
Ibidem Syrupe of Mugworte. Ibidem Syrupus de Limonibus. 28 Syrupus de Cetrach.
Ibidem Syrupe of Buglosse. Ibidem Syrupe of the same. Ibidem Sapo Moschato.
Ibidem Sugar Roset. 34 Sacculum, or scutum. 36
T.
THeriaca Galenj. Fol. 2^ Trifera sarasenica. Ibidem Trochisci Diarhodon
abbatis. 29 Trochisci de Violis. Ibidem Trochisc de Squilla. Ibidem Trochisci
de Theriaci. Ibidem Trochisci diacorallion* Ibidem Trochisci de Camphora.
Ibidem Trochisci de Alchachengj. Ibidem Trochisci de Myrrha. Ibidem Trochisci
de Moscho. Ibidem Trochisci de Rubarbaro. Ibidem Trochisci de Spodio. Ibidem
Trochisci de Absinthio. Ibidem Trochisci de Eupatorio. Ibidem Trochisci de
terra sigillata. Ibidem Trochisci de Ambra. Ibidem Tela Galterij. Ibidem
V
VNguentum Apostolicum. 31 Vnguentum Rorarum. Ibidem Vnguentum basilicum maius.
Ibidem Vnguentum Aureum. Ibidem Vnguentum basilicum minus. Ibidem Vnguentum
populeon. Ibidem Vnguentum martiaton. Ibidem Vnguentum Aregon. Ibidem Vnguentum
Dialthea. 32 Vnguentum Agrippae. Ibidem Vnguentum Diapompholigos. Ibidem
Vnguentum de Enulacampana. Ibidem Vnguentum contra scabiem. Ibidem Vnguentum
pro pueris scabiosis. Ibidem Vnguentum desiccatiuum Rubrum. 33 Vnguentum contra
lumbricos. Ibidem Vnguentum Resumptiuum. Ibidem Vnguentum Album. Ibidem
Vnguentum Matritum. Ibidem Vnguentum Aegyptiacum. Ibidem Vnguentum Citrinum.
Ibidem Vnguentum Neapolitanum. Ibidem Another Vnguentum. c. Ibidem Vnguentum
Galeni. 34 Vnguentum pro Combustione ignis, to heal white fire. Ibidem
U^pours, and Parfumes. 39
W
WAter for soar Even. Fol. 37 Water for the Web. 38 Water of Furnerius for
Cankers. Ibide Water most sweet. Ibide Water to make sleep. 40 Water for the
Palsy. Ibide Waters composed. 41 Water of Quintessence. Ibidem Water of life,
called Aqua vitae. 42 Water to kill the Canker, by sir Anthony Heuenigham
Knight. Ibidem


And thus end the names of Compounds.

The end of the Book of Compounds, and here after follows the Book of the
use of certain Compounds.


Sickness. NOw you have endded your Table, with ye names of compoudes There are
certain words, very hard for me to understand, as when you do name
Apophlegmatismus, Dropax, Liniment. c. I know not what they do mean, by
their proper names: I pray you tell me the significations.


Health. WHen you come to Apophlegmatismus, it is a singular good medicine to
purge phlegm by vomit, or else to draw from ye head, ^uill gross humours,
is used sometime, as I have rehearsed in the proper place of Apophlegmatismus,
before spoken.

And by mixture understand, what sundry Confections, and Electuaries, be
mingled together, to be taken in the morning, or else three hours before
repast of meat and drink, to purge choler. c.

Confectura, is a medicine mingled of Simples, or some meat dygested: as cibus
confectus, meat digested. There are sundry confections, as Confectio Hamech.
c.

Electu^rium is commonly known, made moyste with Honey, Sugar, pouders for to
cleanse humours, being taken in the morning, in Bolo, that is in the same
mass, rolled with Sugar, or else in Potione, or drunk with waters, according to
the complexion: as to the choleric least, and most to the Melancholy person*
by the r^ason of his earthly nature. And of Electuries be divers, and of sundry
inventions, as Rasis made one for an Heathen king, whose name was Almansor. To
this king he writes much, concerning bodyly health, and to put away
pensiveness, heaviness, and Melancholy, he made Elestuarium Laetificans Rasis.

Electuarium de succo Rosarum of Roses, Electuarium frigidum Cophonis of one
called Cophe. Read of this man, and many mo, in the work of Mesue.

Electuarium gemmarum of precious stones. c. with many mo worthy Electuaries,
profitable for mankind: some warming, and some cooling. c.

Tragea, are sundry pleasant pouders, mingled together, which are cast upon
delicate mea^es, or put in Wine against cold in the Stomach, or Colic,
wholesome for the Melancholy, or Phlegmaticke body, which is cold or wyndy.

Conserve is known, as of Prunes, Barberies. c. and will conserve and keep
the strained fruits, wherein spices with Sugar, and sometime sweet waters
are sodden together, to make it both to last in it self, and pleasure much
the receiver, which shall eat thereof, Morning, and Evening. Also young
fruits, as Nuts, Pears. c. and flowers may be conserved, preserved, and
condited in Syrupes. Keeping their form, and goodness, with much virtue.

Trifera sa^acenica against frenzy, Melancholy, and coldness. c. was inueted of
the Saracens, to be drunk in wine.

Esdra was made by Esdras ye holy man, when the people of Israel were in
captivity, in great mysery and affliction of mind: this was the bodyly remedy
for all the pains of the head, coming of cold.

Aurea Alexandria was made in Alexandria, used for the singular virtue against
cold reumes, and to comfort the brain: like as gold excells al other metals
in riches, so doth this al other in virtue.

Lohoch is a pleasant thing, as Lohoch Sanum, Lohoch de Pino. c. This Lohoch
is to like or melt under the tongue, against pains in the throat, and
Lunges, and is good to help the cough.

Syrupe of Liquorice, Horehound. c. are made Simple or compound, to be taken a
mornings and eueninges, some be hot and some be cold.

Rob is a certain thing made harde, and put into medecines: there is Dia rob,
very wholesome for the liver, and put into medecines for the mouth as in
gargarisme.

Decoction is a drink most wholesome to cleanse the body, or to restrain, or
else may be put in Clisters either to purge or stop according to* the
nature of the sickness. When ye will purge, take opening seeds, leaves Barks,
roots, c. with Sugar, sees them, then strain them through a clean woollen
cloth, add to Sugar: let the patient drink a mornings, two or three days.
And when you stop decocte Planten, Shepherds purse, gum Arabike. c. strayn
it and drink it morning and evening. Note also that Syrupes and decoctions be
best new, specially the decoction which will not last long.

Iulep is not sodden so thick as a syrupe, but is clear made with sondery
good waters and clean Sugar, and is wholesome for the Liver, as of ye waters of
Cicory, Endiue or Syrupes and waters together. Infus^on, is when the
Apothecaries do for twelve or xxiiii. hours, put purging medecines in Water,
as Rhabarbe, Agarike, Succo rosa^um c. and then strain them forth to drink
and purge in the morning.

Trochisces are many, as of Cappers, Wormwood, Rhabarbe c. and are dry like
small tablemen, used in medecines, beaten into powder and may be long kept.

Sufuf is a goodly Aromatike powder, made of spices as Galanga. c.

Sief is made for sore even, white and hard in the form of a little Sugar
lofe, but scant an inch long, which must be steped in Rose Water, and women's
milk, to be applied to the even, to help them.

Collyrium is made of Sief, when it is soft, or dissolved for sore even.

Pills are of sundry kinds and natures, of great strength virtue, to expulse
evil matter, and may be taken at evening morning, and Ante cibum: according to
their natures as I have written. But old Pills are dangerous new, are good,
how be it, perilous for very fat bodies. There are also Pills restraining, or
stopping, as for flixes.

Suffimentum* is sondry pouders for women, cast upon coals, whose smoke doth
subtly pass into the body, or matrix, and sometime for men.

Nasalia are wholesome things to be put into the nose, to comfort the brayn and
stop the bleeding at the nose

Frontasia are good to reconcile sleep, to be applied to the forehed, ye length
twelve inches.

Masticatorium, to champ upon, to draw forth phlegm from the head and to
cleanse the teeth.

Gargarismus, is to gargle in the mouth, not to swallow it down, to cleanse the
mouth, throat, and teeth, put in warm to.

Glitter is ministered beneath, and are of sundry kinds: relaxyng, binding and
restoring, and must be ministered, neither to cold, for Wind, nor to hoate,
for excoriation or skaldyng, But temperate to cleanse and work his proper
effect. Clisters are good for the stone, and when one can take no Purgation by
the mouth, Clisters are most best.

Athanasia is so named, because it is so excellent in goodness, against the
immoderate flux menstruall in women, it is called a medicine immortal: of
which I shall speak of more, in a particular Book by it self God willing.

Epithema, is used inwardly for the Liver, and also fine Wolle, or raw silk
quilted, and steeped in waters and pouders, accordingly. Scarlet in Grain, is
wholesome for the same purpose.

Liniment is made to anoint, or make soft, having no wax therein.

Pess^s is made to be applied, into the secret place of a woman, to help the
evils of the Matrix.

Sac^ulum is a bag or quylte, wherein Spytes cordial, with wholesome herbs
are put in, and made warm with wine, vinegar, or sweet Water, and so applied
to the stomachs of sick folks.

Cerot is made of Wax, Spyte, and Oil, spread upon leather, and applied to the
breast. c. as Cerotum Galenj pro stomacho.

Insessus is sweet herbs sodden in sweet Water and wine, in which the
patient must sit at even.

Suppositor, is to put under in at the Fundament, for to relaxe the Bellies of
weak bodies.

Fomentum is to wash the sore body with herbs, which must be much sodden,
and applied to the sore place. c.

Dropax is good for scald heads, to cleanse them: and for Women that would have
high foreheads, against Nature. For a Dropax will pull of the hair.

Emplastrum is commonly known, and is grossye made of herbs, Spices c. and
warm to be applied to the sore, or pained place of the body.

Frication, is rubbing or chafyng of the body, with warm Clothes in the
morning.

Dentifricium, is made of things to cleanse the Teeth, and make them white: as
with dried Mallow roots c.

With many more pretty and apt notes of Medicines, but these shall suffyce for
mans health: which the preparers of medycines, must wisely mark and observe,
with these xxi. notes following. i. Must first serve God, foresee the end, be
clenly, pity the poor. ii^ Must not be suborned for money, to hurt mankynde.
iii^ His place of dwelling shop to be clenly to please ye senses wtall iiii His
guard must be at hand, with plenty of herbs, seeds roots v To sow, set, plant,
gather, preserve and keep them in due time. vi. To read Dioscorides, to know ye
natures of plants herbs. c. vii To invent medecines to chose by colour* taste,
odour, figure c. viii To have his morters, stills, pots, filters, glasses,
boxes clean and sweet, c. ix. To have Charcoles at hand, to make decoctions,
syrupes. c. x. To keep his clean wares close, and cast away the baggage, xi^
To have two places in his shop, one most clean for the Phisik and a baser
place, Thapoticarye.
for Chirurgie stuff. xii That he neither increase, nor diminish the
Phisicions bill, and keep it for his own discharge. xiii That he neither buy
nor sell rotten drugs, xiiii That he peruse often his wares, that they corrupt
not. xv That he put not in quid pro quo, without aduysement, xvi That he may
open well a vein for to help the pl^uresy. xvii. That he meddle only in his
vocation. xviii. That he delyte to reed Nicolaus Myrepsus, Valerius Cordus,
Iohannes Placaton, the Lubik. c. xix That he do remember his office. is only to
be ye Phisicias Co^ke. xx That he use true measure and weight. xxi To remember
his end, and the judgment of God: and thus I do commend him to god, i^ he be
not covetous, or crafty sekig his own lucre, before other men's health, succour
comfort.



Sickness. I Assure you if the Apothicary do godly observe these plain rules,
he can not do amiss: but shall please almighty God, profit the common wealth
in his calling. Finally quiet his conscience, live well. I pray you show unto me
a little of the wayghtes and measures, and so make an end of this part which is
of medicines.


Health. IF I should speak much of weight and m^sure, that I could not well do,
without I should allege the learned man Georgius Agricola, de mensuris
ponderibus, who makes the distinction of al the measures of this world, of
every age people. Who I do wish that you do often times read for this present
time let this suffice for weight, as fol^oweth, for this little book passed be
fore.

The whighte of A pound. li. An uncle. A dragme.. A scruple. A Grain. G
The weight of of each part, ana. A quarter, q. Half. ss. A handful. M.


Note also that the Apoticaryes, do deuyde a pound thus.
li..xii..i..viii..iii..i. G. xx.

Further there is a measure called Pugillum, or a little handful, noted thus.
Another note for wayghtes and measures.
P

And ever measure your Herbs by the handeful. M. your Flowers by the. P.

Your roots and seeds by weight.... c, But sometime the roots are used in
number, as in decoction. c.

The liquorice and pouders, by wayght, as the seeds.

Fruits are used in number, as Apples, Prunes, Mirobalans c. not by wayght,
as.. li. but i.ii.iii iiii.v. c.

Also when you do come to decoction, or seething of your things: Consider that
you first have pure clean vessels, as Iron or stone, avoid stinking brass, as
much as you may, and prepare white mettle to make in your decoctions, with very
clean water: then you must have your roots clean scraped and sodden. Why the
roots first? Mary because they be harder, then any other thing in see thing
or decoction* Why roots are first sod in* decoctio. whiflowers are last put
in decoction.
therefore they had need of much seething to make them tender, next after them
put in your seeds. And last of al your Flowers or Scene leaves, for because
they be tender, will quickly pass away by smoke vapour and air: let it sees
neither upon a sharpe quick fire, nor upon a slow, but upon a mean, unless
it require much hast. But after the seething let it stand by, in some
convenient place: and then strain the same Decoction, through a clean white
Woollen, or Scarlet in grain cloth, and so reserve it to use of Medecin.

Suppositours must be made of Honey, sodden to a thickness and tempered with a
stick, How to make Suppositers.
and when it is almost sodden, then put your Salt, and Hiera picra Simplex
when your Honey is almost thick, or else the Hiera will lose his strength, then
roll it with butter in the form of a spindle, smaller at one end, then at the
other in length, according to the body as a Finger, two fyngers in length.

Clisters you have the making of them before, but because trouble and time hath
prevented me, Clisters.
I cold not doo^ so much in Clisters. c. as by Gods grace. I do intend
hereafter. Therefore I commend thee to Nicholaus Myrepsus. V. Cordus. I.
Placatom, and also to one of this time of little fame because he hath written
but a little book, but yet this work is excellent good for a Poticary, his
name is Petrus Gorias Bitriscensis. Note also, that you must have your Clister
pipe, and bladders in store, to minister the Clisters, neither very hot nor
cold, for fear of wynd, or scalding in the guts. Also I have said before,
your Clisters must be first of decoction with your roots, then seeds, last
Scene, then strained, and so your Oils and Hiera picra c. with a little
recoction, and so given a pint. c. Even so there be Clisters restraining and
stopping c.

Syrupes some be Simple, that is made of one thing, putting there unto Sugar,
Syrupes, simple copoude,
or honey, and this Syrupe is made of the juice of Herbs, or fruits as Borage
c. Either the juice is stamped and strained, clarifyed or else the herb is
sodden in water, until the water be consumed to the third part, then strain
it, and put the decoction again into the Kettle, or Pan, and recocte it
again, putting in the Sugar, compounded with sundry Syrupes, as Grossery, as
Spices, and Seeds, are decocted, and sodden together.

Iuleps must be sodden but lightly, made thin and clear, and are made of
Uyolets, Roses, or Syrupes, and Waters together.

Infusion must stand al the night together, as Agarike, Rubarbe, Scene c. and
stilled water, in the morning strongly pressed forth into a clean vessel, to
the use of potion, to purge.

A stone of Marble must be prepared, to cast Manus Christi, or Lozinges upon:
which Lozinges must be made of Sugar, put into the Pan with Rose or sweet water,
sodden to a thickness, and when it is so thick, that a drop thereof will be
clear, like Uenice Terebintyne, then put in your Cordial pouders, or Dias,
stirring it with a stick, cast it abroad upon your stone. Note also, that
your stone be either anointed, with Oil of Almondes, or else sifted over with
ye powder of Cinnamon, whereby you may take up your Table, to make your
Lozenges* The names and quantities of them, are before rehearsed in the
Compounds.

Electuarium must be sodden thick, and kept close, as Electuarium de succo
Rosarum. c. and..j. of any Electuary, is sufficient to be taken at once in the
morning, with distilled waters accordingly.

Pills..j. made in five, or seven Pills, is sufficient to purge the Body
withal. Pouders, Syrupes, and Waters must be always prepared for Pills, and
to make them new, beaten in a clean Mortar together, and kept close.

For moist, or liquid things shortly to besaid.

Amphora is.xlviij. Sextarius, and this Sextarius doth contain a Pint and a
half, which is ounces.xxiiij. that is. l.ij. Romayne wayght.

Vrna is half of Amphora, which.xxiiij. Sextaries, here in Englande are two
gallons, a half. And thus I do end of these medicines aforesaid, and what
faults be escaped, amends shall be made, God willing. Haec sunt vsitata
Medicamina quae in officinis Medicamentarijs vbi{que} fere prostant, reliqua ad
praescriptum Medicorum parentur, quod non difficile est in communibus
exercitato.

Valeto.


Gulielmus Bullenus.
January, anno salutis. 1562.
Hereafter follows the Book of the use of Sickmen, and wholesome medicine.
The Book of the use of sick men, and medicines.


Surfeyte, age, and sickness, are enemies all to health,
Medicines to mend the body, excel all worldly wealth:
Pisicke shall flourish, and in danger will give cure,
Till death vnknit the lively knot, no longer we endure.
The Book of the use of sick men, and medicines.
Sickness. ALthough medicines, ^s composicions, be well made in all poyncts,
wanting no Simples, yea, and also the Simples are good and new, and the
Apothicary cunning: yet it oftentimes hapeneth that the same good medicines do
hinder me more, than my painful dolorous sickness: in whom is then the
fault? I pray you.


Health. The fruit of rash ministracion of medicines.
IT should appear, neither in the medicine, nor in the Apothicary, but in the
indiscreet geeuer, or rash Physician, which men, be the death oftentimes of
many, that put their trust in them, as evil Medicine is. I therefore shall
show thee, what is to be done, against such evil accidents, if they do
chance, how to remove them. And how thou shalt behave thy self wisely, in
receiving pocions. c. For in the time of sickness, sometime we loose, or
make the belly laxative, when it is stopped, even so we do restrain, stop and
bind the belly, when it doth immoderately run with laxes. Sometime we do
mortify or kill evil humours, that rebel against Nature. And also we restore
to nature, when it is decayed things restorative, A good Kitchen, is a good
Apothicaryes shop.
as Cordials, Dias Syrups according, with Kitchen physic: which Kitchen I
assure thee, is a good Poticaries shop. When we make evacuation with laxatiues,
then use we Scammonie, Rubarbe, Cassiafistula. c. But when we restrain or
bind the body, we give Acatia and Opium. In restoring, repairing, or bynding
nature, then we minister ^n meates drinks, other convenient medicines,
Diarhodon, Triasandali, Diamargariton, c. And there is an other kind of cure,
when the matter is not mature or ripe, crude couched fast, which must be
displaced with decoctions, warm syrupes and medicines acordinge, which I shall
declare hereafter. But here I will speak some thing of Medicines solutiue, or
laxatyue: and then next of constric^iue, or bynding. Thyrdly, of the manner of
restoring, helping, or mending. Fourthly to digest, change alter. Four things
considered attraction, dissolving. c.
Now concerning the first, which is medicines solutiue: we use them three manner
of ways. First by attraction or drawing. Secondly by dissolution or wasting.
Thirdly, by expulsing and driving forth. Then we do this diverse and sundry
ways, according to the diversity of the place where the matter is contained
within the body. Then we loose relaxe, with Benedicta laxatiua, or Catharico
imperiali, or such like electuaries. We make attraction with Aloes, and
certain of the Opiattes. c. We do expel with Scylla, washed in the waters of
Tamarindes, such like: and as the matter is, so do we work, and prepare
pocions, according to the diversity of the place, where the evil humour or
matter lies hidden, which we intende to dispacthe, by Gods grace, without
whose furderaunce, nothing comes to good luck, and all our labour is in
vain, although we watch, rise, study, labour. c. Therefore let the minister
of the medicine diligently foresee the verity of the matter, so that he may
minister one or two pocions of medicines, according to the property and place.
As for example, if ye matter be in the stomach, liver, or places near the
same, one pocion shall suffice to evacuate and expulse the same: but if ye
evil matter do lye in places distant, and far from the stomach, as it
happens to them that have the gou^e, whose grief is in the Feet. We gieue
more medicines, Property and place, must be observed.
to dissolve, remove, and open the matter, which is so far of the stomach:
then we give the Juice of Polipodie, and Agarike, and the Pills called de
Serapino, or Pills de Lapide Armenio, descriptionis Mesuae, and such like.
Then secondly, we use to give medicines which have virtue, to alter, to draw
and attract the losed humours to the stomach, The virtue of bitter medicines
is great
and so dissolve the with Benedicta, Hieralogodion, and Hiera picra. c. For
bitter things do penitrate pearse sooner to the extreme parts, do purge more,
then do any other med^cines. Thyrdly, we give an expulsiue, and expel the
humours that be gathered already drawn in the stomach with, Psileum. c.


Sickness. But I pray you, how do you use these medicines?


Health. IN manner following. Medicines to expel, we give one in ye morning, the
second at Noone, the third at Night: the cause may so require, Apocion mus^ be
gieuen at three sundry times, to remove and expulse matter from the stomach.

A Caveat. to beware.


the one at evening, another at midnight, the third in the morning. Take heed
also, that the humours be not to much dissolved* in the second mynistration:
but after the first pocion, the Patient may sleep, because the pocion is more
weaker, when it is once drunk, than when it is taken two times, for being
drunk twice, then it is double in strength. Some men may not away with
medicines: well, to such we gieue but only a digestiue, and an expulsiue. And
to them that are not able to receive two, Mes natures must be observed, a
little medicine will work much of some men, and a strong medicine, will skan^
work, on some other man.
we give them but one, but that one in effect, must be as good as the three:
which must dissolve, attract, and expel, which way of purgation is not
hurtful. For Physicians seldom times do give two, or three pocions, but it is
greater oversight: for if one pocion will purge, how much more will two or
three: for one strong pocion, h^th not that virtue, and efficacy that three
men's pocions have: although one strong pocion, and vehement medicine, do
quickly purge the nether parts of the Stomach, even so it may be so quick,
that it will penetrate to the extreme parts, as ye head, hands, feet.. Also
the virtue of the medicine, if it be weak in operation, it doth vanish away,
through the passage of the unapt parts, whereby that it cannot reach to the
extreme members. And also, when we do intend to purge the extreme parts, then
we do give two preparatives, to the intent that the third, may have the ^reer
way, and more effectual passage. If we must needs give but one, then (...) it
be done by little, little, oftentimes, so yt the matter may be purged, fair,
softly, and not rashly, nor suddenly, as it chances in many places, where
the Patient doth receive such medicines, yt he goes forty, or three score
times to the stool. Requiem eternam, with a spade.
Such medicines once do cause the patient, to have sung for them, Requiem
eternam, dona eis domine, which is, O Lord, give them everlasting rest, for
sure we be, through such medicines, in this World, they shall never have
rest, nor health. For these swift, strong purgacions, do weaken ye body, dry
up the blood, consume nature bring conuulsion, or palsy, finally retain evil
humours, and let the good humour out. Therefore* Hippocrates saith, after
sudden euacuacion, or replecion, to hot, or to cold, be deceitful, and
utterly adversaries to Nature.


Sickness. I Had thought to have made no more to do, but when my belly had bin
costive, or bound, to have taken any thing that had bin laxative, but now I
perceive by so doing, I should have done my self more hurt than good: For by
such actions doings, I am brought into this case, Like as heate consumes, eve
so do Physic money.
but from henceforth, I will take better heed, God aforne. For so help me God
and holli^ame, gossope Health, I got such a sickness in Flaunders, that by ye
space of two years, consumed my money among the Phisicions, that in ye end,
they had all my riches gain, and I nothing but sickness payne: then like wise
men, they counsayled me, to go home into my native Country where, said they,
the Air should be my chyefe Phisicion. Even so I did, but my sickness is so
inveterate old, that ye Air was unsufficient to be my help: yet the country
is very pleasant, ye know it very well, it is Suffolk, whereas very few
Physicians do inhabit, of mine acquaintance, but only an old Empiric, called
Ihon Preston, some take him to be a great clarke, but I think he is learned
beyond the mark. For all men in that country, he is greatly sought unto: for
he plays our Lady of Walsingham, Ihon Presto, called Ihon of Ston^ham
giving as much health for a penny, as she did holynes: yet custom hath
comenced him amongst the common people, to be their doctor. I was this mans
patient a great time, but yet I never heard him talk of Hippocrates, and
Galen, he troubles not his house with any of their books. What shall I say,
all the time that I was with him, he used to minister his purgacions by chance
medley, to his pacients, happy man by his ^ole, some speed well, but I do
remain sick still. And as I do perceive by these three rules, that the fault
was in abusing, misusing, and not duly ministering of his medicines: how, and
in what manner therefore should I receive, or give my friend medicine, without
error accordingly, I beseech thee gentle Health tell me.


Health. When purging medicines are to be geeuen, first minister herbs and
drinks to provoke vryne.
WHen you will give any purgation, or medicine, diet your patient first, by ye
space of a day or two, with meates or suppings, to provoke vryne: as the
^roathes of flesh fish, boyl^d On^ons with fat Pork. Also give the patient
two or three times poached Eggs, sauced with a little Wine Pepper, or herbs
mollifiing or softening the belly, as Arage, called Atriplex, Mallowes Mercury.
c. For which cause saith Hippocrates, when any may will purge the body, he must
first prepare ye matter to be flowing, that when the purgation doth come, it
may easily pass, cary away all the evil humour, Preparatives must be first
given. then purgation.
without grief or hurt. And this must be given to hard Complexions, which will
not easily give place to purgation: for in case the medicine lo^e not, it will
imprison, shut up, and close, both the humour the purgation, rather than purge
accordingly. Upon which occasion, saith Galen, these Methodians, while as they
make light of medicines preparative, Methodici, be Physicians yt observe
certain rules by art.
they enclose the matter, and make no evacuation, therefore they cause not only
the sickness of the Lunges, but also of the Joints, as Hands and Feet.


Sickness. Now sir, for that you are very sensible, talk in good order, I pray
you furthermore, if you be not weary of my poor company: show me how that I
may best prepare medicine for my self and others accordingly.


Health, FOr asmutch as I do lack many of my Companions, which be now a
days, The causes of sickness.
al on thy side, enticed by idleness, surfeit, their companion gluttony, now
are they all with thee, I know them well by sight, but I keep very little
copany with them. For if I so did, I should loose my name, be called no more
Health, but miserable wretched Sickness, as Fever* Dropsy, palsy, blind, lame,
frantic, consumed, rupture, gouty, pocky. c. Yet would God, would God, if thou
they be not past cure: I wish you all on my side again. For I confess, many
of you have much wealth, but al you lack Health. But to want both, if age
approach, I promise thee it is the first hell, the greatest extreme misery,
and most wretched enemy to mankind, that can be invented, how say thou, is
it not so? Thou can not denay it. Well, yet it is a manifest sign of health
to seek it. Continue therein, thou shalt find it: and for this thy honest
demand, how medicines should be prepared You shall prepare them in this
manner, if you quicken your purgation with Scamonie quicken it.x. or.xv. days,
How to prepare medicine
before it be given: so that the said Scamonie may be incorporated with the
spices. But note that the Scamonie be well rubbed between the hands, or
chafed in a mortar, with oil of Roses, or Violets, or syrupe of Roses, well
wrought between the hands, putting there unto a little Masticke. For Masticke
hath a property, that it will let, not suffer Scamonie to cleave to the folds
of the stomach, which oftentimes causes a bloody flixe, excoriation of the
guts. But by this mixture, the malice of the medicine is excluded, and will do
no harm: but if any chance happen in any such case, it will be soon helped.
But there be many bloody villains, Scamonie is perilous, except it be well
prepared, and doth kill many one.
which will give Medicines immediately, after they have put in Scamonie, before
it be well incorporated with spices. For the longer it is incorporated, so
much it will purge the more effectually and gently. Now if you have not this
medicines prepared, and of necessity it must be given, or ministered in such
case: let the Scamonie be rubbed or chafed, as is aforesaid, with oil Syrupe
of Roses, a little clean Masticke, thus being quickened, it may be given
after.ij. or.iij. days: you must also roast ye medicine, in this manner
following. Take a gray Costarde, or a Quince, cut it a sunder ouerthwarte in
the midst, pike out the Coare, then put in the powder of Scamonie, then put it
together again: when this is done, wrap it close in a went linen clothe, and
cover it in the hot Emers of small coals and ashes. When it is well roasted,
the take it forth, and mingle it with a Medicine, and being thus prepared, it
may be given after two days. But take heed still, that it be not finely
poudered, for fear of cleaving to the Stomach, through which may come a
bloody flyxe, and excoriation of the guts: but it must be beaten grossly, that
it may tarry the longer, or more time in ye stomach. And why so? Mary, then it
shall dissolve the lurking humours, which be hidden privily, in the extreme
parts, as head, hands, and gouty feet. Lurkinge humours howe to find them
and expulse them.
But if you either will receive, or give a pocion, then temper it with Rubarbe,
Mirobalans, or Agarike, and let it stand a day and a night, according as the
medicine shall require, wherewith the matter shall be purged, at Morning,
sometime at Even, as I shall declare hereafter. If a man be strong, lusty, and
not weak, then he may take the substance in the pocion. If he be feeble,
tender, or weak, then to strain it, and drink the liquor only: thus, or
after this manner, is to prepare medicines.


Sickness. How and in what manner, do you give solutiue medicines?


Health. SOlutiue medicines, be sometime given to the whole, and sometime to
the sick. Medicines so^iti^e. why they are give.
To the sick, to expulse syckenesse: to the whole to preserve them in health.
Then when thou myndest to minister to thy self, or to any other, first
consider ye sycknes, and the matter whereof it grows, and the place infected.
When these things be well noted, then as the matter shall require, even so
minister accordingly, as is said before. But consider this, that the medicine
must not be offered, until such time, as the matter or humour be decocted,
riped made soft, The chief sign of digestion.
whereupon saith Hippocrates, we must purge digested matter, but not move
crude, raw matter. c. The digestion of matter is known, by thickness of
Uryne, in case a thyn vryne passed before the said thycke Uryne by at^enuacion,
but is a thick Uryne, come before the thin, then it is a Fever. Wherefore know
first the distinction of the matter in this behalf. Now if it be vndigested,
use incisiues, and things that provoke vryne: then after you have provoked
vryne with Herbs accordingly, It helps much to nature, to provoke Uryne.
then may you minister your medicine. But on the other side, when you will give
a Medicine la^atyne, to the whole body. First, consider what humour doth
abound, and the same is that, which causes the payne and sickness in the body:
therefore purge this cause, That humour which doth abound, purge the same The
cause of sickeneess.
then the effect shall cease, by Gods grace. Now furthermore, if there be two
humours, equal abounding together, extremely in superfluity, then there must
be more Simples, put unto the composition, according to the quality or quantity
of the humour, to purge the same. As when choler and blood do abound, then
purge with confectio Hamech. c For if two humours be superfluous, and then if
you give to purge but one humour, Hippocrates. Purge that which should be
purged, or else meddle
the body will be molested, sick, and grieved: and for this cause Hippocrates
saith. Si qualia oportet purgari purgentur, confert been ferunt, si vero non:
contrarium: which is, if such things be purged, which ought to be purged, is
good and auaylable and men bare it well, if not, then it is clean contrary and
evil.


Sickness. What sign or manifest token, is then to be given, whereby a man
should perceive the humours by, I pray you say on?


Health. PArtly they may be known by certain things, what humours to abound,
Howe to know what humour doth abound, by his proper token.
or ought to be purged or clesed, within ye bodies of Men. or Women. As
example* if any man be lean, or wat his flesh, yea, or whiteshe of complexio
or fleshy, have salt spittle in his mouth, with bitterness of taste, in such
bodies salt phlegm doth chiefly abound, and needs purgation: but they which
feel ye moisture, or spettle sweet in their mouths, have plenty of swelling
veins appear in their faces, and also have noysomnes abhorring in their
stomach, Of sweet phlegm.
with aptness to vomit, and vryne red, thyck, oyley, this is a manifest sign,
of ye abundance of sweet phlegm. Further, if any man do feel tartnes, or
sowernes in his mouth, Tart phlegm.
with quick appetite, no thyrst or desire to drink in this case, there tart
fleume greatly aboudeth, doth raygne, when all ye spettle seems like vinegar.
Sometime the mouth doth feel no taste, is unsavoury, feeling nothing but like
Well water: neither hath appetite or drines, desiring neither meat nor drink:
this is an unsavoury phlegm, and needs purgation. Signs manifest declaring
what humours bear the greatest rule, in the bodies of Men and women without
which it is not possible to purge, according to art^ but rather to kylle.
Nature hath oftentimes rebellyng against her bitterness in the mouth, but no
saltnes, the vryne thyn, yellow or reddysh in colour: this doth declare that
red choler hath the victory. Great strong bitter vomits, as bitter gaul in
the mouth, without vomits, and urine yellow or ruddish not very thin: these
signs do declare, there doth reign in the Body, evil corrupted and infested
coler. But if it, be of less thynnesse, rednes, and bytternes: then it is
coler, vitelline or like yolks of Eggs. that doth abound. Well, if the vryne
be yellow and thyn, having small residence in the bottom, and great bytternes
in the mouth, then Citrine colour, is a Lord, and rules above nature,
therefore this and the rest* ought to be purged with medicines, made according
to the art, to put these cruel enemies away, which else will put the whole
body, with all the members, Signs to know when Melancholy doth approach* after
whom comes the quartaine.
in peril of dissolucion and death Mark when slouthfulnes, dullness, idleness,
weariness, and heaviness be greater, than they be accustome^ to be: the appetite
increased, and thirst diminished, and all the members, as though they had ben
weary, after some painful labour, when these signs do appear, then
Melancholy must needs be purged with speed. If the veins be full, most
chyefely in the Face, also when as the pulses be very full, with plenty of
sweet spettle in the mouth with swelling, the blushing in the face,
heaviness, painfulnes, and weariness in the shoulders, as it happens after
labour, or bearing some heavy burden, and the urine thick and red, in these men
Blood doth plentifully abound, which may be helped, by the opening of the
vein Mediana or Cephalica, or applying of boxing glasses, with skarifying the
place first if either purging do seem to long, or else the opening of the
vein, is not don accordingly. c. Electuariu of Succorosarum. c. be good to
purge blood.


Sickness. HOw then do you purge phlegm, which is one of the four Humours. I
pray you tell me? For lack of medicine, convenient for the same: there be
many which be daily cast away, as it appears by the rules of Physic.


Health, TO speak of phlegm simply, it must be purged with these Medicines,
as with Benedicta laxatiuae, Catarico imperiali: decoction of Polipodie,
Agarike. Purgers of phlegm.
c. But salt phlegm is purged with the holy bitter medicine, which the Greekes
call Hiera picra simplex, Theodoricon, Anacarde, Hyperisticon. c. Sweet
phlegm must be purged with Hyeralogodion of Memphis: and the strongest Hiera
picra, and such like things, for purging sweet phlegm, as appears in the
compounds of medicines.


Sickness. How do you purge burnt red Choler, which is hot and dry?


Health. TO purge such choler, is with Trifera Saracenica, Electuario frigido,
Oxyphoenicum, with the decoction of Mirobalans, Cassiafistula, The Manna of
Calabria is the best of the world, falls down in the night, as dew upon
flowers and leaves.
Tamarindes, Uyolets, Manna of Calabria. Choler infected, must be purged with
Anacardium, or Agni corais, which grows upon a tree in India, which tree,
gives fire of it self, brings forth fruit like unto Labes harts, but very
small, having a bloody juice: of this Rasis makes a good cofection, for simple
take it is venomous. There is also an excellent Antidotu, in the.217. Cap. of
Nicolaus Mirepsus, in his book of Antidotaries called Theodoreton, or Gods
gift, wherein Anacardus in brought is. c. Which medicine doth help the head,
Theodoraton a divine gift.
lunges, stomach, liver, spleen, gout* c. And also purges Choler, so do
with Hiera picra simplex, Rubarbe, Diaprunes. c But when Melacholy, that cold,
dry, wretched Saturnus humour creeps in, with a lean, pale, or swartysh
colour, which reigns upon solitary, careful musing Men: which humour at
length, breeds and brings forth a terryble Child, called the Fever
quarten, Melancholy the worst humour of nature he b^getteth a son called the
Quarten. Compounded humour may not be purged with a simple medicine, for they
are to weak.
the same if he be not corrected, and banished away, will be his fathers
death. When he appears, correct him thus, as with the strongest
Hieralogodion, with the decoction of Scene, Epithymum, Hamech. c. But in case
the humour be compounded, then you must also use compounded medicine: or
medicine simple, doth rather hurt, than help in sutth cases. And why so? Mary
being simple, it purges but one humour, suffers ye other corrupted humours
to remain: what is ye cause thynk you? Truly none other, but yt it is to
weak, lacks strength and force, which ye compounded medicines. As example.
George Tomson of Kelshall in Suffolke, hath a Fever tercian (well) your good
will is to help him, A^ example between a simple a compound medicine.
you give him a simple medicine: but what doth your simple medicine profit
him? Nothing at all. For he which hath a tercian, must be purged of choler, in
such a case, because phlegm is mixed with choler, your simple may rather put
forth phlegm, which is moist, and not move choler, The fire will get the
victory, if the Water be not equal, or have the mastery. Good intents and
good acts, ^e two things.
which is hot and dry, yea, the very cause and worker of the rigour in this
tercian, and so when nature hath moisture drawn away from her, which should
quench the heate, then to conclude, choler shall be come the more hoatter,
vehementer, and cruel to nature, through a simple medicine, foolyshly given of
a good intent,

When blood doth abound, or breaks forth at the nose, commonly on the right
nosthrell, or spetting of blood. c. then diminish it, as I have said by
dyscreete opening the vein, with a fine Lanset, and no flem with a beard,
like to a blood Iron, that Smiths do let horse blood withal. For they will
sometime cut a vein through both the sides, cause a cramp. c. Ignorant
Barbers, their fruits.
Also in diminishyng of blood, let not the Surgeon without counsel, or
upon ancient experience, take or open the said vein or veins. As example,
William Downaby of Iken hath a grievous payne in his head with ache, he can
take no rest. c. there is no remedy, but to let him blood: the common Barbar
doth take his Lanset, opens a vein, as ye blind man shoots at a Crow, he
takes the first that comes to hand, or appears greatest, perhaps a Synewe,
which may chance to let out ye spirits of life, kill him: well, in case this
Barber, for the pains of ye head, intend to open Basilica. which is vena
interna, or axillaris, growing through the arm hoale, brings both from the
heart and Liver, which are his roots, and through ignorance, do open a great
sinew hard by it, which is like a vein: in which sinew the spirits of life
do swiftly run up and down, mixte with the blood of life. What hath he done
now? Mary slain one. And what is their refuge in such a case? The sign, say
they, was in ye place, he would be needs letten blood. But in case if ye
Barbers cunning be better, and if he open Basilica without hurt, what doth this
help ye head? Nothing, or else very little at all. But if you will help W.
Downabies head, open Cephalica, called vena externa, with a long cut, to let
out gross blood, foul matter, and cut not deep, for fear of apostumacion:
this vein I say helps his head, to purge first with,.j.ss. of ye pills of
Hiera simplex, a day before is better. Now if his pains be in his breast, or
rightside, ye or pleurisy, then open the vein called Mediana, the middle
vein, whose parents be Basilica, and Cephalica: this Mediana or Cardiaca must
be opened somewhat overthwart, so shall he bleed well, to help the griefs
aforesaid: but when the matrix, raynes, Bladder, or Yard, be troubled with
grief, stopping, Obseruacios in blood letting.
or swelling, much pains, then in a vessel of warm Water, open vena talie
the Ankle vein, called Saphena: for this old creeping vulcans, or lame
sickness, called Sciatica, with pains in the Huccle bones, can never be better
helped, than to purge with Hiera, to anoint with Oil of the same, as appears
in the Compounds, to open the foresaid Sciatica vein, which is one of the
middle, toward the outsyde of ye foot. And thus to open veins in order, is
the best way: and when time of blood letting, is not convenient, the apply
boxes with scarification, even as the place, humour, time do require, and this
shall suffice of purging humours, with blood letting.


Sickness. I Trust to observe these your sayings very well, dear friends
Health. But how should I know, when medicines have taken their effect, and
wrought accordingly, to thend^ of their force, and virtue?


Health. THus you shall know, first, there is no man, but doth take medicine,
To know, when medicine have wrought their effect.
to put away some grief: and when the grief is past and the body quiet, and
no payne in the stomach, then the medicine have wrought his good effect. Then
you may give the broth of a Capon, Chicken, or Hen, sometime Almond milk, or
clean stewed broth, drink small Wine, of colour yellow and clean, and use
moderacion in eating and drinking, unless there follow an ephemerall Ague. Now
the next day after purging, the patient may go to the stophe, or bathe: so that
he go thither, taking no cold, or do no labour, by the space of three days,
then to use moderate exercise, and to feed upon meat, that will engender good
humours. And thus to conclude, the body, or any that are sick before time,
shall now be converted into a new nature, through the help of Nature, and
medicine?


Sickness. What else I pray you, is to be observed in medicine?


Health. THree things are to be noted, Time, Humour, and Region: where
purgation is to be ministered. First, as touching Time, Time, humour, regio^
are chiefly to be considered.
there be two dyuersityes: The one is the time of the year, and the other is
the time of the Day, and Night, in which every Humour hath his being. For
according to the variation, and alteration of the time of ye year, the manner
of the purgation must be altered and changed. And Hippocrates saith, we must
purge the upper parts of the body in Summer, the nether or lower parts in
Winter. (for why?) The humours do follow the property of time. Purge upward in
Sumer, downward in Winter.
In Sumer purge with Uomits, in Winter by the stool, not without a good
consideration of ye time, age, kind of disease, habit of ye body. For they,
which have straight throats, may not be purged with, or by Uomit, for fear
the spirit breath of life be stopped and strangled, so through choking, ye
body be killed. Again, purge not old men, by the reason of the coldness of
their complexion. In Sumer purge above, early in the morning. In Winter purge
beneath, late at night. In the Equinoctial time, prepare at even, and the next
morning after your preparatyue, purge by Electuarie. c. In extreme hot
Regions, no purgacions: in extreme cold Regions, none also. Neither in the
days, which be not temperate, as to hot with the Sun, or to cold with
Frost. c. nor in the Cauiculer days, except great need require.


Sickness. How must the day, and the night be considered, in purgacions?


Health. WHereas the time of the day and night, be in length.xxiiij. hours,
which is called the artificial day, artificial night, which.xxiiij. hours,
The day natural, and the day artfiiciall
make but one natural day, divided into four times six for the four
complexions. For every Complexion hath his government, dominion six hours.
First the blood begins at nyne at night, continues until three in the
morning. And choler from three after midnight, until nyne before noone. And
so the other two humours: first melancholy, phlegm, have each of them six
hours, wherein they do raygne, govern the body. The four complexions
reigning every one by hours
Now if it be Sumer, then you be minded to purge choler by vomyt, then you
must give the said vomit, a little before ye hour of the day. So that when it
hath remained, and stayed it self a while in the stomach, it may work in ye
hours of choler, to purge the same. In ye like appoyncted hours, so purge
melancholy downward, in his hour and make evacuation of it. If thou wilt purge
phlegm, let the patient rest a Gods name, by the space of three or four
hours in the night, then wake, and take his pocion, or medicine, a little
before Midnight, not sleep after it, until it be purged. Now if you will purge
blood, in the morning open a Ueyne, The aged, the very young, weak folk, and
women with child, may not be let blood.
except very old, or young, or people consumed, or women with child, with
such I dare not have to do. If you will purge humours, otherwise than thus,
that is observing the hours, yea, the mansions, or course of the Moon: you
shall greatly err, do more hurt than good.

Furdermore, consider the diversity of humours, if blood abound, he must be
letten forth by ye vein, Cephalica, or Mediana, c. If Choler be to much
above nature, Matter in the veins must be put forth by blood letting (...)
the belly by Clister, in the breast by vomit.
then purge by vomit: but if choler be mixed with blood, then let blood as I
have said, unless the matter be contained in the nether parts of the Belly,
then purge by Clister or pocion. c. If phlegm or melancholy be beneath, purge
downwards unless it be about ye mouth, or entrance of the stomach, or ye upper
parts of ye body: mark wisely consider the time, in all these things, for that
is the chiefest poynct of all. For every thing, said the wyseman, hath his
proper time under heaven. c. And regions by which here in this place, the
humours be considered: also the places of purging, the upper part, the nether
part, the nostrils, roof of the mouth, pores of sweating, and veins of
bleedyng, c.


Sickness. What say you then of place, in whom the matter is contained?


Health. THE place in deed, as I have said, Place where medicine should be
ministered conveniently joined with time.
must be considered in which a medicine shall be given: whether it be hot in
Summer, or to cold in Winter. If the day be to hoate, you may cast Vinegar,
Sallow branches, Violets, Water Lillies: and be in a low Uaulte, or from the
Sun, and temper the place, where you will purge. On the other part if the
place be to cold, make a fy^r of Charcoales, or a stoue, which is a fire
secret felt, but not seen. Close Windows from wind, in a pretty warm Chber,
wyath good whole hangyngs or seelyng. The pacyent to have light warm clothes,
and slippers, clean, well lined: sweet linen* as sheets, shurtes, and
Kerchiffes, a close chair, lined softly with a back, having a clean round
basin, or vessel within the same, to receive the stools or purged matter. And
then to have soft Cotton or cloth, to make clean natures privy place, you know
my meaning. Forget no sweet perfumes by art, for nature will play the stinkyng
Beast, I tell you truly. Also in this place no noise, nor utter Monkish
silence, but be mindful of some honest merry matter, or pleasant tale, or
things that will rejoice the spirits. c. Cold doth take, and is not taken.
And this place must be thus used, in the time of purgation: but styll I say,
beware that you take not cold, or rather cold take not you. For in such a
case, i^ he get the victory, then he will put you into a sheet, and send you
to the God of Qui Lazarum.


Sickness Well good sir after Qui Lazarum: Credo videre bona domini, The hope of
ye life to come*
in terra viuentium: And that do I believe, even to see the goodness of the
Lord God, in the land of the living, In Adam we have our fall.
where I shall receive all my body whole and sound, in as goodly a form, as my
father Adam was in, before his most Lamentable fall: by whom I am thus
punished, Acab will kill Na^o^h, for his vineyard.
with Misery, care, heaviness, Labour, ingratitude of mine own flesh and
friends, syckenes, pains, soreness, daily danger, to have my blood spilt
for mine own goods, prison, affliction of mind, When one descends into
himself, he shall behold fearful things
and sometime the perjured enemy doth preuaile, with fiery tongue of slander,
with a thousand crosses, which make me to stoup. And to despise the world,
which is trapped with Snares before mine eyes in each place, and then I crepe
within my self, whereas I do see mine own breast and conscience, written the
careful words of Iob, Mans Life is both short and miserable
Chapiter.xiiii. Homo natus mulieris, paucorum dierum est, repletur
inquietudine. c. Man saith he that is borne of a woman, lives but few days,
and is full of misery: few days, and yet spent in trouble, Truly there is none
other purging place, or purgatory but this: In this life we have our
purgatory, that we feel and perceive.
which Iob hath poincted here with his finger. The very manner, condition,
place, and turment, which is only Misery, divided into two kinds, the one is
the grievous affliction and Misery, which is seen with Mortal even, as I
have said before, as penury, Prison, sickness. c. The second misery is not
seen, but felt, as the inward agony, Two sundry kinds of miseries.
affliction of the spyrites: no inward consolation, continual thought,
sometime wishing that death might conquer Life, broken heart, and vexed
spirit, full of sundry inward aff^ctions, and alteracyons of mind, small rest
or quietness, sorrowful for the death of kindred, or fryendes, being changed
into bitter enemies, which is a great plague. Or goods lost, or acts done
insolently in times past: and most fearful of things to come, as doyng hurt,
or suffering harm by enemies, or turning with a sudden fall, from the
fortunate happy wheel, if it so chance, of riches, Sorrow for things past,
and fear of things to come.
health, worship, pleasure, the victory of the enemy, and pleasuring the
friend, and hearts rest. c into the pyt and dark lake of adversity: suddenly
depriued of these vain slippery things, and eftsoon linked, fetred, and
entangled, withal such evils, as the heart, and spirits, do utterly
deteste, fear, and abhor to think upon: besides the sleeping passions of
the night, with careful troubles of the spyrites, and dreams most dreadful,
Prosperity is very slippery.
of strange shapes, fearful syghtes, and pitiful appearing of the dead
Parents, Friends, Brethren, and old acquaintance. And sometime the armed Enemy,
with frounyng face, gnashyng teeth, bloody hands, do mercylesse approach to kill
me, Horrible dremes in the Night,
the sleeping naked man, embracing my delight, eftsoon the flatterer doth
please the ear, and pleasant things approach. And the flesh is soon moved,
through wicked lust, and in the twinkelyng of the eye, from dream to dream,
the spirits be so variable: that the Night to the careful Man, is the very
Image of Hell, and specyally to them which fear not God: Dreams to admonish
men to fear God.
thus he punysheth them, as Iob says, in the Night, to reform them. And by
such affliction of the night, in the time of sleep, which is brother to
death. In which time the almighty doth school mankynde, rebuke him, and suffer
the wicked Enemy to scourge him with strange visions. c. Mankynd may soon
thereby, undoubtedly behold and perceive the soul, The soul never sleeps.
Men do dream, according to their temperament or complexio.
which is lively occupied, when as the gross senses of the body. be stopped,
and in a manner dead: neither seeing, hearing. c. Now whether it be dream,
illusion, vision. c. as some do say, or the effects, or works, of the four
complexions, as the choleric man, to dream of Fire, fighting c. The
flegmatike, to dream of water. c. And so in the other two complexions, or as
Artemidorus in his book of dreams says, they do presage, divine, or show
before, what things do follow, or come after, good or bad. All these things
be great miseries, and grievous afflictions of the soul, which I most humble
desire God, Wicked spirits, do molest our spirits.
to deliver us from: and comfort us with his holy spirit, against all such
evil spyrites, which do molest and vex our spirits: which are a thousand
times more grievous inwardly, than the outward miseries of the body: as
poverty, prysonment, extreme age. The troubles of the mind be greater than
the crosses of ye body.
c. For look how much the soul is purer than the body* even so the joys,
and cares of the same, be more plentiful. And this occasion hath moved me,
being a sick man, to wander from our former talk. And why? Only because you
spake of Qui Lazarum, which I have heard songe, in a lamentable tragedy
perhaps: but my song shall be, Beati mortui qui in domino moriuntur: Blessed be
the dead, which dye in the Lord: and happy are they, which lives in him also:
which is the chyefest sign of their election, and endless estate, in that
place, whereas no end shall be of perfyt felicity, and life for ever: whereas
neither ennemy, sickness, wounds, prison, or poverty shall vex the immortal
bodies, which now be subject to al calamityes: Kings and Queenes be subject
to the miseries of this world and have no perfect felicity before their mortal
end and beginning of immortal life.
yea from the King and Queen* which of all be honoured, obeyed, or flattered
unto the poorest bondsman, and his wife, with his wretched children, that be
shamefully despised, contemned and utterly rejected. But although no manne
shall be perfectly happy before death, as the Philosopher saith, yet the same
death shall be swallowed up in victory, which victory is Iesus Christ the
Conqueror, beginning and ending of all things, to whom be praise for ever
Amen.

Yet because I am a man of the creation of God, scourged with many in fyrmityes
in this world: by and through the same God also, many goodly medecines be
prepared to help me, to relieve and comfort me, until such time as it shall
please God to call me to the end of my Pilgrimage. Therefore good master
health, bear with me, although I have spoken in my grievous passion, to ease my
mind: and now by your patience, whereas you have showed me immediately before,
Of the time of medecin.
in what place medecin should be given: Now I pray you show me what time
medecin should be ministered?


Health I Am sorry for thy double aff^iction both body mind, thou hast told a
lamentable tale: well, I will say thus much to thee, many hands make light
work. Bear these grefes quietly, thou hast many to help thee in this
world. For there is nothing under the sun, but vanity and affliction of
mind. Every living man hath trouble, thus must needs be wisely suffered,
because it cannot be avoided: and wise men may not despair in adversity, for
comfort will come I warrant thee, be neither to effeminate or childish, when
trouble assaulteth thee, for then thou art clean gone. But arm thy self
wisely with magnanimity, foresee the end, hold up thy head, and synke not. Use
this world like a S^age, play thy part there on in thy vocation, for the time
honestly, serve God reverently despise not civil policy, Profit the common
wealth, keep good company, be not ungrateful to thy friend. Depart from thine
ennemy, and yet beware of thy friends, Speak gently, trust not them that
commonly use swearynge, slander, Eccle. v.
drunkenness, and be full of ielousy. Live of thine own, though it be but
poorly. Be not bond, if thou may stand at liberty. Go not to law with
Lawyers, for they will hinder thee. And beware of a flatterer, he will betray
thee. Be not variable in religion, observing time, and the manners of men: But
obeying God which doth not change. There be three sondry men, A three stringed
whip.
which have done thee never good: The winker in his tale, the Laugher in his
rage, and the Fox coloured, which will not stick for blood shedding, false
witness, or perjury* yet pray for them, and let go displeasure. Be angry
and sin not. Let not the Son go down on thy wrath. Trust not to the
world, yet behold it, and thou shalt se marvelous things wrought therin^
Eccle. iiii.
Thou shalt see much wrong done daily under the Son and behold the tears of
such as be oppressed, and there is no man to comfort them, or that will deliver
or defend them from the violence of the oppressors, but only God, therefore
follow the counsel of the wise man, for there is nothing better saith he, for
a man, than to be joyful in his labour, for that is his portion. Eccle. iii.
And for as much as mankynd, hath labour, travel, heaviness, sorrow, and
disquietnes al his life, and yet shall leave al his labours to others, which
never saw them, is it not better then, for a man to eat drink, and his soul
to be merry in his labour, and this is the gift of God saith the wise man.
What thing is be^t for mankynd.
And thus to conclude if thou be troubled in mind, pray only to God, and ask
counsel of the wise: if thou be sick, seek the Phisicion. Honour him because
of necessity, God hath created him. For of the highest comes medecin. and he
shall receive gifts of the king. The wisdom of the Physician, brings him to
great worship: in the syghte of the great men of this world he shall be
honourably taken. The Lord hath created medecin of the earth, E^od. 15.1.
Regua^. 4.
and he that is wise, will not abhor it. Was not the bitter water wade sweet
with a Tree, that men might learn to know the virtue thereof? The Lord hath
given men wisdom and understanding, that they might be honoured in his
wondrous works: with such doth he heal man, and takes away the pains, of
such do the Apothecaries make a confection, yet cannot a man perform al his
works. For of the lord comes prosperous wealth over al the earth. My son
despise not this in thy sickness, but pray unto the lord, and he shall make thee
whole, Leave of from syn, Eccle. 38.
and order thine hands aright. Cleanse thine hart from al wickedness: this is
the counsel of Iesus the son of Syrach, in his holy book. Good counsel in
the time of trouble.
Chap. xxxviii. And now shall I show unto thee, what time medecin shall be
given. Then do thus. Sometime medecin is given to sleapward, or before sleep:
and sometime before day, in the morning, to ye waking time. First in the time of
waking. then give Liquid, or moyste medecines, and also easy: and specially
when we must purge light humours in the stomach, For as a moist liquid medecin
in Pocion is soon dissolved, even so she will speedily and quickly, do her duty,
and work her feat effectually in her place whereas she hath power to convert
actively, and change things into her nature, Even so nature hath power to
change meat and food unto her own proper virtue. Medecin doth change and
meat is changed.
Therefore note this, that when such medecines be ministered: if the Patient
should then sleep, at such time as the natural heate begins to increase,
then the said sleep lets the virtue good operetion of the same medecin:
resolving the body into painful sweat, and attractinge and drawing humours out
of order, making the Patient sicker.

Item in as much as Liquid and light humours, be soon dissolved, then it
follows, that the same humours do eftsoones come to the place of expulsion,
Therefore to conclude, if the said Patient do sleep at that present, it might
then chance, that ye medecin would not convert, or change the humour, or
cast it* forth: but rather resolve humours, in the body, which would cause most
painful peril, and noisome sickness and disease, Why purgations work not
naturally.
while as the putrified matter remains still in the body, not purged. But when
as the patient hath taken but a light supper, he may take pills, so that the
said pills be new, and the patient not very fat, One may sleep after pills,
but yet beware of old dry pills.
for fat men and women have small guts, and pills may chance hurt them.
And when we purge hard matter, or humours in the extreme parts of the body,
we minister pills, But for as much as pills be harde of resolution within
the body, one may sleep well upon them, before they be resolved. For sleep
brings inward warmnes: and warmnes* makes resolution, and furdereth the
workinge of Pills, which must take their effect in the extreme parts, as
head: hands, and the feet. And thus I say, pills may be given without hurt,
when the patient goes to his natural rest and sleep. Provided, that in the
morning, when they begin to work, Pills may be made of al kinds of
medecines.
then the said patient must sleep no more at that time. And note that pills
may be confected, of al kinds of medecines, and there be pills given before
meat, for them which have evil digestion, called Pilule ante cibum.


Sickness. Sometime it* comes to pass, that in a manner unadvisedly, or
sodaynlye, the Physician doth give a Purgation or Medecin, not considering the
complexion of his patient, therein doth he well or no I pray you?


Health. THE complexion would be known, but when there is no opportunity or
leisure to know the complexion, whether it be hot, cold, moist, or dry. In
this cause let us use a preventing medecin, or an Antidotarie, The observation
of complexions.
whereby we may both prepare ye way, and also know whether the matter be hard
or soft, to be removed with the same preventing medecin, either yea or no:
also in this case, let something be ministered before, which may gently resolve
the humours, Benedicta laxatiua, stomachicum carthaticum, imperialae. Or else
let us give to the patient some gentle pills, and decoction of Polipodie,
Agarice, and Hermodactiles, tempered white wine, putting thereunto purifyed and
clean honey, and then give it to the Patient when it hath stand* until it come
to a residence do the same with Polipodye, Esula, sodden in wine, putting in
a little Cinamome. For this doth resolve and vnbynde phlegm, and Purges it
well, or else gather solutyue and losing Herbs: as Mercurye, Beats,
Mallowes. c. sees them in fat Pork, putting in a little Scene. And in case
this lose the said Sick Patient, if he mark the quantitye of the Euacuacion,
or things purged, so he may be contented therewith.

If he feel more grief in the belly, or payne burning, or noysomnesse: he
may then prepare a stronger, or one weaker, according to his humour, age or
time of the year, To give medecin in the fit of a Fever, is perilous.
or habit of the body. And in all medecines beware of this, that nothing be
taken in the fit, rigour, terror, or howre, when the patient shall be vexed,
tossed, or tormented with quotidian, tertian, or quarteine. c.


Sickness. FUrthermore, it comes to pass as is daily seen, that there be many
feeble stomachs and fearful eyes, Weak stomachs cannot a^ ^ay with st^ong
medecines.
that do not only abhor to se medecines. Some for their blacknes to behold,
as Cassiafistula, or bitterness in taste, as Hiera picra, or fulsome to smell, as
strong pills: yea, it no less grieves the to behold or see the vessel, in
which the pocion is kept in, than to drink the same pocion, or bitter
medecin, contained within the same. Such be the weak, feeble, nice, stomachs
of many, God knows why, for nature hath made them no stronger. For the feeble
stomach of a tender Gentlewoman may not be compared in force, to the
boisterous, rough greedy or strong stomach of the Carter. The sight or smell of
vile things, doth him as small displeasure, as the sweet odours, and pleasant
aspects, doth hurt the delicious senses of the tenderlings, or carpet muses. I
say the barbarous vplandish Ienking with torn hose, and clouted boots, foul
shirt, and threadbare bonet, long locks, and crumpled hands, and gryned,
scurvy countenance, with gan^lets made of Sorels hyde, armed with a piece of a
Motley mantel, bodly charging a long whipstocke, with crop and laniarde,
against Rudde or blind Baiard: which trail and draw the laden Cart, bend
their backs with continual burdens, Cow, sheep, plough* be our Nurces.
rewarded with unpleasant food. This unseemly grome or Carter, driving his
cart, I say, yet is he a child, and feeder of the common wealth, with Cow,
sheep, and plow, in the Clotty field following the share and Culter, after the
dreaming steps of the deep treading Ox: which treads on the foot of each
pore man in the country. These sillions which use no Spears* but Spades, and
fight their combats with flailes, in solitary Barnes, among the Sheaves,
s^ayinge the Mise into the Chafe, The life of the plain people in the country
when Snow and Frost makes Cow and Calfe to tremble in couart, and Swyne to
lurk in cotte, for fear of the Northern, sharpe cutting wynd. Long black
nights, and short cold raining days, uncovered naked trees, shrouded with
Snow, under whom lurk the hongry birds. At such time as the plain people do
spend, consume, and bring to nothing their substance among their labouring
hyndes, Somers fruits, not with out Winters travel God wot. If Saturne cast
forth then from his high cold Throne upon them, his malicious evil
unfortunate influence: when he with Syeth in Hand, and gray Hoary Locks, doth
creep into the sixth House of the Heaven, Hali de iudicijs A^rorum pars octaua.
Cap. vij,
or falling angle. Fro whence he pours forth, saith Haly among me great
infyrmities, melancholy, falling evil, madness, leprosy, quartens, also every
sycknes yt comes of coldness drines. c. And drives the plain people to
their wits end, which lack prouydence, to foresee and prepare medecin, fit
for their defence, of whom God takes the only cure and charge, from an higher
place, Psal. cxlvi^.
than whereas old Saturnus doth dwell, upon the simple sort of mortal men: he
cares for the strauger, fatherles, and widow, and opneth his hand, fills
every living wight with plentiousnes: Psal. cxlv.
and is near unto them that doth call upon him faithfully, and there is none
of his, that are fallen into any misery, but he sees their fall, whether it be
poverty, prisonment, exile, care, agony, affliction, or vexation of mind. c.
Then with mercy and pity he puts forth the hand of his providence, and
lifts them up, and helps them in the days of their carefulness, making
them pleasant. Giving them rest, and quiet sleapes, while as the ungodly, doth
remove their neighbours land marks, Iob. xxiiii.
And rob them of their cattle, and by extortion keep them from their own, and
oppress the widow and fatherless, making them go naked, yet these people
prosper for the time, although they murder the simple, But at length the shadow
of death shall come upon them: and they shall go into horrible darkness. And
thus have I read in a lamentable book, of one, who had experience of miseries
infinite. Sickness, and sorrows: yea, The end of (...) wicked men.
this Iob was only sickness, whose seruaunt I am: and what is the chief help,
or to whom shall I the sick, p^ore, feeble man resort? Even to him that my
master Iob went unto Who was that, I pray you? Was it the Chirurgen,
Apoticary, or Phisicion? c. No, no: It was the Almighty God, without whom every
artificer, both in Philosophy and Phisike, God the (...) Phisicion.
their works take none effect nor any good success, although they do excel in
knowledge, learning, judgment, and practice. Therefore I do say, dear friend
Health, with the Prophet Dauid, in his Hymn, or Songe: I do lift up mine
eyes unto the mountains, from whence comes help to me? My help comes
from ye lord god, which made heaven and earth: and here I do gather, Psalm.
if I be sore or sick, weak, or wounded, troubled, or vexed, although I lift
up mine eyes unto the mountains of this world, for the health of my body, as
to ye best Surgeons or Phisicions, which as I have said, do excel in
knowledge and practice. This is nothing if my help come not from heaven, from
the fountain of Physic: even so, for the health and regiment of the soul,
when it is sick. The mountains of Saints, Angels, and men, can not
prevail, except the very salvation, atonement, health, praise, and quietness,
proceade only from God, which is very Salus, that is, health, or Sospes, the
health giver: upon him I do only depend, which dwells in Heaven.


Health. IF he be on your side, who can be against you? Nothing in Heaven,
Earth, or Hell, is able to molest you: if you be under the shade of his Wings,
Roma. viij.
you are safe from all Storms. I do commend your Godly zeal, and
faithful affection to Almighty Godwarde: al be it, you seem unto me, to
wander in this your communication, from the path or line which was laid out
straight, between you and me, God doth work by miracle, and means.
which was the regiment and health only of the body. And you do declare of the
misery of the common people, and of the calamityes: and say when they fall
sick, they lack providence and help among themselves. but only God. Mary I
say also only God. But howe? That God doth always send health without
mean? No: For almighty God doth work by miracle, and by mean: by miracle as
when he raised the dead, Cleansed the Lepre. c. By mean, when with Clay he
opened the Eyes of the Blind: and with Spattle he caused the Deaf to hear,
yea, and commanded the Apostles to carry Oil with them, to heal the Sick.
Why do you then talk thus, leaving out this word mean? Which is like unto
an hand, which works for every thing, both with out, and within the Body.
By which mean, the holy Spirit of God is perceived, as example. The Apostle.i.
Corin. xii. Chapiter. The gift of the spirit is given to every Man, to edify
withal. To one is given through the Spirit the utterance of Wisdom. To an
other the utterance of knowledge, by the same spirit. To an other is given
Faith, by the same spirit. To an other the gifts of healynge, by the same
Spirit. c. Lo here you see healing is the gift of Gods spirit, The holy
Ghost.
which is God the holy Ghost And although the gift of healynge, was
plentifullye showed and powered in, and upon the holy Apostles, which wrought
both with miracles and means: Yet it cannot be denayed, but divers which had
no faith heavenly, or the gift of Faith, yet they had the gift of healing. For
they be several gifts of God.

Infidelles have singular gifts of God.
Hippocrates* Galen. Auicen. c. had not the gift of Faith, and were Infidels,
believed not in God, nor in his son Christ: yet God bestowed upon the
excellent knowledge of Natural things, as appears by their learned Books,
which be Candels to give light to Physicians, to the worlds end, for the
incomparable learning and cunning which is written in them. Thus God hath made
the very Infidels, means to help the Christians, which you may not denay.
Neither think the plain people to be so ignorant, but when they be sick,
they can send to the Physician, or Chirurge for help: as well as they will send
to the Mill, to have their Corn ground, Or to the Shoemaker for Shoes, to
defend them from going barefoot. What would you have the Carters (as you
term them) so miserable, or with out wit, or worse then the Dog: which can
like his wound, and chose his vomittyng grass? That should appear by the
fruits of poor men, I mean their children. I pray you, be not mitours set
upon the headdes of Plowmennes sons? and do not the children oftentimes, of
obscure, scant yomen, and very abiectes, possess both rich houses and lands,
where sometime their parents would gladly have served in the Kitchen? c. What is
ye cause? It should appear virtue auaunceth, and learning helps Exclame not
neither bewail these pore ones estates: Pore men be exalted through virtue.
for they can see day at a little hole, and live as merry, the old proverb
saith, as white B^e in Hyue. I pray you pity them with measure, unless your
large lamentation should give occasion, to nourish Idleness, nor that men yet
should disdain the poor But who so stops his ear at the cry of the pore:
shall cry himself and not be heard of God. Math. xxv.
Nor also that pore people, should disdain, murmure, Psal. cxlvii.
or speeke evil against thexaltation, or advancement of them whom God hath
plucked out of the dust, to be his ministers in the rule of this world. And as
for thoppressours, be patient: for the same god that gives them preparatives
with warnings, as the plague: will also give them a purgation, and expulse them
from him, except they do repent. For gather they never so much, beware the
third heir of an extorcioner, and oftentimes he doth not enjoy his goods
himself. For Salomon saith: Haer^ditas ad quam festinatur in la, in
nouissimo benedictione carebit: Prouer. xx.
The heritage yt comes to hastily at the first, shall not be blessed at the
end. And in an other place, saith he, who so hordeth up riches, Sudden gotten
substance remains not lunge.
with the disceiptfulnesse of his tongue: he is vain, and a Fool, and like
unto them that seek their own death, this is their end. Therefore, my brother
disquiet not thy mind, content thee in thine estate: keep thine own goods,
spend them to Gods glory, desire none other man. L^ no man be angry with an
othe^ mans folly.
And when thou dost see the wicked in great prosperity, disdain them not:
neither fret thy self, thou hast nothing to do with them, but to make
accomptes for thine own self: and be not forgetful of the Prophets words
when he said: Noli emulare in malignantibus. c. that is: Fret not thy self,
because of the ungodly, neither be thou envious against the evil doers, for
they shall be cut down like grass* and be withered even as the green herb.
Put thou thy trust in the Lord, and be doyng good, that thou may dwell in the
Land, and verily thou shalt be fed. Delight thou in god, and he shall ^ue thee
thy hearts desire. He which loves God, shall have hearts rest.
Commit thy way unto the Lord, and put thy trust in him and he shall bring it to
pass. c If thou art troubled in thy mind resort unto his holy word: and
ministers for the soul. And whereas thou art sick, Ecclesiast.
and sore in body dispyce not his ordinary means, but honour ye Physician,
because of infyrmity: the almighty hath created him for yt purpose, yt through
the virtue of Physic, thy name may be changed from Sickness into Health. I
therefore will now cease, give place unto the Divines, and Moral men, which with
tongue and pen can give good counsel, and heavenly Cordials for the sick,
sore, afflicted spirit.

And now to the first part of your question conserninge Physic, which is the
race wherein we begun to run. Let us now come again into that plain
path, hold on still, then we shall the sooner come to our ways end. And then sit
us down, and rest us quiet^y a Gods name: for rest is an Image of Heaven, after
labour. Your question was thus of them which do abhor the sight, or
smelling of medicin, being ready to vomit also, to behold the vessels,
wherein medecin was given: to that question you answered your self. The
cause was, the stomach doth abhor those things that offend the senses, as
in seeing, smelling. c. (But in dede our sense of smelling is worse then any
other living beasts, as Aristotle saith in his book of senses: Odoratum
peiorem habemus quam alia animalia. Further saith he, Aristo. in libro de Sens.
man only doth smell and take delight in the odours of flowers or sweet things:
Even so doth his nature abhor stinking things But specially they which be
clean of Nature, or by accidents. And this is known by natural Philosophy,
and Physic: and whereas the Philosopher doth leave there the Physician doth
begin. Although there be many secrete hidden desires within nature, known
only to the same, and hidden from ye Physician: Nature hath many hidden
desires, unknown to the Physicians.
As example, some women being with child, desire Tar, yea, I have seen them
eat Soap, and hurt them not, with other vile things, that I will not name.
Without nature had led them, death would f^llow: yet Physic compteth them
deadly. These be the secrete hidden things with in nature.) But now to the
question.

When nature is so weak and feeble, that it doth lose and abhor, to see or
smell medecin: the best remedy is thus, that you give laxative Claret, made
after this manner.

Medecines for feeble stomachs to purge gently
R. Clean Claret, or white li, x. of Polipodie, Honey, ana. li. ii. Agarik.ii
Cinnamon, Cloves, Spicknard, Ginger, Galingall, ana..i of Pepper.iii. First make
it thus: temper the clarifyed Honey with wine and draw it through a Colander,
and stamp the Polipodie, and strongly strain it, and sees it to the third
part, and beat your spice into powder, and put them into abagge made of a piece
of a serce or bulter then put your tempered wine, Honey, and juice of Polipodie,
together, put in your bag with spice, and sees all in a close vessel well
Tinned, and strain your bag oftentimes. And then receive this drink, and
give a draught to your weak, feeble, stomach, according to your strength. And
for Honey you may put in clean Sugar, and to your spices, you may put to
Scene..iii. And when you drink of this, you must drink clean cold water, or
running water after it. Now sir if you will restrain, or stop the body, when
it is to much laxative: or draws nature to vehemently. Then give hoate water
to drink, and this is both pleasant, and profitable to nature, although to
many it seem unpleasant. The take spices in pouders, according to the property
of the humour, or complex^on, which ought to be purged, putting the water and
the said spices with a little Sugar, into a close vessel of glass and sees it
in a vessel of water. Provided, that the said vessel of Glass be wrapped in
Hay, or else stand in a plain stillitory, making a good fire under the same,
and then you may take it forth, after it be well and close sodden, and
strained. And either receive it your self, or else give it to others. But if it
be bitter, put in more sugar into the same, to please your stomach. The more
spice you do take* the more virtue it hath for the melancholy, or flegmatike.

Item you may do thus, take a mean quantitye of Elleborus albus, chopped
small with a cuttinge knife, sees it with Barley, with clean Water, into a
thickness. Then feed an Hen eight days, with the same Corn, and Elleborus,
and at eyghte Days end, kill the same Hen, and seethe it, and put in no
Salt but Croomes of Bread and Sugar, and drink this broth. Put in Manna if
you will, and eat the flesh of the same Hen, and it will purge the same,
without any molestation or hindrance to Nature, I assure you, and that I
have proved. Even so have a great number proved, Elleborus albus, the poyso
thereof.
Ell borus albus, to their great hurt, and peril of death by vomittinnge,
yea, almost expyring among the Dog Leches, and murderers. But beware of them,
and then thou shalt be called Health, and no more sickness, by Gods grace.


Sickness. IS there no consideration to be had, in the ages of Men, or Women?
may the medecin giver, give hand over head, to the tender Child, middle age,
and old men, all a like without hurt to them: I would fain know, what to do
in this case. For in the country, the medecin that is given to a woman,
of.xxiii year old: is also given to a man of xlvi. year old.


Health. YEs surely, diversity of age must be considered, in the ministracion
of medecines laxative. For purging or relaxing medecines be given to sondry
sorts of ages: as to boys, Men, women children must take medicines according
to their strength and age,
springaldes, Lusty young men, and to the aged. Even so to Womenkynde in their
degree of ages, every one of these hath his or their proper purgation. As
Manna of Calabria to young things, and the same to old folks: or else some
gentle solutiue medecin, and to women with child, no laxative medecin, until
the v. month be past: and then put gentle ones, as Cassia, Manna, or the
syrupe of Roses solutyue, Even so she may have some Scene of Alexandria, their
leaves sodden close in broth of a Chicken, or Mutton within a covered, earthen
or Tinned pot. Also suppositours may be given to these foresaid folks, that
be excepted in purgacions. And furthermore, with discretion, the aged may
receive a gentle Glister: because the said aged be grieved with corruption of
the raynes, bladder, and guts. For if children be purged much, because the
humour is light: they shall be in danger of their lives. And living, the said
purgations will make wretched. alter the complexion, and expulse the natural
moisture, whereupon they should increase and grow. As we see young children
having laxes, be wretched, leave, swelled bellies, cramp, and conuultion. c.
The aged also in such, shall lose moisture of blood, and fall into melancholy,
drynes, feblenes, lack of sleep, consumption, through resolving of a strong
laxinge medecin. But yet to them which be not in extremes, either of age or
sickness: there be many gentle resolutions, or clensynges of humours, and may be
given without danger. As Reubarbe infused in Cichory water, or the water of
milk, and Mirobalans. But by the way of Parenthesis, let every minister of
medecin fear to give any thing that doth, or will dry the body, or bodies to
much, of yonge or old men: yea, or in the middle age, specially of choleric
men. As example, I did know one, being then a young practicioner, seven years
past who did minister a Purgation wherein was Scammonye, unto a right
worshipful, and a famous Knight, Beware of drying medecines in Summer for
choleric persons.
called sir Robert Wingfeeld of Lethingham, which ^ft soones gave him twenty
stools. The cause was as I suppose now, this Scammony was not prepared
accordingly: and also the patient Choleric, and then partly weak of nature,
before the receipt of the said naughty purgation. Therefore look diligently to
al that I have said before: mark the time of the year, the age, quality, and
complexion of the patient. The Region or dwelling place, the goodness, quantity,
and mixture of your medecin. c. and then you shall do no harm, nor play the
ignorant murderer.

Now again to our matter, neither purge young children nor old men in the heate
of Summer, A cauiat for Summer.
and if you will needs do so, then you shall be commenced Doctor of Physic,
wearing William Summers hud for your labour, which will bring you to no small
estimation. So trimly to set the cart before the horse, and to play blind
Bayard yourself: therefore be warned, or you be reproved, or ashamed. For in
the heat of Summer, resolution of humours, is quickly made with purgation after
which, ensues euacuacion to much abundantly, to the utter hurt of nature.
Young* lus^y, or sickly persons, may be purged at any time: so the said purging
do agree to the time, and the complexions And they may take more of the
purgations, than the children or old people may, because of their strength. But
yet the spring time is best, and ye Dogs days worst to purgation: but
sickness comes at al times, and must at al times be diligently watched for, as
a Thief that will steal away the most precious thing called life, which is
our best jewel through the venom of death. But yet death finishes and makes
an end of every matter, and of every personne good and bad. Before whose
battle be fought we live but vncertaynly: although we flatter our own selves.
For happiness is not common to every living creature: but life and death be
common to every living thing. As Aristotle saith in the book of life and death
Vita mors sunt communia omnibus animalibus, And life is but dwelling of the
soul and body together for a time. And in the mean season, clouted and
patched up, with meat, drink, cloth, sleep. And when life is in peril, then
help Physic, Physic, I pray you help: we be afraid to die godly because
we have lived wickedly. I pray god this Carol be not to common, yea, or
rather, there be many do so live, that they fear no punishment or Hell,
after this life, do they never so wickedly. Excluding God clean out of their
hearts, or rather God refusing them for their wickedness, There is a Psalme
wherein Dauid laments, the wretched estate of fools, saying Dixit insipiens
in corde suo, non est Deus. The foolish man hath said in hart, there is no God,
Would God that there were few of them. Oh Sickness, Sickness, although thou seek
Health, and parhappes may obtain it: yet thou shalt once change this life,
and see an other World, and also God, for no man can see him perfectly before
death, nor be saved, which in this life, believes not in him.


Sickness. YOur conclusion, although it did not belong to your Exordium, is yet
very Godly: I pray God grant us to be his, and to forsake sin Whereby we shall
so quiet our consciences, that when our arrival shall be into the next land: we
fear not our Passage, or journey from hence thither, for away we must. But
in the mean time the Image of death is to all Flesh so fearful, that Men
would be glad to (...) help and comfort Life, both manne and beast, do
undoubtedly fear death, nature hath taught one beast to be in dread of an
other, the sheep to be afraid of the Wolf: the Dere of the Dog? Nature hath
prepared that one creature dreads and fears an other.
the small birds of ye Hawk. And if they escape wounds curable, there be
medecines, yea nature hath taught divers beasts, and fowls to help
themselves, much more man should do the same. We therefore thank God for his
grace, that he hath given us reason: which other living beasts have not,
which do excel us almost in all other things, joined to their natures. As the
Unicorn to have an horne, to withstand poison. The Lyon void of dread. The
horse strong and swift. The sheep whose cast coat, makeh us aparel. The birds
to fly, whereas no man can clime the way. The fysh to swim, where as no man
dare follow them* c. But only reason I say* What makes us else superiors to
beasts? Nothing Well take that away, and then we be the most vilest, and the
worst: can least help our selves, of any other living things upon the Earth:
as appears by the foolish, or mad people, or else young babes. They be in
shape and licknes, as we be. And why are they so miserable? Because reason is
not there, which should govern them, and this is a lamentable case, dear
Health, to see so goodly Images, lacking their principal beauty and
government called reason. Like ships without their helmes, subject to every
hurt and storm: except the providence of almighty God, their only defence
watched the. Else should they perish suddenly, in the moving of an hand, as God
doth know: And because God hath given reason, by which arts are perceived, and
good things, from the bad, ye sick from the whole, and foolishnes from
wisdom. Else, how shouldest thou have showed me reasonably, the natures of
medecines, complexions, age, time, place, quality, and quantity, c. And
therefore to the matter, in my last question I demanded of the age of men and
women, to whom medecin should be ministered, I have in that case received
mine answer, for which I give you hearty thanks, for your courtesy, and great
gentleness: specially for your reverent and godly zeal, wherein you do neither
smell of the Papists, which are the mother of al disobedience to Princes, and
the spring of errors: nor of them, which be of no religion. But some do say,
it is better to be of one evil religion then of none at all. Now sir I pray
you, after our diversity of ages, what do you say to the varietye of
complexion, in giving purging medecin?


Health ALL is in vain, dear friend, if we do forget the temperament, or
complexions of men, or women. You therefore do very well in calling them to
remembrance: for one complexion, can not bare so much as an other in purging.
No more then a little weak boy, or young Lad can bear as heavy a burden,
as a great lubber which is sturdy and strong to labour. We therefore give more
a purging medecin, to the flegmatike body than to the choleric, and yet more
to the melancholy, then to the flegmatike. Why so? Because melancholy is an
harder humour, then the phlegm is: and humidity, or moisture, more abounds in
the phlegm, then in the melancholy, Purge phlegm mo^e than chol^r* and
melancholy more the ^gme.
As example. Therefore when you will give Scammonye, to any choleric person,
give him a penny weight, to the flegmatike, two P^nye weight: but to the
melancholy, give three penny weight, For a cholerik ma must have but little
given him. The cause is, the said choler is hoate and dry: and if he should
take as much Scammony, as the melancholy, it wold inflame him, and rather
consume the pure natural humiditye, then purge the noisome fylthy humour,
which is the cause of the sickness. For the slender man, Choleris sone^drye*
ther^ore purge but little (...) the fleshy body hath much moisture, the^fore
purge more. Of the quantity o^ matter to be purged.
may bide worst a quick purgation: as on the other part, the more fleshy, I
mean flesh, and not gross fatness, the more he may abide a good strong
euacuacion, or strong medecin, by the reason they have the more moisture and
humidity than the said choleric have.

Furthermore, as concerning matter to be purged, sometime it is much and at
other times, it is scarce, or of little quantity. Therefore the medecin. must
be given accordingly sometime much, and sometime little, small matter is
dispatched with small medecin, Except it be wrapped, compacted, and thrust
together: and then a preparative must be given, and after purged. But whereas
much matter is, there it doth require a greater medecin, notwtstanding, Much
humour must be purged by little and little, not at once.
it ought not to be evacuated al at once, but by little and little, by times if
so be it be in the extreme parts of the Body, as the head, hands and feet,
be the extreme parts.

And in this case. we have ye noble famous prince of phisicions, for a witness
how this matter should be handled, in the best manner saying: Nam secundum
multum est repent euacuare, sieve replere, fallax est, omni^o inimicum naturae.
That is to say, to make a large or a quick evacuation. or purging: Replexion,
or filling, is a disceitful thing and an utter ennemy to nature. Therefore
beware of extremity in all things, and use the mean and best way, a gods
name, what else have you to say?


Sickness. I Have almost forgotten, how to receive Moist, or hard Medecines: it
would pl^ase me very much, and not displease you a littl^ y^t again to put
me in remembrance. For Sickness God knows, is forgetful Ferendum est
imbecilitas hominis. The weakness or feblenes of man is to be born withal.
Good sir should they be given hot, or cold What say you to the matter?


Health. TO the healthful, liquid or moist medecines, be given cold: to the
sick persons, Cold medecines to the whole, but warm to the weak must be
given.
they should be given warm, because the virtue of the medecin shall in them
lose, deuyde and expulse matter, when the said medecin stands in the
stomach or guts: which in the whole bodies, the pocion or medecin will take
his effect in good part, this must be done at Morning. The harde medecin, as
I have said at Evening moist, as pills: l^zi^gs after midnight. Pouders at
none in broth, clari^ied posse^ ale at evening. And why be pills give at
Night? Because a ma may Sleep well after them. What doth Sleep then
prevail? Because sleep makes the Body warm within, and Pills be very
harde: and therefore they must be resolved with warmness. To what manner of
men. To them, which have the rich men's sickness. What is that? Forsothe the
gout, which many gentlemen be tormented withal: as example. Sir Rychard
Fulmerston knight, Barthram Anderson Esquyre. c. The Gout loue^h rich men,
but is afraid of poor (...).
For the Gout is sore afraid to dwell among poor men: for they keep him so
hardly, and punysh him with cold, and labour. c. But the bitterest pills of
all in ward medicines, do fardest pearce to the hands and feet, to purge and
heal them. And in the feet the Gout is placed: therefore pills be good for
the Feet. Who can denay it, which I have spoken?


Sickness. AFter purgations, oftentimes it happens, that the Patient falls
into a Fever, called Ephemera febris, or a light Ague: which may do more hurt
to nature, if it be not helped quickly. What is the cause I pray you tell me?


Health. TRuly, there do oftentimes chance, such evil accidents after
purgations, through sundry causes. Of overmuch purging the body, the reamedy to
help the same.
As sometime by to much euacuacion, clensing, or purging. Whereupon the
Spirits cause unnatural heate, and thereof ensues an unnatural flaming or
heate called an Ephemeral, and likewise it chances by ouermutch eating or
drinking, as of Wine. c. and also by cold or by attraction of over many
humours to the stomach, or the lack of the quantity of medicine, which hath
no virtue or strength to be purged, but remains still in the stomach, and
thereby doth continue putrifed, hurting the body making a fever: if this do
chance, then put the Patient into a Bath, if he be able. And let there be
made a good fire, or hot house, for this Patient, and anoint him before
behind with Vnguentum dialthea, or else with Vnguentum Martiaton and bring him
close with clothes, from the balne or Bathe to his Bed, keep him from sleep
eight hours: and so shall he be dispatched clean, and made whole, being
purged again* to cleanse the inward parts, as the stomach. c. But if ye
Patient be to weak to come to the Bathe: refresh him in his Bed, with wholesome
suppings. Keep him warm, in a sweet chamber, and then give him an easy
laxative, of drawn Cassiafistula..j. with water of Borage..iij. or else with
sweet Calabria Manna..ss. And often it chances, that Men are dry after
purging, then give them small Ale clean brewed, or P^isane, or else clean cold
water, Gum Arabic, Dragantum be sodden. And to gargarisme these things in
his mouth and Throat: and to put Prune stones in cold water, and chafe them
with the Tongue up and down in his Mouth, and so renew them still. And keep
the mouth, Teeth, and tongue clean with washing, clensing, To cool the mouth.
scraping: and this shall comfort the sick Man. Which else shall be corrupted,
defiled, and so annoyed, that it shall be as painful to himself, as hugely, and
noisome to the beholders of the said sick Man or Patient.


Sickness. WEll, then I do perceive, that this should suffice to help them,
which be not well purged before: and also to cool them, in their great
thyrst and dryness.


Health. NO not so: it is not sufficient to quench. For, first you must
understand, the occasion of this thyrst: first that it cumeth of hot choler
not purged, of which I speak not. But when the body is well purged of dry,
yea, or of moist humours, then lacking moystnes, it must needs follow,
dryness will eftsoones ensue. Then we give water, where in the four cold
seeds, gum Arabike, gum Dragagantum, and crumes of bread have bin sodden:
drawn through a strayner, this is given blood warm. Now sir, there is a
dryness, as I have said, which when it comes, declares the body is well
purged, as some men suppose. But therein I take, that they do mistake the
words of Hippocrates: Quicunque in pharmacijs purgantur, Hippocrates.
non fitiunt: non quiescut, donec sitiunt: non enim semper bonam purgationem
significat: that is: Who so ever be purged, thyrst not, the paciet takes no
rest, until they do thyrst: this doth not always signify, the purging to be
good. Take this for an example. One called Beumayne* hath a pletorike body that
is a body full, or replenished with gross humours, abundantly compact together
this gross body must be purged: well, he takes a purgation by Electuarie,
Example.
it works upon Beuman. Now if he feel himself very dry, with a great thyrst,
desiring to drink after five, six, or seven stools: what is this, a sign
good, or bad? No it is an evil sign, and is proved thus: choleric or dry
humours be attract, and drawn up into ye stomach, and therefore they are not
expulsed. Whereof there rises a hot and a dry phlegm, smoke, or vapour, into
the throat, and spyritual parts: causing the thyrst a foresaid. How to know
whether Choler be purged, or no.
What reamedy for this gross body, then I pray you? None other, but with
speed to give him an other laxative medicide, to purge the said choler, and
dry matter, then the thyrst will soon, or quickly cease. And so in the end, he
shall be better purged of ye grosnes of humours, perhaps than cleansed fro ye
corruption of evil conditions. For a bodily medicine ca smally preuayl, or take
any effect, in ye Regiment of the Mind or Soul. Also, if such a gross body
as I have named, which is called Pletorike, do wax dry or thrifty,
after.xij.xvj. yea or.xx. stools: the is not haot Choler alone in the
stomach, but in all the members of the body. Purge him still with gentle
Electuaries, by little and little, until he feel moisture in his Throat,
and that much. And to conclude, whosoever being gross, and very dry, before
his Purgation, is sick of the Fever quotidian, or tercian: the same must be
purged, in the same manner, as I have said before^ What harm Wine doth in a
fever, or after purging.
But the lean choleric man, is soon purged, when he is dry: let him take his
reamedy, as is a foresaid, a Gods name. It happens also oftentimes, that the
patient cannot away with cold Water: yea and unknown to the Phisicion, the
said Patient drynketh Wine, to his great danger, hurt, and peril: for
thereof follows hot inflamacion, and torment with pains in the belly. If
this do happen, then with speed provoke Uomit, with drinking warm water, and
Sallet oil, thrusting a Feather into the Throat, or a Finger as far as it
may go, so Uomit. This helps, but do it speedely, my good friend, for
sundry causes, to avoid such danger, as else would follow.


Sickness ONe question I will ask you, because, cause moves me so to do. I
have taken oftentimes Purgacions, and as the Physician hath said, they were
excellent good, well compounded, new, the quantity, place, and time
convenient, to receive them. But to conclude, they would not work
accordingly. What is to be said therein, I pray you tell me?


Health. DOth cause, cause you to move this question to me? Certain causes
which le^ medicine to work.
I will show you three sundry causes, which let the medicine to make
evacuation, or woorkyng. The first cause may be, by the reason the purgation is
to weakly made: else the dosse or quantity is to little, which remains to the
hurt of the body unpurged. The second cause may be, that the body is to much
cold, and subject to melancholy, as me thyncke yours is. The third cause is,
the resol^cion or wasting of humours, doth extinguish or quench the virtue of
ye laxative medicine: Example o^ Wax Fyr^
as it happens sometime in the Phlegmatike bodies In whom, when soever the
phleume begins to dissolve, eftsoones and by and by it quenches, even as
Wax will sometime quench a burning Charcoal, when it is melted upon it. And
because gross humours are resolved, and cannot be expulsed: then there
follows an importable dolor, Signs of death through purging the body.
and a mighty torment about the stomach, and entrails. And in ye end, such
solucio, or none other, but a manifest sign, or peril of death to follow.


Sickness. MAry, this is a poynct next the worst, an extreme case: it is high
time for a man to be wise, and to look diligently to his Patient, now, or else
never. God help, what reamedy?


Health. THE best reamedy is this, when such peril approaches, with the
strength of Men's hands, When the Patient is in peril ye reamedy to help him.
take up the Patient warmely with clothes folded about him, not hard,
boisterous, or coberous about ye said patient. But diligent, quick, easy, trim:
and bring him into a hot Stophe, or Bathe. Or having none such, the prepare a
very good fire, as they term it, made of Charcoal, if you may: and then
anoint his back bone, with the Oils of Camomill. Capers, and Roses. And then
anoynte the Belly, breast, and Sides with ye same: then put a warm Tyle stone,
in a double linen clothe, and apply it very warm to the Belly. Wherefore is
this done? To the end that the natural heate may be made strong: and also
that thereby, the medicine may be excited, stirred, or moved to expulse, A
Clister t^ mollify the belly in the tim^ of danger.
and do his feat. Now if this move him not to go to the stool, then give him
a moli^ying Clister, made with Mallowes, Mercury, Polipodie, Agarike, brayed
sodden in water strained, and mingle ye decoction with oil of Olyue. put in a
little Hiera picra simplex thereunto. But if Euphorbium be in medicines, as in a
Clister, it will excoriate the skin of the Guts, cause a bloody flux to run
forth: it is also helped this way, as to drink Oil, and warm water, or else
the far broth of Pork a Ladlefull, wherein.xii. of Alzarabaca leaves, the
juice of them be strained* and drink this, it will provoke vomits, A good
note to be observed when nature is weak.
rather to help, than hinder the body. If the patient feel no dolor
abundantly in the Guts, then purge not much, unless much purging, wherein
Scamonie is, do cleave to the stomach. But if such things chance, give the
Pacyent to drink, water of Myrrh. It is often times seen, In Ellebor^s you
shall know how to correct the same, folio. 19. Simplici. He means Elleborus
albus.
that when medicine begins to work within the body, in the way of purging:
then Nature is so weak, that it cannot take his effect, as it should do
accordingly: and by the means thereof the said medicine remains, chokyng the
stomach, and neither comes upward, neither downward. What is then the best
remedy to be used: None other,.ss.
but to follow Hippocrates, which saith: Elleborus mouit corpus* c. Elleborus
moves the body. Therefore: let the body ^e moved therewyth, in drink half a
dragme, which is corrected in a Raddish root: and so vomit will follow, but
walk still in the close house, and take no wind. And so ye Medicine shall be
dispersed, and vanysh through vomits and sweat, in vehement moving of the
body. Now if he can not walk, let him sit, but sleep not: and then after
three hours, give him Oxicatarticum imperiale, saccarum violaceum. c.


Sickness. Extremes be perilous things.
LIke as some men, in them medicine will scant work: in other Men, medicine
doth so much work, that it will not cease, until it have (almost, yea, or
altogether) slain the body: what help for them then?


Health. THere be two ways, Death, or Life. If the body be dead, Death is
the end of Life.
there is no remedy* no medicine, no counsel, nor comfort, to call it again.
But patience, and farewell, well, we shall all follow in the end of our lives,
when we have run our race. Therefore, bury him that is dead, let him rest in
peace, and cease from sorrow. But unto the living that is in hope of cure, The
causes why medicine work immoderately.
if his medicine be to violet, cruel, and dangerous, causing flixes: consider
the fault is in the Phisicion, which hath given to sharpe a purgation, or in
the vnwyse Patient, which will not keep the house with a close stool, but
sytteth in the Wind abroad in the Air, Yard, or Garden. c. Or else in the
vndiscretion of the Apothicarye putting in to much Scamony, or this may be the
cause: the aptnes of humours prepared to expulsion, as it chances often to
Children that have repletion with hoate humours. And after purgation,
excoriation or scalding of the Guts doth follow, which is no small danger
to nature. Therefore to withstand this, we stop the flixe with Planten Water,
or water wherein Planten, Bursa pastoris, and Comphorie are sodden, with
Bolearmony, Gum Arabic, tower plumbs c^ or we minister Almond milk with
Rice, c. or Clisters stopping, as appears in the compounded Medicines, here
before: also comfort the pacyent with Diacodion, syrupe of Myrttels, or of
Quinces with warm anointing the pacients belly and his back against the warm
fire, A plaster for the flixe.
with clean clarifyed Honey. Now you shall perceive a bloody flixe by the payne
in the belly, and pouring forth blood, and scrapyng like Leather. Well do as I
have said before, and apply a plaster of Barley bread crommed into strong
Vinegar, and apply it to the Belly: Tenasmus what it is, and how to h^lpe it.
and give him to drink the foresayed Sirupes or Planten Water, wherein the
flowers of Pomgranets or Mulberies have ben sodden in. c. And give him
Diacodion, every night to bedward, and in the night also. Mary there is a
perilous gryefe in the Belly called Tenasmus, having a will or desire to go to
the stool, and yet cannot void or purge any thing at all: this comes of
the acuitie or sharpnes of the medicine or else of the ouersyght of the Patient:
let the Patient therefore, sit over Apozemate or Decoction of Pomegranate
Flowers, barks, or rindes of Pomegranets, Knotgrasse, Roses, Coriander, Peach
leaves, Planten, Oak leaves, or the water wherein Mulberies have been sodden,
Acatia, and Hipoquistis, and Quinces, beaten together and sodden, and the
patient to sit warm and close therein, and to drink Diacodion, putting in a
little powder of Saffron, to comfort the heart.


Sickness. YOu say this is a good remedy for the flixe. It often times
chances, that a man after such torments in the belly can not be without
much noysomnes in the stomach: and when the stomach is annoyed, how is it
helped, or with what Medicine?


Health. LIke as ye earth is the mother and nourish of every living thing, and
feeds all creatures good and bad: The Earth is mother of every living thing.
so is ye stomach the storehouse or Kitchen, which doth nourish both the
members and every part of the Body, noble and unnoble: as the heart which is
the king within the body, and to all the subject members in order, the place
from whence they all be fed is only the stomach, which must be kept clean,
as a pure Uessell, and must not be offended, grieved or annoyed, but nourished,
fortified and pleased: now if it have lost appetite through lothsomnesse, How
to quicken the stomach.
anoint the same with oil of Maces or of Wormwood, apply Galen his proper
Plaster to the stomach, and drink the tart sirupe of Pomgranets, or with sower
Grapes with gross Pepper therein, and give the patient in his sauce the juice of
Mints, and of Parsely, put in Ginger and Sugar: when he hath eaten his meat,
give the said patient sirupe of Roses Diarodon, and this shall help his stomach
with moderate drinking. And keeping ye body from sweating heat* quaking cold, use
temperance only, Extreme heat and cold be evil.
for ye mean diet is best of al. And who so doth use it, shall never fall into
ye snares of surfits or sickness.


Sickness. THe chief thing that I had thought to have demanded, and the very
mark, that I would have thee to sh^te at, is to tell me some thing of dieting
my self with meat and drink, in Health and Sickness.


Health, THere is to be considered, in eating, and drinking, the time of
hunger, A consideration in eating and drinking to be had and of the variety
of meates.
and custom of the place of eating, and drynkinge, whether it be cold or hot.
Also the time of ye year, whether it be Winter, or Summer: also the age or
complexion of ye eater, and whether he be whole, or sick: also the things
which be eaten, whether they be Fyshe, or Flesh, Fruicts, or Herbs. Note also
the Complexions, and temperamentes of the said meates, hot, or cold, dry, or
moist, and most chiefly mark the quantity, so forth. And like as Lamps do
consume the Oil, which is put unto them, for the preservation of the light,
althought it cannot continue for ever: So is the natural heate, which is
within us, preserved by humidity, and moystnes of blood phlegm, whose chief
engender, be good meates and drynkes. A cause why the Soul departs from the
bod.
As Auicen saith, de ethica. When natural heate is quenched in the body, then
of necessity, the soul must depart from the Body. For the workman cannot
work, when his Instruments are gone: so the spyrites of life can have no
exercise in the body, when there is no Natural heate to work upon. Without
meat saith Galen, it is not possible for a man to live either whole, or sick:
and thus to conclude, no vital thing lives without refection, and
sustenance. Whether it be animal, reasonable as man, or animal, as brute
Beasts, without reason, as Tree, Gum, Mettle, Stone, Herb, or any vital thing
insensibly. All these things be nourished with the influence, or substance of
the four Elements.


Sickness. Truly thou know well my Complexion, and disorder of my diet,
what reamedy for me, that have lived without order of Diet?


Health. I Know it well, thou art phlegmatike: and therefore it is long, To
eat both fish flesh together hurts the flegmaticke.
or thy meat be digested. When thou dost eat fyshe flesh together, it doth
corrupt in thy stomach, and styncke: even so doth hard Cheese, cold fruicts.
And old poudred meates, and raw herbs, engender evil humours: so that
diversity of quantity, quantity of diverse meates, do bring much payne to ye
stomach, and engender many diseases, as thou may read in the first book of
Galen: Galen. Hippocrates.
de Iuuamentis membrorum. cap. iiij. And the Prince himself saith, in. iij.
pri. doc. ij. cap. vij. saying nothing is more hurtful, than divers meates, to
be joined together. For while as the last is received, the first begins to
digest. And when the table is garnished with divers meates some roasted, some
fried, and baked, some warm, some cold, some Fyshe, some flesh, To feed of
divers sorts of me^es corrupts the body.
with sundry fruicts, and Sallets of divers herbs, to please thine Eye:
Remember with thy self, that the sight of the all, is better than the feeding
of them all. Consider with thy self, thou art a Man and no beast, therefore be
temperate in thy feeding, and remember the wise words of Salomon: Eccle. 37.
be not greedy in every eating, and be not hasty upon all meates. For excess
of meates, brings Sickness, and Glottony comes at the last, in to an
unmeasurable heate. Through surfeit hath many one perished, Good d^e^ prolongs
Life.
but he that dyeteth himself temperately, prolongs his life. Therefore
gross Fyshe, Lambs flesh, and the Inwards of beasts, raw herbs, Pygges
brains, and all slimy meates, be evil for thee: but late suppers be worst of
all, specially if they be long, for they cause painful Nights to follow. But
Galen saith in his book Di euchimia, the meates which be without all blame,
be those which be between subtle, and gross. Good bread of clean wheat,
flesh of Capons, or Hens, Fesantes, What kinds of meats doth cause good
blood.
and Partriches, Pigeons, and Turtell Doves, Black birds, small field birds,
roasted Ueale, and Mutton: These do engender good blood, saith Galen. Note
also, that any other meat, that thou dost eat at supper, although it seem
repugnant to a phlegmaticke stomach, if thou sleep well after it, and feel
no payne* thou may use as a meat necessary. And when thou can not sleep
well, if the default came through meat: A good rule to be observed
mark that meat or drink, although it seem pleasant, refuse it as an
Enemy. And where as thou hast used evil diet, as accustom in abusing time,
quantity, and quality: by little and little bring thy self into good order,
and to time, both for thy Breakfastes, Dinner, and Supper. Provide always, to
eat good things: but not many things. For like as repletion, or abundance of
meat, is an enemy unto the Body, and Soul, and brings sudden death: even so
is emptiness, a shortner of time, a weaker of the Brain, a hinderer of
Memory, an increaser of Wind, Choler, and Melancholy. And oftentimes to many,
brings sudden death also, except Nature have some thing to work upon, as
I did tell thee before-vse some light things at breakfast of perfet
Digestion. What hurt comes of an empty Stomach when ye go to bed.
Within four hours after receive thou thy dinner, observing the good order of
Diet, drinking Wine, or Beer oftentimes, and little attonce, eschuinge great
draughts of drink, which be used among beasts, and myngle thy meat with
mirth, which is ever the best dish at the Board, and be thankful to God.
And so leave with an appetite, passing the time wisely between dinner, and
supper, with exercise, labour, study, or pastime, An order of dieting.
unto ye end of.vj. hours, and then begin thy supper: provided that if it be
shorter than thy dinner, eating thy meat by little and little: for greedy
eating is hurtful to nature, as Galen saith in his Dietary. Note also, Galen.
die.
that thou must eat more meat in Winter, than in Summer, because thy natural
heate is closed within thy body in Winter, but universally spread in Sumer. Also
choleric men may as lightly digest Beef, Baken, Uenison. c. The Choleric.
With asmutch speed, little hurt, as the flegmatike man may eat, Rabet,
Chicken, and Partridge. c. But the Melancholy man, The Melancholy
through the coldenesse of the Stomach, hath not the strength in ye Stomach,
as he hath promptness in will: to eat things warm, and moist, is good for
him. The sanguine man, is not so swift in his digestion, as the hot choleric
man is. The Sanguine.
But notwithstanding, he hath good digestion, through the humidity, and
warmenesse of blood, and covets to eat sweet things, which greatly augment
the blood: Therefore sharpe Sauces, made with Vinegar, Onions, and Barberies.
Purslen, Sorrel, be wholesome: small Fishes that feed upon ye stones, in fair
running waters, Cucumbers, pure French wine, partly delayed with water, be
good for ye Sanguine Men to keep them from much increase of flesh.


Sickness. THou hast showed unto me a discreate, and wholesome Order of Diet
perticulerly to my self, and partly to other Complexions, but what rule or
pretty government is there for sick Folks, that be suddenly vexed or other
ways?


Health. An order for ye dieting of such as be sick of sharpe Fevers.
THey that be suddenly vexed with sharpe sicknesses, must have thin Diets, with
water Gruell, thin Mutton, or Chickens, Potage without any fat or thickness,
Violet leaves, Endyue leaves, and such like cooling herbs, and let their
drink be made of Ptisantes. Thus do to them, that have hot sharpe
sicknesses, occasioned of choler. And also cold syrupes of Endiue, Uyolets,
Sugar, water and Uynegar, sodden together be very wholesome. But if sicknesses be
long of continuance, their diet must be the thicker, and their meates made
stronger, Short sickness, thin broathe: long sickness, thick broathe.
specially if their dyseases be cold, with the flesh of Cocks, Capons,
temperate Wine stewed Broathes, with wholesome herbs, as Buglose, Borage,
Bazill, Parsely, and Fenell roots, with some Maces, Dates, Damask prunes,
Raysons of ye Sun, and such like. Syrupes of Isope, Of Syrupes and drynkes.
and Citrones: provided, that they neither take meat, nor medicine, immediately
before, or soon after their syts, posset Ale with clarified herbs accepted,
which they may take for their comfort, according to ye estate of their Disease.
Such as be sick, must have Meat contrary to their Complexion. For they that
be cold, must have hot meat, and medicines. And they that be dry, must have
moist things. But they that be hot, must have cold things* for th'ardent
heate of the Fire, is quenched with moystnes of the water, and so the quantity
of one Element overcomes the quality of an other. And in deed, Physic
saith, the bodies that be hot, must be fed with things like themselves, as
they that be hot with hot things to preserve their heate, such like. But
when they do exceed in heate, cold, moist or dry: then let the qualities of
moystnes, be tempered with drynes, and the coldness, with warmenesse. For like
as man delights in things of like, As the coplexion is, so man requires his
food, in the time of health things like to his nature but in sickness the
contrary.
as the Choleric man, in choleric things: even so do Beasts, and
Fruits, as the Coloquintida, which is bitter, delights in bitter ground.
Hot spices delight to grow in hot ground, every fruit, and herb, doth
delight in the thing that is like it self: beware of distemperaunce, surfeits,
or repletion, rear suppers, and drunkenness, make thy Belly no shambles, or
Kitchen.


Sickness. But if a man feel great grief after meates, or drinks, what way is
there then, for to help him?


Health. Use walking up and down, and perhaps, that will Digest, as Auicen
saith: And Rasis saith, Auicen the iii. doctrine, the vii. chapiter. Moderate
walk after meat, profit lj.

Galen in.vi. de accidenti morbo. Capitu i. Auicen in.13. Theo. iii. trac. iii.
Capit.


to walk an hundred Paces after meat, is wholesome. For it comfort
digestion, provokes vryne, and gieueth one power and strength of stomach, to
eat his supper. But the cousayle of Galen must here be observed, which saith:
there is no meat, but it will corrupt, or styncke, if the body be cast into a
sudden heate, by strong travel soon after meat, which corrupcion of
digestion, is the mother of all diseases, and the beginner of all infirmities,
as Auicen reports. And if you see, this will not help to digest your
ingorged full stomach, then provoke your self to sleep, lying upon your
Right side, leaning toward your Breast and Belly, laying your warm hand upon
your Breast, as Auerhois saith: the power of digestion is made strong, when a
man sleeps. For natural heate, that is drawn inwardly with warmenesse, or
heate, hath power to digest: but if sleep ease you not, provoke vomit, or fast
it out: and this is the counsel of many learned Men. For it is no marvel,
although many meates corrupt one man, Auicen in secundo doc. capitu. 6.
which be of sundry workings in the Stomach, Liver, and Ueynes, for the
qualities do hinder Nature, asmutch as the superfluous quantityes. And take
heed these signs, and evil Tokens, be not found in you. The pains of all
your Members, with Idleness, and weariness to go, or move your body:
Sudden great Blushinges, or redness in your Face, Ueynes swelled and puffed
up, red Uryne, and gross Skin, extended or stretched out with fullness, like a
blown Bladder, and Pulses full, small desire to meat, ill rest, and gryefe in
sleep, seeming in the sleep to bear some intolerable burden, or dreaming to
be speechless: Daugerous tokens.
these be the evil and dangerous tokens of replecion. And of this I gieue you
warning, for it hath slain as many by abundance: as hunger hath killed
through scarcity. Therefore forget not vomits, whereof I do intende to speak
shortly hereafter: how to vomit by medicine accordingly.


Sickness I Have heard thee say, that wholesome Air, Of air*
is a great comfort to Mans Nature: but corrupt Air, doth much harm. I shall
require you therefore, to tell me of the good, and the bad Air, that I may
learn to use ye good, and refuse the bad.


Health. GALEN in lib. de Sectis, saith: A wise Phisicion ought to know the
Natures of men, of waters, of air, of regions, Phisicions ought to have a
perfet knowledge of the nature of places, and air.
dwellings, generally. Particularly, to thy self being a natural
Englysheman, of birth education. This Land is very temperate, howbeit, our
dwellings in this land be variable, as Fens, Marryshes, Woods, Heathes
Ualleyes, Plains, Rocky places, near the Sea side. But ye said Galen, Note
which is the most wholesome air, to dwell in.
geeueth counsel in his Regement of health, saying, a good air, which is pure
and wholesome, is that, which is not troubled in standing water Pooles. Therefore
Marrysh grounds, and places where Hemp, and Flax are rotten, What airs
corrupt the blood.
and dead Cartons be cast, or multitudes of people dwelling together, or houses
environed with standing waters, where into Priuies or sinks have issues, or
wallowing of Swyne, or carrion unburied, or foul houses, or such like places,
be dangerous, and corrupt the blood, which is worse than corruptions of meat.
For Hippocrates says, that all places of concauities, Corrupt airs bring
sondry diseases.
as Sellers, Ualtes, hoales of Mineralles, where mettales be dug, or
houses, or Walls joined together, whereas the Sun with reflection beats in
with sooden heate, whose absence brings cold: These airs are distempered:
but pleasant clear airs, sweet Gardens, goodly hills, in days temperate,
when one may see far of: these be good. There be certain stars called also
infortunates in their exaltacion, whose influence brings corruption to
creatures, rot, and pestilence, to men beasts, poysonyng waters, and killing
of Fish, blastyng of Fruit in Trees, and Corn in the Fields, infectyng men
with diverse diseases, Fevers, Paulsies, Dropsies, Frensies, Falling syckenes,
and Leprosies. Against the said influences, Fervent prayer unto God doth
mitigate his wrath.
all Christian men must pray to God to be their defence, for they be Gods
Instruments, to punysh the Earth. Example, we have of mortal Pestylence,
horrible Fevers, and Sweating syckenes, and of late a general Fever, that this
Land is often plagued withal. Then make a Fire in every Chimnay within thy
house, and burn sweet Perfumes, to purge this foul air. Sweet air to be
made in the time of sickness, with perfumes: What situation is best for a
house.
And now in conclusion to answer thy question, for ye health of dwelling,
Auicen saith, to dwell upon Hills is cold: and in Valleys, comprysed within
Hills, is hoate. Upon a Hills side, against the North, is cold and dry.
Toward the West, gross, moist: very subtle towards the East: and clear and
warm, towards the South. And Rasis says: in his first book Afforie. A man
dwelling near the Sea side, or great Waters, can not live long, nor can not be
without weakness of members or blyndnesse, but the best building of an house
is upon a dry Ground, and a hill towards the West side, Pleasaut people, their
air.
and south west doors, and Wyndowes open towards the East, Northeast, having
near unto the said house, sweet Sprynges of running waters, coming from
stony or chalkye Ground, which is both pleasant and profytable to the house.
For Hyppocrates saith in his book of air, Airs are to be observed* in
sickenesses as in health.
and Water, the second chapiter: Cities and Towns, placed toward the East, be
more surer, than the Towns builded towards the North, for temperate air, or
Wind, and their sickenesses be less. And in the said book Hippocrates
greatly commedeth pleasaut Rivers, running towards the rising of the Sun: the
dwellers in such places (saith he) be fair and well favoured, smothe skynned,
clear and sharpe voices, and this shall suffyce, what and where good and
pleasant dwelling is. Note also, that thou must observe air, as thou doest
meat: cold sickenesses, warm air: dry syckenesses, moyste air. And so in
the contraries to them that be sick, and they that be whole. air of like
quality, is most wholesome. They that have lunge syckenesses, change of airs
is a great help, both in Fevers, Dropsies, Falling syckenes, and Reumes. Read
Hippocrates in his book of air.


Sickness. I Have found very much disquyetnes in my body, when my servant and
labouring Family have felt ease, and yet we are pertakers of one air, and my
toode is fine, and theirs gross.


Health THe cause why thy laboring Servant, in the Field at Plough, Pastures,
or Wood, have such good health, is exercise and labour: Moderate exercise is
a sufferaine thing.
and disquietnes, comes partly of idleness, and lack of travel, which
moderately used, is a thing most sufferain to nature. Read of exercise in the
book of household, written by Xenophon: wherein he shows, ye Princes would
labour, plant. c.


Sickness. I pray thee tell me some thing of exercise?


Health. THE well learned man Fulgentius saith: that exercise is a Fyle, and
chafer of the heate natural, which chase away Sleep, Fulgen, in lib. 2.
and consumes superfluous humours, wasting the Natural virtues, redeming of
time, enemy unto Idleness, due unto youg Men, joy unto old Men, and to say the
truth, he which doth abstain from Exercise, shall lack the joys of Health,
and quietness, both of body and mind. And Galen says, in his Regement of
Health, if we will keep perfect Health, we must begin with labours, and
moderate Travel, and then to our meat and drink, and so forth to our
sleep: and this is the cause why Faukeners, Shouters, Hunters, Runners, What
profit comes by exercise.
Tenisplayers, Ploughmen, and Gardeners, and lyfters of wayghtes. c. have so good
digestion and strength of Body. Who be stronger armed men tha Smythes? Why so?
Because of the exercise of their arms: stronger bodied then Carpenters, whyth
lift great Blocks, and Masons, which bear great stones, not only in their
youth, but such men will take marvelous travails in age, which to idol
people, seem very painful, but unto them selves that Travel, no payne, but
pleasure, because of custom. These people can digest gross meates, eating them
with much pleasure, Use makes labour ca^*
and sleeping soundly after them upon hard Beds: where as the idle Multitudes
in Cities, and in Noble men's Houses, in great numbers for lack of exercise,
do loathe Meates of light digestion, and dainty Dyshes: Mary in deed they may
be very profytable to Phisicions. But if Travel be one of the best preservers
of health, Aph^.
then is idleness the destroyer of Life as Auerrhois says: and Hippocrates
says, every contrary is removed, and helped by his contrary, as Health
helps Syckenes* ^xercyse puts away idleness. c, But every light moving, or
sort walking, Idleness the mo^her of all mischief.
may not be called an exercise, as Galen says: therefore Tennis, Daunsyng,
Running, Wrastlyng. Riding upon great Horses, were ordained as well for the
state of men's health, as for pleasure: whereas they are now converted in many
places, rather to the hurt of many, than the profit of few. Exercise doth
occupy every part of the Body, quycken the Spirits. purge the excreamentes
both by the raynes, and Guts, therefore it must be used before meat. For if
strong exercise be used immedyately after meat, it conveys corruption to
each part of the body, Exercise before m^ate*
because that meat is not digested. But when thou see thy water after meat,
appear somewhat citrine, or yellow: Li^le travel for the sick.
then may thou begin exercise, for digestion is then well: but sick folks,
lean persons, young Children, Women with Child, may not much travel. To
conclude: the exercise of Dice, Cards, fighting, drinking, A sign of
digestion.
footebaule, and casting of the stone, with lusts immoderately used, and such
like, may be called exercises of fools, rather than of wysemen. I might have
spoken much of exercise of hand labour: and of the noble profession, or worthy
estate of a true soldier, but this shall suffice.


Sickness. THere are many idle people in Cities, and in noble houses, do think
the chyefe felicity only, The practise of idle people.
to be from bed to belly, and then from belly or board, to Bed again: none
other lives they will use, than Cards, Dice, or pratlyng title tatle excepted.
Spending their times in sleeping, eating, and laughing: and somewhat else to
small effect. Now for asmutch as they neither can, or will travail, what say
you to the matter.


Health. Idleness brings mischief to the body soul, and poverty. Gene. xix.
MAry this kind of life, would make of a noble, or worshipful person, a
deformed monstrous man: with a life short and painful: eftsoon change a yoman
into ye miserable estate of a beggar. For Idleness and plenty of victuals, are
fit for such citizens, as were in Sodoma Gomorha which peryshed in their lust,
idleness and fatness. And although perhaps, there be a great Number, whyth
say in their hearts, The Heath are better tha many Christians.
Non est deus: and look for no life to come. Yet because they have the shapes
of men, not forcing for the immortality of the soul (for which damnation is
due) yet let them not appear, worse than brute beasts, An example of brute
beasts.
in this poyncte. Or the Heathen infydell, which Heathen are both comely,
clean, worldly wise, valiant, neat and fine, and also have goodly (although
not godly providence to preserve bodily health. For it is reason, they should
so do, seeing they are careless for the soul: but the idle Christian, cares
little for both, the belly excepted. Well fare the Heathen, in this honest
manly poinct to preserve nature.

The fat Ox, or ugly brauned Bore, although they can not come out fro their
franks or staules, lacking Liberty: yet nature hath taught them, a trim
wholesome exercise, called fricacion, or rubbing of them selves: chafing forth
by the poares evil humours, Of frication the virtue thereof.
wherein they do find pleasure health. There is no kind of beast, that might
be lunge without filthy itch, sores, or skabbes, without they use fricacion,
coming. c. Fricacion is one of the euacuacions, yea, or clensynges of
Mankind, as all learned affirm: that Mankind should rise in the Morning, and
have his Apparel warm, stretching forth his hands and legs, preparing the
body to the stool, and then begin with a fine Comb to kembe the hair up and
down: the with a course warm cloth, to chafe or rub the head, Neck,
Breast, arm hoales, belly, thyghes. c. and this is good to open the poares.
Further, if any have the Cramp, or is full of Melancholy, or heaviness of
Mind, or else fallen into a sudden cold, through watching in a cold house, or
field, When to use rubbing or frication, and wherefore.
or else have a moyste reume. c. What is better than frication, or chafing with
warm clothes? This is ye very best way, but it must be done a mornings, before
meates: but at night it is not good. For then it opens the poares of the
body, and is an enemy to sleep, and quiet rest, and lets sorth natural
virtue, which should nourysh sleep. Now, as concerning the diversity of
frication, or rubbing, note three things. The first is, Three things to be
observed in Frication.
hard fricacion doth open the poares, let forth smoke, and bind the body. Soft
frication doth mollify, and relaxe the body, as it is written, Dura frixione
ligatur, molli vero soluitur. But the third which neither is soft, nor hard,
but mean doth neither diminysh, nor increase, but indifferently warms.
Neither are the spirits or smoke of the natural heate, thereby letten forth
by the poares of the skyn: And all men that use to be trymmed, washed, It is
not good to be trimmed of ye Barber at night, but in the morning.
or rubbed at ye Barbours at evening, do err from the regiment of health, but
in the morning it is very good and comfortable, and augments natural heate,
strength, expulsing sluggyshnes and sleep. So that the body lift some wayghtye
thing from the Ground or else draw a Bow, according to his strength.
Furthermore understand, that all dry and whole bodies, may use fricacion, with
warm and moist oils: And all moist and cold bodies, to use the contrary.
There are also joined to fricacion, two other exercises: Gestacion the profit
thereof
the one is called Gestacion, that is to be carried of an other thing, without
any travail of the body it self, and as easy cockyng in a Cradell, to be
car^ed up and down in a chair: either in fair Weather, to be rowed up down
in a tylted Boat or Barge, and this is very good for weak people, which have
had lunge agues. c. The second part of this exercise, is Equitacion, Equitacion
is very wholesome.
which may be moderately used of sick men and Women, that be weak through
Fevers, or Timpanye. And that must be used, upon a soft easy going horse, in a
plain pleasant field, in the clear air, upon the fair days. These
exercises do not only reconcyle sleep, but augment make strong the natural
virtues. And thus I end of Fricacion, Equitacion, and Gestation: of this you
may read lib. iiij. capi. vi. Aetius. Cornelius Celsus lib. iiij. capi. xix.
who also writes profitably, and plentifully of the same no less pleasant
than good, to mans nature: sudden exercise after meat, makes the blood
foul, corrupts digestion, lets forth natural heate, When to travel, or
play.
makes the stomach cold, brings skabbes: as Hippocrates affirms. Si
impurgatus laboraucrit, vlcera erumpent, therefore in the morning, and two
hours after meat, exercise is best.


Sickness. THis is well, I assure you. But yet I have seen, strong Uomittes
have chanced to men, after their meates. Exercise or Fricacion. c. what is the
cause thereof?


Health. FIrst, weak stomachs in sick people, or women with child, The
cause of vomit, and when it helps, when it hurts.
they will quickly vomit, as, we see by custom: also Replecio through
meates, or strong drynkes, bring Uomyttes. Notwithstanding vomyte is a goodly
euacuacion, for those persons, which be molested and grieved in their breasts
or stomachs, or them, which be vexed with phlegm, or choler, What persons may
best vomit.
with such like foul humours, which grieve the stomach. And specyally to
people, which have short Necks, great breasts, and wide Mouths: For all
these may easily vomit without hurt. Also they, which have narrow breast, and
lunge small Necks, may not well vomyt, without hurt, or peril of
deaffenesse, and stranglyng: howbeit Hippocrates, the Prince of Phisicions
saith, who so hath a vomyt, without coaction or medicine, Who may worst vomit.
it heals them, which have had a lunge flixe or laxe. The same Hippocrates
saith, who so ever vomits black choler upward, without a medicine given,
Uomit helps the flixe.
it is a token of death. Uomittes be also perilous to them that be in
consumption, or weak of nature. The best time of vomits is in Summer, as
Hippocrates affirms.iiij. Aphoris. Aestate quidem superioris magis ventr.
Hyeme autem inferioris medicamentis purgare conuenit. It is more convenient,
When to vomit.
for to purge the body downward in Winter, but upward in Summer: specially in
Harvest time. Howbeit, Cornelius Celsus affirms, that no vomyt in Winter, is
better than Summer: by the reason the stomach is full of crude, raw fleume.
Galen de lib. primo ratio victus, counsayleth to vomyt two times in the Month
saying it is good, that is to say, every,.xv. days. But note this, that you
vomyt two days together, for that which is left the first day, shall be cleansed
by vomyt the second, But in som^ vomits, How to provoke vomit, and how to stay
it.
veins are broken through great straining of the body: and like as to procure
a vomyt, we do minister Oximell Squilliticum, warm Water and Honey, and
sometime Oil, or the leaves of Azarabaccha. c. Even so we minister when an
evil accydent comes of ouermutch vomyt, to the sick body Mint water with
the powder of Mumie, Sage, Mirobalans, Chepoli, the powder of Mastike. And give
to drink Diacodion, small Wine with tosted bread: and thus I do end with
vomittes, which are good before meat, but better after the same two hours: as
affirm divers men, of great experience.


Sickness. After strong vomits, there chances often times the Hickop, or
yexing, what help for that?


Health. THat is very perilous, I assure you: for after strong purgacions or
vomittes, An hickop after a vomit is perilous.
saith Hippocrates, if either conuulsion, or the Hickoppe, called yexing do
come, it is peryllous, and much to be feared. Further says he, in his
Aphorism. Conuulsio a veratro lethalis est. A conuulsion, saith he, after one
hath drunk Elleborus albus is deadly, by the reason that the strength of this
Uenemous Herb, doth draw from the Sinews moystnes, To help the Hickope.
and contracts them with a sudden emptines, and drines that scant help may
be had, but rather deadly Peril follows, or even as if they were aged, paste
Nature, and ready prepared to the place of silence, or the Grave. Yet
notwythstandyng do thus, and refuse not this mean, which hath great Virtue..
Meal of Fenegreeke, of Fleaworte, of clean Barley, ana..iiij. and the Oils of
Uyolets, water Lillies, red Roses, ana..j.ss. Honey..j. mingle all, and temper
them in a mortar: A goobly way to help hickop, coming after vomit.
then sees Mallowes, and Violets together, ana. M.j. put them into a Mortar*
beat them well, and make two emplasters, applying under the breasts and arm
hoales, meeting towards the Raynes of the back. And gieue the Patient Goats
milk or Woman's milk with Sugar: and wash his head with warm Wine, wherein
is sodden Roses, Violets, Mallowes, Barley, and five finger. And then warm
anoint the head with ye Oils of Roses, water Lillies, and Hens grease, and
then make a Bathe for the Patient to sit in, of Uyolets, Roses, Henbane,
Mallowes, Poppy, Lettyce, and water Lillies: and thus I do end of the yexing,
A mean is best.
which is an evil accident, following vomit of two extremes, that is of
repletion emptiness: a mean is left therefore in every thing. For extremes
you see, are hurtful, both in matters politic, and Physic. c.


Sickness. There is an evacuation called Sternutacion, or neesing: what doth ye
profit?


Health. HIPPOCRATES, of neesing saith thus, Sternutamentum fit ex capite,
Cerebro califacto, aut humectata capitis part inani: Aer enim intro contentus
extra erumpit, sonat autem la per angustiam exit: Aphor. 52. That is,
neesing that comes from the head, Of neesinge, the profit thereof.
is made either of the Brain, which is hot, or else the empty or void place
of the head, being very moist. For the air contained therein, breaks forth,
through a small narrow way: and so comes the sound or noise forth. This is
wholesome, yt the strength of nature forces forth wind, specially once or twyse
in the morning, putting away belching: but more is not good, and who so cannot
neese, it is a sign of weakness, sickness, Neesing doth help Women in their
travel
coldness, and age. And to neese after meat, is not wholesome, but when a
Woman labours with Child, or hath the Mother, then Neesing is wholesome, and
healthful, and will soon help them: but sometime through strong neesing,
bleeding doth quickly ensue, by the breaking of some Ueyn^ Then apply the
Nasalia, and frontarij, as I have written before, in the end* of the
Compounds.


Sickness. Then what say you of bleeding, what profit or peril is in it?


Health. I Have spoken thereof sufficiently before: thereefore, I say,
remember, that to be letten blood in the Spring time, When it is good to
bleed^
is ye best season, as Galen affirms, in libro de Flobothomia, and through ye
same, these evils are helped. Replecion, Pleurisy, hot Tercians, Frenses,
Pestilence, stoppinge of the terms c. All the Orgaynes of the Senses are
cleansed thereby. And finallye, the Body is of a weak body, made strong to
the, Who must no^ bleed.
which are in lusty years. But provide, that neither people in consumpcion,
old folks, Women with child, or young children, be letten blood. And no man
to be let blood, after ye good blood appears in bleedyng, for fear of
Cramp, Palsy, or dropsy. Nor none to sleep, after they are letten blood 8.
hours. Tucke and Rapier.
Read Galen vt supra, and Rasis lib. 4. ad Almanso. There is a new kind of
Instruments to let blood withal, which bring the blood letter sometime to the
Gallows, because he stryketh to deep. These Instruments are called, the
ruffians Tucke, and lunge foining Rapier: weapons more malicious, than manly.


Health. Will boxing do any pleasure?


Health. Boxing is good for a Lubber.
YEa forsooth, very much: As example, if you have any saucy low^, or loitryng
lubber within your house, that is either to busy of his hand, or tongue. and
can do nothing* but play one of the parts, of the.24. orders of knaves, There
is no pretier medicine for this, nor sooner prepared, than boxing is.iii.
or.iiii. times well set on, a span lunge on both the cheeks. And although
perhaps, this will not alter his lubberly condicios, yet I assure you, it will
for a time, change his knauysh complexion, and help him of the green
syckenes: and every man may practise this, as occasion shall serve him in his
family, to reform them.

Boxing doth draw forth evil humour. c.
But for the Boxing, whereof Galen speaks, calling it Boxing, Cupping, with
Cucurbitula. c. Saith he, Boxing doth help swelling, and lets forth wind,
stops the terms immoderate, and the bloody flixe, and helps appetite. And
when a Woman doth swooned, it is good to revive the spirits again. There are
two kinds of the ventosas, or Boxinges, the gentlest is without scarification:
Boxyng do stop the terms, when they do aboud
the other is to draw forth water, and assuage hard swelling, and cleanses
Melancholy, specially in weak Bodies. And it will remove humours from place to
place, as from the head to the Neck, from the Neck to the shoulders. c. And
what stops the terms sooner, as Hippocrates Apho, Si mulieri menstrua
sistere volueris, Cucurbitulam qua maximam sub mammis defige. If thou wilt stop
the terms of a Woman, then put a great ventose under, or upon her breasts,
for the vain, which is in the matrix, comes from the breasts.


Sickness. Doth sweating profit any thing at all, to mankind?


Health. SWeating is no less pleasant to Nature, than profytable to a common
Wealth: Of sweates profitable, and unprofitable, to a common Wealth,
and sometime sweating is unprofitable. As example. If any artificer, or
Husband man, have any servant that is so diligent, that he can sweat at his
labour, and not at his meat, this is a good sweat: But if his man do eat
until he sweat, and labour without heate, this fellow, if you give him not an
expulsiue, out at your Haul door, An expulsiue for an idle Lout.
undoubtedly he will else shortly vomit you, into the backehouse Ditch, with a
thread bare Cap. Therefore, take heed to such sweaters, and idle eaters,
except you be Abunde Dives, and yet let all men both poor and Rich:
Gene..iii.
remember what Almighty GOD said unto Adam: Manducabis herbam agri, in sudore
vultus tui vesceris pane, donec reuerteris in humum. Thou shalt eat the Herb
of the field, in the sweat of thy face, thou shalt eat Bread, until thou be
returned back again into the Earth or Ground. And in an other place it is
written: they which will not labour shall not eat. And also there is a promise
of God* by the mouth of the holy Prophet, which affirms saying: Nam labore
manuum tuarum manducabis, beatus eris, optime habebis: that is. For of thy
labour of thy Hands, thou shalt eat, thou shalt be blessed, and have the best
things: as prosperity, and the fruicts of the earth. c. Lo, here you see, here
is no hunger, begging, idleness, loitring pickyng, slavery, disyng, whoryng,
theeuyng, prysonyng for the same, A good reward, for a diligent labour,
or Tiburnyng, appointed not to labourers, but to loiterers. Here you have the
promise of God for the same: that they which will honestly labour and sweat,
shall be in good health to eat. As we daily see the honest labouring husband
men, and their family do travel, toil, and sweat: they have therefore Gods
blessing, good health and long Life. The Carter doth daily help the Courtier.
For if the husband man and Carter did not sweat each other day, the Courtier
and Citizen would cry well away. Now sir to Phisical sweat, whereof I will
shortly conclude, which are two kinds: the first of them is natural, as when
men do voluntarily sweat, without force of medicine, as hot drink, or hot
House. or stoue: these will easily open the poares, and dissolve gross
humours, Of two kinds of sweates, natural, and artificial.
cleanse the blood, comfort the spirits, put away cold, consume crude humours,
amend the sinews, put away ache or numnes, Fevers, dropsy, and the
Pestilence: Sweat helps all these. And if one be sick in his sweat, he
ought not to sleep: and this is a token, that he shall do well in sweating, if
he sweat in all places, and by little and little feel the pains aswage, then it
is a sign that health will follow. But if he sweat, in one or two places only,
and find more grief, it is an evil token,

The artificial sweat, is made in stoues, bathes, or bladders, Pox is
cleansed by sweat.
with hoate water, hot stones, put in clothes, and applied to the body lying
in Bed. Or else with moist bathes of herbs, or perfumes with Masticke, Stirar
Oil. c. Which have virtue to cleanse skabbes, itch* Pox. I say the Pore, as by
experience we see, there is no better remedy than sweating, and the drinking of
Gu^icum, using it in due time and order. Provided always, to sweat at evening
is better than in the morning: as Physic affirms, and reason proves. For
when the Body hath nourishment within, the spyrites shall not be utterly drawn
forth to the extreme parts, Who ought to sweat, and who not.
through the outward heate. Further, let lean dry folks, or feeble persons,
use little to sweat: for it will hurt them much, but fat folks may sweat
well, it helps them much* howbeit, sweat is not good for the eyes, because
it dries to much: lean Bodies therefore ought to be anointed with Oil,
after they have sweat, Sweat is ever good in sharpe agues, What sweat is
good.
in the days of the Crises, or Judgment of sickness, saith Hippocrates in his
Prognostico: but the contrary, Sudores optimi sunt, in omnibus acutis morbis,
qui in diebus iudicatorijs. c. Read here after, in the signs of death, of
sweating.


Sickness. What say you of abstinence, or fasting, is it very profitable for the
body?


Health. The great goodness of fasting, both for the soul the body.
YEa truly, and also for the soul: as it is written by the Prophet: In
ieiunio humiliaui animam meam: In fasting, saith he, have I humbled and brought
lowe my soul. Fasting is a singular Instrument to correct the flesh, and make
it obedient, and seruaunt to the spirit, if it be joined with faith otherwise
it is vain, concerning perfect religion. But nevertheless, profitable in
Physic, is abstinence for the body. For take this for example: If one have
taken a surfete, with repletion or fulness, or else dronkennes, nothing is better
to bring the body into good quiet order, The rich use gluttony, and poor
penury.
than abstinence, which will consume matter superfluous and hurtful, But yet
not of it self, but by a certain way or mean: for it it is not quickly
restored, which with lunge abstinence hath ben wasted. Fasting is not utterly
to refuse meat, but to eat that which preserves Life only: Oh that
moderacion were used in a common wealth, then would not the rich die in
gluttony, and abundance, nor the poor perysh for lack of bread. Extremes
are evil to much fasting, or to much hunger. Galen affirms, that people
which have narrow veins have but little blood, and such may not suffer lunge
hunger, but shall fall into sickness. But they which have great veins, have
plenty of blood, and may fast without hurt. So may all such, as have much
raw crude matter, Choleric people must not fast much
which is helped through fasting. Abstinence is hurtful to Chollerike, and
Melancholic Persons, or them which are sick and weak, or to young
children: so every one must be considered in order accordingly.


Sickness. WHen I have ben weary and sore veered both in mind, and body, no
thing hath don me so much pleasure. as sleep hath don, and rest in the night
time: what say you to sleep?


Health. Sleep is brother unto death, saving the one doth not awake again,
and the other doth recover the senses: and of necessity, all Creatures that
wake, or watch, must sleep and rest. For the holy Prophet saith, in the book
of Psalmes, or Hymns to almighty God: Ego iacui do^miui atque euigilaui, The
virtue or benefit of sleep, or rest Psal. 3.
la dominus me suffulcit. I laid me down (saith he) and slept, and also
waked again: for the Lord did only comfort me, Truly that God, that made us
also, made our actions and doings as labour, rest, eating, drinking, sleeping,
and waking, without which we cannot live. Aristotle saith, all living things
have sleep, as swimming, flying, and going creatures. Further he says.
sleep is like the falling evil, by the reason all the senses are depryued:
for sleep is the ligament of the senses, No man or beast, can live without
rest.
and waking doth unbind them, and sleep is given to each living creature, for
their health. And further, Aristotle shows the cause of sleep, saying:
Somnus causatur ex vapore cibi, qui vadit ad cerebrum. Arist. de some.
c. Sleep is caused of the smoke or vapour of the meat, going into the
brain: which comes back again cold, and makes sleep. Therefore Men after
Meals, are soon given to Sleep, as we do see by experience: and without
sleep, wise men should be changed into idiot fools. Note this, that all
sleeps do not make thyn, dissolve, or warm always. but such sleeps only
as follow either labour, great exercise, or honger. And further, when man is
sleeping, the natural heate is drawn inward, which when the said sleep
finds no nouryshment or thing to feed upon: then like a Lyon, it doth
forthwith consume, How the stomach must be prepared toward sleep.
and wast the best Humour, or one of the radical virtues, and in conclusion,
doth dry up the blood and make the body lean: therefore, let all lean folks,
or them which have ben abundantly purged, or else letten blood, beware of very
much sleep, sleep after sweat, labour, as running, tenice, much daunsyng,
which do open all the poares, and let forth all the evil vapours, between the
skyn and the flesh. Which sleep doth revoke, retract, and draw back again,
When sleep is perilous.
through the inward heate, wasting the same moisture, and if one have flegmon
in his Guts, that is to say, apostumacion of Choler and Blood, nothing is
more perilous than sleep. by the reason, that the burning and heat
increases, which will augment the dolor: even so in our Englyshe sweat, and
the Pestilent sleep, it is to be forborne, and also before blood letting, and
after during twelve hours, Drunkards what they do.
or else the poison will approach to the heart Or when the fit of an Ague doth
begin, or in drinking any Uenime. c. For in such cases, it will make either
rigour, or horror, leaving the outward parts cold, drawing through unnatural
heate, the venom to the nutrimentall parts, or else to the parts vital: The
cause why a drunkard dies suddenly.
and so this way sleep is not good, but rather hurts. Even so it hurts the
drunkards, bench-whislers, that will quasse until they are stark staring mad,
like March Hares, Flemmyng like Scinkars, braynelesse like infernal Furies,
Drinking, braulyng, tossing of the Pitchar, staring, pissyng, and saving your
reverence, beastly spuing until midnight: these fellows abuse the time of
sleep, and in such case if they should sleep, perhaps apoplexia, Luke.xx.ii.
and sudden death would follow, as Hippocrates affirms Aphoris. vij. Si
ebrius quispiam repent obmutuerit, conuulsus moritur, nisi febre corripiatur,
aut vbi ad horam peruenerit qua crapulae soluuntur, vocem recuperet. That is
(if a drunkard do suddenly lose his speech, and become dumb: he shall die of a
conuulsion, except he be taken of an Ague, or else receive again his Speech,
at the same hour, when the surfyte is dygested. He herein speaks reasonable:
for drunkenness flies into the brayn, and so distills into the sinews, which
brings conuulsion, and after conuulsion ensues Death, through the Crude,
Cold moystnesse. Except the Heate of a Fever do concocte, and waste it. c.
Therefore, let Men take heed of drunkenness to bedward, for fear of sudden
Death: although the Flemysh Nation, use this horrible custom, in their
unnatural watching all the Night. But remember his words, which have made us
all, and know what diet is best for us, even Iesus Christ himself saying:
Cauete autem vobis, nequando grauetur corda vestra, crapula, ebriete. c. And a
wise Man saith: Omne nimium naturae inimicum, all Extreamyties are Enemies to
Nature. So is to much Labour, meat, sleep, Watch: or to little is evil also:
a mean therefore is good, and the best of all. And a due time, place, manner,
and order of sleep. The night is the best time: the day is evil, to sleep in
the Field is perilous. Of good and bad sleep.
But upon, or in the Bed, lying first upon the right side, until you make
Water: then upon the left side is good. But to lye upon the back, with a
gaping mouth, is dangerous: and many thereby are found stark dead in their
sleep, through apoplexia, and obstruction of the sinews, of the places
vital, animal, and nutrimentall. And all such as feel intolerable pains in
their breasts in the Night, which grown, and can not draw their breath:
Fools be afraid of the Mare in their sleep.
the very cause is, lying or sleeping on their back, and not through the Mare,
or night spirit, as they term it, after the Judgment of superstitious
Hypocrites, Infidelles, with charms coniuryngs, and relickes hanging about the
Neck, to fray the Mare, the fool I should say. Let such people, both keep
good diate, clean lodging, lye in order, as I have said, and specyally commend
both their sleeping and waking to Iesus Christ, that they may live honestly,
go to bed merrily, sleep quietly, and rise early. How to auoi^e evil
dreams.
To serve GOD devoutly, and do their business in their vocation diligently: to
help them selves and their neighbours charitably, and not to be careful for
any dream in the Night. But wisely consider this, if they do dream of Fire,
to take it for no evil presage of strife c. But rather that fire doth signify,
that yellow hoate Choler doth abound, and would be purged by good pocios,
Diasene, or the Sirupe of Rhabarbe. And to beware of a Tertian Ague. And when
they dream of Clouds: darkness, What dreams do signify.
or to lye in dark dungeons. c. Remember it is Melancholy, that vexes the
body and spirits in the sleep: and would be purged with Hamech, Pills de
lapide Lazuli. c. If dreams be of cold, Snow, Ise, water, then phlegm would be
diminished with pocions according. and Pills de Agarico. c. Some in the Night
seem in their sleeps* as though a great block were pressing down their
Legs: this is the resolution of the Sinews, or the abundance, which would
be letten forth, by the Medyan vein. And to use bathing to Bedward in warm
water, with sweet herbs: and to dry their Legs, Hippocrates upon sleeps.
and so go warm to bed is excellent. And thus I do end of sleeping and
waking, of which saith Hippocrates Aphor. Vehemens vigilia, tum cibi tum
potionis cruditatem efficit That is, vehement watching doth bring cruditie, and
rawnes, both to meat and drink in the stomach: Much watch causes raw
humours in the stomach.
Moderate watch is good for studients to make them learned, for apprentices to
give them knowledge in their faculty, to the man of war, or Watchman, to
prevent the enemy; to the fat body, to diminish grosenes: But watching at Dice,
Cards. c. Make many watch men in lanes ends, for their purses: To whom watch
is good.
such watches I say make many miserable wretches, whose rewards we see daily,
to be dangerous and shameful in the end.


Sickness. Thafflictions of the mind are hard to be helped.
THere is one thing, which hath troubled me very long, it is a sickness, that
hitherunto I could find no Phisicion so cunning, wise, or learned, that ever
was able to help the same. Neither did I ever see, or taste of that medicine,
that had virtue to relieve me in that poinct. Furthermore, the change of
air, were it never so sweet or pleasant, with the sights of fair fields,
Gardeins, hills, woods, valleis, ^ouered with all coloured kynds of sweet
smelling plants, herbs, or flowers, could never help this syckenes. Pleasure
is noisome to the disquiet heart.
The daily beholding of Jewels of stone, Gold, rich apparel, fair
buildyngs: yea, manly feats of Arms, with triumphaunt syghtes, did me never a
pinsworth of pleasure. But when the time was past, my syckenes doubly assaulted
me again.

The Sacred heavenly Musis or Heliconiades, the daughters of Iupiter, whom I
have known: those.ix. celestial damsels, which did wash them in the Well
with silver streams, where as the swift flying Horse called Pegasus pierced
with hard hove, the frozen hard diamond flint, as Poets affirm. These.ix.
Ladies called the Nymphs, The ix. heavenly Ladies can smally comfort some
careful heart when it is in care.
have infinyte Virtues to please the ear withal in Music, yet have they not
pleased me: as example. The first called Calliope hath a voice most heavenly in
pleasure, to move the affections withal. The.ii. named Clio, a mat^on of grace
to all damsels, for womanly behaviour: yet with a glorious comely Gesture,
moving her beholders, inwardly to sigh. or break their sleeps in the night.
Such grace she hath, to wound the hearts of lusty youth, and make the aged
despair, which are past hope* to renew their age again. The.iii. is the
amorous Lady Erato, with her sweet songs of Lovers delight: whose tunes are
of such heavenly virtue, equal to the Angels: which have such force, that
they will banish all Lovers weeping looks, yea, care, and loving spyght, and
make each amorous subject, or Prisoner, free to them selves, The Sacred gift,
that the ix^ heavenly Musis have and can give to others, to comfort them in
trouble.
without mistrust, casting fro them their cold Willow crowns of morning:
and foorthwyth, this tune will cause them to renew them selves, in that
victorious diadem of warm Laurel, against all cold passions. And gieue them
their delights, through this her sweet pitiful songe. The fowerth will cast a
sweet water on the face of every slothful Lover, and quickly wake them, out of
their flattering or fearful dreams, and show them gladness, and all
pleasant green things, to forget their folly, or pleasant purgatory, her
name is Thalia. Then follows dame Melpomine with her songs, separating of
Mars from Venus. Prophesying of War, and fearful Tragadies, she is the.v.
The sixte named Terpsicore pacifying War, and noise of bloody Trumpet,
reconciling all again, with heavenly Harp, and Musical Instruments of cords
by her: under the sweet arbour, sits her sister Euterpe, with instruments
of Wind, agreeing with her sister in true Musical concord or unity, she is
the seventh. The eight is Polibymnia, with a memory passing all creatures, this
Musis drive Music into numbers, by whose knowledge, the velocity or swyftnes
of the soul is perceived. The.ix. and last is Vrania, through who her sacred
songe, month each living man to be heavenly minded, religious, and to give
them selves to a blessed life. Her songs be lamentable, pitiful, drawing the
hearts from earthly vanities, desiring a change into a happier Land, The names
of the nyne Muses, wych their gifts
above the bright shining stars. These Musis, I say, dear Health, have
helped me before these days: but now can not at all forall their pleasant
pipyng. For their delights to me be rather loathsome, and vex my Mind: saving
the last Muse, called Vrania, which moves me, for else none. For they are but
plain vanity.


Health. WHat sickness is this, that neither Physic, nor all these delights,
can give cure unto? it is a marvelous disease, be like it should appear,
that it is no sycknes of the body, but rather the passions or perturbations of
the mind.


Sickness. You have spoken the truth, it is even so: but I take it to be no new
sickness, All the works under the Sun, are nothing but vanity* and
affliction to the mind.
among foolish Men^ For the wisest man himself, complains thereof, saying:
Ecclesiastes cap. j. Prospexi enim omnia opera quae sunt Caelo, ecce omnia sunt
inanitas, animi molestia. c Truly I did behold all things, that are wrought
under the Sun: and behold they are all but vanity, and vexation of the
mind. c. And so this affliction of the mind, The perturbation, or sudden
motion of the mind, must be well observed.
is the greatest gryef, that I have with my perturbacions. But in a manner, I do
not understand each of their causes, they are so variable, painful, and
endless. For my delight and pleasure is gone, and brought in bondage to them
through lunge trouble.


Health* THey are called perturbacions of the Mind, after. M. Cicero: but
Galen terms them Pathemata vel affectus animi, Of the sudden alteration of
the mind, fro joy to care.
that is the affections,, or sudden mocions of the mind, changed or altered
through some cause, from the right way of reason into some passion; and these
mocions of the spirits, must be as well considered, Of fear what it is.
and diligently observed of the Phisicion, in the time of sickness, as any other
common known Syckenes.

For these perturbacions, or painful affections of the spirits, do change
the estate of the body, marvelously and suddenly. As we within few days
past, Examples of sudden fear.
have seen a person beautiful, well favoured, pleasant. c. but now we
scant know him: Iesus, say we, how this man is altered, and clean changed,
within these five days, as though it had never been he? c. Gods vengeance.
Regum. i.
This is our talk, of the sudden alteracions of our aquaintances: we
therefore must resort unto certain reasons, in such cases. As example. Fear
is after some evil tidings, or doubt of mischief, as loss, prysonment, or
that death will quickly ensue. Then these things will follow: The spirits and
blood are all drawn inward, and then all the outward. members are pale and
cold, with trembling and faintness of speech. By the reason that all the
virtues, both Anymall and Natural, are made feeble, and suddenly weak:
through which often times it have been seen, that sudden fear, hath brought
sudden Death: as example: Ely the high Priest, over the People of GOD, in the
Day of the great battle, when the Philistines prevailed against Israell: as
he sat upon a Stool, looking towards the way, his heart feared him, for the
arc of GOD: in the mean time, there ran a Man hastily unto him, with a
lamentable look, in morning Clothes, declaring unto him, first how that
Israell was fled and slain. Secondly, that his two Sons, Ophni, and Phinehes
were slain. Thyrdly, that the vncircumcysed had taken the Arc of GOD: at
which tidings, such sudden fear came to his heart, that forthwith he fell
down backward brake his neck. And this same evil tidings, slue with sudden
care, his daughter in law, the wife of Phinihes, saying in her death, the
glory is gone from Israell. Evil parents, and evil Children.
This was Elies plague, for suffering his Children to live wickedly. For where
as God is not feared, at length he will suddenly fear them. Fear I do say,
is a marvelous monster, an Infernal Image, and a terrible vision to the
soul: for fear is not for things past, but only for things to come* and to
take things in the worst part, Was not Iesus Christ our God and saviour
afraid, what time as he set before his eyes, the Pains and sharpness of
death, Dolor afficitur anima mea us{que} ad mortem, My soul, Fear is like a
monster of Hell.
said he, is made heavy even unto the death? yea his fear was such, that for
agony, his drops of sweat, were like unto blood. This was a great fear,
even in Christ: but yet it made him not give over, foreseeing the sealyng of
our election by his death. But the fear, which takes mortal men, makes them
cowardly oft times. Through it Peter did swear, he was none of Chrystes
company: and that he knew him not at all. Fear made Dauid to counterfayt, and
go like a mad man, Fear in Christ.
for to avoid Saule which persecuted him. Fear made Athanasius, the Bishop of
Alexandria, to hide himself six years in a Cave, from the cruelty of the
Arrians, Fear in S. Peter. Fear in Dauid.
It causes the Christians to flee, in the time of persecution: And sometime
the Christian through it, is forced to play the Idolater. As example. When the
Tyrant Diocletianus The Emperor, in his cruel murdering of the Christians,
did command every one to be slain, that would not Honour, Athanasius fear.
and offer to his Idols: Marcellus the Bishop, as Eusebius affirms, in a
great fear, did Sacrifice to the Devil: Lo here doth fear try religion.
Sometime fear will creep so far into the conscience, Fear of the Christians.
Fear makes men offer to Idolles.
that it lets in despair. As example of Iudas, which is a good president to
all traitors: and many tyrants through it, have slain them selves: fear
often times, is very intolerable. For there is no touch stone, can better
declare, the diversity of metals, than fear will bewray the worthy, or
unworthy Manhood of Men. As example. There was a lusty blood, Example of
Marcellus.
or a pleasant brave young royster at Athenes, whose name was Aristogiton, as
the Historiographer affirms: which commonly would talk and brag, what good
service if need were that he could do to Mars. All his talk was of UUarre,
how to deuyse Weapons of invasion, to destroy the Enemy: Fear brings
desperation, example. of Iudas.
to train forth Men, to give the Onset, with all lusty courage. And upon a
time, the Athenians prepared a mighty strong Army against their Ennemies, and
among all others, they had this Aristogiton in no small price: supposing him
to be in deed, as he was in word. And calling him forth to take a charge
when he harde, an act to be done in deed: Oh GOD, To prove a coward by
example of a Greek which was a great bragger.
how his Heart was in his Hose, for fear he trembled, and quaked like an
Aspen Leaf, as though he had begone the fytte of a Tercian Ague. He could not
tel what shyft to make, or whether to go to hyde himself: but at length Dame
shame, whispered him in the ear, and bad him wrap one of his legs with
roulers and Clouts, as though he were lame: and so he did, with pale Face, and
staff in hand, he came haltyng and creepyng forth, like a sheepysh Lout,
lamenting his case, that such evil had chaunsed him. But his hart was with
the all, said he, yet durst he not travel, until his Leg was whole. But
when the people did see him daunse so lively, like a Lubber in a Net. Lord how
they laughed this Carpet squyre to scorn. I pray GOD, the like fear be not
found, among a great number of our People, that can Royst, Crake, Brawl,
Swear, and Brag, in ye time of peace: quarelling with quiet people, and lift
up looks, frowning like Tigers. And when the Queenes majesty shall have need
to wythstande the Enemy, or suppress the Rebel: that then they become not
like unto Aristogiton, with soar Legs, Agues, broken Arms, trebling,
lamentable Looks, as bold as Geese, or Lyons of Coteswolde Heath. Sending
their water to the Phisicion, to cloak their knavery, for lack of Manhood:
or ^ls with Vnguentum aurum, can anoint their Capitaynes hand, to blot them out
of their muster Book, A shift for fresh water soldiers.
which is a good Medicine. For fear in such case, there is not the like
receypt, in all Bucklersbury, I assure you: many more things could I speak of
fear, but my matter is of Physic. But this Cordial shall suffyce, for a
Coward.

Now follows anger, which doth increase, inflame, and set their Bodies upon a
fire, with a sudden burning heate: Clean contrary to fear. For fear draws
the heate and blood inwardly, What the passio of anger is
with feeble pulse, but anger doth cast it to the utter parts with swyft Pulse
as Galen affirms, lib. ij. de tuenda sanitate. Counsaylinge every one, that
will preserve natural health, that they use such exercise, as may keep
warmenes temperately, neither to much cold nor heate abounding. And although
exercise commonly brings warmenes, G^l. de. Sani. ^uen.
yet to the Idle bodies, when they have no natural heate, their bodies are
made warm, by any other thing, as Oil, bathing in warm water, or going into
ye Stoue. c. But such heates are artificial, Of heate artificial, and
natural.
to move the heate natural* but they are all without, and not moved of the
principal inward heate. But anger or perturbation, is moved of natural
heate, it needs no mean to help it: as we feel by our selves in cold
weather, let our Enemy suddenly appear before us, Of choleric heate.
or if we hear our selves shamefully rebuked, we need no fire, to kindle the
flame of our choler, forthwith we are in the house top, the holiest of us all.
For heate above nature, will quickly enclose the heart, and with swiftness go
further, seeking vengeance. Unto this evil be Cholerik men most bent, which
must use often to correct Choler: or else to observe an order which a worthy
Philosopher, A lesson against anger.
taught a hasty Prince, yt he should before he did any thing, moved by quick
and sudden affection, first, say over the Alphabet, or the number of letters:
this Heathen rule, against anger or rashenes, will not hurt the Christians. It
declares great pride and anger, to be suddenly moved. As example. At every
light wind, weak trees will move, and tremble with their branches, from
ground to the top of the same: which with great storm and wind, will scant
move the great strong tree. Providence and patience, make men strong, and
cause them to get the victory of themselves: and to be able to wythstand
anger, which is a common passion of cruel Beasts, Tyrants, Fools. Examples
of wrath in Nero.
It should seem by Domitius Nero, that he was an angry wretch, to murder his
Mother, to poison his Scholemayster, and finally to stick himself. In his
manners at the board, he was soon inflamed with anger: yt upon a time hearing
but the french nation named, A wrathful wretch in battayl.
forthwith he brake two most costly drinking vessels, of an incomparable value,
they were so rich and beautiful: he cast down all the meat from the board,
falling out with all the Discombentes without, any other cause (a very
temperate man I assure you). When Ecelinus the Tyrant, in battle had received
a would forthwith he cast his weapon away, and roared like a mad beast, and in
his cruel anger, rent his skin from his own flesh, which, when his enemies
espied, they so laughed, that in a great rage and anger, he slue himself, (a
very meek person). Oh what victory had he upon his enemies, thus to handle
himself.

Alexander the great sitting in a drunken Banquet, A wrathful part of Alexander
in killing of Clitus.
unseemly for a Prince being admonished reverently of a noble wise man called
Clitus his own nourishes son, to live like a Prince in virtue, rejoicing
therein, more tha in victory. c. the ungrateful Prince at his banquet, with his
own hands, struck him through the body, letting forth the spirits of life
from Clitus, yt would not flatter a foolish prince. For an open rebel is not so
hurtful, as a secrete flatterer to a Prince, for they are like Cankers, most
hurtful to them. What anger had Cain against Abel, and Herod, in killing the
hurtless children, that never offended him?

The Popes, The Popes* Law.
which are so charitable (as you know to the living christians) that they will
send them in burnt sacrifice to heaven: among them some have torn one another
with violence, out of their graves, rending out of their pontifical apparel,
cutting of their fyngers, burying them among the common harlottes, yea drawing
them forth again, and heading them a fit Sepulture for such saints. Read
Platina in the lives of Steven the sixth, Sergius and Formosus.

Bubulam an excellent Painter, Hypponax the Poet made such sharp verses against
a Painter, that he caused him to hang him self in his rage. Saule killed
himself*
did so lively set forth the monstrous Image of a deformed Poet called
Hypponax, that the beholders had great pastime, and laughed thereat. But in the
mean time, the Poet wrote such nipping, sharpe, taunting Uerses, against this
Painter: that in a sudden rage, he ran in to his house, and hanged himself.
And to conclude, Saul was in such a rage, that he destroyed the Sacred high
Priest and the Leuites, with the people in the city of Nob, for receiving of
Dauid, the elected of God. And this shall suffice to warn you fro the passion
of anger by these examples.

Then there is an other perturbation of mind, called sorrow or care, which is
the greatest passion of spirits: because it is some folks torment. Again in
an other, it makes short work. For care doth wound and smite ye hart with a
deep stroke, and draws it together as a purse, The cause of sorrow and care
which be marvelous plagues.
suffering nothing to be carried thither, to comfort the same again. And so
the generation of the spirits are let, and the vital parts by little and
little do wither wast away, and in this point sorrow doth differ from fear:
sorrow receives his mischief at length, and fear at once. But in colour
pale, in pulse feeble, in countenance heavy, in stomach weak, they are like:
but yet care is for things past. As example, some for love have slain them
selves, as Cleopatra, The differenc be^wene so^ow and care
a Queen of Egipt, after she had spent her pleasant years in love, mingled
with lust, when her husband M. Anthonie was dead, she fell into such sorrow and
care, that in the end, she caused her self to be enclosed in a tomb, suffering
two Serpents to suck at her breasts, until she had finished her miserable
life with lamentation: Cleopatras death.
for al her riches pomps cold not heal her sorrowful sickness, but death was
only her refuge, so great was her care But Iosephus handles her death
otherwise.

Into what lamentable case fell Queen Dido of Carthage, which, was ye daughter
of Belus the king of Tire, Didos death.
which carefully finished her life in fire, for the loss love of Eneas, as the
Poet fayneth? Leander, a worthy young man, was wonderfully ravished for the love
of a fair maiden called Erus, which dwelled in an Land in the sea
Hellesponte. The story of Leader, Which dyed for love of Erus
And this Leander in a Town called Abidus, the sea passing between them both:
which Water and salt stream cold not quench his love that he bare unto Erus,
his affection was so great, that every night he would swim over this flood,
unto his dear Erus unto a place called Sestos, whereas she dwelled, supposing
his pain to be heavenly pleasure. He used this so long, that in the end
Neptune frowned, and commanded Aeolus to raise up a storm and tempest against
Leander, in which he carefully finished his life. In the morning Erus looked
over the walls, The death of Leander and Erus for love.
beholding the dead body tossed among the rocks: therewith she was suddenly
wounded, with sorrow and care, and with a pitiful cry, cast her self from an
high Tour into the sea whereas she finished her life, for the love of Leander.

The wife unto Duke Proteselaus, did continually weep for the death of her
husband, A noble woman wept to death, for the death of her husband.
until she dyed. Such love of late in this realm, hath been enclosed in the
hart of a certain worthy lady, that for the absence of her living husband,
hath ended her life with care, so that after the number of many Salt tears,
the Salt water was her last drink, and death her refuge. This affection called
love, brings more sorrow with it, then either prisonment, Love is a
conqueror.
poverty, or sickness: as we may read and see by experience, into what
servitude bondage it brings people. And doth degenerate many, in a manner out
of kind, making the more effemin at tha womon: changing Mars into Uenus It
alters complexions, manners conditions, and makes of free men slaves, of wise
men fools, of rychmen beggars, it brings man^ sicknesses, yea, incurable,
through long sorrow and care. Sometime it doth depryue the wits and senses
reasonable, and makes Men more madder then Dogs, crueller then Wolfes, more
shameless then Apes, reting their clothes, waking in their beds, fasting at
their bordes, as wise as Geese, yea, and fynally, what a great number do kill
themselves, by strangling, sticking, and drouning: when they cannot obtain
their purpose, and incurable suit? Thus they be rewarded that fall into such
dolor and care in this foolish affection of mind called love. The fruits of
Love.
And if they might obtain their purpose in their foolish fyshyng in the flood
of fantasy: what should they then get? perhaps nothing but a Serpent, which
would always sting them, or else a weate Eel by the tail, which would quickly
deceive them.

There is an other affection of the mind, very perilous, dangerous, and
incurable, which is cousin G^rmain unto frenzy, which is called Jealousy: or a
greedy foolish affection of the mind, never quieted, Jealousy is cousin
Germain to Frenzy, mark the fruicts thereof.
but ever tourmetyng it self, burning in a continual fire. This inward
spiritual Uengeaunce, doth make domestic debate between man and Wife: and
turns their house of liberty, into a miserable prysone. Double bondage to
each other, with quarelyng in presence, mistrusting in absence, fearing them of
their own house, doubting the stranger, yea, and men often times mistrusting
their own Children, not to be of their own Generation, when they have no
argument to the contrary, but devilish ielousy. Jealousy often times breaks
chastity, amongst them that do profess Godly Matrimony: and causes the
one part to desire liberty, The hell of Jealousy.
to be out of the fire of that loving Jealous Purgatory. For some there be that
do say, there is no more torment in hell, among the infernal Furies, than there
is here in this world amongst Jealous women, which never had good opinion of
their husbands: and some men also of their wives, although they were locked up
in a closet, they having the keie, and sealyng the door, yet they think they
are beguiled. Yea, some be so friendly, that they be Jealous of other men's
wives: what spirit Jealousy is.
and some women following that example, do the like to other Women's: husbands.
Here is marvelous kyndnesse, thus to crucify them selves to the fire of
folly: but the effect thereof, works mischief to them selves, and others. As
it is written of one Phanus, which loved his wife with such Jealousy, that he
would never suffer her to go out of the doors: How a Jealous fool beguiled
himself
he also provided, that none came in at his gates, or doors, but a great noise
was made through crackyng and tinglyng of Belles which hanged at them, at which
sound with all speed, he would run to see who came in. He so lunge used this
order of watching at the Gate, that in the mean time his devout wife gave him
a Barnards blow, letting in her companion, when it was dark, by a broken place
in the roff of the house. Which, when it was perceived by the next Neighbours:
Lord how they commended Phanus, Jealousy causes adultery
for so diligent and witty keeping of his Gates. Here you do see, that
Ielousye brings adultery, yea, and sometime it causes murder: as Helena
after the death of Menelaus, fled for succour unto Poliso, wife to Clipolemus
ye king of Rhoedes, son unto Hercules, which burnt with such Jealousy
towards her husband, that she commanded her to be hanged upon a tree.

Procris, daily burning with Jealousy of her husband Cephalus, which was taken
in love with an other woman, did daily pursue him, from place to place, through
fields and Woods, c. And upon a time, when Cephalus went forth, with his
Dart in his Hand, into the Forest, to seek his pray: his Jealous Wife pursued
him, and closely shrouded her self in covert, among the Brakes, to behold
what her Husband did. But as she moved her self, the covert did shake,
wherein she was hidden: her husband perceiving that, supposing that she had
been a Wild Beast, foorthwyth caste his Dart, Procris did seek her own death
through Jealousy.
and unawares s^ue his Jealous wife. Well rid of an evil sore: O how craftily
she did beguile him.

O what Jealousy was between Antiopa, and Licus her husband, the King of
Egypt, The Jealousy of Antiopa.
and what a cruel Murder came thereof, I need not to fetch no more Examples
from old, of the forgotten World, and time past. For this Evil is to common,
as we do see by daily experience, and a Marvelous plague, both pryuate and
public: the effects thereof are nothing but miserable vexation, Dolor, Care,
Agony, and despair. And this is to conclude, there is no remedy, but
pacyence perfo^ce: for the old Proverb is, that Heresy, Frensye, and
Jealousy, be so bred by the Bone, that they will never out of the flesh,
therefore use no Physic for it.

There is also an other evil, joined to conditions of wicked Men, which is
none of the passions of the Mind, nor yet an infirmitye of Nature: but rather
to be numbered among the sins Mortal, which is an evil most intolerable,
and most odious of all unto a good Nature, which is called Ingratitude,
churlishnes, or vnkyndnesse. I count it not only ingratitude, Ingr^titude ^
es (...) Churlishnes.
to be unthankful to them, of whom we have received benefits, but also to
do harm to them, by whom we be preferred. As example There was no greater
dignitye, next unto Christ, than to b^e one of his Apostelles, as Iudas was
Also none could be more trusted than he, which kept the Purse as he did.
Christ gave him power to do Miracles, equally with the twelve. He suffered him
to sy^ at his board, and feed with him in his own Dish: ^here could be no
greater kyndnesse than this, a Mortal man, to sit with Gods only Son. Luke
xxii. Math. ^xvi. The (...) of Iudas that most ^grateful villain, his example
to a^l ^hu^l^s
But this Villain, ungraciously and ingratefully respecting none of these
Benefittes, but like a traitorous ^horle, sought his Masters Blood, betraying
him to the shameful death of the cross. This Ingratitude of Iudas, is a
goodly president, unto all Traitors against Princes, by whom they have
received Benefits: and many servants, which have ben brought up from rascal
and Beggars states, and through their masters, have been preferred into the
calling of estimation, Wealth, and Worship, which afterward have sucked the
blood of them which gave them first their suck, and nourishment in their
adversity. O what a monster, and a deformed infernal Serpent is this
ingratitude, it is the mother of treason bred in ^ell, enemy to liberality and
gentleness, and is of the right lyne of Wrath and envy, sprung of a deuelysh
pedigree, worse than wild beasts. Which, when they are made ^ame, and receive
any Benefit of their keepers* Gratitude of (...) ^stes.
they will not rent and tear them: but phaune upon them, wagging their
tails, and run about and leap for joy. As by example, we may see of Horses,
^oth god and Nature do abhor ingratefulnes.
Dogs, Bears and Apes, which will rejoice in the sight of their Masters*
and many times, put their Life in venture for them. Although I might bring
forth many notable Examples to prove this, it need not, it is so manifest. The
Scriptures of GOD ^ry out against it, the Law of Nature doth utterly reject
it. There is no man worthy to be called a Gentleman, although he can advance
him self of a pedigree infinite, and boast never so much of his birth, and
is a Gentleman borne in deed. If he be infected with ingratitude, To know a
very Gentleman.
he is degenerated from his right kind: and is become a counterfeit gentleman,
a natural churl, of the right line of Nabel the ca^le, which abused the
gentleness of Dauid, whose wrath was quenched through the beauty, lamentation,
and liberality of Abigael his wife. The shamfull ingratitude of Theseus the son
of Ageus. king of Athes


Who can forget or remember without tears, the Traitorous ingratitude of
Theseus, the Son of Ageus, the king of Athenes, which was a lusty,
beautiful and valiant knight: wanting no gift nor grace, that nature might
do unto him He excelled all men in his days, in manlye acts, saving Hercules:
he sleu a terrible cruel Bull in Attica in his young years. And when he was
xxiiii, years old, by lot, and destiny of the people of Athenes, he was
appointed and condemned, to be cast unto a horrible Monster, in the Labyrinth
of Creete: The Monster of the Labyrinth.
which monster had devoured many thousands before, his food was only the
flesh of Mankynde, he cried and roared out for his pray. This guiltless
knight was enclosed in a dungeon harde by, voy^e of all com^orte, bewaylinge
his fatal destiny: thus to be cut of in his youthful days, being a kings
son. The great grief and lamentation of Thes^us when he was in prison,
Now void of all friendship, helpless, having no su^coure, crying out
against the Gods: Cursing the day of his birth, that he received his life
within the body of his mother being a noble Queen, should eftsoon now be
buried within the infernal bowels of this horrible monster: void of all mercy
deadly to behold with venomous Teeth, and flaming even, pouring forth poison at
his Mouth, with most noisome air and stink, and his infernal kenel. Thus
death approached near unto Theseus: which grieved him nothing so much: as to
remember the pleasant life which he sometime had, acompanying ye amorous
ladies, which were full of al courtly courtesy, and the worthy knights, among
whom he always achieved ever the victory: yea his Music was turned into
morning, and his liberty that sometime he had in the sweet Woods Fields. Was
now changed into a little dark Dungeon, for there is no greater adversity,
then in misery to remember prosperity. The noble pitiful Lady Ariadne* did
comfort the miserable Theseus. set him at liberty.
But Lady fortune smiled upon Theseus, and opened the Ear of king Minos
Daughter, called the Lady Ariadne, and her sister Phedra: which so pitied
Thesius, that with all speed priuilye sent for the Porter of the Dungeon, not
far distant from the Labyrinth, whom with fair words, they entreated to
open the Prison Door and so entered in, beholding this lamentable knight: who
most humbly kneeled down to Ariadne, commending himself to be her Graces
bond and thrall, during his life. To this end, that if it would please her
Honour, to invent some spedye way to deliver him fro this deadly Monster.
Ariadne then cast her pitiful Eyes upon this lamentable Theseus being
secretly wounded with the worthiness of his Person. Pittyinge his miserable
estate, saying: it was more fitter that she should serve him as a Wife than
he hyrs as a thral being a kings son. And they concluded of the enterprise
how to kill the Monster: and afterward, she, her sister, and the Porter, al to
be embarked in a barge for Theseus sake, and to fly her fathers land for
fear of death. With all speed she prepared balls of wax and hair, that
Theseus might cast into the Monsters mouth, Ariadne fled a way for Theseus
sake, forsaking her fathers land.
to keep him occupied, until with sharpe weapon he might kill his grie^ly
course, or bring his monstrous carcass to the ground, which came to pass with
al speed accordingly, within the secrete cave, or Labyrinth: from whence
Theseus came, by the guiding of a Clue of thread delivered him by the hand of
the Lady Ariadne, and so came secretly forth from the cave, and these iiii.
with all speed passed away* in the night time to a country called Enupie,
whereas they were rychlye embarked, having wynd and weather toward their
journey, The crafty t^easan of false* Theseus
until at length they came unto an Island in the midst of ye raging seas,
whereas no man did inhabit, but wyld beasts only There he arrived with his
wife and sister, the Por^er and Mariners, which after their long travel upon
the Sea, were suddenly beguiled with sweet sleapes upon the land. After the
which awaked Theseus and secretly commanded his Mariners to way their Anchors,
and spread their sails without the sound of whistel or other noise* for f^are
of waking Ariadne, whom he left sleaping soudly, among the sweet flowers whom a
little before he had embraced with folding arms. And secretly taking Phedra by
the hand traitorously he toke his leave with silence aborde they went, and away
they sailed. At the length Ariadne awaked, putting her hand aside, feeling her
couch al could where Theseus lay: up she start with a trembling heart, lamentable
look, and deadly cry running to the rocks of the sea. When the ship was
almost out of sight, she did hold up her hands to the heavens, and cried out,
bewailing her miserable estate, thus to be left alone without any cause,
forsaking her own fathers land, for the love of Theseus, which had forsaken her
for her sister. Then called she to remembrance, how he was by her delivered
from a Monstrous beast and he had left her in a Solitary Land,
imprisoned with in the Sea, to live among the Wild Beasts, most
ingratefullye forsakynge her.

Then Ariadne rent from her, her womanly apparel, making a weffe thereof upon
the end of a pole, standing upon the top of a Rock, crying out Return,
return, Theseus again, my dear Theseus, take pity upon me* who love thee
most. The death of Ariadne.
And when she was past all hope, she kneeled down and did kiss his fotesteppes,
cursing her sleep, lying her down in ye bed where Theseus lay bewailing her
fatal destiny. That he should prefer the beauty of her sister, before her
virtues, and fynally forgetting her benefytes. This lamentable story she did
write in barks of trees: but some do affirm, her tongue was cut forth, how
she wrought her misery in a cloth, and thus finished her woeful life.

Ouid doth tel this lamentable story at large, describing vice ingratitude
which among al other evils, is most intolerable, and the greatest grief to
them, Ingratitude hath killed many a man.
yt be of good natures. And nothing sooner doth wound the hart, as when the
child shall show ingratitude to the father, the wife to ye husband, the friend
turn to an ennemy. These be such griefs, that it passes my pore pen to
descrybe what pains they bring to the hart of a gentle minded man. Thus do I
end of Ingratitude or churlishnes, which hath ended many.

There is a passion of the mind* called a sudden Joy, Of sudden joy
which is of such force, that the hart casts from her the vital blood, that
oftentimes it comes to pass, that for lack of strength and lively power in
the hart, the body is killed before the hart do cal back again the warm
spirits, or blood of life, as we may read by example.

There was a noble matron of Rome, which when a false messenger told her
that her son was slain in battle: Example of sudden joy.
she past the time of mourning according unto nature. But upon a day, her
son yet being alive, came unto her, whose presence moved her spirits to such
sudden joy, that in his arms she fell down dead, and never revived again,
Valerius Maximus Capite de morte non vulg. saith of a noble consul of the
Romaynes called M. Iuuentius Thal. as he was in a Temple doyng worship, and
offering to his gods, in the I'll called Corsica: letters were sent him from the
whole Senate, which he brake up, and read them. Iuuentius the Consul dyed
suddenly for joy.
And was smitten with such sudden joy, passing all measure: that or he had
finished the reading, he fell down dead, in the presence of all the people,
before the Sacrifice in the Temple.

Who can forget the noble old learned Diagoras Rhodius, when in his presence,
his three valiant Sons, Diagoras Rhodius did expyre the breath of life for
sudden joy
prevailed in the victory of worthy knighthood, above all other men, and were
crowned with the Garlands of honour, with the praise of all the multitude, at
the hill Olympus? These noble young men came, and cast their crowns with
flowers upon their Fathers head: who for sudden joy, gave up the Soul, and
dyed in their arms. This was a sweet pleasant death. of noble Diagoras.
Read this storye, Cicero lib. i Questi. Tuscul. which saith, A pleasant
death.
Diagoras had but two sons. But A Gellius saith he had three sons.

Some do dye with extreme laughing, as did the Poet Philemon, says
(Valerius Maximus) when he sat at Dinner, Philemon the Poet dyed laughing at
a^ Ass.
when an Ass came stalkyng to the Table, and with his sweet face, stretched
forth his Neck, wagging his ears. The Poet beholding his ancient
Countenance, and his sad comely grace: began to smile at this loutish beast,
or foolish Ass. But when the Ass, licked a Fig from the Table, he did eat
it so mannerly, wrything, and moving with his Lips: that the Poet thereat so
conceited, was smitten into an incessable laughing, until death did end his
pastime. Again there be, which have bin smitten with such inward joy, that they
have suddenly dyed thereof, when they have done a mischief, in bloudshedyng,
vengeance, or cruel murder, Some do rejoice so much in vengeance, that they
have dyed for gladness.
as many Tyrants have, Example of the Tiraunts Sophocles, and Dionisius, as
affirms Plinius secundus lib vij. cap. liij. In which chapiter, you may read
of many sudden deaths, most fearful to be heard. Thus many for gladness of the
destruction of their enemies, have quickly died: a just reward, torid the world
of Tiraunts, which have died in so hellish, and envious infernal zeal,
rejoicing in taking vengeance.

Also there is an other passion very fearful to mankind. As when lusty wealthy
people, Some do kill themselves when they have spoiled their goods. fallen into
det: or else become murderers and traitors.
have spent, spoiled, and Prodigally consumed their goods: then look they
behind them, and call to remembrance their pleasant days, their honour,
riches great possessions. And when their old friends forsake them, when
wealth doth fly them, and misery take hold of them, then eftsoon for lack
of magnanimity, despair doth embrace the As by example, it did to M. Otho, a
noble young man which prodigally consumed among the lusty gentlemen and Ladies
of the Romaines, an infinite substance, and when he had run beyond his race,
he thought there was no way to be his relief, but to kill his master the
emperor Galba, and through his riches to pay his debts. But when he missed
his purpose of riches, although he was Emperor, he became like unto a noble
Ship, whose Mariners had cast out al the ballis, overwhelmed the bark of
their safeguard among the fearful streams rough rocks: The death of Otho for
care.
In such case was Otho, who to redeem honour and liberty, sought to kill his
master Galba the Emperor, which he so did, and was Emperor for few Days.
But to conclude in fine for lack of wealh, to furnish his pomp and grace, to
guide himself in mean, with sharpe dagger he persed his careful hart let
forth the spirits of life. Loke further in Sueton of his life. This Man lacked
the worthy magnanimity, The wisdom of Deonisethe tyrant in adversity.
of some worthy kings, when they were expulsed and banished from their Lands,
and honours, as Dionisius the tyrant, who being a king and for his great
cruelty and sheadynge of the giltles blood, was deposed from his croune and
honour, and banished like a vacabond from his lands and people. What, did he
cry out, weep, or despair like a beast, hang himself? No forsooth not at al.
What then? Mary with a lusty manly courage he defied the spighte of Fortune,
and forth he went to Athens, The king of Boem, what he did in the time of
poverty.
whereas he became a pore Scholemayster, teaching young children goodly letters
both in the Greek and Latin, and lived quietly. Read Tully of him. Suado^opus
the king of Bohem, when his land and cities were subdued through Arnophus the
Emperor: he killed not himself, but did change his princely apparel and put
on the habit of an Hermit, and accompanied with two solitary men, went into
a wilderness, whereas he continued still until his death: quyetlye seruinge
God, imbracinge the Cross of Poverty, as a pleasure to be rid from a
wicked world.

Ualerius of whom Eutropius writes, being a noble Emperor, making War
against Mesopotamia: Ualerius the Emperors misery to Sopores the Persian king.
he was ouecome by Sopores the king of Persia, and every time the said
Sopores did take his Horse, Ualerius did lye down prostrate, and was his
foot stole, all his life: yet would he not kill himself for care, as many
miserable Men have done, when they have spent their time most prodigallye
consuming their lands treasure, riches, with dishonour in abhominacion,
wasting their wealth vaingloriouslye, foolishly, and most beastly amongst a
great Number of Parasites, Bawds, Curtisaines, knaves, and common Whores. In
fine* when they have gotten the hatred of good People, which most do abhor
wickedness, then they run unto their own conscience, which most doth fear
them. Then for lack of grace and magnanimity, The end of men in desperation.
they fly into the dungeon of desperation, led thither, through fear and
shame, not foreseeing their present payne, and endless Torments in the Life
to come. Forthwith in a maze they drown, hang, stick, poysone, and burn
them selves, and break their own Necks, as did Nero the Emperor, who slue
himself, with his own Knife, when he was.xxxii. year old. Read Pontanus de
stellis, lib. xxxv. and Eutropius of his death.

Did not Sardanapalus, the last Emperor of the Assirians, The end of
Sardanapalus.
which was more effeminate than a Woman, and more Lecherous than a Beast, with
all his Pomp, willingly burn himself in Fire? Of his Death read Sabellicus.
Deoclesian, the persecutor of Chrystes Church, did poison himself. Iudas the
traitor hanged himself. Brutus, Deoclesian slue himself. The death of Iudas.

The death of Brutus.


which was one of them that gave Caesar the.xxiiii. deadly Wounds, whereof he
dyed in the Senate, when as he was slain by Treason: in the end killed
himself in despair, with his own Swore, and his wife Porcia hearing
thereof, strangled her self with eating of coals. Read thereof in Plutarcus.
Some do kill themselves for shame, as Lucretia did, which was violated by
Tarquine the proud, the last king of the Romaynes. Other some, Lucretius.
rather than they would make their Bodies unchaste, and beguile their husbands:
have slain them selves, as did Saphronia a Noble Woman of Rome, to be rid from
the temptation of Decius a Prince of the Romaynes. But few women now a days,
Saphronia
will take the matter so vnkyndly, or put them selves in such Danger, I
warrant you. Of this Woman read in Eusebius. Other many have had such Torment
of conscience, or else such weakness of the spirits, Sergeant Hails of Kente
that have drowned them selves: as did Sergeant Hails of Kent, which was a well
learned Gentleman in the Laws of this Realm, finally, was overthrown in the
Battle of Antichryst. Many Examples of Desperation, I could bring in, of the
most fearful Deaths of Men and Women, as well in this our age* as from old.
But these shall suffyce for our Examples, what evils do come through these
Passions of the Mind, and perturbacions of the spirits, which bring men to
despair, and then to Death, and finallye to dampnacion.

For they which kill them selves, do lose their hope in GOD, because that they
sin against their own Souls, and dye in Murder: To die in desperation, is
to renounce salvation.
for it is written. Thou shalt not kill. And God doth abhor the Blood
thurstie, and no man ought for to dye, but by the judgment of the Law of
Nature: that is, when he can no longer live: being prevented by sickness,
Age, or else valiantly to dye in the defence of his Country, the gates of
Heaven be not shut against, such no nor against them which be hanged, and
suffer condemnation for their Offences, by the Laws of Men, if they do dye
in the Christian Faith, and not like to desperate Ruffians. But who so kills
himself, there is no hope left, but the Gates of Hell shall receive him:
because he lacks faith in the time of trouble, and pacyence in adversity. As
Saule did which slue himself. But Ezekias, when he heard tel he should dye,
the day of death appointed him: Example of Saul, which died in desperation.
he dispayred not, but humbly made his prayers unto God, which prolonged his
days. And seeing that God hath put the soul within the Body, of reason it is
he, that must let it forth again. For what seruaunt is he that dare take his
masters treasures from his Chest: without he have his key or other his lawful
warrant? what soldier dare be so bold to go out of ray, before the
captain command him? And who dare kill himself before it please almighty
God to take him? Example against desperation.
None but they which will refuse to dye honestly, who in their lives, have
neither been faithful, nor fruitful, patient, nor pitiful. Or have been
subject to any singular heavenly virtue, Iob, The patience o^ Iob. Cha.
i.ii.iii

And his wives wickedness.


in all his troubles, when his goods and Chattel were destroyed, and his own
natural children slain, his body sore deformed, yea and for agony did curse
the day of his nativity: yet finally, his greatest plague was, the ingratitude
and malice of his own wife, who most wickedly gave him counsel to curse
God, despair, and dye: For all this he killed not himself, but patiently
reserved his plagues saying. The Lord hath given me, and he hath taken away,
his will be done. And in the end, you may read what consolation he received at
the hands of almighty God: unto this mark let all Christian men fly. Like
as in Adam we be al dead, so in Christ we do all live. i. Cor. xv.
Furthermore we have no plagues that fall upon us. what trouble soever it be,
either of the body or the soul: but Adame was the cause, whose children we be,
Adam began our plagues.
whose plagues we suffer: as misery of mind, bodage, sickness, poverty. c.
Even so on the other side, there is no conselation, or quietness of mind,
patience, joy, or long suffering, or any other gifts of nature, or Grace: And
finally life everlasting, but al do spring through Christ, who is the
beginning, the end, and the reward of al good things. And for as much as we
be all embraced with miseries, Christ gives all comfort.
and infinite aflictions, and daily cares moving us to be weary of this world,
and that we have no dwelling place of continuance here on earth: Let us humbly
obey the commandments of God, which are for our own profits, that is to
say, to hope, trust, and loke for help at his hand, as the Woman of Canane
did, which came to Christ in the time of her trouble, hoping in him, neither
killing her self neither her daughter. Who must help us in the time of
trouble.
The fruits of her faith and hope, was quietness of conscience, and health of
Body. And why so? Because she came to Christ in the time of her trouble, for
not only by her, but by all the holy Scriptures, we be taught to go to christ
in the time of trouble. For there is a promise made, cal upon me in the day of
trouble, and I will hear thee, help, and deliver thee. Also there is another
promise of God, saying: if we dye with Christ, we shall live with him. If we be
patient, we shall also rain with him for ever. Now this we see to die with
Christ, is not to despair, or to be more impatient then wyld beasts, which
in most of their rages will not kill them selves. The best regiment of life.
But to conclude, for all infirmities of the Body, let us seek the comfort of
Gods means, which is the Phisicion: and for the griefs of Mind, embrace the
heavenly Physic, contained in Gods word, which is the principal
Regiment. And further for a mean between them both, that each of us do walk
in such calling in this life: that we may be necessary members, one unto an
other, in the common wealth, to profit each other, and hurt no body. To
travail for the fruits of the earth, or any other riches, gotten by honest
policy, and after to spend them accordingly. By providing for our selves
against the time of adversity. To obey rulers, pity the pore, to do as we
would be done unto. To despise a wicked life, and fear no kind of trouble,
that it shall please god to lay upon us. This is the sum of Christen
religion, of a honest life, and of a happy end.


Sickness. THese perturbations of the mind, are wondrous fearful, God
deliverer us al from such infernal plagues, from henceforth. Now I thank you,
that you have showed me them, even as I have felt the Further by good examples.
you have well persuaded me, and finallye with good consolation, you have healed
my wounds of careful misery. But when al our Phisical remedies will not help,
good master Health, I pray you saying that death is ye end of our mortal race,
and ^inisher of life, teach me the signs and tokens, of yt most Monstrous
fearful Death, and how I might know them. Whereby I might not vainly trust in
this life: which is but lent for a time.


Health. AFter the day, follows the night, and after life, approaches most
fearful death: the end of all things, and these have their tokens and signs
before them. As when the day passes away, it is manifest to every creature:
The cause of the night.
the Son withdraws his excellent Lyghte drawing home his beams from us.
Hiding himself, or through his swift course in his circle. The dark
unmovable earth doth take from our eyes the benefits of his bryghtnes:
eftsoon it is called no more day, but night and the time of silence or
darkness. Even so, when the spirits of life, have worn their vessels, or
instruments: or when the gross humour of Melancholy, or earthly complexion.
with extreme cold, have convinced, quenched, and with force overcome the warm
moystnesse, and Uitall lively Well spring of the blood, the fountain of Life.
Then the body soul wax weary of each other, or when they fall to division, or
begin to be at debate within them selves, then they never seas, until they
do come to utter dissolucion. For things with them selves, being at debate,
shall quyckly be desolved, whether it be a publyke wealth, or a private Body.
And all for the want of Unitye. As example. When there is good agreement, Whath
mischief doth chance to the whole body for want of unity.
that is perfect temperament, in the four Complexions: then the Body,
stands in good case. But when one Humour doth greatly abound his three
Fellows, getting the Victory, then for lack of Unitye, or agreement among
them selves: the whole Body is in danger to give place to one yield to death As
example If choler get the pre-eminence, then he will put his three fellows to
the walls: he brings in against himself, and then also Iaundice, Tercians,
red Leprie, Frensye, headache, Pleuresye. c. When phlegm gets the rule, then
dropsy with a swollen belly, Face and Legs. c. doth give the onset against
nature. Even so in the cold melancholy, Consuption, quarten c. when it bears
the rule. All these have their proper tokens and signs going before them and
their effects are death, when they do extreamlye rule, unless they through
the wisdom of the learned be helped. But if they do meanly abound, it is
not much amiss: as if choler do somewhat exceed in drynes and heate, then the
coldness and moister of Phlegm, will pacify her, and bring her again to her
good estate. When the complexions do want unity, then the body cannot long
continue alive.
If Melancholy through coldness, and dryness do harm, the blood with his
warmenes and moystnesse: will reduce, and call her back from killing the body,
and thus one neighbour will naturally help another And when they will not accord,
or gre in unity, than purgations. c. are prepared to help the weaker, expulse
the usurper within the common wealth of the body which is the mansion of the
Soul. or spirits of life after the Philosopher. And as for the most principal
humour, or blood in Sanguine persons, when it begins to corrupt, or the body
at point of danger, these signs will come together. Signs of sickness of
Blood.
Slowness. Idleness. Dullness. Yawning or gaping. Stretching forth the arms
and legs. No delight or pleasure. Sweet Spattel mingled with bitterness.
Much heavy sleep, with dreams of red colour, or bearing burdens great and
heavy. Perturbacion of the senses. Red gross urine stinking. Little appetite
or none to meat. Red face with much sweat, Of these signs come stinking
fevers. Pestilence, Squinaunce, bloody flixe, c.
Signs of ye sickness of choler.
Yellow colour in the skin. Bitterness in the mouth. Pricking in the mouth of
the stomach* Heate above nature. Lothsomnesse to meat. Lamentation or great
grief of mind. Dryness coveting drink of sondry kinds. Uomittes of yellow
and green.
Signs of the sickness of choler
Small or no sleep, but fearful fyery dreams of strife. c Yellow vryne,
little residence, much yellow some. Of these signs come Iaundice, Tercians,
Pleurisies, madness. Collickes c.
The signs of sicknesses of melancholy.
Pale colour in the face. Sowernes in the mouth. Belching of wynd. Little
sleep, yet horrible and infernal dreams. Much thought, pensieuenes, and care.
A desperate mind. More leaner, then before in the body. Straightness in the
stomach. Eluishnes, of countenance, and taunting in words. Coldness,
starting, and fearful. White, thin vryne. Of these come Quartens, Morphew,
Leprie, Caker, madness, hardness of the Spleen. c.
The signs of the sickness of Phlegm.
Sluggishness, and dullness of memory. Forgetfulness. Much spittyng. Much sleep.
Pains in the head, specially in the hinder part. Swelling in the face and
cheeks. Evil digestion. White dropsy like in colour. Patience with
doltishnes, lacking lively quickness. Dreaming or going naked, drowning or of
Snow Of these come Quotidians, Dropsyes, Palseye, falling sickness. c.


And to help all these, there are singular good medicines: both in the Simples,
and chiefly in the compounds. But yet brother Sickness note Hippocra^es. the
well and chief tree, from whence the good order of Physic first did spring,
which is a general text. Upon whose words. C. Galen. c. doth comment and
write at large, his great works. He wrote one small work also called ye
Aphorisms, wherein is great knowledge. But to our purpose For this place of
signs dedly mark what he saith in some of those Apho Praeno.

Whosoever being an healthful body, is suddenly pained, and quickly after hath
lost his voice, and starts withal: he shall dye within seven days, Quicu^que
saui dolor capitis repent. c. Apho Hypo.
next following after. It is not only through the inflamacion of the Spirits
but also by the universal matter, drawn into the brayn, from the stomach. c

If one be amassed, fall into idle talk of ye prick into the head, it is deadly.

A c^nuulsion, shrinking, or cramp in the senewes, after a purgation, Ex
capitis ^ctu c. Aphori. vj. Conuulsio a. veratro lethal^a est Aphor.
is very perilous or deadly.

A conuulsion after the taking of Elleborus, deadly.

A conuulsion after a wound, is deadly.

Considera^e vero con^enit etiam oculoru praeno. Hipp. Capi. 4.
Who so is dreadful or heavy in a Frenzy, the sign is deadly.

It behooves the Phisicion, to consider the eyes of his Patient, when he
sleeps: if there appear any white thing between the eye lids. If he have
had no laxe, nor received any pocion to purge before: it is a sign very
terrible, and present death.

To be deaf in a lunge Fever, if the body be weak: it is a token of death.

It is an evil sign, when one hath a cramp, in bleedyng at his Nose. or else
sowneth withal.

A stoppyng in the throat, or suffocacion falling to one which hath a fever.
and a swelling in the throat, is a perilous deadly token.

Who so in an Agewe, can neither turn his Neck, nor swallow his own
spattle, death is at hand.

If a ^runkard do suddenly lose his speech, he shall suddenly dye of a Cramp,
Si obrius. quispiam repen^e obmutuerit. Aphor pars.ii.vii.
or conuulsion: unless he fall into an Agew, or else receive power to speak
again, when he hath digested the surfet^e.

They which be swelled in the back, before they come to the age of.xii.
years: if it chance of the shortness of breath, or else a very strong cough,
shall soon dye.

A voluntary laxe, coming after apleurisie, or the sickness of the lunges, is
a deadly token.

Mulieri grauidae si mammae. c. Apho. pars. 3.^ Inquibus mor. men^e. c. pho.
pars. 31.
Who so in the empty place in the stomach, hath foul rotten matter, or else the
dropsy: if they be either so cut, or burned, whereby all the Water runs
forth, surely it is present death.

Who so hath his spattle stinking, when it is burnt upon the coals, and also
if his hair do easily fall from his head, it is a sign of death.

A laxe or great cough, with spittyng filthy matter, is deadly,

Who so often times are weakened, and lose their strength without some many^st
cause shall have sudden death.

Quibus hepa^ aqua plenu Apho. pars ^.8

Quibus in febribus morbus regius Apho pars. ^.35.


When a woman's breasts do deminish, being with Child: it signifies the Child
is dead.

To be discontent in the time of sickness, when things are given in medicine,
it is an evil token, for the contrary is good.

In every sickness, if Melancholy or black choler, be either purged upward,
or downward without medicine, it is both perilous, and deadly.

Who so ever be Splenetike, and have a bloody flixe, if it lunge continue:
then they fall to the dropsy, or else their food, shall pass through their
guts, not digested: this is a deadly sign.

Who so ever have their liver repleted, or filled full with Water: and if the
same water break downward to the belly, it is present death.

Who so in h^ate Fevers, is taken with the yellow Iaundice, in the seueth
ix.xi. or the.xiii. day, it is good: so that his right side wax not hard: but
if these days want, and the side wax hard, it is deadly.

A wound in the brain, heart, diaphragma, or midriffe, small Guts, stomach and
liver, is ever death.

If the yellow Iaundice come before the vii. day, it is perilous.

In laxes, black stools are evil: except purgacions cause them. To have any
Melancholy stool, in the beginning of any sickness: it is a sign deadly.

So is a bloody flixe, beginning with a Melancholy sickness, little pieces of
flesh, appearing in a bloody flixe is present death.

If a Woman with Child be suddenly taken with any grievous sickness, it is a
present death.

It is perilous for a Woman with Child, to have a great laxe.

A Woman with Child, if she be let blood, it kyll^th her child: Muliere v^er^
gerent^m* c. Apho pars. 3
the nearer the birth, the greater perilll.

A woman having a Cramp or conuulsion in the temperate time of her terms, is
perilous.

He which hath an ague, being taken with a conuulsion is in Danger: who so
hath a conuulsion before his fever, is in no such peril.

Fevers, which do not give over the third day* are perilous. Of Fevers


In a long agewe, if the outward members are very cold, and the inward parts
hot and dry: death is at hand.

In a lunge fever, when the Lips, Nose, or mouth be drawn a wry or
disgrased: so that the pacyent can neither see or hear, and is in weakness,
death at hand.

If any having an Agewe, sweat in these days, it is good, if not, it is
perilous.ii.v.vii.ix* xi, xiiii.xvii.xxi*xxvii xxxiiii. Of Sweat^


Who so hath the Pestilence, and bleeds not before twelve Hours, or sleeps
eight hours after bleeding: death is at hand.

Cold sweat with a sharpe Fever, signifies death. The signs of dea^h by the
face*


If the face of a sick man be changed from the healthful estate, with a
sharpe nose, hollow even, writhen Temples, cold Ears, contract^d in the
extreme parts, like aleafe when it is dry, hard s^in in the foreh^ade, and
dr^, pale faced, little or no sleep, biting or trembling of the Lips. c.
Th^se are signs of death* saith Hippocra. in libro primo praeno. capit. iij.
beginning at Conside^are por^o hoc modo co^uenitin morbis acutis. c* The signs
of death by the even.


If the pacyent can not abide the light of Sun, sire, or Candle, but fly the
same, or weep inuoluntarily, without cause, or make one eye appear less^r
than the other or goggle with them, looking murch a squynte, except the eyes
were so in health, or else have the whytes turned into bloudye red, or have
darcke or black small veins in them with vnstablenesse, and concave holownes,
or open in the sleep with the ne^ther Lip hanging down, and the upper Lip
drawn up. c. Surely death is at hand, Hippo. prono.

Feel also the Patient when he lies in his Bed, his arms, sides, Neck, The
signs of death by lying in the ^ed
breast, and Legs, wither the parts be pained or flexible, or have lost
their strength and are styffe, if he lie upward: except it were his old
custom, and shrynke to the beds ^eete with casting abroad the hands and
^eete, sleeping with a wyde^open mouth, and covet to lye naked, death, death,
and the grave are at hand Hipp^cra. prono.

If the Pacyent lye in his syckenesse, upon his belly, except custom move it,
and so do sleep: it signifyeth a great syckenesse in the Breast, or belly. Or
else to be mad, and lose his wits, through the malignity of the sp^rites* and
to sit upon their buttocks in their sickness, Signs of death by the
teeth.
of a sharpe sickness, it signifyeth the peril of death, or great inflamacion
in ye lunges. As Hippocrates saith in the Prae. Capi. vij. at in ventrem
decumbere. c.

To gnash or grind the teeth in Fevers, is either a great vexation of the
mind, Signs deadly by wounds.
or madness at hand, or else death: For it is an affection of the Sinews
Notwithstanding young children, tormented with Worms are not in this peril
always, when they do gnash the Teeth.

In a stroke of a deep wound* when conuulsion follows: and no matter, or
corruption comes to the wound so^e after, if the body be pale and swarte in
colour, Signs deadly by the hands.
and dry with weakness of digestion, death approaches. And this affirms
Hippocra. de signis ex vlcere. Cap. viii.

Who so in a sharpe Fever, sickness of the Lunges, frenzy, or pains of the
head, doth wrythe the hand to his Nose or face, as though he would kill Flees
or Flies, Signs deadly by ^he breath.
or k^yt a knot, or brush his clothes, or else pull up Rushes this is a preset
sign of death, saith Hippocra. lib. primo. prae Capi. ix. de gestaculo manuum.

Shortness of breath, and of little force, doth signify great dolor
inflamacion and madness, Signs deadly by sweat.
comes of great breathing, like a Bull, or a wild beast. Cold breath, with
the coldness of the nose and mouth, Death draws near, with fare well vain
World, with flesh, and blood: Read Hippocrates prae. vbi inquit, spiritus
densus dolorem significat. c.

Signs deadly by swellig.
Sweates are best in sharpe Fevers, in the days of their decrees, or judgments:
but the contrary are perilous. As when sweat is cold, specially in a sharpe
fever, death approaches: for cold sweat, comes from gross matter, without
the spirits of lively warmnes. But i^ it be but a mean leuke warm sweat,
Signs deadly by spattle.
called a faint sweat: then it doth signify a lunge sickness.

If the breast be swelled with throbbyng, beating, or trouble in the breast, or
the upper part of the same: and therewith unstable, fearful even utter
madness, or death do approach. But bleedyng at the nose will help it,
specially in young persons: but hardness in those parts, dolor, and
swelling, is death.

Spattle when one spyttes, being white, light, and sweetish, not varyable in
colour, and also very easy drawn forth* is good: but if it be sweatye filth
with matter, or black and stinkyng, with yelownes* greenenesse, or blacknes.
c. Filth which is called pus a putredine, there is peril of death, And that
which is good, is of the benefit of the blood: and goodness of digestion, and
the goodness of phlegm and blood.

It is perilous, not to neese, in the time of sickness: but so neese
vehemently, is perilous also.

Water, as Dropsy between the skyn, and the flesh, coming of a sharpe Fever
is ever perilous and evil in this case: when the nails appear dark and
pale, and the privy members and stones do swell, it is a great token of death.
Read of this, Hippocrates in libro secundo praeno. De aqua inter cutem.

Who so doth wake long, and can not sleep, eather a great sickness doth
approach, or else madness, through an inflamatio. Who so breaks his sleap o^
his common custom, and falls into much waking in the night, this is an evil
sign, and goes before a perilous evil.

In al sicknesses hardness of the beallye, or costifnesse, vile stink, black
stools, or bloody flixes, are very perilous, but breaking of wind downward,
at the stool is good*

To vomit white phlegm, not very gross or yellow, is good, but muddye dark or
black, it is perilous. But to vomit sondrye colours of each sort it is most
perilous and deadly.

To be unnatural dry, with a Fever hedach, shortness of breath, much sweet
spattle, high coloured, great veins, pricking in the side, it is ye signs of
ye perilous pleuresy, death except digestio blood letting. Of blood letting I
have spoken in place, thus I do end because time is so passed or else I would
have spoken more of the Crises, or judgment, and of pulse, and vryne with a
regiment against the sweat and the fearful plague called Pestilence: which I
pr^y God deliver us from. I pray thee take all my talk in good part: and thus
I commend thee to the living god, that hath made both heaven and earth, to
help and preserve thee with his healthful medicines, and good defence against
all sickness, soreness, and wounds, contained within my little Bulwark.


Sickness. I Most heartily thank thee, gentle Health, God bringit so to pass:
and grant us after this life, a blessed estate everlasting whereas is no
misery and wretchedness. But happiness and perpetual blessedness, with Christ our
God. Amen.


The end of the Dialogue, between Health and Sickness: By william Bulleyn,
Marcij Anno salutis. 1562.
Though our gifts be never so small,
Yet let us give thanks to God for all.
And who of talentes hath great store,
Their accomptes to god shall be the more.
W.B.
An Index of the book
A
A Good Richen, is a good Apothicaries shop 1 A pocion must be given at three
sondrye times, to remour and expulse matter from the stomach 2 A caue^t to
beware Idem An example between a Simple and a compound medicine. 4 Achab did
kill Naboth for his vineyard. 6 A cauiat for Summer. 11 A Clister to mollify
the belly in the time of danger. 14 A good note to be observed, when nature is
weak. Idem A plaster for the flixe. 15 A consideration in Eating and
Drinking to be had, and of the variety of meates Idem. A cause why the soul
departs from the Body. Idem A good rule to be observed. 16 An orore for the
dyeting of such as be sick of sharpe ^euers. Idem As the complexion is* so
man requires his food in the time of health, things like to his nature, but
in sickness the cont^rye. Idem Aires are to be observed in sicknesses, as in
health. 17 A sign of digestion. 18 An example of Brute beasts Idem An Hickop
after a Uomitte is perilous. Idem A goodly way to help the Hickop, after a
vomit. 20 An expulsiue for an Idle lout. Idem A good reward for diligent
labour. Idem All the works under the Son, are nothing but vanity, and
afflic^ion to the mind. 23 Athanasius fear. 24 A shift for fresh water
Soldiers. Idem A lesson against anger Idem A wrathful wretch in battle. 25 A
wrathful part of Alexander, in killing of Clitus Idem A noble woman wept to
death, for the death of her husband. Idem Ar^on^ fled away for Theseus sake,
forsaking her fathers land. 27 A pleasant death. 27 Adam began our plagues.
29
B
BEware of drying medicines in Somme^ for Cho^ericke personnes. 11 Boxing is
good for a Ludber. 20 Boxinge doth draw forth evil humours. Idem. Boxing doth
stop the terms, when they do abound^. Idem Both God and nature abhor
ingratefulnes 26
C
Compounded humours may not be purged with Simple medecines for they are ^o
weak. 4 Cow, Sheep, and Plow, be our nurses. 8. Cold doth take, and is not
taken. 6 Choler is soon dry, therefore purge but little, but the fleshly body
hath much moisture, therefore purge the more. 1^ Cold medecins to the whole, but
warm to the sick must be given. Idem Certain causes which let medicine to
work 14 Corrupt airs bring sondry diseases. 17 Choleric persons most not
fast much. 21 Christ gives al comfort. 29 Cleopatras death. 25
D
Dreams do admonish men to fear God 6. Death is the end of life. 14
Drunkar^es what the do. 22 Didos death. 25 Diag^ras Rhodius did expire the
breath of life for sudden joy. 28 Deoclesian slue himself. 29
E
Elleborus albus, the poison thereof 10 Example of wax and fire. 14 Extremes be
perilous things. Idem Extreme heate cold be evil. 15 Exercise before meat. 17
Equitacion is very wholesome. 19 Examples of sudden fear. 23 Evil parents,
and evil children. 24 Example of Marcellus. Idem Examples of wrath in Nero.
Idem Examples of sudden joy. 27 Example of Saul, which dyed in desperation. 29
Example against desperation. Idem
F.
Four things considered, attraction dissolving. 1 Fervent prayer unto God,
doth mitigate his wrath 17 Fear is like a monster of hell. 24 Fear in Christ.
Idem Fear in saint Peter. Idem Fear of the Christians. Idem Fear makes men
offer to Idolles. Idem Fools be afraid of the Mare in their sleep 22. Fear
brings desperation, example of Iudas. 24
G
Good counsel in the time of trouble. 7 God the very Phisicion 9 God doth
work by Mitacle, and means. Idem. Gods vengeance. 23 Good intententes, and
good acts be two things. 4 Gratitude of domme beasts. 26
H.
How to prepare medicine 3 How to know what humour do abound by his proper
token. Idem He which loves God shall have hearts rest. 10. How to know whether
Choler be purges, or no. How to quicken the stomach 15 How to provoke vomit,
and how to stair it. 16. How the stomach must be prepared toward sleep. 22
How to avoid evil dreams Idem Hippocrates upon sleapes. Idem How a jealous
fool beguiled himself. 26
I
Iohn Preston, called Iohn of stonham. 2 It helps much to Nature, to provoke
vryne. 3 Ignorant Barboures, their fruits. 4 In Adam we have our fall. 6
Infidelles have singular gifts of God. 9 In Elleborus you shall know how to
correct the same. 14 Idleness the mother of mischief. 18 Idleness brings
mischief to the body and soul, and poverty. Idem It is not good to be trimmed
of ye Harbour at night, but in the morning* 19 In this life we have our
purgatory, and yt we feel and perceive. 6 Ielousy is cousin germain to frenzy,
mark the fruits thereof 26 Ielousy causes adultery Idem Ingratitude or
unkindness, called churlishnes. Idem Ingratitude hath killed many a Manne. 27.
Inuencius the Consul, dyed sodaynlye for joy Idem
K
Kings and Quenes be subject to the miseries of this World, and have no
perfect felicity, before their mortal end. and beginning of immortal life.
7
L
Like as Heate consumes Snow, even so doth Physic money 2. Lurking humours
how to find them and expulse them. 3 Let no man be angry with an other mans
folly. 10 Little travel for the sick. 18 Love is a conqueror. 5 Love makes
beastly fools. Idem Lucretius. 29
M.
Men's natures must be observed, a little medecin will work much of some men,
and a strong medecin will seante work on some other men. 2 Methodici be
Physicians, that observe certain rules by art. Idem Medicines solutiue, why
they are given Idem. Melancholy the worst humour of Nature begat a son
called the Quarten. 4. Matter in the Ueines must be let out by blood letting,
and in the Belly, by clister, in the Breast by vomit. 5 Man life is both
short and miserable. 6 Medecin doth change, and meat is changed. 7 Medecines
for feeble stomachs to purge gently. 10 Men, Women* and Children, must take
medecines, according to their strength and age 11 Much humour must be purged
by little little and not at once. 12 Much watch causes raw humours in the
stomach. 22 Moderate walk after Meat, profits. 17 Modera^e exercise is a
suffrayn thing. 18 Men do dream according to their temperament or complexion.
6
N
Nature hath many hidden desires, unknown to the Phisicion* 10 Nature hath
prepared that one creature dreads and fears an other 12 Note which is the
most wholesome air to dwell in. 17 Neesyng doth help women in their travel*
20. No man or beast, can live without Sleep. 21
O
Of sweet fleume. ^ Obseruacions in blood letting. ^ Of the time of medecin.
7 One may sleep after Pills, but yet beware of old pills. 8 Of the quantitye
of matter to be purged. 12. Of overmuch purging the body, the remedy to help
the same. 13 Of Syrupes and drinks. 15 Of fricacion the virtue thereof. 18 Of
neesing the profit thereof. 20 Of sweates profitable and unprofitable to a
common wealth. Idem Of two kinds of sweates, natural, and artificial. 21 Of
good and bad sleep. 22 Of the sudden alteration of the mind, from joy to care.
23 Of fear what it is. Idem Of heate artificial and natural. 24 Of Choleric
heate. Idem Of sudden joy. 28
P.
Property and place must be observed. 2 Preparative must be first given, and
then Purgation. Idem Purge that which should be purged, or else medel not.
Purgers of Phlegm. 4 Purge upward in Summer, and downward in Winter. 5 Place
where medicine should be ministered conveniently joined with time. 6 Prospe^ity
is very slippery. Idem Pills may be made of all kind of medycines. 8 Poor
men be exalted through virtue, 9 Purge phlegm more than choler, and Melancholy
more than phlegm 12 Phisicions ought to have a perfect knowledge of the nature
of places and air* 17 Pleasant people they are. Idem Pox is cleansed by
sweat. 21 Pleasure is noisome to the disquiet heart. 23 Procris did seek her
own death, through jealousy. 26
S
Scamonie is perilous, except it be well prepared, and kills many. 3 Signs
manifest, declaring what humours bear the greatest rule in the Bodies of men
and women, without which i^ is not possible to purge according to art, but
rather to kill. 4 Signs to know when Melancholy approaches, after whom
comes the quarten. Idem Sorrow is for things past, and fear is for things
to come. 6 Sudden gotten substance remains not long^. 10 Signs of death,
through purging of the body. 14 Short sickness, thin broth: lunge sickness
thick broth. 6 Sweet air to be made in the time of sickness with perfumes. 17
Signs of death by the teeth. 32 Signs deadly by wounds. Idem Signs deadly by
the hands. Idem Signs deadly by the breath. Idem Signs deadly by sweat. Idem
Signs deadly by swelling. Idem Signs deadly by spattle. Idem
T
The fruit of rash ministracion of Medycines. 1 The virtue of bitter medicines
is great. 2 The cause of sicknesses. Idem The chief sign of digestion. 3
That humour which do abound purge the same. Idem The Manna of Calabria is the
best in the world, and falls in the Night as dew upon flowers and leaves. 4
The fire will get the victory* if the Water be not equal, or have the
maisterie. ibi. To know when medicines hath wrought their effect. 5 The
humours regions, are chiefly to be considered. Idem The day natural, and the
Day artificial. Idem The four complexions reigning every one six hours.
Idem The aged, the very young weak folk, and Women with child, may not be
let blood. Idem The hope of the life to come. 6 The soul never sleeps. Idem
The troubles of the mind, be greater than the crosses of the body. Idem The
observation of complexions. 8 To give medicine in the fit of a Fever is
perilous. I'd The life of the plain People in the Country. Idem The end of
wicked men. 9 The Gout loves rich men, but is afraid of poor folks. 13 To
cool the mouth. I'd The causes why medicines work immo. 14 Tenasmus what it
is, how to help it. 15 The earth is mother of every liuig thing. id To feed
of diverse sorts of meates corrupts the body. I'd To eat both fish and flesh
together, hurts the flegmatike body. Idem The melancholy. 16 The Sanguine.
Idem The practise of Idle people, 18 The Heath are better, tha many christias.
1 Three things to be observed in fricacios. 19 The cause of vomit and when it
helps, and when it hurts. Idem To help (...) Hickop. Idem Tucke, and
Raper. 20 The Carter doth daily help the courtier, id The great goodness of
fasting, both for th^ soul and body. 21 The rich use gluttony, the pore
penury, id The virtue or benefit of sleep or rest. i'd The cause why a
drukard do di^ suddenly. 22 To whom watch is good. Ibidem The afflictions of
the mind, is hard to be helped. Idem The ix. heavenly Muses, can smally
coforre some careful hart, when it is in care. 23 The sacred gift that the nine
heavenly Muses have, and can give to others when they be in trouble. Idem The
names of the nine Muses, with their gifts. Ibidem The perturbacion or sudden
motion of the mind, must be well observed. Ibidem The jealousy of Antiopa. 26
The treason of Iudas, that most ungrateful villain, his example to al churls*
i'd To know a very Gentleman. 27 The sh^mefull ingratitude of Theseus, the
son of Ageus, the king of Athenes. i'd The Monster of the Labyrinthe* Ibidem
The great grief and lamen^acion of Theseus, when he was in prison. Ibidem. The
noble pitiful Lady Ariadne, did comfort the miserable Theseus, set him at
liberty. Ibide. The crafty treason of false Theseus Idem The death of Ariadne.
Ibidem The death of Otho for care. 28 The Wisdom of Dionise the tyrant, in
adversity. Ibidem The king of Bohem, what he did in the time of poverty. Idem
The end of men in desperation. 29 The end of Sardanapalus. Ibidem The death of
Iudas. 30 The death of Brutus. Ibidem To dye in desperation, is to renounce
salvation. Idem The patience of Io^. Idem The best regiment of life. Idem The
cause of the Night. Idem The signs of death by the face. 32 The signs of
death by the even. Idem The signs of death by lying in the bed. i'd The signs
of a pleurisie. 33
V
Use makes the labour easy. 18 Uomit helps the flixe. 19
W
When purging medicines are given, first minister herbs drink to prouo^e
Urine. 2 When one descends into himself, he shall behold fearful things. 6
Wicked spirits, do molest our spirits. ^ What thing is best for mankind. ^
Why purgation works not naturally. 8 We^ke stomachs, can not away with
strong medicines. Ibidem What harm wind doth in a Fever, or after purging.
13 When the patient is in peril, the remedy to help him. 14* What k^ndes of
meates do cause good blood. 16 What hurt comes of an empty stomach when ye
go to bed. Idem UUhat airs corrupts the blood. 17 UUhat situation is best
for a house* Idem UUhat profit comes by exercise. 18 UUhen to use rubbing, or
frication, and wherefore. 19 UUhen to travail or play. Idem UUhat persons may
best vomit. Idem Who may worst ^omit. Idem When to vomit. Idem When it is good
to bleed. 20 Who must not bleed. Idem Who ought to swear, and who not. 21
UUhen sweat is not good. Idem UUhen sl^epe is perilous. 22 UUhat dreams do
signify. Idem UUhat spirit gelousie is. 26 Who must help us in ye time of
trouble. 2^ UUhat mischief doth chance to the whole body, for want of unity.
30
FINIS.

