A new book Entitled the Government of Health, wherein is uttered many
notable Rules for man preservation, with sondry symples and other matters,
no less fruiteful then profitable: colect out of many approved authors.
Reduced into the form of a Dialogue, for the better understanding of
thunlearned. Whereunto is added a sufferain Regiment against the pestilence.

By VVilliam Bulleyn.

Imprinted at London by Iohn Day, dwelling over Aldersgate beneth saint Martins.
Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

QVE TANT IE PVYS

T. H.

To the right vvorshypfull Sir Thomas Hilton, Knight, Baron of Hilton, and
Captain of the King and Quenes majesties castle of Tinmoth. VVilliam Bulleyn,
wishes increase of worship and health.
QVINTVS Curcius, ye famous writer of the great Battayles that King Alexader,
the soon of Phillippe of Macedone, had against the most noble, and rich King
of the Medes and Persians, called Darius (right worshipful sir) declares that
when one Philippe the Phisicion unto the said King Alexander, and his most
trusty subject. By sudden chance, the king fell sore sick, to the great
heaviness of all his royal army, at which time with al speade, this phisicion
did prepare a medicine, most excellent for his sovereign Lord, whom he so
dearly loved, to this end, that the great virtue thereof might prevent his
present sickness, imenint danger: but malicious spite, that wretched enemy
which never sleeps but watches ever, to bring virtue and good fame to
destructio^ Immediately before this gentle Philip did present him self unto
the king with his medicine: Letters were sent to king Alexander coteining, that
the said Philip wa^ corrupted so with money from king Darius, that he had
(...) most deadly poison and uncurable venom into Alexanders medicine. The
king perusing the letters, kept them secrete until he had drunk his
medicine, and immediately he toke his phisicion by the hand, and delivered him
the letters, that he might rede the having in him so great confidence, that he
did in no manner of case mistrust him. The cause why I have alleged this most
worthy prince king Alexader, his excellent phisicio Philip, is to declare the
great trust in the one, the fidelity in the other, not forgetting the
shameless conditions of the flattryng Parasites, which ever wrlketh with two
faces in one hood, bearing fire in the one hand, and water in the other:
sowers of discord, reapers of mischief: which be always enemies unto the
disciples of Philippe, whose venomous stynges can not hurt them, which ever
have in store the precious Jewel of patience, and arm them selves to do good
to every good man, for the preservation of their lives, by the true rules of
the government of health, which here I am so bold to present unto your worship.
For where as there lacks government in a common wealth, the people do
eftsoon fall into ruin. The ships that lacks good governance, oftetimes
be cast away upon sands and rocks. And therefore there is nothing under
heaven, that hath life, but if it lack good gouernemet it will quickly fall into
utter decay. For like as the creature of all things, have formed the bodies
of al me into the goodliest shapes of every living thing that ever was, or ever
shall be: Eve so he hath ordained for ma: herbs, fruit, roots, seeds,
plants, gumes, oils, precious stones, beasts, fowls, fishes, for the
preservation of health, to be moderately used with discretion, which preserves
the body in good estate, without whose virtues the bodies can not live, for
they be the noryshers of life. But misusing or abusing them, brings to the
body many diseases, as rumes, catores, dropsies, impostumes, gowtes, flixes,
opelations, vertigos, blyndnes, ruptures, fransies, with many moonoysome
diseases, which comes thorough the corruption of meates and ill air. For what
avails riches, honours, costly buildings, fair apparel, with all the
pomp of this world, and to be honoured of the people, and in the mean time
to be eaten with worms in the breast or in the belly, consumed with agues,
turmented with gowtes, sorenes, boneache. c. Well I think, an hole Codrus is
better than a sick Mydas. Codrus. Midas.
And seeing that to possess health is better then to govern gold, in so much
that health makes men more happier, stronger and quieter then all manner of
riches, lacking health: as example. Great princes, noble me, men of great
substance, when they be wrapped enclosed with many sundry sickenesses, and in
daily dangers of death, in their extreme pains and passions, they do more
greatly coueit one drop of health then a whole tun of gold, crying out for
the help and counseile of the phisicion. Whom Iesus Sirack, Cap. 38.
in his godly book did counsel allwyse men to honour, and whom the almghtie
God, did create and ordeine for the infirmity of mankind, and also medicine
for his help, and that no wise man should despise the. Therefore yet again
(right worthy Knight) I shall most humbly desire you, to except the good will
of him, which wishes the years of your prosperous life health, Nestor.
Galen. Arganto.
to be equal to Nestor, Arganton, and Galen. Whose lives were long, healthful
and happy. And thus wishing the daily increase of your worship, with continual
health, to gods pleasure: who ever be your guide and governor, Amen. Your
worships always to command.

VVilliam Bulleyn.

CVrsed be Bachus, the father of dronkenes,
Founder of lothelie lust and lechery,
Thy seruautes twain, be inteperauce idleness
Which gentle diet and sobernes do defy,
but sobernes, doth live, when glotony doth die.
Though bakettes doth abound, eyes for to please,
Overcharging the stomach, brings small ease.
THe abundance of wine, and lust of meat,
Feasting in the day, and riot in the night,
Inflames the body with unnatural heate.
Corrupts the blood, and abates the sight,
The synewes will relaxe, the Artears have no might
Apoploxia and Vertigo, will never fro the start,
Until the vital blode, be killed in the heart.
O Happy is poverty, with good governance,
Which of fine fode hath no great plenty,
Nature is sufficed, with things suffisaunce
But poisoned, with floods of superfluity,
Consider your food, in the time of poverty,
Example to Diogmes, sitting in his tonne,
Was well pleased, with reflexcion of the sun.
Beasts and fowls, of nature ravenous,
Infieldes and forestes, seek their adventure,
Upon their prays devouring most odious,
Consuming by glottonie, many a creature,
Yet each of them, according to their nature.
Can purge their Cruditie, with casting venomous
Man through replecion, is in danger parelous.
Mans nature doth weke, as this world doth wast
As things engendered, corrupting by time,
Your life is present, but death makes haste,
Festinate by surfite, I tell you in rhyme,
Example to the epicures, rotten into slime,
As gods word and storis, the treuth to tell,
That vnsatiat glottons shall fast in hell.
TRuly to wise men, this is the chief medicine,
Moderate diet, with temperate travel,
good air in sweet fields, when ye son doth shine,
Fliyng stinging mists, that the life will expel,
Digestion of stomach, they shall feel full well.
And to shake of anger and passions of the mind,
Thus quietness of conscience the happy ma shall find
We know each one, and se by experience,
That men shall waste and physic fade,
What is man? when he is in most excellence,
^one fallen to dust, and sleeps still in shad,
^lowers, leaves, fruts, grows i somer most glad,
^ut from their branches, as it is daily scene,
^re beat down with wind when they are fresh grene
Son moan stars, with heavenly influence,
The earth doth garnish with flowers fresh of hew,
The trees spring, with fruit of their benevolence,
^e rain nourishes, ye sweet felds with silver drops new
^e lelie, read rose, and flowers pale blew.
^orue and cattelle and every thing temporal,
^e not these gods giftts? for these our lives mortal
But to know these creaturs is a gift most excellent
Complexions hot or cold, moist or dry,
And to what nature they be convenient.
Hippocrates and Gallene, in their time did try.
Dioscorides and Auicen, with Plini wold not lye.
Aristotle the philosopher in learning most excellent
So be many men now in this life present.
TO them I bend my knee with dew reverence,
As one unworthy their fotesteppes for to kiss,
Iacking no good will confessing my negligence,
Though many will judge, my intent amiss.
Pouring water in the sea, where aye plenty is.
But of your worship to whom I present this gift,
Except it better the nothing to make a simple shift.
I pray you rede this government short I will it make
Between one called Iohn, Humfrey the wise,
When you are at leisure in your hand it take.
Though it lack eloquence, yet do it not despise,
I will assite no author, which have written lies.
And still will submit my self unto the learned judge
And force not of the ignorant which at my traue^ grudge
Esse cupis sanus sit tibi parca manus,
Pone gule metus, etas vt sit tibi longa.
FINIS.
To the gentle Reader.
HEre I do present unto thee (gentle Reader) a simple Govern met of health,
beseeching thee most heartily for to except it as an argument of my good will,
as one vnfayedly that greatly do couit the good ^ate and happy health of
mankynde. Which by daily casualtis, surfaites (...): do decay, and fall into
many gre^us painful sickenesses. For which cause although perhaps I can not
in (...) points answer to thy request, in ^is little regement: yet I shall
desire ^ee to except me among the feloweshyp of the botchers, which do help
to ^paire things that fall into ruin or ^ecay. Even so be the pratiscio^ers
of ^isicke, no makers of men, but when ^en do decay through sickness, ^en
the counsel of the Phisicion, and (...) virtue of medicine, is not to be
re^sed, but most lovingly to be embraced as a chief friend in the time of a
^uersitie, if thou read this little hoo^ and observe it, I trust it will paye
much as it doth promise. And because I am a young man I would (...) presume
to take such a matter in (...) although the words be few, but (...)
consiliat and gather things together which of my self I have practised and
also read and noted in the works Hypocrates, Galen, Auicen, Plinii, H^lyabas,
VVenzoar, Rasis, Dioscorid Leonhardus Fucchius,
Conradus Gesnerus. c. And thus I leave the to the company of this my little
book, wisshyng thee health, and all them that shall read it.

VVilliam Bulleyn.

The contents of this book of the government of health.
THe Epistle. Verses in Meter against surfeting, commending moderate diet.
Verses in the praise of the book. A preface to the Reader. Of the Epi^urs life.
Fo. i. ^eliogabal{us} court fit for Epicures. Fo. ibid. ^aly gods plaged. Fo.
ii. ^utes of inordinate banquets. Fol. eod ^arietie of opinios, fo. iii (...)
obiectio against phi^cke. fol. eod. ^od, autour of phi. fo. eo ^od ordained
herbs for ^elth of men. fol. eod ^he praise of phi. fo. iiii. ^diffinition of
phi. fo. v ^ndry sectes of phisiti^ns. fo. vi. Phisike divided into v. parts.
fol. vii The description of the.4 complexions. fo. ix The description of the.4
Elements. fol. x Creatures copoud of mo elements the one. fo. eo Elements
fel^e and not scene. fo. xi The.4. complexions divided into.4. quarters of the
year. fo. eod Metals and medicines be knovven. fol. xii The bringing up of
children. fo. xi^i^ Best time to provide for age. fol. xv The description of
the.4 humours. fol. xvi Men hot, but women's tongues hoater. fo. xix Al things
brings their apparel with him, ma only except. fo. eod A diffinicion of
members. fo. xx Muskels and glandens flesh. fo. eod A part, called by the nae
of the whole. fo. xxi What anatomy is. fo. eo Four things conside red in
the body of man. fol. eod Of opening the veins, and blud letting. fo. xxiii
Against dropsy. fo. xxiiii Helping the Eme. fo. eo. Thernia excellent Triacle.
fol. eod Capers good. fo. xxv Miracle healpeth when phisike fails. fo. eod
Time for al things fo. 27 Of blood letting. fo. 28. Usurpation. fo. xxviii
Morning best to let blud fol. eod Of meats and medicin^ fo. eod Best time to
purg. fol. 3^ Vomits and their profits. fo. eo^ Custom in vomiting evil.
fol. eo^ Of bathinges and their properties. fo. eo^ Discommodities by common hot
houses. fo. xxx^ Before bathing use goo^ ointments. fol. eo^ Perilous to bath
upon a^ empty stomach. fo. eo^ Of nesynge. fo. ^o^ Of suppositers. fol. eo^
Boxing good for the body. fo. eo^ Of glisters. fol. eo^ Manipracticioners. fo.
3^ Beasts and birds use pr^ning. c. fol. eo^ Hot water vnholesom^ fol. xxxi^
Frication holesom. fo. e^ Combing the head. fo. eo Cutting of here and paring
nails. fo. eod Consideration to be had in eating. fo. eod A cause why the
soul de parts from the body. fo. 34. To eat both flesh and fish together
hurts the flegmatike. fol. eod Diverse sorts of meates corrupts the body.
fo. 35 Good diet prolongs life. fol. eod What meats doth cause good blood.
fol. 36 To go to bed with empty stomach hurts. fo. eo An order in dieting. fo.
37 An order for them that the sick. fo 38 Of syrrops and drinks. fol. eod
(...) the complexion is, so (...) desires. fol. 39 Moderate vvalke after meat
profits. fo. eod To healpe digestion by diverse vvaies. fol. xl. A note
which be the most holesomest airs to dvvel in. fo. xli What airs
corrupts the blood. fol. eod Corrupt air brings sundry diseases. fo.
xlii Fervent prayer unto god doth mitigate his wrath fo. eod Sweet aires to
be made in time of sickness. fo. eo What sitation is best for an house. fol. 43
Pleasant people. fo. eod Moderate exercise a souerain thing. fol. 44 What
profit comes by exercise. fo. eod Use makes labour easy. fol. eod Idleness
the mother of mischief. fo. 45 Of exercise before meat. fol. eod Of sleep and
vvakinge. fo. 46 To sleep after dinner hurts. fo. eod To sleep on the
right side best. fo. 47 Lodging to be kept clean. fol. eod To sleep in
felds is hurtful. fo. 48 The cause of the stone. fo. eod Remedies for the
stone. fol. eod Of vrines with the colours thereof, and the judgements. fol.
49 Contents in vrin be the chief things to know diseases by. fo. 50 Of stoles
and the judgement of the colours thereof. fo. eod Of doctor diet, quiet,
meriman. fo. 51 Better to lack riches the to want quietness and mirth. fo. eod
Many apt similituds for the same. fol. eod Pore men's pleasure. fo. 52 The
torments of the mind. fo. eod Thought kills many fol. eod Ire is a grievous
passion Fol. 5^ Devils incarnat. fol. eod A good face in a glass fo. eod
Better to be spited the pitied in some case. fo. e^ The virtues of vvorme
vvode. fol. 5^ The property of Annsede. fo. eo^ The virtue of mouse-eare fo.
5^ Of chikvvede. fo. eo^ The properties of sorrel. fo. eod The properties of
plantayne. fo. 57 Of camomel and his property. fo. 58 Of sage and his property
fol. eod Of Polipodio and his property. fol. 59 Of horehounde and his
properties. fol. eod Of veruen and his properties. fol. 60 Of Revv or herb
grace. fol. eod The properties of Burnet. fol 61 The properties of Dandelion.
fol. eod Of spinach. fol. 62 Of covvcumbers. fo. eod Garlyke and his property.
fol. 63 Of oynions. fol. eod ^ettyse and his property fol. 64 Myntes and their
properties. fol. 65 Fennel and his properties. fol. 66 Isope and his
operation. fol. eod Sencion and his operaration. fol. eod Percelye and his
operation. fol. 68 Mugvvorte and his property. fol. eod Of Cabbage. Fo. ibid
Philopendula and his operation. fo. eod Agremoni and his operation. fol. eod Of
Dragon. fol. eod The virtue of violets. fo. e Of the white lilly and his
operation. fol. 70 Centorye and of his virtue. fol. eod Rosemary of his. fo. eo
Peniroyall and his operation. fol. eod Of Mustard and his operation. fol. eod
The veru of buglas. fo. eo The ver. of Basil. fol. eod Roses and his vert. fo.
73 Sauery and his ver. fo. eo Time and his ver. fol. 74 Persely, saxifrage, and
their operations. fo. eod Lyuervvorte and his operation. fo. eod Bitonye and of
his virtue. fol. eod Betes and his virtue. fo. 75 Maydenheere and his virtue.
fo. eod Melilot his vert. fo. 76 Peas and beans, and their operation. fol. eod
Of hutles tares. fo. eo Lekes and their properties. fol. 77 Of Radyshe and
other rotes. fol. eod Herbs engenders melancholy. fol. eod Good things to
digest choler. fo. eod To purge choler. fol. eod To digest fleum, fo. eod To
purge fleume. fo. e^d To purge melancholy. fo. eod To provoke urine. fo. eo
Cofortes for the brains to smell on. Fo. ibid Things good to stop the flixe.
Fo. ibid Good things to provoke nesyng. Fo. ibi. Good things to comfort the
heart. Fo. 18. Figs and dates. Fo. ibi Of Pears. Fo. ibid The Fryers pear.
Fo. ibi Of Appels. Fo. ibi A medicine for the small pockes. Fo. ibi Of peaches.
Fo. ibi Of quinces. Fo. ibid Of Chyries. Fo. 83 Of Grapes. Fo. ibid Sweet
prunes laxatyue. Fo. 84 Of Barbaries and Med^ers. Fol. eodem Of Capers. Fol.
eodem Of Beef. Fo. 85. Remedy for the flix. Fol. ibi Howe to healpe
Digestion. Fo. ibid A medicine for the eyes. Eo. 87 Pork and his operation.
Fo. 87 The discriptio of svvine Fo. ibi Beasts have no reason. Fo. ibid
Buddynges of Svvine. Fol. 88. A plaster for. s. Anthonies fire. Fo. ibid Of
Rams, vveathers, and lambs. Fo. ibid Of Red and Falovve deers flesh. Fo.
89 Of hares and conyes, and their properties. Fo. 91 A medicine for bluddye
eyes. Fo. ibid Of Cocks, hens, and capons. Fo. ibi Of Geese. Fo. 92 The
properties of great Fowls. Fo. ibid Of the flesh of Ducks. Fol. 94 Of
Pygeons and Doves. Fo. ibidem Of the flesh of Pecocks. Fo. 95 Roasted Pygeons.
Fo. ibid Of the flesh of Cranes. Fo. ibid O^ Svvannes flesh. Fo. 9, Of
Herons, Bitters, or shovels. Fo. eod Of Partriches, Fesantes, and Quayles. c.
Fo. eo The properties of small birds. Fo. 98 The operation of fishes. fol. eod
The best feadynge for fish. fol. 99 Soon labour after eating fish hurterh.
fol. 100 Fat fish gross. fol. eod The electio of fish. fo. eo Crauises and
crabs. fo. eo Of oil. fol. 101 Of Water. fol. 102 What kind of water is
best. fol. eod Of Vinegar. fol. 103 Of common salt. fo. eod Of honey. fo. 104
Bees example to us. fo. 105 Of milk. fo. 106 Milk not good for full stomachs.
fol. eod Of Butter and Cheese. fo. 107 Of Eggs. fo. 108 Of Wine. fol. 109
Heat of excess in drinking. fo. eod Of beer and ale. fo. 1^ Bread of all
sorts. fo. 11^ Of Rysse. fol. 1^ Of Almonds. fo. eo^ Of VValnuts. fol. 11^. Of
phylberdes fo. eo^ Of Nutmegs. fo. eo^ Of Cloves, galingale, an^ Pepper. fo. eo^
A practice. fo. 1^ Of Calamus. fo. eo^ Of triacle. fo. 12^ Of Methridatum. fo.
1^ Of Safron. Fo. 1^ A regiment of the pesti^lence. fo. 12^ Good air. fo. eo^
None sleep. Fo. eo^ Of sleep. Fo. eo^ Exercise. Fo eo^ Of mirth. Fo. 12^ Signs
of the pestilenc^ Fo. eo^ Methridatum androm^chi. Fo. eo^
FINIS.
Iohn. OF all pleasures pastimes my think there is none like unto good chere,
The epicure desires too live al together in belly chere.
wh^t should ma do but pass a way the time with ^ood fellows and make merry,
saying ^e have but a time to live, cast away ^re, wherefore is meat and bellies
or^eined but the one to serve the other* ^e flesh that we daily increase is
our ^wn. Abstinence fasting, is a mighty ^emy and nothing pleasant to me, ^d
be used of very few that love the ^lues, but only of beggars, and coue^us
sparers, which do spare much ^d spend little.


Humfrey. Know well your goodly expense of time, I wis it is no ^eruayle,
although you make ^ur belly your God: and boste of (...) You se that al lusty
reuilers, ^ntinuall banquet makers, come to great estimation, as example to
Varius Haelyogabalus, which was daily fed with many hundredth fishes and
fowls, and was accompanied with many brothels, bawds, harlottes, and
glottons, and thus it doth appear by your abhorring virtue, that of right you
might have cleamed a great office in Haeliogabalus court, Heliogabal{us} court
^it for belly gods.
if you had been in those days, but you have an infinite number of your
conversation in these days, the more pity.


Iohn. What good sir, I require not you^ counsel, I pray you be your own^
carver, and give me leave to serve my fantasy. I will not charge you, you ar^
very ancient and grave, and I ar^ but yonge, we be no matchis.


Humfrey. GOod counsel is a treasure (...) wise me, but a very trifle to^
fool, if thou had scene those things which I have seen, I know, thou
would not be such a man, nor thus spend thy time.


Iohn. What haste thou scene, that I have not seen?


Humfrey. I Have seen many notable and grievous plages, which have fallen upon
greddy gluttons, as ^asting their substance, The just reward of belly gods.
disfor^ing their bodies, shorting their ^leasaut days, and in this point ^o
conclude with thee, where as ^lotony remains, from thence (...) moderate diat
banished: and ^ose bellies that follow the lust ^f the eyes (in meates) in
youth, ^all lack the health of all their ^odies, in age if they live so long.


Iohn. My think thou can give good counsel, thou semest to be seen in
ph^sicke. I pray thee is it so great hurt (...) delight in plenty of
bankettes?


Humfrey. SIr, The fruit of inordinate baquets.
if it will please you to be somewhat attentive, I will te^ you. It is ye very
grain whero^ comith stinking vomettes, save faces, dropsies, vertigo, palseis
obstructios, blindness, flixes, applexis, caters and rewmes. c.


Iohn. IS it true that you have said to me?


Humfrey. would to God daily ex^perience did not try i^ I do perfectly
know it. An^ once thou shalt be a witness ther^ of, if thou come to age.


Iohn. THen I beseech thee gentle fren^ Humfrey, declare to me, why the^ is
such division among phisicions?


Humfrey. THou see, Variety of opinions among me.
among the Theologias there is much variety, ^nd yet but one troth. Discords
^e soon known of Musicians, ^nd the Phisicions be not igno^aunt of the
general natures of ^inges. No division is although (...) do so appear: for
regets, place, ^ge, time, and the present state of ^ans nature must be
observed, not the old rules in al points. ^or mans nature is sore altered ^nd
changed, into a viler sort ^an it was wont to be.


Iohn. ^Ome do report that men of great estimation, Anobie^tion against
physic.
say: what needs physic, ^is but an invention only for money, ^e see (say
they) who lives so well, as ^ey which never knew physic, and ^euill as these
pothicary men?


Humfrey. MAny men be more rich the^ wise, more esteemed, for titles of their
honours worships, then for any other virtue or cunning, such men in some
points be more ingratifull to natural remedies then dogs: which can
elect or choose their vomitting gras, or birds, which ca^ chose gravel or
stones for their casting. But to conclude with the^ in this matter. God the
author of physic.
Plini the great^ clarke, have a thousand reasons to prove them foolish that
will object against Physic. The ines^imable goodness of god ordained herbs
for the healh of man.
And th^ author of al things did well fors^ and know, what was good fo^ mans
nature, when he stretchi^ out so large a copas roud abou^ the earth with ye
noble planette^ and signs, and their courses, in^fluences and heavily
qualities and garnished the earth wit^ fruits, herbs, flowers, leaves
grains, oils, gums, stones, for mans comfort and help, and ordained the
phisicion for to help man. Thus the almighty have done saith Salomon. Salomon
And in recompense, God hath not appointed the phisicions to be railed upon,
Eccle. 36.
or despised, but honoured rewarded: yea, esteemed of princes. And seeing good
nature and wise men be on my side: I force not of other men's fantasies, with
whom neither good wisdom, nor good nature is guide.


Iohn. Why is phiscke of such great authority? or hath it ben in estimation
among old fathers? May that be proved of thy part?


Humfrey. Yes that I can.


Iohn. IF thou can bring in any reueren^ fathers that loved physic: I will
no^ despise, but greatly esteem it, desyr^ counseile in demauding of a few
que^stions. The praise exelecie of physic.



Humfrey. Physic hath ben in so hye an estimation, that ye gentilles did all
consent, it came from the immortal gods. Moises.
The Hebrues did well know it, as Moises in the most ancient book, called
Genesis primo, doth describe the work of the almighty God: Adam.
of herbs, fruits, and plants, that Adam might teach the virtues of the to
his children. Iesus Sirack. cap. xxxviii.
Iesus Sirack which was endued with ye spirit of god, have left a laud
behind him greatly commendinge Physic amongst the divines of the Hebrues.
Diodoro. Test. Ouid. Metamor
Mercuri amongst the Egiptians, Ouide doth greatly commend Apollo, the
inuenter of herbs, when they were almost out of ^emory, he revived their
vertes, and taught their nature to ^hers that followed him. After ^at came in
Aesculapius, which ^d many most excellent cures. ^nd chiron, Chiron
centaur{us}.
the instructor of Achil whose name can never die as ^ge as the herb centauri,
gro^eth upon the earth, which is ^led after his name. Podaliri{us}
Podalirius ^echaon, Machao.
were two brethren in (...) time of the battle of Troy, ^iche were excellent
phisicios, ^d be greatly commended of Ho^re, who was more excellent the
^ppocrates, Hippocrates.
in the I'll of Coose: ^ose works will never die, for brought in physic, and
dige^ it into fair books, for mans ^at health. Gallenus.
Then came Gallene, (...) unknown to all wise and ^ned phisicions. I could
rehearse many moo, but this sha^ suffice to prove physic to be (...) great
authority among old^ fathers.


Iohn. I Pray thee friend Humfrey, what physic: I would be glad to learn
some of thy knowledge, for thou hast good order in talking, seem to be g^ded of
authority. Therefore I am so that I have cotended with thee: I pr^ y^ be not
angry, with my former tal^


Humfrey. HIppocrates in his book of wi^des or blasts, Hippocrates in lib.
defla.
saith yt phisic^ or medecin, is but a putting the body which it lacks, or
(...) king from the body things (...) perfluous. A diffinitio of physic.
And although o^ life be short, yet the art of (...) sick is long, because
great n^ bres of things be in it, and (...) quireth much study, labour a^
^actise, Hippocrates in primo
and first of all, it requi^th much conteplacion or know ^dge, in studying good
books, ^hich is called Theoricha. Aphoris.
Secod^ the very effect of contempla^on or study, Theoricha.
is practica or actiua, which is doing of the things, at learning have
taught as ^pairing, amending, or preser^ing, the bodies of men, women and
children. c.


Iohn. It seems to be a goodly science.


Humfrey. HErodotus says: Herodot{us}
they greatly err that call it a science, for is an excellent art in doing of
no^ble things. And science is but (...) know things. There is also this
excellent art sundry sectes (...) phisicions, Emperici
some be called Em^rici, who suppose that only ex^rience doth suffice, and so
by use and experience do take i^ hand to heal diseases, not knowing the
cause of the said diseas^ or sickness. Philinus
Philinus was one (...) that sect at the first beginning Then followed
Serapion, serapion.
after that ye Apolonis. Apolonii.
And then cam^ Glaucius Menadotus Sextus. c. Another kind of phisicions, be
called Methodici, Methodici.
which neither observe time, place, age, state, no^ condition: think them
things of small profit, but only the^ respect is to their disease: the^
love not lunge study in physic and are greatly deceived, because they would
build withou^ foundation: and have the frute^ before they have planted ye
trees These men cures be but b^ chance medley. One Sirus bega^ this,
Asclepiades.
which received certain rules of Asclepiades. The chief ^este sect of
Physicians called Dogmatici. Dogmatici.
These be the wise me ^hiche set not the carte before ^e horse, nor the
roots of the ^ees upward. They do pru^ently consider the change of ^ans
nature, ye dwelling place, ^e alteration of ye air, the time (...) the year,
the custom of peo^e, the manners of diseases, the ^shion of men's diet. And
this ^ey will prous by true argu^entes and reasons, and will be ^ry careful
for their patients. ^he disciples of those me, be the ^st scollers, therefore I
counsel ^ee Ihon to love well Hippocrates ^e prince of Phisicions, Hippocrates.
which ^gan the best manner to give ru^s to all the lovers of physic. ^f this
writes Gallen, much lau^g Hippocrates his followers, ^d in these days
Leonhardus Futchius, Matheolus. c.


Iohn. Saying thou hast spooken of sundry parts of Phisicions, I pray thee
what parts be there of physic?


Humfrey. TRuly there be five things to be noted in physic, Gallen de
elemen. de temp. de facul.
as. v. principal parts, as Gallen saith: in lib. de Elementis. The first is
to consider the nature of mans body. Physic divided into five parts.
The second is, to keep the body in health, and to defend it from sickness
and infirmities. The third is, to know all the causes, rules, and sedes,
whereof the sickness doth grow. The.iiii is Crises or judgement of the disease of
things present, past to come. The fifth is the best and most excellent, for
it shows the manner of healing, dietinge, fashion, order, way to help the
sick body, preserve the same, as lunge as man doth remain in the state of
life.


Iohn. THou hast spoken of the parts of physic, what is the form manner or
distribution thereof?


Humfrey. IT is distributed in three forms one is natural, Gal. lib. 3. de
temp. cap. 4.
another unnatural, ye.iii. against nature. The first is, by those things whereof
ye body is compact, constituted or made, as Gallen saith: in his.iii. book of
his Tepramentis. Cap. 4. The second is called not natural, as meates or things
to preserve the body in health, they be not called unnatural, because they be
against the body, but because the rasshe ^akynge, or glotonus using of ^hem,
may bring many things ^o the utter destruction of the body. The third, be
things against nature, which doth corrupt the body or poisone nature,
whereof Gallen writes. Gall. in lib. 2. The rap. metho.



Iohn. Now thou hast taught me short rules of the parts forms physical, I
pray the show me some pretty rules of the complexions of men, and that I may
aptelie know them with their properties, elements, temperamentes and humours.


Humfrey. Upon my lute some time, to recreate my self, I join with my simple
armonie, many plain verses. Among all other one small songe of the four
complexions, wilt thou hear it take that chair and sit down and I will
teach thee my song


Iohn. I thank thee.


Humfrey. The bodies where heat moister dwell,
Be sanguen folks as Galen tell,
With visage fair chekes rose ruddy:
The slepes is much, The description of the sa^ guene pe^sons.
dreams be bluddy.
Pulls great and full, with digestion fine,
Pleasantly concocting, flesh and wine,
Excremetes aboudant, with anger short,
^aughing very much and finding sport,
Drine gross, with colour read:
Pleasant folks at board and bead.
Where cold with moistur prevails much
Fleumatike folks be always such,
Fatues, The description of the sle^ matil^e persons.
softness here plain and right,
Narrow veins and collar whyt.
Dull of wit, no hart to bold,
Pules very slow, digestion cold.
Sleping over much, vryne gross pale,
Spittell whit thick, thus ends the tale.
Collar is hoot, and dry as fire,
^enis of limbs and puffed with ire.
Costisse belles, with little sleep,
Dreams of fire, The description of the choleric.
or wounds deep.
Sallowe coulered, or tawny read,
Feding on salt meates, crusts of bread,
Voice sharpe, and quickenes of wit,
Vryne yellow and saltnes of spit.
Pulses swyft, and very strong,
Cruel countenance, not anger long.
Melancholy is cold, and very dry.
As here in rhyme his signs will try,
Hear plain, The description of Melacoly.
and very thyn,
A lean wretch, with hardness of skyn.
Collar whitlie, or like to lead,
Much watthe, and dreams of dread,
And stiff in folyshe fantasy,
Digestion slow, and long angry.
Fearful of mind, with watery spitle,
Seldom laughing, and pulls little.
Vryne watery, and very thyn,
The cold earth, to him is kin.

Iohn. THis is a good song, and I will learn it, for though it seem not very
pleasaut, yet I perceive it is profitable. Now thou hast spoken of the singes
of the.iiii. complexions, I pray the teach me shortly, howe to know the
elements.


Humfrey. THey be ye four beginners vnmingled and vntempored, Hippocrates de
Element. Auic. in cauteca.
fro whose mixtures every corporal thing hath his substance.


Iohn. What be ye parts? I pray the tel me*


Humfrey. Four, the one is earth the heuiest matter grossest, The description
of the.iiii. Elemets.
which is cold and dry, and melancholy. And the other is water, which is
lighter most subtle then the earth, of nature is cold, moist, and flegmatike.
Galen. in li. 8. decr.
Then is air more purer and lighter then water, and if it be not altered with
any other strange cause, it is hot and moist and sanguen: Then fire is most
lyghte, pure and clear, a clarifier and a clenser of all the other elemetes,
when they are corrupted, and is of his own nature hoot, dry, and choleric.
And of these four Elements, both man, beast, fysshe, foul, herb, stone,
mettle, have their propre working, not of one of the Elements alone, but of
al: some more and some less, according to their natures.

Hippocrates says: Hippocrates in lib. de na.
after the soul is gone from the body, the body doth return to the first
matter whereof it was made: And to conclude, all things that be made upon earth,
shall return unto the earth again in time.


Iohn. Why might not men, beasts, fyshe, or foul, herb, or tree, be of one
element as well as of four? I pray you tell me.


Humfrey. No, for Aristotel saith: Deus et natura nihil agunt frustra. God
nature has done nothing in vain. ^turs com^ded ^ore e^eutes (...) one.
And if any thing upon the earth sensible were of one element: no sickness
could hurt it, nor disease corrupt it, but every thing living upon the
earth, seeing it hath had beginning, it must needs have ending, to who these
four complexios doth belong, if they do greatly abound or disminish, or
withdraw their virtues with quantities or qualities.


Iohn. MAy a man see any of the Elements.


Humfrey. THe thing which men do see, be none of ye four Elemets: not earth,
but earthy, not water but watery, not air, but airy, not fire, but fiery.
But the things which man do feel, Elen felt seen.
be the four Elements, as earth, air, fire, water. And these be ye uttermost
simples of complexions, diversely specially, alone of them selves, or mingled
with other, taking sundry and diverse effects, manners, conditions, forms
qualities, both in man and beast, and every living thing, sensible and
insensible.


Iohn. What is the complexions of the four quarters of the year, and names of
the signs?


Humfrey. THe spring time when blood doth increase: Hippocr. in lib. de Natura
humana.
Summer when read collar doth rewle: Heruest when collar aduste, or melancholy
doth reign. Winter when fleme doth abound in full strength. Winter. Spring.
Summer Harvest.
It is called winter from the.xii. day of December, unto the tenth day of
Marche. This season is cold moist, it is called spring time, fro the.xii. day
of Marche, and ends about the.xii. day of June. Somer begins about
the.xii. day of June, and ends about the.xii. day of Septeber. Autumn or
Heruest, begins about the.xiii. day of September, and ends about the.xi.
day of December. Capricornus, Aquarius, and Pisces, be winter signs. Aries,
Taurus, and Gemini, be signs for the spring. Cancer, Leo, and virgo, beo the
signs for Somer. Libra, Scorpio, and Sagitari, be the signs for Harvest. And
ye sun goes through all these.xii. signs in xii. months. And the Moon
goes.xii. times through each of the forsayde signs ones in the year, and do
take sondry effects in man, beats, and fruit, in the said signs: hot or
cold, moist or dry.


Iohn. What be the complexions of medicines?


Humfrey. THose things that overcomes and govern the body, as purgacions,
expulciues. c. These be called medicines, Auic. in pri. can.
and those things that norysheth and augments the body, be called meates.
For the complexions of meates medicines, be known by their tastes, as coldness,
hootnes, Meates and medicine be known by tasting
moistnes, Drynes, bitterness, saltnes, sweetness, fatness, sharpness, stiptick,
and clammy. And because thy request is, to have prescribed unto thee, but only
a little government of health: I will show unto thee another of my little songs
in plain metre, howe thou shalt know meates and medicines, by their tastes.


Iohn. THat is my chief desire, I will bear thee, say on.


Humfrey. Cold quenches the collers pride,
Moist humecteth, Cold. Moist. Salt.
yt which is dried,
The flowing moister, be proffe I try,
Is wasted of humours, hot and dry,
The subtle fode, that is persing quick,
The clammy meates, makes it thick,
Bitter things, cleanse and wypith oft,
And expelslem, and makes soft.
Salt dries, and resolves fleme tough,
Fat nourishes, and make subtle enough.
Stiptick or rough taste on the tongue,
Binds and cofouteth appetite long.
Sweet things in clensing, is very good
^t desolueth much, nourishes blod.
These things well used, nature wilplease
But abusing the beastly, brigeth disease.

Iohn. ^N good faith, me think thou say (...) well, for there apere perfect
reasons in ^hese thy pretty rules. Now thou hast declared unto me, the signs
of complexions of men: with the way and ^pte knowledge of meates by their
astes, I would fain learn, shortelye ^he tempramentis and complexions of
mankynde.


Humfrey. THere was never no discrete, nor wise phisicio, that either feared
God or pitied mankynde, or loved his own honesty: wold take in hand either to
prescribe diet, or to minister medicine to any body, before be well did
consider, and wisely weye with him self, the temprament, mixture or complexion
of mankind. First whether he were hoot or cold, moist or dry, fat or
lean, or indifferent between them both.

Tempored by health, or distempored by sickness, Auic. in pri. tract.
cantico. Gal. lib. 1. cap. 2. li. 2. cap. 3. li. 4 cap. vlti. Sim. med.
as the extremities of hootnes, coldness, moistnes, and drienes. Therefore Iohn,
these things may not be forgot, you must note also the four ages of
mankind, first the tender state of children, which begins at the birth, and
so cotinueth until fiftene years next after their said birth: Their
tempramentes or complexions, be hoot and moist, very like unto the seed
whereof they be procea^ed, then next unto childhode or innocent age. Youth which
is the second part of life, begins to ^eigne, his temprament or complexion
has rather more fury ^eate, then perfect natural heat, and this second age,
continues or ten years, Gal. lib. 5. Aphor. come. 9.
as Galen says: ^ell, in this two first states of yfe, let al natural
fathers mo^ers bring up their youth, set GOD before their eyes, An ernest
brief exhortacion for ye bringing up of youth.
for they ^aue no small charge committed ^nto them, that must give ac^mpte to
God, howe they have brought up their children: they (...) in these years do
spare cor^ction, truly be grievous enemies unto their children, and at last
shall be recompensed with shame, when they shall se misfortune and wretchedness,
fall upon the fruit of their own seeds. For me have small profit of their
corn, which be choked overcome with thistles, bryeres, and brakes, which
were not weeded in time, much less of their children, which have received
neither correction nor honest learning in due season. If ye keepers of gardeins
be careful over their late sow sedes, tender herbs, which are in danger to
be destroyed of every frost: What should good fathers mothers do for their
children, whose tender and youthful years be carried away, ouercomed of every
foolish fantasy, and it is no me^uayle. But this shall suffice for the wise,
and smally profit the fools, but to my matter which I toke in hand, I will
return unto the third age of mankynd, which is called the lusty state of
^yfe, and begins at.xxv. years and continues unto, xxxv. This age is hoot
and dry, and very choleric, Galen. in lib. Simp.
as Galene says: This part of life is subject, to many burning and extreme
fevers, ^oote ulcers: therefore it is necessary to know this temprament or
coplexion, which is called choleric, as plainly may appear by age,
strength, diet, urine. c. This is the best time for mankynde to travel in,
with godly exercise in science, art, and profitable travels in his vocatio,
putting in practise, the virtues which he hath learned in youth, for this is
the summer part of life, wherein all goodly fruit (...) flourish in every
good ocupacio* This is the very heruest, The best time to provide for age.
to ga^ the precious corn, and fruit (...) their labours against the cold
storms cloudy days of their aged winter, wherein the body shall be weak, and
the eyes sygh^ decay, and the hands trimble and therefore it is not comely
(...) see the state of age, without rest which in the time of youth, di^
honestly travel. For there is (...) grace given to many creature^
unreasonable, both beasts and fowls, to make provision before hand, what is
then to be required of men reasonable, as follows in these verses.

THe bird in time her nest can make,
The be will build his house full (...)
The Crane with stone in foot will wake,
The Cony will carve under the mine,
The Squirel in trees her nuts can keep,
Against cold winter to feed and sleep,
And should not man well foresee,
In youth to know his old degree.
THen from.xxxv. or few years following, the lusty brauches of youth, begin to
abate his pleasant leues, flowers and fruit by little little will decay, raw
^humers, cramps, dropsies, quaterns, melacoly, will then draw ne'er. The
riots, surfittes, sore labours, bearing of extreme burdens, wrestlings, acts
venerus with the abuse of youth, will then spring forth, to the detriment of age
had sudden decay of life, in especial of drunkardes.


Iohn. What be the places of blend, Collar, Fleume, and Melancholy? Natural or
unnatural. Thou haste not made a particular distinction of their proper
places, but generally thou hast spoken well in thy songe.


Humfrey. THere are also other discirptions of the four humours, very necessary
to be know, and their places where as they dwell within the body, first of
blood, as Galen says: in his first book of effected places, blood (says
he) that is in the pulsis, doth greatly differ from the blood of the veins,
for the blood of the pulsis is thinner, yeallower and hotter, and this blood,
may be called the governor of life. The spring fountain of the blood
general is in the liver, ^.
which serves every vain of blood, this blood in culler is very read.
Flewme. is white, and is engendered in the stomach, and at length by the virtue
of natural heate, pure fleaine is turned into blod. There be also watery, slimy
glassy, gross, salt, sower, thick, harde, binding, and extreme cold fleames,
which in dede be unnatural, that be engendered thorough surphets, coldness or
idelnes, bringing to the body many noisome diseases. There is also collar,
which is yellow, whose place in the body is ye gall, which comes of the
clensing or puryfying of blood: and this collar is clear, hot and dry, and
the coforter of decoction. Grene collar, or collar mingled with fleam, be
unnatural, melancholy natural, in the spleen is nothing but the sex degrees,
or heavy residentes of the blood, the natural melacoly is known by his
blacknes, the unnatural comes of the burning of collar, and is lighter hoter,
browne of colour, sower of taste, and puts the body in great danger: as
madness, black gaunders, continual fevers, and sudden deadly diseases.
Therefore my friend Iohn, remember this short discriptio of humours, as the
words of Galen Auicen, say. Auicen. in li. can.



Iohn. Thus I have heard thy several placinge of the four complexions of
blood, Choler, Fleume, and Melancholy, and is there any distinct hootnes,
coldness, moistnes, and drienes, in any other creature besides man: tel me.


Humfrey. NOt only in manne, but in beasts, fyshe, foul, serpets, trees,
herbs, mettels. And every thing sensible and insensible, according to their
natures, be equally mingled or tempered togeter, which is called mean
teperaunce, or else exceadeth in degrees, which is called intemperance, hot
and moist, may be compounded together, so may cold and dry, hot and dry,
cold and moist, Galen. in lib. 4. de tempor.
example. A choleric man, hot dry: a Fleumaticke man, cold moist. c. Of
herbs, as hisope and few, hot and dry, purssen and coucumbers, cold moist.
c. But tempramentes or complexios of men, beasts, and trees, be some hoter,
some colder, according to their natures. As a lion is hooter then a choleric
man: pepper is hoter the cloves. And though there be degrees in more hotnes or
more coldness, yet they are called but hot or cold, as men after labour or
travel, they will say they are hoot, but the fire which people warm the at,
is hotter. Also there be things repugnant to tempramentes, as moist and
drienes together, heate and coldness together, as fire to be cold, or the
water of his own nature to be hot, which water peraccidence of the fire is
made hot: and fire quenched by the water. And every thing exceading greatly
with distemperaunce or wanting temperance or complexion, do eftsoon come to
an end, as men by extreme sickenesses, surphets or wounds, or finally age,
lacking natural virtue. Of heate and moistnes of trees and herbs, from whom
juice and sap is withdrawn, these things of necessity must needs die,
Galen. in lib. 4. de tempor.
and come to corruption, as Galen and Aristotel says.


Iohn. Whether be men or women of coldex complexion? Arist. de Gene.



Humfrey. AVicen says: Auicen.
like as men be hot dry, so be women cold and moist.


Iohn. YEa but Lucian says: they be perelous hot of their tongues and full of
venom: though I am no phisicion, yet can I make a dissciption of that member,
for I am oftentimes stinged with it, Whether this be true let y^ married judge.
I would to God they had been wormed when they were young, but when they are
old, they are past all cure, but the best medicine y^ I have, is a gentle
herb called few, which I am never without great store.


Humfrey. Mankind was borne naked to this end, every thig bringing his aparel
with him sauig ma.
that he might clothe him self with other creatures: which he brought not in
to this world with him, as cloth, leather, harnes made of iron, for his defence,
because he is ye chief creature. But horses of nature have harde ho^es, lyons
sharpe teeth, purpintyns sharpe pricks which is their cotinual and natural
armour, as things ever prepared to debate strife, by no art can scant be tamed.
The Rose as pleasantly as she doth appear, Muskels and glandens flesh
and as sweetly as she doth smell, spring not further without a great nober of
sharpe pricks. Therefore it is tolerable for men to bear with them whom
nature hath sealed and marked for his own. With that humour most choleric,
disgresse from this thy communication, and let us talk of things more
profitable, for in dead this is pleasant to no ma.


Iohn. Saying thou wilt not describe me thi^ particular members, of which w^
have spoke, I would be glad to know the parts of mankind, with a short^
description of his members.


Humfrey. MEmbers be simple and also compound, the simples be ten in
number, the cartilages, the gristels, the bones, veins, synewes arteries,
pannicles, lygamentes, cords, and the skyn. Members compounded, A diffi^cion
of members
be those that be joined and builded together of simple members as the hands,
face, fete, liver, heart, and so compounded members, be made of simple. Some of
the compounded members be called principals: as the heart from whence the
arteries springes, the brain, fro whence the sinews springes, the liver which
is the well of the blood, from whence ye veins do spring, the stones of
generation from whence the sede of life do spring: but those compounded
members that be principal. Be all the other members except the simple as ye
nose, the ears, the eyes, the face, the neck, the arms and legs, the
brains and chief substance of our flesh, be compounded mebers of sinews,
Muskels and glandens flesh
covered with panackles, which be of a synue nature, but that sinews give
feeling to all the whole body: even as the artiers gives spiritual blood fro
the heart to every meber. The whole body is covered with films and skynnes.
Out the head springs harde matter issuing from the places called ye pores, to
pourge vapors smoke from the brain, which ascedeth out of the stomach into the
head, and is cleansed through Pia matter, called the tender covering of the
brain or spirits animal. And therefore as some parts of ye body being divided
in sonder, be each like unto the other, and yet called by the name of the
whole, as for example. When the bones be broken in sonder, or the flesh cut in
to diverse pieces, or ye blood poured into sundry vessels. A part is called by
the name of ye whole and not ye whole by the part.
A piece of flesh is styll called flesh, a fragmente of a bone, is called a
bone, and a drop of blood is called blood: Even so an hade, arm vein, or
such like vnseparate parts being divided into pieces or called by the name of
pieces, not by the name of ye whole part (as is before.) But my friend Iohn, to
make a large discriptio of Anatomy, it were to lunge for ^e, but shortly I
will say some thing. And first of the definition thereof is, when the body of a
dead man or woman, is cut opened the mebers divided, or for the wat of dead
bodies to read good books as Galen, What annothomie is.
Auicen. c. And it behooves the that cutteth a dead corps, Four things
considered in the body of ma.
to note four things. First the nutramentall members, as the liver with the
veins: the second is, the members spiritual, as the heart with ye artiries,
the third is the animal members, Example.
as the head, brains, sinews. The fourth last, be exeremetes of the body, as
arms, legs, skyn, here. c. Of these said mebers, with the boones, is all
the body compounded. And like as every tree and herb, have their roots in the
earth, their brauches springs upward, even so the roots of mankind, have
the beginning in the brain, and the senewe and branches grows downward: in
the which brain, dwells the virtues of imagination, fantasy, memory. c. And
these animal virtues, be placed as it were heavenly above al the members,
communicating their heavenly influences, down unto the hart, as to a prince,
or chief reuler within the body, which gives life to every part thereof. Thou
shalt consider, that the hart was the first yt received life from the spirits,
and shall be the last yt shall die. Note also, that as, there be noble senses
give to the body, as saying, hearing smelling tastinge, feeling: eve so nature
hath four principal virtues. First Attractive, the second Retetiue, the
third Disgestiue, the fourth Expulsiue. Attractive is that by the which every
part of the body draws the fode of life, and serves the virtue disgestiue,
and ye Retentive do hold the meat until it be ready to be altered
changed. Disgestiue do alter, makes the food like unto the thing ye it
nourishes, as fleme, blood. c. Expulsiue do separate them from the other, the
good fro ye bad. Thou ought also most chiefly to learn the knowledge of
the veins, and for what sickness, they must be opened, and what medicines,
either in sirops or pills thou must use. And first mark this figure of the
Anatomy here preset before thee, with the heavenly signs, because I have not
painted at large the several parts of the said Anatomy.

THe middle vain of the forehead is good to be opened against Megrim,
forgetfulness, and passions of the head. And they that be leaten blood of this,
or any other vain, must first have their head purged with pillule Chochi
Rasis, or some purgation, but first use things to extenuate matter, as
syrruppe of Buglosse. c.

Against Leprosy deafnes. Let blood the two veins behind the eartes, and use
the said pills or else pillule Aurea Nicholai or Arabice, or confectio Hameth
minor.

Against replexion or to much blood, or blood in the eyes, flowing in the
head, open the temple veins called Artiers, for they be ever beatynge. And
use too pourge with pillule Artritice, Nicholai or puluis ad epithema Hepatis.

Against Squinace, stopping the throat, and stoppynge of the breath: Let blood
the veins under the tongue. And for this use Philoniumai{us} Necholai.
Gargarismes, pillule Bechie, and oximel Simplex.

Veins called Originales, open not without great cousaile of a learned
Physician, or cunning Chirurgio. They be in the neck, and have a great course
of blood, that governs the head, the whole body.

Against short wind, and evil blood, aproching to the hart, and spitting
blood. Open the vain called Cordiaca, or heart vain, in the arm. Use
things to extenuate, as Aromaticum, Chariophillatum Mesue, serapium ex
Absin^hii in cold time, serapium Boraginis ^hote time, and pillule stomochi.

Against palsy, yellow Iaundies, burning heats, apostimations of y^ liver. Open
ye liver vain upon the right arm. Take Serapium ex endiue. Diamargariton
frigid^ Auicenni.

Against dropsy, Dropsy.
open the vain between the belly the branch, the right side against the said
dropsy. And the left side against the passions of the milte, but be not rash,
onlesse ye have the cousayle of one well seen in the Annothomie. Use pillule
Hiere cum Agarico.

Against the stoppinge the secrete terms or fluxions of women, Helping the
Emorodes.
or helpinge the Emorodes and purging fores. Open the vain called Sophane
under the ankle. Theriaca is an excellent triacle.
Theriaca Andromachi. Pillule Mastichine, Petri de Ebano.

Within.xx hours after one is infected with the pestilence coming suddenly. Open
the vain between the wrest of the foot, the great to. Use Serapi^ Cichorii,
and Pillule pestilentialis Ruffi.

Against stinking breath. Open the vain between the lip and the chin. Use for
this Catharicum imperialie. Nicho. Alexandri.

Against the toothache. Open the vain in the rofe of ye mouth. And first purge
with pillule Choci Rasis, or with pills of Mastike.

Against quartens, Use to eat Capers, and take Pillule Iude Haly or pilluled^.
lapide Lazule.
tercions, pains of the leftside. Open the spleen vain, commonly called ye
lowe vain, with a wide cut, not deep: For Chirurgios nisely pricking or
opening vayns, with little Scarisfa^ons, doth let out good pure blood, and still
retain, gross, cold, and dry earthly matter, to the great hurt of their
patients. And albeit, many more veins might hear be spoke of: and their
vtilities, yet this shall well suffice by Gods grace to keep al people in
health, that upon just cause, have these veins opened. Except old men, women
with child, and children under xiiii. years of age, or men after diverse
agues. For blood letting, will then engendre perilous palsies, as very
excellent phisicions have well declared. And after one be infected with the
pestilece xxiiii. hours, before he have received medicine, Miracle helps,
but no medicen in this case.
or blod letting, miracle helps him, but truly no medicine have virtue to do
it.


Iohn. THis same figure although it apereth in many books. Yet very few do
understand it in al points, such be y^ secret works of nature. And where as
thou hast well spoke of some veins, apt medicens for the body: I would fain
se the true form and shape of the bones.


Humfrey. OH Iohn, it were a long time to declare ye singular mebers with the
compounds, as Galen do in his book of the parts and boones. It requires
only one work, but I have taken in had to teach the but a Government of health:
Not withstanding at thy request, I will show unto the a proportion of the
boones, no less true, than new, which is the very timber, or posts,
whereupon our frail flesh is buyldyd, beginning in our mothers wombs, and
ending in earth the mother of all things. And as the noble Prince Auicen
affirmith, ye number of al y^ bones, be CC.xliiii. beside Sisamina, Os Laud.




Iohn. THou haste spoken of the opening of veins, and medicines convenient to
cleanse the blood, with the figure of boones, but thou hast not spoken of
convenient time when to let blood, nor of the state or adge of the whose veins
should be opened. Therefore I wold be glad to learn not only time of blood
lettinge, but also, of purging the belly vomits, bathinges: ne^inges, and
rubbinge of the body. c.


Humfrey. EVery thing haithe his time convenient must be donne with sobber
discression, Time for althinges
and not with rash ignoracie, which killethe an infinite nober. Therefore the
cause must be known and the time observed, as Gallen writes in the comentary
of the Afforismes, Hipp. in. 1. Affor. 3.
of Hippocrites, many bodies be extinguished by sodeyn death in whom is
extreme fulness, or abundance. For abundance (...) blood or any other humer
saith A^ristotle, Aristo. in pri. prob. 56.
is the cause of many sickenessis, and those men that uses much glottonie
in winter shall be apt to receive many diseases in the spring time. Auice. in
2. pri. doc. 2. Cap. 6.
Therefore when the body have extreme heate, fulness of veins, flushing with
sudden redenes in the face, gross and rede vryne, and such burning heat in
the night that let the sleep. c: then it is time to evacuate the body, with
some purgation, blood letting, or abstinence as the strength adge of the
patient will serve. For many diseases, he helped by discrete blood lettinge,
as Plurice^, hoot fevers. Gallen. in lib. de ^lobothomia.
Frenyces, repletion, or surphytes taken with overmuch eating or drinking, as
Gallen saith, The letting of blode dryethe up the superfluous moister of the
belly, helps memory, purges the blader quiets the brain, warms the
marie, opens the orgas of hearing, helps disgestio inducith sleep, c. Rasi.
in 4. alman. cap. 14.
Unto this agrees Rasis, saing it helps greatly against leprosies
squinancis. Appoplexis, pestilencis. c. But old men, children or women with
child, ought not to be let blood, nor also those people that dwell in cold
regions may not be let blood, because the blood is the chief warmer of
nature: ye people that dwell in hoot regions, if they be letten blood, it will
dry there bodies, for blood is the chief moister of nature. Therefore, is ye
heate of somer, and the coldness of winter, forbid to open vains, or let blood,
exept for a stripe, or sudden chance, Rasi in 4. alime. Ca. 14.
as Rasis saith th^ spring of ye year is ye chief time t^ let blood in ye right
arm, or right foot, the middle vain.
in the vain called Median^ Which vain must be opened as^ well at other times
in the beginnig of sicknesses, as hot fevers, pleurices, c. As basilica should
be opened in ye middle or toward the end of a sickness. Purgations ought to be
ministered with great discretion, and not rashly to be taken, for every trifle
as thou haste hard me speak of blood lettinge. So observe the self same rules
in purgation, as time, person, Hip. in. 3. ^ri. doct. (...). cap.
quality, or quatitie. For Hippocrates saith, without doubt it is needful
to purge the superfluity of ye body. As if blood do aboude to take things to
purge blood. If steam be superfluous, then take things to cleanse his
superfluity. If collar be to ardet hot, use things to extinguish, If
melacoly be to extreme then taste things to bring him into a mean. Vsurpatio
in medicin be evil.
And not to purge one humer with the medicines of an other, but to take them in
dew ^rder and aptenes. For the said humers as Valarius cordus, Mesue, and
Nicholas, teaches the manner of making of the most excellent purgations with
there quatities. And as in blood lettinge sleep must be avoided for viii. or
xii. In the morning is best to let blood, euell toward night.
^oures after them: so when your ^urgations be taken, air is to ^e avoided and
to be kept close ^or ii. or iii. days or more, as the ^alice of the disease,
or power of he purgations be, and the coun^yll of Rasis must be followed. Rasi
in 4. alman. ca. 15.
Which saith oftentimes to take ^urgations or lax^tiue medices doth make the
body weak, and apt to the fever ethicke, and specialye in very lean or
weak persons they yt be very fat have small guts and veins, purgatios be
very noisome unto the But strong bodies having large vessels, may sustain
purgatios without any hurt, but strong purgations, either in pills or potios,
if they any thing do exceed be very hurtful: therefore, y^ doces or quantities,
may not exceade. And also they must be made as pleasant as art can do
them, onles they offend the stomach. Meates medices ^eith not except pills
before supper.
Hippocrates gives counsel that men should not mingle medicines with meat,
but to take them three or four hours before meat, or else so long after. Onles
they be pills called Antecibum, which^ may be taken at the beginning o^
supper, or else Pilli chochi, a little before sleep, two hours after supper.
Time to purge.
The best time of purgacios is in the spring time, as the docters doth affirm:
the apt days signs are commonly known in the English Almanacs, calculated
into english? As in the writings of master Leonarde Digs, Digs
Kenningham.
of William Kenyngham, a learned student both in Astronomy and Physic, with
many mo good men that takes pains to profit ye common wealth. There is another
manner of purging of the body by vomet, Vomits and there profits.
for it cleanses from ye midrife upward, if they have large breasts, and be
choleric persons. It is good against dropsies and leprosies, better in
summer the in winter, Hip. Setin. 4. Aphoris.
as Hippocrates saith: and holsomer one hour before supper then at any other
time, and not to be used as a custom: Costome to vomit weakens the stomach.
for the custom of of vomittes hurts greatly the head and eyes, and make
the stomach so feeble, that it will scant bear any meates or drinks, but
estsones caste them up again. They which have narrow throats and breasts, and
log necks, vomits be neither apt nor good for them. Auicen. in. 4. pri. cap.
13.
And Auicen says: that vomits ought to be twyse in the month for the
conseruacion of health, but that which is more doth hurt the body. Of bathes
and there propertes.
There is an other kind of the clensing of the body by sweeting, as with hoot
drinks, warm clothes, perfumes made of Olibalu brimstone, niter. c. There is
also bathes and sweetinge in hoot houses for the pockes, scurffe, scabs,
hemerodes, piles, which hoot houses has the virtue of helping the said
diseases. The discomoditie of common hot houses.
But if any that be of an whole temperate complexion do sweet in dry hoot
houses, it doth them much harm: as hyndrynge their eye ^ightes, decaying
their teeth, hur^ing memory. The best bathing ^s in a great vessel, or a little
close place with the euapuration of diverse sweat herbs well sodden ^n water,
which have virtue to ^pen the poores softly, letting out feeble and gross
vapers, which ^ieth between the skin and the ^eshe. To use oyntemetes after
bathings is good.
This kind of bathinge is good in the time of Pestilence, or fever quartein:
in the end of the ^athes, it is good to anointe the ^ody with some sweet oil,
to mo^ifie and make soft the synewes. And thus to conclude of bathing, ^t is
very wholesome, so that it be not done upon an empty stomach, To bathe upon
an empty stomalie is perilous.
palseis may come there by, or to take sudden cold after it, there follows
an other purgation, called nesing or sternutacion which is benificiall for the
body if it be used upon an empty stomach. Of nesing
Twyse or thrice in a morning with a lefe of Bittony, put into thy nose, it
helps memory, good against opilation, stopping, obstructions: Suspositers be
good for weak people or children, Of suppositers.
made with Hieria Picr^ honey, made in the length of a finger: Soringe doth
much good to the body.
Scarifiyng or boxing, as Gallen says: applied unto the extreme parts, as
the legs, and the arms, doth great help unto the body, in drawing watery
humour away from the body, but boxing is not good for the breast, applied
thereto in hot fevers, is ^aungerous. I will speak more of Glisters in my book
of healthful medicines
Glisters made ac^ording to art, be good for them ^hiche be to weak to take
pur^ations. The manner of the said Clisters, because they be not here (...) be
spoken of at large, I entend ^y Gods grace to set forth in my ^ext book of
Helthful medicines. Purgacions venerus, Many practicioners of acts venerus.
there be (...) many practicioners thereof, ^hat I need to write no rules: ^ut
this, that effectio, lust, fan^asie, have banished chastity, te^raunce, and
honesty.


Iohn. ^Laine people in the country, as carters thresshers, ditchers,
colliers, ^owmen, use seldom times to wash ^eir hades, as appears by their
filthy ^s, as very few times comb their ^ads, as it is scene by floxe, neites,
^ese, feathers, straw, and such like, ^hich hangs in their ^eares. Whe^er is
washing or cobing things to decorate or garnish the body, or ^ bring health
to the same?


Humfrey. THou see that ye dear, ^es^es birds, use frictious and pruninge
the selves
horse, or cow, will use friction or rubbing the selves against trees both for
their ease and health. Birds and hawk, after their bathing will prune rouse
them selves upon their brauches and perkes, The profit which comes in
washing, the hades with cold water.
and al for health. What should man do, which is reasonable but to keep him
self clean, often to wash ye hades, which is a thing most comfortable to
cool the heate of the liver, if it b^ done often, the hands be also the
instruments to the mouth and eyes, with many other things comoly to serve
ye body. To was^ the hands in cold water is very wholesome for the stomach and
liver, but to wash with hot wate^ engenders rumes, Hot water is vnholsome to
wash hands in
worms and corruption, in the stomach, because it pulls away natural
heate unto the warmed place, which is washed. Fricatio is holsom for the body.
Frication or rubbing the body, is good to be done a mornings after the
purgation of the belly with warm clothes, fro the head to the breast, then to
the belly, from the belly to the thighs, legs, so furth. So that it be done
downward, it is good. And in dry folks to be rubbed with the oil of
camomyll. Coming the head
Coming of the headde is good a mornings, and doth coforte memory, it is
evil at night and open the pores. Cuttinge of hear paring of nails be comely
for men
The cutting of the heer, and the paring of the nailes, clean keeping of ye
ears, and teathe, be not only things comely and honest, but also wholesome
rules of Physic for to be superfluous things of thexcrementes.


Iohn. THe chief thing that I had thought to have demanded, and the very
mark that I would have the to shot at, is to tell me some thing of dietinge
my self with meat drink, in health and sickness.


Humfrey. THere is to be considered in eating and drinking, A consideration to
he had in eating drinking
the time of hunger or custom, the place of eating and drinking, wheit be
cold or hoot, also the time of the year, whether it be Winter or Summer:
Also the age or complexion of the eater, and whether he be whole or sick: also
the things which be eaten, whether they be fish or flesh, fruit or herbs.
Note also the complexions and tempramentes of the said meates, hoot or cold,
dry or moist, and most chiefly, mark the quantity so furth. And like as
lamps doth consume the oil, which is put unto them, for the preseruacio of
the light, although it cannot continue for ever: so is the natural heate which
is with in us preserved by humidity moistnes of blood and fleam, whose
chief engenderer be good meates and drinks. As Auicen says deethica. When
natural heat is queched in ye body, the of necessity, the soul must depart
from the body. For the worckeman can not work when his instrument is gone. A
cause why the soul departs from the body.
So the spirits of life, can have no exercise in the body when there is no
natural heate to work upon. Without meat says Galen: it is not possible for
any ma to live, either whole or sick, and thus to conclude, no vital thing
lives with out refection and sustenance, whether it be animal reasonable, or
animale sensible, without reason or any vital thing in sensible, both man,
beast fisshe, and worm, tree, or herb. All these things be newtrified with
the influence or substance of the four Elements or any of the.


Iohn. Well Humfrey thou know well my coplexion disorder of my diat, what
remedy for me? that have lived like a riyotter.


Humfrey. I Know it well thou art flegmatike, To eat both fish fleashe
together hurteh y^ flematick
and therefore it is lunge or thy meat is digested. When thou dost eat fyshe
and flesh together, it doth corrupt in thy stomach and stink, even so doth
harde chese and cold fruit. And old poudred meates, and raw herbs engender
evil humers, so y^ diversity of quality, and quatitie of divers meates, doth
bring much payne to the stomach, and doth engendre many diseasses, as thou
mast rede in the first book of Galen: Galen.
iuuemetis membrorum. c.iiii. And the Prince him self saith in iii. pri.
Hipocrites.
doc. ii. Ca. vii. Saing nothing is more hurt full then diverse meates to be
joined together. For while as the last is receiving, the first begin to
disgeste. And when the table is garnished with diverse meates, some roasted, some
fried baken, some warm, some cold, some fyshe, some flesh, with sundry
fruit and salletes of divers herbs to please thine eye, remember with thy self
that the sight of them all is better, To fed of diverse sorts of meates
corrupts the body.
then the feding of them all. Consider with thy self thou art a man and no
beast, therefore be teparet in thy feding and remember the wise words of
Salomo. Be not greedy saith he in every eating, Eccl. 37.
and be not hasty upon all meates. For excess of meates, brings sickness,
and glottonie comes at the last into an unmeasurable heat. Through surphite
have many one perished, A good diet prolongs life.
but he that diateth himself temperatly prolongs his life. Therefore gross
fyshe, lambs flesh, the in meates of beasts, raw herbs, pygges brains, and
all slimy meates, be evil for the: but late suppers is worst of all: But
specially if they be long, for it causes painful nights to follow. But Galen
says in his book De ethimia the meates which be without all blame, be those
which be between subtle and gross. Good bread of clean wheat, flesh of
capons or henes, phesantes and patriches, pigeons, and turtill doves, black
birds, and small field birds, roasted veale, or boiled motton: What kinds of
meates doth cause good blood.
These do engender good blood saith Galen. Note also that any other meat
that thou doest eat at supper, although it seem repugnant to aflegmatike
stomach, if thou sleep well after it, and feel no payne, thou mayeste use it as
a meat necessary. And when thou can not sleep well, if the defaute came
through meat, mark yt meat or drink, although it appear plesat, refuse it
as an enemi. And whereas thou hast used evil diet as a custom in abusinge
time, quantity quality, be little, and little, bring thy self into good order
to time, both for thy brekfastes, dinner and supper. Provided always to eat
good things, but not many things. For like as repletio or aboudauce of meat
is an enemy unto the body, and the soul, and brings sudden death: What
hurt comes of an emty stomach when ye go to bed
even so is emptines a shorter of time, aweker of ye brain, a hinderer of
memory an increaser of wind, collar, and melancholy. And oftentimes to many,
brings sudden death also except nature have some thing to work upon, as I
did tel the before: use some light things at breckfast of perfect digestion
within iiii. hours after that receive thy dinner, obseruinge the good order of
diet, drinking wine or beer oftentimes, little attos, A order of dieting
eschewing great draughts of drink, which is used amongst beasts, and mingle
thy meat with mirth, which is ever the best dish, at the board, be thankful
to God. And so leave with an appetite, passing the time wyslie between dinner
supper, with exercise, labour, study or pastime, unto thede of vi. hours and
then begin thy supper, provided that it be shorter then thy dinner, eating thy
meat be little and little: for gredye and sudden eating is hurtful to nature,
as Galen says in his diatory, Galen me trite.
Note also, that thou may eat more meat in winter then in so^er, because
thy natural heate is enclosed with thy body in winter, but vniuersalie sprede
in so^er. Also Choleric men may as lightely disgeste beef, baken, venison.
c. With as much speade and little hurt as the flegmatike ma may eat, rabit,
cheke partridge, The melancholy.
c. But the melancholy ma through the coldness of the stomach have not that
strength in the stomach as he have proptnes in will, to eat things warm and
moist be good for him. The sanguine.
The sanguine man is not so swyfte in this digestion, as the hoot collerike
man is. But notwithstanding, he hath good digestion through the humidity
warmnes of blood, and covets to eat sweet things, which greatly agment yt
blood: therefore sharpe saucis made with vinegar, onnions, barbaries be
wholesome. Purslen, sorrel, small fishes that fedith upon the stones in fair
running waters, cucombers and pure frech wine partly delayed ^ith water, be
good for the said ^anguine men: to keep them fro ^uch increase of flesh.


Iohn. THou hast showed unto me, a very discrete and wholesome order of diet
^articular to my self, and partly to o^her complexios: but what rule or pre^y
Government is for sick folks?


Humfrey. THey that be sodeinlye vexed with sharpe sicknesses, An order for the
di^tinge of such as be sick of sharpe fevers.
must ^aue thin dietes, with water ^ruell, thyn mutton or chickens ^ottage
without any fat or thick^es, violet leues, endiue leaves, ^nd such like
cooling herbs, ^t their drinks be made of Te^ntes, thus do to them that have
^ote harp sickenesses, occasio^ed of choler. And also cold si^pes of endiue,
violets, sugar, ^ater, and vinegar, sodden together be very wholesome. But if
sicknesses be long of continuance, their diet must be the thicker, their
meates made the stronger, specially if their diseases be cold: with the flesh
of cocks, capos, temperate wine, stewed broth, with holsom herbs, as buglos,
burrage, basel, parcely, and fyncle roots, with some maces, daits, damask
prunes, raysins of the sun, Of siroppes and drynkes
and such like. Siropes of Isope and siterion, provided yt they neither take
meat nor medicine immediately before or soon after their fits. Possitale with
clarified herbs, excepted, which they may take, for their comfort,
according to the estate of their disease, for such as be sick, must have
meat, contrary to their complexion. For they that be cold, must have hot
meat, and medicines. And they that be dry, must have moist things. But they
that be hoot must have cold things, for the ardent heate of the fire is
quenched with the moistnes of ye water, so the quatitie of one quality,
overcomes the quality of an other. And in deed, physic saith, the bodies
that be hoot, must be fed with things like, as they that be moist, with
moist things to preserve their moistnes. They that be hoot, with hoot
things to preserve their heate, and such like. But when they do exceade in
heate, cold, moist or dry, then let the qualities of moistnes, be tepered
with ^rienes, As the coplexion is so man requires.
the coldness with warm^es. For like as man deliteth in ^hinges of like, as the
choleric man, choleric things, even so do beasts, fruit, as the
Colloquintida, which is bitter, deliteth in bitter ground. Hot spices deliteth
to grow in hot ground, and every fruit and herb doth delight in the thing
that is of likes even so doth man in his food. But in al things let him beware
of distemperaunce, surfites or replecion, rear suppers dronkenes.


Iohn. But if a man feleth great grief after meates or drinks, what way is
there then for to help him?


Humfrey. Use walking up and down, The. iii. doctrine, The. vii. chap. Moderat
walk after meat profits.
and perhaps that will disgeste, as Auicen says: And Ras^ says, to walk a
hundredth paces after meat, is wholesome, for it comfort digestion, provokes
vryne, and gives one power and strength of stomach (...) eat his supper.
But the coun^aill of Galene, Gallen. in, 6. de accedenti morbo. 1. cap.
must here be obser^ed. Which says: there is no ^eate but it will corrupt
or ^inke, if the body be cast into a ^dayne heate, by strong travel ^ne after
meat, which corrup^on of digestion, is the mother ^f all diseases, and the
beginner ^f all infirmities, Auice. in 13. theo. 3. tract. 3. cap.
as Auicen re^orteth: And if you se this will ^ot help to disgeste your
ingor^ed full stomach, then provoke our self to sleep lying upon our right
side, leaning toward our breast and belly, laying your ^arine hand upon your
breast, as ^uerois saith: To healp digestion by diverse ways.
the power of disge^ion is made strong when a ma sle^eth. For natural heat yt is
dra^e inwardly with warmnes, or ^eat hath power to digest. But sleep ease you
not, provoke vo^mit or fast it out, and this is th^ counsel of many learned
men For it is no marvel althoug^ many meates corrupts one man, Hipo. in
secondo prim. doc. 3. ca. 6 Hec signa declar^nt.
which be of sundry and d^uers workings in the stomach, liver, veins, for
the qualities doth hinder nature as much as the quantities. And take heed,
these signs and evil tokens, be not found in you. The pains of all your
members with idelnes weariness, to go or move your body. Sudden great
blusshynge or readnes in your face, veins swelled and puffed up, read vryue,
and gross skine, extended or stretched out with fulness, like a blown bladder
full pulses, small desire to meat, ill rest and grief in sleep, seming in
sleep to bear some intolerable burdeyne, or dreaming to be specheles, these
be the evil and dangerous tokens of repletio. And of this I give you warning,
for it hath slain as many by abundance, as hunger hath killed through
scarcity.


Iohn. I Have heard say that wholesome air is a great comfort to mans nature,
but corrupt air doth much harm. I shall require you therefore to tell me of
the good and the bad air, that I may learn to use the good, refuse y^ bad.


Humfrey. GAlen in lib. de Sectis. says: A wise phisicio ought to know the
natures of men, of waters, of air, of regions and dwellings, generally,
particulerly to thy self, being a natural English man of birth and education:
this land is very temporat. How be it, our dwellinges in this lad, be variable
as fens, marisses, wodes, heythes, valleis, plains, and rocky places, and
near the sea side. Note which be the most holsomst ayers to dwell in.
But the said Galen gives counsel in his regimet of health, saying: a good
air which is pure and wholesome is that, which is not troubled in standing
waters, pooles. Therefore maris grouds places, where hemp flax, is rotten,
dead carions be cast, or multitudes of people dwelling to together, or houses
environed with stading waters, whereinto iakes or sinks, have issues, or
wallowing of swine, what airs corrupts the blood.
or cario vnbruied or foull houses, or such like places be daugerous,
corrupts the blood, which is worse then enfectio of meat, for ye prince
saith, that al places of concauetes, as fellers, voltes, holes of minerals
where mettels be dug, or houses, or walls, joined together, where as ye
sun with reflection beats in with sudden heate, whose absence brings cold.
This air is distempered, but pleasant clear air, sweet gardens, goodly
hills, in days teperat when one may se far of. Corrupt air brings sondry
diseases.
These be good also, there be certain stars called infortunates, in their
exal^acion, whose influence brings corruption to creatures, rot pesti^ence to
men beasts, poisoning waters, killing of fish, blasting of fruit in trees, and
corn in the ^ields, infecting me with diverse ^iseases, fevers, palses,
dropsis, ^ranses, falling sickenesses, and eprosis. Fervent prayer unto God,
doth mi^tigate h^ wrath.
Against ye said influeces ^l christen men must pray to god (...) be their
defece, for they be gods ^strumetes to punishes earth. Example, we have of
mortal pestilence, horrible fevers, and sweeting sickness, and of late a
general fever, that this land is oft greatly plaged withal. The one must
make a fire in every chymnay within thy house, Sweet air to be made in ye
time of sickness
and burn sweet perfumes to purge this foul air, and now in conclusion to
answer thy question, for the health of dwelling. Auicen saith: to dwell upon
hills is cold. And in valleis comprised with hills, is hot. Upon a hill side
against the north, is cold dry. Toward ye west, gross, moist, very subtle
towards the East. And clear and warm towards the South. And Rasis says: in
his first book Afforien. A ma dwelling ne'er the Sea side, or great waters, can
not live log, nor can not be without weakness of mebers, or blindness, but the
best^ building of a house, Situation best for a house.
is upon a dry ground, and a hill towards the west side, and south west.
doors, and windows open towards the east, and north east, having ne'er unto ye
said house, sweet springs of running waters. From stony or chaukye ground,
which is both pleasant and profitable to the house. For Hippocrates says in
his book of air and water: the second chapter. Cities towns, which is placed
toward the east, be more surer, then the towns builded towards the north, for
temperate air or wind, and sickenesses be les. And in the said book, Auicen
greatly commedeth pleasant rivers running towards the rising of the sun, the
dwellers in such places says he, Pleasant people.
be fair and well favoured: smothe skynned, clear sharpe voices, and thus to
conclude with thee, this shall suffice at this time, what and where, good
pleasant dwelling is. Note also, that thou must observe air in sickness, as
thou must do meat in sickness, cold sicknessis, warm air, dry sicknessis,
moist air, and so in the contraries to them that be sick, and they that be
hole, air of like quality is most wholesome, they that have log sickeness is,
change of air is a great help, both in fevers, dropsies, falling syckenesses
and rumes.


Iohn. I Have found very much disquietnes in my body, when my servant and
laboring family, have found ease, yet we are partakers of one air.


Humfrey. THe cause why thy labouring servants in the field at plough,
moderate exercise a souera^ thing.
pastures, or wood, have such good health, is exercise and labour, thy
disquietnes comes partly of Idleness, and lack of travel, which moderately
used, is a thing most soueraint to nature.


Iohn. I pray yt tel me some thing of exercise.


Humfrey. THe well learned man Fulgentius, Fulgen. in lib. 2.
saith: that exercise is afile and chaufer of the heate natural, which
chasseth away sleep, What profit comes by exercise.
and cosumeth superfluous strength. Of the natural virtues, redeamynge of
time, enemy unto Idleness, dew unto young men, joy of old me, and to say ye
truth: he which doth abstein fro exercise shall lack ye joys of health,
quietness, both of body mind. And Galen says: in his regiment of health, if
we will keep {per}fit health, We must begin of laborrs and moderat travel and
then to our meat and drink, and so for the to sleep, this is the cause why
haukers, shooters, hunters, and ploughmen, and gardeners, c. have so good
dysgestyon and strength of body. Who be stronger armed men then Smiths,
because of the exercise of there arms: stronger boddyed, then carpenters,
which lifts great blocks, and masons which bears great stones, not only
in there youth, but such men will take marvelous traueles in age which to Idle
people seems very painful, Use meketh labour esy.
but unto them selves that travel no pain but pleasure, because of custom.
These people can disgeste gross meates, eating them with much pleasure, and
slepinge soundlye after them, whereas the idle multitudes in Cities noble men's
houses, great nombers for lack of exercise doth abhor meates of light
digestion and dantye dishes, mary in dead they may be very profitable to
phisicions. But if travel be one of the best preserver of health, so is
Idleness the distroyer of life, Apho.
as Auerdis writes, and Hippocrates saying every contrary is removed and
helped by his contrary, as health helps sickness, exercise puts away
Idleness, Idelnes the mother of al mischief
c. But every ^ight mouinge or soft walking may not be called an exercise ^s
Galen says, therefore tennis, ^ansinge, running, wrestling ^idinge upon
great horses, or^eyned, as well for the state of ^ennes health, as for
pleasure, whereunto it is now converted, rather to the hurt of many then the
profit of few, exercise doth occupy every part of the body, quycken the
sprytes, purge the excrenentes boythe by the raynes, and guts, therefore it
must be used before meat, Exercise before meat.
for if strong exercise be used inmediatlie after meat, it conveys
corruption to each part of the body, because the meat is not digested, but
when thou seste thy water, After meat appears some what citiene or yellow
then may thou begin exercise, for digestion is then well. But sick
folks, leene persons, young children, women with child may not much travel. The
exercise of dice, cards, fighting, drinking, knavish raling, of bauderye, and
such like: rather may be called an exercise of deuels, then of men. And thus to
coclud with Salomo, quam pretiosus sit sanitas thesa^s.


Iohn. AFter painful labour and exercise, or disquietnes of the mind, there
was never thing that have done me so much comfort as sleep have done.


Humfrey. AVicen saith, Auicen in can. Of sleep and waking.
that sleep is the rest and quietness of the powers of the soul, of mouinges
and of sensis, without the which man can not live. And trewly sleep is nothing
else but an Image or brother to death, Tulli. in lib. de scene.
as Tulli saith. And if by imaginatio thou ^idest perseue sleping waking weighed
in the balance together, there thou should see them equal in weight, Arist. in
lib. de so.
for Aristotle saith that man do sleep as much as he do wake. But this is to
be considers in sleep, that natural heate is drawn inwardely and digestion
made perfyte, the sprites quieted and all the body comforted, if the true
order of sleep be observed in six points. First a quiat mind without y^
which ether there is no sleep, or else dredfull dremes, turmentinge the
sprittes. Secondly the time of sleep, which is the night, or time of most
quyat sylens, for the day slepes be not good, most chieflye soon after
dinner, except to sick persons or yonge Children, in there times convenient.
Thyrdly, the manner of sleep, Sleep after dinner not helhtful.
that is to eschew the lying on the back, which brings many grenous
passions, and kills the sleper with sodden death. To lye upon the left side
is very euell in the first sleep, but tolerable in the second, but the most
suerest way to make the digestion perfect, is to lye upon the right side,
with one of the hands upon the breast Forthly sleep have the quantety which
must be men, Sleep on the right side is best.
for superflous sleep makes the sprytes gross and dull, and decays memory,
six or eight hours will suffice nature. For like as much watch dries the
body, and is perilous for falling sickness, Gal. sen. 1. terap. ca. 6.
blindness: even so to much sleep is as perilous, for extremes be ever ill.
Fyftlye in the time of cold fevers, the patient must not sleep until the
trimbling fit be paste, for then the hot fit that follows will be extremer
than any other fit, and harde to help, note forthermore yt those bodies that
be full of hot inflammations sleep not well, therefore thy must use things to
extenuat and to make cold, as Tizantes and cold Siruppes, or gentle purging fro
the belly and liver, or finallye to have the median vain opened according to
time, state, and age. Sixtly the chamber must be considered that it be clean,
sweet comely, clothes fit for the time of the year, the age of the people and to
keep the head warm, is very holsom, for in sleep natural heat is drawn into
the body for the brain of nature is cold and moyste. Thy lodging must be
kept clean.
Windows in the south part of the chamber, be not good, it is best for them
which have cold reumes, dropses, c. To lye in close loftes, and for dry
bodies to lye in lieu chambers, in ye time of the Pestilence, often chyfte
chambers is healthful, ^yinge upon the ground in gardens, Note that sleapeers
in fildes in harueste shall be in dannger of quartens in winter.
under trees, or ne'er unto stinking pryuies be hurtful to the body, and this
shall suffice for thine instructio of sleep, provided that thou dust not lunge
^etayne thine vryn. For fear of the stone, and payne in thy ^aynes.


Iohn. THere is nothing which I more fear then the slone, for my father was
sore vexed therewith, what shall ^ mark in mine vryne.


Humfrey. AMong all mortal diseases, ye stone is the greatest, a pre^enter of
time, a deformer of ma, and the chief wekener of the bo^y, and a grievous enemy
to the ^ommon wealth. How many noble men and worshipful personages has it
slain in this realm: The cause of ye stone
many one, which comet^ of hot wynes, spices, long ban^ quettes, repletios,
fulness, costi^nes, warm kepinge of ye back salt meates. c. The remedy whereof
is in al points contrary to these causes, remedies for y^ stone
small wines, teperat beer, or ale, no spices, but hol^ some herbs, as time,
percilly faxifrage. c. Light meals, mo^ chiefly the supper, no baken, no^
rostid thing, but only sodde^ meates, and often times to rela^ the belly with
Cassia fistula, new drawn from the Cane, with sugar and to eschew salt meates
and not to kepeth ye back warm the stone is often found in young children,
which comes of th^ parents, and oftentimes in old folk. Which stones be
engengendred as I have said: besides milk, fruit, herbs, saltfyshe, flesh,
hard chese. c. Now mark well this lesson following, for thine urine.


Iohn. THat shall I gladly, read but softly and I will write thy words.


Humfrey. FIrst in urine.iiii. things Mark
Thus said Actuarii the good clarke, Four thigs noted in vrines.

^uller regentes and contents therein.
Substance gross, thick or thyn.
^ fair light, an urinal puer,
Then of thy sight, thou shalt be suer.
^uller of bright gold or gilt, Golden urine.

^s health of liver, heart and mylte.
^ead as cheri, Read urine.
or safron dry,
^xcesse of meat in him I spy.
^uller grene, or like dark read wine,
^r resembling the liver of a swyne. Grene urine.

^s adustion with fiery heate
^urning the liver and stinking sweat
^addy culler or black as ink, Couller like lead.

^eath draws near as I do think.
^xcept the terms which women have,
Or purging black collar, which many do save
Culler grey as horne, ^
or clear as water,
Is lack of digestion saith mine auther.
Vrin like flesh broth is very good, ^ like (...) be ^h.

Begins digestion and norishe blood.
Subcitrine and yellow be urines next best,
Bread and flesh will well digest.
The vrin that is white and thick, (...) ^ite (...) v^in ^ite (...) vrin.
(...) ^we (...).

Is ever Called flegmaticke.
Melancholy water is white and thin,
The red and gross is Sanguine.
Yellow and thyn, spring from the gall,
Wherein holler rules all.
The swelling liver and brains bloody,
Causes Circle thick with culler ruddy.
But when Circles be thyn and red, ^esar (...) no^

Choler grave the right side of the head.
If ledden Circles swim on the brink,
It is falling sickness as I do think.
When Oil in vrin doth apeer, ^ in ^.

Resolution pinguis draws near.
When Oil apeere in fevers hot,
Dissoluinge the body, (...) ^oti^ ^s la (...) ^rcit. (...) ^ravel (...) ^n.
causes ablote.
But of Periotides, thou felst no pains,
This Oil Pronogstick, consuming raynes.
The gravel red declares for ever,
In dry backyd men duble tertian fever.
When golden gravel aperyth alone,
It hurt the rains but is no stone.
When gravel is of couller whight,
Stone in the bladder works spite.
Contents like small thrides or heers,
Through heate drienes y^ body weers. Cotents in vrin be the chief things to
know diseases.

Consumtion, scabbe, small sport lust,
Is when many heers be mingled with dust.
In the bottom of vains, or vessels great,
^ieth stoppig matter like bran of wheat.
Wherein contents are, like skales of fish
As apereth in the chamber dish.
These signify fevers, and ethics old,
Or skabs, which the bladder do infolde.
Whight froth swymig, comes of wind,
The yelow froth, is of Iaunders kind.
Thus of urines I do conclude,
With words of truth, but meter rude.
Here is also a little of ye signs of the excrementes of the belly.

Our filthy dung, and fex most vile,
The dregs of natures fode, Many cullers in one stole be evil.

When they be diverse coullerid made
The singnes be never good.
If the siege be like unto the meat,
New drawn into the maw, singns of Crudite wind.

Or fleting with flem or burbles great.
The body is wyndy and raw.
The yelowe doth from choler cum, Choleric signs.

The grene is burnt adust,
The black and lady, Signs deadly.
be deadly signs,
That flesh will turn to dust.
The excremet that is in ye jacks cast, Oil excrements signify cosumsion
except the cause be of fat meates.

If it have oil or fat,
Consuption of body than begin,
The chiefest sign is that.
The priue soft well compact,
Made in the acusiomed time,
Is ever good and the hard is ill,
And thus I end my rhyme. Stools soft and hard.


Iohn. ONs I fell into a great sickness, and hitherto I am scant recovered of it,
the surfite was so great, but cousaill was given me, that I should not staye my
self upon the opinion of any one phisicion, but rather upon three, then said
I: to retain three at once, requiquireth great charge, for those men to whom
lives be committed, ought liberal rewards to be given. Then said my friend,
they are good gentlemen and no great takers. What be their names said I? he
answered saying: The first was called doctor diet, Diet. Quiet. Mexima
the second doctor quiet, the third doctor merry ma. I did write their names,
but yet I could not speak with them.


Humfrey. HEtherunto I have said something that shall well suffice for the to
know doctor diat, as for quiet, and merry man, they lie in no phisicions
hands, to give, but only in Gods. It were better to lack riches, the to
want quietness mirth.
For small it helps to any man, to have honour, riches, fame, conning. c. And
in the mean time, to want quietness, and mirth, which be the chief friends.
Tendrist nuryshes, holsomest phisicios, most pleasant musicions, friendliest
companions, to nature, pleasant birds singing in the branches, be more happier
then ravening Cormerantes, and gready hawk, which with pains inchaseth
their prais. The quiet labes be ever happier in their kind, then ye greedy
rauining foxes, wolves and lions, Many apt similitudes or mettophers.
which never cese, vexing them selves, to kill living things for their fode. The
poor oyster, lurking under the rock, or sand, which is never removed of
strong ebbes nor fluddes, is farther from travel continual pains, then the
horrible whale, most fearful to fishes. The low shrubs, or bushes growing ne'er
to the ground, be ever in more safeguard then the lusty high flourishing trees,
spread with pleasant branches, which be subject to every strong wind. The
poor boots in harbour, be in less peryl then the fikle rich ships, tossed up
down on the cruel fluddes. What shall I say: but this, that ye miserable ragged
beggar called Irus, was more happier in his poverty with quietness mirth, then
was the glotonus beast, mosterous man king Sardanapal{us}, with all his gold
glory court of ruffians, Curticens with Cam to an end most shameful.
Diogenes, I warrant you was not inferor to Alexander, in the state of Happiness,
and have left as great a fame behind him, saving that Alexader, was a more
cruel murderer then Diogenes a chaste liver. The pleasure of poor me.
In dede ye poor sylly shepehard, doth pleasantly pipe with his sheep, when
mighty princes do fight among their subjects, break many slepes in gold
beds, when bakers in bags, brewers in bottels, do snorte upon hard straw,
fearing no sudden mishap. The great pains and secrete grieves that
disquieted minds, do daily sustain, be not much unlike unto the
infernal turmentes, The turments of the mind
that the wicked do feel: Physic unto an extreme troubled mind (say what
they list:) helps as little, as to aplye a plaster to the breast, or
head, of a dead body, to reuocate the spirits of life or soul again. The
syckenes of the body must have medicine, the passions of the mind, must have
good counsel. What pleasure hath a condened man in music, or a dead man in
physic? Through thought many are ^ylled.
Nothing at all God knows. Oh howe many men have been caste away by
thought, and most for loss of estimation, and some of other affections of
the mind, as inordinate love, or couetyng things that they can not get, Ire
is a grievous passion.
or optaynynge those things that they can not keep, or ire of other mes
prosperity or. good hap. Tul. in tuscu. li. 3 Ouid. in lib. 2. metha.
As Tully says: Ouide, as fine in Poetry, as Apelles was in painting,
discribeth this vile passion of Ire, with a pale face, len body, skoulyng
look, gnasshing teeth, venym tongue, choleric ^tomacke, tongue full of
poison, ^ngratefull, seldom smiling, ^ut at mischief, outwardly ap^earynge
as it were quiet, in^ardly the serpent gnaws, fret ^eth devours. c These me
be evils incarnat, Devils incarnat.
beginning hell in his life, most enemies to them ^lues, if they did behold
them ^lues in a glass in the time of ^eir tempests, A good face in a glass.
should nottheir ^untenaunces, be more feare^ll to the selves then their Ire,
hurteful to others? yes, and perhaps make the staring made, in seeing such a
devils image, therefore let wise me be of this mind. First to think that they
would heue no man be Ireful against them or disdain them, even so let them do
to others. Secondly let them think, ^eter to be spited then pitied in some
casis.
it is better to be spited, then pitied, for every prosperus felicite, has
his enemy wating upon him. The foal hates the wise. The wise man, pities the
foal: well couit rather to be spyted then pitied, the wretch envies the worthy
man, and so forth: Only except aduersite, extreme misery, al prosperus me
have enemies, let this suffice, consider what Galen saith, Galen. de rege sani
libr. 1.
that immoderat I reful motions, cast the body into a choleric heate, whereof
comes fevers, and all hot diseases dangerous to the body, In come. 32 septi.
problem.
of this writes Petrus de eba^o. The passion of the mind called dread or
fear, is when the blood and sprites be drawn inwardly, and makes the
outward parts pale trimblinge ^o this, by sides pitiful experies, Haliabas,
Galen, and Aristotel do wit^es the same. Hali. in. 5 theo. ca. vltimo. Ga. 1.
qui. de acc. morbo. c. 6. Ari. 10. proble.
The suddayn passion of joy, or gladness, is clean contrary to fear. For the
heart ^endeth fourth ye spiritual blood, ^hyche in weak persons, the art can
never recover again ^ut death incontinent, as Galen ^yth, and as we may se by
ex^erience: As in the metinge of ^en, and there wives, Children ^nd there
parents, which ether ^y prison, or banyshment, were ^ythoute al hope, ever to
se each ^ther, and in joy of metynge the delating, spreding of ye hart blood,
have caste the body into swoninge. And thus my friend Iohn I do conclude upon
certain affections of the mind, wisshing doctor diat, quiat merry man to help
the, when thou shalt need. For mirth is beloved of musicions, Hudson.
plesante birds fishes as the Dolphin. What is mirth honestly used? an image
of heue. A great lordship to a poor ma, and preserver of nature, Salomon
saith. Eccl. c. 30
Non est oblectatio super cordis gaudium, c. And yet I say.

THe Ireful man is ever a thall,
The joyful mind is happest of al.
Zele burn like flames of fiere,
When honest mirth, have his desire.
Love well mirth but wrath despise:
This is the counsel of all the wise.

Iohn. I Wold very fain know the natures of sorten simples, and first what is
worm wood.


Humfrey. A Common known herb it is of diverse kinds as Poticum. Romanum, c.
It is hot in the first, dry in the second degre, and it is very bitter, and
being ^ried, kepeth clothes frome wor^es and moths, and the sirope ^hereof,
The virtues of wormwood.
eaten before wine, pre^erueth men frome dronkennes, ^f it be sodden in vinegar
it will ^elpe ye sores that bredes in the ^ares, being laid warm upon ^t, is
good to be drunk against Appoplexia, Opthalmia. Which is (...) sickness of the
eye, is greatly ^elped with the wormwood, Auic. li. 2. Sim. 2.
if it ^e stamped made luke warm ^yth rosewater, and laid upon ^he eye, and
covered with a clean ^yked walnut shell, the sirope hel^eth the bloody flixe,
it doth ^elp a cold stomach if it be broke ten days together, every
morning two sponfull of the sirope, is good against the dropsy, every day
drunk, two ounces fastinge, and thus says Auicen, figs, cocle, wormwood,
nitur, stamped together, and made in a plaster, is good against the disease of
the splen, and also kills worms in the belly, used in the foresaid manner,
one drame of the powder may be drunk at once in wine, it haith many moo
godly virtues.


Iohn. What is yt propeties of Anes seeds.


Humfrey. IT is much like unto fenel sede, and is called Roman fenel, that is
warm and sweet, and hot in the second, Gal. de sim.
and dry in the third degre, the new sedes is ye best. It ingendereth vital
sede, opens the stoppinge of the raynes and matrixe, being drunk with
Tysantes, or clean temperate vine.


Iohn. What think thou of mouse ear?


Humfrey. AN herb comenlye known, cold and moist in the first ^egre, as
Gallen saith, the decoc^ion of this herb sodden in wa^er with sugar, is good
against ^he falling sickness, being often ^imes drunk, put a lefe thereof ^nto
the nose it will provoke ster^utation, or nesinge which won^erfullie doth cleanse
the vayns.


Iohn. (...) wold fain know what is Chyken ^ede?


Humfrey. Almost every ignorant woman doth know this herb, but their be of
it diverse kinds, they be very good to keep woudes from impostumations, The
operation of chiekin wed.
stamped, and applied unto them, and draws corruption out of woudes, and
sodden with vinegar, doth drove fleume out of the head, if it be often warm
put into the mouth and spit it out again. In this same manner it helps the
teeth, and soden in wine and so drunk, it will cleanse the reigns of the
back.


Iohn. What is Sorrel, might I know of the and the property thereof?


Humfrey. THy Coke doth right well know it, The properties of Sorrel.
and all they that make grene sauce, but ye description I leave to Dioscorides,
and Leonard futchius, not only in this herb, but in al other, and to tell
tell thee the virtue I will, it is cold and dry in the second degree, it
also stops: it is like on dive in property, because it over comes choler,
and is much commended, it helps the yelow iaundis, if it be broke with small
wine or ale, and also quenches burning fevers: to eat of the leues every
morning, in a pestilece time is most wholesome, it they be eaten fasting. This
herb doth Dioscorides, Galen, and Auicen, greatly commend, besides the
great learned men of this time.


Iohn. What is Planten, or Waybrede?


Humfrey. THe greater Planten is the better, The properties of plantain^
it has seven great veins, it is cold dry, the seed of it, broke with
read wine, stops the bloody flixe: the roots sodden and drunk in wine,
stops the bloody Flixe: the roots and leaves being sodden with sweat
water, and with Sugar or borage water, and given to him that hath an Ague,
either tertian or quartaine, two hours before his fit: prove this, for thus
have I helped many, it is very comfortable for children that have great Flixes
Agues and is a friend unto the liver, this herb is greatly praised of the
Doctors.


Iohn. What is Camomill, and the operation thereof?


Humfrey. THis herb is very hot, it is drunk against cold winds, and raw
matter being in the guts, the Egiptians did suppose it would help all
cold Agues, and did consecrate it to the sun, To what purpose camomell
serves.
as Galen says: Also if it be tempered and streined into white wine, and
drunk of women, having ye child dead within the body, it will cause present
deliverance, it does mightelie cleanse the bladder, and is excellent to be
sod in water to wash the feet: the oil is precious as is declared
hereafter.


Iohn. HOppes be well beloved of the beer brewers, howe do the Phisi^ions
say to them?


Humfrey. THere be which doth cool, be called Lupilum, those that we have be
hot and dry, Fucchi.
bitter, sower, hot, saith old herbals. And ^ucchius saith: they cleanse fleume
^holer, and ye water between the skin and flesh, the sirupes will cleanse
gross raw fleume from ye guts, and is good against obstructios sodden. If
the juice be dropped in the ear, it takes the stink away of rotten sores,
the roots will help the liver and spleen, being sodden, and broke: the beer
is very good for flegmatike men.


Iohn. What is Sage, for that I love well?


Humfrey. THere be two kinds of sage: A woderfull gift given to Sage.
they be herbs of health, and therefore they be called Saluia, this herb is
hot dry, provokes urine, cleanses ye matrix, stops the blood in a woude.
If it be put in a pig, it dries the humours, that would engeder fleume, it
is good against the palsy: oftentimes eaten, or sodden in wine, it will help
cleanse ytche, scabs, and filth from the pudent and secret mebers. Aetius doth
greatly commend this herb, and the excellent regiment of Salern, where it
says Cur moritur homo, cui saluia crescit in horto, enquiring why men do die
that have Sage growing in gardens. But truly, An. in. 3. 1 cap. sing.
neither Physic, herb, nor running, can make man immortal: but assuredly
Sage is wholesome for old folks, to be put in to their meates, for it cleanses
fleam from the senewes, which fleam will relaxe the synewes: The wine of Sage
drunk upon an empty stomach, is wholesome for flegmatike persons, or them which
have the falling sickness or dropsy.


Iohn. What is Pilopodie, that grows upon the Oak tree?


Humfrey. IF this herb be sodden with Beetes and Malowes, Of polopodie.
in the broth of a hen, and drunk, it will loose the belly, and cleanse
fleume: the root of this herb being dry, and beaten into fine powder, and
draw into the nose thrilles, helps a disease called Polipus.


Iohn. I Have heard talk of Hoorhounde, I would fain hear of his working.


Humfrey. IT is a herb hot and dry, if it be sodden with fair water, What
de ^eases hor ^und^peth.
sugar or honey, and streyne it, this drink doth cleanse the stomach from
stynkynge fleume, it is an excellent herb for women, to cleanse their month
terms, the water of this, is good to help them which have a moist reume
falling from the head, upon the lunges, being often drunk: but it is hurtful
to the bladder and raynes, the sirope thereof does cleanse the kings evil:
and also put into the ears, doth greatly comfort the hearing if the ears be
troubled: and stamped with honey, and applied into the eyes, it cleanses the
sight.


Iohn. What is Verben?


Humfrey. IT is called the holy herb, Of verb^ his properties.
it dries and binds, if it be sodden with vinegar, it helps a disease
called saint Anthonies fire, oftentimes washing the pained place, the leues of
Verb and Roses, and fresh swynes grease stamped together, will seace payne
and grief in every wound, and will keep wounds from corruption: it is good
for people, that have the tercian, or quartaine Agues. And thus says
Dioscorides: Dioscorides.
moreover, he says, the weight of a Dram of this herb, with three half
penyes weight of Olibbulom, and put in nine ounces of old wine, tempered
together, and drunk forty days of this quantity fasting, it will help a
disease, called the kings evil, or pain in the throat.


Iohn. What is Few, or herb Grace?


Humfrey. I Tell thee, this herb is very hot and bitter, and doth burn
because of his hotenes in ye third degree: if a little of this few be stamped,
and sodden with wine, and drunk, it is an excellent medicine, against poysone
and pestilence, with roses, and vinegar, and few stamped together, Rue good
against poison.
and put in forred clothe or biggen, applied unto the temples of the head or
forehead, do seace grievous pains in the head. And in like mauer it heals ye
bitinges of serpents or dogs, stamped with vinegar: many nice people cannot
abide it, crying fie, it stinks: The seade of this herb beaten in powder,
put in fresh clarified butter, pitch melted together, is good for the to
drink ^hat are bruised.


Iohn. What is burnet.


Humfrey. IT is of the nature of five finger, The properties of Gurnet.
dry and byndyng, and not moist, as many saith: stamp it put it to the eyes,
doth take away the dropping and pricking, and doth heal wounds, and is good
to drink for the tercian Ague.


Iohn. What is Dandilion?


Humfrey. IT is temperate, The virtues of Dandelio
cold and dry: with Roses and vinegar, tempered together, it helps ye head
in hot diseases. The sowthistle called Soncus, hath the same virtue, and so
hath Suckery: if they be sodden, they lose the belly, and quenches heate
which burns in the stomach, and defends the head fro hot smoking vapours,
and purges yelow chouller, and rebates venerous and fleshelye heate, and is
good to be sodden and drunk in hoate burning Agues, though this herb be
commonly known, and counted of many as a vile weed, yet it is reported of
Dioscorides, to be an excellent herb.


Iohn. What is Spynnage?


Humfrey. AN herb much used in meat, cold and moist, in the first degree,
it mollifies and makes soft the belly, it is good for them that be hot and
dry, and ill for flegmatike men.


Iohn. What is Cowcumbers?


Humfrey. THey be trewly in the second degree, very moist and cold: The
seeds be good to be given in hot sicknesses: the powder of the said seeds,
For what purposes cocober serves.
drunk in clean wine, is good against divers passions of the heart: this
fruit will cause one to make water well the root dried in powder thereof drunken
in water and honey, provokes vomit: if they be moderately eaten, they bring
good blood, tempered with honey, and anointe the eyes, that helps a disease
called Epinictidas, Epinictidas.
which troubles me with strange sights in the nights: the best of this fruit
is, which bears the best seeds the savour of that is not wholesome:
mellons, citrons, pampans, and this kind of pepons or great apples be much
used in Englad, and is more common, then profitable, because they use to eat
them raw. English men being borne in a tempered region, inclining to cold,
may not without hurt eat raw herbs, roots and fruit plentiful, as many
men, which be borne far in the south parts of the world, which be most
hot of stomach, therefore let them eat these fruit boiled or baken with
honey and pepper, and fencle seeds or such like, there be an other hot kind
of bitter cucombers, which do purge.


Iohn. What is Garlic.


Humfrey. Garlic is very hot and dry in ye fourth degre: The properties of
Garlic his operation.
it troubles the stomach, it is hurtful to the eyes head, it increases
drie^ies, but it will provoke urine, is good to be laid upon the by^inge of a
snake, or edder, it is good for the emeroides applied to the sore place, being
first stamped, if it be sodden, the stink is taken from it, but the virtue
remains to be eaten against the coughs, pains in the lunges, it cutteth and
consumes corrupt fleume, and brings sleep. It is not good for hot men, nor
women with child, or Norces, giving milk to children: but Galen calls it
the common peoples treacle, if sanguine men do eat much of it, it will make them
to have read faces, but it is a special remedy against poison.


Iohn. What is Onions?


Humfrey. THey do make thin the blood, The diversity of Onions their
properties.
and bring sleep, they be not good for choleric men, the long onion is more
behemeter then ye ^ounde, and the read more then ^he white, the dry more then
the grene, and the raw more then the sodden, or preserved in salt although
they cause sleep, very painful and troublous hot in the third degree, and
warm in ^he stomach, cleanses the stomach, and brings good colour to the
face, and helps the grene sickness, provokes urine, ^pened the emoroides. If
they ^e sodden in vinegar, and laid ^arme to them: pele of the rind ^nd cut
it at both the ends, ^nd cast it into fair warm wa^er, and let it lie an
hour or two, ^nd then slice it, this takes away ^e veamet sharpnes of it. Few,
^alte, honey, one onion staped to ^ether, is a goodly plaster to lay upon y^
biting of a dog: leekes purges the blood in march, and payneth the heed, and
be not greatly praised, for their i^ juice Adoge says, Dioscorides, the head
being anointed with the juice thereof kepeth hear frome falling: thereis
much variety of this onion amongst wryters saith Plini, but this shall
suffice


Iohn. What is Lettise.


Humfrey. IT doothe mightylye increase milk in women's breasts, The properties
of Lettise.
and therefore is called lettisse, as Martial saith, first shall be given to the
virtue and power to increas^ milk in the breasts every hour^ lettis is an
herb cold and mois^ and is comfortable for a hoate stomach, brings sleep,
mollifies the belly: the drier it be eat the better it is, I mean if it be
not much washed in water, adding clean sallet Oil, Sugar, and vinegar to
it, it abates carnal lust: and much use of it, dulls the sight, the seed
is precious against hot diseases broke with tisans: There is an herb called
Rocked gentle, which partly smells like a Fox, which is very hot, an
increaser of sede, which herb must always be eat with Lettis. The root
there of sodden in water, will draw broken boones, and will help the cough in
yonge children.


Iohn. What he Myntes?


Humfrey. MYntes be of two kinds, The properties of mintes.
garden and wild Myntes, they be hot unto the third: does dry in the
second degre. Garden Mintes is best: ye powder of this with the juice of
Pomgarnites, stops vomits, helps sighig, cleanses hoate choler. Three
branches of this sodden with wine, doth help repletio drunk fasting. This
juice tepered with good triacle, eaten of children a mornings, will kill worms,
and stamped with salt, apply it to yt biting of a dog, it will heal it: It
is wholesome sod with wyndy meates, and sodden in posset al^ with fenill, it
helps collike, it increases vital sede. It is not best for choleric
complexions, but good for flegmatike, and indifferent for melancholy: and it
will stop blood, stamped and applied to the place. The juice of Mintes is
best to mengle in medicine against poison: the pounder of Mintes is good in
pottage flesh, sodden with Oximel, it cleanses fleume.


Iohn. What is Sention?


Humfrey. IT is of a mixed temprament, it coleth and partly cleseth if it be
chopped and sod in water, and drink it with your potage, it will heal ye
grief of the stomach, purge it from hoate choler: his down with saffron
cold water, stamped put in the eyes, it will dry the running drops, stamped
plaster wise, it helps many grievous wounds.


Iohn. What is Pursleyn?


Humfrey. Cold in the third, The operation of Purslein
and moist in the second, if it be stamped with steped Barley, it makes a
goodly plaster to cool the head, eyes, and liver, in agues burning heate. To
eat of it, stops Flixes, and quenches burning choler, and extingwysh
venerus lust, and greatly helps the raynes and bladder, and will kill round
worms in the belly, and comfort the matrix against much fleume: And the
juice is good to drink in hoate Fevers, it may be preserved with salt, then it
is very good with roasted meates. Plini says: it is supposed to make the sight
blunt and weak, further he says: that in Spain a great noble manne, whom
he did know, did hang this Pursleyn root in a thread commonly about his
neck, which was much troubled, of a lunge sickness and was healed.


Iohn. What is Mugwort.


Humfrey. MVgworte and Fetherfoy, The operation of Mugworte.
Tansey, be very hoate and dry in the second degree: Mugwort, sporge and
oil of Almondes, tempered plaster wise, and applied cold to the sick pained
stomach, will bring health. It is good in bathes says Galen: it is wholesome
for women, it cleanses warms and comfort, and breketh the stone. Plini
says: it is good against serpents, and wholesome for travelling men, if they
carry it, it comfort them from worms. Tansey doth myghtely cast worms fro
children, broke with wine: A cold plaster staped laid upon the belly of a woman
whose child is dead within her, it will seperate the dead child from the
living mother, causing her to niese with Betony leues.


Iohn. THere is an herb commonly used to the great relief of many called
Cabage, is it so good as it is reported of?


Humfrey. CAbage is of two properties, The operation of Cabage.
of bynding the belly, and making laxative: the juice of Cabages lightly boiled
in fresh bief broth, is laxative, but the substance of this herb is harde of
digestio, but if it be twyse sod, the broth of it will also bind the belly,
if it be tempered with Allu. This herb hath virtue to cleanse a new read
Leprosy, laid upon the sore place in the manner of a plaster. Aristo. 3.
perproble Auecen. 2 can. Rasis. 3. ^lman.
But to conclude of this herb, the broth of it hath virtue to preserve from
dronkenes, as Aristotle, Rasis, and Auicen, doth report, eaten before drinking
time.


Iohn. What is Philopendula?


Humfrey. IT is an herb hoate and dry, Of philopendula.
if it be sodden in white wine drunk, it dries up windy places in the guts,
cleseth the rains in the back and bladder.


Iohn. What is Agremonie?

DIoscorides says: The operation of Agremonie.
that if this herb with swynes grease be stamped together, and laid upon an
old rotten sore being hot, it hath virtue to heal it: the sede of this herb
drunk with wine, is good against the biting of Ser^entes, stopping of the
liver, and bloody flixe.


Iohn. SOme men say that the herb Dragon is of great virtue.


Humfrey. THe juice of it saith Dioscorides: The virtue of dragon.
dropped into ye eye, doth cleanse it, and gives much might unto the eyes of
them which have dark sights, the water of this herb has virtue against
the pestilence. If it be drunk blud warm, with venis triacle, ye savor of this
herb is hurtful to a woman newly conceived with child. Plenij saith, that who
so bears this herb upon them, no venomous Serpent will do them harm. This
herb is hot and dry.


Ihon. THere is a very sweet flower, called a violet, is it so profitable, as
it is pleasant?


Humfrey. SImeon Sethi reports, The virtue of Violet
that it doth help against hot inflammations of the guts, head and stomach,
if the cause be of burning choler. Either the water sirrope, or concerue of
the said violets, either eaten or drunk, in the time of any hot passion. But
undoubtedly, it offends the hart, because of the coldness, the savour of the
flowers be plesaunte, the oil that is made of this herb, have virtue to bring
quiet slepes to them which have grievous hot pain in the head.


Ihon. What is the virtue of the pleasant white Lilly?


Humfray. DIoscorides saith, that the Oil of Lillies doothe mollifye the
Sinews and the mouth of the Matrixe, Of white lily of his operation.
the Iuse of Lillies, vinegar and Honey, sodden in a brazen Vessel, doth make
an ointment to heal both new and old wounds. If the root be roasted and
stamped with Roses, it makes a healing plaster against burning of fire: the
same rote roasted, hath virtue to break a Pestilence sore, applied hoate unto
the sore place, is dry in ye first degre. The oil of water Lilies be moist,
sufferent against all hoate diseases, to anointe the ardent places, and doth
reconcile quiet sleep, if the forehead be anointed therewith.


Iohn. IN the time of the pestilence, my wife makes me a medicine, of an herb
called Centauri, doth she well or not?


Humfrey. PLini says: Of y^ virtue of Cetaurye.
that the Sirupe of this herb drunk with a little vinegar and salt, doth
cleanse the body: The leaves and flowers, be of great virtue, to be sodden
drunk against al raw humours of gross sieume, watery or windy: it doth cleanse,
cruent, or bloody matter within the bodies of men or women. The powder of this
herb is good in pessaries, for women, causing the dead child to depart from
the mother, and is wholesome against the pestilence, in the time of winter, and
is hot and dry.


Iohn. We beutifie and make pleasant our wyndowes with Rosemary, using it
for small other purposes.


Humfrey. ROsemary is an herb of great virtue, Of Rosemarye.
hoate and dry, sod in wine, and broke before meat, it doth heal the kings
evil, or pains in the throat, as Dioscorides and Galen says: the savour of
it doth comfort the brain and heart: y^ flowers of Rosemary is an excellent
cordial called Anthos.


Ihon. IS pulial royal, an herb of any value, or a wed of contemption?


Humfrey. IT is an herb of much virtue and profit: The operation of Puliall
royal.
hot and dry in the third degre. Diascorides saith, if this herb be sodden
with honey and Aloes and droncke, it will cleanse the liver, and pourge the
blood: most chiefly it helps the lunges. Simeon Sethi saith, if women drink
it with white wine It will provoke and cleanse the terms menstrual, and is a
very wholesome pot herb.


Ihon. What say thou unto Muslarde.


Humfrey. PLinius doth greatly lawd it, The operation of Muster
saying, that there is nothing, that doth pearse more swiftlier into the
brain then it doth. Honey, vinegar, and mustard, tempered together is an
excellent gargarisma to purge the head, teethe, and throat. Mustard is good,
against al the diseases of the stomach or lunges, wind, ^leume, and rawnes
of the guts, and conduces meat into the body: provokes urine, helps the
^alsye, waisteth the quartaine, ^rieth up moist rumes: applied plaster wise
unto ye head. Honey and mustard helps the cough, and is good for them that
have ^he falling sickness, notwithstanding the common use of mustard is an
enemy to ye eye. Many more virtues have I read of mustard, but the occasion
of ^ime has vnhappilye preuened, not only my large discriptio (...) this:
but also in many other ^mples, which heareafter, I entende largely to write
upon if, it please God to permit me.


Iohn. They say that Buglos is very holsom.


Humfrey. IT is an herb most temperate between hoate and cold, The virtues
of ^uglos.
of an excellent virtue, a comforter of yt heart, a purger of Melancholy, a
quieter of the Frencie, a purger of the urine, wholesome to be drok^ in wine, but
most effectual in sit (...). Dioscorides and Galen, doet greatly commend
this herb, that doth daily experience well prove.


Iohn. What is thy mind of sweet Basell*


Humfrey. THis herb is warm in the sconde degre, The virtues of ^asell.
having the virtue of moistues, and if it be sodd^ in wine with Spicenarde,
broke it is good against dropsyes, winds, fleume, coldness of the hart,
hardness of the stomach, the savour of Basil, doth comfort the brain, and
hart, the use of this herb in meates, doth decay the sight.


Ihon. The plain people of the country will say, that those flowers which be
pleasant in smelling, be oftentimes unwholesome in working, the rose is
pleasant in sense, what is it in virtue?


Humfray. IT hath an odour most plesat hath virtue to cole and bind. The
virtue of Roses.
The water is good to make Manus Christ, many other goodly cordials, Roses
and vinegar applied unto the forehead, do bring sleep: conserve of Roses,
have virtue to quench burning choler, and to stay the rage of a a hoot fever,
oil of Roses, Vinegar, and the white of an egg, beaten together, doth not
only quench sacra igms, but also bring a mad man into quietness, if his
forehead be well anointed therewith, after the recept of Pills of chochi, in
the time of the pestilence, there is nothing more cofortable then the savor of
Roses.


Iohn. What say thou of Sauery.


Humfrey. IT is hot and dry in the third degree, The virtue of Sauery.
if the green herb be sodden in water or white wine and drunk, these be his
virtues to make the liver soft, to cleanse dropsies, could choughs, cleanses
women's diseases, and seperateth the dead child from the mother, as
Diascorides and Galen* saith, also Germander is not much unlike the virtue of
this herb.


Iohn. But for troubling of you, I would be glad to know your mind of
Time, and a few of other herbs.


Humfrey. IT is vehamente of heat with dryness in the third degree. The
virtue of time.
Diascorides saith, if it be drunk with vinegar and salt, it pourgeth fleume,
sodden with honny or meide, it has virtue to cleanse the lunges, breast,
matrix, rains and bladder, kills worms.


Iohn. What saiste thou of Parslye and Saxifrage?


Humfrey. THey have virtue to break the stone, Parslye is hot in the second
degree, and dry in the midst of ye third. The virtue of Persly saxifrage
The sede drunk with white wine, provokes the menstruall terms, as
Diascorides saith: also smalledge has the like virtue.


Iohn. What is thy judgement of Liuerworte?


Humfrey. IT has virtue to cleanse and cool. The virtue of liuerwort.
Dioscorides saith, it doth heal the wounds of the liver, and quenches the
extreme heat thereof, tempered with honey and eaten, doth healpe a disease
called regius morbus, and pains of the throat and lunges.


Iohn. What is Bettony.


Humfrey. THey be of diverse kinds Leonardus futchius doothe call the sweet
Gilliuers by the names The virtue of Betony.
of Bettonye, but the one seems to talcke of that, which is commonly known
of the people, called the land Bettony, which has the virtue to kill worms
within the belly, and healpeth the quarteine, cleanses the matrixe, and has
the virtue to heal the body within. If it be bruised, it is of great effect,
if it be sodden with worm wodde in white wine, to purge fleume, and is hot in
the first degre, dri in the second.


Iohn. I Have harde small commendations of Beetes.


Humfrey. THey be of two kinds, and be both praise worthy, The virtue of
Betes.
Simeon Sethi, writes that they be hoate and dry in the third degre, ye
white Beete is ye best, they have virtue to cleause, as niter has but has
evil Iuse, the iuse of this herb with honey applied into the nose, do pourge
the head, it is a wholesome herb in pottage, if it be well sodden, or elsse it
is noisome to thee Stomach. If it be parboyled and eaten with Vinegar, it is
good against the stoppinge of the liver. Notwithstanding the iuse of this
herb, do stop the belly, being simply taken.


Iohn. What is Maiden hear?


Humfrey. IT is an herb between hoot and dry, The virtue of maiden hear
if it be sodden in wine, it breaks the stone, it cleanses the Matrixe,
brings down the secondes, as Diascorides and Galen saith, the best doth
grow upon harde rocks.


Ihon. What is Mellil^t?


Humfrey. IT has virtue to ripe, The ver* of melilot
and is more hotter then cold, Mellilot, flex seed, Rose leaves, Capher and
woman's milk tempered together, doth make a goodly medicine against the hot
inflammation of the eyes. If this herb be droncke with wine, it doth molifye
the hardness of the stomach and liver, the most excellent plaster against
the pains of the splen, doth Mesue describe, which is made of Mellilotte.


Ihon. BE peas and Beans, any thing beneficial to nature?


Humfrey. Beans be more groaser and fuller of wind then peas be, Thoperation
of peas and Beans.
makes euel matter, except they be well sodden and buttered, and so eaten, with
the whitest sweetest Onions that may be gotten. Because they be harde of
digestion: howe be it, they do make fat, and partly cleanse, yet they are
not to be compared with tender white peasen well sodden and buttred, or else
made in pottage with garden mintes and gross pepper, which have virtue to
cleanse the rains of the, But Hu^tels and ^tares be Melancholy.
back and bledder. Liutelles be of the same virtue. Barlye being clean
hulled and sodden with mylcke clean water sugar, makes a very comfortable
wholesome pottage, for hoate choleric persons or young people. And of this
is (...) ^che used in the North parts of Englande, and is called big ^ele.


Iohn. What be the virtues of the leekes roots of Radish, Turnips, Par^neps,
Rapes or Naues?


Humfrey. LEekes be evil, Leekes and their properties.
engender painful sleep: but eaten with honey, then they purge blood, but
roots eaten raw, breads ill ^uice, therefore being first sodden, and the
water cast away, Of the virtues of radish with other rotes.
then sodden with fat mutton, or tender fat bief, these roots norysheth
much. Rapes, Naues, be wyndy: Turnips, causes one to spit easily that have
corrupt stomachs, but makes raw juice. Carettes do expulse wind: Radish roots
provokes vryne, but be very evil for flegmaticke persons, having grief in
their bones or joints, and must be eaten, in the beginning of the meal, as
Galen saith, Galen de alimen.
but many do use the in the end of meals, find ease as sir Thomas Eliot that
worthy knight and learned man reports in his good book called the Castle of
health. And thus I do conclude of those herbs and roots that I have writ
upon. Herbs in gedereth melancholy.
Admonisshyng thee, that herbs pulls, and roots be all wyndye, engederers of
melancholy, in grocers of the blood, eccept lettis, bourage, purslen.
Therefore the gross binding together seething of herbs in brothes pottage, be
more holsomer then the fine choppynge of them. Thus Iohn I have declared unto
the, (...) virtues of certain herbs, which if thou will follow, and ^serue
my rules in the, I doubt (...), but thou shalt receive much ^rofyt thereby. I
would have al^ taught the some pretty ways or Distillation of Waters, but ^n
prevented therein, Vulstadius.
and I am ^ad thereof. Forasmuch as thou ^alt se very shortly, Thesaurus Euono
mij.
booth The^urus Eu^nomi and Vlstadius ^hich be exelent learned men in (...) yt
Science, wherein I am sure you will much delight. For I ensure the, the like
books never were setfurth in our mother tongue, with the lyuelye fashion of
the furnasses, and also of the Stillitories.


Iohn. VHat will digest and purge choler, Fleume, and Melancholy, provoke
ernutacio, and stop Flixes, tel me?


Hufry. Things to digest choler. ENdsue, Purslein, Poppy, Sorrel, Mercury,
Lyuerwort Whaye, Tesantes, Tarmeryndes The four cold seeds of gourdes and
Cucubers. Sanders, Buttermilke, or the milk which comes of the pressing of
the chese.
Topurge choler. MAanna. 6. orames. Rubarbe.ii. drames or.iii. but put into in
fusion from.v. to.vii. Pills of aloe Wild hops, Syrrup of wormwode. Syrrupe
of s^mitory. Diaprunes.
The disgester of fleume. PVulyall, Myntes, Betony, Egrymony, Mugw^rt, Honey,
Pepper, Hysoppe, Pimpernel, Ieniper berri^ Neppe. Finkel, Persely rotes,
Smallage.
Purgers^ fleume A Garick infused fro.ii to.v. drammes Sticaus, The myrabolanes
of al the kinds. Polipody of y^ oak. Centory. Horhound, Maiden here.
^ood ^rgers Melacholy. ELeberus Niger. Capers, Lapis Lazule. Scene of Alexader.
Borage, Hearts tongue, Honey sodden in sweet wine Savoury, Time, Trosses of
cappers, of Coloquintida, and of wormwod.
Good things to provoke drine. PEruye, Time, Saxifrage, Cassa fistula. Rams
Radix, The flesh of an hare, Pills of Tyribenthen. Maiden hear The beris of
the Eglentyn. Bromseede.
Comforters for ye brain to smell upon ROses, Violettes, Iellouers, in summer,
but in winter Cloves Spike, Musk. Amber gres^e.
Things good to stope flire Sinaber called dragons blud. Sloes or there
decoction. Sinamom. Boolearmoniak. Red wine. Planton. Olibanum. Hard eggs.
Hard chese scraped in red wine and drink.
Things good to provoke starnutation or ^eesing. Belony le^ primrose ro^
moderately^ ^sed. Eleborus al^ and Ginge^
Good cofortters for ye hart Muscke. Ambergre^ Rosis, Per^ Maces. Diamuschicis
diambra. The floure^ Rosemary (...) Nutmegge Spiknard. Galanga.




Iohn. what be the virtue of Dates Figs.


Humfrey. SEraphio saith, Of figs and dates
that the Da^ which be preserved with su^ ^ee good. The crude raw Date ^othe
califie the body, and doth ^onuert quickly into choler, it is not good for
the hedes of the hot people, Rases in. 3 alman. Halia in. 5 Theori. Ra. Moyses.
ill for the throat and stops the liver, and makes the ^eeth rotten, but if
they be clean ^illed and the inward rynde take away, they do greatly
norrishe, ^estore, being sodden in stewed ^rothe they be of divers kinds
(...) quantity and quality, but ge^erally hoot moyste in the se^ond degree.
Hi. 2. can. c. ccviii.
Figs as Hippocra^es says, the best be white the se^ond be red, the third
be black, the ^ipest be the best amongst all ^rutes doth most norishe,
prouo^eth sweat, because it doth purge superfluity of humers through skin,
it doth engeder lice, they ^e hot in the first degre, and the ^ew figes be
moist in ye second, the seeds and the skyn of the Fyg, be not greatly comed:
Figs and Almodes, eaten of a fasting stomach, be very holsom to make the way
of good digestion, but best if they be eaten with nuts. Figs and herb
grace, stamped together, be very wholesome to be eaten against the pestilence:
Roasted Figs beaten together, and hot applied upon the pestilence sore, doth
draw, mollify, make ripe the sore. And to the lunges, Galen de Alimen.
liver, stomach, figs be very cofortable, as Gale saith.


Iohn. What be Pears?


Humfrey. THey be of diverse kinds heuier then Appels, The operation of Pears.
not good until they be very ripe, onles they be tenderly roasted or baken,
and eaten after meals.

there is a kind of pears, growing in the City of Norwich, called the black
friars pear, Black friars pear.
very delicious and pleasant, and no less profitable unto a hoot stomach,
as I hard it reported by a right worshipful Physician of the same City, called
doctoure Mafeilde, which said he thought those Pears without all comparison,
were the best that grew in any place of Englande.


Iohn. What say thou of Appels.


Humfrey. APples be very cold winedy, The operation of Apples.
hard to digest ingenderers of evil blood, hurtful to flegmaticke people:
good to choleric stomachs, if they be through ripe, but best if they be
roasted or baken, and eaten with gross pepper to bedward, they be of many
kinds, as the Costard, the grene coat, the pippe, the queen apple, so furth:
The distilled water of apples, Campher, vinegar, milk, is a good medicine to
anointe the faces of children yt have the small pockes: when the said pockes be
ripe, to keep their faces from eres: provided that the said children have
given them in their milk, saffro or Methridatum, A medycin for the small
pockes.
to expel the venom and keep them fro the air, during the said sickness.


Ihon. What be Pechis?


Humfrey. THe leaves he hoate, for if thei^ be stamped in plaisterwyse and
applied unto the belly, The operation of Peache^
they kill worms: The fruit is cold, very good to the stomach, they be good to
be eaten of the that have stinking brethes of hot causes: eat of an empty
stomach which is Galens counsel, which says if they be eaten after meat,
they do corrupt both in them selves and the meates lately eat: and they be
bynders of the belly. But Quinces be most comfortable after meat, for they do
enclose the stomach, and lets vapers to ascend into ye brain, and
stops vometes: They be wholesome for sick folks that be swelled in the
bodies. Eaten with the gross pouders of Gallanga, Spickanarde, Callamus, and
Ginger, and may be eaten before meat of the said sick patients, as well as
after meat But much use of them, be not so profitable as delectable, to the
^aters of them.


Iohn. What be Quinces?


Humfrey. IF thy stomach be very hoate or moist, The operation of Quinces.
or thy belly laxative then Quinces be good to be eaten before meat, being
roasted or eaten cold, and in this case the tarter be the better, and Pomgranets
be of the same virtue, as Isaac saith: Isaac in. perticu. die.
but eaten after meat they do enclose ye stomach, and moist the belly, they
ought not to be used in common meates the custom of them hurts the sinews,
but in the way of medicine they be excellent, and the cores being taken out
and preserved in honey, or kept their musse leg. Then they may long continue
to the use of rosting or baking, for they be perelous to the stomach eaten raw.
But preserved they do mightily prevail against drouckennesse, they be cold in
the first degree, and dry in the beginning of the second.


Iohn. What be Cherris?


Humfrey. THe tart cherries vndubtedly be more holesomer then the sweet, The
operation of Cherries.
and eaten before meat, do mollify the belly, prepare digestion, and they be
most excellent against hot burning choler, they be good also after meat,
and be of many kinds, as black, red, pale. The red cheri partly tart, Galen
de alimen. Ra. lib. 23 cap.
is best. Galen and Rasis, greatly commend this fruit. In the country of Kent
be growing great plenty of this fruit. So are there in a town near unto
Norwich called Ketreinham, this fruit is cold moist in the first degree.


Iohn. What be the virtue of Grapes, Rasins, Prunes, Barberies, Oringes, and
Meddlers?


Humfrey. HIppocrates saith: The goodness of Grapes.
that the white Grapes be better then the black, and holsomer when they are
two or three days gathered from the vine, then presently pulled from it: Galen
de alimen. 2. Rasis in. 4. alman. 20 cap.
And if they be sweet, they be partly nutratiue, and warm the body. And
unto this agrees Galen and Rasis, seems to commend sweet grapes above
Daites, saying: although they be not so warm, yet they do not stop the
body, or make opilatio as Daites do. They be wholesome to be eaten before meat,
even as nuts be good after fisshe. Toward the southe, and southeaste parts
of the world, there be many growing in diverse regions, whereof the wynes be
made. The farther fro us, the hoater wine: There be very good grapes growing
here in England in many places, as partly I have seen at Blaxhall in
Suffolke, Blaxhall in suffolk
where sometime I was ne'er kinsman unto ye chefest house of that toun. Raisins
of the sun be very wholesome, and coforte digestion, but the stones rindes
would be refused, then they be good for the spleen liver. So be aligantes,
Rasis doth much commend the, Sweet Prunes be laxative but tart prunes be
bindinge.
but undoubtedly the small rasins be hurtful to the spleen. Prunes or damasins
have virtue to relaxe the belly, if they be sweet ripe, but they do norysh
very little, but quench choler. Grapes, rasyns Prunes, Plumes, Sloes, if they
be sower, be all bineders of the belly, and so is the barbarye called oxiacatha
and Oringes, Oxiacantha. called the Barbery.
except the said oringes be condited with sugar, and then they be good coolers
against hoate choler, whose rindes he hot dry of nature. The fruit called
the medler, Mespila. called the Medler.
is used for medicine and not for meat, and must be taken before meat
provokes urine, of nature is stipticke.


Iohn. What be Capers and Olives?


Humfrey. Fresh Capers he hot dry in the second degree, The operation of
Capers.
and eaten before meates do greatly coforte digestion, and be the best things
for the spleen, or to clese melancholy that can be taken. preserved Olifes in
salt eat at ye beginning of meals, do greatli fortify the stomach and
relaxeth the belly, cleanses the liver and ^e hoate and dry in the second
degree.


Iohn. I Beseech the show the opinion of the natures of some kind of flesh,
and first of the properties of Beef.


Humfrey. I Will not undertake to show mine opinion: to thy request, but I will
declare the minds, of some wise and learned men: and first of Simeon Sethi,
Simeon Sethi.
which saith, that the flesh of Oxen that be yonge, do much nourish make them
strong that be fed with them, but it brings melancholy, and Melancholius
diseases, it is cold and dry of nature, and hard to digest, except it be of
choleric persons: but being tenderlly sodden, it nourishes Much beef
customably eat of idle persons, and nice folks that labour not, brings many
diseases, Ra^in lib. 2 cap. 3.
as Rasis saith. And Auicen saith that the flesh of Oxen or Kine, Auicen in
2. lib. pri. cap. 15.
be very gross, ingendringe ill iuse in the body. Whereof oftetimes come to
scabs, cankers, biles, but unto hot strong, choleric stomachs it is
tolerable, and may be used as we have the daily experience thereof. Flixe.
The broth wherein beife has been sod, is good to be supped half a pint
every morning against ye flixe of the belly, and running forth of yellow
choler. If the said broth be tepered with salt: Mustard, vinegar or garlic
c. Be commonly used for the sawses to digest beef withal, ^isges^io
for the said sauces do not only help digestion, but also defendefendeth the
body from sundry inconveniences, and diverse si^kne^ises, as drop^ies, quartens,
leproses, A medicine for y^ eyes.
and such like. The gall of an Ox or a cow, distilled in the month of June,
and kept in a close glass, doth help to clese the eyes fro spots, if you
put (...) drop of this water with a feather into thy eyes, when ye go to bed.
The milte of a Bull dried, the powder thereof droncke with red wine, will stop
the bloody flixe. Light poudered yonge Beef, is better then either fresh or
much powdered. In specially those Cattle that be fed in fair and dry
Pastures, and not in stinckinge fens.

The great learned manne Gesnerus, in his discriptyon of Beasts, Conradus
Gesnerus*
doth write moore of the virtues of bulls, oxen, kine and calves, then any
other hath done. And thus to conclude, the flesh of the male beasts, is more
better then the female, and the gelded beasts be more commodyous to nature,
then any of them. And the young flesh more commendable then tholde, for it is
more moist, and a friend to the blood, Hali. in. 5 The. ca. 4.
as Haliabas saith, Roasted flesh, doth nourish the body much, for it is
warm and moist. Bake meats be very dry: Clean boylde meates, with wholesome
herbs and fruit, be excellent to comfort the body, if they be nutramental
flesh. Calves flesh do greatly nourrish and make good blood.


Ihon. THou haste said well of Beef, but what goodness may be reported ^f
Pork, I think very little or no^hinge.


Humfray. THere be many goodly commodities in ye flesh of bores. ^elded swine
and pigs, for ^hey be good for mans nature.


Ihon. FOr mans nature? that is maruel^ For howe can those be good for ^anues
nature, The descriptio of swyne.
which be so vile of their own nature. There soul feding (...) most stinking
filth and carrion. The ^oysome wallo winge in the mire and ^urt, the eating of
their own pigs, and oftentimes pulling children out (...) the Cradle, for
there dinners, if the ^ood wife be not at home. Who is a^le to behold such
noisome spirits, ^r hell hounds: did not almighty God ^ommaund the Iewes to
eat none of them? and the Machomites at this ^aye, will kill that man that
eats of their flesh, why should we then com^ed them? for they are most vile.


Humfrey. ALl the ancient and wisest phisicions that ever were in this world,
^oriba Corona
did all consent, that of all flesh, the flesh of young gelded swine, partly
saulted or poudered, was ever a meat of the best norishinge moister, and
colder then other flesh, Isacke Galen in sec. comp Cap. ii.
for Isaacke saith, it is a flesh very moist, except it be the flesh of
lambs, as Galen reports. Yet it is not good to every complexion, nor every
age, but unto youth and middle age. Whereas thou haste spoken against ye vile
nature of swine, calling them vnresonable, thou dost use more words then wit^
for there is no beast, Beasts have no reason.
yt may be called reasonable? but man only. And whereas God did prohibit the
Iewes to eat swines flesh? it was a figure to abstain from unclean things:
which I leave to thee Theologians. The Mahumites abhor swines flesh, because
there droncken false prophet, and Psevvdo Apostle was ^orne and rent in pieces
with wine, being drunken fallen in the mire. So the one must give ^redence to
time, and to learned Phisicions. The blood of swine ^othe nourrishe much,
puddyng of swine.
as it is ^eene in puddings, made with ^reate Otmeale, sweet sewet, ^nnel, or
Annes sedes. Pigs ^e very moist, therefore Sage* Pepper and Salt, do dry
up ^e superfluous humours of ^hem, when they be roasted. They ^e not holsom to
be eaten before ^hey be three weeks old. of swine.
The ^ipes and guts be holesomer, ^nd doth nourish better then any ^ther
beasts guts, or in meats. Bakon is very hard of digestion, and much
discommended, and is hurtful. Only unto a hoate choleric labouringe body,
the flesh of a Boor, is more holsomer then the flesh of any sow* The
brains of a Bore, and his stones, or any part of the staped together, laid
warm upon a pestilence sore, in the manner of a plaster, A plaster.
it will break it incontinent. Swines grease is very cold, and good to
annointe burning hot places of the body, or a disease called sancte
Anthonies fire, and thus much have I spoken of swine.


Iohn. I Pray you tell me of the flesh of th^ Rams, weathers, and Lambs and
how profitable they are to man^ nature.


Humfrey. SImeon Sethi saith, Labes flesh is partly warm, Simeon Sethi.
but superfluous moist, and evil for ^egmatick persons, and doth much harm to
the^ that have the (...), bonache, or a disease called Epiolus, which is (...)
of fleam like glass. Therefore if lambs flesh were sodden; as it is roasted,
it would bring many diseases unto the body, without it were sodden with wine,
some hot grosseries, herbs, or ^ootes. When a weather is two years old,
which is fed upon a good ground, the flesh thereof, shall be temperate and
nourrishe much. Hip. in. (...) pri. doc. cap. 1^.
Hippocrates saith, that the lamb of a year old, doth no^rishe much.
Galen seems not greatly to commend Motton* but that which is tender, sweet
and not old, is very profitable, as experience and custom, doth daily teach
us. The dounge Tallow and woll be very profitable in Medicines, as Plinii
says: And Conradus Gesnerus, de animalibus, De ali. lib tertio. 3.
and Galen in his third book, de alimentis,


Iohn. What is the flesh of Gotes or kids.


Humfrey THey be beasts very hurtful unto young trees plats, but Simeon Sethi
saith, that kid^ flesh is of easy digestion, in health and sickness,
they be very good meat. They be dry of nature. in la. xii. doc. sec^. Capi.
vii.
Hipocrates saith. It behooves that the conceruers and keepers of health, do
study that his meat be such, as the flesh^ of kids, yonge calves, that be
sucking, and Lambs of o^ year old. For they be good for them that be sick,
Hali in quincte theori. Capit. 2.
or have eue^ complexions. Haliabas doth say, that the flesh of Kids do
engender good blood, and is not so ^legmaticke, watery, and moist, as the
flesh of Lambs. They remain Kids for six months, and afterward comes
into a greaser, and hotter nature, and be called Goats. The flesh of them
that be gel^ed..ias holsom to eat, the l^ngs of them eaten before a man do
^inke, doth defend him that day from drunkenness, as I have red in the
reports of learned men. But the flesh of the old (...) or male gotes be il,
and in^ender the Agues or fevers, I^ ^he urine of goats be stilled in May with
sorrel, A good ^medicen*
the water di^illed is not hurtful nor noy^o, but whomesoeuer use to drin^ke
thereof two drammes morn and evening, it will preserve him from the pestilence.
The milcke of Goats I will describe in the place of milk.


Iohn. What is the flesshes of Read and fallow Dear?


Humfrey. MOre pleasant to some, th^ profitable to many, as appears once a
year in the cor^ fields, Hippo. Simeon Sethi.
the more it is to be lamented. Hippocrates and Simeon Sethi, do plainelye
affirm th^ flesh of them to engender evil iuse, and Melancholy cold
diseases and quarteins, the flesh of winter dear, Ras^. ala. Cap. 3.
do less hurt the body, then that which is eaten in Summer. For in Winter
mans digestion is more stronger, and the inward parts of the body warmer,
and may easerlye consume groose meates, then in Summer, as we see by
experience. In cold weather frosts healful people, be most hungriest. The
lunges of a dere sodden in barlye water, and taken fourth and stamped with
penedice and Honey of equal quantitye to the said lunges, and eaten a
mornings, doth greatly healpe old coughs, and dryness in the lunges.

There be many goodly virtues of their horns, bones, blood and tallow.


Ihon. What is the properties of Hares and Conies flesh? Aui. in. ^. Can.
cap. ^46.



Humfrey. AVisen saiethe, the flesh, of Hares, Aui. in. 2. Can. cap. 46.
be hoot and dry^ ingenderers of Melancholy not praised in Physic for me
(...) but rather for medicine. For indeed, if a Hare be dried in the month of
Marche in an Oven or furneyse, and beaten into powder, and kept close, drunk a
mornings in Bear, Ale, or white Wine: it will break the stoane in the
bledder, if the patient be not old. If childrens gummes be anointed with the
brains of an Hare, their teethe will easily come forth and grow. The gall
of an Hare mingled with clean honey, A medice for bloody eyes.
doth cleanse waterye eyes, or red bloudye eyes. The flesh of Hares must be
tenderly roasted, and well larded and spiced, because of the grosenesse, but it
is better sodden. The flesh of Conies are better then hares flesh, easier of
digestion. But rabbits be holsomer. And thus to conclude of Connies,
experience teaches us, that they are good, they be could and dry of nature,
and small mention is made of them, among the ancient physicians, Galen in.
iii. de ali. Capi. ^.
as Galen says. I need not to speak very lunge of every kind of beasts
as some of the beasts that be in Hiberia like little Hares which be called
Conies.


Iohn. If the old and ignorant men of Connyes, which were seen in the
nature of many other beasts, that had dwelled in diverse places places of
Englande then should have known them right well: And perhaps received of
them as small pleasure, as many husband men have found profit by them in
their Corn. Now thou haste well satisfied me of the fo^r foted beasts,
which commenlye English men sedeth upon. Now I pray thee tell me, some
of the virtues of souls and first of Cocks, Capones and Hens.


Humfrey. CHickens of Hens, saith Auenzoar, Auenz. lib. pri.
is most commended, and most laudable of any flesh, nourrisheth good blood
It is light of digestion, and doth comfort the appetite, cock ^ chickens, be
better then hens, the capo is better then the cock, ^ do augment good
blood and feed, Rasis in lib. 4. Afforis.
as Rasis reports, and ^xperience proves in men, both ^ole and sick. An
old Cock which is well beaten after his ^ethers be pulled of until he be
^ll bloody, and then cut of his ^ead and draw him, and sethe ^im in a close
pot with fair ^ater, and white wine, Fenyll ^ootes, Burrage roots, Violet,
^lanten, Succory, and Buglos ^aues, Dates, Prunes, great Raysins, Mates, and
Sugar, ^ut in the mary of a Calfe, and ^anders. This is a most excel^nt broth
to them that be sick, ^eake, or consumed. The brains ^hennes, capons or
chekens, be ^olsome to eat, to comfort the ^raine and memory. And thus to
^onclude these forsaide fowls, (...) better for idle folks that labour. not,
then for them that use exercise or travel, to whom gross meates are more
profitable.


Iohn. What is the properties of Gese?


Humfrey. VVylde gyse and tame, their flesh be very gross and hard of
digestion, Auicen. in 2. Cano. Cap. 46.
Auicen says* The flesh of great fowls and of gese, be slow and hard of
digestion: for their humidity, they do bread fevers quickly, but their
gooslynges or yonge gese, being fat, are good and much commended in meates.
And Galen says that the flesh of fowls be better then the flesh of
beasts. Galen in lib. 3. de alimen.


But undoubtedly gose, mallard peacock, Of great fowls.
swane, and every foul having a long neck, be all har^ of digestion, and of
no good complexions. But if gese be well ro^ted and stopped with salt, sage,
^epper, and onions, they will not ^urte the eaters thereof. There be great gese
in Scotlad, which ^redeth upon a place called the Basse. There be also
Bernacles, which have a strange genera^ion as Ges^erus saith: Gesnerus.
and as the ^eople of the North parts of Scotlande knows, because (...)
should seem incredible to mani I will give none occasio to any, ^ither to mock
or to marvel. And thus I give warning to ^hem which love their health,
(...) have these foresaid fowls somewhat poudred or stopped with ^alte, all the
night, before they be roasted.


Iohn. I pray the tel me of y^ flesh of Ducks?


Humfrey. THey be the hoatest of all domestical, or yard fowls, and unclean
of feeding: notwithstanding, though it be harde of digestion and marvelous
hoate, yet it doth greatly norrishe the body and makes it fat. Hip. in 2.
can. ca. 46
Hippocrate says: they that be fed in puddels foul places, be hurtful:
but they that be fed in houses, pens or coopes, Isack. in. uni. ca. 16.
be neutratiue, but yet gross, as Isack saith.


Ihon. What he Pigios, Turtles or Doves?


Humfrey. THe flesh of Turtles be marvelous good, and equal to to the best
as Auicen saith: Auicen. in can. de ca.
They be best when they be yonge and wholesome for flegmaticke people. Simeon
Sethi says: the house dove is hoater then the field dove, and doth engender
gross blood. The common eating of them is ill for choleric persons with
read faces, for fear of Leprosy: therefore cut of the feet, wings, and head,
of your Pigios or Doves, for their blood, is that which is ^o venomous: they
be best in the spring time, and heruest. And Isaack says, Isaac. in lib.
dicta: Cap. 16.
because they are so ^yghtly converted into choler. They did command in the
old ^ime, that they should be eaten with sharpe Vinegar, Pur^leyn, Coucombers,
or Sitron. Roosted Pigeons be best. Roasted pigeons be best.
The blood that comes out of the right wing, dropped into ones ^ye, doth
mightily help the eye, if it swells or prieketh. And thus much have I spoken
of Pigeos, or Doves.


Ihon. What is the flesh of Peacoches?


Humfrey. SImeon Sethi says: it is a raw flesh, and harde of digestion,
onles it be very fat. But if it b^ fat, it helps the Pluresie. Haliabas
saith: Hali. in. 5. Retho. cap. 23.
that both Swans Cranes, Pecockes, and any great fowls, must after they b^
killed, be hanged up by ye necks two or three days, with a stoon^ waiyng at
their feet, as ye weather will serve, and then dressed and eaten. Provided
that good wine be drunken after them.


Iohn. What is the flesh of Cranes?


Humfrey. SImeon Sethi says: Simeon Sethi.
their flesh is hoate and dry, the young be good, but the old increases
melancholy, they do engender seed of generation, and being tenderly roasted,
doth help to clear the voice, and cleanse the pipe of the lunges.


Iohn. What is Swan?


Humfrey. EVery gross foul is choleric, harde of digestion: the Signetes
be better then the old Swanes, if their Galantines be ^ell made, it helps to
disgeste ^heir flesh.


Iohn. ^Hat is the flesh of Herons, Bytters, and Shouellers?


Humfrey. THese fowls be fisshers, and be very raw, and flegma^icke, like
unto the meat whereof ^hey are fed: the young be best, and ought to be eaten
with pepper, Synnamon, Sugar, and ^inger, to drink wine after you ^or good
digestion: And thus do for all water fowls.


Iohn. What be partriches, Fesants quails, Larks, Sparrows, Plouer, and bla^
Eirdes?


Humfrey. PArtriches doth bind she belly, Auicen.
and doth norryshe milch^ The Cocks be better then t^ Hen birds, Rasis in.
3. alm. c. 10.
they do dry ^ffeume and corruption in the sto^macke. Feesantes, is the best
o^ al flesh for his swetnes, is equa^ unto the Capo or Partridge, b^ he is
somewhat drier. Ra. in lib. 4. affo.
And Ra^ says: Feasantes flesh is goo^ for the that have ye fever Ethik^ for
it is not only a meat, but medicine, and doth cleanse corru^ humers it the
stomach. Quail altough they be eaten of man^ yet they are not to be comende
for they do engender aguwes, be evil for the falling sickenesse^ For as
Conciliatur says: of al^ fowls that be used for meates it is the worst.
Diosco.
Dioscorides says: that Larks roasted, be wholesome to be eaten of them that be
troubled with the colic. Black birds taken in the time of frost, be
holsom and good of disgestio: The properties of small birds.
The donge of Black birds tempered with vinegar, and applied to any place that
have the black Morphewe, or black Leprosy, often times anointed with a
sponge doth help the. The flesh of Plouers doth engender melancholy. Sparrows
be hoot, provokes venus or lust: Plinii. lib ii. Cap. 36.
Plinii doth describe their properties: ^he brains be the best part of
^hem. Woodcockes be of good di^gestion and temperate to feed upon. All small
birds of ye field, ^s Robbin read breast, Lynettes, Finches, red Sparrows,
Gold wings, and such like, if they be fat, they be marvelous good, and
doth greatly coforte nature, either roasted or boiled, and thus do I conclude
with the of birds.


Iohn. I Heartily thank thee, gentle master Humfrey: for thy pains taking in
these thy rules unto me, concerning the proper use of beasts, and fowls, in
meates. I would be glad to know the virtues of some fyshes?


Humfrey. IN many Ilades of this world, ne'er adjacent unto the occiente seas,
the people live there, most chiefly by fish, and be right strong and sound
people of complexion, as Aristotel says: Aristo in proble.
Consuetudo est taquam altra natura. Custom is like unto another nature, but
because I speak of fish, I will divide them in three parts. First of the
fishes of the sea, secodly the fish of fresh running rivers, Of sea Eishe.
thirdly of the fishes in poles standing waters. The Sea hath many gross and
fat fish, which be noisome to the stomach, but the smaler kind of fishes
yt fed about rocks clear stony places, be more drier and less of moistnes,
then the fresh water fish, doth engenderles fleume and wind, by the reason of
their salt feding as Galen says: Galen d^tuen,
they be the best fishes that feed in the pure sea: and chiefest of all
fishes for the ^se of mankind. Hali. in quin, the^ Capit. 25.
But Haliabas says: new fish lately taken, is ^olde and moist, and
phlegmatic, but lest of all the Sea fysshe. Fysshe that swymmeth in fresh
^leare Ryuers, or stoony places, where as the water is sweat, ^eynge fish
that bear scales, he marvelous good.

If they feed near unto places where much filth is daily caste out, there
the fisshe be very corrupt and vnholsome, as the said Haliabas says: Fyshe
that fedeth in fens, marisces, diches, and moddie pooles, be very vnholsome,
and do corrupt the blood, they be gross slymy, corrupt wyndie. But those
fishes that be fed in fair ponds, wherein two running waters may ensue, Best
feding for fish.
and where as sweat herbs, roots, weeds, that grows about the banks,
doth feed the fisshe: those fisshe be wholesome. Galen saieth^ Fisshe yt is white
skalled, harde. As perches, Cheuiens, Roughs, Carpes, Breimes, Roches, Troutes
c. be al good. But vnskaled fishes, as Eales, Tenches, Lampreis, and such
like, be dangerous, onles they be well baken or roasted, and eaten with
pepper, ginger, vinegar: And note this, To labour soon after theatyng of fish,
is hurtful. Galen.
that it is not wholesome travelling, or labourynge, immediately after the eating
of fysshe, for it doth greatly corrupt the stomach, and as Galen says:
the nourryshementes of flesh is better then the nourrismentes of fyshe: And
thus much generally I have spoken of fish.


Ihon. ANd thus it seems by thy words that great fisshe that be devourers in
sea, Oil far, fish be groos^ fode.
as Seal and Purpos, and such like, be vnholsome, and that the smaller
fishes, as Codlinges, Whitinges, Places, Smeltes, Buttes, Solles, pike Perch,
Breime, Roche, Carpe, and such as fedeth in clean stony waters: thou says
they be wholesome, Eales, Lampreis, and other muddy fish, ^hou doest not
greatly commend.

There be some kinds of fysh soft and harde, which be the best?


Humfrey. If fysshe be soft, the eldest fyshe is the be best: The electiu of
fish.
If fyshe be harde the youngest is best, for it is either soft or hard. Of harde
fish take the smallest, of soft fysshe take the greatest: Provided that your
fyshe be not very slimy, and thus says Auicen in his book of fish. Auicen
cap. de piscibus.



Ihon. I pray the tell me some thing of shell fish?


Humfrey. CRauises and Crabs, be very good fish, Creuises and crabs
the meat of them doth help the lunges, but they be hurtful for the bladder,
yet they will engender seade. If Crabs of the fresh water be sodden in pure
grene Oil olive: this Oil dropped into the ear luke warm, does heal
hoate burning obstructions, and stoppinge matter that hinders the hearing. As
for lempetes, Cockles, Galen in libra de a limento.
Scallapes as Galen says: they be harde of digestion, muskels oysters wold
be well boiled roasted, or baken with onions, wine, butter, sugar, ginger,
pepper, or else they be very wyndy flegmatike. Choleric, stomaks may well
digest raw oysters, but they have cast many one away.


Ihon. What is the virtue of Oil?


Humfrey. Green oil of olives, is ye mother of all oils, which doth draw
into her own nature the virtues of herbs, buds, flowers, fruit, and
roots. Sweet sallet oil is wholesome to disgeste cold herbs, and sallets,
tepered with sharpe Vinegar and Sugar. Auerdies comes oil in quinto de ouis.
New Oil doth moist, and warm the stomach, but old Oil, corrupts the
stomach, cleueth to the lunges, and maheth one horse. Oil of Roses sharpe
vinegar, tempered together, is good to anointe the fore heads of them that be
troubled with extreme heate or fransie, so that Blugose be sodden in their
posset ale, or else drink the syrrupes of Endiue, or Buglos.

There be many goodly virtues in compounded oils, both to calife and make
hot: And also to cool the body when it is extreme hoot, as the great learned
man Iohn Mesua, hath decribed in his Antidorarii.


Ihon. Wilt thou be so good as to tell me the properties of water?


Humfrey. Water is one of the four elements, Galli. 3. de uic. in. aui. li.
1. fen. 2.
more lighter then earth, heuier then fire and air. But this water which is
here amongst us in Rivers, Ponds, springes, What kind of waters is best.
floods, and seas: be no pure waters, for they be mingled with sundry airs,
corruptions, grosenesse, and saltnes: notwithstanding in all our meates and
drinks water is used, amongst all living creatures can not be forborn, both
man, beast, fish, foul, Auice. lib 1. fen. 3. de dispositionibus aquarum.
herb, and grass. And as Auicen says, the clay water is pure, for cley
cleanses the water, and is better then water that runs over gravel, or
stones, so that it be pure cley, void of corruption. Also waters runnynge
toward the east, be pure, coming out of harde stony rocks, and a Pint of
that water is lighter then a pynte of the standing water of wells, or pooles.
The lighter the water, the better it is. Also waters that is put in wine. c
ought first to be sod or it be occupied cold, and so the fire doth cleanse it
from corruption. Standing waters and water running near unto cities and
towns, or marish ground, wodes, fens be ever full of corruption, because
there is so much filth in them of carions rotten dung. c. The hyer it water
doth faule, then the water is. Ise and snow waters be verygrose, and be
hurtful to the bodies of men and Beasts. To drink cold water is evil,
for it will stop the body, and engender melancholy. Salt water helps a
man from scabs, iche, and moist humours, it kills lice, and wastes
blood between the skin and the flesh, but it is most hurteful to the
stomach, but the vapoure and smoke of it is good for them that have the
dropsy.


Iohn. What is Vinegar?


Humfrey. Vinegar is cold and dry, The properties of Vinegar.
and is hurtful for them that be melancholy, but when it is drunk, or
poured upon a outward wound stops the blood It also kills hot
apostumations of erisipilus, it is an enemi to the sinews. Vinegar brimstone
sodden together, is good for the Gout, to wasshe it withal. Vyneger tempered
with oil Olyfe, or oil of Roses, and sode with vnwashed wol, helps a
disease called Soda in the head, applied warm unto the place, it doth help
hoate diseases in the head called Soda, it is good in sauce for al warm and
moist men. Vinegar with clean clarified honey penidies and fair water sodden
together, doth greatly help the pains in the throat, or lunges, or stoppyng
the wind, quenches hot diseases. And sharpe vyneger mingled with salt, and
put upon the biting of a dog, doth heal it: and against poison it is excellent,
chiefly to drink a little thereof against the pestilence in a morning.


Iohn. What virtue hath our common salt?


Humfrey. RAsis saith, Rasis in. 3. alman. Capit. 17.
salt is hot and dry, Dioscorides saith, salt hath virtue to stop, to scour,
and mundifie, and of that mind is Oribasius, The virtue of fault
saying: salt is compouded of matter abstersiue and stiptik, which ^atters be
both binding and driyng moist humours, and is good to powder fat flesh, both
bief and pork, and other fat meat: for it hath virtue to dry up superfluous
humours, as water blood. c. But it is not good for lean bodies, or hot
coplexcioned people, for the much use of it makes the body choleric, appear
aged, and to be angry. The very use of it is only to season meates, but not
to be meat. Much good salt is made here in Englande, as at ^itch, Hollond in
Lincholnshire and in the Shiles ne'er unto new ^astell.


Ihon. What is honey, or the virtue thereof?


Humfrey. AVerrois says, Auerrois in. 5.
honey is hoa^ and dry in the second degree, and does cleanse very much,
and is a medicinable mea^ most chiefliest for old men and women. For it doth
warm them convert the into good blud. Simeon Sethi.
I^ is not good for choleric persons because of the heat and dryness. They do
greatly err that say honey is hot and moist: but if it be clarified from his
wax and dross and kept in a close vessel, there is nothing that is liquid
upon the earth that remains ledger. And this precious jewel honey, hath ever
been more praised above sugar, for it will coserue keep any fruit, herb, rote,
or any other thig that is put into it an exceadynge lunge time. Marvelous is
the work of God in honey, being a heavenly dew, that falls upon flowers
and leues as Auicen ^aieth, Auen in. 2. Cano. Cap. 504.
and is neither the juice of ^eaues nor fruit, but only the ^eauenlye dew.
Whereunto the Sees comes in due time, and ^ather the said honey, and lay it
^p in store in their curious buil^ed houses, whereas they dwell ^gether in most
goodly order. god hath ordained ye Sees to be an example unto us, both for
love worcking in the common wealth. Virgilius
O Sees bees, how happier are you more then many wretched men, ^hyche dwells
never together (...) vnitye and peace, but in con^nuall discord, and
disquietnes ^s Virgill says. En quo discor^a ciues produxerit miseros.
Be^olde what discord wretched Citizins have brought forth. But now to make
an end of ^e most excellent virtues of ^onye, it is good in the meates (...)
them which be flegmatike. Honey newly taken out of their combs, be partly
laxative, but clarified honey doth bind and dry up fleum, and kepeth the bodies
of flegnatike and old persons fro corruption. The best honey is gathered in the
spring time, the second in somer, but that which is gathered in winter, is
ill hurtful. One part of honey, and some part of water sodden together until
the sroth be all scomde of, and when it is cold kept in a close stone pot,
Galen de tuen, sani Libra. 4.
this drink says Galen is wholesome for summer, cleanses the lunges,
preserves the body in health. Oximel simplex and compositum be made with
honey, and so be many mo things which be of great virtue. Sugar which is
called Mel canne, honey of the reed, being clean, not full of gross pannell, doth
cleanse, and is not so hoate as Bees honey, and doth agree with the stomachs of
choleric persons. Haliabas in. 5. theo. Capi. 27.
Haliabas saith it moves not the stomach to drynes, and that the clean white
sugar not adulbrated, doth nourish more then honey. Of Rosewater, Pearls,
sugar is made a goodly comforter for the heart, called Manus Christi.


Ihon. What is the property of milk?


Humfrey. SImeon Sethi says that milk is of three parts: Simeon Sethi.
why, curdes, and creme. Why is wholesome to drink, in Summer, specially of
choleric persons, it cleanses the body. Milk of fat beasts doth nourish
more then the lean beasts, and the milk of young beasts is better then of
the old. And the new milk is holesomer then that which hath stand in the
air, Rasis in. 3 alman. Capit. 15.
as Rasis says. And also those beasts that feadeth in dry Pastures amongst
sweet Herbs, grass, and flowers having convenient Water their milk is
very good. Milk in the beginning of Somer is very wholesome. Milk not good
for foul stomachs
In winter it is unwholesome for flegmaticke persons, or them which have
corrupt and foul stomachs. Fo^ if the milk be sower, it dooet engender the
stone in the raynes or bladder. Cowes milk is th^ thyckest mylcke, and vnctius
or full of butter. But the best mylcke that healpeth agaynst^ Consumptions,
Hip. in. li de air. et aqua.
is womannes mylcke. The next is Goats milk, which Goats milk rather
nourishes to much, if it be taken commonely.

Shepes milk is not very pleasant to the stomach. And note this, that
Mylcke is not wholesome to them which have pains in the Head or teeth. But the
people that be brought up with mylcke, be fair coloured, and healthful
bodies.

Isaac says, if Honey and a little salt be sodden in the milk ^hen it is
wholesome, and is not wyndye nor flegmatycke.

If mynts, burrage leaves, rosemarye flowers, honey suckles, and a little Sugar
be laid in (...) Basone, and covered with a ^ayre lynnen clothe, and milk he
said Basin full through he clothe, and let it stand all ^yghte. This is
pleasant to ^rynke in the morning upon ^n empty stomach, two hours before
any other meat, it cleanses the rage of hoate burning Chollere, Galen de
alimen.
and thus I leave o^ milk.


Ihon. What is butter?


Humfrey. Butter is hoate and moyste fresh butter is used in many medicines.
The operation of butter Cheese.
New made butte^ meanelye salted, is good wit bread, flesh, and fisshe, it
healpeth the lunges, and purges th^ dryness of the throat, and helps
coughs most chieflyest if (...) be mingled with honey or sugar. It is good
for young children when their teeth doth grow o^ ache. Buttermilke if ye
crumm^ new white bread into it, an^ sup it of, there is no milk nourishes
so much, Goats mylk excepted. Cheese if it be new it is indifferentlye well
commended, but harde salt Cheese doth dry the body, and engenders ^he
Stone, Isaac in. 5 doc. ca. 15. Auicen in secun. capitulo. cxxviii.
as Isaac and Auicene saith, and many other doctors mooe do discommend it
then praise it. When pots or stones ^ee broken, if harde Cheese be steped in
water and made soft, and ground upon a Painters Stone, it will join the
broken Pots or Stones together again. By this I gather, that Cheese will
engender the Stone before any other meates. Therefore Cheese should be made in
Somer when the cream is not taken from the milk. And Bittony, Saxifrage, and
Parcelye, ^hopped together, be wholesome to be mingled amongst the cu^ds, and
thus I conclude with Halia^as, that old chese is unwholesome.


Iohn. What be Eggs.


Humfrey. GAlen says in his book of Symples, that Eggs is n^ part of the
fowls, but a portion of the thing frome whence it came. Simeon Sethi writing
of the diversity of Eggs, says, the first properties is (...) their
substance, and the second is in their time, either new laid or old. The
third is in the manner of their rosting, potchynge, or seethinge. New laid
Eggs of Hens potched and supped, upon an empty Stomach, does cleanse the
Lunges and the raynes of the back. Harde Eggs be greatly discommended,
unless it be to stop flixes, but it were better to seath Eggs harde in
vyneger, and then undoubtedly it will dry up the Flyxe of the beallye.
Fried Eggs be very hurtful for Choleric people, and them which have
the Stone. Ducks and Gees Eggs be gross and noisome, but Partridge,
Feasauntes, and Hens eggs, engenders good blood.


Iohn. What is the property of wine.


Humfrey. HIpocrates saith of a customable thing comes less hurt, Hipp. in
ii. aphori
where of I gather, that they that drink wine customablye with mesure, it doth
profit them much, and makes good digestion. But those people that use to
dryncke wine seldom times, be distemperated. White wine if it be clear, Auero
in 6. colig. Rasis in libra, 26. ^on. ca. 1.
it is wholesome to be drunk before meat, for it pearseth quickly to the
bladder: but if it be drunk upon a full stomach, it will rather make opilation
and stoppynge of the meserates, because it doth swiftly drive fode down,
before nature hath of him self digested it. And ye nature of white Wine is of
least warmenesse. The second Wine is pure Claret, of a clear Iacinct, or yelow
colour. This wine doth greatly nourryshe and warm the body, and is a wholesome
wine with meat, and is good for flegmatike folk, but very vnholsome for
young children, or them which have hoate livers, or pains in their head,
occasioned of hoate vapours, or smokes, for it is like unto fire, flax. The
third is black, or deep read wine, which is thick, a stopper of the belly, a
corrupter of the blood, a breader of ye stone, hurtful to old men, and
profitable to few men, except they have the flixe. And for the election of
wine says Auicen: that wine is best that is between new and old, Auice in 3.
prim. 2. doc. ca. 8.
clear, declining somewhat to read of good odor, neither sharpe nor sweet,
but equal between two, for it has virtue not only to make humours
teperate, warm, moist, but also to expel evil matter, which corrupted the
stomach and blood. In somer it ought to be delayed with pure clear water,
as Aristotle saith in his problems. And note this, that in driyeres, wines be
best and most wholesome, but in watery years, the grapes be corrupted, which
wine doth bring to the body many evil diseases, as dropsies, tympanes,
flixes, reumes, wyndes and such like, as Galen says. And thus to conclude of
wine, Galen in. reg. a^.
almighty god did ordeine it for the great comfort of mankind, to be taken
moderately, but to be drunken with excess, The heat of excess in drinking.
it is a poison most venomous, it relaxeth the senewes, brings palsy,
falling sycknes in cold persons, hoate fevers, fransies, fyghtinge, lechery,
and a consuming of the liver, to chollerycke persons. And generally there is
no credence to be given to dronkards, although they be mighty men. It makes
men like unto monsters, with cotinaunces, like unto burning cools: It
dishonours noble men, and beggereth poor men: and generally kills as many
as be slain in cruel battailles, the more it is to be lamented.


Iohn. What is Beer or Ale?


Humfrey. ALe doth engendre gross humours in the body, but if it be made of good
barley malt, and of wholesome water, and very well sodden, and stand five or
six days, until it be clear. It is very wholesome, especially for hoate
chollerycke folks, having hoate burning fevers. But if ale be very sweet and
not well sod in the brewing, it bring thin flamation of wind and choler in
to the belly: If it be very sower, it frets and nepeth the guts, is evil
for the eyes. To them that be very flegmaticke, ale is very gross, but to
temperate bodies it increases blood: It is partly laxative, and provokes
urine. Clean brewed Bear if it be not very strong, brewed with good hoppes,
doth cleanse the body fro corruption, is very holsom for the liver, it is an
usual or common drink in most places of Englande, which in dead is hurt made
worse with many rotten hoppes, or hoppes dried like dust which comes from
beyond the sea. But although there comes many good hoppes from thence, yet
it is known that the goodly stills, fruteful grouds of englad, do bring furth
to mas use, as good hoppes as grows in any place of this world, as by proof
I know in many places of the country of Suffolke: Where as they brew their
bear with the hoppes that grows upon their own grounds: And thus to
conclude of ale and beer, they have no such virtue nor goodness as wine have,
and the surphetes which be taken of them, through dronkenes: be worse the the
surphetes taken of wine.

Know this that to drink ale or beer of an empty stomach moderately hurts
not, but does good. Auicen. ^ter tra. ii. capitu. 8. Auero in come. Rasis
in. 4. alman. Capitu. ^.
But if one be fasting hungry or empty and drink much wine, it will hurt the
synewes, brings crape, sharpe agues, palseis, as Auicen, Auerois and Rasis
says.


Iohn. What is bread?


Humfrey. THe best Bread is made of clean sweet wheat which grows in
clay ground, and makes but little brene when it is ground, light leuened,
meanelye salted, and the bread to be baken in an oven not extremely hoate, for
burning of the bread, nor les then mean hot, for causing the bread to be
heavy and raw, the lighter the bread is, the more full of holes, it is y^
holsomer, as Auerrois and Rasis says. Auerrois in quint. Col.
And also bread must neither be eaten new baken, nor very staile or old, for
the one causes drienesse thirst smoking into ye head, Rasis in. 30. Alma cap. 3.
troubling the brains and eyes through the heate thereof: The other dries the
body and brings melacoly, humers, hurting memory. The best bread is that
which is of a day old, and the loves or manchets, may neither be great nor
little, but mean, for the fire in small loves dries up the moistnes or virtue
of the bread, and in great loves it leueth rawenes and grosenes. Galen. 1.
aliment. Cap. 2.
Read Galen in the properties of bread: Sodden bread, which be called symnels
or cracknelles, be very vnholsome, and hurts many one: Rye bread is wyndy
and hurtful to many, therefore it should be well salted bake with Annis
sedes, and commonly crusts of bread be very dri burns, they do engeder
melancholy humers. Therefore in great men's houses the bread is chipped and largeli
pared and ordynarely is made in brews, and sosse for dogs, which will help
to feed a great number of poor people, but that many be more affectionat to
dogs then men: Barley bread do cleanse, cool and make the body lean.


Iohn. What is Rise.


Humfrey. THere be many opinios in the virtue thereof, but I shall stay my self
with the judgment of Auicen: Aui. in. 2. Can. cap. 500. lxxviii.
Rise saith he, is hot dry hath virtue to stop the belly, it doth nourrishe
much, if it be sodden with milk, but it ought to be steped in water a whole
night before: if blaunched Almondes be stamped and with Rose water streined
into them, and sodden with cowes milk, it is very nutramentall.


Iohn. What be Almondes?


Humfrey. THe bitter Almondes be hoatter then the sweet Almodes. Dry Almondes
be hurtful, the milk of moist Almondes, where in burning steal is queched,
stops the flix: To eat Almondes before meat, preserves against drinkenes.
Of Walnuts.
Walnuts be holsom when they be new, to be eaten after fish, for they hinder
engendering of fleume. Simeon Sethi saith they are hot in the first, and dry
in the second degre, not wholesome before meat, Plinii in Liber. 22. Capitu, 8.
Plinii speaking of Metridatis the great king that Pompius, found of his
own hand writing, that two nuts two figs, and twenty few leaves staped
together with a little sail, and eaten fasting, doth defend a mam both from
poison and pestilence that day. Philberdes and haste nuts, Of Philbardes.
be hard of digestion, ill before meat, hurtful to the head and luges, if
they be roasted and eaten with a little pepper, they will help the running and
distillation of rumes. Chestnuttes if they be roasted eaten with a little honey
fasting, Of chestnuttes.
they healpe the cough, if they be eaten raw, although they greatly
nourryshe the boedy, yet they be hurtful for the spleen and fills the
bellyful of wind. Nutmegs be very good for cold persons, Of nutmegs.
comfort the sight memory, Auicen Capit. de nuce,
as Auicen says but without doubt Nutmegs doth combuste or burn sangwin
men, and dry their blood: and thus much have I spoken shortly of Nuts.


Iohn. What be Cloves, Galangell, and Pepper?


Humfrey. THey be hoate and dry, and as Rasis says: Rasis in li. 4. acho
doth comfort cold stomachs: and make sweat breath, and is good in the meates
of them that hath ill digestion* Black pepper is hoater then log pepper, doth
mightily warm the body, the grosser it is eaten, with fisshe or fruit, the
better it provokes urine, it is hoate and dry, Isaac in parti diebus.
in the fourth degre, therefore they do err that say pepper is hoate in the
mouth and cold in the stomach. Although pepper be good to them that use it
well, yet unto artificial women that have more beastliness then beauty and
cannot be content with their natural complexions, but would fain be fair:
they eat pepper, dried corn, and drink vinegar, with such like baggage, to
dry up their blood, A practise
and this is the very cause that a great number though not all, fall into
weakness, green sickness, stinking brethes, and oftentimes sudden death.


Ihon. What is sweet Callamus odoratus?


Humfrey. AN excellent sweet root and profitable for men, if the poticaries
keep it not until it be rotten, it is hot and dry in the beginning to the
midst of the second degre, it hath poor to clese, to dry, to waste all
winds with in the body without hurt. Galen doth greatly commend the savour of
it. They yt drink of this root sodden in wine, shall have remedy of the white
morphew, and recover good collers. And this have I proved, it helps cramps
sickenessis in the senewes, being drunk in wine, sodden with sage, it helps
the spleen, ye liver and raynes, and will cleanse the secrete terms of women,
and agmenteth natural seed.


Ihon. What is Ginger?


Humfrey. IT is hoot in the third degre, Auerrois in. 5. coll.
and moist in the end of the first if it be vncollered. White and not rotten it
is very good, most chiefly if it be conserved. And grene as Mesua saith: Mesua
in 4. distin.
it makes warm a cold stomach, and consumes winds, helps evil
digestion, and makes meat gooe easily down into the stomach.


Iohn. What is Setwall?


Humfrey. HOate and dry in the second degree, and is good, the powder thereof
to be drunk is most of effect against the pestilence except: Methredatum: It
is good against poison, wind choleric and cold passions of the harts, and
doth restrain vometes. The weight of eight granes doth suffice to be drunk in
ale or wine upon an empty stomach.


Iohn. What is Sinamon?


Humfrey. DIoscorides does say: there be many kinds of Sinamon, but
generally their virtue is this to help dropsies, winds or stopping of the
liver, and is hoate dry in the third degre. Ihon. What is Cassia fistula,
Seneca, and Rewbarbe?


Humfrey. CAssia fistula, if the Caane be heuie the cassia within black and
shining that is good cassia, if this be drawn new out of the caane half an
ounce or more at one time, mingled with sugar, and eaten of a fastinge stomach
in the morning it hath power to purge choler, to clese the rains of the back
it will fret and consume the stone, it purges very easily, and is pleasant
in taking, may be taken of children, weke women, and sick me, in the time of
their fevers, ye access of their fyttes, Of ^barbe and his operation.
eccepted. Rhabarbe do purge yellow collar by him self, two or three drames may
be take or a little more, so that there be a drame of spicanarde or sinamon, put
unto it. In summer to drink it with why. In winter with white wine: but ye
clean yellow rubarbe sliced, and put into infution all the night with whaye,
white wine, or Endiue water, and streyne it in the morning, doth greatly
purge the blood and liver, three or four drames with spicanarde a dram or
more. Seen Alexandria, if it be sodden in the broth of a cock or a hen
doth purge the blood and melancholy, very gently and comfort the hart. One
ouce of the clean small leaves of seen without codes or stalks, half a
quarter of one ounce of ginger, twelve cloves, finkle seed two drames, or else
two drames of sinamon tartar, half a drame, beaten all together in powder:
These do purge the head mightily to be taken before supper, ye weighte of
one drame in a little white wine.


Iohn. I would be glad to learn the virtue of Aloes?


Humfrey. THere be two kinds of aloes, one is named Succotrina, which is like
a liver, clear, brittle bitter, collered between read and yellow, this is
best for medicines (...) little of this being tempered with Rose water, being
put unto the eyes, helps the dropping watery eyes. Also it is put in many
excellent medicines laxative, as safron, myrre, aloes, mingled together. In the
form of pills, is the most excellent medicine against the pestilece, as it is
written in this book following. Honey and aloes mingled together, do take away
the marks of stripes and also doth mundify sores and ulcers, it doth cleanse
the abundance of choler, fleume from the stomach. It is not good to be
taken in winter, Auice in li. de sim.
for Auicen doth forbid it, but in the spring time, or harvest the powder
thereof. The weight of a frech crown mingled with the water of honey or mead,
and so droncke in the morning it doth cleanse both choler and flewme. Aloes
cabalin.
There is an other gross aloes which is good for horse tempored with ale; and
ministered as well to other great beasts as horses, the weight of half Anounce,
and thus much have I said of Aloes, but if aloes be clean washed, it is the
holsomer, many vnwasshed Aloes will cause emeroydes.


Iohn. IS the Safron that grow in England as good as that, that come from the
other side of the Sea?


Humfrey. Our English honey, Safron is better the any that comes fro aniother
strange or foren lad. But to thy question of Safron, it have virtue, ether in
bread or potage, to make the heart glad, it warm the body, it preserves fro
droknes, broke in ale or wine provokes acts venerus, inducith sleep, Pillule
^uffe.
purges vryn. Mirh a loes saffro, makes an excellent pil against yt pestilens,
two penny waght of safron powder roosted with the yolke of an egg very hard,
and the said yoke beaten in powder, twelf grains drink a mornings is good
against the pestilece, Safron, planten, Iuiry sod. The dicoction drink
helps the yellow Iaunders, it is dry in the first degre have virtue to
restrain.


Iohn. We plain men in yt country dwell far from great Cities, our wives and
children be often sick, at deaths door, we can not tell what shift to make we
have no acquantance with y^ a apothicaris, commonly we send for aquatitie or
mamsey what so ever out diseases be, these be our como medicine or else we send
for a box of triakle, when these medicines fail us we cause a great posset to
be made, and drink up the drink: think thou these medicines be not good?


Humfrey FOr lack of medicine God helps the people oftentimes by miracle, or
else a great number of men should pearish. But because the almighty God hath
covered the whole face of the earth with many precious simples, whereof rich
copossions be made. Therefore be nether so rude nor barbarous to think these
medicines good that thou hast rehearsed, for al diseases, although not hurtful
to some: but because many do receive more mischief then medicine in
counterfeit treacles. I shall rehearse unto thee what Valerius Cordus and
other, doth write upon the virtue of the precious triacle called Metridatum.


Iohn. I Would be glad to hear of that precious triacle, and his virtues.


Humfrey. THis excellent triacle Methrid^tum is next in quality and virtue to
Theriaca do differ but little, but only Theriacha is a little hotter and
stronger against venom of Snakes, edders, and serpents. It helps all
pains of the head of men or women if it come of cold, most chiefly of
melancholy and fear. It helps megreme, falling sickness, and all pains of
the forehead, droppynge of eyes. It helps tothe-ach, pains of the mouth,
chekes, if it be put in manner of a plaster, or else anointe the pained place.
It helps pains of the throat called Squinance, and also cough, appoplextia,
and passion of the lunges, and many grievous dollars and pains within the body,
drunk with the decoction of the flowers of pomgranetes or planten it helps
and stops flixes in the Ilias long guts winds or colic. The extention or
cramps be helped very much with this Metridatu droken with stilled watters.
Palses, sickenessis in the midriffe, the liuerrayns bledder, be cleansed thereby,
it provokes the menstruall terms in women being drunk with possit ale. If
Isope or iermader be sodden in the said ale it is excellent against the
pestilence, or poysone. If it be drunk but a little quatitie thereof, according
to the disease, strength or adge of the person. It is very good against the
stone, or for women which have a new disease peraccidentes called the grene
syckenes, there is nothing better against the biting of a mad dog then to
drink of this, and to annoynt the wound. If it be given in drink to any sick
body a little before the access or coming of the cold fyttes of cotidians,
tercians or quartens, so that it be drunk with wine teperatly warmed, Of the
exsilent treacle called Methridatum.
this Methridatu is a medicine of no small price, Democrates hath a godly
composition of it, an other excellent composition is of Cleopatre as Galen
writes. An other and the most excellent is the dyscryption of Andromachus
phisicion unto king Nero, but the chief father of this act, was king
Methridatus the noble king of Pothus after whose name it is called.


Ihon. In dede this is an excellent medicin, but I pray thee where shall I buy
it*


Humfrey. THe blind (fellow Iohn) do eat many af^ye, the plain meaning man
is oft disceiued. There is no trust in some of the Poticaries, for although
the vsurpacion of quid pro quo is tolerable, for their Succidanes yet to abuse
their simples or compoudes, it is not only theft to rob simple men: but also
murder to kill the hurtless.


Iohn. OF late time we have been so afflicted with sondrye sickenesses and
strange diseases that in many places we could get no phisicions to help us, and
when men be suddenly sick CC. miles from London, Cambridge or Oxforde, it is
to late for the patient to send for help, being infected with the pestilence.
I pray the tel me some good regiment for me and my family, if it please God
that it may take place.


Humfrey. I Shall be glad forasmuch as thou hast take pains to hear me al this
while, to teach thee a pretty regiment for the pestilece.


Iohn. Read it fair and softly, and I will take my yenne and write it.


Humfrey. CErtainly the occasion of this most fearful sickness comes many
ways: Oiffinici^ epidimi^ Gall.
as the change of the air from a good unto an evil quality, taking his
venomous effect of the vital spirits, which incontinent with al speed,
corrupts the spiritual blood. And sodely (as it were) an unmerciful fire, it
quickly cosumeth the whole body even to death, unless the wholesome medicine do
prevent and come to the heart, before the pestilent humour. And because it is a
very strong sickness, it is requisite to have a strong curing medicine. For
weak things will not prevail against so strong a matter. Therefore I pray you
note these six saiyngs, as air, diet, sleep, or watch, quietness or trouble,
Good air
and finally medicine. First walk not in stinking mists, nor by corrupt
marris ground, nor in extreme hoate whether, but in fair clear air upon high
ground in sweet fields or guards, having fire in your chamber, with sweet
perfumes, of yt smoke of Olibanium, or Beniamen Frankincense, being cold
whether. And in hoate whether, Roses, willow branches sprinkled with vinegar,
and often shifting the chamber is wholesome, fleing the South wind. Secondly,
diat, moderate eating meat of good disgestio, as all that have pure white
flesh, both of beasts fowls, good bread of wheat, partly leuened. Eat no
raw herbs, Young lettis
Pursten, Lettis, young Lettis, or sorrel, except with vinegar. Drink of
clear thine wine, not changed and use oft times vineiger with your meates,
and myngle not fish and flesh together in your stomach, to drink a tisant of
barley water, rose water, sorrel water, between meals is good, eight
sponefulles at ones.

Thirdly, Noone sleep.
beware you sleep not at none it brings many sicknesses, gives place to the
pestilence, and abates memory. For as y^ marigold is spread by the day, and
closed by the night: even so is man of nature disposed, although through
custom otherwise altered unto great damage and hurt of body. Sleep.
Eight hours sleep, suffices well to nature, but every complexion hath his
proper qualities, to sleep upon the right side is best, euell upon the left,
and worse upon the back. Exercise.
Fourthly, use moderat exercise and labour for the evacuation of the
excrementes, as swyfte going up hills, stretching forth arms and legs,
De^ueda sanitate. Gall.
lifting wayghtes, not very ponderous, forby labour the first and second
digestion is made perfect, and the body strengthened, this is a mighty defence,
against the pestilece, and many mo infirmities, whereas through idleness be
engendered all diseases both of the soul, and body, where of ma is compounded
made. Fifthlye, Mirth.
above all earthly things, mirth is most excellent and the best companion
of life, putter away of all diseases: the contrary in plage time brings on
the pestilence, through painful melacolike: which makes the body heavy and
earthly. Company Music, honest gaming, or any other virtues exercise doth
help against heaviness of mind. Sixtly medicine, the party being changed in
nature and condition, trimbling or burning, vomiting with extreme payne in the
day, Designis destilenci^lis.
cold in the night, and strange imaginacions. c. Apt to sleep, when these
signs do appear, give him medicine before.xii. hours, or else it will be his
death. Take therefore withal speed, Sorel, one handful staped with Few,
Enulacampana, Orange rindes, Sitron seeds: the great thistle rotes, Geneper
beries, walnuts clean piked, of each one ounce, stamp them all together,
then take pure sharpe vinegar, a quarter of a pint, as much ^uglosse water,
as much white wine, and temper your said receipts with these licoures. Then put
in two ounces of pure Methridatum andromachi, Methridatu andromachi.
which is an excellent triacle, and two drams weight of the powder of pure Bole
armein, mingle them al together in a very close vessel, and give the patient
a sponefull or more next his heart, and eftsoon as much more, let them that
take this sleep not during twety hours: or else take pure Triacle and set well
mingled in possit ale made with white wine, wherein sorrel have boiled a good
draught, and let an expert Surgeon let the patient blood upon the middle
vain called Mediana, Mediana Basilica.
or the hart vain: Basilica a good quatity according to the strength and age
of the patient, except women with child, and children. For the retaining the
said blood, would all turn to venym and incurable poison: And note this, that
blood be letten upon the same side that yt sore doth appear. If any appear for
many causes, sleep not.viii. hours after, use this most excelet pill often
times. Pillule Pestilencialis. Ruffi.
Take pure aloes epatik myrre, well washed in clean water, or Rosewater, of
each two drammes, and one dram of the powder of Saffro, mingled with little of
sweet wine, and tempered in a very small vessel upon yt coals, until it be
partly thick, or else incorporat al together in a mortar, the roll them up in
small round pills, use to swalowe half a dram of these pills two times a weke in
yt pestilence time a mornings.iii. hours before meat. An other medicen,
tormentil gentian setwell of each one dram, spicenarde drams.ii. nastick
drammes three, bole armen drams, viii. give two drames to yt patient or any that
fear the plage in the water of Skabeas, or Cardus Benedictus, then drink the
broth of a chicken, or pure wine, to ripe the sore, roast a great onion, take
out the core, put in triacle, and warm apply it to the place three or four
times renewed warm. And oil Olive, black soap, sour leaven, Lilly roots, of
each like quantitye boiled together, put in the ioyse of Few, and make a
plaster, this will break the said sore, Capos grese, yolks of eggs, swines
grease, barlie flower, linsede in powder, encorporated together, will make a
good heling plaster. Emplastrum diachilon, magnum discriptione filii Zacharia
doth resolve: and quence the hot ulcer. But in the time of the plage trust not
urines.


Again to the gentle Reader.
THe swift (runner in his race, gentle Reader) in a stobby or rockye ground is
in danger ef^sones to stumble or faule, where as the goer fair and softly in
the smothe path is safe. Even so, because I have had no coferrence with others,
nor lunge time of premeditatio in study, but with speade have cociliated this
small entitled Government of health, it can not be, but many things have missed
in the print, as in folio.iii. the.xviii. line, read sigh for fight, i^. fol.
lx. the second page.xi. line, read Olibanum for Olibulom: and in the end of
the Epistle to the reader, there is imprinted Wenzoar, for Auenzoer, in fol.
lxvi. line.xv. leave out because. And thus to conclude, I will by Gods grace
join another book, called the Healthful medicines unto this Government, and
at the next impressio such amends shall be made, that both silable and sentence
shall be diligently kept in true order to thy contentation, God willing, who ever
keep the in health. The first of March, the year of our salvation. 1558.

VVilliam Bulleyn.


