A comfortable Regiment, and a very wholesome order against the most perilous
Pleurisi whereof many do daily die within this Cite of London, and other
places: and what the cause is of the same, done by William Bulleyn. December.
8.

Anno salutis. 1562.

Imprinted at London, by Ihon Kingston.

To the right worshipful Sir Rob ^rt ^ingf^lde of Lc hryngham knight.
WHEN BY THE arguments of most true pedigrees, old antiquitees: it is to be
(well) proved, that you are not the fruit that is soon ripe and soon rotten,
or came in yesterday and gone tomorowe. But most anciently have come from
the elder Britains, a people wo^thie of memory, and at that time d^elled in
your Castle in Wails. Flourishing in knightly est^te, and st^ll have proceeded
in the same, being linked with many houses of great honour, favoured of kings,
without male fortune, or turning the globe backward, as it is sometime
spiteful alas, against great Princes them selves These things considered,
it is a good argument of Gods ^. viii.
blessing to the third and fowerth generation, of them that fear him: and long
life do happen to the that honour their paretes. And that is the cause of your
long branches deep roots and hard foundation, not upon the slipping sands:
but upon the rock of honour, invincible to be cast down, as log as you do
unfeignedly love God, and foresee the end. These your virtues are more to be
commended, then the air or pla cyng of your mansion is to be praised, ne'er
unto waters, moist meadows, misty rot fens: also the said masio stands,
very lowe, environed with a deep water, and your woods, hills, sweet fields
but a little to far of. And albeit, that many of our worthy aucestors, did ru
to the uttermost step of nature, yet diverse of the were trapped, and
overthrown in their race by death, in their tether, or lusty years, a^
appears by their Epitaphs, fixed upon their solitary tombs and graves lying
in your church of Lethringha (and although as the proverb saith: that the
young Lambs skin do come to the market, as soon as thold shepes. Yet the old
sheep, when he can live no longer for age: the Lambs and lusty young sheep
do perish, through rotten air, and pestilent pasture, in corrupted soil).
Even so unclean air, as a cause primitiue, do bring the cause Antecedente.
To corrupcion of humours, stoppyng the natural virtues, infecting the blood,
bredyng sundry Apostumacions, sores, and sickenesses in the body, and finally
comes the cause Coniunct, and finishes the malice and extreme vengeance
against nature: and kills the body, except God by miracle, medicen by
virtue, nature by strength do preuaile. This evil considered, I am so bold t^
dedicate unto your Maistership, this small Regiment, against the Pleurisi
which have slain many hundredes: shortly, the causes, signs, and cures:
that it may please you to read them for in the time of occasion, they shall
not be hurtful. But comfortable to as many as will consider them well: and to
this Book I shall GOD willing, shortly add. xxx. sicknesses more, their
causes, signs, cures, with diat accordynglie to them. Thus wishing your
increase of health, worship and lunge life: and to my good Lady, and your
children the same. From London.

Your maistershippes ever. VVillyam Bulleyn.
Anno salutis. 1562.
W. B. To the reader.
GOod reader, through the sins of this wicked world, GOD almighty have
placed over us, ii. mighty sharpe plagues, which he do threat us with all.
The one from cold Saturne, in the ^unciente house of sickness, threatening to
the aged and Melancholic, many evils to the body, as Quartaines, Consumption.
c. And hor rible bloody Mars. crepeth into the house of death, arms him self
with Fire and Dart* threatening the Chollorike with short, hot, and painful
death. c. These are two evil neighbours to dwell in one year so ne'er together,
God of his mercy govern them, which have al thin ges in his hands, both
life and death, and defend us from soche vengeance, as we have deserved. And
grant that this little Regiment, may do pleasure and comfort unto the^m,
which do read it: and with diligence soberlie observe it to Gods glory,
their own help, against this dangerous plague. GOD of his mercy grant
it, and that we may amend, and remember our end.

AMEN.
Deu. xxviii The Lord shall smite thee with swelling* with fevers, heate,
burning, and with the sword. c.
A regiment against the Pleurisie.
O Death, says the Wiseman, Eccle. xx^ and. viij.
how bitter is the remembrauce of thee, to that man, that seeks rest and
comfort in his substance, and worldly riches: Unto the manne that have nothing
to vere him, and that hath bodily fortune and prosperitee in all things: yea,
unto him that is yet able to receive his food. O death, how acceptable and
good is thy judgment, unto the poor and needful: and unto him whose strength
^aileth, and that is in his last age, and that in al things is full of ^are
and fearfulnes. And to him that is in despair, and Poverty, kene^se a^ are
the gr^test enemi^ man^e.
have no hope, nor paciece. Be not afraid of death: remember them that have
been before thee, and that come after thee. This is the judgement of the Lord
God over all flesh: and why would thou be against the pleasure of the
highest? Whether it be ten, one hundred, or a thousand ^eres, Death asks not
how lunge one have lived. And for Adams disobedience, no flesh shall escape
that Sentence, that thou shalt return, into the dust or clay en. iij.
whereof thou wart made. And although the Philosopher naturally do define,
death, to be the separacion of the body from the soul: without meting again
for ever. And that the cause of death, is coldness and dryness. Frigiditas,
ficcitas, ^ristot. de ^ngitudine ^bre. vit.
and that life does consiste per calidum humidum, and what so ever is
corrupted, or killed, is destroyed of his contrary. c. These are natural
causes to mortal me, not repugnant to reason: but to ascend and climb above
reason, apprehendyng ^ithe is a^ue reason.
faith, the perfect way to everlasting life: there we shall plainly se, the
cause of death is sin, and of our help again in Christ. Andthus it is proved
by the Apostle saint Paule. Rom. 5. As by one ma sin entered into the world,
and death by the means of sin: even so Death also went over all men. c.
And grace, life, and salvation came by Iesus Christ, which died for us ^he
cause of ^ath, ^s sin
all. Now, we that do believe in Iesus Christ, do well know the cause of
death is nothing but sin: but yet this sin, which is a strong enemy unto
grace, is of soche force, that it moves GOD, greuouslie to plague us, by
sundry means, and makes Death fearful, painful, and horrible, specially to
them, which live not to die, and care for nothing, saying in their souls, there
is no GOD: and this is the Psalm. xi Iob. xiiij.
misery that Iob said: Man that is borne of a woman, lives but a short
time, and is full of misery, and that was well said. And of this his
lamentation, may well be gathered two evils: The one of the Two gre^
miseri^s.
mind, as ignorance, hardness of heart, evil thoughts, wrath, zeal,
fearfulnes of conscience, Idolatry, whoredom. c. with infidelity the mother
of mischief, which evil or misery, moves God to plague the world, with
outward miseries: as when Moises said unto Israell, if you disobaie your Lord
your GOD, your blessings shall turn into cursings, as in field and town,
the riches into poverty, destruccio of cattle, frui^te and corn, children,
shame rebuke, bondage, captivity: botch, plage and Pestilence. c. Read the.
xrviij. of Deuteronomium, and there you shall see all these miseries that Iob
do mean, and the causes of all our plagues: and thereby all men may perceive,
it is on^lie God, that blesses and curses in every age, all people, that do
strive against him. What should I rehearse, how Sodome perished ^ene. xix.
with fire from heaven: Or how Jerusalem perished in hunger, eating of their
amenta^io Ieremie. ^h^pt. iiii. osephus de ello ludae.
own dung children also, with swords beasts, and fire. c. What do this
help to a great number, but rather with Pharao, do indurate their hearts
against grace: God plageth no people, but first do admonish them, saying:
Turn unto ^alach. iij.
me, and I will turn unto you, saith the lord. And in the Psalmes saith the
Prophet: this day if you will hear his voice Psal. 84. ^ebre. iiii.
harden not your hearts, as in the prou^acion, and as in the temptation in the
wilderness. c. But rather prevent, and let us worship and fall down before the
lord our maker: For he is the Lord our God, and we are the sheep of his
hands. And let us confess our sins before God, with the holy Prophet
Daniel, that we have sinned. Y^ O Lord, unto us, to our Kings ^aniel. ix.
and princes, to our forefathers, and to us all, that have offended thee,
belongs open shame: But unto thee, O Lord our God, pertains mercy and
forgiveness: as for us, we are gone back fro him, and have not obeyed the
voice of the Lord our GOD, to walk in his laws, which he laid before us,
by his servants the prophets: yea, all Israell have transgressed, 2. Reg.
24.
and gone back from thy law, so that they have not harkened to thy voice.
Wherefore, the curse and other, that is written in the law of Moises, the
seruaunt of God, (against whom we have offended) is poured upon us. Let us not
forget, how that God will for the sins of kings, sometime The people ^lagu^d
for the sins o^ Princes.
punish the pleople: as example for Dauids sin, God did in three days kill
of the people of Israel* l^. M. men, and yet suffered Dauid to live. Take
example by that plague, how to fear god, oh princes.

A most fearful mortality of the Pestilence, both of man and beast, fell
upon Exod. viii ix. x. and.
Pharaoes land, the first begotten of every living thing, for rebellyng
against God, were suddenly slain of the plague.

The plague of Israell, is to be had in perpetual remembrance, where many
thousands were destroyed of the Pestilence, for the whoredom of Israel.

Cicero lib. i^. de oratore, shows that L. Crassus a noble learned man, and a
famous Lawyer, in the same day, when he sudden ^r^e picu^sie.
mos^ sharply pleated against Philip the Consul, he died of the Pleurisie.

Volateranus the famous historiographer, most ^earfully affirms, to the
terrible example of all men. That there was a Pestilence at Constantinople,
whereof died three. C. thousand, in a small time.

At Florence. Anno dm. 140. There was thirty thousand men, women, and
children, died of the Pestilece. Anno. 1348. was a wonderful hunger and
Pestilence throughout the world, especially in Italie, scant. x. did l^ue,
whereas. C. died. The same year at Paris in France died of the Pestilence. l.
M. persons. And this year, ^no dm. ^. D. lxij.
there is hunger, sword, pestilence also.

About that time, when the Cimbrias came over the Alpis, there was so^he a
ba^aill seen in the heaven, that from the ^ornyng, until night it appeared,
says P^inie. And the Moon rained blood, great pestilece did follow, mortal
battle: that the bones of y^ slain, did make many walls about the vineyards,
after many years.

Now, let us come home to our own ^ealme, and not forget how God plagued all
this land, with hunger and pestilence ^oste fearfullie, that there was scante
the ^iuyng left, to bury the dead. The whole ^tate destro^ed, the Commons
wasted: and ^inally (the sinful) king Cadwalider the ^aste of the Britains,
poorly departed ^o Rome, where Antichriste do dwell, ^nd there was buried:
Whose roots and ^raunches of honour, had remained and ^rowen in the Britain
land, by the space ^f. 1822. years ante m^ar. And through Pride and extortion
of the great men, Anno dni. vi. c. lxvii.
^hickednesse of the Judges, Idolatry, ^nd coueitousnesse of the Cl^rgte,
reb^l^on of the poor men: all went to hauo^ke ^nd came suddenly to nothing,
but mis^hief in few days, wo and wretchedness.

In king Uortigers days, soche leche^e, Anno dni* cccc. xlv.
dr^nknes, idleness, specially did reign in the great men, that soche evil
did en crease, that God poured for the soche Pe stilence every where, with
hunger, rob byng, insurreccion, and plague: that few were left a live to till
the ground, where upon the king was forced, to fetch in for rain people, by
Hengis and Horsos, the strangers to his destruction his peopl^

In these days were many sicknesses, Anno dni. 476.
uncurable to be healed: Gods wrath was so hot, and virtue so cold.

Soon after the conquest, of king William, Anno dnj. M. lxvii.
duke of Normandie, when the people were subded to him, his enemies vanquished,
and the Knights Fees rated, and himself placed with Croune and sceptour. The
king took the number of the acres of Land, in all this realm, the names and
nombers of all the people: and also had knowledge, what cattall there was in
all the land. After which suddenly ensued soche hunger, and cruel fears^
hot burning Botches, Pleurisis, and Pestilence, that the people died in soch^
number, that till age decayed, and famin^ ensued with rot of cattle. A
fearful ex^ ample to Princes, the noble men and commons of every land, where
soche plagues do come: that neither Physic nor money can help. For Salomon
says, riches shall not help in the day of vengeance, but rightuousnes
shall deliver fro death.

The plagues in the days of Edward Plagues King Edward the* (...) and king
^ward the ^wert^ day
the iii Edward y^. iiij, of most fearful pestilece of many thousands in this
realm in every place: great famine did follow with his. ij. servants,
heaviness of mind and poverty. And in every kings days sins, either the
Pestilence with the botch, the small sparkling Pox, the cruel quar^aine, the
hot inflamed Pleurit^, the stranglyng Squinance, the lepros Frech Pox, or
the sudden smotheryng sweat, have slain many one. These are gods plagues,
Plagues.
Gods vengeance, scourge instrumetes for his enemies: as the present grievous
plague in France, of persecution, honger, sword Pestilece, in these pitiful
days, sorrowful time. But Exsurgat deus, and confound his enemy, the cruel
duke of Guise, with the bludsheding papists

Also of his mercy and pitee, defend our realm fro all enemies, both
against almig^tie God, and the quenes Majesty, God preserve her: give grace
good God to every man, to live in thy blessed rules, which we have professed in
our baptism, to fight against the vain world, the crafty devil, and filthy
flesh: and to run the race in that path, which God have commanded us to
walk in. To hear his voice, to bear his cross, to obaie his ministers, to
love our brethren: to hurt no manne by word or deed, to do as we would
be done to. And then we shall not need to fear death: for it shall be our
best ^he life of a ^risten man.
exchange, into an happy land forever, where no trouble is, nor ye turning
whele of Fortune. And this is a good way, this is to seek first the kingdom
of Christ, and all good gifts will follow. This is lath. vi.
our foundation, even Christ, which gives health to body and soul: which
works both by mean and Miracle. By miracle, when with his word he raised
^on. xi.
the dead. c. By means, when with clay, spittle. c. He made the blind to
see, lark. vii.
and the deaf to hear, and by this mean we may use also means in his
name, ^o heal our brethren that are sick: which mean, if it be his blessed
will to prosper it, I will do my good will, to set forth the cause,
signs, and cure of the perilous Pleurise: which have s^ain a great number of
people, November and December 1562. And thus I begin the matter, as
follows.

A Pleurise is a certain ap^s^umacio bred in the Pellicles of the ribs,
Lacertes, between the said ribs: and sometime in the place called Midriffe,
The di^inic of a Pieur^*
or Diaphragma. And it is also to be noted, that the breast is compact with.
xxiiij. ribs, between the same are certain Lacertes, to bind close, or draw
together: also to sprede or delat. For the attraccion of the air to the
Canill bones and breasts. c. To expulse the superfluous matter, contained
within the Pellicles thin skin, or Membrana, which are within the ribs In
this place is bred a painful, dagerous apostumacion, with peril of life,
either in the lift or right side: creping with his venom unto the Furculer or
Canill bones and breast. And also descending with painful sorenes under the
rim, called the Diaphragma, or Midriffe: and this sickness do daily kill many
men, women, and children, very suddenly, and bring them quickly out of the
wa^e, from this world. The common people, which do not know how to cure it,
and call it a new sickness, which have been ever, lacking help by Gods
ministers, or mean of the P^isicion, who the almighty have ordained for
infirmity: where as one do escape by Gods providence, or strength of nature,
ij. c. give place to life, for want of his singular mean of cure, by Medicene.
The same God be always praised for his mer* cie to us, for his blessing of
knowledge, the mother of medicen, in the time of sickness.

Note also, that there be two kinds of ^wo sundry ^leurisis.
Pleurisis, the one called verae, or the certain true Pleuriti. The other
mendosa, or else no verae, the false, or not the true Pleurisie there is no
distin^c^o between the in their places or mebers (as some learned men do sa^e)
but of the matter contained. It is also called the very Pleurisie, when it
comes of blood, or mingled with blood and choler. The false Pleurisi, is when
it comes of phlegm, or of melancholy.

This ^ote apostumacion of the Pleurisie Verae.
is not, except his essence being, and dolor be within the Pellicles: and the
o^her is without, as among the Lacertes or pellicles, Non vera
covering the ribs, ne'er the short ribs, which are under the Midriff. Further
it is to be well noted, that every pleurisie have three sundry causes.

1. Primatiue. 2. Antecedent. 3. Coniuncte.
THe cause Primatiue, comes many Primatiu^
ways, as (God comfort them) a great number of poor people, for want of
clear Ale, Bear, or Wine, are forced to drink cold water, whereas a great
number of monstrous drunkardes, have aboudance of all drinks, until drink have
consumed them, and never seas, in consuming drink. Also through eating of
unripe fructes herbs, or rotten mutten, Drunkar^
or taking either to much sudden heat or cold, in, and after travail,
labour, or play used immoderatly, out of order, waiting witty foresight or
providence, to foresee this great peril, distemperyng the body, and procuring
the most dangerous pain or sickness. To this Primatiue cause may be joined
grosnesse of the air, the time of the year, and the natures of the Wind. As
the Prince or spring of Physic, says. Aphori. 33. lib. 3. Hyenie uero morbi
laterales. c. In Winter, saith he, Pleur^ses, sornesse of the lunges, reumes
and coughs, do rain in Winter. Further says he. Apho. 5. lib. 3. Quando
praeualuerit aquilonia tempestas. c. When ^rth * ind ^lous.
the North wind blows a long time together, then it breeds Cough,
Collikes, and Pleurises. And also it destroieth many women, causing them to
bring forth abortiues, and vntymely fruits, before their maturitee or
ripeness, and them selves dye, before age do prevent them, or youthful
years forsake them. Therefore, ^deracion c.
let all pleople take heed of extremitees and use moderate mean, in labour,
erercise, eating and drinking. And observe the time of the year, region,
complexion, qualitees and age, therefore both men and women, must give none
occasion thorough abuse of them selves, to be hurtful to them selves. As to
take great cold after sweating, labour, wrestling, dancing. c. Or to drink
cold water, in the time of heate: or lye against the ground, in the gardens
or fields. c.

Cause Antecedent.
WHen these former evils Primatiue, have made nature passive, and subject to
them with infectio, then it comes to pass, that replecion of humours,
proceeds against nature, with abundance and fullness. Corrupting the blood,
both vital and nutrimentall, obstructyng or stoppyng their virtue and course,
boiling and adustyng the natural virtues. Sometime it may begin of the
Primatiue, as in drinking much new Wine: which have tartaru in it, or soche
Beware ^ new win^
dregs hurting the body. Read Anicen de vino, and what mischief comes of
evil Wine, take experience of them, which are hurt by the same evil new
wine.

Cause Coniuncte.
WHen as the Primatiue have bego ^oniuncte.
the cause, the Antecedet take his effect, y^ more venomous against nature,
working all things to the worse part: preparing, even as the Hen sitting upon
her Egg. Now comes to the Coniuncte, and bring forth the Chicken, finish
thapostumacio in the Pellicles or skin in the ribs, Panicles and Lasartes,
then comes the putrifaccion, after it is placed and gathered together into a
sore.

Note also, that every cough, without ^ugh is not ^waies a ^ne of the ^euriti.
the foresaied signs joined to it, is not the very Pleurisie: for then it
would make a great number afraid when the^ cough, (as we do se the poor
people) as the plowman, boys, Neteherdes, and Shepeherdes, and them which go
barefooted, or tenderlynges with lined Shoes, furred gounes, double caps God
wot, which do take cold also, and escape the same with out peril of death,
or the very Pleurisie, but not without sickness often times.

And these signs shall serve to know the Pleurisie: if you mark them well. As
do follow.

1. Pricking in the side. 2. Sharpe fever. 3. Short breathe. 4. Cough with
hedache. 5. Swift pulse, without order or time.
The first.
THe first is painful pricking, with Pricking the side.
a sharpe pricking under the side, by the reason of the hot apostumacion, of
hot Blood or Choler, being placed upon the Lacertes, and the rim or skin by
the ribs: which are very sensible, and some do feel, and are quickly
offended with any thing, that do oppress or touch them, by any soche evil
means. Read Galen. v. de inter. cap. ij.

The second.
A Sharpe fever, or heate above nature, A sharpe fever.
by the reason of opilacion, or stoppyng of the way of respiracion, or clean
drawpng air or breathe, by thinstrumentes of the lunges to the hart: through
which evil matter chokyng the way, being chouched ne'er the heart,
putrefaction do follow, with her disparced foul smoke, or feuerus air: also
there is vicinite or nerenesse between the Lacertes, whereas this evil matter is
coteined. And the hart being the Prince of life, wherein the blood vitalle is
placed, and now stands the heart in peril, through this fever joined with
the Pleurisie, or pricking in the side. Note also, that every pricking y^ ^ery
pric^g in the ^, is not the ^uriti.
seem to be in the side, is not the Pleurisie: as the sickness of the spleen,
wind. c. But every Pleurisie have pricking in the side, the causes are declared
before manifestly.

The third.
Shortness of breathe, or much difficulty ^ortnesse ^reather
to draw it, the pain is so much, through the foul matter or filthy
humours, oppressing, binding, and letting the instruments of breath or wind:
to use their natural working with all, in conveying air up down, with out
which none can remain a live, but turn soon to corruption, because they want
the Organ, which are the bellows conveying hot vapours forth, letting
infreshe air, to comfort the life. For, man do not live by meat and drink
only, but also by air: for lacking air, brings Air.
death, and what should the dead do with meat or drink. And Hyppocrates do
prove, every living thing, both manne, beast, trees, and herb, are nourished
of three things: as meat, drink, and air, saying. Corpora enim omnia tum
hominum, tum reliquorum quo{que} animantium Hyppocr. de flatib.
a triplici nutrimento sustentatur horum, autem nutrimentorum nomina hec, cibus
potus, spiritus.

The fowerth.
THen comes the painful cough, through stoppyng, straightness, and pain in
the member, of the spirits of breath and air, called the lunges, nature
feeling foul corrupted matter: What dang is in cough the lunges*
creepyng sharply into the straight passage of the breast, and so to the
lunges, and is harde to be expulsed, and so is the cough finished, which is no
small ruin to life, a shorter of time, coupled with death it self, except cure
prevent it with speed.

The fifte.
ANd pulse of y^ arms or legs, that ^ulse.
do beat, always moving the hart cariyng up down the blood and spirit of
life: whereas the Physician prouidetly (in feeling of the) do judge the state of
the body: observing what may chance to the paciet, either life or death. And
in this sickness of y^ pleurisi, the pulse, as Galen al firmeth de causis pull.
textu. 8. they are quick and thick, without rule, unequal, beats up and down
like unto a saw in propertee: swift the one way, slack or stopping (...)
pulse in (...) P^e^iti.
the other way. Because the mebers in whom the apostumacio is placed, is si?
new and skinny, and the pulse is hard, sine we also, with cottes fro the
hart. And the more this dolorus sickness do augmet, with thincrease of pain,
then y^ more cruel ler the pulse do beat, both swiftlier, quicker, stronger,
unequal, keeping no time.

The times of the Pleurisie, are four in number.
1. Beginning. 2. Augmentyng. 3. State. 4. Declining.
IN the beginning the accidences, with small pain, little ague, and the cough
scant perceived: and no spattle but thin, cold, and watery. And cotineweth Who
so in th^ beginning (...) the Pleuris^ do spent wel^ do shorten the sickness*
but three or four days, according to the quantity of the matter, and the
strength of the natural virtues.

Augmenting, when the spattle do begin to ware gross, and in colour red or
green: with increase of pain, beginning with signs aforesaid, and then the
spattle is moist raw and loathsome.

The state is, when as the spattle, whithe is caste forth by the mouth, is
digested easelie spit forth, altered in colour Gal. Aphc xij. lib. i.
to whitishenes, and is so cocted and warmelie baked in the breast, that it
can not be increased, or grow any higher or greater, but the matter is now spit
forth, and ready to decline and amend the patient. But if it be long time,
raw and coide, Perilous si gnes to be o^ served in th^ sickness of th^ ^de.
Read Gale. aphc Hypp. i. xi
and the patient can not well spit, then it is perilous: and when much
watch, and no sleep will follow, with pain in the head, rednes of the face,
shortness of breath, and the frenzy with idleness of words, laughing and
weeping coupled together, with sudden mutacions of the mind: these are perilous
signs, fearful dangerous to the Pleuritike man. And if a volutarie flixe in
the ^leuritf.
flux of the belly, do suddenly follow in the pleurisie: or chough of the
lunges, as Hyp pocrates affirms, is perilous. A morbo laterali vel pulmonio
hahito alui profluuium adueniens maluin. Aphoris. 16. lib. 6.

Declining, or when nature have caste forth his venom: and when the malice of
corrupted humours, have done their worst, and are overcome by the natural
virtues and medicen. Then, although the body be very weak, yet by little and
little, nature will help her self, and recover health again. Note further, who
so have the pleurisie, and is not purged in fowertene days, the flure will
turn to sanius matter as Hyppocrates do affirm: Si pleuricj in xiiij.
diebus non purgantur. c.

And furdermore, if this Pleurisie be turned into sanius, or evil corrupted
matter, and digested, cleansed, or purged within fowertie days following, the
breaking forth of the same matter: the patient shall do well, if not purged,
then shall he fall into a consumpcion: as the divine Hyppocrates says.
Quicun{que} ex morbo lateralj suppurantur. Si in quadraginta diebus purgantur.
c. Aphoris. xv. lib. v. Therefore, let al people beware in the declining and
mendyng, for fear in eschuyng Scylla Charybdem do not destroy the: that is
from one mischief to an other, from sick bed, to rotten grave.

Note also, that with ripyng syruppes or medicen for the Pleurisic: that there
be no more matter made ready, to be spit forth, then the patient may
well caste forth at ones, or by little and little: therefore, Prepare no more
matter then may be spette casette forth, by little and little.
give the Syruppes, according as the patient may have strength, to convey
the same. For, like as many for lack of ripyng medicens do die: even so
others are strangled choked, when it stop the throat with coming abundantly,
and want strength time, to utter the same by order.

The Pleurisie either true or false, are in four sundry bodies: and are seen
by the spattle and urine. c. Proceeding of the Pleurisie fo* were ways.
great burden or abundance of humours in the liver, Spleen. c. Or reume drop*
pyng down, into the extreme muscles o^ the breast. c.

To the

j. Bloody or sanguine swet^ cruente spattle, with vrin^ red. ij. Cholorike
people, spattl^ yellow, urine yellow with great pain and hedache. iij.
Flegmaticke frothlie and gross white spattle, with urine whitishe gross, with
lesser pain. iiij. Melacholike blackish spittle with urine of y^ same colour.
NOw sir, if this Pleurisie do come Galenus de quatuor ^umoribus
of the abundance of blood, which do exceed with boiling heate, so that the
patient do spit blood. The^ saith Galen, let the paciet be letten blood (in
the same side) that the pain may deminish Blod letting ^uste be on he pained
de: but may of the old ^riters hold he contrary.
for the Arabians, as Auicen, Rases, Hayle Serapias, and also many of the
Latines did begin the cure, to help the Pleurisie with blood letting. Where as
blood do aboud open the vain: Vbi Sanguis vehementer abundat, ibi secare
venam licit. But when the plethoricke or body is full of evil humours,
Celsus.
be taken with the Pleurisie, then Galen. li.
it is neither good, to begin with hot fomentes of herbs, attractions or
Oils to Note.
the sick or painful place. For like as the hot things do stere and move
the place even so they draw more to hurt the body then cleanse by euauporacion
by the poores therefore, soche fomentes as are applied to the place, are not to
be used, if they do not ease and help the pain quickly: and so Hyppocrates
lib. ii. Vict. acut.. Therefore nothing ought to be first taken in hand, to
be drawn forth, excepted the matter be before riped, and made apt to run,
and smoke forth without stop, therefore the matter called flegmon, or an
exceeding hot inflamacion, burning above nature, infectyng the rest of the
blood: and with the fire and heate thereof, infects the whole blood. Nothing
is better to quench, and also diminish the same sooner, then to open the vain,
that have societee and fellowship therewith: not onelic the Pleurisie is helped
by opening the Iecor or liver vain But also all burning agues, so it be opened
^alenus in ^den. febri^s. i. apho. ^men. 24.
soon after the beginning, according to the age, strength of the body, and
colour of the blood. And in this grievous sickness, I have good experience by my
self and others, the patient shall be vehement dry above measure, coueityng
drink: in this case, there is nothing better to drink, Note.
then Ptisan, that is to say, clean pilled, hulled or cried Barley without
rind, sodden, as I will note hereafter, and to drink it continually two days:
and at night to drink Almonde milk made of Ptisan, called Barley water. Or
the thin broth of a chicken, if the patient be weak. And to wards the
declining of the sickness, to eat small fish, that feed in fresh rivers
upon the stones is good, as Minewes, Gudgions, good diate
and also Smeltes are good meat in clean sweet broth. And lye upon the side
that is grieved, or towards the same, and beware of these four things
following, which are great enemies to life. Read Galen lib. ii. de tuenda
Sani. i. Capi. And also four other things to them.

From

j. Fear, which choleth the heart with blood. ij. Ire, which wtdraweth the
blood contrary fro the hart. iij. Dred, which brigeth sudden weakness to all
the body. iiij. Care, for things done and paste. v. Sharpe things, as
Vinegar, or things binding. vi. Wine, which inflames the blood. vij. Spise,
as Pepper, Grains, Ginger are burning. viij. Salt, for nipping and fret tyng.
THese passions of the mind, are wourse then the Pleurisie it self: and the
body being sick, and having Perilous danger.
these affections or mocions is like fire, and gunpouder together, which will
make short work, sooner for the grave, then for the Phisicion. Of this you
may read in my Bulwark, and the frui^tes of them. Now further to the
purpose, and cure of the body, not plethorice, or not full of evil humours.
Thus you must begin as follows to help, if God say Amen.

After that the vain is opened, let it bleed until it do alter and
change, into a better colour, red and clear, observing the strength, time
and age. fear not to let boys and children blood in this case of six, seven,
or eight years of age, some ounces two, according to their strength, keeping all
soche as be letten blood from sleep after, during four or five hours after
the said blood letting. And one great learned famous Doctor of this time,
called Amatus Lucitanus of lanua, of good judgment, and great experience, do
vouch my sayings to be true, for letting children blood. He hath written
goodly books of Physic, commending blood letting very much: of which
blood letting, I will speak more at large here following. Next blood letting, as
Leonardus Futchius saith ^tchi de ^dendis ^rbis. li. 2.
follow with a gentle Clister, if nature of her self do not purge, going to the
stole, casting for the excrementes, and then take heed.

A Clister.
Take the leaves of Mercurie, purple Uiolettes, Spinache, Cichorie of the
garden, of each of thenn one handful, clean Barley one vnse: sees altogether
in a just quantite of clean water, unto the third part do remain in
seethyng, of the which portion, take a pound waighte, putting thereunto new
drawn Cassia Fistula, fro the cane one vnse and a half, and the Oils of
Chamo^ill, and Uiolettes of each one uncle and a half, new freashe butter
half one uncle, white Salt one dragme, that is the eight part of an uncle,
mingle altogether, and make your Clister, conueighing it neither to warm, nor
to cold

An other Clister.
Take Mallowes, Blittes, Barley hulled, Leonel. F*uent. de ^
of each one handful, sodden in water till the part be wasted of this water,
being strained from the herbs and Barlie, take xv. vnces, in which dissolve
Cassia Fistula and red sugar Candy, of each one uncle, oi^ of violettes. iij.
vnces, salt dragmes. ij ^ ^olke of one Egg, make as before.

When the body is gently eased by this Clister: then nothing is better, then to
apply a fomente in manner following, to the pained place.

A Fomentum.
TAke Chamamill, Melilote, Dill, ^oment or ^ashyng.
the sedes of Flax or Lint, Fenicreke called Farnigrece, Bran, of each half
one hadfull: sees these in running water, asmoche as shall suffice, a pottle if
you will or more, with a spoge hot in this water, often times apply it to the
pained place, both to humecte, moist, and make soft, to open the place of the
pores also. You may take Wormwood, Chamamil Dil, Primrose leaves, Rose
leaves, Flax bladder th herbs.
seed and Melilote, of each like quantitee, with Oil of Roses, running water,
put them in a strong Ox bladder, make fast the mouth with a thread, and then
seethe this bladder in a Kettle of water, until it be hot: then take it
forth, and put it in a thin linen clothe, and warm lay it just to the place,
which is pained of the Pleurisi verae. But if it be not the very Pleurisi,
but windy, then make a dry bag as do follow, warm apply it to the place.

The bag or twilt for the Pleurisie.
TAke the sede called Milliu, tares, Brom, of each one hand full, Sal^e one
handefull: you may put in Wormewoode to this if you will. Mingle them
together, twilt them in a linen cloth, then fry them to warmness drines in
apan, with a little strong Vinegar, and warm apply it to his side. Of this
read Leonellus Fauetinus, Leonardus Futchius, in their wholesome learned
regimetes of health, or medicens. And old Hyppocrates. ii. rege. acuto. cap.
iii. many do use to draw forth Sanius matter by boxyng, but yet let it ripe
first. Note also, that Heben mesueus saith to box, do nothing else, but to
draw evil matter from the bottom of the stomach, A good saying of Met for
boxyng
unto the skin, that is perilous so to do, as many rash Surgeons, through the
counsel of the like Phisicions, do use the same. And except yt body be made
clean first by purging, or blood letting, boxing do bring evil matter to the
pained place, there do increase multiply the pain, causing the dolor to be the
greater, to the peril of life.

Furdermore, in this dangerous sickness to mankind, whereof a great nober have
perished, many years past, daily do and hereafter shall: because they neither
do well consider the causes, signs cure, diat, Symptomata or mischief that may
follow as the Perepneumonia that is thinflamacio at the ^umacio in luges is.
of the lunges, with a sharpe fever, and shortness of breath, through yt hot
burning apostumacio, bred in the lunges, of blood choler, dryness of tong,
lack of sleep, with swelled iyen, lothsomnesse of meat, consumpcion at hand.
In this forsaid Pleurisi I do say, which is between ij. extreme fires or
perilous ramping Lions: many pretty Phisicions do step to the door, beat the
dog with the next staff that cum to had hand ouerhed, happy man by his dole,
god ^e salve for ry sore.
send their patients good luck. For, look what medicen they have most gain
by, or that ca purge most quickly, no further they will go, they will not set a
new vessel abroch as long as they have old in store: let yt sickness be what it
will be, for money sake, they care not, which end do go forward they ^acridion
(...) kill ma^one.
will utter their Diacridion, Scamony. c. They will be their own Apothicares,
and sum of these are suffered to poule practise, Chance medley.
to the hurt of many, help of none, but by chance medley, or good hap or they
wist. O there would do good, gratis to the common people, which people are in
extreme poverty, Charitee ^ help at ned King Her providence, Phisicion punish
offe^ dours, an^ maintain charitable.
both according to charitee art, and finally, permissio of the late souerain
and mighty prince, king Henry theight. Anno. 34. and that act sins was not
frustrate, but stad in good effect at this day, not one lie to punish the,
which lives by secrete spoil, under the name of Physicians, do hurt hinder
the ignorant poor people. But also quietly to suffer them, which of charitee
do help sores, agues, stone. c. Yet Stumble^ at strawe^
these stumblers at straws, leapers over blocks, do not a little vex them
selves, swelling panting for pain, crying as the Pharises did, nos leg
habem{us} et secundu legem debet soluere, quia medicum se fecit. And who so do
minister Physic without our licece, shall pay for every month. v. li. And
thus they would bring a liberal art into bondage to the, which are not of
their Fraternitee, nor yet offend the law: this is for the exceadyng
affection, that they have to gold, whom they do love with ^hat thing best
belo^ among ^citons ^hisicians.
all their hearts, and silver as their selves, more then to have desente,
comely, and charitable orders. It is they that do abuse their poor
neighbours, not helping them that are in sickness, sornesse, and extreme
heuines: wrapped with many calamities ^he misery poor poo^e, in the ci^, and
other ^ces.
as ardent fevers, Pleurises, replecions of humours, Swellynges, Wennes, small
Pox, flires, which have not to help the selves in Physic, for counsaill or
medicens, either to Dector, or the Apothicarie. I mean none, that either are
releued in the almoshouses, or Hospitals. c. But a great number of poor
Citezems, and strangers dwelling in poor houses, having ^any Doc^rs chari^s
to the ^re people.
nothing to take to, but in a manner for want of health and wealth, the bag
and the staff at hand: having also poor young children sick by them, with
small comfort, either with meat or medicene. I do see no Doctors Meules at
their doors. In this respect, and to none other end, I have used Physic to
them that are in this case, because I can not spin, or go to plough: as for
the rich, I do comende them to the Doctors, and the great learned men, as
best worthy they are: both to receive rewards and honour, yea, of kings, as
it is written. Honora medicum What is d^ for the Phi^ sicion.
propter infirmitatem, etenim illum creauit altissimus, a deo enim omnis
medela, a Rege accipiet dominationem. And as for the poor, if they call upon
God and be patient in the time of trouble, he Psalm. l.
will deliver them, and help them, and heal their sores, and be their
defence. To conclude with enemies, like as of late I have builded a book,
called a Bulwark, eve so now I do perceive, there is an assalte and battery
prepared, to overthrow it by slander, with evil words, to the, which give
them credit: yea, of them, which are counted more learned then wise (Ah?
Periant The great^ ^larkes ar^ not commo^ly the wise^ men.
verbis qui credula pectora falluut.) But because I am warn^d, I will be armed,
in the defece of the same: seeing it was mine own travail, none others, I will
also keep watch ward al this Winter, and make trenches for the same with my
poor pen. And these medicens for the pleu rise, are the first part of my
water work about my said Bulwark: which I will garnish about, with a
strong coutermure and within shall be raised a mighty moute ^ulleyns ^ke of
health
called Health. Whereupon tharmes of old Hyppocrates, Galen. c. shall stand:
their coats and colours. I will advance my pe in their defece, against any
that of arrogate malice shall write any thing, repugnante against my poor
travel, profitable to a public wealth. So long as I with authority shall
proceed. following them that have knowledge, and experience of old, and not of
curious, fine, golden, money lovers, which can pick out of pispottes to much
gain. And when I do err, I will be reformed by the most ancient also, which
have left their jewels behind the. As Gal. Paul. c. And of non that with
backbiting, or braulyng, shall dispute, object, reply, or judge against me
of malice, like skoldes. Thus wishing much health, small occasion of ^iat,
Quiat ^d Meruna ^ree good ^octors, and ^t costite.
Physic (but Diat, Quiet, and Merima:) and where very need is, to use
Physic, and not for every trif^le. And unity emog all people, good medicenes
to help the sick, recente, new, clean, ministered, in place, proporcion,
time, quantity, and quality. c. Prefarryng charity before lucre, no disdain,
good words, love, friendship, and quietness: no braulyng, as among beggars at a
dole, for the spoil of sick, or ded men goods, but to be sorry for the
sickness of the people, glad of their health, despising no manes gift, or
knowledge. And thus I do end with the Physicians that are to hot, I mean not
the gentle and now to the ointment for the Pleuriti.

A goodly ointmente for the Pleurisy.
TAke the oils of chamamil, sweet Leonellus Fauentinu de meden. morb.
Almondes, white garden Lilies, of each three dragmes, new fresh butter
without Salt, Capons grease, of each two dragmes, the muslage or water in the
seeds of Fenegrece, Flare, Mallowes, have stand by the space of two or three
days, and then sodden, and beaten in a mortar, and with a piece of new war put
all into a little pan, upon a soft fire, and then keep it in a bore, to the
use, and to an oint the patient, where the pricking grief or pain is.

Montanus Ointment.
TAke the oils of Chamomell, ^oannis ^ptis. Moni de mor ^uri*
the white Lily of the garden, and red Roses, of each of these oils one uncle,
the fat or greece of a Goose of the same year, half one uncle with a little Wax,
mingle them together and melt them, and a nointe the pained place: the greece
of a Goose is put to, for the penitracion or quick entrance. For, it will
enter into the skin sooner, then any other fat or grease: and to a nointe all
the whole breast: take oil of bitter Almonds and Goose grease, of each one
uncle and a half. But says Doctor Ihon Baptist Montan, take heed that no
more be resolved at ones, then may be easily cast forth by spettyng, for fear
of sudden death, by ^hokyng or stranglyng in the throat.

An other worthi^ ointment, called Vnguentum R^sump^iuum for the Pleurisie.
TAke c^arified barowes or young hog good oint^nte.
ges grese three vn^es, the grese of Capons, Geese, Ducks of each two vnces,
green Isope half one vnse the oils of Chamomill, Isoppe and Dill, of each
two vnses: freashe new Butter without salt one pound, white virgin Wax
six vnses, the Musleges, of Gum Tragacanth, Quinse seed, Flax seed, Melon
seed, gum Arabic, of each half one vnse, and make this ointment, as the
other aforesaid, and often an ointe the patient. This is an excellent ointment,
and of a singular virtue, and do much pleasure: and copted for a jewel among
Phisicias, and the Apothicaries, at this time. When in this sickness, and also
in all other sharpe hot fevers, the patient thorough inflamacion, heate,
drines, and wat What ^n ger do c^ for want o^ sleep.
of sleep, can take no rest, but still tossed up and down, from place to
place, from bed, to bed, to seek ease and can not find it, as though the
place would help (when often times no mo^ help come thereby) Example.
then in the streams of the Sea, when choler moves vomits, the going from the
Ship, to the Cock boat, and from the Cork again to the Ship, will help
and ease the sick mariner. In who bitter choler, with pain in the stomach,
and heate do abound, and still continue, for want of sleep, and lack of quiet
rest, the paciet is in danger of a frenzy, or death, because the senses be
not perfectly bound by sleep, Aristotle says. Somnus est ligamentum ^ristot.
de ^m. et viliae.
omnium sensuum, and further, sleep is rest (says he) given to living
creatures for their health. Somnus est requies data animalibus, propter salutem
eorum. Therefore, they can have no health, that want rest or sleep: but all
things contrary to health, which is sickness will follow. Now, to reconcile
sleep, like as Diacodion, and the Syrruppe of white Poppy, Barley water, and
the Syrup of Uiolettes to be drunk, are very good inwardly. Even so, a
frontary made and applied to the forehed and temples, is very good to be made,
in this manner.

A forehead clothe, for sleep or rest.
TAke red Roses, Uiolettes, the Rose of the water, Melilote, Lets, of each
a like quantity, as half one handful or less, the sedes of Lets, white
Poppy, and white Henbane, ^or to bring epe.
some will put in, some of the cold seeds, Petrus ^ tius For^ lae remec
of each of these that I have named, half. i. dragme, that is the. xvi. part
of one vn^. You ma^e put in a little Dill seed, to comfort the brain: braie al
these together, then put them into a very soft linen clothe. xi. inches lunge,
and three inches broad, and twilte it, and apply it to the forehed. You may
take the oils of water Lilies, Nightshade, Poppy, Rose water, Vinegar, and
womannes Milk, dip Flax therein, and bind it to the temples.

A plaster for the Pleurisey.
TAke the roots of wild or field Mallowes, the grese of a hog, a Fox, a
Goose, and a Duck, of each one vnse: freashe Butter, and Terebenthin, of each
half one vnse, the fat that There is a fat sodde^ from wolle
is got from wolle six dragines, the oil of Dille half an vnse, the marowe
of the Deres legs, and Calves legs, of each half one vnse, the powder of
the seeds of Flax, Fenegrece, and Ba^e beries, of each three dragmes, and
eight Figs, beaten all in a mortar. Then put all together in a pan, putting
thereunto some Wax, to bind it together, and stir it with a stick upon the
coals, and then take the whole, or part thereof, and spread it upon Leather,
and cover it with silk, and brase it with thread, like a twilte, and apply
the plaster to the pained place close.

An other emplaster.
TAke the flowers of Chamamill, Pagle, called the Cowslop, the tops of
Dille, of each half one handful, Flare seed, Fenigrece seed, of each throe
dragmes, Dille seed half a dragme, Barley meal half one handful, sees all
in sufficient quantity of water, ^chi. de ^den. li. 2.
^ntill it come to the thickenes of Honey. Then put into this same, the oils
of Dill and Chamamil, of each one vnse and half then sees it softly again:
then put in the y^lkes of two Eggs, and a scruple or penny weight of Safron
in powder, temper all together, and make a plaster with Leather, linen, or
silk, as aforesaid, and warm apply it to the sick place, after the
ointement.

Furdermore, now when this sickness which is known by the signs, do increase
until the fowerth day, if the patient be not letten blood in the beginning,
as commonly many Phisicions, do cause blood to be letten in the Basilica
vain, on the opposite or contrary side (then let the patient blood in the
Cephalica vain, or Vena interna, on the same side whereas the pain is. Some of
the Arabians would never Prolong no to be lette^ blood.
let blood, until the matter were first ^gested. But in the mean time,
because the blood, which still do remain within the body, do turn into
the worse part, increasyng the flegmon apostumacion, ouerchargyng nature: not
only through putrifaccion, destroieth the blood nutramentalle in the veins.
But also the pure blood vital in the heart, and arteres: that finally, the
whole hermony and parts of the body, shall soon be dissolved, and ^urne to
dust. And why? For, because blood is not let forth in duetyme, so abouding.
And further, in the beginning of this great heate, the body is stronger, and
the blood thimier: and then the blood being letten forth, shall quench the
heate and burning, prevent that evil that might ensue, by the time of
continuance. Percase one be letten blood, on the contrary or oposit part: as
when the dolor is on the left side, to let blood on the right side, do this
help, ye forsooth saith a great sort: the stroger is bound by the Law of
Nature, to help the weaker, among men, which are several bodies. Much more
will each meber and part within the body, help each other: as the whole hand or
leg, will help One member ^ill help each ^ther.
the wounded hand, or leg, draw from the weaker part to the stronger, to help
it in danger, with many mo reasons, which I do leave to a leg. Because I will
neither seem to be arrogant, nor repugnant against wisemen in this poinete:
but according to my poor talante, will write things to profit (truly) with
plainness the common wealth withal, and to eschew idleness of time. And
finally, to gratify my friends. For whose sake, I will go further to seek for
poor peoples health, to enlarge this book, if it shall please God.

And now concerning blood letting, that worthy present help in a Pleurisie:
whereof hitherto I have spoke. Whereas as many wise^e^, with Dialectical
argumetes, Logically can reason, pro contra in this matter. But to the very
matter in this poinete I will begin with nature: secondly Nature. Reason.
Aucthoriti
reason, thirdly aucthoritee, to prove to be letten blood on the same side,
whereas y^ pain is placed. First nature will not hurt her self, but nourish,
comfort, make strong and defend her self. As example, no natural man will
poison himself, to pleasure an other man withal: no reason can prove it good,
nor aucthoritee confirm the same desperate part to be honest. Even so within
the body, to draw the venomous corrupted vlcerate poison, placed in the left
side (with festered Melancholy) into the right side being clean, feeling no
pricking, it is nothing, but to mingle all the poison together. And whereas the
stro ger side was well and clean, to defend death: and help the part being
weak What peril to be lette^ blood on th^ contrary si^ in the Pie^riti.
(not by attraccio or drawing) but by strong force of nature, to expulse the
venom, and put it forth by S^nius matter. Now it is become captivate, taken,
and destroyed, and no more can help, or e^tinguishe the ^dente or hot sore,
or Apostuma^ion of the Pleuriti, on the contrary part: then if Poles Church,
when God did send fire from heaven, the West end being of a fire, might have
been the cause, to have quenched the South end, which first began, after the
steeple was burned. No good reason would prove this true, but rather to have
begun with the first cause, matter, and place, to have quenched the fire,
where fire was first: and not to have drawn fire, fro end to end. For, fire
of his own nature, if he be suffered, will be a cruel conqueror, and an
evil master, but it is a very good seruaunt, if it be kept in obedience. Even
so take example of hot Biles, and burning Phlegmons, placed in the left side:
or so of the contrary side, but begin at the next vain, as the Intern or
Liver vain, on the same side infected or sore, and there the foul blood with
evil matter, will eftesones come forth, and health will follow, by Gods
grace. But on the whole side, good blood will go away, which is the chief
friend to nature: and then nothing is left in the common wealth of the body,
but a most cruel enemy to life, even Sa^uus, Makem o^ good (...)
stinkyng, and venom poison. This is an evil change, to expulse a very
friend, and retain a dedlie enemy: and this shall suffice ath tis present,
which is not repugnaunte to nature or rea^on. And for aucthoritee in Physic,
who ever excelled the spring, and most famous fountain of Physic,
Hyppocrates that worthy 4. victu^ cut. 67.
man: whom in this po^cte we must follow. As who so have the Pleuriti, he do
command to open the vain, called the inward or liver vain, on the same side:
and this manne was the most grave author. And nert and best after him came
Galen, which says, when flegmon is drawn towards the liver. c. Then open
the liuor vain, for all the veins have societae, and being with the same. He
speaks of the inward vain, because it is ne'er There. methorcap. ^.
to the place affected or sore: and this shall suffice, for the place of the
body, whereas blood shall be let. And now do follow four intencions, good to
be observed in this case.

1. Replecion of the body. 2. The matter corrupted. 3. Where the pain is, as
heart and head. 4. Retencion of blood, in any other place.
REpletion without purgation, do bring matter to corrupcion: The remedy shall
follow repletion, and corrupcion, are causes to pain: and medicene
accordingly shall help the same pain. Retention is, when any have the
Pleurisie, as men, which have the running of the Emorodes by custom, and a^
stopped, and at that time is smitten with a ^a^e ^icen. Ca^n. 4. ca. i. lias
cano^ 41. cap. 1.
pleuriti. Or a woman being stopped of her menstruall sickness: then what vain
shall be opened: Only the Saphenae vain: and whereas these. ^. signs, as
Haemorrhoida lis aut menstrualis in ^liere non occurrunt. Then in the Pl^risy
let blood in the Intern or liver vain (as I have said) ^lood le^^ng how
^che.
even until the ^oule blood do pass away, and the clean blood appears,
and not to sleep for four or five hours after. And if in blood letting
swonyng do come called Lipothimia, which is easier, and is not utterly
depriued of seces, as Syncope is, which is the image of death: it is no evil
Swouny^ in blod^et^
matter in this return of good blood, and parting fro evil blood. But
although Galen do bid that old men and children, should not be letten blood:
the one for the tenderness and youth to weak the body, which is but yet very
feeble, and blood the chief stay to life. c. And the other cold old, and
declining towards the end, having nothing to help but blood, which is warm
and moist of tempera^ent* Yet in Leonarch* Fu^hi. in medicina li. ii. Sec^i.
this cause of the Pleuriti, the aged is preserved, and the children helped,
daily experience do prove the same. Do not blood by the inst^tion of nature,
in soche hot^ causee break for the at childrens ^ostrels to save the life? Do
not nature here help her self? Why then, should art be slack to every age,
according to the person, disease, complexion, place, time, and measur? Did not
that famous author A^e^zo^ the Arabian, a great learned Phisici^n, let his
own son blood, having the pleu^, being but three years old: boys or wenches
of v. vi. vtj. or. vitj. years old. c. In this case may bleed. in. or. iitj.
vnces, or in any other hot grievous sickness in the beginning. As for the time
of blood letting, the morning is best. And the good aspect between the Moon
and Uenus, not combuste, al is good to be letten blood in: or when the Moon do
not govern the meber that is opened. But in soc^e sharpe sicknesses, or ever
the Moon come into a good place, the paciet may be placed with Placebo: Quod
modo fuit aegrotus. In iacet ille cini: Therefore, prefarre the time of
^ckenes, before the course of Moon, or stars, yet both would do well
together.

Often times this Pleuriti, have joined unto it, or the Symptomata following it:
the cough or apostumacions of the lunges, the remedy of this pleurisy, as I
have written, will help the same cough. But we do se often times, the sickness of
the luges, ^he sickness (...) the lunges (...) helped with ^ medicens (...) the
Pleu^.
having no Pleuritj before it, then it is very perilous also, and consumpcion
do follow it. In this case also, these medices contained within this regiment,
are very good: Further, what remedy if the Fever Pestilent, be concurrant with
the Pleuritj, with extreme heate, hedache, vnpaciet, with Pestilent humours
stopped, having no exaltacion or smoke, to cleanse them out Signs o^ Pestilence
withal, corrupting the blood, and foul gross vrin. c. What remedy then?
The^ are both to be helped. By what mean? Only to take away the cause,
then the effect will seas. By what reason? Only by blood letting: but if the
patient be stopped First purg^ by stool, t^ let blood.
in the belie, must ye begin with blood letting then? In no case. But first
rela^e or ease the belie, with a lenitive or easy clesyng with Cassia Fistula,
new drawn from the Cane or Rede, mingled with sugar, eat the same, and
follow with blood letting. But what if that blood be not letten, in the
beginning of the pestilet fever. What then? Shall the vain be opened or no? No
saith C. Galen. XI. Metho. non em curamus putridinem nisi sanguinem seruemus.
We do not hepl the corrupted matter, except we may keep good blood in store
that is, when the matter is turned to stink and putrifaccion, having but little
good blood left. But in the beginning, as I ^ is good to ^etten blod (...)
^he Basili^ ^ain, in the ^innyng of (...) pestilence.
have said, blood letting is good, for then by the extreme heate is quenched,
and the putrified matter, or stinkyng sore, shall not tha increase. The matter
being thus partly digested, as appears by ye urine which is declined fro the
flaming, gross, red colour and stink, and is become thinner, to better
substance, contents and residence orderly in the bottom. c. And the paciet
towards amendment is good. But if the patient, according to the cause
Antecedet ^ considera^ after blood ^tyng, to a ^die, which (...) not clean
^rged.
have yet evil matter, which is neither purged by Clister, spittyng,
ointmente, or blood letting, if then necessitee do urge the matter, then the
day after blood letting: let the patient drink this medicen following, if
they be rich, for the said drink is costly, and poor people have little
money God help.

The drink to eradicate the cause Antecedent.
TAke Uiolettes, Maidenhere, Buglosse, of each half one handful, Resings of
the son wtthout stones, white Sanders, yelow Liqueris rased, or cut in
chippes, of each half one uncle, Sebeste. vitj. Iuiubes. x. clean Barley without
husk, clean hulled and beat from the rind, half one pound or less. Sees
the in clean water, a good quantitee, until the third part do remain or less.
From three quarts, until one quart do remain, then let it stand until it
be cold, A goodly ^ging drin^
and strain it, in which dissolve. x. dragmes of new drawn Cassia Fistula,
or taken from the cane: or clean white Manna of Chalabria, the same quatitee,
of the best Rhabarbe of Alexander one dragme and half, Spiknard, Grains. v.
Diaphenico dragme half, pare or stise in the Rhabarbe and put all together in a
close stone vessel during seven hours. You may put in the water of the
decoccion of Uiolettes, or stilled Uiolettes unto it, a little quantitee. Then
strain it strongly for the through a strainer, and put unto this purging drink
half one uncle of the Syrup of Uiolettes, and drink a good draught of it in the
morning. But for the weaker stomachs.

Take Cassia Fistula one uncle, Diaphenicon two dragmes, Liqueris or Buglosse
water five vnces, mingle all together, and let the patient drink. Some do put
into the broth of a Chicken, half one ^nce of fresh and the newest Scene of
Alexander, and Resinges of the Sun, taking forth the stones, and no Salt.
And this broth is good, and not costly: but the foresaied pocions be of
goodlier effects.

A clensing or mundificacion.
AFter euacuacion, this mundificacion is good, to be drunk every day: clean
Barley without husk or rind, half a poud clean scraped, and fine chipped or
cut yelowe Liqueris two vnces: if you can get Sebesten one uncle, put
ingraene Uiol^t^es, or else kept dry, half one handful white Penidis, Sugar
Candy white, and gum Tragacanth, of each one uncle and a half. Clean Conduicte
or running water ten pintes, and the water of Uiolettes two quarts: Sees all
in a stone pot, until the third part do remain, then strain it, and
reserve it to use. Surely a Ptisan made of clean Barley, Well ^r Episan.
water Resynges without stones, L^queris, Melon seeds, and white Sugar candy
sodden together, is of great comfort, efficasie and strength in this case, or
in any other perils of the luges. As for the Ptisa of Barley water, Sugar candy
Amsseedes Resynges. c. Thanks be to God, most people can make it, and yet
went neue^ to much Physic School for the matter. Barley water excells in
virtue.

A goodly Lohoch to like upon.
IN the beginning of the Pleurit^e if the matter begin to flow. Thy take the
electuarie Diatragacan. thj frigidi dragmes fine, Penidis, whait^ Sugar candy,
of each three dragmes, th^ Syrup of Maiden hear, of white P^ppu and Liqueris,
of each half one uncle, min gl all together, and put them in a closi pot,
or a glass, then make clean a Liqueris stick, and put into it the same stic^
and like of it often times: If the matte^ be flowing, you may put in Diairis
simplex one uncle.

A Iulep for the same.
TAke the waters of Vngula, cal led Horsehoue, or Tussilago, called commonly
Coltgrasse, of Uiolettes, of the seeds of Pompon, Melon, Gurde, and Cucumer,
of each a pound. Or you may make half of each, put thereunto for the greater
quatitee, vj. uncle of the Iulep of Violets, and three vnces to the half part,
the Syrup of Iuiubins four vnces. Sees all together in a close stone pot,
covered with past upon a soft fire, leave a hole in the covering, putting in a
stick, and stir it half one hour. You may put some Syruppe of Liqueris if
you will: keep this to use to drink. iij. or. iiij. sponfull at ones, after
you have drunk your mundificacion.

A Syrup very good.
TAke Well water four pounds, the flowers of Uiolettes, two vnces half,
scraped Liqueris, white Poppy, of each half one uncle, the seeds of Quinces,
Mallowe seeds, the seeds of Mellons, Citrons, Gurdes, and Cucumers, the
rindes being taken away: Pur slen, gum Tragacanth, gum Arabic, of each three
vnces, let them be tempered together, and sodden in a Tinned pot, or a stone
vessel, until half be waisted, then let it run through a strainer, then
put in white Sugar, and sees it lightly again, in the end put it into a pet,
glass, or soche like. And this is an excellent syrup for the Pleurisy, or any
sharpe, hot sickness in the lunges, coming of the cause Antecedent.

An other good drink.
SUrely, many great learned wise A plai^ pot
men, have given unto their patients, two, three, or four vnces, of clean
Flax, or Linte seed Oil to drink, with a little powder or rasyng of a Bores
tusch: it have virtue to dissolve speedily. Also it is not costly, but yet a
little noisome, Ihon B. Montanj, a great Ioh. Bap^ Monta. de paupere
pleuritico.
learned Doctor, and Leonellus Fauentinus, with many more, did use this to their
poor patients.

Almonde milk.
TAke, sweet Almondes, blanched in clean water, putting the blanched seeds of
Mellos, Cucumers and Citrons, stamp the in a stone morte^ Then sees them in
Barley water (that is a tpisan made of Barley, and Liqueris sodden together:) of
this make your Almond Milk, putting white Sugar Candy, or Penidis, this is a
good Almonde milk, being sodden upon a soft fire, in a silver stone, or well
tinned vessel, and first well strained into the said vessel, then drink it.

To cure the Pleuriti Non verae.
THe cough but very little, and the pain not so great, as the very Pleurisy
have: to be letten blood, to have warm Bay Salt applied in a bag unto the
place is good: so is a plaster made of the powder of Mallowes, l^t sede,
Fenigrece sede, herb Grace, fresh Butter, mingle al together, and with
vnwashed Woll, spread upon linen, lay on these things, cover them with an
other linen clothe, then twilt it fine, make it warm between two platters, and
apply it to the place, wherein most grief is, you may put to this a little
strong Vinegar.

A drink.
THe powder of Crabs iyen, or the tyen of Creuises, sodden in the d^^oction
of Peach leaves, or Peach leaves stilled, drunk warm is very good in this
peril of the false Pleuriti.

Ointment for the false Pleuri^y.
ANoin^ the place pained, with oil^ of Spick, and with the powder of Safron,
very warm: these are medicens of great virtue and strength.

An other very good drink.
TAke clean great Resynges well washed, take forth the stones one uncle, fat
Figs. x. Iuinbes, and Iuinbes ^ ^ebesten, at the Apo th^cares.
Sebesten, of each. viij. in number, Maid here, Ui^lette flowers, Be^onie,
Hearts tong, of each half. i. handful, ^lene scraped Liqueris one uncle, the
seeds of Femile and Anisseedes, of each one dragme, the leaves of Scene of
Alerandria, and of Polipodie of the Oak, of each one uncle: some will put as
much more, for strong people Iris, or flower de Luce rotes one uncle Turbith
clean chosen at the Apothicares half. i. uncle, white Ginger. i. dragme beat the
harde things into gross powder, then sees all in a clean stone pot, with
clean water a good quantitee. Sees all until the third part do remain, then
let it stand close, until it be cold, then strain it: put into this the
syruppes of Liqueris Isope, white Sugar, and honey of Roses, of each i. uncle.
Of this the paciet may take fro. i. uncle, to. ii^. atones. Leonellus a great
learned Doctor, have cured many one with these ij. medicens following, from the
Pleuriti.

A medicene.
Take the thistle called our Lady thistle, e meden^ morb.
or saint Marie thistle, because it is in great strength at that time: and
the lesser. Salge, of each one handful, boil them in a good quantitee of
water, until half be wasted, tha strain the, put into this water that do
remain, a good quantitee of the Syrupe of Scabios, and drink it.

An other.
Take the stilled waters of salge, herb Grace, called Few, of each a quarter
and half quarter of one pound, in which dissolve Theriaca magna, and
Mythridatum of each half a dragme, give the patient of this three uncle at ones
to drink.

A good powder.
TAke dried young Isope, a dragme in fine powder, Yellow Liqueris scraped, and
^inelie shred, or cut in final pieces or chippes, Aniseedes one uncle Fenill
seed, Quinse seed, of each two dragmes beaten together, the sweet precious
wood called Aloes, white Saunders A good pou der against^ the pains the
stomach or sides.
the root called Chinus, and Sinamon, of each a dragme: the rasyng of Ivory a
dragme, Horhound, Margerum, Enulacampana, Irius, of each half a dragme, white
sugar Candy two vnses or more, beaten as small as Bay Salt, and tempered al
together, and eat of this before and after meat, a French croune weight.

A gargarisme.
LOke often times into your patients A gargarisi in the time the sickness the
brea^te sides.
mouth, which you shall se in this hot sickness, foul teeth the mouth,
lips, and pallet furred with filth, the tongue sod into blacknes: then let
the sick body have his mouth cleansed and washed, with Barley water often
times, and with a stick, whereupon is fast knit a little roll of linen, or a
little piece of a Sponge, wherewith rub the teeth, gumes, and tongue. And also
cleanse or scrape the tongue with the back side of a clean knife, or an
instrument made of a thin white stick, and let him gargle, Plant water.
iiij. vnces, Diamoron, and Honey of Roses, or each. i. uncle, cold often times.

If the laxe do take one in the Pleuriti.
TAke Barley water, or Almond Milk, wheren Gum Traga^anth, gum Arabike, Planten
or the flowers of Pomgranettes, which the Apothicares have in store, called
Balaustia, of each of these to this Ptisan or Almond milk. i. dragme to a pint
Sees them in a close vessel, then strain them: and this is in this case, a
goodly drink and also for all flixes.

A diate towards health.
BEware of coldness, both of the air, as mists, wind, thin clothing, vnclene
lodging, with open windows in the chamber, or lying on the back, or ne'er the
ground, but use sweet warm air, with a small fire, not ne'er at hand, it will
help the matter to ripe: whereas coldness will bind or drive back the matter,
and kill the paciet suddenly. Sup clean broth of Chickins eat but little,
and oft. Couite to sleep in the night, sire or seven hours: for sleep is a
great friend to nature, if sleep cum not in the night, then refuse not sleep
in the day, sitting in the chair, with the head up right after meat two
hours, walk not much up down. For rest with warm ness, is a great
nourisher of the humers, specially blood and choler: be rather laratiue on the
day, tha in the night. Beware Care.
of carefulnes for worldly things: look not into the glass of desperation,
with agony and heuines of mind, hope ever for Prove. xiii and. xviii. Eccle.
vii.
the best. For a good stomach drives away many disease:s but when the spirit
is vexed, who mai^ abide it. A merry hart is the life to the body. But rancor
cosumeth the bones, heaviness do bring sickness: and they which have heavy
countenances, with continual agoni^, are either to rich, to poor, to sick,
to foolish, or to sor^ oppressed. Therefore, comende gladness, because a man
have no better thing ^rth is the (...) gift of God, but he^esse is a (...)
plague
under the Soon. Then to eat and drink in time, and measure, and be to merry,
for that shall he have of his labour, al the days of his life, which
almighty GOD have given him under the Son. For, there is nothing better then
gladness, honesti^ie of life, love to each other: do as we would be done
unto. Thus fare you well. If it shall please Iesus Christ, I will ^lar^e this
poor book. xxx. times greater: with. xxx. more sickenesses, and their
medicens for the. Yours Willyam Bulleyn.

(...) Thomae Webster in laudem operis.
Cadide lector habes, (...)
Cum sint, ecce tibi, quicquid amicus habet.
Perlege, ^uenes fide^ pia dogmat^ sacrae,
Ingenij mira* dexteritate sui.
Disces quo pacto corpus quo{que} reddere sanu
Quo{que} modo digne: vita degenda foret.
(...) Bulleno tali pro munere grates
Eternum digno: ^iuere, lector age.
Vale.

