A DIALOGVE both pleasant and pietifull, wherein is a goodly regimente
against the fever Pestilence with a consolation and comfort against death.

Newly corrected by Willyam Bulleyn, the autour thereof.

Imprinted at London, by Ihon Kingston.

Marcii. Anno salutis. M.D.LXIIII.

TO THE RIGHT VVO^shipfull and his singular goo^ friend, master Edward Barret
of Belhous of Essex, Esquier: Willyam Bulleyn sends salutacions.
RIght worshipful sir, if any chamber, haul, gallery, or any new decked
house were apparelled or hanged, all in one mourning dark colour, it would
rather move sorrow then gladness: but no pleasure to the beholders of the same.
Therefore, the diuersitee or varietee of pleasant colours, do grace and
beautify the same, through the setting forth of sundry shapes: and as it
were, to compel the comers in, to behold the whole work. Even so I do
commend unto you this little book (wherein I write part thereof in your
own house) which do entreat of sondry things, to you I do hope not
unprofitable, wherein I have shortly described our poor nedie brother his
pouerte^. Calling upon the merciless rich, whose whole trust is in the vain
riches of this world, entangled as it were among Briers. So that in the hour
of death, God is fardest from his mind, and the goods evil gotten, are
worse spent, and come to nothing, at what time no Phisike can preuaile. I have
also not forgotten the shameful sin, which reigns in this world called
ingratitude which linially came fro the loins of that false vilain Iudas:
neither the Sicophantes, G^atos, Liars and Flatterers of this world, the very
poison of the soul. Oh better says Salomon, is the wounds of the friend,
then the kisses of the flatterer. Further, how many means may be used against
the Pestilence, as good air, diet, medicenes accordingly: the which if it do
not preuaile, then comes on the merciless power of death over al flesh:
fearing no King, Queen, Lord, Lady, bond or slave, but rather makes all
creatures a like to him. Then do I conclude with the divine, Gods chief and
most best instrument in the church. c. And as I do well consider, a
gentilmanne of your good nature, can but take your friends simple token in
good part. Even so I am sorry that it is no better to pleasure you, yet geuyng
GOD most humble thanks for the same, who keep you in good health worship.

This.xij. of Marche. 1564. Yours ever William Bulleyn.

Nullus vnquam hominem mortalem beatumindicet, antequam been defunctum viderit.
TO THE Reader.
GOod reader, when adversity drawethnere to any cite or town, and the
vengeance of GOD appears, either by huger, sickness or the sword, then
ma^nes nature is most fearful, but yet worldly providence to help the
selves: which in the time of prosperitee or quietness is careless and
forgetful, neither mindful to fear God, nor pitiful to help their
neighbour in aduersitee. And when they are touched by the fearful stroke of the
Pestilence of their next neighbour, or else in their own family, then they
use medicines, fly the air. c. Which in deed are very good means, and
not against Gods word so to do: then other some falls into sudden
devotion, in geuyng almose to the poor and neadie, which before have done
nothing else but oppressed the, and have done the wrong: Other do look fro
their hearts Gods lively word, and refuse grace, offered by Christ's
spirit, thinking there is no GOD. Some other are prevented by death in their
flourishing years, which in the Cross of death, have their only consolation
in Iesus Christ. All this is described here in this plain Dialogue: praying you
pacientlie to take it in good part. From him that is yours to command.

W. Bulleyn.

gloriosior est quam mala vita.


A DIALOGVE The interlocutours are twelve persons.
Mendicus. Ciuis. Vxor. Medicus. Antonius. Roger. Chrispinus. Auarus. Ambo
dexter. Mendax. Mors. Theologus.
Mendicus. GOd save my good Master and Masters, the barnes, and all this haly
houshade, and shilde you from all doolle and shem, and send you comfort of
all things that you waud have good of: and God and our dere leddie, shilde and
defend you from this Peste. Our father which art in heaven, hallowed be your
name, your kingdom come, your will be done in earth as it is in heaven. c.


Ciuis. Me think I do hear a good manerlie beggar at the door, and well
brought up, how reverently he says his Pater noster, he thoues not GOD, but
you hynt, Gods blessing on his hart. I pray you wife, give the poor man some
thing to his diner.


Vxor. Sir, I will hear him say the Lords prayer better, before I give him
any thing.


Ciuis. What a reconyng is this? Dame do as I command you, he is poor, we
have plenty, he is very poor and hongrie, therefore dispatch him a Gods
name.


Vxor. Soft fire makes sweet Malt, he shall tarry my leisure.


Mendicus. Masters, if you Ie angry with the saying of my Pater noster in
English, I will say it in Latin, and also my Deprofundis. But so God help me,
I do not ken nene of them beth.


Vxor. I think the same: soche Carpenter, soche thippes, your curate is some
honest man I warrant you, and takes much pain in feding his flock, as
seems by your learning. I pray you what country ma be you?


Mendicus. Saving your honour good Masters, I was borne in Redesdale in
Northumberlande, and came of a wight riding surname called the Robsons, good
honest men and true, saving a little shiftyng for their living, God help them
silly pure men.


Vxor. What doest thou here in this country, me think thou art a Scot by thy
tongue.


Mendicus. Trow me never mare then good deam, I had better be hanged in a
Withie of a Cowtaile, then be a rowfooted Scot, for they are ever fare and
face: I have been a felon sharpe manne on my hands in my young days, and
brought many of the Scottes to ground in the North Marches, and gave them many
greislie wounds, no ma for man durst abide me luke I was so fell. Then the
limer Scottes hared me, burnt my gudes, and made dedly feed with me, and my
barnes, that now I have nethyng but this sary bag and this staff, and the
charity of sike good people as you are, good masters* ause I have many of my
surname here in the cite, that wade think no shem on me, yea honest
handcraftie men.


Ciuis. How got you in at the gates, my good friend?


Mendicus. Dear sir, I have many cuntrith men in this fair cite, that came
of honest stock in our land, and some a little beyond us twenty or
threttie miles, that can make pure shift in the cite, and in the countres
ause. I came in no place but either the person, Bailey, Conestable, or chief
of the parish is of our countrith borne: and some pure men as mine awne self
God ken. Among whem the Bedle of the beggars being a Ridesdale man borne, a good
manne and a true, which for ill will in his youth, did fleen the Country, it
was laid to his charge, the driving of Kine hem to his fathers byre: But
Christ knaweth he was sackles, and live as honestly in his age, as his sire
did when he was young, good master.


Ciuis. I was borne in the North my fellow, and do live here in this cite,
I came hither when I was young, and when I was very poor, but now I am in
good case, to live among the rest of my neighbours.


Mendicus. Gods benison on you, and our dear ladies, I come hither purely in
mine age, I have nethyng but wedom.


Vxor. Give God only thanks, for so is his holy will and commandments,
that we should call upon him in the days of trouble, and only honour him:
we have no commandment to honour our lady.


Mendicus. I think one woman wade take an other womannes part, do as it shall
please you I am no clerk, but an ingram ma, of small cideracion in soche
arogant buke farles.


Ciuis. What news in the Country, as you come by the way? Country man.


Mendicus. Nene, but aude manners, fair sayings, face hearts, and no devotion,
God amend the Market, much ^oilyng for the purse, deceiving of each other:
in the Country, strife, debate, running for every trif^e to the Lawyers,
having nething but the nutshelles, the Lawyers eat the Carnelles, ause much
reising of retes, causing great dearthe, mucle pouertee. God help, God help,
the ward is sare changed: extorcioners, covetous men and hypocrites do
mucle preuaile, God cut them shorter, for they do make a black warlde, even
hell upon earth, I think the great fend or his deam will weary them
all, nene other news I ken, but that I did see micle providence made in the
country for you in the cite, which do fear the Pestilece. I met with
wagons, cartes, and horses, full lade with young barnes, for fear of the
black Pestilence, with their boxes of medicines, and sweet perfumes. O God,
how fast did they run by hundredes, and were afraid of each other, for fear
of smittyng.


Ciuis. I have some of my children forth, God send them well to speed.


Mendicus. Master, why go you not with them your self?


Ciuis. No, youth are apt to take the Plague, and further, parents are more
natural to their children, then children to their fathers and mothers. Nature
doth descend, but not ascend: also if the citeze should depart when as the
Plague do come, then there should not only be no plague in the cite, but
also the cite should be void and empty, for lack of the inhabitours
therein, therefore Gods will be done among his people. I do not intende to
flee, notwithstanding I pray God of his mercy, deliver us from this Plague,
for if it do continue GOD knows, it will not only take away a number of
poor people, but many wealthy and lusty merchants also.


Mendicus. If soche plague do ensue, it is no great loss. For, first it shall
not only deliver, the miserable poor man, woman and barn, from hurt and
carefulness, into a better warlde: but ause cut of many coueteous usurers,
which be like fat unclean swine which do never good, until they come to
the dish, but wroote out every plaute that they can come by. And like unto
great stinking mucle medin hills, which never do pleasure unto ^he land or
ground, until their heaps are caste abroad to the profits of many, which
are kept neither to their awne comforts, nor others, but enely in behadyng
them: like unto cruel dogs, lying in a Manger, neither eating the Heye
themselves, no suffering the horse to feed thereof himself. And in sike
Plagues, we pure people have micke good. Their loss is our gain, when they do
become naked, we then are clethed against their wills: with their dooles and
almose, we are relieved, their sickness is our health their death our life.
Besides us Beggars, many me men have good luck, as the Curate, Parish
clarke, and the bell man, often times the executors be no losers by this game.
And in fine, in my fantasy it is happy to the huntman, when he have nethyng
of the Cat but the silly skin. We beggars, covet not for the carcass of
the dead body, but do defy it, we look for aude caste cootes, doublets,
hose, caps, beltes and shoes by their deaths, which in their lives they
waude not depart from, and this is our hap.


Ciuis. Go thy ways to Antonius Mantuanus gates: For thither, even within this
two hours, I did see Master Antonius Capistranus, solemnly riding upon his
Mule, with a side goune, a great chain of gold about his neck, his
Apothecary Senior Crispinus, a neighbours child, borne here by in Barbary,
and his little Lackeye, a proper young applesquier, called Pandarus, which
carries the key of the chamber with him. These are all gone in at the gates to
that noble Italian: his aulmner this day, because his master was very sick,
applied the poor men with the purse, with much devotion for the time, being
without hope of his Masters recovery.


Mendicus. I pray God send us many sike prays, for it is merry with us, when
en man hurt, do turn to many men gains: I will go thither, fare you
well good Master. I will draw ne'er, and herke what master doctor will say,
if I might be in place.


Ciuis. Farewell, for thou doest not care, which end do go forward, so that
thy turn may be served.


Medicus. How do you good Master Antonius? Lord God how are you changed?
How chances this? What is the matter, that you look so pale? You did send
for me by your seruaunt Iohannes de Corsica, a gentle young man, which lamented
much for you: and when I heard it, with all speed I came from my other
patients, of whom I think I have taken mine vltimum vale.


Antonius. You are welcome Master dectour with all my heart, now help at a
pinch: or else never, for I do fear my self very much. O^ my heart.


Medicus. I warrant you man, let me feel your pulse, and then shall I proceed
to the cure, with Medicine and diet accordingly.


Antonius. Take your pleasure good Master Doctor, here is my hand: feel my
pulse, and then you shall see mine urine, and know the time of my sickness.


Medicus. These are no very good tokens, neither in your urine, pulse, stool.
c. But I will do the best for you that I can do by art.


Antonius. And then you shall want no gold, for though I lack help, yet I
want no gold of every coign, and silver also. My warehouses are well filled
with wares of soderie kinds, which I do sell unto the retalers. Further I
have wares of most ancient service, which owe me nothing, both in packs,
vessels and chests. c. which are not fit for the retalers. The do I keep for
shifts, when any gentlemen, or long suitor in the law, are behind hand, and
know not what to do: then by good suretees, or assured lands by statute
merchant. c. I do sometime make.xxx. or.L. in the hundred by year. I have
diverse soche honest ways to live upon, through the witty and secrete
handling of my brokers here in the cite, and my factors, which are at
Antwarpe. c. By whom I do understand the state, and what commodity is best.
Further I have extended upon ancient lands in the country, for the breche of
covenants That to conclude with you master doctor, I could never have died
in a worse time, my business is soche. I would of all things live still, for
here I do know what I have, and how I am used: but when I am gone, I do not
know what shall happen unto me, nor who to trust with y^ which I have gotten
with travel, and obtained by fortune.


Medicus. You do speak like a wise man as ever I harde, and most things
that you have taken in hand, have great profit with you: of my part I would
be loathe to lose you, both for an unfeigned love that I do bear unto you for
your wisdom, and also for your liberalitee and gifts given to me many a
time. Lo, here is the Damask goune yet in store. Here is also a Flagone chain
of the hundred Angles that you did give me, in your last great Fever.


Antonius. Who is able to resist soche a multitude of Angles, I think few
Doctors of Phisike? But rather then I would dye, I will let fly a thousand
more.


Medicus. That is the way I assure you, to perfect health: and for that cause
the Physician was ordained, as it is written. Honour the Physician, with the
honour that is due unto him, because of necessity, for the Lord have created
him, and he shall receive gifts of the king.


Antonius. That is a good sweet tert for Physicians, but why do you leave out
these words, in the midst of the matter? Which is: of the most highest
comes learning, and so I do remember, I heard our curate read in the church,
as by chance I came in with a Sergeant, to arest two Bankeroutes.


Medicus. What your curate pleased him to read, I care not, for I meddle with no
Scripture matters, but to serve my turn: But I know that, which I have
said, is written in the Bible.


Antonius. Be all things written in the Bible true: I pray you tell me?


Medicus. God forbid Master Antonius, then it would make a fray among
Merchants, for it is writ. Psalm. xv.
None shall enter into gods dwelling, or rest with him upon his Mountain,
that lends his money upon usury, or to usury, whereby to hinder his
neighbour: And this is now become the greatest trade. And many be vndooen by
borowyng, and few do lose by lendyng, specially men of your worshipful
experience. And how like you this text?


Antonius. Text how they will text, I will trust none of them all, say what
they will: there be many soche sayings against men, as the ten
commandments. c. Well, for my part, I have little to do in these matters,
Marie I would be glad to live orderly and Ciuillie, so that the world should
not wonder at my doings: but if dampnacion should arise, when the Scripture
do threaten it to men, then should witti^ words in bargaining* with facing
oaths, and pleasant venerous table talk, with reviling of our enemies. c. be
accounted damnacion. The^ I warrant you, hell i^ well furnished with
courtiers, merchants, soldiers, housebandmen, and some of the clergy, I
warrant you also. Among whom there are many more spiteful then Spiritualle,
even as there are among the Phisicias, many more covetous then kind har^ed. I
mean not you master doctor.


Medicus. Sir, I do know you do not. But so God help me, one thing doth
much rejoice my heart, in your communication.


Antonius. What is that?


Medicus. I think that we two are of one religio.


Antonius. What is that I pray you? For I know not mine own religion.


Medicus. Command your folks to depart out of the chamber, and your young
scapes also which you have gotten by chance medley, for want of marriage: for
the old proverb is, small Pitchers have wide ears, and the field have iyes,
and the wood have ^ares, therefore we must come closely, and beware of
blabs.


Antonius. Well, now the doors are sparred, say on your mind, of what
Religion are you? Be plain with me man.


Medicus. Herke in your ear sir, I am neither catholic, Papiste, Protestante,
nor Annabaptiste, I assure you.


Antonius. What then? you have rehearsed choice and pletie of religions. What
do you honour? the Son, the Moon, or the stars, Beast, S^one, or Foul,
Fish or Tree?


Medicus. No forsothe. I do none of them all. To be plain, I am a Nulla
fidian, and there are many of our sect.


Antonius. Oh. Qui dixit in corde suo non est deus. Well, we differ very
little is this point, but if I do live, we shall draw ne'er to an vnitee: in
the mean time, let your Pothicarie provide some good things for the body. I
pray you open the door.


Medicus. Masters, I pray you call Crispinus hither into the Gallarie, and
Leonardus de Montano with him.


Crispine. What is your pleasure master doctor?


Medicus. How do you like this Garden?


Crispine. There are pletie of goodly herbs, both clensing, healing, losing,
binding, and restoring. I never did see more choice of sundry kinds of
strange flowers, most pleasant to the iye, and sweet also. The fine knots
are done by good art, Geometrically figured. A sweet conduit in the midst,
made of fine stone, plentifully, casting forth water, like fine silver streams
many ways. In which condite, I did behold by the space of one hour a
marvelous thing, the meaning thereof I know not.


Medicus. What was it Crispine?


Crispine. The pillar was eight foot square, and eightene foot high, with
compartementes of conning Masonrie, curiously covered with fine gold. Upon
the top a Tiger fearfullie, having a young child in his arms ready to kill
it, the child had a croune of gold upon his head. And in his left hand a
Globe, figuring the whole world and was called Microcosmos, about which was
written Globus conuersus est.


Medicus. This gentleman came of a great house, this is the crest of his
arms, for he descended of the most aunciet Romaines I warrant you, he is no
vpstrat, assure your self.


Crispine. I had thought it had rather signified the conditions of a cruel
tyrant, or some bloody conqueror: which by vsurpacion getting the victory
of any commonwealthe* as Lands, Countrees or Cites, eftesones do spoil the
true heirs and owners of the land, which do wear the croune change the
state of the Commons to the worser part, spoiling them with sword and
bondage, which appeared by these words: Globus conuersus est: the world is
changed or turned.


Medicus. A good observation: what did you se then?


Crispine. I did behold on the one side the.ix. Muses, with strange
instruments of Music sitting under the hill Parnasus, and the Poets sitting
under the grene trees, with Laurel garlands, beset with Roses about their
heads, having golden pens in their hands, as Homer, He^iodus, Ennius. c.
writing verses of sundry kinds. And Lucanus sa^te there very high, ne'er
unto the Clouds, appareilled in Purple: saying.

Quantum sermotus ego:
Cardine Pernasus gemino petit ethera coll.
Motis Phoebo Bromio{que} sacer:
And ne'er them sat old Moral Goore, with pleasaun^ pen in hand,
commending honest love without lust, and pleasure without pride. Holiness in
the Clergy, no tyranny in rew^ers, no falshode in Lawyers, no Usury in
Merchants, no rebellion in the Commons, and vnitee among kingdoms. c.

Skeleton sat in the corner of a Pillar, with a frost bitten face, frowning,
and is scante yet clean cooled of the hot burning cholour, kindled against
the cankered Cardinalle Wolsey: writing many a sharpe disticons, with bloody
pene against him, and sent them by the infernalle rivers Stvx Flegiton, and
Acheron, by the Feriman of hell called Charon, to the said Cardinalle.

How the Cardinal came of nought
And his prelacie sold and bought,
And where soche Prelates be,
Sprung of lowe degree:
And spiritual dignitee,
Farewell benignitee,
Farewell simplicitee,
Farewell humanitee,
Farewell good charitee.
Thus paruum literatus,
Came from Rome gatus,
Doctor dawpatus,
Scante a bachelaratus.
And thus Skeleton did end,
with wolsey his friend.
Witty Chaucer sat^ in a chair of gold covered with Roses, writing Prose and
Rime, accoumpanied with the spirits of many Kings, Knights, and fair
ladies. Whom he pleasantly besprinkeled with the sweet^ water of the well,
consecrated unto the Muses, ecleped Aganippe. And as his heavenly spirit
commended his dere Brigham, for the worthy intombing of his bones, worthy of
memory, in the long sleping chamber, of most famous kings Even so in
tragedy, he bewailed the sudden resurreccion of many a noble man, before
their time: in spoiling of Epitaphs whereby many have lost their inheritauce
c. And further thus he said lamenting.

Coueteous men do catch, all that they may have,
The field and the flock, the tomb and the grave:
And as they abuse riches, and their graves that are gone,
The same measure they shall have every one,
Yet no burial hurts holy men, though beasts them devour,
Nor rich grave prevails the wicked, for all yearthly power.
Lamenting Lidgate, lurkyng among the Lilies, with a bald skons, with a
garland of Willows about his pate: booted he was after Saincte Benettes
guise, and a black Stamell robe, with a lothlie monstrous hood hanging
backward, his stooping forward bewailing every estate with the spirit of
providence. Forese^ng the falls of wicked men, and the slippery seats of
Princes, the ebbyng and flowing the rising and falling of men in aucthoritee,
and how virtue do advance the simple, and vice overthrow the most noble of
the world. And thus he said.

Oh noble Princes conceive and do lere,
The fall of kings for misgouernere,
And prudently peisyng this matter,
Virtue is stronger then either plate or maile:
Therefore consider when wisdom do counsel,
Chief preservative of Princely magnificence,
Is to almighty GOD to do due reueren^e.
Then Bartley with an hoopyng Russette long coat, with a pretty hood in his
neck, and five knots upon his girdle, after France tricks. He was borne
beyond the cold River of Twede. He lodged upon a sweet bed of Chamomill,
under the Sinamon tree: about him many Shepherds and sheep, with pleasant
pipes: greatly abhorring the life of Courtiers, Citizens Usurers, and
Banckruptes. c. whose old days are miserable. And the estate of shepherds and
country people, he counted most happiest and sure. c. Saying: Who enters
the Court in young tender age.
Are lightly blinded with folly and outrage:
But soche as entre with wit and grauitee:
Bow not so soon to soche enormitee:
But or they enter if they have learned nought,
Afterward is virtue the lest of their thought.


Next them in a black chair of Get stone, in a coat of arms sat an
ancient knight, in Orange Tawny, as one forsaken, bearing upon his breast a
white Lion, with a Croune of rich gold on his head: his name was sir Dauie
Linse, upon the mount, with a hammer of strong steel in his hand, breaking
a sonder the counterfeicte cross kaies of Rome, forged by Antichriste: And
thus this good knight of Scotlande said, to Englande the elder brother, and
Scotlande the younger.

Habitare fratres in vnum,
Is a blesfull thing,
One God, one faith, one baptism pure
One law, one land, and one king:
Clap hands together brethren dere
Unfeigned truce together make,
And like friends do ever accorde,
But French and Romaine do first forsake,
You are without the continent,
A sole land of ancient fame,
Ab origin a people old,
Bold Britains ecleped by name,
S^cut erat in la:
Grant oh God it may be,
In saecula saeculorum,
That we may have peace in thee,
Then we shall fear no foreign power,
That against us shall advance,
The Tartre cruel, the curse of Rome
No yet the power of France. c.
On the second square was a fair dial for this Orison, unto which was added
the hours of the plants, upon the same was written in large letters of fine
gold, Tempora labuntur.


Medicus. There stop and lay a Straw. For Tempora labuntur, is to say: by
little and little, time do slip away. I will hear^ the rest of the matter
at leisure. What is it a clock?


Crispine. But early day, scant.viij. of the clock.


Medicus. Well I pray you, dispense all things in order Contra Pestem, in
the same sort, both noumber of the Simples, Dose and quantitee, even as you
did it yesterday, which was given to Paule.


Crispine. Sir, I have spent all my fine Myrrh, what shall I do?


Medicus. You are a wise manne, put in Quid pro quo, called (...). Hoc est
simplicia que aliorum facultati similium penuria subponi possunt medici
consilio. Intelligis?


Crispinus. Etiam domine Doctor.


Medicus. Move te otius, quicquid agas prudenter agas.


Crispine. By God he shall pay for the malt grinding, he have enough, he know
none end of his pelf, it will come to an evil end. God send me more soche
cheats. What, me think I se two men in long gounes, with short beards at
the gates, what are they a Gods name?


Medicus. I know them very well, they are two petti foggers in the Law, the
one is called master Auarus, a good gentleman, and of a great house, a man of
good conscience, in deed he is my c^sen germaine, on my mothers side: Surly
he can give good counsel, and is ^itte to be with soche a manne, as master
Antonius is, in deed they have been long acquainted, and will never give over
unto the end.


Crispine. Who is the other on the left hand, he seems to be a proper
gentleman and a studious, he is lean, an handsome clenlie man. Me think he
have on each side of his goune a bag, and his hand in them.


Medicus. Every man have his grace and gesture: I promise you, I dared
commit a great secrete unto him. Oh he is a peragon.


Crispine. What means he by winckyng like a Goose in the rain, and biting of
his lip.


Medicus. A constant manne by his gesture.
Do you note that? It is a good sign of a constant man, mark it when you
will, he is a witty fellow, and one that is in great estimation, fit for
master Antonius, his name is Ambodexter. Go doun^ with speed, and say you
have given master Antonius his purgation, and this day he have no leisure to
speak with any ma, and also how that he is amended: for, if the curate were
here for the soul, we for the body, A black sanctus.
Auarus for the purse: here were but a mad company, we should never agree
together, but fall into discords. Dispatch them with speed, fare ye well. I
will go and cause him to be letten blood, and keep him from sleep, then shall
he be purged to morrow in the morning. Bring the powder against the plague
with you.


Crispine. GOD give you good morrow gentille master Auarus: what master
Ambodexter, how fare you both? master Antonius did much desire to have
spoken with you, eight hours paste. In deed within this two hours, saving
your worships, he hath taken a purgation, which have caste such air
abroad, that I was not hable to abide in the chamber, I had forgotten my
perfumes, to make all well.


Auarus. What think you of him, shall he escape or no? Who is with him? I
pray you tell me.


Crispine. None but Doctor Capistranus, which also desire your absence,
because he have him in cure: and trust to make him sleep after his lack of
rest, and to morrow take your pleasure with him.


Auarus. Fare ye well: we have drawn and engrossed his books, commend us to
master Doctor, it were a good pastime, ^o take the foot clothe from his
Mule, for.ij. or three hours in pastime.


Ambodexter. I had rather have the Mule.


Auarus. What the devil doth this doctor here? If this purging were not, we
would cleanse and erpulse with our resettes, that which should serve our turn
well enough.


Ambodexter. I warrant you the Doctor do make work for us both: we shall
bring our matters to pass in good time, take no care man for the matter, we
will prevent the doctor to morrow, when he comes hither with a present, and
bring him some pretty things, wherein he deliteth: we shall find soche means
to persuade with him by little and little, to be executors of his will,
according to his old promise. Further, he will take it kindly, that we do
claim kindred on him by his mothers side, which was a kind hearted woman, and
full of metrix, ha, ha, ha. She was in deed of those qualitees, her son is
like the mother, as seems by one in the house.


Auarus. I fear that damsel will mar all together: she doth rule the
roast, she ware th^ ke^es. He ca never have her out of his sight yet Reinold his
man thinks himself, in more estimation with her, then his master.


Ambodexter. The last year I counterfeeted a sickness of purpose, as I can when
I lust, I framed my Phisicion to my fantasy, no manne thought that I should
have lived two days, when I was a lone I laughed. You remember whom I made
mine executor, even Antonius Mantuanus, I then prouidentlie by three things,
did foresee this time and cause. The first was, his great surfeictes in
banqueting: the second, his watching at Chess and Cards, the third you know
what.


Auarus. Well, well, be as be may is no baning* I do fear many things.
First the medicines may chance recover him, then we shall have nothing.
Well, Reinolde and the damosel be ever in presence, and watch him: she cheers
her master with a loving countenance. Reinold says, that he hath done true
service a long time. c. Well, I smelle an other pad in the straw: when all
this is done, the curate is a crafty Rhetorician, well can he persuade and
rehearse Gods vengeance, threats and plagues, by examples most fearful, like
thonderboltes, describing the scalding house of hell, ve, ve, ve, with the story
of Dives and Pauper, and the day of judgment, reading the Homely of death,
crying out al is but vanity, vanity, and vexation of mind, damnacion, except
repentance, and true confession fro the heart, restitution of wrongs, he will
keep a stire, and bring our cousin into a fools paradise. It is he that will
raise up all the beggars in the toun: he will cry, give with your own hand, for
the day you are a man, to morrow earth ashes.


Ambodexter. A crafty villain.
First, let us be sober, and seem to be sorrowful for him, desiring nothing but
only his life. If he stand in great danger, the doctor shall have his leave,
and tarry no lodger with him, in who I think he have no hope to recover, let him
be well rewarded. Secondly let Reinold be sent into the coutree, to the
debtours for money: tell him it shall turn to his great profit, and how his
master doth intede to take him as his son, and will trust none but only
him, to fetch the money in the coutree. Thirdly, I will seem to fantasy the
minion, wishing her to be my wife, alleging what broken slepes she hath
caused me to have, and the cause of my coming hither only for her stay. Then
I will practise for the keys of the great black chest, and of the steel
casket. Fourthlie, master Curate shall be gently saluted with a Barnardes
blow, we will commend him, we will pray with him, and also receive the
Communion with our cousin, that he may have a good opinion in us, and deliver
him a bag with five pound in pence to give to the poor, in whose absence,
peradventure our Scribe and we shall frame the will: how like you this
practise? If this will not serve, I have a shift of descant in store, that I
learned in Bosoms Inn.


Auarus. The Devil take altogether, so that we had the gold, practise this I
pray you: you have a good wit, by my troth I could not sleep all this night
for this matter, if you were not, I could do nothing, but stand like a sheep.


Ambodexter. I warrant you, I have had long experience in this trade,
everywhere within this Realm, I can do the like with the help of Auarus,
which is a very good pen man, close and honest, he writes sonderie hands,
Petty Foggers, sit for the Pillerie.
and is a lively graver of Seals himself, also is a kind hearted fellow: for
he will not stick to lend his friend an other if need do require.


Auarus. The world is full of starting holes, me may scant know how to trust
men now a days, but for the good report that I do hear of this honest
fellow, I will be glad to have his acquaintance. I knew diverse of his
kinsmen.xx. years ago: GOD have mercy of all Christen souls, it was then a
merry world, and will never be so good again, until this Gospellyng Preachers
have a sweating sickness in Smithfieled, and their Bible burnt, well, would
some were at libertee for their sakes. Well, well.


Ambodexter. Oh I do remember that reverent mortified father, that holy man
bishop Boner, that blessed catholic confessor of Rome, if he were again at
libertee, he would not daily to make the, but trimly would rest these
fellows, and after burn them, you know his workmanship very well.


Auarus. He is my cousin Germain, and Per^urus that honest fellow, was his boy,
brought up with him in his youth, and your graudfather did pen his prologue,
in the book called De vera obedientia, when as they laughed merely, Honest
fellows.
saying they had rather put to their hands, then either their heads or
hearts, wise men, wise men.


Ambodexter. Yea, soche wisemenne will serve the time, Prudenter agere, and be
as wise as Serpents, and simple as Doves.


Auarus. To have the nature of a serpent, I will stand with them: but beshrowe
my heart, if I would be as simple as a Dove, either so simple, fearful, or
doltishe, but rather as my good lord Boner. Quasi Leo rugiens queres quein
deuoret. And thus he would expound that text, which must have soche a gloss
upon it.


Ambodexter. I am a lone upon glosses, Glosses.
I have art in store to sophist. I was brought up.iij. year with a Friar of
mont Pillar, he taught me how to hadle prosa, obscurum, inordinatu, and
barbarum, with genus and species: full well I can hadle the matter, both pro
and contra. Commonly these are my figures, and serve well to my purpose, as
Enigma, proaemiae, ironiae sarcasimus, antephrasis, chatientismus. I have many
rotten rules, which do serve for the purse: I learned them at Paris, they
are written in an old Barbarous French book. When we are at more leisure, I
will show thee all my cunyng, my gains and profits. Now let us confer
both together, this after noone about our matters.


Auarus. Contented in that case, as for terms and tricks in Logic, I force
not of them, they will pay for no horse bread: A good compaignie.
it is gold that makes a glad hart. He deserves reverence and rule, that hath
it and kept it: go let us dine together, and send for our friends, Rapax,
Capax, and Tenax, to keep us company an hour or two, for they are good
fellows.


Ambodexter. Agreed, I like their company very well they are my friends, and
kind hearted men


Auarus. And mine also, go let us depart, and not be seen much together
abroad standing in counsaill, because our matters are not curraunte.


Medicus. Crispinus, where have you been so long? I thought it a year since
your departure, but I have shorted the time, in beholding this pitiful
picture of Lucretia, and this fearful siege of Pauie, but this Map of the
discripcio of Terra Florida in America, have rejoiced me, there the gold
precious stones, and Balms are so plentiful, silver and spice are nothing
with them, no labour is in that land, log life they have: one thing there is,
which likes me not among the.


Crispine. What is that master Doctor?


Medicus. They have never sickness until death do come: therefore there is
no good dwelling for us in soche a land. Further, it is said, that they have
no debate nor strife in their common wealths.


Crispine. Marie then it is as unprofitable for Lawers, as for Physicians. I
trust we shall never be in that case, in this our country.


Medicus. God defend us from soche a Common wealth, it would mar
altogether. Now let us go to the chamber door, and se how the world goes
with master Antonius, and take our Phlebothomer with us, to let him blood.


Crispine. I will wait on your maistership.


Medicus. How do you good master Antonius, have you taken any rest, since I
was with you


Antonius. No more Master Doctor, then if I had been laid on hot coals. A
dreadful case.
Oh sir, there was never manne in soche a case, as I am in. I have had most
fearful dreams of thieves to rob me: me thought I was in the top of a high
tower, telling of money, and suddenly there came an yearthquake, shook the
tower in pieces, caste me down upon weapons all bloody, which a great number
of Morians had in their hands, from the I fell in the fire, which was like
high moutaines about me, whereas was much noise, and a cruel battle. I did
see there many of mine old acquaintance, which sometime were of great
honour, both men Spiritualle and Temporal, and the Pope himself, with many of
his friends. They were in extreme wretchedness, and sore handled of fearful
Monsters, and worms gnawyng upon their breasts, upon whom was written:
Conscience hath accused me, and hell devoured me. Ve, ve, ve, and thus I am
tossed to and fro, A troubled conscience.
alas what shall I do. Also I did hear many ragged and sick people, cry
vengeance on me^ and men in prison also, that said I had vndoen them, to
enrich my self, oh good God.


Crispine. Sir I pray you let me hack in your ear.


Medicus. What is the matter?


Crispine. I will depart: his talk doth so much trouble me, me think he
doth woude my conscience. Also, I will home, and caste away a great number
of rotten drugs, wherewith I have gotten much money, in deceiving the people,
God forgive me.


Medicus. The vicar of saint fools be your ghostly father, are you so wise?
Tarry still with me, let him pay for your rotten drugs, for I may say to
you, that he is almost rotten already himself: me think your conscience is
to much spiced with sudden devotion.


Antonius. What mean you Master Doctor, to whisper in the Apothicaries ear?


Medicus. Nothing sir, but I have appointed at what time that you should
receive your^ Clister, and how your Ptisa^te should be made: and in what order
that your frontarie should be applied to your forehead, to cause you to sleep
quietly. These dreams are nothing, but proceading of the abundance of
choler, you are hot and dry: also the time is very hot: the Son is now xx.
degrees in Leo, the Dog days are to be observed. Notwithstanding, fear
nothing, I warrant you, life for life, discomfort not your self, a man or a
Mouse.


Antonius. You are a merry gentleman, do your pleasure with me, I will put my
self into your hands I tell you: hold here are.xx. old Angles, that did se
no Son this ten year. Your Pothicarie shall be well considered, he seems to
be an honest man, and a cunning fellow: let him set up all the boxes and
glasses in the window, and put on his bonnet.


Medicus. What mean you sir, I pray you remember your self: so God help me,
you are to blame: well, I will not contrary you. My chief desire is to help
you, without the respect of money or gold, or other of your commoditee.
Crispine set the boxes in the window: and you Surgean, prepare your lace,
staff and lance, with your uncle vessels, that I may consider his blood in
order and due quantitee, for hither unto he is but in the augmentyng of his
fever. Further, he had no fit this ten hours, let him blood by little and
little, and although he do fall into Lipothimion, it is no matter, let him
blood until it partly do change into a good colour. Oh Lord, how might you
live? if this blood should have remained any longer, did you ever see the
like? what a good hart he hath, the worst is past this would have been a great
sore, or apo^umacion: stop up the vein a Gods name.


Crispine. I did never see the like, but ones where as your Maistership did a
great cure, upon a noble man.


Medicus. Oh, are you advised of that Crispine, he is a good friend of mine, I
have twenty pound yerelie of him. He sent me a fat Buck upon Mondaie
last, and gave me my Mule also, with a Velvet foot clothe.


Crispine. Sir, when you set me home, I left your mule standing at the door,
but as I returned, I met a lackei clothed in Orange taunie and white, with a
pair of bare taned legs, a blew night cap, with a plume of feathers riding
on him as fast as he might gallop.


Medicus. Oh the passion of Christ, my mule is stolen, I will hence, I had
rather lose.xx.li. I will tarry no ledger: A great loss.
my Mule, I will tech him to ride on my Mule, I warrant him.


Crispine. Sir, he needs no teaching, he can ride well I warrant you. I heard
him say to a young manne with a long cloak, lined with yellow, that his
master sent him to carry a letter, to a merchant venterer, that was
crossailed into Terra Florida.


Medicus. Give me my goune, fare ye well Master Antonius: as evil luck as
ever I had in all my life.


Antonius. I had thought the loss of your friend, and of your Mule, had not
been both a like to you. What for.xx. pound, I will pay it double: the knave
shall not escape, Crispine hath taken good marks upon him. I will send to
every Ward, blind lane, Innes Woods and fields, after the villain. I will
take the matter on me, because you come to me so gently: quiet your self,
sit down again in the chair, I were caste away if you were gone, good
master doctor.


Medicus. I care not so much for the mule, but that my lord will take much
unkindness, and think I should set light by his gift, and the Ruffians will
laugh me to scorn, when they know how I am hadled of the knave boy. Well, I
am contented with your offer I pray you beware you sleep not, you shall sup
the thin broth of a chicken by and by, made with the.iiij. great cold
seeds and cordial Herbs. Crispine, I pray you make the broth in some stone
or silver vessel. Copper or Brass is not good for Master Antonius: soche
vessels are Leprous.


Antonius. If you will have it made of gold, you shall.


Medicus. We shall make shift with other things: gold shall serve to deaurat
or gilde your losinges, electuaries manus christi withal.


Antonius. Contented, so that it makes on my side whatsoever it be. But me
think I feel sleep approaching, what shall I do?


Medicus. Draw the Curtains, open the lukette of the Window: set Sallowes
about the bed, besprinkled with vinegar and rose water. Take of that hot
mantle, let his head and shoulders be bolstred up, lye not on your back,
lean towards this side, let us talk together like friends, why are you so
heavy and yearthlike.


Antonius. I must needs, I was made of earth, but where is the earth placed,
of which I was made, and of what fassion is it, although I walk upon the same,
yet do I stand in doubt of the matter.


Medicus. The earth is most heavy, Aristo. de c^l^ mundo.
and can be in no place, but in the midst of heaven, not moveable, but round
hangs continually, about the which are the lands and countries of the world
fixed, which Aristotle doth call Medium terrae, medium mundi.


Antonius. Are there not bodies, which are called simple.


Medicus. Yes forsooth, The four Elements.
those are the iiij. the fire hot and dry, the air hot and moist, the water
cold and moist, the earth cold and dry, and these are called the
Elements.


Antonius. Are there not bodies called mixed, what are they?


Medicus. Animalia: as man, beast, fish, Mixed bodies.
foul and Worms, Vegetabilia, as Herb, Grass and Trees, and mineralia,
things under the earth, as metalles.


Antonius. Lord, how is this world stayed?


Medicus. The two Pooles Articus and Artarti^ South and North, are the extreme
limits about whom the whole frame of heaven is wrapped, and is called Axie
coeli^.


Antonius. Men says that certain stars do govern the things beneth here
in earth.


Medicus. They do so in deed, as it is well proved when as the Sun and
Moon do enter into any of their circles, in those great bodies, then our
little bodies in earth do feel the goodness or euilnes of them, as Aries,
Leo, and Sagittarius, are hot, dry and bitter, cholorike, and are governing
hot and dry things, and this is called the fiery triplicitee. The second
triplicitee, is of air hot and moist, sanguine, sweet, and do govern
Sanguine people. And other tirplicitee is of water, cold moist, flegmatike,
having the government of cold raw bodies. The last is the earth, the mother
of all things, cold and dry melancholy.


Antonius. What do the knowledge of these things profit to Physic, I pray
you tel me?


Medicus. Most chiefly: for where, as the Philosopher do leave, there the
Phisicion do begin. That is, he must be first a good natural Philosophier, he
must have ye knowledge o^ times and seasons, and be acquainted with complexios
of men, observing the nature of things, and the climates under heave, with the
course of the Son, Moon and Stars, Air and diet. c.


Antonius. I pray you, is there a soul in manne?


Medicus. Yes forsothe.


Antonius. Why then, there must needs be a greater thing, as the cause of every
living soul which I take to be GOD, God.
which hath made all things, and when you and I talked together, you seemed
that, No est deus.


Medicus. I professed to follow Aristotle, but my meaning was, that I credit
not the Bible matters, I am no Divine, I find no reasons there for my turn:
they are to harde things for me, I commend them to Darbell and Duns. c.


Antonius. Why, doth Aristotle show any better reasons then is in the Bible?
Then I pray you: what is the power of the soul?


Medicus. In the soul says Aristotle in his book of Ethiques, The three
parts of the soul.
it hath.iij. sundry powers. The one is named vegitable, in which every man
takes part with herbs, trees, and plants. The second part of the soul is
named sensible: in this part man and beast are both a like in moving. c. The
third part is more, which is racionall, or having reason. And this part of
reason, hath both act to do well, and power to do evil. And these ij. are
called Intellectiue, which learns, deserves and judges in every thing that
may be seen, felt, heard, or understanded: but the power unreasonable, as
sudden raging, crying. c. Is ascribed unto the Lion, Horse, Hog. c. How like
you this manner of talk, yet here is no scripture, but Aristotle, I assure you.


Antonius. Then it should appear, that the soul hath virtues: how many I pray
you?


Medicus. The first virtue is called Intellectual, fro which springs
wisdom, science, prudence. And the.ij. is called moral, which is the mother
of many good things, as chastitee, liberalitee, humanitee, good manners.


Antonius. What is the cause of these two virtues in the soul.


Medicus. The virtue Intellectual, ingendereth and is nourished by learning of
good tutors, and men of experience, or reading of good books of Philosophie:
which is a secrets virtue in the soul. And also the moral comes by good
custom, and not by nature, as if one manne had two sons, the one brought
up in keeping cattelle, the other in daily learning good lessons, Example.
although nature did frame their bodies like in shape, yet they should not be
like in conditions: moral provides, that natural things in them both, can
not be moved by contrary custom. For stones naturally, though they be cast
never so high by art, yet must they naturally fall down again. Even so of
fire being driven down, yet it will caste his flames upward: so virtue is not
in us by nature, but only by power to receive them, for every thing that is
in us by nature: first it is in us bi powers, after comes to act, as it
comes to the senses of mankind. For none can deny, but first^ manne hath
power to hear, see, feel. c. So the power doth prevent, and comes before
the act in nature.


Antonius. Then if power goes before thacte, then a man is called honest,
good, or chaste, before: either nonestie, goodness, or chastity appears in
him.


Medicus. In things moral, evermore the act goth before the power. An
example: a Schoole-maister is called a Teacher, because of his learning, which
is the work going before the power. And the cause of a good ma is his good
works: and so of the eiuill, whose work is either drunkenness, aduitrie,
theft. c. they make him evil.


Antonius. Then it should appear, that this thing called Actus, or work,
brings virtue and vice in man.


Medicus. What else, doth not every man that lives eat? But if he eat to
much or to little, doth it not bring sickness? Even so of to much labour
or idleness, of to much boldness or cowardnesse, are not these acts vicious
and evil? And does not one mean moderate them both. Extremes are ever
hurtful.


Antonius. What remedy then I pray you?


Medicus. Nothing is better then a mean, called temperance, Temperance
which is governed by prudence, which is ever content between both, and
rejoices in it.


Antonius. So then, Aduersitee.
if a man fell into extreme adversity, and sustain it patiently in his
sickness, poverty, or cause of grief, call you this a mean, or no.


Medicus. In every work or suffering, there is pleasure or displeasure. If a
manne do rejoice in trouble, in chastity, Prudence.
in bearing of cruel words or slaughter, the same is a prudent manne, and his
suffering makes it a mean to him: but other men that are chastised, and will
suffer outwardly, and it grieves them in so doyng, the same is vicious, and
lacks mean, or prudence.


Antonius. Hath the soul any delights in her or no?


Medicus. Yes truly, in three things. The first^ profitable, Profit.
whereof springs housebandrie to nourish the earth, as also Physic to help
the body, knighthod to go to battle. c The second is delectable, Pleasure.
as taking pleasure in things done, which is chiefly nourished of the soul,
in which consists al^ the pleasures of the world. The third is called
good, Virtue.
that is to be virtuous, loving, sober, paciet, and also to the soul or mind,
are enjoined, habit, power and passion.


Antonius. Have young children the soul in al points as women have or no, in
operacio or eleccio


Medicus. Aristotle. says: that operation of the will of the soul, is common
to children, but the eleccion or choice, be not in them to will.


Antonius. What is will in the soul?


Medicus. The will is the entente, but eleccion is the antecedent to the
entente, for eleccion goes before operation or work, and the work doth
follow the same, as doyng of things, buiyng, selling, and all the arts and
sciences, are so to be considered. Frste, by eleccion, then by operation, First
eleccio, then operacio
as by art I do prove you to have the pestilence, experience hath taught me,
which young children can not know, as Gramer, Rethorike, Music, Physic,
before they have learned the, or begun with their principles.


Antonius. Now I will stop and lay a straw, and come as yet no more of
the matters of the soul, but only of the body, and namely in this poinct of
the pestilence. Pestilence.
What is the cause of the same, good Master doctor?


Medicus. That which we do se, we do testify, and ^hat which we do testify
is true. The cause of the pestilence
Therefore no man ought in matters, which appertains to the estate of life, to
write fables or lies, but that which is of great aucthorite^ and of good
experience. This pestilent fever, saith Hipocrates, Hypocrates de flatibus.
is in two parts considered: the first is common to every man, by the
corrupcion of air. The second is private or particular to some men through
evil diet, replecion, which brings putrifaccion, and finally mortificacion.
And Galen in the diffrences of fevers, doth affirm the same, saying: Vnam aerem
viciatum ac putridum, Gale^ libri. i. De differen^* Feb. Cap. v.
altera homoree corporis virioso victu colectos, ad putrescendu paratos. Auicen
also, Tractus quartus de febrib{us} pestilentialibus. cap. i. When there doth
come a sudden alteration or change in the quality of water, fro cold to
heate, or transmutacion fro sweetness to stincke, as it chances in waters,
through corrupted mixture of putrified vapour, inf^ctyng both air water,
which of their own simplicity are clean, but through evil mixture are
poisoned: A^tius de remedica. libri. v. Paulus libri. ii.
or when strong winds do cary pestilet fume or vapours from stinkyng places,
to the clean parts, as bodies dead of the plague, unburied, or mortality in
battle, death of cattle, rotten fens, coming suddenly by the impression of
air, ^afis ^ li. de pest. Gal^. libri. i. De diffe^* ca. iiii.
creping to the heart, corrupting the spirits, this is a dispersed pestilence,
by the inspiracion of air. Also by replecion, Uenus, bathing, or opening the
pores, rotten food, frui^t, much Wine, or immoderate labour, or the time
being hot and moist. These are great causes.


Antonius. At what time of the year does the Pestilence caste forth her
poison?


Medicus. In the time of Harvest says Hypocrates, are most sharpe and dedlie
sicknesses, Hyp. (...). xix.
but less danger in the Spring time: and in the time of sundry change of
Winds when the weather is hot and moist.


Antonius. To what persons I pray you, doth the Pestilence come?


Medicus. Most chiefly to them, under the place infected, then to slotishe
beastly people, that keep their houses and lodgings vnclene, their meat,
drink, and clothing, most noisome, their labour and travel immoderate, or
to them which lack provident wisdom, to prevent the same by good diet,
air, Medicine. c. Or to the bodies hot and moist. And these bodies do
infect other clean bodies, and whereas many people do dwell on heaps
together, as Auicen says: Et communicate multitudine hominum. c. Fen. j. Tra.
iiij.


Antonius. By what sign or token is this perilous plague or stripe of the
Pestilence, best known among the Phisicions. Go not about the bush with
subtle words, but plainly speak the truth to me, being in this fearful
danger, as you do well know that I am in.


Medicus. Causes and signs of Pestilence.
The signs are most manifest which are the stars running course or race
after their causes. Oh the most fearful eclipses of the Sun and Moon, those
heavenly bodies are manifest signs of the pestilence emog men, and the
stars cadente in the beginning of Harvest, or in the month of September, or
much South wind or East wind in the Canicular days, with storms and
clouds, and very cold nights and extreme hot days, much change of weather
in a little time, or when birds do forsake their eggs, flies or things breding
under the ground, do fly high by swarms into the air, or death of fish or
cattelle, or any dearth going before, these are the signs of the pestilece,
evident presages of the same


Antonius. These are good signs generalle, but particular: what manifest
tokens do signify the Plague or Pestilence in a man own proper body.


Medicus. They which are smitten with this stroke or plague, Ruff. ^uict^
Fatetur. Actiu^. Cap. xcv. ^ibr. v. viii. Paulus Libri. Cap. xxxv.
are not so open in the spirits as in other sicknesses are, but strait
winded, they do swone and vomit yellow chollour, swelled in the stomach
with much pain, breaking forth with stinking sweat. The extreme parts very
cold, but the internal parts boiling with heate and burning, no rest, blood
distilling from the nose: Urine somewhat watery, and sometime thick with
stincke, sometime of colour yellow, sometime black, skaldyng of the tongue,
ordure most stinkyng, with red iyen, corrupted mouth with blacknes, quick
pulse and deep, but weak, hedache, altered voice, loss of memory, sometime
with raging in strong people. These and soche like are the manifest signs, how
the hart hath drawn the venom to it, by attraccion of the air: by the
inspiracion of the arters to the heart, and so confirming it to be the perilous
fever Pestileciall. This is most true: of this comes foul bubos, antaxis and
carbuncles, sores, through putrifaccion, as Galene says: li.iii. De presage.
Auicen. Fe. i. tract. iiii. Gal. lib. i. De diffe. cap. iiii. Rasis de
constitutione pestiletiae ad mansorem. Also this fever is scant to be
recovered, and almost past help, when these Symptomatas do appear, as Galene
says.iii. De praesage ex pull. qua propter neque hos curare tentandum erit.


Antonius. You have declared unto me a fearful tale of the Plague, whereof
thousands have and shall die: a pitiful case how it comes among people
suddenly, even as you have showed, the cause primatiue in thaire. The
antecedent, Primatime. Antece lent. Coniuncte. Causes of the Pestilence.
when the same air is drawn into the hart by attraccio of the arters: the
coniunct, when it with boiling heat, doth change by putrifaccion, nature into
the worse part, and almost paste cure of any Physician, when it is come to
this point, as I gather by your late talk, which doth put me in great
fear of my life. But I will common with you for others, which are not
infected, howe may they be most safely defended, master Doctor?


Medicus. Would you fain know? Surely I will declare thee, the best defence
that I can, I will hide nothing. First of all, let all men, Good air, Gale. de
la. i. ad Pi^o. Cap. xvi. Ptul. li. ca. xxxvi Auicen de preser. a peste. f^u.
ii tract. iiii. Rasis ad almon. libr. de pest. Cap. ii.
women and children, avoid out of the ill air, into a good soil: and then,
according to their age, strength of nature and complexion, let everyone of
them, with some good Medicene, draw from the body, superfluous moisture, and
deminishe humour hot and dry, and use the regimente of diet to driyng,
sharped with vinegar or tart things, and lesser meates, not so much wine as
they have used in custom, neither Potage, Milk, unripe fruits: hot
Spices, dates or Honey, or sweet meates, wine with Sugar are not tolorable. No
anger or perturbacions of the mind, Trouble of monde or fear.
specially the passion called fear: for that do draw the spirits and blood
inwards to the heart, and is a very mean to receive this plage. Neither use
acts venerous, nor bathing, either with fume, Stoue, or warm water (for this
cause): they all do open the poores of the body, neither quassyng or much
drinking: even so thirst or drines is not tolorable, or immoderate exercise or
labour, specially after meat: A goodly rule against the Plague.
Music is good in this case, and pleasant tales, and to have the meates well
sauced with clean sharp^ vinegar. Forget not to keep the chamber, and clothing
clean, no priues at hand, a soft fire with perfumes in the morning. Shift
the lodging often time, and close in the South East winds, specially in the
time of mists, Note also ye Clisters are good, before the opening of veins.
Clouds and winds. And use to smell upon some pleasant perfume and to be
letten blood, a little at ones, and to take Pills contra Peste: that is a good
preservative against the plague.


Antonius. These are good rules, and happy are they that do wisely observe
them in time, place and manner accordingly: but if one be new lie infected, what
remedy then, as when a man is sick, and the sore appears not.


Medicus. Libri Epid. Sect. ^i. Apho. iiii.
A coming forth like a bubos, are signs of those parts from which they do
swell as example, in the left side, head, neck, flanckes. c. but often times
the plage sore will not appear, the very cause is this: nature is to weak,
and the poison of the infection to strong, that it cannot be expelled and this
is most perilous of all, when soche a cruel conqueror doth rain within the
hart, the principal part of life, now possessed with death. The causes of
this, I have declared before with signs to ye same. Consider two speciciall
things.
Not withstanding, consider two things: first whether it is in bodies
sanguine and choleric, or them which are flegmatike, or melancholy, or not.
The first two, blood is the cause: the second.ij. abundance of evil
humours. Therefore let blood, Auicen. C^rati. f^bri Pesti. ^i.iiii. ^en. i.
tract. iiii.
whereas it hath the victory, and purge whereas other humours have
predominacion, or chief rule: in some men, that have very strong bodies,
first purge, tha let blood. Note this, that what side be infected, Leo. Actus
de med ^d. mor. Lib^i. iiii.
let blood on that side: if it be above the head, open Cephalica: if it be
under the arms, Basilica, or heart vein: if it be about the throat, then
open Malleola, about the flanckes, bealie, legs. c. open Iecoraria: if they
are very weak or young, then boxyng is good to the neck, shoulders, back and
thighs: if the stomach be full, then with speed vomet^e and these things
draw the venom from the heart, and remove the poison.


Antonius. This is good in the cure of the Pestilence, for I do praise this
blood letting very well, in the beginning of the sickness.


Medicus. Blood must be letten in the beginning of the sickness: Example.
for example, like as a pot is cleansed of the scum or some, in the beginning,
when it plays on the fire, and thereby the liquour is cleansed within the
pot: even so, blood letting and pills, do help and cleanse the Pestilence,
Who may not be letten blood.
when it begins first to boil within the body. Howbee it, certain people
may not bleed: as women which have their times abundantly: or men
having flux of the Hemoroides, children very young, or people weak and aged.


Antonius. I pray you, what quantitee of blood must be letten?


Medicus. Quantitee of blood letten.
Forsooth sower vnees, or little more, and must be done every month, sometime in
the Median, sometime in the Basilica. c. And not to sleep after the same, during
six seven, or eight hours.


Antonius. What Pills do you use against the Plague.


Medicus. The best Pills generally under heaven, and is thus made: Ruff.
contra pest. Auicen. libri. iiii. Fen. i. tract. iiii. Paul. Libri. ii. Cap.
xxxvi.
take the best Yellow Aloes two vnces, Myrrh and Saffron, of each one uncle,
beat them together in a Mortar a good while, put in a little sweet Wine,
then roll it up, and of this make five Pills, or seven of one dragme, whereof
take every day next your heart, a Scruple, or more, it will expulse the
Pestilence that day. c.


Antonius. Have you any good pocio in store for the Pestilence: to be drunk a
Mornings, when the Pills are not taken.


Medicus. None better then this: take Theriaca, of the making of
Andromachus.ij. Scruples which is a Triacle incomparable, Galenus libri. ix. de
simplic.
passing against both poison and Pestilence, and the Antidotari of
Mithridatis.i. Scruple. bole Armoniacke prepared, half a Scruple and the waters
of distilled Roses, Fuch. de mede. morbis. libri. iiii.
Scabious and Buglosse, of each one uncle mingeled together: but this Medicene
must be had of Crispine, or one of his companions, which use no rotten ware.


Antonius. Have you any good powder?


Medicus. One better, I assure you, then a kings ransom, and thus it must
be made: take the leaves of Dictamnus, and the roots of Turmentil, of
Pimpernell, of Seduall, of Gentian, of Betonie, of each half an uncle bole
Armoniacke prepared an uncle, Terra sigillata.iij. dragmes, fine Aloes Myrrh of
each half an uncle, Saffron a dragme, Mastike.ij. dragmes: beat them together
finely fearsed, this is the powder. Of this must a dragme be drunk in.iiij.
or.vi. sponfull of Rose or Sorel water, when danger approaches, or in the time
of danger.


Antonius. These are strong things for many weke stomachs: is there any other
holsom things?


Medicus. The siruppes of Uiolettes, of Sorrel, of Endiue, of sower Limondes,
of each like, mingled with Burrage water, and a Ptisane made of Barlie, mingled
together, is very wholesome to drink, put in the powder of bole Armoniack,
which is of a singular virtue to cool: for Galen did help thousades at Rome
with the same Bole, and the Theriaca mingled together, in a great pestilence,
but in the pestilence time, one being infected therewith, let him sweat by
warm things, as hot tiles. c. and let not the patient eat, sleep, nor
drink, and eat light meates, as Hen, Capon, Cheken, Partridge, eating
often, and little at ones, with sauce, made sharpe of vinegar, Oringes, sharpe
Limodes, or Sorrel, and in the first day of the sickness, that the patient be
kept from sleep, by talking, sprinklyng of sweet water, rubbing of the body,
as nose ears, or soft pulling of the hears, as they may be suffered, or a
sponge dipped in vinegar, applied to the nose: and if vehement dryness, or
heate does approach, then drink the Syruppes last rehearsed, and have the
Chamber clean kept, and also parfumed four times of the day, beware of
stincke, let the perfumes be made with Olibanum, Mastike, wood of Aloes,
Beniamin, Storax, Laudanum, Cloves, Juniper, or so^ like, and sprincle al the
chamber about with vinegar: Auicen. libr. iiii. (...) i. tract. iiii. Ras.
roses in the windows, or green branches of Sallowe, or of Quinces, are
good, sprynkeled with Rose water and Vinegar.


Antonius. I have heard say, that Garlic and new Ale, should be good for the
Plague.


Medicus. You do say truth, Garlic is good for to bring it, but not against
it, it is so hot, and hath power attractive, and that is very evil, and a
mean to bring the plague^ so are Onions, Good obseruacions.
Leekes, Rocket, Radish, and s^che baggage, which are sold about, in every
streate in Plaguy time, as means for to bring the same, it is pity to suffer
soche things. Further, the multitudes of infected people emog the whole,
infecting them, or wearing the apparel of the dead bodies of the Pestilence,
which should be burned: for it is like a fire, when it have gotten the
victory, and can not be quenched. Priueis, filthy houses, gutters,
chanilles, unclean kept: also the people sick, going abroad with the plague
sore running, stinkyng and infectyng the whole, or unwise ^ashe passing with an
empty stomach out of the house: Neither to sit tipplyng and drinking all the
day long, nor use running wrestling, Daunsyng, or immoderate labour, which
do not only open the pores but also cause the wind to be short, and the
pulses to quick, and the Arters draw to the hart when it pants, the
pestilenciall air and poison. And what is worse tha fear of mind, when one
doth hear ill tidings, the death of father, mother, child. c. By it the
spirits and blood are drawn inwards to the heart. Also of care, anger,
wrath. c. These are all perilous: The best remedy, the worst mean.
Mirth must be used, specially in this case: Cattes, Dogs, Swine, Ducks,
Doves, Hens or Gese, are very vnholsome ne'er unto the place or mansion of
dwelling, or lye ded in diches ne'er the town: or many people lying together in
one bed, or long watching in the night, or co^ti^nes of the bealy: shut up the
hot house doors, and tennis play, which are most venomous. Be never
without the electuarie of nuts, thus made, Fuch. libri. iiii. de mo^b.
Elect^arii de nucibi^.
cleue walnuts.xx. fat figs.xiij herb Grace.ij. handful Wormewoodde
Fetherfu, or rather Cotula Foetida, called Buphthalmus, called Ore ^ye, and
Scabios of each one handful: the roots of Aristolochia longa, half an vnse:
Aristolochia rotunda, an uncle and a half. The roots of Turmentill, and of the
lesser Bur, cal- Petasitus, Pimpernell, of each two vnces and a half, the
leaves of the very Dictam ni one handful, Bay beries three Dragmes, the
powder of Hearts horne two dragmes and a half, Maces, Morrhe, Bole
Armoniacke, and the earth of Limodes, of each Dragmes three, Salt of the Sea
a dragme and a half, Nux vomica, dragmes two, Buglos flowers one handful,
staped together by art, with clarified honey make it: this is good to be eaten
a dragme every morning. Forget not the Pills of Ruffi, of them may be taken
one at ones.


Antonius. After, or with this Pestilence, there will a fearful sore appear,
as we have ye knowledge universal, by painful experience, which we do call
the plague sore, what do you say to the same sore?


Medicus. Carbo Anthrax are one.
This sore is called Carbunculus, of Carbo a Cole, or Anthrax: they are both
one, and not two, and is engendered of most sharpe, hot and gross blood,
which nature doth cast forth through the skin, to one particular part,
with extreme pain and perille to the body: whose Primatiu^ cause was, the
corrupcion of air or diet, drawn to the heart, of which pestiferous smoke,
or poisoned fume, this sore hath his cause, the same sore is theffect following.


Antonius. What are the signs: when it comes ne'er hand?


Medicus. A fever going before, Signs of the plague.
noisome and lothsomnesse of stomach, wambleyng of the heart, pulse not
equal, urine stinking, desirous of sleep, perilous dreams with starting,
through the sharpness of hot and burning humours, and then a little push
will creep forth like a scabbe, sometime more then one, then it will
increase and shine like pitch or Bptumen, with passing pain, and then it will
have a crust like unto the squanies or flakes of Iron, when they fall of, when
the Smith doth work, and in colour like ashes is this crust, wrought by
extreme heate and burning, therefore it may be called the burning cole, or
Ignem persicum. Further, there are four colours to be observed in the sore
besides the crust, yelowe, red, grene and black. The first two are not so
dangerous as the second two are. Yet says Rasis in his book of the
pestilence, to Mansor the king, that the Carbuncle is deadly, and most
perilous. And Auicen affirms the black to be incurable, specially when a
Fever Pestilece do reign. Sometime it is drawn back again into the body,
then no remeadie. Sometime it happens in the most noble places, Where the
plague sore is placed.
as ne'er the heart, the throat, most perilous, with sudden stopping the
spirits of life. Some pestilet sores do come in the clensing places, as arm
holes, flanks. c And when nature is so strong, to caste it forth with a red
colour, palishe, or yellowishe, the cure is not then very harde.


Antonius. It should seem to be most harde: you have showed more perils then
helps hither unto: But if there be any remedies, what are they? I pray you
tell them, for in that point you may do much good.


Medicus. Even as I have rehearsed before, so will I again begin in the cure of
the carbuncle of the opening of a vein, and if none other thing do let, as
extreme weakness. c. then let the patient bleed, until the defeccion of the
spirits, or ne'er hand swoning. Let it be done on that side grieved or
afflicted, as I have said before in the fever Pestilence of the Mediane. c.
Also forget not viij. special things. First the substance, as compass,
length, depth, hardness. c. Second, the matter whereof it is bread, as
blood. c. The third as accident, through the dolor, as a fever, redness. c.
Fowerth to know it from a cause, whereof a doubt might arise thereof. Gal.
^ttribu^ alter ^in ^midi^. To know the Anthrax from the Cancer.
And this is the difference between them. A Carbuncle in the beginning is
very harde, flaming red, extreme pain. c. As I have said before, and will
come quickelie to his head. But Cancer is not so red, neither so painful,
yet much harder, and longer time or it comes to the head. But when it
begins to wa^e soft, then it ripeth faster then the Carbuncle. The fifth, of
the causes efficiet, whether it be ripe through cococcion or no or the
qualities of the corrupted humours or hardness. c. The sixte, in what place it
is, in place of perille or no. The seventh is to work by incision, plaster. c.
The.viij. is good diet, as air, meat, drinks, sleep. c. These are very good
obseruacions, worthy of memory in this case. And now follows a perille to
the Surgeon, which must be richly rewarded, for he puts his life in
danger, in that, that he helps the sore body infected, he ought to be
provident, that doth take this matter in hand, and before he comes to the
pinch, to eat his antidotari of Methridatum, A cauiate for the Chyrurgian.
or to have a Sponge with strong vinegar, applied to his nostrils, to arm
himself against the poisoned air: and to take his lance in his hand,
according to the art, taking heed that in launcyng, he cut no vain or
Senewe, which have society with each other therefore lance not very deep.
This is no strange thing after bloodletting, to lance the sore, to let forth
the matter, in some it will come forth abundantly, when it is ripe or rotten:
in other some not, because the humours are gross, and baken together, or the
running matter far in, or scant ripe, and nothing will come forth but
salt, sharpe, filthy, stinking water: then beware of any thing that might
drive it back again into the body, as cold, bole armen. c. then thinsicion
must be made in the lowest place, so that thereby the matter mate the sooner
avoid, and must be made in the form crooked, if it be not in a place full of
senewes, if it be, then make the insicion long: after the matter is run forth,
tha cover it with lint dipped in this following, which is excellent good, yea, if
the matter be stubborn in the sore. Take Quinse seed, Note this well.
Galls, of each. iij. dragmes, Myrrh, Olibanum and Aloes, of each.ij. dragmes
and a half, Alom.ij. dragmes, Aristolochia the round roots, Calamenthe, as
much: Calamenth, i. dragme and a half, Calcanthum a scruple, all beaten
finely, then temper it together in a little Red Wine, made in small rolls:
you may keep them dry, and then in this case dissolve it, or part of it in
the water of stilled milk, apply this with lint into the sore, To wash the
place.
also in this case to wash the sore with a sponge dipped in the warm waters of
Dragos, Scabious, sweet wine, Aaristolochia and Comphori, or their decoccio.
And to have the roots of Compho^, of Lillies, of Mallowes, sodden in white
wine until they be soft, then stamped and drawn through a strainer, put
thereunto barlie meal honey of roses, this is a very good thing to apply to
the sore, A good medicen for the sore.
after the washing for.xij. hours, and will digest it. An other good medicen,
both to ripe and assuage the pain: mallowes, violets, cham^ mill, A good
medicene to ripe.
of each half an handful, dill, half as much, sees them and braie the,
then adt^ them barley meal, oil of roses, flax sede bean meal, of each.iij.
vnces. Sees them in sweet wine, until they wax thick, and make plaster.
And to the places about the roots of the carbuncle, round about it, this is
good both to eradicate defend the same Sees sower oringes in vinegar or
sorrel, For the roots of the sore
and put a little bole armen to it, dip a cloth or flax in it, and apply it
round about the sore: many times renew it in this cure, read M. Thomas Gailes
worthy book.

M. Gail.
And to take away the harde crust of the carbuncle, To take away the crust and
the pain
do thus. Take ceruse, dermilion, sublimated of each.iij. dragmes, beaten
finely in powder, and part of this may be cast upon the same. And to this
may follow mallowes, violets, lets, of each one hand full, sodden in mutton
broth, the yolks of three eggs, barlie meal, oil of roses, and fresh
butter, of each three vnces, this plaster applied on, will take away the
Pestilent crust. Also the emplastrum of Diachilo paruum, two vnces with
Amoniack, and Galbanu, of each one uncle, made in a plaster, applied to the
place, or a plaster of figs, Doves doung and Uallerion roots, and the
roots of mallowes, made and applied upon the sore, are very good ripers, and
do much prevail in this cure, and further to bring the cicatrice if need
require. Take oil of Myrrh, of roses, of violettes, A cicatric^ most (...).
of each two vnces, shepes Tallow three vnces, gotes tallow one uncle and a
half, juice of Colewortes three vnces, sees the together softly, until the
juice be consumed, then put thereunto half an uncle of Vermilion, ceruse as
much, and.ij. dragmes of letharge of gold, and sees the unto a blacknes,
stiere them with a stick, then put to them six vnces terpentine, and as
much Wax as shall suffice to make it in the form of a cerot. And this will
make a strong cicatris: and when the matter hath run much and is past venom,
then this is a powder most precious to caste in, and dry it by little little.
A most noble powder.
Take Ashes of Dill of burnt lead, of Terra lemnia, of each one dragme,
litharge of silver, flowers of pomgarnates, and galls without holes, of each
ij. dragmes, Ceruse, Creuishels, Snails horns, roche Alome burnt, of each ij.
scruples beaten in powder: An healing ointemente.
this is the powder, and hereafter follows a good ointmente to heal the
sore. Oil of Roses.ij. vnces, Ceruse, burnt lead, Litharge, of each one a
scruple, red Roses.ij. scruples in powder, the roots of the grease Comphori,
and the flowers of Pomegranates, bole Armen, of each one scruple, the seed of
Purslen tw^ grains, white wax asmoche as shall suffice: and make this
ointmente in a Leaden mortar if it may be. Emog al simples Simphatum called
Cophori, is greatly lauded for the healing or helping of the Carbuncle, being
ground or beaten between.ij. stones, Good notes for the Pestilence.
and warm applied to the place. So is the herb called Scabios in the same
manner: so is the Lilly roots roasted and bruised and warm laid on. (Let not
the great white onio roasted, and the pith in the midst being taken forth,
stopped with good Triacle or Mythridatum warm, and applied to the place, be
forgotten) for some use none other things for the Carbuncle, to cure it. Also
consider this to keep the body temperate in eating. Beware of replecio, light
Fish, with tart sauces, Limondes, Sorrel, Oringes, thin wine with water but
no Sugar or sweet things. Forget not sweet perfumes of Rose water, Perfume.
cloves Maces, Vinegar in a perfumyng pan, and have the stomach anointed with
oil of Maces, and the complete ointment of roses, of each.ij. scruples, and
Gallae muschata, x. grains, and dip in a line cloth in white wax, oil of
Roses, white and red Saunders, and the powder of oriental Pearls, fine bole
Armen, and the sweet would of Aloes with Rose water, made warm in a little
vessel upon charcole, and be not without a good Pomeamber made of Storax,
Pomeamber against the Pestilence.
Calamite three dragmes, Laudani, half an uncle, flowers of water Lillies,
Uiolettes, the wood of Aloes, Spikenarde, of each a dragme and a half, the
three Saunders of each half a dragme, Sinamon two scruples, Masticke.xx.
grains, white Poppy seed, Campher, of each a scruple, Amber and Musk, of
each three grains, with rose water, in a warm Mortar, make Pomeamber,
Cordial.
make a hole in it, and put a silk lace through it, and wear this against
corrupted air. The body must have benefit by purgation, with clister or
suppositer, or some pocion, as the syrup of roses solutiue iij. vnces, Purging.
confeccion of Hamech, v. Dragmes, and water of Endiue.iiij. vnces, mingled
together, and drink at ones in the morning, or Benedicta laxatiua, with water
of Buglosse. Be not without Manus Christi, to eat oftetimes: and the conserve
of Roses, to eat before meat daily. Beware of much ^lepe, which will make
the heate double about and within the heart, for sleep draws in heate: and
in time of waking, it is spread abroad, and the heate draws to the extremes,
as hands, head and feet. Sir, forget not this I pray you.


Antonius. No master Doctor, I warrant you, I have noted it well, and though
it help not me, yet I trust it shall do good to others, when I am gone.


Medicus. Now sir, I will take my leave for a time my calling is soche that I
must depart, and diverse of my patients, which diligently do loke for me, as
the hirdes do for the day after a cold Winters night. And as time and occasion
shall serve, I will return. I have hidden nothing from you, that may be a
means to your health: for when life is gone, farewell altogether, wife,
children, gold, lands, treasures, and all the golden glory of this world,
friends also. Therefore, seeing life is the best jewel, An Epicures ta^ke.
which brings delights to the hart, pleasures to the iye and ear, sweet
savours to sense of smelling, and many hidden treasures knowelege to the virtue
of understanding, what is he that would make soche an exchange, if it were
possible to the contrary? To forsake his gold be decked bed with sweet
slepes, to lie utterly lost, rotten, forgotten, and stinking, in a filthy pit
of darkness, enclosed and wrapped with Worms. As by example, we may see the
multitude of graves in every church yard, and great heaps of rotten bones,
whom we know not of what degree they were, rich or poor in their lives.
Therefore sir, to conclude, pluck up that weak hart, rejoice* be glad and
cast away all care, I warrant you.


Antonius. Gramercies master doctor, I have put you to pain with much talk
and questions: I will keep them in memory, they shall not be forgotten of my
part. Eve so forget not your promise in coming to me again, my trust is in
you: we shall make daily exchauge, cunning for gold, and love for labour,
yours I am. Have, take you that to by you a new Mule, a foot clothe, a
goune.


Medicus. A nice gentleman.
What mean your maistership? well, give me your hand, and here is mine with mine
hart also, ever yours at commandment as your own. Thus fare you well, until
my return: in the mean while, pass the time with some pleasant company Eat
good broth made of Chickens, Diet.
lean Mutton, roast a little Partridge, eat light leauened bread, beware of
gross meates, Bief, Pork. c. And Sallettes, strong wine, Spise, sweet meates,
and raw fruit. I pray you remember this, and drink your Diacodion at night,
to reconcile sleep again, and be somewhat laxative.


Antonius. I thank you most heartily: fare you well.


Medicus. Crispine where are you? Is is not time to depart? We have tarried here
very long, but not without gain.


Crispine. Sir, I have thought it a month since our coming hither: you have
been sent for eight times this after noone, and two of your patients are
dead this day.


Medicus. That is no marvel, for who can hold that will away? I shall have
more work then I can put my hand unto. It is now a golden world with me, and
with you also.


Crispinus. God continue the same: No wind, but it doth turn some men to
good.
I would thousands were sick, but I would have none dead, but the beggars
that do trouble the world, and have no money to pay. I pray you what think
you of master Antonius shall he escape it or no?


Medicus. I have his plentiful reward, and money for you also. I have had log
talk with him. But to be plain with you, I think never to se him again
alive. He was paste cure or I came to him, and he could not skape, therefore I
kept him with lunge talk, but I spake but softly.


Crispine. Then I perceive your talk was unprofitable to him. Yet I wrote it
in a little paper book in my hand.


Medicus. Not unprofitable, if the Phisicion come in the beginning or
augmentyng of the sickness. But in the full state of this sickness, it is
most daugerous, because death will prevent it, or it comet^ to the
declinacion. Oh it is a strong poison if the Pestilence crepe to his heart.


Crispine. This man loved you well in his life: will you not be at his burial
Master Doctor?


Medicus. He loved me as I loved him. He me for health, Worldly fredsh^ppe.
and I him for money: And they, which are preservers of the life of manne
ought not to be present at the death or burial of the same man: therefore I
have taken my leave, I warrant you Crispine, I will return to him no more.
Thus fare you well till the morrow in the morning.


Crispine. I must also depar to my shop, I have much business to do: I
will come to you at your commandment master Doctor. Thus fare you well.


Ciuis. Good wife, The citezen his fear.
the daily jangling and ringing of the belles, the coming in of the minister
to every house, in ministering the comunion, in reading the Homely of death, the
digging up of graves, the sparring in of windows, the blazing forth of the
blew cross, do make my hart trimble quake: alas what shall I do to save my
life?


Vxor. Sir, we are but young, His wife hes counssaile.
and have but a time in this world, what doth it profit us to gather riches
together, and can not enjoy the, why tarry we here so long? I do think every
hour a year, until we be gone, my heart is as cold as a stone, and as heavy
as lead, God help me. Saying that we have sent our children forth three
weeks paste into a good air, and a sweet country, let us follow the: we
shall be welcome to your brothers house, I dare say my sister will rejoice in
our coming, and so will al our friends there: Let us take leave of our
neighbours, and return merelei home again, when the plague is paste, and the
dog days ended, and there you may occupy your stock, and have gain
thereof.


Ciuis. Oh wife, we know not our return, for the Apostle says to you,
Iames. iii.
that will say: to day or to morrow, we will go to soche a cite, and buy
and sell, and have gain, and know not what shall hap to morrow, what is our
life? It is as a vapoure, that appears for a little time, and afterward^
vanish away, for that ye ought to say, i^ the Lord will, and if we live,
we will to this, or that place: and if it please God, we will both depart,
and return again, at his good will and pleasure, for we are in his hands,
whether so ever we do^e go: and I trust it is not against Gods
commandment or pleasure, that we depart from this infected air.


Vxor. I know not what God will in our departing, but my flesh trimbles, when
I do hear the death belle ring.


Ciuis. Ephe* v.
Yes surely, we have the Apostle saying (for our defence in fliyng) no man ever
yet hath hated his own flesh, but nurished cherished it, therefore who can
nurishe his flesh in a corrupted air, but rather do kill it? Further, I heard
a doctor of Phisike say that one called Galen, in a book of Triacle to one
Pison his friend, that the Pestilence was like a monstrous hungry beast,
deuouryng and eating not a few, but sometimes whole cites, that by respiracion
or drawing in their breath, do take the poisoned air. He lauded Hypocrates,
which says, that to remove fro the infected air into a clener, thereby
says he, they did not draw in more foul air, and this was his only remedy
for the plague, to them that did remain: Galen. (...) non aliter ^ruauis qu^
ae^ri^ mutatione. c.
He commanded not only simple would to be burned, with in the cite of
Athenes, but also most sweet flowers and spices, perfumes: as gummes
ointementes to purge the air. And wife, fear of death, enforced many holy
men to fly: as Iacob from his cruel brother Esau: Gene. xxii.
Dauid from Saule: Elias from Iesabell: the christian men for fear of death,
did fly the tyranny of the Papists: and although these men did not fly
the Pestilence, (...) they fled all for fear of death, and so w^ we by
Gods grace, observe soch wholeso means, obey his divine providence: also I
will leave my house with my faithful friends, and take the keys of the che^es
with me. Where are our horses?


Vxor. Our things are ready, have you taken your leave of your neighbours?
Man.


Ciuis. I have done: so now let us depart a gods blessing good wife.


Vxor. Give me my horse Roger.


Roger. Masters, he is here ready at your hand, a good gelding, God bless him
and sweet saincte Loye.


Ciuis. Bring forth mine also, and let the servants forget nothing
behind them, specially the steel Casket: let us ride fair and softly, until
we be out of the town.


Vxor. How pleasant are these sweet fields, ^arnished with fair plants and
flowers, the birds do sing sweetly and pitifully, in the bushes: here are
pleasant woods: Iesus manne, who would be in the Cite again? Not I for
an.C. pound: oh help me, my horse starts, and had like to have unsaddled me,
let me sit faster for falling.


Ciuis. He is a burde iyed lade, I warrant you, and you are no good horse woman,
for I did never se you ride before, in all my life, but exercise will make you
perfect: your mother was a good horse woman, and loved riding well, as any
gentle woman that ever I knew in my life: well, she is gone, and we must
follow, this is the world.


Vxor. I never was so far from London in al my life: how far have we ridden
already sir I pray you?


Ciuis. Wife, we have rid x. mile this morning


Vxor. What town is this: I pray you sir?


Ciuis. This is Barnet, whereas Samuel your son was nurssed: and yonder is
Richard Higmers house, we will see him as we do return home again, we will not
tarry now because every Inn is pestered with Londoners and carriers, and it is
early days: how like you this town Dame?


Vxor. A pretty streate, but me think the people go very plain, it is no cite
as I do suppose by their manners: what house is this at the tounes end,
compassed with a Mote?


Ciuis. Here dwells a friend of ours: this is called the fold.


Vxor. What great smoke is in yonder wood God grant it be well.


Ciuis. It is nothing but making of Charcole, in that place.


Vxor. A wise coc^.
Why, is Charcole made? I had thought all things had be made at London, yet I
did never see no Charcoles made there: by my truth I had thought that they had
grown upon trees, and had not been made.


Ciuis. You are a wise woman, they are made of wood: but how like you this
Heath? Here was fought a fearful field, called Palm Sondaie battle, in
King Edwarde the fowerth time, many thousands were slain on this ground, here
was slain the noble Earl of Warwicke.


Roger. If it please your maistership, my graudfather was also here, with.xx.
tall men of the Parish, whereas I was borne, none of the escaped, but my
grandfather only I had his bow in my hand many a time no man could stir
the string when it was bent: also his harnes was worn upon our saint Georges
back in our church, many a cold Winter after, and I harde my grandam tell
how he escaped.


Ciuis. Tell Roger I pray thee: howe he did escape the danger.


Roger. Sir, when the battle was pitched, and appointed to be foughten,
Barnet field.
ne'er unto this Windmill, and the Somons given by the Harottes of arms, that
sphere, polax, black bill, bow and arrows, should be set a work the day
following, that it should be tried by bloody weapon, a sudden fear fell on my
grandfather: and the same night when it was dark, he stale out of the erles
camp, for fear of the kings displeasure, and hid him in the Wood, and at
length he espied a great hollow Oak tree, with arms somewhat green, and
climbed up, partly through cunning, for he was a thatcher, but fear was worth
a ladder to him and then by the help of a writhen arm of the tree he went
down, and there remained a good while, and was fed there by the space of a
month, with old Ackors, and Nuts, which squirelles had brought in, and
also did in his Sallet keep the rain water for his drink, and at length
escaped the danger.


Ciuis. So he might for any stripes that he had there: he was well harnessed
with a Tree, but I never read this in the Chronicle.


Roger. There be many things [and it shall please your Maistership] which are
not written in the Chronicles: I do think are as true, as Ihon your man do
read unto me, when we do go to bed* almost every night, I shall never
forget the, farewell good Ihon


Ciuis. What are they Roger?


Roger. Marie sir, he told me in the old time, howe Horses, Sheep, Hogs,
Dogs, Cattes, Rats, and Mise did speak, and I do partly believe that,
for as much as our Parate will say, Parate is a minion, and beware the Cat:
and she will cal me Roger, as plain as your Maistership, and although Dogs
have lost their speech, yet they do understand: when I do whistell, Trowel
will come, he will fetch my glove, my bolt in the water, or stoop, or lye
down when I bid him. And surly he which do understand, and here what I
do say, may speak also: but that there are so many languages now adays,
Dogs and women.
he ca not tell which to speak, and to leave all a lone, and turns all to
plain barking, as women do, when as they do fall from reasonyng into
scoldyng.


Ciuis. Thou foolish knave, Three things ^onsidered in all creatures.
what meaneste thou to speak thus? Dogs did never speak, they do want
reason. For there are three things to be considered, in each living creature:
the first is vegitable, wherein man, Dog and tree, are all one. The second is
sensible, in this, man and dog are all one. The third is, where man excells
al other creatures, where he have reason and judgement, having act to do
well, and power to do evil: through this reason man do speak. The beast
wants reason, therefore he speaks not. c. But Dogs are taught by custom,
and not moved by reason.


Roger. Well sir, our Ihons book shall confound your talk, for I did se it in
writing, and that which is written, I will believe and follow by Gods grace,
and no more.


Ciuis. Why, will you do no more for me, then I have commanded you by writing:
you are an honest fellow?


Roger. Rogers writing.
When I came to you first, you gave me a scroll of parchment, wherein said you,
do no more but as this commaudeth, and I will ask no more of thee, but allow
thy service Now in case your Maistership with your horse, fell both into the
mire over the ears: if it were not in my writing, to help you both forth, I
have done you no evil service. Ha, ha, ha, how crack you this nut?


Vxor. It were a good deed to crack your pate you saucy verlet: Gods dentie
Jack sauce whence came you?


Roger. Forsothe out of the country, Masters nisibecetur, as fine as
fippence: how prettily you can call verlet, and swear by Gods deintie. God
bless you, I did never se you stomble before.


Vxor. Out rog and slave, avaunt villain, out of my sight knave.


Roger. I think you learned your Rhetoric in the vniuersttee of Bridewell:
you were never well wormed, when you were young.


Vxor. Sir, you do ride to fast: have you not heard what this honest man have
said to me?


Ciuis. Dame, all things must be taken in good part, I heard nothing^ if any
thing be amiss, at our return it shall be amended, we must have one riding
fool by the way, so that it be done merrily, and exceade not. Well, fellow
you do believe that beasts will speak, because it is written so of the.


Roger. That I will, if that my Masters will hold her peace, I will prove
it.


Vxor. I pray you give ear to no soche trifles and lies, good husband.


Ciuis. I pray you be content, it is as good to hear a lye, which hurts
not: as sometime a true tale that profits not. Tel on gentle Roger a Gods
name: ride ne'er, and let us be merry.


Roger. The tale of the Lyon.
It so chanced in the pleasant time of May, a lusty young Lion after his
pray, or new eaten spoil, did lye him down to sleep, and yet being a sleep,
the beasts that were ne'er hand, did quake and tremble in beholding of his
most fearful coutenauce, and fled away. The poor cillie Mouse, crept out
of her small cave, and came softelie, thinking no harm, and played about the
Lyon, and piped merely, wherewith the Lyon awaked suddenly, and was angry,
caught the Mouse fortwith, thinking to have devoured it: Patience in poverty.
but this poor Mouse kneeled down upon her knes, and held up her hands,
saying: I have offended your lordship, I pray you therefore forgive me, and
let me have my life, and ones I shall requite it you, whereat the Lio smiled,
and let her pass away in peace. Within few days, the same Lion was taken in
a strong Net, thinking never to have been delivered: and cried most
fearfully with desperation. But gentle* Margerie Mouse, withal speed came
running, and with sharpe filed teethe, did gnaw and shred the strong cords,
which entrapped the Lion: wherewith he stood at liberty, and went his way.
This is true, when Mise and Lions did speak: I will abide by the same, sir if it
shall please your Maistership.


Ciuis. No surly, Lyons nor Mise did never speak, Roger: Note this.
but some wise manne have written this to this end, that like as cruelty is
to be utterly avoided, even so ingratitude is to be abhorred. We may here by
consider, that very poor men in the time of trouble, may help the mighty
and strong, Ingratitude
and often times do in deed. Why should then the great lord, forget the
benefit of a poor grome, which many ways may pleasure him: (if ye simple
Mouse were from the Lyon) then the gentleman were most wretched, in occupation
drudgery most vile. If poor and simple men, in the time of extreme
persecucio, by Gods providence have delivered the oppressed, which persecuted or
oppressed, since are come to great promocio, both spiritual and temporal,
do forget the same benefits again It were not only the parts of infidels, but
also more ungrateful then beasts, as horses, which have rescued their
masters in battle, and dogs, which would never eat after their masters
death, but die upon their graves. An other kind of ingratitude is with Iudas,
when one bestow a benefit upon a man, the same manne to invent to murder his
friend. Knavish ingratitude.
As if a man in the time of cold, should find a snake; and for foolish pity,
put him into his bosom to warm him, I think his nature is to sting the ma Or
if a Shepherd should bring a young Wolf up among his Lambs, and give him
Milk, surely he would fall to blood at length, and kill the Shepherd
himself? Mark this.



Roger. Sir, you have well expounded my tale, now I know your meaning: I
perceive it is not good keeping of soche unkind beasts, they are very costly
and perilous, would have Jack Drakes medicene. Sir, Jack drake.
upon a time when quaklyng Ducks did speak, and Hehes kackling could talk,
which in deed are continual companions, because they are Fowls (Marie of
sundry kinds, and names) for Ducks and all water fowls, do not only take
the benefit of goodly ponds, rivers, and pleasant waters, in the time of
hot Sammer, with many deintie meates, and at their pleasures, they do take
the commoditee of the land also. The land birds do but only live upon the
land as footmen: (as for Hawk and fleing birds of the would, which daily
persecuteth each other, as murderers do innocents, or cruel rich men the
poor, that would live in rest, I meddle not withal.) Upon a time the Drake with
his Duck and his neighbours the Gese, Traitors.
being pleasantly disposed (as Iudas was in plaiyng the traitor) only to
destroy the land fowls, to the end that they might enjoy, both land water
together at their pleasure. Rogers observation.
After the example of coueteous men, that would have all things in their
hands, and when one manne have any good profitable trade to live upon, they
will covett or use the same: although their poor neighbours do perish, and
that is the cause of much trouble good master, now adays that every calling
do pinch poule each other, and where the hedge is lowest, that commonly is
soonest caste to ground, but the strong stakes, will stand in the storm. I
speak not of the lusty Lawyers, nor the mighty marchautes, no, no, I will
observe nothing in them, let every Fat stand upon his own bottom.) Now
said the Drake to the land fowls: good cousins we are much bound unto you,
for your daily entertainemente in good chere, and daily company: we with our
wives and children are much bound unto you, you are most natural unto us, we
daily feed and take of your commodity, and come at our pleasures. Now
therefore, take part with us, and use your pleasure upon the Water, there is
plenty of young fry fish, great store, Sallet herbs of sundry kinds,
good against every woude or grief: both meat and medicen. c. Oh Lord what
pleasure is there to be had, come sweet hearts, let us take our progress, to
the pleasaut river of Tagus, where as the sands of that s^od are precious
gold, there is both pleasure riches, go and gather wealth and treasure: here
is poverty, there is sweetness, and here but stinkyng dunghilles, there is
liberty, and here in bondage, there is joy of the mind, and here daily fear
of the For that false traitor. Coparisons.
This sweet tale pleased well the land fowls (as it is often times seen,
that fair words make fools fain) notwithstanding the Cock said unto the
Drake, Gossippe, our bringing up, have been by land, and our fathers also, we
can not swim, we have no webs in our feet to row withal as you have: we
fear drounyng. Whaat said the Drake? what needs these words emog friends?
Use makes perfitenesse, we will teach you to swim by art, as well as we do
by nature (nothing is to hard to willing minds.) Well, let us go together,
have with you said the Cock, then very womanly the Duck did take the Hen
by the hand following their husbands, Merry when friends do meet.
which were arm and arm, walking before the Chickens, and the Ducklynges
followed in a goodly train, as it had been to a sumpteous Marriage, between
the Cocks eldest soon with the pale face, and the Drakes daughter with the
pretee foot: at the water side, the Drake with all the water fowls, did stope
lowe, and receive their carriage, and when they were all a kockehorse together,
Horsemen.
they went into the water. And eftesones, when the Drake gave his watch
word, the water fowls did all sink at ones, and all the land fowls were
suddenly in a wreck, and many of them perished, and some with much a do came
to land, as the Cock and the Hene, which returned home with care and shame,
and lived long in lamentation, and remained solitary, without company of water
fowls: the For which had gains a both sides, made the league with a learned
oration, painted full of Rhetoric between them: declaring what vnitee was
between brethren, and the fruits and peace, and so reconciled the water fowls
to land, where was a feigned truce, taken with much dissembling, yet very
good chere, shaking of hands, kissing. c. Great was the feast at the Cocks
place, the Nightyngale was there, to pleasure them with Music, much daunsyng,
and after the same a cosilie banquet: as you know the manner of the water
fowls, do commonly sit ne'er the ground, but land fowls do mount up to
perk, and so they did. And when all were at rest, secretly the Cock sent by
the Cat a token, to come and do execution among the grateful traitors: the
Cat was glad, and ran to the Fox, finding him in sacrifice and prayer, and
shortly declared thambassage. The Fox at the first refused so heinous and
bloody a deed: declaring his indifferency and rightousnesse like a father,
and also what eiuill opinion many creatures, causeles had in him. Marie said
he, I love the Cock and his wife very well: I also know how the Water fowls
have done, I have made the vnitee between them. I will therefore not be seen in
this matter my self, but two of my sons shall do the feacte, go before,
and clime in at the window, and open the door. So in fine it was done,
suddenly the water fowls paid for the Malt grinding, and were slain like
flattryng ungrateful villains: and this is Ihon Drakes medicen.


Ciuis. This tale is well told Roger, I thank thee: ungrateful people and
flatterers be most wicked, and the children of Iudas, if any man be
prepharred by an other man, and made rich: if this rich manne should forget
that benefit to his friend if he fell into poverty, whether would the poor
manes lack more vere him, or thingratitude of him that he hath pleasured:
(which perhaps hath said, if ever I have soche a Marriage, Note this note well.
yea or soche a ferme. And in case if he be of the clergy, soche a bishoprike,
prebedarie. c. thou shalt not want as long as I can help, I will never forget
your courtesy, showed to me in these my days of trouble, how says thou to
this question Roger


Roger. ^nauerie.
Sir, saving your reverence, you may cal it ingratitude: but slaundring no man
in my judgment, it is plain knavery. Therefore it is good triyng of friends
before need do require, as the ma which taught his son to kille a swine, and
put him in a sack all bloody, and secretly to prove his friends, which of
them would help, A friend at need.
not only to hide the slain man, but also help to couaie him in safety, and
to conclude, in the time of trouble, among many he found but one.


Ciuis. Marie God defend, Secret murder, openly punished.
that murder should be cloaked by friendship, which although it be, yet God
often himself will take vengeance be it never so close, as example in Cain. I
like not this example of thine.


Roger. I have better in store, if you will here it.


Ciuis. Say on a Gods name, it is good passing the time, but me think we ride
to fast, we have day enough: how do you wife, what chere with you?


Vxor. Well sir, I thank you, I hear your talk well. God be with our friends
at home, and forgive our foes, and end these plagues at London, amend al
people that through sin have moved God to plague us.


Ciuis. It is well said good wife. Amen. Amen. Remember your talk goodman
Roger.


Roger. A tale of a Friar.
Sir, in our country there was a man, which by occupation was a Friar (or
Religion, whether you will) I did know him well, he wore a gray cote, well
tucked under his corded girdle, with a pair of trime white hose, the knave had
a good leg (for his brother was a Yeoman of the Guard, which was a great
wrestler) Marie this Friar although he did rise to the Quere by darcke night,
he needed no candle his nose was so red and bright, and although he had but
little money in store in his purse, yet his nose and cheeks were well set with
currall and rubies: and I do remember, the gentleman had one great orient
perle in his right iye, he never travelled without Aquaeviti, and spectacles,
and fine Nedles with a quarter staff in his neck, which he called a bless
beggar, he had many proper colacions and pardons in store, he song his
prickesong very trime, he would have been loathe that any should have song one
note above him in the Quere, he was well-beloved in the coutree, specially emog
women, a close man, he was never without a bale of dice, Marie he used no
foisting nor cogging, he played well at tables, The Friars delights.
and of all meates he most loved a fat Pig and a pudding, but he might not
away to eat Communions, nor read the scripture, it ever went against his
stomach, but he was cockhope for Portas matters and cakes: I dare say he
could raise beelzebub and bring devils to crepe and crouch in a circle: also he
had the Foolosophers stone, and taught many his secretes therein. Upon a time
this holy Friar in the month of June travailed in his pleasant prograce, with
his boy following him, which was in deed his sisters soon, one young Renob by
name, Young Renob.
a pretty young stripplyng: and as they had walked from the morning, until
ten of the clock, after the Friar had said our lady Matins, with a
Collect of s. France his patro, he sat down under a hawthorn tree, to rest
with his boy also, gave ear to the pleasant charm of sweet birds, much
commending the Coko, because she kept so constant her plain song, when the
Nightingale did sing the distant. Oh said the boy, this were Paradise, if
here were meat and drink for our relief, I would desire no better dwelling.
Yes said the Friar, it were better to be a Pope, which is above all men,
Angles devils, which have the Keys of heaven gatts under his girdle: to who
the kings of the world do service. That is past my reche said the boy I lack
friends, age, and learning to take that dignity. Who will find fault and if
thou were the Pope my poor boy, said the Friar, by my preferment, what
kindness would thou show to me, being so much thy friend? sir said the
boy, you should be a Latro Cardinal on my right hand, (...) and Latro.
and be half with me in my kingdom, remember said the Friar your promise,
give me thy hand my lad. I promise thee I will make thee Pope. Uhe Popes
Patron.
Then he raised sir sathanas the patron of Popes, transformed the tree where the
boy was into kyngly palace, with. S. Peters throne, with infinite of the
clergy, among whom sate this young Pope, forthwith came the Friar in this
golden dream, very lowly he kneeled and put the Pope in remembrance who he was,
and what he had done, hoping to be gratified, to whom sir Pope said, I know
thee not thou lousy beggar, and false Friar, I am descend of kingly
parentage, advanced by God learning, away with thy black curse, away.
Pride will have a fall.
Forthwith the friar by subtle calculacion, withdrew this delusion of his
master the devil, the late pope with his pope became again the Friars boy,
sitting in a Birche tree, to whom the Friar said: now you false vile boy, I
know what you would have done, if you had been Pope. Come down in the
deuilles name, and carry my wallet. And first for your knavery, I will make
you a ^anket of birche, and thus my young master was served in this sort.


Ciuis. Honours do change manners, yet pride will have a fall. I do remember
a poor young man, by fortune was advanced into promocion, to whom one of his
old fellows came, and spake homely unto him, after the old fashion, as when
they dwelled together, in scorn the rich man answered disdainfully, after
this manner.

Take me as I am, and not as I was: We are now no fellows it is com to pass

To whom the other made answer thus again.

Sometime thou wart, yt now thou art not. And now thou art that tha thou werst
no^ And what thou shalt be tell thou cast not, A churl incarnate.
Although a churls hart, live you may not. Well, well, God send every ship
to a good Haven, and send us peace, and seas this plague, that we may
return home again to our old acquaintance, for this week I do remember.xx.
good fellows met together at one banquet, my very friends Marchautes and others:
you know them well Roger, towards young men honest, great doers, close and
just, witty I warrant you to preuet any proviso in the love of money, by
month or year, no state or time will nip them, they can wisely colour the
matter, for Roger, that is an art among merchants not to be reveled,
Closeness in Usurers.
God send me into their company again. Notwithstanding I have been no great
doer in lending forth money.


Roger. Master, it gives me in mine hart, that you shall never meet
altogether again.


Ciuis. Wherefore.


Roger. A tale of many Foxes.
Sir, upon a time a number of Foxes assembled together at a great banquet, where
as was great plenty of lambs flesh, hens. c. In the end of the feast, this
blessed company loathe to depart, inquired of old Reinold the day, wherein
they should mete again to be merry: I will tel you said Reinard, when we shall
mete again, so trained the up to an high mountain, where as there were many
high ways derived into sundry countries, farewell said he my children, and
follow your fathers steppes, go every one a sondry way, for we shall never
mete again at a banquet, until we do mete together in the Skineers shop. Sir, I
have weighed the matter, I warrant you it will prove so. One of late departed, I
will not name unto you, which is ded buried, my fellow Ihon did read his
Epitaph to me.


Ciuis. What was it I pray thee?


Roger. No sir, you will be angry then.


Ciuis. Surly, What wisemen should do to preserve health.
I will give no place to anger to chafe my blood: it is perilous in the
Pestilent time. For next to the serving of almighty God, and my Christian
duty to my neighbour: I will give my self only to mirth, which is the
greatest iew^ll of this world.


Roger. Sir, thus it was, an Epitaph of one that was a great usurer, covetous,
merciless, and churlish, but passing rich, he knew no end of his goods:
it made him look a loft, and many louted full lowe at his presence. And thus
it was written of him.

An Epitaph of a covetous manne.
Here lies Gathrall that never did good, A gentleman degenerate, yet sprung
of good blood: Merciless, an usurer al the days of his life
An oppresser of poor me, a mover of strife:
A Papiste of religion, a soldier of Rome,
Here dwells his carcass till ye day of doom
Depriued of riches, spoiled of fame,
Nothing left i memory, but an evil name
His judgement we comed to ye s^at divine,
Yet he lived like a wolf, died like aswine



Ciuis^ Who was this made upon, Roger I pray thee tell me.


Roger. Name no body.
No so God help me, I will not name him inquire it out: but I heard a friend of
mine say, that he had written a book against Extorcioners and Usurers,
which if they amend not, he will name them, and paint them forth, not only
them, but their parents, which are dead, which used that vile trade of
usury, procuring Gods vengeance, incasting the Pestilence upon cites,
tounes, and countrees. The fruits of Usury and Extortion.
Causing poverty, breaking up houses most aunciete selling to lend upon
gain, destroiyng hospitality, with infinite incombraunces by forfitures
statutes. c. Oh that the usurers goods were confiscated after their deaths to
the common poor, as in case they had slain themselves, and that they had no
power in law, to be will unto their children y^ which was gotten in serving the
devil, which would not prosper to the.iij. heir, for evil got goods are
evil spent said our eurat upon Sondaie. God grant.
Oh that the buriyng were turned into open casting forth among ded cattle, and
not nombred in the christen fellowship after death, which in life have been
so wicked, so said our Eurate. Sir, you heard not how a man of late did let
forth his Cow by ye quarter, by the year.


Ciuis. No, I pray thee tell me.


Roger. Of the Usurers Cow.
There was a man of late, which had one C. pound, which he called his Cow,
and secretly did lend her forth, sometime by the weke, and his price was.x.
shillings the weke, and when her milk became derer, and many fasting days at
hade, he called for his Cow, and said that she gave in different milk. But
said he, I must put her into a better pasture, and she shall give more Milk
by.v. shilling in the weke. c. and at length white meat became a little better
cheap, because of the great plenty of soche kiene in the town, Many Usurers.
that his Cow was brought home again, because that she was letten so dere, now
because she had done him good service, and he had no more but her at home,
and calfe he had none by her to keep up the stock. His seruaunt loved milk
well, and could get none of that Cow: when his master was from home, stale
the Cow and ran his way, and hitherto hath not been found, neither Cow nor
man, and all the milk is gone.


Ciuis. A marvelous thing good lord? What would soche graziers do, if they
had many cattle or Kiene in store?


Roger. They would destroy all a common wealth, but we see what mischief they
have done.


Ciuis. It is time to bait our Horses in this town: if there be any good
meat, we will dine, prepare Roger, for we have far to ride this night.
Know what compaignie is in the Inn: and whether the house be infected or no?


Roger. Sir, I was in the haul, Of geastes in the Inn.
and there sits our host, a pleasant merry manne, and a good compaignion I
warrant him: I see by his nose, that of al potage he loves good ale, he is
mounsire graundpanche, he hath chafed the Parsone woundrouslie, which with a
pair of spectacles, plays at tables with him, he steals fast the table men
fro him. Our hostess hath a sharpe nose, thin lipped, a proper young woman,
with a shrill voice like a Cat: but when she is pleased I warrant her to be a
pleasant woman, and full of meritrix. The good man of this house brings up
youth very well, Meritrix.
and is very loving to his soon, and I perceive he will bear much with
him.


Ciuis. Wherein?


Vxor. A young man well brought up.
When I came into the halle, my young master leaned upon his fathers shoulder,
with his cap upon his head, sitting and coughyng like a lought.


Ciuis. Call the chamberlain, and let us have a chamber severally.


Roger. With all speed a Gods name. Chaberlain, prepare your chamber, with all
things accordingly in the same, for my master and masters. Whip master
Ostiler with a caste of ligerdemain, bestir you sirrha, and make.xij.d. of
three botles of stinkyng Haie and a peck of Ottes. The honesty of an hostler.
You can make a stoned horse a gelding, and a long tail a curtal. You know
my meaning welenough: hem sirrha, I say nothing but mu I have seen you often
in Smithfielde.


Vxor. What, s^r sau^, you take upon you to play the Comptroller: g^e qui^tly
about your own business, and let the Ostler alone.


Roger. Masters, it is merry when knaves are met, I did see him ones ask
blessing to xij. Godfathers at ones.


Ciuis. This is a comlie parlour, very netlie and trimly apparelled, London
like, A parlour.
the windows are well glased, fair clothes with pleasant borders about
the same, with many wise sayings painted upon them.


Vxor. I pray you husband what is that writing in those golden letters.


Ciuis. Melius est claudus in via quam cursor praeter viam. That is, better is
an halting ma which kepeth the right way, then ye swift ronner besides, that
wanders a stray.


Vxor. What is that man, I pray you?


Ciuis. Non hominis consuetudinem sed dei veritatem sequi oportet: which is.
The truth must be followed.
It behooves us not to follow the constitucions or customs of men, but to
follow the truth of Gods word. And also there is a good saying following
the same.

The best doctrine is Gods word.
Doctrinis varijs peregrinis no circumferamini. That is: be not led or carried
about with diverse or strange doctrine. Here is more following, written upon the
chimney good wife, which I will keep in store. Oh God what serpents they are,
lord defend me fro them. I will rede it to my self. O mulier omne facinus ausa
est plus quam omne, verum nihil est peius, nec erit vnqa mulierae inter hominum
calamitatis.


Vxor. Mulier is a naughty word, said the gentlewoman.
Well man, well, truth seeks no corners, I perceive there is some noughtie
matter, that I know not, but by one thing that I do here, you rede, make me
think all the rest is not well, because the first word is stark nought:
that is. O mulier, which I am sure is, nor ever was good. I pray you
husband, what picture is that following.


Ciuis. Oh wife, it was the picture or Effigium of a noble man, which in his
days served a most noble king, and was like the cutter down of trees by the
ground. But if God had not upon some see ete purpose, The Lord Crumwell.
prevented his labour in the wood of Antichriste, he would have utterly
eradicated the roots with all Papistrie, which daielie spryngeth out in every
corner, to the hurt of better fruits, but by Gods grace they shall be
confounded as God will.


Vxor. What picture is that, This picture signifies great clerks evil
occupied in keeping silence.
which have a gray whore head, a long goune, and a locke of gold linkyng his
lips together: with many goodly books before him, and a pair of blind
spectacles upon his nose, with a golden pen fallen from his hands.


Ciuis. Oh wife, wife, it is a Candle covered with a Bushel, and the noble
Talent of wisdom hid, which must make great accomptes, for keeping
silence.


Vxor. Sir, in that table environed round with antikes of sundry portratures,
the ground thereof is hoping Russet are three pictures black scholer like, or
in morning clothing the first of them with a Rake in his hand with teeth of
gold, do stoup very lowe, groping belike in ye lake after some thing that
he would find, and out of this deep water above the Rake a little steple. The
golden Rake.
The second gapes up towards the heaven, holding the lap of his goune
abroad, A gaper. A catcher.
as though he would catch something, and to wards the same lap or spread goun
doth fall, as it were a church with a stiple and quere. c. The third man
stands in poor apparel, A poor man.
with a book in his right hand, and his left hand upon his breast, with a
lamentable countenance, in simple apparel: what means this husband?


Ciuis. Dame, I dare say but little to this matter to others, but to you, I
will speak a little, I mean no honest or learned men.
and not so much as I do think. The first man is one, that hath but a very
small learning, lesser wit, less honesty, he hath no virtue to prefer him to
living, but only the name and title of a priest or minister he would fain have
a benefice or personage of some pretty donatiue, he cannot get it at the
Bishoppes hands, he lacks Gods plough. This fellow raketh with the Devils
golden rake, Magus and Iudas.
even in the conscience of the covetous patrons, or confounders hart which
gives the benefice, he plays Symon Magus, he will by it, and with Iudas the
other will sell it, and at length it is gotten for gold, and spent with
wickedness, to the slander of the church: God defend us from soche rakers and
Simoniakes. The second is sick of the mother, and like unto heirs, when as
the fathers have left them fair lands, they morn of the chine, and are
never contented but wimper whine, Children sick of the mother remedy is the
gallow^s.
until the mothers are ded, and when it so comes to pass, their wicked
covetousness by one means or other, comes to shame and poverty. This honest
man gapes for a vouson of a benefice before it is fallen, doth catch it or
it comes to the ground, before the death of the discombent. He will not suffer
it to fall into relappe. This man is a steward to a great man, or kepeth his
hall, garden or barnes, or is a wiseman a good husband. Loke where his master
is patron, there he hops to be person. He gathers for his young masters,
his patrons son: his patron must be his executour, or some of his masters
kinsmen. This fellow wallows in benefices, as the Hedgehog doth with apples
upon his pricks, hath the benefit but of the apple in his mouth: he gets
nothing of his promocions, but only one little benefice, yet his master will
snatch at that, either to save the wol or la: Patrons Charlice.
And so he hath only the shells or glorious tittes of promocion, Spiritual
promocion.
but the geuer hath the sweet kernels: God amede this good wife. The third is,
one which shows the state of learned men, labouring log time in study and
divine virtue, which are wrapped in poverty, wanting the golden Rake, or
gaping mouth.
This man hath very few to prefer him to that promocion, he smites himself
upon the breast, Symonie.
he wepeth and laments, that vice should thus be exalted ignorance rewarded
with glory, coueteous men spoiling the Church by the names of Patrones and
geuers, Note this.
which are extorcioners and sellers, they care not to who, so that it be
raked. Well, well, God of his mercy, amend this evil Market.


Vxor. A Judges Skin.
Upon that wall is painted a mans skin, and tanned, coloured like unto Leather,
with the skin of the hands and feet, nailes and here remaining, and the skin
is spread abroad, in the which is written certain words, which I do not
vnderstade.


Ciuis. Wife, I wish more soche leather, or else fewer soche carcases, as soche
leather hath contained in it. It is the Skin of a wicked Judge, a Lawyer,
which played on both hands. A wicked Judge his reward.
This gentleman loved gold above God, and cruelty above Justice: both his
ears were stopped, his iyen open, he had respect of persons: specially who
brought in lucre, and made him humble courtesies, them he would defend, although
their causes in righteousness deserved it not. The innocent he oppressed that
wated, A good prince
and undid many a ma. His master being a great prince (in the whole multitude
of the people, and specially of the Lawyers, to certify them. Money do great
mischief in this world
And to decline from evil and do good, to have the ears open, to hear both
rich and poor alike, in the seat of judgement, to have lame hands in
taking of money, which is the root of al evil emog them.) Commanded his Skin
to be flain from his flesh, he being yet living, roaring with blood running
from his body, and died in a case most miserable. Upon whose Skin is this
writing, hanging in the Judgement halle, before the place of Justice.

Iudex qui non queret veritatem, debet excoriari. A Judge which will (for
lucre) not seek out the truth (in the law) ought to have his Skin flaine from
his body.


Vxor. Here stands a woman of most excellent form in shape, and fairness in
beauty, with a croune of rich gold, with seven precious stones, fixed in the
border of her croune, covered with a costly mantle fro her paps dounward,
her breasts naked the right breast gives milk unto ye mouth of the young child
on the right side. And fro the left breast flows blood, into the mouth of an
other child: what means this?


Ciuis. It is a goodly picture, and signifies the estate of an university, or
multitude of scholars, which comes to be nourished in learning. Uniuersitee,
the fruits thereof.
Which mother the university, being crouned with the seven liberal arts,
fixed in her croune: and as many as taste of her doctrine, in the better part
in virtue, to this end to do well be blessed, they do taste upon the right
breast, but the left breast, yields forth doctrine of Errors, Magiches,
Papistrie. c. To this end to persecute, rob and spoil Christ's Church: God
grant that both these breasts may give good milk, One pure well, gives but
clean water.
to nourish the people of God, in one holy doctrine to each vocacio, to agree
in vnitee like brethren, and that the vniuersitees may teach the learned
acts, ^ne true religion in this Christ our lord.


Vxor. What is that picture, which graffeth a golden Imp, upon a Leaden
stock, with a bag of money of great bigness, hanging about his neck?


Ciuis. It should seem to be a pitiful case, it is a noble covetous Senior,
which for goldes sake, do make dispargiment of his blood, mariyng and selling
his son and heir, unto some Extorcioner, or shameless usurers daughter,
Note also ye virtue gentleness makes a gentleman.

Euenso ancient blood wrapped in vice* is but gross gentleness.


whose fruits are so infected on the mothers side, that they will become as
counterfecte, crafty compounded mettle, and never come to the true touch
stone again. The fine mettle is so corrupted through coueteousnesse and
natural^e coniunccion, as we do se grafts of trees, (fix young Imps)
although the Imp be of a fine Pippin, and graffed into an evil stock. You
shall know that fruit by the tree, a plague prepared for gentlemen, for their
abuse.


Vxor. Upon that Table before you, is painted a naked manne, lying down
wounded, upon whom feeds many Flies with fulle bealies, and there comes an
other man, which with a green branch of Rosemarie, beat them away.


Ciuis. A Metaphor
It should appear by the circumstance, that it is not hurtful to keep
officers still in place: for when they have filled their purses, and have all
things accordingly, The hongrie Fly will fill his beal^e.
they are well, and if they be removed eftesones, the new hongrie Flies will
vere the body of the common wealth, and never cease until they be also
satisfied. c.


Vxor. Yet what is that man I pray you, that sits in a rich throne a
sleep, and one do blow in his care, with a pair of golden bellows, and an
other do pick his purse?


Ciuis. Flattery of noble men.
That same is a mighty person, overcome with adulacio or flattery, careless,
swimming in pleasure and vainglory, whom his men do use like an home Comb,
and daily spoil him of his riches, by sundry frauds, which he perceives
not.


Vxor. And what means yonder Mule, holding his head so lowe: with a plain
black foot clothe, shod with golden shoes?


Ciuis. Wife, silence now is best: I will say nothing to the matter. Who shall
shoe the Mule.
The Mule carries a Master, that will do nothing but for gold, and the
fools of the world, that love debate and strife, must shoe this Mule.


Vxor. Here is a row of pictures like Prelates painted one by an other in the
border, in three parts. The first are barefooted men barehedded, long
garments, and books in their hands, some of them are bloody. The second
company are mitred, shod with Shepherds hooks in one hand, and books in
the other hand. The descripcion of the Romish Church.
The third sort have Sw^ordes in their hands, crouned with triple crowns,
clothed in kyngly robes, with frounyng faces, and books under their feet: and
next after them sits an old mangy slave naked, with a triple croune,
making or patchyng of a Net, from whom goes as it were, men laden with
tounes, woods, and treasure.


Ciuis. The descriptio of the prelates of the Roomishe Church.
Wife, this is the true Church of God, and the malignaunte Sinagoge of
Antichrist figured: first the true Preachers and martyres of Gods church,
simple men, which followed most nearest the testamet of Christ. After this
persecution, then entered Confessors, good men, which lived well, and
according to the Apostles doctrine: were good Shepherds, withstood the Wolves
of heresies. c. Kept hospitalitee, and live accordynglie, and were as Lambs
and good Wheat. Then for the sins of Princes, and wickedness of men, came in
Wolves among Lambs, Darnel choked the Lords field: oppressors of Princes,
emptiers of Purgatory, and ^illers of hell, raisers of debate, shedders of
blood, makers of Martyres, men of war, destroiers of the true church,
erectours of Idolles, usurpers of kingdoms, and treaders of Gods truth under
their vile sect: The Popes mekenesse.
which sect kings have kissed soche is the pride of the Pope.

Then the Pope sits all naked woorkyng: now through Gods word, Antichrist
is reveled, and seen what he is, foul lothlie clothed in shameful decrees,
wicked laws and filthy life, and is despised of many nations, save of his
own children. Now patcheth his old Bottles, which will keep no new wine:
neither ca he well piece Christ's pure clothe, and his ragged tradicions
together. The Popes practise.
Neither will his Net pleasure the Church, in which Net he have taken the
servants of Christ, shed their blood. He may be rather called a murderer,
then a fisher, he never had saint Peters Net, since the Pope came to the
church of Rome: now clouteth he a net, with his rotten Decrees, Counsels,
glossing it with Gods word. Like the Angel of darkness, transeformed into
the similitude of an angel of light: but his nakedness is seen, for all his
title of his holiness, and rich Croune. The Popes almose deeds.
Now as many as will not obey his maistership, he gives away their
kingdoms, dukedoms, provinces goods, after the example of his patron, not
Peter, which forsook worldly things, but rather satha, which would have give
Christ much riches, to have honoured him. But the lands of Princes, Popes
Portars.
are so heavy to be carried with his Portars: and also to hot to be trodden
upon, of any of his messengers, his Net is very good, to catch the great
Onele withal, and some of his lawless country men, to store the Popes holy
ponds at Rome.


Vxor. I will ask but one or.ij. questions, now our diner is ready, I pray
you. What means yonder Shepherd to clip the Sheep so ne'er, that he bledeth:
it is well painted.


Ciuis. Coueteous Landlords.
It seems a coueteous land lord, that do so oppress the tenant with fine,
rent, bribe. c. whereby he and his family, doo^ live in great misery like
slaves, with continual penury, and affliccion of mind, and he will never
suffer the woll to grow, to the full staple, at length to his own decay


Vxor. A fool.
What means yonder fool that stand upon the tree, and cutteth the arm a
sonder, whereupon he stands, with a sharpe axe, and is falling down?


Ciuis. Under that predicament is comprehended all traitors against Princes:
children against parents, Rebels and knaves.
servants against Masters, poor against rich, tenautes against lords. c.
Whereupon they do live, and have their stay in this world, and will sek^
their hurts, which in deed is their own decay, loss and destruction in the
end.


Vxor. Good God, what means that bloody naked picture, with a sharpe rod
in each hand, wounding his body, and spoiled of all his apparel.


Ciuis. God send peace in the christen realms good dame. That do signify
by the circumstance of some old wise painter, Peace and unity God send us.
that when the body or state of any Realm, or Realms of vicinite or
nerenesse together, being as hands to one body, or helpers to each other. If
they be at strife, the whole body, whereupon they are derived, shall eftsoon
through the same be ruinated and brought into peril. In this matter I will
talk no further as now: let us go to diner a Gods name. Roger, what good fellow
is here, to keep me and your masters copany


Vxor. Husband, in this fine border is curiously painted a house builded of
stone, and with many strong doors and windows, barre^ and railed with strong
iron bars. Ludgate.
And before one of the doors standing a man, with a yelowe cap, in a plain
poor coat with white sleues, and a little boy stadeth behind him with a
fair goune in his arms, Make shifts
merchant like, in a fine black cap, and over the door is written. Veritas
non querir angulos. I know not the meaning.


Ciuis. In deed truth seeks no corners, as these evil disposed vile thieves
do, although it was meant to help some honest decayed citizens, that they
should not be utterly destroyed of pitelesse creditors, but after they might
rise up again. Seignior w^ters.
Now the bakerote is induraunce, hath lost his credence, he is in prison, where
as his credence is spoiled and gone, Happy privilege, and subtle practise.
no manne will trust him. But that inn hath a privilege to increase many
gestes by this means. That they may have liberty, with a little Applesquire
to be his keeper, which changes his apparel and countenance, crepyng into
corners, making bergaines in every place, taking up every commodity, refusing
nothing, al is fish that comes to the net, he sets hade and Seal to every
thing, Perilous th^euish bankeroutes.
he swears he would not loose his credence for thousands, he gives sweet
words, he knavishly robs, vndoeth, spoils, the widow and the honest
pitefull merchant or true citezen, and when he hath vndoen them, he runs
to his place again, as the Fox doth to his hole, and lives by the spoil.


Vxor. What means this strange picture, here stands a man double, or in.ij.
twins, back to back, the one side is lusty, fair, rich and young, and
beautiful. Young and foolish, old and beggarly.
The other side seems sick, ^oule, poor and old, in the young man hand was
a grasshopper, and in the old man, an Ante without fete.


Ciuis. In that table is lively declared mankind, both the time of his youth in
felicitee, with the careless grasshopper, gathers nothing but spoils: house,
land. c. in bankettes, dice, apparel and harlottes. c. And when age comes,
he would be thrustie, and then ca get no more, then the lame footeles ante.
Then makes he exclamacio, saying oh what goods did my father leave me? A
wretch that refused good counsel in time.
What good counsaill my friends gave me, but I esteemed none of them both, but
in fine lost both riches and friends. And now I am in great poverty, sickness
and age Let other men take example by me, and remember the wisdom of
Salomon, saying: Vade ad formicu o pigar considera vias eius, disc sapientiam.
c. Go thou idle body to the Ante, consider and mark well her ways, A lesson
for ^ ^ubber.
and learn wisdom, she hath no gide, prince, nor law geuer, but gathers in
somer, to keep her in winter. c.


Vxor. There is also painted a lusty young man, (...) down to a vessel, in
which swims both Eels and Snakes, he seems ^o catch one of them: what
means that?


Ciuis. Ha, ha, ha, it is merrily handled forsothe it is one that is overcome,
either with love or coueteousnesse. ^.
He goes a wooing, my dyng, dyng: and if he spedeth my darling, what gets he
my swetyng? Forsooth, either a serpent, that will sting him all his life with
cruel words, or else sweet heart with pleasant speech, that when he thinks
her most sure, Well fished.
he hath but a quick Eel, you know where. Ha, ha, ha.


Roger. Sir, there is one lately come into this hall, in a grene Kendale cote,
with yellow hose a beard of the same colour, only upon the upper lip* a
russette hat, with a great plume of strange Feathers, and a brave scarf
about his neck, in cut buskins. Mendax is described.
He is plaiyng at the trea trip with our host son: he plays trick upon
the gittarne, and dance Trechmore, and Heie de Gie, and tells news fro Tera
Florida. He looks a squint, I did see him give the good man, a piece of a
Unicorns horne, good against poison: he seems a pretty Scholer. But I heard
him pray the chamberlain in his ear, to lend him.vj.d. upon a pressing iron,
which chaberlain refused the gage.


Ciuis. Roger, call him into diner, it is some pleasant fellow, and lacks
money belike, through travail, Well taken.
the poor man is driven to his shifts, and would make other men merry, when
he wepeth in his heart.


Vxor. Good husband, A good wife.
cal in some grave compaignie. What should soche Jacks and tossepottes do
here? He seems to be some thief or ruffin. Fie on him varlet, fie, fie.


Roger. By our lady I will fetch him into diner: he is a good companion for
me. We shall hear news. News.



Ciuis. Go thy ways quickly.


Roger. A gentle gretyng.
Sir, my master and my masters, pray pour maistershippe, to take the pains
to come to their chamber: where as you shall be heartily welcome, to their diner.


Mendax. Sir, I will wait upon the: but first I will upon this Whetstone,
sharpe my knife.


Roger. Sir, here is this gentleman come: to keep you compainie.


Ciuis. He is most heartily welcome, set him a chair, give him a trencher and
a napkin: I pray you take part of soche as God have sent, if it were at London,
I might make you better chere, but here I can not.


Mendax. Here is good chere. Mendax do begin.
I was there within these.x. weeks, that I would have given x^. shillings for
soche a lofe as this: whereas no soche chere was to be had.


Ciuis. Where was that, I pray you gentle Master: I can not tell what to call
you, nor of what country you are?


Mendax. Sir, I was borne ne'er unto Tunbrige, where fine knives are made, my
name is Mendax, a younger brother, linially descended of an ancient house,
Mendax his arms.
before the Conquest. We give three Whetstones in Gules, with no difference,
and upon our crest a left hand, with a horne upon the thobe and a knife in
the hand. The supporters are a Fox on the one side, and a Friar on the other
side. And of late I travailed into Terro Florida, whereas I felt both wealth
and woe: the black Ox never trod upon my foot before, a Dog have but a
day. A Ruffian.
We are borne all to travail, and as for me I have but little to lose: yet I
am a gentleman, and can not find in my heart, to play the slave, or go to
Carte. I never could abide it by the Mass.


Ciuis. You speak like a wiseman, I perceive by your behauor, Ironia.
you have been well brought up. I pray you where is that land?


Mendax. Many.c. miles beyond Torryda Zona, or the Equinoctial line: In the
longitude ne'er unto the Pole Antartike. Terra Florida^ described by Master
Mendax.
It is.xvij. M. miles lunge, and is in the part named America, and by the way
are the Islands called Fortunata, or Canaria, whose West parts be situated in
the third climate.


Ciuis. It was a dangerous travail into that country: where landed you, at
what place?


Mendax. We sailed to the Islands of Portum sanctu, and then to Medera, in
which were sundry countrees and Islands, as Eractelentiae, Magnesortis,
Grancamariae, Tenereffe, Palma Ferro. c. And our Capitain wet with his
soldiers to land, and at our first coming ne'er unto a river, in one of these
Islands: as we refreshed our selves among the Date trees, in the land of
Palms, by the sweet Wells, we did to the great fear of us all, se a great
battle between the Dragon and the Unicorn, A battle very profitable.
and as GOD would, the Unicorn thrust the Dragon to the heart: and again the
Dragon with his tail, stonge the Unicorn to death. Here is a piece of his
horne, the blood of dragos is rich: that battle was worth two.C. marks to
our capitain. Then we traueilled further into Tenriffa, into an exceeding high
mountain, above the middle region: whereas we had great plenty of Alom. And
might well hear an heavenly Hermony among the stars, He was ne'er the
stars.
the Moon was ne'er hand us with marvelous heat. And when we came down at the
hill foot, grow many gross herbs, as Lo^ege, Laserpitium, Acanthus, and
Solanum, whether it was by the eating of Solanum beries or no, there was a
very mighty man naked and hearie, in a great sleep, whom we gently suffered to
lye still. He had a great ^earde, in which a bird did breed, and brought her
young ones meat. No lye, no lie
Our capitai^ declared unto us, that the spialles had viewed the lad, and how
that our enemies were at hand. The next day most fearful people, painted
with sundry colours, approached in strange beasts skins, with Flint, so
were their shaftes and Darts, with whom we fought and slue, and took some:
yet the people so assaulted us, that with much difficultee, we recovered our
barks. And then we sailed forth, chance to let fall our sounding lead new
^allowed, whereupon did slick gold, with all speed we sent down our
Deuers, and so within three days we gathred thirty hogsheddes of five gold:
besides two buttes of orient Pearls, all the shore was full of Currall. Fro
thens we sailed to the great Isle, Medax brings good tidings of treasure
and riches, and where it is.
called Madagastat in Scorea, where were kings, Mahumitaines by religion,
black as Deuilles: Some had no heads, but ^yen in their breasts. Some when
it rained, covered all the whole body with one foot. The land did abound in
Elephants teethe: the men did eat Camiles and lions flesh. Musk and Zeuet in
every place did abound: and the mother of perle the people made their
platters, to put in their meat, they dwell among spice, the ground is moist
with oil of precious trees. Plenty of wine out of grapes as big as this
loffe: much Pepper, they can not tell what to do with sugar: but that their
merchants of Maabar, twenty days journey of, do come and take of their
goods frankly for nothing, but some of them do bring iron, to make edge
tools, for which they have for one pound, twelve pound of fine gold. Their
pots, pannes, and al vessel is clean gold, garnished with Diamonds. I did
see swine feed in them.


Ciuis. Did you see no strange Fowls there, and Fishes?


Mendax. In the Isle called Ruc, in the great Canes land, I did see Mermaids
and Satyrs, with other fishes by night, come sower miles from the sea, and
climbed into trees, and did eat Dates and Nutmegs, with whom the Apes the
Babians had much fighting, yellyng and crying. The best meat and the worst
meat.
The people of that land do live, by eating the flesh of women. In this
land I did see an Ape play at tic tack, and after at Irishe on the tables,
with one of that land: and also a Parate, give one of their gentle women a
check mate at Chess.


Ciuis. God keep me from those cruel people.


Mendax. Birds of strange kinds.
But sir, as for birds they are not only infinite in nobers, but also in
kinds: some voices most sweet, and some most fearful. Nightingales as
big as Geese, oules greater then some horse: and there are birds that do
lye in a rock, where Dragons are, whose Feathers in their wings are thirty
foot long, the quill as big as a Canon royal. Also I heard Parates despute
in Philosophie. Fresh in Greek.


Ciuis. I pray you, is there any plenty of precious stones?


Mendax. Very many, but harde to come by, but in the Island Zanzibar, is much
plenty of Ambergrise, Ambergrise as plentiful as clay.
that they make clay for their houses withal, there if we had holden
together like friends, we might have gotten a great kingdom. Oh my hart, it
makes it blede, when I do remember it: every man is but for himself, you may
consider what diuisio is. Emeroddes, Rubbies, Turks, Diamonds and Sapphires,
Precious stones most plentifully.
were sold when we came thither first, for the weight of iro A.M. rich
Turkesses were sold for.iiij.d. to be short, one with an other after three
shillynges and four pence a peck. Our men gathered up Carbuncles and
Diamonds with rakes, under the spice trees. Diamonds gathred with Rakes.



Ciuis. How chance you brought none home into this realm?


Mendax. Oh sir, we filled.ij. ships with fine gold, A great loss, it have
vndoen all Englande.
iij. ships with Ambergrise, Musk and Unicorns horns: and.ij. tall barks
with precious stones, and sailed by the Adamat stones, which will draw iron
unto them and so caste away the greatest riches in Heathenes or christendom.
After that euel chance, we came upon the main land of Cuba, in the great and
mighty land of America, where as the people called the Canables, do dwell in
caves, rocks and woods, there as women will eat their own children, and one
man an other, and they are Giant most high and fearful: Cruel women
all go naked, they neither know good humanitee human policy, religion,
law, nor chastity. One is equal with an other, the strongest of body are
chief, A good common wealth.
for there all is ruled by force, and not through reason: after the manner of
swine. Children love their fathers no more then pigs do the boars, for they
say, lust causes generation. And when their parents are very old, they
bring the to an exceeding high mountain, whereas is a great tower builded upon a
rock, under which tower is the golden mine, in which mine there be ij. great
monstrous dragos keeping the same, The price of gold.
which will never suffer the children to come to receive the benefits of that
place, until soche time as they have slain their parents, and cast their
flesh into the cave, and wash the Dragons Images, which are within that tower,
made of precious wood, with the blood of their said parents. From thence we
traue^led into an Island, where as it never rains but ones a year, that is
in the month of July, whereas Nylus runs, by giving benefit unto the plain
country, where as spice of all kinds doth grow. In that Island doth grow
Hoppes most plentifully, which they do call Lupilu. A little before our
coming, was a great wind, which had shaken down much fruit and precious
spice, A miracle of double Bear.
and many hundred carte lodes of good Hoppes: after which fell down pletie of
rain, raising a mighty flood, incontinent succeeded a burning heate, for it is
under the Equinoctial line, or Torrida Zona. Where it remains double Bee^.
In fine, through this concoction of the sun moving this boiling of the water,
through the help of much Spice, I never drank soche Hippocras, Wine, nor
Beer. The Flemynges have found out the commodity, A feast for Fleminges.
and caren to transport no more Hoppes hither unto us. And if good luck had
been our good lord, we had made our selves and all the christian kingdoms for
ever.


Ciuis. Alas, alas, what was that I pray you tell me, I am sorry that you your
friends have travelled thus long, and have been in daungier for nothing. But I
perceive you have been a great traveler, and have seen many Countrees, Woods
and Rivers.


Mendax. Non finis erit si prosequar omnia verbis, Loquax.

Flumina specos, capos siluas{que} lucus{que}*
Colles apricos{que} siunos{que} vnde{que} portus.
Omnia sunt vidi. Now let them go, I have seen those things and manymo. Sir
in the lands beyond Cuba, or as the Cosmographars call Lamiam or Ianica, where
as the people do curse the Sun at noone because it burns them. There are
many Islands among them. There is a fletyng Island, A new Ilelande that
swims, coming from Paradise.
swimming above the sea, by what means I know not, whether occasioned by
corcke, Wolle. c. it would by the wind shift fro place to place. Some said it
was a shreed of the banks of Paradise, broken through the force of ganges, and
so in continuauce brought down: it was not broad. In that Isle were but few
people, and the men of that place do by proper art, with a sharpe Flint
stone worm the women, and pretelie cut their tongues, Women have worms in
their tongues.
and take forth a small Serpent a live, and heal their tongues again with
herb Grace. This Island hath many rich stones, gold and spice in it, with
precious trees, as Agallicum and Guiacum. Guiacum.
In that Isle, there had been some French men, whose skins were clean caste
of, in the manner of Snakes, Marie they were full of hooles. This Guiacum did
much pleasure to the belike. But as we were deuisyng how to steal this land
away, and bring it forth to the maine Sea with our Pilottes, two things
let our purpose. A great loss.
The one was, the haven mouth was to straight. The second, the people were to
vigillant, and let our purpose. But I trust, I and my compaignios will make
one lusty voyage and give an onset for all: we will either win the
saddle, or lose the horse. We are none but good fellows, of my part I will do
what lies in me, to make many prentices free, An honest fellow.
and cause other good young gentlemen in selling their land, to get thousands.
If men knew as much as I do in this matter, they had rather venture the
best iointe, then be from thence, it is almost heaven, and if we do want
by the way, let every man keep close, and there we may chance to find
some little fletyng Islands by the way, Pirates, heirs of wapping for their
snappyng.
wherein good Sugar, spice, Silk, Linen. c. do grow, ready made, and that
will make ready money: and money makes a manne. Oh that young men would
believe me, and follow me, I would make them Lords.


Vxor. Good husband bearken in your care, I would speak with you sweet
heart.


Ciuis. Speak on your mind good Susan: what is the matter woman?


Vxor. Sir, this is a blind iyed shameless ruff, a rog, I warrant him, and a
thief. This knave is hable to make children run from their parents, seruautes
rob their masters, young heirs to sell their lands, men to run from their
wives, and women also. You may know by his Arms of what stock he comes,
She describes a ruffian
I warrant him fro drouning, and dying of the Pestilence. Oh villain, he will be
hanged. I dare say he knows al kinds of thieves, vagabonds, rovers
hasarders. I like not his words, nor his braggyng countenance, let us hence.


Ciuis. Well, much good do you, you have taken much pain, but small
profit, you have travailed far, and may speak by aucthoritee. Come take
away, pay the reconyng: Roger, horse, horse, and away.


Roger. All things are ready sir.


Ciuis. Well rid of evil store.
Fare ye well gentle friend.


Mendax. I thank you of your gentle company, good gentleman.


Vxor. Whose fair field is yoder, Fair fields
I would fain know it, and let trifles pass, I will not believe them: let
foolish things go, and talk of matters profitable.


Roger. Masters, do you not know it? it is my masters, I am his bailey there:
he had a good bargain, I assure you, it was in mortgage to him this ij. years,
I would he might find the like purches: al yonder town is his, he hath raised
the rent one.C. marks a year more then it was. There were good lying in the
plague time: Honest landlords, God amend them
for there are large pastures, and the houses are down, saving the manner
place, for the carles have forfeited their leses, and are gon a begging like
villains, many of the are ded for honger.


Vxor. Whose Oxen are these, Roger.


Roger. My masters also, for he yt hath money shall have land worship: my
master is a close wiseman, A net for fools.
and lies in the wind of the that will buy money for land: he can handle a
young gentleman trimly, and ride him with a golden snaffle, A horse master.
he knows upon which side his bread is buttered well enough, I warrant
you, my master rised so early this morning, that he noddeth as he rides


Vxor. Sir, me thinks you totter as you ride, what are you a sleep? Do you
not hear your man praying? He is pleasantly disposed, he would make me
believe, that you were a great landed manne, and had much cattle in store:
why sir, how do you that you speak not to me?


Ciuis. Feaer and dread.
Wife, wife, God send us good luck, do you not see yonder cloud in the West
towards the North, coming hither?


Vxor. Most fearful God send us good luck sir, it is a sudden change, I
will hide my face, it fears me so much.


Roger. I am forty years old, but I did never se the like, but ones, and
that was between Godmichester and Gogmanshill, a little from Cambridge, as I
travailed to Wolpit fa^re, Roger did se visions.
to buy Coltes, and there appeared a strange form, as me thought, a great
number of steples were broken: and many naked Friars, Bishops, and the Pope him
self did wryng their hands, A pitiful case
in ragged clothes, they looked all very lean: and then it thundered and
lightened, in which storm many Geese were killed, and also sheep and Lambs.
The year after was the tumbleyng down of Abbaies, and the reformacio for the
Church matters: but this passes, for the precious passion of Christ, let us
ru away with speed. I do se a fearful thing in ye clouds appering, a black
len naked body, very long, riding upon a pale miserable foul jade, Death
appears with.iii. Darts.
he hath also.iij. darts in his left hand, the one is cole black, the other
blood red, and the third is a dark pale, he hath no flesh upon him: me
thinks that I do se a great fire, and many fearful monsters in the same
follow him, with a fearful voice, saying: all the wicked shall come to us. We
are swallowed in the second death.


Ciuis. Let us take this house, ride apace; the storm doth begin most
fearful, God help us, what shall we do, or whether shall we fly? Iesus,
Iesus, what a thuder is this, A great thunder.
as heaven earth should go together: Lord how the lightning falls fro
heaven, all this regio is upon a flaming fire, the birds fall from the trees,
loke how the cattle treble, and trees are pulled up by the roots, the houses
are burnt with celestial fire.


Vxor. Let us depart from these trees, for I have heard say, to sit under a
white thorne, is most safe and surest in a tempest: I have many goodly jewels
against lightning, as the Carbuncle, Witchcrafte.
Hemoralde, Hiasinthus, with Amber and gold: God and S. Barbara defend us: I
have a S. Ihos Gospel about my neck, and a pair of braselettes of Coral
about mine arms, Oh God defend us: I am sorry that we came forth.


Roger. Master and Masters, come into this valley, and let us sit in that
same deep close pit, under the hill side, until this storm be past:
saincte George to borrow, merciful God, who did ever se the like.


Ciuis. Sudden fear
I think it be the day of judgment, the earth doth quake, the heave doth
burn, and me think I do see the fearful horseman lighted in the valey, with
a meruaillous fearful saying: En (...) vobis, mors vltima linia rearum. c. Oh
where shall we hide us from him? Death destroieth all creatures, none can resist
him.
He casts forth his.iij. darts, and takes the up again. He is in a great
rage: behold, how he destroieth man and beast in this valey. This is come in a
moment, who would have thought it in the morning? none of us, he draws ne'er,
I know him well, it is merciless Death most fearful: I am afraid of his
presence he bends his black dart against me, I have no target to bear it
of.


Vxor. Good husband, The condition of a woman.
remember that I am young, and with child, also you are well stricken in years:
therefore play the man, and take Roger with you, and entreat him, if he will
needs have you, yet for Gods sake be not acknowen that I am here, for fear
that he kill me, and your child also.


Ciuis. Keep you close under that Cloak, and stir not I pray you.


Roger. I can not abide him, I will run away: Gentle Roger
for poverty and death, will part good fellowship, Sir, shift for your self,
and draw your sword against him.


Ciuis. A friend at need.
Alas, my wife in my trouble is to faint hearted, and will not keep me company,
my seruaunt is run away from me, whether may I sly from death? If I do run,
he is to swift for me, if I turn my back, he will cowardly kille me: if I do
submit my self to him, he is merciless: I perhaps shall persuade him with my
gold, I have an hundred pounds in Angels, Death will not be entreated.
I will give it him to save my life: Oh he is here. Sir, most humbly here upon
my knees, I desire your lordship to pardon me, and suffer me to live still in
this world, and here I offer unto you this purse of gold, I shall always do
you service, and love you with all my heart, and be at your Lordships
commandment, and to my power seek to please you, as my good lord and
Master.


Mors. You are well overtaken, I am glad that we are met together: I have seen
you sins that you were borne, I have thretened you in all your sicknesses, but
you did never see me, Death comes not before his time.
nor remembered me before this day, neither had I power to have taken you with
me until now: For I have commission to strike you with this black dart,
called the pestilence, Pestilence.
my master hath so commanded me: as for gold, I take no thought for it, I
love it not, no treasure can keep me back the twinklyng of an iye from you, you
are my subject, and I am your lord: I will cut of your journey, separate your
marriage, but not cut of your years, for they are determined when I should come:
Our days are set.
this is your appointed time, and when the time shall be appointed me, I will smite
your wife, children and servants, they shall not be hidden from me, I will
find them forth, be they hid never so secrete, or flee never so swift or
far of, for I am so swift, that in the moment of an iye, I can compass the
whole world, and am of so wonderful a nature, that I can be in sundry places
at ones, and in sundry shapes, in flames of fire, What death is.
I oftentimes do consume mankind, in the water I do kill the, I am marvelous
in work: I spare nothing that hath life, but I bring to an end, and to mine
own nature, which is death.


Ciuis. Sir, I most humbly desire you to suffer me to return home again into
the cite, and let my goods in order, to thuse of my wife and children, to
pay my debts, then godly to depart this world, I desire no more.


Mors. I must dispatch, and strike you with this black dart: I have much
business to do with the other two darts.


Ciuis. Oh fearful Death: what is these two^ other darts in thine hand?


Mors. I will smite thee with this pestilent dart, as I have done to many
kingdoms, cites and people, both man and beast, young and old. Honger.
With this pale dart, I will destroy infinite nombers with honger: they shall
perish for lack of food, in destruction of corn, cattle, wine, oil,
fruit, herb, grass foul and fish. Great vengeance.
I will make them eat their own flesh, and make their own children to be
sod and roasted for them. With this third dart, I will in battle slay in
number, more then the Stars of heaven, and bathe my self in blood. I spare
not one, neither Prince nor Peasant, against whom I do cast this dart. I have
no respect of any person, be they never so noble, rich, strong wise, learned,
or cunning in Physic, they shall never preuaill against me: but I will
overcome them. I come into the Kings chamber at the time appointed, in force
of Phisike, and cast my dart, that none shall se but feel. I often come into
the counting house, and suddenly kille the money teller. I overthrow the
Daunser, and stop the breath of the singer, and trip the runner in his
race. I break wedlockes, and make many widows. The greatest cross of all.
I do sit in judgement with the Judge, undo the life of the prisoner: and at
length kill the Judge also him self. I do somone the great Bishops, and cut
the through their rotchettes. I utterly blemish the beauty of al Courtiers.
And end the misery of the poor. I will never leave until all flesh be
utterly destoied, I am the greatest cross and scourge of God.


Ciuis. What is the cause, O fearful Death, that thou doest scourge the face
of ye earth with thy Darts: and who hath sent thee for that purpose?


Mors. Neither is the saying of the Philosophers, Note this.
or Poets true, which count that I come by chance, to mortal things, or
inquiring the cause of the matter, or Depriuatione in materia, or of generation
and corrupcion. And some other do affirm, that I do come through the cocorse
of the stars infecting the air, poisoning living things. And therefore the
Heathen in fearful Tragidies and stories, have admonished the vain world to
repent, by setting forth of me Death. Some of them daily had the dead heads
of their parents brought to their tables, to mortify their vanitees withal.
And al these men whom I have slain, were Heathen men. But I am the messenger of
God, his scourge and cross to all flesh good and bad: and am the end of life,
which do separate the body from the soul. I am no feigned thing by the wise
brains of the Philosophers: but only through the disobedience of your first
parents Adam and Eua, Adam caused death.
through whose fault all flesh is corrupted subject to me Death: for through
sin came death. Truly my masters anger was so great in your parents, that
he suffered me to plague with my hand the best in his church, as Able,
Esaic, Ieremie, Zacharie, Ihon Baptist, and Iesus Christ his only son,
which suffered me, and seeing that my master hath commanded me not to spare
his only child, with his Apostles holy Martires. Do thou think that I
should bear with thee, or suffer any in this wicked world? He sent me to
Sodome with his Angels to burn the. To droun bloody Pharao. And to slay the
kings of the Heathen. Death is horrible.
Also I was at their ends, although al flesh doth abhor me. Yet Iudas and
all desperate men, did call upon me. Thus do I end both good and bad, but
precious in the sight of the lord is the death of his saints: and many be
the scourges of wicked men. I am in gods hades, as the sword is in the man of
wars as it is written. Death works.
The lord doth kill quicken again. And it is he that did create evil, that is
pain or death, light and darkness. And whereas he hath not set his strong
angel to bridle me, I am merciless, and will kill all where as the token is
not set up, or his mark upon them whom he doth forbid me to touch. And that
is not upon thee nor upon many thousands that live most wretchedly. Thy days
are but a span long, Ezech. ix.
thou art like a flower in the field, thy days are passed like a shadow. Iob.
xiiii.
Thou haste run thy race, and thy days are consumed like smoke, and thou shalt
scante live to draw thy breath. I must destroy this thy ye^ this mansion, I
am so commanded: have here is thy reward, suffer it patiently, I must go
presently to visit a gre^te number suddenly, that do not remember me. I will
cut them down with my sith like grass and kill them with my three fearful
darts. Hell comes after death.
The pains of hell do follow me, to swallow up all flesh, that does not
repent them of their wickedness.


Ciuis. Psal. cxxxviii
Oh wretched man that I am, whether shall I ^ie for succour? Now my body is
paste cure, No policy against death.
no Phisike can preuaile, the sorrows of death doth compass me round about,
the policy of the world with fear bad me fly and use Gods means, as Lot
did, when Sodome was a fire. But now do I se, who so escapes honger and the
sword shall be overtaken with the pestilence. I am at the pits brink, now
begin I to wax weak in body. I am very dry, my pain does increase, he
is gone that did strike me, but I do feel his wound that he gave me. Alas, woe
is my vile stinkyng carcass, and filthy flesh, conceived and borne in sin,
depriued of original justice: compared to a beast in Adam, fallen as a rotten
Apple from a living tree. What have I gotten, my Lord God by my fall, nothing
else but only darkness, care, misery, Remember this good reader,
affliccion, sickness, pain, agues: and now in mine heart, Death most
painful it self. Now for all my pomp, health, wealth, riches and vain
pleasures of this world: this my body, which I have both costl^e clothed,
well fed, and garnished with all delights, for whose sake I have been
covetous, and sinned against Iesus Christ, to maintain the same body. Man
most vile carien.
From heceforth therefore now shall I be turned into a stinkyng carrion, for
worms delight, dust, clay, rotten, most vile, forsaken of al me, poor,
without substance: naked without clothing: sown in dishonour, forgotten of my
posteritee. ii. Cor. xv.
Not known from henceforth, vanish like a shadow, wither like a leaf, and
fade as a flower. Oh uncertain life, but most assured death fie on this
filthy shadow of this world, and flattryng of the same, with all the
instruments of the flesh. Psalme. ii. and.Cxix.
Oh Lord, although I be in this extreme trouble, yet have mercy upon me,
according to thy great mercy and loving kindness. For I do make my prayer in
the time of trouble: trusting that thou wilt hear me.


Roger. Masters, the fearful thing that talked with my Master, is gone. Let
us go hear what news with him?


Vxor. I am glad it is past, thanks be to God, I will go with speed, to se my
husband, for he hath been in great danger.


Roger. Sir, I am glad that he is gone, the devil go with him: hath he taken
all your gold?


Ciuis. No, I have my gold in store, for in the world I found it, and in the
world I must leave it, it is but vain, and can not help in the time of this
my trouble: We can carry nothing away,
God hath prevented me, and summoned me to appear before his seat. This death
hath smitten me, I must dye.


Vxor. Alas my good sweet husband, what ails you? Or what would you have
me do for you, to help you in this case?


Ciuis. Help me into some house, where as I might send for some manne of God,
The best way.
to be my heavenly Phisicion, teaching me the way to the kingdom of Christ.


Roger. Here is a house at hand, and here is your horse also: we will help
you up, and carry you to this place.


Vxor. Now sir, you be come here into this place, for gods sake discofort not
your self: I trust you shall do well, you shall want nothing that may be had
for money, gold and silver, Past remedy
I will send for your own brethren and sisters. You shall have withal speed
the best learned Physicians in this Realm, in the mean time drink Dragon
water, Mithridatu mingled together, to put this passio from your hart. Ride
Roger and seek a Physician with al speed, spare not the horse


Ciuis. Soft sir, and speak with me, and do what that I do command you,
in the name of Iesus Christ.


Roger. Sir, look what your maistership shall command me to do: that will
I do with all speed, and tarry not.


Ciuis. Go thy ways, and pray moister Theologus to come to me, that I may
have his counsaille, pray him to come with speed, deliver him this token.


Roger. I shall, in the mean time good master be of good cheer, for Gods
sake.


Vxor. Alas what shall I do, my poor children.


Ciuis. I have set my worldly things in order, for so hath Gods word taught
me to do, A wiseman.
I thank God, and my debts shall be truly paid: and whatsoever any poor man
doth owe me I, do forgive them: and restitution shall I make with all speed, to
as many as I have wronged. And I shall leave plenty to you and my children,
requiring you to live according to Gods commandment obeiyng him all ye days
of your lives, Tob. x^i.
and remember death, and to do to all men, as you would be done unto. To live
chaste, either in Marriage, or a life sole: use prayer, Admonision to his wife
and children.
chaste your bodies with abstinence. Be pitifully minded, hate vice: beware of
wicked company, love well the temple of god visit the prisoners and
helpless, this is good Religion in the iyes of God. As ne'er as you can keep
the commaudementes of the almighty God, and beware of idleness and pride of
heart, lament no more good wife. For who can keep that must needs a way? me
think I hear Theologus come.


Theologus. Sir, God the heavenly Phisicion bless you, Good things
and give you the perfect consolation of conscience in Christ his son, and
give you grace mekelie to bear this his cross.


Ciuis. You are heartily welcome dear Theologus, I have thought it long, since
I did send for you.


Theologus. Your man declared to me by the way, a pitiful story, which
happened to you this day. Further, I had sooner been with you, but one master
Antonius sent for me, but or I came he was dead: To late.
and Auarus and Ambodexter is in his house, preparing a solemn funeral for
him.


Ciuis. Oh sir, then I have no cause to reherase the matter new again, but
seeing my flesh is ne'er the pit, and in a manner my breathe fails me, being
wooded with death, and that I am of two parts, body and soul, the one paste
all cure, the other in hope of salvation, I desire, if it please God, that I
may live to the end of your oracions. Declare unto me, what is the cause of
sin?


Theologus. The Devil was the first cause of sin, as it is written in
Genesis, Sathans work.
how with a lie he deceived the woman, and they that commit sin, are of the
Devil, for he hath sinned from the beginning of the world, and is the first
author of sin. The second cause was manne, Man wretchedness
declining from God, and credityng the Devil, by which man, sin entered into
the world, and all the calamities and crosses therein, as sorrow, dread,
fear, poverty, sickness and death it self, all to punish sin.


Ciuis. Oh lord, how I have erred, I had thought God had been the cause. As
when I rede these words. Indurabo cor Pharaonis, I will indurate ye hart of
Pharao, with soche like places: his induracion was the cause of his sin, and
who did indurate him but God? And when it is said, no nos inducas i
tentationem, neither led us into temptation. c. Here I gathered, it was God
that led us into temptation, for which cause, we desire him not to led us into
teptacion. c.


Theologus. You have mistaken those places, for God is not the author or
cause of sin, for he did so much abhor the same, that nothing could pacify
his wrath under heaven, no merit or work, but only the blood of Iesus
Christ his son. Christ's death.
And for this word I will indurate, the very word in Ebrue is: I will suffer
Pharaos heart to be hardened. And so it was in the Lords prayer, it is No
sinas nos induci, neither suffer us to be led or fall into temptation. c.
Therefore my brother, it was the will of Satan and man, that caused sin.


Ciuis. Why, Man wi^
hath not manne will to do good again, if he lust?


Theologus. No, if he had the eleccion to will, as first he had, he would do
the like: therefore it is in a sure hand, even in Gods, and not in ours. Math.
x.
As when men do speak the truth, it is not of their own will or power, but
the heavenly spirit in them, by almighty God, are al the steppes of men
directed: though man fall into sundry temptacions he shall not be cast of, for
the lord puts under his hand, Psalme. xx.
which is a great comfort to us in trouble, when we are vnderneth the cross.
Without him we can do nothing that is good. No man can take any good thing
upon him, Ihon. xi.
except it be give to him from heaven: and no man dere brother, can come to
the son of God, unless the father hath drawn him, not his will, which is
most wicked fro his youth upward, as appears in our vile nature, thought,
word, deed. And who so ever hath not the spirit of Christ, Roma. viii.
is not of Christ but those, which are led of the spirit of god are the sons
of God: and this comes not by man will and power. For, the worldly minded
man, does not understand or perceive those things, that are of Gods spirit,
without which he can not be saved, be he never so learned, and can dispute of
the soul: making distinctions of knowledge and judgement, What the soul is.
calling it the mind, or intelleccion, or reason, or desire, which is the
will, under whom the affection is governed, whose spring is the hart. All these
make not to the heavily purpose but rather stading upon soche trif^es, doth
hinder the way to salvation in Christ: and rob him of his passion, when we
do attribute freedom or frewille, Of free will.
to come of our selves, but that we are in Gods hands, as his instruments,
through him to work soche things, as best may please him, and he withdraw
his holy hands, we can do no good: therefore submit your self to Christ and
his will, for our wills are malignant, and damnable in his iyes. Forsake
your praue will, and humbly submit your self to Iesus Christ, saying: now
before our death. Prayer.
Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed (...) name, thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven. c. And thus I do conclude of free
will in us, and faithfully look for the reward, not of works, but of mercy
only: only purchaced by the Sacrifice of Christ, Mercy and not works.
thanking him that he hath made you mercifulle to your brethren in this
world, which was the fruits of faith, by which faith in his blood we are
saved, and shall receive our almose or reward, and not our duty: for we are
unprofitable, when we have done our best.


Ciuis. What reward is that, I pray you? Or what promises are granted by
Christ?


Theologus. The reward is the remission of sins, and life everlasting,
grouted by the father for Iesus Christ's sake, Reward in Iesus Christ
frelie without our works, for there is none other salvation under heaven
given to men, but only Christ. In him we do merit: as when we are
merciful, we have a promise of this preset life, and the life to come. And in
this world also an.c. fold: Matth. x.
and in the world to come everlasting life. And who that gives one of these
little ones, a cup of water for my names sake, shall not lose his reward. And
he commanded to give, promising it shall be give to them again. And further he
says: break the bread to the poor, and it shall be to thee like a garden.
He saith not, let thin executors or assigns give the poor when thou art
dead, but thou must do it thy self in this world: Luke. xv.
Now while it is light, for the night is at hand, I mean death, when thou
can not work. Remember Dives lost the time, could not call it back again,
which waileth in hell, hath no reward, for he trusted not God, nor rewarded
any man. Further, recocile thy self to thy brother, for else thou can not
please God, though thou wrough test all good works, and gave thy body to be
burned: i. Corin. xiii.
for charitee is so precious in Gods iyen, that who so want it, can not reign
with Christ. Therefore forgive fro thy hart, and thou shall be forgeuen. Make not
thy will upon goods gotten by usury, nor by any thing that falsely in
bargening, thou hast taken from thy brother, Psalme. xiiii.
for then thou shalt not dwell in Gods tabernacle. Neither shall thy children
prosper upon the earth, but God will hate them to the.iij. iiij. generation
for thy sin: Psalme. iiii.
examen well thy conscience, death hath wounded thee, which is common to al
flesh: in thus doyng, thou shalt pass from death to everlasting life by
Christ, and never taste upon the second death, among the impious or
castawaies: Contesse thy sins from thy heart, ask mercy, be they never so
red, and many in number, Psalme. ii.
Iesus hath washed the in his blood, and sprinkled them with Hysop, and made
the as white as snow: now play the man in Christ, fear not to depart this
world. Christ is gone before with his holy Apostles, Prophets, Martyres,
Cofessours and Virgins, penitent thieves and harlottes also, there is the
army of angels before his throne, with joy incessantly honouring him. Hell
gates are sparred, satan beaten down, thy ^innes rased, the good Angel at
hand to conduct thee to that blessed land of rest: ^oc. vltimo.
here is nothing but labour, days of care, sin, wretchedness, a thousand
crosses, the snares of the devil, and many vanitees, the flesh most
inconstant, the world a place of misery and sin, bid it farewell, taking
thy leave with the badge of a christen man, of Christ crucified: A Christian
mans badge.
remember that promise made in thy Baptism, arm thy self with the breast plate
of faith, continue to the end, and thou shalt receive a croun of life, thy
cross taken away: cast thy hole care upon Christ, ii. Cor. xv.
and he shall deliver thee at hand, and give thee, the holy resurreccion of
body soul to dwell in one for ever with him.


Ciuis. Oh what comfort in conscience I have received: Comfort in conscience.
first I render thanks to God the father, the son, and the holy ghost:
secodly, blessed be the hour of your coming hither, in this time of my
trouble, with this holy consolation in Christ, in whom I do believe,
renounsing the world, the flesh and the devil, believing all the articles of
my Christen faith, acknowledging the blessed Sacramentes to be the instrumetes
to everlasting life and salvation in Christ, Sacrametes
by the which God doth work in his Church to the worlds end, to them
that shall be saved: one Trinitee, The holy Trinitee.
and three distinct persons coequal in vnitee, in one essence being is my
God: the father created: no, the son redeemed me, and the holy ghost
sanctified me, and inspired me, where by I know that I am his elected, and one
undefiled mother the Church, hath thus taught me, in that blessed book of
Patriarchs, Prophets, Martyres, The holy Church.
and Iesus with his Apostles, which is Gods work: now master Theologus, my
time is at had I pray you say some thing of the resurreccion, and then let
us pray in the name of God together, that it may please him, to forgive me my
sins, which I have committed against heaven and earth, and to receive my
soul into his blessed hands.


Theologus. Good brother, not only the doctrine of Prophets and the
Euangelistes, do promise the Resurreccion to come, of some to salvation, and
some to damnacion, but the same resurreccion is most manifest. Math. xxvii.
As for example: Christ himself and other, did rise, and were seen to many in
Hierusalem: and by the space of.xl. days, he taught the Apostles, and was
conversant with the: and then ascended into glory, until the time appointed
to judge the quick and the ded when he shall send his angles to gather all
flesh under heaven, Math. xiii.
from the.iiij. winds, and sit down in judgment, saying: come to me you
blessed of the father, and receive the kingdom prepared for you fro the
beginning. Further he saith, this is the will of my father, which hath sent me,
that all that do see the soon, and believes in him, shall have everlasting
life, and I will raise him in the last day: and the holy Apostle saincte
Paule most heavenly doth preach the resuraeccion to the Corinthias Thy dead
shall live, says Esaie, Esaie. lviii.
and thy slain shall rise again: and those which sleep in the dust shall rise:
Daniel. xii.
the earth shall caste forth their dead bodies: I will creat both heaven and
earth new, says the Lord, and put the old out of my remembrance: many
says Daniel, that lie a sleep in the dust, shall be wakened again, some to
life everlasting, and other to reprobacion. God says, Math. xxv.
I will open their tombs and bring them forth: and the holy man Iob saith:
Iob. xiiii.
I know that my redeamer lives, and that in the last day, he shall raise me
again out of the earth, and shall be clothed again with my Skin, and in my
flesh I shall see God, who I shall see with these same iyes, and with none
other. These are comfortable, and most true places of holy scripture for the
resurreccion of the dead, you are assured in cosciece of this blessed
resurreccio, life everlasting in Christ Iesus our lord.


Ciuis. Yea forsothe dear Theologus, but my speech is almost paste, yet I
thank God I know you all, and I beseech him to bless you: and when my
spirit is gone, I pray you bury my body with comeliness, not with pomp, and
use it as an instrument, wherein the soul hath dwelled, and which the soul
shall posses again in honour, in that blessed resurreccion.


Theologus. Let us most humbly here upon our knees, with our hades lifted
up towards the heaven: desire God the father for Christ's sake, to receive
your soul into his glorious kingdom.

An exhortacion to death.
O dere citezen rejoice and be glad, that thy labour is almost past: rest is at
hand, fear not the pain of death. For it is impossible to escape that,
which can not be fled, or avoided. For it is written, who is that man that
lives, and shall not see death: none, no not one, therefore, suffer it my
sweet heart pacientlie, and that is an argumet of good ronscience, and of an
heavenly mind. Your wife mourns immoderatly, oh God: all flesh was borne
to die. All flesh shall dye.
This happened to our paretes, as father, mother. c. And shall not fail to all
that shall follow, unto the end of the world or coming of Christ. For surly
sweet life, was never without the exception of bitter death, it is no
novelty, therefore when we do hear tel, of the departure of any of our
friends: let us not fall into a sudden passion, as only the high priest did,
which hearing of the death of his children, fell down and brake his neck. A
constant wiseman in aduersitee.
But rather costauntlie with wise Anaxagoras, which hearing of the death of
his beloved son, said to the messenger: this is no new tidings, nor
strange to me, as soon as he was borne, I knew that he should die: for of
natures law is learned, life to be taken and resigned, no man dye, but he
which have lived. Oh leave your lamenting good masters, why rage you like
one, which have no hope. Be absent, or use moderacio remember holy Iob, Of
Iobs patience.
the same days when the Lord permitted Satan, not only to destroy his
servants and cattle, but also before age, in the lusty time of youth, in
the feast day, at one table, his dere children of his body, were all broken
in pieces and slain, with the violent fall of the house. What did he, rend his
here or flesh, no, no: he considered who sent them, and who did take them,
even the Lord, whom he most obedientlie suffered, and reverently thanked.
Further good sister, remember. S Hieromie, taking GOD to witness of an holy
woman, whose husband was ded* whom he most tenderly loved: A constant
wom^n in trouble.
by whom she had but two sons of singular beautee, wanting no gift of grace
or of nature, which both died the same day, wherein their father departed.
When this Cross was, saith. s. Hierom, who would not have thought that she
would have fallen mad, in rending her here, breasts, clothes and skin,
running up and down, wailing and crying, with pitefull wringing of hands.
What did she? First, she weeped not one tear: but most soberly, with a
womanly countenance, she humbly kneeled upon her knees, holding up her
hands, renderyng thanks, and making prayers to almighty GOD, saying: most
humbly I thank thee good lord, for that that it have pleased thee, to take me
into thy service, I am sped, oh lord, for thou haste discharged me. Counsaill.
c. Take also for an example, the most worthy constancy, A blessed woman, ii.
Match. vii.
of that patient woman, which without much lamentation, did with her own
iyen, behold her dere children slain, their members cut in pieces, and boiled in
caldrens. Mark how constantly of late years, children did se the flesh of
their fathers, mothers. c. burn in the fire most pacientlie suffering. And
again, fathers beholding their children do the like. What did they r^re like
Lions. c. No, no, but rejoiced, that God had of their blood stock erected a
people, to reign with him in life, which witnessed him in death. The examples
should move al christians, perfect mortificacion is not much, to lament for
our friends dying: Remember our end.
but rather by the example of their deaths, to remember our end, and then we
shall not sin. Therefore, better it is to go to the house of morning, then
to the house of banqueting. And when it shall please God to call your
husband away, and the days of forgetfulness shall approach, as every thing
under heave have the time, both of mourning and rejoicing When you do behold
your self in a glass remember your face shall be lean and pale your nose
rotten, A glass.
your teeth stinkyng and black, your iyen dim and blind, your ears deaf
and running, your here's fallen away, your veins broke, your senues relaxed
and wasted, bones corrupted, bowels full of rooms, and all your flesh
consumed. A glass for fair gentlewomen.
Behold, behold, you damos^ls of vanitees and lusty youth, the pleasure of
this world howe it ends, with stincke, filth c. not reserved after death to
any good purpose: as timber when it is cut down, but because it is so vile,
and will infect the air. The corps is enclosed in a pit, as we daily se,
where as it consumes, as I have said. Remember this, be not proud of noble
paretage, of riches, beauty or cunning but rather consider where are the old
lusty kings, Where are the old noble persons.
queenes, lords, knights, ladies: where are the old courtiers and valiant
men of war? where are the Majors of cities, lawyers, bisshops, Phisicions?
where are all the pleasant Musicians? where are become the old commons in every
kingdom where is become the Popes rotten holiness, with all the infernal
malignat sinagoge of antichrist. c. al are gone and passed like shadows,
wasted and come to nothing, as S. Augustine affirms. De va^i ^
Oh man saith he go to the channel house or graves, The greatest of the dead.
take up the bones, mark well if thou can know the master from the
servant, the fair from the foul, the rich from the poor, the wise from the
fool. c. thou can not do it, it is impossible to know the. Well world: well.
What do thou promise unto all them which do love thee, perhaps much
riches or dignitee. The hurt of rithesse.
How noisome to ye soul is riches, the very minister of, or to all, civil
rule and mischief, as damnable usury, adultery, treason, murder, it makes one
proud, high minded, and forgetful of him self. It deludeth him with
flatterers, and curtises of Hypocrisy, it is the mother of vainglory, and
nourisher of pride and idle life, and lothlie glotonie. Spend all succeeding
Gathrall.
It is remembered by our master Iesus Christ, which calls it thorns: and
by his Apostles, which names it the root of all ill. It is the master of
some rich men and women, which kepeth it to their great hurt. And the
foolish prodigal waster, which commonly succedeth the gatherer, spends it
soon away in wickedness, as it is said: easy gotten goods are soon spent.
Therefore sufficient or a mean, is well to a christen ma (for sundry causes.)
For they that will be^ rich, fall into sundry temptacions, cares, broken
sleeps: he gapes and looks for much, spends little, he can not be merry
(for fear of loss. Coueteous men, still do covet.
) The more he gets he is never satisfied, that is a covetous man but still
desires never pacified, like unto the dry man in a hot burning fever.
Riches hath poisoned the church, and transformed the clergy: specially in
Room among the Popes, and many great men, whose auncitours did keep
plentiful houses of the one half. Which now is come to pass, that now a
days in keeping hospitalite, or ministering of charite, but breaks up houses,
and hurt many poor, even for the love of one glotton, himself which will not
well spend it, Riches help not in the day of vengeance
nor for his children which can not well use riches. For we do se how God doth
plague the seed of extorcioners vile usurers. c. What if they had mountains
of gold, so increased dolor of mind and death steals on all flesh like a
thief, and smites the money lover, the usurer, the oppressor, the golden
watcheman, the great officer, merchant, the wise gentleman, that hath
purchased so much. What is the end of this ger, a dead carkesse, and scant a
good winding shete, out of the door he must to grave, he shall fare well Gloria
mundi, and welcome silie worms. I pray God that this turns not to
damnacion. Oh what is become of rich Senior Antonius Treasurers, Capax, Rapax,
Tenax, Ambodexter (ill gotten goods are worse spent.) Sower sweetness, and
slipping Ise, the golden entangled hoke, and the drink of Midas hath utterly
destroyed him, and or ever he was aware, death hath slain him. He loved so well
this world, What pains man will suffer to fly death
and life in the same: that if his Phisicion might have saved his life, he
would have lost one of his hands, and suffered his flesh to have been cut
with some broken bones, with the cotinuaunce of pain, ache and grief, with
dreadful slepes. And when he did se no remedy, the terror of conscience
tormented him, vexed him, and overcame him, made him rage and curse the time of
his birth, his life was so horrible in the iyes of God and manne, whose
judgment I do commend to God, but surly great plagues do remain for the
ungodly. Therefore let us be converted, and turn clean from our sins and
wickedness, Forgive enemies.
and so there shall no sin do us harm. Let us fast and pray hate evil, and
clean to good: make restitution, forgive our enemies, abhor vice, and be
sorry that we can not be sorrier. Remember our accomptes, and come be times
unto the Lord, make no tariyng to turn unto the Lord: put not of from day
to diae. Suddenly comes vengeance.
For suddenly shall his wrath come and in time of vengeance shall he destroy
us, and except we do all repent, we shall perish says Christ. Let us
repent therefore, and turn unto god, that he may forgive us, that our sins
may be done away: that we may say. From plague, pestilece and famine,
from battle and murder, and from sudden death, oh lord deliver us. From
hardness of heart, and contempt of thy word and commandment: which is the
greatest cause of the wrath and indignation, oh good Lord deliver thy people,
for thy holy names sake. Amen. Am.

A prayer in trouble or death.
Almighty and most dere father of heaven, we most humbly beseech thee for
Iesus sake, have mercy upon this thy servant, which now is nailed to the
painful cross of death, for Adams offence: impute no sin unto this
penitent, Hebre. xi.
which most willing hath submitted himself to thy fatherly correccio: but
behold thy soon on the right hand, the only mediator for al the elected,
whose names are written in the book of life. Let this thy seruaunt, we beseech
thee most mighty God, have clean remission and forgeuenes of all his sin, by
thought, word and deed, committed against thy divine Majesty: The best
medicene.
now in this perille of death, assist him with thy holy angel, command
Satan to depart, make clean his conscience, with a glad mind to rejoice
only in thy mercy, for vain is the help of man, but thy mercy doth
endure for ever: we are thy people, and the Sheep of thy pasture, to thee we
shall give praise for ever and ever. Amen.


Ciuis. Amen. Amen: Lord receive my soul into thy hands: thou God of truth.
A blessed end.



Theologus. THe mighty God of Angels, and the former of al things, visible
and invisible: in whose hades is only life and death, light and darkness, A
prayer in the time of death.
and all the mocios of the soul and body, without the most mighty God, all
things had been nothing, and of nothing all things are made by thee: Through
the holy Trinity is creation salvation.
without thy Christ, and thy blessed spirit, which is one coeternall trinitee,
all flesh were accursed, all consciences molested, and all souls utterly
dampned. From light into darkness, from freedom into everlasting reprobacion:
but by Iesus Christ thine only son, we thank thee dere father of all mercy,
that now it hath pleased thee, to take to thy mercy at this present time our
brother, whom thou haste elected, consecrated, and now he shall by thy mercy
and pitee be sanctified unto thee, A prayer.
to be a citezen of eternal glory, now dode flesh and blood forsake him,
and all his worldly strength fails him. Now is the Orgaines yielding up, the
heavenly sound, his soul comes now unto thee, good Lord receive it to thy
mercy, into thine everlasting glory: where as Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, are
continually, to thee, oh heavenly father, be incessant honour and glory.
AMEN.


The end of the Dialogue.
A Copy of a letter, to Frances Barlowe, by W. B.
When the time of trouble draws ne'er (good Frances Barlowe,) as death, which
shall separate the soul from the body, if we be not ware, and wisely
provident, we shall stand in great danger of losses: first we shall lose our
health, strength and beauty, Uanitee pla^n vanitee in this world
wherein we have delighted, and all our censes, as pleasure of sp^che joy of
heart, and the cofortable sight of the eyes, wherewith we do daily behold all
the pleasures of this world c. we shall lose all our further treasures, laudes
and substance, and also our lives, and as dung be cast into the earth: and
finally our souls banished from Gods blessed presence or resting place.
Therefore let us call my France, to our remembrance, the fearful curses of
almighty God, against our sins, and the cause of our plagues, which is our
abominable living, in sinning against God, in thought, word and dede, against
heaven and earth, in pride, wrath, idolatry, fornicatio, swearing, lust
gluttony, stopping of our ears against grace, and the word of truth: let
us call to remembrance, how that we have done wrong to each other, in word,
deed, in flaudring or in hindering by bargainig. c. Our brethren, for whom
Christ hath died whom we have hated not pitied in their extreme sorrows and
adversities, have not paid their labours and travels: let us repent and call
for grace, Restitution.
and restore now while we are in the way of grace, in that that we can not
make satisfaction for our sins, by no merits of alms, prayers, oblations.
c. which are unclean in Gods eine, as cocerning the remission of our sins,
Iob. xxiii.
as Iob says: how can he be clean that is borne of a woman? behold, he will
give no light unto the Moon, and the stars are vnclene in his sight, how
much more ma, a worm, even the son of a man, which is but a worm, which
in beholding of his sin hath no cause, but to despair, and to be dapned,
what remedy in this case? none but with al speed by faith, lift up your head,
and behold even Iesus Christ on Gods right hand, pleading our case, excusing
us to his father, which prays to him for us, and is heard, and Satha beten
down, and Gods Angels set at our bedside with spiritual armour, for us in
this battle of death against Satan, to conduct us to that happy landerlet
us kneel down, and first say, whatsoever God doth send to us, life or
death, his name be praised, Gods will.
his will be done in earth as it is with his Angels in heaven, desiring him
to be fed with his lively word, and blessed sacrament, the immortal fode for
the soul, passing al worldly treasures or physic for the body: that it would
please him to pardon our trespasses and offences, in thought, word and dede,
against his divine majesty, even as we do forgive our enemies, soche faults
as they do here in earth against us, and that in the time of agony or pains
of death, he suffer us not to fall into temptation, or be overladen under our
cross: The land of the living.
but that his hand may help us, and deliver us fro this vile life full of
miseries, and bring us into the land of the living: in doing this, you shall
be most happy and blessed: let us submit our selves to him that hath made
us, we have not made our selves, we are his vessels, and are in his sight, can
not flee from his presence, nor run beyond that race, Genesis. ii. Sapi. x.
which he hath appointed us: he brings death, and restores again to life in
the resurrection. Oh be content to render the same talent, Tob. xiii. Math. xxv.
which was but lent unto you, even your body, the gifts of nature and grace:
commit wife, children, and all to him. He doth no wrong, Yield all to God.
he takes but his own. Remember he brought you in hither naked, and how you
do live but a small time, and are full of misery: Like a flower for the time and
shall pass away like a shadow. Iob. xiiii.
Alas we do deserve great punishment, but he plageth us not according to the
grauitee of our sins, for then were we dampned, or like unto Sodome, that
perished without hands in the day of Gods wrath and vegeaunce. Consider
France, that this is no news or marvelous chance that you should change
your life, Lamen. iiii.
well, it happened to al your forefathers from Ada, to kings and all the
nobles of the earth, and to the poor also. Al flesh is grass, and worms
are the companions to the corse, All flesh is grass.
in dark grave or house of clay. Yet there is a day which God hath
appointed which none can tel but himself, Math. xviii. Luke. xix.
in which he will judge both the quick and dead, and call all flesh before
him: both his very elect and the merriles reprobates, and then body and soul
shall remain immortal together, have life everlasting. This hold fast dere
Frauces, as an anchor in this storm, from death to life everlasting. Hold fast
the.xij. articles of the Christian faith, pray to the end, only to God the
father by Christ, remember his promises, that at what time soever a sinner doth
repent, he will forgive. Cal, he will answer unto thy soul: knock and he
will open. This time of your aduersitee and plague of the pestilece, Eccle. xi.
doth make you forget all pleasures and delights paste, even so remember this
world is the more slippry, and the pleasures do compass all understanding to
Gods elected. Because I will conclude, the time draws at hand of our
deliverance, caste your care only upon God almighty, look not back
again, beware of by paths, either upon the right or left hand, but tread in
the true path or very way of Iesus Christ himself. I pray you let Ambrose
Barnes, rede the xj. Chapiter of saincte Ihons Gospel, and the first Epistle
to the Corinthians, Chapiter.xv. If the time had not been somoche spent, and
the venom so dangerous, and the parties so weak and feeble, I would have
caused you to have been letten blood and given you pills contra pestem, with
cordials accordingly by Gods grace, if that would have done you any good, but
take this cordial in good part. Thus God give you the croune of life, which
Iesus Christ without our deservinges, hath purchased for us in his precious
blood. His name be praised. Amen.

Your W. B.
Fare ye well. We must follow when it pleases God.
To his loving friend and brother, M. Willyam Conscience, Minister, W. B.
sends Salutation.
Luke. xii. Math. v.
IF the almighty God do take care for the fowls of the air, and flowers of
the field, and provides nourishement for them, how much more for his beloved
men, that do faithfully serve him in the holy ministry of his word and
sacramentes, visiting the sick, and buriyng the dead? The Captain that
doth but serve a mortal Prince, how so ever he spedeth, life, or death,
behaving himself wisely and valiantly against the enemy, is worthy of
worldly fame and honour, much more the Lords armoured knight, Gods messenger.
Mala. i.
being his Angel and mouth, between him and his people, that stand in
danger, is worthy in Christ to be noumbred, crouned, and placed among his
Angles immortal: by this I know that you are no hireling, but (under
Christ) the true Shepeherde, in that, that you fly not from your fold, when
that Wolf Satan with his companion Death, do work their violence against
the flesh soul: Ihon. x.
In this case remember these words. Nolite eos timere qui occidunt corpus. c.
Fear not the, which do kill the body, they can not kill the soul. In this
we do see what the power of death is, not only to kille in us the four
Elements, whereof the body is framed (by sword, fire, water, sickness. c. But
the soul is not made of any of them, but the Creator of al thing, hath made
it most pure of nothing, upon which soul death hath no power, because it is
of nature immortal. But so long as body and soul are together, not divided,
that is called manne. August. de (...) anima. Cap. xliii. c.
And whatsoever things are seen with bodily iyen, are ordained for the same
body, and the body for the soul, and the soul for God. The life of the
body is the soul, and the life of the soul is God: so for sin the body is
ruinated, and shall be in dust, until the resurrection. But in the fall or death
of the body, the soul dies not but is delivered, when the snare of this flesh
is broked. Psal. cxxiiii.
The flesh with the senses are dead, but Anima cum ratione sua, do still
live: The soul dies not.
therefore I trust and know, that you do consider wisely three things. The
first is, the world with the wretchedness therein, worthy to be despised. The
second, our own knowledge of our selves, our sin, our sickness, and whereof
we are made, even of repugnaunte eelementes. Thirdly, is to lay hand of
eternal blessedness, remembering the merciful promises of God: As come to me
all you that are heavy lade either with affliction of mind, Math. xii.
poverty in Christ, sickness or death, and I shall refresh you. The best
Physic.
This is the very Phisicion of the soul, even Christ, and the perfect
quietness of conscience. God hath given you a talent full godly, you do
lucrifie the same and hide it not. Therefore, it shall be said most joyfully: it
is well done good seruaunt and faithful, thou haste been faithful in little,
Math. xxv.
I will make thee ruler over much, enter into thy masters joy. And again,
he which doth continue to the end, shall have the croune of life. Be patient
my brother (Conscience) and settle your heart, Iames. v.
for the coming of the Lord draws ne'er: and blessed are the dead, which
dye in the Lord, for they shall reign with Christ in glory, his name be ever
praised: and his will be fulfilled. Amen. Be of good comfort, and caste away
fear: be merry, let not the Pestilent corses, nor the noise of belles,
terrify you.

Inter mortales te non mihi charior vllus:
Te plus, quam verum diligo amo{que} fratre.
Finis.
COLENDISSIMO FRATRI* SVO IN CHRISTO, MAG^STRO Richardo Turnero Theologo,
Guilhelmus Bullenus. S. P. D.
REuerendissime, obseruandis sime frater, puto te literas meas recepisse, in
quibus tibi scribebam, regimen contra pestee, ac idcirco modo non ero
prolixiori^ febre pestilenti. Na omnis febris quam pestilentem vocamus prouenit
e putredine quae fit ab excessum humidi. Hac vero [vt inquit Galenus] febre ex
plurima humiditate putrefacta, Causa pestis.
prouenire prutrefacta sine dubio potius quam a calore aucto fatendu est
humiditas. Sign^ pest^s.
Ideo materia est putrescens in venis vnde calor naturalis valde afficitur la
die omnes virtutes decidunt vrinae sunt foetentes c. Galenus, Auic. Rafis,
Trallianus. c. affirmant: in febre pestilenti est multitudo obstructionum
praecipue vbi materia vrgit ad cutim caput. Multitudo materiae cruditatum in
causa est.

Curatio in quam c^n^iderandum*
Cura est, prohibere putredine. Obstructiones igitur sunt aperiendae, cum humoru
euacatione. Sed si natura mouit, tunc nihil mouendum est.
Hoc est autem remedium vt inquit. Iohannes Baptist. Monta. Vironensis.. Syrup.
de Cichorio cu Rhabarbaro 1. ss. aq^a Boraginis, acetosae 3. in quibus citrum
sit impositum decoctum deinde vnguentum pectorale contra peste, vnguenti
Rosacei confortatiui mesues. j. specierumcordialium, j. Sandalorum alborum j.
Rosarum siccaru ss. misce simul artificiose fiat linimentu pro corde, pro toto
regione ventris. Dicta in temporac pestis.
Mirum est hoc remedin cotra venenum pestis. Quod ad rationem victus attinet,
vbi est maxima putredo [vt iquit Hypo. 17. Aphoris.] vbi coruptihumores
putridi nihil, perniciofius quam instituere tenuem victu, quia inter, exhibeas
ius pulli, ponas semper in tuo cibo praeter acetosam succu citri. De reliquo
velim tibi persuadeas quemadmodu legisti i Galeno. c. Vale vale iterum
[eruditis. vir] sis{que} bono animo. Nunc literas cocludo. Nam plura non opus
habeo scriber, no tuis optimis occupationibus [in vi nea domini] importune
nunc obstrepere vi dear.

Martij. Incarnati. 1564. Tuus ad o^a Guil. ^ullenus.

AMANTISSIMO AC PRObissimo viro magistro T. Gaylo Chyrurgo. Guilihelmus
Bullenus. S. P. D.
BOnam valetudinem, cum corporis tum animi* a deo opt. max. tibi precor (optime
vir.) Nihil est hoc tepore quod tibi scribam, quam quod libellum quem mihi
donasti, legi, et iteru legipro quo tibi ago gratias habe^ vt pro sumno munere.
Nam ex eo intellexi amorem et animu quem erga me geris, operam tuam perspexi no
solum mihi sed omnibus qui vbi{que} sun^ Anglis futuram vtilitati. Nostrum eui^
omnim haberi possunt amatores cultores, libri tui insignissimi. Qua obrem quid
magis mihi gratu esse potuit hoc munere, praesertim cum a tali Chirurgo mihi
datu sit? cuius rei nuquam me capiet obliuio, sed quantum potero gratias
referri libenti animo faciam. Opto te been valere, ac interim me tibi comendo
doctissimo viro magistro Bactero humillime meis verbis gratias agi me{que} plu
rimum comendare desidero.

Martij. 28. Anno incarnati. 1564. Tibi deditissi^ Gui^helmus Bu.

The Table of this present book.
A Poor manne seking relief. Fol. 7. A wives answer to the poor man. idem A
tale of the poor mannne against coueteousnes. 2.^.4. Antonius Capistranus the
richeman. 5. Antonius the Physician. idem A subtle merchant man. 6. Antonies
angles. idem. A sweet text idem. A medler with no scripture. 7. A good
indifferent man. idem. An infidel. idem. A man of good religion. 8. A papist,
a protestant. idem. A nulla fidian. idem. A fine garden. idem. A pillar in a
garden. 9. Antonies armies. idem. A good observation idem. An exclamacion of
Skelto. 10 A saying of Chaucer 11. An admonishion of Lidgat. i'd A young
Courtier. idem. A saying of sir Dauie Linse to Englande and Scotland. 12. A
saying of the Phisicion. 13. A^arus a petty fogger. idem. Am^o dexter. idem. A
black Sainctus. idem. Am^o dexter gapes for Antonius deat^ 14. A maid in
Antonius house. 14 A simple practise. 15. A crafty villain. idem. A cousin
made. 16. A periurer. idem. A serpent. idem. A good company 17. A land where
as no sickness is. 18. America. idem. A dredfull case. 17. A troubled
conscience. 19. A Pothicaries repetaunce i'd A time to purge. idem. A yearly
reward 20 A great loss. idem. A knavish lackey idem. A mule lost 21.
Aristotle de coelo mundo. 22. A discripcion of the soul. 23. Actus what it is.
24. Aduersitee 25. Actr^ de rei medic^.26. Auicen notes of the pestil. 27.
Anticedent of the pestilence 28. Air infected idem. Auicens counsaill. 30. A
powder for the plague. 31. A drink for the pestilence i'd. A perfume for the
pestilece 32. A medicen for a carbuncle. 34. A cauiat for a Chyrurgi^n. 35. A
lotion for a sore. 36. A medicen for the plage sore 16 A Cicatrice most best.
39. A healing ointment idem A Cordial idem. An Epicures talk. 40. A
horsewoman 42. A nise cockney of London. 43. A churl incarnate. 53. A tale of
Foxes idem An epitaph of a covetous. 54. A young man well nurtred 56. A parler
with many things 57 A taker, a catcher 57. A wicked judge. 60. Note aduersitee
62. A lesson for a lubbar. 65. A wretch which refused good counsaill. idem. A
russen. 67. Amber grice. 69. A great loss to England, 70. A good common
wealth. idem A swimming land. 71. A prayer in death. 82, A letter to master
Willyam Aileward called Cosciece 85. A letter to master Richard Tu^ner of
Canterbury. 83. A letter to master Thomas Gail Chyrurgian. idem.
B
Beasts did speak. Fol. 45 Borders in a cloth. 57. to 86 Barnit field. 44
Birds of strange shapes. 68 Bankruptes. 65
C
Clisters. ^ Closeness in usury. ^ Children sick of the mother. Fol. 59 Cruel
women. 70 Christ's death. 82 Carbo antrax. 33 Causes of the pestilonce. 27
D
Dogs and women. 45 Death kills. Fol. 78 Death works. Fol. 78 Death
horrible. Fol. 78 Death will not be entreated. 75 Death what it is. 76 Death
ends all. 7^ Death destroieth all. 75 Death apereth with three darts. 74
F
Flatterers of noble men. ^1 Fair fields. 73 Fear and dred, ibi. Fre will in
man. 83
G
Glosses. 17 God. 23 Golden raake. 58 Good air. 29 Good observations. 32 Gentle
Roger. 75 Galen ad Pisonem. 42 Gentleman what he is. ^3 Galen de diffe. feb. ^
H
Honest landlords. 9 His wives council. 33 Honger. 76 Hosteler. 56
I
Ingratitude. 48 Jack Drake. ibi. Ionge Renob. 52 Jack a napes played at
tabies* 69 Ionge and foolish. 67
K
Knavery. 50
M
Money doth great mischief. 60 Mulier a naughty word. 57 Many usurers. 55 Magus
and Iudas. 58 Makeshiftes. 66 Mendax is described. ibi. Mendax kindred arms. 63
Mendax hath ben in florida. ^ Medax brigeth good news 8 Mixed bodies. 22
N
News from Florida. 63 No w^nde but turn some to profit. 45 No^e this well.
48.50
P
Phisitio doth well. 25 until 40 Pirates undoes. 27 Promotion spiritual. 59
Ponicamber. 38 Perfu^ idem Peace and unite. 64 Prudence. 25 Pestilence. 2^
Petty foggers. 1^ Purging the body. 36
R
Rasis de peste. 2^ Ruf. contra pestem. 28 Rogers writing. 46 Rogers pleasant
talk by the way. 46. c. Reward in Christ no merit in us. 83 Resurrection of
the dead. 84.85
T
The iii. elements. 22 Trouble of mind, 29 The best remedy of ye plague. 33
To know the Antrax. 35 The tale of a Lion. 46 The ^rutes of usury. 55 The Lord
Crumwell. idem The discriptio of To. prela. 60 The Popes practise. 61 The
greets cross. 77 The holy trinite. 85 The holy church. idem
W
Weome have worms in their tongues. 7 Witchcrafte. 75 What the soul is. 83 We
can cary nothing away. 79 Where it taineth double bear. 74 Who shall shoe the
mule. 62 Who may not blede. 30 Well fished. ^
FINIS.

