An Hospital for the diseased.

Wherein are to be found most excellent and approved Medicines, as well
Emplasters of special virtue, as also notable Potions or Drinks, and other
comfortable Receptes, both for the Restitution and the Preservation of bodily
health.

Very necessary for this time of common Plague and immortality, and for other
times when occasion shall require. With a new addition.

Gathered T. C.

ECCLESIAS 38.4. The Lord hath created medicine of the earth, and he that is
wise will not abhor it. Imprinted at London for Edward White, at the little
Northdore of Paules Church, at the sign of the Sun, and are there to be
sold. 1579.

To all such Readers as have care of their bodylie health.
HOwe prouidente a Patron, and bountiful a father, the Lord of life is unto
us unthankful and rebellious children, his manifold benefits, do testify:
Yea, the continuance of his kindness is herin principally declared. For
whereas our own natural corruption, works daily in us the banishment out
of his favour, and the danger of reprobation: He notwithstanding, in
consideration of our weakness, with draws not his compassion from us, but
in all our necessities, reaching out his helping hand unto us, is most ready
(as he is always able) to pluck us out of the pit of perdition, whereinto
the hainousnesse of our transgressions (as it were with a gab^e,) hales us
perforce. O gracious God, howe shall sinners worthily advance the excellency
of thy love? Who shall give them an heart to conceive thy kindness? Whence
shall they have utterance to sound out thy mercy: Of themselves (because they
are vessels of wrath) they cannot compass to perfect a work: thou
therefore which art the perpetual spring of all goodness, give it them: O
give it them, and they shall have it: yea and in the having of it, they shall
magnify thy name, extol thy power, and marvel at thy mercy. Where is one,
among thousand thousands, that looking upon the Heavens, most gloriously
beautified: upon the earth, most plentifully enriched, upon the frame of his
own body, most Angelically created: but shall of compulsion acknowledge the
omnipotence of God, and confess the unmeasurable greatness of his goodness,
and love toward man: The Heaven, to maintain life and light: the Earth, to
succour and sustain Nature; all creatures, living in land or water, to
supple his wants: nothing to be reckoned and named, which he hath not most
liberally given unto man, as appointing him Lord and sovereign, but them his
vessels and servants. Against hunger, least thou shouldest famish, he
hath provided nourishment. Against thirst, least thou shouldest perish, he
hath ordained fauourie Liquours. Against cold, least thou shouldest dye in
thy nakedness, he hath given thee clothing. And what hath he done beside:
Hath he not had special regard to thy condition and estate: I mean to the
health of thy vndie, and the safety of thy soul* Yes, yes: and that is
evidently proved by the manifold remedies which he hath prepared to restore
thee to soundenesse of limu^e and life, and by the free course of the pearl of
his Gospel, which is the Jewel of all Christian joy. In consideration of
these so many good graces of God, what doth Christian duty require: (I
speak to all, unto whose view and censure this preface shall be presented.)
Let them take the sweet Sacrifice of thankfullnesse, and burn the same upon
the Alter of an humble heart, that the redolent and perfumed incense of the
same ascendyng up into Heaven, may smell sweet in his nostriles, whose
special delight is in such a burnt offering and oblation. Thus much have I
said by way of advertisement, upon occasion of this present book, whose
benifittes as they are diverse, so are they singular: and in them all is Gods
goodness highly commended. Note my words, and then judge of the value and
worthiness of the book. Art thou diseased in thy head: Art thou grieved in
thy heart: Art thou pained with ache* Art thou tormented with a Fever: Art
thou wounded: Art thou troubled with any irksome sore: Doth thy sight fail:
Doth thy hearing ware weak: Doth thy youth wear away: Doth age creep on a
pace: Finally, doest thou feel thy self infected with the poison of the
Plague and Pestilence: Then delay no time, but with a small price buy a gem
worth gold, (this book I mean) which though it be little in quantity, yet
it is great in quality and virtue. Here (as in a cunning Apothecaries shop
(are receiptes of sundry sorts provided, where with the rage of any sore may
be mitigated, the nippyng smart of any vlcere or wound assuaged, the venom
of any malady expelled: and the perfection of health restored. Thus much in
brief, by a souden blush judge of the rest, esteem it as it is, a necessary
implemente for any householder, yea in the next degree to our daily food and
nourishment to be esteemed. Thank God for it, and use it in thy need. Here
thou hast succour to serve thee in thy sickness.

Thus farewell in Christ. T. C.

An hospital for the diseased.
A preservative against the Plague.
TAke a handefull of Sage, a handefull of herb Grace, otherwise called Few, a
handful of Elder leaves, a handeful of red Bramble leaves, and stamp them
together, and strain them through a clothe with a quart of white Wine: then
take a quantity of Ginger, and mingle with them altogether, and drink thereof
evening and morning, a sponefull nine days together.

For the party infected with the Plague.
If it do fortune one to be sick of the plaque before he have drounke the
foresaied medicine, then take the water of Scabious a sponefull, water of
Betany like much, and a quantity of fine Treacle, put it together, and
drink it, and it will expel all the venom.

A medicine to break the Botch.
IF it fortune the Botch to appear, then take Brainble leaves, Elder leaves,
Mustard seed, and stamp them all together, and then take of it and make a
plaster and lay it to the sore, and it will draw out all the venom.

A medicine for the Plague.
TAke thee slips of herb Grace and sire spoonefulles of vinegar, and beat
the same together, then strain the juice out thereof, and put thereunto one
uncle of fine Treacle, and one ounce of Sugar, and stir it together, then
set it over the fire, and make thereof a Syrope, and put it in abore close.
Then take a Sage leaf, and every morning fasting spread as much as a Bean
thereof upon the same leaf, and so eat it. And if he that takes it be
infected, it will drive it from his heart, and if the party that takes it
evening and morning be not infected, it will preserve him within four and
twenty hours after.

A plaster to draw the sore.
TAke one spoonful of Honey, the juice of spurge, two spoonefulles and a
half of wheaten flower, a good quantity, and one spoonful of Turpentine,
and temper these togeathe, without fire, and make of the same a plaster, and
say it to the sore, chaungyng it at every four and twenty hours.

A good medicine against the plauge approved.
AMongst other excellence and approved medicines, for the Pestilence, there is
none more worthy and available when the sore doth apperre, then to take a
Cock Pullet or Chicken, and let the feathers of the tail of highest part be
plucked of till the rump be bare, then hold the said bare of the pullet to
the sore, and the pullet will ga^e and labour for life, and in the end will
die: then have an other pullet, and do the like to the patient, and if that
die, yet still apply the patient with Pullets, so long as any do die: for
when the Poison by the said Chickens is drawn forth, the said Chickens that
be offered thereunto will live, theu the sore presently will swag, and the
party forthwith recovers: this medicine is necessary to drive the venom
from the heart.

A sovereign drink against the Pestilence.
TAke one uncle of Sorrel water, and as much Dragon water, adragme of Treacle,
and put thereto a ^ragine and a half of powder imperial, and give it to the
patient with Ale within four and twenty hours after he is infected, and he
shall with Gods grace escape and do well.

A plaster to draw a head to the sore of the plague, and to break it.
TAke two Lyllie roots, one handful of sower dow, two handfuls of Mallowes,
one handful of linseede, stamp al these together small, and boyle it in a
quart of the lees of wine till it be thick, then lay it an inch thick upon
leather, brother then the sore, and let the borders of the leather be plastered
with wax, to make it cleave, it shall bring out the botch in xii. hours and
break it shortly.

A medicine that was taught King Henrie the seventh by his Physician against
the pestilence.
TAke half a handefull of Few, likewise of Mandragories, Fetherfewe, Sorrel,
Burnet, and a quantity of the croppes and roots of Dragones, wash them
clean, and sees them with a soft fire in running water, from a pottle to a
quart, and then strain them together through a clean cloth, and if it be
bitter, put thereto a quantity of Sugar Candy, or of other Sugar, and if
this medicine be used before the purples do arise, ye shall be hole by Gods
grace.

A medicine to be dr^nke suspecting any to have the Plague.
TAke a great Onion, and the core being taken out, fill the same full of good
Treacle of Gene, and wrap the same in a Paper, and roast it till it be
soft, then strain the same with a little Wine Vinegar, and being tempered
with a quantity of Sugar, give the patient to drink two spoonefulles
fasting, and if the patient be infected with the Plague, you shall perceive
the appearance thereof, within sire hours after the receipt of the same
drink.

Also for the usual drink of every patient being so infected.
TAke of Rosemarie the quantity of eight on nine croppes, then take of
Marigoldes being browne within, of Burnet, and of Burrage every one a handefull
thereof, let them be sod in a quart of stale Ale clarified, then put into
it a crust of bread, a little whole Mace, and a quantity of Sugar, and let
him drink the same at all times during his sickness, and put Pympernell in
his broth.

Also an other drink to be taken every morning, for a preservative against the
Plague, and for the avoiding of infection.
TAke Sauery the quantity of a handful, and boyle the same in a quart of
good Wine vinegar, with a spoonful of Grains being beaten, and put into the
same: then drink the same with a quantity of Sugar, every morning fasting.

A good medicine against the Plague.
TAke of Betonie water the quantity of three sponefulles, of good Wine
Vinegar, the quantity of three spoonefulles, and the quantity of a Nutmegge
of good Treacle of Gene, or else the quantity of a Hasell Nut of Metridatum,
being all mixed together, take it in the beginning of your sickness.

For the Plague.
TAke in the morning fasting one dry Fig, one Walnut, and four or five
leaves of Few, chopped altogether, and eat them, and afterwards drink a
cup of Wine, if it be a Woman with child, leave out the Few.

For the Plague.
TAke an uncle of the leaves of Few, half an uncle of good Figs, an uncle of
Ieneper berries, two vnces of Walnuts picked, four ounces of Vinegar, and a
good quantity of Saffron, Stamp all the foresaied things together, and
reserve them in an earthen pot or a glass, fast stopped, that no air issue
out, whereof if ye receive in the morning upon a knives point the quantity
of a Bean or more, ye shall be sure by the grace of God not to be infected
within four and twenty hours after.

A medicine for the Plague or Leprosy.
TAke herb Grace, Southernwoode, Mugwort, Wormwood, of each a handefull:
three or four handefulles of Ieneper berries, these which be black, cut and
shreade the herbs small, and put them in a flaunders pipkine, and power there
to four quarts of good white Wine vinegar, and let them soak a seven nights
if the herbs be dry: if they be green, let them soak not above forteene
hours, then put a handefull or two of those herbs which be in the pipkine
into the still and then take out a quart of the same Vinegar, and power it
into the still upon the herbs, and distill it with apretie soft fire, for to
great a fire will waste it a way, and so still it until you have stilled
all, from the pipkine into the stillatrie, and after this power it into the
Pipkine again, and put as many new and fresh herbs with so many
berries as you had before into the pipkine again, and so let them soak one
other seven night, and then still them again as you did before, and so the
third time to be used with new herbs, c. in the same manner as before, and
at the last time, put four vnces of Metredatum into the pipkine, amongst the
herbs, or else fi^e of six vnces of Treacle in place of the Metreda^um. for
want thereof, and then being stilled as before, put the same into a double
glass, and stop it, with a pieces of leather bound about it, and if the
party be infected, let him take thereof four vnces at one time: and if
need be, you may give him so much for two or three days as you see cause,
and to a Woman but two vnces, and to children according to their age, and as
they be able to bear it: and so sweat two or three hours or longer if the
party may endure, and let one stand by always to wipe their face, lest by
putting out their hands they take cold, c. when all this is three times
stilled, it will not amount to above three or four quarts.

An oil for all manner of aches, bruses and strainynges of the Synewes.
TAke a pottle of Neates fecte oil, and a quart of an Ox gall, a pint of
Aqua vite, a pint of Rose water, Bay leaves, Rosemarie stripped from the
stalks: Strawbury leaves, roots, and strings: Lavender Cotton, of every of
these a handful, beat them small, and put them into the foresaied stuff,
and sees it over a fire of Coals, in a pan of two gallons, and at your
own peril let not the flame touche the stuff: let it sees very well, and
then take it of and let it stand until it be almost could, then strain it
through a course linen cloth, but not the bottom of the said licoure: then
put it in a glass and so keep it, and when you are pained, anoint your
greese withal.

Far an ache.
TAke Aqua composita, and the oil of Neates ^eete luke warms, and annoynte the
patient upon the place of the grief, laying warm clothes thereon,

A medicine for an ache, or shrinking of Synewes.
TAke the tenderynges of Rosemarie, and Marsh, Mallowes, by as even porciones
as you can guess, gather your herbs when they be dry, from rain and dew,
pound them in a Mortar very small, then take May butter well clarif^ed, and
put it to the herbs, and mingle it in a vessel, and let it stand four
days, then set it over the fire, and let it sees till the strength of the
herbs be gone, then take a little of it in a spoon and let it dropppe upon
thy nail, and if it be green as the Emerald, it is perfect: and then put
it in an earthen pot, and when you will occupy it, you must warm it.

A medicine for an ache.
TAke Parsely, and Wormwood, of each a handful and sees them in a quart of
Ale, with a quantity of sweet Butter, and wash well the place therewith that
aches, and also bind the herbs to the place, as hot as you may suffer it.

A proved ointment for aches.
Stamp Smallage, and put to it Aqua vite, and strain it, then put thereto
Bores grease, and stir them well together, and annoynte the patient, before
the fire there with evening and morning.

A medicine for an ache in any place.
TAke Sowthistle, Thickweede, Elder leaves, Grounsell, and Cleauers, of each a
handful, dry all these together between two Tiles, and then lay these
herbs to the place where the grief is, let the herbs be washed before
they be dried.

A medicine for achyng sores.
TAke Juice of Smallage, of Morrell, of Waibred, of each of them like much,
take Honey, and the white of an Egg, of ether like much and mingle them
together till it thick let it come near no fire, but all raw, and cold
lay it to the sore.

For aches and swellynges in the knees.
TAke a quart of Malmesey, and a handefull of Time, boyle them together, and
when it is half boiled, put in a good piece of sweet Butter, and let
them boyle together, from a quart to a pint, when you go to bed bathe
your knees well therewith, and weate a clothe three of four times double
therein, and lay it to your knees, as hot as you can suffer all night, and
use this six or seven times, and it will doubtless help you.

For a Sciatica or ache.
TAke oil of Neates feet, and Aqua composita, and annointe the same place
where the pain is, then take Woolle newly plucked from the Sheep back, and
lay thereon, and wrap it well with warm clothes.

A plaster for an ache.
TAke as much stone Pitch, to the value of a Tennis baule, and a Spoonful
of Tar, and a penieworthe of Triacle, and Rosen to the value of a Tennis
baule, and a spoonful of Honey, boil it over the fire in a little Rettle,
and stir it all together till it be well melted, then take a new Sheep
skin, and make holes in with it a Botkinne, and spread the medicine on the
fleshie side of the Skin, and lay it to the ache as hot as you may.

For an Ague.
TAke Bur roots, and red Nettle croppes, and sees them in stale Ale, and
clarify it, and give the sick thereof to drink, about such time as the
cold begins to come, and after the heate be paste, when you see that he
begins to sweat, give him to drink posset Ale, made with Marigold and
Fenell, and see the posset Ale be well clarified. Use this medicine, for it
will take away the Ague within three or four fits at the uttermost.

A medicine against the hot Fever.
TAke a handful of Bay leaves, a handful and more of red Sage, and sees
the same in a pottle of stale Ale to a quart, and the same being strained, let
the patient, being in bed, drink thereof a good draught, being warmed with a
little Sugar, an howre before his fit do come.

A good medicine for an Ague, be it quotidian, or quarten.
TAke of Smallage, and of Fetherfewe, of ether of the the quantity of a
handful, stamp them and straiue them, and then take half so much as the
juice of the same is, of small ale, and being mixed together, drink it warm a
little before the time that the fit shall come, that is to say, when you
perceive any grudging. This must be drunk three several times, the patient
going to bed, and clothes enough laid upon him.

A medicine for an Ague.
TAke Nettelles, and Cobwebbes, and Salt, and beat them in a Wooden dish,
and lay it to the left arm of the sick, and it will take away the heate of
the Ague.

For the Ague.
TAke Soot, and yolks of Eggs, and Bay Salt, and Pepper, and mingle them
together, and lay it to both the wrestes, and it will take a way the Ague.

For your drink in an Ague.
FOR your drink, take Ale, and not strong, and use it luke warm.

Drink and potage in an Ague
MAke your Potage, and Posset ale, and Almond milk, with these herbs
following, that is to say, Sinkefoile, Succorie, Buglosse, Endiue, Burrage,
Sorrel, Lattice, and Fenell roots, and Parsely roots, great Reasons, and
Prunes.

A medicine for the drought in an Ague.
TAke a quantity of Burrage, a quantity of Sorrel, a certain Violet leaves,
a certain Straburie leaves, sees them in a pottle of fair running water, to
a quart, then strain the herbs: then take Almondes and blanch them, beat
them, and strain them with the said water, and put Sugar therein, and drink
it warm.

A medicine for a quarter Ague, and for the drought.
TAke a pottle of good red wine, and a pottle of new Milk of a Cow of one
colour, take two or three good handfuls of Mouse ear, clean picked and
washed steep it into the Milk and wine, and temper them together, and let
them stand so one night, and put them in a fair still, and still them with a
soft fire, and take the water and put it in a fair glass, and set in the
Sun, four or five days, and let the sick when he dries in his ague
drink thereof, three or four times, and he shall be rid of his ague, and his
drink shall quench his brought.

A medicine against the Quarten.
TAke shell Snails two handfuls, Bay Salt Mallowes of each a handful,
beat these together, and lay it to the soulles of your feet, before the
Quarten fit doth come.

A medicine for the cold in a Fever,
TAke Camemell and Worm wood, and sees them in a quart of Ale till half
be consumed, and give it the patient first and last.

A medicine against the hot Fever.
TAke a pottle of stale Ale, and a bottom of a stale white loaf, and a
handful of Sinckfoile, a handful of Camemell, Triacle, and Vinegar of each a
spoonful a few whole Maces, and Sugar Candy, as much as they list, and
sees these until half be consumed, and strain it from the herbs, and
give it to the patient to drink, and none other drink durying his heate, and
as much thereof as he will, and it helps.

For the Ague.
TAke two or three cloves of Garlic, and bruise them and a peniworthe of Aqua
vita, half a pint of Ale sees them together, and drink it a little before
the fit come, as hot as you may.

Against the corrupt air.
TAke Betanie, Centorie, and Egrimonie, of each a handful, and stamp them
and strain them with ale and with a Licoras stick bruised, and then boil it,
and clarify it, and make it pleasant with Sugar, and drink thereof every
morning blood warm three spoonefulles, three or four days.

To make a man have an appetite to his meat.
Sees Centorie in fair clean water, and let the sick drink it luke
warm, fasting three days, each day nine spoonefulles, and he shall be
whole, for this purifieth the stomach and breast also.

A good comfortable powder to digest well and many other good properties.
TAke Pillitorie of Spain, Centorie, Annis, Licoras, Grains of Paradise,
Ginger, Sinamum, of each like much, beaten and searced into fine powder, and
drink thereof Morning and Evening, half a spoonful in Wine, or Ale.

To make Hypocras for a weak Stomach.
TAke a pint of Aqua vitae, and put it in a glass, then take two vnces of
Sinamum, and one uncle of Ginger, two peniworthe of Cloves, two peniworthe of
Grains, one of Nutmegs, and beat them all together to gross powder, and
put them all into a glass to the Aqua vitae, and shake in every day often,
nine days together, and then drink it with wine or ale, half a spoonful, or
a quarter, with half a pint of Ale.

A medicine to cleanse the back, and to purge the rains.
TAke one Fenell root, and two Parsely roots, and pick out the pitches of
the, and take thereto one hand full of Pelatorie of the Wall, and all these
being washed clean, sees in Posset Ale, and drink thereof when you go to
bed, and if you wake at midnight drink you also.

A medicine for pain in the back, and for the heate in the back.
TAke Rose water, and put thereto Saunders, and Rose leaves, and lay them
in sleep in your Rose water one whole night, then wash your back with the
same, and it will take away the heate, and greatly comfor the rains.

For pain in the back.
TAke Sage, Rosemarie, Camemell, and Maudelin, of each of them a handful,
then pound them together, and fry them in May Butter, and annointe your
back with it warm.

A medicine for the rains of the back.
TAke half an uncle of Turpentine of Venice, and let it be well washed in
Plantine water, or Rose water, and the mix it with fine white Sugar, and make
thereof four or five Baules, which you must eat three in a Morning fasting,
and daily drink a little White wine, or Renishe wine immediately after.

To drive out a pain or griping in the beallie.
TAke Sothernwoode, and lay it against the place, on the contrary side where
the torment is, and it will drive it out, and if it be laid to the navel, it
will drive away the pain.

For the biting of any venomous beast.
TAke Plantine and drink the juice thereof, and take Plantine and Salendine,
of each like much, stamp them, and temper them with stale Peace, and lay to
the sore, and it will alwage the swelling, and draw out the venom.

A medicine for the biting of a mad Dog.
TAke a good handefull of Betanie, and a handefull of wild Sage, a handful of
Nightshave, and fair running water a pint, the herbs being stamped, and
strained therewith, and put thereto a peniworthe of Triacle, and give it to
the patient to drink, two or three mornings.

A medicine to stop bleedyng.
TAke Sentorie, grieve Few, and red Fenell, and stamp and strain them, and
drink them warmed.

A medicine to stop bleedyng.
TAke Bursa pastoris, Plautine, and I sop, of each of them like much, and
bruise them in a mortar, and warm them as hot as you can against the fire,
and lay them to the nose of him that bleeds, and bind, same of the herbs
to his temples as hot as he can suffer them.

An other medicine for the same.
TAke an old clean linen clothe, and weate it well in Vinegar, then burn
it to powder: then take th^ powder thereof, and if it be a wound cast it
therein, and it will stop the bleedyng immediately: but if the nose bleed,
then snuff up the foresaied powder into thy nose, and it will stint bleedyng.

Another for the same.
TAke a Todde and dry him in the Sun very dry, then put him in a linen
bag, and hang him about your neck with a string, so lowe, that it may
touch your breast on the left side near unto your heart, and commonly it
stays all kind of bleedyng at the mouth, nose, or wound.

Another to stop blood.
IF your nose do bleed vnmesurably, then tie your little finger very harde
about the lower joint, and for the most part it fails not, but stays the
same.

For spittyng of blood.
TAke the juice of Betonie, and temper it with Gates milk, and give the
patient to drink three days.

For the same.
TAke Sma^lage and Mints, Rue, and Betonie, and sees them well in good Milk,
and sup it warm.

To stench blood at the nose.
TAke Betonie, stamp it with a little salt, as much as thou may take up
with thy two singers, and put it in thy nose.

To stench blood.
TAke linen cloth and burn it, and take the powder, and put it in an other
clothe, and so lay it to the wound. Also take an herb that is called
Perui^cell, and hold it between thy teeth, and thou shalt not bleed while
thou hold it there.

Good for the brain.
TO smell the saver of Musk, Camamell, to drink Wine mesurably, or to care
Sage but not much, to keep the head warm, often washing your hands,
mesurable walking, mesurable sleeping, to hear little noise of Music or
Singars, to eat Mustard, or Pepper, the savour of red Roses, and to wash
your temples with Rosewater.

Ill for the brain.
ALL manner of brains, Glottonie, Drunkenness late Suppers, to sleep much
after meal, corrupt a^res, anger, heaviness of mind, to stand much bare
headded, to eat to much, or hastily, to much heate, to much watching, to much
cold, Make, Cheese, all manner of Nuts, much bathing, Onions, Garlic, and
great noise, or to smell to a White Rose.

For stopping in the breast.
TAke Few, and sees it in Eysell, and so drink it. Drink Nettle seed
brayed, and it shall void gravel of the stone in the rains of the back.

For a stinking breath.
TAke the seed of Coriander, and boyle it in white Rumney or Sack, and
thereof drink three spoonefulles in the morning and as much at evening, but
that you drink in the morning must be cold, and the other hot, but you
must use to take none excess of meates, nor drinks, nor sit not late up,
but rise early.

A medicine for a bruise in the Leg, or arm or elsewhere.
TAke Watercresses, and wash them clean, and sees them in fair water, till
they be soft, then heate them small in a Mortar, and put them in a clean
pan, and put there unto sweet sewet, of Narte, Buck, or Sheep, and put
there to the lees of Wine, and Wheat bra^, and fry all together and make
aplayster thereof, and lay it warm to the sore place, and so lay three or
four players as need shall require.

Another plaster for a bruise, or sore vnriped.
TAke Otemeale grotes, and sees them in sweet Cow milk, until they be as
thick as pap, and put it into a pan, with a quantity of sheep fallow,
and boyle them well, and stir them well, and then make a plaster thereof,
and lay it to the grief as hot as ye can suffer.

For a bruise or strain.
TAke the grounds of Ale or Bear, and wheat bran, and Chickweede, and late
it to the grief three or four times a day upon a red cloth not to thin.

For allbruses and aches in the bones.
TAke a good quantity of Walworte, and a certain of Balm and Smallage, and
stamp them well, then take a pound of May butter, and temper them together,
then make them in round balls and let them lie eight days after, and then
stamp it again, then fry it, and strain it, and so put it in a earthen
pot, and this will help the bruise though it be very black.

A medicine for burning, scalding, or hurt with an handgun.
TAke ten or twelve Eggs, as you will make the quantity of your Oil, and
let them be as new as you may, and lay them in the fire, and roast them as
harde as you can, then take the yolks, and chap them as small as you can, and
put them in an earthen pot, and set it over the fire, and take a stick and
stir it, and let it bail until you see it consumed in a manner to nothing:
then take it from the fire and set it in the air a quarter of an hour or
more, and there will come an Oil thereof: then take a feather, and anoint the
grife with the same oil, and take Hartstongue leaves, and face it upon the
grief, and that will gather the skin, then you may bind a clothe to it.

An other medicine for the same.
TAke the doung of Geefe, of one nights making, and fresh butter vnsalted, or
else clarified sheep sewet, and fry them in a friyng pan, a good time or
season until your sewet be almost consumed, then put them in a clean
course linen cloth, and strain them into a small vessel: then take a
feather, and dip it in the licoure, and anoint the place burned or skalded,
and when you have so done, weate a fine linen cloth in the said licoure, and
cover the sore withal, and do this twice or thrice a day, and by Gods grace
it shall help you.

For burning and skaldyng.
TAke Maiden wort, stamp it and sees it in fresh Butter, and strain it,
and anoint the patient.

To take away a heate or burning with gunpouder.
TAke a good quantity of Houslike, stamp it and wring out the juice, take the
white of six Eggs and beat them in a dish till they be thin, and then take
of the skumne, and put the rest together, and wash the sores with a linen
cloth, and lay the cloth aloft on the sore wet.

A medicine for burning and skaldyng.
TAke black Soap, or gray: Soap, and lay it immediately to your sore.

For burning or skaldyng.
TAke a good handefull of Auans, and as much of Sheep doung, and so fry
them in May butter, and strain it, and anoint the place with the same cold,
twice a day, and anoint it first with gray or black Soap, and it will
help, the ointment must be spread upon a Flaxen clout, if you can get it.

To make an ointment for burning with gunpouder, or scalding with water.
TAke a handefull of Barrowes grease, and two handfuls of Grounsell, and two
or three handefulles of Houslike, and stamp the herbs together, then put to
it new Sheep doung, two handfuls, of Goose doung, two handfuls, and
stamp them altogether, and being hot, strain them through a cloth into an
earthen pot, and with the liquor anoint the burned place.

An ointment for burning.
TAke Plantine, Whaybred, Daisy, and the green Bark of Elder, and green
Goose doung, and Oil of Oliffe, stamp them together and wring them through a
cloth, and bathe the hurt with a feather.

For burning or scalding in what place so ever it be.
TAke the white of an Egg, and put it in a pew^r dish, and then labour it
with an Allome stone, till it be like a posset curd: then take a fine piece of
lining a: (...) weate it in Oil Oliffe, or in some other Oil: then lay the
said cloth upon the sore, and above it lay the forsaied curd made of the
white of an Egg, and that shall draw out the fire and heal the sore.

For burning or scalding.
TAke four Eggs and roast them, and take out the yolks, and fry them in a
pan softly upon the imbers, till they be black, and thereof will come an
Oil the which save and put it in a gally pot, and use it when they have
need.

A medicine for a burning for lack of other things.
TAke the berries of the Elder tree, and lay unto the sore and it helps.

Another medicine for the same.
TAke Oil Oliffe, and beat it with water till it ware very white, and anoint
the place.

For a burning with fire.
TAke black Varnish, and all to annoynte the place with a feather, and it
will stay the heate, and heal it as fair as ever did medicine, and so use it
till you be whole.

For a Cancar in a woman's Paps.
TAke Goose dirt, and Salendine, and bray them well together and lay them to
the sore pap, it will cleanse the Cancar, flea the worm, and heal the sore.

For the Cancar in the mouth.
TAke the juice of Plantiue, vinegar, and water of Roses, and wash thy mouth
withal many times.

A receipt to still a Cock.
TAke a red Cock, of three or four years old, and kill him, and dress
him fair, and cut him in four quarters, bruise the quarters, and pick out the
fat out of them, then take half a handful of red Mints, a handefull of
Hartstounge, put them into the pot close, half a pint of water and half a
pint of Malmesse, six crops of Isop, a root of Parsely, a root of Fenell, a
root of Endisfe, twenty Damask Prunes, twenty Reasons of the Sun, four
Maces, and set it still twelve hours, and let the p^tte be covered with
paste with a Platter vnd^r it, and let the patient drink it every morning
next his heart.

A medicine for the Collike.
First, take a handful of Rosemarie, as much of Time, and as much of Isope,
an uncle of Cloves Mace, and sees it in a pottle of white wine, and let if
sees till it be consumed to a quart: then put therein a little Sugar, and
drink thereof luke warm, when you feel your self pained, and when it is
sodden, as is before mentioned, you must burn it as you burn other wine.

For the Collike in the side.
TAke a small Wooden dish, and put therein first cold Ashes, then lay
upon them hot ymbers, without great coals, and there upon strew a good
quantity of Cummenseede, and sprinckle it with Malmesey, and so do till the
dish be filled: then cover the dish with a fair linen clothe double, and
lay it hot to your bare side where the Collike lies, and use this two or
three times, and it will help you: and for lack of Cumminseede take red Sage,
Camemell, Isope, Cyme, Peniriall, of like quantity, and use it as the
Cumminseede before.

A medicine for the Stone.
TAke Pellitorie that grows on the waulle, ground Ivy, Saxefrage, Parselie,
Auans, Mallowes, and red Nettles, Pepper, Chervell, and Mouse ear, and boil
all these herbs, of every of them a like quantity in whaie, clarify the
Whaie with the white of an Egg, and drink fasting of it a draught.

An other for the same.
TAke half a peniworthe of Parselyseede, as much of Radish seed being well
dressed and bruised, and sees them all in a pint of white Bastard, to half a
pint, and then drink it milk warm.

An other to break the stone.
TAke Hawthorn flowers, or for lack of flowers, take Hawts and distill them,
the flowers in May, and the Berries when they be ripe, take of this water
three spoonefulles, and three spooncfulles of Malmesey, and a quantity of
Ginger, and drink it warm.

A medicine not only to break the stone, but also clearly to purge you
thereof, if you do use the same daily.
TAke the Roses of Heptree, an pricked Holly leaves and dry them in an Oven,
and beat them severally into dris powder, then put them together being first
searced, and of like quantity: Then put there to the powder of Grommelseede,
and Broomeseede, of like quantity, doyug but half so much in quantity, as
the pouders aforefaied: and they being mirte altogether, use daily a good
spoonful of the said powder, in a draught of Ale, Beer, white wine, or
Rhenish wine, evening and morning: and besides that, you may use to the same
powder in brothes, and pottages, the oftner the better, have always in store a
good quatitie of the said powder, you must keep the same always dry, as in a
Pipkin by the fire side, or otherwise.

An other for the same.
TAke Parsely, distill it, and use to drink of the water in white Wine, or in
good A^e, and it will destroy the Stone, Colic, Strangurie, and other
passions in man or woman.

A medicine for the Collike or Stiche.
TAke the grounds of Malmesey, Sheep Tallow Ribworte, red Sage, and
Allisaunders, sees all these together, and make a plaster thereof, and lay
it to the grief, and annointe you with oil Olife, and oil of Balm mixed
together.

For the Colic and Stone.
TAke Pellitorie, vnsette Leekes, and Mallowes, of each like quantity, stamp
them, and put there unto a peniworthe of Neates Oil, fry them well together
in manner of a plaster, put them in a bag of Linneu clothe and being very
hot, lay it to the beallie, and it helps within an hour. And for the
stone, lay the same to the rains of the back behind, and it helps with
speed.

For the Colic and Stone.
TAke half a pound of Time, as much Parsely roots and blades, half a
pound of Allisander roots, and sees them altogether in a pottle of Ale,
until it consume to a quart, and so drink it fasting.

For the Stone, and for him that cannot peace.
TAke a quantity of Time, Parselie, croppes of Fenell, Sinckfoile,
Allisanders, of liquantitie, ^iue or six cloves of Garlic, stamp them all
together, and strain them with white Wine or Ale, and drink thereof first
and last warmed.

A special medicine proved for the Stone, Collike, Dropsy, Strangurie, and
Iaunders.
TAke of Cenie half an uncle, Ginger, Annisseede, Liquoras, Maces,
Nettleseedes, Geate, Safferon, of each two penny weight, Fenell seed, and
Spiknard, of each one penny weight, and three penny weight of Sinamum, make all
these in powder, and drink thereof half a spoonful at once, in Posset ale,
or in Pottage.

A goodly powder to help one that hath Collica passio.
TAke Annisseedes, Fenelseedes, and Carawaiseedes of every of them half an
uncle, Ginger, Gallyngall, and Sinamum, of every of them two dragmes, Cloves,
Maces, and Cardam, of every of them half a dragme, Setwall four dragmes,
Sugar eight vnces, make them altogether in powder.

For the stone, or stoppyng of the water.
TAke a pint of white Wine, and therewith make a Posset, then take all the
curdes away, and put into the Posset Ale, two penny weight of the scrapyng
of white Soap, and boil it, then drink it as warm as you can.

A sovereign medicine for the Stone and Collike, and to break them both.
TAke Paseliseede, Broomeseede, Gromelseede, Fenelseedes, Annisseedes,
Plantineseedes, and Smallage seeds, of every of them a quarter of an uncle,
and of Nutmegs half an uncle, of Sugar tried four vnces, and beat them
altogether in a mortar, until they be very fine, then scarce the powder
through a scarce, and use to drink this powder Evening and Morning, three
days in a week with wine or other drink, luke warm and take of this powder
at a time, the quatitie of a great Hasell Nut, and if the pain be great,
take of the oil of Scorpions, with the oil of Roses, and annointe your side
where the pain is, against the fire.

A medicine to purge the bladder of him that cannot peace.
TAke Fenell, and the roots of Allesanders, Parsely, the leaves and the roots
of Hartstongue, Maidenheare, and sees them in white Wine, and give it the
patient to drink, and it shall purge the bladder in short time.

For the same.
TAke Few, Grommell, and Parsely, stamp them together, and temper them with
white Wine, and give it the sick to drink warm.

For him that cannot wellpisse.
TAke a Flint stone, and lay it in the fire, until it be red hot, and
there with warm your Ale, and then drink thereof.

To provoke Urine, and against the Stone.
TAke three quarts of Ale, warm it well, let it be scummed thrice: then
put to it a handful of Time, a handful of Rosemarie, and handful of
Peneriall, and let them sees together till one quart be co^sumed, or more,
strain the herbs from the Ale, and drink a draught of the Ale first and
last warnie.

To make one peace.
TAke a quarter of handful of Parselie, as much red Fenell, wash and
shrede them small, and put them in a cup of stale Ale, and make a posset
therewith and drink the Ale, and it helps.

For a man that pisseth blood.
TAke Ambros a handful, Bursa Pastoris a handful, Parselie seed a handful,
stamp them all together, and give the sick to drink in Goats milk.

To provoke Urine.
TAke a handful of red Nettle roots, and sees the in a quart of good Ale,
till it be consumed to a pint, and put thereto half a dish of Butter, and
let it be clean scummed, before the Butter be put in, and sees in it
Allisander seeds, Parselie seeds, Gromell ^eedes, being beaten into fine
powder, and strain them through a fine clothe, as much of the one as of the
other, drink thereof first and last.

For the same.
TAke a quantity of black Soap, and English Saffrom, and temper them
together cold, and lay it cold upon your Navel, being spread upon a broad
paper, or red Leather, and then lay upon it linen clothe of ten or twelve
folds hot, and roll you with a towel, and so lye down upon your bed
warm, and it will make you peace within an hour.

A drink for the windy Collike.
TAke a quart of Malmesey, and two spoonefulles of the pith of Parsely
roots, and a handful of Violet leaves, and five Bay leaves, sees all these
together until a pint, and drink it Morning and Evening warm.

To take away Corns.
TAke Marigold stamped, and lay upon the sore Evening and morning, and it
profits. Or else pare your corn, and lay to Turpentine and red Wax boiled
together, and make a plaster thereof, and it helps.

To do awai^ a Corn.
TAke and cut away the Corn, and drop into it a drop or two of a
black Snail, and put thereto the powder of Sandefer, and it will do it
away.

For the sam^.
PAre away your Corn as ne'er as you can, put into the hole vnsleckt Lime as
much as a Fatche, and cover it with a plaster of Wax and Rosen, and let it
lye four and twenty hours.

To make a water against a consumption.
TAke a quart of Rose water, as much of woman's Milk, Milk of Goats, of
Mares, or of Cow Milk, put unto them thirty yolks of Eggs, well mingled
together, and thereof still a water, whereof give the patient to drink warm
first and last, with a cake of Manus Christi, made with gold and Perles.

For a consuption in the rains.
TAke Clarie leaves, and prick them, and fry them with two or three yolks
of Eggs, and put thereunto Saffron dried upon a stone, and grind it small,
and put altogether, and fry them in frea^he Butter, and eat it warm next
your heart.

To wake Ielly for one that is in a consumption.
TAke a leg of Ueale, and cut away the fat, and a Capon or cock new
killed, and scald him and wash him clean, and let the Capon and the Ueale
lye in water, the space of three hours, and sees them on the fire, with two
pottles of fair water, scum it clean, and as the fat rises take it of, and
so let it sees, till half the broth be consumed: then put in a pottle of
racked Renishe Wine, if you have it, or else a pottle of white Wine, and let
it sees altogether, until it consume to a quart, and clarify it with three
or four whites of Eggs, and let it run through a Ielly vagge, and then
set it on the fire again, and put in one pound of Sugar, and one uncle of
Sinamum gross beat, and then let it run through a Ielly bag, three or four
times, and after let the patient drink thereof warm.

An excellent medicine against the extreme cough.
Take Fenell roots clean washed, Anniseedes, and a little Liquoras, and sees
them altogether in white wine, and take the white wine drink a good draught
thereof when you go to bed, and the next morning, take a Fig and a Date, and
roast them and eat them somewhat hot, and neither eat nor drink in two or
three hours after, and in two or three times drinking it shall help you.

A powder for the Cough.
Take eight penniwaight of fine Ginger, and sixteen peniwaight of powder of
Elicompane roots, and one ounce of the powder of Liquoras, and to ounces of
the powder of Anniseedes, and three ounces of sugar Candy: mingle all those
together, and use to eat it when you will at all times in the day, and you
shall find case therein, for this medicine is well prou^d.

Another for the cough, and to dry up the rum and fleam.
Take a handful of Sage, a handful of Baysalt dried at the fire, a handful of
Commin, a peniworth of Cloves, and an other of Maces, and beat all these and
mingle them together and put them into a linen bag, the length and breadth of
a mans hand, and guilt it, and use it hot upon the mold of the head till you
^e eased, warmed morning and evening and lay it to your mould again.

For the cough of the lunges.
TAke a pattle of running watter, twenty Figs, a quarterne of the best
Sugar, a good quantity of Licoras and Aniseedes, a peniworth of Maydenheare, a
handful of great raysons the stones picked out, boyle them unto a quart, and
so warm a little in a stone cruise and drink thereof.

For the cough.
TAke I sop, Horehound, sugar and water, boyle them altogether till it come to
a thin syrop, and so use to eat it evening and morning, and all other times
when you think good.

A syrop for a cough.
Take a pynt of I sop water, and half a pynt of Rose water, and a good
quantitye of Licoras bruised, a great spoonful of Anniseedes, half a pound
of white sugar Candy: let all these boyle together till it come to a clear
syrop, then put it in a fair glass strained, and take this syrop at all times
in the day or night when you list.

For the cough
Take a toste of bread and make it hot, and put on sweet Sallet oil, on
both sides of it, and eat it every morning and it will help you.

A remedy for the same.
Take Barrowes or Bores grease, three or four cloves of Garlic, and stamp
them together, and warm and annoynt thy feet therewith at thy going to bed,
and so keep them hot with a tosted trencher, and warm clothes, and you shall
recover.

A medicine for the chinecough for children.
Take Bores grease, and warm the soales of their feet to the fire, and chafe
them with the foresaid, Bores grease, and let them go to bed and keep them
warm and lay clothes to their feet.

A medicine for the cough and the whesing.
Take a pound of sugar Candy somewhat finely beaten, half a pound of Licoras
searced, and half a pound of Anniseedes seared, and an ounce of the powder of
Ginger, an ounce of Elicompane roots, made into powder and mingle these
together, and take of the same powder hal^e a spoonful at a time, when you
go to bed and when you rise in the morning.

For a cough.
Take Isop, Licoras, Horehounde, a little of the root of Elicompane, great
reason^, Figs, cut in small pieces, and Anniseedes: boyle all those in
water, then strain out the water, and drink it in the morning fasting.

For the cough and for stopping at the breast and to open thepypes, and to
avoid much corruption.
Take the root of Elicomepane, and root of Radish and shred them thin, and
Pear Wardens, twice so much as of both the others, then put altogether into a
new earthen pot, then put thereunto clarified honey till it overflow the
said ingredience, then cover the pot and paste it that no breath come out, and
set it into an oven, and let it bake with a batch of bread, give the sick
thereof a spoonful at morning and an other at night.

A sovereign medicine for the cough of the lunges Master Bakers medicine.
Take three pyntes of running water, half a pound of Portugal Sugar, with
vine Figs, and half a spoonful of Anniseedes bruised, a handful of Raysons
of the Sun clean washed, having the stones picked out, a pennyworth of
Maydenheare: let all these boyle together until the one half and more be
boiled away, and then strain the same through a fine cloth, and every morning
drink too sponefulls of it luke warm, you shall find present remedy.

For the Cramp.
Take Holy oak, oil of Violets, of Swines grease of each like much, and make
an ointment, and annoynt the place.

An excellent salve for a cut.
Take two handfuls of Bugle which grows most commonly in woods, and as
much Ualerian, bruise them very small: then take a quantitye of Dears sewet,
half so much vnwroughte wax, so much of these two as the herbs may be boiled
therein, then set it on the fire, and when it is half boiled put in a
quantitye of the best Turpintine that ye can get, then set it boyle till it be
enough, and all the white stir it well, when it is boiled enough strain it
through a cloth into a vessel and so keep it.

A salve for a new cut, that will not leave bleeding.
Take the blades of vnset leekes and stamp them, and put thereunto honey and
Wheat flower and stir them well together until they be thick: let it come
near no fire, but all cold lay it to the wound and it will stanch the
bleeding, and draw out the bruised blood and make it clean.

A medicine for deafenes in a mans head.
TAke a quart of Malmesey, a peniworth of Commin and viii. Betanie leaves that
grows on the land, then boyle all these together, till the one half of the
Malmesey be consumed: then take the pot that you boyle your medicine in as
soon as the herbs be boiled and cover it with a tonell and bind it close
about the verge that the heate come not out, then put a quill in the other
end of the tonell, then put the patients ear thereunto so that the heate
may go close into the head, tyrst the one and then the other, and whiles the
^eate is driving in the one ear, you must stop the there with black wool,
and you must have hot clothes to keep in the heate on the other side of the
head while that your medicine works: then serve the other care likewise. You
must use it three times in the day, that is to say, in the morning, at noone,
and at night, and so you must continue the space of three days and three
nights. See that the patient come not in any open air the space aforesaid,
and you must put to your Malmesey a quarter of a pynt of clear running water,

A good medicine for deafness, used by Thomas Steeuens of Bushton.
Take Bay berries, Bay leaves, Betany, and Sticardes, of each of them one
handful: seethe them in white wine to the half, and for an old man in
Malmeseye, then put it in a vessel that hath a narrow mouth and hold your
ear over it being vnstopped, so that you may suffer it being not too hot nor
too cold, then take oil of bitter Almondes, and let drop thereof two or
three drops into your ear, and always have a locke of fine black woll that
grows between the sheep legs, to stop close your ear therewith,
wherein if you put a little mus-ke, it will be the better,

A sovereign medicine for the payne and bushing in the head, which bindereth
the hearing very much.
Take one clove of Garlic, pill it, and pick three or four holes in the
midst, and dip it in fine English honey and put it into your ear, and put a
little black woll after, and lye upon your other side each night and so let
it continue in your ear for the space of vii. or eight days, and it will
expulse the humours at your nose, expel the payne and restore the hearing.

For the payne in the ear.
Take two handfuls of Sage, one handful of Isop, half a handful of
Rosemarye, put these in a little pillow boiled in Rose vinegar, Aqua vitae,
and Rose water, and lay this to thine ear as hot as thou can suffer it.

An ointment for a swelling.
Take good quantitye of Smallage and Mallowes, and put thereto two pound of
Bores grease, one pound of butter and oil of Netes feet a quantity, and
stamp them well altogether, then fry them and strain them into an earthen
vessel.

To make a drink for an extreme beat or drought.
Take a pottle of fair water, a handful of Succorie, a handful of Endife, a
handful of Violet leaves, a handful of Burrage, half a handful of Letice,
two Fenell roots, two Parsely roots, put them all in your pottle of water,
and let them sees from a pottle to a quart, then take it off any put a little
Sugar to it, and let it have two wallops more, then drink of it as you list.

To make a diet drink.
FIrst, buy a diet pot and fill him full of Conduit water, lacking a quart,
then put to the water a quart of white Wine and set him over a soft fire of
coals, then put thereunto a pound of Liquor as scraped and cut in small
pieces, half a pound of Anniseedes bruised, half a pound of Ling. vite bought
at the turners, an ounce of the bark of the same which you may have at the
Poticaryes, then let all these boyle together, an hour and a half, so that
one part of ye licoure be boiled away: then take and strain it into a fair
vessel and keep it close, and drink thereof first and last a pretty draught
warm

A water for the eyes.
Take kindly Roche Alom white, a small quantitye of red Rose water, and the
juice of red Fenell, and the white of an Egg well beaten, take of the scomme
of the Egg and beat them together, and then strain it through a fine cloth,
then dyp your finger in the water and let it drop into your eye.

Good for the sight.
ALL this is good for the sight: Red Roses, Verueine roots, Fenell,
Salendine, Pimpernell, Ocula christi, to wash your eyes with clear water, or
to look upon green colours, mesurable sleep, to loke in a fair glass,
often washing of your hands and feet, and it makes your meat to digest well.

Ill for the sight.
TO study after meat, Garlic, Unions, Leekes, Letice, to sudden going after
meat, wines, hot or cold air, Drunkenness, Gluttony, Milk Cheese, much
beholding of bright things, and as evil red things, as white, much sleep
after meat, to much walking after meat, and to much letting blood, cold
wortes, fire, dust, to much weeping, and overmuch watching.

A special good water for the eyes.
TAke a new laid Egg, and roast it harde, cut the shell in the midst and
take out the yolke, and put in a piece of white Coporas where as the yolke
lay, and bind the Egg together again, and let it lye in the fire until
the Coporas be resolved to water, then take the white out of the Egg, and cut
it in small pieces, and put it into a glass of running water, and let it stand
a while, and strain it through a fine cloth, and keep it in a close glass,
and dress the eye every morning and evening.

To kill the pin and web in the eye.
TAke a quantity of three leaved grass, as much red Fenell, as much red
Sage, as much Daisies, the white of an Egg beaten and the froth taken away,
and half a spoonefulle of Honey, and stamp all the herbs together, and
then take the juice thereof, and put thereunto the white of the Egg and the
Honey, and then stir them together, and drop the same into the eye of the
patient: and then take a plaster of flax tow, and dip it in the said
medicine, and lay it upon the eye of the said patient and bind it fast,
and let it remain so an hour at every time of dressing.

An other for the same.
TAke the leaves of Salendine and stamp them and strain them, and put one
drop of the ieuce of it in the eye, and it will help by Gods grace.

For the Web in the eye if it be old.
TAke the red Pimpernell, and Euphraesia, and stamp them in a Mortar, and then
fry them with Capons grease in a clean pan, and then wring it through a
cloth into a vessel of Brass, and let it stand therein three days after,
put it in a box of horue or tin, and take thereof and put it in the Web
of the eye, an^ this medicine is sovereign.

A good medicine for the eyes being either Pearl or Web.
TAke the leaves of Daisies, and Pouchwo^te alias B^rsa Pastoris, and the
Chestloppes alias Woodliffe, stamp them together and strain them in a little
good Ale, drink of the same three several mornings two hours before you
rise and you shall find ease, notwithstanding your eyes will be sore, then
wash your eyes with running water, and then dri^ke of your drink two
mornings again, and you shall be whole and find great ease by Gods grace.

A water comfortable for the eye.
TAke the juice of Euphrasia, or else Water made of it, for it is the best
herb that can be for the eyes what way soever you take it.

For sore eyes.
TAke Coporas and lay it in running Water, and strain it, and when you go to
bed strike the brees of your eyes with the same Water, and let it drop into
your eyes.

For the same.
TAke rotten Apples and still them, and with the water thereof, wash your
eyes, and it will purgue and cleanse them, and clear your sight.

A water very comfortable for the eye sight.
TAke Rose leaves, a great handefull of red Feuell and Verueine as much, of
Few a handful, of Salendine as much, and so still them together, and you
shall have a good Water and comfortable for your eyes.

A drink for the eye sight.
TAke a quantity of Ivy that grows upon th^ Is^, a quantity of the roots
and leaves of Daisies i^ the field, a quantity of Fenell, and a quantity of
three leaved grass, all these being washed clean, stamp them and strain
them with a pint of stale Ale, and drink thereof evening and morning, or at
midnight for a season.

A perfect water very good for the eyesight.
TAke Sage, Fenell, Veruaine, Betanie, Euphrasia, or Eyebright, Pimpernell,
Sinckfoyle, and herb Grace, and lay all these in white wine all night, and
then still them in a Stillatorie of glass or c. and this water is special
good.

For the hemeraudes, and to dry up any sore.
TAke the broad Nemphane leaf, commonly called Canne leaves which grow in
waters, wash them clean, put them in a Paper and fry them in the Embers,
and apply them as hot as may be suffered, or make them in powder and cast
them into the sore and it helps.

For the same.
TAke red wortes and sees them in a pot: then take the pot and set it
under a close chair, and sit over it, and lap warm clothes about the
chair that no air may go out, and so sit still over it till it be cold,
and then annoynt the members with the licoure.

For the same.
Take a plate of lead and rub thereon a quantity of Bores grease fore a
man, and Swines grease for a woman, and wash it out with white Wine, and
anoint the Emerodes.

A medicine for a red or high coulored face.
TAke Vine leaves, Strawburies, and Cream, and put two penny worth of
Camster unto it, and put it into a Stillatorie with the foresaied leaves and
distill it, and take the water thereof and wash your face therewith morning and
evening for a certain space, and it will take away the high colour.

An other for the same.
TAke Cowcumbers, and pare them clean, and cut them in slyces and still
them, and with the Water that comes of them wash your face daily three or
four times in the day, if you have none of the Water, then take the Cowcumber
it self and pare him, and rub your face therewith.

A medicine to destroy a heate in the face or in any other place, thought it
be Sanct Anthonies fire.
TAke a quart of Smiths water, a handful of Sage, a handefull of Elder
leaves, or of the green bark, a penieworth of Alome, and sees them
altogether from a pottle to a pint, then put it in an earthen pot and
anoint the patient.

For the pymples in the face.
TAke Wheat flower, mingled with Vinegar and Honey, and lay upon them, and
it will cleanse them.

Good for a Felon.
TAke Sage, Few, ^naples, bay Salt, and Bacon, and heate them altogether, and
then ^aie it to the Felon and it shall help you.

For the same.
TAke Herb Grace, March, and white worts, rusty Bacon, a little butter, a
house Snaple, mingle them together, and make thereof a plaster.

A medicine for boils, felons, and vncomes.
TAke Wheat flower, Bores grease, May butter, and Sage, and stamp it
together and make ^ plaster thereof and lay it to the Boyle or Felon and it
will both ripe it and draw it, and if it be fried it works the better.

To ripe boils, felons, or vncomes.
TAke a pint of sweet milk and set it over the fire, and put thereunto a
quantity of Sheep sewer, small sh^ed, and a handefull or two of Otmeale sine
beaten, and let all these secth till it ware very thick so that ye may
spread it upon a fair linen clothe, and lay it as warm as ye can suffer
to the sore, and it will quicly ripe him and break him without great payne,
then when he is broken lay a little Turpentine upon a piece of white leather
pricked full of holes, and it will draw and heal it.

A Gargresse for fleam.
TAke a quantity of Endiffe Water, and as much Honey Succle Water, a good
spooneful of Mustard pure, a spoonful of Honey, two spoonefulles of
Vinegar, and a little powder of Pepper, two or three branches of Rosemarie,
and the leaves of Sage, and put all these together and heate them upon a
chasing dish of coals luke warm, and let the patient put a spoonful at
once in his mouth, and hold his head upwards and wash his throat therewith,
and it shall make him void much fleam, let him take thereof as oft as he
shall think good.

To break the steam and for the Cough.
TAke a pint of Isop Water stilled, one quart of good Muskadine, three or
four good Races of case Ginger, pare them clean and cut them in slyces, and
twice so much Licoras, and pare it likewise, one good handefull of sugar Candy
gross bruised, put all the premesses together in a glass, and shake them
together and stop it close, and let it stand four and twenty hours, then
drink thereof at your pleasure.

To break fleam.
TAke Butter without salt, and Honey, of each a like quantity, and tewe
butter Almonds: blanch them and beat them fine, and eat a little every day.

For the same.
TAke Smallage and sees it in Vinegar, then take the Vinegar and wash your
breast withal, and then take the Smallage and put it in a clothe and bind
it to your stomach three hours.

For the same.
Take Sorrel, and stamp it and strain it, then take the juice and temper it
with old Ale, and drink a good quantity in the morning before you rise out
of your bed, then take a sleep after, and you shall deliver fleam wonderful
to see for the quantity.

A medicine for the Flixe or Lax.
TAke Eggs and roast them hard, then take the yolks of them and strain them
with red Wine, and put thereunto Synamum, then sees them together, and
drink it as hot as you may suffer it.

For the same.
TAke Wheat flower, and the yolks of Eggs, with the juice of Plantine, and
make a cake of it, and bake it in an Oven, and eat it as hot as you can, and
drink thereto red Wine or Respice all hot, or else the juice of Plantine
for it will vinde him.

A Candle for the bloody Flix.
TAke a pint of red Wine, and the yolks of five new laid Eggs, a good
quantity of S^amon and a little Sugar, the pill of a pound Granat dried and
beaten to fine powder, a good quantity, and boyle all these in a fair Platter
upon a cosyng dish of coals till it be some what thick, then let the
patient eat of it morning and evening, and as oft else in the day as his
stomach will serve him thee so, and it ^hall stop him be the Flexe never so
great.

A singular medicine for the bloody Flixe.
TAke as much fi^e li^nen cloth as will make a suppositarie being wrapped
round together button wise, then weate the same in the best Agua vite, or
Ag^acompossita, and let the party grieved convey the s^me into their
fundament, and it will help them God wishing with in three or four dressinges,
this is proved and hath li^tpen many that hath been brought very lowe and
judged past cure.

An other for the same.
TAke a piece of All^ine as much as a ^a^i^itte, put it in a pint of new
Milk, and sees it on the f^e til^ the Milk turn to a curd, then take of
the curd as you do of the posset Ale, then take the licoar that (...) and put
unto it a good quantity of the powder of the pi^ of a Poungranat and Sinamum
fine beaten, and let them drink it, and it will stop them, and if they
eat of the curd they shall be stayed the sooner.

For the bloody Flixe.
TAke Almondes skins and all, and stamp them small, and take the Water of
Husked Barley sodden, and make thereof Milk, and put therein skins and
scorches of Pound-granats being stamped to powder, with a little Sugar, and so
eat the same every morning and evening, and put gaddes of steel that hath
been made red hot in the fire into their drink.

To stop the bloody Flixe.
TAke a quart of Beans dried over the fire, so that ye may make powder of
them, then bruise them in a mortar very small and boulte them, and take a quart
of good Ale and a quantity of flower, and so sees them both together, and let
the patient eat thereof at night as hot as may be suffered.

For the bloody flixe.
TAke a pint of running Water and a pint of warm Milk as it comes from the
Cow, and put them together, then put five or six flint stones in the fire,
and when they he red hot, quench them in that lycoure, then put them in
the fire again, and quench them again three or four times therein, till the
lycoure be half consumed, and let the party drink of it warm.

A medicine for the falling of the fundament.
TAke red Nettles, braie them well, and put them in an earthen pot, and put
thereunto a good portion of white Wine, and sees it till the half be wasted,
and give it the sick to drink first and last always warm, and lay the
herbs to the fundamente as hot as ye can suffer it.

A plaster to heal a gowtie leg, a wound or sore whatsoever.
TAke a handefull of Mallowe leaves, and an other of Grounsell, put them in a
possonet with fair Water and let them boyle till they be sodden so tender
that ye may make a plaster of them, then put the lico^re from the herbs,
and strain them through straynar upon a Platter, and set the Platter upon a
chasingdishe of Coals, then pu^e thereunto a quantity of Dear sewet, or
Sheep sewet clarified, and unwrought Wax, Sallet oil, Turpentine, and
Rosen, let all them boyle upon a chasingdishe of coals until they be
thick: then strain all the said stuff through a linen cloth into the
vessel that you will keep your salve in, and so let it stand until it be
cold, then use the same being spread upon a clothe, and you shall find
ease by Gods grace, and help.

A plaster for the got or ache in the joints wherewith the Lord Rich was
cured when all Surgeons thought him to be uncurable.
TAke half a pound of unwrought Wax, half a pound of Rosen, an ounce of
Olibantun, a quarter of a pound of fine Litarge of Gold, three quarters of a
pound of white lead all beaten to powder, and scarce it through a searcer,
and take a pint of Oil of Neates feet, and let it on the fire in a small
vessel, with the Wax and Rosen, and when it is molten, then put thereto the
other powders and stir it fast with a stick, and then put a little of it
upon a pewter saucer, and if it be harde being so tried on the pewter saucer,
then take it from the fire and anoint a fair board with some of your oil of
Neates feet, and as you may handle it for heate, work it as it were
Curriers wax, and make it in great roles, and make players of it with a
chasing dish of coals, and spread it thin upon a linen clothe or leather
and lay the plaster wa^me where the pain is, and so renew it morning and
evening until you be whole, or till the ache be driven to some other joint,
and then take the plaster and lay where the ache is, and beware of cold and
hot wines.

A medicine for the gout.
TAke four handefulles of W^lworte, and one handefull of Horehounde, and ^raie
them in a Mortar, and put their juice to one pince of Swines grease, and boyle
them on the fire, the space of half anhower, then strain it fair, for it is
good for all cold gowtes in the arms, legs or feet, and for all griefs in
the bones, that comes of cold.

A drink for the got festered.
TAke a quantity of Archangel, Betonie, Verueine, of each like much, and
boyle them in wine, and let the sick person drink thereof first and last and
it helps.

A plaster for the same.
TAke a saucer full of the juice of Smallage, an other of Wormwoode, Honey,
Salt, and Vinegar, and meddle them well together, and do there to a quantity
or Rye flower, stir them fast together and boyle them and make a plaster in
a clothe, and lay to the sore, use the drink aforesaid and the plaster and
it will help by Gods grace.

Good for the heart.
SAffrone, Burrage, Musk Cloves, Galingall, Nutmegs, the red Rose, Violets,
Sugar, Maces, best of all.

Ill for the heart.
Beans, Peace, Leekes, Garlic, Onions, Sadness, Anger, Dredde, to much
travel, to drink cold water after travel, and evil tidings.

A medicine for the passion at the heart. called termor cords.
TAke the powder of Burrage flower, the powder of Nutmegs, white Amber
likewise in powder, the bone in a Stags heart, the powder of Sinamum, all
these powders drink luke warm with Bear, Ale, of Wine evening and morning,
and the party grieved shall find ease. These things must be proporcioned by
good advise.

A medicine for a continual head ache.
TAke Betanie water, and take a cloth three or four double, and but three
singers broad, weate it well in the Betanie water, and lay it to your
forehead cold. Let the cloth being weate come round about the head, and
tie it fast, and in three or four times thus doing, it will help thee: and
when the cloth is dried, weate it again.

A medicine (...) clens^ or purge the head.
TAke Pellitorie of Spain, and chew the root in your mouth three days at
times, and it shall do away the ache and fasten the teeth in the gummes.

A medicine for the payne in the head.
TAke a Rose cake, cut it in the length and breadthe of the forehead, then
take Rose water and Vinegar of like quantity and as hot as ye may suffer
it, lay to the forehead.

A medicine for wind in the head.
TAke a handefull of flowers of Camemell, and half a handefulle of powder of
Commin, and mingle them together, and make two bags of the breadthe of your
ears and lay them thereunto.

For the headache.
TAke the juice of Few, and put it in the nosthrelles, for it gets out the
fleam and cleanses the brain: the herb sodden in wine doth the same.

For the megrime or headache.
TAke four of five Nutmegs, and pare and slice them as you would pare and
slyce Ginger thin, then make two little bags of linen clothe, of the
length of your finger, and put in the Nutmegs, then take a quantity of
pure red Rose water and lay your bags in the same water in a dish, upon a
chafingdishe of coals and make them hot, and lay them to the temples of your
head.

A medicine for the megrime truly proved.
TAke half an uncle of Pepper, two Nutmegs, half a quarter of an uncle of
Grains, one pint of Vinegar, and a handefull of Rosemarie, and boyle
altogether, betwixt two Platters upon a chafingdishe of Coals, and then
take a clothe and put it over your head, and hold your head close over it
till it be boiled well near al away and by Gods grace it helps.

For the megrime.
TAke five leaved Grass, and Morrell that is called Saint Marie herb, even
porcions of chese two, and Betonie as much as of both the other, and beat
all these in a mortar, and take the juice of them, and put to the same juice
as much May butter as the quantity of the juice, and chere of make an
ointment, and annoynt therewith the patients brows when he goes to bed.

An other for the same.
TAke Bole Armoniacke, Sanguis Dragonis, and Terra sigillat, of each like
quantity, and beat them in powder, then to make a plaster take Flax and
lay it upon a russet Paper, as broad as you will have your plaster, and take
the clear of an Egg and lay it upon the Flax, then take the foresaied
powder and cast it on that side of the plaster that shall lie nexe your head,
and put one fold of russed paper or else of linen between your head and the
medicine, or else it will clean very fore to the hear of your head, and this
medicine is sure and well proved.

A good medicine for the megrime. in the head.
TAke Leather vnallomed so broad as your forehead and in length from temple
to temple, race the same Leather but not through, there upon lay the Oil of
the white of an Egg, then take of the Poticaries Sanguis Dragonis, veate it
into powder, and scatter the same upon the oil thinly, and this done lay it
upon the forehead, not taking it away till it be ^eadie to tall away of it
self.

A medicine for the black Iaunders.
TAke Wheaten straw, and lay it abroad upon a fair Flower in a close
house, and put in Geese and watch when they doung and take it up hole, and
with a knife scrape of the white that is about the doung, till you have a
quantity thereof, then dry it in an Oven and make powder thereof, and drink
it morning and evening in Ale warmed, and that will cure both the black and
yellow Iaunders.

An other medicine for the black Iaunders.
TAke the herb Ambros Bet^nie, Mugwort, of each of them a handefull, of
Senturie half a handefull, and three or four Dock roots clean washed and
scraped, and stamp all these together in a mortar, till they be indifferent
small beaten, then take Spicknell, turmeracke and Galigarie, of each of them
like quantity and stamp them likewise in a mortar, then put the herbs in a
clean linen cloth by them selves, and the Spices by them selves, and tie
them fast with strings, and hang them in a gallon or two of Ale when it is
new and ready to be tunned, after three or four days drink every morning
next your heart a good draught thereof, and drink or eat nothing two or
three hours after, and do so likewise when you go to bed, and no doubt^,
by Gods grace it will help you.

For the black Iaunders. M. Anthony Cox prisoner.
TAke the gall of a Raven and dry it, and grate into powder, take a quantit^e
in a spoon and temper the same with Bear or Ale together and drink it
fasting in the morning.

A medicine for the yellow Iaunders.
TAke a handefull of red Nettle croppes, and seethe them in a pint of Ale,
and drink the same being strain^d three or four days together.

Another for the same.
TAke harde spanish Soap, a little stale Ale in a cup. and rub the Soap
against the cup bottom till the Ale be white, and shave in Iuerie, and let
the patient drink thereof first and last till he be hole.

For the same.
TAke Salendi^e leaves and put them in your hosen next your feet.

A remedy for the yellow Iaunders.
TAke a big Apple and cut the top so as it may cover the Apple again, and
take out the core and put into it some sweet Butter, and a good deal of
Turmeracke, and a pretty quantity of English Saffron, and roast it very
tender, and let the sick person eat of it three or four mornings together,
or more if need be.

For the same.
TAke a quart of white Wine, a great handefull of Salendine leaves, and boyle
them to a pint: but in Winter, take ^he roots and drink thereof evening and
morning warm.

For the Yella.
TAke Base salt, Otes, and Cumin, and dry all these and make two bags
thereof, and as hot as may be suffered lay the one after an other to the
plow or crown of the head, and so use it a good while.

For the same.
TAke sharpe Leven, and bay Salt upon it cold, and put it to the yuella and
it will help.

A very good medicine for an itch.
TAke Dock roots, and beat them and bruise them, and fry them wit^ fresh
Butter, and annoynt the patient with the salve, and in five or six times
drinking it will help you.

To make one seem young long, to purge the wind, and clear the sight.
MAke powder of Fenell, Annisse, and Elicompane, and temper them with Aqua
vite, and dry them again, and eat a quantity thereof evening and morning.

To make a whey laxative.
TAke a pint and a half of clarified Wheye, half an uncle of Seeue^e, a groat
worth of Anniseedes half a handefull of Hoppes, Burrage, Buglas, of each
half a handful, and a little Fumetorie, and sees all these in clarified
Wheie until it be half consumed, and drink it two mornings.

A good plaster for festered legs that have been long sore.
TAke March, and wild Ta^sie, Plantine, and the great M^rrell, Honey, and the
white of an Egg, and milk of a Cow that is of one colour, and Barley flower,
and thick all these together, and braie the herbs in a mortar, and after
that mingle the rest with the herbs.

For the stopping in the liver.
TAke the broth of a Chicken, of Mercurie, and Succorie half a handefull, and
a few great Reasons, and pick out the stones, and let all these boyle
together, thentake a few bitter Almondes and blanch them and beat them, and
with the same licoure make Almonde milk, and so use to drink it every morning
first.

Another for the same.
TAke Madder roots, boyle them in half a pint of Ale, and let it sees to a
draught, and set ^im drink it in the morning fasting twice in a week.

For the same.
TAke Turpentine of Venice, to the quantity of a Bean, and put it into a
spoon, and hold it over the fire till it do melt, then put thereto a
little white Sugar, and let him eat it every day fasting.

For the same.
TAke a great green Capers, and lay them in Vargis, five or six days, and
then wring them out of the Vargis, and put a pretty quantity thereof in a
saucer, and put unto them Strope of Vinegar, and eat them an hour before
dinner, and an hour before supper.

For heate in the Liver or dryness in the hands.
TAke a quantity of Strawburie water stilled, seethe therein a quantity of
Liuerworte, and drink it with as much Sirope of Mints.

For the heate of the Liver.
TAke Saunders, and good strong vinegar, and heate them hot, then take
Scarlet in grain and dip it in the same and so lay it to the spoon of the
breast on the right side.

For the Plurasie.
TAke Brookelime, Sheep sewet, and a little fair water, and fry them
together in a friyng pan, and make thereof a plaster, and lay to the
patients side, and it will draw out the corruption.

For the plurasie or stich.
TAke Aqua vite, and Capons grease, boyle them together and dip therein
black Wool, and lay it hot to the stomach, and that will ease the stitch.

For the Lunges.
TAke the Lunges of a Fox and dry it to powder, and put a quarter of a
sponefull into a little Almon milk or broth, and eat it, and it is very good
to preserve the lunges.

For the pricking of a thorne or needle in a joint and the hole be stopped
again.
TAke fine bolted flower of Wheat, and temper it, with white Wine, and boyle
it together until it be thick, and lai^ it on the sore as hot as he may
suffer it, and that shall open the hole and draw out the venom or fil^h and
ease the aching, and heal and close it up again, and for lack of white Wine
ye may take Ale or Bear, and this medicine is good to heal a Boil, Whitlo,
or Uncome.

An easy purgation.
TAke a pint of white Wine, and one uncle of Seen, and a good handful of the
Reasons of the Sun, the stones being taken out, and half a spoonful of
Anniseedes, put all these into the said white Wine a whole night, and the
next morning boyle it to a drawght, and so let the person drink it blood
warm, and if you will, you may put there unto three or four roots of
Polipodium of the Oak.

An easy purgation.
TAke two pound of Figs, and put them in a gallon of sine wort of Barley
malt, put thereto two vnces of the powder of Licoras, and an uncle of Sugar:
when the Figs are boiled, braie them small in a mortar, and draw them
through a strainar, and let boyle again, and caste thereto a pint of the best
Oil Oliffe, when it is well cooled, and uncle of Reasones of Corra^s, and eat
this with light bread.

A plaster to be laid to the side that the Melt is in.
TAke a good quantity of new Wheat bran, as much Anniseedes and beat them
small in a mortar, then in a pan mingle them with Vinegar upon the fire till
it be like a plaster, then put it in a linen bag of two handefulles long,
and one handful broad, and make it thin, and warm lay it to the side
where the Melt is, and role it fast, and in the morning take it away, and
then wash the side with his own water and drink again, use this three or
four nights.

For the Morphewe.
TAke and drink Elder water nine days, three sponefulles, and every day
look that ye f^ca^e, then take three or four Oak Apples, and lay them in
white vinegar four and twenty hours, and then w^he the body with the
vinegar and it helps.

A medicine for the Morphewe.
TAke the juice of Salen^ine, and mingle it with powder of Br^mestone, and ^nie
it where the Morph^we is, all ^de.

For the Morphewe white or black.
TAke Betanie, Hartstonge, Sage, Plantine, red Fenell, Waterc^esses, of every
of them one handful, of ^erbe Benet half a handful, of the leaves of Verucine
an uncle, and still these, and drink every day fasting thereof four
spoonefulles, and walk an hour after upon it.

A water to cleanse the mouth and to fasten the teeth.
TAke Sage, and Woodbine leaves, of each a handful a good spoonful of
Honey, a piece of Alum as big as a good Walnutte, boyle all these together in
a quart of running water to a pint, and wash the mouth with this water luke
warm three or four times in the day.

For to destroy a Ringworme.
TAke a red Dock root, and let the root be pared, and when it is pared,
lay it in Vinegar till it be well steeped, and then rub it (...) on the
ryngworme, and if it be very rank, take powder of Brimstone, and lay it in
a Vinegar, and temper them well together, and then rub well the ryngworme
withal, and it shall destroy it.

A medicine to kill a Tetter or Ryngworme, or any kind of Itch.
TAke Sallet oil, and Salt tempered together, and being luke warm, annointe
the sores.

A restority, which diverse noble men have used, and it hath prolonged their
life.
They took a pound of cap Dates, clean picked, and the stones taken out,
and caused them to be sodden in a pint of Muscadine, till the wine were some
deal consumed, and keep it in a glass, and there of did put in their
Pottage, three or four spoonefulles at once, when they did eat any broth
every meal.

To heal the vessel wherein Nature lies, if it be broken.
TAke the Husks, or Ladelles of Acornes, dried and beaten to powder; take a
spoonful and drink it in the Morning with a little warm Ale, and lye in your
bed an hour or two after.

For the Palsy.
TAke a handefull of Sage, a handefull of Southernewood, a handful of Spike, a
handful of Lauend^r, a gallon of running water, and boil all these together
till it come to a pint and a half, then strain it, and put (...) out into
a stone Cruise, and take every time thereof, three or four, or five spoonfulles
in a saucer luke warm, and gargle it in your month (...) and fro, and after
spit it out, and in like manner put four or five spoonefulles in a saucer luke
warm, and so chafe that part of the body, that is pained with the Palsy,
with a Sponge dipped in the said water.

An other for the same.
TAke powder of Pepper, and powder of Peslatorie of Spain, and powder of Ivy,
of each an uncle and powder of Sage two vn^s, use this powder in thy potng.

For lameness in the side coming by palsy.
MAke a bathe of Sage and Isop, and boil a great quantity of them together in
runyng water, and bathe the side that is sore with it, and binder the herbs
to it, as hot as you may well suffer it.

A medicine very good especially for those that be taken with the palsy,
thoughnes the shaking Palsy.
TAke the blood of a Fox, warm as it comes from the Fox, the blood about
the heart is best, but all the rest is good, and with this blood al to chafe
the place that is taken, and then take the skin of the Fore, and put the raw
side near where the Palsy is, and it must lye to it at the least twelve
hours, and in the mean time till you can get a Fox, chafe the numbed place
with oil Olive, Aqua composita, this medicine of the Fox is special good for
the Palsy, and hath been well proved.

A medicine for the Palsy that takes away the speech.
TAke Sage leaves, and Primrose leaves, and if it be Winter, take Primrose
roots, and then beat the Sage and the Primrose leaves together, of each like
much, and strain it with stale Ale, and give it to the sick to drink a good
quantity, this is well proved.

For the same.
TAke Sage, and dry it between two warm Tiles, and lay it to the nape of
the Neck, and bind it to the wreastes of both the arms, then take a
Nutmegge and slice it thin, and lay one slice above the tongue, and an other
under the tongue, and so (...) as often as you will, and by the grace of God it
shall (...) much good, the neck and wreast to be nointed with oil of Spike;
or water of Spike.

A medicine for the Palsy.
TAke Lavender, Spike, and Sage, and still them and drink thereof a good
quantity every Morning being warm, either in Ale or otherwise. Take also
Sage, and Betonie, and put them between two dishes, upon a chafyngdishe of
coals, and sprinckle them with good Malmesey, and so apply them warm to
the nape of the neck, and the wresles of the hands.

A medicine for the piles.
TAke the beards of the heads of vnsette Leekes, and wash them clean, and
take a quantity of running water, and sees them therein till they be some
what tender, then dry them well in a Linen clothe, stamp them as small as
you can, then take a good piece of fresh Butter, and boil them therein, upon
a chafingdishe of coals, and put in a good quantity of English Saffron, and
boil them together, and when it is well boiled, strain it through a fair
clothe into a glass, and keep it, and when you will occupy it, and make a
plaster thereof upon a Linen clothe, and lay it cold to the grief.

To stanch bleedyng of the piles.
Drink the juice of Millefoile, for that is proved, also do thereunto the
powder of burnt Garlic and the piles shall dye.

To destroy the piles.
TAke Oil of Roses, and Frankincense, and House, and make an ointment of them,
and put it in with the finger into the fundamente, and put there unto Myrrh,
and often annointe the fundamente therewith, and let the breathe thereof go up
into the fundament.

A true medicine for the piles.
TAke black Woolle and black Soap, and bind it thereto.

To make a Salve to bring wounds that rancle, and ache, into their own kind,
and seace the burning and achyng.
TAke the juice of Smallage, and of Plantaine like much, take Honey and the
white of an Egg like much, and put to the bulted flower of Wheat, and stir
them well together until they be thick, and let it come near no fire, but
all cold and raw lay it to the sore, and it shall cleanse the wound, and
cease the achyng, and bring it to his kind, and heal the wound fair, for
this is a principal salve.

For a wound that is over healed, and sore underneath.
TAke Barley meal, the white of an Egg, and Honey, and meddle them together,
and make a plaster therewith, and apply it to the sore, and it helps.

A plaster for a green wound.
TAke Flower and Milk, and sees them together till it be thick, then take
the white of an Egg, and beat them together, and lay it to the wound, and
it will keep it from rancklyng.

To make Milonitret, to cure any green wound, or vncome, or others, what
soever they be.
First take two pound of Ros^me, half a pound of Wax, half a pound of
Frankincense, a quarterne of a pound of Sheep sewet clarified, put them
in a fair Pan, then take a pottle of the juice of Millonet, boil these
aforesated stuff with a soft fire till they be molten, and stir them a
pretty while, then put thereunto the juice of your Millonet, and stir them
till they be cold, and let them stand a day or two, then melt it again
with a soft fire, and when it is molten, put thereunto a pint of red Wine,
and stir it till it be cold, that you may work it with your hand, and
make it up in roules.

A water to cure all manner wounds and sores, be they never so sore and
slinking, and all manner of Cankers in the nose, mouth, throat, or whersoeuer.
TAke a handful of red Sage, a handful of Sallendine, and as much Woodbine
flowers, with the leaves, take a gallon of running water, and put the herbs
in it, and let the boil to a pottle, then strain the through a strainer, and
take the liquor and set it over the fire again, then put thereunto a pint of
English Honey, a good handful of roche Alome finely beaten, a peniworthe of
Grains grossly bruised, and let them boil altogether, three or four walmes,
and then let the scomme be taken of with a feather, and when it is cold, put
it in a yearthen pot, or bottle, so as it may be kept close, and for a green
wound, take of the thinnest of the same water, and for an old sore of the
thickest, the water being first well shaken together: and after that you have
cleansed the old sore with white Wine, take a quantity of fine Linte, and the
same being well wet in the said water, do you there with often times bathe
your wound, and with the said Linte in the end cover the wound, and if
there be any holes in the said wound, fill them with Linte, made tent
wise, and so after cover the w^le wound with a piece of a bladder, the more
better to ^tinue your Lint in moisture, dress your wound twice a day, in the
morning, and in the evening, and it helps.

A medicine or drink for him that is burst in the beally or coddes.
TAke a knucke of the Ueale, a pottle of white Wine, half an uncle of Mace, half
so many Dates, half a pound of reasons of the Sun, a handful of Cumfrey, a
handful Polipodium, alias Fearne of an Oak, a handful of Sparokyng, alias
Knotworth, take all these and put them in an yerthen pot, and set on a Kettle
of water of five gallons, and set the yearthen pot in the water, stop it with
paist very close, and let the Kettle be kept seething five or six hours, with
the yearthen pot therein, and keep the Kettle still full, with other seethyng
water, then take all these, and beat them in a mortar, and strain it, and
give the patient of the liquor thereof, both first and last.

For the tooth ache.
TAke a pint of white Wine, half a handful of Lavender Cotton, and sees
them together, till the wine be half spent, then put into it half a
spoonful of Bay Salt, then let it sees a little, then take a spoonful
of that liquor, and put it in that side that the pain is in, and keep it in
thy mouth, and then put an other spoonful, so one after an other, and it
will help thee.

A good drink to put out the small Pox or pimples.
MAke a possette of Ale with Milk, and the curd being taken of, take red
Fenell the quantity of a spoonful, and the same being sod together with
the Ale strain it, and put thereto the quantiti^ of a Nutmegge, of fine
Triacle, a quantity of Setwall, a quantity of English Saffron, being well
mingled together, and give it the patient to drink warm.

A present remedy for an Ague.
TAke two vnces of Bay Salt, two vnces of white Frankincense, and a handful
of Smallage, beaten altogether, and lay it to the wrestes of your hands, and
to the boughtes of your arms, two hours before the sit do come, proved.

For the same.
TAke two or three cloves of Garlic and bruise them, and a peniworthe of Aqua
vitae, half a pint of Ale, and sees them together, and drink it a little
before the course or sit come, as hot as you may.

For the Colic.
TAke Gromell seed, Parsely seed, and Annisseedes, of each two spoonefulles,
green Fenell one handefull, one Parsely root, one Radish root, of each as
log as a finger, vnsette Time one handefull, one handful of Philipendula, and
a handefull of Cheristones, wash all these and bruise them, and stamp them
very small, boil all these in two quarts of white Wine, in an yearthen pot
close, till a pint be consumed, then let it run through a Linen clothe of it
self without strainyng, and drink it Morning and Evening.

For the windy Colic.
TAke a quart of Ale clarified, two spoonefulles of the flower of Liquoras,
one spoonful of the flower of Annisseedes, half a spoonful of bruised Fenell
seeds, a little Time, and sees them together till a pint of the ale be
consumed, and so drink in first and last.

For the Colic and Stone.
TAke a handful of Auens, a handefull of Pellitorie of the wall, and as much
Camomell as will lye in the palm of your hand, and a spoonful of Parsely
se^de bruised a little, make a posset of Renishwine, take of the curd and boil
all these together in the drink, till the substance be boiled out, then use
it morning and evening.

For a pain in the side that comes of wind.
TAke a handful of Cummenseede, an other of Annisseede, and two of Few,
sees all these together in running water, from a pottle to a quart, put to it
half a pint of white Vinegar, before it be cold, dip a sponge in it, and
wryng out the liquor some what, and lay it to the patients side, as hot as
he can suffer it, and when it begins to wax cold, take a new.

To remove a disease from the stomach.
Drink a quantity of Dragon water, or water Imperial, mingled with Triacle,
or Methredatum.

For them that do caste up their meat by reason of weakness of the stomach.
TAke the nether crust of brown bread, dry it well and leisurely at the fire,
then steep it directly in strong vinegar a little while, take it out and
spread upon t^e powder of Cloves, warm it again, and tie it about the
mouth of the stomach, and the vomit will seas.

A drink for clensing the stomach, to be taken luke warm in the morning.
TAke Isop, Rosemarie and Time, of each two crops, and put them in a pint of
Ale, with a pr^tic quantity of Sugar, and let them boyle till the streng^he
is in th^, then drink thereof two hours before meat.

A drink to avoid the fleam out of the stomach, ^o make it easier to come
up, you may take of it a spoonful or two, continu^ally when you need.
TAke eight spoonefulles of Rosewater, four spoonefulles, of Conduit water,
and two spoonefulles of white Vinegar, half a quarterue of white Sugar, boyle
all these in a poringer, upon a chafingdishe of Coals, and skumme it clean,
and then drink it luke warm.

A remedy against the Plague was sent to the Lord Mayre of London from King
Henrie the eight.
TAke a handeful of Sage, a handful of herb Grace, a handefull of Elder
leaves, a handful of red Bramble leaves, stamp them all, and strain them
through a fine cloth with a quart of white Wine, and then take a quantity of
Ginger, and mingle them together, and so take a spoonful of the same and you
shall be safe for four and twenty days, and so being nine times taken shall
be sufficient for al the whole year by the grace of God. And if it be so that
the party be stricken with the plague before he hath drunk of this medicine,
then take the water of Scabious a spoonful, and water of Beatonie a
spoonful, and a quantity of fine Treacle, and put them altogether, and
cause him to drink it, and it shall put out all the venom. If it fortune the
botch to appear, then take the leaves of Brambles, Elder leaves, Musterde
seed, and stamp them altogether, and make a plaster thereof, and lay it to
the sore, and it shall draw out the venom, and the party shall be hole by
the grace of God.

Another for the same.
TAke a handefull of Sorrel, a handefull of Burnet, a handful of Sage, a
quantity of Dragons, as much of the croppes as of the roots, then wash them
a^ well and put them in a pottle of running water, and ^eethe them to a
quart: then set them by the fire, and strain them through a linen cloth,
and put in some Sugar Candy to delay the bitterness of the herbs, and
give the patient to drink nine spoonefulles at one time be^ore the purples
do appear, and if the botch do arise and break he shall live: proved.

To cause one to sleep.
TAke a spoonful of pure Rose water, as much of vinegar, two spoonefulles of
the oil of Roses, half a handefull of Rose leaves made in powder, ming them
altogether, and take cromnies of leuened bread made of Wheat, and make a
plaster thereof, and lay it over the forehead and temples.

For a sore throat.
^Ake Columbines and Sinckefoyle, and stame them both together, and strain
them with milk, and ^inke it very warm.

For the hickop.
A^ oil of Lillic (...) annoynt the sickmans body sundry ^ymes.

For a Canker in the mouth.
TAke a slower deluse root, wash it and slice it, and a few leaves of Penny
royal, lay them in steep in Conduit water, and so wash your mouth with the
water.

For a last.
TAke an Egg, and Aqua composita, and boyle it vith the Egg till it be dry,
then take Sinnamum Sugar, and eat with the Egg.

A medicine very precious called Flos vnguentorum, go (...) all manner of
maladies, that is to ^tte, agains^ all sores and wounds, against all manner
^mpostumes in the head or body, against headache, singing in the brain, or
boiling in the heart, shrinking of Synewes, it draws out any thorne or broken
bone, and all manner of ache out of the Liver, Spline or Lungs, it helps the
Hemerodes, and is very good to make a sear cloth for all goutes, aches, and
pestilent botches, and therefore this trett is worthily called Flos
vnguentorum.
TAke Rosine and Perre, of each half a pound, of virgin Wax and
Frankincense, of each a quarter of a pound, of Masticke an uncle, of Hearts
sewet a quarter of a pound, a quarter of a pound of Camfer, and two dragmes,
melt that is to be melted, and pare that is to be pared, and scarce it,
botle them over the fire, and strain them through a clothe, into a pottle of
white Wine, then boil the Wine with all the other medicines together, then let
it cool, till it be no hotter th^ blood warm, then put thereunto a quantity
of Turpe^tine, ever stir^yng it until it be cold: but ever beware that your
stuff be no hotter (...) blood warm, when you put to your Turpentine, ^r
else it mars all your s^ife, and make it up in roules, and keep it to your
use, and when you will occupy it, plaster wise to your grief.

To make the black salve, that cures all old sores and ulcers, be the^
never so great foul, and stinking.
TAke a gallon of stale Ale, being very strong, two handfuls of Woodbine
leaves, half a hand. of red seeded Nettles, as much Colewortes with the
ragged leaves, half a pound of red Onions, half a pound of Garlic
pilled, a pound of vnse^ Leekes, a little ^ishefull or handefull of the powder
of a rotten post, of an Oak is best, let these be stamped small in a mortar,
severally by them selves, put them into the Ale with half a pound of roche
Alome, then set them over a soft fire, let them boil till the one part or
more, be boiled away, then let them stand three or four days, but first
strain them through a clean clothe, into a clean vessel, then put to them
half a pound of Wax, half a pound of Rosine, half a pound of the Naruell
that is green, a quantity of stone Honey, then set it over a soft fire
again, and let them boil till the one half be consumed, then put it into a
clean yearthen pot, and stop it very close, and use thereof when you have
occasion.

FINIS.

