A book, or counseill against the disease commonly called the sweat, or
sweating sickness.

Made by Ihon Caius doctor in physic.

Very necessary for every personne, and much requisite to be had in the
hands of al sorts, for their better instruction, preparation and defence,
against the soubdein coming, and fearful assaultyng of the same disease. 1552.

To the right honourable William Earl of Pinbroke, Lord Harbert of Cardife,
knight of the honourable ordre of the garter, and president of the kings
highness counseill in the marches of Wales: Ihon Caius wishes health and honour.
IN the feteful time of the sweat (right honourable) many resorted unto me
for counseil, among who some being my friends acquaintance, desired me to
write unto them some little counseil howe to govern themselves therein: saying
also that I should do a great pleasure to all my friends and contrimen, if I
would devise at my laisure some thig, which from time to time might remain,
where men might in such cases have a recourse present refuge at all needs, as
the they had none. At whose request, at that time I wrate diverse counseiles
so shortly as I could for the present necessite, which they both used and did
give abroad to many others, further appointed in my self to fulfil (for so
much as lay in me) the other part of their honest request for the time to
come. The which the better to execute and bring to pass, I spared not to go
to all those that sent for me, both poor, and rich, day and night. And that
not only to do the that ease that I could, to instruct the for their recovery:
but to note also thoroughly, the cases and circumstances of the disease in
diverse persons, and to understand the nature and causes of the same fully,
for so much as might be. Therefore as I noted, so I wrate as laisure then
served, and finished one book in English, only for English me not learned,
one other in latin for men of lerninge more at large, and generally for the
help of the which hereafter should have need, either in this or other coutreis,
that they may learn by our harms. This I had thought to have set furth before
christmas, to have give to your lordship at newyeres tide, but that diverse
other businesses let me. Nevertheless that which then could not be done
comes not now out of season, although it be never so simple, so it may do ease
hereafter. which as I trust this shall, so for good will I give and dedicate it
unto your good Lordship, trusting the same will take this with as good a
mind, as I give it to your honour, which our Lord preserve and grant long to
continue.

At London the first of April. 1552.

The book of Ihon Caius against the sweating sickness.
MAN being borne not for his own use and commodity alone, but also for the
common benefit of many, (as reason will and al good authoures write) he which
in this world is worthy to live, ought al ways to have his hole mind and
intent given to profit others. Which thing to show in effect in my self,
although by fortune some ways I have ben let, yet by that which fortune
cannot debar, some ways again I have declared. For after certain years being
at cambridge, I of the age of.xx. years, partly for mine exercise and proof what
I could do, but chefely for certain of my very friends, did translate out of
Latin into English certain works, having nothing else so good to gratify
them with. Whereof one. of S. Chrysostome de modo orandi deum, that is, of ye
manner to pray to god, I sent to one my friend then being in the court. One
other, a work of Erasmus de vera theologia, the true and ready way to read
the scripture, I did give to master Augustine Stiwarde Alderman of Norwiche,
not in the full as the authore made it, but abbreviate for his only purpose to
whom I sent it, Leuyng out many subtle things, made rather for great learned
divines, the for others. The third was the paraphrase of the same Erasmus upon
the Epistle of. S. Iude, which I translated at the request of one other my
dear friend.

These I did in English the rather because at that time men ware not so given
all to English, but that they did favour mayteine good learning contained in
tongues sciences, and did also study and apply diligently the same the selves.
Therefore I thought no hurt done. Sense yt time diverse other things I have
written, but with entente never more to write in the English tongue, partly
because the commodity of that which is so written, passes not the compass of
Englande, but remains enclosed within the seas, and partly because I thought
that labours so taken should be half lost among them which set not by
learning. Thirdly for that I thought it best to avoid the judgment of the
multitude, from whom in maters of learning a man shall be forced to dissente, in
disprouyng that which they most approve, approuyng that which they most
disalowe. Fourthly for that the common setting furthe and printig of every
foolish thing in english, both of physic unperfectly, and other matters
vndiscretly, diminish the grace of things learned set furth in the same. But
chiefly, because I would give noue example or comfort to my country men,
(who I would to be now, as here tofore they have been, comparable in learning
to men of other countries) to stoned only in the English tongue, but to leave
the simplicite of the same, and to proceed further in many and diverse
knoweleges both in tongues and sciences at home and in universities, to the
adournyng of the common welthe, better service of their king, great pleasure and
commodite of their own selves, to what kind of life soever they should apply
them. Therefore whatsoever sense that time I minded to write, I wrate ye same
either in greek or latin. As first of all certain commentaries upon certain
books of William framingha, master of art in Cambridge, a man of great wit,
memory, diligence and learning, brought up in the same schools in Englande
that I was, ever fro his beginning until his death. Of the which books.ii. of
co^inetia (or cotinence) were in prose, ye rest in metre or verse of diverse
kinds. One a comfort for a blind ma, entitled ad Aemilianum caecum
consolatio. one other ^cpyros^s, seu incendi^ sodomo^, the burning of Sodome.
The third Laurentius, expressyng the torments of Saincte Laurence. The
fourth, Idololatria, Idolatry, not after the trade and vein of scripture
(wherein he was also very well exercised) but conformable to scripture and
after the civil and humane learning, declaring them to worship Mars, that
war, or fight: Venus, that live incontinently: Pluto, that follow riches
couetousely: and so forth through all vices used in his time. The fiueth book
Arete, virtue: the sixth, Epigrames, contained in two books, which by an
epistle of his own hand before ye book yet remaining, he dedicated unto me,
purposing to have done many more pretty things, but that cruel death preueted,
and toke him away where he and I was borne at Norwiche, in the year of our Lord
M. d.xxxvii. the xxix day of September, being then of the age of.xxv. years,
vii. Months, and vj. days, a great loss of so notable a yonge man. These
works at his death he willed to comme to my hands, by which occasion after I
had viewed the, and perceived them full of al kinds of learning, thinking the
no works for all me to understand with out help, but such as were well scene
in all sorts of authors: I endeavoured my self partly for the help of
others, partly for mine own exercise, to declare upon them the profit of my
study in civil and humane learning, and to have before mine eyes as in a
work (which was always my delight) how much I had profited in the same. This
so done, I joined every of my commentaries to every of his said books, fair
written by Nicolas Pergate puple to the said Master Framyngham, minding after
the judgment of learned men had in the same, to have set them furthe in
prynte, if it had ben so thought good to them. For which cause, at my
departing into Italie, I put an Epistle before them dedicatorye to the right
Reverend father in God Thomas Thirlbye, now Bishop of Norwiche, because
the same master Framyngham loved him above others. He after my departure
delivered the books to the reverend father in god Iho Skip, late bishop of
Hereforde, then to. D. Thixtle, tutor to the said master framyngha, fro him to
sir Richard Morisine, now ambassador for ye kings majesty with theperour,
then to D. Tailor Deane of Lincolne, and sir Thomas Smithe secretary after to
ye kings Majesty, all great learned men. Fro these to others they went,
among whom the books died, (as I suppose,) or else be closely kept, that after
my death they may be setfurthe in the names of them which now have the, as
their works. Howe soever it be, well I know that at my return out of Italie
(after.vj. years continuance there) into Englad, I could never understand where
they were, although I both diligently and desirousely sought the. After these I
translated out of Greek into Latin a little book of Nicephorus, declarynge howe
a man may in praiynge confess him self, which after I did give unto Iho
Grome bachelor in art, a young man in years, but in wit learning for his
time, of great expectation. That done I began a chronicle of the city of
Norwiche, of the beginning thereof things done there fro time to time, The
matere whereof yet rude and vndigested lies by me, which at laisure I mind to
polish, and to make an end of that I have begun. And to be short, in
physic diverse things I have made settefurth in print both in Greek and
Latin, not minding to do other wise, as I have before said, al my life: For
which cause al these things I have rehearsed, else superstuous in this place.
Yet see, meaning now to counseill a little against the sweating sickness for
help also of others, notwithstanding my former purpose, two things compel
me, in writynge thereof, to return again to English, Necessite of the matter,
good will to my country, friends, acquaintance, which here to have required
me, to whom I think my self borne.

Necessite, for that this disease is almost peculiar unto us English men, and
not common to all men, following us, as the shadow the body, in all countries,
albeit not at al times. There fore compelled I am to use this our English
tongue as best to be understand, and most needful to whom it most follows,
most behooves to have spedy remedy, and often times least nyghe to places of
succourre and comfort at learned men hands: and least needful to be
setfurthe in other tongues to be understand generally of all persons, whom it
either haunteth not at all, or else very seldom, as ones in an age. Thinking
it also better to write this in English after mine own meaning, then to have
it translated out of my Latin by other after their misunderstandyng.

Good will to my country friends and acquaintance, saying them with out
defence yield unto it, and it ferefully to invade the, furiousely handle them,
speedily oppress them, vnmercyfully choke them, and that in no small numbers,
and such persons so notably noble in birth, goodly conditions, grave
sobriety, singular wisedoe, and great learning, as Henry Duke of Suffolke,
and the lord Charles his brother, as few hath been scene like of their age: an
heavy pitiful thing to here or see. So that if by only learned men in physic
not this way also it should be helped, it were needful almost half so many
learned men to be ready in every town and city, as their should be sweating
sick folks. Yet this notwithstanding, I will every man not to refuse the
counseill of the present or nigh phisicen learned, who may, according to the
place, person, cause, other circustances, give more particular counseil at
need, but in any wise exhort him to seek it with all diligence. To this
enterprise also among so many learned men, not a little stirs me the
gentilnes and good wills of al sorts of men, which I have well proved
heretofore by my other former books. Mindynge therefore with as good a will to
give my counseil in this, and trusting for no less gentleness in the same, I
will plainly and in English for their better understanding to whom I write,
first declare the beginnynge, name, nature, and signs of the sweating
sickness. Next, the causes of the same. And thirdly, how to preserve men fro
it, and remedy them when they have it.

In the year of our Lord God, The beginning of the disease.
M.CCCC.lxxxv. shortly after the.vij. day of august, at which time king
Henry the seventh arrived at ^ilford in walls, out of France, and in the
first year of his reign, there chanced a disease among the people, lasting
the rest of that month all september, which for the soubdeine sharpness and
vnwont cruelnes passed the pestilence. For this commonly gives.iv. or.iiij.
often.vij. sumtyme ix. as that first at Athenes which Thucidides describes
in his second book, sumtyme.xj. and sumtyme.xiiij. days respect, to whom it
vexes. But that immediately killed some in opening their windows, some in
plaieng with children in their street doors, some in one hour, many in two it
destroyed, at the longest, to the that merrily dined, it gave a sorrowful
Supper. As it found them so it toke them, some in sleep some in wake, some in
mirth some in care, some fasting some full, some busy and some idle, and in one
house sometime three sometime five, sometime seven sometime eight, sometime
more some time all, of the which, if the haulfe in every Town escaped, it
was thought great favour. How, or with what manner it toke them, with what
grieffe, and accidents it held them, herafter the I will declare, when I shall
come to show the signs thereof. In the mene space, know that this disease
(because it most did stand in sweating from the beginning until the ending) was
called here, the Sweating sickness: and because it first began in
Englande, it was named in other countries, the english sweat. Yet some
conjecture, that it, or the like, hath been before seen among the Greeks in
the siege of Troie. In theperour Octauius wars at Cantabria, called now
Biscaie, in Hispaine: and in the Turks, at the Rhodes. How true that is, let
the authors loke: how true this is, the best of our Chronicles she with, of
the late begone disease the fresh memory yet confirms. But if the name were
now to be given, and at my liberty to make the same: I would of the manner and
space of the disease (by cause the same is no sweat only, as her after I will
declare, in the spirits) make the name Ephemera, which is to sai, a fever of
one natural dai. A fever, for the fervor or burning, dries sweating feure
like. Of one natural day, for that it lasts but the time of.xxiiij hours.
And for a distinction from the commune Ephemera, that Galene writes of,
coming both of other causes, and with unlike pains, I wold put to it either
English, for that it follows somoche English men, to who it is almost
proper, also began here: or else pestilent, for that it comes by infection
putrefaction, otherwise then doth the other Ephemera. Which thing I suppose
may the better be done, because I se strange and no english names both in
Latin and Greek, by commune usage taken for English. As in Latin, Feure,
Quotidia, Tertian, Quartain, Aier, Infection, Pestilence, Uomite, Person,
Reins Ueines, Peines, Chamere, Number, c. a little altered by the commune
pronunciacion. In Greek, Pleuresie, Ilchiada, Hydrops, Apostema, Phlegma, and
Chole: called by the vulgar pronunciatio, Schiatica, Dropsy, Impostume,
Phleume, Choler: Gyne also, and Soutyre, Sciourel, Mouse, Rophe, Phrase,
Paraphrase, cephe, whereof comes Chaucer's couercephe, in the romant of the
Rose, writ and pronounced comoly, kerchief in ye south. courchief in the
north. Thereof every head or principal thing, is comonlye called cephe,
pronounced writ, chief Very many other there be in our commune tongue, which
here to rehearse were to long. These for an example shortelye I have here
noted. But for the name of this disease it makes now no matter, the name of
Sweat being comoly used. Let us therefore return to the thing, which as occasio
cause served, came again in the.M.D.vi. the.xxii. year of the said King Henry
the seventh. Aftre that, in the year M.D.xvii. the.ix. year of King Henry the
viii, and endured from July, unto ye midst of Decebre. The.iiii time, in the
year. M.D.xxviii. the xx. year of the said King, beginning in the end of May,
continuing June and July. The fifth time of this fearful Ephemera of Englande,
and pestilent sweat, is this in the year. M.D.LI. of our Lord GOD and the
fifth year of our Sovereign Lord king Edwarde the sixth, beginning at
Shrewesbury in the midst of April, proceadinge with great mortality to
Ludlowe, Prestene, and other places in Wales, then to Westchestre, Couentre,
Oxenfoorde, and other tounes in the Southe, and such as were in and about the
way to London, whether it came notably the seventh of July, and there
continuing sore, with the loss of.vii.C.lxi. from the.ix. day until the.xvi.
day, besides those that died in the.vii. and.viii. days, of who no registre
was kept, fro that it abated until the.xxx. day of the same, with the loss
of.C.xlii. more. Then ceasing there, it went from thence through al the east
parts of England into the North until the end of Auguste, at which time it
diminished, and in the end of September fully ceased.

This disease is not a Sweat only, (as it is thought called) but a fever. as I
said, in the spirits by putrefaction venomous, with a fight, travail, and
labour of nature against the infection received in the spirits, whereupon by
chance follows a Sweat, or issues an humour compelled by nature, as also
chances in other sicknesses which consiste in humours, when they be in their
state, and at the worst in certain days judicial, as well by vomits,
bledinges, fluxes, as by sweates. That this is true, the self sweates do show.
For as in utter businesses, bodies yt sore do labour, by travail of the same
are forced to sweat, so in inner diseases, the bodies travailed laboured by the,
are moved to the like. In which labours, if nature be strong able to thrust out
the poiso by sweat (not otherwise let) ye person escapes: if not, it dies.
That it is a fever, thus I have partly declared, and more will straight by the
notes of the disease, under one showing also by the same notes, signs, and
short tarriance of the same, that it consists in the spirits. First by the
peine in the back, or shoulder, peine in the extreme parts, as arm, or
leg, with a flusshing, or wind, as it seems to certain of the patients,
flieng in the same. Secondly by the grief in the liver and the nigh stomach.
Thirdely, by the peine in the head, madness of the same. Fourthly by the passion
of the hart. For the flusshing or wind coming in the utter and extreme
parts, is nothing else but the spirits of those same gathered together, at the
first entering of the euell air, against the infection thereof, flyeng the same
from place to place, for their own safeguard. But at the last infected, they
make a grief where they be forced, which commonly is in tharme or leg (the
fartheste parts of their refuge) the back or shoulder: trieng there first a
brut as good soldiers, before they will let their enemy come further into
their dominion. The other grefes be therefore in tother parts aforsaid
sorer, because the spirits be there most pletuous as in their founteines,
whether always thinfection desires to go. For fro the liver, the nigh
stomach, brain, and heart, come all the.iij. sorts, and kinds of spirits,
the gouernoures of our bodies, as first sprung there. But from the hart, the
liuish spirits. In putrifieng whereof by the euel aier in bodies fit for it,
the heart is oppressed. Whereupon also follows a marvelous heaviness, (the
fifth token of this disease,) and a desire to sleep, never contented, the
senses in al parts being as they were bound or closed up, the parts
therefore left heavy, vnliuishe, and dull. Last follows the short abiding, a
certain Token of the disease to be in the spirits, as well may be proved by
the Ephemera that Galene writethe of, which because it consistethe in the
Spirits, lasts but one natural day. For as fire in hardes or straw, is soon
in flambe soon out, even so heate in the spirits, either by simple
distemperature, or by infection and putrefaction therein conceived, is soon in
flambe and soon out, and sooner for the vehemence or greatues of the same,
which without lingering, consumes soon the light matter, contrary to al other
diseases resting in humours, wherein a fire ones kindled, is not so soon put
out, no more then is the same in moist would, or fat Sea coals, as well by
the particular Example of the pestilence, (of al others most like unto this)
may be declared, which by that it stadeth in euel humours, tarries as I said,
sometime, from.iiij.vii.ix. xj. until.xiij. days, differentlie from this, by
reason thereof, albeit by infection most like to this same. Thus under one
labour shortelie I have declared, both what this disease is, wherein it
consists, howe and with what accidents it grieves and is different from
the Pestilence, and the propre signs, and tokens of the same, without the
which, if any do sweat, I take them not to Sweat by this Sickness, but
rather by fear, heate of the year, many clothes, great exercise, affection,
excess in diet, or at the worst, by a small cause of infection, and less
disposition of the body to this sickness. So that, insomoche as the body was not
al void of matter, sweat it did when infection came: but in that the mattere
was not great, the same could neither be perilous nor paineful, as in others,
in whom (...) was greater cause.

Hitherto I have showed the beginning, The causes.
name, nature, signs of this disease: now I will declare the causes, which
be.ij: infectio, impure spirits in bodies corrupt by repletio. Infection, by
thaire receiving euel qualities, distepring not only ye hete, but the hole
substance thereof, in putrifieng the same, that generally.ij. ways. By the time
of the year unnatural, by the nature site of the soil region. whereunto may be
put the particular accidents of this same. By the time of the year
unnatural, as if winter be hot dry, somer hot and moist: (a fit time for
sweates) the spring cold and dry, the fall hot moist. To this my be joined
the euel disposition by coustellation, which hath a great power dominion in al
erthly things. By the site nature of the soil regio, many ways. First
specially, by euel mists exhalatios drawn out of the ground by the sun in
the heate of the year, as chanced among the Greeks in the siege of Troy, whereby
died first dogs mules, after, me in great number: here also in Englad in
this m.d.lj. year, the cause of this pestilent sweat, but of divers nature.
Which mist in the country where it began, was scene fly fro town to town,
with such a stincke in mornings eueninges, that me could scarcely abide it.
The by dampes out of the earth, as out of Galenes Barathru, or the poets
auernu, or aornu, the dampes whereof be such, that they kill ye birds flieg over
them. Of like dampes, I heard in the north country in cole pits, whereby the
laboring me be straight killed, except before the hour of coming thereof (which
they know by ye flame of their cadle) they avoid the ground. Thirdly by
putrefactio or rot in groudes aftre great flouddes, in carions, in dead men.
After great fluddes, as happened in ye time of Gallien theperor at rome, in
Achaia Libia, where the seas suddenly did overflow ye cities nigh to yt same.
And in the.xi. year of Pelagius, when al the flouddes through al Italye did
rage, but chieflye Tibris at at Rome, which in many places was as high as the
walls of the city.

In carios or dead bodies, as fortuned here in Englande upon the sea banks in
the time of King Alured, or Alfrede, (as some Chroniclers write) but in the
time of king Ethelred after Sabellicus, by occasion of drowned Locustes cast up
by the Sea, which by a wind were driven out of France thither. This locust
is a fly in bigness of a manes thumb, in colour brown, in shape somewhat like
a greshopper, having.vi. fiete, so many wings, two tiethe, an head like a
horse, and therefore called in Italy Caualleto, where over ye city of Padoa, in
the year.m.d xlij. (as I remember,) I, with many more did see a swarm of
them, whose passage over the city, did last two hours, in breadth
inestimable to every man there. Here by example to note infection by deadde
men in Wars. either in rotting above the ground, as chanced in Athenes by
them of Ethiopia, or else in being buried ouerly as happened at Bulloigne, in
the year M.D.xlv. the year aftre king Henrye theight had conquered the same,
or by long continuance of an host in one place, it is more plain by daily
experience, then it neadeth to be showed.

Therefore I will now go to the fourth especial cause of infectio, the pent
aier, breaking out of the ground in yearthquakes, as chanced at Uenice in the
first year of Andrea Dandulo, then Duke, the.xxiiii. day of Ianuarye, and xx.
hour after their computacion. By which infectio mani died, many were borne
before their time. The v. cause is close, v^stirred air, therefore putrified or
corrupt, out of old wells, holes in ye ground made for grain, whereof many I did
se in about Pesaro in Italy, by openig the aftre a great space, as both those
coutrime do confess, also by example is declared, for yt many in openig the
vnwarely be killed. Out of caves, tobes also, as chased first in the country
of Babilonia, proceeding aftre into Greece, and so to Rome, by occasion that ye
soldiers of the emperor Marcus Antoninus, upon hope of money, brake up a golden
coffin of Auidius Cassius, spieg a little hole therein, in the temple of Apollo
in Seleucia, as Ammianus Marcellinus writes. To these my be joined the
particular causes of infectio, which I cal the accidents of the place,
augmenting the same. As nigh to dwelling places, merishe, muddy grounds,
puddles or donghilles, sinks or canales, easing places or carious, deadde
ditches or rotten grounds, close aier in houses or ualleis, with such like.
Thus much for the first cause.

The second cause of this Englyshe Ephemera, I said were thimpure spirits in
bodies corupt by repletio. Repletion I cal here, abundance of humores euel
maliciouse, from long time by little little gathered by euel diet, remaining in
the body, coming either by to much meat, or by euel meat in quality, as
infected fruit, meates of euel iuse or nutrimet: or both jointly. To such
spirits when the air infectiue comes cosonant, the be they distepered,
corrupted, sore handled, oppressed, the nature is forced, the disease
engendered. But while I do declare these impure spirits to be one cause, I
must remove your minds fro spirits to humours, for that the spirits be fed
of the fiuest parts thereof, aftre bring you again to spirits where I toke
you. And forsomuche as I have not yet forgotten to whom I write, in this
declaration I will leave a part al learned subtle reasos, as here void vnmiete,
only use such as be most evident to whom I write, easiest to be vnderstanden
of the same: and at ones therewith show also why it hauteth us English men more
the other nations. Therefore I pass over the vngetle savour or smell of the
sweat, grosenes, colour, and other qualities of the same, the quantity, the
danger in stopping, the manner in coming furthe readily, or hardly, hot or cold,
the notes in the excremetes, the state longer or soree, with such others,
which my be tokes of corrupt humours spirits, onli will stad upon.iii. reasos
declaring yt same sweat by great repletio to be in us not otherwise for al ye
euel air apt to this disease, more the other natios. For as heraftre I will
show, Gale cofirmeth, our bodies cannot fuffre any thig or hurt by corrupt
infectiue causes, except there be in the a certei matter prepared apt like to
receive it. else if one were sick, al should be sick, if in this countri, in al
coutres where the infection came, which thig we se doth not chase. For touching
the first reason, we se this sweting sickness or pestilet Ephemera, to be oft in
Englad, but never enters Scotland, (except the borders) albeit they both be
ioinetly within the copas of on sea. The same beginning here, hath assailed
Brabant the costs nigh to it, but never passed Germany, where ones it was in
like facio as here, with great mortality, in the year.m.d.xxix. Cause whereof
none other there is natural, then the euell diet of these three contries which
destroy more meates and drynckes without al ordre, coueniet time, reason, or
necessite, the either Scotlande, or all other countries under the sun, to the
great annolance of their own bodies and wits, hinderance of them which
have need, and great dearth and scarcity in their common welthes. Wherefore if
Esculapius the inuentour of phisike, ye saver of me from death, and restorer to
life, should return again ito this world, he could not save these sorts of
men, having so much sweating stuff, so many evil humours laid up in store,
fro this displeasante, fearful, pestilent disease: except they would learn a
new lesson, follow a new trade. For other wise, neither the avoiding of this
country (the second reason) nor fleing into others, (a commune refuge in
other diseases) will preserve us English men, as in this last sweat is by
experience well proved in Cales, Antwerpe, and other places of Brabant, where
only our contrimen ware sick, none others, except one or.ij. others of
thenglishe diet, which is also to be noted. The cause hereof natural is only
this, that they carried over with the, by like diet there incresed that which
was the cause of their disease. Wherefore let us asserteine our selves, that
in what soever country like cause and matter is, there coming like aier and
cause efficient, will make like effect and disease in persos of agreeable
complexions, age, and diet, if the time also do serve to these same, and in
none others. These I put, for that the time of the year hot, makethe much
to the malice of the disease, in opening the pores of the body, lettynge in
the evil aier, resoluynge the humores and making them flowable, and disposing
therefore the spirits accordingly, beside, that (as I showed in the first cause
of this pestilent sweat) it stirs and braweth out of the earth evil
exhalations and mists, to thinfection of the aier and displeasure of us. Diet
I put, for that they of the contrary diet be not troubled with it at all. Age
and complexion, for this, that although it spares no age of both kinds, nor
no complexion but some it touche the, yet for the most part (whereby rules and
reasones be always to be made) it vexed them of the middle age, best lust,
and them not much under that, and of complexions hot moist, as fitteste by
their naughty much subtlety of blode to fed the spirits: or nigh and like
to the same in some one of the qualities, as choleric in hete, phlegmatike in
moister, except tother their qualities, as dryness in choleric, cold in
phlegmatike, by great dominion over tother, did let. For the clean contrary
complerios to the infected aier, always remain helthful, saulfe and better
then tofore, the corrupt and infected aier notwithstanding. Therefore cold and
dry persons either it touched not at all, or very few, and that with no
dangers such I say as beside their complexion, (which is so harde to find in
any man exact and simple, as exact helthes) were annoied with some corrupt
humours spirits, therefore mete by so much to receive it, that by good reason.
For nothing can naturally have power to do ought against any thing, except the
same have in it self a disposition by like qualities to receive it. As the
cause in the foot cannot trouble the flank and leave the knee (the mean
betwixt) except there were a greater consent and likeness of nature in
sufferance (which we call sympathian) betwixt those then tother. Nor fire
refusing stones, ca^e burn hardes, straw, sticks and charcole, oil, wax
fat, and seacole, except these same first of al were apt, and by convenient
qualities disposed to be inflamed and burned. Nor any man goes about to burn
water, because the qualities thereof be contrary, and the body vndisposed to
the like of fire. By which reason it may also be perceived, that ye venemouse
quality of this corrupt is hot and moist. for it readily enfectethe the like
complexions, and those nygh unto them, and the contrary not at all, or hardly:
easily doth putrify, as do the Southe wyndes. Therefore next unto those cold
and dry complexions, old men escaped free, as like to them by age: and
children, as void of replecion consumed by their great hete, and therefore
always ready to eat. But in this disease the subtle humour evil and abundant
in full bodies fedyng ye spirits, is more to be noted then the humour
complexional, which notwithstanding, as an helper or hinderer to ye same, is
not to be neglected. For else it should be in all contries and persons
indifferently, where all complexiones be. The third and last reason is, yt
they which had this sweat sore with perille or death, were either men of
welthe, ease, welfare, or of the poorer sort such as were idle persons, good
ale drinkers, and Tavern haunters. For these, by ye great welfare of the one
sort, and large drinking of thither, heped up in their bodies much evil
matter: by their ease and idleness, could not waste and consume it. A
comfirmacion of this is, that the laborouse and thin dieted people, either
had it not, because they did eat but little to make the matter: or with no
great grefe and danger, because they laboured out much thereof. Wherefore
upon small cause, necessarily must follow a small effect. All these reasones go
to this end, that persons of all contries of moderate and good diet, escape
this English Ephemera, and those be only vexed there with, which be of
immoderate and evil diet. But why? for the evil humores and corrupt aier
alone? No. for the the pestilence and not the sweat should rise. For what then?
For ye impure spirits corrupt in them selves and by the infectiue aier. Why
so? for that of impure and corrupt humores, whether they be blode or others,
can rise none other then impure spirits. For every thing is such as that
whereof it comes. Now, that of the best and fineste of the blode, yea in
corrupt bodies (which best is nought) these spirits be engendered and fed,
I before expressed. Therefore who will have them pure and clean, and him self
free from sweat, must keep a pure and clean diet, and then he shall be sure.

Infection by the aier, The preservation.
and impure spirits by repletion thus found and declared to be the causes of
this pestilent sweat or English ephemera, let us now see howe we may
preserve our selves from it, and howe it may be remedied, if it chance, with
less mortality. I will begin with preservation. That most of all doth
stand in avoiding the causes to come of the disease, the things helping
forward the same, remouyng that which is already had gotten. Al be done by the
good order of things perteynyng to the state of the body. Therefore I will
begin with diet where I left, then go furth with aier where I began in
treating the causes, and declare the way to avoid infection, and so furthe to
the rest in order. Who that lust the to lyne in quiet surety, out of the
sudden danger of this English ephemera, he above all things, of little and
good must eat spare not. the last part whereof will please well (I doubt not)
us English men: the first I think never a deal. Yet it must please them
that entende to live without the reche of this disease. So doyng, they shall
easily escape it. For of that is good, can be engendered no evil: of that is
little, can be gathered no great store. Therefore helthful must he needs be and
free from this disease. that vsethe this kind of living and manner in
dietynge. An example hereof may the wise man Socrates be, which by this sort
of diet escaped a sore pestilence in Athenes, never fleing no keeping close
him felfe from the same. Truly who will live according to nature and not to
lust, may with this diet be well contented. For nature is pleased with a
little, nor seeks other then that the mind void of cares and fears may be in
quiet merrily, and the body void of grefe, may be in life sweetly, as
Lucretius writes. Here at large to run out until my breath were spent, as
upon a common place, against ye intemperace or excessive diet of Englande,
thincommodities displeasures of the same many ways: and contrary, in
commedation of mean diet and temperance (called of Plato sophrosyne, for that
it coserueth wisdom) and the thousand commodities thereof, both for helthe,
welthe, wit, and lunge life, well I might, lose my labour: such be our
English factions rather then reasones. But for that I purpose neither to wright
a lunge work but a short counseill, nor to weary the reders with that they
lust not to here, I will let that pass, and move the that desire further to
know my mind therein, to remember that I said before, of little good eat and
spare not, whereby they shall easily perceive my meaning. I therefore go furth
with my diet, wherein my counseill is, that the meates be helthfull, and
holsomly killed, sweetly saved, and well prepared in rostyng, sethyng, baking, so
furth. The bread, of sweat corn, well leuened, and so baked. The drink of sweet
malt and good water kyndly brewed, without other dross now a days used. No
wine in all the time of sweating, except to such whose sickness require it
for medicin, for fere of inflamynge opening, nor except yt half be well soden
water. In other times, old, pure, small. Wishig for the better executio hereof
oversight of good and helthsome victalles, there were appointed certain masters
of health in every city and town, as there is in Italie, which for the good
order in all things, may be in al places an example. The meates I would to be
veale, muttone, kid, old lamb, chikyn, capone, hen, cock, pertriche,
phesane, felfare, small birds, pigeon, young pecockes, whose flesh by a
certain natural secrete property never putrefy, as hath been proved. Conies,
pork of mean age, neither fat nor leave, the skin take away, roast, eat
cold: Tartes of prunes, gelies of veale capone. young befe in this case a little
poudered is not to be dispraised, nor new eggs good milk. Butter in a morning
with sage and few fasting in the sweating time, is a good preservative,
beside that it nourishes. Crabs, crauesses, picrel, perch ruff, gogion,
lampreis out of grauelly rivers, smeltes, dace, barbell, gornerd whityng,
soles, flunders, plaice, millers thumbs, minues with such others, sod in water
vinegre with rosemary time, sage, hole maces, served hot. Yea sweet salt fish
and ling, for the saltes sake wasting ye humores thereof, which in many fresh
fishes remain, may be allowed well watered to the that have non other, well
like it. Nor all fishes, no more then al fleshes be so evil as they be take
for: as is well declared in physique, approved by the old and wise romaines much
in their fishes, lusty chartusianes never in fleshes, helthful poor people
more in fish then flesh. But we are now a days so unwisely fine, and
womanly delicate, that we may in no wise touch a fisshe. The old manly
hardness, stout courage, peinfulnes of Englande is utterly driven away. in the
stead whereof, men now a days receive womanlines, become nice, not able to
withstand a blast of wind, or resist a poor fisshe. And children be so
brought up, that if they be not all day by the fire with a toste and butire,
and in their furs, they be straight sick.

Sauces to metes I appoint first above all things good appetite, and next
Olives, capers, iuse of lemones, Barberies, Pomegranetes, Orenges and Sorel,
veriuse, vineigre, iuse of unripe Grapes, thepes or Goseberies. After mete,
quinces, or marmalade, Pomegranates, Orenges sliced eaten with Sugar, Succate
of the pills or barks thereof, and of pomecitres, old apples and peers,
Prunes, Reisons Dates Nuts. Figs also, so they be taken before diner. else
no fruit of that year, nor raw herbs or rotes in sallattes, for that in
such times they be suspected to be partakers also of the enfected air.

Of air so much I have spoken before, as apperteinethe to the declaration of
enfection thereby. Now I will advise and counseill howe to keep the same pure,
for so much as may be, or less enfected, and correct the same corrupt. The
first is done in taking a way ye causes of enfectio. The second, by doing in
all points the contrary thereto. Take away the causes we may, in damnyng
diches, auoidynge carios, letting in open air, shunning such evil mists as
before I spake of, not opening or sturrynge evil brethynge places, landynge
muddy and rot grounds, burieng dede bodies, keeping canelles clean, sinks
easyng places sweat, remouynge dongehilles, box and evil sauouryng things,
enhabitynge high open places, close toward the sowthe, shut toward the
wind, as reason will thexperience of. M. varro in the pestilece at Corcyra
confirm the. Correct in doyng the contrary we shall, in dryenge the moist
with fires, either in houses or chambers, or on that side the cities, towns,
houses, that lies toward the infection and wind coming together, chefely in
mornings eueninges, either by burning the stubble in the field, or
windfallynges in the woods, or other wise at pleasure. By which policy
skilful Acron delivered Athenes in Gretia, and divine Hippocrates abdera in
Thratia fro ye pestilece, preserved fro the same other the cities in Greece, at
diverse times coyng with the wind fro aethiopia, illyria paeonia, by putting
to the fires well smelling garlades, flowers odours, as Galene and Soranus
write. Of like policy for purging the aier were the bonfires made (as I
suppose) fro long time he thereto used in ye midst of summer, and not only for
vigiles. In cofortyng the spirits also, and by altering the aier with sweet
odours of roses, sweat perfumes of the same, rosemary leaves, bays, and white
sanders cut, afewe cloves steped in rose water and vinegre rosate, the
infection shall be less noious. with the same you may also make you a sweet
house in casting it abroad therein, if first by auoidynge the russhes and
dust, you make the house clean. Have always in your handcercher for your nose
and mouth, both with in your house and without, either the perfume before
said, or vinegre rosate: and in your mouth a piece either of setwel, or of the
rote of enula campana well steped before in vinegre rosate, a mace, or berie of
Juniper. In want of such perfumes as is beforesaide, take of myrrh dry rose
leues of each a like quantite, with a little frank encense, for the like
purpose, and caste it upon the coals: or burn Juniper their beries. And for so
much as clenelines is a great help helthe, mine advise is, that all your
clothes be sweet smelling and clean, and that you wasshe your hands and face
not in warm water, but with rose water and vinegre rosate cold, or else with
the fair water and vinegre wherein the pills or barks of orenges and
pomegranates are sodden: or the pills of pomecitres sorel is boiled. for so
you shall close the pores ayenst the air, that it readily entre not, and cole
and tempre those parts so washed, according to the right entente in curing
this disease. For in al the discurse, preseruatio, and cure of this disease,
the chief mark purpose is, to minister such things as of their nature have
the faculty by colyng dryenge and closing, to resist putrefaction, strength
and defend the spirits, comfort the heart, and keep all the body ayenst the
displeasure of the corrupt air. Wherefore it shall be well done, if you take of
this composition following every morning the weight of.ij. d. i^.vi. sponefulles
of water or ^uleppe of Sorel, cast it upon your meat as pepper.. says citri,
acetos, ros. rub, sadal. citrin, an, 3. i, boli armeni orietal. 3. ^. 8, terr.
sigil. 3. 8, margarit. 3. i, fol. auri puri. no. iiii, misce. f. pull. diuidatur
ad pod. 3.8. Or in the stead of this, take fasting the quantity of a small
been of Mithridatum or Uenice triacle in a sponeful of Sorel, or Scabious
water, or by the self alone. And in going abroad, have in your hand either
an handekercher with vinegre and rose water, or a little musk balle of
nutmegs, maces, cloves, saffro, cinamome, of each the weight of.ii. d. fiuely
beat. of mastike the weight of ij. d. ob. of storax.v. d. of ladane.x. d. of
Ambre grise.vi. grains, of Musk.iii. grains dissolved in right Muscadel:
tempre al together, make a balle. In want of Mithridatum or such other as I
have before mentioned, use daily the Sirupes of Pom granates, Lemones, and
Sorrel, of each half an uncle, with as much of the watres of Tormentille,
Sorrel, and Dragones, fasting in the morning, and one hour before supper. A
toste in vinegre or veriuse of Grapes, with a little poulder of Cinamome and
Settewelle caste upon it. Or two figs with one nut carnelle, and ten
leaves of rue in each, and a little salt. Oboutire, rue, and sage, with bread
in a morning eaten next your heart, be as good preseruatiues, as theie be
easy to be had. These preseruatiues I here appoincte the more willingly
among many others further to be fetched, because these may easelier behadde,
as at hand in niede, which now to find is my most endeavour, as most
fruictfulle to whom I write. And this to be done I counsaille in the
sickness time, when first you hear it to be coming and begone, but not in
the fit. Always remembering, not to go out fastinge. For as Cornelius Celsus
wrytethe, Uenime or infection takes hold much sooner in a body yet fasting,
then in the same not fastinge. Yet this is not so to be understand, that in
the morning we shall straight as our clothes be on, stuff our bellies as fulle
as English men, (as the French man says to our shames,) but to be
content with our preseruatiues, or with a little meat both at breakefaste
(if custom and need so require) dinner and supper. For other wise nature, if
the disease should take us, should have more a do against the full bealy
and fearce disease, then it were able to sustain.

Aftre diet and air followethe filling or emptieng. Of filling in the name of
repletio I spake before. Of eptieng, I will now shortly write as of a thing
very necessary for the conseruauation of man health. For if that which is
euel within, be not by good means ways well fet out, it often times
destroys the life. Good means to fet out the euelle stuff of the body be
two, abstinence, avoidance.

Abstinence, in eating and drinckynge little, as a little before I said, and
seldom. For so, more goes away then comethe, and by little and little it
wastes the humours dries. Therefore (as I wiene) through the counseil of
Phisike, by the good civil, politic ordres, tedring the wealth of many so
much give to their bellies to their own hurts damages, not able for wat of
reason to rule the selves, thereby inclined to al vices and diseases: for
thauoiding of these same, increase of virtue, wit and health, saving
victuals, making plenty, avoiding lothesomenesse or weariness, by change,
in taking sometime of that in the sea, and not always destroieng yt of the
land, an ordre (without the which nothing can stand) and common wealth, days
of abstinence, and fasting were first made, and not for religion only.

Avoidance, because it cannot be safely done without the healpe of a good
Phisicien, I let pass here, expressing howe it should be done duelye
according to the nature of the disease and the estate of the personne, in an
other book made by me in Latin upon this same matter and disease. Who
therefore lusts to see more, let him loke upon that book. Yet here thus much
will I say, that if after evacuation or avoiding of humours, the pores of the
skin remain close, and ye sweating excrement in the flesh continues gross
(which thing howe to know, hereafter I will declare) then rub you the
person meanly at home, bathe him in fair water sodden with Fenel, Chamemil,
Rosemarye, Mallowes, Lauendre, last of al, power water half cold over al his
body, and so dry him, clothe him. Al these be to be don a little before yt end
of yt spring, that the humours may be seatled, and at rest, before the time of
the sweting, which comes commonly in somer, if it comes at al. For the
tormoiling of the body in that time when it ought to be most quiet, at rest,
and armed against his enemy, likes me not best here, no more then in the
pestilence. Yet for the present need, if it be so thought good to a learned
and discrete Phisicien, I condescend the rather. For as in this, so in alle
others before rehearsed, I remytte you to the discretion of a learned manne in
phisike, who may judge what is to be done, and how, according to the present
estate of your bodies, nature, custom, and proprety, age, strength, delyghte
and quality, time of the year, with other circumstances, and thereafter to
give the quantity, and make diversity of his medicine. Other wise loke not to
receive by this book that good which I entend, but that euel which by your own
folly you vudiscretelye bring. For good counseil may be abused. And for me to
write of every particular estate and case, which be so many as there be
men, were so great almost a business, as to number the sands in the sea.
Therefore seek you out a good Phisicien, and known to have skill, and at the
least be so good to your bodies, as you are to your hosen or shoes, for the
well making or mending whereof, I doubt not but you will diligently search out
who is know to be the best hosier or shoemaker in the place where you dwell:
and fly the unlearned as a pestilence in a comune wealth. As simple women,
carpenters, pewterers, brazier, sopeballe sellers, pulters, hostellers,
painters, apotecaries (otherwise then for their drogges.) auaunters the selves
to come from Pole, Constantinople, Italie, Almaine, Spain, France, Greece and
Turkie, Inde, Egipt or Jury: from ye service of Emperors, kings quienes,
promising help of al diseases, yea uncurable, with one or two drinckes, by
waters six months in continualle distilling, by Aurum potabile, or
quintessence, by drynckes of great and high prices, as though they were made of
the sun, moon, or sterres, by blessings and Blowinges, Hipocriticalle
prayenges, and foolish smokynges of shirts Smocks and kerchieffes, with such
others their fantasies, and mockeryes, meaning nothing else but to abuse
your light believe, and scorn you behind your backs with their medicines (so
filthy, that I am ashamed to name them) for your single wit and simple
belief, in trusting the most, which you know not at al, and understand least:
like to them which think, far fowls have fair feathers, although they be
never so euel favoured foul: as though there could not be so conning an
Englishman, as a foolish running stranger, (of others I speak not) or so
perfect health by honest learning, as by deceitful ignorance. For in the
error of these vnlerned, reasteth the (...) of your honest estimation, deer
blood, precious spirits, and swiete life, the thing of most estimation and
price in this world, next unto the immortal soul.

For consuming of euel matter within, and for making our bodies lusty,
galliard, helthful, I do not a little comende exercise, which in us English men
I allow quick, and liuishe: as to run after hounds and hawk, to shot,
wrestle, play at Tenes and weapons, toss the wind balle, skirmish at base
(an exercise for a gentleman, much used among the Italianes) and vaughting
upon an horse. Bowling, a good exercise for women: casting of the bar and
camping, I account rather a laming of legs, then an exercise. Yet I utterly
reprove them not, if the hurt may be avoided. For these a convenient time is,
before meat: due measure, reasonable sweating, in al times of the year,
saving in the sweating time. In the which I allow rather quietness then
exercise, for opening the body, in such persons specially as be liberally
freely brought up. Others, except sitting artificers, have their exercises by
daily labours in their occupatios, to whom nothing niedeth but solace only, a
thing convenient for every body that Iusteth to live in health. For else as no
other thing, so not health canne be lunge durable. Thus I speak of solace,
that I mean not Idleness, wisshing always no man to be idle, but to be
occupied in some honest kind of thing necessary in a common wealth. For I
account the not worthi meat drink in a como wealth, yt be not good for some
purpose or service therein, but take the rather as burdennes unprofitable and
heavy to the earth, men borne to fille a number only, and wast the fruit
which therthe doth give, willing sooner to fiede the Lacedaemonians old crooked
ass, which laboured for the living so long as it could for age, then such an
idle Engisshe manne. If the honesty and profit of honest labour and
exercise, conservation of health, preservation from sickness, maintenance
of life, advancement, safety from shameful deaths, defence from beggary,
dyspleasures by idleness, shamefulle diseases by the same, hatefulle vices,
and punishment of the immortalle soul, canne not move us to reasonable
labour and exercise, and to be profitable members of the commune welthe, let
at the least shame move us, seeing that other country men, of nought, by their
own wit, diligence, labour and activity, can pick out of a cast bone, a
wrethen straw, a lyghte feather, or an hard stone, an honest living: Nor ye
shall ever hear them say, alas master, I have no occupacio, I must either
beg or steal. For they can find other means between these two. And
forsomuche as in the case that now is, miserable persons are to be relieved in
a common wealth, I would wish for not favouring the idle, the discretion of.
Marc. Cicero the romaine were used in healping them: who would compassion
should be showed upon them, whom necessity compelled to do or make a fault:
no compassion upon them, in whom a fault made necessity. A fault makes
necessity, in this case of begging, in them, which might labour and serve,
will not for idleness: and therefore not to be pitied, but rather to be punished.
Necessity makes a fault in the, which wold labour serve, but cannot for age,
ipotecy. or sickness, and therefore to be pitied relieved. But to avoid
punishment to show the way to amendmente, I would again wish, yt for so much
as we be so euel disposed of our selfes to our own profits and commodities with
out help, this old law were renewed, which forbids the nedy impotent
parents, to be releued of those their welthi children, that by them or their
means were not brought up, either in good learning and Science, or honest
occupation. For so is a man without science, as a realm without a king. Thus
much of exercise, and for exercise. To the which I would now join honest
company between man and woman, as a part of natural exercise, and healpe to
yt emptieng lightning the body in other times allowed, in this sweating time
for helthes sake, for fear of opening the body, and resolving the spirits,
not approved, but for dout, that with lengthing the book, I should weary ye reader.
Therefore I let yt pass come to sleping waking, which without good ordre, be
greatly hurtful to the body. For avoiding the which, I take the mean to be
best, and against this sweat most commendable. But if by excess a man must in
either part offend, I permit rather to watch to much, then to lie in bed to
lunge: so that in watching, there be no way to surfeiting. Al these things
duly observed, and well executed, which before I have for preservation
mentioned, if more over we can set a part al affections, as fretting cares
thoughts, doleful or sorrowful imaginations, vain fears, folysh loves,
guawing hates, and give our selves to live quietly, friendly, merrily one with
an onther, as men were wont to do in the old world, when this country was
called merry Englande, and every man to meddle in his own matters, thinking
them sufficient, as they do in Italye, and avoid malice and dissension, the
destruction of commune wealths, and private houses: I doubt not but we shall
preserve our selves, both from this sweating syckenesse, and other diseases
also not here purposed to be spoken of.

But if in leaving a part these or some of them, The cure or remedy.
or negligently executing them, it chances the disease of sweating to trouble
our bodies, then passing the bonds and compass of preservation, we must come
to curation, the way to remedy the disease, the third and last part (as I
first said) to be entreated in this book. The principalle entente hereof, is to
let out the venom by sweat according to the course of nature. This is
brought to pass safely two ways, by suffering and serving handsomely nature, if
it thrust it out readily and kindly: and helping nature, if it be let, or
be weak in expellinge. Serve nature we shall, if in what time so ever it
takes us, or what so ever estate, we streyghte lay us down upon our bed,
if we be up and in our clothes, not taking them of: or lie stille, if we be
in bed out of our clothes, laying on clothes both ways, if we want,
reasonably, and not loadinge us therewith immeasurably. Thus laid and covered,
we must endeavour our selves so to continue with al quietness, for so much as
may be without fear, distruste, or faintehartednesse, an euel thing in al
diseases. For such surrendre and give over to the disease without resistance.
By which occasion many more died in the first pestilence at Athenes, that I
spake of in the beginnynge of this book, then other wise should. Our keepers,
friends and lovers, must also endeavour them selves to be handesome and
dilygente about us, to serve us redilye at al turns, and never to leave us
during four and twenty hours, but to loke well unto us, that neither we
caste of our clothes, nor thrust out hand or foot, during the space of the
said four and twenty hours. For albeit the great daungere be paste after
twelve hours, or fourtene, the last of trial, yet many die aftre by to much
boldenes, when they think them selves most in suretye, or negligence in
attendance, when they think no necessity. Whereby it is proved that without
dout, the handsome diligence, or careless negligence, is the saving, or
casting away of many. If.ij. be taken in one bed, let them so continue,
although it be to their unquietness. For fear whereof, for the more
quietness safety, very good it is during all the sweating time, that two
persons lye not in one bed. If with this quietness, diligence, and ordre, the
sick do kindelye sweat, suffer them so to continue, without meat all
the.xxiiij. hours: without drink, until the fifth hour, if it may be.
Always taking heed to them in the fourth, seventh, ninth, eleventh hours
specially, and fourtenth also, as the last of trial and daungier, but of
less in both. For these be most perilous, as I have observed this year in
this disease, having ye hours judicial, as others have their days, and
therefore worse to give any thing in, for troublyng nature standing in
trialle. Yet where more danger is in forbearing then in taking, I counseill not
to spare in these hours to do as the case requires with wisdom discretion,
but less then in other hours. In the fifth howre give them to drink
clarified ale made only doulcet with a little sugar, out of a cruet, or glass
made in cruet facion, with a nebbe, for fear of raisynge them selves to
receive the drink offered, so to let the sweat, by the air striking in. But
if the sick on this wise beforesaid cannot sweat kyndly, then nature must be
helped, as I said before. And for so much as sweat is let in this disease
four ways, by disorder, wekenes of nature, closeness of the pores in the
skin, grosnes of the humours: my counseil is to avoid disorder by such
means as hitherto I have taught, and next to open the pores if they be close,
and make thin the matter, if it be gross, and provoke sweat, if nature be
weke. Those you shall do by gentle rubbynges, this by warm drinckes as
hereafter straight I will declare. And for that every man hath not the knowledge
to discern which of these is the cause of let in sweating, I will show you
plainly howe to do with most surety and lest offense. I will beginnne with
wekenes of nature. Therefore remember well that in treating the causes of this
disease, I said that this sweat chauncethe commonly in them of the mydde age
and best lust, the infection having a certain concordance, or convenience
with the corrupt spirits of them more then others. Know again that nature
is weke, ij. ways, either in the self, or by the annoiance of an other. In
the self, by want of strength consumed by sickness or other wise. By
annoiaunce of an other, when nature is so overlaid with the quantity of evil
humours that it can not stir. Between these two set your wit, and se
whether the person be lusty or sickly. If he be lusty, understand that the
sweat doth not stop for wekenes of nature in it self. Then of necessity it
must be for some of tother causes. But for which, thus know. Consider
whether the lusty person were in foretyme given to much drinking, eating and
ravening, tomoch ease, to no exercise or bathinges in his health, or no. If all
these you find in him, know that both nature is wekened by the annoiance of
the humours, and that the skin is stopped, and the humour gross, and that
for this the sweat is let. If you find only some of these, and that
rauenynge, annoiance is the cause. If want of exercise or bathinges, stoppinges
of the pores and closeness, or grosenes of humours, or both, be the cause of
not sweating. On the othersyde, if the person be sickly, it is easily know
that his wekenes consists in nature the self. And for so much as weke folks
and sick shall also by other causes not sweat, consider if in his sickness he
hath sweat much or no, or hath be disposed to it and could not. If he
neither hath sweat, nor could sweat disposed, know that closeness of the
skin, and grosenes of the humour is the cause. Therefore every thing in his
kind must be remedied. Wekenes of nature, by drinks provoking sweat:
closeness, grosenes, by rubbing, as I said. But be ware neither to rub or
give drinks, except you see cause as beforesayd. Forother wise, the one
hindrethe nature, and tother lets out the spirits wastes ye strength.
Therefore accordingly, if rub you must, give to the sick in to their beds
a new and somewhat harde kerchefe, well warmed but not hot, and bid them
rub all their bodies over therewith under the clothes, neither to much
neither to little, nor to harde or to soft, but meanly between, taking you
heed which be about them, that by stirrynge their arms they raise not the
clothes to let in the air. This done, if case so require, give the a good
draught of hot possette ale made of swiete milk turned with vinegre, in a
quart whereof percely, and sage, of each haulfe one little handful hath been
sodden, with iii. sliftes of rosemary, ij. fenel roots cut, and a few hole
maces. Always remembrynge here, as in other places of this book, to heate the
herbs in a peuter dish before the fire, or wash them in hot water, before
you put them in to the posset ale, and that you put their to no cold
herbs at any time during the hole fit. Or give them posset ale hot with
rosemary, dittane, germander. Or bay beries, anise seades, calamintes with
claret wine sodden and drunk warm. Or white wine with whore and wild tansy
grown in medes sodden therein, and ii. d. weight of good triacle, drunk hot,
or in yt stead of that, wild tanesy, mogwort or feuerfue. These provoke sweat,
may easily be had, be metest for the which have al ye causes beforesayde of
letting the same. But specially if for cold and gross humours, or for
closeness of the skin, the sweat commethe not furthe. If with one draught
they sweat not, give them one other, or.ii, successively, after half one
hour between, and increase the clothes, first a little above the mean, after,
more or less as the cause requires, make a little fire in the chamber of clean
wood, as ash oak, with the perfume of bdellium: or swiet wood, as Juniper,
fyrre, or pine, by theimselues: remembrynge to withdraw the fire, when they
sweat fully, and the clothes above the mean, by little and little as you laid
them on, when they first complain of fainting. And after.xii. or.xiiii.
hours, some also of the mean, but one after an other by half one hour
successively with discretion, always not looking so much to the quantitte of
the sweat, as what the sick may saufely bear. And in such case of
faintynge, suffer competent open aier to come into the chamber, if the same and
the whether be hot, for smoderynge the patient, by such windows as the wind
liethe not in, nor opens to the south. Put to their noses to smell vinegre
and rose water in an handkercher, not touching them there with so nigh as
may be. Cause them to lie on their right side, and bow them selves forward,
call them by their names, and beat them with a rosemary branch, or some
other sweet like thing. In the stead of posset ale, they which be troubled
with gowtes, dropsies, reumes, or such other moist evil diseases, chancing
to sweat, may drink a good draught of the stronger drink of Guaiacum so hot
as they can, for the like effect, as also others may, not having these
deseases, if it be so ready to them as the other. After they ones sweat fully,
myue advise is not to give any more posset ale, but clarified ale with sugar,
during the hole fit, neither unreasonably, nor so oft as they call for it,
neither yet pinching them to much when they have need, always taking heed
not to put any cold thing in their mouth to cole and moist them with, nor
any cold water, rose water, or cold vinegre to their face during the sweat
and one day after at the least, but always use warms according to nature,
never contrariyng the same so nigh as may be. If they rave or be phrenetike,
put to their nose the same odour of rose water vinegre, to let the vapours
from the headde. If they sleep, use them as in the case of fainting I said,
with betyng them and calling them, pulling them by the ears, nose, or
here, suffering them in no wise to sleep until such time as they have no lust
to sleep, except to a learned ma in physic the case appear to bear the
contrary. For otherwise the venom in sleep continually runs inward to yt
hart. The contrary hereof we must always intende, in provoking it outward by
all means during the fit, which so lunge lasts in burning and sweating,
as the matter thereof hath any fury or apt parts therefore. For as great
strong wine, ale, or bear, so lunge do burn as their is matter in them apt
to be burned, and then cesse when that which remainethe is come again to his
first nature: that is, to such water clear unsavoury, as either the bruer
received of the river, or vine of theearth: even so the body so lunge
continuethe burning and sweating, as their is matter apt therefore in the
spirits, and then leaves, when the corrupcion taken of the finest of the
evil blode is consumed, and the spirits left pure and clean as they were
before the time of their corruption.

This done, and the body by sufficient sweat discharged of the venom, the
person is saulfe. But if he by vnrulines brekyng his sweat, sweateth not
sufficiently, the he is in danger of death by yt venom that doth remain, or
at the least to sweat ones again or oftener, as many hath done, falling in
thrice, six times, yea, xii, times some. If sufficiently the sweat be come,
you shall know by the lightness cherefulnes of the body, lanckenes in all parts,
by the continual sweating the hole day and out of all parts, which be the
best and wholesome sweates. The other which come but by times only in certain
parts, or broken, be not sufficient nor good, but very evil, of whose
insufficiency, ij. notes learn: a swelling in ye parts with a blackenes, a
tinglyng or pricking in the same. Such I advise to appoint them selves to
sweat again to rid their bodies of that remains, abide it out until they
feel their bodies lank light, and to move the sweat as before I said, if the
same come not kyndly by the self. If they cannot forbear meat during ye space
of their fit, and fast out their.xxiiij. hours, without danger, give them
a little of an alebrie only, or of a thin candel of an egg sodden with one
hole mace or ij. If they be forced by nature to ease them selves in the mean
time, let them do it rather in warm sheets put into them closely, then to
arise. After they have thus fully sweat, convey closely warm clothes into
their beds, and bid them wipe themselves there with in al parts curiously:
and be ware that no air entre into their open bodies (and specially their
arm holes, the openest rarest part thereof) to let the issue of that which
doth remain. The like may be done in the rest of their fit, with like
warenes, for that clenlinesse comfortethe nature, and relieves the patient. If
in during out the four and twenty hours there be thought daungiere of
death without removing, rather warm well the other side of the bed, and will
him to remove himself into it, the to take him up remove him to an other bed,
which in no case my be done. For better is a doubtful ware hope, then a
certain auentured death. The four and twenty hours passed duly, they may
put on their clothes warm, arise, and refresshe them selves with a caudle
of an egg swietelye made, or such other meates and sauces reasonably and
smally taken, as before I meucioned. And if their strength be sore wasted, let
them smelle to an old swiet apple (as Aristotle did by his report in the book
de pomo) or hot new bread, as Democritus did, by the record of Laertius in
his life, either by it self alone, or dipped in well smelling wine, as Maluesey
or Muscadelle, sprinkled with the powder of mintes. Orenges also and Lemones,
or such musk balls as I before described, be things mete for this purpose.
For as I said in my ij. little books in Latin de medendi methodo, of devise to
cure diseases, there is no thing more comfortable to the spirits then good
and swiet odours. On this wise advised how to order your selves in al the time
of the sit, now this remains, to exhort you not to go out of your houses
for.iij. days, or.ij. at the least after the fit passed, and then wisely,
warily, and not except in a fair bright day, for fear of swouning after
great emptiness, and vnwont air, or for forcing nature by soubdaine striking
in of the same aier, cold, or evil, in to the open body. For nature so forced,
makes often times a sore and soubdaine flux, as well after auoidaunce of these
humores by sweat, (as was this year well scene in many persons in diverse
contries of Englande for none other cause) as of others by purgation.

Thus I have declared the beginning, name, nature, accidents, signs, causes,
preseruations, and cures natural of this disease the sweating sickness,
English Ephemera, or pestilent sweat, so shortly plainly as I could for ye
comune saufty of my good countrymen, help, relieve, defence of the same against
ye soubdaine assaults of the disease, to satisfy the honest request of my
loving friends and gentle acquaintance. If other causes there be supernatural,
them I leave to the divines to search, and the diseases thereof to cure, as a
matter with out the compass of my faculty.

IMPRINTED at London, by Richard Grafton Printer to the kings majesty.

Anno. Do. 1552.

Cum priuilegio ad impri^ mendum solum.




