A PROGNOSTICATION OF RIGHT GOOD effect, fructfully augmented, containing
plain, brief, pleasant, chosen rules, to judge the whether for ever, by the
Sun, Moon, Sterres, Cometes, Raynbowe, Thunder, Clouds, with other
Extraordinary tokens, not omitting the Aspects of Planetes, with a brefe
Judgement for ever, of Plenty, Lack, Sickness, Death, Wars c. Opening
also many natural causes, worthy to be know. To these and others, now at the
last are adjoined, diverse general pleasant Tables: for ever manyfolde ways
profitable, to al manner men of understanding: therefore again publisshed by
Leonard Dygges Gentleman, in the year of our Lord. 1555.

(*)

Imprinted at London, within the black Friars, by Thomas Gemini. 1555.

THE CONTENTS.
First ye have many pleasant chosen rules for ever, to judge alteratio of
whether, by the Sun, Moon, Sterres, Cometes, Raynbow, Thunder, Clouds, with
many tokens extraordinary: not omittinge the Coiunctions, Quadratures, and
Oppositios of Planetes, among them selfes, and with the Moon also: and their
conbustion, in the.12. signs celestial. 2 Then ensue natural causes of such
alteration, according to Aristotele: first of the Raynbowe, then of Rain,
Dew, Snow, Hayle, Wind, Earthquakes, Thunders, and Lightninges. 3 The
causes and operations of Cometes, Flames, and other horrible fyrye sights,
apperinge in the air. 4 The natural causes, and significatios of Eclipses,
both of Sun and Moon, with the true proportion of all the Planetes, and
fixed Sterres, unto the earth. 5 Causes natural of many Suns and Moons,
appearinge at one time on the earth. 6 Then ensue the Aspects of the Moon,
and her signification, in the 12. celestial signs, conducing to all manner
affairs. 7 A table, declaring what sign the Moon is in, for ever:
conteyninge the aptest time to let blood, to take purgatios, and to bathe. 8
How to know at all times, what the Moon differs fro the Sun: I mean what
signs and degrees of the Zodiac are between them. 9 Ye have a coducible note of
all the euel days in every month: with other necessaries: for letting blood
also, with the dominio of the Moon in mans body: for pourging, and bathing,
more largely then by the Table tofore said. 10 Of inundations or fluddes, with
the metest time of Timbre falling, Sowing, Planting, Grafting, Hearclipping,
Shaving, and Geidlng. 11 For farther knowledge in things following the Sondaies
letter and Leap year, is brefly declared by a Table, at no time to be altered.
12 A table, as general for the Prime and Epact. 13 A table to find the
moveable feasts for ever. 14 Then is opened plainly the age of the Moon at
all times, the full, and quarter, for ever. 15 A table showing continually the
true time of ebbing and flowing, in most coasts of Englande. 16 Here is also
declared for ever, how log time the Moon shy neth, when she rises and
sets, with her continuace on the Horizon, or earth. 17 A Table for the
break of the day, and twilight, and for this country the true hour and very
mynute of the Sun rising, and going down, with the just quantity or
length of every day in the year, and the length of the night also. 18 The
hour of the night is known by the Moon, and that dyuersly. 19 The hour of
the day doth plainly appear by right shadow: that is, by any thing directly
standing up, and also by shadow Geometrical, which is squyre shadow. 20 The
exact hour of the night is pleasantly searched by Sterres and Tables
calculated, with an instrument appointed for that practise. This instrument is
a perfect Dial for the day, of al other the ground, whose making, reringe,
placinge, and use is playnlye opened. 21 Before the peculiar Calendar, ye have
a brefe Kaledar general, containing things commonly desired.
Here ends the contents.
To the right honourable, Sir Edward Fines, of the noble order of the Garter
Knight, Lord Clinton and Say, c. Leonard Digs wissheth continuance of
health, and daily encreace of honour. (,:,)
Sith my late trobles (right honourable, and singular good lord) my duty hath
made me careful to procure, that some fruit of my studies might declare me
thankfully minded, toward your lordship, emoge other honourable, to whom I
owe my self, with all my endeuore, and fruits of study. For the performance
whereof, not only your lordshippes late talk of a Prognostication, seemed to
make that argument fittest: but also the manifest imperfectios, and manifold
errors yearly committed, did crave the aid of some that were both willing, and
able to perform the truth in like maters. I thought it therefore worthy the
labour, truly and brefely to collect many things, both necessary, and
pleasant, as well for Nobility as others: and to adioyne them to my general
Prognostication, imprinted the year 1553. augmentinge diverse ways the same:
and more orderly placing such as were before set forth. Your honour shall here
receive, in this little book, by infallible rules taught for ever, a truth of
all such things as heretofore have ben put forth of other for one years
profit only, compelled thereby of necessity to make a yearly renewing of
them: whereupon errors many increased. You shall have diverse other conclusions
general, of none before attempted. These (right honourable lord) according unto
my duty, I do present, and beseech you in good worth to receive: and have
willed them to pass under protection of your Lordshippes name: that if to any,
any commodity ensue thereby, such as receive it, may have cause to further
me, in yeldinge thanks to your honour.

To the Reader.
TO avoid (Gentle reader) the yearly care, travails, and peines of other,
with the confusions, repugnaces, and manifold errors, partly by negligence,
oft through ignorace, committed: I have again briefly set forth a
Prognostication general, for ever to take effect: adjoining thereto diverse
profitable collectios, many pleasant coclusios, easy of all willing ingenious to
be perceived Here note (Redder) where as the elevate Pole, Meridian should be
considered: in this work it is performed for London: because I wiss he this
Meridian, Situation, or Clime the exact truth of things. If any yearly
practises in like maters, agree not with my calculatios: be assured, they are
false, or at the least for other Eleuatios, or Meridians supputated, and
therefore little serving thy purpose. And that the late rude inuetios, and gross
devises of some (this year, and two years past, published) might be of them
perceued, then filed, and so serve to some profit: I have purposed even now to
put forth a book named Panauges, well serving their turn, and so generally and
most exactly all Europe, pleasant, profitable to the learned, and no small
delight to all manner me. An other book is also ready to come to thy hands,
titled Tectonicon, a treasure unto the Masons, Carpenters, and Landmeaters:
correcting their old errors, wrongfully rekened of them as infallible grounds:
teaching faithfully, sufficiently, and very brefely, the true mesuration of all
manner land, tymbre, stone, board, glass, c: and at the end coteining an
Instrument Geometrical, appointed to their vse-Take in good worth these labours
(Loving reader) and loke shortly for the pleasant fruit Mathematical, eve such
as have ben promised by my friends, and partly by me. Neither shall my desire
to profit here stay: but entendeth farther to proceed, if these seem accepted
As the good will of Printers not had, hath kept the foresaid from you: so I
trust the willing mind and excellecie of Thomas Gemini, shall bring them
shortly unto you. Certes my hope is, while life remains, not to be vnfruteful
to this commune wealth, with study, and practise.

Against the reprouers of Astronomy, and sciences Mathematical.
I Am diversely occasioned, loving Reader, somewhat to write in the commendatio
of the Mathematicals, which needed not: but only to open the foolish rasshenes,
and rasshe foolishenes of such, which of late have in writing dispraised these
goodly arts. It is an old said saw, and true: Scientia non habet inimicum
nisi ignorant. But to avoid tediousness, and chiefly for the more satisfieng,
Vituperant, qui simpliciter eas ignorant.
I refer all of that sort, which have tasted any learning (the rest not
regarded) to the first part of famous Guido Bonatus, de vtilitate Astronomiae
in communi: where he writes contra illos, qui dicunt quod Scientia stellarum
non potest sciri ab aliquo: contra illos, qui dixerunt quod scientia stellarum
non est vtilis, sed potius damnosa c. contra illos, qui contradicunt iudiciis
Astronomiae, qui reprehendunt eam, nescientes dignitatem eius, eo quod no est
lucratiua. Also for brevity, I appoint all nice divines, or (as Melanctho
terms them) Epicurei Theologi, to his hye comendatios touching Astronomy,
uttered in his epistles to Simo Grineus, to Schonerus, and at the peroration of
Cardanus five books, where he shows how far wide they allege the scriptures
against the Astronomer, which make wholly with the Astronomer. Melancthon
writes and affirms, Arrogantiam esse cum summa stultitia coniunctam, venari
choragium aliquod gloria, ex insectatione artium, quae sunt graui autoritate
doctorum c. prudetium receptae. He calls it manifestum insaniae genus,
declaring quod magis opus habet Medicis, qua Geometris, advising the learned not
to give ear unto their folly. Sinamus (ait) una cu Epicuro ineptire. Which
counsel lo, I follow. Now therefore, ye enemies of all good doctrine, either
give an overthrow, and that with your pen, or let famous Guido, or learned
Melancthon satisfy. If neither: certes I will shortly (God sparing life) take
some payne in publisshyng the wonderful unknown pleasant profits of these
dispraised high knowleges, and by that means to enforce silence. Now in few,
for thy encouragement in these, thus I say and trewly, the ingenious learned,
and well experienced circuspect student mathematical receives daily in his
witty practises, more pleasant joy of mind, then all thy goods (how rich so
ever thou be) canne at any time purchase. Id tantum quod pulchrum est, quod
purum est quod diuinum est, nihil mortale sapiens dulci ardor amplectitur. Vt
^ulta paucis (cred mihi) extingui dulce erit Mathematicarum artium labore.
Now to end, that learned Guido, that excellent Guido Bonatus, shows what
Astrologi or Astronomy is, and ought not says he, by any mean to be
reprehended, in that the most wisest, yea, the holy fathers have practised
that sciece. He proves it one of the chief sciences Mathematical, by the
autoritie of the best learned, and by Aristotele in his Posteriorum. Howe
comes it to pass loving Reader, saying it is a noble science, et scientia
est notitia vera conclusionum, quibus propter demonstrationem firmiter
assentimur, that it is counted vain, and of so small strength. The secret
truths and most pleasant profits therein not desired, yea, utterly despised,
and of some busy byghtinge bodies rejected as very lies. Let no man doubt
ignorancie, the great enemy of all pure learning Stulti negligunt et
cont^nunt: Q ui contradicit, ambitiosus est, Q ui ma ledicit, fa^ us.
hath wrought this. Nam incertam la hanc artem vulgus, propter errores now
arti, sed bominum indoctiss^orum inscitie, et temeri^ tati (...)putandos, qui
citra delectum omnia effutiunt. Thus I leave indigestly farther to trouble:
favour me as I tender the furtherance of good learnings, profitable to a
common wealth. Fare most heartily well, unfeigned good Christian Reader.

HOWE TO IVDGE WEATHER by the Sun rising, or going down.
THe Sun in the Horizon, or rysynge, clear and De obseruandis ^eteoris.
bright, shows a pleasant day: but thinlie overcast with a cloud, betokens
foul weather. Also at the going down, the body diverse coloured or red, ad
about dispersed with like cloud des, the beams red, and of length,
{pro}nounce great wyndes the next day fro that part. Blaknes in the Sun or
Moon betokens water: red, signifies wind. The element red in the
evening, the next day fair: but in the morning red, wind and rain. Also
the Sun beams spottid, grene, pale, or black, gathered to a cloud,
signify ^yne. Further the Sun at the setting playnlye seen without any
cloud, decla reth a fair night to ensue. Here note, Ptolome wills us
diligently to observe the circle, or circles about the Sun. If it be
clea(...) and the circle of no continuance, behold fair weather: if many of
them, wind. Wyndes more vehement are signified, if that the circles be some
what red, here and there broken: but these ob scured, thycke, and black,
look for cold, wind, and snow. What Note.
is spoken of the Sun, touching the circles, the same is meant of the Moon.
Note here that greater wyndes chance in the day, than in the night.

How weather is declared by the colour of the Moon: and by the nature of the
sign wherein she is.
IF the Moon in the third of her change, yea three days before the full, or in
the midst of the quarter, be found of pure light: no thing copasyng her, the
end direct up, she {pro}mi^ith fair weather, but bent to red colour, provokes
wind. The Moon pale, or some Luna rube^ ventat, pallor pluit, Alba s^ renat.
what inclined to black, obscure or thick, threatnith rain. Also by the
nature of the sign, whether may be judged, thus, according to Staeflerinus,
Monte regius, Leupoldus, ad famous Guido Bonatus, with others well travailed in
the mutacions of air. Consider the nature of the sign where the Moon is, at
the change, quarter, and full. If she be in hot dry lignes, as Aries, Leo,
Sagittarius, in winter hot, earthy. wyndy. * watery.
a good token of fair weather: in somer, a great signification of immoderate
heat: if in erthy, cold and dry signs, as Taurus, Virgo, and Capricornus, in
winter judge cold, frost, and snow to ensue: but in somer temperate weather.
In aerie and wyndy^ signs, as Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius, much wynd. If in
watery cold and moist lignes, as Cancer, Scorpius, and Pisces, in winter wet
weather: in somer a pleasant temperature.

Also, the Sun in Aquarie: the Moon, at the change there, or in Sagittarie,
or at the full in Leon: betokens rain. The Sun, in Pisces, or in Aries:
the Moon, in Virgo, Libra, or Sagittarie: signifies rain, especially in
watery dwellinges. The Moon in Aquari, or Pisces, look for change of weather:
the chiefly she troubles the air. The Moon: also at the change, or rather at
the full, in Aries, Libra, Scorpius, or Pisces, tempestuous weather folowith.
The Sun in Aquari, in Aries, Libra, or Scorpio, but chiefly in Leon: the
Moon, then at the full, and that after rain or missinges: look for
lightning, thundering. c. Also the Sun, or Moon food in Pisces, without all
help of Mars, it betokens abundance of rain, lightning, thunder. c. To
conclude the Moon, in Cancer, Leo, Capricornus, or Aquarius, aided with any
aspect, but chiefly with the opposition or quadrate of Venus, rain folowyth.

The judgment of weather by sterres.
Behold the sterres whose magnitude you know best. If they appear of much
light, in bigness great, more blazing the they Cum maior^ apparent, tum enim
Humore medius crassescit ^er.
are commonly, it be tokeneth great wind or moisture in that part where they
show: in winter, cold and frost. When sterres seem to run in the elemet, it
shewyth wind. Affirm also alteration of weather if they be few in nubre,
cloudy, and of little light. Further when dim sterres appear with long fiery
tails, judge wyndes, and great drougthe: the more in nubre, the greater effect.
When sterres in the night (as it is said) shot, or seem to fall, it arguith
wind in that part: If in diverse places, inordinate wyndes: if in all places,
then pronounce Wyndes, Thunder, Lightnynges, yea weather most tempestuous.

The signification of Cometes
Cometes signify corruption of the air. They arsignes of earthquakes, De
comctar^ prodigiis, leg Cardanil. lib. 4. fol. 83.
of wars, changing of kingdoms, great derth of corn, yea a common death of
man, and beast.

How by the clouds change of weather is perceived.
IF thyck clouds resembling flocks, or rather great heaps of woll, be
gatherid in many places, they show rain. Also when gross, thick, dark
clouds, right over the north part, or somewhat declining to the west, are close
with the earth, immediately folowyth rain. If they appear like hills,
somedeale from the earth, a good token of weather overpassed. Black clouds,
signify rain: white clouds apperyng in winter, at the Horizon, two or three
days together, prognosticate cold, and snow.

Of the raynebowe and his effect, touching alteration of air..
IF in the morning the raynebow appear, it signifies moisture, onlesse great
drouth of air work the contrary. If in the Arcus niss sole aduerso non
fiunt. Non apparet nisi cum Vap^ res rarifica^tur, vel inspis santur.
evening it show it self, fair weather ensues: so that abundant moyste air
take not away the effect. Or thus.

The rain bow appering, if it be fair, it betokens foul weather: if foul,
loke for fair weather. The grener, the moare rain: redder, wind.

Of Thundres: what they signify.
THundres in the morning signify wynd: about Noone, rain: Signum futurorum
bellorum.
in the evening great tempest. Some write (their ground I see not) that
Sonnedayes thundre should bring the death of learned men, Judges, and others:
Mondays thundre, the death of women: Tuesdays thundre, plenty of grain:
Wednesdayes thundre, the death of harlottes, and other blodshede: Thursdays
thudre, plenty of sheep, c^rne: Fridays thundre the slaughter of a great man,
and other horrible murders. Saterdayes thundre a general pestilent plage, and
great death.

How weather is known after the change of every Moon, by the prime days.
SVnday prime, dry weather. Monday prime moist weather. Tuesday prime, cold
and wyndie. Wedensday prime, water full. Thursday prime fair and clear.
Friday prime, myxte weather. Saturday prime, moist weather.

Now ensuyth extraordinary tokens for the knowledge of weather.
SOme have observed evil weather to follow, when watery fowls Co(...)no tokens of
weather, me^e for all manner wits.
leave the sea, desiring land: the fowls of the land flyeng high: the
cryeng of fowls about waters, making a great noise with there wings: Also the
sees swelling with uncustomed waives: If bestes eat gredyly: if they lycke there
hooves: if they suddenly move here and there, making a noise, brethyng up to
the air with open nostrils: rain folowyth. Also the busy heuing of moules,
the appering or coming owte of woormes: hens resorting to the {per}che or
rest covered with dust, declare rain. The ample woorkyng of the spinnar in the
air: the ant busied with her eggs: the bees in fair weather not far watering:
the cotinual prating of the crow, chiefly twice or thrice quick calling,
show tempest. When the crow or raven gapith against the son, in somer,
heate follows. If they busy themselves in proyning or washing, ad that in
winter, look for rain. The uncustomed noise of pultrie, the noise of swyne,
of pecokes, declare the same. The swalowe flyeg and beating the water: the
chirpinge of the sparrow in the morning, signify rain. Rain suddenly dried
up: woody coueringes strayter then of custom: bells heard further then
comonli: the wallowynge of dogs: the alteration of the cock crowing: all
declare rainy weather. I leave these, wating the good ground of the rest. If
the lernid be desirefull of the too foresaid, let them read grave Virgil primo
Georgicorum At Bor. c.

There be a multitude of other not extraordinary but of the best known causes:
many for brevity here omitted: the moare part not mentioned, because they
pass the capacity of the common sort, upon all the which the Astronomer doth
well and lernydly conclude. I doubt not there be also some time unknown
maters, mitigatinge the aforesaid, or provoking tempests unloked for, which
nether experience, no learning hath stablisshed. How vnkynd (these considered)
yea how far from worthy thanks giving are they, which in general heddily do
blame, checking bitterly the Astrologer, with these iudiciarie maters, (the
least part among a nubre of his most certain doings) when things fortune
contrary to expectation? Understand gentle reader: the co sent of a multitude
famously learnid is their buclar, even in these maters iudiciari: who have
weighed a long time prudently, the great strength, the vehement force, and
marvelous natures, of all erratical and celestial costellatios, with their
Angles, Radiations, Aspects, Affections, Stationes, Progressions, Defections,
Dispositions, Applications, Preventions, Ref^enations, Contrarieties,
Abscisions, Coniunctions, Quadratures, and Oppositions. c. Therefore extreme
folly, yea mere madness doth he utter, which imbraydeth or bacbiteth these
knowleges, not remembering the great, and manifold benefits, had through
them, and that with most certentie in all other doings.

What Meteoroscoper, yea who lernyd in maters astronomical, notith not the
great effects at the rising of the ster called the Canis minoris ^fficatia.
Little dog? Trewlie the consent of the best learnid do agree of his force:
yea Plinie, in his history of nature affirms the sees the most fierce, wynes
to flow in cellars, standing waters to move, Orionis, Are* cturi, Coronae,
caprae, succula rum effectus... cum aut.... cum cum ^ Aut cum vel cum.
dogs inclined to madness then most wood. Farther these costellations, Orion,
Arcturus, Corona, rising provoke tempestuous weather: the Kydd and Goat,
wyndes. Hyades or Succulae rain. What Meteorologer consentith not to the great
alteration and mutation of air at the conjunction, opposition, or quadrate
aspect of Saturne, with either two lights? Who is ignorant, yea meanly
travailed in Astronomy, that Iuppiter, with Moercurie, or with the Sun,
enforces rage of winds? what is he that perceauith not the fearful thunders,
lightnynges, and raynes, at the meting of Mars, and Venus, or Iuppiter, and
Mars? c. Leave for shame to impugn these iudicialles strongly authorised. He
that any other part carpith may seem moare then mad. All truth, all
experience, a multitude of infallible grounded rules are against him. Certum
est omnibus que notum, quod ^li motus, signor^ ortus, occasus, planetarum
aspectus, coiunctiones, luminari^ eclypses. c certiss^am, determinatam, ac
infallibilem babent causam. Quis jam sanae mentis negabit eorum effectus saepe
innotescere, vtpote bella, fa^es, grandines, aeris perturbationes, elemento^
commotiones, terrae motus, similia? Positis ca^ sis naturalibus, non impeditis,
sequitur effectus.

The learned that lists ingeniously to {pro}gnosticate of weather, will not
only discreetly way all before written, but consider also with them the
Stregthe and Aspects of the Planetes following, ad their Cobustio in the. 12.
Signs, with the Coiuctios of fixed Sterris, Masions of the Moon, the
Ascendet, Climes. c. Also the times or quarters of the year must be notid
diligently, (as ensues) and judgment accordingly pronounced.

Of the year divided in four quaters.
THe spring time is hot, and moyste: and continues so long as the Son is in
Aries, Taurus, and Gemini: which is from the power of the breast.
tenth of Marche unto the twelfth of June. The somer is hot and dry,
counted from the beginning of Cancer, to the end of Virgo, that is, from the
twelfth of June, to the fourtenthe of September. power over yelow colours.
Harvest is cold and dry: that is from the beginning of Libra, unto the end
of Sagittarie: counted from the. xiiij. of September to the twelfth of
December. Winter is cold and moist: continued from. power over al flumes.
the beginning of Capricornus, to the end of Pisces: that is from the twelfth
of December, to the tenth of Marche.

Now follow the aspects of the planetes, for the better judgement of weather.
Before I declare of planetes, and the signification of aspects, it behooves
brefly to open what I cal planetes, and what aspects, and howe they are
charactered and figured. Understood there be seue moveable sterres, pleasant to
the ^ight, called planetes. The highest Saturne.. The Iupiter.. Mars.. Son.
Venus.. Mercurie. and the Moon next to the earth. Now when I desire to
express Saturne, I write this figure: for Iupiter, this: For Mars, this. Thus
of the others as their characters declare. All radiatios or aspects are
expressed as follow. A Coiunction thus figured: and it is, when an other planet
is joined with the Son, or Moon, or others emonge themselves, with in one
degre, or less. The Sextile aspect or radiation is thus expressed: and it is
with in 60. degrees the one fro the other. The Quadrate aspect thus: 90 digres
distant. The Trine thus: separated. 120. degres. The Opposition thus: 180.
degrees, the one distant from tother. Lo here they follow in order: the
characters of the Planetes: and Signs also.

Conjunction, Sextile, Quadrat Trine, Opposition Aspects.
Saturne, Iupiter, Mars, Son Venus Mercurie Moon Planetes.
Aries Taurus Gemini Cancer Leo Virgo Libra Scorpius Sagittarius Capricornus
Aquarius Pisces Signs.

Yet for more playnesse behold this figure.


The signification of aspects of planetes among them selves: for the judgment
of weather.
THe conjunction or meting of Saturne with Iuppiter, in fiery signs,, cum
inforcith great drouth: in watery signs, fluddes, continual rain, general
ouerflowynges. c. in aerie signs, plenty of wyndes. The quadrature, sextile, or
oppositio of Saturne, with Iuppiter,, cum
in moist signs cawsith troubled air, by hayle, wind, rain, thunder, c.
before and after.

The conjunction, quadrature, or opposition, of Saturne, with,, cum
Mars, in watery signs, declare in somer, rain, often shores, with hayle,
thunder and lightning.

The conjunction, quadrature, or opposition of Saturne, with the,, cum
Sun, chiefly in cold signs, show dark weather, hayle, rain, thunder,
and cold days.

The coiunction, quadrature, or opposition of Saturne, with Venus,,, cum,
in winter, engender cold and rain, principaly in moist signs: in summer,
mitigation of heat.

The conjunction, quadrature, and opposition of Saturne, with,, cum
Mercurie, in watery signs bring rain: in hot or dry signs, drouth: in
summer, thunder, lightnynges, and tempest.

The conjunction, quadrature, or opposition of Iuppiter, with,, cum
Mars, in moist signs, declare thunders lightnings, and rain: in winter,
snow, or cloudy thycke weather.

The conjunction, quadrature, or opposition of Iuppiter, with the,, cum
Sun, great and most vehement wyndes.

The conjunction, quadrature, or opposition of Iuppiter, with,, cum
Venus, in moist signs, cold and myssinges: in the rest signs, fair weather.

The conjunction, quadrature or opposition of Iuppiter, with, cum
Mercurie, great wyndes.

The conjunction, quadrature or opposition of Mars, with the,, cum
Sun, in fiery signs, drouth: in watery, thunder, rain.

The conjunction, quadrature or opposition of Mars, with Venus,, cum
in moist signs, rain, and tempest.

The conjunction, quadrature or oppositio of Mars, with Mercurie, cum.
in hot signs, great heate: in dry signs, drouth: in watery, rain:
sometimes thunders, lightninges, with sudden fierce wyndes.

The conjunction, quadrature or opposition of Venus, with,, cum
Mercurie causes rain: in somer thy provoke tempest, the more if they agree in
watery signs. Note what is said of the coniunctio, quadrature or oppositio,
the same is also meant of the Sextile and Trine: but they are oflesse
signification, so the lernid notes.

A declaration of weather by aspects of the Mo^ne with plants.
THe conjunction quadrature or opposition of the Moon, with,, cum
Saturne, in moist signs, brings a cloudy day, cold air, according to the
nature of the sign: if she go from Saturne, to the Sun, by conjunction or
other wise, harder weather ensues.

The conjunction, quadrature or opposition of the Moon with,, cum
Iupiter in Aries, or Scorpio shows fair, white dispersed clouds.

The conjunction, quadrature or opposition of the Moon with, cum
Mars in watery signs rain: in hot signs, diverse coloured red cloud des are
made, all the element over: in summer, often thunder.

The conjunction, quadrature or opposition of the Moon with, cum
the Sun in moist signs, rainy weather: the more if the Moon go from the
Sun to Saturn.

The conjunction, quadrature, or opposition of the Moon with cum
Mercurie, in moist lignes shows rain and wind, the more when the Moon
passes from Mercurie to Iuppiter: then great wyndes follow.

How whether is judged by the Oriental and Occidental station of Planetes, with
their combustion in the. 12. signes-celestiall. First of the planetes in Aries.
SATVRN in Aries, under the beams of the Sun, that is to in. What these
terms cobust Oriental, and Occidental, mean.
say, combust, makes a cloudy dark troubled air: Oriental, I mean in the
morning apperyng before the Sun, fair whether: Occidental, that is to say,
showing him self after the Sun going down, betokens great wyndes.

Iuppiter in Aries combust, a token of rain: being Occidental, it brings in
clouds, and dews: Oriental, fair, pleasant whether.

Mars in Aries combust and Occidental, good whether: contrary in
Oriental.

Venus in Aries combust, Occidental moystnes, great wyndes: Oriental in
thunders, and raynes.

Mercurie in Aries combust tempest, Occidental, and Oriental, fair wyndy
whether. in


Of the planetes in Tauro.
SATVRN in Tauro cobust, and stationarie, brings thick clouds, thunders,
and troublesome whether. in

Iuppiter in Tauro combust, indifferent whether: Occidental, pleasant shores.
in

Mars in Tauro combust, a quiet air: but Oriental wyndye. in

Venus in Tauro combust thunders, c. Occidental fair. in

Of the planetes in Gemini.
SATVRN in Gemini combust, and Occidental, drouth. in

Iuppiter in Gemini combust, a good signification. in

Mars in Gemini combust and Occidental, heat. in

Venus in Gemini combust Occidental, wind. in

Mercurie in Gemini combust, wind. in

Of the planetes in Cancer.
SATVRN in Cancer combust, dark whether, great wyndes in
and troublesome wethers: Occidental calmer.
Iuppiter in Cancer combust brings calm pleasant whether. in

Mars in Cancer combust, great heat. in

Venus in Cancer combust, a quiet calm time. in

Mercurie in Cancer combust, tempestuous whether, chiefly on the sea: in
Occidental calmer.
Of the planetes in Leon.
SATVRN in Leon combust, makes wyndes and mysslynges. in

Iuppiter in Leon combust, pleasant wyndes. in

Mars in Leon combust, Occidental, drouth. in

Venus in Leon combust, drouth. in

Mercurie in Leon combusi, wyndes. in

Of the planetes in Virgin.
SATVRN in Virgin combust, is a significator of infirmities. in

Iupiter in Virgin combust, manifests abundance of things. in

Mars in Virgin combust, like unto Saturn. in

Venus in Virgin combust drouth: Oriental contrary. in

Mercurie in Virgin cobust, drougth, raging sees: Occidetal drouth. in

Of the Planetes in Libra.
SATVRNE in Libra combust, shows infirmity of sight: in
Oriental, cold wyndes.
Iupiter in Libra combust, indifferent whether. in

Mars in Libra combust, brings moisture. in

Venus in Libra combust, moist air. in

Mercurie in Libra combust, wyndes. in

Of the Planetes in Scorpione.
SATVRN in Scorpio combust, cold air: Occidental frost: in
Oriental cold, Northwyndes.
Iupiter in Scorpio combust rain: Occidental, bitter whether* in

Mars in Scorpio combust, declares moisture: Oriental, wyndes. in

Venus in Scorpio combust rain, both Occidental and Oriental. in

Mercurie in Scorpio combust, raging whether, chiefly Oriental. in

Of the Planetes in Sagittario.
SATVRN in Sagittario combust, cold, rainy air: Oriental in
cold and frost.
Iupiter in Sagittario combust, (...) rain: Oriental worse whether. in

Mars in Sagittario combust, drouth. in

Venus in Sagittario combust, rain: Occidental, wynd, and cold. in

Mercuri in Sagittario combust rain: Occidental, clear air. in

Of the Planetes in Capricorne.
SATVRN in Capricorno cobust, signifies dark whether with in
Southwyndes: Occidental cold: Oriental North wyndes.
Iupiter in Capricorn cobust moist air: Occidental, increasing the same. in

Mars in Capricorn combust, cloudye: Occidental some heat. in

Venus in Capricorn combust, cold air. Oriental rain. in

Mercurie in Capricorn combust rain, both Oriental and Occidetall. in

Of the Planetes in Aquario.
SATVRN in Aquario combust cold air: Occidental dangerous in
sees: Oriental rain.
Iupiter in Aquario combust, Occidental rain. in

Mars in Aquario combust drouth: Occidental and Oriental plenty in
of wyndes.
Venus in Aquario cumbust, cloudye: Occidental hot: Oriental rain. in

Mercurie in Aquario combust, snow: Occidental more cold: Oriental in
rain.
Of the planetes in Pisces.
SATVRN in Pisce combust, brings clouds: Occidental in
rain.
Iupiter in Pisce combust, Oriental, calm waters. in

Mars in Pisce combust, Occidental, drouth: Oriental lightning, and in
thunders.
Venus in Pisce combust, cold: Occidental disposed to snow. in

Mercurie in Pisce combust, moist air. in

Thus much of the judgment of weather.

SAYING that I have now sufficiently declared howe, by what rules and tokens,
weather is judged: I think it conueniet to adioyne here a brefe collection,
how Plenty, Scarsitie, Sickness, Death, Alterationes, Trobles, wars, c. are
for ever perceived.

A rule to prognosticate the aforesaid, by the falling of Newyears day.
IT is affirmed of some, when Newyears day falls on the Sudaye, Sunday.
then a pleasant Winter doth ensue: a natural Summer: fructe sufficient:
Heruest indifferent, yet some wind and rain: many marriages: plenty of wine
and honey: death of yonge men, and cattle: robberies in most places: news of
prelates, of Kings: and cruel wars in the end.

On Monday, a winter somewhat vncofortable: Summer temperate: no plenty of
fructe: many fanlies and fables opened: A gues Monday.
shall reygne: Kings and many others shall dye: marriages shall be in most places:
and a come fall of gentle men.

On Tewesdaye a stormy Winter: a wet Summer: a diverse Heruest: Corn, and
fructe indifferent: yet herbs in gardens shall not Tewesday.
flourish: great sickness of men, women and yonge children: Be a^es shall
hunger starve, and dye of the botch: many ships, Galleys, and Hulks, shall be
lost: and the bloody flixes shall kill many men: all things dere, save corn.

On wednesdaye, Lee a warm Winter: in the end, snow and frost: a cloudye
Somer: plenty of fructe, of corn, Hay, Wine, wednesdaye,
and Honey great payne to women with child, and death to infantes: good for
sheep: news of Kings: great wars: battle and slaughter toward the midst.

On Thursdaye, Winter and Summer wyndye: a raynye Heruest: Thursdaye.
therefore we shall have ouerflowynges: much fructe: pletye of Honey: yet
flesh shall be dere: Cattle in general shall dye: great troble, wars c:
With a licentiouslyfe of the feminine sex.

On Fridaye, Winter stormy. Summer scante pleasant: Heruest Fridaye.
indifferent: little store of fructe, of Wine, and Honey: Corn dere: many
blear eyes: youth shall dye: Earthquakes are perceived in many places,
plenty of thunders, lyghtnynges, and tempests: with a soden death of cattle,

On Saturday, a mean Winter: Somer very hot: a late Heruest, Saterdaie.
good cheap garden herbs: much burning: plenty of Hemp, Flax, and Honey:
old folk shall dye in most places: Fevers and Tertians shall grieve many
people: great mutteringe of wars: murders shall be suddenly committed in many
places, for light matters.

NOw that I have opened divers ways, both for the learned and unlearned, howe
whether to come at all times may be well judged and known c: I thought it
mete, for farther knowledge therein, not to omit here, the natural causes of
such and so many alterations of air. Lo, therefore orderly they follow.

Natural causes, conducynge to all the aforesaid, ever to be had in memory
of the wise: and first of the Raynbowe.
THe Raynbowe is the shynyng, and rebounding of beamys of light, that turn to
the contrary vapour again, in the cloud. It declares sometime rain, and
many times fair whether: when the one, and how the other, is before opened.

Of Rain.
Rain is a cold vapour. an erthy humour: or fumosities, out of waters or earth
drawn up by the virtue of the Sun, to Quare lapides pl^at, leg ^li, lib, 2,
Ca. 44.
the nether part of the middle space of the air: there through cold thycked,
then dissolved: thus engendered falls on the earth. Here I leave to speak of
miraculous raynes, as Milk, Blud, Flesh, Yearn Woll, c. For more satisfieng in
these, read Plinius in the second book. 58. Chapter.

Of Frost and Dew.
A Cold moist vapour, a little way drawn up in the day, thorough ^s est ate,
pruina bieme ^it.
faint heat of the Sun, descends in the night, dissolved on the earth,
there congelated, or resolved in to water, the one called Frost, the other Dew.
The last is a sign of fair whether, in the spring or Harvest.

Of Snow.
IT is a moist vapour, drawn up to the middle region of the air, then
thy^ked, and frozen into the body of a cloud. So Nix humour modice concr^ tus.
congelated, descends.

Of Hayle.
A Cloud resolved into water, in the fall congelated, makes Hayle. The hyer
it comes from above, and the longer it Grando, plu^ uia in discesu congelata.
tarries in the air, the rounde^ hayle.

Of wyndes.
VVynde is a multitude of dry exhalations, drawn up fro the Ventor^ ergo
materia, calida ^icca ex^alatio.
earth: and above the earth, enforced here and there.

Of earthquakes, in the most quiet time.
Plenty of wyndes, entered into holes, cones, or caves of the Quemadmodu in
n^be tonitruu, sic in terra tr^nor.
earth, which absent from above the earth, causes quietness: the violent
brustyng out of them (the earth closed again) is the earthquake: Sign^ est
futurorum bellorum.

Tokens of earthquakes to come.
AFyry cloud, appering in the element, like a little pyllar, is a token Signa
terrae motus.
of earthquakes to come. The obscurity or darkness of the Sun, without
clouds, and strangely coloured, bloody or otherwise, is a token of
earthquakes.

Also, when Well water and others are troubled, or salt, or infec ted by favour
c.

A great quyetnes of air, by land and sea, and chiefly the long absence of
wyndes.

Also, strange noises herd, as clamours of men, russhynge of harnes,
mournings, lamentations c. All these have been observed, to signify
earthquakes at hand.

Of Thunders and lightninges.
THunder is the quenching of fire, in a cloud. Or thunder is, Fulgetrum prius
cerni, quam t^nitru audiri, cu simul fi^nt, certum est, Pli. lib. 2. Ca. 56.
cotra Aristo.
an exhalation hot and dry, myxte with moisture, carried up to the
middleregio, there thycked and wrapped into a cloud: of this whore matter,
coupled with moystnes, closed in the cloud, grows a strife, the heat beating
and breaking out the sides of the cloud, with a thundringe noise: the fire
then dispersed, is the lightnynge. Thus for the learned: Tonit(...) sonitus est,
qui editur quado ^ube^ rumpit halitus. Fulmen flamma vel repetinus est ignis,
qui ex collisione nubium, aut ruptura nascitur. Aristotele affirms the
lightning after the thunder: but the fire doth first appear, in that the sight
is before the hearing. If this satiisfie not, read the second of his Meteoron.
Here follows a note of lightninges.

There be three kinds of lightninges, dry, moist and clear.
Dry do not burn, but cleave, depart, or divide. Moist burn Note.
not, but alter colour. The clear are of marvelous natures. Full barels by it
are emptied. It melts money in the purse, it breaks the sword, the purse and
scabbard not perisshed, yea, wex in them vnmolten.

Of the Cometes, or flames in the night.
A Comet is a flame, working in a dry, hot, flymye exhalation, draw up to
the highest part of the air. His matter or substance Ventoru causa
after it is brent, dispersed provokes wyndes.

The natural cause of the Sun eclipsed.
NOthing else is the Eclips of the Sun, but the direct putting the body of the
Moon, between the Sun and the earth, or between our sight and the Sun:
which chances only at the change.

A Corollary.
BY this gather the darkness at Christ's death, not to stand by natur all
ecliptical cause: but by supernatural, or miracle. For it was at the full Moon,
the scriptures witness: which enforced Dio^ysius Miracle,
Areopagita, at the time of his passion, to speak thus: Aut Deus natur^
patitur, aut mundi machina dissoluitur.

The cause of the Moon eclipsed.
THe Sun being in the contrary point to the full Moon, enforces the shadow
of the earth, then directly put between the Vniuersalis est Eclipsis Lu^ No
semper in nouilunio, sed in ca, et cauda
Sun and the Moon, towards the Moon, hiding more or less of the Moon, as
she differs from the Ecliptical. Some observe pestilent plagues, sudden
battle, great dearth, to ensue these eclypses: which all I desire God to avert
from his chosen. Many other things by this Eclips are gathered, as Longitudes
of countries: the quantity of the Sun, containing the bigness of the earth
162 times: the compass Omniu planetaru ad terra magnitudo.
of the earth 21600. miles: whose thycknes, according to Archimedes rule is,
6872 miles and 8 eleuenthes of a mile. The quantite of the Moon is the 43 part
of the earth. The Sun contains Haec incredis bilia videtur tatu hiis, qui
matbematicis demostrationi bus no assueue runt, c.
the globe of the Moon 7000 times. Saturnus comprehends the bigness of the
earth 91 times. Iupiter 95 times. Mars 1 and 10. sixtenthes. Venus one 37 part.
Mercurius on 32000 part of the earth. Note here, that Alfraganus affirms the
least fixed sterre, perfectly scene, as big, as the whole earth.

HAec non erunt admirationi, si globi capacit atem ex longitudine diametri
quaesieris. Continet enim sol^ dim^tiens terrae dimetientem quinquies Dimetiens
ad terrae dime tiente 11 ad 2.
semissem. Est{que} propertio diametri solis ad terrae dimetiente, quae est
numeri vud^im ad duo, quintupla sesquialtera. Cubus soli^ mill ter^ntu una
triginta parts tales continet, cuiusmodi terrae cubus octonas conplectitur.
Cubus enim numeri vndecim, est mill tercentu vnu triginta. Cubus vero bi^arii,
qui est terrae, octo. Subducto quoties id fieri potest, minore cubo Cubus 1331
Terrae. 8.
qui est terrae, a maiore qui est solis, cognoscitur cub^d cubum proportio,
quanto Sol mayor, terra sit. Inuenimus ergo octo centics, sexagi^ sexies, in
mill tercentum la triginta.

Terrae Diametros Lunae dimetiente coplectitur la, duas eius diamet^i
portiones quintas. Dimeties terrae ad diam:. 17, ad 5. Cubus terrae 4. 913.
Cubus 125.
Est{que} ea proportio, dimetientis terrae ad Lunae diametrum, quae est septen
decim ad quin{que} tripla superbipartiens quintas. Cubus numeri septendecim,
quater mill nongenta tredecim. Cubus numer^ quin{que}, est centum viginti
quin{que}. Maiore cubo per minorem distributo, reperimu^ numerum cetum
vigintiquin{que}, tricies nouies in quater mill nongeus tredecim: quod
paululum a superioribus obseruationibus diflert.

How many miles the Moon is from the earth: and every planet from other.
AS some have published, it is from the earth to the Moon. 15750. miles. From
the Moon to Mercurie, is 12812. miles. From Mercurie to Venus, as many miles.
From Venus to the Sun, is 23437. miles, and a half. From the Sun to Mars,
is 15725. miles. From Mars to Iupiter, is 78721. miles. From Iupiter to
Saturne, as many miles. From Saturne to the firmament 120485 miles. The Whole
sum, from the earth to the firmament is, 280734. miles, and a half.
The natural causes of many Suns or Moons.
THese cometo pass, when a thicker cloud is gathered toward Milichius notes
the king of Pole to has ue* scene. 6 Suns at ones.
the side of the Sun or Moon: in the which the broken beams of the Sun, do
leave the fashio and very form of that Sun. The first is the very Sun: the
second and third come of the breaking of the Sun beam is in the cloud, on
the side of the Sun. Thus as follows, saith Plinius in his second book, of
the history of nature, and 31. Chapter. No more Suns are perceived in our
time then three: and they are never scene, either above or beneth the Sun, but
on the sides: never in the night, but only at the Sun rising, or
goyngedoune.

What is to be chosen or avoided, under every aspect of, the moon: with her
signification, in the. xii. signs, touchyug the same.
THE conjunction, quadrature, or opposition of Saturne with vel cum
the Moon, causes an euel unlucky day, for all maters. Leave therefore to
have to do any manner way: nothing shall prosper, or come well to pass then
attempted. Yet the sext le or Trine of Saturne, with the Moon declares a
convenient time to till, del^e or cum
dig, to sow, to lay fundacions, to erect ^r repair houses yea, a mete
time to obtaynesutes of fatherly farmours. The Moon in Capricorn or Aquario,
brings this later effect of the sextile and trine. in vel,


The conjunction, sextile, trine, quadrature, or opposition of Iupiter, vel cum

with the Moon, shows a fortunate day, chiefly to obtain suits of Kings,
noble Princes, Prelates c, of Lawyars, and Religious persons: and a mete time
to study, to journey, to take an honest matter in hand. The Moon in Tauro, in
Leon, or Sagittario, in vel.
shows the same.

The conjunction, sextile, trine, quadrature or opposition of Mars with the
Moon, warns thee not to match thy self that day, or cum.
with warryours notwithstanding very good, and most mete to finish all manner
fyry works: nought to journey: yet most convenient for valiant captains, to
work their feat, to lead, encourage, or stomach their souldiars: most
vnmete to treat peace, to take servants, or to seek friendship.

The conjunction, quadrature or opposition of the Sun with,, vel cum
the Moon, declares a very unhappy day, for all maters: therefore attempt
nothing, no any manner suit: neither plant, build, no journey. Yet the sextile
and trine are very fortunate, specially to obtain suit of Kings, Princes, and
other Nobles. The Moon in (...) enfor in
ceth the effect of this later part.

The conjunction, sextile, trine, quadrature, or opposition of Venus with the
Moon, causes a day most apt to obtain all suits of,, uel cum.
women: good to woo, to attempt marriage, and to follow all manner pleasures, and
pleasant pastimes: not vnmete to hire servants, in vel
to let blud c. The Moon in Libra or Pisces, provokes the like.

The conjunction, sextile, trine quadrature, or opposition of,,,, vel cum
Mercurie with the Moon, promises a fortunate happy day, to bye and sell:
very good to enter children in liberal arts: an apt time for the ver^i^iar:
good to use merchandise, to journey, to send embassage, to give accomptes, and
such like.

The Moon in Gemini, Cancer or Virgo, en^lyneth even to the same in vel.
aforesaid.

The Moon with the Dragons head, shows a lucky day for cum
all maters: with the tail joined, contrary.

Now ensues a Table showing what sign the Moon is in, and shall be for ever:
declaring also the metest time to let blood, to p^urge, and to bathe.
THIS Table following, hath at the head seven titles. The first months: the
second days: then the prime: the. 1^. signs: the titles to let bludd, to
pourge, and to bathe. Here it is to be noted, that those days are good for
these purposes, which be signed with this letter G: and those euel days, that
are noted with B. Now ensues the Table, and the whole use of it, and first for
the sign, where the Moon is.

This Table declares for ever, in what sign the Moon is, or shall be at any
day in the yea^. It serves also very well to let blood, to purge, and bathe.
Monetbes. D^es. (...). Prime The 12. Signs. To let bludd. To purge. To bathe.
Febr. Noue 1 3 Aries. G B G Marche. 2 Aries. G B G 3 14 Taurus. B B B (...) 4 6
Taurus. B G 5 Gemini. B G Aprile. 6 17 Gemini. B G 7 9 Cancer. G G May. 8 1
Cancer. G G 9 Cancer. G G 10 12 Leo. B B G 11 4 Leo. B B G I^e. 12 Virgo. B B B
13 15 Virgo. B B B July. 14 7 Libra. 15 Libra. 16 18 Scorp^s G G 17 1^ Scorpi^
G G Auguste 18 2 Scorpius G G 19 Sagitta. G G 20 13 Sagitta. G G 21 (...)
Capri. B B B September. 22 Capri. B B B 23 23 Aquari G Ian. Octo. 24 24 Aquari
G 25 25 Pisces. G G 26 26 Pisces. G G 27 27 Pisces. G G

How to find by this Table, the sign where the Moon is for ever.
Seek out under the titles of the months, the name of the month, whose day
you must look out, right against the month, under the title of days: and
there begin to tell down wards, one, two, three, c. to the end, if it so
require. And then from the beginning, if need be, until you have reconed the
number of the day that youseke. Loke what number it falls upon in this
table, under the title of days: that number keep in mind. Then seek under the
title of the prime, the golden number for that year: right against that
lestward, under the title of days, begin to tell dounewardes, one, two, thr^,
four, c, until you have reconed the number, which you did keep in mind.
Against that dounewardes, on your right hand, under the title of Signs, is
the sign wherein the Moon shall be that day. Eve then under the other titles,
ye shall find in right order, for lettinge blood, for pourginge, and
bathinge, according as they be noted with G. which is good, and B. signifieng
bad. Ensample. The sixth day of Marche in the year of our Lord 1555, I
desire to know what celestial sign the Moon doth then occupy. I find
first the name of the Month, that is, Marche: and the day as follows, in the
next ordre of this table. I begin here to tell, right against my month, at
the figure of. 2. saying: one, two, three, c. so I have at the end, and count
of syx days this figure 7. which I keep in mind. Now I must seek out the
golden number, for the year aforesaid, under the title of the prime here,
that is 17: against the which, on the left side is 6. There you must begin
again to count, one, two, three, c. until you come unto your number 7. So on
your right hand, in the row, or order, you shall see Virgo, the celestial
sign, that the Moon, is in: and after that these three letters, b, b, b, which
declare bad or euell to let blood, to pourge or bathe, agreeable to the
titles in the head. G, there had signified good.

To know what the Moon differs from the Sun.
MVltiplie the age of the Moon, by 4, and divide by. 10: the quotient shows
the signs, that the Moon differs frome the Sun: the remain augmented by.
3, brings degrees to be added.

Now shall follow, what days in every month are vnmete to let blood,
dangerous to suffer wouding, perilous to fall sick, deathly to journey,
euell to marry, and nought to take any matter in hand. The whole year after
this count folowinge, hath. 33. euell days.

The year hath. xxxiii. evil days, general for ever.
IANVARIE has eyghte such days, the. i, the. ij, the iiij, the. v, the. x,
the. xv, the. xvij, the. xxix. Drink white wine this month.

February hath three days, the. viij, the. x, the. xvij: these not so euell,
the. xxvi, the. xxvij, the. xxviij. Eat no potage of oaks, or malowes: they
are venomous.

Marche three days, the. xv, the. xvi, the. xix: this not so euell, the xxviij.
day. This month, all sweet meates are good.

April two days, the. xvi, the. xxi: these not so euell, the. vij, the viij,
the. x, the. xx. Use hot meates, of light digestion.

May three days, the vij, the. xv, the. xx: these not so euell, the iij, the.
vi. Rise early, and use breakfast.

June two, the. iiij, the. vij: these not so euel, the. x, the. xv, the. xxij.
Sage and lettuse are good to eat. Cold water fastinge hurts not.

Iulie two days, the, xv, the. xx. Abstain from carnality.

August two days, the. xix, the. xx: these not so euel, the first, the xxix,
the. xxx. It hurts not to abstain fro potage, and all hot meates, and
drinks of spicery.

September two days the. vi, the. vij: these not so euell, the. iij, the iiij,
the. xxi, the. xxij. Eat good fruit.

October one day, the vi: these not so euel, the. iij, the. xvi, the xxiiij.
Good wine is wholesome this month.

November two days, the. xv, the. xix: these not so euell, the. v, the vi,
the. xxviij, the. xxix. Blede not.

Decembre three days, the. vi, the. vij, the. ix: these days not so euell,
the. xv, the. xvij, the* xxij. Blede not over much. Warm not thy legs at
the fire.

A conducible note for lettiug blood.
LEt blood at no time, without great cause: for it brings wekenes, Malu
minui, vel purgationibus vti, tem pore caloris, propter defectu humoris.
and many infirmities. If ye do, see it be after good dige(...)n and fastinge,
in a fair temperate day. Beware before of all manner exercise, bathinges,
watchings. and carnal copulation c. After, use fine meates, of light
digestion: abstayninge from all the aforesaid, until the fourth day.

These signs are most dangerous for blood letting, the Moon Ill to let blud
in,,,,
being in them: Taurus, Gemini, Leo, Virgo, and Capricorne, with the last half
of Libra, and Scorpius. Therest are all good, so the Moon bear no dominion in
that member, which ye cut: as follows.

Behold the figure.


The dominion of the Moon in mans body.
Aries. The. Head, and face. Taurus. The. Neck. Gemini The. Arms, hands,
shoulders. Cancer. The. Breast, stomach, rybbes. Leo. The. Hart, back. Virgo.
The. Bowels, belly. Libra. The. Reins, nauill, buttocks. Scorpius. The.
Secret members. Sagittarius. The. Thyes. Capricornus. The. Knees. Aquarius.
The. Shynnes, legs. Pisces. The. Fete.


FRom the change, to the first quarter, a mete time to let yonge men blood.
From the first quarter, to the full, good for middle age. From the full, to the
last quarter, apt for aged folk. From the last quarter, to the change, best
for old men.


Signs mete for the complexions.
for the fleumatike: the head, and thyes excepted. ARIES. Sagittarius. for
melancholic: buttocks, and legs excepted Libra. Aquarius: Haec
diligentissime obseruare oportet solerte Medi cu, nisi maiora pericula cogat
for choleric: breast, members, and fete excepted. Cancer. Scorpius Pisces. For
the sanguine, all be apt that tofore are named good.


In the spring time let blood at the right side.

In Harvest time at the left side.

The learned Physician will consider, beside all that is said, the
Coniunctions, Oppositions, and quadrate aspects of the Planetes: with many
other things Astronomical, most necessary, both in bludletletting, purging,
bathinge, c.

For to take purgations, and to bathe,
THe metest time to take purgations c. is neither in hot, nor cold days:
that is, from the tenth of Marche, to the twelfth of June.

Further, by rules Astronomical, it must be performed when Good to purge,,.
the Moon is in cold, moist, and watery signs, as Cacer, Scorpius and Pisces:
conforted by aspects, and radiations, of planetes fortifienge the virtue of
the body expulsiue.

The Moon in Aries, Taurus, and Capricornus, naught. One cause of Bad to
purge.,,.
vomiting the purgation, is the Moon having aspect to any planet retrograde.
Good to bathe,,,,,.


The Moon in these signs folowinge, very good to bathe: Aries, Leo,
Sagittari, Cancer, Scorpius Pisces.

These ensuing are euel to bathe: Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorne. Bad to
bathe.,,,


Of inundations, or fluddes: of tymbre falling: sowyng: planting: graffing:
hear clipping: shaving: and geldinge.
THe fludde is biggest at the full: because then dispersinge her virtue, she
fills all places with moisture. By common experience, joined with learning, I
know, at the full the Moon Iodeth all bodies with humou^s: and so are
emptied, growing to the The fall of timber.
change. Of this, some gather the fall of tymbre at the change, more to the
purpose then other times: wanting then superfiuous moisture, the cause of
putrefaction. Omnis putredo ab aqueo humido ortum habet. Schoner wills from
the. xv. day unto the. xxij. day of the Moon, trees to be felled, and that
after Midsomer to January. So tymbre is strong, sound, and void of worms.
Good to sow.,,,,.


To sow, Taurus, Cancer, Virgo, Libra, and Capricorne are best, in the
increace of the Moon.

To Plant or Graff, best is when the M^one hath her being in any To plant or
graff,,
fixed sign: either in Tauro or Aquario, in thencrease.

Hear cut grows well, the Moon encreacing, being in Tauro, To cut
bear.,,.
Virgin, or Libra.

Cuttinge, shaving, clipping, in the wane, causes baldnes: what is then cut,
grows little. Caluitiu prohibet, oleum Tartari.

The best time of Gel^ing is in Cancer, Scorpio or Pisces, in the wane. Good to
geld,,.


This round Table above, and that also, which ensues: conduce to the rest
folowinge.


Here after ensuyth a table for the moveable feasts: whose use is thus briefly
declared.


THis Table following, conteyneth in the first title the Prime: in the second,
the Dominical letter: in the third, Lent: in the fourth, Easter day: in the
fyfthe, Rogation day: in the sixte, whitsondaie: in theseuenthe, howe many
weeks and days are between whitsondaie and Midsomer. Which all appear by
their titles.

The use is this.
Ye shall consider by the Table before put forth, what number the prime is
that year, where of ye require to know all these aforesaid: and seek that
number under the first title of this Table ensuing. Then s^ke under the
second, the Dominical letter, next after the prime for that year: which
title ensues the prime. Directly against the same Dominical letter, towards
your right hand, in the same lyne, ye shall find under the titles, what
^oneth and day, enery one of these aforesaid shall happen.

Ensample.
I would know this year of our Lord 1555. these moveable feasts: the first
Lent sondry, Easterdaye, Rogation days, Vvhitsonday, and how many weeks
betwixt Vvhitsonday, and Midsomer day. First I find the prime this year 17.
Which 17, I loke out under the title of prime in this table. Then I seek in
the next order, and after the prime, for the Dominical letter that year. Now
in right order, according to the titles, I find the third of Marche to be the
first Lent sunday:, the 14. of April Easterday: the 19. of May, Rogation: the.
2. of June, Vvhitsondaye: and. 3. weeks, and 1. day betwixt Vvhitsondaye, and
Mydsomerdaie. Thus for ever.

The prime. The sodaies letter. The first Lent sondaie. Faster. day. Rogation
Whitsontide. Betwixt whitson. ad midso. 16 D Februa. March April. May. Wek.
da^s d 8 22 26 10 6 3 e 9 23 27 11 6 2 13 f 10 24 28 12 6 1 2 g 11 25 29 13 6 0
A 12 26 30 14 5 6 10 b 13 27 May. 1. 15 5 5 c 14 28 2 16 5 4 18 d 15 29 3 17 5
3 7 e 16 30 4 18 5 2 f 17 31 5 19 5 1 15 g 18 Aprile. 1. 6 20 5 0 4 A 19 2 7 21
4 6 b 20 3 8 22 4 5 12 c 21 4 9 23 4 4 1 d 22 5 10 24 4 3 e 23 6 11 25 4 2 9 f
24 7 12 26 4 1 g 25 8 13 27 4 0 17 A 26 9 14 28 3 6 6 b 27 10 15 29 3 5 c 28 11
16 30 3 4 14 d Marche. 1. 12 17 31 3 3 13 e 2 13 18 June 1 3 2 f 3 14 19 2 3 1
11 g 4 15 20 3 3 0 A 5 16 21 4 2 6 19 b 6 17 22 5 2 5 8 c 7 18 23 6 2 4 d 8 19
24 7 2 3 e 9 20 25 8 2 2 f 10 21 26 9 2 1 g 11 22 27 10 2 0 A 12 23 28 11 1 6 b
13 24 29 12 1 5 c 14 25 3^ 13 1 4

How to know the age of the Moon: then the change, and quarter, for ever.
First learn the Epact, as I have instructed, for that year Ye seek to know
the age of the Moon: then reckon how many days is past of that month, which
day ye desire to know the age. Put that nubre to the Epact. Then begin at
Marche, and reckon for every month from him orderly one, until your said
day, includinge both the month of Marche, and also the month of your said
day. Add all these days, unto your former number: putting away as many
thirty days, as ye find. The rest, is the age of the Moon. But By the Prime
the Change is known, but uncertainly: therefore here omitted.
January and February are counted from Marche bacwarde, as above is said.
The age found, the change is known. If ye add 7. days to the change, ye
have the first quarter: then 7. days, and somewhat more, shows the full: and
so to it adding 7. and more, brings the last qurater: thus by 7. unto the
new Moon.

Now ensue two perfect Tables, declaring the true hour and minute of Ebbing
and Flowing, in most coasts of Englande.
When you will know the full sea, seek out the name of the Of Ebbiage and
Flowing.
place, where you desire the full water, in the headde of the Tables following:
or learn the points of the compass there noted: or if you list, know of some
mariner, what Moon makes a full sea there: a South west, or South Moon c.
Then the age of the Moon found under the place or point of the compass,
shows in right order, the hour, and minute of the full water. The ebb then
is manifest. En^ample. I desire to know the full water at London bridge, the
year of our Lord 1555. the 6. day of February. I find by rules before put
forth, the 6. day of February, the year aforesaid, the Moon to be 14.
days old. I see also under the title where London is S. W. which letters
signify, that a Southwest Moon makes a full sea there: and that is at 2. of
the clock, and 12. minutes past. This is well perceived, if you run down in
the Table, to the 14. day of the age of the Moon, under London title. Behold
the Tables.

Quiub Southampton. Portsmoth. Redban Aberde Graves end. Dudee. S. And. Age of
the Moon London Tinmot Hertle pole. Berwyke. Frith. Lythe. Dubar. Falmot South.
S b w. S S w S w b S S w S w b w w S w w b S. H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M H. M
H. M. H. M. 12 48 1 33 2 18 3 3 1 3 48 4 33 5 18 6 3 1 36 2 21 3 6 3 51 2 4 36
5 21 6 6 6 51 2 24 3 9 3 54 4 39 3 5 24 6 9 6 54 7 39 3 12 3 57 4 42 5 27 4 6
12 6 57 7 42 8 27 4 0 4 45 5 30 6 15 5 7 0 7 46 8 30 9 15 4 48 5 33 6 18 7 3 6
7 48 8 33 9 18 10 3 5 36 6 21 7 6 7 51 7 8 36 9 21 10 6 10 51 6 24 7 9 7 54 8
39 8 9 24 10 9 10 54 11 ^9 7 12 7 57 8 42 9 27 9 10 12 10 57 11 42 12 27 8 0 8
45 9 30 10 15 10 11 0 11 45 12 30 1 15 8 48 9 33 10 18 11 3 11 11 48 12 33 1 18
2 3 9 36 10 21 11 6 11 51 12 12 36 1 21 2 6 2 51 10 24 11 9 11 54 12 39 13 1 24
2 9 2 54 3 39 11 12 11 57 12 42 1 27 14 2 12 2 57 3 42 4 ^7 12 0 12 45 1 30 2
15 15 3 0 3 45 4 30 5 15 12 48 1 33 2 18 3 3 16 3 48 4 33 5 18 6 3 1 36 2 21 3
6 3 51 17 4 36 5 21 6 6 6 51 2 24 3 9 3 54 4 39 18 5 24 6 9 6 54 7 39 3 12 3 57
4 42 5 27 19 6 12 6 57 7 42 8 27 4 0 4 45 5 30 6 15 20 7 0 7 45 8 30 9 15 4 48
5 33 6 18 7 3 21 7 48 8 33 9 18 10 3 5 36 6 21 7 6 7 51 22 8 36 9 21 10 6 10 51
6 14 7 9 7 54 8 39 23 9 24 10 9 10 54 11 39 7 12 7 57 8 42 9 27 24 10 12 10 57
11 42 12 27 8 0 8 45 9 30 10 15 25 11 0 11 45 12 30 1 15 8 48 9 33 10 18 11 3
26 11 48 12 33 1 18 2 3 9 36 10 21 11 6 11 51 27 12 36 1 21 2 6 2 51 10 24 11 9
11 54 12 39 28 1 24 2 9 2 54 3 39 11 12 11 57 12 42 1 27 29 2 12 2 57 3 42 4 27
12 0 12 45 1 30 2 15 30 3 0 3 45 4 30 5 51 North. N b E N N E N E b N N E N E b
E E N E E b N

For Lin Huber weimot Dertm Plimot Bristo. Milfo Bridg^ water Portl. Peter
port Age of the Moon Orkn Pole. Or* well. Di^p. Lux. Lenoys Boloig. Dover.
Harwic Yar^ot Calice. East. EBS. ES. SEBE SE SEBS SSE SBE H. M. H. M. H. M. H.
M (...) H. M H. M H. M. H. M. 6 48 7 33 8 18 9 3 1 9 48 10 33 ^1 8 12 3 7 36 8
21 9 6 9 51 2 10 36 11 21 12 9 12 51 8 24 9 9 9 54 10 39 3 11 24 12 9 12 54 1
39 9 12 9 57 10 42 11 27 4 12 12 12 57 1 42 2 27 10 0 10 45 11 30 12 15 5 1 0 1
42 2 30 3 15 10 48 11 33 12 18 1 3 6 1 48 2 33 3 18 4 3 11 36 12 21 1 6 1 51 7
2 36 3 21 4 6 4 51 12 24 1 9 1 54 2 39 8 3 24 4 9 4 54 5 39 1 12 1 57 2 42 3 27
9 4 12 4 57 5 42 6 27 2 0 2 45 3 30 4 15 10 5 0 5 45 6 30 7 15 2 48 3 33 4 18 5
3 11 5 48 6 33 7 18 8 3 3 36 4 21 5 6 5 51 12 6 36 7 21 8 6 8 51 4 24 5 9 5 54
6 39 13 7 24 8 9 8 54 9 39 5 12 5 57 6 42 7 17 14 8 12 8 57 9 42 10 27 6 0 6 45
7 30 8 15 15 9 0 9 45 10 30 11 15 6 48 7 33 8 18 9 3 16 9 48 10 33 11 18 12 3 7
36 8 21 9 6 9 51 17 10 36 11 21 12 6 12 51 8 24 9 9 9 54 10 39 18 11 24 12 9 12
54 1 39 9 12 9 57 10 42 11 27 19 12 12 12 57 1 42 2 27 10 0 10 45 11 30 12 15
20 1 0 1 45 2 30 3 15 10 48 11 33 12 18 1 3 21 1 48 2 33 3 18 4 3 11 36 12 21 1
6 1 51 22 2 36 3 21 4 6 4 51 12 24 1 9 1 54 2 39 23 3 24 4 9 4 54 5 39 1 12 1
57 2 42 3 27 24 4 12 4 57 5 42 6 27 2 0 2 45 3 30 4 15 25 5 0 5 45 6 30 7 15 2
48 3 33 4 18 5 3 26 5 48 6 33 7 18 8 3 3 36 4 21 5 6 5 51 27 6 36 7 21 8 6 8 51
4 24 5 9 5 54 6 39 28 7 24 8 9 8 54 9 39 5 12 5 57 6 42 7 27 29 8 12 8 57 9 42
10 27 6 0 6 45 7 30 8 15 30 9 0 9 45 10 30 11 15 West. wbN wNw Nwbw (...) Nw
NwbN NNw Nbw

To know how lunge the Moon shines.
FOr her shining in the encreace, multiply the age of the Moon by 4. In the
wane augment therest of the age, which she lacks of 30. by 4: and divide by
5. The Quotiet shows the hours. The Remain, if there be any, multiplied by
12. brings minute^ to be added.

Here follows for the going down, and rising of the Moon: with her
continuance on the earth.
NOte diligently after the change, and before the full of the Moon, what hour
the Sun goyth down: and add to that same so many hours and minutes, as
the Moon shines that night: for that hour and minute, she goes down. Then
hath she continued as long time on the earth, as the Sun would have done,
being in that sign where she is. Therefore, her rising is known by
subduction of that Arc. Note after the full, the Moon rises so many hours
before the S(...)no, as she shines that night.

Now shall follow a Table, at al times plainly and briefly declaring, what day
the Sun is entered the first degre of every sign. It shows the break of
the day: the hour, and minute of the Sun rising: the just length of the
day: the length of the night also; the very minute of the Sun setting: and
the Twilight.
Monethe^ Day^. Break of the day. Sun rising. Length of the day Legthe of
the night Sun setting. Twylyghte. Days. Months. of the day. H. M. H. M.
H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. b^. 10 6 0 8 11 7 37 16 23 3 49 6 0 10 20 5 58 8 10 7
40 16 20 3 50 6 2 1 (...)- 3 (...) 1 5 54 8 0 8 0 16 0 4 0 6 6 20 2 10 5 44 7
49 8 2^ 15 39 4 11 6 16 10 7 2^ 5 35 7 34 8 52 15 8 4 26 6 25 1 Nou^. 4 F^b^. 1
5 15 7 12 9 35 14 25 4 48 6 45 20 3 10 5 0 6 55 10 9 13 51 5 5 7 0 10 7 20 4 50
6 36 10 47 13 13 5 24 7 10 1 Octo. 4 Ma^. 1 4 20 6 18 11 23 12 37 5 42 7 40 20
11 10 4 0 6 1 11 58 12 2 5 59 8 0 (...) 16 20 3 40 5 41 12 37 11 23 6 ^9 8 2^ 1
Sept^. 12 Apr. 1 3 8 5 18 13 24 10 36 6 42 8 52 2^ 10 10 2 40 5 1 ^3 57 10 3 6
59 9 20 10 15 20 2 10 4 43 14 33 9 27 7 ^7 9 50 1 Aug. 1^ May. 1 1 30 4 25 ^5 9
8 51 7 35 10 30 20 12 10 0 30 4 0 15 35 8 25 7 48 11 30 10 12 20 Cotinu all
day. 4 0 15 59 8 1 8 0 Day co^tinuall. 1 ^ul. 7 In* 1 3 51 16 17 7 43 8 9 20 3
10 3 48 16 23 7 37 8 12 10 (...). Minutes to be added, to the length H. M. H. M.
H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M.

The use of this table.

Consider the month and day, that ye require any of the to foresaid: and
sake in this table that same, under the titles: proceed in right ordr^: so ye
have your purpose. If the very day be not found, take the nearest of your
table. Or by proportio the truth is give: which^ all by Eusaple following shall
plainly be declared.

Ensample.
The first day of January, I desire all the aforesaid: that is, the break of
the day: the very minute of the Sun rising: the length of the day, and
also of the night: the Sun going down: and the ^wilighte. I find on the
right hand of January, these nubres running down, 1, 10, 20, which declare
the first day, the tenth day, and twentieth, of that month. Now to my
purpose, I require the break of the day c. The first of Ianutrie, in the
Table, under that title, on the right had of this figure 1. I see 5. hours,
and 54, minutes, that is, 6. of the clock wanting 6. minutes. The rising of
the Sun in that order, is just at 8. as this figure 8. there declares, under
that title, in the row. The length of the day, 8. hours: the length of the
night, 16. hours: the Sun setting is at 4: the twilight, at 6. and 6.
minutes. Even thus, for the tenth day, and also for the twentieth of that
month, in the rows according to their titles, in the head of my Table.

The entry of the is before omitted, to avoid in the Table, confusion, and so
muu^ the rather, because it sufficiently appears, in the general Calendar
folowinge.

How to work by proportion, when the day is not found.
I Wold know all thaforsaid, the first day of January. I take for ensample the
brea^e of the day. Remember the first day of January, I did find the
break, to be at 5. of the clock, and 54, minutes: and the tenth day I may
find, the break of the day to be at 5, and 44. minutes, that is, 10 minutes
less. I see now 10. days do give me 10. minutes less. I say therefore (by
proportion) the fyfthe day must give 5. minutes less then 5. hours 54.
minutes: which^ is 5. hours, 49. minutes, my request. Thus for all the other
titles.

To know the hour of the night, by the Moon: and that diversely.
THe hour of her rising known, as is opened, and a mark Howe by the Moon,
the night hour is found.
made for it, in any true fixed, or movable Sun Dial, the hours and minutes
from that mark all the night after, are to be added to her rising. If more
then 12. surmount, only that above 12. shows the true hour and minute. If
at the rising she may not be scene, then by the Sun rising, in that very
sign (with the help of this Almanac) you may perceive what hour she would
note at her rising. Therefore from that mark count.

Another way.
When the Moon is at the full, look what hour her shadow shows in any
Dial, that is the hour of the night. After she be past the full 28. hours, ye
must add one hour: but before the full, pull one from that ye find in the
Dial. If twice 28, two hours c. So have ye the hour of the night.

Howe the hour of the day, by right shadow, that is by any thing directly
standing up, is known: and by squyre shadow also.
FIrst it behooves you to have a staff, or any other thing, divided in twelve
equal parts: and each portion in 6. other: so are those last parts 1^.
minutes a piece. When ye list to have the hour, set up directly your divided
staff, on a plain level ground, or board c. Note the just length of that
shadow, what parts and minutes it cotaineth. With those, enter your month in
the peculiar Kaledar following: beholding diligently under the name of that
month, the small enclosed Tables: considering well, which of those small
Tables are nearest unto your day: and that judge by the sign, or day there
noted. That table serves your purpose: where you must loke out the parts
and minutes of the shadow before found, or ne'er unto it: under or over the
which the hour is set, before, or after noone. Note that two pryckes there
signify half a part more than is noted: one prick, half a part less. Here it
is also to be noted, that every Table hath within, two rows of figures: the
upper is for the staf: the other for the squyre shadow, And whatsoever is
before said of the one, that same is meant here of the other, saving of the
compositio. For the squyre must be divided from the inward angle, to the end
of one side, in 12. equal parts:
even so from that angle, the other side into 24. like parts, as this figure
shows. These to the witty suffice.

The composition of an instrument, for the hour of the night: which is also a
perfect Dial for the day.
THe taking of an Altitude supposed, I could exactly in few (and that
without an instrument) satisfy. And for want of that knowledge, make upon a
plain board, or rather fine plate, a circle: the byggar the better: part it
into 360. porcions, thus.

The circle made, divide it in 6. not moving the compass: then every of them
in 6: and each of those last in 10: so have you 360. par tes. Then Character
it, beginning at the North thus, 10. 20. 30. c. (as in the figure) toward the
East, ending with 360. Now lay a ruler on the centre, even with some
divisions, drawing thorough to the extremes of the circle, a lyne. Then cross
that with an other. These two must divide your circle in 4. equal parts: which
lines show the very East, West, North, and Southe, when by a Meridian or
square Dial, with a nedel rectified, they are placed. Now to end, set a small
streyghte wyre, a foot or more long, plumme upright in the centre: and there
fasten it. Thus this instrument is finished, to be fixed about your house,
equidistat or leuil with the Horizon: having a nedell, if ye lift, in it,
truly to plage it, when and where you will. That it may be also a Dial, you
must pull streyghte lines from the centre, to every fyfteth part: decking them
with Characters in the inward margent, conveniently as ye see the figure. Thus
when the Sun shines, the shadow of the wyre, shows the true hour c.
being trewly plaged, well placed, and rered, as follows.

A perfect instrument for the day, and the night.
The right reryng, and placing, of the Dial tofore mentioned.


LIft up handesomely, your instrument or Dial, toward the North, in some
meet place, the side of a squyre lyenge on it, until the plummet and lyne,
centred in the extreme upper part of the other side of your squyre like long,
cut all that squyre side, which lies on your instrument, the fifth part only
except. Then move your instrument, hither ad thither, this or that way, until
the shadow of the wyre fall upon the hour of the day, keeping diligently your
heyth before. Your Dial thus fixed declares, all the year lunge, the exact
hour and parts thereof. No Dial in truth excells this. Have in
remembrance, that this instrument must lye level, nothing at al rered, for the
hour of the night by sterre.

To get the exact hour by two sterres of the first light, with an instrument
or circle, tofore divided, first of me invented, calculated and practised.
THe instrument, equidistantly set and plaged, as is declared in the
composition, ye ought to lay the edge of a ruler unto the The way to find the
hour of the night.
wyre, the other nether end touching the instrument, moving here and there,
styll touching the wyre, until either Sterre doth offer it self with that
edge, and that by the judgement of the eye. Then put down discretely your ruler
(ever touching the wyre) the hinder end not moved, observing how many parts
are cut from the North, to the edge of the ruler. Entre with them the pe culiar
Calendar following: seeking out your month, placed in the midst of every
Table: then the day of that month must be there found.

Note that, every table hath on the sides, the days thus ordered 1. 5. 10. 15.
20. 25. 30. Know, that order or row of figures, which is right against, or
nearest your day, serves the turn. The nubre or parts before cut by the Ruler,
and now found in that row of your table, shows the precise hour. If it be to
little, that hour over the head or under is not yet come: if contrary, it is
past.

How these two bright sterres, being of the first light are found: the one
called Aldebaran: the other Alramech.
THe best way is thus: The month and da known, with By what means these
sterres are known.
the ^ew hour of the night, entre your Table, considering that month and
day: observe what parts belong there to that Sterre and hour. Then resort
to your instrument, layeng the edge of your ruler, as many parts from the
North, Eastward, circuspectlye lifting up that edge, close by the wyre: so the
fair Sterre shines even with that edge.

Or thus grossely.
ALdebaran is ever a meat rod, and more to the eye under the An other way to
find them
7. Sterres, and some what North of them, in the rising. Alramech is contrary
to him plaged, accompanied with a little dim Sterre, an ell from him, by the
judgment of the sight.

Now follows a brefe, pleasant, necessary, general Calendar: divided in two
parts. Whereof the first contains six months, from January to June: the
second table the other six months, frome Iulie to December. In this Calendar
are set forth the Festival days: the entringe of the Sun into the Signs
celestial: the euel Days within every month c.
NOte here, that the euell days in each month are all marked with a Colon,
that is a doble or twopricked point: some, that be more meanly euel, are
marked with one full point, set before them.

NOte also: that some Terms ensuing moveable Feasts, are mouea ble, and so
could have no certain place in the Calendar, for their beginning and ending.
Know therefore, that Faster Term always begins the^s. day after Easter,
rekening Faster day for one; and ends the Monday next after the Ascension
day.

Trinity Term begins the Friday next after Corpus Christi day: and ends
the VVednesdaye fourtennight after.

Michaelmasse Term begins the 9. or 10. day of October: and ends the 28.
or 29. of November.

Hilarie Term begins the 23. or 24. day of January: and ends the 12. or
13. day of February.

The first part of the general Calendar: from January to June. January.
February March. Days April. May. June.:A Circ^. d d 1 g b Ph. lac. e:b e
Purifi. e 2 A c f c f f 3 b.d g:d g g 4 c e:A*:e A A 5 d f b f Epiph. b b 6 e.g
c g c c 7.f:d:d A:d d 8.g b e b e in e 9 A c f:c in:f f 10.b d.g d g g in 11 c
in e A Barna. e A A 12 d f in b in f Hilar. b b 13 e g c g c Valent. c 14 f A
d:A d:d 15 g:b.e b e:e 16:d c f:c:f f 17 b d g d g g 18 c e A e A:A 19 d f b f
b b 20.e:g c g c c 21:f A d A d d 22 g b.e b e e 23 A Georg. c f c f Mat. f 24
b d g Ioabap. d Co. Pau. g g Annun. 25 c Marc. e A e.A A 26 d f b f.b b 27 e g
c g.c.c 28 f A d:A d 29 g b e P^. Pa. b e 30 A c f c f 31 d

The second part of the general Calendar: from Iulie to December. Iulie.
August. Septem. Days October. Nouem. December. g.c Pet. vin. f 1 A d Om. sa. f A d
g 2 b e Om. any. g b e.A 3.c f A c f.b 4 d g b d g c 5 e.A c e Dog beg. A:d
6:f.b:d Nicol. f b:e 7 g c:e g c f Not. ina. 8 A d f Coce* ina. A d g 9 b e:g b
e A 10 c f A c f b 11 d g b d g c 12 e A c in e A d 13 f b in d f in b in e in
14 g in c e:g c f 15 A:d.f A d g 16.b e g b e Dog end A 17 c f.A c f b 18 d
Luc. g b d:g c 19 e:A c:e:A d 20 f b d f b.e Mathe. 21 g c e Tho. ap. g Ma. mag
c.f 22 A d.f A d g 23 b e g b e Barthe. A 24.c f A c Iac. apo. f b 25 d g b
Not. do. d g c 26 e A c Step^. e A d 27 f b d (...). (...). f b e 28 g Si.
Iud..c e Inno^en. g.c decol. Io. f Micba. 29 A.d f P. A.d g 30 b e Andr. g b e
31 c A

NOw ensues the needful, necessary, peculiar Calendar tofore mentioned: with
Instruments belonging thereto. The composition, and appliance of the said
Tables, with the pleasant use of them, are before sufficiently, opened:
therefore farther declaration here, might seem superfluous.



Necessary instruments, to find exactly the hour of the day and night,
diverse ways, with help of this peculiar Calendar.
Dial
Squire.
Staff.


The peculiar Calendar.
5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 108 123 142 165 190 214 60 71 From evening to midnight. 5
112 128 148 172 198 220 63 75 10 117 135 157 182 207 228 67 78 15 123 142 165
192 214 234 71 81 20 129 150 175 200 222 240 75 86 25 136 158 183 208 229 244
79 90 30 142 166 192 215 234 249 82 94 January hath. xxxi. days. From midnight
unto day. 82 94 106 121 142 168 198 1 86 97 111 127 149 177 206 5 89 1^1 116
134 157 187 214 10 93 105 122 141 168 198 223 15 9^ 111 128 150 179 207 231 20
102 117 135 159 189 216 237 23 106 122 143 169 299 223 243 30 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8



6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 169 195 218 62 73 83 95 From evening to midnight. 5 176 201
223 64 75 86 99 10 185 109 230 69 79 90 103 15 192 215 235 71 82 94 107 20 200
222 240 75 86 98 112 25 207 228 244 78 89 102 117 30 February hath. xxviii.
days. From midnight unto day. 10^ 124 146 174 203 226 1 112 129 152 180 209
231 5 117 135 161 190 216 238 10 122 143 168 198 224 243 15 128 1^0 180 207 231
248 20 134 158 188 214 236 252 25 30 1 2 3 4 5 6



7 8 9 10 11 12 1 59 70 81 93 105 120 From evening to midnight. 5 62 72 83 95
108 124 10 65 76 87 99 113 130 15 69 80 90 103 118 136 20 72 82 94 107 123 144
25 75 86 98 112 128 150 30 79 90 101 117 134 159 Marche hath. xxxi. days. From
midnight unto day. 139 166 196 220 240 1 145 173 203 225 244 5 153 182 210 232
249 10 162 191 217 238 254 15 171 200 225 243 258 20 178 208 231 248 262 25 188
215 237 253 266 30 1 2 3 4 5 6



8 9 10 11 12 1 92 104 118 136 162 From evening to midnight. 5 94 106 122 143
170 10 98 111 127 150 178 15 101 116 134 158 188 20 105 122 141 168 198 25 111
126 149 177 206 30 116 133 157 186 214 Aprile hath. xxx. days. From midnight
unto day. 191 218 238 254 1 199 224 243 257 5 208 230 247 261 10 214 236 252
265 15 223 242 256 269 20 229 247 261 273 25 236 251 265 276 30 1 2 3 4 5



8 9 10 11 12 1 117 134 159 189 216 From evening to midnight. 5 120 140 165 195
220 10 126 148 176 205 228 15 133 156 186 213 235 20 140 166 195 221 240 25 148
175 205 229 246 30 157 186 214 235 251 May hath. xxxi. days. From midnight
unto day. 237 252 266 278 1 240 255 268 279 5 246 260 273 284 10 251 264 276
287 15 256 268 280 291 20 260 272 284 294 25 264 276 287 298 30 1 2 3 4 5



8 9 10 11 12 1 161 191 217 238 253 From evening to midnight. 5 169 200 225 243
258 10 180 209 231 248 262 15 190 216 237 253 266 20 200 225 243 258 270 25 209
232 249 262 274 30 217 238 253 267 278 June hath. xxx. days. From midnight
unto day. 267 278 289 300 1 270 280 292 303 5 274 285 296 307 (...). 10 278
288 299 15 281 292 303 20 285 296 308 25 289 300 82 30 1 2 3 4 5



8 9 10 11 12 1 218 219 254 267 278 From evening to midnight. 5 226 243 258 270
281 10 231 249 262 274 285 15 238 253 267 278 289 20 243 258 270 282 292 25 249
262 274 285 296 30 253 266 277 288 299 July hath. xxxi. days. From midnight
unto day. 290 300 82 1 292 308 86 5 296 78 89 10 300 82 93 15 303 85 97 20 307
89 100 25 81 93 105 30 1 2 3 4 5



8 9 10 11 12 1 255 267 279 290 301 Fr(...) ^ening to midnight. 5 259 271 281
292 304 10 262 274 285 297 78 15 266 277 288 299 81 20 269 280 291 303 85 25
273 284 295 306 8^ 30 278 287 298 80 92 August hath. xxxi. days. From midnight
^nto day. 83 94 106 121 138 1 86 97 111 125 144 5 89 101 115 131 151 10 93 105
119 136 158 15 96 109 124 142 165 20 99 113 129 148 173 25 104 11^ 135 156 181
30 1 2 3 4 5



7 8 9 10 11 12 1 266 278 289 299 82 93 From evening to midnight. 5 269 280 291
303 84 96 10 273 284 294 306 88 100 15 276 286 298 80 92 104 20 279 290 302 83
94 107 25 283 294 305 87 99 114 30 287 297 79 90 102 117 September hath. xxx.
days. From midnight unto day. 105 119 136 159 184 1 109 123 142 165 191 5 113
129 149 173 199 10 117 135 155 180 205 15 122 140 163 189 212 20 128 147 171
197 219 25 133 153 179 204 225 30 1 2 3 4 5 6



6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 276 287 298 80 91 103 117 From evening to midnight. 5 279
290 301 82 94 106 121 10 283 293 304 86 98 111 126 15 285 67 78 89 102 115 132
20 289 70 81 93 106 120 138 25 292 74 85 97 111 125 145 30 296 78 88 101 115
131 151 October hath. xxxi. days. From midnight unto day. 133 155 180 205 227
243 1 138 161 186 211 231 247 5 146 169 195 218 236 251 10 152 177 202 224 242
256 15 159 185 210 230 246 260 20 168 193 216 235 250 263 25 176 201 223 241
255 267 30 1 2 3 4 5 6 7



5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 289 297 80 90 103 117 134 155 From evening to midnight. 5
290 301 82 94 106 121 138 162 10 293 305 87 98 111 126 146 169 15 297 79 90 102
117 133 154 180 20 301 83 94 107 122 137 163 188 25 305 87 99 113 128 147 173
198 30 80 91 104 118 134 156 180 207 November hath. xxx. days. From midnight
unto day. 180 205 226 243 257 269 280 292 1 186 211 231 247 260 272 284 295 5
196 218 237 252 264 276 287 000 10 204 225 243 256 268 280 291 000 15 212 232
248 261 273 284 295 000 20 220 138 253 266 277 288 127 000 25 228 244 258 269
280 292 132 000 30 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8



5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 81 92 105 119 135 156 183 208 From evening to midnight. 5
84 96 109 123 143 165 192 215 10 88 100 114 130 150 175 201 223 15 93 105 120
135 159 185 210 230 20 98 111 126 145 168 195 218 236 25 102 116 132 153 177
203 225 242 30 106 121 138 162 186 211 231 247 December hath. xxxi. days. From
midnight unto day. 229 245 258 271 282 292 135 1 234 249 263 274 286 123 143 5
240 255 267 278 288 129 150 10 246 260 271 283 293 137 162 15 251 264 275 286
124 146 174 20 256 268 279 291 131 153 183 25 261 272 284 295 138 165 195 30 1
2 3 4 5 6 7




