Here begins a treatise against pestelece of ye infirmits

A^t^onomye. Ptholomeus.


AT the reverence and worship of ye blessed trynyte of ye glorious virgyn saint
ma ry / the conseruacyon of the comyn wele of crysten people as well for them
yt be hole as for remedy of them that ben seek. I the bishop of Arusiens in
the royalme of denmark doctor of physycke will write by the most expert end
famous doctors auctorysed in physyque some things of ye, Infyrmyte of ye
pestylence which daily enfecteth soon suffers us to depart out of this life.
First I will write ye tokenes of this infyrmy te / The second / ye causes
whereof it comes. The third remedies for the same. The. iiii. comfort for the
heart the pryncypall members of the body. The. v. when it shall be season to be
let blode.

First I said ye tokens of this infyrmyte. vii. thyges ought to be noted in the
same / ye first is when in a summers day the weder oftentimes chaugeth as in ye
mornyn ge the weder appears to rain / afterward it appe reth cloudy at ye
last wind in the south. The secon de token is when in somer the days appears
all der ke like to rain yet it raynes not / and if many days so cotynue it
is to dread great pestylence. The third token is when great multitude of flies
ben upon yt earth then it is sign / yt ye air is venymous and infect. The.
iiii. token is when ye sterres semen oftentimes to fall / then it is token yt
the air is infect with much venomous vapours. The. v. token is when a blasynge
sterre is scene in the element above / then it should fortune soon after to be
great manslaughter. in battle. The. vi. token is when there is great light
nynge thundre namely out of the south. The. vii. token is when great wyndes
passen out of the south / they be foul vnclene / therefore when these tokens
appear it is to dread great pestylence but god of his mercy will remeue it.

These thyges following ben the causes of pestylence. The pestylece comes of.
iii. things / sotyme it comes fro the rote byneth other while fro ye rote
above to ye we may feel sensibly how the change of the air appears unto us /
sotyme it comes of both together as well fro the rote above as fro the rote
byneth / as we see a sege or a privy next to a chamber or of any other
pertyculer thing which corrupts ye air in his substance qualyte which is
a thyge may hap every day / thereof comes the ague of pestylence / about the
same many physycyons be deceived / not supposing this axes to be a pestylence
/ sometime it comes of dede careyn or corrupcion of standing water in dyches
or sloughes other corrupt places / and these things sometime be vnyuersall
sotyme particular. Fro the rote above it fortunes ye causes of the bodies
above the air by whom the spyryte of life is corrupt in man or be as
Auicece saith in his.. iiii. book / by ye form of thayt above the bodies
byneth lightly be infect / for thynpressyons above corrupts the air so the
spirytes of man be corrupt / this infyrmyte comes from the rote above /
bynethe when of thynpressyons above the air is corrupt / and of the
putryfaccyon or roten careyne / or of vile places byneth an infyrmyte is caused
in a man / such an Infyrmyte sometime is an axes / sometime a postome or a
swellyge and that is in many things. Also the air inspired sotyme is venymous
and corrupt / hurtynge ye heart / yt nature many ways is grieved so / yt he
perceives not his harm for ye vyrgyn appears fair shows good dygestyon
yet nevertheless ye pacyent is like to dye / wherefore many physycyens saying
the vryn of their pacyentes yt speak superfycyally be deceived. There fore it is
need yt every pacyent prove to him self a good expert physician. These
things written be fore are ye causes of pestylence. But about these thy ges
two questyons be moeued. The first is wherefore one dies another dies not in a
town where me be dede in one house / in another house there dies none. The
second questyon is whether pestylence sores be cotagyous. To ye first questyon
I say it may hap to be of two causes / yt is to say of ye thing yt doth of
yt thyge that suffers / an example of yt thyn ge that doth / ye Influence of
the bodies above beholds that place or that place more than this place or
this place / the pacyent is more disposed to dye tha another. therefore it is to
be noted yt ye bodies be more hot disposed of open poores than bodies Infect
ha: uynge the poores stopped with many humours where bodies be of resolucyon or
opening / as men which abusen them self with women or use often times bathes /
or men yt be hot with labour or great anger they have their bodies more
disposed to this great sekenes. To the second questyon I say yt pestylence
sores be cotagyous by cause of infect humours of bodies and the reeke or smoke
of such soores is venymous and corrupts ye air therefore it is to flee fro
such persons yt be infect / in pestylence time no body shol de stand in
great prece of people by cause some manne use the remedies following.

In the morning when ye rise / wasshe a little few one or two fylberde nottes
clenc with salt ete them / if yt can not be had than ete breed or a toste sopped
in veneger namely in troublous cloudy weder. Also in the time of pestylence it
is better to abide within the house / for it is not wholesome to go in to cite or
town / also let your house be sprynkled specyally in somer with vyneger and
roses with leues of vine tree. Also it is good to wasshe your hands oft times
in the day with water veneger / wipe your face with your hands smell to them.
Also it is good always to savour ayger things. In the mout of pessulane I
might not eschew the company of people for I went fro house to house because
of my pouerte to cure seek folks therefore breed or a sponge sopped in vyneger
I toke with me holding it to my mouth and nose because all eager things
stoppen the ways of humours and suffers no venymous things to entre in to a
man body so I escaped the pestylens my fellows supposyge yt I should not
live these things I have proved by my self.

Here follows the cofortes of ye heart of ye pryncypall members.
The cofortes of ye heart be these / saffron anifex plantayn: with other herbs
they open the inward spyryte / these be good among the comyn people where
lightly it happeth yt one is infect of another therefore beware the brethe of
another. Also of an Infect ayet a mans even be made dymme if he bear not ye
foresaid thyges in his hand Also it is wholesome yt ye wasshe your mouth face
even hands oftentimes in ye day with rose water medeled with veneger / if ye have
no rose water take veneger and so these things used ye may go surely among
the people. Also a natural lax of the belly is a great re medy else provoke a
lax by a supposory craftily / use pypylle pestileciales for they be good / they
be in thap potycarye shops. Also keep fire always in your thou se for it
lets much the Impressyons of the bodies above clarefyeth the air. Also it
is profytable as well for hole seek folks to drink tryacle therefore take it.
ii. times a day with clear wine limphat or with clear rose water or with clear ale
/ take a quantyte of trya cle two sponefull of clear wine or rose water or ale
dyssolue the tryacle in the cup dryke it dine not till ye midst of the day yt
the tryacie may have his operation / then chese a good dysshe with mete / dryke
clear wine often times drink in the day but not much together / for much
haboundaunce of drink putryfyeth the humours. Also beware hot things in
metes as pepper garlyke / though pepper purges the brain from the flewme
specyally ye members from vesyous humours / yet it makes much hete / hete
falls in to putryfacion / bytternes only is more please than hot odor or
savour. Also garlyke though it putgeth flewme put out all humours provokes an
appetite to ete suffers no dry aper to entre yet it troubles the even makes
the heed hot therefore it is not good to ete garlic. The pestylence grows
often times of an hot cause therefore all metes the more they be light
digestion so much they be the better / In the morning ere boiled mete at euyn
roasted / forbere broth potage without they be eyger / in ye time of this sekenes
eyger meters be better tha other. Also forbere all fruits but if they be eyger
/ as cherries or pom garnates or a little of a pere or apple by the way of
medicine / because all fruit induces putryfaccyon / ete convenient spices as
gvger synamum comyn macys saffro / these be the best sauce may be made for
rich people / for poor take few sage fylberde nottes percely with veneger
myste together these be good lets putryfaccyon. To be merry in his heart is a
great remedy for health of his body. Therefore in time of this great Iyfyrmyte be
ware ye dread not death but live merely hope to live lunge.

For the lettynge of blode.
Lettynge of blode ones in the month may be made / but age or other thyges
forbede it as pylgryms or feeble {per}sons yt have the flyxe / suffer to be let
blode in ye vain called basilica on ye right or lift side before etyge / after
in cision of the basilisca be merry drink wine or ale temperatly / sleep not yt
day when basilica is cut / if ye feel yeu grieved to be infect / than eschew
sleep be walking moeuynge / for by sleep thynwarde hete induces poison to ye
heart and to other specyall members / so yt vnneth any herb may take away
such poison / which should not be if a man would be moeuyge to fro / but some
would axe wherefore should sleep be eschewed / I say shortly yt in pestylence
time anon after mete if a body list to sleep / then such a lust ought to be
forborne by a space walkyge in the gardyns or feldes / therefore Auicenne
writes yt if a man would sleep he must drink a good draught of ale or wine
a^ore / because a ma being a sleep draws many humours / ye evil humours be
put down by thumours of a good draught. But some would vnderstonde how may a
man feel when he is infect / I say that a man which is infect yt day he eteth
not much mete / for he is replenysshed with evil humours / forthwith after
dinner he has lust to sleep feleth great hete under cold. Also he hath great
payne in the forhede but all these thyges he may put a way by moeuynge of a
place hyder and theder to ride or to walk he may not for sloth / of the body
the weight of the same. Also a man which is infect hath lust to sleep every
hour for the vemyn within the body troubles the spyryte of life so yt always he
would rest sleep so of these tokens a man shall know feel him self infect /
if a body will not believe this. Abide the midst of ye day / then anon he
shall feel a swellyge under the arm about the share / or about the eres
therefore se an hye a good medicine / forbere sleep because of the thyges
aforsayd / it is plain that the spyryte of lyf rests in sleep all the body
here and there is venymed. All these things I have proved by my self / these
things known when a man feleth him self infect as soon as he may let him be
let blode plentuously till he swoune / then stop the vain / for a little
letynge of blode moeueth or styrreth vemyn / if a man will not have many veins
cut together / then let him suffer ye vain cut to run till ye blode with draw /
for a little bledyge meueth strongly ye venym as it is said before also a man
whether he be infect or not if he be let blo de let him forbere sleep all yt
day till mydnyght folowyge / always let blode ye vain upon yt side of the body
where yt swellyge appears. Therefore if a swellyge appear under ye right arm
let blode in ye midst of ye same arm in ye vain called mediana / if it of
them may be infect. Therefore wise physycyens in vysytyge seek folk stade far
fro yt patient holdyn ge their face toward ye door or widow. And so shol de
ye seruautes of seek folk stade. Also it is good to a pacyent every day for
to change his chamber / to have the wyndowes open ayenst ye north eest / to
sphere the wyndowes ayenst the south / for the south wind hath two causes of
putryfycicaon. The first is / it makes a man being hole or seek feeble in
their bodies. The second cause is as written in ye third of Amphyrosmis ye
south wind grieves ye heecynge hurts the heart because it opens ye poores
of man and enters in to the heart / wherefore it is good to an hole man in time
of pestylence when the wind is in the south to be within the house all day if
it shall be need a man to go out / yet let him abide in the house till the
son be up in the eest passing south ward.

The remedies of pestylence here after follows. Now it is to wet by what
remedies a man may pre serve him self fro pestylence / first se ye writing of
Ieremye ye prophet yt a man ought to forsake evil things do good deeds
mekely to confess his sins / for why it is the highest remedy in time of
pestylen ce / penance confession to be preferred of other medecynes.
Nevertheless I promytte you verily it is a good remedy to void change
thynfect pleaces. but some may not prouffytably change their places / therefore
as much as to them is possible it is to eschew every cause of putryfaccion /
namely every flesshely lust with women it to be eschewed. Also ye sothern
wind which is naturally enfecteth therefore sphere ye wyndowes axenst the south
as it is said before un to the first hour after the midst of ye day. Then
open ye wyndowes ayenst ye north. Of ye same cause every foul styncke is to be
eschewed / of stabyll stynkynge feldes ways or streets / namely of stynkyge
dede carayne most of stynkyge waters where in many places water is kept by.
vii. days or. ii. nyghtes / or else there be gutters of water cast under
the earth which causes great stink corrupcyon of this cause some they in ye
house where such things happen / in another house dye none as it is said
before. like wise in yt place where be wurtes coals putrefyed it makes a
noyfull savour stynkynge for as by the sweet odor of bawme ye heart the
spyrytes have recreation / so of evil savours they be made feeble wherefore keep
your house that an infect air enter not in / for an Infect air most
causes putryfaccyon in places and houses where folk sleep / therefore let
your house be clean and make clear fire of wood flamynge / let your house be
made with fumygacyon of herbs / that is to say with leues of bay tree Jeneper
vberyorgany it is in thappotycary shops / wormwode few mugworte of ye tree of
aloes which is best but it is dere. Such a fume taken by the mouth eres
opens thynwarde parts of the body. Also it is teschewe all great repleccyons
by cause full bodies be lightly infect / as Auicene saith in the fourth canon /
they yt chargen their bodies with repleccion / shorten their life. Also comyn
bathes are to be eschewed / for a little crust corrupts all ye body Therefore
ye people as much as is possible is to be eschewed / leest of infect brethes
some ma be infect / but when ye multitude of people may not be eschewed. the be
risen. But if yt he feel any such swellyge after his sleep / thenne upon the
contrary part the lettynge of blood must be made / as for if the swellynge
or rysynge appear in the right arm let him blood in the lift arm in
epate or (basilica) or mediana. And if that a swellynge or a moeuynge ap pere
under the left arm let him blood in the right arm like wise as is be
foresaid of the lift arm / and so of allother places of the body / let
blode on the contrary part of such swellynge or rysyn ge. And that the
lettynge of blood be very little and feeble / Thenne let the pacyente sleep
after the midst of the day / and thenne always within the midst of the day
/ for he must be in contynuelly meuynge riding or going moderately / and
afterward if that the swellynge grow let him not be a frayed of death by
cause such a swellyge puts out all manner of evils / and makes a man
very hole. And that the sooner a swellynge may be made ripe / take this
medicine as follows. Bruise the leues of an elder tree the which ben fair and
great and put thereto mustard the which shall be well and strongely grounden
in a pair of querues and then when ye have done as I have told you / take and
drive a plaster of the foresaid things good thycke and after put it upon the
sore and swellynge and it shall aledge him anon of the foresaid sykenes

Also for the foresaid swellynge / or rysynge in the neck / or in ye arm / or
in any other place of a man body when it appears take fylberde nottes
figs and few and bruise them together in a mortar well and lay it upon the
swellynge. And if that it appear under ye left arm let him blode in ye midst
of the same or in ye vain of ye liver which is above ye little fayger / if it,
be about the share let him blode about the heal upon ye same side / if the
swellynge be in the neeke let him blode in the vain called cephalica about the
thombe in ye hand in the same side or in the vain called medsana of the same
arm or in ye hand of the same side about the little finger / if ye swellynge
appear about the ere let him blode in the vain called cephalica of the same
side or in ye vayn which is between the lunge finger the thombe / lest many
venymous things go in to the brayn / or let blode the vain which is about
the little finger yt is named by physycyons basiuca / if a swellyn ge appear in
the sholders less it with ventosyte and first lest the vain called mediana /
if the swellynge be on the back / less it upon the vain called pedia magna)
all these thyges be made if man sleep not before ye knowledge of ye swellyge.
some surgeons will put treacleto ye swellynge But do not so / for tryacle
puts out venym. Thefore dryke tryacle for yt put teeth out the same. Also
there is another medyeyne ta ke syngreue hysworte other wise called wild time
mawdesyn grafie plantayne and a little rye flower break all these together till
ye se water come out there of / meddle yt water with woman's milk give it to the
pacyent fastrge before sleep will werke the better for to remeue the swellyge
These remedies be suffy cyent to eschew this great sekenesse with the help of
god to whom be ever lastyge laud praysyge worl de without end. Amen.

Enprynted by Wynkyn de Word.

