Here begins a litill book necessary behooveful aenst the Pestilence
^T the reverence worschip of the blessed Trinyte of the glorious virgyn saint
mary the conseruacion of the comyn wele of alle christen people / as well for
them that ben hole as for remedy of them that ben seek. I the Bishop of
Arusiens in the royame of Denmark doctor of Phisike will write by the most
expert famous doctors auctorised in Phisike sum things of the infirmyte of
pestilence which daily enfecteth soon suffers us to depart out of this
life.

First I will write the tokenes of this ifirmyte The second the causes whereof it
comes The third remedies for the same The fourth comfort for the heart the
pncipal members of the body The.v. when it schal be season to be let blode


First I said the tokenes of this infirmite.vij. things ought to be noted in
the same The first is when in a summers day the weder often times changes.
as i the morning the wedyr appears to payne / afterward it ap{per}ith cloudy
att last wyndy i the south The.ij token is when i somer the days ap{per}ith
all derke like to mynr yet it myneth not. if many days so {con}tinue it is to
dread of great pestilence The.iij. tokyn is when great multitude of flies ben
upon the eerthe thenne it is sign the air is venomous and infect The fourth
token is when the sterres semen oft times to fall then it is token that the
air is infect with much venomous vapours. The.v. token is when a blazing
sterre is see i the element then it is sign to be soon after great pestilence
or great maslaghter i bataille The.vi. token is when there is great lightnynge
thudre namely out of the south The.vij. token is when great wyndes passen out
of the south they be foul vnclene. therefore when these tokenes ap{per}e it is
to dread great pestilence but god of his mercy will remeue it

Here after folowen the causes of pestilence
The pestilence comes of.iij. things sometime it comes fro the rote bynethe
Otherwhile fro the rote above so that we may feel sensibly how the change of
the air appears unto us And sometime it comes of both to gider as well fro
the rote above as fro the rote bynethe As we see a sege or privy next to a
chambre or of any other particular thing which corrupts the air in his
substance and qualite which is a thing may hap every day: And thereof
comes the ague of pestylence. And about the same many physicians be deceived:
not supposing this axes to be a Pestilence / sometime it comes of dede careyn /
or corrupcion of standing waters in diches or slouhes other corrupt places
these thiges sometime be universal sometime {per}ticuler Fro the rote above: it
fortunes the causes of the bodies above i thayer by whom the spirit of life
is corrupt in a man or in a best: In like wise as Auycenne saith i his fourth
book / by the form of thayer above / the bodies benethe lightly be infect:
For thynpressyons above corrupts the air and so the spirits of a man ben
corrupt. This infirmyte comes also from the rote above and bynethe: when of
thynpressyons above / the air is corrupt of the putrifaccion or rotyn caceyn
of the vile places benethe an infirmite is caused in a man. such an infirmyte
sometime is an axes. sometime a postume or a swelling that is in many things.
Also the air ispyred is venomous corrupt hurtig the heart that nature many
ways is grieved so that he {per}ceyueth not his harm: For the vryne appears
fair schewe^h god digestion yet neuth^les the patient is like to dye /
wherefore many physicians saying the vryn of their patients they speak
su{per}ficially be deceived: Therefore it is need that euy paciet {pro}uyde to
him self a god ex{per}te physician. These things wryton before are the
causes of pestilence But about th^se things.ij. qstions be me^ued. The first
is wherefore one dies another dies not in a town where me be dede i one house
i another house there dies none. The.ij. qstion is whether pestilence sores be
contagious. To the first qstion I say it may hap to be of.ii. causes that is
to say of that thig that doth of that thig that suffers. An ensample of that
thig that doth / the influence of the bodies above be holds that place or
that place more than this place or this place. the patient is more disposed to
die than another Therefore it is to be noted that bodies be more hot disposed
of oopyn poorys than bodies ifect hauig the pores stopped with many humours
where bodies be of resolution or opening as men that abusen them self with wymme
or vsen oft times bathes. or men that be hot with labour or great anger their
bodies be more disposed to this sekenes. To the.ij. qstion I say that
pestilence sores be {con}tagious because of enfect humours bodies the reke or
smoke of such sores is venomous corrupts the air therefore it is to flee fro
such {per}sons as be ifect In pestilece time no body should stand i great
prece of peple for some ma of the may be infect Therefore wise phisicies visiting
seek folk stade far fro the paciet holdig their face toward the door or
window so shall the servants of seek folk stade Also it is god to a patient
euy day to change his chamber often times to have the wyndowes open ayest the
north eest to sphere the wyndowes ayest the south For the south wide hath two
causes of putrifaccion The first is it makes a ma be i hole or seek feeble in
their bodies: The.ij. ca is as it is writon i the.iij. of Amphorismie the south
wind grieves the heering hurts the heart because it opens the pooris of ma
enters ito the heart wherefore it is god i time of pestilece to an hole ma
when the wide is in the south to be withi the house al day if it needs to go
out yet let a ma abide i his house till the son be up in the eest passing
southward.

The remedies for the Pestilence
Now it is to wet by what remedies a ma ma^ pserue him self fro pestilence
first see the writig of Ieremy the {pro}phete that a ma ought to forsake evil
thiges do god deeds mekely to confess his sins for whi it is the hiest
remedy i time of pestilence penance {con}fession to be pferred al other
medicines Neutheles I {pro}mitte you verily it is a god remedy to void
change thinfect place: but some may not proffitably change their places
therefore asmoche as to the is possible it is teschewe euy cause of putrefaction
stinking namely every fleschely lust with wymme shall be eschewed Also the
sothern wind which is naturelly infectif therefore sphere the windows ayenst
the south as it is said before till the first hour after the midst of the day
then opene the wyndowes ayest the north Of the same cause euy foul stinche is
to be eschewed of stabyl stinkyng feldes ways or streets namely of stinking
dede careyn most of stynking wats where in many places wat is kept.ij. days
or.ij. nights. or else there be gutters of water cast under therthe which
causes great stink corrupcion of this cause some they in that house where such
things happen in another house dye none as yt is said before Like wise in that
place where the wurtes coals putrefied it makes a noyfull savour stynking. For
like as by the sweet odour of bawme the heart the spirits lave recreation so of
evil savours they be made feeble wherefore keep your hons that an infect air
entre not in. for an infect air most causes putrifaccio in places houses where
folk slip therefore let your house be clean make clear fire of wode flaming
Let your house be made which fumigacion of herbs which be the levies of bay
tree Ieneper vberiorgany it is i tha poticaue stoppes worm vode few nugwort of
the tree of aloes which is best but it is dere such a fumee taken by the
mouth eeris opens thynward {per}tes of the body Also it is teschew all great
replecions because full bodies be lightly infect as auycene saith in the fourth
cano They that chargen their bodies with repleccio shorten their life Also
comyn bathes are to be eschewed for a litil crust corrupts al the body
Therefore the peple asmoche as is possible is to be eschewd lest of infect
brethes some ma be infect But when the multitude of peple may not be eschewed
then use the remedies following, In the morning when ye use wesshe a litil few
one or two filberd nottes clean with salt ete the if that can not be had then
ete breed or a toste sopped i vinegre namely in troubelo{us} cloudy weder Also
in time of pestilece it is better tabyde within the house for it is not holsom
to go in the cite or town. Also sprenkle your hows specially in somer with
vinegre roses with the levies of vyn tree Also it is god to wasshe often times
in the day your hades with wat vinegre wipe your face with your hands smelle
to the Also it is god always to sauo aygre things. In the mount of pessulane I
might not eschew the {con}pany of peple for I wet fro house to house becae of my
poute to cureseke folks therefore breed or a sponge sopped in vinegre I toke
with me holding it to my mouth nose because al eager things stoppen the ways
of humours suffers no venomous things to ent into a manys body so I escaped
the pestilence my felows supposing that I should not live These things I have
{pro}ued by my self

The {con}fortes of the heart the pncipal mebres
The {con}fortes of the heart be these / faffron Canifex planteyn with other
herbs thy o^e the inward spirit these be god emog the comyn peple where
lightly it happeth that one is infect of another therefore beware the breath of
another Also of infect air a mans even be made dymme if he bear not these said
things in his hand Also it is holsom to wasshe your mouth face even hands
often times in the day with rosewat meddled with vinegre if ye have no rosewat
take vinegre: so these things used ye may go surely emog the peple Also a
natural laxe of the belly is a great remedy ellis {pro}uoke a laxe by a
suppository craftily Use pipille pestilenciales for they be god they be in
thappoticary shops Also keep fire al way in your house. for it lets much
thin pssions of the bodies above clarefied thaier Also it is {pro}ffitable
as well for hole seek folks to drink Triacle: therefore take it.ij. times a day
with clear wyn lymphat or with clear rosewater or with clear ale: Take a
quatite of tryacle of a pese.ij. sponeful of clear wyn or rosewater or ale
dissolve the triacle in the cup drink hit: dine not till the midst of the
day so that the tryacle may have his operation then chese a god disshe with
mete drink clear wyn often times drink in the day but not much to gider for
much habondaunce of drink putrefieth the humours Also beware hot things in
mete as pepir garlik though pe{per} purges the brayn from flewme specially the
mebres from viscous humours yet it makes much hete and hete falls into
putrifaccion / bittnes only is more to please than hot odour or sauo. also
garlik though it purges fleam put out evil humour {pro}uoked an appetite to
ete suffers no dry air to entre: yet it troubles the even makes the heed
hot. therefore it is not god to ete garlik The pestilece grows of ten times
of an hot cause therefore all metes the lighter they be of digestion somoche
they be the better In the morning ete boilled mete / at euyn roasted / forbere
broth potage without they he eygre In the time of pestilence eygre metes be
much better than other metes. Also forbere al fruit but if they be eygre as
cherries or pomes garnates or a litil of a pere or apple by way of medicine
because al fruit induces putrifaccion Ete convenient spices as gynger cynamum
comyn matis saffron These be the best sauce that may be made for rich peple
For pour take few sage filberdnuts {per}celly with vinegre mynst to gider.
These be god lets putrifaccio To be merry i the heart is a great remedy for
health of body Therefore in time of pestilence beware ye dread not death: but live
merely hope to live lunge

For the letting of blode
Letting of blode ones i the month may be made but aage or other thig forbede
it as pilgryms or feeble {per}sons which have the flixe suffer to be let blode
i the wine called basilica on the right or lift side before eting after icision
of basilica be merry drink wine or ale temperatly: sleep not that day when
basilica is cut If ye feel you grieved to be infect than eschew sleep be
walking moeuig For by sleep thiward hete iduced poyso to the heart to other
special mebres that vnethe any herb may take away such poyso which should not
be if a ma wold be meuig to fro But some wold axe wherefore sleep shall be
eschewd. I say that i pestilence time anon after mete if a body list to sleep
then such lust shall be forborn by a space walking i the gardyns or feldes then
make a naturell sleep by the space of an hour therefore Auycenne writes that
if a ma wold sleep he must drink a god draught of ale or wyn before because a
man being a sleep draws many humours the evil humours be putt down by
thumours of a god draught But some wold ask how may a ma feel when he is
infect. I say that a ma which is enfect that day eteth not much mete for he
is replenisshed with evil humour forthwith after din he hath lust to sleep
feleth great hete under cold. also he hath great payne i the forhede / but all
th^se thiges he may put away by moeuyng of a space hider thither to ride or to
walk he may not for sleuthe of the body the weight of the same Also a ma
that is enfect hath lust to sleep euy hour of the day night For the venym
being within the body troubles the spirit of lyff so that always he would
rest sleep And also of these tokenes a man schal know feel him self enfect.
if a body will not believe this / abide the midst of the day then he shall feel
a swellig under the arm or about the share or about the eerys therefore see
an hye a god medeane / forbere sleep because of tho things before said y^ is
plain that the spirit of life rests i sleep all the body here there is
venymed: All th^se things I have {pro}ued by my self These thiges known when
a ma feleth him self ifect as soon as he may let him be let blode plenteously
till he be swoune then stop the wine For a litil letting of blode moeueth or
styreth venym: if it be so that a ma will not have many wynes cut to gender /
then let him suffer the wine cut to rene till the blode withdraw for a litil
bledyng meueth strongly the venym as yt is said before Also a man whether he be
infect or not if he be let blode / let him forbere sleep al that day till
midnight following allewaye let blode that wine upon that side of the body
where the swelling ap{per}eth Therefore if a swelling appear under the right arm
let blode i the midst of the same arm i the wine called mediana / if it
ap{per}e under the lift arm let him blode in the midst of the same or in the
vain of the lyu which is about that litill fingre / if it be about the share
/ let hi blode about the heal upon the same side if the swelling he i the neck
let him blode in the vain called Cephalica about the thobe in the hand of the
same side or in the vain called mediana of the same arm: or in the hand of
the same side about the litil fingre. And if the swelling ap{per}e about the
eere / let him blode in the vayn called cephalica of the same side or in the
vain which is between the lunge fingre the thombe lest many venomous veins
go into the brayn or let blode the vayn which is about the litil finger named
by the phisicions Basilica. if a swelling ap{per}e in the sholdres less it
with ventosete first less the vain called Mediana ^f the swelling be on the
back: less it upon the vayn called pedica mag al these things be made if a
man sleep not before the knowleche of the swelling But if ye feel such
swelling after sleep then on the {con}trarie part the letinge of blode must be
made As if the swelling ap{per}e in the right arm let him blode in the lift
arm in Epate or basilica or mediana. if a swelling ap{per}e under the lift
arm let him blode in the right arm like as it is said of the lift arm: so of
other places of the body let blode on the {con}trarie part of such swelling.
if the letting of blode be verray litil feeble then let the patient sleep
after the midst of the day and always in the midst of the day he must be in
continuell meuyng ridynge or going moderately. afterward if the swellig grow
let him not be aferde of death be cause such a swelling puts out all evil
makes a ma verray hole. that the sooner a swelling may be made ripe / take
this medicine as follows Brose the levies of an elder tree put thereto ground
mustard make a plaster thereof and put it upon the swelling Some surgeons will
put triacle upon the swellig but do not so for triacle puts out venym:
therefore drink triacle for that puts out the same: Also there is another
medicine Take sengrene hylworth otherwise called wild time maudelyn gras
plateyn a litil rye flower break all these to gider till ye see water come out
thereof Medyl^ that water with womans milk give it to the patient fasting before
sleep it will werke to better for to remeue the swelling. Also for the swelling
when it ap{per}ed Take filberd not tes figs few: bruise them to gider lay it
upon the swelling These remedies be sufficient to eschew this great sekenesse
with the help of god to whom be eulastig laud praising world withouten end
AMEN


