A brief and most pleasaut Epitomye of the whole art of Physiognomy, gathered
out of Aristotle, Rasis, Formica, Loxius, Phylemo, Palemo, Consiliator, Morbeth
the Cardinal and others many more, by that learned chyrurgian Cocles: and
englished by Thomas Hill Londoner.

Imprinted at London by John Waylande.

Cum priuilegio per septennium.

To the right worshipful Master George keable Esquier, Thomas Hill wishes
prosperytye.
THe kindness which, I have found at your friendly hands, joint with your
knowledge and love of good letters, hath moved me to dedicate these my
labours, unto your mastership: which I have attempted to put in prynt,
rather to show what I wish to be done, than what I can do. The argument is
not only plesante but also necessary, and that for all kinds of men to be
skylled in. And that right well knew the auncyente Philosophers, which would
receive no Skolers nor bye any scruautes, whose shape answered not their
knowledge in this science. But what need I declare this unto you, who know it
already much better than my self: wherefore no longer to trouble you with my
rude letters, I heartily beseech you to take in good part my good will, and with
your authority to protecte my doings. Thus I pray god to keep you.

yours most bounden Thomas Hill.

The Preface To the Reader.
IF it be true (gentle Reader) that the chief point in knowledge is to know
God, the second to know our self, the third (which is also the first part
of prudence) to know al other men, tha must it needs follow that such means as
lead us to the nearest perceiving of any of these three, must needs be both
good, profitable and necessary. What folly is than in those heads which
condemn or despise natural Philosophy, which as Saincte. Paul affirms,
leodeth us to the first, and as King Salomon says, drives us to the
second. And as the whole consent of all that have been learned bears
wytnes, doth thoroughly instruct us in the third. For the excellency of the
creatures as heaven (whose course effects Arithmetic and Astronomy declare)
and earth, (whose compass, scituacion, and alteration Geometry and Physic
publysheth) cause men to grant not only the excellency but also the
almyghtynes of their maker and ruler. The use and effects of natural reason
whose truth and pleasantnes logic and rhetoric do plainly set furth,
teach us how we differ from other creatures, for what end we were created, and
how we may behave us to come to that end: for about this last point moral
Philosophy is only occupied, teaching what is just, what honest, what cumly,
and what profitable. And as the excellency of the creature makes us know the
creator, whose name be blessed for ever, and as the use of Reason in us doth
cause us to know our seiues: so doth the effects and wurkyng of nature,
comprehended by reason, teach us to know and judge of al other things, As
first of the elements and of their powers in in them selves severally
vnnixed, secondly of their myxture in things, thirdly of the effects caused
through their mixtures, which be plainly set furth in Physiognomy, that is to
say knowledge of bodies. This Phisiologie is learned two ways: by meditation
or by appearance. Meditacyon is a conceyuyng in the mind of such things as
cannot be perceyueo by any sense, as the substance of souls, spirits, and
virtues. Appearance is the judgement which the senses have of such things
as are objected against them: as the feeling, of substances: the hearing of
mouynges, the taste and smelling of qualities and mixtures, the syghte, of
forrmes and Colours. Which senses although they be all excellent in their
kinds for us to judge and discern things by, yet the chefest truest and most
ready is the sight, which is chiefly occupied about Physiognomy, as we may cal
it in english, body skill, or the knowledge of the temperance of bodies by
their shape forms, Which although it be of al creatures, both stones,
plants, verbes, fish foul, beasts and men, whose inward prop r^yes and
difference are known by the outward shapes: yet be cause that of all the rest
man is most excellent, therefore it specially belongs to him. And of his
nature the Philosophers have chefely sought, that because man is not only the
chefest good to manne, but also the chefest evil both to man al other thiges.
Which causes Tully in his book de natura deorum, to call Reason (which is the
excelletest creature that god ever made) the wurst of al other creatures:
because that only by man (the only possessor thereof) al kides of iniquities
and sins against nature are diuised, and committed. But to leave Tully in his
error till an other time because he distinguishes not lust and reason, but
attributeth the effects of the one to the other, we will come to the matter
concerning Physiognomy chefely in man, which teaches the third part of
wisdom, and first of prudence, that is: how to discern the disposicions of al
men by their form and shape, whereby we may know whom to make our friends
and familiers, whom to preserve fro being our foes, whom to avoid as
dangerous to have to do with all. Al these points are marked by nature in
the proporcion and liniamentes of mans body, with diverse other more secrete,
which are well known to as many as know the art, and specially in the face
and hands, which as it should seem, god hath made open and vncouerable because
al men might at all times see and perceive them. And to the end no man should
think this incredible (as the gross heads do of all things which they
cannot comprehend) I will counsel them by things more evident, to credit
such as be more obscure, yet not obscure of them selves but hidden from us for
lack of search. Can not we know by a mans countenance when he is merry,
when sad, when angry, when fearful, when ashamed, and when shameless? and that
by new and so dayne alteracions of the visage? Do we not by the colours and
making judge and not fail of stomach and properties of horses, dogs,
Cocks, other creatures? Do not the Phisicions likewyse judge the
temperamentes, crasis, and diseases of the body by the colour and alteration of
the qualities and quantyties of parts? And how are all these things known
but by considering what element is strongest and what weakest in the
composition. For the elements wurke the same or much like effects in
composicions of bodies where they rule, as they have in themselves simply, and
so cause the proporcyons both of members and liniamentes, and bring furth the
like conditions and properties. Which what they be, and how they differ, the
best learned me from time to time have searched, noted and put in wrytyng.
Wherein as they are to be commended, with al other which have followed their
good example, so of al other nacyons I am forced most to dispraise mine own
country men, which have least no monument of their skill therein. For there are
few other nations but have in their own tongue diverse treatises thereof set
furth in print, whereas we (so far as I have seen), have never a word thereof.
And although I know that no begynnynges can lack dispraise, yet to set other
on wurke therein, I have with blind bayarde adventured to turn into Inglish,
that which I have found in other tounges, written by the best learned in that
art as Hermes, Aristotle, Rasis, Formica, Locius, Philemon, Palemon,
Conciliator and other, wishing that al me at vacant times might occupy their
wits therein. And one thing I warn (as I my self am warned) not to Judge by
any one part alone, but by all (or at the least) by many together: so shall we
be sure not to be deceived. I mean we shall not be deceived to know the
truth of the natural disposition, and yet we may fail of the mans
conditions, which Socrates himself well declared. For when he with his
disciples about him, asked of a Phisiognomer what conditions he perceived to be
in him, Ah Socrates (quoth the Phisiognomer) thou art a great ^eachour, a
crafty fellow, subtyle, and given to all wyckednes. This answereso vexed
Socrates Scolets, who know the contrary to be most true, that they railed at
the Phisiognomer, and would with strypes have recompensed his pains, had not
Socrates stayed them. For it is all true that he says (quoth Socrates) for
such I am by nature, but I have (as al other me may have if they will) a reason
and grace that rules about nature. By this it is evident that reason and grace
ma^ bridle nature or turn the prouocacions thereof unto goodness. For the
choleric or ireful man may either by grace repress his lust, or else use it
well in correcting of vices. The malicious man may by gra^ assuage his lust,
or else turn it against the wicked and so furth of al other natural
inclinacions. And therefore although a man may perfectly by Physiognomy declare
the natural inclinacions of any man, y^ may he not perfectly judge him except
he know wh^ther he have grace or no. And the lack of this consi^raunce hath
brought this science to be thought fals^ because grace brydeleth or uses well
the natural ^clinacions of man. This well remembered, the boo^ may be safely
read, and thou (good Reader) thereby may infallibly judge the state and
conditions of any manne. For the better knowledge whereof, I entende shortly to
set furth palmestrye, In the mean rhyme I beseech thee to take in good part
this my rude endeavours.

A brief Epitome of the whole art of Physiognomy, touching generally al the
members of man.
Of the signs of healthful and sick bodies, by the part of the four
compleccions. First the signs of the body of a hot compleccion.
The first Chapter.


BOdies naturally hot, do speedily well increase, as appears in youg children,
and wax fat, much dry, their veins apparaunte in their places, their
breath strong, their voice loud, mighty, and great, mighty in coeatyng, and
much desiring or lusting thereto, They fed, digest and bear their meat well,
having aboundauncy or plenty of hear on the head, and in such places as it
should naturally grow, which partly be thick bristled of hear of the breast,
which comes by much heate of the heart as perfectly appears in the lion
and cock.

The signs of the body of a cold compleccyon. The. ii. Chapter.
Bodies naturally cold, do slowlye increase, and wax fat, their veins appear
great and manifest, their breath small to be hard, (or as it were in dark
manner) their voice subtle in the hearing or shrill, feeble in coeatyng, and
seldom desiring thereto, eating little, digesting, bearing their meat euell,
white of skin, or rosie of colour, their hear deape and long after
suffisaunce whether it be black or white, and they be subtle, fearing, and
trem blyng of a light cause, and weak to labour.

The signs of the body of a moist compleccyon. The. iii. Chapter.
Bodies naturally moist, be soft, and lyghte in the flesh, their Joyntes hid
and of small fortytude, whereby they may endure but a while to labour, they
fear and tremble in manner at every matter sleaping evilly, oft moved to
coeate or to the lust of the body, naked and thin of hear, their eyes often
watery or distilling, y^ hear of their head, and in the other places, long and
thin having a good or forward wit to learn.

The signs of the body of a dry compleccyon. The. iiii. Chapter.


BOdies naturally dry, be thought rough in the fealing, len in flesh, strong
and durable in labour, willingly, and conveniently they eat, the iointes of
their members be manifest and apparent, the hear of their head, in the other
natural places, great, rough, and courled.

The signs of a temperate and healthful body. The. v. Chapter.
TEmperate and healful bodies, eat and drink well, after their convenience of
nature, digest and dispose, things to the be sauerye, they hunger in
convenient hours, they joy with them that be merry, they sleep their full
slepes, they think them self light of body, and go lightly on the ground they
sweat soon, seldom or never snese, they wax meanelye fat, coloured in the
face, hot in the fealyng, in them the five senses have conueuiente force, after
congruency of age, body, and hour.



The signs of a distemperate, and vnhealthful body. The. vi. Chapter,
DIstemperate and vnhealthful bodies, in all things be unlike to bodies
temperate and healthefull, wherefore they eat evilly or very little, they pass
not to drink, they digest and dispole or bear their meat evilly, things to
the be not sauery, they hungre not in congruente hours, they give not them
selves fully to be cheerful and merry, in ^eioising at them that laugh and be
meary, but be always as it were sad, and continue sad, they sleep their
slepes evilly, they judge and think them selves heau^, and go heavily on the
ground, they seldom sweat, or sweat nothing at all, they gape or often
snese, streachynge their arms out and abroad, pale in the face, or over high
or much coloured, their. v. senses be weak, they may not lunge sustain or
endure labour, they soon forget matters, spiring much their nostrylles always
full of fi^th, their body therow out as it were fat, their flesh blown ly^e
the nose, and their hands, fyngers, and eyes sweaty and distil lyng.

The signs of a good nature and memory. The. vii. Chapter.


HE is of a singular memory understanding, and well fathoned in nature, which
hath moist and soft fleash, mean between roughnes and lenity, mean of
stature, having a ruddy counten aunce suffused with whitnes, having also age
till and friendly loke, whose hear of the head is plain thorowout: having eyes
meanly big, and declynyng to a roundenes, the head meanly great with an
equality, the neck well fashioned, and the shoulders declining downwards, or
shoulders ready to decline, not fleashlier about his shanks and knees, having
a mean voice between great and shrill, having the palms long with log fingers
declining to subtunes, mean in laughing or of laughter, whose countenance
looks joyous and meary.

The significacyons of hot and dry bodies after Rasis. The. viii. Chapter.


THese bodies be thick, bushye of hear on the head, and else where, lean
also, and in the feeling hot, the skin thycke and rough, and strong sinews,
having the veins bones iointes, much apparaut, a lowe voice, their pulces
very swift, and moauing or beating the like, they be also hot in the
fealyng, very bold, and obstinate, these hitherto be Rasis words.

The significations of cold and moyst^ bodies after Rasis. The. ix. Chapter.


THese bodies be thought saft in y^ feeling, and naked of hear, having gentle
or saft hear on the head, their veins narrow, Jointes hyd, having corpulent
bodies, much fat, sleping weakly or unquietly, slow of moving and slower in
their pace going.

Of the hear of the head. The. x. Chapter.
THe hear of the head, plain and long and whitshe like or flaxen in colour,
if they be thin and soft, declare that man yuery to be naturally fearful
in heart, weak in strength, peasable in sosietyes, every where congruente,
reformable, benign, and gentle.

The hear gross, bristled and short, declare that man to be naturally
strong, without care, bold, unquiet, a maker of lies or envious, (and of sum
named vayn) an often deceauer, desyryng fair things to the eye, and more
simple then wise, although for tune may favour or fawn on him.

The hear much kurled, declares that man to be dull of wit, or of much
simplicity, or else both a like.



The hear aboundaunte on the temples of the face, and on the forehead, by
which the forehead may well be judged heary: declare that man to be simple,
vayn, seacherous, soon credityng other, in manners talk rustical, and gross
of wit.

The hear much bristlyng, and standing up in a bush writhingly, declare that
man to be much simple, bold, proud, of a dull capacity, soon angry, a
liar, leacherouse, maliciouse, in evil presumptuous.

The hear feakyng up on the corner of the forehead, and al the rest standing
up, or but part of them and that the forehead thereby appears bald, declare
that man to be simple, and partly maliciouse, with a wittines or circumspeccio
of ordre, or manners therein.

The hear much aboundaunte on the head, that is, thick, bushing over all the
head, declare that man to be lecherous, and of good digestion, vain or a
liar, lightly fierce and rigorouse, slow in doyng things, evil of memory,
desiring or coveting fair things and unfortunate.

The hear of the head red in colour, declare that man to be enuiouse, much
ireful, full of inward deceit, full of rancore or poison, which we term com
monly venimouse, a deceauer, proud, and an evil talker by one behind his
back, flattering to his face.

The hear of the head very browne to the colour of the chesnutte, declare
that man to be congruente to all things, loving or desiring honour, doing
justice, having a haut mind, and vain pride or gloryin himself.

The hear of the head very black declare that ma to be congruente to all
things more to the good the to the evil, in ockupacion and labour studious,
secret faithful, and not well fortunate.

The hear of the head to flaxen or cleishe colour, declare that man to be of
a good condition, and congruente to all things, fearful, chaste or shameast,
weak, and of a good wit, of a tender capacity, having a hard and cruel
fortune.

The hear of the head mean in quantity, and co lour, declare that man to be
congruente, and more te dyng to the good, then to the evil, loving a peaceable
life, loving clenlynes, and good manners.

The hear of the head, in Juueniute or young age, h^ry, and bald, declare
that man to be often moved, and desiring to coeat, vayn or a liar, bold,
unstable, and talketyue.

Of the head. The. xi. Chapter.
THe head big, and sufficient round through out: declares that man to be
secrecte, witty, and circumspect in his doings, ingenious, discrete, of a
great imagination, or a great imaginour, laborious, stable or steadfast, and
faithful in promis or otherwise, for the more part.

That head that hath a great throat with the neck which declyneth to the
earth ward: declares that man to be ware or witty, a nigarde, peaceable,
secrete: following very much his own sensuality and mind, and stable in
doyng matters.

That head which is long, having the face long and big, and deformable:
declares that ma to be a fool maliciouse, or very simple, vain or a liar,
soon believing the thing heard or told him, a caryer or teller of news, and
also envious or hateful.

That head which is very voluble, or lightly turning here and there: declares
that man to be a fool, simple, vain, a lier, deceitful, presumtuouse,
unstable, dull of capacity or understanding, of an evil wit, of a tender
capacity, somewhat prodigal or wasteful, and a bearer or teller of news.

That head which is great having a large face: declares that man to be
suspiciouse, stout and hardy, couetyng beautiful things, wary, simple,
gross of fedyng, secrete, bold, and not sufficient shamefast.

That head which is great and not congruentlye shapen, having a short throat
and great neck: declares that man to be sufficient witty, to himself wary,
secrete, Ingenius, of a stable Imagination, faithful, telling troth, and in
many things or matters tractable.

That head which is small, having a thin and long throat: declares that man
to be very Weak, folyshe, long angry, fearful, a little feader, apt to learn
or to be taught, and not well fortunated, and for the smalnes of the head, apt
to fall into lickenesses.



That head which is very great, and the neck with the sinews and bones small:
declares an evil condition or quality of the brain, and that man to be a
dullard and fool, compared to the ass.

That head which is great propercyoned to the body, and especially with the
neck, so that the neck be strong and meanly great, with strong and great
sinews: declares a laudable conversation and honesty in that persons, apt to
study good arts to be an upright dealer with all men for the more part.

That head which is like to a pineapple, that is great beneath, and sharpe
round up to the crown: declares that ma to be alwey without shame, a gready
catcher, and universally Ireful and bold.

That head which moves fast as though it quauereth: declares that man to be
unstable, bold and Ireful thorough the cause of the heate of the brain.

That head which is very round as a boule or compass round: declares that
man to promise many things and perform none, a babbler, double toged,
importunate, covetous, enuiouse, and cosidereth not of that paste nor coming,
but that present, and that very slenderly: And there be also of them which
rob and murder by the high way, which if they cum to be rulers, they be
tirauntes, cruel, importunate and vndiscret, whose companies be to be avoided
and eschewed, as fro thy enemies as Conciltator saith.

The head very long and fashioned big and small to an organ pipe: declares
vnshamefastnes.

The head soft and plain, or flat: declares arrogantnes and dissolucion in
that person.

The head appearing dentid in hollow (in a certain manner) in the fore part
thereof: declares that man to be deceatfull and Iracundious.

The head great with a largeness of the forehead and countenance like to a
giant: declares that manne to be slow, gentle, strong, dull and vnapte to
learning, compared to the ox.

The head long and flat as a beatyll: declares that manne to be
circumspect, and a foresear in his doings: And for the more part many of
the swichers and fleaminges have the like head.

Of the forehead The.xii. Chapter.


THe forehead very high and round declares that man to be liberal to his
friends and acquaintanuce, meary, of a good understanding, tractable to other,
and in many graces vertuouse.

The forehead plain or smothe in skin and bone without wrynkles, declares
that man to vary for a lyghte cause, vain or a liar, deceatful, more simple
then wise.

The forehead over small and narrow through ou^ declares that man to be simple,
soon stirred to Ire, lightly furious or cruel, a desyrer of bewtiful things to
be a courtier or a seruinge man, foolish, vnapte to learning, a poluter, an
over great feader and a gloto.

The forehead sufficient round, in the angles of the temples that the bones
appear as it were, and naked of hear, declares yt man to be of a good wit
and parfyt understanding, of much boldness, a lyare in evil stout and hardy, a
delyrer of bewtiful mundanes, and of honour.

The forehead very great, declares that man to be slow and a heavy goer on
the earth, a dullard and folyshe, compared to the Ox.

The forehead sharp pointing out in the angels or corners of the temples, that
the boones appear as they were standing without, declares that man to be
vayn or a liar, unstable, weak in al his doings, simple, of a tender
capacity, and a glutton often times.

The forehead in the temples as it were blown with the grosnes of the flesh,
that is that it hath the cheke bones filled with flesh, declares that manne to
be diverse or of a sondry mind, Phlegmaticke, proud, Ira cudiouse, of a gross
and dull wit, and hath also a great head and evil fashioned, lecherous or
unshamefast, en uyeth lunge, covetous and a backbyter.

The forehead full of wryncles declares that man to be iresul: And the
forehead plain without wryncles after a sad manner, declares that man to be
sad and sorrowful always in a manner.



The forehead wrinkled, and a falling of the wrinkles fro the middle as it were
so that it appears double as it were in the face of the nose, whether it hath
or makes a valley or no valley, declares that manne to be simple, stout and
hardy, of a great wit, and to have a sharpe and cruel fortune.



The forehead great througheoute and somewhat round throughout, bare of hear
or somewhat bald, or sufficiently, declares that man to be bold, of a good
wit and understanding, wary, malicious, stout and heady, long continewyng
angry, faynedly faithful, therefore he will lightly lye.

The forehead very long and high round, so that the face to the chynne
appears figured sharpe out, declares that man to be simple, feeble,
congruently faithful, and to have hard fortune.

The temples of the forehead bearing out round and heary: declares that man
to have a worthy wit, desiring honour, arrogant and always stout and hardy
in his doings.

The forehead very great, round and heary: declares that man to be bold,
hardy and a liar.

Of the ouerbrowes, of the cies. The.xiii. Chapter.


THe over brows as Aristotle saith much heary, declare that manne to be
perverse in talk talkatyue, vngracyous or wicked, and rude manered.

The hear of the over brows extendinge to the temples, declare that manne to
be envious, proud and lecherous, unshamefast and haulte of stomach or mind.

The over brows thynne of hear in congruent quantity of length and shortness,
declare that man to have a ready wit, and facile in understanding.

The ouerbrowes growing thick and long to the rote of the nose: declare that
man to be of a melancolyke nature or otherwise of an evil nature, and sum
such like, to be thieves, but always deceivers, murderers, and maintayners of
harlottes, fleering, catchers, dissemblers and malicious, and these when the
ouerbrowes by the herines join: and vniuersallye be thinckers of all
mischefes: and not unlike be they too these which have but one eye, which be
heaped in vices, contumelious deceitful and wicked.

The hear of the over brows growing from the rote of the nose upward, fro
the Temples downward, declare him to be lecherous and of a dull wit.

The hear of the nether part of the ouerbrowes to the nose growing douneward,
and the upper part growing upward, so that thereby they appear broad, declare
him to be unshamefast, enuyouse, a dullard a foal, and vnsaciable, compared to
the hog.

The hear of the ouerbrowes descending by incur uacion by the part of the
noose, declare that manne to have a sharpe and an ingenious wit in unhappy and
wicked busynesses.

The hear of the ouerbrowes growing even straight lined along, declare that
man to be evil, weak and of a feminate mind or stomach, compared to the
woman.

The hear of the ouerbrowes growing so bendynglye that they almost join
with the nose, declare that manne to be subtle and ingenious, and also
studyous.

The hear of the ouerbrowes thyn and great in breadth, declare that man to be
facile in understanding and of a ready wit.

The ouerbrowes much herye and long, declare that man to be one which
willingly seeks and desires to be much prayed and entreated in any matter.

Of the eye lyddes. The. xiiii. Chapter.


THe eye lyddes much wrinkled and which by often moving elevate on high:
declare that man to be proud, stout and hardy, vain glorious, bold, a
threatener, a desirer of bew tifull things, and congruente to good and evil.

The eye lyddes declining downward, when he speaks to one or beholds one
(as it were wrinklig lye) declare that man to be very maliciouse or a deceauer,
a liar, a betrayer, a niggard, slow of pace or otherwise, secrete, and of
few words.

The eye lyddes thynne of hear: declare that man to be simple, vain, weak,
lightly or for a small cause cruel, and in friendship or company sufficiently
congruente.

The nether eye lydde bonching out as it were blown and red in colour:
declares that manne to be a notable drunckarde, especially if the lyddes
appear dry.

The eye lyddes that naturally fold downewardes as they were wrinkled, and
red or not red: declare that man to be unshamefast, slow in pace or
otherwise suspiciouse, a niggard, enuiouse, and a light or a sleyght deceauer
in many things.

The eye lyddes very short or narrow and in colour white or browne: declare
that man to be as he were congruent to all things, weak, fearful, easily and
soon crediting other, more simple then wise, and conuertible to good and evil.

Of the spaces between the eye brows. The. xv. Chapter.
THe spaces between the eye brows near joining together: declare that man to
be a nyggarde, enuiouse, secret, very much desireful of beawtiful things,
having a vain fortune, and more cruel or fierce, then delectable.

The spaces between the eye brows, very long, declare that man to be somewhat
dull of capacity, of a subtle understanding, of much boldness, very
faithful, and of a perfyt, and vpryghte frendshyp.

Of the eyes. The. xvi. Chapter.


THe eyes great, that is gross, and much apparaunte: declare that man to be
commonly slow, and sumtyme bold, enuyouse, partly shamefaste, and partly not
secrete, congruente, a niggard, ^ain lightly lying, long a^grye, of an evil
memory or remembrance of a gross wit an^ of a small understanding, and
less sapyente then h^reakenc^h himself to be.

The eyes deep in the head, as they were hid that is* hollow in and the
syghte far in, declar that man to be suspiciouse, maliciouse, long angry o^
much Ireful, of a perverse manner, perfyt of memory, bo^de, cruel, lightly
lying, a threatener, a vycyouse leacherer, proud, en^ouse, and a deceauer.

The eyes situated (as in length): declare that manne to be a wyly begyler of
men, enuiouse, and a deceauer of deceauers, having his delyghte therein.

The eyes standing very far out: declare that manne to be simple, or a
fool, somewhat shamefaste, somewhat large in expenses, wyllyngly to be bound,
to serve, or to be a prentice, of a gross understanding and wit, talketyue,
and lightly leaded to good or evil.

The eyes that behold sharpelye, and with the eye lyddes studyous^ye
declining, declare that manne to be maliciouse, and an often deceauer, very
false, often lying, enuiouse, a thief, a nyggarde, secrete, wicked, and fayntly
faithful.

The eyes very small: declare that manne to be a fool, weak in strength,
applying in manners to the ape: that is, to be fearful, and a deceauer.

The eyes congruentlye small, and round: declare that manne to be shamefaste,
weak, simple* soon beleauyng an other mans sayings, of a gross wit, and
dull understanding, and often having a sharpe or cruel fortune, liberal to
other, and decently shamefaste.

The eyes little, and wrinkled: declare that manne to have an unhappy foreward
wit, to do unhappy deeds, compared in his life to the ape.

That manne which hath a chyides look with him: declares to be one, that
bethynketh not on hard or diffuse matters, and lives long after nature.



The eyes ob^yque, or looking crokedly: declare that man to be a deceauer,
witty, a niggard, enuiouse, Ireful, a liar, and in many things malicyous, and
shall have also a sharpe fever, whereof he shall speedily dye upon.

The eyes diverse or not a like, and in beholdynge waver up and down, or to
and fro, declare that man to be an often liar, bayne, simple, leacherouse, a
deceauer, soon credityng one, envious, stout and hardy a desirer of fair
things, and easily brought to good or evil.

That man which is varyable, gray, and whitishe ^yed, is for the more part
borne to be a Philosopher and a searcher of dark and hid secretes.

The eyes that ^winkle often, and move before and after: declare that manne to
be lecherous, unstable, often lying, lightly or soon false, a betraier
vnfaythfull, presumptuous, harde in beleuyng^ one.

The eyes that move swiftly, and the syghte appearing sharpe: declare that man
to be full o^ disce^t, wyly, a thief, and vnfaythfull: which Cocles found
true in sondry parsons.

That manne which ^oketh or beholds with the eyes as though he always
laughs: declares him to be a flatterer, leacherouse, unshamefast, and a
deceauer.

The white of the eyes somewhat cit^ine in colour, declare that manne to be
simple, often lying to one, and reasonable, secrete, very seife willed, and
long angry, or Ireful.

The eyes that move fast or slow, or slowlye beholding but yet sharplye, with
a reclinacyon of the fleashe of the eye lyddes: declare that man to be very
maliciouse in many things, vain, slow in pace, or otherwise, a liar,
vnfaythfull, enuiouse, and a brauler.

That man which hath white or black, or red spots like blode about the
eyes, is to be forsaken of al good and honest company.

The eyes which be as they were red, or filthy, by tears, or blood,
declare that man to be Ireful, arrogant or proud, disdaynful, cruel,
vnshamefaste, vnfaythful, a liar, obstinate, vain, simple, of a tender
capacity, a deceauer, and may easily be brought godly, or vertuouse.

The eyes very great, looking upward, like to ^xe even, and that they appear
readdysh: declare that ma to be mischeuouse, folyshe, and a fool, dull of
understanding, of an evil remembrance, a drunkard, and a gross feder.



THe eyes mean inform, tendynge to the celestial colour, or to blackenes:
declare that manne to be reasonably, ^easeable, gentle, faith full, of a good
wit, of a synguler understanding, and congruentlye willing to be bound to
serve one* or to be a prentyse or a courtier.

The eyes which be mattery, and one while rune and another while cease
running: declare that manne to be deceatfull, rash, a robber by the high way,
and like to cum to an evil death, onlesse almighty god pleases the
contrary.

They which have dry matter, or filth, shining before the eyes, declare that
manne to be a great sleaper, and lover of sleep: And he also which hath filth
hanging on the eyes, is a lover of wine, and a great drynker: he which hath
the whytnes of the eyes tending to blackenes: declares him to be a great man
living or being in honour: And the whytnes, yellowish, to be a cruel manne,
and a deceauer.

The eyes great, and the ouerbrowes long: declare that manne to be short
lived: And the eyes also lunge, with the ouerbrowes long: declares that ma
that he shall be learned, but short lived, he which shall have the eyes
oblique having that time a sharpe fever on him, shall soon after dye.

The upper eye lydde* covering as it were the nether: declare that man, to be
long lived after nature: he which hath sinal and round eyes, declares him to
renew again wyllyngly to do evil, especially, if he be pa^e faced.

The eyes of measurable or competente greatness moist and clear shining, to be
stout and bold, th^n king and intending or doyng mighty matters, and sumtyme
they declare that man to be Iracundyouse, a wine bybber, a braller or
clatterer, geauyn to most ^c^able glottony.

The eyes having as it were like to a pearl, compasyng the syghte of the eyes:
declare that manne to be enuyouse, full of words, fearful and mischeuouse.

Of the nose. The. xvii. Chapter.
THe nose lunge, and somewhat thin, declares that manne to be bold,
curious in his doings, Ireful, vain, soon persuaded to good or evil,
weak, and soon geuynge creadite to one.

The nose lunge, and extensed having the typpe declining downward to the
mouth: declares that manne to be wary, secrete, content to serve, and
congruentlye faithful to one, modest in his doings, and a supplanter or
deceauer.

The nose that moves, with the moving of the muscles, and cheke bones:
declares that manne to be Ireful, and hasty, and not far unlike in
condition is he, which hath the nose bendynge upward.

The nose stretching to the mouth: declares that manne to be of a hot
compleccyon thorowelye, and by the consequente, gives him to be honest manered
and bold.



The nose flat, declares that manne to be violent or hasty in his wrath,
vain or enuyouse, a liar, leacherouse, weak, unstable, soon credityng one,
and conuertible to good or evil.

The nose broad in the middle, and denteth or bends to the top thereof,
declares that man to lye, knauysh or malapert, diverse or variable, lecherous,
cruel, full of words, wanton, reprocheful, proud, ready to do wrong, and
having a hard fortune: wherefore keep the out of his company.

The nose throughout great, and sufficient long, declares that man to be a
desyrer of beautiful things, in good matters simple, and in evil sapient,
congruently well fortunated, a fayner in those things or matters which he
desires or c^eteth to keep secret, and knowing much less, then he reakneth
him self to know.

The nostrils great and large: declare that man to have great testicles,
lecherous, a betrayer or utterer of secrettes, false, bold* ^lyar, enuyouse,
covetous, of a gross capacity, having a slendre wit, and fearful.

Note, that of the gross humores, is engendered the grossnes and magnytude of
the members, and by the consequence, the spirittes gross, as witnesses
Aristotle in his second book and fourth Chapter, de partibus animalium.

The nose very sharpe at the end or typpe, and mean, between lunge and
short, great and thin: declares that ma to be soon angry, much self
wyllde, likely brawlyng, disdaynful, wary, weak, mali cyouse, a deceauer, a
threatener, and of a good memory or remembrance, and coleryke of compleccyon.

The nose very round at the end with small nosethrelles: declares that man
to be haut or proud, a gross feader, having a ready mind and will to
venereouse acts, soon credityng, vain, large in expenses and faithful.

Note that the nose expresses the quality of the heart: wherefore the nose
great, declares the caliditie of the heart, which causes such a person to
be Irefuli, and to have a great yard.

The nose overlong, and at the end more thynne then gross, and congruently
round, declares that man to be bold in talk, modest in his doings, lightly
iniuriouse, a deceauer, enuiouse, a niggard, in faith secrete, a coueter of
other men's goods, and in many manners covertly maliciouse. Note, that thou may
not take or understand singly, these sayings, because sum other membre evil
shaped may contradict the same, therefore consydre this, as a worthy note*
into this art.

The nose retorte and crokyng upward, and long, having the end congruently
gross: declares that man to be bold, proud, a niggard, enuyouse,
couerouse, Ireful, leacherouse, a liar, a deceauer, vain gloryouse,
vnfaythful, a stryuer, and a brawler.



The nose very high elevated in the middle which we name a copped nose:
declares that man to be an often liar, vain, unstable, leacherouse, soon or
lightly credytyng, importunate, having a good wit, gross in feadyng, and
more simple then wise, and malycyouse.

The nose ruddy in quality, more than any others, or hath pustles here and
there on the nose. declares that manne to be covetous, a bybber, wicked, a
drunkard, leacherouse, much and often thirsty, a fayner of goodness, gross
of feadyng, and wit, and of a tender capacity.

The nose short, and the mouth small and the teeth short and great:
declares that manne to be cold, and moyste of compleccyon.

The nose congruentlye gross, or great thorowoute, and at the end somewhat or
a little flat, declares that man to be peaseable, gentel, faithful and
laborious, secrete and of a good understanding.

The nose that croketh, like to the byl of the Egle, declares that man to be
choleric, couragyous, bold a greedy rauener and cruel.

The nose somewhat heary on the end, and congruently great through out, and
in the ioininge of the forehead somewhat thynne, declares that manne to be of
a good condition in all things, and lightly brought, or led, to good or evil.

The nose thorough out great, having large nostrylles, declares that man to
be of a gross wytt, and more simple then wise, a lyare, vnapte to learning,
deceitful, cautelous, a braller, lecherous, enuiouse and vain glorious.

Of the mouth. The. xviii. Chapter,


THe mouth great and large, both in the closing and opening, declares that
manne to be bold, unshamefast, lightly fighting, or to be a warrior, a
lyare, full of words, a bearer or teller of news, a gluttonouse feader,
vnclenlye or nastye, of a gross wit, a niggard and very folyshe.

The mouth small, both in the closing, and opening, declares that man to be
peasable, modest, fearful, faithful, secrete, shamefaste, asparer, sobre,
sometime large in expensis, apt to be taught or tolerne, and a little feader.

The mouth standing far out, and round, by mean of the thickness of the
lyppes, and the mouth somewhat wrythinge withal: declares that manne to be
vnclenlye or nasty, a fool, fierce or churlysh, compared to the hog.

That mouth that savours ill, or stinks in the breathing, declares that
manne to be corrupt in the liver, an often lyare, vain, lasciuiouse,
deceatfull, of a tender capacity, and gross understanding, a seducer,
enuiouse, covetous, or a coueter of other men's goods, and congruentlye
liberal to one, a bearer and teller of news, soon credytyng one, and more
simple then wise.

The mouth having the quantity thus with the lyppes small, and the closing
small, and the eyes with the reast of the face, looking smilingly, such a
person after Conciliator is lecherous, or libidinous, and a liar.

The mouth that sauourethe sweet in the breathing: declares that man to be
congruent or reformable, sapient in geuynge, and wary in reteynynge, secrete,
a coueter of beautiful mundanes, faithful, soon crediting one, and conuertible
to good or evil.

The mouth little, having thyn lyppes, declares that man to be weak of mind
and stomach, deceatfull, and malycious.

The comlyest conditioned mouth, is when it is not over moyste, for the
moystnes or waterishnesse of the mouth and lyppes: declares fearefulnes and
malignity. As Albertus affirms.

Of the lyppes. The.xix. Chapter.


The lips of the mouth very great, or over much folding outward (which
we name blabered) declare that man to be more simple, then wise, soon
creadetinge one, a gross feader, and congruente to good or evil, a dullard,
talketyue, bold, lecherous, unconstant, and vnmanered.

The lips fair, and cheerful, and the countenance cheerful or smylinge
also, declare that man to be leachearous, or to appear lybidinouse, leake to
the wanton geldinge, but sum such be deceauers, thieves, and full of gieles or
caute lous: as Cocles noted it in a countryman of his, which was the like.

The lips with the gummes bearing or bunching up above the teeth, declare
that man to be wicked, an unquiet talker, Iracundious, and inclined to do
injuries, properly compared to y^ dog, as Palemo saith.

The lips well coloured, and more subtyle then great, declare that man to be
of a good condition in all things, and lightly conuertible to good or evil,
and rather to virtues, then to vicis: as Mychael the Scot faieth, and there
Jubiter is represented.

The lips not sufficient equal thoroughe out. To that the one is greater
the the other, declares that man to be more simple, then sapiente, of a gross
wit, and dull understanding, having a diverse or variable fortune, as the
autentikes affirm.

The upper lip thin, and somewhat elevated or turmnge up (as Ptholome
says) declares that ma to be very talkative, an accusare, very envious.

The upper lip turning or folding up, and the neither lip down, declare
to that man, a miserable life, and to be vnseamite manered: and this Cocles
noted in certain, and neady poor parsones.

The Philosopher Ptholome also says, that if the lyppes be thin, and that
the upper lip folds up, and the nether down, declare that man to be a
deceauer, and a thief.

The lyppes great, like the dog, declare that man to be a deceyuar and an
accuser.

The nether lip of the woman, large, hanging and very ruddy: declares a most
earnest will to coeate, and sometime to be a harlot.

The lyppes congruently thin, and not much folding outward, declare that man
to be secret in al his doings or in all things (commonly) wary,
Iracundious, and of a synguler wit.

Of the Teathe. The.xx. Chapter.
THe teathe small and weak in chewing, and thynne set, and short, declare
that man to be weak, of a good wit, of a tender capacity, gentle,
faithful, trusty, secrete, fearful, of short life, and congruente to good,
or evil.

The ththe not equipolent or all alike, in quantity, and in the standing of the
gummes, certain be shall narrow, certain large, certain thynne, and certain
thyck set, declare that manne to be wary, of a good wit, bold, dysdaynfull
envious, and lightly or easily brought to good or evil.

The teeth very lunge, and as they were sharpe, and somewhat thynne set, and
strong in the chewynge, declare that man to be enuyous: wicked, a gluttone,
bold, and as he were vnshamefaste, a lyare, false or deceatfull, vnfaythfull,
and suspicious.

The teathe cytryne, or browne in colour, whether they be short, or lunge:
declare that man to be more foollyshe then wise, a gross feder, soon
crediting, of a trubled or an encombred understanding, often deceatfull, a
lyare, envious, a coueter of other men goods, and suspicious.



The teathe great, and large, whether they decline or bear out, or in, whether
they be thynne, or thick set, declare that man to be vain or envious,
lascivious, of a gross feading; soon crediting, simple, deceatfull, a lyare,
and of a tender capacity: and wyttyd to the Ox.

The teathe strong, and thycke set: declare that manne to live lunge by
nature, a desyrer of bewtyfull things, of a dull capacytye, and gross wit,
stout and hardy, much self willed, or a follower to much of his own
reason ^ a bearer or teller of news, soon credyting to one.

The teathe weak set, small, thin, and slendre, declare that man to be
weak, of short life, wary or wyttie, of a good capacity, soon crediting,
common lye shamefaste, tractable, gentle, and faithful.

The teathe strong, and thick set, declare that man to live tongue,
leachearous, a riotous waster of his proper goods, bold, strong, discrete,
and self willed.

The teathe lunge like dogs teathe, and strong set and properly bearing
outward, declare that man to be a very gluttonous person and fierce, angry,
compared to the dog, or bore: such Cokles knew to be devourers of their own
substance, great hauters to taverns, and ale houses, deceuars, horehunters or
maynteiners of hores, and sometime murderers espectiallye if any other
proportion strengthens the same.

The teathe weak set, thynne, and very small, declare the hole body thorough
out to be weak as Rasis affirms.

The teathe of a person sick, most dry, with out any moystenes in them,
declare a most sure token or sign of death: because the radical moystnes in
him is consumed: and such bodies, be like to a laumpe without oyte.

Of the tongue. The. xxi. Chapter.


THe tongue over swyft to speak, declares that man to be more simple, then
wise, of a gross wit, and dull vndrestanding, soon creadyting, and lightly
conuertible to good, or evil.

The tongue that stutteth or stamereth in speaking, declares that manne to be
very simple, vain or a lyare, unstable, iracundious, soon conuer tible fro
anger, willing to sarue, and weak.

The tongue very great and rough, declares that man to be wary, malicious,
congruentlye willing to sarue, vain or a liar, dysdaynfull, secret, a
betraier, a bearer or teller of news, fearful, wicked, ungracious, having
congruentlye sufficient of many things.

The toungue subtle or thyn, declares that man to be very ingenious,
lyghtlie or for a light cause fearful, soon creditynge, and conuertyble to
good or evil.

The tongue that lyspeth or stamereth: declares that person to fear, to
drink wine: and sumtyme he susteyneth debility of the brain, and thereof it
comes, that the drounke do stammer, stut, or lyspe, because the vapours of
the wine drunk in, into that part of the tongue named the sponge, enlarge the
same, and change it fro his natural state and form.

Hypocras in his secrettes says, that the heaviness of the tongue in a young
man, after his lightens, declares sudden death: if God permit the same.

The tongue great and large: declares that man to have a rude wit: and that
phlegmaticke humores rest in the brain, or in the rest of his body: as
Cocles many times noted it.

Conciliator says that, that person, that speaks his words at twyse, or
pronounces them with great difficulty, declares a melancholic quality.

The tongue come swyfte by mouynge, and corruptnes, causing a repeatynge of
words: declares that manne to be a fool, violent or hasty in wrath, and
Iracundious: for the mouablenes and caliditie of the spyryttes, festinating or
hastininge the pronouciation* without consideration.

The tongue in manner immovable, like to a stone, declares that manne to be
slow in his pace, and in his worckes or doings. And the tongue subtle,
represents a subtyle wit: for the decente matter, that is, of the humore
and spyryte, although it declares a hot, and perauenture a cholerycke
complextion.

Ptholome the philosopher says, that the tongue lunge and red, declares
that person to be wyttye, because it declares laudable humours, and in
kisses may much be conceived herin: for Cocles consyderinge a certain
creature, felt the tongue put fourth most pleasant, to a branch, whereof
he knew that the virtue of the musckles is voluntary.

Ptholome also says, that the tongue white of colour: declares poverty, and
misery to that person.

The tongue in the natural colour infected, declares an infection, and evil
disposition especially of the breast and belly, as Conciliator affirms.

The tongue lunge, great, and round, and that it may like the nose therewith,
declares that parsone to follow the nature of the Ox: as Cocles noted the
same, by a neyghboure of his.

Of the sygnyfycacion of the voice. The. xxii. Chapter.
HEre Aristotle doth Physiognomate by the voice, affirming a doble knowledge,
after the doble diposition of the voice: for says he, the voice may be
heavy and dyscensed, or high, that is great, to a basse orgayne pipe: and
such a voice (says he) declares that manne to be strong: or if it may
be small and lowe that is not great, but soft, which declares such a
parsone to be ferfull: And the causes of these sygnifycationes be taken by the
complextion or quality of the heart, and lunges, in the hotnes and coldness of
them: For these members when they be hot, cause or make large and sounding
pippes, and much breath by the largeness of those fynewes: Wherefore much
breathe, in such large and great sounding pypes, make a great and gross or
base voice, like to a large, and great, or base or gane pipe blown, which
sounds very big, and baselie, econtratio. When these members be cold,
they make those synewes or vain pypes, small, and narrow, and little breathe,
by the which is caused a high and shrill voice: as the like appears in small
organ pypes, which blow, make a shrill sound: and the like knowledge of
this is in men, and little women, the me for their hotnes, and women for their
coldness, and this well appears by Auerois, where he writes (de signis
temperantie pulmonis) saying that the fortitude of the voice doth ensewe like
the largeness of the veins, and the largeness declares the hotnes of the
complexcion or quality of the lunges, and the causeis, that the fortytude of
the voice declares necessarilye hotenes, but the cold complexion, declares
straytnes of the ways, that is, of the veins, and debility of the voice: The
Philosopher, in an other distinctyon saith also, that they which speak great,
be Injurious, compared to the ass: And they which sore call, be foolish: in a
basse manner, and end small, be iracundyous, and to be pleased, compared to
the Ox, and to the colins of the voice. And they that speak small, safte,
fayntlye or weryedlie, speak fearfullye, and compared to women, and to the
decentnes of the voice: they which call in a big or basse voice not
parplexed, be compared to bandagges, and to the comeliness thereof. They that call
saftlie, without any tension or reaching out, be gentle, compared to the
sheep: They which call small and fearcilie, be Iracundious, compared to the
go^tes. These hitherto, be after the mind judgment of Aristotle, and the
same like affirms Albertus, and Conciliat^r, Hieronimus de: Manfredis, a
bononiane, but yet Cocles writes of the same in a more ample manner, and with
other words as after shall appear, bringing in a contrary reason to these before
First Cocles says, that he which hath a great, high, and sounding voice,
declares to be bold, eloquent, and a warrioure. The voice mean in
subtilnes, and grosnes, declares such a parsone, to be sapiente, for saying,
true, and just: for the contrary cause, he which speaks or talks fast,
especially having a small or shrill voice declares such a parsone to be
obstinate or malaparte, a fool, importunate, and a lyare. The voice also
great, to be iracundious, and of an evil nature. The voice sweet (or
fawningly as I may nameit) is enuyous, suspicious The pleasantnes or
bewtyfulnes of the voice, declares folishnes, cochebraynes, and stoutnes. The
swiftness of talk, declares a hot complextione, and the same affermeth,
Albertus, Loxius, Palemon, Phylemon, and Conciliator, under those words.
Again the voice great, to be iracundious, peruerce and of an evil nature,
and the reason is, for the intemperate caliditie. He that speaks hastily,
hauig a shrill voice, declares to be froward, obstinate, or malaparte, a
fool, importunate, a liar, ireful, and always evil conditioned. The voice
alper, like the crane, to be envious, teteyning rancour, and secrete hatred
in the heart, and abounding in melancholic humores: He that speaks his
words cuttedlye, not with a lunge breathe: declares a vilenes or infection of
nature, through the coldness of the heart, and perauenture with moystnes
applicated. And he also which has a heavy voice, is seruaunt to his proper
belly: the reason is, because the voice heavy, proceeds of the debylitie of
the virtue, which can not breathe out plentifulnes of air to move the muscles
of the breast, by which proceadith slouggyshnes, so that the wit cannot be
applied in study, nor labour with the body, or use bodily labour. They that
speak big inflexible, by the commotion of the breast: be manlye, vnapte to
be taught or to learn, and hardy, compared to the lyons. They which have a
slow and basse voice, be peasable, and joyous or merry: and certain of these
parsones, be just and affable manered. And they which speak and sound their
words thorough the nosethrelles, be babblers, liars, malycious, and envious,
and of them there be which joy in evil, and such follow the nature of the
Duck, as Cocles by experience found true.

These few examples gentle reader, of the sygnyficacions of the voice, for
this time suffice here: which I shall desire thee to accept in good part,
bearing with my grossenes in the traunslation of them, such as they be: And
in so dooynge, I have my hearts desire.

Of the breath. The. xiii. Chapter.
Much breathe and wind, argues aboundancye of spyrite, and the contrary is
after two manners: as the tone by smalnes or lack of the lunges, and the other
by the straytnes of the breast: and therefore a beast much breathing, is of
much fortytude, and might, by reason of the caliditie resolving the
moisture, and especially the dew moisture: ordinate breathe, between great
and small, being a mean, declares quietness of the heart and to be a man well
to be pleased: and to breathe loud without cause, and to make huge and lunge
sighs, wytnesseth a most melancholic qualytie to be, and when the breath is
cut between, being ordinate, and at the last with the straytnes or parplexity
of the mind comes out troubled with syghyng: declares that parsone to be
encombred and detented with thought and vexation of the mind: and to some, to
be immixte with evil, especially, if the head quaver or shake much withal.
And loke, when with bewaylinge or syghing he brings or casts the eyes
crokedly or wrythingly, he then sorrows for that comes into mind, searching
or deuisig with himself the manner howe that he may best handle and do the
same. He that breaths with a certain noise in the delayinge or stoppinge of
the nosethrelles, declares cruelty, brutish furiousnes, and violence or
hastines: which delaying also is referred to the passio, in which the troubled
spirit and thycke rests: as though it were accidental caused by running or
laboring: then they be violent or hasty and iracundious. when the breath shall be
short, and thycke, and by a much cutting of, stopped between, is Judged
fearful and weak. And he which with the syghing countenance, is berest with
a certain godlines, and inspyratione, such a parsone is named, to be taken and
wrapped, in furious love. Aristotle in his secre^ces to Alexander says, that
when thou shalt see a parlone much and often behold the, and when thou
regardest him, fears, and of this blushes or is a shamed, and especially if
against his will he sygheth, and the tears appear standing in his eyes, this
parsone (says he) loves, and fears thee. And if it be contrary, he
shall be enuyous, contem^ne the. The breath loud cut between, with the syghing
like, declares sorrow, and sadness for things lost. Certain of the worthy
Physicians affirm, that the breathe passing out cold, by the mouth and
nosethrelles: declarethe death at hand, or shortelye after. The Philosopher
Ptholomie also says, that he which wepeth for nothing, or for lyghte cause,
shall be always poor, and neadye.

Of laughter. The. xxiiii. chapter.


A Fool much, and often laughs, and they also, which have the mylte great:
econuerso. The bellows of the mouth that lightly laughs, declares that man
to be simple, vain, unstable soon crediting, of a gross wit, and fedinge,
willing to sarue, but not secret.

The bellowse, or hollow of the cheke that seldom laughs, and soon hath
done, declares that man to be stable, a niggard, or sparer, wary or witty,
of a parfyt understanding, secret, faithful glorious.

The hollow of the cheke, hardly moved to laugh declares that man to be
sapiente, much or very self willed, wary, ingenious, patient, a niggard,
studious of his art, iracundious, and a surmyser.

The hallow of the cheke, or bellowse that lightly laughs, and in laughing
often cougheth or ga^eth or wryeth the head, declares that manne to be
varyable or diverse, envious, soon creditinge* and couertible to good or evil.

The hollow of the cheke, or bellowse that wryeth in the laughing, with
derision of an other: declares that man to be arrogant, false or deceatfull,
harde to be moved, Iracundious, a lyare, and somewhat given to be an utterer of
secrettes, or a betrayer.

He which sufficiently laughs; is benign, beloved with all men, endamaged or
grieved lightly, and passes very little of, or for any: and he is of an
apparent comlynes, compared to sanguine parsones, or to Jovial.

If they sufficiently laugh, it declares iocundi^c, and a good complextion in
that manne, and they much joy in coeating, especially when the lies loke
cheerful and merely. But yet to much laughter (as Aristotle to Alexander
wry^teth) removes reueren^y, and causes old age: suerly with them, is no
assured fellow ship to be had, because there is no stability, nor secretenes in
them, worthy the* trusting to, although they ^e saruisable, after certain.

He which laughs loud or with a certain noise is inucrieu^d^ous, and
Conciliator says, that he which in laughing cougheth* or susteyneth
difficultnes of breath, is judged inuericundious, and a tyrant: and this Cocles
found most true in a certain prince

Whose bellouse of the mouth often smyleth or co uertly laughs: declares an
evil mind, and perverse cogitacion, and a lyare, and such universally, be
malicious, and dissemblers: and there is no trust in the, or to be given to
them: especially when it is conjoined with the accydentes of the mind: and if
their eye lids fold to a cloud, they be sleares of men, thieves and
robbers by the high way, or pirates, as Cocles many* times. noted it. To
smile or laugh covertly to himself, in speaking or talking, declares
foolyshnes in such a person, as Cocles noted the same, in a certain
countryman of his: and such says he abound in the melancholic quality.

Of the chynne. The. xxv. chapter.


THe chynne large and great with much (...), declares that man to be
peaseable; of a mean capacity and gross wit* faithful, secret, and lightly
conuertible to good or evil.

The chynne sharpe, and congruentlye full with flesh, declares that man to be
of a good understanding, of a high heart or arrogaunt, and suffycyent
laudable of fedyng.

The chynne as it were double, by a certain vale or hollow dentinge in,
declares that man to be peasable, of a gross wit, vain, soon creaditing,
congruently saruisable to one, and a very surmyser, and secrete of his doings.

The chyn sharpe, and subtle or thynne in flesh: declares that man to be
bold, a warryer or fyghter, Ireful, disdainful, fearful at times, weak, and
somewhat content to sarue.

The chynne recuruate, with a vale or hollow, in the ioyninge or knyttyng of
the Jaws, and in flesh lean, as it were sharpe, declares that man to be
most wicked or ungracious, simple, bold proud or haughty, a threatener,
enuyous, wary in expenses, deceatefull, soon angry. Iracundious, a betrayer
or traitor, a thief, and a surmyser.

Note that Physiognomy and ^awmestrye do more declare by experience* then
reason, but yet (says Cocles) somewhat may be judged in the pryncypaller
members which give or express the magnytude and smalnes of matter fro the
beginning of generation.

The chin lunge declares aboundauncie of matter: and by reason of the
caliditie, it is over much lengthened out: yea they be Iracundyous, aspere,
cruel, as Dalemon, and Constantyne affirm.

The chynne small, and short, declares that man to be full of naughtynes, and
vices, and one whose company is utterly to be eschewed, being a man most
envious and vncurtyous: and this manne Palemon applies to the venomous
serpent. The chin round, declares that parsone to be effeminate* conditioned
like the woman: as Pythagoras writes. And if there be aboundauncie of flesh
vndre the chynne, reachynge to the throat: declares that man to be most
luxurious, especially if ether hole be found in the the chekes. The chynne
very lunge descendynge: declares that manne to be full of wiles and
deceates. And if in the middle division of the chynne it be not much de^e ^at,
^t is a toke of venereousnes, and that with me such shall win grace and
favour: as Cocles many times noted the same in them which haunted hatlottes.
The chynne curuate, that the ^y^s be as it were in a va^ye, declares rudeness
of wit* and to be most wicked manered or conditioned; vnfaythfull: and of these
there be, which b^ the^es, (as certain say) unless old age cause this, for
the loss of teathe. Aristotle also says, that they become less bald th^
other* which have the chynne divided as it were in two parts.

Of the nature of the beard. The. xxvi. chapter.


THe beard in the masculyne, grows after fourten years, by little and
little, fro Day to day, and then after spring the thyghes fast: and note, that
such hear soryngeth of the superfluity of meat, proceeding thorough the
fumosities: which superascende unto the parts of the chekes or Jaws as a fume
passing out of the holes or chi^kes of an oven, or fornace, vntyl the ways or
passages be stopped, that they may no more ascend, and so like issewe out the
hears in man, which make the beard: The colour of the beard sometime,
expresses the qualities, and quantities of the humours, but yet Cocles never
saw a beard in colour like to Juorye, because the phlegmaticke humour is not
mighty to generate hears in colour like, for the lack of caliditie,
eleuatyng the matter congruente to the generation of hears.

Some may argue, and say, that we see sometime women have beards or bearded,
yet they be of a phlegmaticke complexcion: This happens saith Cocles because
the humours be so subtle, that by nature they be hot, that of them also spring
hears sometime on the cheakes or Jaws, and properly about the mouth where the
more heate abounds: and this woman is named bearded, understand that such a
woman is very luxuriouse, thorough her hot and moist coplexcion, and that she is
of a strong nature, and virill or manly conditioned: but the woman sufficiently
naked and bare of hear, especially about the mouth* (after physiognomy) is
named to be of a good complexcyon, that is fearful, chaste, shamefast, weak,
gentil, and obedient for the more part: but the bearded women be contrary, as
above appears: here rises a dout, why women have no beards as well as men.
To this Don't may be answered, when it is demanded, why (...) have beards
and not women, that this cause may be by the especial working and by the
material and final cause, because it is as an ornament to the man. Note that
in every kind, the male is bewtifuller th^n the female, and the beard is also
as a defensione to the Jaws, the which the woman needs not so much as the
man, because the fences and fealyng is stronger or mightier in me, whereby they
may the better endure to go bare headed, and barefoted in the sharpe winter
without harm to them, which very few women can do: understand also* y^ al
women in a manner have no beards: why because al the humours in which mas
beard is engredred, in women runs to the mesture the which is in them, by a
certain passage, and runnynge, after the age, or increase and decrease of the
Moan: as sumtyme once and twyse in the month: whose issue out is named to be
the flux, or superfluous fume, but this runs, when the woman is not with
child, and in them that be past. xii. years older and this ^enstrue sometime
in women is altered and changed to milk in the breasts or paps. By the
aforesaid appears, that the thycknes of the beard, and much hear: nes
vniuersallye, is judged of the substaunciall heate, and moisture, and of the
natural vygorte or strength. Here it may be say^d, that me children be hot,
and moyste, and yet be not bearded: and the reason is because the fumositie
superfluity, which is the matter of the hears of the head and else where,
runs to the nurishinge and increasinge of them as all these very well appear
by Constantine. Wherefore how much the more heate, and so much the more
aboundauncie of hear on the head: therefore beware of them which have to much
hear on the head, especially when he is of an aduste complextion. Beware of
them espetially, which have a red beard, because they represent the
aboundauncie of adustion and caliditie, and such be luxurious, deceauers, and
stars, and in whom the principal heap of vices teste. Whose beard is
comely, and well fashioned* declares that manne to be of a good nature, and of
a reasonable condition* and congruente to all things, and manered after h^s
bringing up: but in the contrary manner it is of them, which have the beard
ill fashioned, as appears in gealded parsones, which after they have lost
both their testycles, be very much changed fro the nature of men* into the
nature o^ women, as Arystotle saith. Undrestande, that Cocles saw many which
wearing lunge beards, came to ^ melancholic madness, or folyshnes. And Cocles
saw also, many parsones with him, that after the full growth of their lunge
beards, were throw headlonge into miseries, and kept under: and also pry^ces
having the like beards, driven out of their bomynyons: and of the beard
which comes soon horie, he pronounces the like* because their nature
draws ne'er to the feminine.

Of the face* The. xxvii. chapter.


THe face which often sweateth of a light moving: declares that man to be of
a whore nature, vain or enuiouse, luxuriouse, of a gross wit and gluttonous.

The face very fleshye, declares that man to be ferefull, congruentlye merry,
large in expenses, discrete, luxuriouse, of an evil memory, soon credityng
things harde, sufficiently faithful to one, of an importunate will in
desyryng vain and impossible things in (unwished hap) enuiouse or froward,
and sufficiently conuertible to good or evil, and very presumptuous or haute
of mind.

The face lean declares that man to be wary or witty, circumspect in his
doings, fatigable, of a good understanding as the mercuriales have: more
cruel or enuiouse, then godly, of a tender capacity, and dysdaynfull.

The face very small, and round, declares figuratively that man to be simple,
fearful, weak, of a gross fedynge, and of an evil memory.

That face which is belpekled, or otherwise to a dronkarde: declares that man
to be a drinker of good wine after the choice of the nose, as the proverb is,
luxuriouse, vain or a liar, strong, and one that will lightly or very soon be
drunk.

That face which is like to an Ireful countenance: declares that man that
he will lightly and soon be angry, and retain anger long in mind.

The face long, and lean, declares that man to be very bold, in tongue,
dead, simple, a braller, proud, en^uriouse, deceatfull, gross or harde
manered, godly and congruently luxuriouse.

The face commune between long and round, lean and gross: declares that man
to be cogruente to all things, but sooner to good then evil.

The face very gross, and large, declares that man to be more simple then
wise, of a gross wit, and dull understanding, dull in doyng matters, often
vayn gloriouse, soon crediting, conuertible to al things, luxuriouse, vain,
obliuiouse or forgeatfull, in evil false or crafty, an ill reporter or
slanderer byhynde ones back, and a supplanter or surmiser.

The face very flat, or plain, without very high puffyng or bearing up:
declares that man to be of a good condition, having a sufficient love to all
things, seruiseable to one, or content to serve one, soon credityng, not
very wary, sufficient faithful; more simple then witty, and commonly
quiet, and well bearing the loss of weighty things, by misfortune.

That face which denteth somewhat in, and is more lean then gross, declares
that man to be iniuriouse, enuiouse, deceatfull, a liar, bold, a chyde^ or
braaller, cruel, laboriouse, of a gross wit, vain, very simple, and of a dull
understanding, and sometime a murderer, especially if he be adust wanne or
yelowesh in colour as Cocles knew the like.

The face mean to the disposition of the others before but more fat, then
lean: declares that man to be true in talk, willing to be bound to serve,
commonly ingeniouse, wary and pertitie of memory.

The face very crooked, long, and lean: declares that man to be of a gross
wit, (as it were to all good things) simple, of a dull understanding, not
faithful, enuiouse, and of a light occasyon malicious.



The face larger fro the forehead downward to the joining, or knitting of the
cheke bones or Jaws, and higher then after or behind, declares that man to
be simple in doing matters, in talk enuiouse, partly fearful, partly bold,
sometime sparing, a lie are, vain, deceatfull, stout of mind, a braller,
weak, a gross seder, and of an evil wit.

The face well disposed or fashioned in flesh, colour, and in his parts, as
in the eyes, and eye lyddes, in which is a pleasantness and comeliness: declares
that man generally, to be well disposed to do both vices, and virtues.

The face pale in colour, declares that manne to be parfytlye healthefull,
very malicious, a betrayer or utterer of secretes, a lyare, proud, vain,
luxuryous, somewhat sparynge, envious, presumptuous, a gros feder, not
sufficient faithful, nor trusty.

The face well cou^oured: declares that manne to be of a laudable dysposicion,
in his or after his complextion merry, soon creditynge, congruentlye
saruisable to other, of a good understanding, and lightly conuertyble to all
things.

The face hollow, that is, fro the beginning of the forehead unto the end of
the chynne, that the nose and mouth be, as it were in a vallye, argues that
ma to be evil manered, especially if the face be aduste, or wanne in colour:
Cocles saw such, to be murderers, robbers by the high way or pirates and
thieves: and this was his judgment often in such parsones.

The face small, and yelowyshe in colour, argues that man to be ungracious,
vicious, a deceauer, and often given to be drunk, as Cocles many times noted
it.

The face as it were fury red incouloure, especially with many red
spots, like to little pustles, declares that manne to have a very crafty
and wily wit.

Of the sygnyfycacyon of the ears. The. xxviii. Chapter.


TThe ears express the temperance, and the proporcion of the principal
members and specially the brain, which experience certifieth us, because the
brain sometime sends out an intoxicate matter very fulsum behind the ears,
where is engendered an impostome, after the diversities of the humours.

The ears great, and thick, declare that man to be simple or a foal,
slothful, a gross feader, of an evil memory, and of a dull capacity, and
long lived.

The ears very small, and thynne: declare that ma to be of a good wit,
understanding, and wisdom, secret, peaceable, wary, fearful, honest, clenly,
somewhat sparing, shamefast, vayn gloriouse, bold or hardy, of a good memory,
and sufficiently content to serve.

The ears somewhat over long, that is, above the commune form, or large by an
ouerthwarte manner, declare that man to be bold, unshamefast, vayn, slothful,
folyshe, content to serve, and may endure but a while to labour, and a great
feader.

And in a manner, al they which have great or big ears (as Cocles hath noted
it) have a short neck, a well facioned head, and they be sanguyne, and for
the more part tending to choler, or to gross sanguyne somewhat aduste: and
these persons be impacyent, and soon or for a lyghte cause angry, for that
Aristotle nemeth them nidiottes, but that they be of a good condition, after
their fury past, and also of good memory and long lived, because in them is a
good proporcion between hot moyste: and he that is a mean is temperate in his
doings. The ears great and rising high or long, declare folyshnes and a
babbler.

They which have over small ears, be conditioned to the ape, and great ears,
after the ass, whose properties both of the axe, ass, be well known:
Ptholomie the Philosopher says, that the, ears great bowing downward, argue
riches, and when the ears be very small, it signifies paucitie of matter, and
the weak virtue of the brain, and it argues also a choleryke matter, of the
which be caused subtle spirits, and therefore such be witty in vngracyouse
works, and be thieves, nidiottes, (and so covetous) that they desire all
things, and thorough their concupiscence, they be luxuriouse, and peradventure
understanded of the immoderate desires, not by the power or virtue of the
matter. The ears bearing or hanging very great out, (as Palemon says)
declare foolyshues and garrulitie, and to be also covetous. The ears also as
they were cutted, and very short: declare (as Loxius says) a dyuerle
dysceate. The ears fashyoned, that the connexed lines semicircularlye, be i^
the mydle somewhat flat toward the centre, and of mean bygnes, which may
agree decently to the head, do witness a goodness of nature in that person. And
the ears over round: declare that person to be unapt to learn or to be
taught. The ears long and narrow: declare enuiousnes. The ears hanging flat
to the head: declare dullness, slouthfulnes, as Albertus affirms: note also,
that small ears declare short life. and to be perfect of hearing, thorough the
virtue of heate. The ears very great and far bearing out as Consiliator
saith, declare foolyshnes, garrulitie, and imprudencie. And Ptholomie the
Philosopher says, that he which hath thynne and dry ears, shall never have
substance or be rich, and it deciadeth a very choleric complexion, of
which proceeds an exhaust intention in congruente operacyons, and argues
also most instability.

Of the throat. The. xxix. Chapter.
THe throat clear, whether it be lean, or fat, declares that manne to be
vain glorious, envious, fearful, lascivious, lightly lying, congruently
wary, much Ireful, and lunge dysdaynfull.

The throat lean, and thynne, and in which the veins appear: declares that
man to be of an evil fortune, weak, slothful, a gross feder. soon
crediting, and conuertyble to good or evil.

Of the sygnyfycacions of the neck. The. xxx. chapter.
First the neck great, not by reason of the fleshines, but by reason of the
bygnes of the bones sinews: be strong. likened to the masculyne kind (after
the manners of the mind he vndrestandeth) because the male in his kind, hath a
great neck, and lively: The neck mean, between lunge and short, declares a
hot complexion, boldness. The neck long, and slendre, likened to the feminine
kind: when the neck is great lyueliy, as I have above said argues fortitude
of the brain, by the consequente, caliditie of the heart, like as there be
men, in their kind.



The neck great by fleshines, and not by reason of the magnitude of the
sinews, and bones, and as. Rasys adds to, stiff and strong, be
Iracundiouse: and likened to the apparent congruencie in Ireful bulls
chafed, which then inspeciall have such a disposition of the neck: and as
Rasis adds to, be also hasty in their doings. The neck sufficiently big,
not by reason of the fleashlynes, but by reason of the sinews and bones, and
congruente long also, be hardy, compared to the lion, and this is especially
true, when the head, and neck be proporcioned so, that it is also of a mean
magnitude, as the same Constantine affirms. The four me of the head, if it
shall be of mean bygnes. and the neck somewhat great, declares the goodness of
the complexcyon and disposition, but if the head shall be small, and neck great,
declares abundance of matter, and his superfluousnes, and the lack also of
the informatyue virtue and such a head as it is said is fatigated, by much
payne, and vnquietnes of the head.

The neck very long, and thynne, be fearful, compared to the heart, but yet
that man which hath assender and long neck, bearing it up strayghte, is not,
so much fearful, as the hart. The neck very short be deceitful and wyly
begilers or full of wiles, compared to the wolf. And this sign is taken, by
the manner apparent in men, and beasts, for men intending to go closely in a
matter not to be seen, draw in the neacke, and so appear the shorter: as the
like may be considered in the cat, when she steals upon the mouse Some say
also that the neck long, declares lunge feat, and the neck slender, slendre
fete, wherefore the neck hollow and flat, declares debility of the
sinews, and sickenesses, after the conioyning, but the neacke much fieashie
declares him to be a liar, using most fylthy excess, and the neacke mean,
witnesses goddnes: And the nape of the neck next the head, when it shall be
heary, wytnesseth that man to be strong, and hardy, because it declares
caliditie. The neck longhauyng a middle part, declares malice in that
parson: and they say also, to be a foal, weak, fearful, a loud clatterer,
but great with a certain proliritie not very fleashlye, argues that person
to be strong, and stout. The neck styffe, and strong, to be Iracun diouse,
hasty, unapt to be taught, and the virtue of the mind, and the humanity also
negatively (they say)* to concur to such an operation. The neck weak or
lose, that it seems to hang, unable to damage and to be deceatful it
declares. The neck great and fleashie, with a certain shortness, declares
him to be a ^oole, and a great feader. and when between the conioyninge of the
shouldr^ points, and beginning of the neck, shall be a certain berynge or
bunchynge up, as of the knots growing sharpe, Cocles noted those parsones to
be proud and haute of stomach, for the more part. The neck declinynge: un
apt to be taught. And bearing the neck to much upright, declares him not
alonly unapt to be taught, but also high minded, and disobedient, receiving no
admonition. The neke bending upward, to be haute or proud, stubburne or
ungentle, and void of a^ honesty. The neck bending to the parts of the
breast, declares that man to be much encombred with the thoughts and cares
of the mind: but su^ime with nigardshyp, and sumtime with malygnitye: of the
neck shall decline to the left part: to be a ^hurl and doggysh. The neck
styffe, and great whether it be lunge, and that it styfiye bends: argues him
to be a gready catcher. The neck crooked after the latytude of the body, fro
the right or leafte side, argues him to be deceatfull, a wary talker, and
vnfaythfull: as Arystotle affirms, eschew utterly his company, which is
wry necked down to the Joining of the shoulder points, for such be
ungracious, disseblers deceateful, as Cocles noted the same in melancholic
parsoes. The neck meant between loge short, be endued with algood virtues. The
neck lunge, declares that man to be simple, not secretee, fearful, weak,
enuyous, a lyare, deceatfull, indoctrynall, and soon conuer^yble to good or
cuyll. The neck short, declares that man to be wary, somewhat sparynge,
deceatfull, secret, stable discrete, ita cundyous, ingenious, of a great
understanding, congruently strong, loving peace or quietness, and government,
and fearful in al things.

Of the colour of the hole body. The. xxxi. Chapter.
ANd that which we have spoken or declared of the mebres, is the like to be
judged of the hole body. For if thou considre the body in the feeling thou
shalt promptly know the quality, or copleccyon thereof. Wherefore the body
safte and slender, and the skin clear with softness of the flesh,
especially, if somewhat ruddy about the knees, declares that person to be
sanguyne of complexcyon The body white, fleashy, and saft, declares that
person to be Phlegmaticke of complexcio. The body fuskyshe or swart or
reddyshe, declares that person to be choleric of complexcyon. The body
bleke, blackishe, pale or palishe, declares a melacholyke quality, or ad ust
choler: Even so the body wrinkled, having great or many sinews, and thycke
skynned, declares that person also, to be of a choleryke complexcyon. The body
slender, and the skin thyn, white, to be phlegmatike, and weak. Further of
the knowledge of divers complexcyons. The colour white, and as it were inward
clear and reddyshe, declares equally a common quality, and such a colour
ought to be (as it were) thorough out the hole body, naturally, well disposed.
There be three places in which ye virtue of colour is showed. First in the face,
secondly in the hands, thyrdly in the breast. If such a colour be fierte
red, declares him to be Idle, especially if his eyes move fast. If such a
rednes be fuskishe or swarte in colour, declares a gross blood, and to be a
deceauer: such a colour of Albertus is named (^nopos), which is a fiery,
dark red:* but such a colour may very well be named a deuelyshe colour
as the like was noted in one. If such a read colour* draw ne'er to grennes or
as it were to grains more the to whitnes, declares black c^ole^, and his
qualities: and* if to subtle cit^innes (as it were to whyttynesse) which is
wont commonly to be in healthful persons, and this without great matter,
declares the shedding of nature, with the loss of the spirits (and
especially this) if the eyes be, or stand deape, and moveable, such then be
taken or ravished with the passion of love, which vndoutedly (as Locles
says) is a greuouse sickness. The virtue of such love is this, that it
ex^incteth virtues, and dulls or darcke^th understanding, causing leacherye,
making the fearful bold,* and the sobre in manner frantyke And if whi^nes
shall abound, and that readnes so little that it can scarsely be seen, declares
a Phlegmatycke condition, and such a colour was wont of the autent^ckes to
be named a clayishe colour. And if to this colour, be redu^s ^dmixt to,
declares an evil Phlegmaticke, and his condicios: and this colour is named a
leadyshe colour, comixt with swartyshe and grenishe colour, this is the
outwardest degre of a maliciouse complexcyon, that is, that heate declares the
mortificacion natural. The fealyng temperate and good cosysteth in the dew
proporsyon of the first qualities, and more approaches to caliditie and
ienyty, the to coldness or aspernes, and more to fleashynes, then to leannes:
such a feeling verily argues the goodness of the complexcyon, y^ is, the equal
complexcyon with the goodness of the wyite, and understanding.

The veins very large and apparent, declare a cho^crycke parson, and his
conditions. The veins narrow, and as they were flat, and sometime leadish in
colour, declare a melancholic nature or complexcion. The veins deep in the
body, seem to declare a Phlegmaticke nature. The veins in due proporcion
apparent and notable, declare a sanguyne nature

Of the shoulder points.
THe shoulder points lean and small: declare that man to be weak, fearful,
peaseable, and may not endure to labour, soon credytyng, and to all things
conuertible.

The shoulder points large and great, declare that man to be strong, to much
constant or hard to be moved, faithful, of a gross wit, and feadyng,
simple, a painful laborer, sufficiently feadig, and some quieted.

The shoulder points crokyng inward: declare that man to be wary, slothful,
secrete, ingeniouse, and a surmiser.

The shoulder points flat and broad, declare that man to be simple, a sparer
or niggard, laboryouse, modest in all his doings, especially in tongue and
feadyng, quyete, soon credyting, and conuertyble to good or evil.

The shoulder points unequal, as the one greater then the other, declare that
man to be slothful, of a dull vnderstandig* of a gross wit feadyng* sipie, of
a dull capacity, faithful, bold, a niggard or one hard to be moved, and
sometimes an utterer of secretes, false, and not credityng one.

The shoulder points very high standing up, declare that man to be in manners
of an open life, enuiouse, simple, vain, a liar, unstable, bold,
inuerycundiouse, and a braller or quareier.

Of the Physiognomy of the arms. The. xxxii. Chapter.
OF the arms needs not much to speak saying there is none so slendre wytted
(as I Judge) but that can readily say, and Judge those men to be mighty and
strong, which have well brawned arms, or great sinews and many: which make a
body strong. Contrary, the skin fleshie, and the senowes not so diverse land
many to be scene, declare such to be Phlegmatike, and sanguyne, prove to
cowardnes. The arms monstrous long, declare holdnes, fortitude, ignobilitie,
and with this short life. The arms crooked, in respect of the stature, or
great boned, declare those persons to be vnthankeful, shameless, covetous, ill
reporters or backebiters, enuiouse, haute or proud, and not much differyng
fro the, which have heary arms, which also be proud or reprocheful,
veneriouse, wielie, crafty, unstable, and talketyue or full of words. When the
arms shall be so long, that they reche to the knees, argues subtylnesse,
arrogance, and covetousness to reygne or govern. Aristotle also says, that
these signs declare boldness* goodness, with largeness in expesis, such king
Alexander was thought to have. The arms so mostruous long, that they reach to
the thighs, declare that those persons be vngracyous, Joying in other men
harms, and enuyouse: and many authors say that this sign declares
fearfulnes, ignorance, and a lover of discord. He which feadeth so gredely,
that he brings the mouth to the meat, not with the hand decently, for the
evil fashioning thereof, and for the shortness, and crokednes of the arms,
declare those persons to be malicious, and enuyouse. The cubits of the arms
slendre and lean, if they shall be weak, declare him to be rude, unapt to be
taught. The arms great in the bones, sinews, fleashe, declare a strong and
mighty nature. And if the veins appear, declare a hot complexcyon, when the
arms be great, by soft fleashe, declare a feminine nature.

The Phisiognomiers say, that the arms very hearye, declare that person to be
luxuryouse, Aristotle says, that he which when he talks moves the arm
much, by the moving of the hand: declares that person to be enuiouse*
eloquent of speech, and a deceauer. And he that refrayneth to move the hand
the like, is of a perfect understanding, well disposed and witty of council, or
a witty counsaylet.

Of the significacions of the breast and ribs. The. xxxiii. Chapter.
THe lion is not lonely know strong but also bold by the breast, as they
especially Judge which write of the natures of beasts: even like by that
conjecture we name that man to be strong and bold which hath the breast well
bearing out, and to be luxuriouse, malapert, or wanton in asking, or i'll tonged,
lasciuiouse of talk, haute or proud, Iracundiouse, and somewhat spatyng.

The breast bushy of hear, and in the selyng hot, declares that man to be
choleric with his quality, that is to be bold, obstynate, and much Ireful.

The breast naked and bare of hear, declares that parson to be cold, and
Phlegmaticke of nature, and inqualitie fearful, and slow. The breast
vnequallye hounchyng ht^h out: on the ton part, we find such parsons to be
marcialies, wie^y begilers, prone to al wickedness, to be naturally vain or
liars, and hipocrites. Even so they which be red on the breast up to the
throat we find to be Ireful, contencyouse, presumptuous, haute or arrogant,
inconstant, but yet fearful. And that breast we Judge most comely, which is
meanly filled with flesh, and meanelye heary, for this declares that person
to be discret, prudent, and of a good nature. They which be well ribbed
strong after life, be compared to the masculyne k^d. And they which be weak
small ribbed, after nature be likened to the feminine kind: they which he
compassed about the ribs with fleashe bearing out like as they were blown:
declare those persons to be talkatyue, and folyshe talkers, compared to the ox
frog. Note also that the ribs of the feminine kind be narrow and small, and
the great guts also for the lack of natural heate. And the man, the
contrary, by ^s great heate.

Of the Physiognomy of the hands. The.xxxiiii. Capter.
FOr as much as hitherto I have used an ordre in the phisiognomatyng of the
members, and that by the hands may diuerse^ye be noted, I will therefore speak
somewhat thereof. And first as Aristotle saith, the greatness and shortness of
the fingers declares paucitie of matter, and a Phlegmaticke compleccyon and
that nature may not direcie, of which the spirits be not like to nature, and
then they be folysh: and the like affirms Rasis, Consiliator, and the
Philosopher Ptholomie. Formica worthily saith that the greatness of the hand,
comes sometime by much labour, and therefore they which labour much have
great hands. And sometime it comes by nature and the by the grennes of the
bones and sinews or muscles, such a person whether it be man or woman, be
naturally strong, and sometime also it proceadeth by the grossenes of the
flesh, and then such be drunkardes, luxuriouse and naturally vile. Also he
which hath great hands and the fyngers at the tops sharpe or small such a
parson is covetous, false: understand also, that the fore finger, middle
finger, ring finger, and ear finger, have three Jointes a piece. If therefore,
in each Joynte, shall be but one lyne, he shall dye suddenly: but if there
shall be two lines in each Joynte equal distant, declare a happy sign,
and to be an honest faithful man. And if in the middle Joynte of each finger,
shall be but one lyne, and in the other Joyntes two, such a person shall s^ese one
of his eien, and these hitherto Formica. Ptolom^e says that the hands
great, and think skin ^ed, declares that manne to be disquieted in mind.
Rasys says, the hands light and subtle or thin declare much wisdom, and
a good perfyt understanding, and subtilnes of the humours. The hands slendre
and very long, declare tyranny, and foolyshnes. Ptholomie the Philosopher
says, that the hands of diverse colours, declare that man to be luxuriouse
or cruel.

The fyngers also over thynne, declare foolyshnes. Formica says that he
which hath the fyngers at the top broad, such a person is faithful, a good
companion.

The table in the hand large, and the fyngers slendre, that is long, such a
person is subtle in a natural work, and given to play on Instruments.

The table in the hand small or narrow, and the fyngers great, such a
person is given to write well or perfitlye. And such a person shall dye of an
apostume.

He which hath the hands not over great, nor over small, but well proporcioned
to his body, such a person is more congruente in all his mischancis or
accidents.

The hands small, such a person is feminine, in his doings, and is also
vnsac^able, and hateful, and now loves, and now hates, and seldom or never
there is any confidence to be had in him.

He which hath great and fat hands, such hath ^ dull wit. And the woman
having such hands, desires much veneriouse act.

He which hath slendre hands, is nimble and ready in his doings, and much
desires women.

The fyngers hollow, and ill fashioned, and not con^oyning well together, is an
evil person, talking larger lier then he will do, and full of untruth. He
which hath the fyngers segregate, and not lying strayt out, declares misery,
and poverty.

And the reason of this is, for the improporcion, which presupposes not there
a good and perfyt understanding, but an evil, and inordinate.

The fyngers small, declare that person to be a fool, ^ dullard, and enuyouse.

Morbeth the cardinal in his chyromancye says that the fyngers long, and
thynne, and well proporcyoned together: declare a good wit, and especially in
handy crafts.

And it declares also an evil governance, whereby they be always miserable,
and neady, and this Cocles many times noted in neady persons, that lived by
alms.

The fyngers very short, and little: declare them to be strong, and
fuffyciently wary or wyttye: but this lonely is not to be affirmed.

The hands gross or fat, and the fyngers over short: declare that man to
be a false demer or periurer, a thief, and full of wiles: and the hands
croaking in, and thynne, declare that person to he a glutenouse feader and
talkatyue: Certain say that the fyngers flat and small, and the palm of
the hand crooked, declare that ma to be enuyouse, a foal, an innocent o^
wreache, and covetous: and the reason of this is, because the grossnes
declares abundance of the matter, and somewhat of natural heate, not mighty
above the degree, by which is declared an earthly dry man and rude by reason
of over much drynes, and a foal for the lack of natural heate and moisture
proportionable, and by the consequence to be covetous, for the crokednes
thereof: A^u^or in ^ys small work of chyromancie saith y^ the woman which
hath small or (...) ^e had^ and the fyngers gross at the tops, declare a
rude wyt^* and a notyse to be ^u^u^ouse.

And those women which have a short pa^e, shall be grieved with the strayghtnes
in the ^e^ue^ie of child.

A certain authoure says, whose name Cocles knew not, that the hands
short and knottye or bounchyng out and thynne, declare that manne to be a
Jeaster, and glu^enouse feader.

And the cause of this is, that the end of the sinews which thorough drynes
is drawn together, and bends inward, is thereby knottye.

When the top of the ear finger, shall not reach to the upper Joint of the
ring finger, declares that person assuredly to be a bastard, which Cocles
very often found true. And if the fyngers bend in the tops: declare envy,
and covetousness, and such be wary, and false of promise, compared to the ape.

But when they bend inward, contrary wise, If the thombe towards the
fyngers, and the fyngers toward the thombe enclyne, declare ma^cousnes, and
covetousness.

He which of a custom or customably, holds the hand ^rayghte out, and the
fyngers like extensed ^ length, declares that man to be talkatyue, fearful,
and vain.

He which always bears the hand close shut, declares to be vn^itifull or
vio^ente, and Iracundiouse. The fingers small and thynne i^ a man declare him
to be an idiot, If short and gross, declare boldness, and enui^: and the
fyngers comely made, fair of form, and of sufficient length, declare good
and honest manners in that person. He which in speaking moves and clappeth the
hands much together, and uses many gestures besides, declares to be
eloquent enuyouse, and a begiler. Certain say (as Hermes) that the trembling
or quaueryng of the hands, in a healthful young man, declares to be soon
and lightly angry or moved to ^re. And this proceeds by great heat, and
commotion of the spirits But if the trembling be very strong or fast, it is a
token of a vic^ouse comple^cion, and that such a one will be or is angry for a
triff^yng cause* melancholyke, desiring diverse things, and covetous or
enuiouse. The hand hollow, with the tubercles fair, and the proportion of the
lines like semly, promise long life. And ^f it be contrary, contrary Judge. The
fyngers in what form they be, with the Joites gross, declare misery
mi^ortune as Cocles hath very often noted it. Albertus and Conciliator say^,
that when the fingers be so well filled with fleashe, and perfyt round, that
holding them up thou cannot see the elemet thorough them, declare that man to be
covetous, and enuyouse: And if the fingers rightly bend towards the back of
the hand especially if they be thynne, declare that man to be unjust, subtle,
and ingeniouse. And he which of a custom when he walk, holds or bears
the thombe thrust within the other fingers: declares to be covetous as
Cocles noted the same in a country man of his. The fingers also long declare
the ears of the liver to be long, and the magnytude of the fyngers, declares
the magnitude of the ears of the liver. And the smalnes of the fingers,
declare the smalnes of the ears of the liver.

If any have ruddy hands, whether it be manne, or woman, declares that person
to be sanguine and luxuriouse, as Formica saith: ^tholomye says that he
which hath the upper joints of the fyngers gross and bending or turning up,
such if they shall be the rich, in countinuaunce of time after shall be poor or
by some other infortune they shall be hindered: further he says, having the
hands crooked in length, declare him to dye a violent death: These hithert^ of
the Phisiognomating of the hands for this time suffice here.

Of the belly, back, great guts, and haunches, with the legs to the fet.
The. xxxv. Chapter.
OUr matter requires not much to write, what each ma may Judge by the beliye,
back, and great guts, although they be principal mebres of the body, by
which might much be noted and Judged: but notwythstandyng what is
necessarily to be spoken of them in brevity shall be showed. First the belly
heary and rough to the navel: declares that man to be luxuryouse, bold,
hardy or stout, prudent, of a great understanding, studyouse, wary, and
sometime hardly fortunated.

The belly lean, and thynne, declare a hot and cholerycke complexcyon, and
often times also a melancholyke complexcyon.

As they for the more part, which have fa^te and ^orpulente beliyes, and yet
very witty, and this by often experience, we find true. He also which is ^a^
or well brawned about the belly, and that the belly bear not much out, is
Judged strong after nature. He commonly which by some accydente, as by
fasting, or sickness, or by some other accydentall cause hath a lean belly,
is Judged vnapte to be taught tender, and weak: And so long as he contineweth
(...) such a passion, he declyneth to the feminine nature. Aristotle in his
secretes to Alexander writes, that he which hath a great belly, is
vndiscreate, folyshe, and light minded, loving and delytyng in veneriouse
acts: but the belly mean, and the breast decently strait or narrow, declare
to be a man of a singular understanding, and witty of counsel or a good
counseler* Aristotle says that the back bone, great and well brawned, and
strong declares that man to be strong and might in stomach, compared to the
masculyne kind. And the back bone narrow, ^a^te brawned weak, to be weak,
compared to the feminine kind: wherefore Rasys says that the largeness of the
back, declares fortytude, arrogancye, and vehemence of ^re.

The crokednes of the back, declares the maliciousnesse of condicious, and
ouerthwartnesse in manners.

The equality of the back, is a good sign, Conciliator says, the back
large, strong, well brawned, by*ned, declare a manlye nature: contrary, a
femini^e nature. And who that is croak backed if it shall be sa^t in fleashe,
bearing up to a hill, and that any by that be ^arroer, as it were to a waste
about: this man excells in virtue, having a studyouse desire in hunting.

They say also that the crokednes of the back, declares the ouerthwartnes in
manners. The back large vnextensed, declares fortitude, arro gancie, fierceness
or furiouse hastines in anger. The thynnes of the back declares yt man to be
of a wayward nature. Further the back bone large at the nether end to the
buttocks, and safte compassed or brawned with fleashe, declares that person
to be effeminate, compared to the woman. But if the back bone be long and
end sharpe: declares that man to be libidinouse, moderate in manners, and
fearful. Certain say, that the back heary, lean, and much bearing up, fro
an equality of the parts: declares that man to be inuericundiouse,
maliciouse beastly of an evil understanding weak, not long enduring to labour,
and slothful.

The back great or broad and fat: declares that man to be diverse,
slothful, of much deceate.

The back thynne extensed, and lean, declares that man to be weak, and of
lyghte cause fearful, vain, a brawler, and of much credulity.

The back from the shoulder points down to the wast or geardel stead
short, and sufficient large, such persons as Cocles hath very often noted
it, be swift and pressed in coetyng.

Certain of the Philosophers admonish us, to beware of those persons which
have the back much bunchyng out, for such especially be given to do
mischief and harm, and most in defamyng, backebytyng, and envy.

The haunches express the like, in manner of the former: for if the haunches be
fleash, and fat, and that the legs, down to the fete be also fleashy:
declare boldness, and strength.

He which hath bony haunches so that the bones bear out and well sinewed: in
such manner that the haunches be great by especialler cause of the bones and
sinews, the of over much fleashines: declare that man to be strong, bold.
Rasis also says yt when the bones of the hauches shall bear out: declare
boldness.

And this Rasis means, when the haunches be well brawned and bending to the
siluester part, which is a notyse of fortytude, and such run quick and
swiftly, and be also great iourn^ers: as Cocles hath noted it. Mthell the Scot
says, that the haunches well brawned, declare that man to be strong, hardy,
and no less proud: as appears in the stone horse, cock, and falcon. Also he
saith, that having the hauches bony, but yet in such wise yt the bones be not
great much fleashy, with the smaines of the synewes: such be weak referred to
the feminine kind.

To this Rasys says, that when the haunches bear out through much
fleashe: declare debi^itye of strength, and looseness of the members.

The hipp or hucke^l bones tendynge outward (as Consi^ator saith) declare
vri^litie and fortitude: except effiminate fleashines happen to hinder the
same. The siendernes or smalnes of them: declares that man to be a lover of
women and to be fearful, with weakness of the body. The shanks well sinowed,
strong brawned or muscled and great, not by reason of the fleashines, but
rather by reason of the greatness of the bones, and sinews: declare that manne
to be strong after iyfe, referred to the masculyne kind. The shanks thynne or
lean, and sufficiently synowed: declare that person to be luxuryouse, light,
and unstable in his mouinges: and this notyse is taken by birds having the
like shanks. Which because they be light after nature, unstable, have little
of the terrestrial substance or gravity, but much of the Aerial ^yghtnes. The
shanks lean without the sufficiency of sinews, declare that ma to be
fearful, as cociliator affirms. The shakes over great, by reason of over much
fleashines, and as it were indistincte, that is with equality or all a like,
so that about the ankles they be fleashye and fat, as women be, be named
weak, and vnshamefaste, as appears above, by the signs incensible. When the
grosnes or fleshines shall be about the ankles, declare that man to be gross
and folysh of nature, as Rasys says. And Aristotle wryttyng to Alexander
saith, yt the thynnes or leanes of the shakes declares that man to be
Ignorant or simple, And the greatness of them, declares that ma to be bold,
and strong.

The shanks all a like, as they were swollen down to the ankles of some
disease, declare a fylthy intemperamente.

The shanks soft in fleashe, be signs of a feminine nature.

The shanks lean, and sufficiently synewed, and rough (after Aristotle)
declare an ardencye to venerouse act: For that their nutrimentall matter, is
altered into sperma in the, and likened to birds.

The shanks superfluouse, and indistincte or ill fashioned, declare that man
to be od^ble, and vnshamfaste. Note also that the shanks very hearye, with the
multitude of hear about the preuie members, declare an ardent desire to
veneryouse act, for such be compared in nature like, with brute beasts.

They that be much heary fro the haunches to the feat, declare to be much
given to coeate.

The feet great, by mean they be well sinowed muscled, and that the muscles
and sinews, appear in such manner, that the greatness be, by reason of the
bones and sinews, and not by reason of the abundance of fleashe, such be
judged strong after nature. Rasis says, the feet much fleashie, and harde,
declares that man to be of an evil understanding. Aristotle in his secretes
writes that the fete fleashye, declare such a person to be folyshe, and a
lover of Injury. And the fete small, and lyghte, declare that man to be bold,
and strong. Rasys also says, that the fete small, and beautiful, declare that
man to be a fornicator, and sporter and maker of mirth, always merry. The nails
of the fete croaking like to hawk talons be judged gready catchers and
unshamefast, in manner living like as the hawk after his pray. Cocles always
marked such persons, which had the like nails on the toes and fyngers, to be
of a cholerycke complexcyon: And found it a laudable notyse, in worthy
warriors, in such as use martial aries. And such persos Aristotle means to
be naturally vnshamfast or over bold, thieves, despoylers, and fyithy talkers.
And he names the martial, theaues or warriors, because they, which give
their industry holly to war faring, be robbers, and wily begilers a^raynyng
substance or bouties, whether it be in right or wrong. Of women's fete, is
here what to be noted; as they which be long foted, be apter to the
procreacion of children, and by their rote also (as the Philosophers say) may
be known which be apteste to coeate, with many others more, which for the
displeasure of god in the uttering of them, I omit, desiring thee gentle
Reader to bear with me ther^.

Of the hole stature of man. The. xxxvi. Chapter.
WE may here somewhat Judge of mans stature. And first for an example we read
in the histories of one Maximinus Emperor, which was a man of a huge
parsonage, and stature, and yet named or rea^ ned for a sole. Of whom arose
this proverb. ( Climacis egiptia, et Caliga Maximini) which proverb brieflye
to say, is applied to such as be of huge stature parsonage, having eun
conditions or properties, that for their manners, had in contempt of al men. But
what needs to recite this, seeing we see every where (saith Indagines) that
such which be of so huge strange stature, be not of the wisest, or very
nidiottes, this most especial, if they be lean long bodied, and crane neaked,
or neaked log like the crane. Of which sort, Indagines noted in the court of
Fredericke the third, and Charles, Emperors, maruelouse lean, and tall, very
froward, and stark folyshe: nor they much differ not fro these, which go
much stoupyng or crokedly, whereof the old proverb (If I may so say) might
here be renewed, which is, I have seldom seen a long or tal man, witty, or a
little man, meek and pacyent. But to be brief, that man which is of a mean
stature, and comely or reasonable fat of body, and in qualities honestly
nurtered, declares to be ingeniouse, circumspect, and with expedition doth
his businesses. Further, the stature long and sufficient strayte and more lean
then fat, declares that man to be bold, cruel, proud, clamorous, vain
gloryouse, long angry, or furiouse in anger, to much constant or hard to be
moved, presumptuous, not soon credityng things heard, an often liar in many
things maliciouse The stature long and sufficiently fat, declares that man
to be strong, lightly vnfaythfull, false, of a gross wit, a niggard wary,
vnfaythfull, and a surmiser. The stature long lean and thynne, declares that
man to be sapyente, vain, a liar, of a gross feadyng or feader, importunate,
to wished things soon credityng, weak, slow in doing things, and very self
willed. The stature short and gross: declares that man to be vain,
fearful, suspicious, more folysh then witty, of a gross wit, and
congruently saruisable to one, soon crediting, and long continewing angry.

The stature short and lean, and sufficiently strayte up, declares that man
to be naturally wary, ingeniouse, a sparer, proud, bold, secrete, fatigable
or a much provoker, vain gloryouse, congruently sap^ ente, of a good
understanding, and very often surmysing, The stature declining or falling
forward (not caused thorough age) but by nature: declares that man to be wary,
secrete, dull, of a gross feadyng, sharpe or cruel, a niggard, laboriouse,
long bearing anger in mind, and not lightly credityng. The stature bending
bakwarde, declares that man to be a foal, of small vnderstadyng, a gross fea
der, vayn, of an evil memory, and lightly couertibleto good or evil.

A conclusion or brief rehearsal of the whole art of Physiognomy.
Now let us reduce all these matters before spoken, to a conclusion: Although
these before rehearsed appear sufficient. Wherefore to be brief, let us
pronounce of all the members throughout the body, and first of the eyes. They
which have moysty, clear, cherful, and quaueryng eyes: declare them to be
honest conditioned and merry. And that these may the readyier appear, we shall
set them forth orderly as it were in a table, what every membre declares,
which we have placed here under.

FIrst the eyes moist, clear and smiling: declare that man to be merry, well
manered, and circumspect in his life. The eyes steadfast of sight, some what
red, and very great; declare that man to be a glutton, and leacherouse. The
eyes small, somewhat moving: declare that man to be covetous. The eyes great:
declare that man to be crafty and a begyler. The eyes steadfast of syghte: to be
deceitful or crafty. The eyes moving to fro: declare yt man to be sedicious,
suspicious, vnfaythfull or trusty, a boster. Brod eyed: declare that man to be
dull witted, a sluggard, fearful, a coward, honest and trusty, drunk with
wine. Small eyed: declare that person to be unshamefast or shameless. The eyes
covertly quaueryng (as it were) to be unjust. The eyes not a like, and small:
declare that ma to be deceitful, and a flaterer. The sight of the eyes turning
ne'er the nose: declare that person to be veneriouse. The eyes broad and
runnynge, and the syghte moving to and fro: declare that man to be Ireful. The
eyes dryer then they before: declare that man to be changeable, wyly, and
expert. The eyes twinklyng as it were: declare that man to be shameless. The
eyes black and clear: to be a just and vpryghte meaning man, witty, and
libidmouse, and of knowledge. The eyes round about grene: declare that person
to be deceitful, unjust, and a thief. The eyes moisty: declare that man to be
high minded, able to perform that he promises, vpryghte of counsel. The
eyes great and quaueryng: declare that per son to be mad, light or idle
witted, and a glutton. The eyes having many windings or wrincies, hollow, and
dry: declare that man to be a forelec^, and a betrayer. The eyes standing high
out, great, clear, pure, and moist: declare that man to be witty, studious and
a lover. The eyes watery and running, if it come not by sickness: declare him
to be a fool. The eyes dark of sight and dry, to be very faithful. The
eyes quaueryng as it were, large, moist and clear: to be a man of singular
knowledge, haute of stomach, furiouse in anger, hardy of courage, and a
boster. The eyes black and resp^endent: declare that person to be fearful,
and most wicked. The eyes round about swollen as they were, and crude:
declare that person to be a glutton, and hateful. The eyes very small, and
hollow: declare that man to be covetous, and a crafty begiler. The eyes
cherefull of loke, and of a like bygnes: declare that person to be prone and
apt to laughter, gentle, and godly. The eyes moyste: declare that man to be a
good counsayler, sad, gentle, and studious for the more part. The eye lids
parting: declare that person to be a lover, and loved. That man which winks
with the eyes: declares to be a deceauer and thief. That man which hath
bleared eien: declares to be libidinouse. The over brows large: declare that
person to be efftminate. The cye lyddes playing often, declare that man to be
an aduouterer.

The forehead narrow, to be a fool. The forehead long, to be studyouse and
apt to be taught, or high, or as it were swollen, and round, to be crafty,
mutable, and a doer of injury.

The forehead full of wrinkles: declares that man to be burdened with cares.

The forehead round to be enuyouse, and deceitful. The forehead large, to be
free and liberal. The ouerbrowes hearye, to be a stammerer. The eye bries
streatchyng to the Temples, to be nastye, and beastly conditioned.

The face plain or even filled with fleashe, to be full of strife. Not full
faced, to be Iniuryouse, rude and nasty, leaner faced, to be witty. The face
fleashye, apt to learn, sad of countenance, to be a foal, mixed with wisdom.

The cares wide open, to be a nidiote. The ears very great, to be simple
witted. The ears small to be a foal. The ears as they were four cornered,
to be learned.

The nose sharpe, to be Ireful. The nose fleashye, soft, to be evil manered.
The nose bowing to the mouth like an hawk bill, to be honest, strong,
learned, and apt to be taught. The nose great, to be gentle and friendly.
The nose small to be a deceau^r.

The nose flat, to be leacherouse, wyllful and pleasant.

The nosethrelles steafe, to be mighty and strong. The nostrils round, to
be fearce. The nosethrils divided a part as they were, to be quick wytted,
iustye of courage and mearye. The nostrils narrow and round, to be a
foal.

The mouth wide, to be full of strife and a fyghter, fierce, and bold. The
mouth very great or large, with the upper lip hanging far out, to be a
glutton, wicked, a babier, fool hardy, ouerthwarte, and duli wytted.

The lyppes small, thynne, and subtyle to be Eloquent. The lyppes thynne in a
little mouth, to be effeminate. The lyppes fleashye or thycke, to be a foal

They which have teeth like to a dog, bearing out the lyppes, be
contumeliouse, or use to speak rebukefullye, and not to be trusted.

The throat boll asper, to be a trifler, and of little wit.

The throat boll, far fro the shoulders standing, large and extenced*
declares imbecility of mind. And mean to be manered and strong.

The neck long, and slender, to be fearful, and evil manered. The neck
fat, and long, to be furiouse, fearful and obstynate.

The neck mean between both, apt to learn, strong and vertuouse.

The neck fat, to be rude, rude speakers, and dull to learn.

The neck rough to be contumelyouse. The neck short, to be fool hardy.
The neck bendyng^ in, to be necligente, and covetous.

The neck bowynge to the right side, to be reasonable of conditions, but
bowing to the least sydeto be a rioter or Ruffyan, and a foal.

The breast great to be a manne worthy commendacyon.

The breast large, to be hardy of courage, bold, ^nd in whom reasteth
honesty.

The breast small or narrow, to be fearful.

The breast corpulent or fat, to be furyouse, and cruel.

The paps hanging down fro the breast: declare that man to be violent
unadvised of that he doth. The belly great, to be vndiseret, folysh, proud and
leacherouse. The belly straight, and broad breasted, (to be one) whose mind
may be perceived, and a maker of agremente between man and man, or man and
wife, a counsayler. The back large, to be gentle of nature: and the back and
breast indifferent broad: to be worthy praise. The back corked or bending: to
be a niggard and covetous. The arms very log: to be bold, gentle honest and
strong. The arms short to be a sower or worker of discord, lecherous. The
hands very short: to be gross, and rude manered. The hands narrow in the
middle part, and broad at the upper: to be in his first age a wastful spender,
in his middle age covetous, and in his old age, a spender or liberal: And some
at that age be ryper of counsel, covetous in that old age. The hands
fyngers, fat or fleashy to be a thief. The hands small: to be mutable, wyly,
and expert. The flat or palm of the h^des to the fold broad, the upper part
narrow: declares that man to be a rioter in his first age. The legs slebre:
to be dull of knowledge. The legs gross: to be bold strong. The legs
larger to be mighty strong The legs having great or many ^inowes: to be strong
The legs short and fat: to be furious and cruel. The legs crooked, and
hollow or bending in the nether part of the legs: declare those men, to be
evil. The legs soft and high pouffed up: to be well instructed in good
manners. The shanks or legs fro the knee down with the heal asper or rough,
fleashy and short, and with the thighs fat: declare those men that they shall be
^naticke. The fete fleashy: to be foolish. The fe^e small and light: to be dull
wytted. The fete naked, or dare of hear: declare a most perfect notise of
impotency. And much heary to be luxuryous and bold.

Finis.

