AN APPROVED Medicine against the deserved Plague.

Is any among you afflicted? Let him pray.

Iames. 5.13. JMPRINTED AT London, by Thomas Est, dwelling in
Aldersgate-streete, at the Sign of the black Horse.

1593.

To the honourable and virtuous Lady Scudamore, attendant upon her Majesties
most excellent person in her privy Chamber, Anthony Anderson, Preacher of
Christs holy gospel, Subdean of her Majesties Royal Chapel, wishes all
honourable increase, and heavenly felicity.
ALthough (Honourable Madame) the matter herewith tendered, be of small worth, to
some men, less esteemed with many, yet sure I am the right use thereof, may
aduaile more, then make account of it. If in the days of health prosperity,
we think it dutiful to pray the Lord, to continue the same, how much more
ought we, in affliction and adversity, to practise sound petition, which
godliness hath this riches, that the faithful by it in Christ from God, doth
receive, both temporary good, and eternal comforts. We in this Realm, are
under the rod of affliction, and who doth pray, but those which are taught of
God, to use it. Amongst the number of whom, for that in my knowledge, with
many others in Court, your Ladyship doth daily use and desire it, and my self
for your good opinion and Christian kindness conceived and bestowed on me, to
you greatly bound, I am bold to patronize my poor indeauors present, under your
Godly protection, assured that both in Court country, it shall be the more in
use, which undoubtedly will countervail their pains, if they pray in faith.
The cause moving this my boldness, to present the Church here with, is, my
duty to the same in general, especially, next to the most honourable Court,
(whereof I am a poor membre, in her Majesties goodness,) to my comfortable
charge at Stepney, a people of great import, for Maryne service, cheefely
zealous in God, loyal to her Majesty, well deserving of the whole Realm, and
now under the rod of this smart visitatio, for whom, I humbly beseech all them,
which may or shall feel any comfort by this poor tender, that in their
fervent prayers, they will effectually commed us to the Throne of Gods mercies
in Christ. And to you good Madame, with the rest of the honourable and godly
Ladies and others at Court, I humbly commend me, beseeching God, to grant us
merciful deliverance of this his loving rod, that we her Majesties servants,
may thither return to our bouden duty, as apertaineth, and so humbly I take
my leave.

August 1. 1593. Stepney. Your honours devote in the Lord, Anthony Anderson.

To the humble hearted Readers, in the Lord.
THE Almighty GOD, the Lord of Hosts (as Father of mercies) dear brethern,
for many years past, hath sweetly called us to unfeigned repentance, by the
Ministry of his holy word, but we have not hearkened thereunto. Wherefore
eftsoones and again, the same mighty God, doth at this present, summon us, by
his smart Preacher, Micah. 6.9.
the visiting rod. Whose increasing voice, cries to all in the persons of
many, thus. Oh sinful earth hearken and give ear: stop thy course, stay thy
race, turn thy self to me, receive my stripes with patience, and wisely
foresee the plague and hide thee. For he that sent me saith farther unto thee.
Pro. 22.3. Zoph. 2.1.
O Nation not worthy to be loved, how yet, have I, loved thee? What should I
have done, that I have not done unto thee? I have given thee a wonderful
peace, an invincible protection, an heavenly doctrine, and the choice store, of
all earthy treasure. The gold of Ophir, Salomon sought after, 2. Chron. 8.18.
but the Indians gold, I have powered into thy lap, as unlooked for. A Prince
thou hast, the holy wonder of the world. Else, ask the Lands which know not
God. Thy Realm and rest, is kept by me, the watchman thereof, and when soever
the enemy assails, I put him back, with great disgrace. The heavens do drop
the fatness, the earth doth make thee laugh and sing, what would thou have
more, but a continuance of that spiritual comfort, and corporal pleasures
which yet abide with thee, but be wise and consider, see how I now begin to
beat thee, beware therefore, repent in time, least I utterly remove, Reave.
2.5.
thy Candlestick from thee, and then who will pity thy last dissolution?
Behold, and hear my rod, Micah. 6.9.
and me that sent it. I have made thee sick with striking, do not my piercing
arrows, stick fast in thee? Psal. 38.2.5.
Are not thy wounds putrified? Doth not hasty death greatly devour thee? Mark
it well and the cause thereof. Thy sin is the cause, Micah. 6.13.
thy great sins, and they passing account. Oseas. 9.9.17
Turn therefore unto me that am in just anger coming unto thee with a mind
of revenge: prepare thee therefore to meet me, before the day of my decree
come forth. Psal. 106. in all. Luck. 7.38. Ioel. 2.13.
Come to me, not with Israells hypocrisy, but with Magdalens tears. Rent
your harts, and keep whole your garments, for I cannot take pleasure, in that
bodily exercise, where the penitent spirit, speaks not for mercy. If any be
afflicted let him pray. Jam. 5.13.
If many be under the rod, let all come together, turn together, morn
together, cry together and say: O Lord of Hosts, in the middle of thy wars
think upon thy promised mercies. We come, no more to fight against thee in
our sinful lusts, but to fall before thee, forsaking confessing our sins,
sweet Lord have mercy. And let every of you, Esa. 1.5.6. Hos. 4.1. Iero. 8.6.
from the top to the toe, (for you are sore from the head to the foot)
applying profitably the controversy to your selves, say: Our sins O Lord,
yea every man say, my sins, as our sins are the causes of this malady. Our
rebellions, presumptions, scorning, Atheistical, our Roman sins, our carnal
apetites, present, past, remembered, and forgotten sins. Sins without
remorse, without conscience, against all conscience, even when ye spirit
quakes in dread: even the ye flesh burns in lust. Sins in Court unbridled,
sins in the Church not repented of, in the country not cared for. Iero.
17.27.
The profanation of the Sabboth day, the abominations in the week day, no
truth, less trust, Hose. 4.1.2.
no faith to God, no love to our brethern, much fayll of loyalty to the
Prince, and small proof of due obedience, to her Magistrates. But a mighty
scorn of the Lords Preachers, through an utter contempt of his word.
Resolute, in league with sin, Esa. 28.
death and hell, and an absolute distrust, of Gods sure promises, either for
mercies, or Judgment. And what should I say more? Oh how many are the foolish
wise, which say in unpunished boldness, they have no God, Psal. 14.1.
There is no God. Oh England, O people, why wilt thou dye? Say to thy self, Oh
Soul, repent thee of thy sin, Iero. 18.8.. 26 3. Psal. 91.4.7.
and God will repent him of the plague, will take thee into his protection, and
hide thee under his wings. They shall fall on both sides thee, but it shall not
come to thee.

But if thou wilt not hearken to this his voice, O flesh, (of what mould so
ever,) but still wilt pamper thy self in carnal delights, to a further
transgression, (which now ought to be feared) then fear, for he hath not sent
this scourage for little purpose, and be sure that he hath his store-house
full, of final instruments, which can and will make quick dispatch. As
cleanness of teeth, barrenness of earth, Amos. 4.6.
brought of heaven, devouring worms, fiery feauers, burning botch, scouring
sword, revenging axe, haylestones and storms of fire, as of Sodome and
Gomorrah, to persecute, to pull down, to cast out, and into hell, all those
which forget God. Are the treasures of wickedness still in your houses, the
false balance, small weights, naughty wares, counterfeit lights, sweet
words, sour deeds? Eccle. 10.16.17
Do your heads eat for lust, and not for need, drink to surfeit, and not for
thirst, send their proud servants, to bring, and never satisfied? Are the
daughters of Zion proud, as Essay descryes them? Amos 4.1. Esa. 3.16. Ezech
13.18. Esa. 28.10. 1. cor. 9.26. 14.9. Ier. 20.9. Micha. 3.12.
Be your Prophets chamber grooms, to lay pillows, under sinful elbows? or
do their tongues cleave to the roof of their mouths? or speak they to the
Clouds, or in the Air? or is fearful Ieremy, become an example? Oh for woe.
Ah Syon, thou ploughed field, sometime, the beauty of the world? what is become
of thee? Oh England the present Bride, beware of widowhood, Psal. 19.5. Cant.
6.1.
the Bridegroom is come out of his chamber, go forth to meet him. He is gon
into his beds of spiceries, shall be find store? Cant. 4.13.
He feeds of flowers, where be his Lillies? Oh thrice happy land, perceive
thy present happiness, prevent a futuer horror, pray for the life of thy
Princely light, and harden not thy hart, 2. Sam. 21.17.
being still daily called in mercy. 1. Cor. 11. Luck. 13.3.5.
For this sin, many are sick, and many are dead, let the Remainder repent,
least ye all likewise perish. And now my beloved, and important charge, To.
12.1.
I beseech you by the mercies of God, remember with me, Amos. 1.2.. 3.4.
there is no plague but for sin, and the Lyon roars not, without his pray.
We are now under this growing plague with others, Zeph. 2.3.
let us repent effectually as others, which truly, Esa. 30.22.
seek the Lord, Cast our sins from us, and draw the Lords mercy to us.
Forget not what godly Sirach saith, Eccle. 10.8.
because of unrighteous dealing, and wrongs, and riches gotten by deceit, the
Kingdom, is translated, from one people, Hab^. 2.9.
to an other. Wo unto the buylder which builds with blood. And bewise to
understand this. Goods evil gotten, are of no long continuance. Finally let
this sentence summon you, before the last Tromp, sound for you. Go to now, In
5.1.2
ye rich men, weep and howl, for your miseries, that shall come upon you.
Your riches are corrupt, and your garments are moth eaten, your gold and silver
is canckered, and the rust of them, shall be a witness against you, and shall
eat your flesh, as it were fire. Ye heaped up treasures for the last days.
Behold: the hyer of your laborers, which have reaped your feelds (roomed your
ships) which is of you kept back, by fraud, cries, and their cry, is entered
into the ears of the Lord of Hosts. Iames, 5.1.2. c. Lay your selves open to
the Lord, for all things are apparent unto him, Pro. 28.13.
but he will have thee to accuse thy self, that he may forgive thee. He that
hides his sins (saith Salomon) shall not prosper, but he that confesses his
sins, and forsakes them, shall find mercy. Therefore take a good heart to
thee, bring repentance with thee, fall on your knees, 1. Tim. 2.8.
lift up pure hands, the whole in Church, in our great assemblies, the sick at
home, amids their children and families. Take these prayers (or such) into your
hands, send them heartily, up to God, in Christ our only Mediator, and fear
not to find mercy, with gracious deliverance, because, Pro. 50.15.
he hath so promised, saying: Call upon me in the day of thy trouble, and I
will hear thee, and deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify me. Math. 11.28.
And our saviour Christ doth tenderly inuit all penitent sinners thus. Come
unto me all you that travel and be heavy laden, and I my self will ease
you. To whom with the Father and the holy Ghost be always, all honour and
glory, one God everlasting. Amen.

A Prayer to God against the Plague.
WE prostrate our souls and bodies, before thy mercy seat, O Father of
mercies, humbly confess, that we have most justly procured, thy heavy
indignation against us. We have hitherto, spent our time in wanton appetites,
careless abuse, of thy singular bounties, but thou hast in mercy, curbed the
bit, straytned the rain, of our vnbrydled affections, whereby we begin to
dread thy threatened Judgements. Our sins are as manifold, as manifest, (O
Lord) we have daily heard ye word of our saving health, with ye ear of grudge
contempt, either deriding or not caring, but never truly repenting, at the cry
thereof. Thine abundant blessings erthie, we have greedily devoured, and by
our wealth, have increased our wickedness But O sweet Father have mercy, and
pardon our sins, (even the whole tree, with her braunching fruits,) which at
this present, we heartily disclayme, and wherewith, even the teeth of the whole
Land, hath been set on edge, namely infidelity, incredulity, and all
impiety. No faith, no truth, no mercy, no knowledge of thee in our harts,
though great pretence of thy Religion in our lips, but by falsehood, and
cunning circumvention, one of another, by lying lips, and decitfull tongues,
vanity, hath been tossed, one to another, pryuat pilffrie, and open stealth,
robbing at home, and roving abroad, swearing, forswaring, whorring and killing,
oppressing, deuoureing, to all our powers and policies, even blood unto blood,
passing by pleasure to pleasures, from profit to pride, from pride to
ambition, and in ambition, to inward contempt, outward disdain, each one of
another. Our common peace by thee, hath not yet procured our Godly peace with
thee, but rather we have taken occasion thereby, to harden our hearts against
thee, which mightily hath drawn thee to this great controversy with us. O
Lord vnbend (in mercy) thy bow of strength, for thy steeled Arrows, stick fast
in us, and our putrified wounds, bewray our iniquities. Yea Lord that more is,
if we by thee, turn not speedely to thee, the wise in thee, do behold thy
sharpened sword, with an outstretched arm, drawn out against us. O Lord hear
us, and heal us, for in this our sickness and trouble (in our mediator
Christ Iesus) we call unto thee. And Lord it is high time, for our head City
is sick, her Sister Cities groan under this burden, their neighbor people are
turned to their earth, and no part is free, from the noisome pestilence. It
flies by day, it walk in the dark, it destroys at noone tide, none can
resist it, but only thou O Lord, which sent it, even thou only (if thou wilt)
can utterly restrain it. O dear father forgive us wretched sinners, relieve
us miserable wretches, remember that we are but earth and ashes, yet in thy
mercy thy dear children: deliver us from death, and work life in us. Let
this thy loving rod, rid us, of our carnal rust, and quicken us with thy
sanctifying spirit, open our harts to thy holy word, purge our consciences from
all dead works, and rebuild us fit, for thy holy service, give us patience in
every adversity, an humble and regardant eye, in all prosperity, fervent
spirits to pray to thee, and now to give thee no rest, till thou vouchsafe to
have mercy upon us. Our Prince thine holy Anointed, prays for us, her
potetates, thy preaching ministers, and sanctified people, morn and lament.
Thy wydows, and desolate Orphans, yea thy small and tender Infants cry, lifting
up pure hands, sweet Lord, (say they) have mercy. And now O Lord both one and
all, pouring out the tears of our hearts unto thee, most humbly beseech thee,
relieve us, release us, hear us, forgive us, revive us, preserve us, protect
us, deliver us from evil, and receive us into thy everlasting favour, through
Iesus Christ our Lord: To whom with thee and the holy Ghost, three distinct
persons and one only our good God, be all honour and glory, for ever and ever.
Amen.

An earnest prayer for the Queenes most excellent Majesty.
O Lord God holy Father, infinitely wise, omnipotent, and abundant in mercy,
mighty in work, just in revenge, which for the common converse, of all men,
hast planted them plats, put them under sovereign auctoritie, through which
good government, they might most firmly, live and love one another, most wisely
ordaining each one, to have mutual need and occasioned intercourse one with
another* Sondry which Royal staves, of beauty and bands, eftsoones thou hast
broken into shieuers, when by overmuch provocation contempt, thy awonted long
suffering, hath been abused: as thereby under a sparing chastisement, to reduce
them, or by a deadly blow, utterly to subvert them. O Lord magnificent, by thee
it is, that Kingdoms are, and Kings do reign. Put down one, sets up
another, as, where, when it pleases thee, in all every place, under the Coape
of heaven. We thy chosen children and people of England, magnify thy mercies,
and praise thy power, for giueing preserving unto us, a most rare and
peerless Queen, our Sovereign Lady ELIZABETH, by whose sacred sceptre, thy
holy Church, this common weal, and many other Nations and people have found,
both celestial blessings, and terrestrial comforts. The faithful Protestant
from whersoeuer, finds here a secure fertile norcery. The wilful papist,
sits under his Vine, the malcontent carnal, hath long lasting favour, but
every of which by her, have from thee O Lord, thy gospel, to reclaim them,
her Sceptre, to protect them, with a sweet rod, in sparing hand to refine them.
Her disloyal subjects at home, her professed enemies abroad of all sorts, thou
hast miraculously brought under, or to utter confusion. For the which we
render unto thee continual praise. And inasmuch O Lord, as our life, the light
of the land thy golden Candlestick, is deadly darckned in the want of her,
Lord, still give us thy bountiful mercy, and therein preserve, her Highness,
long to reign over us. Increase, thy graces in her, her goodness to us, to
thaduaunce of virtue, suppression of vice. Keep thine anointed our Sovereign,
from the treachery of dissembling subjects, and malice of the foreign foe. Hide
her under the shadow of thy wings, from the noisome pestilence, and defend her
against the hurtful sword: that our selves and families, may live in peace,
our land, may yield her increase, that no invasion, Psal. 144.10.
may empeach us, or going out may daunt us, nor any crying be in our streets.

Dear Father grant her our Sovereign, a swift eye and speedy rescue, from
the subtle snare, of every wily hunter. Give her Lord, fast, and not faylling
confederats. Wise and faithful Councellors, loyal and loving subjects, and so
in thy mercy keep us from evil, that we provoke not, thy judgements, to
deprive us, of our chiefest comfort. Grant this O Father, through Iesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

The Preface.
MY Father having special care,
of Stepny his great charge:
Hath made sweet prayers for their comfort
their harts to God enlarge.
And I desirous of your health,
my brethren, Sisters all:
Have sent you these to train you up,
rather on God to call.
For th'health and wealth of our parents,
our selves and neighbours eke:
Pray we to God with one accord,
for so it is most meet.
And so my brethren fare you well,
with all my sisters dear:
God grant that we may give unto,
gods word attentive ear.
Antony Anderson, Junior.

A prayer for the infection of the plague. 1593.
O Lord our God omnipotent,
of mercy we thee crave:
Pour down thy truth most excellent,
that we the same may have.
And cease O Lord thy iry rod,
which doth opresse us sore:
And give us true repentance Lord,
that we may sin no more.
Cease now O Lord thy heavy hand,
the Father we entreat:
And let us in our harts thy word,
full often times repeat.
From thee O Lord we cannot fly,
Thy power doth so excel:
But keep from us we thee beseech,
thy rod which is most fell.
But give to us O Lord of might,
the pardon of our sin:
And take thy plague from us O Lord,
that here of long hath bin.
Give us O Lord thy holy word,
which always is most true:
And give us grace to praise thy name,
for praise to thee is due.
Remember blessed Lord thy flock,
which else is like to pine:
And take from us that heavy clog,
which loads us at this time.
Thy will be done O Lord of might,
as seems best to thee:
For thou wilt strike where thou think best,
no man a let can be.
When it shall please thy majesty,
to take this life away:
Receive our souls unto thy Throne,
to live with thee for aye.
O Lord preserve our noble Queen,
our realm and people both:
And keep us from the deadly fear,
of thine eternal wroth.
Grant our request O Lord of might,
for Christ his sake thy son:
And take away thy cruel plague,
that now is us among.
Finis
quoth Anthony Anderson, junior.


