A short treatise declaring the detestable wickedness, of magical sciences,
as Necromancy. Conjurations of spirits, Curious Astrology and such like.
(:)

Made by Francis Coxe,

Esaia. ^. Babell is fallen, it is fallen, and all: images of her hath he broke
unto y^ groi
Esaia. ^. Thy filthines shall be discovered, and t^ shame shall be scene. Stand
now amon thine enchaunters, and in the multitu^ of thy sothsayers, c. Let now
the Astr^logers, the star gazers, and Prognosticatours, stand up, end save
thee fro these things, c.
I. C.
Fl from the wrath that is to come
You filthy adders brood,
I cast that you perish in your sins
As guilty of your blood.
The wrath of God is kind lid
All such to consume quite,
That in the filthy soppes or dregs
Of Egipt do delight
Repent therefore I say to you
For mercy call betyme
And learn to hate the stinking mud
Uvhere wallow nune but swyne.
Here may you read the woeful end
Of such as wont to use
Those wicked arts that God abhors
In time such then refuse.
Finis.
I. P.
YOu wicked rout of sorcerers
For shame, your lives amend
Lest god doth pour such plages on you
As never shall have end
All such he doth right sore abhor
As scripture telth us plain
Repent therefore, and learns to hate
These wicked arts, most vain.
Let his sweet rod example be
Of late, you saw did fall
Into such as professed the like
Whom God now home doth call.
Bring forth new fruit, sob your sins
Lest double, ire doth light
On you that do refuse Gods grace
When have the same you might.
Finis.
To the good and gentle Reader.
ALthough, I lack such eloquece and learning, as is to be required in him,
which should compile any work to y^ praise, or dispraise of a thig, yet for y^
I have my self ben an offender in these most detestable sciences, against
whom I have compiled this work, as Astrology, Netroniancie, such like: I
thought it my part, for. ij. causes principal, the same to do. Whereof the one
is, y^ I would it should openly be known, howe wicked an offender I have
ben, both towards God, and the laws of my prince, y^ thereby I might give an
occasion too all men, too laud and praise God for his bountiful gifts of
grace, that when I deserved his eternal ire: yet he by his gentle and sweet
rod of correction, would call me again too y^ state of salvation, from which
I was fall. And also, to bless this God of merci, which hath appointed such a
merciful governor to rule and rain over us. Who as she is severe to punish
the obstinate and stubburne male factors, so uses she clementie too the
penitent trangresiors: whereof I of late sufficiently tasted, at what time I
stood before her graces most honourable counsel to receive determinate
sentence for my wicked offences. The second cause of this my labour is: that I
would deter and fear away, all such as yet do, or hereafter may by the
craftines of Satan be procured to the like. Wherefore gentle reader, I most
haretly beseech thee to take it in good part which thing, if thou shalt do: I
have my desire, who wissheth thee the eternal peace of God.

Francis Coxe.

In honore sanctissime Trinitatis.
Amongst other the Godly, wholesome and profitable sayings of the divine
Philosopher Plato: I call too my remembrance this one, as most necessary for
all Christians to be had in memory, which is this. Non solum nobinati sumus,
sed ortus nostri partim patria sibi vendicat, partim parents, partim amici
(that is to say) we are not born only for our selves, like brute beasts, to
seek y^ satisfiinge of our own desire or lust: but of our birth (says he)
our contrye chalegeth a part, our parents likewise, yea, our friends also.
Wherefore to enjoy any good, godly, or profitable things, or to reserve any
benefit or gift, by the means of other, or through our own travels and
diligent labour (if the same by any means may seem to sound to the glory of
God, the profit of our cotry, parents friends) in withholdinge or keeping back
the same, we shall not only trasgresse y^ comaudmets of almighty God, which
comaudeth us to do as we would be don unto: but also, if it shall be well
perceived diligently marked of such as are wise learned: we shall be found
manifest robbers spoilers of y^ high may sty of God, which hath imparted his
benefits so liberalli unto us for y^ setting forth of his glory finally show
our selves unnatural, both to our cotry, parents friends, hewraieng our great
ingratitude, not only towards God: but also toward our cotries. Amongst
(therefore) y^ inestimable heaps of wickedness, sin danation, foreseinge y^
proclinitie or redines of me, how apt prone they are to euel, also saying very
many to err go astray, especially by one means, whereby they detrude the
selves, even down to y^ botoles lake of vnspekeable offences, for so much as I
my self have beit, in y^ like disceiued, yea had almost vtterli perished, had
not y^ almighty power of god by his onipotetie and gifts of grace called me
back through most sweet gentle chastisemet. And also seeing well perceiving y^
craftines of wicked Satha, who (as S. Peter testefieth) goes about like a
rorig Lio, seking whom he may devour. To cause all touges to land his eternal
majesty, which hath so renouated or regenerated me fro y^ state of endless
death, into the which I was almost slipped, to show my self mindful therefore of
my love duty towards my cotry and friends, to whom next God and my prince I
am most chiefly bounden, and to aduoyde the filthy vice of ingratitude, then
the which nothing ca well be more odious: I thought it my part manifestly to
declare and open the wickedness of those arts and sciences, which hath of late
time to y^ provocation of Gods wrath and almighty displeasure, ben had in
such estimation, yea, rather veneration, that without it y^ whole state of men
(except a few) would do in manner nothing, yea, it grew into such credit with
men, that not only they judged the course of natural things thereby to be
governed, but also that part which god hath and doth reserve to him self, and
his determination, as the mind of man, and such like. Nay they seassed not
here, but so blinded and bewytched the wits of men, that scant durst they
credit God him self, if it seemed that their blinded prophesies any time would
make contradiction. How well this appeared in the year of our Lord God, 1559.
at what time our most noble souerain began her Imperial government reign over
us, all men may judge, and easily perceive. For although it was well know
unto all me, what love and godly zeal, her most royal majesty had and did
bear to the true prophets of God, his afflicted flock word of the cross,
yet did the people so waver, the whole realm was so troubled so moved with the
blind enigmatical and deuelish prophestes of that heaven gaser Nostravamus, in
such sort, that even those which in their hearts could have wished the
glory of God and his word most flourishing to be established: were brought
into such an extreme coldenes of faith, y^ they doubted God had forgotten
his promise, yea, they hong so choysly between the heavenly fountain of hope,
the bottomless pit of utter desperation: that in doubt it was to which they
would adhere or stick, so great was thinfectio of this pestileciall poisoned
lying prophesies. Of all poisons most difficult to avoid by mea nes of the
sweet and pleasant myxture thereof, wherefore it may be called dulce venenu.
Aswete and delicious poison: but as the proverb says, sweet meats haths
sower sauce, so is this sweetness tempered, with an everlasting bitterness or
gall:

For in these sciences Arologie, Geomacis, Necromancy and such like infinite,
contained under the general name of Magic but especially Necromancy, of which
here chiefly I purpose to speak, is one thing promised: but an other
performed, for why lest they seek riches: they find beggary, for hope of good
report: they have euel fame open shame, for health: diseases and grief, for
quiet minds: wandering wits. Of Christians: they become infideles, ^urninge
the temple of y^ holy Ghost into ^agoge of Satan. Therefore dear cotrymen,
flee frome these most wicked and damnable sciences of divination, manifestly
prohibited, by the sacred Scriptures and eternal word of God, let the love
of him, which for thy sake sweat both water and blood, and had his flesh
rent upon a cross, cause thee to withdraw thy mind from the snares of utter
despair. But if that may not prevail with thee: let the fear of revenge, at
least wise abate thy courage therein, and learn this lesson. Felix que faciunt
aliena pericula cautum. Happy and fortunate are they, whom other men's harms,
do cause to be ware.

The God of Gods who suffers no good deed tobe unrewarded, no wicked offence
vnpunisshed (which has said heaven and earth shall perish, but his word
shall endure) hath not only manifestly in diverse sundry places of the
scriptures forbid the use and exercise of such curious sciences: but also
hath appointed sharp punishment to the vsers thereof, that is no less then
death.

This godly and wholesome law was in time past executed within this realm, by
the terror whereof, many were feared from these practises, But now whilst
this law for lack of execution hath lain a sleep, and thoffendors nothing
punished: it was in such sort increased, that it was made a berye
handycrafte, so that many lived thereby, yea, thought they did as honestly
get and gather their substance: as he, which daily sweat for the same.

The people were grown unto such a folly, that scant would they ride or go
any journey: onelesse they cosultide, either with these blind prophets, or at
the least with their prophecies, which yearly to no little hurt, both in the
faith of Christ, wealth of the realm, were without all shame deuulgid.

What hurt it did in the faith before I have showed, what damage it procurid to
y^ commun wealth, my easly be judged, for what with their comminacions of
wars, and dearth, they so tickled the minds of unsatiable niggards, that
without al need, eve a midst the plenty: we lived yet in pen^urie. Well, to
my purpose, I promised to open the wicked and blasphemous secretes of these
deuelish sciences. And although I bend my self wholly to write against y^
superstitious and hellish practises of Necromancy, I do not exempt the
curious part of Astrology, frome the number of them: whose utter devastation
and cofouding before God, I most earnestly desire wish, for this I am able to
justify, have the like in my self experimented, that of a truth it is
Malorum esca, the very bait or train to fer greater mischeues. Never was
there any that could yet hold him self content with the simple knowledge of
Astrology: but would wade further in those sciences of prediction, having this
as ^ ground work to ser higher matters. I need not here to speak any more
of it, for who list to read the commendable work of fulce, uttered too the
same intent, shall find of what force it is. But this I know that what ever
is contained within their books, which they esteem, as principal rules and
pillars of their knowledge to be nothing else but mere fables, and toys, that
in them there is no truth at all. Experience therein have I had diverse and
sondry kinds, not by the judgment of one or.ij. but a number, yea, even of
the chefest and most expert, amongst whom I shall recyte the judgment of
one, form of his calculation. The question was moved for stolen gods, the
hour was by an instrument exactly take, the Astrologer draws the form of
y^.xij. houses, so calculateth for the time, which had, he domineth, now in his
forsayde calculation moved with talk, and forgetting him self (as he afterward
confessed) where he should have subtracted: he added, and by that means
placed y^ sign that should have ben ascendinge: in the.vii. house, and so
contrarely, that sign which should have ben in the.vij. house placed he in
the first, whereby all his work was turned vpsidedoun, as we properly term it,
the carte set before the horse, yet he not finding this his great error, gave
judgment, that it should be had again, so fell it out, that it was
recovered. Whereupon may easly be gathered, that if he had calculated right,
according to the rules of art, he should have quite missed the cushion.

O how certain a science is this trow ye, and of how good a ground? Yet will
they presume to enter in judgements of the secrete motions of men, which God
hath reserved to his own proper knowledge. I would such did remember this
disticon of wise Cato.

Mitto arcana dei celuq{que} inquirere quid fit?

Cu sis mortalis que sunt mortalia cures. He teaches them wherein to be
accupied, and not to meddle with y^ mysteries of God. Yea, this he says more
unto them, eve in the same book following thus.

Quid deus intendat, noli perquirere sort

Quid statuat de te, sine te deliberet ipse; These are the presumptuous imps of
Satan, which ca not yet be cotet here to seek out according to y^ hardness of
their hearts, (as Paul to the Romains the.ij. Chapter testifies) seas not to
heap unto them selves; wrath, against the day of wrath. For y^ stars skies
are not sufficient for their future prediction: but they must adioyne thereunto
most detestable parts or societye with spirits. Which thing, when they go
about, would have any thing brought to effect, they do it by one of these.ij.
means: either besides the horrible grievous blasphemies, they commit in their
coiuratios, they must fall to some copositio with y^ deuell, that is too promise
him for his service, he will abstayn fro wynes, or some certain meates, or
drinks. As I my self knew a Priest, not far fro a toun, called Bridgewater,
whcih as it is well know in the contrye, was a great magicia, in all his life
time, after he once began these practises, he never would eat bread, but in
stead thereof did eat always chese, which thing as he confessed diverse times, he
did because it was so concluded between him the spirit, which served hi, for at
what time he did eat bread: he should no lodger live. Yea, he would not blusshe
to say y^ after a few years he should dye, that the deuel for his pains y^ he
toke with him, should have in recopece his soul. O most miserable ma wretched
creature that would in hope of any earthly treasure: forsake his Lord, God,
which had so tenderly bought him. These are they, of whom Paul speaks in
his.vi..x. chapters to the Hebrews, these are they y^ crucify Christs again
unto them selves, and therefore it is impossible, they should be reuewed again
by repentance.

The second way, which is as euel as the first, or rather worse: is thus.
For when the spirit is once come before the circle, he forth with demands
the exsorciste a sacrifice, which most commenlye is a piece of wax
cosecrated, or hallowed after their own order (For they have certain books,
called books of consecration) or else it is a chic, a lapwing, or some living
creature, which when he hath received: then doth he fulfil the mind of the
exsorcist, for oneles he hath it, he will neither do, neither speak any
thing. Of this testefieth bacon in his book of Necromancy, where he tells
also this story. After so long time travelled in these sciences, at last joined
him self with a Turk, which was most excellently scene therein, and lunge
conferring together: they went about too call a certain she deuell, named
Egippia, which spirit would by no means make them answer to any their
demands, whereupon Bacon, which knew that nothing could be done without
sacrifice: cruseth the Turk to be baptised, and after the baptism, they both
entered the circle called the spirit, which when she came: for all their
conuirations she would not

(...) God of his justice ca neither leave y^ workmaister, neither yet him that
seeks to any such for help, unpunished. For as well deserves he execution
that seeks to them: as they them selves.

Example of this: we have in the first book of Samuel. called communly the
first book of the Kings, in the.xxviij. Chapiter. For after y^ Saule went once
to wytches sorcerers to learn his state: God gave him up quite into utter ruin.
If then he were so precise with his own peculier people, that the spared not
their king and anointed: what will he do unto us? How much more think ye
will he execute his righteous judgements on us, that are but the brauches of
the wild Olyue tree, grafted in by his mercy and grace?

I can not se how they may excuse them selves of crime by Gods word, that
either seek too them or procure them too work, for both, by the scripture
deserve like payne, and punishment. Yea, the Deuell him self is of that
condition, that he will not suffer them lunge to reyg^ that use him as an
instrument for their necessities. I remember a very notable history writ in
Frosarte; but the time is so long since I read it, I well remebre not the place,
but who so lists to loke in y^ tables of his book: may easly find it, where
he writes of Ortho a spirit. Theffect is this, a priest a certain gentleman,
falling at variauce, and the gentleman seming styll too persevere in his
purpose: the priest to abate his courage, and to make him yield: sends unto
him the foresaid spirit Orthon, to molest and trouble him, which coming
about the quiet time of the night, when all things are most styllest: he
clappeth the wyndowes and doors, as though he would have toren them to pieces.
The gentleman, regards it not, the next night he doth likewise, but a great
deal more fiercely, in so much that it seemed he would have entered the
gentleman's bed chaumbre, wherewithal his spirits moved: soddenly asked who was
there. The spirit answers, tells his name, shows him fro whom he was
sent, and to what end as is aforesaid. Well says the gentle man, wilt thou
be contetid to serve me, and leave thy master the priest? He answers yea,
and so they concluded. The office of this spirit was to bring him news out
of all places of the world what was done, within the space of.xxiiij. hours,
which thing he did.

After a while, this gentleman being very desirous to se his new man (for as
yet though he heard him, he never saw him) requested him earnestly that he
might see him, which thing at the last he granted (and says) when ye
arise in the morning, the first strange thing you se, after you be up: the
same is I, so he departed. In the morning the gentleman arising and casting
on his night goune, he might se three russhes stand upright, and move
inform, as though they danced the hay, but this pleased him not, wherefore at
night when he came to him again, he challenges the spirit with the breach of
his promise, which he could in no wise a bide, for though he be never so
vntrewe, deceitful: yet may ye not charge him therewith. And therefore asks
his master what strange thing he saw? he answered nothing but.ij. or.iij.
russhes drive up down with a wind.

The same quod Orthen was I. Nay says his master, I would se the more
near thy shappe, which after earnest request he granted, and says, the
first living thing that ye se out of your gallery in the morning in your
court: the same am I.

The morning coming he goes unto his gallery, which looks into his
court, and behold, there he saw the mosteroust sow and lean, that could
be, whereupon moved with the sight, caused dogs to be set at her, and so he
baited her, but immediately he falls sick, and so from time to time, pyneth
away.

A worthy servant too serve a noble man, full well he rewarded his master in
the end. Neither was it any otherwais but as they are wont all to do.

For this is no new or rare thing amongst those that use society with
Devils, for all have the like end, though not after one form, yet to one
effect. Bakons end was much after the like sort, for having a greadye
desire unto meat: he could cause nothing to enter the stomach, wherefore
thus miserably he starved to death.

Cornelius Agrippa, of whom all the world speaks, whose works remain
unto this day, of whose end are diverse opinions, some rumours have ben, that
when he rode abroad, he had always a black dog, waytinge upon him, which
dog one day in iourneinge: carried him away body and soul, some say that the
sword seperate his headde from the body, so that his end is uncertain and
most like it is that he endid after some strange sort, that the truth
thereof is no more manifest.

Fabiane in his Cronicles, the seventh part. and where he writes of Carolus
the eyghte, speaks of a certain maid, expert in these sciences, called La
pucelle de dieu, that is too say: the maid of God, who by her knowledge
caused the Frenchmen marueylouslye too prevail in their martial affairs, as
more copiously doth in the alleged place appear.

But almighty God, which for^ ^son suffers such sorcerye and dyuelishe
ways too prosper and raygne, too the correction of sinners: lastely too show
his power, and that no good Christen men should fall intoo any error: he
shows the clearnes of such mystical things, and so he did in this, for she
by a knight Burgonion was taken, and after sent to Roane in Normandye, too the
duke of Somerset, and there brent, for her de merits.

Saint Dunstane (of whom Bale in his book entitled the acts of the English
votaries writes sufficiently, being one of this sort and faculty, after
diverse sondry prodigeous signs in the element scene: departed this life, a
swarm of deuels couaying away his corps.

Ihon Grecian, that coniuringe Pope, after he had done many deuelish things,
as testifies Martin{us} Carsulanus Platina in la Pontificum: was of the
deuell (as he was dooinge his feats in a forest) strangled to death.

What may we say of Stansholde of late time, which was expert in these
scieces, which for robbing of a college, in the university of Oxforde, was
hanged at the towns end for his demerits. Many have ended their lives after
these such like sorts, of whom if I should write: it would conteyne an
infinite volume, and that is most horrible, where thou see one repent: a
number are so soddenly taken, that they have no time of repentance.

Wherefore I say to such of that sort, repent and amede your lives, you
Adders broad, and learn by him that hath felt the smart, to fl from greater
mischeues too come, for even now is the axe put unto the rote of the tree,
therefore defer no time. And now^ th^e that hereafter shall be moved by the
provocation of the deuell, either to practice the like, or to seek for
counsel or advice of them that do use and practise these blasphemous
sciences: know ye, that even as the good corn is with the fan purged from the
chafe: so all those be separated from the elect and chosen of God, as in the
former part of my treatice, I showed by thexample of king Saule.

God him self hath promised in his most holy and sacred scriptures no less to
do, also for the punishment of such, has by his own decre, in the.xx. of
Leuiticus appointed sharpe correction, saying. And if a man or woman have a
spirit of divination or sothsaying in them: they shall dye the death, they
shall stone them to death, their blood shall be upon them.

A most worthy punishment for such rebellious traitors. For if we judge
him worthy of death that euel reports of an earthely prince: what shall we
say by him that blasphemes the king of all kings, his Lord and only
saviour? They can not say that ignorance is y cause of their euel disposed
life, for God hath manifestly forbidden the use thereof, not in one, or two
places: but in sondrye.

Thus he says Deuteronomie the.xviii. when thou shalt come into the land,
which the Lord thy God gives thee: thou shalt not learn to do after the
abominations of those nations, let none be found among you that makes his
son or his daughter to go through the fire, or that uses wytheraft, or a
regarder of times, or marker of the fleinge of fowls, or a sorcerer, or a
charmer, or y^ counsayleth with spirits, or a soothsayer, or that asks
counsel at the dead. For all that do such things, are abominatio unto the
Lord. c.

Lo, here he not only forbids the use: but commands that those, which
will be his people, and of his flock: shall not seek help at the sorcerers
hands. Rede the. xxx of the prophet Isaiah, and there shall ye find, how he
reproves the children of Israell for sekinge too the Egiptians for help, who
were counted expert in deuelishe arts. Ieremiah in his.x. Chapiter says:
Hear the word of the Lord that he speaks unto you: O house of Israell.

Thus says the Lord, learn not the way of the Heathen, and be not a feared
for the signs of heaven, thought the Heathen be afraid of such, for the
customs of the people are vanity. O how direct are the laws of the Lord?
how plain are his paths? how sweet are they to them that fulfille them, for
it preserves them from endless death and payne.

If we do embrace and follow them, we shall not only be sure here in this
world to live without dredde or fear, safe from our enemies, both boddely,
and ghostely: but after this life, we shall be crouned with the croune of
everlasting joy, and felicity.

Where as the contrary, and such as will take no admonission, but live
inordinately, shall be condemned to everlasting terror, whose torments, no
tongue is able to express.

This God of mercy has offred his grace, wherefore refuse it not, but with
all humble hearts embrace it, beseeching him so to strengthen you with his holy
spirit, that this life endid, we may hear this comfortable saying of our
Saviour: Come ye blessed children of my Father, possess ye the kyngedome,
prepared for you, fro the beginning of the world. Too the which Father, Soon,
and holy Spirit, be eternal laudes, praises, empire, and glory, worlds
without end.

AMEN.
Finis.

