THE COSMOGRAPHIcal Glass, containing the pleasant Principles of Cosmography,
Geography, Hydrographie, or Navigation. Compiled by VVilliam Cuningham Doctor
in Physic.

Excussum Londini in officina Ioan. Daij Typographi. Anno. 1559.

In this Glass if you will behold
The Sterry Sky, and Earth so wide,
The Seas also, with winds so cold,
Yea and thy self all these to guide:
What this Type mean first learn a right,
So shall the gain thy travail quite.


DROICT ET LOYAL



TO THE RIGHT honourable the Lord Robert Duddeley, of the most noble Order of
the Garter Knight, Master of the Horse, to the Quenes most excellent
Majesty: and his singular good Lord, and Master. c.
DAEDALVS THAT EXcellent Geometrician (right honourable) whanas with the eyes of
knowledge, he did behold that horrible Moster Ignorace, he therewith praesently
conceived such intollarable grief, that he daily sought occasion ether how to
banish her his praesence and company: or else by what means to escape, out of
her loathsome Labyrinthe. At length, perceiving she could not be banished, he
praepared wings (through Science aide) and so did fly out of her most
filthy Prison: according to the pleasant Poet.

Daedalus fabrifactis alias Coelum ipsum adiuit.
He made him wings where with to fly:
Ascending to the Sterrye Sky.
Yea this Monster have in all ages been accounted so deformed and Vile, that
those whose company she frequented, were reputed not in the number of
reasonable Creatures: but of brute beasts. For what doth man differ from a
beast in nature, if he (leaving reasons rule) follow his sensual appetite as
they do? Or wherein doth he so near approach unto God in likeness: as by
Science, and Knowledge? for this thing is proper to God only, to know all
things: and unto beast to be in all things ignorant, except in such as there
senses and custom teach them. Which has engendered such immortal hate
towards this loathsome wight, least man should lose his name and dignity, that
he invented all Arts, sought out all Secretes, and laboured through curious
works, to bring her into perpetual exile. But now in these days, lest she
should return again (admonished by these examples) I though one of least
strength and force, yet not of least good will, have devised this mirror, or
Cosmographical Glass. In which, me may behold not one or two personages, but
the heavens with herplanets and stars, th*Earth with her beautiful Regions,
and the Seas with her marvelous increse. So that she shall not (if men be
diligent) creape into any of these places, without espyeng. Yet considering
with my self, howe that Ignorance hath left no small number of her friends
among us, which seek to deface both science and her servants, I have no other
refuge to keep this my Glass from perishing, then to be an humble suitor unto
your honour (which doth not only favour Science, but also have given her
within your breast a reastinge place) that it may come forth under your noble
protection: and be defended as Teucer was under the shield of mighty Aiax,
against two sorts of men especially. Of which, th'one will dispraise and
despise such things as they never red, and are utterly ignorant in. The other
sort will of mere arrogacy il report al men's travails, how exact and perfect
so ever they be, they them selves (like Dracns) remaininge without profit. As
for the learned, wise, and modest, I am sure will not rashly give sentence: but
if faults escape, either friendly admonish: or else with pen speedily amend
it* unto which suit I am the more bouldened, remembering as well your excellent
virtues, and gifts of nature, which for fear of suspicion of flattery I
overpass, as to all men evident: as also your Lordshippes incoragement of me
to knowledge, both in words and most liberal rewards. Wherefore, if it
shall please your honore to take this simple work into your tuition, and be
Patron unto it: I shall be bouldened (God granting life) to present you
also with other of my labours, the Titles of which follows.

1 An Apology Lib. ij. 2 A new Quadrat, of no man ever published. Lib. ij. 3
The Astronomical Ring. Lib ij 4 Organographia. Lib. iij 5 Gazophilacion
Astronomicum. Lib. xvj 6 Chronographia. Lib. xij 7 Comentaries in Hippocrates
de Aere, Aquis, Regionibus. Lib. iij
With diverse others, whose names I omit for sondry causes. Thus I leave at
this present, to trouble your honour with my rude Letters, prayeng God to
grant you long life, continual health, increase of honour: and after this life,
a place of Joy, and comfort.

Your Lordshippes most humble Seruaunt, W. Cuningham Physician.

Gilberti Barcklei Grimbiens. sacrae Theologiae Profess. in Speculum
Cosmographicum (...).
Machina conspicui variis pulcherrima mundi
Digna modis la cognitione venit.
Mira Creatoris patet hinc Sapientia, Virtus,
Et Bonitas, cui sit semper habendus honos.
Quod grauis Aegyptus, quod Athenis Graecia rerum,
Quod docuit Musis aemula Roma suis:
Hocce Cuninghamus studijs Gulielmus acutis
Anglus in hoc libro Nordouicensis agit.
Thomae Langlei Cantabrigiensis ad Lectorem Carmen.
Si totam toto diuisus ab orb Britannus
Noscere Tellurem, si Mare percupiat,
Climata, quinque Plagas, Circlos, positusque Locorum,
Sydereos cursus, Tropica Signa, Polos,
Quaeque Dies tenebris aequant, quae tempora mutant,
Lumine cur Phoebus, Lunaque deficiant,
Gadibus occiduis ater quam dissidet Indus,
Et quantum distent a Scythe, Maurus, Arabs,
Spacia metiri, terras describere, vrbes
Praestantes charta pingere in exigua,
Nomina ventorum, Classes maria omnia circum
Ducere, ad portum quamque, refer suum,
Qui quibus (...), quique (...),
Vmbras qui varient: haec docet iste liber.
En Strabo, Sollinus, Plinius, Mela, Ptolomaeus,
Libris ac tabulis quae docuere suis,
Vnus cuncta tibi monstrat liber iste legenti:
Aere potes paruo, discere multa breui.
Haec Cuninghamus sparsim diffusa coegit
Sedulus instar apis, quo tibi prosit Opus.
Effecit primus, vt (...) nostras
Effingat voces: Momus hic esse cave.
Dystichon eiusdem.
Hic mundi tractus, terras, Mare, Sidera, Ventos,
Vmbras, atque situs, spacia quanta, skies.
Authoris (...).
Vis Terrae Tractus? Pelagi vis noscere fluxus?
Hoc tibi descripsi (candid lector) opus.
portrait

THE PRAEFACE OF THE Author, setting out the dignity, and Ample use of
Cosmography.
IF EVER THERE were Art for all mes use invented, Science set forth wherein
consists Sapience, or Treasure worthy to be had in estimation: no doughte
(loving Reader) either Cosmography is the same, or else it is not to be found
upon th'Earth. For if we do well consider with our selves what her office is,
there is no man I suppose, so mean witted, but will confess her ample use,
nor yet so simply learned but must acknowledge her manifold benefits. And if I
shall begin with the defence of our Country, which ought to be more praecious,
the Parents wife Children or Consanguinity, Cosmography herein do so much
profit, that without it both valiant Courage, Policy and Puisaunce oftentimes
can take no place. For by her we are taught which way to conduct most safely
our ooste, where to pitch our tents, where to winter: yea, and where most
aptly to encounter with them in the field. Which thing Alexander the mighty
Conqueror understanding, accustomed to have the Map and Carte of the
Country, by his Cosmographers set out, with which he would war. Commanding
it also to be hanged in open markets for all men to behold, whereby the
Capitaines did for see, and seek out where was the easiest places to arrive,
and the Soldiers allured with the commodities of the Countries, were made the
willinger to the thing. This was it which got him so many victories, and made
him so great a Coqueror. This was it which obtained the Romanes their fame,
more then there force and strength. This has been to all men profitable, and
injurious to no man. On the contrary part, what damage, yea utter subuertion
has followed to most noble Princes, and valeaunte Capitaines through
Ignorance of this Art, histories full well can testify. And that among many,
I may resight one Example, was not the mighty pertian King Cyrus (who had
brought Babilon, and all the East parts in subjection) vanquished withal his
army of Tomyris the Scythia Queen, at the River Oaxis, as he should have passed
over? what shall I speak of Agamemnons army in the Trojan wars: of the
Persians, against the Leonidians: or of Crassus, against the Partheans: which
ware them selves destroyed, or made captive, their wives children and family
spoiled, and their country most ruinously subverted, for want of Cosmography.
Also, as touching the study of divinity, it is so requisite, and neadfull,
that you shall not understand any book, ether of the old law or Prophets (yea I
had almost said, any part of a book, or Chapter of the same) being in this Art
ignorant. For what number of places, Lands, Regions, Cities, Towns,
Mountains, Seas, Rivers, and such like, is there to be found in every Book? How
often doth father Moses in his. v. books, make mention of Babilon, Sinehar,
Armenia (in whose hills, No his Arc stayed after the universal deludge)
Assure, Charan, Caphdorim or Caldaea, Aegipt called of the Hebrues Mizraim,
Syria (divided into three parts, Mesopotamia, Arabia, and Aethiopia,) with
infinite like places, which without Cosmography can nether be rightly
understand, or yet truly expounded? What contention, and strife, have there
sprung in all ages among the Interpreters of the scriptures, touching the
situatio of Paradise: their own works most euidentlye bear witness. All
they agree in this point, that it is a place of joy, reast, and abounding in
all kind of pleasures, but yet as touching the situation, some understand it
spiritually: some imagine it ether in heaven or in the harts of the quiet and
faithful: other affirm it a place in th'Earth at this praesent yet remaining,
but is so kept with Angels that no man may come to it: some say it is in the
East part of the world, above the middle reagion of the Aere, and so is free
from the violence of all winds. Other suppose it to be in the burning Zone,
under the Equinoctial: So that not two in this point do accord. But yet of all
the rest, there opinions seems most fond, which place it in the middle region
of the Aere, and also those, that understand it spiritually, for that the
scripture affirms it to be in the Earth, and the. iiij famous floods
(Euphrates, Hidekel now called Tigris, Gihon, which many interpret Nilus, and
Phison at this day named Ganges (to come from thence. These things I bring in
only as example, to prove the necessary use of it in divinity, and not to
dispute ether of Paradise or his situatio, seeing it belongs not to my
profession, and office. Moreover man health (without which Honour, Fame,
Riches, Friends, and Life it self, seems both troublous, and noisome) can
not be conserved in perfect estate, or once lost be recovered and restored
without Cosmography. For howe greatly herein it profits, to consider the
temperature of Regions, Cities, and Towns, in what Zone, under what Climate
and Parallele they are situated: Hippocrates doth plainly set out. Yea it
might seem superfluous, to show how both he Galenus, commanded there pacients
to remove from one place, to an other (especially in lunge sickness) because
of the alteration of the Aere. What it avails also, to know the natures of
waters, the quality pertition of winds, the manners complexions of the
inhabitants all Physicians right well do understand. And to conclude, in the
election of simples, as stones, treis, rotes, herbs, gummes, earths, metals,
beasts, fowls, fishes, what light springs by considering the country from
whence they are brought: I suppose no man of that profession, is ignorant. In
the making, ordaining laws, for brideling mans froward appetide, Cosmography
is not vnfrutfull. For she sets out the natures of all people, the laws and
statutes by which they are governed, the sequel of every decre established.
Grammarians also, can not fully understand the pleasant invention perfect
sense of the witty Poets, but by Cosmographies aide, because of the names of
Regions, Cities, Towns, waters, fluddes, mountains, ceremonies, people and
monsters, which every Poet do commenlye introduce, in all their writings. I
omit for brevity, the incredible benefits, which spring by reading of
Histories: the beauty, ornature of which, consists in the description of
countries, names of people, nature of the inhabitants: which remain as
unknown of the inexperte of Cosmograghie. Moreover, the famous merchant,
have by it not only enriched them selves, but also their country: fineding out
such commodities, as without it should remain, as not known. Yea that is
daily more more perceived, for what country, or Island, is not in our age
searched out? what shall I herein speak of Vesputius Americus, who (by his
knowledge in Cosmography) found out America, the.iiij. part of the world,
(unknown in all ages before our time) to the great benefits of all Europe. I
may seem to utter that all men know, in making rehearsal of the Indians,
Calicute, Ginea, the. v. Ilandes Moluccae, also Porne, Sololi, infinite other,
which are the fruit of Cosmography in this our age. Mariners travellers on
the seas (without which no realm can long stand, or mans life be sustained) are
bound to acknowledge Cosmographies benefits. For it sets forth there
ports, it shows there course, it declares the ordre of winds, it warns
them of rocks, shaloues, sands, infinite like dangers. In travailing by land,
her tables poynteth which way to follow, that thy iornay may be spedier, safe,
short, pleasant, where you shall ascend up to hills, where to pass over waters,
where to walk through woods, and where most aptly to remain at night. If al
these were not (as it serves to infinite uses more then time will permit to
repeat,) yet this one were sufficient to keep it in honour, that by it, in so
small a lump, or piece of clay, beholding such strange forms of men, beasts,
fowls, and fishes: such diversity of times, such burning hills, such
marvelous stones, metalles plants, we are enforced to confess the
omnipotency, and wondrous work of God. This is it, that provoked Dioscorides
to leave cities, towns, travail into deserts, woods, to search the nature of
herbs This caused Atlas, Ptolomaeus, Alfonce, to be so diligent in setting out
the heavens course, form of this earthly mansion. The vtilitye of this, alured
Orpheus, Solon, Democritus, Pythagoras, Eudoxus, Plato, Hipparchus, Polybius,
Strabo, an hundredth more of the ancient Philosophers, to leave their country,
friends acquaintance, not doubting perel of the seas, dagers of enemies, loss of
substance, werines of body: or anguish of mind. Yea the sweatnes thereof was so
great that Strabo after his travails said, that if any art were requisite for
a Philosopher: it was Cosmography. And Homer called Vlisses the wi sest among
the Graecians, because he knew the natures of people, and the diversity of
nations: Adding, that his eloquence, prudence, fortitude, constancy, other
like virtues (mete for a man) ensued of his perigrinations, travails, which
remaining at home, he should never have learned by any precepts, discipline, or
teacher. But seeing diverse in our age are desirous of knowledge no less then
the Philosophers were, yet can not travail for the discord of nations, the
sondrye sectes of people, and diverse other impediments, our refuge is, to say
with Propertius.

Cogor et e Tabula, pictos ediscere Mundos. In Tables set out, Countries to
decern
Constrained am I, and eke for to learn.
In which, I had almost (through making over much hast) forgotten to resight
the benefits we receive of Cosmography: in that she delivers us from great
and continual travails. For in a pleasant house, or warm study, she
shows us the hole face of all the Earth, withal the corners of the same. And
from this perigrination, thy wife with sheadinge salt tears, thy children
with lamentations, nor thy friends with words shall dehort persuade the. In
travailing, thou shalt not be molested with the inclemencye of the Aere,
boisterous winds, stormy shores, hail, Ise, snow. Coming to thy lodging,
thou shalt not have a churlish unknown host, which shall minister meat twice
sodden, stinking fish, or watered wine. Going to rest, thou shalt not fear
lowsy beds, or filthy sheates. In Somer, the soon with his fiery beams,
shall not vex thee: nor yet in winter, stormy Saturnus shall make thy beard
frozen. In sailing, thou shalt not dread Pirates, fear Peries and great
winds, or have a sick stomach through vnholsome smells. Therefore these
things considered, who is not incoraged to achieve such an interprice, as shall
redound to his countries fame, his perpetual memory? what wise man doth not
delight to read such things, as Emperors, Kings Princes have painfully
travailed in, esteming there labours plentuouslye rewarded, with the fruit of
this Art? But least these my words, should stir up the greadye appetides of
diverse to this knowledge, then to want herein that might satisfy the same,
behold I have compiled this my Cosmographical glass. By which, such as are
delighted in travailing as well by land, as water, shall receive no small
comfort (If I be not deceived) the other sort, by it may also protract, set out
particular cards for any country, Region, or province: or else the universal
face of the earth in a general Map. First if they describe Parallele
circles in the Map, answering to the like circles in the heavens: by the
right or crooked Horizont, the equinoctial, polary circles, and altitude of the
pole, to limit out the Zones, Climates, Paralleles of Longitude, and Latitude:
which being once praepared, you shall place there in the countries, hills,
fluddes, seas, fortresses, Ilandes, cities, deserts, such like (according to
the praecepts of the art) as are placed on the plate form of the earth. And
that the praeceptes might seem the more facile plain, I have reduced it into
the form of a Dialoge: the names of the personages in dede fained, but yet
most aptly serving our institutio. In which Spoudaeus (repraesenting the Scho
ler) makes doubts, asks Questions, obiecteth: yea, some time, digresses
not from the fond imaginations of the gross witted. Unto which, Philonicus
(supplying th'office of a teacher) answers to to all th'obiections, gives
praeceptes. What diligence I have given in time of the Printing, to the
correction hereof, and also in diuisinge sundry new Tables, Pictures,
demonstrations, praeceptes: that you may easily judge by reading the same
work. Also what charges the Printer hath sustained, that his good will might
not be wanting, that shall be evident conferring his beautiful Pictures letters,
with such works, as herto hath been published. And thus I leave the with my
Cosmographicall Glass, requiring that these my travails labours, be not
rewarded with ingratitude, or ill report. And if for the difficulty of the
work, any error escape: remember I am the first that ever in our tongue
have written of this argument, therefore am constrained, to find out the path.
which if it be not at this time made plain, smothe pleasant: if God grant
life, leisure, I trust so to tread it again, that both night and day (walking
in the same) thou shalt not miss of the desired Port. Again fare well,
favour me, as I wish thy furderaunce in knowledge.

At Norwich, the xviij. of July. 1559.
THE FIRST BOOK OF THE Cosmographicall Glass, containing the necessary
Principles required in this Art: and therefore is an Isagoge, or Introduction
unto the hole work.
The Interloquutors* Philonicus. Spoudaeus.


Spoudaeus. LATELY calling to my remembrance the Race that every ma in this
his trasitory life have to run: and that faults committed in this course,
for want of time, can scarslye with great difficulty, Men happiest
labour, and diligence, any thing be amended: I was of force compelled, to
confess Time the grea test treasure.
those most happy, which use this time (being so great a treasure) as
repentance may take no place. And on the other part, those most miserable me
(yea, rather Images, Men most unfortunate.
and pictures of men, then very men in dede) which employ their busy cure
care, in stealing, Idleness, vayn pastimes, long sleapes, dronkennes, lascivious
toying, swe ring, scraping and gathering of Plutos corn together, as though
they had more time, then might be well spent in the exaltyng of Virtue,
supplating of Uyce, and profiting their Country, Friends, and Consanguinity.
In time past, following only nature as Ruler and guide, men did more earnestly,
(and as it wear with an insatiate mind) seek Uertu for her self, and abhor
Uise, for the horrible name thereof: the we do in our days, having both Nature,
Gods precepts, and politic laws, as our Capitaines and lodesmen. Which
abuse of time, is the greatest cause, that men in our age, are not comparable
Why men in our age, are not so learned as they were in old time.
in any thing to those of times past. For how many sondry Arts, secrete
Sciences, and wonderful Ingens, throwgh well spending of time, did the
ancient Philosophers in their days invent? Archimedes deuisyd glasses, with
which the Siracusians might burn their The fruit spri ging of well spent
time.
enemies far distant, on the seas from them. Ptolomaeus, Atlas, and Alphonsus
(being kings) found out the marvelous course and sondry motions, of the
supercelestiall bodies: writing sondry volumes of them, to the great comfort of
such, as are living at this present. Appollo, first found Physic the
repayrer of health. And in like manner, some one thing, and some an other, of
whose Godly travels so many precious monuments yet remain: yea and the
Authors them selves (being dead so many hundred years sense) are as fresh in
the mind of ma, as it were but yesterday, such is the reward of vertuouse
travel. But whom do I se walking in yonder grene place, among the pleasant
birds, flowers, and trees, is it not Philonicus? It is he: I will go and
salute him. God the giver of all sapience and science, save you (right reverent
Philonicus.) I account my self happy, that I have found you: for now my hope
is, to be delivered (although not of all yet) of some of the bonds, and
chains, of Ignorance.


Philonicus. You are vnfaynedly welcome to me at this present: and like as your
name is Spoudaeus: so you What Spoudaeus signifies
do in no point degenerate fro the same: but are diligent in seking knowledge,
eschewing idleness, and vain pastimes.


Spoudaeus. That I learned, taking at you example: for you ever keeping
perpetual war with ignorauce, The interpretation of Philonicus.
and vise of every kind: (for reward whereof virtue also gave you that name) do
use to read, and revolve the tree sure of Sapiece, I mean, the secrete works
of Nature shut up, or rather contained, in the worthy and ancient writers. And
in reading certain of them, I have found not only matters of great
difficulty: but also (as to me it seems) of much vntruthe.


Philonicus. You must judge well of their labours which have before our days
written: for time brings The old wryters excused.
things to their perfection. If we without any ground, should by our
vigilance, find out such mysteries, yea and (as I may term them) hid
secretes of Nature: I assure you, we should have left many more errors to our
posterity, then they have in their writings unto us. Yea and there are many
things which seem false and untrue: because the gross capacities, of
unlearned persons, can not readily comprehend the same. But whereof do those
Authors entreat, in which you have so lately travelled?


Spoudaeus. They be wryters of Cosmography, Geography, Hydrographie, or
Navigation. But because that ether they observe no order, or Methode in their
teaching, ether that they digress from that they take in hand (and fill their
volumes with other scieces, rather then Cosmography.) I have very little
profyted by my travel.


Philo. I rejoice that your fortune was to take in hand such authors. For
Cosmography in my judgment is mete for every estate, and most excellent of
all other natural science. Wherefore be you nothing discomfortid, and amasyd
with the difficulty of their writing. For howe much the thing transcende in
worthynes other knowledge not so plausible: so much the more it is companion
with dificultie. And where as you allege, that the most part of them observe
no Methode, and order: in that I will do my endeavour, (as also in the other,
where place shall require) to suplie that want in that behalf.


Spoud. You shall meruailouslye encourage me, and take away the greatest
trouble in this my study, if you do not only show me the knowledge thereof in
such order, as I may best conceive it: but also explicate, and open such
placis, as are obscure and dark for me to understand.


Philo. Yet before we take in hand this study, there is one thing, of which
I must have knowledge (that is) whether you have red any authors of
Arithmetic, Arithmetic and Geometry necessary for this art.
and Geometry: else you had best read some of them, and resort to me again at
some other convenient season.


Spoud. Yes sir I have red the ground of Arts, The whestone of wit, and
the path way.


Philonicus. That I am glad to understand: so shall it be the easier for me to
instruct you, and you better to conceive, and also retain the surer, such
things as shall be taught. For he that will cover the roufe of his house, before
he have made the foundation, and buildyd the walls: beside the loss of his
cost, shall be thought scarce a witty builder. But I will exhort you as time
shall seem mete also to read with great diligence Orontius Orontius.
Scheubelius. Euclide. Theodosius.
Arithmetic, Scheubelius Algeber, Euclides Elemetaries, and Theodosius of
spherike Demonstrations: not only for this studies sake which you now have in
hand: but for all other arts (which taste of the Mathematicalles) that you
shall here after travel in. But now to the scope that you desire. And because
that you may know, whereof the matter depend of which we shall entreat, let
me here what you call Cosmography.


Spoud. That seems unto me to be none other thing, What Cosmography is.
then the art which do set forth, and describe the universal world.


Philo. You have said rightly, for so the Etymology of this word Cosmography
doth sound. But is there no dife renc betwixt this word Cosmography, and
Geography?


Spoud. It should so seem to me, for both do describe the world.


Philo. Then define you Geography, after such authors minds as you have
red.


Spoud. That will I do gladly. Ptolomaeus in his geography Lib. 1. cap. 1.
defines it in this sort.

(...). What Geography is.


Which sentence I turning into Latyne soundith in this sort.

Geographia est vniuersarum terrae partium cognitaru, una cum hiis, quae ei
veluti vniuersaliter coniuncta sunt, picturae imitatio.

Which in our tongue is as much to say as.

Geography is the imitation, and discriptio of the face, and picture of
th'earth, with her parts known, and of such things as are to it conected and
joined.


Philo. You have truly repetyd Ptolomaeus words. Now I will prove by your
difinition, that you have erred two ways, in putting no diference betwixt
Cosmography, and Geography. First Cosmography teaches The diference of
Cosmography and Geography.
the discriptio of the universal world, and not of th'earth only: and
Geography of th'earth, and of none other part.


Spoud. Why sir, make you a diference betwixt the world, and th'earth?


Philo. Yea verily, and that as much as betwixt a ma, and his little finger, but
of that, you shall hear more or we depart. The second way you erryd in the
order of dividing th'earth: for albeit Cosmography describes the face of
th'earth, yet it is by noting and observing certain divisions, answering unto.
v. principal paralleles or equidistant circles in the heavens. As they dwell in
the midst of th'earth that inhabit under th'equinoctiall lyne, and the like of
the dwellers under the other circles, is said On the other part, Geography do
deliniat, and set out the universal earth, no respect had unto the fornaed
circles of the heaves: but by Hills, Moutayns, Seas, fluddes, and such other
notable things, as are in it coteined.


Spoud. Then by your words I also gather, there is some diference betwyxt
these two, and Chorographie.


Philo. Yea and that Ptolomaeus in the place of you What Chorographie is and
howe it difereth from the other two.
alleadgid, do plainly express. For like as Cosmography describes the
world, Geography th'earth: in like sort Chorographie, shows the parts of
th'earth, divided in themselves. And severally describes, the ports, Rivers
Havens, Fluddes, Hills, Moutaynes, Cities, Villages, Buildings, Fortresses,
Walls, yea and every particular thing, in that part contained. And is in
respect saith he, of Cosmography and Geography, as if a paiter should set
forth the eye, or ear of a man, and not the whole body, so that Chorographie
consists rather in describing the quality and figure, then the bigness, and
quantity of any thing.


Spoud. Although by your words, I have received more commodity at this
present, then by all my reading touching the true diference of these three
names: yet if it Things seen are longer in mind, then only harde.
may please you to give me the figures of every of them, I shall so steadfastly
print it in my mind, as I trust not to forget them, for it is truly said,
things scene have longer impresion then only harde.


Philo. I will gladly fulfil your request. Mark now this example following.
Here first you do see the heavens contain in them th'earth. Which earth is
divided into five principal parts, according to the five Circles in the
heavens: the names of which for brevity I omytte until convenient place,
lest thorough oft repeting things they at length seem tedious. The This figure
repraesent the form of Cosmography.
other figure without circles, represents th'earth, set forth with Waters,
Hills, Mountains, and such like.

This Picture answers unto Geography.


And finally for Chorographie, I have placed th'excellet City of Norwyche, as
the form of it is, at this present 1558. Now that you have learned their
difference, declare in which of the you most delight to be instructed.


Spoud. I thank you sir, I shall never be able (more then with prayer) to
recompense your pains. But sense Cosmography excells Geography and
Chorographie.
Cosmography is more excellent then the other two, both for the manifold use,
and that it coteineth and comprehends the other in it self: I would employ
my whole industry herein.


Philo. Then seeing that Cosmography describes the world as you have said,
(and that rightly) it is necessary to know what the world is, what the parts
of it are, The argumet of the whole work.
and how many, yea and finally, by what means, as well the world, as also the
parts of it, are described. This perfectly lernyd, have you then for this
present, your whole desire?


Spoud. Yes verily.




THE DECLARATION OF THE PRINCIPAL places in the City, after th'order of
th'Alphabete.
A Thorpe VVoode. B S. Leonardes. C. The place where men are customablie burnt.
D. Bishoppes Gate. E. The Cathedral church, called Christ's Church. F. S.
Martins at the Pallis Gate. G Pokethorpe Gates. H. The Suburbs called
Pokthorpe. I. Magdalene gates K S. Butholdes. M S. Clementes. N S. Augustines.
P. S, Augustines Gates. Q. S. Martines Gates. R. S Martines at th'Ooke. S. The
new milles. T. Hellgates, the Suburbs joining to it, called Heiham. V S. Benets
Gates. W S. ^les Gates. X. S. Stephens Gates. Y. Brazen door. Z. S. Iohns
gates.. Lakenam VVoode. AA Chapel in the field. BB Eaten VVoode. CC The
Castle. DD The hospital. THEE The market place. FF S. Peters permantigate. GG
S. Martines on the hill. HH. S. Iohns on the hill. II S. Michaels. LL S. Iohns
at the gates. MM S. Stephens. NN Thorpe. QQ In the righthand is that part of
the river Yerus coming from Yermouth, and runs thorough the City. QQ The left
hand the other part of the forsaid river going hier into the country.
This Picture must be placed before the 9. leaf.

Philonicus. Then let us begin with the definition Lib. primo in initio.
of the world, which the ancient Cleomedes definith in this manner.

(...). What the World is.


And I do translate it into Latin as follows.

Mundus est ex caelo, terra{que}, ac naturis deni{que} in eis compraehensis,
compages. Is autem corpora in se singula continet, nec extra eum, prorsus
quicquam cernitur.

That is, the world is an apt frame, made of heaven, and earth, of things in
them contained. This comprehedeth all things in it self, nether is there any
thing without the limits of it visible.

Which definition differith not from Aristotle and other Aristotle.
famous writers. So that what so ever is betwixt the seat of the almighty
governor of all living creatures, and the center of the earth: is called the
world. And is compared to a round ball and globe.


Spoudaeus. Then all that we ether by sight may decern, or by art conceive,
that same is the world. And conteyneth in it what so ever the eternal
Creater, by his wounderfull work have in this circuit blessed, and made.


Philonicus. True it is.


Spoud. Then I perceive my error before committed, The World and the earth not
one thing.
where I applied this word world, only to the earth.


Philonicus. So in like sort it is otherwise abused, but note you diligently
that is said before of Cleomedes and it shall be sufficient.


Spoudaeus. And is there nothing beyond this world? my imagination, leads
me to the contrary.


Philonicus. Indeed Pythagoras following imagination, more then Reason affirms
somewhat to be, Pythagoras error.
which is not comprehendid with in the world: and names it Vacuum. But
Plato, and Aristotle, do overthrow Plato. Aristotle.
this assertion. And seeing that it transsendith the knowledge of ma let it
pass, return we to our matter.


Spoudaeus. What be the parts of the world?


Philonicus. The world is made of two parts, that is to say, of the
Elementary Region, containing in The World made of two parts.
it the four Elements, Fire, Air, Water, and Earth: and what so ever of them
is compounded and made, of which hereafter we shall entreat: and of the
heavenly region, of which at this present time we will make metion. This Type
do represent the world, deuidid in to his two peculiar parts.
This region do in it contain. x. spheres, in such sort The number of the
heavens.
as the greater comprehendith in him the lesser, as the. x. heaven or Primum
mobile, comprehendith the. ix. heaven callid also Cristalline. This heaven
compasses the viij. heaven, called in greek (...) because the sterres keep one
uniform distance in moving, and for that cause are namid fixid. And so this
receive in this compass the sphere of Saturne, Iupiter, Mars, the Son,
Uenus, Mercurius, the Moan, and the four Elements.


Spoud. Why should not the spheres of the Son, and An objection
Moan be above the other Planetes, as well as in that order, you have rehearsed
them?


Philo. This serves not for our purpose, but it is excellently proved of
Ptolomaeus, Alphraganus, Tebitius, Archimedes, and other, with such invincible
reasons as can not be denied. But me think the pleasant Ptolomaeus.
Alphraganus Tebitius. Archimedes.
Poet Ouidius, makes a good reason to prove the Son to have his sphere, in
like order as is aforesaid, when as he speaks under the parson of Phebus,
unto yonge Lib. 2. Metamorphosis.
Phaeton (entering into his Chariot) in this manner.

Altius egressus, caelestia signa cremabis:
Inferius terras: medio tutissimus ibis.


In our english tunge, the meaning of these versis is thus.

Direct thy Chariot in a mean, climb thou not to bye:
Lest thou dost burn the heavily Signs, set in the sterry sky.
Or descending to lowe the earth, of heat shall feel the flame.
But keep the mean, y^ shalt be fre, fro fear, eke fro blame



Spoud. The cause is so manifest, that it need no longer declaration. So that I
suppose their excellent wryters aforesaid, have found out the true order of the
spheres as you have repeated them. And that Crates with his company, The error
of Crates Albetragnius Democritus and Plato.
have no less erred, placing the luminaries above the eight heaven: then
Albetragnius which supposes Venus: and Democritus, which affirms Mercurye,
to be higher then the Son.


Philo. Yea and Plato, (which otherwise is a grave Philosopher) did no less
err then the other, imagining the luminaries to have their course under all
the other Planetes.


Spoud. Well let them pass, and now to the number of the heavens, which you
affirm to be. x.


Philoni. You have ryghtly spoken.


Spoud. I remember among other things that I have The Aegiptias found out but
8. heavens.
red in Diodorus, howe that the Aegiptians supposed there were but eight
heavens: and that by this persuasion. They gave to the seven Planetes. vij.
heavens. And because they perceived that heaven (which you call the firmamet)
to cary the fixed sterres in it, and to keep one uniform order and distance
in rising, none steed, and going down: to circuit the earth also in. 24.
hours: and finally, to cary the heavens of the Planetes, by his swiftness about
the earth with him, contrary to their natural motion, they supposed (of whose
mind I also am) that there ware but eight heavens. And that, which you call
the eight heaven, they name primum mobile.


Philo. You may not to rashly adicte your self to any of their opinions,
before you are certain they are either true, or else received as most
probable. For by the like Ptolomaeus found out the 9. heaven.
reason, I can compel you to confess there are. ix. heavens, as Ptolomaeus
affirms. But for shortness of time, and that it somewhat swaruith from our
purpose, I will omytte it: and lean to the authority of the famous king,
Alfonsus first found the. 10 heaven out.
and grave Philosopher Alphonsus: whose name by his travel, is made immortal.


Spoud. Thus I perceive your saiynge to be verified (when you excused the old
writers) that time, bring all things to their perfection. But I have red
also of an heaven, which in greek is named (...), Empyreu.


Philo. It is so named of the wonderful brightness, and beauty. But because it
is imoble, and without any mouig I exclude it out from the number of the movable
heaves: and that, as not serving to our purpose. And thus you have learned what
the world is, and also the heavenly region. But for the redier conceiving of
that which is now spoken, behold the figure ensuing.


Spou. Will it please you now to proceed with the elemetarye region, which you
declared to be the other part of the world?




Philo. Before we shall take this part in hand (for the easier avoiding often
repetitio of one thing) I will give you some introduction into the celestial
sphere, touching such circles as must of necessity serve in this art.


Spou. And that fault have troubled, yea right excellent authors, for they
obseruig no methode, were compelled to repeat one thing diverse, and sondry
times. But because you made mention of a sphere, may it please you to make
definition of it?


Philo. All such as have written hereof, do accorde in one as Theodosius,
Proclus, Euclyde, Orontius, Iohn Theodosius. Proclus. Euclide. Orontius. Iohn
Halifax
Halifax our worthy countryman, (called also Iohn de sacrobosco.) c. But as
well for the authority, as also elegancy, I will repeat unto you Theodosius
definition, who saith in this wise.

(...). Lib. 1. prop. 1.


Sphaera est figura solida coprehesa una superficie, ad qua ab la eoru puctoru
quae itra figura sut, oes rectae lineae ductae sut inter se aequales

A sphere is a sound body, contained within one plate form and bound, unto
which all right lines drawn from the Center, (they being coteyned within the
figure) are found aequal among the selves.

To the understanding of which definitio, is requisite to know both what the
center, axe tree, and diameter of a sphere is.


Spoud. Now I perceive the reading of the pathway doth not a little help me, in
understanding this definitio of Theodosius: as also such words, which are
usual in Geometry. But what is this axe tree of the sphere? for I understand
that by a center is nothing mete, but a prick What a ceter is.
in the midst of any circumference.


Philo. Theodosius, calls the axe tree, a certain right Lib. 1. prop. 3.
line drawn by the center, both ends of it ending in the plat form of the
said sphere, the sphere being turned about What the axe tree is.
it: and yet this axe tree to remain fixid without motion. As in example. Here
you se A. B. C. to represent the half sphere, the axe tree also drawn through
it is A. D. C. which being fixid, the half sphere turnynge round about,
makes a parfait roud body. As this figure here placed makes true mention.


Spoud. I pray you what difference is there betwixt the diameter of a sphere
and the axe tree.




Philo. I will show you, omitting the auctors names What a diameter is, and how
it difereth from th^ axe tree aforsayd.
for briefnes. A diameter of a sphere, or globe, is any lyne drawn thorough the
same, going by the center of the sphere, or globe. And so there may be (yea and
you will). xx. diameters, or as many as you please in a sphere: but there can
be but one axe tree, on which the sphere, or globe, is reuoluid. And this axe
tree is void of all motion.


Spoud. I will (and it please you) make a proof whereby you shall perceive, if I
rightly understand your meaning.


Philo. do you so.


Spou. Here I will make a sphere, in which I draw right lines, fro the one
part of the circuferece, by the ceter, so to the other. Such right lines, or
diameters, are AD: CF: BE: but I do imagine only A. D. to be the axe tree, and
imoble.




Philo. Very well wrought. Now proceed we forth. You must also consider that the
sphere is divided, into a right sphere and into an oblique or crokyd sphere.
they only have a right sphere which dwell under the equinoctial, The sphere
is taken two ways. A right sphere The poles of the world what they are.
and have both the pole arctike, and antarctick in their Horizont.


Spoud. Do you not call the two points or ends of the axe tree, the fornamed
poles?


Philo. It is so, and for firmer printing it in memory, behold here the type
of them that have a right sphere. As A. D. C. represents both the axe tree,
and the right Horizont: and A. C. the two poles: Yea and B. D. the half part
of the equinoctial.




Spoud. So that a ma inhabiting under B. D. which is the equinoctial, do
perceive both A. which is the North pole, and C. which is the South, level
with the earth, and his vertical point, in the for said Aequinoctial.


Philo. You do well perceive it.


Spoud. Then it follows, that where ether of the poles, is elevated above the
earth, they dwell not under the An oblique or crooked sphere.
aequinoctial, and so have a crooked, an oblique sphere.


Philo. And that do this figure perfectly prove. Here C. E. is the half of the
axe tree above the earth, B. E. is the half of the equinoctial. C. the one
pole above the earth. Which makes the half sphere. A. B. C. D. to be
oblique, and crooked, according to my first meaning.




Spou. I understand this perfectly


Philo. Then is it expediet for you to consider, that this sphere doth in it
contain many Circles.


Spoud. Your words bring me in a doubt. For I perceive that a circle, a
sphere are both round, have like Centers, Diameters.


Phil. They have no less, yet they do as greatly differ as the world, the
earth (of which we made mention) as this definition of Euclid, do manifest
plainly. (...). Lib. 1. defi. 14.
which Scheubel. excellently (after his manner) traslateth.

Circulus est figura plana, una linea compraehensa, quae circumferentia
appellatur, ad quam ab la quodam puncto eorum, quae intra figuram sunt posita,
omnes cadetes rectae lineae inter se sunt aequales.

And is thus much to say with us.

A Circle is a plain and flat figure comprehended within one line, which is
called a circumference: unto which, if lines be drawn from the Center, or
point of the circle, unto the circumference, they being contained within the
same, are found to be equal one to an other.

As in this example. A. is the center of the Circle: B. C. D. E. the
Circumferent line. c.




Spou. By these words I find a two fouled difference How a sphere and a
Circle differ.
betwixt a sphere, a circle. First, that a circle is a plain, flat figure, a
sphere of roude form, like unto a Ball. And then that a Circle is
copraehended within one line, a sphere within one plat form* But now I pray
you declare such Circles, as are imagined to be in the sphere of the world,
most necessary for an introduction.


Phil. In This sphere chiefly x. Circles are imagined: The principal circles
in the Sphere of the world are x. in number.
Of which 6. be great, 4. be small: which in order I will set out. And
therefore answer me: Have you not read among your authors of the Horizot
circle? we will begin with that first, because necessity inforseth such
order.


Spou. Yes sir: Proclus defines it in this sort.

(...). What the Ho rizont is.


Horizon est circulus qui diuidit nobis mundi partem, quae videtur, ab ea quae
non apparet: qui ita in duas parts aequales ^otum discindit mundi globum, vt
eius dimidia pars altera supra terra extet, dimidia altera sub terra sit.

Which sounded in our language in this manner.

The Horizont is a Circle which divides, parts that part of the world which
we see, from that which do not appere^ which par teeth the world in two equal
parts, in such facion, as the one half is ever above the earth, the other
always under.


Phil. The use of this Circle is right excellent, for by it we find out the
rising, going down of every Planet Star. In this Horizont the day night,
have also their beginning, end.


Spou. So that this Horizont is a lyne imagined to go round about by the face
of the earth, parting the heavens in two parts, and is said of (...), which
signifies to decern, or end. But standing on an hie Mountain, A question.
steple, or such like thing, shall I se but half the heaves,


Philo. Yes verily, you shall see more then an Hemisphere (for so call they the
half sphere) as also being in The answer.
a valley and lowe place, you shall not see your Hemisphere totally. And
although you may object, that this Horizont divides not the heaven in two
equal portios, yet it is proves nothing: for the Astrologians allow no such
Horizont.


Spoud. And is this Horizont a fixed Circle or not?


Philo. It is fixed, and without motion. An objection



Spou: It should seem contrary. For I being at London have one Horizont, and
going to Andwerpe, have an other, and so at Colein an other, and at Heydelberge
another. c.


Philo. I confess no less, but that proves nothing The answer.
that the horizont moves, for loke into what error you should fall: you
must grant (if the horizont move) that with the turning of the heavens, your
horizont Circle must come over your vertical poit, once in 24. hours.


Spoud. Nay, I will not grant such absurdity in any case: wherefore I see
that it is my chaugyng that makes me to have a new horizont, and not the
horizont to move with me.


Phil. You hit the nail on the head (as the saying is) The Horizont divided
into two parts.
Now your author divides the horizont, like to the sphere: that is, into a
right horizont, and into a crooked or oblique.


Spoud. What be they that have a right horizont? A right Horizont.



Phil. They have a right horizont, when as this circle crosses the
equinoctial rightely in two parts, and they have a crooked horizont, when
either of the Poles A crooked Ho rizont.
is above the Earth, and the other under: such is our Horizont which inhabit
Europe. But for the better understanding, I have made here a figure, in which
C. A. and E. is the equinoctial. And because B. A. D. crosses it rightely: It
is the right Horizont. Also B. D. are the two Poles of the world: because B.
is elevated above the earth, it makes F. A. G. to be the oblique Horizont, as
these ij. pictures here placed do show.

This Picture shows the form of a right Horizont.
This Figure represent a crooked or oblique Horizont.



Spoud. Saying that the Horizont seems only necessary for to know the true
rising, going down of the Son, Moan, Planetes, fixed sterres, it can not
any thing help for to know when any of them are at the hiest above the
Horizont for that day, in which place when as the Son comes: it is midday.
For I perceive every Planet, Star, to ascend by little, little above the
earth, until they be at the hiest: then in like manner do continually
descend, until they come to the Horizont in the West.


Phil. For this diverse other occations (in times past) they imagined a circle
which they called the meridian circle and Proclus, in this sort sets it
out.

(...). What the Me ridian is.


Meridianus circulus is est, qui describitur per polos mudi, per verticis
punctum, in quo cum fuerit sol, facit diei noctis{que} dimidium.

The meridiane or middaie circle (saith he) is describid and drawn by the
poles of the world, and the point directly over our heads called Zenit
Zenit is that point or prick imagined to be directly over our heads is always.
90. degrees fro the East, South, Weast, and North. Lib. 1. prop. 3.
in which when the Son enters (which is twyse in a natural day) it is
mydday, or midnight.


Spoud. Yea and this meridiane by Theodosius probation, shall in all places
cross rightly the Horizont, is also a fixid circle as the Horizont is.


Philo. And that was one of the greatest reasons (if I be not deceived) which
provoked the Astronomers to make their computation from midday. And as many as
dwell either plain North, or South, have the same meridiane that you have: and
such as are either East, or West, have an other meridian, and not the same
which you have.


Spoud. Then by your words I gather that the inhabitants which be directly
under us (the Geographers Antipodes.
name them Antipodes) are under the same meridiane lyne, that we be.


Philo. Verily it is true. But we will omyt the declaration of them until our
next metinge, and I will give you example of the meridiane circle, joined with
the Horizont. Here you se A. E. C. represent the vertical point, B. D. the
poles of the world, by which and A. (being the vertical circle) is the meridia
circle A. B. C. D. delineated and draw. Which crosses also B. E. D. F. being
the Horizont circle.


Spoud. This circle I do well remember, but I do further perceive that the Soon
rises not always at one time, and therefore is sometime longer or he come to the
meridian, and sometime shorter, so that the days increase and decrease
continually, except twyse every year. (Which is to say the. x. of Marche, and
the. xiiij. of Septeber) and then the days, and nights are equal, and he
rises directly East, and sets plain West: which in other times, he do
not, as we may daily understand.


Philo. The diference of the times, engendered by the course of the Son, you
shall easily find by the quinoctiall.


Spoud. you renew that, which almost was out of my memory. For I reading the
for said Proclus, remember he makes mention of the equinoctial circle in this
wise.

(...). What the quinoctiall is.


A equinoctialis autem circulus est horum quinque paralleloru maximus, ita ab
horizonte in duo sectus, vt eius dimidia pars altera sit supra terram, altera
vero lub terra: in quo cum fuerit sol, aequinoctia facit duo, vernu Autumnale.

The equinoctial is a circle greatest of all the other. v. Paralleles, and is
so divided, and parted of the Horizont, that the one half is ever above the
earth, and the other half under: into which, when the Son enter (which is
twyse yearly spring time, and harvest) the days and nights are equal thorough
the whole earth.


Philo. Moreover you must further consider that this circle difereth from the
other two before said because it is movable, and carried about with the heavens,
where the other are steadfast and fixid.


Spoud. It must needs so be. But are not the poles of this circle, the poles of
the world?


Philo. Yes verily, and they that dwell under the equinoctial have the signs
equally ascending, and descending, which should not be, if the poles of it,
did vary fro the poles of the world. That they do ascend, and also descend
equally, Lucan the excellent Poet, do aptly set out, where he describes Cato
his voyage into Lybia, Lib. 9.
which is toward the equinoctial, in these versis annexid.

Non oblique meant, nec Tauro rectior exit
Scorpius, aut Aries donat sua tempora Librae.
Aut Astrea iubet lentos descendere Pisces.
Par Geminis, Chiron: idem quod Carcenus ardens
Humidus Aegoceros, nec plus Leo la Vrna.


The meaning of which versis in English meater is,

The signs in equal times, do ascend and descend:
The Balance and the Ram, the Scorpion and Bull.
The Twins and Archer eke, the Crabe and Goat defend:
The fearse Lyon, the Pot with water that is full.
The Virgin with her branch, sooner cannot apere:
Then the Fish by course approach to the west ne'er.



Spoud. I shall and it please you make a prove hereof as I did in the other,
whereby you may correct my error, if any shall follow: and then you may proceed
with the other circles.


Philoni. Do you so.


Spoud. I have here made a figure in which C. E. do represent the
equinoctial. B. A. D. the axe tree of the world. B. the north pole or
arcticke, and D. in like sort the antarcticke, which are also the poles of the
equinoc tiall.

The use of the Horizot, Meridian, and aequinoctiall Circles.



Philo. I do much commend you. Now further more you may consider, that like
as the rising, and going down of the Son, Moon, and Planetes, is found out
by the help of the Horizont: their true height by the meridian circle: and the
variety of time by the equinoctial: (comparing the quantity of the day
present, unto the quantity of the day when as the Soon is in the equinoctial)
so there is also a proper path, or way, in which the other Planetes, as well
as the Son do finyshe their reuolutio, and course, according to their true
time. Which circle is very needful for Geographers, as hereafter you shall
understand.


Spoud. I pray you sir, is not that the circle, which I have in a starry night
decernid like a broad girdle full of stars, in which also in some part is
the mylkey way called as I suppose (...) of Ptolomaeus, and of Tully lacteus
orbis?


Philo. It is the very same, and Proclus describes it in these words.

(...). What the zodiac is.


Circulus autem obliquus est zodiacus, qui duodecim signa continet, ipseque ex
tribus circulis parallelis constituitur: quoru duo latitudine eius definiunt,
tertius vero per media signa ducitur. Hic attingit duos circulos aequales
parallelos, nepe Aestiualem tropicu in prima part Cancri, Hiemalem in prima
part Capricorni. Latitudo autem Zodiaci est partium duodecim, la obliquus
hic circulus, propterea quod parallelos secat circulos.

The crokyd, oblique, or thwarte circle, is called the Zodiac, which in it
conteyne the. xij. Signs, and is made of three parallele cir cles, of which
two do conteyne in them the breadth, and latitude: the third This lyne is called
the ecliptic, becau se in it is the cotinual course of the Soon and that all
Eclypses as well of him as of the moan can not be but in this lyne.
do divide the Signs equally in the midst. This Zodiac, extendith unto two
equidistant circles, or paralleles. That is to say the somer tropike, in the
beginning of Cancer: and the winter in the beginning or first degree of
Capricorne. The latitude and breadth of the Zodiac is. xij. degrees, and it is
called thwarte or crooked, because it crosses the parallele circles.

And here you must note for eschewing further error, that the author menith by
crossinge the parallele circles, that the zodiac goes ouerthwarte them, and
not rightly as the equinoctial, and the right Horizont doth.


Spoud. And this circle, is divided into. xij. equal parts which you call
signs. What a sign is.



Philo. You have truly spoken: yea and every sign, is divided into. xxx.
parts, which they call degrees: and every degree, into. lx. minutes. c. But
this serves What a degre is.
rather for Astronomers.


Spoud. By your words I gather the length of a degree What a minute is.
to be the. 360. part of the heaven (for. xij. times 30. makes. 360.) and not
any determined, or appointed measure, as a yard, a forlong, a mile. c.


Philo. Unto this circle and the equinoctial, al the moving of the Planetes,
and fixed stars is referred. For by them we find out their longitude,
latitude, and also the elevation of ether poles, which is so necessary in this
art, as without it you shall little or nothing profit. But now I will set
before your eyes the signs, with their names in Greek, Latin, and English,
adding also certain characters of every one of them, which the Astrologians do
use both in their writing, also in their instruments.

1 2 3 4 5 6 (...) (...)* (...), (...) (...) (...) Septemtrional signs.
Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Rame, Bull, Twins, Crab, Lion,
Virgyn, 7 8 9 10 11 12 (...) (...) (...). (...) (...) (...) Libra, Scorp.
Sagitta. Capricor. Aquari. Pisces. Meridionall signs.
Balau. Scorpio, Archer, Goat. Waterma. Fishes.


Spou. These names I have often red in Homer, Sophocles, and other greek
Poets: and the latin, in Virgil, Ouide, Horace, Palingenius, and every other
Poet well near do make of them mention: and I do perceive the use of this
circle to be very expediet. For of it consists the The use of the zodiac.
quantity of the year, the. iiij. times of the same, as the Spring, Somer,
Harvest, Winter. But I perceive also other configurations, and forms, as well
out of the zodiac, as also in it. And the Poets make metion of many of them,
as Charles wayne, the Drago, Boots, The egle, the flieng Horse, the seven
Stars, the great Dog, and others: of which you make no mention.


Philo. No, nether do I intende, lest that I shall seem to epsy a mote in an
other, and not a beam in mine own eye. For I will digress as little as
possible I may, fro our A TABLE OF MANY NOT ABLE FIXED STERRES WITH THERE TREVV
LONGITVDE, LATITVDE, AND DECLINATON, faithfully rectified unto the year of our
Lord. 1559*
The names in Englyshe The names in Latin The names in Greek. The Longitude.
The Latitude. Declination. and Magni. S D. M. D. M. P. D M P M The Whales back
Dorsum Caeti, 6 6 15 40 M 12 11 M 2 The Whales belly Venture Caeti. 16 2 20 0 M
12 20 M 2 Aries horne. Cornu Arietis. 27 42 7 20 S 17 19 S 3 The Rams head.
Caput Arietis. 1 46 10 0 S. 21 16 S 3 The Bulls eye. Oculus Tauri. (...) 3 42
5 10 M 15 42 S 1 Orions left foot. Orio. pes sinist. 10 12 31 30 M 9 14 M 1
Orions left shoulder. Orion. hue. sini. 11 20 17 30 M 4 37 S 2 First in Orions
girdle. Cing. Orio. pri. 16 22 24 20 M 1 19 M 2 Second in Orions girdle. Cing.
Orio. se. 18 22 24 50 M 1 49 M 2 Orions right shoulder. Orio. hue. dex. 23 6 17
0 M 6 18 S 1 The great Dog. Canis Ma^or. (...), 8 42 39 10 M 15 50 M 1 The
lesser Dog. Canis Minor. (...). 20 12 16 10 M 6 4 S 1 Brightest in Hydra.
Lucida Hydrae. 21 2 20 30 M 4 47 M 2 The Lions neck. Ceruix Leonis. 23 16 8 30
S 21 59 S 2 The Lions heart. Regulus. (...). 23 32 0 10 S 14 3 S 1 The Lions
back. Dorsum Leonis 5 16 13 40 S 22 31 S 2 The Lions Tail. Cauda Leonis, 15 32
11 50 S 16 49 S 1 The Crows head. Caput Corui. 5 0 19 40 M 19 53 M 3 The
Crows right wyng. Ala dextra Cor. 9 36 14 50 M 17 8 M 3 The Virgins Spike.
Spica Virginis. (...). 17 42 2 0 M 4 54 M 1 Betwixt Boots thyghes. Inter cox.
Boo. 18 6 19 40 S 22 9 S 1 South Balance. Lanx Merid. 9 2 0 40 S 1^ 44 M 2
North Balance. Septemtriona. 13 12 8 30 S 7 33 M 2 The Scorpions hart. Cor
Scorpij. (...). 3 42 4 0 M 24 47 S 2 Hercules Head. Caput Herculis 8 42 37 30 S
15 20 S 3 The Serpents head. Caput Ophi. (...) 15 52 36 0 S 14 7 S 3 The Egle.
Aquila. (...). 24 52 29 10 S 7 27 S 2 Capricornes Tail. Cauda Capri. 17 22 2
10 S 14 13 M 3 In Aquarius leg Crus Aquarij. 2 20 7 30 M 15 52 M 3 Pegasus
shoulder. Hue. Pegasi. 17 42 29 40 S 13 0 S 2 first institution. But I will give
you here a table of many notable fixed stars, which are profitable for the
trieng out of the latitude of any country and place.


Spoud. This table seruith unto small use (if my authors deceive me not) onlesse
that I have in like sort the declination of them.


Philo. You say ryghtly, and to satisfy your expectation, I will also place
here a table of declination of theclipticke lyne from th'equinoctiall, which
shall extend unto. 23. digrees. 28. minutes, the true declination of the
son, of this our age.


Spoud. I pray you sir, what call you the declination of the son, or other
planet and sterre?


Philo. It is no other thing then the distance of any sterre from
th'equinoctial unto his true place in the zodiac. And here mark that every
sterre hath two decli Every Planet have two decli nations.
nations, the one is having there course in the zodiac fro the beginning of
Aries, unto th'ende of Virgo, and they are North fro th'equinoctial. The other
from the beginning of Libra, unto th'ende of Pisces, and they are said to have
their declination south from th'quinoctiall.


Spoud. have this declination of the son, been always one, or it doth vary?


Philo. I will show you, in the time of Ptolomaeus as (his works do testify)
the sons greatest declination from th'equinoctiall was. xxiij. degrees. lj.
minutes, and The diversity of the Sons declinatio, fro Ptolomaeus time, unto
our age.
xxx. secondes. Almaeon found it.xxiij. degrees.xxxiij. mynutes, and.xxx.
secondes. Iohannes de monte Regio, tried it to be.23. and but.30. minutes. And
George Pour bachius.23. degr..28. mi. which agrees with our time


Spoud. This diversity of obseruatio, may arise rather of the instruments not
exactly made, then that he do so vary in his declination.


Philo. Nay verily. I attribute the cause here of unto that moving of the heave
which is called of Tebitius Alfonsus, motus trepidationis.


Spoud. How may I find this variety of declination, by mine own diligence.


Philo. Although it vary not in a mans life any thing sensible, yet because you
may both know the observing of it exactly and also teach other that hereafter
shall learn as you are now instructed your self: I will in few words open the
whole labour. Take a quadrant (the making of How to find out by Instrument the
Sons Declinatio
which you shall see among the other instruments) and and set it directly
upright upon some plain in the meridian lyne (the finding of which you shall
see in the next treatise) and is here marked A. B. as also C. A. door present,
the zenit or vertical point, then raise up and down the ruler (having two
sight holes made in it) unto the son, when as he is in the meridian line: and
observe diligently that height, in the circle of degrees noted in your quadrant,
fro B. to C. the.xi. or.xii. day of Deceber, which is B. D. until you find he
goes no lower: and again in like case the.xi. or.xij. of June, until you
perceive he increases nothing in height, and is noted here B. E. and so the
distance of D. E. is the distance of the.ij. tropic Circles.


Spoud. What mean you by those tropic circles?


Philo. You shall know, our conclusion ended. This distance in our days is
found.46. degrees.56. minutes, which being parted in two equal parts, reconed
from the Equinoctial. B. F. shows the Sons greatest declination Northwarde
from the forsaid Circle, 23. degrees.28. minutes. And in like case Southwarde
in Winter. And thus shall you always find his declination.


Spoud. This rule will I put in practise when the time of the year doth
insewe.


Phil. Well now behold this table of Declinatio, which shall serve thy use more
largely the Orontius, or D. Records Table: is not so proplixe, as E.
Reignholdes.


A TABLE OF DECLINATION of the Ecliptike, in Degrees, Minutes, Secodes, from
the Equi. noctiall, answering to the Sons greatest Declinatio.23. Degrees. 28.
Minu.
Degrees. Aries. Differe. Taurus. Differe. Gemini. Differe. Libra. Scorpius.
Sagittarius. Degrees. Mi. Degrees. Mi. Se. Mi. Se. Degrees. Mi. Se. Mi. Se. De. Mi. Se. Mi.
Se. De. Mi 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 12 14 48 20 36 15 30 0 0 20 0 8 41 12 21 17 20 40 2 29
40 0 40 0 17 22 12 29 6 20 43 47 29 20 1 0 0 26 2 12 26 12 14 1 20 47 29 29 0 1
20 0 34 43 12 43 16 20 51 8 28 40 1 40 0 43 24 12 50 18 20 54 45 28 20 2 0 0 52
4 12 57 19 20 58 20 28 0 2 20 1 0 45 1 9 13 4 17 21 1 52 22 1 27 40 2 40 1 9 26
13 11 14 21 5 21 27 20 3 0 1 18 6 13 18 10 21 8 48 27 0 3 20 1 26 46 13 25 3 21
12 12 26 40 3 40 1 65 25 13 31 54 21 15 34 26 20 4 0 1 44 5 13 ^8 42 15 6 21 18
54 26 0 4 20 1 52 43 13 45 28 21 22 11 25 40 4 40 2 1 22 2 19 13 52 13 21 25 25
25 20 5 0 2 10 (...) 13 58 57 21 28 37 25 0 5 20 2 18 39 14 5 37 21 31 46 24 40
5 40 2 27 17 14 12 16 21 34 53 24 20 6 0 2 35 53 14 18 53 21 37 58 24 0 6 20 2
44 30 3 9 14 25 27 21 40 59 23 40 6 40 2 53 6 14 31 59 16 0 21 43 58 23 20 7 0
3 1 42 14 38 31 21 46 56 23 0 7 20 3 10 17 14 44 59 21 49 51 22 40 7 40 3 18 52
14 51 25 21 52 42 22 20 8 0 3 27 27 14 57 50 21 55 31 22 0 8 20 3 36 0 4 8 15 4
12 21 58 17 21 40 8 40 3 44 33 15 10 32 22 1 1 21 20 9 0 3 53 6 15 16 49 22 3
43 21 0 9 20 4 1 38 15 23 4 22 6 22 20 40 9 40 4 10 9 15 29 18 22 8 59 20 20 10
0 4 18 40 15 35 30 17 2 22 11 33 20 0 10 20 4 27 10 5 6 15 41 39 22 14 4 23 1
19 40 10 40 4 35 38 15 47 46 22 16 33 19 20 11 0 4 47 7 15 53 51 22 19 0 19 0
11 20 4 52 34 15 59 53 22 21 24 18 40 11 40 5 1 1 16 5 53 22 23 45 18 20 12 0 5
9 27 16 11 52 22 26 4 18 0 12 20 5 17 51 6 4 16 17 47 22 28 20 17 40 12 40 5 26
15 16 23 41 22 30 34 17 20 13 0 5 34 39 16 29 33 22 32 45 17 0 13 20 5 43 1 16
35 22 18 1 22 34 54 16 40 13 40 5 51 23 16 41 9 22 37 0 16 20 14 0 5 59 43 16
46 53 22 39 3 16 0 14 20 6 8 2 7 0 16 52 35 22 41 4 15 40 14 40 6 16 21 16 58
15 22 43 2 15 20 15 0 6 24 39 17 3 53 22 44 59 15 0 15 20 6 32 55 17 9 28 22 46
52 14 40 Pisces. Diffe. Aquarius. Diffe. Capricorn Differ. Degries. Virgo. Leo.
Cancer THE SECOND PART OF THE Table of Declination of th'ecliptick, from
th'Equinoctiall.
Degrees. Aries. Libra. Differe. Taurus. Scorpius. Differe. Gemini.
Sagittarius. Differe. Degrees. Mi. Degrees. Mi. Se. Mi. Se. Degrees. Mi. Se. Mi. Se. De.
Mi. Se. Mi. Se. De. Mi 15 20 6 32 55 17 9 28 22 46 52 14 40 15 40 6 41 10 17 15
1 22 48 43 14 20 16 0 6 49 25 17 20 33 22 50 31 14 0 16 20 6 57 37 17 26 2 22
52 17 13 40 16 40 7 5 49 8 5 17 31 29 22 54 0 13 20 17 0 7 14 1 17 36 52 22 55
41 13 0 17 20 7 22 11 17 42 13 19 4 22 57 18 12 40 17 40 7 30 19 17 47 33 22 58
54 12 20 18 0 7 38 26 17 52 50 23 0 28 12 0 18 20 7 46 31 17 58 4 23 1 59 11 40
18 40 7 54 36 18 3 16 23 3 26 11 20 19 0 8 2 41 9 8 18 8 26 23 4 52 11 0 19 20
8 10 43 18 13 33 23 6 15 10 40 19 40 8 18 44 18 18 38 23 7 36 10 20 20 0 8 26
44 18 23 41 23 8 ^3 10 0 20 20 8 34 42 18 28 42 23 10 8 9 40 20 40 8 42 38 18
33 40 23 11 20 9 20 21 0 8 50 34 10 0 18 38 35 23 12 31 9 0 21 20 8 58 28 18 43
28 20 0 23 13 39 8 40 21 40 9 6 21 18 48 19 23 14 44 8 20 22 0 9 14 13 18 53 7
23 15 46 8 0 22 20 9 22 2 18 57 53 23 16 45 7 40 22 40 9 29 50 19 2 36 23 17 43
7 20 23 0 9 37 38 11 0 19 7 18 23 18 38 7 0 23 20 9 45 23 19 11 57 23 19 30 6
40 23 40 9 53 7 19 16 33 23 20 20 6 20 24 0 10 0 49 19 21 7 23 21 7 6 0 24 20
10 8 29 19 25 38 23 21 51 5 40 24 40 10 16 8 19 30 7 23 22 33 5 20 25 0 10 23
47 19 34 33 23 23 13 5 0 25 20 10 31 23 19 38 56 23 23 50 4 40 25 40 10 38 57
19 43 18 23 24 25 4 20 26 0 10 46 29 12 6 19 47 38 23 24 56 4 0 26 20 10 53 59
19 51 55 21 1 23 25 25 3 40 26 40 11 1 29 19 56 9 23 25 52 3 20 27 0 11 8 58 20
0 21 23 26 17 3 0 27 20 11 16 25 20 4 30 23 26 39 2 40 27 40 11 23 48 20 8 37
23 26 58 2 20 28 0 11 31 10 13 1 20 12 41 23 27 14 2 0 28 20 11 38 30 20 16 42
23 27 28 24 0 1 40 28 40 11 45 49 20 20 41 23 27 39 1 20 29 0 11 53 7 20 24 39
23 27 48 1 0 29 20 12 0 22 20 28 34 23 27 54 0 40 29 40 12 7 36 20 32 26 23 27
58 0 20 30 0 12 14 48 20 36 15 23 28 0 0 0 Pisces. Virgo. Diffe. Aquarius. Leo.
Diffe. Capricorn Cancer Differ. Degries.

Spoud. I pray you learn me th'vse of this table.


Philo. That I will reserve unto his necessary place?


Spou. Then or we proceed any further, show me what the poles of the zodiake
be, for every circle have his proper poles: yea and whether they be all one
with the poles of th'equinoctiall.


Philo. I will fulfil your request. The poles of the zodiac, do much differ
from the poles of th'equinoctiall, as you may easily perceive by this figure
here placed. In which I have made C. H. E. I. for th'equinoctial: ^. H. G. I.
for the zodiac, and A. for th'earth. Now if I make B. D. the poles of
th'equinoctiall as they must needs be: the can they not be the poles of the
zodiac, as herafter you shall hear, but K. L. being the ends of th'axe tree
of the said zodiac, shall be the poles.




Spoud. I understand your mind. Will you now declare unto me the meaning of
the two tropikes, of which you lately made mention.


Philo. Yea and that right gladly, using Proclus autho ritie as in the other
circles which saith.

(...). What the some mer tropic is.


Aestiuus Tropicus, e circulus oim quos sol describit, {pro}xime Septetriones
vergens, in quo cum fuerit Sol, reuersionem aestiuam facit: Vbi omniu totius
anni logissima dies, nox vero breuissima habetur. Nam post reuersione aestiuam,
non ultra ad septetriones {pro}gredi Sole videris, sed ad alteram mudi partem
reuerti: vnde circulus hic, Tropicus appellatus est.

The Somer Tropic (saith Proclus) is the most northely circle which the Son
describes, in to which when as he enterith, it is the longest day, and
shortest night in all the year. For after this somerlye reverting, the Son
is not perceived to decline farther North, but directly to the contrary coost:
for which cause this circle is called a tropike (or circle of reverting and
turning back.)


Spou. And what calls he the other tropicke?


Philoni. The winter tropike or circle of retorning from the South: as these
his words following do testify.

(...). What the winter Tropic is.


Hyemalis vero tropicus circulus est omnium, quos Sol per mudi couersione
describit, maxim australis, in que cu sol puenerit hyema lem reuersione facit:
vbi maxima oim totius anni nox, dies vero minima conficitur. Na post hyemale
reuersione, sol ultra no pergit austrum versus, sed ad altera mudi part
reuertitur, vnde huic quo{que} circulo tropici nomen inditum est.

The tropic of winter, is the furdest south circle of al other that y^ son
by the tournynge of the world doth describe: into which when he doth enter, he
makes his wynterly return backward, at which season it is the logest night
in all the year, and shortest day. For after this return, the son goth not
further south, but doth approach to the contrary part of the world: for which
cause, this circle also was called a tropicke circle.


Spo. Proclus here means (as by the repetitio of his words I gather) that
these two tropikes, are as it were the boudes, length of the Sons iournay. For
going from the Summer tropicke in the beginning of the Crab, he directs his
course in the zodiac towards Libra in th'equinoctiall: and so leaving it,
draws unto the Winter Tropicke in the beginning of the Goat, beyond which
he can not go, but returns backward again, until he cum to the head of
the Ram.


Philo. It is so, and by these words you may also gather, The four times of
the year whereof they take beginning.
that the. iiij. times of the year, Spring, Summer, Harvest, and Winter, have
their beginnig in these. iiij. points (that is) the two Aequinictiall points,
and the tropickes.


Spoud. You have here just occasion to speak of the diversity of days, and
nights, and it please you.


Philo. Yet that shall be omittid until we make mentio of clymates, and the
paralleles: and at this present will speak of these circles which do divide
as well Th'equinoctiall, as also the zodiac, into. iiij. equal parts: so
that the Son being in any of them do make one of the forsayde times.


Spou. These circles also are necessary, but what are their names?


Philo. They are called Colures, of which th'one is drawn by the beginning of
Aries and Lybra, and of that is named th'quinoctiall Colure, and the other by
the beginning of cancer, and Capricorne, and called thereof the solstitiall
Colure, and are definid of Proclus in this manner.

(...). What the two colours are.


Per polos mudi ducutur circuli, quos aliqui coluros la: quibus accidit, vt
in sua circuferetia polos mundi habeat. Coluri vero dicti sunt, {pro}pterea
quod eoru parts quaeda non videatur. Na reliqui circuli per mudi couersione
toti cernutur coluroru vero parts quaedam nunquam videntur, eae scilicet, quas
sub horizonte nobis condit circulus Antarcticus. Caeterum ducutur hii circuli,
perpuncta tropicorum, in parts duas aequales diuidunt eum circulum, qui est in
zodiaci medio.

There are circles drawn by the poles (which some men call) Colures: and
contain in their circumference the Poles of the world, they be named Colures,
or trunckid circles, for this consideration, because that some parts of them
are not at any time scene. The other circles by the turning of the world are
all apparently seen: but some parts of the colures, be never decernyd. Such
are these parts as are under our Horizont in the circle Antarctike. These
circles also are drawn by the. ij. tropike points, dividing the ecliptic in
two equal parts.


Spoud. Is there yet more circles to be observed?


Philoni. Only Th'arctike, and Antarctike circle remains, and then you have
learned all such circles of the sphere, as shall serve for our purpose at this
present, What the are tic circle is.
and therefore I will make definition of them.

(...).

Arcticus circulus omnium maximus orbiu, qui nobis semper videntur, qui
attingens la puncto Horizontem, totus extat super terram: inter que inclusa
la, neque oriuntur, neque occidut, sed tota nocte mundi lustrare polum
spectantur.

The Arctike circle is the greatest of such circles as do at all times totally
appear: which touching in one point only the Horizont, is in all parts
above th'earth. And all sterres with in this circle included, do nether rise,
nor yet set, but turn round about the pole, all the lunge night.


Spoud. What calls Proclus the antarctike circle?


Philo. I will repeat his words. What the An tarctickcircle is.


(...).

Antarcticus circulus, est ac parallelus aequalis Arctico orbi, attinges
Horizotem la puncto, totus sub terra conditus: intra quem, coplexa la
nunquam a nobis cernuntur.

And may aptly be translated into English as follows.

The Antarctike circle, is an equal parallele with the circle Arctick,
touching the Horizot in one only point, and is totally under the Earth: the
Sterres which are within it comprehended, do never rise above the Horizont.


Spou. Yet I have harde, that such as inhabit the South parts of Spain, in
Calecut, Guinea, diverse other cutreis, do see many goodly bright Serres, yea
the southe Pole figured with sterres like a Crose.


Phi. It is as you have said. But of that we will speak in the treatise of
Nauigatio, to return to Proclus, he means not that the Antartictick Circle
pole of the same is under the Horizot to all men: but to us that are on this
side th'Equinoctiall, therefore it is spoken no less trewly, then pleasantly
of the sweet Poet Virgilius.

Hic, Vertix nobis semper sublimis, at illum Lib. 2. Geor.

Sub pedibus, Stixatra Videt, manes{que} profundi.
The north Pole, Still we have in sight:
But under th'Earth, the South sterre right.



Spou. And what is the Axe tree, poles of this circle?


Philoni. The same, that are of th'Equinoctiall, the two tropike circles. For
saying th'Equinoctiall, the ij. tropikes, the circles Arctike, Antarctike, be
equididistant paralleles (as Proclus affirms) it must the of necessity
follow, that they are revolved, turned upon the same Poles, have all one Axe
tree. Theodosius also confirms the same in these words.

(...)

In Sphaera, paralleli circuli circaeosdem polos sunt. Li. 2. Theor. ^


In a Sphere the parallele or equidistant Circles, have all one Pole.

But I will not burden you ( especillye in a true cause) which such grave
authority, but give you the figure of these. vj. last Circles, then proceed
further herein. In this figure is set all the. v. Paralleles, the ij. Colures,
the Zodiake. And first B. D. is the Equinoctial. E. F. the tropike of Cancer.
H. G. the tropike of Capricorne. K. M. the Circle Arctike, L. I. the circle
Antarticke, A. B. C. D. the Solstitial colure, A. N. C. O. th'Equinoctial
colure, E. G. the Zodiake, A. C. the Axe tree, which goes thorough the Center of
th'Earth directly, ends at the Poles.




Spoud. I must confess the words of Theodosius, Proclus, to be true: but yet
musing with my self, I can not conceive by what reason this Axe tree should
stey the Earth. And it standing fixed, the heavens as well under it, as also
above th'Earth, should be turned, revolved in like manner, as we see: I ever
fear lest th'Earth, being so heavy, ponderous, as it is, should fall to the
other part of the Heavens, which is under it.


Philo. I perceive you are not yet free from the fond imaginations of the
gross witted people, but yet you are the more to be excused, saying Lactantius
being so learned Lactantius petulance.
a man, was so foolish (whether it sprung of petulancye, or ignorance, I know
not) as to affirm the Heavens to be flat, not to go under th'Earth. But now to
your doubt, I answer: if God by his woderfull providence, power, did not steye
it in the place where it is, there could be no axe tree which might sustain
so unknown a burden, weighte: therefore you must rather imagine a straight
line, to be the forsaid axe tree, (as also the Circles of which we have
intreatid, being void of Latitude, and Profundity) then to believe any such
circles, or yet axe tree to be in the Heaves visiblie:


Spoud. I perceive your meaning right well.


Philoni. Now you have learned what the vj. great circles of the Sphere are, as
the Horizot, the Meridian, th'Equinoctiall, the zodiake, th'Equinoctiall, the
solsticiall Colures: as also the iiij. lesser Circles, which Why sum Circles
are called greater, and some lesser.
are the tropicke of Cancer, the tropic of Capricorne, the circle Artic, and
the circle Antarticke.


Spoud. I have so, I thank you sir. But for what cause be the vj. called the
greater Circles, the iiij. the lesser?


Philo. Iohn de Sacro Bosco, doth answer your question in these, or like
words. We call that a greater Circle of a Sphere (saith he) which being drawn
in the compass of the Sphere upon his Center, do divide it into two equal
portions: that a lesser Circle, which being drawn as the other, do not divide
the Sphere into equal parts, but inequall portios, such are the iiij. lesser
Circles.


Spou. If I shall for the better understanding such things as herto are
spoken, make a Sphere of Hopes, apply your precepts to the instrument, by what
order may I gather the true proportio of one of them, to an other?


Philo. Because the time doth so fast ron, I have also other matters to
entreat on: I will reserve the making of the Sphere, until I show you the
composition of other instruments required in this Art, in my Organographie. But
now for this present, let this figure (representyng the form of the Sphere,
with all the principal Circles to it belonging) satisfy thine expectation.


Spoud. Then will it please you to take The other part of the division of the
world.
in hand the second part of your division of the world, for hitherto (if I be
not disceiued) stretches the declaration of the heavenly Region.


Piloni. True it is, for our talk as yet either was of this regio, or else of
things giuynge lyghte to the same: and now let us convert our style in like
manner unto the Elemetary Region. This in it self, coteineth the iiij.
Elements, Fire, Aere, Water, Earth, (these are not corruptible) also
whatsoever is coteined within the circuit of the heaven of the Moan, as well
bodies perfect, as also imperfite, made of the forsaide Elements (the
Latinistis call them) corpora mixta.


Spoud. And wherefore are there but iiij. Elements? Why there can be but iiij.
Eel mentes. Lib. 2. de gene ratione.



Philo. Aristotle doth give a sufficient reason: saying, there are so many
Elements as there is combination, mixture, of the simple and first qualities,
which can be but four: hoot, and dry, propre to the Fire: hoot and moist,
of the Aere: could and moist, which is resembled to the water: could with
drynes, to the Earth. As for heate and couldnes, are so repugnant that there
can be no mixture of them: no more then of moisture drynes. There is also an
other reason made of Aristotle, taken Lib. primo de Coelo.
of the diversity of motion, which I do at this time willingly over pass.


Spou. We are agreed of the number of the Elements, but what is their order,
which of them is higher, and which of them lower?


Philo. That Element is higher then the rest, which is lyghtest, most fugitive,
and subtle. For it is a general A general mayor.
mayor among Philosophers, that al light things cotend upward: all gross and
poderous, to the Center of the Earth.


Spou. By this propositio I gather, The situation place of the Elements.
that the Fire being more subtle than the other three, shall ascend above them, be
next the Globe of the Moan. For you said, that there may be no place empty,
void. And then next him the Aere, then the Water, last of all the Earth.


Philo. It is in like order as you have said. And the Fire, conteyneth in him
the Aere: The Aere, in his compass the Water: the Water also doth compass
environ

The Earth, not round about as the other do, but in diverse parts, so that the
water, th'earth, rather make one vnifourme Globe: as this Figure here annexid
doth plainly declare.


Spoud. There seems in your description to be five distinct Regions, How may
that be, saying that there are but iiij. Elemetes?




Philo. There are as you have said, but the Aerie Regio, is deuidid into iij.
parts, springing thorough Heate, and Cold: as the hier The Aere deuidid into
three Regions.
part of the Aere signified with A. being ne'er to the Orb of the Fire, and is
daily carried about, (as Cometes and Where Cometes and blazing Sterres are
engendered.
blazing Sterres there engendered, do apparently declare.) and is made more hoot
the the middle Regio is: again, the lower region next us, markid with C. is
thorough the reflextio of the Son beams rebounding from th'earth also made
hoot, therefore the middle region B. being void of heate, is always could:
yea and so much the coulder, howe much the heate is more vehement in the other
two regions.


Spou. Then in this middle region I suppose all Hail, Where Hail and Snow is
engendered.
Snow, and such like is ingendrid.


Phil. It is so, but I let that pass, and entreat of th'use of them, touching
our first meaning.


Spoud. Because the Fire, and Aere, should seem little to profit in this place,
will you somewhat speak of the Water, and Earth?


Philo. I will speak nothing of the Water (but refer it until we entreat of
Nauigatio) but only in this place, make mention of th'earth, and so depart
until to morrow.


Spou. And it wear not more for troblynge you, then any werines that I have, I
would wish the day to be. x. days in length, I have received such pleasure
in your instructions. But sense the Son somewhat declines to the west
Ocian, I will give diligent ear unto your words, for the short time there is
yet remaining. What th'Erth is.



Phil. I rejoice much to understand your fervent desire to knowledge, which I
will to my uttermost further. And now touching th'Earth, consider you that she
is lowest of all Elements: black, ponderous, and round, inuironid, and
enclosed within the other three. She is called the mother of fruits, the root
of all plants, the norishe of living creatures, the foundation of all
buildings, the sepulchre of the dead, the Center of the beautiful frame of
the world, the matter and substance of mans body, and the receptakle of
heavenly influence. She is also garnished with fragrat flowers, of Man, Beast,
and Foul, inhabited, and comfortablie quickened by the norishing beams of the
Soon, Moan, Planetes, and fixed Sterres. Diversity of opinions touching
th'Erth his form.
But you shall note for all that here is spoken, that there is great
controversy touching th'Earthes form: which must be descidid and put away,
or we can safely proceed further. As th'opinions of those which affirm
th'Earth not to be round, like a Globe or Boule. Those that affirm it to be
of pillar form. Those that will not have it to be the Center of the heaven.
Those that suppose the Earth to move: with other like. But the greatest of all,
is the error of those that speak against the roundness of th'Earth. Wherefore
I will touche it principally, which thing done, the other are manifest of them
selves.


Spoud. You enter into that question, in which of all other I desire most
especially to be satisfied, for I also am in that error (if it be an error
to say th'earth is not round.)


Philo. Bring forth such reasons than, as inforseth you so to judge, and I
will answer them.


Spou. It seems sufficient to An objection, against the round form of
th'Earth.
credit th'Earth not to be round, if we consider the great deep valleis, that
are in it: the Cities, Towers, Castles, and Trees, with such like placed upon
the face of the Earth: but most of all, the hougie and hie Mountains, and
Hills: Of which, some of them are supposed to be These Hills are the
greatest in all the Earch.
60. miles in height. As the Hill in th'Iland Teneriffa, (which Ptolomaeus
names one of the fortunate Ilandes) and is beyond Hercules Pillars. Also an
other in Thessalia, called (of Solinus) Olimpus, This is the fa mous Hill of
which Poets so much entreat: in the top of which the Gentles builded an aul
la making to Iuppiter Sacrifice.
being of such height that the ashes (there days of Sacrifice being ended)
remain a whole year in the top of the same, not moved with troublous
tepestes, or vehement blasts: but thorough his great height, is free from all
violence of winds. What shall I speak of the Hill Caucasus, which divides
Albania Colchis, from Sermatia (as doth appear in the second Table of Asia,
in Ptolomaeus Geography) which Aristotle doth esteem to be of such hight, that
it may be scene at the mouth of the river maeotis. The distance of which, is
from theforsaid Hill. 620. English miles. Moreover you shall see no place, but
either flat, or else full of Hills, Dales, Valeis, or such like, which is
far from a Globe form, figure.


Phil. Yet do all these words nothing conclude. Do you not consider, that the
sight is deceived in things from it, Th'answere to the first objection.
far distant. And therefore I will in few words answer you, that these
Hills, Mountains, Valleys, are no more in quantity (respect being had to the
whole Earth,) the the Pits holes of a rough polished Gustone, to the stone:
which although it be not smooth, yet it argues nothing less then this
gunstone not to be roude, like a Globe in form: yea, then the body of the
Th'earth is a stone.
Earth being a rough stone, harde, not so apt to be polished, as the body of
the Water, doth remain with such valleys Hills as you have said, in many
places these valleys are filled with water, to the more apt proportio of a
Globe. Moreover, Nature considering the necessity of th'inhabitauntes in this
Center, left such form unto it as might for there use most coueniently serve.


Spou. For what cause suppose you th'Earth to be a stone?


Philo. If it were not a stone but Sand, or Clay in substance, then the water
being mixed with it, they both should be confounded in them selves: yea the hie
Hills, Moutaines, (of which you made mentio) should sink, settle down to
the Center of th'Earth: saying, they are so ponderous, heavy, not be
sustained, borne up as they are in the face of th'Earth. But for the further
cofirminge you in that, which is spoken, answer me. Imagine there were a
great round trunk of Timber, which went thorough the whole Earth directly by
the Center, then there were a great heavy stone put in at this Truke: how
far suppose you this stone should descend?


Spoud. Until the center of th'Earth, midst of the Trunk.


Philo. In like case, if th'earth were not an hard, stony substance, but Clay
or Sad (as to our sights doth appear) these Hills, rocks being much
heavier then any stone, should in like sort go to the Ceter of th'earth. But
have you any other doubts?


Spou. Yea verily, that is, th'Earth to be flat. The 2. obiectio



Philo. What provokes you so to judge?


Spou. This reason, that th'Earth must be in form most agreeable to the
Heavens. And that the Heaves be flat, I can prove by th'authoritie of
Lactantius Firmianus. Th'answere.



Philoni. It is truly said, that knowledge hath no enemy but ignorance.
There are now at these days, no small number of Lactantius sort, not
scrupulous enemies only, but also Physicians, of whom I am ashamed to speak,
they do contempne that knowledge (which is the greatest suerist token of Gods
providence for mankind) either by perverse interpreting the scripture, or else
of mere folly, dispisinge that, of which they never tasted, are utterly
ignorant in. But such were very ill to be Judges, for they would condemn the
man, or they knew the crime of which he were accused: but let that pass. As
touching your opinion, that th'Earth is flat, I will prove it to be round from
th'East to the West: and in like manner, from the North, to the South.


Spou. Then must I needs grant that it is in like sort round in all parts.
In lib. 1. de Mundo.



Philon. I will use the same argumetes that Cleomedes doth. If th'Earth were
flat, then the sterres should rise at the same moment to us, that they do to
them which dwell in th'East parts of the world: it should be midday with us,
them at one instant: yea the same Stars should set in the Weast in like
manner with the, and us.


Spoud. That they do not, I am most sure: for at Alexadria, a city in Egipt,
it is day iij. hours sooner then with us: night in like sort. Yea at
Compostell in Spain (which is West from us) the day begins with us sooner
by one hour a half, then with them: and is day with them, after the Son is
set with us, in like sort one hour, xxx. minutes.


Philo. And all this comes, because th'Earth is round, causing us them not to
have one general Horizont. The like reason is to be said of the diversities of
times, in the beginning of an Eclipse, either of Son, or Moan. As for example,
th'Eclipse of the Moan, which was 1556. Example of ij. Eclipses of the Moon.
the 17. day of Noueber, at one of the clock in the morning, with us at
Norwiche, ( for the most part of Englande) which in the Horizont of Calicut,
began at vij. of the clock. In like sort, there shall hap an Eclipse of the
Moan, in the year of Christ our saviour. 1562. the 16. day of July, at two of
the clock, iiij. minutes in the morning: at which time she shall be totallie
darkened, continue from the beginning to th'ende iij. hours, and yet
th'inhabitauntes at Calicut, shall not see any part thereof: which most
evidently shows the roundness of th'Earth to be the cause, as this Figure here
following do more plainly set out: in which, E. signifies th'Earth: A. the
East: C. the West: D. the vertical point for Norwich: B. in like manner, the
Zenit of Calicut. Whereby it is manifest that the Moan shall be perfectly separated
from the Son, or she shall appear in the Horizot of Calicut. And yet we in
England, diverse other places East, shall se both beginning, end of her
Eclypsing.




Spoud. These are sufficient probatios to declare th'Earth roud, fro th'East to
the West: but by what argument can you show it to be also round from the
South to the North?


Philo. That is very easy to prove. For if th'Earth were flat from the South,
to the North, then we should se the south Sterres under th'Earth: as well as
those that be North always in our sight. And again, the Son, Moan, Sterres,
at mid day through the universal year, should be ever in one height: which
also is false.


Spoud. Yea, for I have had practise of that thing, saylinge in a ship, for
we going from th'Equinoctiall Line northwarde, did see the North, south Poles,
equal with the Water. But directing our course more to the north coast,
leaving th'Equinoctial, we reared the north star in short space. xij. degr.
at length, 30. degrees. looking south, we could not se the southe Pole, nor yet many
other sterres which in th'Equinoctial, were visible to us.


Phi. Yea, where your north star was elevated xxx. degrees, your south Pole
was xxx. degrees depressed in like manner: But for the firmer fixynge it in your
memory, behold this Figure: in the which C. signifies both th'Earth, and
water, A. the north Pole, B. the south, therefore if one go from B. to A (the
earth being roud) he must have B. so much under him, as A is above his
Horizot. There are besides these many, sundry reasons, to prove this thing:
which I may omit (as I suppose) to you, which need no longer probatio, in that
which is most manifest.




Spo. Yet their argumets shall not only stay my mind in a truth, but also
with the same I shall co fut th'errors of other, if any shall spring about this
matter. Ptolomaeus. Cleomedes. Philo. Aristotle. E. Reignholt. Orontius.



Phil. Then I will exhort you, where these shall not seem sufficient, you will
gather more stronger out of Ptolomaeus Almegiste, Cleomedes de mundo, Philo de
mundo, Aristotle, Erasmus Reignholt, Orontius, Hic canet errante Lunam,
Solis{que} labores
Arcturu{que}, pluuias{que} hyad. geinos{que} trioes
Iohn de Sacrobosco, our countryman master Record, which doth almost repeat
all their arguments, in the Castle of knowledge. And now behold the Type of
the world, containing in it, as well the heavenly Regio, with such Spheres,
Circles, as have been in sundry parts before set forth in this treatise: as
also th'Elementarie region, comprehending the Fire, Aere, Water, Earth: in
such order form, as is cosonant agreing both with Reason, Practise, and
Authority of most approved authors. And for this time we will depart: for
behold the Son is gone to rest, Hesperus do show in the West very bright,
all other living things also do apply them to take rest: therefore let us go
down this Hill into the City, refreshyng our selves, quickening memory, to
morrow I will mete you in this same place again.


Spoud. I thank you hertly.


Philoni. Let me here you can repeat the sum of such things, as we have
taken in hand this day, as we walk downward.


Spoud. With a right good will.

1 First, you showed me what Cosmography was, what Geography, and what
Chorographie, yea, and wherein every of them differs from other. 2 Next, what
the world was, with his parts (that is to say) the Heavenly Region,
Elementary: with a brief Discourse, touching the Parts, and order of the
Heavenly Region. 3 Thyrdly, what a Sphere is, howe it is divided into a Right,
and Crooked Sphere: And howe it differs from a Cirle. 4 Forthly, what a Center
was, what an Axe tree, what a Diameter, and of their difference. 5 Fiftlye, of
the Principal Circles which are said to be in this Sphere. As the Horizont,
Meridian, Aequinoctiall, Zodiake, two Colures, the two Tropickes, the Circles
Arcticke, and Antarctick. Also that the Horizont; and Meridian Circles be
stable, and without motion, with diverse other things herto belonging. 6 Last,
you proceeded to the second part of the world, which is the Elementary Region:
In which you refuted sundry opinions, touching the form of the Earth.



Philo. Now I perceive both your apt nature in conceiving such things as
are spoken, also your firm memory in retaining the same. Wherefore you shall
encourage me, to give you further instructions. But for this time I must bid
you fare well.


Spou. God preserve you, grant you life to accomplish your desire, in
profiting your country, as you do entende.


Amen.
THE SECOND BOOK OF the Cosmographicall Glass: in which is plainly expressed
the Order, and Number, of Zones, Paralleles, and Climates. Also sundry ways
for th'exacte finding out of the Meridiane Line: The Longitude, Latitude, of
places: with many other precepts, belonging to the making of a Carte, or
Map.
Spoudaeus. MORPHEVS THE God of dreams, with his slepie rod, so much this
last night frequented my company, that (my body taking rest) my mind was much
more busily travelling in such conclusions as I had learnid of Philonicus, the
it was in the time of his teaching. For some time Morpheus showed me the Son,
in the tropicke of Capricorne, When the Soon is in the Tropic of Capricorne. In
both Aequi noctiall points.
far in the South, among the cloudye skies, as he comenly is the. 13. day of
December: And next he appeared in the Equinoctial points, as it is the tenth
day of March, and the. 14. of Septeb. willing me with great di liges to note
that parallele circle. Shortly after the soon appeared in the tropicke of
Cancer, in which place he is In the Tropic of Cancer.
the. 12. day of June, causing in our region the logest day in the year.
immediately the time seemed as it were midnight, Charles Wayne, with Boots,
diverse other sterres, turned about the Pole. But as he wold have carried me
about the heaves, to have shewid me the North Crown, strong Hercules,
Cassiopeia, the Egle, the flieng Horse, mighty Orion, the two Dogs, the
famous, great ship Argo. c. Mercury the messenger of the Gods came to my
bed side, said, Aurora did appear, Phebus with his gold beams, was entered
his chariot, minding to finish his diurnal Arcke: so that it was a reproach
for me, any lodger to play the sluggard: declaring more over that Philonicus
was in the fildes. And surely I suppose no less, but I shall not from him be
lunge absent. I am justly reprehended of Mercury, because the time that is
consumed with sleep more then nature requires, is all lost: for there spring no
profit thereof, but sickness disquietnes, both of body mind. But what is he that
calls Spoudaeus, beckneth with his hand? It is Philonicus. I will make speed
to mete him.


Philon. God save you Spoudaeus.


Spoud. And you also, most hertilie I require the Gods: you know the occasio
(I trust) of my resorting into this place.


Philo. For to be further instructed in the knowledge of Cosmography. what is
taught in this second Book.



Spoud. It is verily my desire, specially to know the Longitude, Latitude,
circuit of the Earth, and of the diuisio of it into Climates, to know the
meaning of Zones, paralleles: to find out the Meridiane line, the longitude
latitude of any place: because they have a singular use in this Art.


Philo. You have repeated matter enough to consume this day in, I will if time
permit, willingly satisfy your request. But saying this thing doth depend
chiefly of dimention, measuringe: it is requisite to know that first, yea the
principal parts of it.


Spou. Dimention is no other thing, then a logitude What Dimetion is.
known, practised: by which we may in like manner, measure th'vnknowe
distance of places by the same experience.


Philo. True it is. And there are three things only which may be measured. For
either it is a line, as Longitude: or else a Plat form, as Latitude: or last, a
body, as thickness, or profundity.


Spoud. Glarianus hath the like saying, Campanus shows whereof these three do
spring, in this manner. A What a Point is. What a Lyne is.
point (saith he) is that which have no parts, yet by the moving of it, a lyne
is described. And a lyne, moved because it hath length (being void of breadth
depenes) ca but describe a plat What a Plat form is.
form. This plat form, is both a round plat form, also a flat, as in
these figures. And a plat form moved, because it has length breadth,
describes a Body, having both What a Body is.
length, breadth, depenes.


Philo. Hereto agrees your Pathway. Now proced we further. Because in this
Art, the chief measures we use, is a Pace, a Forlog, a leque, A round plat
form.
A plain plat form.
a Mile, a Degree c. I will set before your eyes in this Table both the
diversity of miles, also their exact length, placing a Barley corn (being the
least measure) as the rule, whereby other measures shalbetried. And like as
progression is made from the least unto the most, as from a point, to a lyne:
from a lyne, to a plat form: and from a plat form, to a body: even so in the
quantity of measures, we do go fro a barley corn, to a finger breadth: from a
finger breadth, to an vnch: fro an vnch, to an had breadth: from an hand
breadth, to a span: fro a spane, to a foot: from a foot, to a pace: so forth
to a perch, a furlong, a leque, a mile, as in this Table is manifest and
plain.

A Barley corn is the least mea sure, yet from it do all other mea sures
proceed, as

A Finger breadth, An Vnche. A Hand breadth. A Span. A Foot. A Geomtricall
Pace. An English Pearche. A Furlonge. An English Furlonge. A Leque. An
Italian mile. A common Germaine mile An English mile.


Conteyninge in it.

4 Barley corns in thickness. 3 Fingers. 4 Fingers. 3 Hand breadth. 4 Hand
breadth. 5 Five foot. 16 Foot a half. 125 Pace. 660 Foot, or 132. Pace. 1500
Pace. 1000 pace, or 8. furlogs 32 Furlongs. 8 Furlongs.


There is also diversity what a Furlong should contain in length, it should
appear that Ptolomaeus, Strabo, Plinius, do not agree herin. Lib. 2. cap. 23.
Natura. hist.



Spou. What call you this word Furlong?


Philon. That which the Grecians call (...) Plinie name it stadium (...). That
is, a statione. And it is usurped, for a place where men exercise there horse,
ronnyng a race, which length Plinie determines to be 125. pases, or. 625.
foot, by which reason. 8. of these furlongs do make an Italian or English
mile, which being multiplied by 4. makes. 32. furlongs, the length of a common
Germanie mile, I call it a common Germaine mile, for that in Heluetia not
observing any true distace Heluetian mi les.
in their iorneis, they use 40. or. 50. furloges for a mile.


Spou. Those are Robin Hodes miles as the proverb is.


Phi. There is also a diverse order in measure observed, as the Aegiptians by
signs: the Gretians by furlongs: the Spaniardes, French men by leques: the
Italias, Germans, Englishmen, by miles: which I thought mete to declare, more
for that it may further you in reading their works, then that I entende to
introduce in place any of there ways, but will use only the English mile, The
quantity of an English mile.
writing to English men: the quantity whereof as I said, is 8. furlongs:
every furlonge containing 132. pases: every pace 5. foot: every foot, 4.
handbreadthes: every hand breadth, 4. fingers in thickness: every finger, 4.
Barley corns round dried. So that an English mile contains in length.
253440. Barley corns, as by the rules of Arithmetike, is manifest plain.


Spoud. This seems very strange, yea rather incredible, yet surely to be
true, I am assured.


Philon.. You shall understand matters, both more strange, pleasant then
this, which is found out by the infalible rules of Arithmetik, Geometry: now
proceed we to our purpose, beginning with this word Logitude.


Spoud. I take it for no other thing then the distance of a Star, or part
of a sign, from the beginning of Aries the first sign, in the Zodiake. As the
Virgins spike, in the xvij. degree. xlij. minutes of Libra: is vj. signs,
xvij. degrees, xlij. minu. or 197. degrees. xlij. minu. from the head of Aries.


Philo. That signification of Logitude, is used among Longitude taken two ways
the Astronomers: but in Cosmography it is otherwise. For they call the
Longitude of any Region, the portion of the Equinoctial Circle, which is
included betwixt the Canarian Ilandes, (in the West being the first degre of
Longitude) the Meridiane of the Regio, that thou wilt describe. Such portio of
the Equinoctial in the midst of Englande (from the fornamed Ilandes) is about
xxij. degrees.


Spoud. Then in describinge the face of the Earth, Cosmographers do place the
first degre of Logitude in the West fortunate Ilandes, so proced thorough the
whole face of the same, until they come to that place again.


Philo. It is so as you say. So that the midst of the Earth is 180. degrees,
from the West. Such are the East Indians, 360. is the furdest that one can be
from the West.


Spou. But could not the degrees of Longitude be accounted from some other
part of the Earth, as well as from the Iandes before said?


Philo. Yes verily: but Ptolomaeus the restorer of this Ptolomaeus.
Art, placed the first degree of Longitude in them, as the furdest point of the
confines bounds of Afrike, Hercules Pillars.
Europe: as the famous, excellent pillars of Hercules (called of Diodorus
(alpe, Abyle) doth declare. The cause which moved Ptolomaeus thus to do, you
shall find In Prologo li. 2. Geographiae
in his Geography.


Spoud. And is there the like difference, betwixt Cosmographers Astronomers
cocerning the signification of the Latitude of a region, as there was in the
Longitude?


Philo. No verily: For they mean nothing else by the What Latitud is.
Latitude of a region, but the Arc, or portion of the Meridiane circle,
contained betwixt the Pole of the world, the Horizont of the same region.


Spou. And is not this Latitude, reconed fro the Equinoctial unto either of
the Poles?


Philo. It is, as in like manner the Longitude, from the West to the East.


Spoud. Yet Glarianus accopteth Glarianus error.
the Latitude from the North to the South, not from the Equator toward either
of the Poles.


Philon. It is a small error, you your self are able to refute it. But now
will I show unto you howe much the circuit of the Earth is, then make
mention of the Zones.


Spou. Sir, never take it in hand, for the common people will judge you mad:
saying you neither have gone about the viij. part of it, neither yet for want
of years you might achieve such an enterprise, although you had so long life
given you, as Nestor had, because of the hougie Seas, great Rivers, deep
Lakes, besides Wodes, Rocks, desert places, innumerable perils: which I can
not repeat.


Philon. You have trewly said, if there were none other way to attain to it,
the by travelling about it: but it shall be sufficient to have travelled any portio
of this great circuit. For Ptolomaeus shows Howe to find out the Circuit of
the Earth.
how to find out the Circuit of the Earth, by searching the distance of a
great Circle, comprehended betwixt the vertical points of two (or more) places,
distaut a sunder.


Spoud. By what mean shall I find out the vertical point The vertical
Point, Zenit or Pole of the Horizont, is so much distance from the
Equinoctial, how much the Pole is elevated above the Horizot. And like as the
meridian, ever do describe the North and Southe costs: so doth the vertical
Parallele, the East and West.
?


Phi. It is equal to the Pole Arctike (the finding of which, hereafter I will
teach you) you may use the one for the other: the you also in like manner must
know the distance in miles of these places, after diuid the distance of the
two places, by the difference of the two vertical points, the quotiet shall
show you howe many miles do answer to one degree of the said Circle in the
Heaves. But or we further proced, mark this figure, in which C. is the earth,
A. B. the distance of two placis in the Earth, D. E. the space of the great
Circle in Heaven, betwixt the two vertical points.



Now dividing the space, A. B. by D. E. the quotiet shall show the number of
miles. As for example: I take the eleuatio of the pole at Portsmouth, which is
the furdest place on the south shore of Englande, find it, 51. degr. 20.
minutes: in like An example.
sort at Barwike, the furdest place North, whose Latitud is 56. degrees. 50. mi.
The difference of these. 2. eleuatios is. 5. degrees, 30. minutes. Also the
direct distauce from Portsmouth to Barwicke, is 330. miles. Therefore dividing
the. 330. miles (which is the portio of the Earth, answering the difference of
these 2. Eleuatios) by the 5. degrees, 30. minutes, which is the difference: I
find the quotient to be. 60. Wherefore in all places in Englande 60. miles,
answer to one degre of any great Circle in the heaven.


Spoud. Then I pray you return to your figure again, and confer it with
your example.


Philo. I will so do. First. A. do represent Barwike. B in like manner
Portsmouth, whose eleuations of the pole Arcticke is set over their heads. The
distance fro. A. to. B. 330. miles, the portion of the heaven betwixt the ij.
eleuations is. 5. degrees. 30. minutes: by which I did divide the distance of
the Earth. A. B. finding the quotient. 60. And in like sort you may work
with any other places in the Earth.


Spoud. This serves well for to know what portion of the Earth in Englande,
answers to the Arc of any great Circle contained betwixt the Zenit of two
several places. But what is this in respect of the Circuit compass of the
hole Earth?


Philo. Yet by this you are able to declare how many miles answer to. 30.
degrees?


Spou. Yea verily, and that easily.


Philo. And by the same ordre you may find that. 21600. English miles, answer
unto. 360. degrees which is the compass of the heaves.


Spou. This is so evident that all men must needs confess it, but it seems
very meruailus.


Ph. What say you then (which is more) if I make you presently to find how
many barley corns in thickness will go about the Horizont, if they might be
placed equally?


Spo. It seems impossible to be brought to pass by any mans devise, therefore
you had best omit the work.


Phi. You know how many barley corns will extend the length of an English mile.


Spo. Yes sir, you said. 253440. makes a mile in length.


Phi. The if. 253440. corns make a mile: shall not 5474304000. barley corns
answer to. 21600 miles.


Spo. And is there any difference Diversity of opinions touching th'earth his
circuit.
towchig the compass of th'earth?


Ph. Yes for Ptolo. saith 22500. mil. the circuit of th'earth. Tibitius
Alphraganus but. 20400. Eratosthenes. 31250. Hipparchus 34625.


Spo. And you differ fro the all: but whereof doth all this diversity spring?


Phi. Ether of the diversity of the measures, or else that the places Latitudes
were not exactly know. As Ptolom. making example of Alexadria Rodia, calls
Rodia 36. degrees. 50. mi: Where it is 38 degr.. 30. min. now behold the Figure. And
saying you have learned sufficiently what the Logitude, Latitude, Circuit, or
Compass of th'Earth is: it should seem very requisite to make plain relation,
which places of th'Earth are habitable, which be not.


Spoud. That thing is very expedient as well, for the conservation, as also
reperation, restoring a man unto health lost. For by that invention the
temperature of th'Aere, is easily found out.


Phil. You have well spoken, therefore we will convert our talk unto the
zones.


Spou. It should seem first requisite to declare the nature of Paralleles, for
by the distinction of them (as I remember) the Zones are found out.


Philo. It is so, but here note that there are Paralleles which divides the
Longitude of Regions, are called Paralleles of Longitude, also Paralleles of
Climates (which in there place I will declare) making here mention but of v.
only, which have principal use in the distinctio of zones. As th'equinoctial,
the ij. tropikes, the What a Zone is.
circles Arcttike, Antarctike. And these divide the face of th'Earth in five
portios, or parts, are called zones, in French beds, we may aptly call the
equidistaunt places, or Girdles.


Spou. And howe is th'Earth divided into five Zones according to the v.
parallele Circles?


Phi. I will show you after Parmenides Parmenides. Possidomus.
mind, unto who Possidonius (as Strabo witnesses) ascribeth th'inuentio. First
directly under th'equinoctial in the heaves, there is also in the midst of
th'earth an Equino. imagined, under the tropic in the heave, two tropike
Circles in the Earth: and finallye, under the two polary circles in the Heaven,
two circles in the Earth answering in like proportio: so that the Earth is
parted in v. equal portios, which are called zones, as this Figure doth
manifestly set out.




Spoud. Do you not in this Figure call every portion betwixt two paralleles: a
zone?


Phil. Yes verily, as the space betwixt the tropike of Cacer, Capricorn, in
Graeke is called (...), with us the burning zone, The burning zone.
because the son goes over the inhabitants heads continually. Also betwixt
the tropicke of Cancer, Temperate zones.
the Circle Arctike, (...). or the temperate zone.

And the portio betwixt the circle Arctick the north Frose Zones
Pole (...) we call it Frozen. In like manner with the other two zones southe
from the Equinoctial, the temperate south zone is called (...), and the frozen
zone, (...).


Spou. Yet by my computation your table shows sex zones: Two frozen zones,
two temperate, and two burning zones: for the space betwixt the two Tropicke
Paralleles, is divided equally of the Equinoctial.


Phi. You are in the same error that Polybius was (as Polybius error.
testifies Strabo) but Proclus hereto do aptly answer, where he speak of
zones, and I will repeat his words of this burning zone only, omitting the
rest, whereby it (...).
shall be evident unto you, that there are not two, but one burning zone, his
words are these.

(...).

Reliqua quae inter memoratas quatuor medium locu tenet, quod sub ipso
Solistransitu iacet, torrida nuncupatur: a terestri equatore in duas parts
diuisa.

The other zone (saith Proclus) which is in the midst of the. iiij. aforesaid,
because it lies under the course of the son, is called burning: and is
divided of the earthly Aequinoctiall, in two equal portions.


Spoud. But what compelled Proclus to say that it is but one zone: Saying it
is divided in two, by the aforesaid earthly Aequinoctiall? I will tel you,
because there is no alteratio of the quality, teperature of the heaves betwixt
the space and distance of the. ij. Tropikes, but continually hot al the year
(by reso of the sons iornay in the zodiake as in the figure you may se)
therefore not only Proclus but also Plato, Aristotle, Strabo, Ouide ad Uirgil
yea al authors do make their account but of. v. zones. An objection.



Spo. It should seem that this burning zone, for the feruet heat, the. ij.
frozen zones so far distant from the sons course, should not be habitable, as
Ouide doth right Lib. 1. Metamorphosis.
excellently in these verses set out.

Vt{que} duae dextra coelum, totidem{que} sinistra
Part, secant zonae: quinta est ardentior illis:
Sic onus inclusum numero distinxit eodem
Cura dei, totidem{que} plagae tellere praemuntur:
Quarum, quae media est, non est habitabilis aestu.
Nix tegit alta duas, totidem inter vtras{que} locauit,
Temperiemque dedit, mista cum frigore flamma.


Like as the Zones into v. parts do right the Heavens divide,
Even so, for the Earth a nubre like, nature did well provide
The midst of the all men eschew, the burning is so fell.
In the zones next the Poles through could, no creature long may dwell.
Bitwixt these, the burning Zone, two other se you may,
For tempratnes replenished with living things always.



Philo. Well, because I will not have you to err with The Answer.
Poets, other that suppose these not habitable, I will take the more diligence
to drive this Heresy out of your Ptolomaeus. Auicenna.
head, although Ptolomaeus, Auicenna were of sufficient authority, to make
you credit this thing, affirming that they have scene men which did inhabit
betwixt the Equinoctial, the tropike of Cancer: yea, that, there are many
notable Cities, Villages: yet I will use other reasons then testimonies in this
behalf. And first answer me: Is not the heate of the Soon cause (that in the
Sumer ceason he inclining toward our habitatio) that men's colour in there faces
hades are made blacker, then naturally they are?


Spoud. Yes verily: I have scene some dwellers in little Vilages, as Ploughmen,
Heardmen, Shepehards marvelously sonneburnt.


Philon. What will you coiecture then of those people that are black, face,
body all extern parts of them, doth it not come of the heate of the Soon?


Spoud. It must needs so be, and I have scene men of that colour, we call them
Aethiopians.


Philo. Very well, do not you believe that the country where they dwell, must
of force be under the beams of the Soon?


Spou. Else it could not follow that there colour should so much differ fro ours.


Philon. And there is no place under the perpendiculer Soon beams, but only
this burning Zone: Ara bia (somewhat fro the Soon beams situated) is the cause
that the inhabitants, are not so black as the Aethiopians: nor the
Spaniardes, as the Arabians: or Frechme, as the Spaniardes.


Spoud. And the Germaynes have their skin whiter then the Frenchemen: we here
in Englande, then all these: so that the further from this burning Zone, the
whiter the sky: and the nearer the Equinoctial, the blacker, more adust burnt.


Philo. Moreover the Nauigatio to Calicute, (of Vesputius Columbus.
which voyage Vesputius, Columbus were the first authors, now more frequented
of the spanierdes, then sailing into coutreis nie adiacet to us) do witness
bear, that under this burning Zone there are inhabitautes.


Spou. by these words it is manifest, that the burning Zone is not habitable
only, but also inhabited. And as touching the temperate Zones, no man is so
foolish, or mad, as to deny them to be replenished with all living creatures
abundantly: wherefore if you can prove that the two Zones, next the Poles are
also habitable, you shall as far banish this error fro me, as the Soon doth
darkness.


Philoni. Although Ptolomaeus do not describe any parallele beyond Thylim,
which is two degr. more of this side of the Circle Arctike. And that for the
situatio of it, far distant from the beams of the son, and therefore the
Waters continually frozen and th'Earth with Snow covered: Yet Erasmus Reignholt
Erasmus Reignholt.
(and that truley) describes a Parallele by Hielso, an Ilad in Norway which
is. 9. degrees beyond the polary or Arctike circle. Also the grene land, and
in diverse countries there inhabited, and the inhabitants are called in Greek
(...) in Latin Periscij, and we may call them aptly inhabitants which have
there shadow daily declining unto all parts of the Horizont.


Spo. Then I perceive that both the burning zone, also the frozen are habitable
and not that only, but also inhabited, although not so plentifullye as the
temperate zone. But now sense there is offered good occasion to entreat of
shadows, and their diversity* yea and the place serves aptly for it, or we
do further proceed. Wherefore I require you, to turn our comunicatio to this
matter.


Phi. With a right willing mind. You must first understand that of the
diversity of shadows, there are. iij. diverse distinct habitatios of people
found, that is to say, (...). which names also the latinest use, Amphiscij,
Heteroscij, Periscij, we wat apt English terms for them, yet I will make it
plain though I use the more words. And first I will speak of those which we
call Amphiscij. You do mark well that the sons course, Amphiscij.
recourse continually in the Zodiak makes the shadow long, and short?


Spou. I know that well, and the nearer he comes toward us, the shorter is the
shadow, and the further he goes fro us, the lodger he gives a shadow.


Philo. It is so as you say. But how think you, is there not some place that
hath no shadow?


Spoud. There can be no such.


Philo. If the greatest declination of the Son from th'Equinoctiall ne'er to
the zenit, ver ticall point, make the shadow shortest that can be in thy
region: then where he goes over any zenit, there must be no shadow.


Spou. It should seem to follow.


Phil. Yea it must of necessity so be.


Spoud. But where is there any such, over whose heads the Soon directly goes?


Philo. Such be those that dwell in the burning Zone, which (as I said) is
betwixt the two Tropikes, so that when the Son is in the beginning of Aries,
and Libra, they have no shadow, and therefore Ascij hath two Somers two
Winters. lib. 9.
Plinius calls the (...), Ascij, or people without shadow. And because he is
twice yearly in these points, they have two summers, and in like case two
winters, for that he declines to the Tropikes of Cancer, and Capricorne.
Libro. 9.
Wherefore Lucanus spake of such inhabitants very aptly, in this these verses
following.

Depraensum est hunc esse locum, quo circulus alti
Zolstitii, medium signorum percutit orbem.


This is the place where th'Equinoctiall divides
The Zodiake in twain, causinge two Somer tides.



Spoud. I remember that Ptolomaeus in his Almegist Lib. 2. cap. 4.
makes mention of such inhabitants, and names also such as dwell under the
tropikes Ascij, but yet I should not have called it to mind if you had not give
th'occatio.


Philo. Yet this people when as the son declyneth Northward from them, have a
shadow, which shadow falls at none stead directly southe (for of other
shadows I make no account).


Spoud. It must neades so be, for the soon is North fro that thing which gives
the shadow.


Philon. And when the son is in the winter point, unto what cost do the
shadow decline?


Spoud. It shall fall directly North by the reason of you aleaged.


Philo. Here then you se the cause where of these inhabitants were called
Amphiscij, and we may call them double or two fold shadowed.


Spou. I understand your meaning.


Philon. The Heteroscij.
second be those, which have the shadow continually, toward one cost, ether
North or South.


Spou. Then we be in the number of those, for we have our shadow directly
North.


Phi. And such be those that dwell in the opposite place of Antipodes.
the earth against us ( therefore called Antipodes. For the so no never coming
over their zenit, they have the shadow into the South cost perpetually
declining, as we have into the North.


Spou. This must needs be certainly true, but yet I do much marvel thereat.


Phil. What so ever is rare, and not commonly scene and hard, is ever marvelous.
And the Arabians coming into Europe, marveled as much to see the shadow
Northwarde, as you do to here it is declined (with the aforesaid inhabitants)
toward the South cost, therefore Lucanus speaks of them in this sort. Lib. 3.


Ignotum vobis (Arabes) venistis in orbem,
Vmbras mirati nemorum non iri sinistras*


A Region unknown (Arabians) you find:
Musing that the shadow, is still North declined.



Spou. There remains yet to speak of the third sort of people which you
named Periscij.


Phil. They toke Periscij.
that name because they (dwelling within the circles arctike Antarctike) have
the shadow going round about the Horizont.


Spou. But yet the shadow moves not so swiftly about the Earth with them,
as it doth with us (and those you call Amphiscios) for with us it goes about
from the West by the North, so to the East in the space (that the son is in
our Hemisphere, above the earth, which at the most is in. xvij. hours.


Phi. It is so.


Spou. The seeing the son goes not out of there sight for the space of. 182.
dais, xij. hours, which is there continual day: then it should go about the
horizont but in that log place.


Phi. That is false. For how think you, doth not the son circuit the earth in
xxiiij. hours continually?


Spou. Yes verily.


Phil. The doth the shadow go about their Horizot in the same space of time,
except you imagine those Periscios, to dwell without the circuit of the earth.


Spo. That were a point of demency or madness: so that as oft as he circuith
the earth, so oft in lik case do there shadow turn about the place of their
horizont, which must neades be 182 times.


Phi. I am glad you understand the reason of it, and now behold the table of
shadows.

A TABLE, OF SHADOVVES, SHOWING THEIR PROPORTION UNTO THE GNOMON (it being
divided in 60. parts) for every degree of the Sons altitude: and also the
quantie of the Shadow in every Country, Region, City, thorough the universal
Earth, when the Son is in the Aequinoctiall, and Solsticiall points.
The Sons Altitude. The Sha dow. The eleuatio of the Pole. Shadow solstitial
in somer Aequinoctiall Shadow Shadow Solsticiall in wi. The Sons Altitude.
The Sha dow. The eleuatio of the Pole. Shadow Solsticial in So. Aequinoctiall
Shadow Shadow Solstitial in wi. par. Mi par. Mi par. Mi par. Mi par. Mi par. Mi
par. Mi par. Mi 1 3437 24 1 24 49 1 3 27 18 46 57 56 46 24 53 62 8 160 16 2
1718 10 2 23 36 2 5 28 35 47 55 57 47 26 7 64 20 169 12 3 1144 52 3 22 24 3 8
29 53 48 54 1 48 27 22 66 38 179 4 4 858 2 4 21 13 4 11 31 12 49 52 9 49 28 39
69 1 190 0 5 685 48 5 20 3 5 15 32 32 50 50 20 50 29 56 71 30 202 14 6 570 51 6
18 53 6 18 33 54 51 48 35 51 3^ 15 74 5 216 0 7 488 39 7 17 44 7 22 35 18 52 46
52 52 32 37 76 48 231 35 8 426 55 8 16 36 8 26 36 44 53 45 12 53 33 59 79 37
249 26 9 378 49 9 15 29 9 30 38 11 54 43 35 54 35 23 82 34 270 5 10 340 16 10
^4 22 10 34 39 40 55 42 1 ^5 36 48 85 41 294 15 11 308 40 11 13 16 11 39 41 12
56 40 28 56 38 15 88 57 322 57 12 282 16 12 12 10 12 45 42 45 57 38 57 57 39 45
92 23 357 35 13 259 53 13 11 5 13 51 44 21 58 37 29 58 41 16 96 1 400 16 14 240
38 14 10 0 14 57 46 0 59 36 3 59 42 50 99 51 454 12 15 223 55 15 8 56 16 4 47
41 60 34 38 60 44 26 103 54 524 34 16 209 14 16 7 52 17 12 49 24 61 33 15 61 46
5 108 14 620 17 17 196 15 17 6 48 18 20 51 11 62 31 54 62 47 46 112 50 758 8 18
184 39 18 5 45 19 29 53 2 63 30 34 63 49 30 117 45 974 1 19 174 15 19 4 42 20
39 54 56 64 29 15 64 51 17 123 0 1360 36 20 164 50 20 3 38 21 50 56 53 65 27 58
65 53 8 128 39 2253 44 21 156 18 21 2 35 23 2 58 54 66 26 43 66 55 1 134 45
6547 56 22 148 30 22 1 32 24 14 61 0 67 25 28 67 56 59 141 21 Infinite 23 141
21 23 0 29 25 28 63 10 68 24 14 68 59 1 148 30 number. 24 134 45 24 0 33 26 43
65 25 69 23 2 69 61 6 156 18 25 128 39 25 1 36 27 58 67 45 70 21 50 70 63 17
164 50 26 123 0 26 2 38 29 15 70 11 71 20 39 71 65 32 174 15 27 117 45 27 3 41
30 34 72 43 72 19 29 72 67 52 184 39 28 112 50 28 4 44 31 54 75 21 73 18 20 73
70 18 196 15 29 118 14 29 5 48 33 15 78 7 74 17 12 74 72 51 209 14 30 113 54 30
6 52 34 38 81 0 75 16 4 75 75 29 223 55 31 99 51 31 7 56 36 3 84 2 76 14 57 76
78 15 240 38 32 96 1 32 9 0 37 20 87 13 77 13 51 77 81 9 259 53 33 92 23 33 10
4 38 57 90 34 78 12 45 78 84 11 282 16 34 88 57 34 11 8 40 28 94 5 79 11 39 79
87 23 308 40 35 85 41 35 12 14 42 1 97 49 80 10 34 80 90 44 340 16 36 82 34 36
13 19 43 35 101 45 81 9 30 81 94 16 378 49 37 79 37 37 14 25 45 12 105 56 82 8
26 82 98 0 426 55 38 76 48 38 15 32 46 52 110 23 83 7 22 83 101 58 488 39 39 74
5 39 16 40 48 35 115 8 84 6 18 84 106 9 570 51 40 71 30 40 17 48 50 20 120 11
85 5 15 85 110 37 685 48 41 69 1 41 18 57 52 9 125 39 86 4 11 86 115 23 858 2
42 66 38 42 20 6 54 1 131 30 87 3 8 87 120 28 1144 52 43 64 28 43 21 16 55 57
137 49 88 2 5 88 125 56 1718 10 44 62 8 44 22 27 57 56 144 40 89 1 3 89 131 48
3437 24 45 60 0 45 23 39 60 0 152 7 90 0 0 0 138 9 Infinite

There may many coclusions by this table be wrought as you shall know or we
depart: but now let us further proced cocerninge our talk of zones, in which
you must consider that these zones of which we have entreated, are divided into
climates, regions.


Spo. How doth a climatand a zone differ, they both were for this cause first
invented, to make division of the face of the earth into sodry parts.


Philo. I confess no less, but they differ in this point, How a Zone a
Climate differ.
that a Zone doth in it cotain the fifth portio of the earth, and a climate but
only so much of the earth, the logest day in that place, do differ from the
equinoctial. xxx. minutes, or half an hour, and are named. vii. in number, of
all the ancient Geographers.


Spoud. Then the first climate shall be in latitude. xvi. degrees. xliiij.
minutes from the equinoctial, and the logest day, shall exceed. xij. hours
(which is the quantity of the day under the equinoctial) one hour: for so
saith Ptolomaeus.


Philon. It is true, but hear you must consider, that Ptolomaeus de vision of
Climates.
Ptolomaeus divides every climate in. iiij. equal portions, names them
Paralleles: every one of them coteining in latitude. iiij. degrees, xviij. min.
incresing the quantity of the longest day. xv. minutes: so that Ptolomaeus
(making the first climate xvi. degrees, xliiij. min. in Latitude from the
equinoctial) means the midst, and not the beginning of the climate.


Spou. I pray you or we any further proceade show me the signification of a
Parallele.


Philo. (...) in Greek (which What a Parallele is.
we also do call a Parallele) is a Circle equally distant, from that which is
drawn next him, and are described by the course of the son and stars, of
which the greatest is the equinoctial: for that he is furdest fro the Poles, so
that the nearer the poles, the less is the parallele: and the number of them
Ptolomaeus makes. xxj. as in this figure, in which I have made. xxj.
paralleles fro the equinoctial, unto both the poles Arctike Antarctike, and
now to our matter again from whence we did digress. You shall consider that
every Climate has a proper name, for the suerer difference of one from an
other: takes his name of some notable City, Mountain, or River, over which
the midst of that Climate is drawn As for example.

The midst of the first Climate goes over a notable Land of Nilus, called
Meroe of that we name it Dia Meroes, that is, the climate going over Meroe. The
second Climate is called Dia Syenes of a city in Egipt called Syenes. The
midst of the third climate is drawn over Alexandria, an other City also in
Egipt therefore called Dialexandrias. The fourth goth over the Island of the
Rodes, now in subjection to the great Turk, and is named Diarhodou. The fifth
climate Dia Romes going over Rome sometime the head of the world, at this preset
the sink of sin. The sixte Climate is named Dia Pontou, because it goes over
the Pontike seas named Euxinus. The seventh is draw by Boristhenes a City so
called therefore named Diaboristheneos, not by the Ri^hean Mountanes as the
vnlerned sort suppose: seeing that they are at the lest. x. degrees. fro this climate
distant.



Spou. And what was the cause that they described no places, beyond the. 7.
climate: seeing that there are many inhabitats, (as by your words do appear)
where you made mention of the habitable places in the earth?


Philo. It was, ether because they supposed those places scat, or with much
pains habitable for the extreme cold: or else, that they knew not the parts
North fro the situated, as now we do,


Spou. And do they not make mention of Climates drawn South from
th'equinoctiall as of the North, of which you have spoken?


Phi. They do in like manner divide that portion, into vij. Climates: but for
that they knew no notable places, South Climates.
(as in the north parts from th'equinoctiall) they gave them the names of the
North Climates, with this addition Anti (that is to say oppositie or against)
as Antidiameroes, the Climate Southe from th'equinoctiall, opposite or against
the north Climate, drawn by Meroe. And so in like sort with the other, as this
figure shewith, in which.A. B. C. D. do represent the meridian circle, A. the
North Pole, and.C. the Pole Antarctike.B. D. th'equinoctiall.E. F. the Tropike
of Cancer: G. H. the Tropike of Capricorne: the Polary circles.I. K. and.L. M.
The Climates of themselves are evident, having their proper names, to them
joined: are drawn from B. D. th'equinoctiall, toward the poles.A. C.


Spou. Now I pray you declare the cotinuation of the Climates, paralleles.


Philo. I will fulfil your request. The parts of th'Earth Northwardes being
by painful, dagerous nauigatios found out, are divided also into Climates, we
following the same ordre that Pto lomaeus, and th'aunciente Geographers used:
tbat is, every parallele to be distant from an other. 4. degrees, 18. minutes:
and every climate one from an other 7. degrees The quantity of climates
Paralleles.
27. minutes: giving them in like sort apt names of the places over which they
are drawn: so that in our time, there is found after the same invention 96.
Paralleles, of which are made 24. climates, and for that it shall not easily be
breuied in the poke of Obliuio, behold I have drawn out a Table, containing in
it the paralleles Climates with the places over whicb they directli are
described: as also th'eleuation of the pole Arctike, unto 90. degrees: and the
quantity of the longest day, answering unto every one of those degrees,
which Table shall much pleasure you, as hereafter it shall be evident.


A TABLE CONTAINING THE NVMBRE OF PARALLELES, AND CLIMATES, WITH th'Eleuation
of the Pole Arcticke, quantity of the longest day night answering hereto.
Paralleles af la Ptolomae us. Paralleles more certain exact. The number of
Climates after th'olde Graecians use. Climates after th'inuen tion of
Geographers in our time. The names of Climates Paralleles after some notable
place in them. Th'Eleuation of the Pole arctick. The quantity of the lon gest
day. 1 1 1 Under Th'Equinoctiall. 0 0 12 0 2 2 4 18 12 15 3 3 2 8 34 12 30 4 4
12 43 12 45 5 5 1 3 By th'Ilande Meroe. 16 44 13 0 6 6 20 34 13 15 7 7 2 4 By
Sy^ne under the Trow pick of Cancer. 24 11 13 30 8 8 27 36 13 45 9 9 3 5 30 48
14 0 10 10 By Alexandria. 33 46 14 15 11 11 4 6 By the Rhodes. 36 30 14 30 12
12 39 3 14 45 13 13 5 7 By Rome. 41 23 15 0 14 14 43 32 15 15 15 15 6 8 By
Ponte Euxine. 45 31 15 30 16 16 47 ^1 15 4^ 17 17 7 9 By Boresthenes. 49 1 ^6 0
18 18 50 34 16 15 19 19 10 By VViteberge. 51 59 16 30 20 20 53 17 ^6 45 21 21
11 By Grypsualde. 54 30 17 0 22 22 55 36 17 15 23 23 12 By Moscouia Irlande. 56
38 17 30 24 24 57 34 17 45 25 25 13 58 27 18 0 26 59 15 18 15 26 27 14 59 59 18
30 28 60 40 18 45 29 29 15 61 18 19 0 30 61 ^3 19 15 28 31 16 62 25 19 30 32 By
Orcades. 62 55 19 45 29 33 17 63 22 20 0 34 63 47 20 15 35 18 64 10 20 30 36 64
31 20 45 30 37 19 All these Paralleles following are drawn by places 64 49 21
0 38 65 6 21 15 39 20 in Norwey, and Sweuelad c. 65 22 21 30 40 65 ^5 21 45 31
41 21 65 47 22 0 42 65 58 22 15 43 22 66 7 22 30 44 66 15 22 45 2 45 23 66 21
23 0 46 66 25 23 15 47 24 66 29 23 30 48 Under th'Arct. Circle. 66 31 23 43 33
49 66 32 24 0 Paralleles after Ptolomaeus. Paralleles more certain and exact.
The names of the Paralleles after the notable places, by which they are
described. c. Th'Eleuation of the Pole Arctik. Continual day in somer.
Continual night in winter. 50 67 0 23 11 22 1 34 51 67 30 33 17 31 13 52 68 0
41 14 39 2 53 68 30 48 6 45 8 54 69 0 54 3 50 22 55 79 30 59 12 56 0 35 56 70 0
64 ^1 60 16 57 70 30 69 4 65 2 58 71 0 73 13 69 6 59 71 30 77 17 73 5 60 B^
Laponia and the grene Land 72 0 81 17 77 1 61 72 30 85 14 80 17 62 which
after the opinio of sundry 73 0 89 8 84 6 36 63 Authors do continually without
separation Join with west India. 73 30 92 22 87 18 64 74 0 96 10 91 2 65 74 30
99 21 94 9 66 75 0 ^03 5 97 14 67 75 30 106 11 100 17 68 76 0 109 16 103 19 69
76 30 112 20 106 20 70 77 0 115 22 ^09 20 71 77 30 118 22 118 ^7 72 78 0 121 22
118 14 37 73 78 30 124 21 118 11 74 79 0 127 19 121 7 75 79 30 1^0 17 124 2 76
80 0 133 13 126 20 77 80 30 136 8 129 14 87 81 0 139 3 132 7 79 81 30 141 21
135 0 80 82 0 144 14 137 17 81 82 30 147 7 140 9 82 83 0 150 0 142 23 83 83 30
152 16 145 13 38 84 84 0 155 8 148 4 85 84 30 158 0 150 18 86 85 0 160 15 153 9
87 85 30 ^63 5 155 22 88 86 0 165 19 158 12 89 86 30 168 9 161 2 90 87 0 170 23
163 15 91 87 30 173 13 166 4 92 88 0 176 2 168 16 93 88 30 178 16 171 6 94 89 0
181 5 173 19 95 89 30 183 19 176 9 96 90 0 186 7 178 22

Spou. Can they not in like manner, draw paralleles from th'Aequinoctiall
Southward as they do North yea give them the same names of the North
paralleles, with the Greek proposition anti, as they do in climates?


Phi. Yes verily, they so do, until by their travels South Paralle les.
they have found out the Regios, Lands, Hills, Rivers such notable things, of
which in like sort the south cli mates paralleles may take denomination. As at
this preset there are South paralleles, which are opposite to the North, places
found out, of which they may very aptly take name.

As the parallele (opposite unto the North parallele, which goes by the
Canarian Lands, is drawn by the River Nilus, and Mons Lunae, the Mount of the
Moon. The parallele opposite to that which is drawn by Syene, goes by the
Ilandes Mendacascar, Peuta, Necura, the greater Iaua, Candin, and the kingdom
of Coilum. The parallele opposite to that which is drawn by Damascus, goth by
the promontory of good hope, called promontorium bonae Spej. The opposite
parallele, to that goes over the Rhodes, is described by th'Ilands Seilan,
Augama. they are antipodes unto Italy, which dwell in Iaua Antipodes.
the lesser. The antipodes to the Lucitanians, are those in the Isle of Seila.
There be also diverse other places toward the south coast, of which neither I
have heard of any credible person, nor yet red: therefore can not affirm any
certain truth: will omit it until an other ceason.



Spou. Yet or we proceed further, I must trouble you with one doubt: that is
gathered of the Arabian Physician Auicenna, who says, that th'Aere is of best
Auicenna.
temperature under th'equinoctiall, they are more fre from infirmities of the
body then we are, whom you affirm to dwell in the North temperate zone. For
if the paralleles be of this nature, that howe much the nearer we are
th'equinoctiall, so much the greater is the heate: and howe much the further
removed from th'equinoctiall, so much the colder the quality of the air is:
there must seem a manifest repugnancy, betwixt Auicenne, the Geographers.


Philo. I will answer you. Auicenna means not that Auicenna defended.
the temperature of th'Aere is in a mean, neither vehement hot, nor yet
extreme could under th'Equinoctial, for that were an evident error, but
because the Son declines not more then. 23. digrees. 28. minutes fro the
vertical point, therefore there can be no contrary quality engendered: as
horible could, so that th'Aere is not subject to alteration, contrary
qualities, as ores is. that is the cause why Auicenna thought it most
temperate, Aphoris. 3. proposi. ^
hereto agrees Hippocrates: (...). Mutationes temporum maxim pariunt morbos,
in ipsis temporibus magnae mutationes aut frigoris, aut aestus, alia{que}
congruenter ratione eodemmodo. that is. The mutation of times do chefely
engender sickness: and in the same times, great change either of heate or
cold, or other qualities in like sort.

Then saying there is no mutation of quality of the Aere, it is thought
temperate. And for that this place is judged most temperate, there be some that
suppose Can Eden, that is to say, Paradise, to be situated under the
Equinoctial, Pardaise where.
as a place of pleasure, voluptiousnes, void of Alteration, contrary qualities:
Yea, Lira, interpreting Lira.
Genesis, (where Moses speaks that Adam, being expulsed from this place of
pleasure joy, for breaking the commandment: Cherubyn kept it with a fiery
Eratosthenes. Polybius.
sword) saith that the fiery sword is no other thing then the burning zone.
And Polybius with Eratosthenes (as Strabo witness) doth affirm the
temperatest dwelling to be under the equinoctial.


Spoud. Saying you have made mention of the place most excellent of other in
the Earth for pleasure. I pray you let me hear your mind Hell where.
concerning Hell the place of all other most horrible, painful, as both
Christians and Ethinckes do confess.


Phil. I will not much of that thing speak, but if Hell be in that place which
is furdest from the heaven, as pain grief is furdest from pleasure, and joy:
then it must needs be in the center of the Earih, which is to say that part
that is in the midst of the same, for that is of all other parts furdest from
the heaven. Which is the cause that not only we, but also the Poets in their
tragedies, introduce persons coming out from under the earth call that place
Hell, among other, Senica introduceth Thyestes, coming out of hell, in this
manner speaking.

Opaca linquens Ditis inferni loca, In Agamemnone.

Adsum, profundo Tartari emissus Specu*


Leaving the dark places, of infernal Pluto,
Sent out from Hell pit deep, here am I praesent lo. c.


But we will leave such curious questions, and spend the day (which so fast
consumes) in more necessary talk: for behold by my Astrolabe the son (being
in the xxj. of Gemini) is elevated. 54. degrees, above the Horizot with us here
in this plain, and therefore he will shortly approach to the meridian line.


Spoud. Then I must earnestly require you, to teach me some way how I may find
him being in this line, as also other stars: for my authors make mentio
hereof, affirming also that it is one of the chief things wherwyth to find out
the Longitud, and Latitude of places.


Philo. I will gladly, keeping not back such ways as I also have devised to
find out the aforsaid line. And first I will begin with the invention To find
out the Meridian Line after Glarians manner.
of Glarian to find this none stead line, which is in this manner. In any
level and plain place, with your compass make a circle: in what quatitye you
please, in the center of which, you shall place a right Wire, directly
standing up, that it may give a shadow on the circle aforesaid. Then mark the
shadow which the son in his rising going down in thy Horizot gives, as for
example. A. Is the Wier reared right up in the center of the Circle: C. the
East, B. the West. The longest shadow that the Son makes above the Horizont
is A.D: The he ascending hier, makes his shadow shorter. A.E. the None stead
or Meridian shadow, which is shortest is A. F. and the other shadows G. A: H.
A. are in the like sort the shadows which the soon casts into the East, after
he is past the meridian circle, descending into the West.


Spou. Shall it be necessary for to observe the shadow of the thing erected as
well th'after noone, as I do from the sons rising until noone?


Philo. No verily, for when the shadow doth no longer decrese, you drawing from
the center to the circumference a straight line, shall have your own desire.
Other willing to exchew the tediousness of time in observation, The second way.
do provide a Plate of Meatall, well pullished, or some thick plank smothe,
and plained, in which is drawn a circle as in the other aforsaid, with a Wire
or like thing set up right in the center, and do diligently before none
observe when the shadow of the Wier in length is equal with the circumference:
and at th'end of it make a prick. In like sort after noone when as the shadow
comes unto the circumference, and make there also a prick, the with the
compass, divide the space betwixt these two pricks in the midst, and make
there a note or prick: after draw a right line from the center, to that middle
prick, and it shall always show the when as the son is in the meridian or
middaye line, for that elevation of the Pole as in this example.



A. Is the Center B. E. C. F. the Circle drawn in the plank or plate of
metal A. D. the Gnomon, or thing which gives the shadow, AE. the shadow
before Noone. A. F. the shadow after none: now deuidinge the space E. F. in
the midst, which is.C. and drawn a right line from A. being the Center,
unto C. and that is the true Meridian line.


Spoudeus. This way seems much easier, and facile then the other.


Philo. Yea and it is also as certain as the other, and it was invented as I
suppose of Iohannes de monte regio, or Vitruuius. But Uernerus uses no other
way to find The. iij, way.
out this Line, then only a Dial having a perfaite nedle, placinge it on
some plain, and smothe place: when the nedle stands steadfastly in the
right Line within the Dial, it doth as it were point directly North and
South.


Spoud. This way in my judgment doth excel all the rest, both for the
easines thereof also (which you can not do by the other) that you may by it
find the Meridiane, or middaye Line, at all times both day, night, hour.


Phil. You may so, but the neadle doth sometime err from right north, south,
as has been observed, I will show you in the treatise of Navigation: Yea, how
you shall also correct your neadle. but I also have The iiij. way.
invented two ways, the first is, I make a plain roude plate, in the midst of
which I fix a ruler, having two sights to loke thorough, then when the son
risith half above the Horizont, half under, I (placing my Instrument flat on
th'earth) do direct the ruler unto the same, so that I may see him thorough the
sights: then my ruler not moved, I draw with a Chalk, or like thing, a right
lyne fro the Center, unto the Soon, when the Soon goes down I do in like manner
draw an other Line: then I draw a right Line from the Line of his rising,
unto the Line of his going down, divide this Line in the midst: after I
draw a right Line from the Center, unto the midst of the ouerwart Line, the I
fix in the Center an upright wier, the shadow of which at all times shall
show when as the Son is in the Meridiane Line in that habitation: but or we
further proceed, I will give you hereof an example, in which I do make A. for
the Center, then putting upon it a wire, or prick, I do fasten the ruler there
on: this being done, I place my instrument flat, apply the ruler with his
sights. G. F. unto the Soon, draw there a Line A. D. in like sort, when he
is going down, make an other Line A. C. then I draw a right Line from C. unto
D. which I divide in the midst E. cross it with a Line A. B. which is the
Line at midday. But in place where I cannot have this, or other The v. way.
like instrmet (when as I se the soon to draw very ne'er the south) I prick
upright in the groude a knife, or such like thig, markig diligently how log the
shadow doth decrease, when as I perceive it decreases no more, but rather wax
lunge again, I draw a line from my knife, to the shadow which serves for the
Meridian line.


Spoud. I thank you sir, for this, your gentleness, in beating these things
into my gross, and dulhed: And I will put them all in practise when convenient
time shall To find the Noonesteade Line by night.
serve, but in the night (I miding to take the true height of any Planet, or
fixed sterre in the nonestead lyne) what ordre shall I observe, for then there
is no shadow, which will do pleasure.


Philo. Therefore with some Quadrat, Astrolabe, or Ptolomaeus ruler (the fation
of which I do here place, and the making you shall find among the other
Instruments) and mark what his It is made of 3. peaces, being 4. square: As
in the Picture where A. F. is the first peace or rule.

A. D. The second.

G. D. the third rule.

E. The Foot of the staff.

C. F. The Plumrule.

C. B. The joints, in which the second third Rulers are moved.

K. L. The sight holes.

I. The Son.

H. The Zenit, or ver ticall point.

M. N. The Noonestead Lyne.

altitude is, then you may staye a season: after a while observe his hight
again, and so from time, to time, until he increase no hier, which is a
perfect token that then he is in the Meridian line. The same you may do also
with the son. And for that nightlye travel hearein seems somewhat combrous
and painful, behold here is a Table of the sons height, for every degree of
the signs in the Zodiake: his greatest declination being. 23. degrees. 28.
minutes, and th'eleuation of the Pole arctike, above the Horizont. 52. degrees,
10. minutes.

As concerning the use of the Table, I will speak nothing, but will reserve it
for his due place, only admonishing you at this present, that first you find
out the place of the Zodiake in signs and degrees, (by some Ephemerids,
Gazophilacio Astronomicu.
or out of my tables in the Gazophilacio Astronomicum) then loke in the
ouerpart of the Table, and if that sign be there mensioned, descend downward
in the first column find out also the degre, and directly against it, shalt
thou have the sons Meridian altitude. But and the sign be found in the lower
part of the Table, then you shall search out his degre in the last column, and
against it toward the left hand, you shall in like manner find the Altitude
answering hereto.


Spoud. I pray you give me example hereof, or you do take in hand any other
matters.


Philo. The thing is so easy, as it need no farther working* yet I will not
refuse in so little a request, to satisfy your desire. I find the son, the
first day of the new year 1558, in the sign of the Goat. xx. degrees) the.
37. minutes A TABLE OF THE SONS MERIDIANE, Altitude above the Horizont.
Calculated for every digree in the Zodiake, Respecting the Elevation of the
Pole Arctike, a^ Norwich 52. Digrees: 0. minutes, the Sons Declination 23.
Digrees 28. minutes.
Capricornus Aquarius Pr^ces. Aries. Taurus. Gemini. Digr. Digr. Min Dig. Min
Dig. Min Dig. Min Dig. Min Dig. Min Dig* 0 14 22 17 ^4 25 36 37 50 50 4 58 ^6
30 1 14 23 17 26 25 57 38 16 50 26 58 37 29 2 14 23 17 38 26 19 38 42 50 47 58
48 28 3 14 24 17 50 26 42 39 8 51 8 58 58 27 4 14 25 18 3 27 4 39 34 51 28 59 8
26 5 ^4 27 18 16 27 27 40 0 51 48 59 18 25 6 14 29 18 29 27 50 40 25 52 8 59 27
24 7 14 32 18 43 28 ^3 40 51 52 28 59 ^6 23 8 14 35 18 57 28 36 41 17 52 47 59
45 22 9 14 38 19 12 29 0 41 43 53 6 59 53 21 10 14 42 19 27 29 24 42 8 53 25 60
1 20 11 14 46 19 42 29 48 42 34 53 43 60 9 19 12 14 50 19 58 30 12 42 59 54 1
60 16 18 13 14 55 20 14 30 36 43 24 54 19 60 22 17 14 15 0 20 30 31 1 43 49 54
36 60 29 16 15 15 6 20 47 31 26 44 14 54 53 60 34 15 16 15 11 21 3 32 0 44 39
55 10 60 40 14 17 15 18 21 21 32 16 45 4 55 26 60 45 13 18 15 24 21 48 32 41 45
28 55 42 60 50 12 19 15 31 21 56 33 6 45 52 55 58 60 54 11 20 15 39 22 15 33 32
46 16 56 13 60 58 10 21 15 47 22 34 33 57 46 40 56 28 61 2 9 22 15 55 22 52 34
23 47 4 56 43 61 5 8 23 16 4 23 12 34 49 47 27 56 57 61 8 7 24 16 13 23 31 35
^5 47 50 57 11 61 11 6 25 16 22 23 51 35 40 48 13 57 24 61 13 5 26 16 32 24 12
36 6 48 36 57 37 61 14 4 27 16 42 24 32 36 32 48 58 57 50 61 16 3 28 16 52 24
53 36 58 49 2^ ^8 2 61 17 2 29 17 3 25 14 37 ^4 49 43 58 14 61 17 1 30 17 14 25
36 37 50 50 4 58 26 61 ^8 0 Digr. Digr. Min. Dig. Min Dig. Min Dig. Min Dig.
Min Dig. Min Dig Sagittarius. Scorpius. Libra. Virgo. Leo. Cancer. I omit, as
not requisite in this business) then first I found in the hier part of the
table, Capricornus, therefore I descending downward (in the second column
against the. 20. degre of Capricorne) found. 15. degrees 39. minutes, the
altitude of the son for the midst of that day. In like manner the same year,
the. 6. day of September the son had his course in the. 24. degre of the
virgin, and because I find Virgo in the lower part of the Table, ascendinge
in the last colunme upward, find the 24. degre, and against it in the column
of Uirgo. 40. degrees 25. minutes, the Meridian altitude of the soon, answering
that degree: in like sort, do with any degre of the other ^gnes, when as
occasion is ministered.


Spou. This now shall I always keep surely in memory, and because you have
hear apt place to give me some precept for th'eleuation of the Pole
Arcticke, I desire you herein to show me some instructions.


Phi. I will so do, and the rather for that without it you can little preuaile
in this Art: and with knowing it, and the longitudes of regions, you shall
meruelouslye profit.


Spou. I pray you then begin first with the finding out of the latitude of
any place.


Philo. When as the son is in either Aequinoctiall To find out th'eleuation
of the Pole above the Horizont.
points, by the help of your none stead shadow, you shall find when he is in
the meridian line: then with your instrument take his altitude, which you
shall subtracte from. 90. degrees, and the remanent shallbe the just elevation
of the Pole, as for example.

At Norwich. 1557, the 10. of march, I found the meridiane An observation.
altitude of the soon by my Astrolabe 37. degrees and 50. minutes, which I did
subtract from 90. degrees, and there remained 52. degrees 10. minutes, the true
height of the Pole, and latitude of Norwich.


Spou. And do you not mark his declination at that time?


Phi. I cannot mark that, which is not. For in Fol. 31. 32.
these points he hath no declination, and that you might se in the table
serving that use which is in the first book. But although this way is very
perfect yet carries it this discommodity with him: that you can but twice
yearly, take th'eleuatio of the Pole. And therefore I will show you also how
to find it when he is in the Tropic points.


Spoud. That is in the beginning of Cancer and Capricorn.


Phi. It is so, you shall find out (as before) with your instrument the sons
height at middaye, when as he is in the first degree of Cancer.


Spou. That time can I find out by the help of an Ephemerids.


Phi. From this height, you shall take away, as your table shows 23. degrees
28. minutes: this number you shall subtract fro 90. degrees, the remanant shall be
th'exacte Elevation of your pole, as for example. I find the height of the soon
at midday in the beginning of Cancer. 61. degrees. 18. minutes, from which I
take 23. degrees 28. minutes, and there shall remain 37. degrees 50. minutes,
this number I take from. 90. degrees (being an hole quadrant) there remains
52. degrees 10. minutes, th'eleuation of the pole.


Spoud. I will prove by your licence, and I can do in like case when as he is
in Capricorn.


Phil. Do you so.


Spou. I imagine his none stead heighte to be. 14. degrees. 22. minutes, for
because he is far from our Zenit: from which I cannot substract the greatest
declination of the son, answering the first degre of Capricorn, in the table
of declination.


Phi. Nor you shall not make any subtraction. For like as when he declines
North, from th'equinoctiall (which is from the beginning The Sons de clinatio
north.
of Aries unto th'end of Virgo) you shall subtracte his declinatio from his
altitude: so in like manner, having The Sons de clinatio south.
his declination South (which is from the beginning of Lybra unto th'end of
Pisces) you must add his declination to the meridian altitude: and subtract
the both from. 90. degrees.


Spo. Then I will end my example. I do add. 23. degrees. 28. min. unto 14.
degrees 22. min. (the nonestede height) which make 37. degrees. 50. mi. I take
this fro. 90. degrees, as you commanded, and there remains 52. degrees. 10.
minutes as before.


Phil. You have truly wrought.


Spou. But is it not possible to find th'eleuatio of the Pole every day? for
in travelling it should pleasure me.


Phil. It is possible to find it not only every day, but al so every hour: but
I will reserve that until an other season, and will show you how to find the
height of the Pole every day, for which thing I will give you two sondrye
wais: th'one without any other instrument more then a staff, or other thing
erected to give a shadow (which I have invented) the other way is by the help
of an instrument, The third way
with which I will begin. Take the sons heighte as before being in the
Meridian line, then take out of some Ephemerids his place in the Zodiake, in
degrees, minutes, with which you shall enter into the table of declination,
there find his declination from th'Equinoctiall, answering to the said degrees,
minutes. And if it be North, the subtracte it from th'Altitude Meridia: or if
it be South, add it to the said Altitude: then adding, or subtracting that
number from 90. Digrees, there shall remain the true Elevation of the Pole.


Spoud. Will it please you to let me prove this rule by an example?


Philo. Right gladly.


Spou. I find the Son in the sixth Digree of Gemini, whose heighte as you see
is 59. Digrees 28. minutes, well ny. And now I find in the Table of the
Sons declination under the 6. Digree of Gemini. 21. Digrees. 37. minutes 58.
secondes. Which I subtracting from the sons height, there doth remain 37.
digrees 50. minutes, this I take from 90. digrees, find the place in height
52. digrees 10* minutes.


Phil. Let not this slide out of your memory, because it hath a singular use in
this art, by it you may in al pla ces where you travail, find out the height
of the Pole. And now I will show you my way howe to find th'aforesaide The.
4. way.
elevation.


Spou. And shall your way serve in like manner for every day in the year?


Phi. I find out the height of the North star by the shadow ether. iiij.
times in the year, or else every day the son being in the meridian line.


Spou. Then I require you show me first howe to find the latitude of any City
or town.


Philon. right willingly. You shall proueide a staff, or any rightwand, in
what length you please, this you shall divide into. 60. equal portions. Then
take out of some Ephemerids, or Almanach, the day when as the Soon enters
into the first digree of Aries, Cancer, Libra, Capricornus. At which times set
your staff upright in some place: And mark the shadow how lunge it doth
decrease, when it is at the shortest, the soon is in the noonstead place. Then
at that instant take the length of the shadow, enter into the Table of
shadows: there thou shalt find th'exacte Latitude of thy City. As for thy
better instruction: I find in an Ephemerids the soon to be in the first
Digree of Aries, 1558. the 12. day of March. Therefore when as the son
approach toward the south, I set my staff directly up, find the shadow at
midday 77. parts, 13. minutes, with which I enter the Table of shadows (under
this title, Aequinoctiall shadow) can not find my number expressed, therefore I
find next under my number seventy six, 48. unto which 52. digrees in Latitude
do answer, wherefore I workinge by proportion, find correspondent unto 77.
parts, 13. minutes: 52. digrees, 10. minutes.


Spoud. Then your mind is, that I shall use the rule of proportion, in all
Tables, where as the perfect number is not expresedly found.


Philo. Yea certainly.


Spo. Now show how I may work every day the same coclusio.


Phi. It differs in no point fro the former order, saving that in the table
of shadows, you must only have respect to the column of the sons altitude,
the shadow answering hereto. Then to find the degre he is in at that present:
next in the table of declination to seek out the declination of the same
degree, if it be North, subtract it from the altitude, so the remanent from.
90. degrees, you shall have your own desire.


Spoud. But I find him to decline Southe, must I add it to his altitude,
subtract both from. 90 degrees, as you did in the other?


Philo. In the same manner in all points. There is also The Astronomy* Ringe.
an other way to find the latitude of Regions and Cities by the help of the
Astronomy Ringe, which you shall find in my book touching that matter, in
which I show the making, as also th'use of the same.


Spou. But in the night seaso, how may I find the said Elevation of the Pole in
any place.


Philo. The Mariners use to find out the latitude of the place by finding the
height of the North star, which they call the lode star, esteming a degre,
or two, in observation as no error. But you shall worcke in this manner: first
find out any notable star (that you know perfaitly) in the table of fixed
stars, with Ptolomaeus rule, or other instrument, observe his heighte in the
meridian line: then in the table of declination, you shall find how much he
declines North or South, from th'equinoctiall, observing th'order, as you do
with the searching out of the Pole by the sons altitude Meridiane, and
declination: you shall have your hole desire.


Spou. Will you now show the finding out of the Logitude of any place from
the Canariane Ilandes?


Philo. It is not so easy, facile a thing, to try th'eleuation of the Pole:
but it is as harde, laborus, to get the Longitude, which was the cause that the
Ancient Geographers had only one way, that is by observing of th'Eclipses of
the Moan.


Spoud. I remember Strabo affirmith the same. Lib. 1. fol. 6.



Phi. There is in dede no way so parfit, suer, as by th'Eclises: therefore king
Atreus is worthy eternal fame, Atreus found first out the time of Eclipses.
which was the finder out of th'Eclipses of the Son, Moan, (1205. years
before Christ our Saviours incarnation) by whose travail we receive this
benefit.


Spoud. Not we only, that are presently living: but also such as have been
before us, also those that shall here after follow. But what is the cause of
her obscuration, doth not she at that time lose in dede her light?


Phi. No verily: For it is directly against Aristotle, Aristotle.
all Philosophers well near, to confess that the supercelestiall bodies are
subject to alteration, yea or to affirm, any colour in them. But I will let
that pass, will show you the cause of her eclipsing, which is no other The
cause of the moan Eclipsed.
thing, the the moan being (in oppositio of the soon) ether in the head or tail
of the drago: the shadow of th'erth is be twixt the moan, our sight. So that as
lunge as she is in perfect oppositio without latitude, so log doth she continue
in darkness.


Spo. And is she not Eclipsed at no other time then only at the Full?


Phil. No certainly there fore Lucan doth aptly in his first book open the cause,
time of the moans Eclipsation, in these versis.

-- Cornu{que} coacto,
Jam Phaebe toto fratrem cum redderet Orb,
Terrarum subita percussa expalluit vmbra.


VVhan as the moan unto the world, her brother Titan bright
In form wold represent, shining with face both full and round:
She suddenly was sore wounded, and there with left her light,
Titan causing th'earthes shadow, her beauty to confound.



Spou. These verses are short, very full of eloquece.


Phil. Yea they are also easy to be vndarstand, for she never resembles the
figure of the son (who Poets call her brother) but only when she is at the
full, at which time being in th'opposite place to him, th'earthe (as I said)
shadows her from our sights. But let that pass, and behold to serve thy
use in this behalf, I have calculated such Eclipses of the moan, as shall hap
fro the year of our Lord. 1560. until the year. 1605: Applying the time of
there beginning, in years, days, hours, minutes, unto the meridia of Norwich
exactly, which is. 22. degrees, and. 30. minutes, from the Canarian, or West
fortunate Ilandes.

1560.
March. Day. 11 Hour. 16 Minute. 6

1562.
July. Day. 15 Hour. 14 Minute. 4

1563.
July. Day. 5 Hour. 7 Minute. 34

1565.
November. Day. 7 Hour. 11 Minute. 36

1566
October. Day. 28 Hour. 2 Minute. 44

1567
October. Day. 17 Hour. 13 Minute. 53

1569
Marche. Day. 2 Hour. 14 Minute. 57

1570
February Day. 20 Hour. 5 Minute. 20

1570
August. Day. 15 Hour. 9 Minute. 5

1572
June. Day. 25 Hour. 9 Minute. 10

1573.
December. Day. 8 Hour. 7 Minute. 25.

1576.
October. Day. 7 Hour. 9 Minute. 12

1577.
April. Day. 2 Hour. 6 Minute. 29

1577.
September. Day. 26 Hour. 10 Minute. 37.

1578.
September. Day. 16 Hour. 12 Minute. 24

1580.
January. Day. 31 Hour. 8 Minute. 36

1581.
January. Day. 19 Hour. 8 Minute. 38

1581.
July. Day. 15 Hour. 15 Minute. 0

1584
November. Day. 8 Hour. 11 Minute. 18

1587.
September. Day. 6 Hour. 8 Minute. 54

1588
Marche. Day. 2 Hour. 13 Minute. 22

1588.
August. Day. 25 Hour. 14 Minute. 47

1589
August. Day. 15 Hour. 6 Minute. 8

1590
December. Day. 30 Hour. 7 Minute. 15

1591.
December. Day. 19 Hour. 14 Minute. 48

1592
June. Day. 14 Hour. 8 Minute. 7

1592
December. Day. 8 Hour. 6 Minute. 31.

1594
October. Day. 18 Hour. 17 Minute. 8

1595
April. Day. 13 Hour. 14 Minute. 15

1596
April. Day. 2 Hour. 7 Minutes. 57

1598
February. Day. 10 Hour. 16 Minute. 31

1598
August. Day. 6 Hour. 5 Minute. 28.

1599
January. Day. 30 Hour. 16 Minute. 30

1601
November. Day. 29 Hour. 5 Minutes. 9

1602
May. Day. 25 Hour. 4 Minute. 56

1603,
May. Day. 14 Hour. 10 Minute. 39

1603
November. Day. 8 Hour. 7 Minute. 7

1605.
Marche. Day. 24 Hour. 7 Minute. 15

1605.
September Day. 16 Hour. 14 Minute. 49



When as thou wilt find the longitude of any Region, Howe to find the
Longitude of Regions by an Eclipse.
Country, or Village, by an Eclipse, do in this manner. Observe diligently the
perfaite time, when as she begins to be eclipsed (either by some perfait
Dial, or clock, or else by the heighte of some fixed sterre) and if the time of
her beginning, do agree with that which thou shalt find here calculated, know
certainly that thy Meridian and longitud, is all one with Norwich: but if they
differ, do in this order. Subtract the lesser time, from out of the greater,
the difference turn into degrees, mi. of the Equinoctial. The if the time in the
beginning of her obscuration be more, then that which I have hear placed: add
this difference in degrees, and minutes, unto the logitude of Norwiche, (because
the place is East from it, and you shall have the perfait logitude. But and she
begin sooner with the, to be Eclipsed then is here metioned, subtract the
difference aforesaid in digrees minutes, from the Longitude of Norwiche (because
thou art West from it) you shall have the Longitude desired.


Spou. Howe shall I torn the hours, minutes of the day into digrees, minutes
of the Equinoctial?


Philo. You must give to every hour, 15. digrees: How to turn the hours of
the day into degrees minuces.
to every 4. minu. of an hour, one digr. of the Equinoctial: every minu. of an
hour, 15. minu. of the Equinoctial: as this Table following shall always
declare. And now I will give you a twofould example. Anno. Christi. 1558. An
observation of an Eclipse.
the second day of April, there was a great Eclipse of the Moan, so that she
was darkened x. points well ne'er, began to come under the shadow of the Earth
at Norwich, at x. a clock 37. minutes at night (as by taking the height of a
fixed sterre, called the virgins spike, did evidently appear) now willing to
note men's observations in other places, I find that Leouitius Cyprianus, in
his book of Eclipses, apoynteth it to begin at Augusta in Ger many 23. min.
after xi. a clock at night. Then to find the longitude of Augusta fro Norwich I
subtract. x. hours 37. min. fro xi, hours 23 min, there remain 49, minutes, A
TABLE, SERVING TO THE converting the hours, and minutes of the day: into
digrees, and minutes of the Equinoctial.
The ark of the equinoctial in The arc of the Equinoctial in Thou. of the day
Digre. Mi Second Mi. of thou. Digrees Min. Seco. Third. 1 15 2 30 1 0 15 2 3 2
30 5 0 2 0 30 5 0 3 45 7 30 3 0 45 7 30 4 60 10 0 4 0 0 10 0 5 75 12 30 5 1 15
12 30 6 90 15 0 6 1 30 15 0 7 105 17 30 7 1 45 17 30 8 120 20 0 8 2 0 20 0 9
135 22 30 9 2 15 22 30 10 150 25 0 10 2 30 25 0 11 165 27 30 15 3 45 37 30 12
180 30 0 20 3 0 50 0 13 195 32 30 25 6 16 12 30 14 201 35 0 30 7 31 15 0 15 225
37 30 35 8 46 27 30 16 240 40 0 40 10 1 49 0 17 255 42 30 45 11 17 1 30 18 270
45 0 50 12 32 5 0 19 285 47 30 55 13 48 2 30 20 300 50 0 60 15 2 30 0 21 315 52
30 22 330 55 0 23 345 57 30 24 361 0 0 with which I enter into this tahle,
find answering to. 46. minutes of time. 11. degrees. 30. minu. of the
equinoctial, because that the beginning of the Eclipse, is later at Augusta*
then at Norwich, it shows the situation to be East from it. Wherefore I add
the difference of time turned into degrees unto 22. degrees 30. minu. (the
longitud of Norwich) there arises. 34. degrees the longitude of Augusta. In
like manner 1559. the. xvi. day of September, at 3. of the clock 19. min. after
dinner, the moan shall begin to be darckened at Norwich, which at Tolet in
Spain shall happen at 2. of the clock. 22. minutes. The difference in time is
47. minutes. I convert them into degrees, minutes of the equinoctial (as
before) find 11. degreet 50. min. And because that the Moan is darkened sooner
at Tolet, then Norwich, I subtract this difference fro Norwich find. 10.
degrees, 40. minutes, the longitude of Tolet which is West from Norwich.


Spo. But this Eclipse of the Moan, shall not be scene in the beginning, nether
end at Norwiche, or Tolet?


Phi. True it is, because the Moan being in the perfect opposition of the son,
can not show her self above our Horizont, before the soon be under the Earth,
which is not unto. 6. of the clock.


Spou. How can you then show the true time of her beginning at Norwiche, or
Tolet, when as she is not scene of their inhabitants?


Philo. right perfetlye. Conferring the meridian of Norwich, or Tolet, with
other places East from them, whereas the beginning shallbe plainly of these
inhabitants perceived. But in this place it is brought in only for example.
And although this way of finedinge the true longitude be both certain, and
most easiest of all other: yet it has this discomodity, because th'eclipses
happen rarely, and seldom, as twice in a year at the most, sumtime but once
in.ij. year. Furthermore there hapeneth sumtime impedimets that at the time also
of her Eclipsing, we cannot observe her beginning or end, either because the
clouds are betwixt our sight, her, so is shadowed: or else that she is under
our Horizont, at that preset season. Wherefore P. Apia practised an other way,
how to find out th'aforsaid Apians way to find out the Longitude of places.
Longitude, yea that every night hour of the same, so that the Moan be above
the Horizont, the air clear and fair.


Spou. We are bound to have him in much estimation, which by his labours, has
supplied that we did want: but what is his invention?


Phil. I will show you, there are three things required unto this business, the
Astronomers Iacobes staff.
staff, also called Iacobes staff (the making of which you shall find among
the other instruments) the second is the true place of the Moan in the Zodiake,
in degrees, minutes, for the hour you make obseruatio, (which you may take out
of an Ephemerids) and the iij. is the longitude of a fixed sterre, which you
may take out of the Table of fixed sterres in my first book. These Fol. 27.
had, you must take your staff with the Cross on it. and apply the one end
of the Cross to the Center of the Moan, and the other unto the sterre: which
thing to do, you shall remove the Cross up and down, until the ends of the
staff touch both the center of the moan also of the sterre. This ended, the
cross shall show you what the distance of the Moan, star is in degrees
minutes. Then take the distance in degrees, minutes of the Moan, fixed sterre,
which you had before the observation: And substract these.ij. distances, th'one
out of the other, the remanet divide by the portio that the moan moves in one
hour, And that shall show you the time, when as the Moan was joined with the
star (if the star be West from her) or when she shall be joined with the
star, if it be East from the Moan. This time being had, you shall turn it
into degrees, minutes of th'equinoctiall, (as I said in the other precept before,
the table shows) if the moan be West of When the Moan is West of the Star
What is to be wrought.
the star, do in this manner. Marcke whether the difference of the moan,
star found by thy observation, be greater then the difference found by the
ephemerids, the logitude of the fixed star: if it be lesser, the subtract
the time turned into degrees, mi. from the meridian for which th'Ephemerides
are Calculated, because thy place is west from it: but and the difference be
greater, then add the degrees, mi. to the Longitude (for which th'Ephemerides
are supputated, because thy place is East from it) so shalt thou have the true
Longitude desired. Moreover thou must consider if the When the moan is East of
the Sterre.
Moan be East fro the Sterre, then thou shalt work contrary (that is to say)
if the distauce found by obseruatio, be lesser the the other, you shall subtract
it fro the logitud know, because thy place is west fro it, but this difference
be greater, then add it to the fornamed Longitude, because thy place is East
from the other: so without error, thou shalt have thine own desire. And this
way also, is excellent to correct the course of the Moan, and amend the
tables, out of which her mouinges are taken: if they do err at any time.


Spo. I must neades confess your words true, when you said how much any thing
excelled other in knowledge, so much the more it was companion with difficulty.
For except you give me an example, I shall never attain the perfait meaning
hereof.


Philon. I will give you an example of that time, which I observed my self to
find out the logitude of Norwich.

Anno. 1558. the second day of February, at. x. a clock An example,
at night, I found the place of regulus (called also the lions hart) in
longitude degrees. 23. 32. minut. in Leo: the Moan also at that present, in
the.xxi. degree.xl. min. of the same sign (her place being calculated for
Anwarp, which is xxvi. degrees. xxxvj. minutes) I subtracte the place of the
moan, from the longitude of regulus, the distance.j. degre.lij. min. that she
is West, from the sterre. Then I take my staff (with one eye closed) I move
the cross up down, until th'one end was equal with the Center of the Moan,
the other end with the Star. Then I find by that observation, the Moan to
differ fro regulus, j. degree. 43. min. This number I take from the first
difference, there remains 9. minutes. The inquire I out, how many min. of
time, answer unto. 9. min. of the Moans course, (making the Moan to move in one
hour xxxv. minutes, find.xvj. minutes of time: which turned into degrees of
th'equinoctiall, make. 4. degrees: because the Moan is West of the sterre, the
distance found by the staff less in number, therefore I subtracte the. 4.
degrees from the longitude of Anwarpe, there remain. 22. degrees. 36. minutes,
which differ little fro the other observations.


Spou. The difference of. 6. minutes in Longitude, is small or no error, when
as. 15. minutes of th'equinoctiall, make but one minute of time.


Phil. True it is.


Spoud. By your example, the precept seems more evident, I mistrust not, but
with diligence to make in other places, the like observation.


Phi. I will open unto you an other way to find the Another way.
Longitude of any region, in every place, as well day, as night, that every
hour, most necessary for the, which either sail, or travel.


Spou. But you do then observe the distance of the places, in miles.


Phil. No verily, for if I were carried by land into places unknow
(blindfilded, as they term it) or by the violence of troublesome whether, on
the sea, driven from my course, I can declare how many miles I am from my
country, how many leaques from my proper course.


Spoud. Then surely, it must have in it much difficulty, saying that there
springs of it so much utility, and profit.


Philo. The way is very facile, without great labour, I will no longer make
you muse thereon. You shall prepare a parfait clock artificially made, such as
are brought from Flauders, we have the as excellently without Temple bar,
made of our countrymen.


Spoud. Do you not mean such, as we use to wear in the facion of a Tablet?


Phi. Yea truly, when as you travel, you shall set the nedle of your Dial
exactlye on the hour found out by the son on the day, by some star in the
night: the travelling without intermission, when as you have travelled.xx.
yea.xl. miles or more (if your next place, whose longitude you desire be so far
distant) then mark in your Dial, the hour that it shows: after with an
Astrolabe, or Quadrant, find out the hour of the day in that place: if it agree
with the same which your clock shows, be assured your place is north or South
fro the place you came from, therefore have the same logitude, meridia line. But
the time dif fer, subtract th'one, out of the other, the difference turn into
degrees minut. of th'equinoctiall as before, then add or subtract, as in
the other.ij. precepts, going before. But now behold the sky is over cast with
clouds: wherefore let us haste to our lodgings, end our talk for this
present.


Spoud. With a right good will.


THE THIRD BOOK OF THE Cosmographicall Glass: in which is uttered the making
and protracture, of the Face of th'Earth, both in Cartes Particular, and also
universal, with diverse necessary things, incidente hereto.
Philonicus. SAYING THAT in our last days talk, it was made evident unto
you, what the Longitude, Latitude, Circuit of th'Earth was, how you also might
find the same by diverse sondrye ways: moreover the division of th'Earth into
zones, by the help of Paralleles: it should seem now convenient, to show you
the cause wherefore all these are learned, to what final end they are desired.
Therefore, least you shulde be left destitute of The principal part of
Cosmography.
the principal tresure of Cosmography, that is to delineat, protract, or set
forth the platform of th'vniuersall face of th'earth: or else perticulerli any
one portio of the same: I will this day also do my endeavour, to show you the
way how to attain hereunto.


Spo. Wold to god, that fortune had unto me give of her tresure, that I might
sowhat (al though not recopece) yet show forth my good will for this your great
pains, travel. For in dede silver gold, The noble reward, of learning in
times paste.
is to base to recompense knowledge with, that did the famous kings princes in
th'old time well perpende: When they did not only give th'inuentors (of any new
Science, Art, or profitable thing for a public weal) abundance of treasure:
but also for perpetual memory, made an Image to represent such a person,
and called him a God for his invention. So was Neptunus Neptunus.
called God of the seas, for that he found the Art of sailing. Aeolus, the
God of winds, because he invented Aeolus.
the true use of them. Ceres a Goddess, for finedinge Ceres.
out tillage. But what make I discourse in these things to you, which know
them much better then I.


Ph. Hear by I gather your good will to th'aduancemente of learning. But it is
not treasure which at your hands I crave, but only that you show your self
enemy unto ignorance, thorough your industrious labour, both in profitinge your
self, also your native country. But or we proceed further in this our
busynesse, I will brieflye open unto you certain names, which we use in
Geography, with th'interpretation of the same: and histories with Poets
abound also with them. And first you must consider that th'Earthe being
environed, compassed about with the great Ocian seas, seems as it were an
Land (after Strabo his mind) notwithstanding there is a great difference
betwixt an Island, What an Land is.
and th'Earthe: for an Land, is a portion of th'Earthe separated from the
hole, by waters which do circuit it on every side, so that you can not
journey by land, either from Europe, Asia, or Afrike unto your country, but
must use herein Navigation.


Spoud. Unto your description do agree, America, Sicilia, Iaua, the Rodes,
Candy, Delos, Therasia, and England, in which we inhabit.


Philon. It it true, now you shall further note that the seas divide th'Earth.
4. sundry ways, for either it is an Island, or little differing there from (and
therefore called Peninsula) or Isthmus, or Contines.


Spoud. So that Peninsula, differs from an Peninsula.
Land, because in some part, it is joined to a greater portion of th'Earth
without separation: as Taurica, Thrasia, Cherronesus, also Cymbrica Aurea, in
India.


Philo. Isthmus, doth differ from them both Isthmus.
signifies a portion of th'Earthe, having of either sides the raging Seas:
such are found agreeable to this description properly, Corinthiacus, and
Thrasius.


Spou. But howe doth Continens differ from these Continent.
three?


Ph. I will show you, it is a portio of th'Earth, which is not parted by the
Seas a sounder, but is continually in length, so that you may go from one part
unto another without navigation: as Saxonie, Bohemie, Sueuelande, c.


Spod. By these I gather there is no portion of th'Earth, but it is either an
Land, or that which you call Peninsula, Isthmus, or Continens.




Philon. No verily, but now behold the figure. Yet there remains to show you
what this word, Ocea Sea, means, what we call Promontorium, Fretum, Lacus,
Stagnum, Fluuius, Palus, c. which I reserve until we speak of Navigation: And
now we will turn to our scope. You shall consider that the face of th'Earth
is protraste, drawn two sundry ways: either on a roud plate form, for which
invention the Globe most aptly serves: or else on a plain plat form, as a
Card in which we draw th'vniuer sall Earth, or else but the half, or the one
part: yea, you please but one particular Region: which is proper to
Chorographie (as I said to you in the first book.


Spo. Th'inuention should seem much better An objection against the te
restriall Globe.
to draw th'Earth in a plain plate form, thereon a Globe, for in it, we may
behoulde the whole face of th'Earthe, without any remouynge or tournynge of
the Card: on the Globe you shall be compelled to turn first one part, then
another, or you can view any great portion of it.


Phil. Yet because it doth most evidently in figure, Th'Answere.
represent the form of th'Earth, it should seem more apt for this institution.
But I will leave his composition until I show you the making of it among
other instrumetes. And your cause alleged against this form, as I suppose,
did minister occasion to Ptolomaeus, to delineat, describe th'Earth in a plain
form. And because that right lines only used in this business, did cary error
with them (as the fornamed Ptolomaeus noted in Marinus the Geographers
invention) therefore he used in this protraction, such lines as might answer
proportionallye, the lines described in a Globe: But now I will leave to use
more words herein, will begin the work it self. And least that the difficulty
of the thing might somewhat discouragie you, I will first nosel train you up
in making a cart for a Region. But here note that a A particular card, made.
ij. ways.
particular card is made by knowing the distance of places: without Longitude
Latitude of Regions, which form of working I will here after open: or by
Longitudes, with which first we will begin. And then show you the making of a
Card, for the eight part of th'Earth, after The argument of the third^ book.
for half th'Earth, last for the hole universal face of th'Earth.


Spoud. I thank you sir, now I perceive your great care in observing a
methode, order in teaching, with the manifold utility springing of the same:
But seeing you will begin first with the descripsion of a Regio, I pray you let
your diligence that way bend, to the setting out of our country. So shall
the example be the more familiar, your pains nothing the greater.


Phil. I will accoplish your desire, in describinge a particular Regio,
Country, or Province, First you shall draw a right line in such length (in
the midst of your The manner of making a particular Carte for any Regio.
parchement, or paper) as it will aptly receive. This line shall represent the
meridia Line for the midst of that Regio. Then divide this line into so many
equal portios, as the latitude of the regio is: drawing right Lines, or
paralleles, in every of the same diuisios, according to the capacity ^f the
plat form of thy paper, or parchement, write on th'endes of these paralleles,
32. 33. 34. or 40. 41. 42. according to their distance fro th'Equinoctall.
after you shall consider howe many digrees the north part of your regio is fro
th'equinoctiall, entringe into this Table following (which is entitled the
quatitie proportio of th'Equinoctall, or any great Circle, unto every
parallele both North and Southe from them) search how many minutes, and
secondes answers to the furdest of these degrees in latitude, with thy
compass, take the like space in any of the divisions of latitude: and then
beginning at the hier part of the Carte (for that shall represent the North
part) make pricks with this compass from the Meridiane line, on both A
PROFITABLE TABLE, SHOVVING THE quantity, and proportion of th'Equinoctiall,
unto every Parallele, both toward the Pole Arctick, Antarctick, making every
digree 60. minutes.
Latitude of Paralleles. Latitude of Paral. Latitude of pural. Dig. Mi. Se.
Their Dig M S. T. De. Mi. Sec. Th. 0 60 0 0 31 51 25 48 62 28 10 6 1 59 59 27 32
50 52 58 63 27 14 22 2 59 57 18 33 50 19 13 64 26 18 8 3 59 ^5 4 34 49 44 32 65
25 21 26 4 59 51 14 35 49 8 57 66 24 24 15 5 59 46 18 36 48 32 28 67 23 26 38 6
59 40 17 37 47 55 5 68 22 28 35 7 59 33 10 38 47 16 50 69 21 30 7 8 59 24 58 39
46 37 44 70 20 31 16 9 59 15 41 40 45 57 46 71 19 32 3 10 59 5 18 41 45 16 57
72 18 32 28 11 58 53 51 42 44 35 19 73 17 ^2 23 12 58 41 20 43 43 52 52 74 16
32 18 13 58 27 20 44 43 9 37 75 15 31 45 14 58 13 4 45 42 25 35 76 14 30 55 15
57 57 20 46 41 40 46 77 13 29 49 16 57 40 33 47 40 55 12 78 12 28 29 17 57 22
42 48 40 8 52 79 11 26 55 18 57 3 48 49 39 21 49 80 10 25 8 19 56 43 52 50 38
34 2 81 9 23 10 20 56 22 54 51 37 45 33 82 8 21 1 21 56 0 53 52 36 56 23 83 7
18 44 22 55 37 52 53 36 0 32 84 6 16 18 23 55 ^3 49 54 35 16 2 85 5 13 46 24 54
48 46 55 34 24 53 86 4 11 7 25 54 22 42 56 33 33 6 87 3 8 25 26 53 55 40 57 32
40 42 88 2 5 38 27 53 27 37 58 31 47 43 89 1 2 50 28 52 58 37 59 30 54 8 90 0 0
0 29 52 28 38 60 30 0 0 30 51 57 4 61 29 5 19 both sides: then account howe
far distant the south part of thy Region is from th'Equinoctiall, by the
help of the Table you shall know howe many minutes answers to one digree:
then with your compass take the like proportion of the digrees of Latitude,
your compass not opened wider, make pricks from either side of the meridian
line in the lower part of the Card, for that signifies the south coast of
that regio. After draw right lines from the pricks in the hier part of the
Table, unto the Pricks in the lower part. And write in them the degrees of
Longitude, as. 10. 11. 12. or. 20. 21. 22. then is thy card made ready to
serve thy necessary use.


Spou. This being ended, what is then requisite to be observed to the perfait
finishing of this card?


Phil. Only to seek out of Ptolomaeus Geography, or my fifth book, the
latitudes of Cities, Towns, Villages, Hills, Rivers, or other notable things
in that Region contained, according to those nobres, to place the in your
card, or map.


Spou. I do not so much fansye Ptolomaeus, in logitudes latitudes, for he was
not able being so mighty a Prince to travel into those countries, that to a
private person (for the great distance a sunder) was impossible. And therefore
receiving (as he confesses) observations at other men's hands, did in many
sundry places swerve from the truth.


Ph. And that was not to be imputed unto Ptolomaeus Ptolomaeus ex cused.
as a crime, saying the error ensued by other men's observations. But for this
cause I have made my fifth Book, in the which, I have followed Ptolomaeus in
certain points touching his native Country, places to them adjacent. In
the other, I have used later writers travels, not omitting my own as you
shall evidently perceive.


Spoudeus. I pray you give me an example of these things spoken.


Phil. Here minding to describe the plat form of An example.
Englande, I draw (as you se) a right line in the midst of the Map. And
because I find in my fifth book, that it is fro the Weast part of the same to
th'East. 11. digres: I divide this streght line (being the Meridian Line, for
the midst of this Regio) into xj. equal parts, or portions: Then do I
search how much the Pole Arctik is elevated above th'Aequinoctiall, in the
furdest north part of Englande: find it 61. (for under the name of Englande, I
comprehend the whole Land coteyning also Schotlande, Irelande.) Therefore I
enter into the Table going before, find answering to 61. digr. 29. minutes, 5.
secondes, 19. thirdes. Which space, I take with my compass in one of the
diuisios of Logitude, that I made in the meridian line, so my compass not
opened wider, I begin at the Meridian Line in the higher part of the Card, make
on either side 5. pricks (that is to sai) v. on the left had, v. on the right
had. in like ma ner I find the south part to differ fro th'equinoctial lj. di.
wherefore entering into the Table, I find answering to lj. dig: 37. min. 45.
seco. 33. their. And with my compass I take the like portion in one of the
divisions of the Meridian line, then with my compass I divide the lower part
of the Table, as I did the hier. Then draw I right Lines from the Pricks in
the hier part of the Table, unto the pricks in the lower part: wright at
th'endes of them, the Digrees of Logitude, as also in the diuisios of the
Meridiam line, I wright the digrees of latitude. The seek I in the fifth book
for the notable Cities, Towns, Villages, such like, place them in this card,
according to their true Longitude, Latitude, as in the card of Englad following
you may well perceive.


Spoudeus. Now I perceive by the making and describing of this only Map,
that the whole work doth chieflye depend upon the Meridian Line, appointing
by them the longitudes of Regios: by Paralleles of Climates, whose use in a
Card, is to limit the Latitude fro th'Equinoctiall. So that observing this
order of you prescribed, I may in like sort at my pleasure, draw a Card for
Spain, France, Germany, Italye, Greece, or any particular regio: yea, in a
warm pleasant house, without any peril of the raging Seas: danger of
enemies: loss of time: spending of substance: werines of body, or anguish of
mind. Oh how precious a Jewel is this, it may rightly be called a
Cosmographicall Cosmographicall Glass.
Glass, in which we may behold the diversity of countries: natures of
people, innumerable forms of Beasts, Fowls, Fishes, Trees, Fruit, Stremes,
Meatalles.


Phi. You shall have just ccasio to affirm, when as you understand the whole
commodity of the same. But I will show you to describe iij. or iiij. Regios in
one Map: yea, or so many as are coteined in th'eyght portion of th'Earth.
And therefore I call it a Card, containing th'eyght part of th'Earth, whose
compass, in what quatitie you please (the greater the better) note, it with A.
B. C for the easier understanding, un till you are exercised herein. Then
divide the compass of this Circle in iij equale parts, mark the points of
the division, with A. B. C. After place th'one end of the compass in A.
stretch out the other end unto B. or C. with thy compass draw an arcke, or
portion of a Circle, from B. to C. Then set th'one end of the compass in B.
draw the like arcke fro A. unto C. After place the one end of thy compass in
C: describe the like arck fro B. to A. And here note that A. doth signify the
North, or south Pole. And th'arke B. C. the quadrant, or iiij. part of
th'Equinoctial Circle. This arc B. C. you shall di uide equally in the
midst, at that point place D. Then draw a right line from A. unto D. this
shall repraesent the meridiane line for the midst of this card. This line
shall you divide into 90. parts, every one shall repraesent a digree: or into
18. portions, every one shall answer unto v. digr. Or (if the Map be small)
into 9. portions, every such division shall signify. 10. digrees. Then
placing th'one end of your compass in A. extend, or stretch out the other
unto every of these divisions, draw arkes, or portions of circles, from
th'arck A. B. unto th'arck A. C. These ended, you shall write in every division
from B. to C. th'equinoctiall, unto A. the Pole Arctik 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. or 5. 10.
15. 20: or 10. 20. 30. according to the division of the meridiane line. After
you shall account in this division 23. digrees. 28. minutes from the
quinoctiall, which is the sons greatest declination, and draw there a double
arc which shall serve for the Tropicke of Cancer, or Capricorne, noted with E
L, in like manner account. 23. degrees. 28. minutes from the North or South
pole, in that space draw in like sort a double arc, which shall be in stead of
the polary circle, either Arctike or Antarctike, set th'endes of it. I K. and
so are all the paralleles of latitude, (answering your map) perfaitly
finished.


Spou. I understand the protracture of them very well. But shall there be but
one Meridiane line for all this Map?


Phil. Yes verily, there shall be so many, as there are paralleles of latitude,
whose nombre as I said was. 90.


Spou. Now I perceive the reason of this artificial working, for like as the
circuit of the heavens is distributed into. 360. parts: so in like manner the
compass of th'earth is also into 360 portions divided, both toward the Poles
also from West to East. Therefore I pray you show me the way howe to draw these
meridiane lines.


Philo. You shall divide the arc B D Cinto. 90. or. 18. or else 9. portions
equally, as I did the latitude from A unto D. In like sort you shall divide the
polary Circle. I K. then drawing in these divisions from th'equinoctiall (by
the divisions of the Polary Circle) unto A, Arkes or portions of Circles, you
shall have the frame preparid in which you shall (in the same manner that you
did for England) place such portion of the world, as it can aptly receive.


Spo. But may I not describe here the paralleles, climates (taking the out of
the table in the second book) as Ptolomaeus doth in his Geography?


Phi. Yes verily, it shall adorn the map, not omitting the principal winds
serving for that part of th'earth, nor yet th'inhabitats called for the
diversity of shadows, Periscij, Heteroscij, Amphiscij, but now behold the
frame of whose composition we have made so many words.




Spou. This map doth lively express your meaning so that there is none (I
suppose) so ignorant or dull, but that without great difficulty he may practise
the like, there fore I require you proceed in the descriptio of a Card, for
half the face of th'Earth which (as I conjecture) will conveniently serve for
our Hemisphere.


Philo. Not for our Hemispere only, but also for any one half portion of
th'earth, as well serving th'vse of the that dwell under us directly ( called
therefore Antipodes) as also any other. But I will leave to speak of th'vse of
it, because of it self it is manifest, will make plain un to you the composition,
artificial praeparatio of it. First with your copase describe a Circle as great
as your card shall be, withi which draw an other Circle, a finger breadth
distant, just to this, also an other. Then part these Cir cles in the midst
with a right lyne, th'endes of which are A. C. cross this lyne in the midst,
with an other right line B. D. So is your Circle parted into 4. equal portions
Then divide every portion in the compass of the circle into 90. parts in this
manner. First into 3. then every of the again into 3. after into 2. last into
5. After write in them 5. 10. 15. 20. 25. 30. c fro B. C. unto D A. so is the
whole compass of your card, parted into 360. portions.


Spoud. Unto what use serves the cross lines drawn thorough the face of the
Map?


Philo. The line A. C. repraesenteth the meridiane: as the line B. D. The half
Aequinoctiall circle. Also A. C. repraesenteth the Poles of the world, the
plages, or parts of the same, north south: as B. signifies the weast, D.
th'East.


Spou. I perceive your mind, therefore proceed.


Phi. The apply the ruler to the digr. of the circle of A. B. C. note
th'intersections of the ruler in th'Aequinoctiall in like manner do in the other
half Circle A. D. C. this ended, you shall describe from A. unto C.
Paralleles, or half circles, by these divisions in th'Equinoctiall: then write
on them from B. to D. 10* 20. 30. 40. c. Also you shall apply the ruler to the
circle, dividing the Meridiane line A. C. as you did th'equinoctial B. D.
describe in th'interfectios in like manner, half circles, which shall serve for
Paralleles of Latitude. Then account in the circle from B. toward A. xxiij.
digr. 28. min. describe an arcke, which shall repraesent the half tropic of
Cancer, also fro A. toward B. accopte xxiij. digr. 28. min. draw with your
compass another arcke, which shall signify the half Artic, or polary
circle: in like manner do with the tropike of Capricorne, th'Antarticke circle.
After place the half part of th'earth in the map thus praepared, describe
the Climates, Paralleles, inhabitauts, winds, with their proper names, the
map shall be perfaitlye finished, as for example, you may behold the frame of
the Hemisphere of th'Earth, before placed.


Spou. This card should seem to give a great light knowledge unto Navigation.
And if I do praepare me an other Map, for the other Hemisphere, I shall in
these two copraehende, contain th'vniuersall Earth.


Phil. True it is. but as touching the light, it brings to Navigation, we
will make metion of, at our next meting: now I will show you, how in one
card, or Map, you may describe all th'earth, in such wise, as shall be most
perfait, in that form, figure, which shall be right pleasant.


Spou. I pray you then begin, The making of a Card conteininge the whole
Earth.
I shall give diligence.


Phi. First describe on some plain place, an half circle A. B. C. upon the
center D. so great as thou wilt have the card, after divide the right lyne A.
D. into 90, portions equally. Then place th'one end of your compass in A.
stretching forth the other end un to 86. degr. xv. min. xx, secondes, in the
line A. D. so with your Compass, draw an arc fro D. unto the half circle A.
B. C. which shall cross it in B, (for by this way th'arke A. B. being
extended right forth, shall be as long as the right line A. D.) Then you shall
divide this arc A. B. into 90. equal parts. After with your compass take the
quatitie of th'arke A. B. and placing th'one end in B. take the like quatitie
in the half circle towards C. which in like manner you shall divide into 90.
portios, so th'arke A. B E shall be parted into 180. parts. Again with thy
compass take the length of the line A. D. th'one end being placed in A.
take the like proportion from A. to F. so that A. F. shall be equal to the line
A. D. Then divide the line A. F. into 90. parts equally, as you did A. D.
after placing th'one foot of thy compass in the Ceter D. thou shalt draw arkes
in every of the diuisios, or else every fifth, or x. division only note the
hiest Arc next with G. H. then enter into the table following, find out how
many degrees in logitude answers to. 80. degrees of latitude, north fro
th'equinoctiall (which in the table are. 140. degrees. 40 minutes) that number
you shall account in the half circle from A, unto E. applying your ruler unto
th'end of this nober, unto the ceter D. drawa short line, which shall exted
unto H. again enter into your table with 70. degrees of Latitude, you shall
find. 138. degrees 23. minutes (which I account from A, toward E as before,
applying my ruler to the short line, the degrees in Longitude, with my pen I
draw an other short line. In like manner I do with the other paralleles of
Latitude. 60. 50. 40. 30. 20. 10.


Spou. So that by entringe into the table, accounting the degrees in Longitude
fro A. towards E, drawing short lines one at th'end of an other, there arises
as it were a portion of a circle fro D to B. if I could in like manner find the
proportio of th'equinoctiall unto the South paralleles (which in like nobre
are. 90.) the the whole form would repraesent the figure of half an hart.


Phi. The other part of the Table containing Southe paralleles, shall serve
herein your use sufficiently. For entering into it with. x. degrees of latitude
which is the next south parallele fro th'equinoctial, I find. 79. degrees. 46.
min. which accounting as before in the half circle A E. I draw an other
short line at th'end of the other, so in like sort with. 20. 30. 40. 50. A
TABLE, CONTENING THE SEGMENTES and parts of th'equinoctiall, drawn in a
plain plat form, answering unto the circumference of Paralleles. c.
The North Latitude of Paralleles Paralleles drawn South fro th'Equinoctial Di
Dig M. Di Dig 40 Di. Di Mi Di Di Miunt. 89 141 20 44 126 40 1 88 59 46 41 22 88
141 20 43 126 2 2 87 59 47 40 19 87 141 19 42 125 22 3 86 58 48 39 16 86 141 16
41 124 44 4 85 59 49 38 12 85 41 12 40 124 4 5 84 53 50 37 8 84 141 7 39 123 16
6 83 55 51 36 4 83 141 1 38 122 44 7 82 52 52 35 0 82 140 55 37 122 4 8 81 51
53 33 56 81 140 47 36 121 20 9 80 17 54 32 53 80 140 40 35 120 38 10 79 46 55
32 2 79 140 27 34 119 55 11 78 44 56 31 2 78 140 22 33 119 10 12 77 41 57 30 0
77 140 4 32 118 55 13 76 38 58 29 0 76 139 58 31 117 41 14 75 33 59 28 5 75 139
46 30 116 58 15 74 31 60 27 0 74 139 30 29 116 9 16 73 27 61 26 1 73 139 14 28
115 21 17 72 25 62 25 2 72 138 45 27 114 33 18 71 19 63 24 2 71 138 38 26 113
45 19 70 16 64 23 3 70 138 23 25 112 56 20 69 12 65 22 5 69 138 13 24 112 6 21
68 7 66 21 6 68 137 56 23 111 17 22 67 3 67 20 9 67 137 32 22 100 27 23 65 50
68 19 12 66 137 15 21 109 35 24 64 55 69 18 16 65 136 55 20 108 55 25 63 50 70
17 20 64 136 33 19 107 52 26 62 45 71 16 23 63 136 10 18 106 58 27 61 40 72 15
27 62 135 47 17 106 9 28 60 36 73 14 31 61 135 25 16 105 13 29 59 32 74 13 37
60 135 0 15 104 19 30 58 41 75 12 43 59 134 35 14 103 22 31 57 23 76 11 49 58
134 6 13 102 29 32 56 18 77 10 55 57 133 41 12 101 34 33 55 13 78 10 1 56 133
12 11 100 39 34 54 8 79 9 8 55 132 43 10 99 42 35 53 5 80 8 17 54 132 15 9 98
45 36 52 0 81 7 26 53 131 48 8 97 49 37 50 55 82 6 35 52 131 16 7 96 51 38 49
51 83 5 44 51 130 44 6 95 53 39 48 44 84 4 55 50 130 10 5 94 52 40 47 43 85 4 2
49 129 37 4 93 58 41 46 39 86 3 13 48 129 2 3 92 58 42 45 34 87 2 24 47 128 29
2 91 58 43 44 31 88 1 35 46 127 52 1 91 0 44 43 28 89 0 47 45 127 16 0 90 0 45
42 25 90 0 0 60. 70. 80. 90. where the Pole Antarctike is, and makes the
Figure as you said of half an hart.


Spoud. This can I practise by my self at an other season: wherefore I pray
you proceed to the finishing of this Map.


Philo. Then taking the Clothe or Parchemente, in which you will describe the
Paralleles, and Meridiane Circles: you shall reduce all the Circles with their
divisions, which you made in A. B. C. into this second Map, the Center of
which is. K. by the healpe of your compass, first drawing a right line. K.
L. the midst of which shall be M. and this line must be in length equal to
the Line. D. F. in the first Map. Then placinge th'one end of the compass
in. K. extend the other unto. M. and protracte a Circle, which shall
represent th'Equinoctiall, and shall be equal unto the Circle. A. B. C. after
take with your Compass the distance of every Arcke described in the first
Map, and with th'one foot of your compass, (placinge the other foot in. K.)
draw Cyrcles in such circuit, as one of these shall be four times the quantity
of one of the other in the first Map.

Moreover you shall divide th'Equinoctiall line into. 360. equal portions,
such as are in the Line. A. B. C. In like sort the other Paralleles, both
Septemtrionall, and Southe from th'Equinoctiall, and drawing from every
division of one Parallele unto an other short lines as you did from. D. to. H.
in the first Map, your Card will not only grow to the form of a heart,
but also of a double heart one within an other, as this demonstratio, figure
shows. Last you shall draw the Tropickes of Cancer and Capricorny, the
Circles Arcticke and Antarctike, making them double lines for the easier
knowing them from the other paralleles.

Then place in this Map the Face of th'Earthe, according to his parts in
Longitude and Latitude, as it is set fourth in my fifth book, using in every
Country, to place only the Meridiane Line, for the midst of the same, where
as your Map is of no great quantitye. Then place the degrees of Longitude,
Latitude unto the Paralleles, and Meridiane Circles, with Climates, Winds,
diversity of inhabitaunce, and other necessary things.


Spoud. But may I not describe the Planet sign under which every nation is,
also in this Map? for Ptolomaeus makes mention of them in his quadripartite,
as also every Astronomer writing of the reuolutios of the world.


Phi. Yes truly, by that reason, you shall make it an Astronomical Glass
also, serve your use profitablye therein.


Spoud. I pray you give me a table of the principal winds, of which you
have hitherto made no mention, also of the Planets signs, under whom every
region Country is governed.


Phi. As touching the winds, and there nombre, because it requires a longer
time then now is offered, you shall find in the table of the where we make
mention of Nauigatio: but as for the Planets signs governing every region,
because you have not always Ptolomaeus, I will not refuse to make mentio of it
in this place, adding furdermore unto Ptolomaeus the names both of Regions, and
Cities, which ether were not known of him, or else willingly omitted. As in
this Table you may easily perceive, coferrig it with that which is of him
described.

Regions and Cities, subject to the signs Planets, and first of those that be
under Aries, and Mars..
Basternia, Syria, Palestina, England, France, Germany, Burgundy, Sweueland:
and of Cities with Towns, Naples, Ancona, Ferrariae, Florens, Verona Capua,
Lindauia, Cracouia. c. Under Taurus, and Uenus..
Parthia, Media, Cyprus, the lesser Asia, th'Ilandes named Cyclades, Irelande,
Heluetia. c. Of Cities and towns, Bonony, Tigure, Lucerna, Herbipolis, Lipsia,
Posna. c. Under Gemini, and Mercurius..
Hircania, Armenia, Cyrene, Marmarica, the lower Aegipt, a part of Lombardie
and Fladers, Brabant: and of Cities and Towns, London, Louain, Brigys, Mence,
Hasford, Norinberge. c. Under Cancer, and the Moan..
Numidia, Africa, Bithynia, Carthage, Phrigia, Hollande, Seland, Scotland, the
kingdom of Granat* c: And of Cities Towns, Constantinople, Uenice, pise,
Millan, Treuers, York, S. Andrews, Lubeck. Under Leo, and the son. Italy,
Sicilie Apulie, Boheme, Phaenicia, a part.
of Turkie, Sabina. c. And of Cities with towns, Damascus. Rome, Confluence,
Rauenna, Cremona. Prage. Under Uirgo, and Mercurius. Mesopotamia, Babilon,
Assiria, Greece, Achaia.
Crete: and of Cities and of towns, Hierusale, Corinth, Rhodes, Papia, Tolose,
Lions, Paryce, Heydelberge,.
Basile. Under Libra, Uenus. Bactriana, Caspia, Thebaida, Aethiopia, Lyuonia,
Austrige, Oasis. And of cities towns, Caieta, Lauda, Suessa, Placentia,
Friburge, Argentine, Spiers, Francford. c. Under Scorpius and Mars..
Iudaea, Cappadocia, Getulia, Mauritania, Norway, Cathalonia. And of Cities and
Towns, Ualentia, Padua, Messana, Aquileia. c. Under Sagittarius, Libra..
Spain, Arabia the happy, Ungary, Slauonia, Celtica, Misnia. And of Cities
Towns, Tolet, Collein, Narbona, Stutgardia, Rotenburge, Buda. c. Under
Capricornus, Saturnus..
India, Arriana, Macedonia, Thracia, Greece, Saxonye, Hessia, Orchney Lands,
Machline, Oxford, Bra denburge, Constantia, Fauentia. Augusta vindel. c. Under
Aquarius, Saturne..
Arabie desert, great Tartarie, Denmark, Segdiana, Sarmatia. of Cities,
Hamburge, Brema, Salisburge. c. Under Pisces Iubiter. Lydia, Paphylia,
Calabria, Normandy, Portugal.
Sicilie. of cities towns, Alexader. Hispalis, Copostel, Ratisbone, Worms.



Sp. There now remains to speak of the describing a particular card for any
regio or country, without knowing their logitudes latitudes.


Ph. That is well remembered, there be diverse, sodri ways to perform this work,
of which I will show you but one: that is by an instrument, serving properly to
this use. But like as this way is more easier then that which is performed by
longitude, Latitude, may be put in practice at all times: so in like condition,
the worcke is not so exact, and perfaite, as by Longitudes and Latitudes,
which require lunge and diligent observation.


Spou. In what form is th'instrumet made by which so much utility may spring,
as to describe by it, a country.


Philonicus. It is made much like the back part of an Astrolabe, conteininge
in the circuit. 360. degrees, An Instrument seruinge th'vse to describe a
country
and has a ruler with two sights, which we move to and fro, as occasion is
ministered, until thorough them we see the place desired. But it differs from
an Astrolabe, in that it hath a Dial, with a Nedle fixed in it, also that
th'Instrument is divided into two thirty parts, like as a Shipman's compass.
As this figure before placed, doth apparently set out.


Spoudeus. This Instrument is easy to be provided, To make a Carte without
knowing Logitude, Latitude.
yea, that without great expense, is not troublous in carriage: but in what
sort may I by it describe a Country?


Philon. I will in few words make it to you evident. With your Instrument
you shall ascend on some hie tower, Steaple, or Mountain, so that you may on
every part se the towns, Uillagies, about you adjacent in your Horizont. Then
placing your Instrument (which I name a Geographical plain Sphere) Flat,
level, The Geographical plain Sphere.
tourninge it from one part unto an other, until the nedle fall on the
Meridian Line, in thy Geographical plain Sphere, then it remaininge
stedfaste: direct the ruler with his two sights unto any one place that you
do see, mark diligently the Angle of sight, (Gemma The Angle of sight.
Frisius calls it) Angulus positionis.


Spoude. I pray you be not offended although at this present I interrupt
you, and or you further proceed show me what you call the Angle of sight.


Philonicus. I am nothing displeased, but much rejoice that you will not
negligentlye suffer things to escape you, until you be satisfied touching
their true meaning. You shall note that the Angle of sight, is that Arc or
portion of the Horizont of any The Angle of sight.
place, comprehended betwixt two Meridiane Circles and drawn by the vertical
Circle of the first place, unto the Meridian of the second, whose distance you
seek out.


Spou. Then you in this place call that Arc A perfect Angle.
of the Horizont, the Angle of sight, which is lesser then a perfait angle,
conteininge. 90. degrees.


Phil. I do so, for if it be. 90. degrees, the place is under the same
Parallele of Latitude, but yet differs in Longitude, therefore is directly
East or West, as also if there be no Angle of sight, it has the same
Longitude meridiane Line, is plain North or South from you.


Spoud. Then I pray you proceade with your precept, you say I shall take the
Angles of sight of every place that I can see in the Horizont of my place
where I begin my work.


Phil. Yea verelye, and then you shall make in some Paper a great Circle,
divide it into. 360 parts, as your Geographical plain Sphere is, writing
the four coasts of the country East, South, West, North, in your paper, then
draw right lines fro the Center of your circle, (which represents your place
where you take the Angles of sight of other towns, villagies adiacet) unto
such Angles of sight as you have found out by your Geographical plain
Sphere.


Spou. But this shall little (as I coiecture) avail: yea although I might have
the Angles of sight of all the places in a Regio, from my place, if I have not
the true distance of them?


Philon. I confess no less: for if you have not the Angles of sight from ij.
places, you can not gather the distance of the third. Therefore when as you
have placed in the Paper all the Towns, Villages, or notable hills, that you
can se in that Horizont: you shall take your instrument and Paper, trauelinge
unto some other town, where in like manner you shall go up into the hiest place
of the same, and there placinge your instrument as before, observe the Angles
of sight of such Towns Villagies as are in that Horizont. Which ended, you
shall describe in the Paper an other circle as before (as far distant fro
the other, as you think convenient, marking diligently that the Center of the
second Circle, be in the line of sight, drawn from the Center of the first
Circle, it being also divided into. 360. parts) drawing such Angles of sight
as you can find. And so proceed fro place to place, until every Town or
Village have come twice in your sight. And where that any line of the second
Circle, Crosses the like line in the first Circle, make there a Sterre, or
like mark, for that third place (so call I the town observed twice) so in
like manner you shall do with other places, until you have drawn the hole
region you desire.


Spoud. Than it is expediente for me to observe the Angle of sight of every
Town, from ij. several places, so shall I find out the distance of one of
them from an other, or of the third fro the both, as it must be placed in the
Card.


Phil. Yea, and not only in the Card, but that being known, you shall easily
find out the distance in To find the distance in miles of diverse places.
miles of one of them from an other.


Spou. That seems very marvelous, saying that you have not their Longitudes
Latitudes.


Phil. Yet the work is right easy) as I doubt not but you will confess) for
knowing the distance in miles of any Towns, or Uillagies, you shall know
the true distance of all the Towns in an Region, one from an other, as for
example.

Swarston in Norfolk, is from Norwich. iij. miles: I divide as you se the line
drawn from Norwiche to it with my compass, in three equal parts, after
apply my compass to the line drawn fro Norwich to Windham, from Windham to
Swarston, find. vi. miles betwixt Norwich and Windham, and. iiij* miles from
Winda to Swarston.


Spo. By this way, I can find out the distauce of two towns nie together, by
that to find out the distauce of all towns in a Card.


Phi. I do greatly commend you, and you may also make a scale, or ruler,
conteininge in it the quantitye of miles from one, to an hundredth if you
please, and by this means Howe to find the distance of places.
you may take with your compass the distance of ij. places, then apply the
compass to the foresaid scale, or ruler, you shall find the perfaite
distance. And now sense I have fulfilled your mind for the chief principal
matters belonging to Cosmography, Geography, I will at this present return to
my lodging again.


Spou. When shall it be your pleasure, that I shall repair unto you to be
instructed in the Terrestrial Globe, because you said that it do most aptly
represent the form of th'Earthe.


Philo. Being required by certain of my friends, I do entend, to make a longer
more ample discourse therein, then this place will permit: And therefore will at
this time omit it. As touching my fifth book you shall receive it of me to
morrow, which day also for your furderaunce, I entende to consume in teaching
you necessary principles for Hydrographie and Navigation. And therefore again
fare you well.


THE FOVRTH BOOK OF the Cosmographicall Glass, setting out such necessary
principles, rules, as are to be observed in Hydrographie, Navigation.
Spoudaeus. THERE IS NOthing under the Globe of the moan contained, which Time
tedious.
unto man, beast every living wit, seems more tedious, more ickesome, and
long the time, when as they once feel the want of that they most desire.
Which saying to be true (although many do confess) yet I above all other
must of force affirm, remembringe your promise, touching th'Arte of
Navigation. For sense your departure, the greadye Greyhound (I assure you)
never more desired his pray, nor the thirsty heart, the flowynge fountain, or
the languishinge sick patient, the recovery of his health: then my mind
wanting her fode and Nutrimente, thought lunge, wished, and thirsted, after
your presence and company.


Phi. It is the proper nature of such in whose mind knoweledge have once
builded her Boure, ever more more (like a covetous ma) to labour travel after
sciece: for there is no other ways, how to expel that foul, ugly beast
Ignorance, out of the mind of ma: to place knowledge in the same, but by all
possible means, to embrace Sciece Cunning. Wherefore, lest that your pain
should with Tantalus increase: I will no longer occupy the time with other
kind of talk, but will begin somewhat to entreat of necessary things belonging
to Na uigatio: for I do not intende to set out the differes of one vessel fro
an other, as th'Argousie, Hulke, Ship, Craer, Pincke, Pynice, Gally, or what so
ever name they have, nor yet of their takling: but will leave it to such as are
Pi lotes masters of that faculty, will show the a way how they shall both
correct their errors, also guide direct their Uessels, according t'Arte
Science.


Spo. The first I pray you begin with the diuisio of the water, expouding such
names as they take of there place.


Phi. That was my meaning: first as touching the seas you shall note that it is
diversely called: either according to the hole, or else accordig to the part.
Accordig to the hole, as the seas by this general name Ocea, because they
circuit Th'Ocean sea
th'earth roude about. according to the parts, as the seas breaking into the
land, making backs on either Sinus, what it here signifies
side is called Sinus, taking also the name of the place it flows into, as
Sinus Adriaticus, sinus Arabicus, Sinus Indicus c. Also the great seas which
divides Afrik Europe is called the middle earth sea: taking that name Mare
medite^ ranium.
because in the Weast of Spain, it breaks into the midst of th'Earth. The
Red seas where proud Pharo The red Seas.
all his bend were drenched: is not far distant from the mid Earth Seas,
for there is but a certain Mare Mortu^.
hill, which they must needs go over that go by land fro Egipte to Arabia
Petrea, that parketh them. Also the Sodomiticall or dead Seas (so called
because that Sodoe other Cities were there burnt with fire coming from heaven)
is not far from Iordane, it is also called the dead sea, because the water
moves not, no not with most vehement tempests, because of the pitch in it,
nether ca any ship sail, or any fish live there. The seas which Mare
Cagelasum.
are under the Poles Arcticke Antarcticke are called the congeled or frozen
Seas. There are also the English, Germaine, Spanish other seas, of which I
neade to make no mention, no more then of the notable rivers, as the Themes,
the Rhine, Confluence, Neccarus, Danubie, Tyber, Nilus. c. Because they are
manifest unto such as travel in any of them.


Spoud. I read also in diverse writers these words, Fretum, Lacus, Stagnum,
Palus, Fluuius. But their difference I know not.


Phil. Fretum is contrary to that peas of th'Earth, that What Fretum i^.
is called Isthmus. For like as that is a straight portion of th'Earth, having
the Seas on both sides: so Fretum is a narrow streit arm of the Seas, being
betwixt two shores. Lacus, we may call it a lake, is that which continually
What Lacus is. What Stagnum is.
hath water. Stagnum do differ from it, because it conteyneth only water
gathered by inundations, and rain in the winter season. Palus is a water
merueilus What Palus is
deape, broad, Fluius, we name it a fludde, is called so of flowing.


Spoud. Your words gives me occasion to demand the cause of ebbing,
flowing, also whether the time may by any mean be learned?


Philon. And I will gladly answer you, for this is not the least thing that
Pilotes, Shipmen ought to have regard unto, both for going out, also coming
in into any Port, or Haven, other necessary matters. as touching the Seas
howe that they raise, and Elevate up them selves, as though they would touch
the firmament, and there with fills other Arms, Havens, The cause of spring
ebb tides.
and waters: and also, that they wax shallow, and as it were empty again: I
can conjecture no other cause then that, which the Noble Philosopher Physician
Gale nus citith, in his book De diebus decretorijs: in which he affirms that
when as the Moan increse in light, al moist things in like case increase: when
as her light decrea seth, they in like sort decrease. Whereby it is evident that
spring, ebb tides, take their beginning end of the moans course in the
Zodiac. Galenus words are these.

(...) Li. 3. de Dieb. decret. cap. 2.


Omnia siquidem quae facere nata est, vbi falcis figura repraesentat languida
fiunt: inualescunt omnia cum plena fuerit.

All things which are under the power of the Moon, when as she resembles the
since in likeness, they are feeble, decrease: but al things wax increase, when
she is at the Full.


Spou. Then by these words I gather a repugnancy An objection.
betwixt his authority, daily experience: for it is more manifest, clear the
midday, how that the seas ebb, flow every natural day, that is in 24. hours
twice: Galenus saith, how but twice in a Month the Seas ebb flow: for because
she is but once at the full, once at the change in this circuit of time.


Phi. This objection nothing infringes Galen his authority, Th'answere.
nor yet experience. For in the spring, and ebb tides, the seas do increase,
decrese marvelously: which happen but twice every moth, this is that, which
Galenment. And as for daily ebbing, flowing, the seas do not increase, or
decrease therewith. And therefore is properlye called fluxus, etrefluxus, but
the other Augmentum et Decrementum maris.


Spo. And what is the cause of this daily ebbinge and flowing so orderly, as
often sundry times I have well noted?


Phi. The moan also, for when as she rises in th'East, The cause of Ebbyng and
flowing.
the seas begin to increase more more, until she comes to the Meridian
Circle, is full Southe: then causes full Sea. And so as she declines from the
South, so the sea decrease, until she go down in the Weast Ocean, at which
time again the Seas begin to increase, until the Moon be in the foresaid
Meridian Line, under th'earth, then she is full North, making also full seas.
So they decrease by little little as the Moan approaches toward th'East.


Spou. Then I pray you teach me some brief way how I may at all times
find th'age of the Moan without any tables of her diurnal course, or
Ephemerids: for having that, I shall easlye find out the spring and
ebbetides.


Philon. With a right good will, you shall account the days, that are past of
thy month, add thereto the Epacte, How at all times to find th'age of the
Moon.
And to this number you shall also add for every month past (beginning at
Marche) 1. These 3, numbers you shall add together, and that shall show you
the age of the Moan. As for example 1559, the 24. day of An example.
August, I would know the moans age. First I add 24 days to th'Epact which
is 22, the number of them is 46, then from March to August, there are 5. Months
past, therefore I add to 46. the number of 5. and the hole number is fifty
one, from which I take thirty, (for so must you do, if your number be more
then xxx. under sixty) there remain, one twenty, which is th'age of the
Moan.


Spoud. And what if the number be 30. or 60. what must I then do?


Philonicus. There is no thing to do, for that number shows the Moon to
change that present day.


Spoude. And howe may I find the true Epacte, for on that is all the
difficult of the work?


Philon. That is so easy, as I count it but lost time to make many words
there in. For having th'Epacte for Th'Epacte.
one year: you shall for the next year add xi. so yerelie xi. cast away xxx.
as oft as you can: the remnent, shall be your Epacte. But because I will not
make more words in trifles, behold the Table, and when the years are
expired, begin again at the first number, so continue for ever without
variation.

The year of Christ The gol de number. Th'Epacte The year of Christ The gol de number
Th'Epacte 1560 3 3 1570 13 23 1561 4 14 1570 14 4 1562 5 25 1572 15 5 1563 6 6
1573 16 26 1564 7 17 1574 17 7 1565 8 28 1575 18 18 1566 9 9 1576 19 29 1567 10
20 1577 1 11 1568 11 1 1578 2 22 1569 12 12


Spou. Now if I could know, howe long the Moon doth every night shine, me
think it should be very pleasant comfortable, especially being on the
troublous seas.


Philoni. And to that thing also, you shall easily attain by the help of the
Table following.

A TABLE OF THE SON RISING and going down, through the whole year.
Ianua^us. Februarius. Martius. April. May. June. Da. of themo Son rise.
Son go do. Son rise. Son go do. Son rise. Son go do. Son rise.
Son go do. Son rise. Son go do. Son rise. Son go do. H M. H M. H M. H
M. H M. H M. H M. H M. H M. H M. H M. H M. 1 7 47 4 13 7 5 4 55 6 16 5 44 5 23
0 37 4 36 7 24 4 7 7 53 5 7 42 4 18 6 59 5 1 6 9 5 51 5 16 6 44 4 31 7 29 4 5 7
55 10 7 36 4 24 6 50 5 10 6 0 6 0 5 8 6 52 4 25 7 35 4 4 7 56 15 7 30 4 30 6 42
5 18 5 51 6 9 5 0 7 0 4 9 7 41 4 4 7 56 20 7 24 4 26 6 34 5 26 5 42 6 18 4 51 7
9 4 14 7 46 4 6 7 54 25 7 17 4 43 6 24 5 36 5 34 6 26 4 43 7 17 4 11 7 49 4 9 7
51 Iulius. August. September. October. November. December. Da. of the mo Son
rise. Son go do. Son rise. Son go do. Son rise. Son go do. Son
rise. Son go do. Son rise. Son go do. Son rise. Son go do. H M. H M.
H M. H M. H M. H M. H M. H M. H M. H M. H M. H M. 1 4 12 7 48 4 48 7 12 5 39 6
21 6 32 5 28 7 22 4 38 7 53 4 7 5 4 15 7 45 4 55 7 5 5 46 6 14 6 39 5 21 7 28 4
32 7 55 4 5 10 4 20 7 49 5 3 6 57 5 54 6 6 6 47 5 13 7 34 4 26 7 56 4 4 15 4 26
7 34 5 11 6 49 6 4 5 56 6 55 5 5 7 40 4 20 7 55 4 5 20 4 32 7 28 5 18 6 42 6 13
5 47 7 4 4 56 7 45 4 15 7 54 4 6 25 4 38 7 22 5 26 6 34 6 21 5 39 7 12 4 48 7
49 4 11 7 51 4 9

First you shall seek out the Month in this table, with To know howe log the
Moon doth shine every night.
his day which if it be not there expressed, take that which is next it. And
it shall show you what time the son sets: after, seek out th'age of the
Moan by th'Epacte, or otherwise, against that number in this table (entitled
the time that the moan shines. c.) You shall find hours, minutes, which add
to the going down of the son, that number shall manifestly declare how long
she is above th'Earthe, as for example. The. xx. day of An example.
Marche. 1559. the Moan is xj. days old: against which number in the Table of
her shining, I find viij. hours, 48. minutes. The do I loke at what time the
son sets the. xx. day of March, find it at vi. of the clock xviij.
minutes. These I add together, and the number is xv. hours vi. minutes: so
that the moan shows unto iii. of the clock in the morning, vi. minutes
after. hear you must note, that before the Full, after the change, she
shines presently, the son being set. But after the Full moan, you shall
subtract out of the sons rising, so many hours minutes, as you find in
th'age of the moan: the remanent, shall show when as she do rise as for example.
The xxvij. day of March, the moon is An example.
xviij. days old, the time of her shining, is x. hours xxiiij minutes: the
son rises that day, at v. of the clock. xxx minutes. Now subtract the
shining of the Moan, out of the sons rising: there remain vii. hours vi.
minutes, the time when as the Moan shall show her self above the Horizont.

A TABLE SHOWING HOWE LONG the Moon shines in our Horizont.
Th'age of the Moan. The time she shines. Th'age of the Moan. The time she
shines. Days. Hovr. Min. Days. Hour. Min. 1 0 48 16 12 0 2 1 36 17 11 12 3 2
24 18 10 24 4 3 12 19 9 36 5 4 0 20 8 48 6 4 48 21 8 0 7 5 36 22 7 12 8 6 24 23
6 24 9 7 12 24 5 36 10 8 0 25 4 48 11 8 48 26 4 0 12 9 36 27 3 12 13 10 24 28 2
24 14 11 12 29 1 36 15 12 0 30 0 48


Spoudaeus. There yet remain to set out, at what time daily ebbing and flowing
shall be in every cost or you further proceade: for you have declared the division
of the seas: with the cause of the spring and ebb tides, also of daily
ebbinge, and flowing, moreover, the age of the Moan, and how long she shines*
whereby I can conjecture the tides aforesaid: now therefore if you do instruct
me, whereby I may know the perfect time of Ebbinge and Flowing: then you may
with other things at your pleasure proceade.


Philon. That you may do without any labour or study, if you do, but only know
what Moan in that coast make full seas: which thing this Table following shall
lead you unto, in which, I have placed the principal towns on this shore of
England, of other costs, with the Moan that in every one of them make full
seas.

FVLL SE AS IN THESE PLACES FOl^wynge by the cost of the Moon, as when she is
at
London. S. W. Graves end. S. W. S. Poperelle. S. Lands end. S. E. Marget.
S. S. E. Gulles. S. W Sandwich S. E. S. Dover. S. E. S. Rhie. S. S. E.
Porchmouth. S. Portland. S. E. Dartmot W. S. Plumot W. S. Famot. W. S. Mous
bay. W. Scilli. W. S. Milford. W. S. The lands end at Gulf. W. S. W And
all the coasts up to bristow, yea and the coasts of Irlande, fro VVaterforde,
unto Holdhede of Kinssael. w. S. Calys. S. S. E. Boleyne. S. S. E. Deep. S. E.
S. New Haven S. E. S. The coast of Lions. S. s. w. Conquit. S. w. Al the coast
a long, till you come to Poell head S. w. From Poell head till you come to the
streit of Malgate. S. w. Grauelin S. E. Dunkerk S. E. Host End. S. S. w.
Blank Borrow. S. S. w. Sluse. S. s. w. Ramkinse s. s. w. At Anwerpe. E.
Newporte s. s. w. Harwich s. s. E. Yermouth s. E. All the coast a lunge to
VVintertone. s. E. Humber. E. Scarborrow, and a lunge the coast to Newcastell.
s. w. Castle. s. s. w. Holly Land. s. s. w. Barwike s. s. w. South Hapton.
S. Black Deppes S. Red Bank. S. Tyne Mouth. s. w. Hartle Poule. w. S. w.
Feylene. W. S.


Spo. This I understand very well.


Phi. Then when you will learn the time that it shall How to know th'exacte
time of ebbinge and flowing.
be full sea, seek out the town with the coast of the moan. After, enter into
this table (having th'age of the moan) there stay your finger. Then seek in the
hier or lower part of the Table, for such a coast as you found written To the
Reader.
Hear should come into this Page (friendly Reader) the table of the Moans
ebbinge and flowing: but because the space is not sufficient, you shall find
it, in an open sheet, which must here to be annexid.

A PROFIT ABE TABLE FOR FINDING OVT EBBES, AND FLVDDES IN THE COASTS of
Englande, Scotlande, Irelande, Duchelande, and France.
THE COATSES OF THE MOON BEFORE the Full, after the Change.
The age of the Moan East. East by S. East. S. E. S. e. by Ea. S. Ea. S. E. by
So. S. S. East. S. and by Ea. Sou. S. and by we. S. S. weast S. we. by s S. we.
s. w. by w. we. S. weast we.. by So. H. M H. M H M H. M H M H. M H M H. M H M
H. M H M H. M H M H. M H M H. M. 1 6 48 7 33 8 18 9 3 9 48 10 33 11 18 12 1 12
48 1 31 2 18 3 3 3 48 4 33 5 18 6 3 2 7 36 8 21 9 6 9 51 10 36 11 21 12 6 12 51
1 36 2 21 3 6 3 51 4 36 5 21 6 6 6 51 3 8 24 9 9 9 54 10 30 11 24 12 9 12 54 1
39 2 24 3 9 3 54 4 39 5 24 6 9 6 54 7 39 4 9 12 9 57 10 42 11 27 12 12 12 57 1
42 2 27 3 12 3 57 4 42 5 27 6 12 6 57 7 42 8 27 5 10 0 10 45 11 30 12 15 1 0 1
45 2 30 3 15 4 0 4 45 5 30 6 15 7 0 7 45 8 30 9 15 6 10 48 11 33 12 18 1 3 1 48
2 33 3 18 4 3 4 48 5 33 6 18 7 3 7 48 8 33 9 18 10 3 7 11 36 12 21 1 6 1 51 2
36 3 21 4 6 4 51 5 36 6 2^ 7 6 7 51 8 36 9 21 10 6 10 51 8 12 24 1 9 1 54 2 39
3 24 4 9 4 54 5 39 6 24 7 9 7 54 8 39 9 14 10 9 10 54 11 39 9 1 12 1 57 2 42 3
27 4 12 4 57 5 42 6 17 7 12 7 57 8 42 9 27 10 12 10 57 11 42 12 27 10 2 0 2 45
3 30 4 15 5 0 5 45 6 30 7 15 8 0 8 45 9 30 10 15 11 0 11 45 12 30 1 15 11 2 48
3 33 4 18 15 3 5 48 6 13 7 18 8 2 8 48 9 33 10 18 11 3 11 48 12 33 1 18 2 3 12
3 36 4 21 5 6 5 51 6 36 7 21 8 6 8 51 9 36 10 21 11 6 11 51 12 36 1 21 2 6 2 51
13 4 24 5 9 5 54 6 39 7 24 8 9 8 54 9 39 10 24 11 9 11 54 12 39 1 24 2 9 2 54 3
39 14 5 12 5 57 6 42 7 27 8 12 8 57 9 42 10 27 11 12 11 57 12 42 1 27 2 12 2 57
3 42 4 27 15 6 0 6 45 7 30 8 15 9 0 9 45 10 30 11 15 12 0 12 45 1 30 2 15 3 0 3
45 4 30 5 31 16 6 0 6 45 7 30 8 15 9 0 9 45 10 30 11 15 12 0 12 45 1 30 2 15 3
0 3 45 4 30 5 31 17 5 12 5 57 6 42 7 27 8 12 8 57 9 42 10 27 11 12 11 57 12 42
1 27 2 12 2 57 3 42 4 27 18 4 24 5 9 5 54 6 39 7 24 8 9 8 54 9 39 10 24 11 9 11
54 12 39 1 24 2 9 2 54 3 39 19 3 36 4 21 5 6 5 51 6 36 7 21 8 6 8 51 9 36 10 21
11 6 11 51 12 36 1 27 2 6 2 51 20 2 48 3 33 4 18 5 3 5 48 6 13 7 18 8 2 8 48 9
33 10 18 11 3 11 48 12 33 1 18 2 3 21 2 0 2 45 3 30 4 15 5 0 5 45 6 30 7 15 8 0
8 45 9 30 10 15 11 0 11 45 12 30 1 15 22 1 12 1 57 2 42 3 27 4 12 4 57 5 42 6
27 7 12 7 57 8 42 9 27 10 12 10 57 11 42 12 27 23 12 24 1 9 1 54 2 39 3 24 4 9
4 54 5 39 6 24 7 9 7 54 8 39 9 14 10 9 10 54 11 39 24 11 36 12 21 1 6 1 51 2 36
3 21 4 6 4 51 5 36 6 21 7 6 7 51 8 36 9 21 10 6 10 51 25 10 48 11 53 12 18 1 3
1 48 2 33 3 18 4 3 4 48 5 33 6 18 7 3 7 48 8 33 9 18 10 3 26 10 0 10 45 11 30
12 15 1 0 1 45 2 30 3 15 4 0 4 45 5 30 6 15 7 0 7 45 8 30 9 15 27 9 12 9 57 10
42 11 27 12 12 12 57 1 42 2 27 3 12 3 57 4 42 5 27 6 12 6 57 7 42 8 27 28 8 24
9 9 9 54 10 30 11 24 12 9 12 54 1 39 2 24 3 9 3 54 4 39 5 24 6 9 6 54 7 39 29 7
36 8 21 9 6 9 51 10 36 11 21 12 6 12 51 1 36 2 21 3 6 3 51 4 36 5 21 6 6 6 51
30 6 48 7 33 8 18 9 3 9 48 10 33 11 18 12 1 12 48 1 31 2 18 3 3 3 48 4 33 5 18
6 3 west. w. and by N. w. N. weast N. we. by we N. w. N. w. by N. N. N weast
N. by w. Nor. N. by Ea. N. N. East. n. c. by N. N. E. n. c. by ea. E. N. East.
N. and by E.

THE COASTS OF THE MOON from the Full unto the Change.

Place this Table before the leaf. 153.

with your town, and over against the age of the Moan you shall have the
day, and hour; when as in that cost it is full sea. As for example, I find
at Yermouthe. S. E. An example.
Whereby I say that a Southeast Moan, make a full sea with them: the I Imagine
the Moan to be. xij. dais old therefore in the first row I seek the age of
the Moan, in the hier part of the Table, find S. E: then descending until I be
directly against the age of the Moan, I find vi. hours. xxxvi. minutes, which
is the exact time, when as it is full sea at Yermouthe. So in like manner you
may work with any place, about this our Ocean sea, as in the table going
before it is evident.


Spoude. This I do right well perceive.


Philon. Now order inforseth, that we convert our talk unto the winds,
because of the necessary use of the in Navigation, first you shall understand
that the wind is no other thing, then a hot dry exhalatio, engendered What the
wind is.
in the bowels of the Earth, which once breaking forth, is driven round about
the face of the same.

This both Homer, and the old Graecians, divided Four Principal winds.
only into iiij. East, Weast, North South. But those that followed them next,
after a more exquisite sort, divided the Horizont into. viij. equal portions.


Spoud. And what names did they devise for them?


Philon. I will show you, they called the East: Subsolanus, for that the sun
rises there being in the equinoctial points. The Weast wind also they called
Fauonius, of norishinge: the wind which comes out of the North, Septentrio:
the South wind Austere. Then the wind that blows betwixt the east, the South,
named South East. Also that which comes out of that place betwixt the east the
north, they called it northeast. The space directly betwixt the north, the
west, they named northwest: as betwixt the south, the west southwest, as in
this, figure A. B. C. D. represent the Horizot, A. the east, B. the north: C.
the weast, D. the south: E. the northeast: F. the nortwest: G. the southeast:
H. the Southeast.


Spo. Yet there is another kind of parting the Horizot, the you have declared:
for I remember that I red in Marcus Manilius, how the Horizo: was Marcus
Manilius.
parted in 12. parts: but the reason of it I could never understand. His
versis as I remember, are these.



Asper ab axe ruit Boreas: furit Eurus ab Ortu:
Austere amat medium Solemn: Zephyrus{que} profundum.
Hos inter binae mediis e partibus aurae.
Fxpirant similes, mutato nomine, flatus.


From the North, rough Boreas come: Eurus, from the East:
Austere, from the South blows: Zephyrus, from the West.
Betwixt either of these quarts, two other winds brost out:
In nature like: their names changed, whistling all the earth about.



Phi. Manilius doth very aptly show the order of parting the Horizot in to 12.
parts. For (saith he) there com meth two winds fro those parts of the
Horizont, where the equinoctial crosses it equally, of which, the East he
calls Eurus: And the Weast Zephyrus, or Fauonius. The the meridia circle
crosses also the Horizot equally in the midst. And so by these intersectios
there are two other winds described: the North, he calls Boreas, The Southe
Austere.


Spoud.. These. iiij. are the Principal winds, agrees with Homer the old
Gretians.


Philo. Yea, but in the rest it differs both from the, also the second
sort. For these parted the Horizont in. 8. equal portios: but Manilius into.
12. inequal parts for he described. iiij. collateral winds by the. ij.
Tropic Circles, which are the places where the Son rises goes down in the
midst of Somer, and Winter. And also other 4. winds at the Circles Arctick
Antarctick.


Spou. I remeher that in our first days talk, you showed me what
th'equinoctiall, the Tropickes, the circles Arctik Antarticke were:
notwithstanding I shall the more speedily conceive your meaning, if you vouch
safe (as hitherto you have used to give me some example picture hereof.


Phil. That I will not refuse to do, or any other thing, so that the more
vtiliti hereof may unto you ensue. Where fore behold the tip before placed in
which. A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H. Is the place of the Horizont. H. the North. A.
th'East: L. the Southe:. B. the Weast. From which the Principal winds doth
blow. C. is the place where the Son rises in the Summer, E. where in the same
time of the year he sets: Also. D. do represent the place, where as the
son rises in the winter point, and F. the coast where he goes down. Also
that part of the Arctick circles, which is most easterly marked with G,
the other part furdest Weast, noted with I. also the part of the Circle
Antartike furdest East, is marked The Horizont parted into 32 parts.
with M. And the other portion furdest west with K. But now in our time, the
learned Hydrographers, Trauelours on the Seas, have yet gone beyond them all,
parting the Horizont in 32. equal portions, as sufficiently answering unto
every viage through the hole Earth, they have given them very apt names, as
in this Instrument following more largely appears.


Spou. Thus I see, that by diligence, labour, small things have great root,
increasing. For first there were found out but iiij. Cardinal, chief winds:
after they were made viij. in number, then xii. And now in our days 32. so that
I believe we be at the furdest, and that those which follow us, shall not be
able to add The number of winds infinite.
any thing to this pertition of winds.


Phi. You are much deceived, if that you so do think, for the number of ^indes
be infinite, break out of every part of the horizot. But like as 12. in number
seemed not sufficet: so 32. are thought to answer in all parts, that is in
Nauigatio required, the devising of a greater number, shall rather cause
confusion of memory: then help in this behalf. Also by this Compass (the
Son shynynge) you shall perfectly know the hour of the day by the coast he is
in. As when he is right East, West, it is always six of the cloak: also, a
Southe Son makes xij. of the clock. So in like manner, a southeast son,
makes ix. of the cloak, a south weast son, iij. of the cloak after noone.
The other hours are manifest by the compass.


Spou. This is very necessary also in trauilinge. And now return to that,
from whence we did digress.

There are certain qualities applied to the winds, whereof doth that spring?


Phi. There are so, that comes of the teperature North winds cold.
of th'Earth, so that the North winds be called could, because they proceed
fro the frozen Zone, these south winds hot, because that they come fro the
burnt zone. South winds hot.
But this belogeth more to Physic, the Nauigatio. For we seek herin, to learn
th'apt wind which shall cary us, unto the desired Port, not health, which is
the Physicians chief care.


Spou. I confess no less, but yet sense we have entered in to this matter, I
will be so bold, as to trouble you herein further. And where as you say, the
qualities of the winds An objection
spring of the teperature of th'earth, do you mean the zones, Climates?


Phil. I do no less:


Spou. The saying the North wind is called cold, because it comes fro the
north frozen zone, why by the like reason shall not the South winds be of like
quality, coming fro the south frozen zone?


Philoni. I will answer you in few words. The Th'Answere.
North wind comes from the North frozen zone, and is felt in our Climate,
because we are situated, nearer that, then the South frozen Zone: which being
under our fete (as you have heard before declared) is kept fro us, the
couldnes of the wind, not only mitigated, but also greatly altered, through
the heate of the burning Zone. And therefore the South winds are called hot.


Spou. This doth very well agree both to reason, experience. So that in
th'Equinoctial, where both the north, and South winds meet, there the winds
are called teperate, Winds temperate under th'eqninoctiall
because the couldnes of them is taken away by the heat of the burning Zone.
And by this also I gather, that such as dwell in the temperate Southe Zone,
((...) Proclus call it) beyond th'Equinoctiall, they call the South wind cold,
and the North wind hot.


Phi. It must neades so be, for that the burning Zone qualifieth the coldness
os the North winds, through his heat, as to us, he doth the South.


Spou. There is now an other dout entered into my head, of which to be delivered
I must (or we further proced) require your ientill aid. And that is, whether in
describing A question.
the. iiij. Cardinal winds, you call the North Pole, the furdest North point
or not: and th'Antarctick Pole the South point.


Philon. No verily, respecting our climate, but I call Th'Answere.
North, South, the place of the Horizot, which the meridia circle rightly doth
cross, as also th'east, west, where th'Equinoct. crosses the horizot.


Spo. The under th'equinoctial, where the Poles are equal with th'earth the
Poles them selves are the north South points.


Phil. It must of force so be. But now saying their instructions seem
sufficient unto you, touching the order, number, division, and names of the
winds: I will pass from that, and convert my talk, unto the desired scope,
(that is) howe to direct any ship, from place to place, from Port to Port,
exactly by Art:


Spou. And that is a thing, which seems marvelous. For it is thought praise
worthy to go by land, directly without error, from one place to an other,
far distant a sonder, having no path, or way whereby to be guided. But in
the wide Ocean, to find a direct way, to conduct his vessel unto the port
desired, is much more commendable. If Vlisses had known this Art, he should
not have hene so long tossed on the troublous seas. If Diomedes, Vlisses.
or Aeneas, had been herein learned, they had not so Diomedes. Aneas.
many years been driven from place to place: knowing not by what means, to
attain to their so lunge desired Region. What thing more commodious for
Princes, was there ever invented: more profitable for a common weal: and more
necessary for al men? And that considering the worthy Princes in time paste,
called Neptunus th'inuentor hereof, a God: as also Aeolus, which found out the
use of winds: For it is truly said, honour nourishes arts. Neptunus. Aeolus.



Philon. I wold in these days, they would reward the learned, painful (which
ether invent, or add to that which is invented) with a necessary living, as
for calling the gods, let that pass, it is to great a title for mortal men.
But omit we these things, as touching the directing of any ship, you may
do it two ways: th'one by the compass only, which was to th'olde
Hydrographers, The compass unknown to th'olde Hydre graphers.
unknown: the other by longitudes, Latitudes, and the compass, of which her
after we will show the manner. As touching the first way, I will not labour
to write much of, because it is known well nie to every Mariner. But yet I
will show them certain observations, by which there is found many errors in
the nedle: that done I will also declare, how they shall correct the same, and
sail more exactly then the most part are able?


Spou. This is a marvelous nedle, which being touched, The praise of the
neadle.
(as I hear only with the Magnes) should know to turn always to the North
pole, and that only by the same, the. iiij. Plages, and quarters of th'Earthe,
are presently found out. But what be th'obseruations of this neadle, by
which you affirm that it doth not exactlye point North, and Southe.


Phi. They are of Iofrancus set forth, in this wise. Observations of the
nedle where it hath erred.
In the Land called Insula Corui, it declined Easterlye. xv. degrees. Also in
the place which shipmen call (Le Cap d'espoir en terre neuue) it declines
toward the Weaste. 33. degrees, and. 45. minutes. Again at Deppe, (saith he)
it poynteth Easterlye to much, by. 11. degrees well nie.


Spo. If this be certain, then in dede th'error is not tolerable, but admit it
be not so much, yet error in all things (as much as is possible) is to be
eschewed, verity to be followed. Wherefore I pray you, show me how to find out a
perfait nedle, to correct it, if it be not perfect.


Phi. Both the choosing of a nedle that is perfect, also to correct the false,
consists all in one precept. For if I How to correct the nedle
can correct a false nedle, I can also choose a true, perfect: the way how you
shall do that, is on this wise. when you will verify your nedle (if it be in
the day) you shall use the healpe of the Sun (and on the night) of some
fixed sterre, marking diligently when they are in the nonestead line: then
direct your nedle unto the Son, or sterre, if the flower of the nedle be
right North from it, your neadle is perfect: or if the flower be toward the
son, the other part of it North, it is also true, this your nedle corrected,
you shall perfectly direct your ship, without error.


Spou. I can with my Astrolabe, or Quadrat, observe the height of the soon,
sterre, until that he come to the meridia, or nonestead line (as you taught me
in the second dais talk) at that instate, place my nedle Fol. 91. 92. 93. 94.
right towards him.


Phi. And this will serve as well on the seas, as on the lad. But on the lad you
may draw a meridiane line, as I taught you, set your compass on the meridian
Line, which you have drawn, in such manner, as the line North South in the
compass, stand right in the same, it is of all other th'exacte way: this
having your line made, you may at all times, verify any nedle, not tarrying
for the sons coming to the Meridian Circle.


Spou. But then my Meridian line which I have draw, must ever be fixed in
some place without remouig


Philo. It must neades follow. There is also great error committed in describing
the shipman's Cart, because they use right lines in the place of Parallele
circles, of which at this time I will no further entreat.


Spoud. Then I pray you begin the way how to sail by Longitudes, and
Latitudes.


Philon. Unto this way are required the circles of the Sphere, the meridian
altitude of the son by day, and sterre by night, the heighte of the Pole,
the longitude of Regions and Ports, and the use of the shipman's quadrat, whose
inuentor was worthy D. Gemma.




Spou. As touching the Circles of the sphere, you gave me instructios in our
first days talk: also to find th'altitude of the Pole, son, sterre in the
second days meting: the longitude of places you promised to set forth by
themselves give me at my departure: therefore there, only remain, to show me
th'use of the quadrat, in this art.


Phi. The I will herin satisfy your expectatio finish our talk for this
present. This Quadrat as you se contains. 32. points, with their names in
them written.


Spoud. I perceive it well, but what is meant by those degrees of Logitude,
Latitude, in that order placed?


Philon. I will show you, opening the whole Art of directing Howe to direct a
ship to any Port.
your ship. First you must seek out the longitude Latitude both of the place
from whence you sail, also of that unto which you intend to travail. Those
you shall for the most part find in my book (which I will deliver you at
our departing) then subtracte the smaller number of Longitude and Latitude out
of the greater, and with the difference of Logitude and Latitude, do in this
manner. First if the Longitude of the place unto which you travel be greater
then that from which you depart, entering into the hier part of the Quadrate
(and toward the left hand under this title, the greater longitude) you shall
seek out in degrees and minutes, this difference. And do in like manner in the
lower part of the table directly under it, this difference so found out,
apply a thride, or ruler, to the number found in the hier part of the Quadrat,
also in the lower part.


Spou. But if the Longitude of the place unto which I travel, be less, the
that from which I depart shall I not then account the difference of Logitude
from the middle Line, toward the right hand?


Ph. You must so do, but now as touching the difference in Latitude of the two
places, if the pole of the place (unto which you direct your ship) be
greater, then the Pole of the place, from which you losen then accomptinge fro
the middle line upward, under this title, the greater Latitude, in like case
toward the right had, then draw and extend a third, or apply a rulers, unto
this number of latitud, where the. ij. thrides or rulers cross one an other,
there make a mark for it is the place which you desire.


Spou. But where shall be placed the port from which I must depart?


Phil. In the Center, or midst of the Quadrat. So that if you apply a ruler fro
the Center of the Quadrate, unto th'intersectio of the two thrides or rulers,
it shall be manifest what point or wind, you must use, until you have finished
your course.


Spoud. But admit the logitudes be not trewly observed, so I shall be deceived,
how shall I know when we have sailed the differeces in logitude of their ij.
places?


Phil. That you may at all times without difficulty bring to pass, by finding
out the height of the pole: which you may do in the day, by the height of the
son, at midday, or on the night, by some fixid Sterre: or (that sterre which
Shipmen call) the Lode Sterre.


Spou. How may I know the form of this lode star?


Phil. Because the form of it shall much better make you know it, then th'vse
of many words, behold here the Figure following, in which you shall see the
configuration both of the Pole Arctick, and also Antarctick. And now again to
our former talk: having the height of the Pole found out by instrument, you
shall enter into the Quadrat with this number, finding out the Latitude, fro
the midline, upward or downward, as before it was declared: apply a ruler unto
the same place, noting diligently where this ruler, touches the line which
was drawn fro the center, unto the intersectio of the difference of Logitude
and Latitude first taken. The account the like number in the difference of
Logitude, that you did of Latitude, and applying the ruler there unto, it shall
show plainly the logitude of that preset place, like as the line from the
center, do certainly declare the cost of the world.

A. I^ the Southe Pole, D. C. th'Equi noctiall. ^. the North.




Spou. This seems to have a singular use in rectifying the longitudes of
places. Now that, which here is spoken* touches only th'exacte course (and
as it were) the path, in which we must sail. But if great winds, How to
know in what place they are, being driven from their course.
tempests, and storms arise, so that we are utterly drive from our course,
tossing up and down, the Seas, howe may I know, in what Parallele, and
Climate, we are, that thereby we may come again to our right course. Fol. 77.
78.



Phil. That shall you do by the help of the Table of Clymates, Paralleles, in
the second book, by the Eleuatio of the Pole, the finding of which I have so
oft set forth, that I am ashamed to make thereof any more mention.


Spou. Then you will that having the height thereof, I shall enter into that
table of Climates, seek there the eleuatio, directly against it, I shall find
the name of the Paralleles, Clymates.


Phil. You do rightly understand my meaning. And these things parfaitly kept
in memory, put in practise, when as occasion shall be ministered: there are not
many other thiges in this business requisite. Wherefore, saying that I have
satisfied your request, in all such things as you at our first days meting
desired, I think it a convenient place, at this time to make an end touching
this Argument of Cosmography, Geography, Navigation. And therefore depart with
me, you shall receive the Book, which I promised, conteinynge in it the
Longitudes, Latitudes of the famous Regios, Countries, Cities, Towns,
Villagies, such like, as are placed on the face of th'Earth. And when you find
any other doubts, either in this Art, or any other belonging to my
profession, if you do to me resort, I will therein willingly help you to my
power.


Spoud. I thank you most heartily, thus have I kept you (for my vtilities sake)
from your urgent, and necessary business, this long season, that without
receiving at my hand again any recompense. But sense I can not do herein what
my good will is, I shall refer the whole unto God, who pletiously rewards
the good travels of every man.


THE FIFTH BOOK OF THE COSMOGRAPHICAL GLASS, IN WHICH the parts of
th'Earthe, perticulerlye (according to the late observations of Cosmographers
in our age) are exactlye described. With the Longitudes and Latitudes of
Regions, Provinces, Ilandes, Cities, Towns, Villages, Hills: also the
commodities of every Country, the natures of th'Inhabitauntes, Laws,
Rights, and Customs, with diverse other things coincident to the same.
PERCHANCE, there my arise sundry sicophats (reading this my labour following)
which will not let to accuse me of arrogance, in that I take this part in
hand, sense Ptolomaeus that famous King hath of that argument left to us his
Geography. Unto whom I answer, confessing me not worthy to kiss his
fotesteppes, as well for the majesty of his person, when he lived, as also for
his excellent Learning, Science, diligence. But saying the hougienesse of the
labour, did far transcend not only his, but al so the diligence of any one
man (having none other beginning then he had) he is to be excused, though he
have not expressed throughout his hole work the true situation of places. For
as touching this part it is requisite, ether to travel much him self, or
else to take observations of the most learned, which dwell in the Regions,
for which he will wrighte. But the other part of his labours touching the
heavenly motions (because remaininge in one place) he might behold the
Heavens, tourninge and showinge them selves, he has most exactlye not only
laid the foundation, but also brought it to perfect end, as the noble
Almegist doth testify. But as touching this my book of Longitudes and
Latitudes, I have for the chief places of Englande used both my friends
travails, and also mine own observations. And where as any place is taken
out of Ptolomaeus, that shall you find noted with a star*. In which also
this I have diligently observed (having. vi. sondrye examples and Copies) that
where the most part of them agree, that I have only used. Also in
describinge other Regions, I have followed th'obseruations of th'inhabitantes.
As in France, I have used authors, which are French men: For Spain,
Spaniardes: in Germany in like case Germans: And in the late found Ilandes,
such as do of them most probably treat. Moreover, I have for the most part,
placed to every City, Town, Port, two names, th'one Latin for the comunitie
of the tongue, the other as it is properly of th'inhabitauntes named. And if I
shall not exactly for the difficulty of the work in all places express the
perfect Logitudes Latitudes: Thou must herein pardon me (friendly Reader) for
the cause aledged, also take this in good part, saying no man (Ptolomaeus
except) hitherto have in all parts set out so large, ample a work. But now
I will commit it to thy discretion judgment.

A PERTICVLER DESCRIPTION OF Europe: Which in our days contains
Christendom and part of Turkie.
Seeing that th'Earthe environed, and compassed with the mighty Ocean seas,
seems as it were an Island: th'ancient Geographers (for the better avoiding
confusio in the describing of the face of the earth (divided it into. iij.
parts, Europe, Africa and Asia. As for the fourth part, which is called
America or the new world, was unto them unknown. Therefore at this present,
minding to follow the same order, I will first begin with Europe. This part
was so called as histories do witness, of an amiable Lady called Europa being
daughter to King Aginor, who Iupiter (being ravished with her beauty) espying
among a company of other virgins, playing by the sea side carried away out of
Africa, saylinge through the Ponticke Seas until he came into Crete. This
story the Poets in this wise do resit, how that Iupiter turned into a white
Bull, did cari her on his back thorough the seas into Crete, which bull was no
other thing the that in their Ensigns, Flags, the Cretetias navy bare the
white Bull. This part of th'erth is pleasantly separated from Africa, by the
middle earth Seas, which is so named of sundry Nations, that it nourishes. It
is also parted from Asia, by the notable River Tanais, which from the North
parts with great violence runs into Ponte Euxine. The Heavens in this part
gives temperatnes of Aere: th'Earth flowing with abundance of all things
necessary for mans use. As Grains, Fruits, Fish, Foul, Oils, Wines,
Catell, Metalles, such like. The nature of the people more civil, frindlyke,
wise, learned, apter unto wars then they of Afrike, Asia. And although it may
seem much inferior to them, if you do consider the bigness, quantity: yet in
the commodities to it belonging, it shall be to either of them equiualet. Morouer
it is beautified with pleasaut Ilandes, adorned with notable Rivers, finally
garnished with innumerable Cities, Towns, Fortresses, Villages. The length (by
direct distance from the uttermost confines, borders of Spain, unto
Constantinople in Greece the furdest place East of all Europe) contains after
Ptolomaeus mind 2200. English miles: the breadth of it to be somewhat lesser
Ptolomaeus affirms. Notwithstanding, if you reke the Septentrion all Regios,
which ware to Ptolomaeus unknown, as Sueulande, Gothlande, Norway, other such,
you shall well perceive the Latitude to exceed the length of the same. There are
also in Europe many particular Regions, as Englande, Irlande, Scotlande,
Spain, France, Germany, Italy, Polande, Unlgarie, Denmark, Greece, diverse,
unto the number (as Ptolomaeus affirmith) of 34. Of which severally I will set
out the notable Cities towns, mountains, rivers, beginning with Irland first,
as Ptolomaeus doth in his Geography.

OF IRLANDE.
IRland is an Ilad very fertile, subject to the Crown of Englad: In it there are
great pletie of wolves, red Alume, sea Cole, also mines of gold, silver, in
sundry pla ces Pearls are found. It brings forth very many herbs necessary
for the health of man. It is free from Uenomous beasts, Worms, as Ranny,
Tod, Edder, Snack, swift, or such like. The people are savage, wild, beastly,
they are given to sorcery, superstition, witchcraft: their shirts, smokes are
saffroned, they go with long Mantils, Their weapons in battle are Darts,
swords, which are brodest at the point: their musical Instrumetes in battle,
are Bagpipes. They delight in many coloured fring. They are great drinkers of
Aqua vitae (which is there only medicine.) They live unto 60. 70. And (as I
here) unto 90. years. The longitude of it, is supposed to be 280. En glishe
miles, the breadth, 92. miles. The midst of this Land hath in longitude,
latitude. 7. 0. 57. 0. The chief places are *The north {pro}montorie. 13. 0.
61. 0 *Venicnium promontory. 12. 50. 61. 20. Reba. 6. 40. 57. 20. Lamon. 7. 5.
56. 30 S. Patrickes Purgatory 6. 42. 58. 50 * Diuiline. Eblana. 14. 0. 59. 0

There are ioyninge unto Irlande, five Ilandes called Ebudae, but of Plinie,
Haebu des. Of which that which is most west, is called properlye *^buda. 15.
10. 62. 0

That which is most East. *Ebuda. 15. 20. 62. 0 Ricnea. 17. 0. 62. 0 Maleos.
17. 30. 65. 10 Epidium 18. 30. 62. 0

Also on th'east part of Irlande, are these Ilandes. *Monarina 17. 40. 61. 30
*Th'Il^ of Man 15. 0. 57. 20 *Adros, a desert. 15. 0. ^9. 20 Limnus, a desert.
15. 0. 59. 0

OF ENGLANDE.
ENglande the most famous and plentiful Island in all the Earth of Ptolomaeus
called Albion, afterward Britania secunda: Because that in the days of
Ptolomaeus, Scotlad it were accounted for one Land, It is environed about
with th'Ocea Seas, not much unlike to a Triagle in shape: it hath on th'East
part of it, Germany, on the South East, France, on the Weast, Irelande, on
the North, the 30. Ilandes, called Orchney. Of Englande, both of the finding of
it first, also of the particular description, herafter, I shall more largly
speak (if God grant life.) At this time, I intend but only to set out the
Longitude, Latitude of the chief Cities, Towns, as here follows. *Bathe,
Aquae calidae. 17. 30. 53. 40 *Banger, Ganganotum. 15. 30. 57. 30. Berwicke.
Tuesis. 17. 0. 56. 50 *Bodnam. Voliba. 14. 50. 52. 20 Bedforde. 21. 0. 52. 0.
Bukhingham. 25. 0. 52. 50 Bury. 22. 20. 52. 0 Callis. Caletum. 25. 10. 51. 40.
Caerleil. Caturactonium 19. 30. 58. 0 Caemarden. Maridunum 15. 30. 54. 40

Cambridge, a Uniuersitie flourishing with al kind of good letters. 21. 30. 52.
0 Canterbury. 22. 10. 51. 10 Chester. Vsellum. 18. 30. 52. 10 *Chichestre.
Naeomagus. 19. 43. 53. 35. Colchestre. Camulodanum. 21. 0. 51. 40 Coventry.
20. 0. 52. 0 Darbie. 20. 0. 54. 10 *Dee. Deua, a river. 17. 0. 60. 0 Doncaster.
Deuana. 18. 30. 55. 0 *Doram. Dunum Sinus. 20. 45. 57. 30. Elye, an I'll. 21.
36. 52. 16 Excestre. Isca. 17. 30 52. 15 Gloucestre. 18. 0. 54. 30 Harforde 20.
0. 52. 50 Humber. Abus, a river. 21. 0. 56 30. Huntington. 21. 0. 53. 20 Hulle.
21. 10. 54. 34 Kirkby. Olicana. 19. 0. 57. 30 Lancastre 19. 0. 55. 0 Leicestre.
19. 40. 52. 50 Lincolne. Lindum. 18. 20. 55 10.

London of Ptolomaeus called Lodinium, is the chief principal city of all
th'Iland, it is exceeding populous, it is inhabited with men of every faculty,
it was builded before Rome. 420. year, before the reign of Alexander the
great. 811. years, before Christ our sauiors incarnatio 1136. so that from the
first building of it, the years are 2735. And whereas Cities through
process of time do come to ruin decay: this City contrariwise do more and
more beautifye and increase. the Longitude Latitude. 19. 52. 51. 30.
Manchester. Mediolanium. 16. 45 56. 40. S. Micha^ls mount. 12. 0. 51. 30 New
Castle. Orrea. 19. 20 58. 55 North Hampton. 21. 0. 52 15

Norwiche an healthful pleasant City, having a fair River called Yerus,
ronning thorough it, which comes out of the seas, fro Yermouthe cost. It is
much subject to fierce, which have not a little hindered the beauty thereof. The
picture of it you shall find lively set out in the first book: the longitude
Latitude. 22. 30. 52. 10.. Notyngham. Hrate. 18. 0. 55. 30.

Oxenford called (of Pto lomaeus) Caleua a norishe of learning, and a famous
university it is in Longitude Latitude. 19. 0. 51. 50. Penbrouch. 16. 0. 53.
40 Peterborough. 21. 0. 53. 20 Portsmouth, 19. 0. 51. 20 Richmunde 19. 0. 55.
20 Sandwich. 21. 45. 54. 0 Salisbury. 19. 0. 51. 50 Seuerne, a river. 17. 20.
54. 30 Sudburie. 21. 20. 51. 55 VVinchester. 21. 30. 50. 15 Wight, an Land.
19. 20 52. 20 Yermouth. 22. 20. 52. 20. York. 19. 0. 54. 20 Ypswich. 22. 0.
52. 40 Tynemouth. 24. 0. 58. 30 Tenet, an Island. 23. 0. 54 20.

OF SCOTLANDE.
SCotland being reconed of Ptolomaeus, but for part of Albion is parted by two
arms of the seas, which mete not from England. Th'east arm begin about. ij.
miles from the minster of Eburcuring: the weast arm on the right side, a strong
City Aclynd (which in the Britishe tongue, was called the River Clynt.

The chief cities, towns, are these following. S. Andrewes. 16. 40. 57 55.
Dunber. Varer 17. 0. 59. 30. Dundie. 19. 20. 59. 30 Dunkel. 19. 20. 58. 0

Edenbrugh called Alata castra is the chief City in all Scotlande. 17. 15. 59.
20 Saint Iohns 15. 40. 59. 15

Also the midst of the 30. Ilandes adjacent to Scotlad, called Orchney. 30. 0.
61. 40

OF ISLAND.
ISland called of Ptolo. Thyle, is an Ilade subject to the king of Denmark:
it is full of marvelous things to behold.

Among which there are iij. mountains of an incredible height: the tops of
which are continually covered with snow. The first mountain is called Helga: the
second, the mout of the Cross: the third, Hecla, which continually (like to
the mountain Aetna) doth burn, castig with violence (as it were out of a
Gune) great stones fro it. And this fire can not by water be queched, that
which is to be wondered, although the fire be marueylus great, of force, by
reason of the Sulphur, yet hay straw, or rede, is not of it cosu med.
Sulphur is there so pletifull that you may for the 4. part of a ducat, have a
thousand weight. There are also 4. Foutaines of a diverse nature, quality.
The first, if you cast in a stick, ma, beast, or what soeuerit be, it turns
it presently into a stone, yet it retains the natural form still. The
second is of an intolerable could. The third is much sweter then Honey, most
pleasantly aswageth drines. The fourth is Pestilent, Poisonable, deadly. When as
the Son is in the beginning of Cancer, it is continual day with them, when he
is in Capricorne, also continual night, darkness. They are a simple people,
hold the the faith of Christ. They have no king, but all obey the Bishop as
their king. Their merchandise are Fish, wadmoll, sulphur. There are found
Falcons, Sperhaulkes, Crows, Bears, Wolves, both white black. Roude about
this Ilad, for the space of 6. or 7. moths, th'Ise swim meth, making a
miserable sound, noise, so that th'inhabitauntes suppose that in the mount
Hecla, in this Ise, the souls of men women, are tormented. The fro sen,
congelid Seas begin at this Island. It is now much travailed to of english me,
Danes, that in the Somer only, because of the horrible cold, abundance of
Ise. The midst of this Land 7. 0. 65. 30. Harsol, a City 7. 40. 60. 42
Thirtes, a City. 5. 50. 64. 44 Nadir, a City. 6. 40. 57. 20

OF CORSICA.
COrsica, an Island whose chief places are Istria. 30. 30. 40. 15 Mariana. 30.
10. 40. 20 Nebia. 31. 0 40. 40 Aleria. 31. 35. 40. 20

SICILIA.
SIcilia, an Land. Palerna. 35. 30. 36. 10 Marsara. 35. 20. 35. 30 Gergentum.
36. 20. 35. 10 Terminae. 35. 55. 36. 5 Pula. 36. 0. 36. 0 Siracusae, 37. 20.
35. 30 Cataua. 37. 40. 36. 0 Messina. 38. 0. 36. 40 Aetna, the burning hill. 37.
10. 35. 20 20.

OF THE CHIEF Cities, towns, in th'Ilande of Sardinia.
SArdos. 30. 20. 38. 58 Galea. 29. 40. 37. 50 Argetara. 29. 30. 36 30 Arestana.
29 45. 36. 50 Aquilastrum. 31. 20. 37. 30 Cambonara. 31. 30 36. 30 Stira. 30.
30. 36. 40

OF TH'ILANDES called Maiorica, Minoria.
MAiorica, Minorica, be Ilades adjacent to Spain, Maiorica contains in
Logitude, Lat. 17. 40. 38. 30 Minorica. 20. 0. 39. 0

GADIRA AN Land.
GAdira, which is also called the Gades, in the west Ocea under 5. digr. 30.
34. 0.

EVBOEA, AN Land.
EUboea, now called Nigropont: Is an Land to Achaia joining. 54. 0. 38. 0.

CRETA, AN Land.
CR^ta, now called Candy, an Land famous. 55. 0. 35. 20.

CYCLADES.
CYclades, are Ilandes about Delus. 56. 10. 37. 20

SPORADES Ilandes.
THese Ilandes are also ioynynge to Delus, they lie scatered about in the seas,
of the read Plinius lib. 4. capite. xij. their Longitude, Latitude. 56 10. 37.
20

Thus ends the particular description of the chief Lands in Europe.
OF SPAIN.
SPain as it appears in the Table thereof in Ptolomaeus Geography, it
compassed about with the seas, except it be in that part which touches
France, and is parted from France by the Pyrenean mountains. And it is the
first Region, Weast betwixt Africa France. It brings fourth such
abundance of pleasant fruits, that it serves not only the necessity of
it self, but also of Italie and diverse other parts. They do not boyle their
salt, as they do in Selande, but dig it out of th'Earth. The men go all for
the most part in short cloaks, and commenlye black. This Region in time
paste, was divided into five Kingdoms, that is to say, Gallicia, Nauarra,
Castille, Catalonia, unto which is joined Aragonie, Portugale Granite. Of
which we will perticulerlye touche the chief Cities, towns, beginning with
Castilla, whose principal Cities, Towns are.

Tolet, where the famous king Alfonsus made his astronomical Tables,
containing the mouinge of the heavenly Bodies. 10. 49. 37. 0 Salamanca 7. 20.
38. 20 Valeria now called Concha. 11. 34 43. 5. Alcala de Enares. 10. 20. 41.
40 Logronyo. 12. 10. 44. 0 Valladolit. 10. 10. 42. 0

GALLITIA.
Compostella, where S. Iames is 7. 0. 42. 15. Lands end. 4. 23. 44. 2 Almoisa.
4. 40. 44. 45 Bilbao 11. 45. 45. 25 Fontarrabie 13. 13. 44. 15 S. Sebastianus
15. 30. 45. 5

NAVARRE.
Pompelon 13. 15. 42. 0 Vaganna 12. 15. 43. 0

CATHALONIA.
New Carthage 15. 57. 38. 0 Tarragone 16. 12. 41. 0 Gerona 17. 42. 42. 12
Barsalona 17. 0. 41. 35 Valentia 14. 38. 36. 10

ARRAGONIE.
Sarragossa 13. 45. 41. 45 Burges. 10. 33. 42 48

PORTVGALE.
Lysbona 5. 0. 36. 40 Portugallo 4 56. 41. 35 Arcobriga 5. 40. 36. 35 Badaioz
5. 20. 39. 0 Cabo de. S. Vincentio. 2. 32. 38. 15 Braga 6. 0. 43. 40 S. Maria
de Guadalupe. 8 30. 39. 30

GRANITE.
Granite 8. 34. 34. 20 Hispalis. 5. 42. 37. 0. Corduba 7. 4. 37. 50

Calpe, both one of the Pillors of Hercules, also a moutaine called at this
day Gilbalter where the streit is named Zibalter. 7. 30. 36. 15 Vama 6. 15.
38. 25 Malaga 8. 50. 37. 30

OF FRAVNCE.
France being separated from Spain, by the Pyrenean Moun taines follows
next. It is parted from England, by the English Seas. It contains many
dukedoms. It is garni shed with pleasant Cities, towns, of which I will set
out the principal: beginning with the weast part first.

NARBONAHATH*
Vienna. 26. 0. 45. 0 Ebredunum. 28. 8. 43. 30 Briansonum. 28. 30. 45. 0
Gratianoposis. Granoble. 27. 0. 45 30. Tarantasia. 29. 0. 45. 0 Gebenae. 28. 0.
45. 45 Mauriana. 28. 30. 44. 30 Vapincum. 27. 15. 43. 30 Dinia. 27. 35. 43. 5.
Valentia. 26. 0. 44. 10 Romonum. 26. 0. 44. 30 Sistarica. 26. 45. 43. 20
Viuarium 25. 45. 43. 45. Aurasicum 26. 30. 43. 30 Auinio. 25. 45. 43. 15
Carpentorate 26. 5. 43. 15 Tritastra 25. 45. 43. 0 Arelatum. Arles. 25. 50. 42.
45 Massillia. 26. 30. 42. 5 Tollona. 27. 30. 42. 0 Barcellonna. 28. 30. 43. 15

AQVITANIA.
Burdigala. 18. 0. 44. 30 Baiona. 17. 30. 44. 30 Vasaticum. 18. 15. 44. 0
Tarba. 19. 15. 42. 15 Lorona. 18. 10. 42. 0 Lebretum. 18. 30. 43. 10 Auscus.
20. 15. 43. 0 Lombarium 21. 20. 42. 40 Tholossa. 22. 10. 42. 50 Rinum. 21. 45.
42. 15 Conserana. 22. 15. 41. 50 S. Pontius. 23. 0. 42. 15 Narbona. 23. 30. 42.
0 Agata. 24. 0. 42. 10 Mirapiscae 22. 45. 42. 15 Lodeua. 23. 45. 42. 50
Beserium. 23. 30. 42. 20 Mons pessulanus, Monpeleier. 24 30. 42. 50.
Astrericum. 23. 0. 43. 0 Vabra. 23. 15. 42. 45 Varinum. 22. 15. 43. 15 Albia.
22. 30. 43. 40 Montalbanum. 21. 30. 43. 30 Cadurcum. 22. 0. 44. 0 Rhodium. 23.
15. 43. 30 S. Florus. 23. 30. 44. 0 Anicium. Lepny. 24. 30. 44. 15

CELTICA GALLIA.
Lugdunum, Lyons. 26. 0. 45. 15 Niuernium. 24. 0. 46. 40. Lamouica. 21. 30. 45.
45 Petragoricum 21. 15. 44. 40 Engolisma 20. 30. 44. 50 Xantona 19. 0. 45 0
Luxiona 18. 30. 46. 30 Nanetum 18. 15. 47. 15 Rhedona 17. 30. 48. 10 Turonia
Tours. 20. 15. 47. 30 Aurelia orleans 22. 0. 47. 30 Constantiae 18. 40. 49. 35

Lutetia Parisiorum. Paris the head City of all France in which is a
florishinge university, the fame where of is spread through all Europe. 23.
30. 48. 40. Seno. 24. 0. 47. 45 Cathalanum 25. 30. 48. 30 Lingo 26. 30. 47. 30

GALLIA BELGICA.
Rothomagus, Roan. 21. 30. 49. 30 Catalaunum, Chaalo 21. 30. 48. 30 Rettena.
Rethe. 22. 26. 49. 0

GERMANYE.
GErmany, the most ample, large Regio in in all Europe, sometime divided fro
france, by the Rhine: from the Pannonians by the river Danubye, from Sarmatia
Demarke, by moutaines, Hills, in al other parts having th'Ocean Seas. But in
our days, it exten- it self more largely. It may compare at this time with
Spain, France, or Italy, in commodities to it belonging. For it is beautified
with most plea saunt Cities, Towns, Castles, it hath great woods, abundance
of fruits, hills replenished with pletiful Vines. There are also these famous,
helthfull rivers, the Rhine, Danuby, Moganus, Albis, Neccarus, Sala, Odera,
with diverse other. It is parted into the hier Germany into the lower, of which
we will first set out the princi pall cities and Towns.

Seelade, an Ilad the furdest cofines of Germany the midst of it, in Longitud,
Latitude. 25. 0. 52. 0. Middlebourgh. 25. 26. 51. 48

HOLLANDE.
Traiectum, Vtrick. 27. 15. 52. 20.

BRABANT.
ANtuerpia, Antwerpen, the noblest Town in all Europe. 26. 36. 51. 28 Louaine,
a university. 20. 36 50. 59. Bruxella* Brussell 20. 16. 51. 28 Mechlinia
Machelen 20. 20. 51. 15 Lira. Liere 20. 24. 51. 21

FLAVNDERS.
Gandauum Ghent 25. 30. 51. 15 Bruge brugge 24. 30. 51. 20 Tornacum. Tornay 25.
15. 50. 10

PICARDIE.
Ambianum Amiens 16. 40. 49. 49 S. Iodocus 16. 52. 52. 0 Samarobriga 22. 20.
52. 10

LVCENBVRGE.
Lucenburgum 25. 30. 50. 0 Creutznacum Creutz 24. 34. 50. 2 Sarbruccu. Sarbruck
23. 47. 49. 16 Key serluterna 24. 44. 49. 22

GVLICH.
Bonna bonne 23. 23. 50. 47 Iuliacum Gulich 22. 44. 51. 8 Leo dium Ludich 21.
48. 50. 51 Aquisgranum Achen 28. 45. 50. 55

GELDRIA.
Geldria Gheldere 23, 48. 51 42

CLEVIA.
Cleuis. Cleff. 22. 6. 52. 0

HELVETIA.
s. Gallus 27. 6. 47. 8. Constantia 26. 43. 47. 30 Tigurum Zurch 26. 36. 46. 48
Badena Baden 25. 16. 48. 44 Lucerna 26. 0. 46. 34 Friburgum 37. 30. 51 50 Berna
24. 18. 46. 25

ALSATIA.
Colmaria 24. 3. 48. 12 selestadium schletstad. 24. 6. 48. 22 Caesarmontanum
Key sersperg. 23 48. 48. 14 Hagenoia Hagenau 24. 36. 49. 7

CITIES OF BASSE Germanye.
Colonia Agrip 29. 45. 51. 0 Campena Kampen 28. 30. 52. 50

Confluence, commonly called Coblentz, where two fair rivers the Rhine, Mosell
mete. 30. 15. 50. 20 Andernachum Andernacke. 30. 0. 50. 25.

CITIES, AND TOVVnes of hie Germanie.
MAguntia, Mentz, the Bishoppes seat. At this City was the Art of Printing
first found (by Iohn Faustus) in the year of Christ our saviour. 1453. The Lon.
lati. 31. 15. 50. 0 VVormatia, worms. 31. 30. 49. 40 Spira Spier 31. 30. 49.
15

Argetina, Strausborough a notable city, in which Iohn Sturmius, D. Seuenus
excellent Orators flourished 1559 30. 15. 48. 45. Basilia. Basile 29. 45. 47. 45
Schathusa 28. 0. 47. 28 Curia chur. 32. 0. 47. 30 Vesalia 26. 20. 51. 30
Francofordia 31. 40. 50. 10 Curia 32 0. 47. 30 Marburgum 32. 10. 51. 0 Bremen
32. 10. 53. 40

Heydelbergu, called Heydelberge, is a flourishing Uniuersitie, maintained by
the Palsgraue, by it there runs the river Neccarus: there flourished 1559 in
Physic, D. Iohn Langius, the Princes Physician, Iacob Curio, Thomas Erastus,
Petrus Lotichius Secundus, all Doctors in Physic: And D. Balduinus the Reader
of the Civil Lector, with diverse others, of whom I was very gentely
entertained at the time of my Commensment. 32. 0. 49. 30. Vlmes 33. 0. 48. 30
Herbipolis wirtzpurgk 33. 30. 50. 0 Amberga 34. 0. 47. 15 Augusta 34. 0. 48. 15
Brunsuiga 34. 40. 52. 40 Ingolstadium 34. 45. 48. 30 Hamburgum 34. 0. 54. 30
Limeburgum 34. 45. 5. 45 Ratisbona 35. 40. 49. 0 Erdfordia 35. 0. 51. 10
Lubecum 35. 20. 54. 50 Liptzigum 36. 30. 51. 30 Magdaburge 36. 10. 54. 50
Salisburgum 36. 30. 47. 30 Brandenburgum 37. 20. 52. 40 Rostochium 37. 10. 54.
36 Misna 37. 20. 51. 50 Peurbachium 37. 35. 48. 15 Berlinum 38. 30. 52. 50
Praga 38. 20. 50. 6 Gripsualdia. 38. 55. 54. 20 Vratislauia 41. 20. 51. 5 Gran
42 50. 47. 15 Posna 42. 0. 52. 45 Buda 43. 0. 46. 50 Lonreth 43. 20. 52. 30
Thorn 43. 30. 53. 30 Cracouia 44. 30. 50. 15 Mons Regius 49 0. 45. 0 Dantiscum
46. 0. 54. 55 Caralostadium 33. 25. 50. 0 Noribergum 34. 40. 49. 30 Munster 32.
0. 52. 5 VVitenberga 32. 10. ^3. 40

MOSCOVIA.
MOscouia is a lunge ample Regio, the people miserable, suspicious, crafty,
the chief city of there Empirour is also called Moskaua. 69. 0. 57. 0. Thither
sailed out of England. 1553 Chancelour, diverse other. The nature of
th'inhabitantes, commodities of the country, a perfect description of all the
parts of the same you shall se at large set out by Sigismunde Liber baron c.

ILLIRIA, AND Dalmatia.
I Lliria, which is called Lyburnia, hath on the North parts Pannonia, on the
west Istria, on the South the Uenice seas, on th'East Dalmatia the chief
Cities, towns are Sara 40. 5. 44. 9 Stridona the country of Saint Ierome 42.
20. 43. 20 Flauona 37. 0. 44. 45

DALMATIA.
Ragusia 45. 0. 42. 20 sibinicum 43. 0. 43. 20 scutara 45. 30. 41. 30 saloniana
45. 0. 43. 20 Durazo 45. 55. 40. 55

ITALIE, AND LOMbardie.
Brundusium 41. 0. 39. 30 Tarentum 40. 30. 39. 15 salernum 37. 20. 39. 30
Naplis 38. 50. 39. 55 Capua 36. 40. 40. 5 Aquilea 36. 40. 41. 10

Roma, a City famous through all th'Earth. 36. 40. 42. 0 Sena 34. 10. 42. 0
Florence 34. 15 42. 45 Viterbia 35. 0. 41. 15 Pisa 33. 0. 42. 15 Luca 33. 30.
42. 45 Ancona 36. 40. 42. 30 Bononia 33. 30. 43. 40 Rhauennae 35. 0. 43. 15
Farraria 34. 10. 43. 50 Parma 32. 30. 43. 50 Verona 34. 0. 44. 25 Venice 35.
30. 44. 45 Padua 35. 0. 44. 45 Mantua 33. 10. 44. 10 Vincentia 34. 39. 44. 20
Cremona 32. 45. 44. 20 Placentia 32. 30. 44. 20 Myllan 31. 45. 44. 15 Tortona
31. 30. 44. 0 Genua 31. 30. 43. 15 Taurinum 30. 40. 43. 45 Nisa 29. 30. 42. 40
Secusia 29. 45. 44. 0 Grassa 29. ^0. ^2. ^5 Albinga 3^. 40. 42. 5^ Vercellae
30. 30. 44. 30 Nouaria 30. 15. 45. 0

A PERTICVLER DEscription of Greece, and first of Macedonia.
MACEDONIA.
MAcedonia has on the North part Thrasia the hier Misnia: on the West, the
Venetian seas: on the south parts Epirus and Achaia: On the East the Seas
called Egiu Pe lagus. The principal Cities, towns of it are Thessalonica, now
Salonica the seat of the chief Bishop of the Philippians, unto whom S.
Paule wrote two Epistles, the first from Athenis, the second from Laodicia the
chief bishopriche of Phrygia, where also S. Paule preached the Gospel. 49.
50. 41. 0 Apollonia 45. 6. 40. 10 Aulon 44. 50. 39. 56 Bullis 45. 0. 39. 45
Arethusa 50. 10. 41. 0 Panormus 54. 404. 1. 0 Hadrianopolis 50. 55. 40. 55
Ampelus 51. 15. 40. 30 Ioleos 51 3. 39. 15 Demetrias 50. 30. 38. 56 Larissa 51.
20. 38. 50 Thebae Thebs 51. 10. 38. 30 Arnissa 45. 20. 40. 40 Elima 45. 40. 39
40 Amantia 46. 0. 39. 40 Albenopolis 46. 0. 41. 0 Europus 46. 30. 41. 20
Apsalus 46. 20. 41. 5 Parocopolis 48. 40. 41. 40 Amphipolis 50. 0. 41. 30

Philippis a City where the great Alexander was born, and from this City S.
Paule sent his second Epistle to the Galatians. 50. 45. 41. 45 Heraclia 47. 40.
41. 30

EPIRVS WHOSE chief places are
Nicopolis 47. 30. 38. 30 Cassiopa 47. 0. 38. 45 Ambracia: larta. 48* 8 38. 20

ACHAIA, WHOSE chief places are
Athenae sometime the fountain and wellspringe of all good letters, hear did
Plato and Aristotle teach, it is now destroyed. 52. 45. 37. 15 Megaris 52. 15.
37. 30 Peloponesus. Morea. 51. 10. 37, 30 Modonam. 48. 30. 26. 0 Parnassus, a
mount. 50. 20. 38 0

Helicon the holy Hill of the Musis, at the foot, whereof is a founteine of the
Hove of Pegasus foot. 51. 0. 37. 45 Pythia, the place where Apol logaue Oracles.
50. 30. 37. 45

Constantinople, sometime a city under the Christia Em pire, but now the
chief seat of Solymanus th'Emperor of Turks, which he wa. 1453. 56. 0. 43. 5.

Corinthe, the Bishoppes seat in Achaia. Hither sent S. Paule two Epistles, the
first fro Philippis, a city in Ma cedonie by Stephan, fortunatus, Achaicus:
The second Epistle by Titus, Luke. 51. 15. 36. 55 Stymphalus. 50. 20. ^6. 20

Thus ends the particular description of Europe.
A PARTICULAR DESCRPTION OF AFRICA.
AFRICA, which also in Greek is named (...) is the second part portion of
th'Earth. And was first so called of Iupiters daughter bering that name. But
Festus saith it came of the quality of th'Aere, in that country, deriving it
of (...), as who should say, (...) that is, without horror of coldenes: other
affirm that it toke name of Afer, one of the posterity of Abraham, which
ouercomyng his enemies, remained in this part. It begins at Gaditanum Fretum
(a narrow straight coming out of th'Ocean into the middle Earth Seas, have
Spain on the north shore, the Mores on the South) And it doth end at the
Egiptia Seas. On the North it have the middle Earth seas, on the south shore
the great Ocean, on th'East the sea, which stretch almost to the middle earth
seas.

Africa is divided into two parts by the hill Atlas, of which the lesser
extends to the middle Earth seas: the greater part goes beyond this hill unto
the south Ocea. The greater part of it is not inhabited for two causis: one is
for th'extreme heat, being under the burning zone, the Soon draws all the
moister of th'earth fro it, so that for want of water no man ca there live. The
second is for the innumerable multitude of venamous worms, wild beasts,
which are naturally ennemies unto mankind. As the Lion, the Olephant, the
Tiger, such like. Also, Dragons, Chrocodile, Cocatrice, sundry other venomous
Worms, in such sort that th'inhabitauntes are compelled to put on botes, for
better avoiding their sting, poison. The part that is inhabited, is frutful
enough. The people black, Savage, Monstrous, rude: yet in those countries,
cities, towns where the Spaniardes, Portugalles, Italians, other do frequent,
the people are somewhat more civil, modest, reasonable. Diverse also (yea right
grave authors) make metion of certain deformed that dwell in Africa, as men
with dogs heads, called Cynocephali, some with one eye that in the forehead,
named Monoculi, others without heads, their face in the breast, with diverse
such like which I sup pose rather fables then any truth. If you desire a longer
descoure Towching Africa, her inhabitates, commodities, read Strabo, in his 2.
17. books. And also Plinius his 8. book, with diverse other writers, which at
large do hereof entreat, now I will (following my order begun) set out the
notable regios (which Ptolomaeus numbreth to be 12.) with their chief Cities,
Towns, hills, rivers, with in Africa: first we will begin with Mauritania,
which is divided into Mauritania Tingitana, Mauritania Caesariensi.

OF THE PRINCIPAL PLACES IN Tingitana or Barbarica Mauritania.
Fesse 10. 0. 30. 0 Tingis caesaria called commenlye Tanger 6. 30. 35. 30
Abilis one of Hercules Pillars, is a hill against Calpe an other Hill in
Spain 7. 50. 35. 40 Baba 8. 10. 34. 20 Banasa 6. 30. 34. 20 Septa 7. 30. 35.
55 Sala 6. 55. 34. 0 The Sons Mount 6. 45. 31 15 Benta 9. 30. 33. 40 Dorath.
10. 10. 31. 15 Tamusida 7. 15. 34. 15

MAVRITANIA CAesariensis.
Apollos promontory 15. 30. 33. 40 Iulia Caesaria. 17. 0. 33. 20 Tucca. 20. 0.
31. 30 Hippa. 20. 15. 29. 50 La Guardia. 12. 0. 34. 20 Cissa. Cerlel. 18. 45.
32. 10

IN AFRICA THE less.
Colops the greater. 27. 40. 32. 20 Colops the lesser. 29. 20. 32. 35 Hippon
30. 30. 32. 15

Utica, where Cato died, now called Bensert. 32. 0. 32. 45. Carthage. 34. 40.
31. 50 Clupea. 35. 0. 33. 20 Sabatra. 41. 0. 31. 0 Vsanum. 33. 15. 32. 20 Dabia
33. 0. 29. 40

NVMIDIA.
Culuca. 28. 30. 31 0 Tucca 29. 30. 31. 20 Bizancina 37. 50. 30. 40 Capsa. 37.
30. 29 45 Calatha. 31. 0. 53. 40 Sabrata 41. 15. 30. 50 Ammon. 65. 30* 28. 0
Oasis the great. 59. 20. 26. 55

MARMARICA.
Alexandria. 60. 30. 31. 0 Memphis 62. 50. 29. 50 Cayrum 62. 15. 30. 0 Syene.
62. 15. 23. 50

LYBIA INTERIOR.
Tagaza 7. 0. 15. 40 Tuchorora. 12. 30 16. 0 Tambutum 15. 30. 15. 40

MEROE.
Meroe is an Ilad of Nilus, sometime called Saba, now Elsaba, where S. Matthew
did preach the Gospel. From hence came the queen of Saba, to here Salomos
wisdom. From hence also came Cadaces, the quenes Enuche, which was baptised of
Philip th'Appostle. But at this preset it is the seat of the mighty prince,
that we cal Preter Iohn. 61. 30. 16. 25

QVIOLA.
Quiola, or Cayla, is a region, in which great plenty of Cinamome grow, the
chief cities are Hamaharica. 65. 0. 9. 10 Masta. 67. 30. South Pole. 4 15
Beritis. 60. 40. 21. 31 Quiola. 76. 30. South pole. 7. 30 Sabath. 67. 30. 12.
30 Mombaza. 79. 0. South Pole. 6. 0. Melinda. 82. 30. 2. 0 Cauaquin. 80. 0. 9.
50

Babell mendap. There are the streightes of the red seas. 74. 50. 11. 0.

OF CITIES OF SONdry Regions, in Southe Aethiopia.
Goia 60. 50. South Pole. 19. 50 Garma. 57. 0 South Pole. 24. 0 Bali 70. 0. 21.
40 Meli 33. 0. 16. 30

OF THE NOTABLE Ilandes about Africa.
Porto Sancto. 0. 35. 31. 30

Medera an Land, first inhabited of the Portugales, it aboudeth with Sugar,
Honey, Wax, sundry Herbs. 358. 40. 29. 50 The Canarian Ilades being x. in
number. 1. 30. 23. 30 S. Thomas Ilad. 32. 30. 0. 30 Madagascar, which is also
called Saint Laurence Ilad, there the North Pole is not scene, the nedle in
sailynge will do no service. Therefore they are costreined to use Astro labes,
other Instruments. 85. 30. South Pole. 20. 0,

Thus ends the Description of Africa.
OF ASIA THE THIRD part of th'Earth.
WHAT Asia is, and whereof it was first so called, there is no controversy.
For all writers, as well Historiographers, as also Geographers, make it the iij.
part of th'Earth, to take that name of Asius, son to king Cotis. And
although they call it the iij. part of th'Earth, yet it is not because it
conteyneth but the third part, but because it is so divided by the seas, for
of it self it is as much as Europe, Africa, contains (after Ptolomaeus
account) 48. Provinces. It is parted into Asia the greater, Asia the lesser.
Notwithstanding diverse wryters use this word Asia the lesser, more largelye
than Geographers doth. For they call all that portio which is within the south
shore of the ponticke seas, th'east seas Pelagus Aegeum, the North part of our
Ocean, the West part of the River Euphrates to be Asia the lesser. Asia
conteyneth in her circuit, Bythinia Potus, the lesser Asia, Lycia, Galatia,
Paphlagonia, Paphilia, Capadocia, the lesser Armenia, Cilicia. And all these
after the manner of th'olde Grecians, is comprehended within this one word (...)
Anatolia, that is to say th'east plage or coast. Asia doth far excel both
Europe and Africa. For it is so frutefull, has so pleasant fildes, such
pletie of foder pasture, the heavens giving moisture to th'Earth in due season.
It hath aboudace of gold mines. It brings forth plenty of Cinamome,
Ginger, Aloes, diverse aromaticall spices, Gumes. There are diverse strange
beasts bred in Asia, as Unicorns, Camelles, Liberdes, Mermosites, Mercattes,
Grippes. Yet one thing is to them unfortunate, that there are terrible many
Earthquakes, in so much that there have been x. xij. Cities at one time
subverted, overthrown. Th'inhabitauntes are sundry, diverse: for some are
Anthropophagi, which eat the flesh of men: drink their blood. There are also
Pygmeans (men but a cubit in height) which riding on Goats, Rames, do keep
war with Cranes. There are diverse other forms of inhabitants recited of
Plinius, which at this present I willingly overpass. The spirits in this
country, by many illusions seek to bring travellers into dangers, sumtime by
calling them by their names, other times by musical noise, as it were
alluring the by the swetnes of the sound, until they be brought into danger
through wild beasts. But now these things omitted, (which would make a
great volume of them selves) I will briefly set out the chief principal
places of Asia* beginnynge with Pontus, Bythinia.

PONTVS AND Bythinia.
Chalcedon. 56. 20. 43. 5 Olbia. 57. 0. 42. 40 Nicode^a 56. 0. 42. 40

Clauciopolis, where S. Luke di^ write his Gospel, the

Acts of th'Apostles. 59. 30. 42. 45.

Nicaea, where the Nicene counsel was. 58. 0. 42. 15

Caesaria, smirdiana. 56. 40. 41. 40

Olimpus, an Hill of which I spake in the first book. 57. 0. 41. 40.

THESE FOLOVVINGE are properly called Cities of Asia.
Lampsacus. 55. 20. 41. 25

Illium, sometime called Troie now Ruinous. 55. 50. 41. 0

Dardanu, Dardanellu. 55. 25. 40. 5. Alexandria. 55. 25. 40. 40 Autandrus. 56.
30. 40. 20

Smyrna, the country where Homer was borne. 58. 25. 38. 25.

Assum. 56. 30. 40. 15

Ephesus, the chief city in Ionia, in which S. Iohn wrote his gospel. 57. 40.
3740

CITIES OF CARIA.
Heraclea. 58. 50. 43. 30 Miletus 58. 0. 37. 0 Nysa 59. 0. 38. 15 Antiochia.
59. 30. 38. 20 Neapolis. 59. 25. 38. 35

Trallis, which is also called Emathia, at which place cer teine suppose
Pygmeans inhabit. 58. 40. 38. 5

OF BOTH LYDIAS
Philadelphia 59. 0. 38. 50 Sardis 58. 20. 28. 15 Sala 60. 15. 38. 20 Sanis 61.
0 38. 20 Hierapolis 55. 20. 38. 15 Apamia 55. 30. 42. 0

CITIES OF LYCAOnia or Lycia.
Carya 59. 50. 35. 55 Patara 60. 30. 36. 0 Olimpus a City 61, 30. 36. 10
Xanthus, Patara 60. 30. 36. 40 Migra 61. 0. 36. 45

CITIES OF GALAtia.
Sinopa stala 63. 30. 43. 0

Pompeiopolis so called because Pompey builded it. 62. 0. 42. 0

Claudiopolis 63. 15. 42. 20 Ancyra 62. 40. 42. 0 Laodicaea 60. 15. 38. 40

OF PAMPHILIA.
Olbia 62. 0. 36. 55 Magydis 62. 40. 36. 55 Seleusia 62. 0. 38. 30 Antiochia
62. 30. 39. 0

CITIES OF DORIS.
Alicarnassus 57. 50. 36. 10 Cadmos an hill 59. 40. 37. 40 Phaenix an hill 58.
0. 36. 30 Apollonia 57. 0. 39. 45

Pargamus, here was the noble Physician Galenus born, which made Physic
perfaite, and expoundes Hippocrates. 57. 35. 39. 45.

CAPADOCIA.
Trapezus Genech. 68. 50. 43. 5 Sebastopolis. s. Greg. 66. 0 41. 20. Zama. 65.
0. 40. 45 Archelais. 64. 45. 39. 40

Caesaria. Maza, here was Basilius magnus Bishop. 66. 30. 39. 30

Derba. 64. 30. 38. 15

OF ARMENIA THE lesser.
Satala. 96. 50. 42. 10 Nicopolis. 69. 20. 41. 40 Ispa. 70. 30. 40. 20 Camana.
68. 0. 38 0 Claudia. 71. 0. 38, 45

CILICIA.
Antiochia 64. 40. 36. 50 Agaeae 69. 0. 36, 30 Seleucia 66. 10. 36. 45 Tarsos.
S. Paules country. 67. 40. 36. 50 Epiphania 69. 30. 36. 0

OF COLCHIS.
Neapolis. Negapotimo. 71. 30. 45. 40. Geapolis 72. 0. 45. 30 Phasis 72. 30.
45. 0. Madia 74. 15 46. 15

OF IBERIA.
Sura 75. 0. 45. 20. Zalissa 76. 0. 44. 40 Varica. 75. 20. 46. 0

ALBANIA PART of great Tertarye.
Gelda. 83. 0. 46. 30 Albana, 81. 40. 45. 50 Bacchia. 77. 0. 44. 40 Baruca. 79.
20. 44. 40

ARMENIA THE greater.
Lala. 76. 10. 44. 0 Brizaca 74. 50. 45. 30 Babila. 73. 15. 40. 45 Anarium. 76.
50. 41. 30 Belcania. 73. 50. 39. 40

OF SYRIA, THE CITIES
Alexandria 69. 30. 36. 10 Selutia 67. 30. 32. 50 Laodicea, Ramatha 88. 30. 35.
3 Posidium 88. 30. 35. 15 Myriandrus. Alapso 69. 30. 35. 50

PHAENICIA.
Tripolis 67. 30. 34. 20 Biblus 67. 40. 33. 55 Sidon 67. 30. 33. 30 Tyrus 67.
5. 33. 18

Sor, comenly called Sir, a city after the ruin of Alexa der christened: now
destroyed of the Turk. Of the ij. cities, Sido Tyrus, Christ our sa auior in
his gospel speaks.

Ptolomais, Acon. 66. 50. 33. 0

Berytus, but of our travellers now called Barut, it is the Port of Damascus.
67. 0. 33. 20.

Botrys, Botrus. 67. 50. 34. 5 Dora. 66. 30. 32. 40

Antiochia ny the mout Tau rus, the Country of S. Luke Euangelist. 69. 0. 35.
30

Laonia. 70. 30. 36. 20

OF CVRVA, THE CISIES.
Abila Lysanium. 68. 45 33. 20

Damascus, here did Cain, sle his brother Abel. 69. 0. 33. 0

Adra. 68. 40. 32. 10 Hippus, Scphet. 68. 0. 32. 30 Capitolia Suueta 69. 45.
32. 30 Philadelphia 68. 0. 31. 20

LAODICINA.
Paradissus 69. 45. 33. 35

IVDEA OR PALEstina.
Ioppa, Ioppen or Iaffa a port which was builded before the diludge. 65. 45.
31. 55

Ascalon, hibelis commonly called Escolona. 65. 0. 31. 40 The dead seas or lake
of Sodome. 66. 50. 31. 10

OF GALILAEA.
Iulias or Bethsaida, the country of s. Peter, s. Andrew. 67. 5. 31. 15.

OF SAMARIA.
Neapolis, Sichen here did Christ convert the Samaritane. 66. 50. 31. 50

IVDVA.
Gaza 65. 25. 31. 15 Sebasta, Samaria 65. 40 31. 30 Lydda Rama 66. 0. 32. 0
Ericus, Ierico 66 15. 31. 25

Nicopolis sumtime called Emaus, here was Christ known by breaking of bread
65. 45. 31. 50.

Jerusalem which is now called Capitolia: have diverse other names: here was our
saviour Christ Iesus crucified, paid the ransom for our sins in the
beginning of the 34. year of his bodelye age. 65. 45. 31. 22.

IDVMAEA.
Berzamma 64. 50. 31. 15 Maps. Massa 65. 40 30. 50

MESOPOTAMIA.
Porsica 72. 0. 37. 30 Soleucia Mosell 79. 0. 35. 40 Edesse. Race 72. 30. 37.
30 Zama 75. 20. 36. 30

Carre, Charan, here did the holy Patriarch, Abraham dwell. 73. 45. 36. 10.

Babilon, Baldach the chief Bishops sea in Chadea here (building the tower
Babel) sprag the confusion of tongues. 79. 0. 35. 0.

Bilba 79. 0. 35. 0 Caesa 76. 40. 32, 50 Thelma 77. 40. 32. 0 Orchoe 78. 30.
32. 40

ARABIA WHICH IS parted in three parts: Arabia deserta, Petrea, Felix.
Erupa 72. 30. 30. 15 Sora 75. 0. 30. 20 Choca 72. 3^. 32. 40 Salma 78. 20. 29.
20 Lysa 65. 50. 30. 15 Petra 66. 45. 30. 20. Lydia 69. 0. 30. 40

The red seas through which

Moses, th'Israelites went 63. 30. 29. 50.

Adra 6^. 40. 31. 40

Mout Sinay, which is also called the mount Oreb, or Choreb. Here received
Moses the x. comaundementes. 64. 0 30. 0.

Thebae 69. 40. 21. 0 Muza 74. 30 14. 0 Sanina 75. 30. 11. ^0 Arabia. Aden 80.
0. 11. 30 Moscha 88. 30. 14. 0 Cabana 85. 0. 23. 0 Istriona 80. 0. 25. 40
Badea. Gydda 70. 0. 20. 15

Mecha. Here is the Sepulcher of Mahomet, which the Turks go to visit with
great devotion, yet straun gers coming thither se no other thing the a golden
shoe, hanging in the rouffe of the Temple. 72. 15. 23. 0 Saba, the seat of
Gaspar the king, which brought gold of Arabic, to offer unto Iesus, being a
Child. 76. 0. 13. 0

ASSIRIA.
Ninus, Niniute, a great Ci tie, but now desolate unto which Ionas the
Prophet was sent. 78, 0. 36. 0

Ctesiphon 80. 0. 35. 0 Arbila 80. 0. 37. 15

MEDIA.
Zalaca 86. 15. 41. 0 Mandagara 87. 45. 39. 30 Ecbatana 88. 0. 37. 45 Veneca
93. 20. 38. 15 Gariauna 91. 0. 37. 20 Trauaxa 92. 0. 37. 40 Rapsa 90. 10. 35.
40 Aradripha 93. 20. 34. 45

SVSANA.
Asia a City. 80. 10. 31 40 Susa Sambragata 84. 0. 34. 15 Tariana 84. 0. 32.
30 Agra 80. 30. 33. 45

PERSIA.
Axima 87. 45. 33. 50 Persipolis 90. 0. 35. 10 Diodorus 91. 0. 33. 20 Niserga
90 15. 34. 0 Tragonica 87. 40. 32. 40 Bassara 81. 20. 29. 50

CARMANIA.
Agris 96. 30. 23. 0 Gerniana 100. 0. 2^. 0 Thaspis 98. 0. 27. 40 Armusa 94.
30. 23. 30

PARTHIA.
Hecatompylon, a City which have an hundredth gates. 96. 20. 37. 50.

Rhoara 98. 30 38 20 Ambrodax 9^. 30. 38. 20 Rhagaea 98. 20. 34. 20 Appha. 98.
0. 35. 20

HIRCANIA.
Hercana 98. 30. 40. 0 Adrapsa 98 30. 41. 40 Saca 94. 15. 39. 30

MARGIANA.
Sena 1. 2. 30. 42. 20 Iasonium 103 30. 41. 30 Antiochia margiana 106* 0 41. 40
Nigaea 1^5. 0. 41. 10

BACTRIANA.
Chomara 106. 302 4. 40 Menapia 113. 0. 41. 20 Bactra 116. 0. 41. 0

SOGDIANA.
Prepsa 130. 0. 45. 0 Alexandria oxiana 113. 0. 44. 40

Scythia within the Mount Emaus.

Aspabota 102. 0. 44. 0 Dauaba 104. 0, 45. 0

Scithia without the mount Emaus.

The kingdom of Chatay is under the great Cham, king of the Tartarians, the
chief Cities are Issedon scithica 150. 0. 48. 30 Soeta 145. 0. 35. 20

SERICA.
Issedon serica 162. 0. 45. 0 Sera 177. 1^. 38 35 Dama 156. 0. ^1. 40

In this country breed the Worms which make silk, we call them in English
Silk Worms, of which at this day the Spaniardes have great Plenty.

ARIA AND ARIANA.
The iniddes of it 106. 0. 3*. 30 Namaris 105. 40. 36. 10 Articaudna 109. 20.
36 10 Alexandria Ariae 11^. 0. 3^. 0

DRANGIANA.
Asta 107. 30. 30. 40 Bigis 1^1. 0. 29. 20 Agriapsa 108. 0. 34. 0

GEGROSIA.
Cuni 110. 0. 23. 50 Parsis 106. 30. 23. 30 Arbis 105. 20. 20. 30

INDIA WITH IN the river Ganges.
Bardaxima 213. 40. 20. 40 Monoglossum 114. 10. 18. 20 Mandagara 113. 0. 14. 30
Nitria 115 10. 14. 20

Colchi now called Cuchina, unto which the Lucitanians are very friendly 123. 0.
15. 0

Salur 125 0. 15. 0 Bizantium 113. 40. 14. 40 Tyndis 138. 30 16. 10

Calicutium, Calechut. The most fimous City of Merchandise in all India,
they have a proper King of their own: but the Crown come not by succession
unto their children for this cause. For they have this use that when any manne
marries, he must commit his wife to the priest to be deflowered. Unto this city
is brought fro al India al kind of spice, Cloves, Nutmegs Giger, Cinamome,
Rubarbe, Musk, Saders, Aloes, Cassia. Also praecious stones of diverse kinds,
al manner of silks. There are diverse sorts of inhabitants in this city:
Christians, Turks, Mahomites, Caffranans, Idolaters. And this last kind do
often (as it ware in token of Friendship) lend their wives one to another.112.
0. 5. 0

Simylla 110. 0. 14. 45 Hippocura 120. 30. 4. 0 Caticardama, Corimandel. 136.
20. 12. 40 Sambolaca 132. 15, 31. 50

PRASIA.
Palibotra 143. 0. 27. 0 Tamalitis 144. 30. 16. 30 Sambalaca 141. 0. 29. 30

COVNTRIES AND CIties without Ganges in India.
Pcntapolis 150. 0. 18. 0 Baracura. Bangella 152. 30 16. 0 Sabara 159. 0. 8. 30
Begynga 162. 20. 8. 26 Tacola 160. 30. 4. 15 Sabana 160. 0. 3. 0 Colipolis 164.
20. 0. 0 Balonga 167. 30. 7. 0 Synda 167. 15. 13. 40 Thagora 168. 0. 6. 0

Eldana, hither came S. Thomas to praeche the Gospel. 152. 0. 13. 0

Trygliphon 154. 0. 17. 0 Gorgatha 167. 0. 12. 30

CHATAY, A REGION.
Chataio 222. 0. 43. 50 VVeast Ciamfu 222. 0. 37. 17

Quinsay, the greatest City in all th'Earthe, and is as much to say with us,
as the heavenly City, in the midst of it, is a Lake, which in the circuit,
have 1200. Bridges. 226. 0. 37. 40.

Geiten 259. 0. 25. 15 East Ciamfu 231. 0. 3^. 5 Focho 240. 55. 7. 0 Tingrei
236. 0. 35. 0

MANGI, THIS contain in it. 9. kingdoms.
Taygni 224. 15. 31. 0 Sygni 232. 0. 29. 20

Thebet, a Province in which the great Cham, lord of the East, south Indians
have his seat, all the kings of India are under him. 204. 10. 3. 20.

CYAMBA.
Cyamba 208. 10. 25 30

These use Coral in the stead of money, they have great plenty of Nutmegs,
Aloes, all kind of Spices.

SOVTH INDIA.
The inhabitants are all Idolaters, have these kingdoms following.

Lamia 202. 10. 11. 40 Morfuli 285. 0. 13. 0 Time 180. 0. South Pole. 3. 10.

MOABAR.
Nar. The inhabitants do worship Oxen 276. 0. South Pole. 20. 10 Malaqua, here
was S. Thomas slain 260. 6. South Pole. 15 30

THE KINGDOM of Lac.
Lac, a city, the inhabitates worship Ox, are great Idolaters, yet just in
their affairs, haters of lies, liers. 166. 30. 21. 40.

OF THE ILANDES adjacent to Asia, and India, and new Regions of this iij. part
lately found out.
CYPRVS.
IT is an Land in the middle earth Seas, in which Iaphat, one of No his
sons, first inhabitid. 65. 30. 35. 10

SCOTORA.
Scotora, in Arabi^ the happy now it is called Scoyra. 86. 20. 12. 0.

ORMVSA.
Ormusa is an Ilad in the narrow Persick seas. 96. 20 19. 0

TABROBANA.
It is also named Samotra, it is a great Land. 151. 15. It is without
Latitude, because it is under the Equinoctial.

COO.
Coo, an Land, in which the the prince of Physicians Hip pocrat. was born.
57. 0. 36. 25.

THE GREATER Iaua.
Iaua. 17^. 0. the south pole. 7 ^0

BORNO.
Borno, an Land. 178. 0. The South pole. 2. 30

THE LESSER Iaua.
Iaua. 188. 9. Under the equinoctial.

AMBICON.
Ambicon. 166. 0. The south pole 7.0.

GELILO.
Gelilo, also Solor, one of the greatest Ilandes of Moluck.

204. 0. The south Pole. *1. 0

ILANDES OF Moluck.
The other Ilandes are under 193. 0. 9. 0. digrees.

IVCATAN
Iucatan. 257. 30. 19. 0

CVBA.
Cuba. 269. 30. 23. 30

It is under the Tropicke of Cancer.

IAMAICA.
Iamaica. 270. 0. 19. 30.

VASANDREA.
Vasandrea. 3^1. 30. 40. 0.

Thus ends the particular description of Asia.
A PERTICVLER DESCRIPTION OF such parts of America, as are by travail found
out.
RIGHT order inforseth that (the iij. parts of the Earth, being set out
according to their notable parts) I shall direct my Pen to speak of
America, which is named the fourth part, was to Ptolomaeus, the Ancient
Geographers unknow: as also at this praesent great part of it is not yet found
out. It takes the name of America, of Americus Uesputius, who by the
commandment of Ferdinando king of Castle, found it out, in the year of
Christ our Saviour. 1497. about the end of June, as doth appear by his
own testimony. The people both men, women are naked, neither suffer they any
hear to grow on their bodies, no not on their brows, the head except. They
are excellent in swimming, both men women, so that they without werines can
swime ij* leaques. Their weapons are bows, arrows, which they praepare, head
with stones, the teeth of Fish, for that they want Iron, all metal (gold
except.) They have war with the inhabitants of the country next them,
which have an other language. But it is not for riches, for enlarging their
segniory, or election of a king: but for to revenge the deaths of their
praedicessors. There is no law or order observed of wedlock, for it is lawful
to have so many women as they affect, to put them away with out any danger.
They be filthy at meat, in all secrete acts of nature, comparable to brute
beasts. Their bread is rotes, their meat mans flesh, for all their enemies,
which they overcome, they with great bankettyng devour. Their houses are
builded like the shape of Belles, covered with leaves palms of trees. they use
no kind of Merchandise, and as for gold, Pearl, stone, that we have in great
prise: they have in no esti mation. For their riches is in feathers of diverse
colours, stones, which they hang on their ears lips for an ornatur. They do
honour the Son, Moan, Sterres. There is also in the weast part of America, a
region cal led Peru, most rich of all other that hitherto have been found
both of meatalles, praecious Drugs. Their sheep be of such fertility, that
they twice yearlye have Lamb. The inhabitants are civil, wise, prudet,
skilful of merchandise. But yet they know not Christ. The midst of America is
in digrees. 330. 0. The pole Antarctik 10. 0. The breadth of it is 2100.
English miles, the length 3000. miles. There are diverse and sundry Ilandes about
America, in our days found out of which hereafter shall follow the
principal.

PERV WITH THE shore toward Spain.
Peru. 290. 5. 0. south pole. Archay Cherson^sus. 303. 0. 5. 0 Caput de Stado.
317. 0* 2. 30

Sinus aquae dulcis, here are vij. Ilandes found, in which are great plenty
of Pearl, praecious Stones. 322. 0. South Pole. 5. 0.

Rio grande 329. 0. South pole. 4. 30 S. Rochi 341. 0. South pole. 8. 15

Caput S. Crucis, here Magelanus found a Giant x. foot in length. 345. 0.
140.

Rio. s. Iacobi 356. 0. 23. 30 Rio d^. s. Lucia 341. 0. 27. 20

ILANDES adjoining to America.
Riqua the lesser 296. 0. 10. 0 Riqua the greater 300. 0. 9. 0 The Island of
Giants 308. 7. 5. 0 The Land of Brasil 305. 4. 6. 10 La ponto 318. 30. 4. 0

Spagnolla, here is found, Gua iacu that heals the Neapolitane sickness. And
the midst of the Land coteine. 305. 0. 23. 0.

ILANDES TOWARD Africa, are innumerable of which these are found out.
Todosanctos 332. 30. 17. 0 Deforana 323. 0. 18. 0 Degadalupo 331. 10. 15. 30
Caput de bonauentur 294. 10. 4. 10 The grene Island. 347. 0. 14. 0

FINIS.
A PLENTIFVL TABLE CONTAINING the principal matters of the whole work,
reduced into the ordor of the Alphabet, for the spedier finding of such
things, as you require.
A
ABILE, one of Hercules Columns. 58. 187 Egyptians first founnd the 8.
heaven. 12 Aequinoctiall Circle what. 22 His use. 24
Aer divided into iij. Regions. 42 Aeolus, God of winds. 112. 159 Aetna, a
burning Hill. 176 Africa, her description. 184 whereof it toke name. eodem.
Albania. 193 Albetragnius error in placing Venus above the Son. 11
Alexander the great were borne. 183 Alfonsus. 2 He first found out the x.
heaven. 12 Where he dwelt. 178
Alphraganus. 11 Ambicon. 198 America, her description. 200 Amphiscij. 68 (...)
190 Angle of Sight what. 137 what a perfect Angle. 138
Andwarpe. 180 Antarctick circle what. 37 Antiochia. 193 Antipodes. 21. 70. 80
Apians way to find the Longit. 106 Apollo first ^ounde Physic. 2 Where he
gave Oracles. 184
Arabia. 195 Archimedes devised Glassis to burn with all. 2 Arctick circle
what. 36 Argentina, loke Strausborough. Argument of the whole work. 8 Aria
Ariana. 196 Aristotle. 9 Arithmetic neadfull in Cosmography. 4 Armenia, ^yr
chief places. 193 Armusa. 198 Asia, the third part of the Earth, ^yr
Adescription. 190. 191 scij. 69
Assiria. 194 Atlas. 2 Atreus first found the Sons Eclipse 97 Auicenna
defended. 81 Axe tree what. 14 (...) 64
B.
BAbilon. 194 Bactriana, her Cities. 195 Bagpipe used in War. 172
Barbarica Mauritania. 185 Barley corn the least measure. 56 Blazing Sterres
engendered, where. 42 Body, what it is. 55 Bononie. 182 (...) 64 Barno. 198
Brasil, an Land. 202 Burning Hills. 176. 175 Burning zone. 66 Polybius
error herein. 65 That it is habitable eodem
Bythinia. 19^
C.
CAdmos, an Hill. 191 Caesariensis Mauritania. 187 Calicute, the nature of the
inhabitants. 196
Calpe, one of Hercules Pillars. 58. 178 Cambridge. 173 Canarian Ilandes the
first digr. of Lon. 58 Their number. 188
Capadocia. 193 Cards particular made ij. ways. 115 And howe to make them.
116. 117
Caria, her Cities. 191 Carmania. 195 A Carte for tl^ ^ight part of the Earth.
122 For the half part of the Earth. 125 For the whole face of the Earth. 127
Cayla, loke Quiola. Center: what. 14 Ceres Goddess of Corn. 112 Chatay. 197
Chorographie, what. 6 Howe it differs from Cosmography, Geography. 7
Cilicia. 193 Circle what, howe it differs from a Sphere. 17 Circles
Arcticke, Antartik. 37 Circles greater lesser. 39 Circuit of the Earth, howe to
find it out. 60 How many English miles it conteyneth. 61. Cities governed of
the Signs Planetes. 134 Cleomedes. 9 Climate, what. 73 Division of them after
Ptolomaeus. eodem. Their number. 74 Their names. 75 South Climates. 76 Their
Table. 78. 79
Cooblentz. 181 Colchis. 193 Collen, where the Pilgrimage is to the three
kings. 181 Colure circles ij. their definition. 36 Cometes engendered where. 42
Constantinople. 184 Contents of the first book. 51 Continens what. 113 Coos.
198 Corsica, an Land. 176 Cosmography mete for all estates. 4 Cosmography
most excellent of all Sciences. eodem. Cosmographies definition. 5 Howe it
differs from Geography. 6
Cosmography excells Geography, and Chorographie. 8 The principal part of
it. 111
Cosmographicall Glass. 120 Crates error placinge the Luminaries above the
eight heaven. 11 Crete an Land. 177 Cuba. 198 Cumpasse unknown to the old
Hydrographers. 160 The Cuntrey of Pygmeans. 191 Cvrua, her chief cities. 163
Cyamba. 197 Cyclades Ilandes. 176 Cyprus. 198
D.
DAlmatia. 182 Damascus 193
Declination, what 28 Declination howe to be sought out by instrument. 29 A
Table of the Sons declination. 31 Democritus error in placing of Mercury.
11. Destinction of Zones. 65 (...) 64 Diameter of a Sphaere what, howe it
differs from the Axe tree. 15 Digree, what. 25 Digrees of Longitude of
places, fro whence accounted. 58 Dimention, what it is. 55 Distance in miles,
of diverse places, howe to find out. 140 Distance of places howe to find
out. 141 Diversity of opinions, touching the earth bis circuit. 62 Diversity
of the Sons declination from Ptolomaeus, to our time. 28 Doris, her chief
places. 191 Drangiana. 196
E.
EArth, what. 43 Opinions of her figure eodem The midst of it. 6 Objections
against her roundness. 44 And the answers. 45
Earth, and the world, not one thing. 10 The Earth a stone. 45 Of the Earths
circuit, diverse, opinions 62 The Earth, howe to describe it in a universal
card. 127 Or half the Earth. 125 Or the eight part. 122 Or one particular
Region. 121
Ebb tides. 145 The cause of it. 146 Their time. 151
Ebudae, Ilandes joining to Irlande. 172 Ecliptic lyne, what. 25 Eclipse of
the Son who first found out 97. The cause of the Moan Eclipsed. eoda
Figures of Eclipsis. 98. 99. 100. 101. 102.
Elementary Region. 40 Elements, why but iiij. 41 Their situation place. eode.
Elevation of the Pole, howe to find it. 91. 92. 93. 94. 95. Emantba. eodem
(...) xi. Heaven. 12 Englande, her principal cities. 173. 174. Englshie miles,
what they contain in the length. 56 Howe many barlie corns thereto answers.
eodem.
Epact howe to find it. 148 Ephesus. 191 Epirus, her chief Places. 183 Eubae,
an Land. 177 Euclides Elementaries. 5 (...) 64 Europe, whereof it toke that
name. 170 The description of it. 171 The Bigness of it. eodem.

F.
FIgures of the Moon Eclipsed. 98 Florence. 182
Fountains of marvelous nature. 175 Fortunate Ilandes, the first digree of
Longitude. 58 Their number. 188
Fourlong, a kind of measure, and his quan titie. 56 France, her description.
178 Fretum, what. 144 Frozen zones two. 66 Fruits of well spent time. 2
G
GAdira, an Land. 177 Gaditanum fretum, where 184
Galenus country 191 Gelilo 198 Galitia, her Cities 191 Gazophilacion
Astronomicum. 89 Gedrosia 196 Gemma Phrisus way to find the Longitude of
places 109 Geography, what it is. 5 Howe it differs from Cosmography. 6
Geographical plainsphere. 137 Geometry ned full in Cosmography. 4 Germany,
her description. 189 Germane miles, both come great, the quantity. 56. 57
Giantes Land. 202 Glarians error. 59 His way to find the Noonesteade lyne.
82.
Grene Island. 202
H
Happy men. 1 Hayle engendered where. 42
Heavenly Region contain x. Heavens. 10 The eyghte, nine, and ten Heaven,
who found them out. 12
Hecla, a burning Hill. 175 Hell, where. 82 Helga, an Hill in Island. eodem
Helicon, the holy Hill 184 Heluetian miles. 57 Hemisphere of the Earth, how to
be drawn in a Carte. 125 Hercules Pillars, or Columns. 58 Heydelberge. 181
Hierusalem. 194 Hippocrates country. 198 Hircania, and her chief cities. 195
Hills, the greatest in all tb' Earth. 44. Heteroscij. 70 Homerus cuntrye. 191
Horizont Circle, what. 18 Divided in two parts. 19 The use of the Horizont. 24
Horizont divided into. 32. Parts. 156 Hot winds from the South, the cause.
158. Hour of the day known by the coast of the Son. 157. 158
I.
IAcobus Staff. 105 Iamaica. 198
Iberia, her chief Cities. 193 Idumea, her Cities. 194 Land, what. 112
Ilandes in Europe from. 172. unto. 178. In Africa. 188
In Asia. 198 In America. 201. 202 Illium. 191 Illyria. 182 Unfortunate men. 1
India within Gangis. 196 Soutb India. 198 An Instrument serving to the
describing of a Cuntrey. 136 An Instrument serving to Navigation. 162 Iohn
Faustus first found out Printinge. 181. Iohn Halifax called, De sacro bosco.
14 Irlande, her description. 172 It hath plenty of Alume, sea Cole, and
Wolves. eodem
It is without venamous worms and beast eodem. Island and her description 175.
176 Isthmus what. 113 Italy and her chief Cities. 182 Italian miles. 56 Iucatan
198 India. 194 Iaua the greater. 198 Iaua the lesser. eodem
L
LAc a kingdom. 198 Lacus. what. 144
Lactantius petulancye. 38 Laodicina and her cities. 194 Laponto. 202 Latitude
of regions, what. 59 Latitude of Regions howe to find out from 91. Unto. 95
Length of miles. 56 A leque what it contains. eodem Licaonia her Cities. 191
Line what it is. 55. Line Ecliptic. 25 London, howe lunge builded before Rome
173. before Cbristes Incarnation. 174 Longitude taken two ways. 58 Of
Longitudes of places, where the first degree is placed. eodem Longitude of
regions how to find out sondry ways from. 103 Unto. 108
Loode sterre and his configuration. 166 Louaine. 180 S. Lukes Country. 193
Lybia interior. 187 Lydia. 191 Lyra. 82
M
MAcedonia and her description. 183 Madagascar an Island. 188
Mahometes Sepulcher, where. 194 Making of particular cards, by Longitude and
Latitude. 116. 117 Without Longitude and Latitude. 137. 138. Mangi. 197
Maiorica Minorica Ilandes. 176. A Map for one Region. 120 A Map for the
eight part of the earth. 122 A Map for half the earth. 125 A Map for all
the earth. 127 Mare mortuum. 144 Mare congelatum. eodem Marmarica. 187
Margiana. 195 Mauritania Tingitana, and her description. 185 Mauritania
Caesariensis. 187 Measures of diverse sorts and quantitye. eodem. Medera an
Island. 188 Media and her cities. 195 Men most happy. 1 Men most unfortunate.
eodem Mentz. 181 Meroe and her description. 187 Meridian circle, what. 21 The
use of the Meridian. 24 Meridian line howe to find it. 83. 84. 85. 86. 87. 88.
Meridionall signs. 26 Mesopotamia. 194 Middle earth seas. 143 Miles of diverse
countries, and their quantity. 56 Myllan. 182 Minute, what. 25 Moabar. 198
Moons age howe to find it at all times. 147. Moons shining every month. 149
What cost of the Moon make full Seas in the chief costs of this our Ocean.
151 Of Moan Eclipsed, what is the cause. 97 Figures of her Eclipses. 98
Morfuli. 198 Moscouia and the nature of the people. 182 Mount Sinay. 194
N
NAplis. 182 Neadle and his praise. 160 Where it have erred. 160 How to correct
it. 161
Neptunus God of the seas. 112. 159 Nicaea. 191 Niniue. 195 North Pole and his
configuration. 166 Norwich subject to fire. 174 Her picture set out. 8
North winds cold and the cause. 158 (...) 64 Numidia and her chief places.
187
O
Ocean seas. what. 143 Olimpus a famous hill. 44. 191 Oracles where given to
the Gretians. 184. Orchney Ilandes. 171 Orontius. 5 Observations of the Neadle,
where it have erred. 161 Ouides versis for the placing of the Sphere of the
Son. 11 The North Pole to be above the Horizont. 37 The signs to ascend and
descend equally under the equinoctial. 32 The division of Zones. 66
Oxford. 174
P
PAdua. 182 Palus, what. 144
Pamphilia. 191. Paris. 189 Paradise, where. 82 Contention of the deuines
touching it. Loke in the praeface.
Pargamus. 191. (...) 73 A Parallele what, and their number. 74 Their Table.
78. 79
Persia. 195 Parthia. eodem Peninsula what. 113 Particular cards made. ij.
ways. 115 Peru. 200 Phaenitia. 193 Phaenix an hill. 191 Philonicus what it
signifies. 3 Places dictaunce how to find out. 140. 141 Planets have. ij.
declinations. 28 A plat form what, and how many ways spoken. 55
Plato. 9 His error in the placing of the luminares. eodem. A point, what. 55

Point vertical, what. 60 Pole of the Horizont. 21. 60 Poles elevation how to
find out. 91 92. 93. 94. 95. Polybius error touching the number of Zones.
65 Pontus and her chief places. 191 Porto sancto an Island. 188 Prasia. 196
Printing first found, where. 181 Ptolomaeus. 2 He first found out the. 9.
heaven. 12 His rule serving to the observing of altitudes. 88 He excused. 118.
169
Pygmeans country. 191 Physic who first found it out. 2 Pythagoras error,
touching vacuum. 9 Pythia. 184
Q
QVadrate an instrument of Navigation. 162 Quality of winds. 158. 159
Quantity of measures used in demensio. 56 Quiola. 187
R
REd seas. 143. 194 Region elementary. 40 The heavenly Regio cotein. x.
spheres. 10
Regions governed of the signs and Planets. 134 Regions Longitude, how to find
it out. 103 Unto. 108 Regions Latitude, how to find out. 91 Unto. 95 Reward of
learning in old time. 111 Rome. 182 Rio de grande. 202 Rio. S. Iacobi. eodem
Rio de. S. Lucia. eodem Riqua the greater. eodem Riqua the lesser. eodem
S
SAmaria. 194 Sardinia with her Cities and Towns. eodem.
Sheubelius Algeber. 5 Scotland, and her description. 174. 175 Scotora. 198
Scythia without the hill Imaus. 195 Seas and her division. 143 Sepulcher of
Mahomet. 194 Shipman's Neadle when it err to correct it. 161 Shipman's compass
unknown to the old Hydrographers. 160 Ship out of her course howe to come
in it again. 166 Shadows and there diversity. 69. 70 A Table of Shadows. 72
Sicilia an Island with her chief places. 176 Sidon. 193 A sign, what. 25
Signs Meridionall. 26 Signs Septentrionall. eodem Sinus, what. 143 Smyrna.
191 Snow engendered, where. 42 Sogdiana. 195 Somer Tropicke. 33 Sons sphere in
what order placed. 11 Errors touching the same. eodem The Son have. ij.
declinations. 28. 93 A Table of his declination. 31. 32 When he is in the
tropic points, or Equinoctial. 53
Sons rising and setting through all the year. 148 South India. 198 South
Pole and his configuration. 166 South winds hot, and the cause. 158 Sparades
Ilandei. 177 Spagnolla. 202 Spain and her description. 177 Sphere, what. 14
Divided in two parts. 16
Shere have. x. Circles. 18 Spoudaeus, what it do the signify 3 Spring tides.
145 Strausborough. 181 (...) what and whereof so called. 56 Stagnum what. 144
Sulphur where great plenty. 175 Syria and her Cities. 193
T
TAble of fixed sterres. 27 Table of the sons declination. 31 Table of
shadows. 72 Table of Climates. 78. 79 Table for tourninge hours of the day
into degr. min. of the equinoctial. 104 Tabrobana. 198 Terrestrial globe. 114
Theodosius. 5 Things scene longer in mind, then only harde. 7 S. Thomas
Island. 187 Tides both spring and ebb 143 There cause. 146 Time the greatest
treasure. 1 The fruit of time well spent. 2 Time bring all things to
perfection. 3 Times of the year, where they take their beginning. 35 Time
tedious. 142 Times of ebbing and flowing. 151 Tingitana mauritania. 185
Trallis. 191 Tropicke circles. 33 Somer tropicke, what. eodem Winter Tropicke.
34 Tyrus. 193
V
Venomous beasts and worms not in Ireland. 172 Africa abound therewith. 184
Vertical point, what. 21. 60 Vesandrea. 198
W
Winter tropicke, what. 34 Winds what. 153 And there number. 153. 154 Winds
teperat under the equinoctial. 159 World what it is. 9 The world earth not ove
thing eodem The world made of. ij. cartes. 9
Z
Zenit, what. 21. 60 Zodiac, what. 22 Zodiakes use. 26 Zone, what. 63 There
number. 64 There qualities. 66. 67. That they are all habitable. 67. 68 Zones
divided into climats paralleles. 73
FINIS.
Faults escaped in the Imprinting.
Fol. 2. the vi. lyne, Ingens, read Engeins.

Fol. 25. the eightene lyne, goes overthwart them, read, goes overthwart the
Sphere.

Fol. 69. the xxi. lyne, Zolstitii, read Solstitii.

Fol. 121. the last lyne, whose compass, read whose compositio is in this
wise. Describe a Circle with your compass.

Fol. 189. the ii. columbe, the last lyne, it exten- read, it extends.

AN EXTRACT OF THE QVENES highness gracious Privilege, Licence.
ELIZABETH by the grace of God Queen of Englande, France, and Irelande,
defendour of the faith c.

To all manner of Printers, Book sellers, and other our Officers, Ministers,
and subjects: greatyng. We do you to understand, that of our grace especial,
we have granted, given privilege and licence: And by these presents for us,
our heirs, and successors do grant and give Privilege and License, unto our
well-beloved subject Iohn Day, of the city of London, Printer, and Stationer,
and to his assigns for the term of his life, to Imprint, or cause to be
Imprinted, as well the Cosmographicall Glass, compiled by VVilliam Cuningham
Doctor in Physic, as also during the time of vij. years, all such Books,
and works, as he hath Imprinted, or herafter shall Imprint, being diuised,
compiled, or set out by any learned man, at the procurement, costs, charge,
only of the said Iohn Day. Straightly forbidding and commanding by these
presents, all and singular our subjects, as well Printers, Bookesellers, as
all other persons within our Realms Dominions, what so ever they be, in any
manner of wise, to Imprint, or cause to be Imprinted, any of the aforesaid
Books, that the said Iohn Day shall by authority of this our licence,
imprint, or cause to be imprinted, or any part of them: But only the said Iohn
Day, and his assigns, upon payne of our high indignation. And that every
offender therein shall forfaite to our use forty shillings of lawful money
of Englande, for every such Book or Books, at any time so Printed contrary to
the true meaning of this our present Licence, and Privilege: Over and besides
all such Book, or Books so Printed, to be forfayted to whom so ever shall
sustain the charges, sue the said forfaiture in our behalf. c.

Given at our Palice of VVestminster the xxviii. day of October, the first
year of our Reign.


Imprinted at London by Iohn Day, dwelling over Aldersgate, beneath Saint
Martins. 1559.


