VVONDERFVLL strange sights seen in the Element, over the City of London
and other places, on Monday being the second day of September: beginning
between eight and nine of the clock at night, increasing and continuing till
after midnight: most strange and fearful to the beholders.

Psalm. 19.1. The Heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows
his handy work.

AT LONDON; Printed by Robert VValdegraue, dwelling without Temple-barre, near
unto Sommerset-house.

The Call of England.
AS nothing can move or stir man more effectually, unto the feeling of his
own sins, then the law of God, thundered out, threatened against the conscience
of his iniquity: so, nothing can draw him, more forcibly unto repentance, then
the sensible sight and feeling, of fearful and mighty plagues, heavenly
threatenings, and strange and prodigious wonders, drawn by the efficient cause
(God) from the operations of earthy, airy, watery, heavenly supernal Elements.
As on Monday, being the second of September, Anno 1583. was seen very strange
sights in the air, beginning betwixt the hours of eight nine at night. And so
increasing continuing till after midnight, but chiefly betwixt eleven twelve
was seen marvelous strange, rare, miraculous, wonderful permouements, ad and
regrediacions, with constellations of the air, and watery elements, which were
sometime dark, sometime red, sometime fiery, and bloody colloured, with
streams like sharpe spears, shooting straight upward, and meeting together,
(as it were) in a round point, with flashes, much brightness, many streams,
and strange and unwonted colours of the rainbow. As also with the colour of
the fire of Brimstone, and seeming as it were burning with fiery flashes and
smoke. Strange, and fearful no doubt to the beholders, as though the
gallant frame, of all the radiant sky and elements, had been even then about
to be set on fire. All which threats and often preachings from Heaven, by
Fire, doth yet once again call our disobedience, unto speedy obedience, and
amendment of life. I therefore, as one that beheld the same, although of all
others, the most unfittest to report it, have here in writing, published the
very truth, and sight, as it then appeared and was manifestly seen, (over our
horrizon at London) no doubt of many others. To the end that none might be
ignorant, of that last warning, which appeared, to call us unto repentance.
Before the Lord God (whose mercies, are always as great, as him self) do
bring any notable overthrow, or destruction upon any nation, kingdom, or
people, he first of all gives them warning, to the end, that if they repent
not, yet they might be found, inexcusable, as having no cause, to plead
ignorance. Thus he dealt towards the Sodomites, to whom, before he destroyed
them. (With fire and brimstone from heaven) he sent three Angels to Abraham,
to give them warning, who prayed for them. And before he destroyed the old
world, Gen. 18.
by the diluge of water, he sent them Noah, who preached by the preparing of an
Arc, an hundredth and twenty years, so that every stroke of his hammers, might
have been a sufficient sermon, to warn them, of the coming of the waters:
before the dearth came upon Egipt, Gen. 6.
the Lord sent Ioseph, to provide barnes, and store, for old father Iacob, his
family, as it appears, in the 45. chapiter of Gene.

When the heart of Pharaoh, could be mollified, towards the Egyptians, by none
other means then by the Lords punishments, The Lord sent ten marvelous
notable plagues, and wonders upon Pharaoh, and al his host, yea, from the
hiest that sits on themperiall seat, to the lowest, that grinds in mile,
or slandeth behind the door, and made his stout stomach, somewhat to
stoup. The Lord hath forewarned us a great while, yet doth not cease, so to
do still, first by his Law, then by his gospel, thirdly by the benefits, that
we have continually received of him, fourthly by his creatures, and miraculous
tokens, strange monsters, blazing comets, unwonted enundations of waters,
strange fishes, perrillous wars, earthquakings, and last of all, firye
constellations, as now also lately appeared, and is here before more plainly
specified. Observing in al points (touching the declaration of that strange
sight, which I saw) the truth, so near as I can. Requesting, the gentle
readers, to pardon me, as one unlearned, and willing to submit my faltings,
always to the censure, judgment, and discretion of the learned, whom I
reverence. Requesting al, to bear in mind, the holy words of S. Peter in his
second epistle, and third Chapter, which are spoke to this purpose. First,
that there shall come in the latter dais mockers, walking after their own
lusts, And saying, where is the promise of his coming? For ever since, the
old fathers fell asleep, al things have continued still alike from the
beginning and creation of the world. For this they know, (how be it are
wilfully ignorant of it) howe that the heavens were of old, and the earth
consisting of the water, and the water by the word of God. By the which the
world that then was (as I have said before) perished, being over run with
Water. But the heavens, and the earth which be now, are kept in store, by his
word, and reserved unto fire, against the day of judgment, and the pardition
of ungodly men. And therefore be not ignorant of this, that one day is with
the Lord, as a thousand years, and a thousand years, as one day. And that ye
Lord is not slack in coming, as some men count slackness, but is patient to
us ward, (forasmuch) as he would have no man lost, but received all, unto
repentance. Nevertheless, whether ye repent, or continue still in your sins,
yet the day of the Lord shall come, as a thief in the night, in which the
Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt, with
fervent heat, the earth also and the works that are therein, shall be utterly
burned. Seeing then, that al these things shall perish, what manner of persons
ought ye to be, in al manner of holy conversation and Godliness. Looking for,
and hasting unto the coming of the day of God, by whom, the heavens shall
perish with fire, and the elements shall melt with fervent heate. Wherefore
good Christians and beeloued brethren, seeing that you do now look for such
things, which undoubtedly shall come to pass, be diligent, that ye may be
found of the Lord in peace, without spot, and undefiled. Wherefore seeing ye
be warned, (and that before hand by diverse and sundry preadmonitions) to take
heed. Take heed and beware, least ye fall away (thorough the error of the wicked)
from your own stedfastnes. But grow ye in grace, and in the knowledge of our
only Lord, and Saviour Iesus Christ, to whom be glory both now and forever.
Amen.

Farewell in the Lord, Thomas Day.

THE CALL OF England, which sets out our great sin and iniquities, Gods
long sufferance, his sundry kinds of callings, our slackness in coming, our
incredulity in believing, and our just destruction.
NO comfort, solace, nor no joy,
can lodge within my breast,
Because thou dost me still annoy,
with thy unquiet rest.
Repent England, and turn with speed,
whilst God doth daily cal,
For he doth send, and bid thee mend,
before thy dreadful fall.
Dear England thou, dost daily grieve
and vex me every way,
To see my works and prove my deeds,
what I can do, or say.
Repent England, c.
Full twenty years and four thou hast
at large, heard out my cry,
And still by word, I say repent
by waters, earth, and sky.
Repent england, c.
And as upon Jerusalem,
I did both weep and wail,
So doth my loving preachers cry,
but nothing can preuaile,
Repent england, c.
Thou think not upon my call,
my voice thou dost note hare,
My preachers meek, my word most sweet
to save, thou dost not fear.
repent england, c.
Neglecting still, thou dost fulfil
all wickedness and sin,
And hast delight, both day and night
to fit, and dwell therein.
repent england, c.
What sins in No, his time were found,
or else in Sodomes store,
That doth not now in thee abound,
a thousand times, and more.
repent england, c.
Is not thy whoredom, and thy pride,
thy usury, and gain,
Thy weight, and measure unjust tried,
still lodged in thy brain.
repent england, c.
No care to get, so that thou have,
thy pining purse to fill,
Who be undone, although thereby
thy brothers blood thou spil.
repent england, c.
Lo England now, what means else,
thy rents which tripled be,
In such a rate, that none but thou
or thine, can dwell with thee.
repent England, c.
And is it all, nay leases great,
yea Fines and Incomes bare
Up such a price, that non that's wise,
but thee and thine doth fear.
repent England, c.
Why deal thou so (O England)
with thine anointed king,
Who fills thy store, and empts thy store
again, of every thing.
repent england, c.
But avarice (that bag) stirs up,
thy Tygred natures kind,
To wring and wrest the poor, to fill
thine discontented mind.
repent england, c.
Thus carelessly, thou dost contemn
the poor, whom thou should feed,
And to the rich thou make feasts
with fare thou dost exceed.
repent england, c.
Esteeming more thy gluttony,
thy pride, and idle life,
Then care, and conscience of the poor,
to end their law and strife,
repent england, c.
Yet God doth send his Ionas still,
thee England to cal,
While there is time, if thou wilt hear,
and fear, from sin to fall.
repent england, c.
If not, his judgment is most swift,
remember Easter past,
how on the wednesday, he did shake
this earth, and all things fast.
repent england, c.
Both Castles, towns, and Towers strong,
and Mountains every where,
The ground most firm, and al thereon
did shake, and quake for fear.
repent england, c.
If then his wrath be found so fearce,
as senseless things makes nymble,
Shall it not make the stoutest hearts,
of understanding tremble?
repent england, c.
Yes, yes, O england think not so,
but that thou shalt be found,
And as amazed gydsicke man,
fall flat with death to ground.
repent england, c.
While thou hast time, therefore repent,
and call to God for grace,
That he from wrath may yet relent,
and al thy sins deface.
repent england, c.
Unto thee which his judgements call,
and cause thee to decline,
And thitherward appoint thy path,
as by a squared lyne.
repent england, c.
Repent I say, and soeke his face,
whilst it is to be found,
In this same special time of grace,
here living on the ground.
repent england, c.
And dare thou not protract the time,
to dally any more,
Because the judge with judgment comes,
and stands at the door.
and saith repent, c.
With wonders strange and monsters fell,
and blazing stars by past,
Doth still Prognosticate and tell,
of judgment at the last.
repent england, c.
What sickness new, with plagues are sent,
what floods do overflow,
In every place, what wars are bent
to tell us it is so.
repent england, c.
And everything in their degree,
as nature hath assigned,
The tide, the time, and winters be,
unnatural by kind.
repent england, c.
What warnings hath been often sent
to thee, by flashing streams
Of fire, which bids thee to repent
and wake, out of thy dreams.
repent england, c.
The clouds, likewise infixt with blood,
and Brimstome fire, like smoken,
With colours strange, not oft like seen,
a day of dome betoken.
repent england, c.
As late (alack) on Monday last,
who so abroad did range,
Betwixt the hours of leven and twelve,
might see it very strange.
repent england, c.
On al the parts of heavenly sky.
was tokens to remember,
The latter coming of the Lord,
the second of September.
repent therefore O england, c.
Therefore while thou haste time and space,
and whiles he calls thee still,
Come unto him, turn not thy face,
obey unto his will.
repent england, c.
And thou shalt have, that he hath bought,
and purchased for thee free,
The kingdom of eternal rest,
for thy reward and fee.
repent england, c.
Lord send us al those heavenly joys,
with thee for to remain,
And us defend from sathans noyes,
and everlasting pain.
repent england, c.
God save our queen Elizabeth,
and stablish still her reign,
In health, and wealth, and happy peace,
thy Gospel to maintain.
Repent (O England) then with speed,
and turn from sathans thrall.
Both man and wife, amend your life,
and Christ will save you all.
FINIS.

