A brief and short discourse of the Virtue and Operation of Balsam, With an
instruction for those that have their health to preserve the same.

VVhereunto is added Doctor Bullins Diet for Health.

Imprinted at London for Iohn Perin, dwelling in Paules Church-yard. Anno
Domini. 1585.

The virtue and operation of this Balsam.
HOWE this Balsam may be used to ye health and profit of the byers, it must be
always kept close, and the vessel wherein it is, must be very well stopped, for
else it will consume and wast away.

ANy person which hath his sight beginning to fail him, let him continually
smell unto this Balsam, and they shall be helped, and their sight shall be
preserved.

Make this Balsam warm, and rub therewith the Nose within and without of all
those which have a moist and cold brain, so shall they be preserved in
great health thereby.

And whosoever hath a coldrume descending from the brain, let them use to
rub their Nosethrils with this Balsam three times a day, morning, noone,
and night, and it helps them.

SUch as are heavy hedded, dull witted, forgetful, let al those use to anoint
the hinder part of their head with the Balsam, and it comfort the wit, and
refreshes a man exceeding well.

Give one drop of this Balsam in a sponeful of wine, Beer, or Ale, fasting,
to all those which hath no appetite, and it helps them. Also all they which
use to drink of it are long preserved in good liking: And causes a mans hear
to keep his colour, and not to wax white:

IF any person have a slimy stomach, let them use every morning fasting to
take one drop of this balsam, in wine, beer, or ale, and it expulseth the
fleam, and comfort ye stomach. Also whosoever hath abundauce of coruptio
in their stomach, which is cause of great feeblenes, let them use as it
aforesaid, every xii. or xiiii. day to purge himsefe, so may one shortly be
helped, which might their life time live and suffer great pains.

Being taken every morning one drop in a sponefull of wine, beer, or ale: It
preserves one from poisoning the whole day after: Also, it preserves a man
from corupte or poysned air, and is especial good to be used in the time of
Pestilence.

SUch as are poisoned, let them incontinent take one drop of this Balsam in
a sponefull of water, so continue in taking of this Balsam xii. hours after,
that is every hour a drop, so shall they be helped.

ANy person which by chance falls and is bruised on any part of the body, let
them straight way annoynt the same place therewith, and it aswageth the
swelling, puts away the blackness of the sore, also when a man hath a
stitch in the side, anoint it therewith and it helps.

NEither any old or young folk which have a stinckking breath, so that the
stench come out of the stomach, but it helps, if it be received every
morning fasting one drop with a sponefull of wine, the space of xiiii. days,
and fast ii. hours after they have taken it.

ONe drop of this Balsam put into a Fistel every day the space of xx. days,
heals and stops the fistell, also it heals all wouds old new, laid into
them twice a day according to the quantity of the wound.

Four drops of this balsam put upon a broad Pustel which comes of cold and
gross humours, in the space of xii. days it will be made whole.

MAny which are sick by occasion of cold and dry humours, which causes
consumption, may drink every morning evening one drop of this Balsam with
wine, and they shall recover their health again.

ANy body which hath a postimation which comes of wind and moisture, which
would settle it self in any place of the body, anoint the said place with
this Balsam three times a day, and in the space of eight days it will be
healed.

REadely doth this Balsam help al sores which chances in ye hands, legs,
arms, or any part of the body, if they be anointed with it three times a
day.

PEaceably and very quickly this Balsam swageth al swellings which is not of
the dropsy, if the swelling be anointed three times a day with it, and Linnin
clothes laid upon them wet with the said Balsam.

Every person that is taken with the Palsy, let them morning and evening
drink a drop of this Balsam in a sponefull of wine, and also anoint the part
which is take with the said Palsy ii. times a day, and theyshall be healed,
and it comfort yt parts marvelously.

THis Balsam heals all pains in yt joints, so that ye wash the joints
therewith, and also plaster ye said joints with a linen cloth, wet it in the
said Balsam, this must be done twice a day.

HE or they which have their sinews drawn together let them wash the with
this Balsam, and they shall be restored with their former health and strength.
Also it helps the Emroides when they are very grievous. Also it is good for
the sickness which chances in the Arse Gut which is named Tenasmos, if a
linen cloth be wet with the said Balsam and put therein.

For those which have their Health.
HE which hath his health and would so continue, I wish him either to forbear
or little to use those things which greatly digress from that constitution,
or mediocrity in which man is created. Our Physicians do cal every thing hot
or cold, in the respect of ye nature of man. For if it be somewhat hotter the
his nature, the it digresses, and they term it hot in the second degree, and
in like manner to the third and fourth, which because it doth so far exceed
his constitution, by daily proof is found to be unto him flat poison, the
like consideration on the contrary side have they of cold things, whereby you
may gather how like always desires like, and abhoreth the contrary. The
things which are like, and best agree with the nature of man, are good wholesome
usual meates drinks, a dry fresh sweet air, moderat sleep and travel or
labour, which although it were allotted unto us as punishment by GOD. Yet
mercifully withal he hath made it a mean to preserve our health, the things
which greatly disagree are wines, spice, salt meats, and al very hot things,
which thou shalt know by taste, for either they bite like Pepper, fret like salt,
or else show some great manifest heat in the mouth. Also on the other, side,
all raw fruits and cold herbs, with diverse things of like nature, much use of
Sawses devised by belly gods, whom God hath punished as much by want of
appetite, having meat at will: as the poor by want of meat having good
appetite, to live in a thick foggy air, to live idly and to exceed in
eating drinking, sleeping watching or venery. I would not have any man to
think that I do utterly condeme al very hot and cold things, but seeing they
are rather of the nature of medecin then nutriment: I wish them to be very
discreetly moderately used, for hot things are to be used when a mans body is
very cold, and cold things when his body is over hot, but to use either the
body being not distempered, is mere madness. Now further for as much as all men
are subject unto death, and our bodies as yielding thereunto, from time to time
always gather corruption, to preserve our health as much as may be, until we
have run that race which God hath appointed. I comende unto you this receipt.

Take Borage and Parsley in like quatity, boyle them in Whey clarified keep it
in some earthen vessel, use of it warm in ye spring, especially every morning
fasting a good draught, and in every draught take so much of a polion as will
give thee two stools a day more then ordinary, some may use it ten days
together some fifteen or twenty as the body doth require, by this means thou
may prevent many disseases and keep thy body in very good state, it makes
women apt to conceive, if during the taking thereof they live chaste, and it
hath many other special virtues which for breuities sake I will omit. Their is
yet one dissease wherewith our wantons here of England are much troubled for not
resperting the force or help of nature, if they feel never so small or light
a grief, they must presently to Physic, until they have so filled their
Bodies with drinks that they are sicker of their Physic, then of any
dissease, in this grief a little more wit will be a present help, for so
shall they have he auier purses lighter hearts souder bodies.

Doctor Bullins Diet for Health.
BEware of coldness both of the air, as misses, wind, thin clothing, unclean
lodging, with open windows in yt chamber, or lying on thy back or ne'er the
ground, but use sweet warm air with a small fire not near at hand, it will
help ye matter to ripe, whereas coldness will bind and drive back the matter and
kill the patient suddenly, sup clean broth of chickins, eat but little and
oft, couit to sleep in the might vi. or vii. hours for sleep is a great
friend to nature, if sleep come not in yt night* then refuse not sleep in the
day, sitting in thy Chair with thy head upright after meat two hours, walk
not much up down, for rest with warmnes is agreat nourisher of the humours
specially blood and choler, be rather laxative on the day, then the night.
Beware of carefulnes for wordly things Look not into the glass of
desperation, with Agony and heaviness of mind. Hope ever for the best, for a
good stomach drives away many disseases: but when the spirit is vexed: who may
abide it. A merry heart is the life to the body but rancor consumes the bones.
Heaviness doth bring sickness, and they which have heavy countenances, with
continual agony, are either to rich, to poor, too sick, too foolish, or to
sore opressed. Therefore commend gladness, because a ma hath no better thing
under the sun, then to eat and drink betime and to leisure, and to be merry
for that shall he have for his labour, all the days of his life, which
almighty God hath given him under the sun, for there is nothing better then
gladness, honest^ of life, love to each o^er, and do as we would be done unto.
Thus fare you well.


