THE CASTLE OF HELTHE, Gathered, and made by sir Thomas Elyot knight, out of
the chief authors of Phisyke, whereby every man may know the state of his own
body, the preservation of helthe, and how to instruct well his physician in
sickness, that he be not deceived.

M. D. XXXIX.

TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THOMAS LORD CRVMwell Lord privy seal, Thomas Elyot
knight wishes lunge life in honour.
HE GYVETH TVVYSE THAT Bis dat, qui clto dat.
gives quickly (saith Senek). the griete, which I had tor your lordeshypes
disease, with the desire that ye mought live lunge, without syckenesse, caused
such speed in buyldinge the Castle of health, that therein lacked some part of
perfection, but yet the promptness in gyuynge that thing, which I thought
necessary, to declare mine affection, I doubt not, was no lass esteemed of
your good lordeshyp, than before is rehearsed. Notwithstanding when I had
eftsoon perused that little fortress, and found here and there some thing
that lacked, I toke my pen in the stead of a truell, amended the faults, and
added somewhat more, where I thought it convenient: And yet perthaunce some
things mought happen to escape, which were as needful to be corrected: mine
attendance on the parlyament, I being a membre of the lower house,
withdrawinge frome me leysur convenient, to find in this warke all the
faults, which mought be amended. May it now like your good lordeshype to take
in good part, not e^tsones the castle, which I already have given you, but my
good will and diligence in amen dynge or repayryuge the same, which is also
printed in a much better lettre, considering that I no lass do behold you
continuelly with mine eye of remembrance, than they which at dynuar and supper
do daily loke on you, the cause I will not repeat for suspicion of flaterye.
Frendeshype (as men say) should be requyted, but yet crave I none other
thing, but only equal benevolence, and faith without any suspicion:
whereunto actual demonstration is so much requysite, that without it they
both, seem to be drowned, sens among us that be mortal, things are most
judged by outward tokens. And yet also in them men be sometime deceived,
Hypocrisy having in this world so great a preemynence: but in amity is one
rule, which seldom fails. He that lives moderately, doth love always
faithfully: for over him affections and passions have left authority: and he
that stands just in the myddell, stands most surely. Also in the world
there is no more folly, than to chese friends of them, which do follow fortune,
like as swyne do follow the maiden, which bears on her head a payle full of
milk. And if the payle fall, or happen to be empty, they will follow no
lengar. The moderate personne, where both authority and virtue be in his
friend equal, because that virtue was the only cause of his love, that
remaining, his mind is in such wise thereunto joined, that although
authority happen to flyp, yet that love virtue may never be severed. I have
spoken of frendshyp perchance more than needs, but who will not wish (if it
mought happen) to have such a treasor, as neither the mountains of Ethiope,
nor the ryuers of Inde do conteyne in them, to be thereto compared. Callimachus
an ancient port saith, Puyssance is dredeful: Riches is honourable: but love
for surete is most incomparable. Who perceives herein more tha your good
lordeshyp, which besides the abundant knowledge of histories natural wit,
also concerning this matter in your own sondry experiences, I dare say without
flattery, are equal to any noble man living. Yet this my lunge tale is not
superfluous, which is told not to teach you, but only to renew your lordships
remembrance, which is not always present, specially where the brayn is choked
with worldly maters of wayghty importance. In such as I am, having little and
little to do, remembrance stands more at liberty, and therefore we may more
often think on that, which we have both herd and scene, and in chesinge
friends, be the more circumspect. But lest I shall make the name of frendeshyp
tedyouse, by often rehearsal, I now conclude, that I leave this little warke a
monument of the lunge continued affection by me borne toward your lordeshyp, a
perpetual wytnesse, that I have deserved, so much of your favour, as in
mutual frendeshyppe is of rayson required: which may be as easily payed, as
it (...) granted, if in place, where it ought to be showed, ye do not forget
it, In the mean time I shall pray to God to add to your good fortune and
helthe, continuance, with his grace and favour, wherein only is most perfyt
surety.

THE TABLE
IT MVSTE BE REMEMBERED, that the number in the Table, doth sygnify the leaf,
and the letter A, doth sygnifie the first page or side, the letter B, the
second page or side.

A
ANnexed to thiges natural. fo. i. b. Ages. fo. xi. a.. xxxix. b. Air. fo.
xii. a. Appuls. fo. xx. b. Almondes. fo. xxi. b. Anyse sede. xxiiii. b. Ale.
fol. xxxii. b Abstinence. lv. b. Affects of the mind. lxiiii. a.
B
Blood. fol. viii. a. Beetis. xxiii. b. Birds. xxix. a. Brain excedynge in
heate. fol. iii. b. Brain excedynge in cold. ibidem. Brayn moist. ibid. Brayn
dry. iiii. a. Brayn hot moist. ibi. Brayn hot dry. ibid. Brain cold moist.
iiii. b Brain cold dry. ibi. Beans. xxiiii. b. Breakfast. xliiii. a. Blood
suckers. lxiii. a. Borage. xxvi. a. Breadd^. xxvii. b. Black bird. xxix. b
Bustarde. xxx. a. Byttour. ibidem. Brayn of bestis. xxxi. a. Butter. xxxii. a.
Bier. xxxv. b.
C
COnsyderations of things belogyng to helthe. fol. i. a. Coplexion of man. ii.
a. Colerike body. ii. b. Coler. viii. b. Coler natural. ix. a. Coler
unnatural. ibid. Colour. xi. a. Colour of hear. xi. b Custom. xvi. b
Cucumbers. xix. a Cherries. xx. a. Chestnuttes. xxi. b Capers. xxii. a
Colewortes and cabages. xxii. b Cykorie. xxiii. a Cheruyle. xxiii. b
Consyderations in abstinence. lvi. a Cloves. xxvii. b Cony. xxviii. b Capons,
hens, and chyckens. xxix. a Crane. xxx. a Chese. xxxii. a Cider. xxxv. b
Confortatiues of the heart. lxx. a Cruditie. lxxvi. b
D
DAtes. xix. a Duck. xxx. a Diversity of meates. ^uii. a Digestiues of
choler. lix. a Digestiues of fleme. ibi. Domynyon of sondrye complexions. lxx.
b Diet of sanguine persons. lxxii. b Diet of choleric persons. lxxiii. a
Dyete of fleumatycke persons. lxxiiii. a Diet of melancolycke persons.
lxxiiii. b Diet of them, which be ready to fall into syknesse. lxxx. a Diet
in time of pestilence. lxxxviii. b Drink between meals. xliii. b Drink at
meles. xlvi. b Digested. lv. a
E
EXementes. fol. i. b Endyue. xxiii. a Eggs. xxxii. a Exercise. xlviii. a.. l.
a Evacuation. lv. a Excrementes. ibidem.
F
FLematik body. ii. b Fleume. viii. b Fleume natural. viii. a Fleme unnatural.
viii. b Fruits. xviii. a Figs. xix. a Fenell. xxiiii. a Fylberdes. xxi. b
Flesh. xxviii. a Fesaunt. xxix. b Fete of beastis. xxxi. b Fyshe. ibidem.
Frycasyes or rubbynges. xlix. a
G
GEnitors hot. vii. a Genitors cold. ibi. Genitours moist. ibid. Genitours dry.
ibid. Genytoures hot and moyste. vii. b Genytours hot and dry. ibidem.
Genitours cold and moist. ibidem. Genytours cold and dry. ibid. Gourdes.
xix. a. Grapes. xx. a Garlyke. xxv. b Gynger. xxvii. a Goose. xxx. a Gysar of
birds. xxx. b Gestation. li. b
H
Heart hot distempered. iiii. b Heart cold dystempered. v. a Heart moyste
dystempered. ibidem. Heart dry dystempered. ibidem. Hart hot moist. ibid.
Heart hot and dry. v. b Hart cold moist. ibid. Hart cold and dry. ibi.
Humours. viii. a Herbs used in potage, or to eat. xxii. b. Hare. xxviii. b
Hearon. xxx. a Hart of beastis. xxxi. a Heed of beastis. ibid. Honey. xxxvii. a
Hemorroides or piles. lxiiii. a Heuines or sorrow. lxvi. b
I
ISope. xxvi. a Joy. lxx. b.
K
Kydde. xxviii. a
L
Liver in heate dystempered. vi. a. Liver cold dystempered. ibidem. Liver
moyste dystempered. ibidem. Liver dry distempered. ibidem. Lettyse. xxii. b.
Lekes. xxv. b. Lamb. xxviii. a. Lark. xxix. b. Livers of birds and beasts.
xxx. b Lungis of bestis. xxxi. a Letting of blud. lxi. a. Leaches or blood
suckers. lxiii. a Lassitude. lxxviii. b. and lxxix. a
M
MElancolyke body. fol. iii. a. Melancholy. ix. b. Members instrumental.
ibidem. Meat drink. xii. b Meates making good juice. ibidem. Meates making
ylle juice. xiii. a Meates making choler. xiii. b. Meates making fleme ibidem.
Meates ingendrynge melancholy. ibidem. Meates making thick juice. ibidem. Meates
hurtynge the teeth. xiiii. a. Meates hurtynge the even. ibid. Meates making
oppilations. ibidem. Meates wyndy. xiiii. b. Melons. xviii. b Medlars. xxi. a
Malowes. xxiii. b Mutton. xxviii. a Moderatio in diet. xli. b Meals. xlii. b
Maces. xxvii. b Members of birds. xxx. b Melt or spleen. xxxi. a Marowe.
ibidem. Milk. xxxv. a
N
Nutmigges. xxvii. b
O
Official members ix. b. Operations. x. b. Olyues. xxii. a. Orenges. ibid.
Onyons. xxv. b. Order in eating and drinking. xlv. b Opylations what they are.
xli. a Old men. ibidem. Ordure. lv. a.
P,
PRyncipalle members. ix. b Parts similares. ibid. Powers natural. x. a
Powers spiritual. ibid. Powers animal. x. b Peaches. xx. a. Pears. xxi. a
Pourselane. xxiii. b Persely. xxiiii. a Purgers of coler. lix. a Purgers of
fleme. lix. b Pourgers of melancholy. ibidem. Precepts of Diocles. lxxxv. b.
Pomegranates. xxi. a Prunes. xxi. b Peason. xxiiii. b Parsnepes. xxv. a
Penyriall. xxvi. b Pepper. xxvii. a. Partryche. xxix. b Plouer. ibidem.
Pygeons. xxx. a Pourgations by siege. lvi. b. and. lvii. b. Precise diet.
xlvii. a
Q
QVantite of meat. xv. b. Qualite of meat. xv. b. and. xviii. a. Quynces. xx. b
Quail. xxix. b.
R
RAysons. xx. a. Rapes. xxiiii. b Radyshe. xxv. a. Rokat. xxvi. a Replecion.
liii. b.
S.
SAnguyne body. ii. a Stomach hot. vi. b. Stomach cold. ibide. Stomach
moist. ibide. Stomach dry. vii. a Spirit natural. x. b Spirit vital.
ibidem Spirit animal. ibide. Sorrel. xxiiii. a Sauge. xxv. b Stomach in the
which meat is corrupted. lxxxvii. b Sleep and watch. xlvi. b Sauery. xxvi. a.
Saffron. xxvii. a Swynes flesh. xxviii. a Sparrows. xxix. b Shouler. xxx. a
Supper. xliii. b. Sugar. xxxvii. a Scarifyenge. lxii. b Sickenesses appropried
to sondry seasons ages. lxxx. b Significations of sickenesses. lxxxii. a
T.
Things natural. i. a Things not natural. ibidem. Things against nature.
ibidem. Things good for the heed. xiiii. b Things good for the hart. ibidem
Things good for the liver ibidem Things good for the lunges. xv. a Things
good for the eyes. ibidem. Things good for the stomach. ibidem Temperature of
meates. xvii. a Turnyppes. xxv. a Time. xxvi. b Townecresses. ibidem. Trypes.
xxx. b Tongue of beastis. xxxi. b Time. xxxvii. b. and xxxviii. b Times
appropried to every humour. lxxi. b.
V
VVyndes. xii. b Walnuts. xxi. a Veale xxviii. b Venyson. ibidem. Woodcockes.
xxx. a Vdder. xxxi. a Water. xxxii. b Wine xxxiii. b Whaye. xxxv. b
Vociferation. lii. b Vomyte. lvi. b Vrines. lxxxiii. a Virtue of meates.
lxxxvii. b
Thus ends the Table.
TO THE CONSERVATION of the body of mankynde, within the limitation of health
(which as Galene says) is the state of the De ^uenda sanitate lib. 1.
body, wherein we be neither grieved with peyne, nor let from doing our
necessary busynesse, doth belong the diligent consyderation of three sorts of
things, that is to say, Things Natural, Things not natural, and Things
against nature.


Things Natural be.vii. in number. Elements. Complexions. Humours. Members.
Powers. Operations and Spirits.


These be necessary to the being of health, according to the order of their
kind: and be always in the natural body.

Things not natural be six in number. Air. Meat and drink. Sleep and
watch. Meuyng and rest. Emptynesse and repletion and Affections of the mind.


Things against Nature be three. Syckenesse. Cause of syckenesse. Accident,
which follows syckenes.


Annexed to things natuall. Age. (...). Figure, and. (...) of kinds.


THE Elements be those original things vnmyxt and vncompounde, of whose
temperance and myxture all other things, having corporalle substance, be
compact: Of them be four, that is to say, Earth. Water. Air and Fire.


EARTH, is the most gross and ponderouse element, and of her proper nature
is cold and dry.

VYATER is more subtle and light than earth, but in respect of Air and
Fire, it is gross and heavy; and of her proper Nature is cold and moyste.

AIR, is more lyghte and subtylle than the other two, and being^ not altered
with any exterior cause, is properly hot and moyste.

FIRE, is absolutely light and clear, and is the clarifier of other elements,
if they be vy^a^e or out of their natural temperance, and is properly hot
and dry.

IT IS to be remembered, that none of the said elements be commonly se^e or felt
of mortal men, as they are in their original being: but they, which by our
senses be perceived, be corrupted with mutual mixture, and b^ rather erthy,
watery, airy, and fyr^; than ^bsolutely earth, air, fire.

Of the complexion of Man. Cap. 2.
COMPLEXION is a combynation of two divers qualities of the four elements in
one body, as hot and dry of the Fire: hot and moyste of the Air, cold
and moyste of the Water, cold and dry of the Earth. But although all these
complexions be assembled in every body of man and woman, yet the body takes
his denomination of those qualities, which abound in him, more than in the
other, as hereafter inseweth.

The Body, where heate and moisture have souerayntie, is called Sanguine,
wherein the Air hath preeminence, and it is perceived and known by these
signs, which do follow, Sanguine.
Carnos^tie or flesshynesse. The veins and a^ large, Heate plenty and red.
The visage white and ruddy. Sleep much. Dreams of bloody things, or
things pleasant. Pulse great and full. Digestion perfect. Angry shortly.
Siege, vr^, sweat abundant. Falling shortly into bledyng. The v^in^ red and
gross.


Where cold with moisture prevails, that body is called Fle^matike, wherein
water hath pre^minence, and is perceived by these signs, Fleumatike,
Fatness, quauyng and soft. Veins narowe. Hear much and plain, Colour
white. Sleep superfluous. Dremes of things watery or of fysshe. Slowness.
Dullness in learning. Cowardyse, Pulse slow and little. Digestion weak.
Spyttell white, abundant, and thick. Urine gross, white or pale.


Choleric is hot and dry, in whom the fire hath preeminence, and is
discerned by these signs following. Choleric,
Leanness of body. Costyfenesse. Hear black or dark aburne curlyd. Visage
and skyn red as fire, or salowe. Hot things noyfull to him. Little sleep.
Dreams of fire, fighting, or anger. Wit sharpe and quycke. Hatdy and
fighting. Pulse swyfte and strong. Urine byg^ coloured and clear. Voice
sha^e.


Melancolyke is cold and dry, over whom the earth hath dominio, is perceiuid
by these signs. Melancolyke.
Leanness with hardness of skin. Hear plain and thynne. Colour duskysh,
or white with leannes. Much watch. Dremes fearful. Styffe in opinions.
Digestion slow and ill. Timorous and fearful. Anger lunge and frettynge.
Pulse little. Seldom lawghynge. Urine watery and thynne.


Besides the said complexions of all the hole body, there be in the partycular
members, complexions, wherein if there be any distemperaunce, it brings
syckenesse or grief into the member. Wherefore to know the distemperature,
these signs following wold be considered. Forsene, that it be remembered, that
some distemperatures be simple, and some be compound. They which be simple,
be in simple qualities, as in heate, cold, moyste, or dry. They which be
compound, are in compound or myxte qualities: as heate and moisture, heate
and drythe, cold and moyste, cold and dry. But now first we will speak of
the simple complexions, of every principal member, beginning at the brain.

The brain exceeding in heate hath The heed and visage very red and hot.
The heate growing fast black and courlyd. The veins in the even apparent.
Superfluouse matter in the nosethrylles, even, and ears. The heed annoyed with
hot meates, drynkes, and savours. Sleep short and not sound.


The brain exceeding in cold hath Much superfluity running out of the nose,
mouth, ears, and even. Hear straight and fine, growing slowly, and flaxen.
The heed disposed by small occasyon to pooses and murres. It is some annoyed
with cold. It is cold in touching. Veins of the even not scene. Sleapy
somewhat.


Moyste in excess hath Hears plain. Seldom or never bald. Wit dull.
Much superfluities. Sleep much and deep.


The brain dry hath No superfluities runnynge. Wits good and ready.
Watchefull, Hears black harde and fast growing. Bald shortly.


Complexions compouned.
Brain hot and moyste distempered hath The heed akynge and heavy. Fulle of
superfluities in the nose. The southern wind grievous. The Northern wynd holsom.
Sleep deep, but vnquyete, with often wakynges, and strange dreams. The
senses and wit vnperfecte.


Brain hot and dry dystempered hath None abundance of superfluities, which
may be expellyd. Senses perfect. Much watch. Sooner bald than other. Much
hear in chyldehoode and black or browne, and courlyd. The heed hot and
ruddy.


Brayn cold moist diste{per}ed hath The senses and wit dull. Much sleep.
The heed soon replenyshed with superfluouse moisture. Distillations and poses
or murres Not shortly bald. Soon hurt with cold.


Brayn cold dry distepered hath, The heed cold in feeling and without colour.
The veins not apperynge. Soon hurt with cold. Often discrased. Wit
perfect in chyldhode, but in age dull. Aged shortly and bald.


Of the Heart.
The heart hot distem bred hath Much blowynge and puffyng. Pulse swyfte and
busy. Hardynesse and manhood much. Promptness activity and quycknes in doing
of things. Fury and boldness. The breast heary toward the left side. The
breast broad, with the heed little. The body hot, except the Liver do let
it.


The hart cold distempered hath The pulse very little. The brethe little and
slow. The breast narowe. The body all cold, except the liver doth inflame
it. Fearfulness. Scrupulosite, much care. Curiosity. Slowness in acts. The
breast clean without hears.


The heart moist distempered hath The pulse soft. Soon angry soon pacified.
The body al moist, except the liver disposes contrary.


The hart dry distempered hath The pulse harde. Not lightly angry, but being
angry, not soon pacified. The body dry, except the liver doth dispose contrary.


The heart hot and moyste The breast stomach heary. Promptness in acts. Soon
angry. Fiersnesse but not so much as in hot and dry. Pulse soft, swift,
and busy. Breath or wynd according. Shortly falls into diseases caused of
putrefaction.


The heart hot and dry. The heart poulse great and swyfte. The breath or
wynd according. The breast and stomach all heatye. Quick in his doings.
Boldness and hardynesse. Swyft and hasty in moving. Soon styred to anger, and
tyrannous in manners. The breast broad, and all the body hot and dry.


The heart cold and moyste The pulse soft. Fearful and tymorous. Slow. The
breast clean without hear. Not hastylye angry, nor retaynynge anger. The
breast natowe. All the body cold and moist.


The heart cold and dry hath The pulse harde and little. The wind moderate.
Seldom angry, but when it happens, it dureth lunge. The breast clean
without hear and little. All the body cold and dry.


Of the Liver.
The liver in hete distempered hath The veins great. The blood more hot
than temperate. The bealy heary. All the body hot excedynge temperance.


The liver cold distempered hath The veins small. Abundance of fleume. The
blood cold. All the body cold in feeling. The bealy without hear.


The liver moist distempered hath The veins soft. Much blood and thynne.
All the body moist in feeling except the heart disposes it couttary.


The liver dry distempered hath The veins harde, The blood little and thycke.
All the body dry.


THE complexions compound, may be decerned by the said simple qualities. And
here Galenus in art par ua. lib. 2,
it is to be noted, that the heate of the heart may vanquyshe the cold in the
liver. For heate is in the heart, as in the fou^tayne or spring, and in the
Liver, as in the River.

Of the stomach.
The stomach hot distempered He digests well, specially harde meates, and
that will not be shortly altered. Light meates, and soon altered, be therein
corrupted. The appetite little and slow. He delytethe in Meates and drynkes,
which be hot, for every natural complexio delyteth in his semblable.


The stomach cold dystempered He hath good appetite, He dygesteth ylle and
slowelye, specyally gross meates and harde. Cold meates do ware sour, being
in him vndigested. He delytethe in Meates and Drynkes, which be Cold, and yet
of them he is indammaged.


The stomach moist distempred He thyrsteth but seldom, yet he desires to
drink. With superfluouse drink he is hurt. He delyteth in moyste meates.


Of humo^rs.
IN THE body of Man be four principal humours, which contynuyng in the
proportion, that nature hath lymytted, the body is free from all syckenesse.
Contrary wise, by the increase or diminution of any of them in quantity or
quality, over or under their natural assignement, inequall temperature comes
into the body, which syckenesse follows more or lass, according to the
lapse or decay of the temperatures of the said humours, which be these
following. Blood, Fleume. Chole^, Melancholy.


Blood hath preeminence over all other humours in susteynynge of all living
creatures, for it has more conformity with the originalle cause of living,
by reason of tempera^es in heate and moisture, alsoo nouryssheth more the body,
and restores that which is decayed, being the very treasure of life, by loss
whereof, death immediately follows. The distemperature of blood happens by one
of the other three humours, by the inordiuate or su{per}fluous mixture of them.

Of fleume.
Fleume is of two sorts, Natural and Unnatural.


Natural fleume is a humour cold moist, white and sweet, or without taste,
engendered by insufficient decoction in the second digestion of the watery or
raw parts of the matter decocte called C^ilus, by the last digestion made
apt to be converted into blood. In this humour, water hath dominion most
principal.

Fleume unnatural is that, which is myxte with other humours, or is altered
in his qualytie: And thereof is.viii. sondry kinds, Fleume.
Watty, which is found in spettyll of great drynkers, or of them, which
dygeste ill. Slymy or raw. Glasy, like to white glass, thycke, viscouse like
bird lyme and heavy. Plastry, which is very gross, and as it were chalky,
such is found in the joints of them, which have the gowte. Salt, which is
mingled with coler. Sower, myxte with melancholy, which comes of corrupt
digestion. Harsh, thycke and gross, which is seldom founden, which tastes
like ^cum
grene crabs or sloes. Stiptike or binding, is not so gross nor cold, as
harsh, and hath the taste like to green red wine, or other like, straynynge
the tunge.


Choler
doth participate with natural heate as lunge as it is in good temperance.
And thereof is also two kinds, Natural and Unnatural.

Natural coler is the some of blode, the color whereof is red and clear, or
more like to an orege colour, and is hot and dry, wherein the fire hath
dominion, and is light and sharpe, and is engendered of the most subtle part
of matter decocte, or boiled in the stomach, whose beginning is in the liver.

Unnatural choler is that which is myxte or corrupted with other humours,
whereof be four kinds, Citrine or yelowe choler, which is of the myxture of
natural choler, and watery fleume, and therefore hath less heate than pure
choler. Yelky, like to yelkes of eggs, which is of the myxture of flewme
congeled, and choler natural, and is yet lass hot than the other. Grene like
to lekes, whose begynninge is rather of the stomach, tha of the liver. Grene
like to grene canker of mettle, and bourneth like venym, and is of excedynge
adustyon of choler or flewme, and by these two kinds nature is mortified.


Melancholy or black coler is divided into two kinds. Natural, which is the
dregs of pure blood, and is known by the blaknes, when it issues either
downward or upward, and is verily cold and dry. Vnnaturalle, which
proceeds of the adustion of colerik mixture, and is hotter and lighter,
having in it violence to kill, with a dangerous disposition.


Of the members.
There be diversities of mebers, that is to say.

Principal members. The brain, The heart, The liver, The stones of
generation.
Offycialle members. Synewes, which do serve to the brain. Arteries or
pulses, which do serve to the heart. Vayns, which do serve to the liver.
Vessels spermatike, wherein mans seed lies, which do serve to the stones.
Parts called Similares, for being divided, they remain in them self like as
they were. Bones. Gristell. Calls betwixt the uttermost skin and the
flesh. Muskles or fylettes. Fat. Flesh.
Members instrumental. The stomach. The raynes, The bowels. All the great
synewes.

These of their virtue do appetite meat alter it.

Of powers.
Anymall, Spyrituall, Natural.
Natural power, Which doth minister. To whom is mynystred.
Which doth mynyster, Appetiteth, Retains, Digests, Expels.
To whom is mynystred, Engenders, Nouryssheth, Feeds.

Power spiritual. Warkynge, which delateth the heart and arteryes, and
eftesoones strayneth them. Wrought, which is styred by an exterior cause to
work, whereof comes anger, indignation, subtility, and care.

Power animal. That which ordeyneth, discerns, and composes. That moves
by voluntary mocyon. That which is called sensyble, whereof do proceed the
five wits.
Of that which ordeineth do {pro}cede. Imagination in the forheed. Reason in
the brain. Remembrance in the nodell.

Operations.
Appetite by heate and drythe. Digestion by heate moisture. Retaynyng by cold
and drithe. Expulsion by cold and moyste.
Spirit is an airy substance subtle styringe the powers of the body to
perform their operations, which is dyuyded into

Natural, which takes his begynninge of the liver, and by the veins, which
have no poulse, spreads into all the hole body. Natural, which proceeds
from the heart, and by the arteries or pulses is sent into all the body.
Anymalle, which is engendered in the brain, and is sent by the synewes
throughout the body, and makes sense or feelynge.
Annexed to things natural.
Ages be four. Adolescency to.xxv. years, hot and moist, in the which time
the body grows. Iuuentute unto.xl. years, hot and dry, wherein the body is
in perfyte growth. Senectute, unto.lx. years cold and dry, wherein the body
begins to decreace. Age decrepit, until the last time of life, accidentally
moist, but naturally cold dry, wherein the powers and strength of the body be
more and more minished.


Colour.
Of inward causes. Of outward causes.
Colour of inward causes. Of equalytie of humours, as he that is red and
white. Of inequalytie of humours, whereof do proceed, black, salowe, or white
only. Red, Black, do betoken domi Salowe, nion of heate. White, cold of
fleume. Pale cold of melancholy. Red, abundance of blood. Salowe, choler
citrine. Black, melancholy or coler adust.
Colour of outward causes. Of cold or heate, as englyshe men be white, Mories
be blak. Of things accidentalle, as of fear, of anger, of sorrow, or other
like motions.
Colour of hear. Black, either of abundance of coler inflamed, or of much
incendynge or adustion of blood. Red hear of much heat not adust. Gray
hears of abundance of melancholy. White hears of the lack of natural
heate, and by occasyon of fleume putrified.

All the resydue concerning things natural, contained in the Introduction of
Ioannicius, and in the little craft of Galene, I pourposely pass over for
this time, forasmoche as it doth require a red^, having some knowledge in
philosophy natural, or else it is to harde and tedyouse to be understand.
Moreover this, which I have written in this first tables, shall be sufficient, to
the conservation of health, I mean with that which now follows in the other
Tables.

The second Table.
THINGS not Natural be so called, because they be no portion of a natural
body, as they be, which be called Natural things, but yet by the temperance
of them, the body being in health, so consists. By the dystemperaunce of
them, syckenesse is induced, and the body dissolved.

The first of things not naturalle is air, which is properly of it self,
or of some material cause or occasion, good or ill. That which is of it self
good, hath pure vapours, and is odoriferous. Also it is of it self, swyfte in
alteration from hot to cold, wherein the body is not much provoked to sweat
for heate, no to chylle for vehemence of cold. Air among al things not
natural, is chiefly to be observed, forasmoch as it doth both enclose us, and
also enter into our bodies, specially the most noble member, which is the
Hart, and we can not be separate one howre from it, for the necessity of
breathynge and fetching of wind.
The causes, whereby the air is corrupted, be specyally four. Influences of
sondry sterres. Great standing waters never refreshed. Carayne lyenge lunge
above ground. Much people in small room living vnklenly and sluttysshely.


Wyndes bringing wholesome air, North, which prolongs life by expoulsynge
ylle vapours. East is temperate and lusty.
Wyndes bringing ill air. South corrupts, and makes ill vapours. West, is
very mutable, which nature doth hate.

Meat and drink.
In meat and drink we must consider six things. Substance, Quantity,
Quality, Custom, Time, Order.


Substance, sum is good, which makes good juice, and good blood: some is
ylle, and engenders ill juice, and ill blood,

Meates and drynkes making good juice.
BReed of pure flour somewhat leuened, well baked, not to old nor to stale.
Eggs of fesantes, henes or partriches new laid, poched, mean between rear
and harde. Milk new mylked, drunk fasting, wherein is sugar, or the leaves
of myntes. Fesauntes. Partriches or chikens. Capons or hens. Birds of the
fields. Fyshe of stony ryuers. Veale suckynge. Pork yonge. Beef not passing
three years. Pygeons. Venyson of red dere. Peas potage with myntes. Fete of
swine or calves. Figs type, before Raysons, meals. Borage. Languedebiefe.
Persely. Myntes. Rice with almod milk. Letyse. Cykorie. Grapes ripe. Wynes good
moderately taken, well fined. Ale and bier syx days old, clean brewed, and not
strong. Mirth and gladness. The liver and brains of hens and chykens and
yonge geese.
Meates and drynkes making ill juice.
Old beef. Old mutton. Geese old. Swan old. Ducks of the kanell.
Inward of beastis. Black puddynges. The hart liver and kidneys of all
beasts. The brains and inary of the backbone. Wodde culuets. Shell fyshe,
except creuyse deaudoulce. Chese harde. Apples and peers much used. Figs and
grapis not type. All raw herbs, except letyse, borage, cikory. Onions,
immoderatly Garlik, used, specially Lekes, in colerike stomachs. Wine in must
or sour. Fear, sorrow, pensyfenesse.
Meates ingendrynge choler.
Garlyke. Onyons, Rokat, Kersis. Lekes, Mustard, Pepper, Honey, Wine much
drunken. Sweet meates.
Meates ingendryng fleume.
All slymye and cleauynge meates. Chese new. All fyshe, specially in a
fleumatike stomach. Inwards of beasts. Lambs flesh. The synewe parts of
flesh. Skynnes. Brains. Lunges, Rapes, Cucumbers. Replecion. Lack of
exercise,
Meates ingendrynge melancholy.
Beef, Gotes flesh. Hares flesh. Bores flesh, Salt flesh, Salt fyshe.
Colewortes. All pulse, except white peason. Browne bread course. Thycke wine.
Black wine, Old chese. Old flesh. Great fyshes of the see.
Meates making thycke juice.
Rye breadde, Must, Bread without leven. Cake breadde, See fyshe great.
Shelle fyshe. Beef, The kydneys, The liver of a swyne. The stones of beasts.
Milk much sodden. Rapes. All round roots, Cukumbers, Sweet wine, Deep
red wine. Garlyke. Mustard, Origanum Hysope, Basylle, Fenelle, Cheese, Eggs
fried or hard, Chesten nuts. Nauews, Figs grene. Appuls not ripe. Pepper.
Rokat, Lekes, much used. Onyons,
Meates which do hurt the teeth.
Very hot meates. Nuts, Sweet metes drikes. Radyshe roots, Harde meates.
Milk. Bitter meates. Much vomyte. Leekes. Fyshe fat. Lymones, Colewortes.
Meates which do hurt the eyes.
Drunkenness. Lecherye. Must, All poulse. Sweet wynes, and thycke wynes,
Hemp sede. Very salt meates. Garlyke, Onyons. Colewortes, Radyshe, Reedynge
after supper immediately.
Making great oppilations.
Thycke milk. All sweet things. Rye breadde. Sweet wynes.
Meates inflatyng or wyndye.
Beans. Lupynes. Cicer, Mill, Cucumbers. All juice of herbs. Figs dry.
Rapes, Nauewes raw. Milk. Honey not well clarified. Sweet wine. Must.
Things good for the heed.
Cububes. Galyngale. Lignum aloes. Matoram, Balm myntes. Gladen. Nutmygges,
Musk, Rosemarye, Roses, Pionye. Hyssope, Spyke, Camomylle, Mellylote, Few,
Frankincense.
Things good for the Heart.
Cynamome. Saffron. Coralle. Cloves, Lignum aloes. Perles, Macis. Balm
myntes. Myrabolanes, Musk. Nutmygges. Rosemarye. The bone of the heart of a
red dear. Maioram, Buglosse. Borage. Setuall.
Things good for the Liver.
Wormewode. Wythwynde. Agrymonye. Saffron. Cloves. Endyue. Lyuerworte. Cykorie.
Plantayne. Dragons, Raysons great. Saunders. Fenelle. Violettes. Rosewater.
Lettyse.
Things good for the Lunges.
Elycampane. Hysope. Scabiose. Lykorise Raysons. Maydenheare. Penidies.
Almondes, Dates, Pystaces.
Things good for the eyes.
Eyebryght. Fenyll. Veruyn. Roses. Celandyne. Agrymonye. Cloves. Cold water.
Things good for the stomach.
Myrabolanes. Nutmygges. Organum, Pystaces, Quynces, Olybanum, Wormewode,
Saffron, Coralle, Agrymonye, Funytorie, Galyngale. Cloves. Lignum aloes.
Mastix, Mynte. Spodium. The innermost skin of a hens gysar. Coriander
prepared.
THE SECOND BOOK.
Of Quantity. Cap. 1.
THE Quantity of meat must be proporcioned after the substance and qualite
thereof, and according to the complexion of him that eats. First, it ought to
be remembered, that meates hot and moist which are qualities of the blood,
are soon, turned into blood, and therefore much nourysheth the body. Some
meates do nourish but little, having lytteil conformity with blood in
their qualities. Of them, which do nourish, some are more gross, some
lighter in digestyon. The gross meat engenders gross blood, but where it
is well concocte in the stomach, and well digested, it makes the flesh more
fyrme, and the official members more strong, than fine meates. Wherefore of
men, which use much labour or exercise, also of them, which have very chorike
stomachs here in Englande, gross meates may be eaten in a great quantite: and
in a choleric stomach beef is better dygested than a chykens leg,
forasmoche as in a hot stomach. fine meates be shortly aduste and corrupted.

Contrariwise in a cold or fleumatike stomach gross meat abides lunge
vndigested, and makes putrified matter: light meates therefore be to such a
stomach more apt and convenient. The temperate body is best nourished with
a little quantity of gross meates: but of temperate meates in substance and
qualytie, they may safely eat a good quantity. Foreseen always, that they
eat without gourmandyse, or leave with sum appetite. And here it would be
remembered, that the cholerycke stomach doth not desire so much as he may
digest: the melancholy stomach may not dygeste so much as he desires. for
cold makes appetite, but natural heate concocteth or boils. Not
withstanding unnatural or supernatural heate distroyeth appetite, and
corrupts dygestyon, as it appears in fevers. More over, fruits and herbs,
specyally raw, would be eaten in a small quantity, all though the person be
very cholerycke, forasmoche as they do engender thynne watery blood, apt to
receive putryfaction, which all though it be not shortelye perceived of them
that use it, at length they feel it by sondrye dyseases, which are lunge in
coming, and shortly sleeth, or be hardly escaped. Fynally, excess of
meates is to be abhorred. For as it is said in the book called
Ecclesiasticus, Eccl. 37.
In much meat shall be syckenesse, and inordynate appetite shall approach
unto coler. Semblably the quantity of drink would be moderated, that it
exceed not, nor be equalle unto the quantity of meat, specially wine, which
moderately taken, aydeth nature, and comfort her, and as the said author
of Ecclestasticus saith, Wine is a rejoicing to the soul and body. And
Theognes says in Galenes Eccl. 31.
warke, A large draught of wine is ill. A moderate Calen. de ^en. sani.
draught is not only not ill, but also commodyouse or profytable.

Of quality of meates. Cap. 2.
QValitie is in the complexion, that is to say, it is the state thereof, as
Hot or cold, moist or dry. Also some meates be in winter cold in act, and in
virtue hot. And it would be considered, that every complexyon temperate and
intemperate, is conserved in his state, by that which is like thereto in form
and degree. But that which excedeth much in dystemperaunce, by that which is
contrary to him in form or quality, but like in degree moderately used. By
form is understand grossenesse, fynenesse, thickenesse, or thynnesse, by
degree, as the first, the second, the third, the fourth, in heate, cold,
moisture, or drythe.

Of Custom. Capit. 3.
CVstome in fedynge is not to be contemned, or little regarded: for those
meates, to the which a man has been of lunge time accustomed, though they be
not of substance commendable, Hippocra tes aphorismo. 2.
yet do they sometime lass harm than better meates, whereunto a ma is not used.
Also the meates and drynkes, which do much delyte him that eats, are to be
preferred before that, which is better, but more vnsauerye. But if the custom
Galenus.
be so pernyciouse, that hit needs must be left, than would it be
withdrawn by lyttelle and lyttelle in time of health, and not of syckenesse.
For if it should be withdrawn in time of syckenesse, Nature shulde sustain
treble detriment, first by the grief induced by syknesse, second by
receyuynge of medicines, thirdly by forbearing the thing, wherein she deliteth.

Of the temperature of meates to be received. Capit. 4.
TO keep the body in good temper, to them, whose natural complexion is moist,
ought to be given meates, that be moyste in virtue or power. Contrariwise to
them, whose naturalle complexion is dry, ought to be given meates dry in
virtue or power. The bodies intemperate, such meates or drynkes are to be
given, which be in power contrary to the distemperance, but the degrees are
always to be considered, as well of the temperance of the body, as of the
meates. For where the meates do much exceed in degree the temperature of the
body, they annoy the body in causing distemperance, As hot wynes, pepper,
garlycke, onyons, and salt, be noyfull to them, which be choleric, because
they be in the highest degree of heate and drithe, above the just temperance
of man body in that complexion. And yet be they oftentimes hol some to them,
which be fleumatike. Contrary wise, cold water, cold herbs, and cold
fruits moderately used, beholsom to choleric bodies, by putting a way the
heate, excedynge the natural temperature: and to them, which be fleumatike,
they be vnholsome, and do bring into them distemperance of cold and moyste.

what distemperaunce happens by the excess of sondrye qualities in meates and
drynkes. Capitu. 5.
Meates.
Cold, do congele and mortify. Moist, do pntrifie and hasten age. Dry,
sucks up natural moisture. Clamy, stops theissue of vapors and urine, and
ingendrethe tough fleume and gravel. Fat and oily, swymmeth lunge in the
stomach, and brings in lothesomnesse. Bitter, doth not nouryshe. Salt, do
fret much the stomach. Harryshe, like the taste of wyld fruits, do
constipate and restrain. Sweet chauffeth the blood, and causes opilations
or stoppynges of the pores and cundytes of the body. Sower cools nature, and
hastens age.
what commodity happens by the moderate use of the said qualities of meates
and drynkes. Cap. 6.
Meates.
Cold asswageth the burning of coler. Moist humecteth that which is dried. Dry,
cosumeth superfluous moisture. Clammye, thycketh that, which is subtle and
percynge. Bitter, cleanses and wypeth of, also mollifies and expels fleume.
Salt, relents flewme clammy, and dries it. Fat and vnctuous, nourysheth,
and makes soluble. Stiptike or rough on the tongue binds and comfort
appetite. Sweet, doth cleanse, dyssolue, and nouryshe.
Of Fruits. Cap. 7.
FOr as much as before that tyllage of corn was invented, and that deuouryng
of flesh and fyshe was of mankynde used, men undoubtedly lived by fruits,
and Nature was therewith contented and satisfied: but by change of the diet
of our progenytours, there is caused to be in our bodies, such alteration
frome the nature, which was in men at the beginning, that now all fruits
generally are noyfull to manne, and do engender ill humours, and be oft times
the cause of putrified fevers, if they be much and continually eaten. Not
withstadyng unto them, which have abundance of coler, they be sometime
conueniet, to repress the flame, which proceeds of coler. And some fruits
which be styptike, or bynding in taste, eaten before meals, do bind the belly,
but eaten after meals, they be rather laxatine. Now shall it not be
vnexpedient, to write of some fruit particularly, declaring their noyful
qualities in appairyng of Nature, and how they may be used with lest
detriment.

Of Gourdes.
GOurdes raw be unpleasant in eating, ill for the stomach, and almost never
digested, therefore he that will needs eat them, must boyle them, toste them,
or fry them, every way they be without savour or taste, and of their proper
nature, they give to the body cold and moist norishment, and that very little,
but by reason of the slyppernes of their substance, and because al meates which
be moyste of their nature, be not byndyng, they lightly pass forth by the
bealye. And being well ordered, they will be meetly concoct, if corruption in
the stomach do not prevent them: they be cold and moyste in the second
degree.

Of Melones and Pepones.
MElones and Pepones be almooste of oone kind, but that the melone is round
like an apple, and the innermoste part thereof, where the sedes are contained,
is used to be eaten. The Pepon is much greatter, and somewhat lunge, and the
inner part thereof is not to be eaten: They both are very cold and moist, and
do make ill juice in the body, if they be not well digested, but the pepon much
more than the melon. they do lest hurt, if they be eaten before meals. Albe it,
if they do find in the stomach fleume, they be turned in to fleume, if they
find choler they be turned into choler. Not withstanding there is in them
the virtue to cleanse to provoke urine, they be cold and moyste in the second
degree.

Cucumbers.
CVcumbers do not exceed so much in moisture as melons: and therefore they be
not so soon corrupted in the stomach: but in some stomachs, Galen. de alimen.
fa. 2.
being moderately used, they do digest well: but if they be abundantely eaten, or
much used, they engender a cold and thycke humour in the veins, which never
or seldom is turned into good blood, and sometime brings in fevers. Also
they abate carnal lust. The sedes as well thereof, as of melones and gourdes,
being dried, and made clean from the husks, are very medicinable against
syckenesses proceeding of heate, also the difficulty or let in pyssynge, they
be cold and moyste in the second degree.

Dates,
Be harde to digest, therefore being much eaten, and not well dygested, they
annoy the heed, and cause gna wing in the stomach, and make gross juice,
and sometime cause obstructions orstoppynges in the liver and spleen. And where
there is inflammation or hardness in the body, they are vnholsome, but being
well digested and temperately used, they nourysshe and make the flesh firm,
and also binds the bealy: old dates be hot and dry in the first degree:
new gathered are hot and moyste in the first degree.

Of Figs.
Figs eaten, do shortly pass out of the stomach, and are soon distributed
into all the Aetius. 1.
parts of the body, and have the power to cleanse, specially grauelle, being
in the raynes of the back, but they make no substancial norishment, but rather
somewhat louse and wyndye, but by their quick passage, the wind is soon
dissolved. Therefore if they be ripe, they do leest harm of any fruits, or
almost none. Dry figs and old, are more hot and moist than new gathered,
but being much eaten, they make ill blood and juice, and as some do
suppose, do engender lice, and also annoys the liver and the spleen, if they
be inflamed, but having the power to attenuate or make humours currant, they
make the body soluble, and do cleanse the raynes. Also being eaten before diner
with gynger or pepper, or powder of time, or penny royal, they profyt much to
them, which have oppilations or harde congeled matter in the inner parts of
the body, or have distillations or reumes falling into the breast and stomach.
New figs are hot and moist, old figs are hot in the first degree, and dry
in the second.

Of grapes and raisons.
GRapes do not nouryshe so much as figs, but being ripe, they make not much
ylle Galen. de alimen. 2.
juice in the body: all be it newly gathered, they trouble the bealye, and
fylleth the stomach with wind, therefore if they be hanged up a while, er they
be eaten, they are the lass noyfull. Sweet grapes are hottest, and do louse
somewhat, and Diosco. 5.
make a man thyrsty. Sour grapes are cold, and do also louse, but they are
hard of digestion, and yet they do not nouryshe. They which are in taste bitter
or harryshe, be like to them that are sour. Raysons do make the stomach firm
and strong, and do provoke appetite, and do comfort weak bodies, being eaten
before meals, they be hot in the first degree, and moyste in the second.

Of Cherries.
Cherries, if they be sweet, they do soon flyp down into the stomach, but if
they be sour or sharpe, they be more wholesome, and do louse, if they be eaten
fresh, and newly gathered, they be cold and moist in the first degree.

Of Peaches.
PEaches do lass harm, and do make better juice in the body, for they are
not so soon corrupted being eaten. Of the juice of them may be made a syrope,
very wholesome against the distemperance of coler, whereof proceeds a stynkynge
breathe, they be cold in the first degree, and moyste in the second.

Of Appulles.
AL appulles eaten soon after that they be gathered, are cold, hard to digest,
and do make ill and corrupted blood, but being well kept until the next
winter, or the year following, eaten after meals, they are right wholesome, and
do confirm the stomach, and make good digestion, specially if they be roasted
or baken, most properly in a choleric stomach. They are best preserved in
honey, so y^ one touch not an other. The rough tasted appuls are wholesome, where
the stomach is weak by distemperance of heate or much moisture. The bitter
appuls, where that grief is increaced. The sour appuls, where the matter is
congeled or made thycke with heate. In distemperature of heate and drythe by
drinking much wine, they have ben found comodious: being eaten at night, going
to bed, without drinking to them: they be cold and moist in the first
degree.

Of Quynces.
QVynces be cold dry, eaten before meal, they bind and restrain the
stomach, that it may not digest well the mete, except that they be roasted or
sodden, the core taken out, and myxte with honey clarified, or sugar, than they
cause good appetite, and preseruith the head from drunkenness: taken after
meat, it closes and draws the stomach together, and helps it to digest,
and mollifies the bealy, if it be abundantly taken. they be cold in the
first degree, and dry in the beginning of the second.

Of Pomegranates.
POmegranates be of good juice, and profytable to the stomach, specially they,
which are sweet: but in a hot fever, they that are sour, be more expedient
and wholesome. for than the sweet do incende heate, and puff up the stomach.

Of Pears.
Pears are much of the nature of apples, but they are heuyer, but taken after
meat, roasted or baken, they are not vnholsome, and do testrain and knit the
stomach, being ripe: they be cold and moyste in the first degree.

Medlars.
Medlars are cold dry, constcictife or strainig y^ stomach, therefore they may be
eten after meles as a medicine, but not used as meat, for they inge der
melacoly, they be cold dry in the second degre.

Wallnuttes.
VVallnuttes, if they be blanched, are supposed to be good for the stomach, and
somewhat lousynge the bealy, myxt with sugar, they do noryshe temperately. Of
two dry nuts, as many figs, and.xx. leaves of Few, with a grayn of salt,
is made a medicine, whereof if one do eat fasting, nothing which is venomous,
may that day hurt him. and it also preserves against the (...) ^hee, and this
is the very right Mithridate. they be hot and dry in the second degre, after
some opinions hot in the third degre, dry in the second.

Fylberdes and hasyll nuts.
They are more strong in substance than wall nuts, wherefore they are not so
easily or soon digested, Also they do inflate the stomach, and cause heed ache,
but they engender fat. And if they be tosted, they are good to restrain
reumes. Also eaten with pepper, they are good against tourmentes of the bealy,
and the stoppyng of vri^e. they be hot and dry in the first deg^ee.

Of Almondes.
They do extenuate and clease without any bindynge, wherefore they pourge the
breast and lunges, specially bitter almondes. Also they do mollyfye the bealye,
provoke sleep, and causes to pysse well. Five or six of them eaten before
meat, kepeth a man from being drunk: they be hot and moyste in the first
deg^e.

Chestyns.
They being roasted under the ymbers or hot ashes, do nouryshe the body
strongly, eaten with honey fasting, do help a man of the cough.

Prunes.
Of the gardeyn, and type, do dispose a man to the stool, but they do bring
no manner of nouryshement. To this fruit like as to figs, this property
remains, that being dried they do profit. The damask prune rather binds
than lowseth, and is more commodious unto the stomach. they be cold and moist in
the second degree.

Olyues.
Condite in salt lycour, taken at the beginning of a meal, doth corroborate
the stomach, stireth appetite, and louseth the bealy, being eaten with vyneger.
They which be type, are temperately hot: they which be grene, are cold and
dry.

Of Capers.
They nourish nothing after that they be salted, but yet they make the bealy
louse, and pourgeth fleume, which is therein contained. Also stireth appetite
to meat, and opens the obstructions or stoppynge of the liver and spleen,
being eaten with oximell, before any other meat: they be hot and dry in the
second degree.

Orenges.
The ryndes taken in a little quantity, do comfort the stomach, where it
digests, specially con dite with sugar, and taken fasting in a small
quantity. The juice of orenges, having a tossed of breadde put unto it, with a
little powder of myntes, sugar, and a little cynamom, makes a very good
sauce to provoke appetite. The juice eaten with sugar in a hot fever, is not
to be discommended. The rynde is hot in the first degree, and dry in the
second. The juice of them is cold in the second degre, and dry in the
first.

Herbs used in potage, or to eat. Cap. 8.
GEnerally al herbs raw, and not sodden, do engender cold watery juice, if they
be eaten customably, or in abundance: albeit some herbs are more comestible,
and do lass harm unto nature, moderately vsid, makith meetly good blud.

Lettyse.
A Monge al herbs, none hath so good juice as lettyse: for some men do
suppose, that it makes abundance of blood, all be it not very pure or
perfyte. It doth set a hot stomach in a very good temper, and makes good
appetite, and eaten in the evening, it provokes sleep, all be it, it neither
doth louse nor bind the bealye of his own property. It increases milk in
a woman's breasts, but it abat^th carnal appetite, and much vsynge thereof,
hurts the eye sight. It is cold and moyste temperately.

Colewortes and Cabages.
BEfore that avarice caused matchauntes to fetch out of the east and southe
parts of the world, the traffyke of spyce and sondry drouges, to content the
vnsaciablenes of wanton appetites, Colewortes for the virtues supposed to be in
them, were of such estimation, that they were judged to be a sufficient
medicine against all diseases, as it may appear in the folk of wise Cato,
wherein he writes of husbandry. But now I will no more remember, than shall be
required, in that which shall be used as meat, and not pure medicine. The
juice thereof hath virtue to purge: the hole leaves being half sodden, and
the water poured out, and they being put eftesones into hot water, and sodden
vntyl they be tender, so eaten, they do bind the bealy. Some do suppose, if
they be eaten raw with vyneger, before meat, it shall preserve the stomach
from surfettynge, and the heed from drunkenness: all be it much vsynge of
them dulls the sight, except the eyes be very moyste. Fynally the juice that
it makes in the body is not so commendable, as that which is engendered of
lettyse. It is hot in the first degree, and dry in the second.

Of Cykorie or suckorie.
IT is like in operation to lettise, and tempers coler wonderfully, and
therefore in all colerike fevers, the decoction of this herb, or the water
thereof stylled, is right expedient. semblably the herb and rote boiled with
flesh, that is fresh, being eaten, kepeth the stomach and heed in very good
temper. I suppose that Southystel Dent delyon, be of like qualities, but not so
convenient to be used of them, which are hole, because they are wild of
nature, and more bitter, and there fore causes fastidiousnes or lothsomnesse of
the stomach. It is cold and dry in the second degre.

Endyue and Scariole.
Be much like in their operation to Cykorie, but they are more conuentent to
medicine than to meat. All be it Scariole called white End^ue, having the
tops of the leaves turned in, and laid in the earth, at the latter end of
summer, and covered, becomes white and crisp, like to the great stalks of
cabage lettyse, which are in winter taken up and eten. And to them that have
hot stomachs and dry, they be right holsom, but being to much used, or in
very great quantity, they engender the humour, which makes the colike. they
be cold and moist in the first degree.

Malowes.
Are not cold in operation, but rather somewhat warm, and have in them a
slyppernesse: wherefore being boiled and moderately eaten with oil Galen. 2. de
alim ^tis.
and vyneger, they make meetly good concoction in the stomach, and causes the
superfluous matter therein easily to pass, and cleanses the bealye: It is hot
and moist in the first degree.

White betes.
Are also abstersiue, and lowseth the bealye, but much eaten, annoys the
stomach: but they are right good against obstructions or stoppyng of the liver,
if they be eaten with vyneger or mustard. likewise it helps the spleen. It
is cold in the first degree, and moist in the second.

Pourslane.
Doth mitigate the great heat in al the inward parts of the body, semblably
of the heed and eyes: also it represses the rage of Venus, but if it be
preserved in salt or brine, it heats and purges the stomach. It is cold in
the third degre, and moyste in the second.

Cheruyle.
Is very profytable unto the stomach, but it may not sustein very much
boiling: eten with vinegar, it provokes appetite, also urine. The de coctio
thereof drunk with wine, cleseth y^ bladder.

Sorrel.
Being sodden, it louseth the bealy. In a time of pestilence, if one being
fasting, do chew some of the leaves, and suck down the juice, it
meruaylousely preserves from infections, as a new practiser callid Guainerius
doth write. And I my self have proved it in my household. The sedes Dioscorides
lib. 2. ca. 106.
thereof brayed and drunk with wine water, is very wholesome against the colyke,
and frettyng of the guts. it stops fluxes, and helps the stomach annoied
with replecion. It is cold in the third degree, and dry in the second.

Persely.
Is very convenient to the stomach, and comfort appetite, and makes the
breathe sweet, the sedes and root causes urine to pass well, and breaks
the stone, dissolveth wyndes. the roots boiled in water, and thereof oximell
being made, it dissolveth fleume, and makes good digestion. It is hot and
dry in the third degree.

Fenell.
Being eten, the sede or rote makith abundance of milk: likewise drunk with
ptysane or ale. The sede somewhat restrayneth flux, provokes to pysse, and
mytigateth freattynges of the stomach and guts, specially the decoction of
the root, if the matter, causynge frettynge be cold, but if it be of a hot
cause, the use thereof is dangerous, for inflammation or exulceration of Ga^.
^m. de medicamen. li. 3. ca. 74.
the taynes of bladder. It is hot in the third degree, and dry in the
first.

Anyse sede.
Makes sweet breath, provokes urine, and drives down things, cleauynge to
the raynes or bladder, styrreth up courage, causes abundance of milk. It is
hot and dry in the third degree.

Beans.
They make wind, howe so ever they be ordered: the substance, which they do
make is spungye, and not firm, albeit they be abstersiue or clensyng the body,
they tarry lunge or they be dygested, and make gross juice in the body, but if
onyons be sod with them, they be lass noyful.

Peasyn.
Are much of the nature of beans, but they be lass wyndy, and passes faster
out of the body: they be also abstersiue or clensing, specially white peason,
they also cause meetly good noryshing, the husks taken away. And the broth,
wherein they be sodden, cleanses right well the raynes and bladder.

Rape rotes and Nauews. Ca. ix.
THe juice made by them, is very gross: And therefore being much eaten, if
they be not perfytely concocte in the stomach, they do make crude or raw
juice in the veins. Also if they be not well boiled, they cause wyndes, and
annoy the stomach, and make sometime frettynges: If they be well boiled first
in clean water, and that being cast away, the second time with fat flesh,
they nouryshe much, and do neither louse nor bind the bealy. But Nauews do
not nouryshe so much as rapes, but they be even as wyndye.

Turnepes,
Being well boiled in water, and after with fat flesh, norysheth much,
augmeteth the sede of man, provokes carnal lust. Eaten raw, they styre up
appetite to eat, being temperarly used, and be convenient unto them, which
have putrified matter in their breasts or lunges, causing them to spit
easily, but being much and often eaten, they make raw juice and wyndynesse.

Parsnepes and carettes,
They do nourysshe with better juice than the other roots, specially carettes,
which are hot Gal. ^p. med. li. 7.
and dry and expels wynd. Not withstanding much used, they engender i'll
juice: but carettes lass than parsnepes, the one and the other expels
urine.

Radyshe roots,
Have the virtue to extenuate, or make thyn, and Paulus Eginera. Dioscorides.
also to warm. Also they cause to break wind, and to pysse: being eaten
before meals, they let the mere, that it may not descend, but being eaten
last, they make good digestion, and louseth the bealy, though Galenus write
contrary. For Lib. 7. de alimentis.
I, among diverse other, by experience have proved it: not withstanding they
be vnholsom for them, that have continually the gout, or peynes in the
joints.

Garlyke,
It doth extenuate and cut gross humours, slmy, dissolveth gross wyndes,
and heats all the body, also opens the places, which are stopped, generally
where it is well digested in the stomach: it is ^om to divers purposes,
specially in the body, wherein is gross matter, or much cold enclosed. If it be
sodden until it louseth his tartness, it so mewhat nourishes, and yet loses
not his propetie, to extenuate gross humours: being sodden to (...), it
profyceth much against distyllations from the heed into the stomach.

Onyons,
Do also extenuate, but the lunge onions more than the round, the red more
than the white, the ^ than they which be green: also raw more tha sodden,
they styre appetite to meat, and put away lothsomnes, and louse the bealy,
they quycken fight: and being eaten in great abundance with meat, they cause
one to sleep soundly.

Leekes,
Be of ill ^ce, and do make troublous dreams, but they do extenuate and cleuse
the body, Galen. 7. cap. 138.
and also make it soluble, and provokes urine. More over it causes one (...)
spit out easily the fleume, which is in the breast.

Sauge,
It heats, and sommewhat binds, and therewith provokes urine, the decoccion
of the leaves and branches being drunk* Also it stops bledynge of
wounds, being laid unto them. More over it hath ben proved, that (...),
which have ben lunge time without chylderne, and have drunk.x. ounces of the
juice of sauge, with a grain of salt, a quarter of an hour before, that they
have companied with their husbands, have conceived at that time. It is hot
and dry in the third degree, the vsynge thereof is good against palseys.

Isope,
Doth heate and extenuate, whereby it digests slymy fleume: being prepared
with figs, it pourgeth fleume downward, with honey and water up ward,
boiled in vyneger, it helps the tothe ache, if the teethe be washed therewith,
it is hot and dry in the third degree.

Bourage.
Comfort the heart, and makes on^ (...), eaten raw before meals, or laid
in wine that is drunk: Also mollifies the bealy, and prepares to the stool.
It is hot and moist in the myddell of the first degree.

Sauerye.
Pourgeth fleume, helps digestion, makes quyck s^ght, provokes (...), and
styreth carnal appetite: It is hot and dry in the third degre.

Rokat,
Heats much, and increases seed of manne, provokes courage, helps
digestion, and some what louseth. It is hot and moyste in the second degree.

^me.
^, breaks the stoone, expellyth urine, and ceases freattynges. It is hot
and dry in the third degree.

Penyryall,
Doth extenuate, heate, and decocte, it refouemeth the stomach, oppressed with
fleume, it doth recomfort the faint spirit, it expels melancholy by sege,
and is medicinable against many diseases. It is hot and dry in the third
degree.

Townecresses.
Paulus discommendeth, saying, that it resits concoction, and hurts the
stomach, and makes ill i^yce in the body, taken as medicine, it helps many
diseases. It is hot and dry in the third degree.

Rosemarye.
^ to heate, and therefore it dissolveth (...) congeled with cold: It helps
against palseys, falling sickness, old diseases of the breast, (...) or
frettyng, it provokes urine and sweat: it helps the rough taken with pepper
and honey, it puts away tothe ache, the root being chewed, or the juice
thereof put into the tothe: being bourned, the fume thereof resysteth the (...):
the rynde thereof sodden or burned, the fume received at the mouth, stops
the ^ume, which falls out of the heed into the chekes or throote: which I
myself have proved, the grene leaves bruised, do stop the hemorroides, if
they be laid unto them. this herb is hot and dry in the third degree.

Spices growing out of this realm used in meat or drink. Cap. 10.
Pepper.
Black pepper is hottest, and most dry, white pepper is next, long pepper is
most temperate. The general property of al kinds of pepper is to heate the
body: but as Galene saith, it pierces downward, and doth not spread into
the veins, if it be gross beaten. It dissolveth fleume and wind, it helps
digestion, expulseth urine, and it helps against the diseases of the
breast, procedynge of cold. It is hot in the first degree, and dry in the
second.

Gynger.
Heats the stomach, and helps digestion, but it heats not so soon as
pepper: but afterward the heate remains longer, causes the mouth to be
moyster: Being grene or well confection^ in syrope, it comfort much the
stomach and heed, and quyckeneth remembrance, if it be taken in the morrow
fasting. It is hot in the second degree, and dry in the first.

Saffron,
Somewhat binds, heats and comfort the stomach and the heart specially,
and makes good digestion, being eaten or drunken in a small quantity. It is
hot in the second degree, and dry in the first.

Cloves,
Hath virtue to comfort the synewes, also to consume and dissolve superfluous
humours. They be hot and dry in the third degree: sodden with milk, it
comfort the debility of nature.

Maces.
Dioscorides commends to be drunk against spitting of blod, bluddy fluxes,
excessive laskes. Paulus Egineta adds to it, that it helps the colyke: they
be hot in the second degree and ^ in the third degree. It is to the stomach
very commodious, taken in a little quantity.

Nutmigges,
With their sweet odour comfort and dissolve, and sometime comfort the power
of the sight, and also the brayn in cold discrasies, and is hot and dry in
the second degree.

Of bread. Cap. xi.
BReadde of fine flower of wheat, having no leuyn, is flow of digestion and
makethe flymy humours, but it nourysheth much: if it be leuyned, it digests
sooner: bread having much bran, fylleth the bealy with excrementes, and
nourysheth little or nothing, but shortly descends from the stomach: The
mean between both sufficiently leuyned, well moulded and moderately baken is
the most wholesome to every age. the greatest loves do noryshe most fast, for
as much as the fire has not exhausted the moisture of them. Hot breadde,
much eaten, makes fulness and thyrste, and slowly passes. Barley breadde
cleanses the body, and doth not nouryshe so much as wheat, and makes colder
juice in the body.

Of Flesh. Cap. xii.
BEfe of Englande to Englisshemen, which are in health, brings strong
nouryshinge, but it makes gross blood, and engenders melancholy: but being
of yonge oxen, not excedynge the age of four years, to them, which have
colerike stomachs, it is more convenient, than chikens, and other like fine
meates.

Swynes flesh.
Above all kinds of flesh in nouryshyng the body, Galene most commends
pork, not being of an old swyne, and that it be well digested of him that
eats it. For it makes best juice, it is most convenient for yonge persons,
and them which have sustained much labour, therewith are fatigate, and become
weak. young pigs are not commended before that they be one month old, for they
do breed superfluous humours.

Lamb,
Is very moyste and fleumatike, wherefore it is not convenient for aged men,
except that it be very dry roasted, nor yet for them, which have in their
stomach much fleume.

Mutton,
Galene doth not commend it, not withstanding experience proves here in this
realm, that De alime. lib. 3.
if it be yonge, it is a right temperate meat, and makes good juice: and
therefore it is used more than any other meat, in all diseases. And yet it is
not like good in all places, nor the sheep, which bears finest wolle, is not
the sweetest in eating, nor the most tender. But I have found in some
countrays mutton, which in whytenes, tenderness, and sweetness of the
flesh, mought be well nygh compared to kydde, and in digestion have proved as
wholesome.

Kydde and veale,
Of Galene is commended next unto pork, but some men do suppose, that in health
and siknes they be much better than pork, the juice of them both being more
pure. And here it is to be noted, that of all beasts, which be dry of their
nature, the youngest be most wholesome: of them that are moyste, the eldest are
lest hurtful.

Hate, Cony,
Makes gross blood, it dries and stops, but yet it provokes a man to
pysse. Cony makes better and more pure nourishment, and is sooner Hippo. de
ratione ui ctus lib. 2. cap. 19. Plin. 28.
digested than hare. It is well proved, that there is no meat more wholesome,
or that more clean, firmly, and temperatly noryssheth tha tabettes.

Dere red and falowe.
Hippocrates affirms the flesh of hearts and hyndes, to be of ill juice,
hard of digestion and dry, but yet it moves urine. Of falowe dere, he nor any
other old writer doth speak of, as I remember. I suppose, because there be
not in all the world so many as be in England, where they consume a good part
of the best pasture in the realm, and are in nothing profytable, saving
that of the skynnes of them is made better leather, than is of calves: the
hunting of them being not so pleasant, as the hunting of other venery or
vermin, the flesh much more vnholsome and unpleasant, than of a red dere,
engendering melancholy, and making many fearful dreams, and disposes the body
to a fever, if it be much eaten: not withstanding the fat thereof, as some
learned men have supposed) is better to be digested, than the lean.

Of Birds.
THe flesh of al birds, is much lighter than the flesh of bestes in
comparison, most specially of those fowls, which trust most to their wings,
and do breed in high countries.

Capons, Hens, and Chyckens.
The Capon is above all other fowls praised, for as much as it is easily
digested, and makes little ordure, and much good nouryshment. It is
commodious to the breast and stomach. Hens in winter, are almooste equal
unto the capon, but they do not make so strong nourishement. Auycen saith, if
they be roasted in the bealy of a kydde or lamb, they will be the better.
Chickens in summer, specially if they be cockrelles, are very conuement for a
weak stomach, and nourysheth a little. The flesh of a cock is hard of
digestion, but the broth, wherein it is boiled, louseth the bealy, and having
sodden in it c^l^wortes, Polypodium, or C^tamus, it purgith i'll humours, and is
medicinable against gowtes, joint aches, and fevers, which come by courses.

Fesaunt,
Excedeth all fowls in sweetness and holsomnesse, and is equal to a capon in
nourishing, but he is somewhat drier, and is of some men put in comparison,
mean between a hen a partridge.

Partryche,
Of all fowls is most soonest digested: and hath in him much nutriment,
comfort the brain, and makes sede of generation, and revives lust which
is abated.

Quayles,
Although they be of some men commended, yet experience proves them to
increace melancholy, and a^e of a small nourishynge.

Larks,
Be as well the flesh as the broth, very holsom. eaten roasted, they do much
help against the colyke, as Dioscorides saith.

Aplouer,
Is ^lowe of digestion, nourysheth little, and increases mela^colye.

Black birds or ousyls,
Among wild foul hath the chief praise, for lyghtnesse of digestion, and
that they make good nouryshement, and little ordure.

Sparrows.
Be harde to digest, and are very hot, and ^tyreth up Venus, and specially
the brains of them.

Woodcockes,
Are of a good temperance, and meetly lyghte in digestion.

Pygeons,
Be easily digested, and at very holsom to them, which are fleumatike, or pure
melancholy.

Goose,
Is hard of digestion, but being young and ^atte, the wings be easy to dygeste
in a hole ^tomake, and nourysheth competently.

Duck,
Is hoter than goose, hard to digest, makes wars juice, saving the braunes on
the breast bone, and the neck is better than the remnant.

Crane and bustarde.
Crane is harde of digestion, and makes ylle juice, but being hanged up lunge
in the air, he is the lass vnholsome. Bustarde being fat, and kept without
meat a day or two before that he be killed, to expulse his ordure, and than
drawn, and hanged as the crane is, being roasted or baken, is a good meat,
and nourysheth well, if he be well dygested.

Hearon, Byttour, Shouelar.
Being yonge and fat, be lyghtlyer digested than crane: and the byttour
sooner than the hearon. And the shoular sooner than any of them: but all these
fowls must be eaten with much gynger or pepper, have good old wine drunk
after them, and so shall they be more easily digested, and the juice
coming of them, be the lass noyfull.

The parts and members of birds and beasts. Cap. 13.
THe wings brawns and neck of gese, capons, hens, fesant, partridge and
small birds being fat, are better than the legs in digestion, and
lighter in nouryshyng. Of wild foul and pygeons being fat, the legs are
better than the wings: the brawns of duck, ^eale, and wygeon except, which
is better to dygeste, than the resydue.

The gysar or stomach.
Of a goose or hen being fat with bran and milk, being well sodden or
made in poulder, is good for the stomach, in making it strong to digest, and
nourysheth competently.

The liver
Of a capon, hen, fesaunte, or goose, being made fat with milk myxte with
their meat, is not only easy to digest, but also makes good juice, and
nourysheth excellently. But the livers of beasts be ill to digest, passes
slowly, and makes gross blode, but it is strong in nouryshyng.

The inward of beasts, as trypes and chytterlynges.
THe flesh of them is more harde to digest. And therefore although they be well
digested, yet make they not juice naturally sanguyne or clean, but raw juice
and cold: and requires a lunge time to be converted into blood.

The lunges or lights,
Are more easy to digest, than the liver, and lass nourishes, but the
nourishment, that it makes, is fleumatike: albeit the lunges of a Fox, is
medicinable for them, which have siknes of y^ luges.

The spleen or mylte,
Is of i'll juice, for it is the chamber of melacoly.

The heart,
Is of harde flesh, therefore is not well digested, nor passes shortly, but
where he is well digested, the juice y^ it makes, is not to be dispraised.

The brain,
Is fleumatike, of gross juice, slow in dygestyng, noyouse to the stomach,
but where it is well digested, it nourysheth much.

Marowe.
Is more dilectable than the brain, it is ill for the stomach, but where it
is well digested, it norysheth much.

The stones and vdders.
Being well digested, do nourysshe much, but the stones are hotter with their
moystnes, the vdders cold and fleumat^ke, they both do increase sede of
generation but the blood made of the vdder is better than that, which comes
of the stones, except it be of calves and lambs. Also the stones of cocks,
makes commendable norishmet.

The heed.
The flesh thereof nourysheth much, and augments seed: but it is slow of
digestion, and noyeth the stomach. but to them, which use much exercise, it
is not discommendable.

The tongue,
Is of a spugy and sanguine substance, but the kernelles and gristell, which
are in the roots, if they be well dygested, they make good nourishmet: if
they be not well digested, they make ^eme.

The Feet,
Being well boiled and tender, in a hole stomach, dygesteth well, and
makes good juice, and passes forth easily. Galene commends the fete of
swyne. But I have proved, that the feet of a yonge bullock tenderly sodden,
and laid in sows two days or three, and eaten cold in the euennyng, have
brought a colerike stomach into a good digestion and sleep, and therewith hath
also expulsed salt fleme and coler* and this have I found in my self by often
experience: always forsene, that it be eaten before any other meat, with out
drinking immediately after it.

Of Fysshe generally. Cap. xiiii.
THe best fyshe after the opinion of Galen, is that, which swymmeth in the
pure see, and is tossed and lift up with wyndes and sourges. The more calm
that the water is, the wars is the fyshe, they which are in muddy waters, do
make much fleume and ordure: taken in fens and dyches be warste, being in
fresshe ryuers, and swyfte, be sometime commendable: all be it generally, al
kinds of fyshe makes more thinner blood, than flesh, so that it doth not
much nouryshe, and it doth sooner pass out by vapors: to a hot colerike
stomach, or in fevers, sometime they be wholesome, being new, fresh, and not
very harde in substance or ^lymy. harde fyshe is harde of digestion, but the
nourishment thereof is more firm, than that, which is soft: those which have
much gross humours in them, are best, poudred.

Of Butter. Cap. xv.
Butter is also nourishynge, and profits to them, which have humours
superfluouse, in the breast or lunges, and lacks ripynge and clensynge of
them: specially if it be eaten with sugar or honey. If it be well salted, it
heats and cleanses the more.

Of Chese. Cap. xvi.
CHese by the hole sentence of all writers, lets digestion, and is ennemye
unto the stomach. Also it engenders ill humours, and bredeth the stone. The
chese which doth leest harm, is soft chese, reasonably salted, which some men
do suppose, nourysheth much.

Of Eggs. Cap. xvii.
Eggs of fesauntes, hens, and partriches, be of all other meates most
agreeable unto nature, specially if they be new laid: If they ^e (...), they
do cleanse the thro^e and breast. If they be harde, they be slow in digestion,
but being ones digested, they do nourysshe much. Mean between ^e^e and
harde, they digest conue^ently and noryshe q^yckely. Eggs well poched, are
better than roasted. If they be fried harde, they be of ill nourishement, and do
make stynkynge fumes in the stomach, and do cortupt other meates with whom
they be mingled. They be most wholesome when they be poched, and most vnholsom
when they be fried. Dioscorides saith, If they be souped warm, before any
other meat, they do heal the grefes of the bladder and raynes, made with
gravel: also sorenes of the chekes throat, and spittyng of blood: and they be
good agei^st cata^es or ^illing out of the head into the stomach.

Of drynkes, and first of water. Capi^ 18.
VVndoubtedly water has preeminence above all other lycoures, not only
because it is an elem^t, that is to say, a pure matter, where of al other
lycours have their original substance: but also forasmoche, as it was the very
natural and first drink to all manner of creatures. Wherefore the saying of
Pindarus the poet, was ever well allowed, which says, water is best. And
one th^nge is well considered, that from the creation of the world, until the
vniue^sall deluge or flood, during which time, men lived eight or nyne
hunderde years, there was none other drink used nor known, but water. Also
the true folowers of Pythagoras doctrine, drank only water, and yet lived
lunge: as Apollonius and other: and in the serchyng out of secrete and
mystical things, their wits excellyd. Moreover, we have scene men and women
of great age, and strong of body, which never or very seldom, drank other
drink, than pure water: As by example in Cornwall, although that the country
be in a very cold quarter, which proves, that if men from their infancy,
were accustomed to none other drink, but to water only, moderately used, it
should be sufficient to keep natural moisture, and to cause the meat that is
eaten, to pierce and descend unto the places of digestion, which are the
pourposes that drink se^ueth fore. But now to the qualities of water, after
the sentence of ancient philosophers and physicians, The rain water, after
the opinion of the most men, if it be received pure and clean, is most subtle
and penetratiue of any other waters: the next is that, which issues out of a
spring in the east, and passes swiftly among great stones or rocks: The
third is of a clean river, which runs on great harde stones or pebbles.
There be diverse means to try out, which is the best water. For that which
is lightest in poise or weight is best. also that, whereof comes leest skymme
or froth, when it doth boyle. Also that, which will soonest be hot. Moreover
deape linen clothes into sondry waters, and after lay them to dry, that which
is soonest dry, the water wherein it was deaped, is most subtle. After a great
surfete, cold water drunken, is a general remedy. Hippocrates affirms, y^ in
sharp and fervent diseases, none other De ratioe ^ictus in mor. acutis lib. 3.
remedy is to be required, than water. And Galen will not, that children should
be let from drinking of water: but that when they feel them selfes very hot,
after meals, and do desire to drink water, specially of a clean fountain,
they should be suffered. Also Hippocrates saith, In such syknes, where as thou
fear, lest the heed should be vehemently grieved, or the mind perished, there
must thou give either water, or white wine alayd with much water. Not
withstadyng there be in water causes of divers diseases, as of swelling of the
spleen, and the liver, it also flytteth swymmeth, and it is lunge or it
pierces, in as much as it is cold ^lowe in decoction, it lowseth not the
belly, nor provokes urine. Also in this it is vyciouse, that of his proper
nature, it makes none ordure. Fynally, always respect must be had to the
person, that drynketh it. for to young men, and them, that be hot of
complexion, it doth lass harm, and sometime it profyteth. but to them that at
feeble, old, fleumatike, or melancholy, it is not couenyent.

Of wine. Cap. xix.
PLato, the wisest of all philosophers, doth affirm, that wine moderately
drunk, nourysheth and comfort, as well all the body, as the spirits of
man. And therefore god did ordeyn it for mankynde, as a remedy against the
incommodities of age: that thereby they shulde seem to return unto youth, and
forget heuynes. Undoubtedly wine heats and moysteth the body, which
qualities chiefly consetueth Nature.

And Galene of all wynes, comendeth that, which is yelow and clear, saying,
That it is the hottest, and white wine lest hot. And the colour mean
between both, of semblable temperature. The yelowe wine, which is the proper
colour of very hot wynes, to old men doth bring these commodities, First it
heats all their members: also it purges by urine, the watery substance of
the blood. Moreover, the wynes, which be pale or yelowe, and full of
substance, they do increase blood, and nourish the body: but for the more
part old men have need of such wynes, which do provoke urine: forasmoche as
in them do abound watery excrementes or superfluities. And they which do tarry
lunge in the bealy, be not apt for aged men. Black or deep red wynes and
thick, do bind and congele that which they do find in the body, and
although some of them do not long abide in the bealy, yet they move not urine,
but rather withdraws: but yet they do harm to old men, forasmoche as they
do stop the cundites of the spleen, the liver, and the raynes. Also gross
wines be best for them, which desire to be fat, but it makes opilations: old
wine and clear, is better for them, that be fleumatike.

Galene also prohibiteth chylderne to drink any wine, forasmoche as they be of
a hot and moist Lib. 1. de ^en. (...).
temperature, and so is wine: and therefore it heats and moysteth to much
their bodies, and fills their heeds with vapours. More over he would, that
yonge men shulde drink little wine, for it shall make them prone to fury and
to lecherye: and that part of the soul, which is called rational, it shall
make troublous and dull: not withstanding, yet it is sometime profitable to
mitigate or expel ordure, made of coler or melancholy. Also it profyteth
against drythe, which happens in the substance of the body, either by to much
labour, or by the proper temperature of age: for wine moysteth and nourishes
that, which is to dry, also mitigateth and dissolveth the sharpnes of coler,
purges it also by urine sweat: Finally (as Theognes saith) Much drinking of
wine is ill, but moderate drinking of wine is not only not ill, but also
commodious and profytable. Which sentence is confirmed by Iesus Syr^, in the
book named Ecclesiastic{us}, saying, Eccl^. 31.
wine moderately drunk, rejoices both the body and soul. Wherefore to
conclude this chapiter, There is neither meat nor drink, in the use whereof
ought to be a more discrete moderation, than in wine, consyderinge that deing
good and drunk in due time and measure, it not only conserveth natural and
radical moisture, whereby life endures, but also it helps the princypall
members, which belong to digestion, to do their office: On the other part,
being ill or corrupt, or taken out of order and measure, it doth contrary to
all the premises. besides that it transforms a man or woman, making them
beastly. More of the qualities of wine, shall be touched hereafter in the order
of diet.

Of Milk. Cap. xx.
Milk is compact of three substances, cream, whey, cruddes. The most
excellent milk is of a woman. The milk of a cow is thyckest, the milk of a
camel is most subtle, the milk of a goote is between cow milk, and camel
mylk. Ewes milk is between cow milk and asses milk. Also the mylk of
beasts, fedyng in large pastures, and out of fens and marshes, is better
than of them, which be fed in little closes, or in watery grounds. In
spring time milk is most subtle, and milk of young beasts, is holsomer,
than of old. To children, old men, and to them, which be oppressed with
melancholy, or have the flesh consumed with a fever ethike, milk is
convenient. And generally to all them, which do not feel the mylk rise in their
stomachs, after that they have eaten it: and in those persons, it doth easily
pourge that which is in the bealye superfluous. And afterward it enters into
the veins, and brings good nourishement. Who so ever hath an appetite to
eat or drink milk, to the intent that it shall not arise or abraid in the
stomach, let him put into a vessel, out of the which he will receive it, a few
leaves of myntes, sugar, or pure honey. And into that vessel cause the best to
be mylked, and so drink it warm from the vdder: or else let him do as Paulus
Egineta teaches, that is to say, boyle first the milk with an easy fire,
sethe it after with a hotter fire, skym it clean, and with a sponge deaped in
cold water, take that clean away, which would be burned to the vessel, than
put to the milk, salt and sugar, stere it often. More over milk taken to
purge melancholy, wold be drunk in the morning abundantly Oribasius de
confectione ciboru li. 3.
new mylked, as is before written. And he that drynketh, should absteyn from
meat, and exercise, until the milk be digested, and have some what purged the
bealy. For with labour it becomes sour: therefore it requires rest watch or
to walk very softly. Finally, where men women be used from their childhode, for
the more part, to mylk, and do eat none or little other meat, but milk and
butter, they appear to be of good complexion and facion of body, not so much
vexed with sycknes, as they which drink wine or ale: not withstanding much
use of milk in men sanguine or colerike, doth engender the stone.

Of ale, bier, cider, and why.
I Can neither here nor rede, that ale is made used for a common drink in any
other country than England, Scotlad, Ireland, Poyle. The latin word
Cereuitia, is indifferent as well to ale as to bier, and the only difference
between them is, that bier hath hoppes sodden in it, ale ought to have none.
If the corn be good, the water wholesome and clean, and the ale or bier well
and perfytclye brewed and cleansed, and by the space of syx days or more,
settled and defecate, it must needs be a necessary conuenieut drink, as well in
syknes as in health: consyderinge that batleye corn, whereof it is made, is
commended, and used in medicine, in all partis of the world, accounted to be of
a syngular efficacy, in reducynge the body into good temper, specially which is
in a distemperature of heate. For what ancient physician is there, that in his
works commends not ptysane, which is none other than pure barley, brayed in
a mortar, and sodden in water? The same thing is small and clean ale or
b^ere, saving that perchance, the drienge of the malt, is cause of more
dryth to be in the ale, than in ptisane. And the hoppes in bier makes it
colder in operation. But to say as I think, I suppose, y^ neither ale nor
bier is to be compared to wine, considering, that in them do lack the heate
and moisture which is in wine. For that being moderately used, is most like to
the natural heate and moisture of mans body. And also the lykour of ale bear
being more gross, do engender more gross vapours, and corrupt humours, than
wine doth, being drunk in like excess of quantity.

And one thing is to be noted, which was lately well marked of a man of
excellent learning, being vexed witd the sickness of the stone, That in them,
which do always use to drink ale or bier, the stone and gravel engendered in
them is white of colour: And in them, which do use to drink wine for the more
part, the stones and grauelle, which be engendered in them, be red of
colour. Not withstanding commonly the colour of the stone follows the humour,
which doth most abound in the patient. As coler makes the gravel more
red, fleme makes it more white. also some men do suppose, that red gravel
is engendered in the raynes, white gravel in the bladder. Moreover, who so ever
uses ingurgitation of ale or bier, his breath shall be more lothsom, than the
breathes of them, which do take the excess of wine: for the wine by the
reason of his heate, is sooner digested, and doth leave behind him fewer
dregs. As for Cider, may not be good in any condition, considering (as I
said) that all fruits do engender ill humours, and do cool to much natural
heate: but to them, which have abundance of red coler, moderately used, it
somewhat profyteth in mitigation of excessive heate. But who that will
diligently mark in the countries, where cider is used for a common drink, the
men and women have the colour of their visage pallyd, and the skin of their
visage ryuelled, although that they be yonge. Why, if it be left of the
butter, being well ordered, and not drunk, until it have a thycke curd of
milk over it, like to a hat, is a right temperate drink, for as much as by
the vnctuositie of the butter, whereof the why retains some portio, it is both
moist and nourishing, and cleanses the breast: and by the subtylnes of it
self, it descends soon from the stomach, and is shortly digested. Also by
reason of the affinity, which it hath with mylk, it is conuertible into
blood and flesh, specially in those persons, which do inhabyte the north
parts, in whom natural heate is conglutinate, and therefore is of more
puissance and virtue in the offyce of concoction. Also custom from childhode
doth elevate the power of meates and drinks in their disposition, not
withstanding that the four humours, sanguine, coler, fleume, and melancholy,
must also be considered, as it shall appear in divers places hereafter.

Of honey. Cap. xxii.
Honey as well in meat as in drink, is of incomparable efficacy, for it not
only cleanses, alters, and nourishes, but also it long time preserves that
uncorrupted, which is put in into it. In so much as Pliny saith, Such is the
nature of honey, that it suffers not the bodies to putrefy. And he affirms,
that he did se an Hippocentaure Plin. li. 22.
(which is a beast half man, half horse) brought in honey to Claudius the
emperor out of Egypt, to Rome. And he tells also of oone Pollio Romulus,
who was above a hundred years old, of whom Augustus the emperor demanded, by
what means he lived so lunge, and retained styll the vygour or lyuelynes of
body mind, Pollio answered, y^ he did it inward with mead (which is drink
made with honey water) outward with oil. Which saying agrees with the
sentence of Democritus, the great philosopher: who being demanded, how a man
mought live lunge in helthe, he answered, If he wet him within with honey,
without with oil. The same philosopher, when he was a hundred years old and
nyne, prolonged his life certain days with the evaporation of honey, as
Aristoxenus writes. Of this excellent matter, most wonderfully wrought and
gathered by the little be, as well of the pure dew of heaven, as of the most
subtle humour of sweet virtuous herbs flowers, be made lykors comodious to
makynd, as mead, metheglyn, and oxymell. Mead, which is made with one part
of honey, and four times so much of pure water, and boiled until no skym do
remain, is much commended of Galene, drunk in Galen. de tuend. sanita. li. 4.
summer, for preserving of health. The same author always commends the vsynge
of honey, either raw eaten with fine breadde, somewhat leuened, or sodden, and
received as drink. Alsoo mead perfectly made, cleanses the breast and lunges,
causes a man to spit easily, and to pysse abundantly, and purges the belly
moderately. Metheglyn, which is most used in wales, by reason of hot herbs
boiled with honey, is hotter than mead, and more comfort a cold stomach, if
it be perfectly made, and not new or very stale. Oximell is, where to one part
of vinegar is put double so much of honey, four times as much of water, and
that being boiled unto the third part, and clean skymmed with a feather, is
used to be taken, where in the stomach is much fleume or matter vndigested,
so that it be not red choler. Loke the use thereof in Alexandro Tralliano.
Many other good qualities of honey, I omytte to write of, until some other
occasion shall happen, to remember them partycularly, where they shall seem to
be profitable.

Sugar. Cap. xxiii.
OF Sugar, I do find none ancient author of greeks or latynes, to write by
name, but only Paulus Aegineta, who saith in this wise, after that he hath
treated of honey. Moreover sugar, which they call honey, that is brought to us
from Arabia, called Felix, is not so sweet as our honey, but is equal in
virtue, and doth not annoy the stomach, nor causes thyrst. These be the words
of Paulus. It is now in dayely experience, that Sugar is a thing very
temperate and nourysshynge, and where there is choler in the stomach, or that
the stomach abhors honey, it may be used for honey in all things, wherein
honey is required to be.

Of time. Cap. xxiiii.
IN the consyderation of time, for taking of meates and drynkes, it is to be
remembered, that that in winter meates ought to be taken in great abundance, and
of a more gross substance than in summer, forasmoch as the exterior air,
which compasses the body being cold, causes the heate to withdraw into
the inner parts, where being enclosed, and contract together in the stomach
and entrails, it is of more force to boyle and digest that, which is
received into it. Also meates roasted, are than better than sodden, flesh and
fyshe powdered, is than better than in somer. Herbs be not than commendable,
specially raw, neither fruits, except quynces roasted or baked: drink should
be than taken in a little quantity. More over wynes shall need no water or
very little, and that to coleryke persons: red wynes, and they, which be
thycke and sweet, may be tha most surely taken of them, which have none
opilations, or the stone. Always remember, that in winter fleume increases by
reason of rain and moystnes of that season, also the length of nights and
much rest. And therefore in that time colerike Cal. in co^ns. in a pho. 2. li.
3
persons, are best at ease, semblably are young men, but to old men winter is
enemy. It begins the.viii. day of November, and endures until the.viii.
day of February.

The spring time doth participate the first part with winter, the later
part with summer. Wherefore if the first part be cold, than shall the
Hippocrates de natura humana.
diet be according to winter. If the end be hot, than shall the diet be of
summer. If both partis be temperate, tha should there be also a temperance in
diet: always consyderinge, that fleume yet remains, and blood than
increases. And meat would be lass in quantity than in winter, and drink
somewhat more. Spring time begins the.viii. day of February, and cotinueth
until the.viii. day of May.

In Summer the inward heate is but little, and Gal. com. in aphor. 18. li. 1.
the stomach doth not digest so strongly nor quikly, as in winter. Wherefore in
that season, eating often, and a little at ones, is most convenient. And
Damascenus saith, that fasting in summer dries the body, makes the colour
salowe, engenders Hipocrates de humoribus.
melancholy, and hurts the sight. also boiled meat, bread steped in white
broth, with sodden lettyse, or cykorie, are than good to be used. also variety
in meates, but not at one meal, potages made with cold herbs, drink in more
abundance, wine alayde with water, to hot complexions much, to cold natures
lass. In this Galen. in come. in aphor.
season blood increases, and toward the end thereof, coler. And therefore
they, which be cold of nature and moist, are than best at ease, hot natures
and dry warste. Moreover childerne, and very yonge men in the beginning of
summer, are holest, old folk in the latter end, and in harvest. somer
begins the.viii. day of May, and continues until the.viii. day of August.

Autumn begins the.viii. day of August, and ends the.viii. day of
November, that season of the year is variable, and the air changeable, by
occasion whereof, happen sondry syckenesses, and blode decreases, and melancholy
abounds: Wherefore all summer fruits wold than be eschewed, forasmoche as
they make i'll juice and wyndes in the body. In this time meat wold be more
abundant than in summer, but somewhat drier: drink must be lass in
quantity, but lass myxt with water. This time is dangerous to all ages, al
natures, and in all countries, but the natures hot and moist, be lest
indamaged.

Diet concerning sondrye times of the year, written by the old physician
Diocles to king Antigonus.
FRom the.xii. day of December, at the which time the day is at the shortest,
vntyl the ninth day of Marche, which do conteyne.lxxxx. days, reumes and
moystures do increase, than meates and drinks naturally very hot, wold be
moderately used. Also to drink wine abundantly without alaye or with little
water, and to use lybecally the company of a woman, is not vnholsom to the
body.

From the nynthe day of Marche, at which time is aequin^ctium uernum, unto
the.xxv. day of Apryll, sweet fleume and blood do increase, therefore use than
things having much juice and sharpe exercise the body dilygently, than may
ye use safely the company of a woman.

From the.xxv. day of Apryll, to the.xiiii. day of June, Choler increases,
than use all things that are sweet, and do make the bealy soluble, forbear
carnal company with women.

From the.xiiii. day of June, at which time the day is at the legest, unto
the.xii. day of September, doth melancholy reign, forbear lechery, or use it
moderatelye.

From the.xii. day of September, unto the xvii. day of October, do abound
fleume and thynne humours, than would all fluxes and distillations be
prohibited, than all sharpe meates and drynkes, and of good juice, are to be
used, and lechery eschewed.

From the.xvii. day of October, to the.xii. day of December, increases gross
fleume, use therefore all bitter meates, sweet wynes, fat meat, and much
exercise.

Of ages. Cap. xxv.
Children wold be noryshed with meates and Galen. de tuen. sani. lib. prim.
Children.
drynkes, which are moderately hot and moyste, not withstanding Galene
doth prohibit the use of wine, because it moysteth and heteth to much the
body, and fylleth the heeds of them, which are hot and moist, with vapours.
also he permytteth them in hot whether to drink clear water of the fountain.

A child growing fast in his members toward a man, so that he seems well
fed in the Oribasius de uirtute simp. li. 1.
body, is than to be feared of fullness of humours, and if it be perceived, that
he is replete, tha must be withdrawn and minyshed some part of that
nutriment, and according unto his age, some evacuation would be devised,
otherwhile by exercise, walking up and down fasting, and before that they
eat any meat, let them exercise them selfes with their own labours, and do
their accustomed busynes, and eat the meates, whereunto they be most used, so
that it be such, that may not hurt them. And this need they not to know of
physicians, but by experience and diligent search by their stool, their nourices
shall perceive what digests well, and what doth not.

But if it appear, that by excessive fedyng, the bealy of the child is fuller
and greatter than it was wont to be, and that which passes by the bealy, is
corrupted, or his sweat stynketh. These things known, if they eat strong
meates, give them not one kind of meat, but divers, that the novelty of the
meat may help, that they may go more easily to the stool. For if any have
an unreasonable appetite, he is sooner recovered, if he be pourged by a boyle
or impostume come forth and broken, before that the meat be corrupted: and
after that let him eat fine meates, and being ones hole, return by little
and little to his old custom.

Yonge men, excedynge the age of.xiiii. years, Young me
shall eat meates more gross of substance, colder and moyster: also salads
of cold herbs, and to drink seldom wine, except it be alayd with water.
Albeit all these things must be tempered, according to their complexions, and
exercise and quietness in living, whereof ye shall rede in their proper places
hereafter.

Old men, in whom natural heate strength Old men.
seems to decay, should use always meates, which are of quality hot and
moyste, and therewith all easy to be digested, and absteyne utterly from all
meates and drynkes, which will engender thick juice and slymy, semblably from
wine, which is thycke, sweet, and dark red wynes, and rather use them, which
will make thynne humours, and will purge well the blood by urine: therefore white
or yelow wynes, and perchance french claret wines are for them very commendable.
Also wine prepared Paulus Egineta. li. ^ cap. 23.
with pure honey clarified, wherein roots of persely or fenel be stieped,
specially if they suspect any thing of the stone, or gout. And if they more
desire to cleanse their raynes and bladder: than is it good to use small white
wine, as racked renishe wine, or other like to it, and sometime to stepe over
night therein a persely rote slyt, somewhat bruised, and a little lykorice.
Fynally, let them beware Op^atios what they are.
of all meates, that will stop the pores, make obstructions or oppilations,
that is to say, with clammy matter stop the places, where the natural
humours are wrought digested, the which meates I have before set in a table.
But if it charmce them to eat any such meat in abundance, let them take
shortly such things, as do ^e^y^e opp^lations, or resolve them. As white
pepper bruised mixed with thetr meates or drink: garlyke also, or onions, if they
abhor them not. Always remember, that aged men should eat oft, and but little
at every time, for it fares by them, as it doth by a lamp, which is almost
extinct, which by pouring in of oil little and little is long kept bournynge:
and with much oil poured in at ones, it is clean put out. Also they must
forbear all things, which do engender melancholy, whereof ye shall rede in the
table before: and breadde clean without leven is to them vnholsome.

Moderation in ^iete, having respect to the strength or weakness of the
person. C^p. xxvi.
Now here it must be cosid^ed, that although I have written a general diet for
every age, yet nethelesse it must be remembered, that sum children and young
men, either by debility of nature, or by some accidental cause, as syckenes,
or much study, happen to gather humours fleumatik or melancholy in the places
of digestion, so that concoction or digestion is as weke in them, as in those,
which ate aged. Semblably, some old men find nature so beneficial unto
them, that their stomachs and livers are more strong to dygeste, than the
said yonge men, sum perchance have much coler remaining in them. In these
cases the said yonge men must use the diet of old men, or nygh unto it,
vn^yll the discrasy be removed, having always respect to their universal
complexions, as they, which a^ naturally colerike, to use hot things in a
more temperance than they, which be fleumatyke, or melancholy by nature. The
same observation shall Hippocra. aphor. Galen. in comment.
be to old men, saving that age, of his own property is cold and dry,
therefore the old man, that is cholerycke, shall have more regard to moisture
in meates, than the yonge man, being of the same complexyon. Foresene always,
that where nature is offended or grieved, she is curyd by that, which is
contrary to that, which offends or grieves, as cold by heate, heate by
cold, drythe by moisture, moisture by drythe. In that whereby Nature should be
nourished, in a hole and temperate body, things must be taken, which are
like to the man nature in quality and degree. As where one hath his body
in a good temper, things of the same temperance doth nouryshe him. But where
he is out of temper, in heate, cold, moisture, or drythe, temperate meates or
drynkes, nothing do profit him. For being out of the mean and perfytte
temperature, nature requires to be thereto reduced by contraries, remembrynge
not oonely, that contraries are remedy unto their contraries, but also in
every contrary, consideration be had of the proporcion in quantity.

Times in the day concerning meals. Cap. xxvii.
Besides the times of the year and ages, there be also other times of eating
and drinking to be remembered, as the sondry times in the day, which we call
meals, which are in number and distance, according to the temperature of the
country and person: As where the country is cold, and the person lusty, and
of a strong nature, there may mo meals be used, or the lass distance of time
between the. Contrary wise in contrary contrais and personages, the cause is
before rehearsed, where I have spoken of the diet of the times of the year, not
withstanding here must be also consideration of exercise and rest, which do
augment or appaire the natural disposition of bodies, as shall be more declared
hereafter in the chapiter of exercise. But concerning the general usage of
countries, and admitting the bodies to be in perfect state of helthe, I
suppose, that in Englande, young men, until they come to the age of.xl. years,
may well eat three meals in one day, as at brekefast, dinner, and supper, so
that between brekefast, and diner, be the space of four hours at the lest,
between diner and supper.vi. hours, the brekefast lass than the dinner, and
the dinner moderate, that is to say, lass than sacietie or fullness of bealy,
and the drink there unto mesurable, according to the dryness or moystnes of
the meat. For much abundance of drink at meal, drowns the meat eaten,
and not only lets convenient concoction in the stomach, but also causes it
to pass faster than nature requires, and therefore engenders much fleume,
and consequently reumes, crudenes in the veins, debility and slyppernes of
the stomach, continual flux, and many other inconveniences to the body and
members.

But to return to meals, I think breakefastes ^
necessary in this realm, as well for the causes before rehearsed, as also
forasmoch as coler being fervent in the stomach, sends up fumosities unto
the brain, and causes heed ache, and sometime becomes aduste, and
smouldreth in the stomach, whereby happens peryllous syckenes, and sometime
sudden death, if the heate enclosed in the stomach have not other convenient
matter to work on: this daily experience proves, and naturalle reason
confirms. Therefore men and women not aged, having their stomachs clean
without put^ified matter* slepyng moderately and soundly in the night, and
feeling them self light in the morning, and sweet brethed, let them on goddis
name break their fast: Cole^ike men with gross meat, men of other complexios
with lighter meat. Foreseen, that they labour some what before: semblably
their diner and supper as I have before written, so that they sleep not
incotinent after their meals. And here I will not recyte the sentences of
authors, which had never experience of English men's natures, or of the just
temperature of this realm of Englande, only this counsel of Hipoctates
shall be sufficient. We ought to grant some what to Hipoc. ^phor. 18. lib. 1.
Galen. de ^uen. sani.
time, to age, to custom: not withstanding where great weariness or drith,
grieves the body, there ought the dinner to be the less, and the longer
distance between dinner and supper* also much rest, except a little soft
walking, that by an upright mouynge, the meat being styred, may descend.
This is always to be remembered, that where one feleth him self full, and grieved
with his diner, or the savour of his meat by eructation ascends, or that
his stomach is weke by late syknes or much study, tha is it most convenient,
to absteyne from supper, rather provoke him self to sleep much, than to eat
or drink any thing* also to drink between meals, is not laudable, except
very great thirst constrains, for it inter^upteth the office of the stomach
in concoction, causes the meat to pass faster tha it should do, the drink
being cold, it rebukes natural heate that is working, and the meat remaining
raw, it corrupts digestion, makes crudenes in the veins. Wherefore he yt is
thirsty, let him consider the occasion. If it be of salt fleme, let him walk
fair softly, and only wash his mouth and his throat, with barley water, or
with small ale, or lye down and sleep a little, and so the thirst will pass
away, or at the least be well assuaged. If it hap by extreme heat of the air,
or by pure coler, or eating of hot spices, let him drink a little ^ulep
made with clean water and sugar, or a little small bier or ale, so that he
drink not a great glut, but in a little quantite, let it still down softly into
his stomach, as he sits, than let him not move suddenly. If the thirst be in
the evening, by eating to much, and drinking of wine, than after the opinion
of the best learned physicians, and as I my self have often experienced, the
best remedy is, if there be no fever, to drink a good draught of cold water
immediately, orels if it be not p^ynefull for him, to vomit, to provoke him
thereto with a little warm water, after to wash his mouth with vi neger water,
and so to sleep long soudly, if he can. And if he in the morning he feel any
fumosit^es risynge, than to drink iulep of violettes, or for lack thereof, a
good draught of very small ^le or bier, some what warmed, without eating
any thing after it.

Of diversity of meates, whereby health is appayred. Cap. xxviii.
Now let this be a general rule, that sondry meates, being diverse in
substance and quality, eaten at one meal, is the greatest enmy to health,
that may be, that which engenders most syknesses* for some meates being
gross, and hard to digest, some fine and easy to digest, do require divers
operations of Nature, and divers temperatures of the stomach, that is to say,
much heate, and temperate heate, which may uat be together at oone time*
therefore when the fine meat is sufficientelye boiled in the stomach, the
gr^sse meat is raw, so both i^yces, the one good and perfect, the other
gross and crude, at one time digested, and sent into the veins and body,
needs must helthe decay, and sycknesses be engendered. Like wise in divers
meates being divers qualities, as where some are hot moist, some cold and
moist, some hot and dry, some cold and dry, according there unto shall the
juice be diverse, which they make in the body. And like as between the said
qualities is contrariety, so the^y shall be in the body an unequal
temperature, forasmoche as it is not possible for man to esteem so just a
proporcion of the qualites of that which he receives, that the one shall not
exceed the other in quantity Wherefore of the said unequal mixture, needs must
ensue cortuption, and consequently syknes. And therefore to a hole man it were
better, to fed at one meal competentely on very gross meat only, so that it
be sweet, and his nature do not abhor^e it, than on diverse fine meates, of son
dry substance qualities. I have known and scene old men and old women, which
eating only beef, bakon, chese, or curdes, have continued in good health,
whom I have proved, that when they have eaten sondrye fine meates at one
meal, have soon after felt them self grieved with frettynges and heed ache,
and after that they have ben hole again, there has ben given to them one
kind of light meat, they have done as well therewith, as they were wont to do
with gross meates, when they eat it alone which proves to be true that
which I have rehearsed. And it is good reason* for after the general opinion of
philosophers and physicians, the nature of mankynde is best content with
things most simple and vnmyxt, all things tendynge to unity, wherein is the
only perfection. Also it is a general rule of phisyke, that where a sycknesse
may be cured with symples, that is to say, with one only thing that is
medycinable, there should the physician give no compound medicine myxt with
many things. These things considered, it may seem to all men, that have
reason, what abuse is here in this realm in the continual gourmandise, and
daily fedyng on sondry meates, at one meal, the spirit of gluttony,
triumphynge ^.
among us in his glorious chariot, called welfare, driuynge us a fore him,
as his prisoners, into his dungeon of surfeit, where we are tourmented with
catarres, fevers, goutes, pluresies, frettyng of the guts, and many other
syckenesses, and fynally cruelly put to death by them, oftentimes in youth, or
in the most pleasant time of our life, when we would most gladly live. For the
remedy whereof, how many times have there ben devised, ordynaunces and acts of
counsel, al though perchance bodily health was not the chief occasion thereof,
but rather provision against vain and sumptuous expenses of the mean people.
For the nobility was exempted and had liberty to abide still in the dungeon,
if they wold, and to live lass while than other men: But when, where, and howe
lunge were the said good devises put in due execution, for all that thereof
should succeed double profit, that is to say, health of body and increase of
substance, by eschewing of superfluous expenses in sondry dishes? Alas how loge
will men fantasy laws and good ordinances, and never determine them. Fantasy
proceeds of wit determination of wisdom, wit is in the devising speaking,
but wisdom is in the performance, which rests only in execution. Here I had
almost forgotten, y^ my purpose was to write of the order of diet, and not of
laws, but the fervent love that I have to the public weal of my country,
constrained me to digress somewhat from my matter: but now will I proceed
forth to write of order, which in taking of meates and drinks, is not the
lest part of diet.

Of Order in receyuynge of meat and drink. Capit. xxix.
Herbs as well sodden as vnsodden, also fruit, which do mollify and louse
the bealye, ought to be eaten before any other meat, except that sometime for
the repressynge of fumosities, rising in the heed by much drinking of wine,
raw lettyse, or a cold appul, or the juice of oren ges or lymons may be
taken after meals in a little quantity. Moreover all brothes, milk, rear
eggs, and meates, which are purposely taken to make the belly soluble, wold be
first eaten. All fruits and other meates, that are stiptike or byndynge, would
be eaten last of all other. Fruits cofectionate specially with honey at not to
be eaten with other meates. But here it is to be diligently noted, that where
the stomach is choleric and strong, gross meates would be first eaten:
where the stomach is cold or weak, there would fine meates be first eaten.
for in a hot stomach fine meates are bourned, while the gross meat is
digestyng. Contrary wise in a cold stomach, the little heate is suffocate with
gross meat, and the fine meat left raw, for lack of concoction, where if
the fine meat be first taken moderately, it styreth up and comfort natural
heate, and makes it more able to concoct gross meates, if they be eaten
afterward: so that it be but in small quatite. not withstading, as I late
affirmed, one ma ner of meat is most sure to every coplexion. forsene that it
be always most commonly in conformity of qualites, with the person that eats.
More over take heed, that slipper meates be not first eaten, lest it draw with
it to hastily other meates, or they be digested, nor that stiptik or
restrainyng meates be taken at the beginnynge, as quinces, pears, and medlars,
lest they may let other meates, that they descend not into the bottom of the
stomach, where they should be digested, not withstanding the confection made
with the juice of quinces called Dacytonites, taken.ii. hours before diner or
supper, is commended of Galene, other, for restoring appetite, making good
cocoction. Also concerning drink at meals, it wold not be before that somewhat
were eaten. And at the begin nyng, the drink wold be strongest, and so toward
the end more small, if it be ale or bier and if it be wine, more and more
alayde with water. And after the better opinion of physicians, the drink would
rather be myxte with the meat by sondrye little draughts, than with one
great draught at the end of the meal, for the myxture tempreth well the meat
without anoyace: a great draught with much drink, drowns the meat, rebukes
natural heate, that than works in concoction, and with his weight drives
down the meat to hastily. Note wines sweet, or confectioned with spices, or
very strong ale or bear, are not convenient at meals, for the meat is by
them rather corrupted, than digested, and they make hot and stynkynge vapours
ascend up to the brains, all be it if the stomach be very wyndy, or so cold
and feeble, that it can not concocte such a quantity of meat, as is required
to the sufficient nourish met of the body of him that eats, or hath eaten raw
herbs or fruits, whereby he feleth some annoyance, than may he drink last
incontinent after his meal a little quantity of secke, or good aqua vite in
small ale: but if he have much coler in his stomach, or a heed full of
vapours, it were much better, that he did neither drink the one, nor the
other, but rather eat a little colyander sede prepared, or a piece of a
quynce roasted, or in marmelade, and after rest, to amend the lack of nature
with sleep, moderate exercise, and plasters provided for comfortynge of the
stomach. And here will I leave to write any more of the diet in eating and
drinking, saving that I wold, that the reders should have in remembrance these
two counsels. First, that to a hole man, to precise a rule is not convenient
in diet: and that the diseases, which do happen by to much abstinence, are
wars to be cured, than they which come by repletion. And as Cornelius Celsus
saith, A man that Cor. Cel. lib. 1. ca. 1.
is hole and well at ease, is at his liberty, ought not to bind him self to
rules, or need a physician: but yet where the stomach is feeble, as is of the
I'd cap. 2.
more part of citesyns, and well nygh all they that be studyous in learning or
weyghtye affairs, there ought to be more circumspection, that the meat may be
such, as that either in quality or quantity, nature being but feeble, be not
rebuked, or to much oppressed.

Of sleep and watch. Cap. xxx.
THe commodity of moderate sleep appears by this, that natural heate, which
is occupied about the matter, whereof proceeds norishment, is comforted in the
places of digestion, and so digestio is made better, or more perfect by sleep,
the body fatter, the mind more quiet and clear, the humours temperate: as by
much watch all things happen contrary. The moderation of sleep must be
measured by health and syckenes, by age, by time, by emptynesse or fullness of
the body, by natural complexions. First to a hole ma having no debility of
nature, and digesting perfectly the meat that he eats, a little sleep is
sufficient: but to them, which have weak stomakis, do digest slowly, it
requires that sleep be much lengar. semblable teperance is required in youth
and age, winter and summer. The body being full of ill humours, very little
sleep is sufficient, except the humours be crude or raw, for tha is sleep
necessary, which digests them better than labour. Semblably, where the body
is long empty, by lunge syknesse or abstinence, sleep comfort nature, as
well in the principal members, as in all the other. Also regard must be had
to the com plexion, for they that are hot, do eat little, digest quickly, a
little sleep serves, specially to colerike persons, for in them much sleep
augments heate, more than is necessary, whereby hot fumes and inflammations are
often engendered, some time the natural coler is aduste or putrified, as
experience teaches. Fleumatike persons are naturally inclined to sleep: and
because they engender much humours, they require more sleep than sanguine or
colerike. Persons having natural melancholy, not proceeding of coler aduste, do
require very much sleep, which in them comfort the powers animal, vital,
and natural, which ye may find written in the tables preceding. Sleep wold be
taken not immediately after meals, be fore that the meat is descended from the
mouth of the stomach. For thereby is engendered peines noise in the belly,
digestio corrupted, the sleep by i'll vapors asccding, made unquiet troublo{us}.
Moreover immoderate sleep makes the body apt unto palseis, apoplexis, falling
siknes, reumes, impostumes, also it makes the wits dull, and the body slow
unapt to honest exercise. semblably imoderate watch dries to much the body,
and doth debilitate the powers animal, lets digestion, makes the body apt
to consuptios, where fore in these.ii. thiges, as well as al other, a diligent
teperance is to be used. the moderation is best coiected (for it is hard
perfectly to know it) by the sen sible lightness of al the body, specially of the
brain the brows and the eyes, the passage down of the meat from the stomach,
the will to make urine, to go to the stool. Contrariwise, heuynes in the body
eyes, and savour of the meat before eaten signifies that the sleep was not
sufficient. They that are hole must sleep first on the right side, because the
meat may approach to the liver, which is to the stomach, as fire under the
pot, by him is digested. To them, which have feeble digestio, it is good to
sleep prostrate on their bealies, or to have their bare hand on their stomachs.
Lienge upright on the back is to be utterly abhorred.

The commodity of exercise, and the time when it should be used. Cap. xxxi.
EVery meuynge is not an exercise, but only ye which is vehement, thend whereof
is alteration of the breath or wind of a man. Of exercise do proceed two
commodities, evacuation of excrementes, and also good habit of the body, for
Exercise being a vehement motion, thereof needs must ensue hardness of the
members, whereby labour shall the less grieve, the body be the more strong to
labour. also thereof comes augmentation of heate, whereby happens the more
attraction of things to be digested, also more quick alteration, and better
nouryshynge. More over, that all and syngular parts of the body, be therewith
somewhat humected, whereby it happens, that things harde be mollified, moyste
things are extenuate, and the poores of the body are more opened. And by the
violence of the breathe or wind, the poores are cleansed, and the fylthe in the
body naturally expelled. This thing is so necessary to the preservation of
health, that without it, no man may be lunge without syckenesse, Cor. Cel. lib.
1.
which is affirmed by Cornelius Celsus, saying, that sluggyshenes dulls the
body, labour doth strength it, the first brings the incommodities of age
shortly, the last makes a man long time lusty. Not withstanding in exercise
ought to be four things dilygentely considered, that is to say, the time, the
things precedynge, the qualytie and the quantity of exercise.

First as concerning the time convenient for exercise, that it be not when
there is in the stomach or bowels, great quantity of meat not sufficiently
digested, or of humours crude or raw, lest thereby peril moughte ensue by
conveyance of them into al the members, before those meates or humours be
concoct or boiled sufficiently. Galen Galen. de ruen. sani. lib. 2.
saith, that the time most convenient for exercise is, when both the first
and second digestion is complete, as well in the stomach, as in the veins,
that the time approaches to eat eftsoon. For if ye do exercise sooner or
later, ye shall either fill the body with crude humours, or else augment
yelowe coler. The knowledge of this time is perceived by the colour of the
urine, for that which resembles unto clear water, betokenethe, that thiuyce,
which comes from the stomach, is crude in the veins: that which is well
coloured, not to high or base, betokens, that the second dygestio is now
perfect: where the colour is very high or red, it sygnyfyeth, that the
concoction is more than sufficient. Wherefore when the urine appears in a
temperate color, not red nor pale, but as it were gilt, tha should exercise have
his beginning.

Of fricasies or rubbynges precedyng exercise. Cap. xxxii.
AS touching things preceding exercise, for as much as it is to be feared, lest
by vehement Galenus. Paulus. Oribasius Aerius.
exercise any of the excremetes of the belly or bladder, should hastily be
received into the habit of the body, by the violence of hete, kendlyd by
exercise: also lest some thing, which is hole, be by heuynes of excrementes, or
violent motion, broken or pullyd out of his place, or that the excrementes, by
violence of the breath, should stop the pores or cundites of the body, it shall be
necessary little and little, by chasing the body, first to mollify the parts
consolidate, to extenuate or make thin the humours, and to louse and open the
poores, and than shall ensue to him that exercises, no peril of obstruction or
rupture. And to bring that to pass, it shall be expedient, after that the
body is cleansed, to rub the body with a course lynnen cloth, first softly
easily, after to increase more and more, to a harde and swift rubbing, vntyl
the flesh do swell, and be somewhat ruddy, and that not only down right, but
also ouerth wart roud. Some do use fricasyes in this form. In the morning,
after that they have ben at the stool, with their shirt sleue or bare hand,
if their flesh be tender, they do first softly, afterward faster, rub their
breast, and sides downward, and ouerthwarte, not touching their stomach or
bealy, and after cause their servant semblably to rub overthwart their
shulders and back, beginning at the neckebone, and not touching the raynes
of their back, except they do feel there much cold and wind, and afterward
their legs from the knees to the ankle: last their arms, frome the clbowe to
the handewreste. And in this form of fricasy, I my self have founden an
excellent commodity. Old men, or they, which be very dry in their bodies, if
they put to some sweet oils, as Yrinum, Nardinum, Cham^melinum, or other
like, myrt with a little sweet oil of roses, I suppose they do well. I will not
here speak of oyntmentes used in old time among the Romayns and Greeks, in
fricasies or rubbynges. For I suppose, y^ they were never here used. and in the
said places, they be also left, onles it be in palseys, or apoplexies, or
against the rigour, which happens infeuers, only I will remember the saying of
Hipocrates, Fricasye hath power to louse, to bind, to increase flesh, and to
minyshe it. For harde fricasies do bind or consolydate, soft rubbing doth
louse or mollify, much doth minishe flesh, mean rubbing doth augment or
increase it. He that will know more abundantly hereof, let him rede the book
of Galen of the preservation of health, callid in latin De tuenda sanitate,
translated most truly eloquently, out of Greek into latin, by doctor
Linacre, late physician of most worthy memory to our sovereign lord king
Henry the eight. The same mattier is written more brefely of Paulus Aegineta,
Oribasius, Aetius, and some other late writers, but unto Galene not to be
compared.

The diversities of exercises. Cap. xxxiii.
THe quality of exercise is the diversity thereof, forasmoche as therein be
many differeces in mouynge, and also some exercise moves more one part of the
body, some an other. In difference of mouynge, some is slow or soft, some is
swift or fast: some is strong or violent, some be mixed with strength
swiftness. Strong or violent exercises be these, deluynge (specially in
tough clay and heavy, bearing or susteynynge of heavy burdeyns, clymmyng or
walking against a stipe upright hill: holding a rope, and clymmyng up thereby,
hanging by the hands on any thing, above a mans reach, that his fete touche
not the ground: standing and holding up, or spreding the arms, with the
hands fast closed, abiding so a lunge time. Also to hold the arms steadfast,
causing an other man, to assay, to pull them out, and not withstanding he
kepeth his arm steadfast, enforcing there unto the sinews and muscules.
Wrastlyng also with the arms and legs, if the persons be equal in strength,
it doth exercise the one and the other: if the one be stronger, than is it to
the weaker a more violent exercise.

Al these kinds of exercises, and other like them, do augment strength, and
therefore they serve only for yonge men, which be inclined, or be apt to the
wars. Swift exercise without violence is, running, playeng with weapons,
tenise, or throwing of the ball, trotting a space of ground forward and
backward, going on the toes, and holding up the hands. Also stirring up and
down his arms, without plummettes. Vehement exercise is compound of violent
exercise and swift, when they are joined together at one time, as dansyng of
galyardes, throwing of the balle, running after it. footeball play may be in
the number thereof, throwing of the lunge dart, and continuing it many times,
running in harness, other like. The moderate exercise is lunge walking or going
a journey. The parts of the body have sondry exercises appropried unto them,
as rounning and going is the most proper for the leggis. Moving of the arms up
down, or stretching them out, playeng with weapons, serves most for the arms
and shulders, stouping and rising often time, or lifting great weightes, taking
up plummettes or other like poyses on the ends of staves, in like wise,
lifting up in every hand a spear or moryspike by the ends, specially
crossing the hands, and to lay them down ageyn in their places, these do
exercise the back loins. Of the bulk lunges the proper exercise is meuing of
the breath in syngyng or crieng. The entrails, which be vnderneth the
myddreste, be exercised by blowing, either by constraint, or playeng on
shaulmes, or sackbottes, or other like instruments, which do require much
wind. The muscules at best exercised with holding the breath in, a lunge time,
so that he, which doth exercise, hath well digested his meat, and is not
troubled with much wind in his body. Fynallye load Celsus. 1.
reading, counterfeit battle, tenyse, or throwing the ball, running,
walking, add to shotyng, which in mine opinyon exceed al the other, do
exercise the body commodiousely. Always remember, that the end of violent
exercise, is difficulty in fetching of the breath. Of moderate exercise,
alteration of breath only, or the beginning of sweat. More over in winter,
runnynge, and wrastlyng is convenient. In summer wrastlynge alytell, but not
running. In very cold whether, much walking, in hot whether, rest is more
expedient. They which seem to have moist bodies, live in idelnes, they have
need of violet exercise. They which are lean and colerike, must walk softly, and
exercise them selfes very temperatly. The plummettes, callid of Galen Alteres,
which are now much used with great men, being of equal weight, according to
the strength of him that exercises, are very good to be used fasting, a
little before breakfast or dinner, holding in every hand one plumet, and
lifting them on high, and bringing them down with much violence, and so he
may make the exercise violent, or moderate, after the poise of the plummettes,
heuyer or lighter, and with much or little laboring with them.

Of Gestation, that is to say, where one is carried, and is of an other thing
meued, and not of himself. Cap. xxxiiii.
THere is also an another kind of exercise, which is called Gestation, and is
mixed with mo Paulus Egineta. Aerius.
uyng and rest. For as much as the body, syttyng or lyenge, seems to rest,
and not withstanding it is meued by that, which bears it, as lienge in a
bed, hanging by cords or chains, or in a cradell, sytting in a chair,
which is carried on men's shulders with slaves, as was the use of the ancient
Romaynes, or syttinge in a boot or barge, which is rowed, riding on a horse,
which ambleth very easily, or gothe a very soft pace. The bed, cradel, and
chair carried, serves for them, y^ are in long continual siknes, or be lately
recovered of a fever. Also them, which have the fransy or letharge, or have a
lyghte terciane fever, or a cotidiane. This exercise sweetly asswageth troubles
of the mind, and provokes sleep, as it appears in chylderne, which are
rocked. Also it is convenient for them, which have the palsy, the stone, or
the gowte. Gestation in a chariot or wagon hath in it a shaking of the body,
but some vehement, and some more soft. the soft serves in diseases of the
head, and where any matter runs down into the stomach and entrails. But
the vehement shaking is to be used in the griefs of the breast and stomach.
Also in swelling of the body and legs in dropsies, palseys, mygrimes, and
scotomies, which is an imagination of darkness, being returned, at the end
of his journey, he must sit up, and be easily moved. I have known, says
Aetius, many persons in such wise cured without any other help. Navigation
or rowyng nigh to the land, in a calm water, is expedient for them that have
dropsies, lepries, palseyes, called of the vulgar people, takynges, and
fransies. To be carried on a rough water, it is a violent exercise, and
induces sondrye affections of the mind, sommtyme fear, sometime hope, now
coward heart, now hardynesse, one while pleasure, an other while dyspleasute.
These exercises, if they be well tempered, they may put out of the body, all
lunge during syckenesses. For that which is myxte with rest and meuyng, if
any thing else may, it most excellently causes the body to be well nourished.
Celsus doth prohibit gestation, where the body feels peyne, and in the
beginning of fevers, but Celsus. 2.
when they cease, he aloweth it. Riding moderately, and without grefe, it
doth corroborate the spirit and body above other exercises, specially the
stomach, it cleanses the senses, and makes them more quycke: albeit to the
breast, it is very noyfull. It ought to be remembered, that as well this, as
all other kinds of exercise, wold be used in a hole countraye, where the air
is pure and uncorrupted. Foresene, that he that woll exercise, do go first to
the stool, for the causes rehearsed in the last chapiter.

Of vociferation. Cap. xxxv.
THe chief exercise of the breast instruments of the voice is vociferation,
which is singing, redyng, or crienge, whereof is the property, that it
purges natural heate, and makes it also subtle and stable, and makes the
members of the body substancial and strong, resisting diseases. This exercise
would be used of persons short winded, and them, which can not fetch their
brethe, but holding their neck straight upright. Also of them, whose flesh is
consumed, specially about the breast and shulders. Also which have had
apostumes broken in their breasts: moreover of them that are hoorse by to much
moisture. and to them, which have quarteyn fevers, it is convenient, it
louseth the humour, that stycketh in the breast, and dries up the moystnes of
the stomach, which properly the course of the quarten is wont to bring with
him, it also profits them, which have feeble stomachs, or do vomit
continually, or do break up sowrenes out of the stomach. it is good also for
griefs of the heed. He that intends to attempt this exercise, after that he
has ben at the stool, and softly rubbed the lower parts, and washed his
hands. Let him speak with as base a voice as he can, and walking, begin to
singe louder louder, but still in a base voice, and to take no heed of sweet
tunes or armonye. For that nothing doth profit unto helthe of the body. but to
enforce him self to singe great, for thereby much air drawn in by fetching of
breath, thrusts forth the breast stomach, and opens and enlarges the
poores. By high crieng loud redyng are expelled superfluous humours. Therefore
men and women, having their bodies feeble, and their flesh louse, and not
firm, must read oftentimes loud, and in a base voice, extending out the wynd
pipe, other passages of the brethe. But not withstadyng this exercise is not
used always, and of all persons. For they, in whom is abundance of humours
corrupted, or be much diseased with cruditie in the stomach and veins, those
do I counsel, to absteyn from the exercise of the voice, left much corrupted
juice or vapors, may thereby be into all the body distributed. And here I
conclude to speak of exercise, which of them, that desire to ^emayn long in
health, is most di^igently, as I mought say, most scrupulously to be observed.

THE THIRD BOOK
Of Replecion. Cap. i.
REPLECION IS A superfluous abundance of humours in the body: and that is in
two manner of wise, that is to say in quantity, and in quality. In quantity,
as where all the four humours are more in abundance, than be equal in
proporcion to the body that conteyneth them, or where one humour much
excedeth the remena^nt in quantity. In qualytie, as where the blood, or other
humour, is hotter or colder, thycker, or thinner, than is convenient unto the
body. First, where all the humours, being superfluousely increased, fylleth
and extends the receptories of the body, as the stomach, the veins, and
bowels, and is most properly called fullness, in greek Plethor^, in latyne
Ple^it^do. The other is, where the body is infa^ced, either with coler, yelow
or black, or with fleume, or with watery humours, and is properly callid in
greek Cacochymia, in latin Viciosus succus, in english it may be called
corrupt juice. I will not here write, the subtle and abundant definitions and
descriptions of Galene in his books de Plenitudine, and in his comentaries upon
the aphorisms of Hipocrates. For it shall here suffice, to show the
operations of replecion good or i'll, remytting them, which be curious, and
desire a more ample declaration, to the most excellent warkes of Galene, Aph.
li. 2.
where he may be satisfied, if he be not determined to repugue against reason.
Hipocrates saith, Apho. 15. Vbi cibus praeter natura plusing est* est hic morb^
facit. Galen. in comment. loco praedicto.
where meat is received much above nature, that makes syckenesse. Galene
declaring that place saith, More meat than accords with natures measure, is
named Replecion. And afterward he expounds that word above nature, to
sygnyfye to much and superfluously, as who saith, where the meat is
superfluousely taken, it makes syckenesse. For meat but a little exceeding
temperance, may not forthwith make syckenes, but may yet keep the body within
the latitude or bounds of helthe, for the meat that shall make syckenesse,
must not a little exceed the exquisite measure. The incommmoditie, which
happens thereby is, that moystnesse is to much extended, and natural heate is
debilitate. Also naturalle heate, resolves sommewhat of the superfluouse meat
and drink. And of that, which is re^olued of meat vndygested, proceeds
fumosytie, gross and vndygested, which ascendyng up into the heed, and
touching the rhyme, wherein the bray^e is wrapped, causes head ache, trembling
of the members, ^uskyshnes of the sight, many other sycknesses: also by the
sharpnes thereof, it prycketh and annoys the sinews, which make sensibilttie,
the roots of whom, are in the brain, and from thens passes through all the
body. Fynallye, the said fumositie, engendered of replecion, percynge the
innermooste part of the said synewes, called sensible, it greuousely annoys
the power animal, there consisting, by the occasion whereof, understanding and
reason, as to the use of them, are let and troubled. And also the tongue,
which is reasons exposytour, is depriued of his offyce, as it appears in
them, which are drunk, and them, which have grievous peynes in their heed,
procedynge of replecion. Signs of replecyon be these, loss of appetite,
delyte in nothing, slouthfulnesse, dullness of the Oribasius E^poristo lib. 1.
wit, and senses, more sleep, than was accustomed to be, cramps in the
body, stertynge or saltion of the members, fullness of the veins, and
thyckenesse of the pulses, horror or shrouelynge of the body myxt with heate.
The remedies are abstinence, and all euacuations* whereof I will make mention in
the next chapiter.

Of Evacuation. Cap. ii.
THe meates and drynkes received into the body, if the stomach and liver do
their natural office, be altered by concoction and digestio in such wise that
the best part thereof goth to the nouryshement of the body: the warst, being
separate by the members official, from the residue, a^ made excrementes in
sondrye forms and substances, which are like in quality to the natural
humour, which than reigns most in the body. These excrementes be none other,
but matter superfluouse and unsavoury, which by natural powers may not be
couerted into flesh, but remaining in the body corrupt the members, and
therefore nature abhorring them, desires to have the expelled. These
excrementes be three in number, Exc^eme^tes. Ordure.
ordure, v^ine, humour superfluous. Moreover, there be two sorts of ordure,
that is to say, one digested, which passes by siege, the other vndigested,
which is expellyd by vomyte. Where I Dygested.
say digested. I mean, that it is passed the stomach, and turned into an
another figure. Likewise I call that vndigested, which styll retains the
figure of meat. Urine is the watery substance of the blood, like as why is
of milk, Vri^.
which out of the meat that is altered and co^cocte or boiled in the stomach,
is strained in the veins called Mesaraice, which proceeds frome the holowe
part of the liver, and sent by the rains into the bladder, passes by the
Instrument, the which is ordained as well to that purpose, as for generation.
Humour superfluous is in.iii. sorts, (...) s^perfluous.
either myxt with any of the four humours, called natural, orels it is
gathered into the brain, or it is between the skyn and the flesh, or lies
among the sinews, muscules, or joints. Of humours, some are more gross and
cold, some are subtle and hot, and are called vapours. Now for to expel the
said excrementes, are. ix. s^ndry kinds of evacuation, that is to say,
abstinence, vomyte, purgation by siege, letting of blood, sca^ifieng called
cupping, sweating, provocation of urine, spittyng, bledyng at the nose, or by
hemoroides: And in women, their natural purgatios. Of these euacuations I will
brefely declare, with the commodities, which by the discrete use of them do
happen unto the body.

Of Abstinence. Cap. iii.
ABstinence is a forbearynge to receive any meat or drink. For if it be but
in part, it is than called rather temperance than abstinece. It ought to be
used only after replecion, as the proper remedy therefore. And than if it be
moderate, it consumes superfluities, in consuminge them, it clarifies the
humours, makes the body Cells. li. 2. Hipoc. apho. li. 7.
fair coloured, and not only kepeth out sickness, but also where sycknes is
entered, nothing more helps, if it be used in season. To them, which have
very moist bodies, hunger is right expedi^t for it makes them more dry, not
withstanding there ought to be consideratios, in the meat before
Co^syderations i^ absti^
eaten, in the age of the person, in the time of the year, in custom. First in
the mete before eat, if it be much in excess or very gross, or not much
excedinge, or light of digestion, and according thereto, would abstinence more
or lass be proporcioned. Concerning age, Hipocrates saith, old me Apho. li. 1.
may susteyn fasting easily: next unto them, men of myddel age, young men may
wars bear it, childern warst of all, specially they that be lusty: not
withstanding here Galen corrects Hipocrates, Galen. in comment.
saying, that he should have exceptid men very old, who, as experience
declares, must eat often and little. As touching time, it must be remembered,
that in winter and spring time, the stomachs be naturally very hot, sleep is
lunge, therefore in that time meates would be more abundant, all though much be
eaten, it will be son^ digested. Wherefore abstinence wold not be tha so much as
in summer, albeit to absteyn much in summer, except it be after replecion,
Damascene saith, it dries Damascenus apho.
the body, it makes the colour salowe, it ingedreth melancholy, and hurts the
sight. Moreover custom may not be forgoten. for they, which are used from
childhode, to eat sondry meals in the day, wold rather be reduced to fewer
meals, little meat, than to be compelled to absteyn utterly, to the intent, yt
nature, which is made by custom, be not rebuked, the power digestiue thereby
debilitate. And note well, that by to much abstinence, the moisture of the body
is withdrawn and consequently the body dries, and waxes lean: natural
heate, by withdrawing of moisture, is to much incended, and not finding
humour to warke in, turns his violence to the radycall or substantial
moisture of the body, and exhaustynge that humour, brings the body into a
cosumption. Wherefore Hipocrates says, that to scarce and exquisite an order
in meat and drink, Aph. li. 2.
is for the more patte more dangerous than that, which is more abundant.
Contrary wise moderation in abstinence* according to the said consyderations,
is to health a sure bulwark.

Of Vomit. Cap. iiii.
THe meat or drink superfluous, or corrupted in the stomach is best expelled
by vomit, if it be not very grievous to him, which is diseased. Also the
moderate use of it, pourgeth fleume, A^i*. li. 1.
lights the heed, causes that the excess of meates or drinks, shall not
annoy or bring syckenes. Moreover, it amedeth the affects of the rains, the
bladder, and the fundement. It also helps against lepries, cankers, goutes,
dropsies, also divers syckenesses proceeding of the stomach. For if any grefe
happens of the head, vomit is than vncommodious. It is better in winter, tha
in summer. Also good for them, which are replete or very colerike* if they have
not well digested. but it is ill for them that be lean, or have weak
stomachs. And therefore where one feels bitter vapours, rising out of his
stomach, with grief and weighty^es, in the over parts of his body, let him
run forth with to this remedy. It is also good for him that is hart burned,
and hath much spittel, or his stomach wambleth, and for him that remeueth into
sondry places. yet I counsa^le saith Celsus, him that will be in health, and
wold Cells. li. 1.
not be to soon aged, that he use not this dayely. And I my self have known
men, which daily using it, have brought thereby their stomachs into such
custom, that what so ever they did eat, they could not lunge retain it,
whereby they shortene their lives. Wherefore it wold not be vsid, but only where
great surfeit, or abundance of fleume do require it. He that will vomit after
meat, let him drink sondry drinks myxte together, and last of all, warm
water: or if that be to easy, let him myxt therewith salt or honey. If he will
vomit fasting, let him drink water and honey sodden together, or Isope with
it, or eat of a radyshe root, and drink warm water upon it. also water,
wherein radyshe is boiled, and afterward provoke him self to it. Them, that
will have more violent purgations, I remytte to physicians learned. But yet I do
eftsoon warn them, that there in they be circumspect, and do not much use it.
Moreover in vomits, the matter brought forth, wold be considered, according to
the rules of Hipocrates, Hipocra. praesag. 2. cap. 7.
in his second book of pronostications, that is to say, if it be myxt with
fleme and coler, it is most profitable if it be not in very great quatite, nor
thick, the lass mixture it hath, the wars is it. If it be grene, like to leke
blades, thyn or blak, it is to be judged ill. If it have al colours, it is
extreme perilous. If it be ledy coloured, sauorith horribly, it signifies a
short aboli^ion, or dissolution of nature. For as Galene affirms there in his
commente, such manner of vomit declares corruption with extinctinge of
nature. Also every pu^ified and stynkynge savour in vomit is ill. These
things be right necessary, to be looked Galen. de lo^s aff^ctis. lib. 1.
for, where one doth vomit without any difficulty: but to enforce one to
vomit, which can not, is very odious, and to be abhorted.

Of Purgations by siege. Cap. v.
IF the head be heavy, or the eien dim, or if there be peyne felt of the
colyke, or in the lower part Cel^. li. 1. A^. li. 3.
of the belly, or in the hippes, or some colerike matter or fleume in the
stomach. Also if the breath be hardly fetched, if the bealy of him self
sends forth nothing, or if being costive, one feleth i'll savour or bytternes
in his mouth, or that which he makes, hath an horrible savour, or if
abstinence do not, at the first put away the fever, or if the strength of
the body may not sustain letting of blood, or else the time therefore convenient
is past, or if one have drunk much before his sycknes, or if he which
oftentimes vnconstrayned, hath had great sieges, be suddenly stopped: in al
these cases, and where it is peynfull to vomit, and in gnawyng or frettinges
of the stomach, finally in all replecions, where a man can not or will not be
let blood or vomit, it is expedient to provoke siege by purgations, which
are received by two ways: upward at the foundement by suppositories or
clysters. Downward at the mouth, by potions, electuaries, or pylles.
Suppositories at used, where the patient is weak, and may not ^eceyue any
other purgations. sometime for as much as the strayt gut is stopped with
excrementes, which are dry and hard: sometime where there needs none other
pourgation, specially in bournyng fevers, whereof the matter ascends in to the
heed, than clisters may do harm, by the benefit of suppositories, excrementes
at brought forth without any annoyace. And oftentimes it brings forth that,
which clysters may not.

Suppositories at made sometime with honey only, sodden, rolled on a board, and
made round, smaller at the one end than at the other, of the length and
greatness, according to the quatitie of the body that takes it. Sometime there
is myxte with the honey salt dried, or salt peter, or the powder of such
things, as do either purge the humour, which offedeth, or dissolveth gross
winds, or other matter: they be sometime made with toseyn, pitch, ware, or
gumes, sometime of rotes, or the leaves of mercury grene, very small bruised.
also with figgis or reisons, the stones take out, or of white soap, made i the
figure aforsaid, being made in the form aforesaid, they must be put up in at
the fundement, to the great end, and the patient must keep it there the space
of half an hour or more. Clysters are made of lycour, sometime simple, as
water sodden, mylk, oil, or wine. sometime myxt, as water and oil together, or
decoctions, as where herbs, rotes, fruits, sedes, or gumes, having property
to make soft, dissolve, draw forth, or expelle matter that grieves, be
boiled, and the lycour thereof, sometime warm, sometime hot, is received at
the fundement into the body by a little pipe of gold or silver, yuo^ie or
wodde, therefore ordained and called a clyster pipe. This is necessary, where
the stomach is weak, and may not susteyn the warkyng of medicines received at
the mouth. also in fevers, colykes, and other diseases in the bowels, grief in
the raynes of the back or huckle bone, ventosyties in the bealye, inflammation
or exulceration in the guts or bladder. It is a convenient and sure medicine,
and lest hurt doth ensue of it. The making and ordryng thereof* I will omytte to
write in this place, partly that I wold not, that physicians should to much note
in me presumption, partly that an another place may be more apt to that
pourpose.

The particular commodities of every pourgation. Cap. vi.
IN potions, electuaties, and pylles ought to be much more observation, than in
clysters or suppositories, for as much as these do enter no further than into
the gut, where the ordure lies, by that plac^ only, brings forth the
matter, which causes disease. But the other entering in that way, that meates
and drinks do, comes into the stomach, and there is boiled, and sent into
the places of digestion, and afterward is myxte with the juice, whereof the
substance of the body is made, and expellyng the adversary humou^s, somewhat
thereof doutlesse remains in the body. Wherefore men have need to beware, what
medycines they receive, that in them be no venenositie, malice, or corruption,
lest for the expellyng of a superfluous humour, which perchance good diet, or
some brothes made of good herbs, or the said evacuation, with supposytorie or
clyster, mought bring forth a^leysure. by desyryng of to hasty remedy, they
receive in medicine that, which shall engender a venomous humour, vneuitable
destruction unto al the body. And therefore happy is he, which in sycknes
finds a discrete and well learned physician, and so true a poticary, that hath
always drowges vncortupted, whom the physician may surely trust, to dispece his
things truly. But now to return to the said form of purgation, I will now
set forth some counsayles, concerning that matter, which I have collected out
of the chief authors of phisike.

Bodies hot moist: may easily susteyn purgation by the stool. They, which be
lean or thyn, having the members tender, may take harm by purgations. To men
that at colerike, and them, that eat little, purgations at grievous. In young
chyldern and old men, it is dangerous to louse much the ^ealy. To them that
at not wont to it, purgation is noyful. He that lives in a good order of diet,
needs neither purgation nor vomit. After that the purgatio hath wrought,
thirstines and sound ^lepe, be signs that the body is sufficiently purged. By
daily taking of medicines, nature is corrupted. When ye will pourge any
thing, make first the matter flowing and soluble. Medicine to purge ought not
to be mingled with meat, but to be take fou^e hours at the least before
Hipocra. ^phor.
meals, or three hours after meals, except certain easy pylles made to
cleanse and comfort the stomach, which wold be taken at the beginning of
supper, or after supper, a little before that one goth to bed, making a light
supper or none. After purgation taken, the patient should rest, and not walk,
vntyl the medicine hath wrought, nor eat or drink in the mean space. These
things have I rem^bred, because I have known right good physicians, to have
forgotten, to instruct thereof their patients. Now will I set forth the
table of such things, which of their property do digest or purge superfluous
humours particulatly, which I have gathered out of the books of Dioscorides,
Galen, Paul{us} Egineta, Ori basius, A^tius, and other late writers. not
withstanding. I have not written all, for as much as there be diverse things,
whereunto we have not (...) founden any names in englyshe.

Digestiues of Choler.
Endyue. Lettyse. Cykorie. Scabiose. Maydenheate. Malowes. Mercurye. The juice
of pomegranades. Pourselane. Popye. Berberyes. Roses. Violettes, the leaf and
flower. Sorrel. Lyuerworte. Sorrel de boyse. Why clarified. The great four
cold sedes, that is to say, of gourdes, cucumbers, melones, and cittuls.
Psillium, Vinegar. Saunders. Barley water. Prunes. Tamarindes.
Pourgers of Choler.
Wild hoppes. Wormewode. Centorie. Fumitorie. Why of butter. Violettes.
Mercurye. Juice of roses. Prunes. Eupatorie. Tamarindes half anounce in a
decoction: Manna.vi. drammes at the least, and so to xxv. in the broth of a
hen or capon. Reubarbaru by it self from two drammes, unto four, infused or
stiped in lycour, from.iiii. drammes unto.viii.
Digestiues of fleume.
Fenell. Persely, the rotes. Smallage. Capers. Laurel. Synuy^. Puly. Maioram.
Peny^oyall. Wild parsny^ sede. Mynt. Pympernell. Horemynt. Gladen. Ag^ym^nye.
Calamynt. Nep. Betayne. Sauge. Radyshe. Mugworte. Iunyper. Hysope, P^onye.
Balm. Honey. ^ynger. Squilla. Ari^tolochia. Cynamome. Pepper. Cumyne.
Purgers of fle^e.
Centorie. ^ettyll. Agtimonye. Alder. Polypod^u of the oak. Myrobalani kebuli,
in fused from half an ouce to an ounce, and.ii. drames. In substance, from two
drammes to half an ounce. Aga^icus fro a drame to two drames infused, from.ii.
drames to five. Y^eos. Maydenheare. Sticados.
Purgers of mel^colye.
The broth of colewortes light boiled. Balm mynte. Sticados. ^yme. Scene
boiled in white wine or in the broth of a hen. Lased sauery. Exithimus.
Unwrought sylke. ^rganum. Calamynt. Bourage. Hartis tongue. Quyckbeme.
Maydenheare. With wind. Pulyall mountain. Honey. Sugar.
Melancholy for the thynnesse and subtylnesse of the humour, needs no
digestiue.

They which will take sharper purgations, or compound with divers things, let
them take the counsel of an honest and perfect physician, not adventure to
myxte things together, with out knowing the temperance of them in degrees, and
that he can proporcion them to the body, that shall receive them in symples, as
they be written. And so he may use them without peril, against the humours,
whereunto they serve.

Lettynge of blood. Cap. vi.
THe part of Evacuation by letting of blud, is incision or cutting of the
vain, whereby the blood, which is cause of syckenes or grefe to the hole body,
or any particular part thereof, doth most aptly pass. The commodities whereof,
being A^oldus de uilla nova.
in a moderate quantity, and in a due time taken, be these that follow, it
clarifies the wit, and makes good memory, it cl^s^th the bladder, it dries
the brain, it warms the ma^owe, being in the bones, it opens the hearing,
it stops tears or droppynges of the even, it takes away lothsomnes, and
confirms the stomach, it nourishes that, which is propre to nature, and the
contrary expels. It is thought, that thereby life is prolonged, and the
matter making syckenesse shortly consumed. Wherefore lettynge of blood
Oribasius su medici nae compendio.
is not only expedient for them, which are full^of blood, or have abundance of
strength, but also for them, in whom, without plenitude, called fulness,
inflammations begin to be in their bodies, or by some outward stroke, the
blood being gathered within, by collection thereof, do feel grief or disease.
Also where there is much peyne felt, or debility of some member, whereof is
supposed to be engendered some grievous disease. Moreover they which use excess
of meates and drynkes, may be cured by lettynge of blood. But those, which
be temperate, keeping good diet, be helped without lettynge of blood: as by
fricasies, using of bathes, exercise, walking, and tydyng moderately. Also
vnctions with oils and oyntementes, called Diaphoreticae, which by
evaporation, do shortly evacuate the fullness. All be it, if the fullness be
of melancholy blood, than always needs must be lettynge of blood.
Abundance of melancholy blood is known by these signs. There is felt in
the entrails, or within the bulk of a man or woman, a weyghtynesse with
tension or thrusting outward. and all that part, which is above the navel, is
more heavy, than it was wont to be. Also much vain and fatty, the residcce or
bottom thycke, troublous, and fat. sometime black poushes or boils, with
inflammation and much peyne. These must be shortly let blood, and the melancholy
humour also purged by siege. They which have crude or raw humours, must be
warily let blood, before that syknesse engender, but having the fever, in no
wise. Concerning letting Acti. ll. 3
of blood, these things following, wold be had in continual remembrance,
and be before thought on. In abundance of the blood, the quality and quantity,
the greatness of the sycknes, and if it be present, or looked for. also the
diet precedynge, the age and strength of the person, the natural form of
his body, the time of the year, the region or country, the present state of the
air the disvse of accustomed exercise, the cessyng of euacuations used before.
In quality consider, of what humour the fullness proceeds. In quantititie the
abundance of that, which is to be purged. In siknes, if it be dangerous or
tolerable: if the siknes be present, it requires the more diligence: if it be
looked for, it may be the better proporcioned. In diet, the custom in eating
drinking, must be specially noted. In young men women, letting of blood wold be
more liberal. In old men yonge children, it wold be scarser: strong men may
sustain bledyng, they which are feeble, may not endure it: Large bodies have
greater vessels, than they, which be little. lean men have more blod,
corporate men have more flesh. The time of the Cor. Celsus li. 3.
year must be specially marked. For in the beginning of spring time is the
best letting of blood, as Dribasius saith, and so doth continue, after the
opinion of Arnolde, unto the eight calendes Oriba. su. Arnoldus de uilla nova
de flobothomia. lo. Dama scenus in art med.
of June. Aetius affirms, that in winter, or in a cold country, or where
the person is of a very cold nature, the veins shulde not be opened. And
Damascene says, They which in youth have used to be much let blood, after
they be three score years old, their nature waxes cold, and natural heate is
in them suffocate, specially if they were of a cold complexion. but that is
to be understand, where they that are in health, are often let blood. For in
the lapse from helthe, and in divers diseases, wherein the blood is corrupted,
or where it ingedreth impostumes, or resorts to any place, where it ought not
to be, or passes by any other cundyte, than nature hath ordained, or where it
is furious or inflamed, or by any other means bredeth grievous diseases, in all
these cases, it ought to be practised, ye sometime in aged persons, women with
child, and young infantes. For in extreme necessity it were better experience
some remedy, than to do nothing. Al other things concerning this matter,
pertayn to the part curatiue, which treats of healing of sycknes, whereof I
will not now speak, but remytte the reders to the counsel of discrete
physicians.

Of scarifyeng called boxyng or cuppyng. Cap. vii.
FOr as much as it is not convenient, to be let Galenus.
blood oftentimes in the year, because much of the vital spirit, passes
forth with the blood, Acti^ li. 3.
which being exhaust, the body waxes cold, and natural operations become the
more feeble, I there fore do counsel (saith Galen) that the base parts of the
body, as the legs, be scarified, which is the most sure remedy, as well in
conseruynge helthe, as in repayrynge thereof, being decayed. For it cures the
even being annoyed with lunge dystillations. It profits also to the heed, and
over part of the body against sondry diseases. In what member the blood is
gathered, the body being first purged by scarification, the grefe may be
cured. Also Oribasius affirms the same, and also adds thereto, that it
helps squynances, or Oribasius in medici no compendio.
quinces in the throat, and dissolveth the constipa tions or stoppinges made of
al places, if the places be scarified: not withstanding application of boxes
about the stomach, in hot fevers, where reason is troubled, are to be eschewed,
for fear of suffocation. Likewise put to the heed undiscreetly, it hurts
both the heed and the cies. The late authors Actius.
do affirm, that scarifieng is in the stead of letting blood, where for age,
debility, or time of the year, or other like consyderation, a manne may not
susteyn blood lettynge, and it bryngethe forth the thyn blod, which is next to
the skin.

Of blood suckers or leaches. Cap viii.
THere is also an other form of evacuation by worms, found in waters called
blood suckers, or leaches, which being put unto the body or member, do draw
out blood. And their drawing is more convenient for fullness of blod than
scarifienge is, for as much as they fetch blood more deper, and is more of
the substance of blood. yet the opinion of sum men is, that they do draw no
blood but that, which is corrupted, and not proporcionable unto our body. And
therefore in griefs, which happen between the skin and the flusshe of
blood corrupted, these are more convenient than scarifienge. But before that
they be put unto any part of the body Oribasius in medici no compendio.
they must be first kept all one day before, giving unto them a little blood
in fresshe flesh. And than put them in a clean water, somewhat warm, and with
a spounge wipe away the flyme, which is about them, and than lay a little
blood on the place grieved, and put them than to it, and lay on them a spounge,
that when they be fulle, they may fall away, or if ye will sooner have them
of, put a horse hear bytweene their mouths, and the place, and draw them
away, or put to their mouths salt or ashes, or vyneger, and forthewith
they shall fall, and than wasshe the place with a spounge, and if there do
issue much blood, lay on the place the poulder of a spounge, and pytche
bourned, or lynnen clothe bourned, or galls bourned, or the herb called Bursa
pastoris bruised. And this suffices concerning blood suckers.

Of hemoroides or piles. Cap. ix.
HEmorroides be veins in the foundement, of whom do happen sondry passions.
sometime swelling, without bledynge, sometime superfluous blood by the
puissance of nature, is by them expelled, and than be they very convenient. for
by them a man shall escape many great sycknesses, which be engendered of
corrupted blood, or of melancholy. Semblably, if they be hastylye stopped frome
the course, which they have been used to, thereby do increase the said
syknesses, which by them were expelled, as dropsies, cosumptions, madness,
fransies, and diverse diseases of the heed, and other syknesses, paleness of the
visage, grief in the rains of the back, and this. And if they flow to much,
there ensues feblenes, leannes of the body, alteration of colour, great peines
in the lower parts of the body. And if the flux be vnmoderate, it engenders
myscheuous diseases. Wherefore it would be diligentely taken heed, that they
run in mesure, or else to use some things moderately, which may restrayn
them.

Concerning other euacuatios, I do purposely omytte to write of them in this
place, for as much as in this realm, it hath been accounted not honest, to
declare them in the vulgar tongue, but only secretly.

Of affects of the mind. Cap. x.
THe last of things callid not natural, is not the least part to be
considered, the which is of affects and passions of the mind. For if they be
immoderate, they do not only annoy the body, shorten the life, but also they
do appaire, and sometime lose utterly a mans estimation. And that much more is,
they bring a man from the use of reason, and sometime in the displeasure of
almighty god. wherefore they do not only require the help of phisyke corporal,
but also the counsel of a man wise and well learned in moral philosophy.
Wherefore after that I have recyted, what they be, I will briefly declare such
counsayles, as I have gathered. And as concerning remedies of phisike saving a
few symples, which do comfort the heart spirits, the residue I will remytte to
the counsel of physicians, like as I have done in evacuation. Affects of the
mind, whereby the body is annoyed, and do bring in siknes, be these, ire or
wrath, heuynes or sorrow, glad nes, or reioycyng.

Of Ire. Cap. xi.
IRe is kendlyd in the heart, inordinately chaufyng the spirits there, and
than is sent forth into the members, and doth superfluously heate them, and
disturbs reason, where the bodies be hot before. Where natural heate is
feeble, the heate may not be dispersed unto the extreme parts, and than doth
the extreme members, that is to say, which are far frome the heart, remain
cold, and trembling. Of this affection comes sometime fevers, sometime
apoplexies, or privation of sencis, trembling, palseys, madness, fran sies,
deformity of visage, and that wars is, outrageous swearynge, blasphemy,
desire of vengeance, loss of charity, amity, credence, also forgetfulness of
benefit precedynge, and of obedience, duty, and reverence. There also do
succeed contention, chargeable suite, vnquietnes of mind, lack of appetite,
lack of flepe, feeble digestion, scorn, disdain, and hatred of other, with
peryl of losing of all good reputation. These incommodities of Ire, perfitely
had in remembrance, at the first motion thereof one of them thought on, may
happen to bring in his fellows, thereby the flame may be quenched. or let him
that is angry, even at the first consider one of these thin ges, that like as
he is a man, so is also the other, with whom he is angry, and therefore it is
as lefull for the other to be angry, as unto him, and if he so be, than shall
that anger be to him displeasant, and stere him more to be angry. Whereby it
appears, that Ire is to him loathsome. If the other be patient, than let him
abhorte that thing in him self, the lack whereof, in the other contents
him, and asswageth his malice. More over, let him before, that occasion of Ire
doth happen, accustom him self to behold, and mark well them that be angry,
with the success of that anger. ruminate it in his mind, a good space after.
And in that time, let him remember, how Christ, the son of God and God, who
(as he him self said) mought have had of God his father, if he woldehaue asked
them, legions of angels to have defended him, ye with lass than a wynke,
mought have slain all his adversaries, yet he not withstanding rebuked,
scorned, falsely accused, plucked hither thither, stryped, bounden with
halters, whipped, spit on, buffeted, crowned with sharpe thorne, laded with
a heavy piece of timber, his own proper torment, halyd, driven forth like a
calfe to the slaughter house, eftsoon beaten and overthrown, retched forth
with ropes, arms and legs laid on the cross, and thereunto with long iron
nailes through the hands and fete nailed, with many strokes of hamers, with
many prickynges, or ever the nails mought pierce by his tender most blessed
flesh, and synewes, quyte through the harde timber, up to the heeds of the
nails, and all this being done for the offence of mankynd, and not his, yet
with the men, which did it, his most unkind country men, his most
unnatural kynnesinen, whom he first made of nothing, preserved by miracles,
delivered from perylles, and cured of dyseases, in all his vexation and
trouble, he was never scene or perceived angry. If one will say, that Anger is
natural, let him also consider, that in Christis manhood were all natural
powers. If he will say, that Ire is token of courage, and in Christ it lacked
not, whom both angels and devils trembled and feared. The premysses often
revolved, and borne in the mind, I will not say, shall utterly extinct all
motions of wrath, which is not possible, but it shall, when it kyndleth lightly
repress it, and let that it shall not grow into flame. And in speaking
here of wrath, I do not mean that, which good men have against vices: or
wise and discrete governors, and masters, ageinste the defautes or
negligences of their subjects or servants, used in rebukynge them, or
moderately punysshynge them. For that is not properly ire, but rather to be
called displeasure, and is that whereof god speaks, by his prophet Dauid,
saying, Be you angry, and do not sin. And that manner of anger, Psal. 4.
Genes. 31. Exod. 32. Leuit. 10. Marc. 11.
hath ben in divers holy men, prophets, and other. And it appeared in Christ,
when he drove out them, which made their market, in the holy temple of
god, where there ought to be nothing but prayer. And in like wise when he
rebuked the hypocrites. But if none of these things may come so shortly to
his remembrance, that is meued with anger, at the least, let him think on
the lesson, that Apollodorus the philosopher, taught to the emperor Octauian,
that before he speak or do any thing in anger, he do recite in order, al the
letters of the A, B, C, and remove somewhat out of the place, that he is in, and
seek occasion to be otherwise occupied. This shall for this time suffice, for
the remedies of Ire. And he that will know more of this matter, let him rede
in my warke, called the Governor, where I thereof do write more abundantly.

Of dolor or heuynesse of mind. Capitulo. xii.
THere is nothing more ennemye to life, tha sorrow, called also heuynes, for
it exhausts both natural heate and moisture of the body, and doth
extenuate or make the body lean, dulls the wit, and darkens the
spirits, lets the use and judgment of reason, and oppresses memory. And
Salomon saith, that sorrow dries up the bones. And also, like as the mouth in
(...). 17.
the garment, and the wourme in the tree, so doth heuynesse annoy the heart
of a man. Also in the book called Ecclesiasticus, Sorrow hath killed
Ecclesiasti. 25. 28.
many, and in it self is found no commodity. Also by heuynesse death is
hastened, it hydeth virtue or strength, and heuynesse of heart bows down
the neck. This is so puissant an enemy to nature and bodily health, that to
resyste the malice and violence thereof, are required remedies, as well of the
wholesome counsayles found in holy cripture, and in the books of moral
doctrine, as also of certain herbs, fruits, and spices, having the
propretie to expelle melancolyke humours, and to comfor^ keep lively the
spirits, which have their proper habitation in the heart of man, and moderate
nourishynge of the natural heate and humour callid radical, which is the base
or foudation, whereupon the life of ma stands, and that failing, life falls
in ruin, the body is dissolved. Now first I will declare some remedies
against sorowfulnesse of hart, cocernynge necessary counsel.

Sometime this affect happens of Ingratitude, either where for benefit, or
special love employed, one receives damage, or is abandoned in his necessity,
or is deceived of him, whom he trusted, or finds him, of whom he hath great
expectation, forgetful or neglygent in his commodity, or perceives the
person, whom of lunge time he hath loved, to be estranged from him, or to
have one of later acquaintance in more estymation. This affection nyppeth the
heart, ye of most wysemen, for they love most heartily, not provoked by carnal
affection, but rather by good opinion, ingedred by similitude of honest studies
and virtuous manners of lunge time mutuallye experieced. And it is not only unto
ma grievous, but also unto god most displeasant and odious, as it is abundantly
declared in scripture. Wherefore the person, which feleth him self touched
with this affect, before that it grow into a passion, and waxes a sycknesse,
let him call to remembrance these articles following, or at the lest ways some
of them, for eueryche of them may ease him, though perchance they can not
forth with perfectly cute him.

Consider, that the corruption of mans nature is not so much declared in any
thing, as in ingratitude, Louiasles against ingratitude.
whereby a man is made wars, tha divers brute beasts. The little ant or emote
helps up his fellow, whom he sees overthrown with burdeyn, or, by other
occasion. Also when olyphantes do pass over any great water, the grettest most
Appianns in varia historia.
puissant of them divide them selfes, and setting the weakest in the myddell,
part go before, trieng the depenes and peryls, part come after, succouryng the
weakest or least, with their lunge noses, when they se them in danger. The same
beasts have ben scene not only bring men out of deserces, which have lost
their ways, but also revenge the displeasures done to them, the which gave
them meat, as one that slew him, which had comytted aduoutrie with his
masters wife. The terrible Lyons and Panthers, have ben seen in their manner,
to render thanks to their benefactors, ye and to object their own bodies
and lives for their defence. The same we may daily behold in our own dogs.
Tha in whom thou fyndest the detestable vice of Ingratitude, reputing him
among the warst sort of creatures, think not that thou haste lost a friend,
but think that thou art delivered from a monster of nature, that devoured thy
love, that thou art now at liberty, and hast won experience to chese the a
better. But if this may not suffice, than eftsoon consider, that if thou loke
well on thy self perchance Seneca, de benefi. 7.
thou may find the fault, whereof thou complain, within thyn own bosom.
Call to thy remembrance, if thou hast always rendered unto every man condign
thanks or benefytte, of whom thou hast kyndnes received, or if thou hast always
remeinbred, every one of them, that have done to the any commodity or
pleasure. Thou shalt well perceive, that what thing thou rereceyuedst in
childhode, thou forgattest or did little esteem, when thou camist to the
state of a ma. And what thou dyddeste remember in youth, in age thou did
little think on: thy nouryces pap, her rockynges, her watchynges, thou hast
not always remembered, or equally recompensed.

Thy school masters study, his labour, his dilygece, in a like degre, thou
hast not required. What greater friends hast thou had, of whom thou could
receive any gretter benefits, than thy norishyng and preserving of thy life,
in thy most feblenes, or thyn erudicion, whereby thy nature was made more
excellent. Remembrynge this, leave to be angry or sorrowful for so common a
vice, yet if it cesse not to grieve the, coferre the ingratitude that doth vex
the, with that ingratitude, which was showed by the Israelites, whom god
chase for his own people, delivered from seruage, showed for them woders,
preserved them forty years in desert, destroyed for them kings, gave to them
the country, which flowed milk and honey, defended them against all outward
hostility, sent unto them such abundance of riches, that silver was in
Hierusale, as stones in the street, had his tabernacle, and afterward his
most holy temple among them, which he did daily visit with his divine
majesty, made their kings to reign gloryousely, and spake with their
prophets famylyarlye, and corrected their errors most gentilly: and yet for
all this, they embracing the paynims idolatry, they left so gracious and
loving a lord, and living god, and to his great despite, gave divine
honours, to calves of brass, and other monstrous images, and at the last,
put to most cruel death, the only son of god, that had done so much for
them.

And if we christen men, do loke well on our selves, reuoluynge the
incomparable benefit, which we have received by Christis passion, and cosyder
the circumstance of his most excellent patience, and most fervent love
toward us, with our forgetfulness, and the daily breach of our promise,
which we made at our baptysme, conferring our mutual vnkyndnes thereunto,
there shall appear none ingratitude that shulde offend us. Fynally for a
conclusion, behold well about the, and thou shalt al day find the chylderne
ingrate to their parents, and wives to their husbands. And will thou loke
that thy benefit or vain expectation, should make the more fre from
ingratitude of thy friend, whom chance hath sent the, than nature may the
parents to ward their children, or the coniuction of bodies by lefull marriage,
take unkindness from the wives toward their husbands. This vice therefore of
Ingratitude, being so common a chance, make no worldly frendshyp so precious,
that life or helthe therefore shulde be spent or consumed. I have ben the lengar
in this place, because I have had in this grief sufficient experience.

If death of chylderne be cause of thy heuynesse, Death of chylderne.
call to thy remembrance some chylderne (of whom there is no little number)
whose lives either for vncortigible vices, or unfortunate chances, have ben
more grievous unto their parents, than the death of thy children, ought to be
unto the: considering that death is the discharger of al griefs and miseries,
and to them that dye well, the first entry into life everlasting.

The loss of goods or authority do grieve Loss of goods.
none but fools, which do not mark diligently, that like as neither the one
nor the other doth always happen to them that are worthy, so we have in daily
experience, that they fall from him suddenly, who in increasynge or keeping
them seems most busy.

Oftentimes the repulse frome promotion is Lache of promtio.
cause of discomfort. but than consider, whether in the opinion of good men,
thou art deemed worthy to have such advancement, or in thyn own expectation
and fantasy. If good men so judge the, thank thou god of that felicity, and
laugh at the blyndnesse of them, that so have refused the. If it proceed of
thine own folly, abhorte al arrogance, and enforce thy self to be advanced in
men's estimation, before thou can find thy self worthy in thy proper opinion.

All other chances of fortune, esteem as no Chances of fortune
thing, that lunge before they do happen. The oft recordynge of misery,
prepares the mind to feel less aduersite. And the cotempt of fortune is sure
quietness and most perfect felicity.

This now shall suffice concerning remedies of moral philosophie. Now will I
write somewhat touching the counsel of phisycke, as in relieuynge the body,
which either by the said occasions, or by the humour of melancholy is brought
out of temper.

The first counsel is, that during the time of that passion, eschew to be
angry, studyous, or solitary, and rejoice the with melody, or else be al way in
such company, as best may content the.

Avoid all things that be noyous in syghte, smelling and hearing, and embrace
al thing that is dilectable.

Flee darkness, much watch, and busynesse of mind, much companieng with
women, the use of things very hot and dry: often purgatios, immoderate
exercise, thirst, much abstinence, dry wyndes and cold.

Absteyne from daily eating of much old bief or old mutton, harde chese,
hare flesh, boars flesh, venyson, saltfyshe, colewortes, beans, and
peason, very course breadde, great fyshes of the see, as thurlepole, porpyse,
and sturgeon, other of like natures, wine red and thycke, meates being very
salt or sour, old, burned, or fried, garlyke, onyons, and lekes.

Use meates, which are temperately hot, and therewith somewhat moyste,
boiled rather than roasted, light of digestion, and ingendryng blood clear and
fine. As milk hot frome the vdder, or at the lest new mylked, ruen chese,
sweet almondes, the yelkes of rear eggs, little birds of the bushes,
chyckens, and hens. Wine white or clarette, clear or fragrant. Sweet
savours in winter hot, in summer cold, in the mean time temperate.

Confortatiues of the Hart hot.
BOurage, the flower or leaf. Buglosse. Balm mynte. Elycampane. Cloves.
Cardamomum. Rosemarye. Lignum aloes. Musk. Ambergrise. Saffron. The bone of
the heart of a red dere. Myntes. The rynde of Cytron. Been. Cububes. Basyle.
Confortatiues of the Heart cold.
VIolettes. Perles. Coralle. The unicorns horne. Old appulles which be good.
Roses. Saunders. The olyphantes tothe. Waterlyllies. Coriander prepared.
Confortatiues temperate.
Iacincte. Sapphire. Emerauldes. Myrabolanes, called kebuli. Buglosse. Gold,
silver.
Of Joy.
Joy or gladness of heart doth prolong the life, it fats the body that
is lean with troubles, bringing the humours to an equal temperance, and
drawing natural heate outward. But if it be sudden and fervent, it
oftentimes flees, for as much as it draws to suddenly and excessively
natural heate outward. And therefore divers men and women have ben scene to
fall in a sound, when they have suddenly beholden the persons, whom they
fervently loved.

As a woman in Rome, hearing first, that her son was slain in battle.
After when he cam Ti. L^s
to her, she saying him alive, imbracynge each other, she dyed in his arms.
This well consydred against such inordinate gladness, the best preservative is
to remember, that the extreme parts of mundayne joy is sorrow and heuynesse:
And that nothing of this world, may so much rejoice us: but occasion may
cause it to be displeasant unto us.

The dominion of sondry complexions. Capitulo. xiii.
IT seems to me not inconvenient, that I do declare as well the counsayles of
ancient and approved authors, as also mine own opinion gathered by diligent
marking in daily experience, concerning as well the necessary diet of every
complexion, age and declination of health, as also the mean to resyste
discrasies of the body, before syckenes be therein confirmed, leaving the
residue unto the substaciall learning and circumspect practise of good
physicians, which shall the more easily cure the patients, if their patients
do not disdain to bear away and follow my counsel.

And first it ought to be considred, that none of the four complexions, have
sooly such dominion in one man or woman's body, that no part of any other
complexion is therewith myxt. For when we call a man sanguine, colerike,
fleumatike, or melancholy, we do not mean, that he hath blood only without any
of the other humours, or coler without blood, or fleume without blood or
melancholy, or melancholy without blod or coler. And therefore the man, which is
sanguyne, the more that he draws into age, whereby natural moisture decays,
the more is he colerike, by reason that heate, surmountynge moisture, needs
must remain heate and drithe. semblably the colerike man, the more that he
waxes into aege, the more natural heate in him is abated, and drythe
surmounting natural moisture, he becomes melancolyke: but some sanguyne man
hath in the proporcion of temperatures, a greatter myxture with coler, than an
other hath. Likewise the colerike or fleumatike man with the humour of sanguine
or melancholy. And therefore late practisers of phisike are wont to call men,
according to the mixture of their complexions, which man receives in his
generation, the humours, whereof the same complexions do consist, being
augmented superfluously in the body or members by any of the said things
callid not natural, every of them do semblably augment the complexion, which is
proper unto him, and brings unequal temperature unto the body. And for
these causes, the sanguine or fleumatike man or woman, feeling any discrasy by
choler happened to them by the said things called not Naturalle, they shall use
the dyete described hereafter to him, which is naturally colerike. Semblably
the coleryke or melancolyke man or woman, having any discrasye by fleume, to
use the diet of him, which is naturally fleumatike, always remembrynge, that
sanguyne and fleumatycke men have more respect unto drithe, colerike and
melancolyke unto moisture, and that always as the accidetall complexio decays,
to resort by little and little to the diet, pertaynyng to his natural
complexion.

The times appropryed to every natural humour. Capitu. xiiii.
But first it must be considered, that where the four humours, be always in
manne, and in sum man commonly one humour is more abundant than an another
naturally, that is to say, from his generation. The said humours have also
peculyar times assigned to every oone of them, wherein each of them is in his
most power and force, as after ensues, after the description of Soranus.
Soranus Ephesius.


Fleume hath most puissance in winter, from the.viii. Idus of November, unto
the.viii. Idus of Februarye, whereby are engendered Catarres or reumes, the
vuula, the cough, and the stytche. This humour is part in the heed, part in the
stomach. It hath dominyon from the third hour of night, until the nynthe
hour of the same night.

Blood increases in Spring time, frome the.viii. Idus of February, unto
the.viii. Idus of May, whereof are engendered fevers, and sweet humours, which
do shortly putrifye, the power of this humour is about the hart, and hath
dominion from the.ix. hour of night, until the third hour of the morning.

Red choler hath power in summer from the viii. Idus of May, vntyl the.viii.
Idus of August, whereby are engendered hot and sharpe fevers, this humour is
specially in the liver, and hath dominion from the third hour of day, until
the.ix. hour of the same day.

Yelowe choler, whereof is engendered the fleme of the stomach, is nourysh ed in
Autumn, which begins the.viii. Idus of August, and dureth unto the.viii.
Idus of November, and makes shaking fevers and sharpe, the black coler than
increases, and than follows thycknesse of the blood in the veins. Black
coler or melancholy most reigns in the spleen, and it reigns from the
nynthe howre of day, vntylle the third howre of night.

Peculyar remedies against the distemperance of every humour.
IF the distemperance be of blood, help it with things cold, sharpe, and
dry: for blood is Soranus in art me (...).
moyste, hot, and sweet. If it be of red coler, give things cold, moist,
and sweet, for red coler is bitter and fyry. If it be of black coler, give
things hot moist and sweet, for black coler is sharpe and cold. If the
disease be of salt fleume, give things sweet hot and dry, thus saith Soranus.
Not withstanding where there is abundance of cold fleume not myxte with coler,
there things very sharpe and hot be most convenient, as tart vyneger with
hot rotes and sedes, or wynes strong and rough, honey being sodden in the one
and the other, or where choler is myxte with fleume, syrope acetose made with
vyneger and sugar boiled, sometime with herbs, roots, or sedes, which may
dissolve fleume digest it.

Dicte of them, which are of sanguyne complexion. Cap. xv.
FOrasmothe as in sanguyne men blood most reigns, which is soon corrupted,
it shall be necessary for them, which are of that complexio, to be circumspect
in earynge meat, that shortly will receive putrefaction, as the more part
of fruits, specially not being perfectly ripe, also mea tes that be of i'll
juice, as flesh of beasts to old, or to yonge, vdders of beasts, brains
except of capons and chykens, marowe of the backebone, much use of onyons,
lekes, garlyke, much use of old figs, much use of raw herbs, and al
thing, wherein is excess of hete, cold, or moisture, meates that be stale,
fyshes of the fens or muddye waters, and to much sleep, as experience
shows.

Dyete of choleric persons. Cap. xvi.
TO them, which be choleryke, being in their natural temperature and having
not from their youth used the contrary, gross meates moderately taken, be more
convenient, than the meates that be fine, and better shall they dygeste a piece
of good bief, than a chykens leg. Choler of his property rather burning than
well digestynge meates of light substance, not withstanding some gentylmen,
which be nycely brought up in their infancy, may not so well sustain that diet
as poor men, being the more part used to gross meates. wherefore their diet
must be in a temperance, as yonge beef, old veale, mutton, and venyson
powdered, yonge geese, and such like, conseruinge their complexion with meates
like thereunto in quality and degree, accrodyng to the counsel of Hipocrates.
And as he perceives choler to aboude, so to interlace meates, which be cold
in a moderate quantite, to allay their wine more or lass with water, eschewynge
hot spices, hot wines, and excessive labour, whereby (...) body may be
much chaufed. Also he may^ eat oftenet in the day, than any other: foresene,
that there be such distance between his meals, as the meat before eaten be
fully dygested. which in some person is more, in some lass, according to the
heate and strength of his stomach, no tinge always, that the colerike person
digests more meat than his appetite desires, the melancolyke person
desires by false appetite more tha his stomach may digest. And to a choleric
person, it is right dangerous, to use lunge abstin^e: for choler, finding
nothing in the stomach to concocte, it fares than, as where a little potage
or milk, being in a vessel over a great fire, it is burned to the vessel,
and unsavoury fumes vapours do issue out thereof. Likewise in a choleric
stomach, by abstinence, these inconveniences do happen, humours adust,
consumynge of natural moisture, fumosities and stynkynge vapours, ascendynge up
to the heed, whereof is engendered, duskynge of the eyes, heed aches, hot and
thyn ^eumes, after every little surfete, and many other inconue^iences.
wherefore beside the opinion of best learned men, mine own peynful experience also
moves me, to exhort them, which be of this complexion, to eschew much
abstynence. And although they be studyous, and use little exercise, yet in the
morning, to eat somewhat in little quantity, and not to study immediately,
but first to sit a while, and after to stand or walk softly, which using
these two years, I and also other, that have lunge known me, have perceived in
my body a great alteration, that is to say, from ylle astate to better. Always
remember, that if any other humour do abound in the choleryke person, as
fleume, or melancholy, than until that humour be expelled, the diet must be
cortectiue of that humour, and therefore more hot and fine, than the natural
diet before ^ehersed: but yet there would be always respect had to the
natural complexion, some time suffering the person to eat ordrynke that,
which nature working, seruently desires.

Dyete of fleumatike persons. Cap. xvii.
IT is to be remembered, that pure fleume is properly cold and moyste, and
lacks taste. Salt fleume is my^e with choler, and therefore has not in him
so much cold nor humidity, as pure fleume hath: therefore it requires a
temperance in things hot dry, whereby fleume is dygested or expulsed. To
fleumatike persons al meates at noyful, which are very cold, viscous or slymy,
fat or soon putrified, eating much and often, specially meates ingendringe
fleume, which be remem bred in the table precedynge. Al things be good,
which are hot and dry, also meates and drinks which be sour: onyons
also, and ga^lyke, moderatelye used, be very commendable, in pure fleume not
myxte with choler, much vsynge of salt, specially dried. Pepper gross beaten
and ea ten with meat, ought to be with all fleumaticke persons famylyar, also
gynger is right convenient, but not to be so frequently used as pepper, for as
much as the nature of pepper is, that being eaten, it passes through the
body, heatyng and comfortynge the stomach, not entering into the veins, or
annoyenge the liver, which virtue is not in gynger. Gynger condyte, the which
we do call grene Gynger, specyally candid with Sugar, if it may be gotten, and
also Myrobalaues, called kebuli, condite in India* be most excel lent remedies
against fleume. also the herbs, which are remembered before in the table of
digestiues of fleme, and the roots of persely, fenel, yreos, Elycampane, and
ca^ettes be very commendable. Exercise twice in the day, the stomach being
almost empty, so that sweat begin to appear, is very expedient, clensing of
the body from al filthynesse, with rubbing and wypynge, oftentimes with
washing, specially the heed and partis therabout, moderate sweating in hot
bathes or stufes be to this complexion necessary, specially when they have
eaten or drunken excessively. The heed and fete to be kept from cold, to dwell
high and fat from mores and marshes, is a rule right necessary, also to
absteyne from eating herbs and rotes not boiled, and generally from all
meates* which will not be easily dygested.

The division of melancholy, and the diet of persons melancolike. Cap. xviii.
Melancholy is of two sorts, the one is called natural, which is only
cold and dry, the other is called aduste or bourned. Natural melancholy is
as Galene says) the resydence or dregs of the blood: and therefore is colder
and thycker than the blood. Melancholy aduste is in four kinds, either it is
of natural melancholy adust, or of the more pure part of the blood aduste,
or of choler adust, or of salt fleume adust. But of all other that melancholy is
wa^st, which is engendered of choler: fynally all aduste melancholy annoys the
wit and judgment of man. for when that humour is hette, it makes men
mad, and when it is extinct, it makes men fools, forgetful, and dull.
The natural melancholy Ex Marel lio ficino. de uita sana.
kept in his temperance, profyteth much to true iugement of the wit, but yet
if ^t be to thick, it darkens the spirits, makes one timorous, and the
wit dull. If it be myxt with fleume, it mortifies the blood with to much
cold. Wherefore it may not be so little, that the blood and spirits in their
feruentnes, be as it were vnbridlyd, whereof do happen vnstablenesse of wit
slipper remembrance: nor yet so much, that by the weight thereof (for it is
heavy, approchynge nyghe to the ^the) that we seem to be always in sleep, and
need a spur to prycke us forward. Wherefore it is right expediente, to keep
that humour as thyn as nature will suffer it, and not to have to much of it.
But now to the diet pertaining to them, whom this humour annoys. The
knowledge, that melancholy reigns, is oftentimes heuynesse of mind, or fear
without cause, slepynesse in the members, many cramps without ^eplecion or
emptynesse, sudden fury, sudden incontinency of the tongue, much solicitude
of light things, with paleness of the visage, and fear full dreams of
terrible visyons, dreamynge of darkness, deep pyttes, or death of friends or
acqueyntance, and of all thing that is black. The meates convenient are they,
which be temperate in heate, but specially they that be moist: meates soon
digested, and they rather boiled tha roasted, temperately myxte with spices,
milk hot from the vdder, or late mylked, is very conuement for that
complexion, sweet almondes blaunched, and almonde milk, the yelkes of rear
eggs, and fynally all things, which engender pure blood, and all that is
written in the chapiter of age. All these be ill for them, wine thycke or
troublouse, specially red wine, meates hard, dry, very salt, or sour,
bourned meat, fried meat, much bief, hares flesh, beans, toket,
colewortes, mustard, radyshe, ga^lyke, except there be much wind in the
body, for than is it very wholesome, onyons, lekes, fynally all things, which
heats to much, keleth to much, or dries to much, also wrath, fear,
compassion, sorrow, much study or care, much ydelnesse or rest: all thing
that is greuouse to see, to smell, or to here, but most specially darkness.
Moreover much drienge of the body, ^ther with lunge watch, or with much care
and ^o^ynge of the mind, or with much lecherye, or much eating and
drinking of things that be hot and dry, or with immoderate evacuation,
labour, abstinence, thyrst, going in the air vntemperately hot, cold, or
dry, all these things do annoy them that be grieved with any melancholy. It is
to be diligentely considered, that where melancholy happens of choler aduste,
there meates, which be hot in warkynge, would be wyselye tempered, and
drinking of ho^e wynes would be eschewed: semblable cautel would be in
sauoures. Not withstanding moderate use of small wynes, clear, and well
verdured, is herein very commendable, the humour thereby being clarified, and
the spirits cleansed, but the abuse or excess thereof doth as much damage.
Alsoo it is right expedient, to put into wine or ale, a gad of silver or
gold, glowyng hot out of the fire, to temper hot meates with ^oses,
Vyolettes, Saunders, Rose water, bourage, Buglosse, balm called in latyne
Melyssa, or the water of all three drunken with good wine, white, or clarette,
or made in a Iuley with sugar, is wonderful wholesome, chewing of lykorise, or
raisons of coraunce is right expedyente: but most of all other things,
mirth, good company, gladness, moderate exercise, with moderate feeding.
And thus I leave to speak of dyetes aptely belonging to the four
complexyons.

THE FOVRTHE BOOK
What cruditie is, and remedies therefore. Capitulo primo.
CONCERNING syknes, and things accident thereunto, I will not treat of in this
warke, saving only that I will somewhat write of two discrasies of the body,
which do happen by the excess or lack of things callid not natural, whereof
I have spoken before. The one is called cruditie, the other lassitude, which
although they be words made of latin, having none apt englyshe word
therefore, yet by the definitions and more ample declaration of them, they shall
be understand sufficiently, and from hensforthe used for english. But fyrs^e
it shall be necessary, to consider, that concoction is an alteration in the
stomach of meates and drynkes, according to their qualities, whereby they are
made like to the substance of the body. Cruditie is a vycious concoction of
things received, they not being holly or perfitely altered. The cause thereof
is, sometime the distemperature of the stomach, sometime inflammations, sometime
matter congeled, or impostumes in the stomach, otherwhile ingurgitation of
meat and drink: or for the vicious quality of the same meates or drinks, or
the ^eceyuyng thereof out of order, or lack of exercise, or of convenient
evacuation. The mean to escape cruditie, is to be diligent in observation of
the councels before written, concerning the things called not natural, not
much using meates that be very harde to concoct, also fat meat and meates
lunge kept, also corrupted or stynkyng, sweet fruits, and bankettynge dyshes,
hasty fedynge without good chewynge, also much or very oft drinking at
meals, very much heate, or very much cold after meat. This affect of
cruditie, perceived by sum ill savour, rysynge out of the stomach, the
most spedy remedy is vomyte, if that it may be done without great
difficulty: but if it be greuouse unto the patient, tha let him rest absteyn
al that day or more, if that need be: Afterward, with suppositories or other
light remedies, provoke him self to the stool. A^tius would, that he shulde
drink a draught of cold A^ti' sermon. 9
water, affyrmynge, that thereby the stomach being corroborate, drives out of
him down into the belie, that which cleaves fast to it. I my self vsynge
to drink fasting, very small bier or ale, when I have ben in that case, have
found ease by it. Paulus Aeg^eta wills, that at the beginning, the legs
and arms should be Paul. Egi. lib. 2.
rubbed with a course lynnen clothe, the legs downward to the fete, the
arms to the tops of the fingers, and when they be well chaufed, tha to rub
them again with some oil, that doth open the poores, and dyscusse the
vapou^s, as oil of cam^myll, oil of anete, and other like. he praises much
Mulse, or the water of honey, specially if some I soap be boiled in it. Galene,
all other, do agree, that in this case, Pepper bruised and eaten with meat, is
very expedient: And where there is much wind in the stomach, tha to eat all
times of the day of the medicine made of the three kinds of pepper, time,
anyse sede, honey clarified, which is called Diatrion pipereon, or that which is
called Diaspoliticon, or Diapiganon, which is made of cummyne, stieped Galen'
de menda sa ni. lib. 5.
one day and a night, or longer in tart vyneger, and after feyed or laid on
a burning hot stone, and made in powlder, also pepper, few dried somewhat,
and made into powlder, all in equal porcions, and myxt with clarified honey.
Galene adds thereto salt peter, called in latin Nitrum. The confection made
with the juice of quynces, and is called Diacytoniten, is very excellent, but
it is to be diligently noted, that where eruditie is in a choleric personne,
there would the said medicines be temperatly used, and the said Diacytoniten,
to have little or no spices in it. And for my part, being the space of four
years continually in this cruditie, I never found any thing to be compared to
fine Reubarbe, chewed with raysons of corens, which I toke by the counsel of
the worshipful and well learned physician, master Doctor Augustine, who in his
manners declares the ancient gentylnesse of his blood, which medicine I do not
leave to use dayely fastinge, when I feel such cruditie to begin. Also
syrope acetose, that is to say, sugar sodden in pure vyneger, and little
water, until it be thick as a syrope, is sometime convenient, and that as
well to colerike personnes, as unto fleumatike: and if fleume be abundant, than
with roots and sedes of fenelle and persely sodden with it. Also in that case
Oxymel, that is to say, honey and water sodden together, with the said roots
and sedes, and a quantity of vyneger put thereto in the boylynge, is very
commendable, if the patient be very costive, than the medicine of Galene,
called Hierapicra, frome half an ounce to an ounce, taken in water of honey or
ale, or taken in pylles the weight of a groat and a h^ two grotes, if the
stuff be good, will pourge the body sufficiently, without making the body
weaker. Also that medicine by clensynge the stomach and body, delyuereth a man
and woman, frome many peryllous syckenesses. If the humours in the stomach be
not putrified, but that it is grieved with abundance of salt fleume, I have
found that milk new mylked, wherein is put a quantity of good honey or
sugar, and three leaves of good spear myntes, and a little boiled, so being
drunk warm fastinge, the quantity of a pynte, and resting on it, without
eating or drinking any other thing the space of three hours after, have
abundantly pourged and comforted the stomach, but where there is no fleume,
but only choler, it is not so wholesome, but rather hurts, making fumosities
in the heed, whereof comes heed ache.

Of Lassuude. Capitulo. ii.
LAssicude is a disposition toward sycknesse, wherein a man feleth a
soorenesse, a swellynge or an inflammation. Soreness happens of humours sharpe
and gnawing, as after great exercise and labours, which lassitude happens to
them, whose bodies are full of i'll juice and excrementes. Also after cruditie in
them, which are not exercised, or do abide lunge in the heate of the Acti^ li.
3.
son. It may also be in the body, wherein is good juice, if he be fatigate
with immoderate exercise. In them, which do feel this lassitude, the skin
Galen' de menda sa ni. lib. 5.
appears thick and rough, there is felt a grefe sometime in the skin only,
sometime also in the flesh, as it were of a soore. The cure thereof, is by much
and pleasant rubbing, with sweet oils, which have not the virtue to restrain
or close, and that with many hands, and afterward to exercise moderately, and
to be banned in water sweet and temperate in heate. also than must be given
meates of good juice, potage but selde, wine is not to be forboden. for unto
wine, vneth any thing may be compared, that so well dygesteth crude humours.
it also provokes sweatte urine, and makes one to sleep soudly. but if this
lassitude do abide the night and day following, or waxes more and more, than if
the patient be of good strength and young, and hath abundance of blood, let
him be let blood, or provoke the hemoroides or piles to blede, if they do
appear. But if it proceed of the malice of any humour, without abundance of
blood, than resort to purgatios apt for the humour that grieves. The tokens
whereof, shall appear as well by the colour of the skin and die^e precedyng,
as by urine, ordure, sweat, thirst, and appetite, as it is rehearsed before in
the complexions. If the ill blood be little in quantity, and the crude
humours abundant, than shall he not be let blood, nor vehemently pourged,
neither shall exercise or move him self, nor be banned, for all exercise
carries humours throughout al the body, and stoppith the powers. Wherefore these
manner of persons, should be kept in rest, and such meates drynkes and medicines
should be given to them, which shulde attenuate or dissolve the grossenes of
the humours, without notable heate, as oxymell, barley water, muise, if the
patient abhor not honey. And for as much as in the said personnes, commonly
there is abundance of wind about their stomachs, therefore pepper, specially
lunge pepper, or white, is very convenient to be used, and the medicine before
written, callid Diaspoliticum. When the humours are dissolved, tha is it good to
drink white wine, or small clarette wine moderately.

Lassitude extensiue. Capit. iii.
VVhan one thinks that he doth feel a swelling or bollyng of the body, where
in dede there doth not appear in sight or touching any swelling, that is
called Lassitude extensiue, if it happens without exercise or vehement mouynge.
This doth happen of excessive multitude of humours, which do extend the
muscules or fyllettes. In this no sorenes is felt, but only an heuynesse with
extension or thrusting out of the body. And because that there is abundance of
blood in the body, best remedy is to be letten blood about the the elbow or
ankle, after to be purged, than to use soft fricasyes with oils before
rehearsed, afterward much rest and temperate bathes, and meates lacking
sharpnes, and being abstersiue.

Lassitude with the feelynge of inflammation. Capitulo. iiii.
IF without any mouynge, the muscules and flesh rise up in the body, as it
swelled with great peynes and exceeding heate, than soon after follows most
hottest fevers, except it be prevented by letting of blud, and that in
abundance, and almost to swooning, but it were more sure to be let Aetius.
blood twyse in one day, the first time without sownyng, at the next time
sownynge is not to be feared. If the grefe be in the neck or head, the blood must
be let of the vain called Cephalea, or the shoulder vain. If it be in the
bulk or uppermost part of the body, than must the vain be cut, which is
called Basilica, or the innermost vain. If all the body be grieved, tha cut the
veyn, which is named Mediana. or the myddel vayn. If a fever remain after
blood letting, than order him with the diet of them that have fevers, which ye
shall find written hereafter. If no fever remain, than use moderate
fricasies, and little eating, that of meates having good juice, increacynge by
little and little to the natural diet.

Diet of them that are ready to fall into syckenesse. Capitulo v.
Now return eftesones to speak of diet, it is to be remembered, that they,
which are ready to fall into diseases, they are prepared thereunto, either by
replecion of superfluous humours, orels by cruditie or malice of humours, which
are in them. As touching the first, the general diet must be such, as thereby
the humours may be attenuate, and by convenient evacuation, brought to a
moderate quantity. As for the second must be corrected with meates and
drinks of contrary qualities, having always respect to the age of the person,
time of the year, place of habitation, and most specially the universal
complexion, for choler offendynge in an old manne, in winter time, in a cold
country, or the person being of his natural complexion fleumatike or
melancholy, would not be so habudantly expulsed or subdued, as if it be in one
young and lusty, in the hot summer, in the coutreys, where the son fervently
burns, or the person of his proper nature is very colerike. And in likewise
contrary. Wherefore every manne, knowing his own natural complexion, with
the quality of the humour that offends, let him make temperance his chief
coke, and remembrynge that which I have before declared, ordeyne to him self
such diet, as may reform the offence with none or little annoyance, to his
universal complexion. And if he can so do, he shall happily escape, not only
divers syckenesses, but also the most pernicious dagger, proceeding of
corrupted drowges or spices, whereof some covetous poticaries do make medycynes,
maugre the hedes of good and well learned phisytions.

Sickness most commune to particular times of the year and ages. Cap. vi.
Although I do not intende to write of the cure of egritudes or syckenesses
confirmed, as well because it moughte be reputed in me a great presumption, as
also forasmoche as it were very peryllous, to dyuulgate that noble science, to
commune people, not learned in liberal sciences and philosophy, which be
required to be suffi ciently in a physician. And moreover, many books of
Hipocrates and Galene ought to be radde, before that one do take upon him the
general cure of men bodies: yet not withstanding, I trust I may without
any note of arrogaunce write, what diseases do most commonly happen in sondry
times of the year and ages of men and women, with some significations, whereby
the dyscrasy or distemperature of the body is perceived, to the intent that the
physician being far of, may be truly informed, considering that vrines far
carried, do often deceive them, and likewise lack of the sight of the paciet,
and inquisition of things, which do precede or follow the sycknes. And with
this I trust none honest and charitable physician will be offended, but rather
give to me thanks for my diligence, in the aduauncyng of their estimation,
which by lack of perfytte instruction hath ben appaired.

Syckenesses of Spring time.
Diseases procedynge of melancholy, as madness, falling syckenesse,
bleedynges, quynses, poses, hoorsenes, coughs, lepries, scabs, ache in the
joints.

Syckenesses of Summer.
Many of the said diseases also fevers continual, hot fevers, fevers terciane,
quartayns, do mytes, flyxes, watryng of eyes, peynes of the ears, blysters
sores of the mouth sweattynges.

Syckenesses of Autumn.
Divers of somer sycknesses, also oppilations of the spleen, dropsies,
consumptions, strangulyons, costyuenesse, ache in the huckle bones, shortness
of wind, frettyng of the bowels, falling sycknes, and melancolyke dyseases.

Sycknesses of winter.
Stytches and grefes in the sides, inflammation of the lunges, reumes, coughs,
pains in the breast, sides, and loins, heed ache, and palseyes.

Spekenesses happenynge to children.
When they be new borne, there do happen to them sores of the mouth called
Aphte, vomiting, coughs, watching, fearfulness, inflamatios of the navel,
moisture of the ears.

When they breed teeth, ytchinge of the gummes, fevers, cramps, and laskes.

When they wax elder, than be they grieved with kernelles, opennesse of the
mould of y^ heed, shortness of wind, the stone of the bladder, worcester mes of the
bealy, wartes, swellynges under the chynne, and in Englande commonly purpyls,
mea sells, and small pockes.

Syckenesse happening to young men frome.xiiii. years of age.
Fevers cotidiane, tercyane, quarteyne, hot fevers, spittinge or vomytinge of
blood, pleuresies, diseases of the sides, inflammation of the lunges,
lethargies, fransy, hot syckenesses, cholerik passions, costiuenes or vehement
laskes.

Syckenesses of age.
Difficulty of breath, reumes with coughs, strangulyon, and difficulty in
pissinge, ache in the joints, diseases of the raynes, swymmynges in the heed,
palseyes, ytchinge of all the body, lack of sleep, moisture in the eyes and
ears, dullness of sight, hardness of hearing, tisiknesse or shortness of
breath.

Although many of the said sycknesses do happen in every time and age: yet
because they be most frequent in the said times ages, I have writ the, to
thintet, y^ in the ages ^ymes most inclined unto the, such thiges mought be tha
eschewed, which are apt to ingedre y^ said dyseases.

The general significations and tokens of syckenes. Cap. vii.
IF the body be hoter, colder, moyster, dryer, leaner, fuller, the colour more
pale, or swart, the eyes more holowe, than is accustomed to be, it signifies
that the body is disposed to sickness, or already sick.

The brain sick. Rauynge. Forgetfulness. Fantasy. Humours coming from y^
roufe of the mouth, the eyes, the nose, or the ears. Watch. Sleep.

The heart sick. Difficulty of breathe. Trembling of the heart. Beatynge of
the pulse. Fevers. Cold. Diversity of colours. Grief about the hart.

The liver sick. Lack or abundance of humours. The form of y^ body
altered. Paleness. Concoction. Digestion. Alteration of excrementes
accustomed. Peyne in the place of y^ liver. Swelling. Difficulty of breath.

The stomach sick. Concoction, slow or quick. Appetite of moist or dry, dull
or quycke. Separacion of excrementes moist or herd with their colours.
Yexynge. Belkynge. Vometynge with peyne and difficulty of breath. Urine much or
little with the colour and substance, to red or to pale, to thick or to thyn.


The breast. Difficulty of breath. Cowghe. Spyttinge. Peyne in the breast.

This have I written, not to give judgment thereby, but only for the patient
to have in a redynesse, to the intent that what so ever he feleth or perceives
in every of the said things, thereof to instruct his physician, whereunto he
may adapt his counsel and remedies.

Of urynes. Cap. viii.
FOrasmoch as now a days the most common judgment in syckenesse is by vrynes,
which being far carried or much meued, or standing lunge after that it is
made, the form thereof is so altered, that the physician shall not perfytly
perceive the natural colour, nor contents, although it be never so well
chaufed at the fire, as Actuarius and other great learned men do affirm. I will
therefore somewhat speak of vrines not so much as a physician knows, but as
much as is necessary to every man, for to perceive the place and cause of his
grief, whereby he may the better instruct the Physician.

First in urine, four things are to be considered, that is to say, the
substance, the colour, the regions or parts of the vryne, and the contetes or
things therein contained.

Also forasmoch as in the body of man be four qualities, heate, cold,
moisture, and dryth, two of them, heate and cold, are causes of the colour,
dryth and moisture are causes of the substance.

Moreover in urine, being in a vessel apt there unto to be scene, are three
regios. The lowest regio in the bottom of the vrynall, containing the space
of two fyngers or little more. The myddel region, from whens the lowest ended
unto the cerkle. The highest region is the cerkle.

The hyghnesse of the colour sygnifyeth heate, the pale, black, or grene,
sygnifieth cold.

Also the grossenes or thyckenesse of the vryne sygnyfyeth moisture, the
clerenes or thynnes, signyfieth drithe.

The colours of Vrynes.
Colour of bright gold. Colour of gylte.
Perfyte digestyon. Red as a red apple or che^y. Base red, like to bole
armenake, or saffron dry Red glowynge like fire.
Ercesse of digestion. Colour of a beasts liver. Colour of dark red wine.
Grene like to colewortes.
Adustion of humours. Leaddy colour. Black as ink. Black as horne.
Feblenes or mortification of nature, except it be in purging of melancholy.
White clear as water. Gray as a horne. White as why. Colour of a camels hear.

Lack of digestion. Pale like to broth of flesh sodden. The beginning of
digestion. Citrine colour or yelowe, Subcitrine or paler.
The myddell of digestion. White and thynne betokens melancholy to have
dominyon. White and thycke, sygnifieth fleume. Red and thycke betokens
sanguine. Red and thynne betokenethe choler to have the souerayntie.
The substance of the urine. Cap. ix.
AT the first pissyng, all vrines well nigh do appear thyn, as lunge as they
abide warm. for natural heate, during the time that it prevails, suffers
not that the lycour, which is the substance of the urine, to congele or be
thycke for any occasion: but after that heate is gone, some vrines shortly,
some a longer time after, wax thick, like wise sometime, some at pissed
thicker, and after wax clear, some remain stylle as they were made, some be
meetly thycke, as they were troubled, some very thick and gross. They that
wax clear, soon do gather that, which is thick into the bottom of the
vrinal, some remain troubled, the grossenes not withstanding gathered in the
bottom. Semblably the diversity of thyn or subtle vrines, must be perceived,
that is to say, that some are very subtle as water. some lass subtle, some in
a mean between thycke and thynne.

Of things contained in the urine, some do discende down to the bottom, and
be called in a greek word Hypostasis, in english some call it the grounds,
some the resydence, which if it be white, light, risynge up from the bottom
of the urinal, like a pear, it sygnifieth health, if it be of any other figure
or colour, it betokens some annoyance. If like things be scene in the myddell
of the vrynall, they be called sublations, if they approach unto the highest
region of the vryne, they be named clouds, in latin Nebulae. The groudes or
residences not perfect, some is like lyttelle red vetches, and is called in
latin Orobea, some is like to bran of wheat ground, and severed from the
meal, and is callid branny residence, in latin Furfurea, some be like unto
plates, having breadth and length without thickness, and may be named platy
residence, in latyne Laminea. some is like to meal, wheat, or barley, and may
be named mealy residence, in latin Similacea.

There is also seen in the urine like to white hears, some lengar, some
shorter. sometime like to rags somewhat red. there is also scene in the
uppermost part of the urine, sometime a some or froth, sometime belles or
bobles. sometime there swymmeth in the urine a thing like a copwebbe,
otherwhile there is about the cerkle, as it were the rentynge of clothe, sometime
there is in the urine like motes of the son, sometime like the matter of a
sore, otherwhyle like the sede of a man. also grauelle or sand. And in these
things may be divers colours, some white, some red, some between both, some
yelow, some gray, and some black. All this must be diligently marked, and
thereof separatly to advertise the Physician, unto whom I refer the judgment
of the syckenes, for the cause before rehearsed, and for as much as the
judgment of them is very subtle.

Semblably of ordure, wither it be very thyn or very thick: what other matter
yssueth out with it, what colour it is of, the savour very great, little or
none, if it were easily expulsed, or peynefully, how oft or how seldom.

Moreover of sweat, what colour it is of, and of what savour, if in tastinge it
be salt, sour, bitter, or unsavoury.

Also the vomyte, if it be of one colour or many, if it do smell horribly, of
what humour it had most habundaunce, if it were fasting, or after meals, if
it were peynefull or easy.

Likewise spettyl, whether it be thick or thin, or mixed with blood or matter
corrupt, accordingly of the humour issuynge out at the nose, and if that be
blood, than wither it be red, watery or black.

Moreover, it may not be forgotten, to aduertyse the Physician of the diet
used by the patient, as well before the syckenesse, as in the time of the
syckenesse, his age, the strength of his body, his exercise, and place, where
he lengest abod^ in his youth, whether it were hye or lowe, watery or dry, hot
or cold.

This I trust shall be sufficient, to instruct a phisicion, he that desires to
know more particularly hereof, let him rede the books of Hipocrates Galene,
Cornelius Celsus, Actuarius, Paulus, and divers other late wryters, for this
little treatise may not receive it.

The precepts of the ancient physician Diocles unto king Antigonus. Cap. x.
We will now divide the body of man into four parts, the heed, the boulke,
called in latin thorax, which conteyneth the breast, the sides, the stomach, and
entrails. The belly, called in latin venture, conteyneth the panche and the
bowels. Also the bladder, called in latin vesica, in the which name is also
contained the cundytes, by the which brine passes. When any disease approaches
to the heed, these tokens do commonly precede, swymmynge in the heed, heed
ache, heuynes of the brows, soundynge in the ears, pryckynges in the temples,
the eyes in the morning do water, or wax dynime, the smelling is dull, y^
gummes do swell. When thou felest such tokens, forthwith pourge the heed with
somewhat, not with vehement medecines, but taking Isope or Organum, and the
croppes of them boyle with white or claret wine half a pynte, and therewith
gargarise your mouth fastinge, vntyl the fleume be purged out of pour heed,
this is the easyest medicine in discrasies of the heed. It is also very wholesome
to gargarise the mouth and breast with honey water, whereinto mustard is put and
mingled, but first the heed must be rubbed with a warm clothe, that the
fleume may easily come out of the heed. And if these tokens be neglected,
these manner of syckenesses do follow soon after, bleared eyes, humour lettinge
y^ sight, cleftes in the ears, swellynges in the neck full of matter, called
the kings evil, corruption of the brain, poses, or reumes, heuynesse of the
head, and tooth ache.

When the boulke is like to suffer any sickness it is perceived by these tokens,
all the body is in a sweatte, the bulk most specially, the tunge waxes
thick, the spettyll is either salt or bitter, or choleric, the sides and
shoulders do ache without any occasion, the patient gapes often, also there
doth happen much waking, suffocations or lack of breath, thirst after sleep,
the mind is vexed with heuynesse, also the breast and arms are very cold, and
the hands do tremble. Against these things this remedy may be prouy ded.
After a moderate soupper, assay to vomit without any medicine, vomyte is
also profytable, which meat doth follow: He that in such wise will vomit,
let him eat hastyly small radysshe roots, townketsis, rokat, synuy, or
purslane, and drink after it a great quantity of warm water, and provoke
him self to vomyte. He that sets little by the said tokens, let him fear
these sycknesses following, the pleuresie, the sickness of the lunges,
melancholy or madness, sharpe fevers, the fransye, the letargie, inflammation
with yexinge.

If any syckenesse be toward the bealye, they may be espied by these tokens,
the bealy is first wrapped together, and in it self is troubled, all meates
and drinks do seem bitter in taste, he feleth heuynesse in his knees, a
styffenes in his loins, a weariness in all his body without any occasion, a
slepynesse in his legs, with a little fever, when thou feleste these tokens,
mollyfie the bealy, not with medicine, but with good order of diet, for it is
best and most sure, to use those things, whereof lightly may ensue none
annoyance, in the number of them are betes boiled in water of honey, garlic
sodden, malowes, sorel, mercury, and al things condite in honey. All these do
expel the ordute of the belly: but if any of the said signs doth more more
increase, the lyquour, wherein the sede of Carthamus, called also Cnicus, is
boiled, is a pleasant sure medicine. small colewortes boiled in a good quantity
of water, the liquor thereof in measure.ii. pintes, saving the third part of a
pint, with honey salt being drunken, shall profit much. Cicer, the pulse callid
in latin eruum, in english I suppose chittes) in water drunk fasting, hath the
same effect. To them, which set little by the said tokens, these diseases do
suddenly happen, Flux of the bealy, bluddy flux, slyppernes of the bowels,
peines in the guts, ach in huckle bones the fever tercyane, the gowte, the
apoplexy or pal sey in the lymmes, hemoroides, aching of joints.

When the bladder is toward any sickness, it is perceived by these tokens,
fullness felt after lie tell meat, brekyng wind downward and upward,
paleness of colour in all the body, heavy or troublous sleapes, the urine pale,
and passing forth peynefully, swellynges about the coddes privy members. When
these tokens appear, tha is it expediet to have remedy of odoriferous things,
which do expel urine, which shall be done without any peril with the rotes
of fenell persely stieped one or two days in good white wine and to drink
thereof fastinge every morning three ounces and two drames, with the water of
wild carettes, or elycampane, which of these is next at hand, every of them
have like effect. Also water, wherein the peasyn called in latyne Ciceres, are
stieped, being drunk with wine, is like commodiouse: he that neglects the
said tokens, let him loke for these syckenesses following, the dropsy, the
greatness of the spleen, grief in the liver, the stone, ache of the back, or
peynes in the raynes, the difficulty of urine, fullness of the belly. In all
these things that we have spoke of, we shall give to children most easy
medicines, to men those, which be stronger in workynge.

This diet of Diocles, although at this time it seems not most pleasant,
nor according to the practise now used, yet being tempered with that, which I
have before remembered, some thing may be found in it, which being
experienced, may be as commodious for the health of mas body, as that diet,
which is morecuryous or pleasant.

Of them in whose stomachs meat is corrupted. Cap. xi.
THey in whom customably meat is corrupted, let them before that they eat any
meat, assay to vomyte, drinking sweet wine, absteyne frome meat, that engender
botches, inflammations, fumous ructuations or vapours, and take such as
nourysh good juice, and chose them out, which do mollify the belly, at sondry
times take them. It is also good to take temperatly y^ which lowseth the belly,
as the medicine called picra, and to absteyne from such things, whereby ill
juice is gathered, and do engender syckenesses, harde to be cured or never, as
goutes, boneache, peynes of the raynes c.

Of the virtue of meates. Cap. xii.
HE that is studyous about the conservation of health, he needs to know the
virtue of meates. The meat which hath virtue to Oribasius de medici na
simpli.
extenuate, or make humours subtylle, it opens the poores, and brings
forth that which is fast in the flesh, it makes that which is clammye,
subtylle, and doth extenuate, or relent that which is fat, it brings
forth that which abides lunge in the bealy, but that which is eaten, is a
superfluity watery and colerike, and at length makes melancolyke blood.
Wherefore much using of them is prohibited, specially to them; that are
colerike, and only serves for them that are replete with fleume, crude or
vndigested humours, clammy or fat. The diet of fattinge things, doth
nourish abundantly, so that the stomach and liver do digest well: meat of
good juice, makes good blood, but yet it stops the liver and spleen. These
do they, which make fat humours only, as the poulse called Lenticula, and
they that are slymy like malowes, some do make fat humours, be also slymy, as
fishes with hard shells. Fynally the diet, which doth extenuate and make
lean, is more sure for keeping of health, than that, which fats much.
Norishyng meates wold be therefore moderately used, when a ma perceives him
self to have need thereof, it may be most surely used of them that be exercised
temperately, and can sleep when they list. They that can not sleep by reason of
exercise, let them eschew fattynge meates, let none ydelle person
attempt to use them. In the preservation of health, sluggardy is the greatest
mischief. Like as the temperate moving is good, so is the meat which between
thycke and thynne, is to man health most convenient, which engenders blood,
according to the competent constitution of mans body, therefore is it to be
chiefly used. Meat of ill juice is always noyfull, wherefore it ought to be
eschewed. Likewise the variety of meates is to be observed diligently, for it
is a great thing to couple well together things of contrary virtues. for if
they be not well digested, that which is received, may bring displeasure.

A diet preservative in the time of pestilence. Capitulo. xiii.
THe bodies most apt to be infected, are specially sanguine, next colerike,
than fleumatike last melancolyke, for in them the humour being cold and dry,
is most unapt to receive putrefaction, having also strayte passages, by the
which venom must pass. The diet convenient for y^ time is to abstein fro
metes, inflamig openig y^ pores Marfilius ^inus.
also from the heat of the son, fro to much heate of fire, or garmentis, from
very hot herbs, much use of tart things, except onions and cikory, or
radish with vinegar. for they do resist against venom, from wine very fumishe,
exercise incontinent after meals, from swetting, from al thingis that will
cause oppilations putrefaction, from things hot moist, where moisture hath the
dominion in degree, specially being not sufficiently boiled: also from milk,
except it be in a little quatite, that with a little sugar. Frutis herbs cold
dry, therewith sour or somewhat bitter, are not prohibited. If ye eat figs,
grapes, or sweet cherries, eat after them of an orange with salt. If ye eat
things cold moist, as cucubers, melones, fyshe soft and fresshe, or damsyns,
eat by and by after some fenell, and orange with salt, drinking therewith a
draught of good wine. Beware of musherons, much purslane, gourdis, and al
other things, which will soon putrefy: not withstanding, I will not forbid
eating of lettyse, with a few myntes, or myxt with cynamom. Al things sour
are commended, as well in diet conseruatiue, as in that which is curatiue or
heals, except where there is straytnesse of the breast, or weakness of the
stomach, than ought they to be tempered with sugar, salt, almond milk, cinamom,
pepper, fenell, saffron, eggs, and some thing that is fat or vnctuous.
Capers are good to be used with vinegar. Chese very fat and salt, is not
commended, no more is colewortes, or any kind of pulse, except chittes: great
peason, rapes, nor spynache is good. Also there be forboden rokat and mustard,
much wine and eggs, except they be eaten with sorrel sauce, vyneger, or juice
of orenges: persely and also parsnepes be good. new wynes be noyfull, let the
meat be somewhat more than drink. but yet susteyn not to much hunger nor
^hyrst. beware of lechery, of a cloudy whether and close, eschew much resort
or throng of people, wyndes coming from fens or mores, from sleep at none:
use with your meat this poulder, sanders red, half an ounce, cynamom three
drammes and a half, saffron half a dram. After your meat, eat a little
of coriander sede, well prepared. In the morning, at a temperate fire kembe
your heed backward, cleanse your body and heed of all superfluities: use also
moderate fricasies, with sweet perfumes, and odouts, wash oftentimes your face
and hands with pure vyneger myxt with rosewater. In cold whether mixed it with
myntes, balm, rue, or myrtes, and some time cloves. In hot summer with
roses or violettes. Above all things use to take white wine good, white
vyneger rosette, water of roses, in equal porcions, put there unto a little
setuale, or of the rynde of a citton, and drink thereof a little, and
oftentimes wash there with your handis and visage. Medicines preservative
against the pestilece, which be always most ready, at these, a fig with rue,
and a wall nut eaten fasting, also triakle, or mithridate, to old men a
dram weight, to yonge men half a dram, or a scruple dissolved in vinegar
and rose water, or in water of tormentill, scabiose, or balm, if the plage be
in summer: if it be in winter, put to the waters some white wine. Also the
pills called commonly Pillul^ Rasis, but in dede they were invented by Rufus)
are very excellent, specially if the aloe, which is it, be washed, and there
unto added a little Bolus armenus, terra sigillata, And if the person be of
hot complexion, a quantity of sorrel sede, and red cotall, this confectioned
with syrope of cittons, in cold complexions or to old men with white wine, use
them every third day one pill at a time, three hours or four before dinet or
supper. If ye take triakle or Mithridate, absteyne from meat at the least syx
hours after. A piece of the rote of setual, borne in the mouth, preseruith from
infectio. In likewise doth sorrel chewed fasting, and the juice sucked down.
To poor men, Marsilius was wont to give a toste of bread steped in vinegar,
with a piece of an onion or few. Al things which be cordial, that is to
say, which do in any wis^ comfort the hart, do resist pestilece, vehement
anger, or heuynesse, be very pernicious. other more exquisite and costly
preseruatiues, I pourposely pass over, which Marsilius, other physicians, do
write of abundantly, forasmoch as I desire to be in this warke compendious. One
thing I had almost forgotten, that there is no better preservative, than to fl
from the place corrupted, betyme and far of, and to let none approach you,
that hath made their abode, where the plage is feruet. More over receive not
into your house any stuff, that comes out of a house, wherein any person hath
ben infected. For it hath been scene, that such stuff lying in a cofer fast
shut by the space of two years, after that the coffer hath be opened, they
which have stand nigh to it, have ben infected, soon after have died. But here
I always except the power of god, which is wonderful, also merciful, above mas
reason or counsel, pseruing or strikig whom, when, where it shall like his
majesty, to whom be glory praise everlasting. Amen.

THUS make I an end of this treatise, desyryng them that shall take profit
thereby, to defend it against enuyouse dysdayne, on whom I have set the
adventure, for the love that I bear to my country: requiring all honest
physicians to remember, that the intent of my labour was, ye men and women
redinge this warke, and obseruinge the counsayles therein, shulde adapte thereby
their bodies, to receive more sure remedy by the medicines prepared by good
physicians in dagerous syckenesses, they kepinge good diet, and infourminge
diligently the same physicians, of ye manner of their affects, passions, and
sensible tokens. And so shall the noble and most necessary science of phisike,
with the ministers thereof, escape the sclaunder, which they have of long time
sustained, and according to the precept of the wise man, be worthily
honoured, for asmoche as the highest god did create the physician, for mas
necessity. And of the earth created medicine, and y^ wise man shall not abhor
it. Thus fare ye well gentle reders, and forget me not with your good report,
and pray to God that I be never wars occupied.

Londini in aedibus Thomae Bertheleti typis impress.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

ANNO M. D. XXXIX.

